

During the Seven Years War, occasions when fleets were forced to abandon operations due to poor logistics were common. Two of Hawkes's cruises in 1755-6 barely lasted two months.

17

Anson, although aware of the risk involved in raising the blockade, was forced to leave his station in 1758. Given the perilous shortage of provisions for his fleet he had to grasp any expedient to preserve the health of the crew. He sent a large minority of his fleet back to port due to scurvy, with the intention of allowing them to restore their strength. otherwise, they 'will be destroyed and the ships in the end will become useless'. They were not home long enough: in August the fleet had almost one thousand sick on board, half of these ill with scurvy and fever, and the worst affected ships had to be sent home again, reducing the strength of his squadron by three vessels.

I8

Operations continued to be seriously affected by victualling shortfalls, with the result that the blockade was periodically broken.

The victualling service improved from 1759. There were developments in packing and processing of victuals, with production of naval victuals centralised in the major ports in

15 Michael Duffy, 'Devon and the Naval Strategy of the French Wars 1689-1815' in Michael Duff, Stephen 
Fisher, Basil Greenhill, David J. Starkey, Joyce Youngs, ed. The New Maritime History of Devon: Volume 
1 From Early Times to the Late Eighteenth Century (Conway Maritime Press, London, 1992) p. 188. 
16 Baugh, 'Naval Power', p. 250. 
17 Duffy, 'Devon and the Naval Strategy of the French Wars 1689-1815', p. 188. . 
18 Anson to Shelburne, 16 th July 1758, William L. Clements Library, Shelburne MSS, Vol. 137 p. 91, cIted 
in Gradish, The Manning of the British Navy, pp. 137-8. 

Portsmouth, Plymouth and Deptford.

That year, the decision was taken to transport fresh victuals such as beef and vegetables to seamen on board the Western Squadron, without which the Squadron could not have maintained such a constant and effective blockade of the French Atlantic ports. As Hawke wrote in 1759, 'the relief of the squadron depends more on the refreshment of the ships companies the cleaning of ships' .20 From May 1759 the Admiralty instructed the Victualling Board to arrange to have supplies of fresh beef available at Torbay for re-victualling. By July there were two transports carrying live cattle and sheep to the blockading fleet. 21 On the 2 August 1759, the Admiralty ordered four transports to carry live cattle out to Hawke's fleet. 22 Ships were sent from Portsmouth and Plymouth to re-victual and refresh their crews, including a steady flow of fresh victuals.

23

The strategic consequences of this were significant. For the first time ships could remain on station regardless of the state of their provisions: no longer would they need to return to port every few months. Even a partial conquest of the provisioning process could ensure the success of a blockading fleet. Dr James Lind, a leading advocate of the use of citrus fruit for the prevention of scurvy described a fleet during the Seven Years War: