

As Britain entered the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-1748) the naval administration would be confronted by a further problem: administrative inefficiency. Logistical distribution was a systemic problem and the movement of supplies and stores across the globe would be a challenging and occasionally impossible task. This was further weakened by problems of management: even assuming resources could be distributed there was no guarantee that what was sent would be a well judged or accurate amount. Clerks worked from reports that were out of date; consequently calculations of spoilage and supply were inaccurate and unreliable. As a result, administrators learnt to provide more than enough and to accept waste as an unavoidable consequence of preparedness. 6 Wastage of provisions, administrative inefficiencies and faults in the provisioning system would therefore connive against naval operations.

Daniel Baugh has outlined the improvements the victualling services made during the war of 1740-48. The Victualling Board took great initiative in anticipating the needs of various squadrons. The government office did remarkably well in answering sudden demands (helped by a dynamic London food market, and Irish beef and butter), and stood ready to fill gaps in the army's victualling arrangements.

7

Facilities at Portsmouth and Plymouth were expanded, which made them the two most important out-ports after

5 Ibid. Victualling difficulties were sunnounted by a degree of local provisioning, though as the Baltic fleet 
of 1808-12 found later, this was limited to a few foodstuffs, all of which were extortionately expensive. 
6 Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, pp. 444,449. 
7 Baugh, Naval Administration 1715-1750, p. 406. 

Deptford. Not only would this enable the Royal Navy to distribute higher volumes of provisions, the location of both south-coast ports enabled them to playa significant role in supplying fleets blockading French northern and western ports. The proximity of closer \,ictualling out-ports meant re-provisioning could be completed much more quickly. Baugh comments that "it is striking how seldom, during the war of 1739-1748, they altered plans or postponed their moves because of inadequate victuals,.8

Problems of \,ictualling were magnified when distributing victuals to squadrons and bases o\'erseas. Fleets cruising in foreign waters were victualled through local contracts. This was limited by politics and geography. The increasing number of ships in service added to \'ictualling difficulties, as the war escalated. As Baugh commented, 'with the expansion of overseas operations the challenges of distance and climate grew more formidable,.9 The problem of communication over wide distances, and problems securing transport tonnage impacted upon the victualling system. At times there was a dearth of shipping a\'ailable for government hire, without which supplies could not be transported. victualling commissioners complained that shipping was hard to get. This was not because potential shipping was not available: government was slow in adjusting its rates and terms of hire to meet wartime market conditions. 1o As we will see, this was not a problem limited to the 1740s. Despite some improvements in the victualling service, the naval administration could not yet guarantee timely arrivals of foodstuffs at ships, and admirals and captains continued to complain of bad provisions and to worry about future supplies. Ships or fleets could not act independently of their supplies.