

The \'ictualling system had failed to learn from earlier conflicts. During the Seven Years War a force one and a half times a squadron's strength was required so that piecemiel parts of it could return home for victualling. Such inefficiencies of naval strength were repeated between 1776 and 1783. Middleton was of the opinion that blockading 'squadrons should consist of such a number of ships as would admit that a fourth or third part of each of them should be able to go into the nearest port to refit, to victual or to store: and the remaining three-fourths or two-thirds should be of such force as still to ha\'e a decided superiority over the enemy' .59 The principle of regular and timely delivery of foodstuffs by transports to blockading fleets had yet to be instituted.

The French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars

This would change as Britain once again entered a war with France. There were two key developments at the beginning of the Revolutionary War that improved the victualling system. Firstly the Transport Board was re-instigated, taking responsibility for the entire

55 Mackesy, The War For America, pp. 357, 397. 
56 MJ. Williams, 'Sandwich', p. 557. 
57 Ibid. p. 562. 
58 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 150. 
59 Middleton to Philip Patton, 2 June 1794, Letters of Lord Barham, II, p. 386. 
60 

transport sen'ice for the army, navy and ordnance. It was created at the prompting of ~1iddleton. by now Lord of the Admiralty. Not having a Transport Board 'operated so much on the mind [of Middleton] that it induced him to submit to Mr Pitt, the absolute necessity there was for its existence'; and Pitt 'was so convinced of it as immediately to put it into execution', wrote Dundas.6o Its appearance allowed that Board to concentrate on its own area of expertise: procuring tonnage from the merchant sector. It is interesting that the naval departn1ents were felt the best to manage these crucial logistical developments. a sign that the naval administration was ahead of its civil and military counterparts. With the creation of a Transport Board many of the abuses revealed by the Commission on Fees were eliminated, the most important being the competition among the different boards for tonnage. Instead, the Victualling, Ordnance and Navy Board would apply to the Transport Board, whose sole duty was the hiring of transports from the merchant community.61 As Morriss has commented, 'rationalization was true of all victualling and transportation undertaken by the Treasury, secretary of state, Admiralty, Ordnance, and other government departments after 1794' .62 In a further rationalisation, the Victualling Board took on the duty of supplying the army. As the Admiralty explained, 'it was considered that the service would be 'performed with greater advantage to the public ... than in any other war' .63 It promised new economies since the Victualling commissioners could engage for army supplies with contractors who supplied the navy. 64 From this point on the provisioning of military forces abroad would be the responsibility of the Victualling Board.