

6 TNA, ADM 1/8/265-6, Dr. Jamison to Saumarez, 23 April 1809. 
7 TNA, ADM 1/8/310, Saumarez to Admiralty, 10 May 1809. 

the large ships, their wants will be magnified in a London newspaper and afford a good subject for an Editor to throw his invectives, besides when the large ships are reduced to the necessity of affording supplies the general want will become rapid, therefore precaution is very early to be purchased, and as there are many months yet to look forward to in the Baltic supplies eventually must be sent'. 8 Not only is this an interesting prediction, it also reveals politics being increasingly guided by popular opinion.

The 'Observator' s' fears for the Baltic fleet did not end there. Sweden could supply water but not bread. spirits or wine, while the fleet's sheer size would consume prodigious quantities which it was not certain could be procured in Scandinavia.

Sweden is unable to afford the necessary supplies our Ships are accustomed to have, & of the same quantity. Bread especially being of an extreme coarse quality, Spirits exported from this country chiefly Prize Brandy, and very dear, Wine from the Mediterranean hardly any to be got. these my Lord are material Articles, and in Victualling of the most consequence: the other parts are material and entitled to due consideration which I must respectfully entreat may be considered in time; Water can be supplied from Gothenburg river. or other parts of Sweden that need not be considered. 9

Saumarez' provisioning efforts would face the hostility of the surrounding states. It was common practice for naval fleets to procure supplies locally when on distant stations. Throughout the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, naval squadrons in the East Indies and West Indies used sea provisions contactors who were paid to supply all of the fleet's victualling needs. With Russia, Prussia and Denmark all hostile to Britain, securing sea provisions contracts for all varieties of foodstuffs would be impossible. As the anonymous writer observed, only Sweden remained on friendly terms, a country not known for its vast quantities of arable land. Nor did it have the agricultural infrastructure to cope with the demands of a Royal Navy fleet numbering thousands of men.

10

Ii MA 20/30, 'Obervator' Anonymous writer) to Lord Mulgrave, 13 July 1808. 
9 MA 20/30. 'Obervator' Anonymous writer) to Lord Mulgrave, 13 July 1808. 
]0 Indeed, Sweden did not have enough grain to supply its own population. Sweden, so dependent on grain 
from north Germany, was devastated when this supply was cut off by the British blockade in the Baltic. 
George Foy, a British businessman and agent in Stockholm, wrote to Saumarez in 1811, reporting 
Sweden's intense happiness that Saumarez had allowed the grain trade to continue under special license, 
that he had 'occasion to see Baron D'Engestrom very often now, and in a conversation with him to day, he 
desired me to say that His Government is most gratefully sensible of the value of Your Excellency's 
humane motive in granting the licenses in question to allow the trade with Pomerania ... This years' Crop of 
Grain has almost entirely failed in Sweden, at least in the greater part of the country, and consequently 