

Throughout the conflict in the Baltic, a Royal Naval squadron arriving would double the population of nearly all Swedish ports, including the second largest city of Gothenburg, with a population of only 12,000.

11

The Swedish historian Ingvar Anderson wrote that 'according to calculations, about three-quarters of Sweden's population was directly employed in agriculture at the beginning of the nineteenth century. Yet farming was still based largely on medieval methods'. This had become evident when Sweden lost the grain-producing Baltic provinces at the Peace of Nystad in 1721.12 From the 1790s there \\'ere attempts to resolve these problems, but they had not been resolved by Saumarez' arriyal.

Indeed, S\\'eden was dependent on supplies from northern Germany for subsistence. After receiYing a letter from Mr. Christopher Fay, Agent for Victualling from Norway at Gothenburg. wrote in 1809 'representing the distressed situation of his Country for want of Provisions'. it was ordered that 'all British Cruizers [were] to suffer all Vessels laden with Provisions destined for Norway, to proceed free and unmolested' .13 In November, -1-0 licenses were granted for importing cargoes of grain into Norway.14 As Glete has pointed out. the Baltic region was 'to a large extent a sparsely populated region unsuitable for large scale military operations on land. Large armies could not be maintained through local resources and had to supplied from outside' .15

In other theatres such as the West Indies and Mediterranean, commanding naval officers had the benefit of merchant contacts built up around repeated British naval involvement in the region. On arrival in the Mediterranean in 1800, Keith's Agent Victualler could write to him that 'it has been the prevailing practise before ... for the ships to take live bullocks aboard which they slaughtered themselves'. Commanders and administrators

these indulgencies, whilst the season admits of getting grain into the Country from the Baltic Ports, are of 
the greatest importance'. SRO, HA 93/6/1/1874, Foy to Saumarez, 5 September 1811. 
11 Stockholm was the one exception with a population of 70,000. The Baltic fleet would rarely visit 
Stockholm however. 
12 Ingvar Andersson, A History of Sweden, Translatedfrom the Swedish by Carolyn Hannay (Wiedenfeld 
and Nicholson, London, 1955) pp. 297-9. 
13 TNA, FO 22/60/9, Barrow to Bagot, 26 September 1809. 
14 TNA, FO 22/60121, Office of Committee of Privy Council for Trade, to William Hamilton, 30 
th 
November 1809. 
15 Jan Glete, Navies and Nations, p. 295. 

stationed in the eastern Mediterranean, could draw upon decades of seafaring and provisioning knowledge of the area. In May the Agent Victualler in Port Mahon, James Yeo, wrote to Keith that, 'it has always been a practise to put three or four Galleons [sic] of Brandy into the Syracuse Wine to make it keep in summer, whereas the Masala wine will keep in any climate and any length of time' .16

Knowledge of local conditions, merchants, and victualling practices were invaluable in the Mediterranean: they were absent in the Baltic. As Nelson himself found in his brief yoyage through the Baltic in 1801, the last British fleet to enter the Baltic had been in 1727, since when ships of the line had become larger, with greater draught of water and had more numerous crews. Knight points to the consequent inconveniences for Nelson; when Admiral Totty arrived to reinforce Nelson, he found vessels 'in want of fuel and cannot purchase any. as their bills are non-negotiable', whilst the governor of Bornholm refused to supply the British ships moored off the coast with vegetables. Cattle were eventually supplied from Danzig, though there were difficulties and delays. Nelson, an astute organizer as well as a celebrated tactician, kept a firm financial hand on victualling matters: 'it must be noted that the lowest price & best provisions must both combine', he urged when in the Baltic. Aware of the problems he had encountered, and in a letter that can be read as a warning for the Baltic fleet that would arrive seven years later, he commented on Baltic provisioning, 'such iniquity, I fear, has been going on in Denmark that the victualling must look out before they pay the horrid bills,.17 The inclusion of an Agent Victualler with the fleet in 1808 suggests that the Victualling Board had paid attention to Nelson's experiences.