

72 Baugh, Naval Administration J 7 J 5- J 750, pp. 406, 402.

Chapter 3: The Challenges of Baltic Victualling

This station affords much greater anxiety than the Channel Islands and I may add than any other station I have hitherto been upon and its being so perfectly novel in all respects makes it the more interesting.

Vice-Admiral Sir James Saumarez, 8 July 1808 1

Saumarez' anxiety a mere two months after entering the Baltic was based on the knowledge that the Baltic Sea was one of the most formidable commands. It was not as far from home ports as other foreign fleets, for example in the East Indies. However the difficulty of commanding a fleet in the Baltic was not solely based on distance. The Baltic Sea would provide challenges that exacerbated the natural test of moving industrial amounts of provisions over long distances.

Figure 3: The Baltic 1808

1 SRO, SA 3/1/2/1, Saumarez to Martha Saumarez, 8 July 1808.

There had not been a British fleet in the Baltic since 1727 (Nelson's brief voyage in 1801 aside) and Saumarez was faced with a considerable challenge to ensure the provisioning of his fleet: with inadequate charts, in unknown waters, all the while surrounded by hostile states and with a supply line open to attack from Danish gunboats. At the same time Saumarez was aware of the vulnerability of his opponent's supply lines. In 1809, he deliberately set out to attack the Russian enemy's logistics, 'having stationed the Defence and Bellephroll in Makiloto Bay for the purpose of interrupting the supplies of Provisions passing along the coast of Finland for the use of the Russian Troops in Aland,.2

Concerns for the Fleet: Economics and Administration

There were senous concerns for the Baltic fleet's ability to prOVISIon itself. One anonymous officer, calling himself 'Observator', wrote to Mulgrave, then the Lord of the Admiralty. at the outset of the Baltic operation to express his fears for the fleet. He was clearly a man who had spent much of his career with the Victualling Board and is therefore someone whose views were taken seriously, as Mulgrave's acknowledgement indicates. As he wrote,

No man can be more attached to His Majesty's Service with more respect than myself the veneration I hold every measure in which has proceeded to from the Board you have the Honor to preside at. It is animated with the welfare of my country, and that no cause of importation might appear from a want of foresight to the various necessities of the Ships and Vessels employed in the Baltic, that I now very respectfully address your Lordship, and as I profess to have some knowledge of the Victualling of Ships from having spent many years in that service I trust I may be allowed to presume on that point. 3

This illustrates the prevailing opinion; that the victualling of the Baltic fleet was to be a feat more challenging than any other station. Speaking of the recent logistical problems suffered by Sir Richard Strachan's Squadron when off Rochfort, he mentioned that this was 'a collected force', which despite its concentration in one place 'from a source of information I cannot make known was much in want of Provisions and Water, which it is