

board'. Sir Richard Strachan wrote on the 1 December that 'we failed with the hope of falling in with the Victuallers, which I concluded would have sometime past left Plymouth'. The Superb, Spencer and Cumberland were sent to Rochefort to replace the ships forced off station as a relief force, but it arrived too late to prevent the French fleet escaping from port. The' State and Condition' of the squadron of 21 December noted that the Impeteux and Donegal had only fifteen and nineteen days bread left, while the Emerald and Raleigh had only nineteen and twenty two tons of water remaining. The Colosslls and Mediator were delayed in setting off from Deptford, as reported on the 31 December, not to sail until the 6 January. The supplies would not arrive until the 16 January, by which time it was too late. As Strachan reported, 'since the Mediator left the Squadron, I have used my utmost exertion to regain our station of Chasseron, but Strong North east winds have prevented our getting to windward. This morning the Attack gun vessel joined us, making the signal that the Enemy had put to sea. She had a Transport with Provisions under convoy, and has seen us to leeward this two days past' .71 In other words, the fleet having to leave station to find the Mediator, had allowed the French fleet to escape. Four months after these problems, and two months after it was presented to Parliament, the Baltic fleet set sail for the Baltic.

Naval administration proved very successful at overcoll11ng so called 'insoluble' problems. There is a clear correlation between advances in the victualling system and increasing operational and strategic capabilities. As the logistical support for fleets improved, they were able to remain at sea for longer periods, at distances further from Britain than had been attempted before. As Baugh argues, 'all in all, the rise of the Victualling department may have had more impact on the success of British arms than any other administrative development since the time of Pepys'. An evolution of the means available transformed the operational and strategic ends that could be attained. At times it was a slow development. Baugh comments that 'in the early years of the

71 House of Commons Parliamentary Papers Online, 1808 (103) Papers Presented to the House of Commons Relating to the State and Condition of the Squadron Employed off Rochefort under the command of Sir Richard 1. Strachan, printed J 5 March J 808 No.9-59, 16, 18, 35,28,44,46, 56, 59.

eighteenth century ... the Victualling department was still putting its house in order,.72 Clearly the improvement of the victualling service was incremental. Advances, particularly with the Channel fleet during the Seven Years War were not implemented across all squadrons. Fleets in the American War suffered from this inability to learn from previous developments. Much had been learnt by the time of the Napoleonic War. Systematic developments enabled fleets around the globe to be supplied. Problems in 1807 hinted that arrangements for provisioning had not yet reached perfection. Incidents such as Walcheren and Strachan's leaving of his station were however isolated events, but explain why commanders continued to worry about their supplies. Delays and inefficiencies would continue to affect operations. This would not suffice in the wars against Napoleon, where the necessity of a full-scale international war raised the bar of administrative competence far higher. As naval administrators turned their attention to victualling fleets in early 1808 they would discover further challenges. There would be good reasons to doubt the viability of provisioning a Baltic fleet.