

2 TNA, ADM 11917, Saumarez to Admiralty, 16 August 1809. 
3 MA 20/30, 'Obervator' Anonymous writer) to Lord Mulgrave, 13 July 1808. 

true were sent, but from what cause I am not informed did not arrive until too late'. This made him especially worried for the Baltic fleet: 'from this circumstances I cannot suppress my anxiety when I look to the Ships in the Baltic, and employed on such detached services from each other, blockading the coasts of Holstein, Jutland, the Island of Zealand and the different Islands near it, the indispensable necessity of timely supplies

being sent from here to that quarter' .4

He was right to be concerned. The dispersal of the Baltic fleet was indeed a serious obstacle. In 1808 for example, there were ships at Gothenburg (Flemish Roads), in the Sound. in the Belt, at the entrance of the Great Belt, off the Skaw, off Christiansand and in the Gulf of Finland, with other ships in convoys to Karlskrona and Stockholm.s Indeed, eyen the ships in the Sound and Belt were dispersed over large distances, often on separate duties, as the below plan for the protection of trade illustrates.

Table 3: Plan for the protection of Trade

Station Line Frigates Sloops Gun Brigs

Cruizers - on the South Shore of the Baltic from 1 2 
the Gulf of Livorna to Colberg in Prussia 
Intermediately between the above cruisers and 3 
Point of rendezvous in Sweden 
Off the Rendezvous 1 1 
In the Port of Rendezvous to give Instructions 1 
Off Bornholm and Eartholm 2 1 
Off Rugen 1 
Between Moen & Falsterbo 1 1 1 
To receive Convoys from the Belt between 2 1 2 1 
Femeren and the Frindelen, and to take convoys 
from the point of Rendezvous to Nyborg 

2 3 11 6 Source: SRO, HA 93/6/1/697, Plan for the protectIOn of trade, Keats to Hood, 6 May 1809.

Figure 4 demonstrates the dispersal for the protection of trade in the Sound and Belt.

4 MA 20/30, 'Obervator' Anonymous writer) to Lord Mulgrave, 13 July 1808. 
5 SRO, HA 93/6/1/115, Fleet disposition, 24 May 1808. 

Figure -': Briti h naval dispersal in the Baltic 1808

o

Convoy us de fO\Jtec;.o ~nd from the 8 elt II.ndso".md

• 8 ritish nil val resen e 

The anonymou writer was not alone in fearing for the fleet. After one year's service in the Baltic, the phy ician to the fleet warned measures would need to be taken 'to prevent from their uffering by Scurvy, which the quality of the water, and the humidity of the atmo phere, in that climate so much encourage,.6 Saumarez himself anticipated problems as the fleet moved to the peripheries of the Baltic Sea, particularly in 1809. 'Apprehen ion of the great difficulties that will exist, in keeping up the supplies of the Squadron when in the upper parts of the Baltic', he wrote; 'I cannot too early draw the attention of the Lord Commissioners of the Admiralty to that important object'.

7

The 'Observator' left Mulgrave in no doubt as to the potential consequences. 'I am aware the large ships are fitted out for 5 months' he wrote, 'but when it is considered the small Vessels are numerous and provisioned for much less time, the will sooner cry out for relief, and if they should unluckily not happen to be on the station, to be supplied from