

because of his experience of the reason, pressed for continual mapping to be done, as ships passed through the Great Belt. . As it is deemed of national Importance to obtain the most correct knowledge of the Navigation of the Great Belt', he wrote in a memo to his subordinates:

the Se\'eral Captains and Commanders are desired to combine that object as much as circumstances \\ill permit with the important one of their instructions, and neglect no opportunity of Sounding and laying down the different rocks and shoals as well by land marks ... noting leading marks for the fair channel where they can be laid don, the rise, strength and set of tides, influence of the wind ... and it is believed a more correct chart than any hitherto in use, may be made from the survey and remarks. 35

Shallow and rocky, the Belt was dangerous to navigate. 36 Crowhurst estimates that, 'in consequence it was not unusual for ships to take up to six weeks to pass through the Belt' .37 In truth, provisions moved much faster. Even at the height of victualling problems in 1809. it was never the transportation of the victuals that was problematic. One typical convoy of victuallers sailed from the Nore on the 13 June, arrived in the Belt on the 1 July 1809 and then reached Saumarez in the eastern Baltic (Nargen Island) on the 21 July.38 Six weeks is therefore an exaggeration. However the threat to British supply lines was consistently to be a problem.

The voyage through the Great Belt was no less threatening than the Sound, with large numbers of gunboats based at Nyborg and other Danish ports. Captain Graves, of the Brunswick, wrote to Saumarez in August 1808, after only a few months of action in the Baltic, that 'the increasing force of the enemy's Gunboats render it absolutely necessary that convoys should be very strongly protected'. 39 Captain John Harvey Boteler observed the difficulty of convoying large numbers of vessels through the Belt, 'we were mostly employed conveying large bodies of merchant vessels through the Great Belt, and arduous service; the passage was swarming with privateers and row-boats' .40 Rear Admiral Keats warned his captains that, 'it is my direction that the Ships and Vessels

35 TNA, ADM 801145, Keats, Memo, 16 September 1808. 
36 Albion, Forests and Seapower, p. 164. 
37 Crowhurst, Defence of British Trade, p. 74. 
38 See convoy of Curlew, TNA, ADM 7/791/118. 
39 TNA, ADM 1/6/401-2, Captain Gates to Saumarez, August 3 1808. 
40 Bonner-Smith, Captain John Harvey Boteler p. 10. 

under my orders in the Belt are kept in readiness for action at the Shortest notice, that the most yigilant look-out be established, and in calms and light winds that guard be showed especially in those directions that is may be more particularly requisite to guard against

surprise from' .41

AdYerse currents also hampered ships passing through the Sound and the Belt, sometimes delaying communications and individual voyages for weeks. In July 1808, Saumarez wrote to his wife, reporting that he was 'proceeding thro' the Great Belt, but such is the contrariety of Currents that with a fresh breeze and favourable, we scarcely make any progress'. A year later he would again write