

13 Bartlett, Castlereagh, p. 53. 
14 Watson, The Reign of George III, p. 444. 
15 Wilkinson, The British Navy and the State, p. 21. 
89 

(and in1pressing) and confirming appointments. The formal duties of the Admiralty were as follows:

to consider and determine upon all matters relative to Your Majesty's Navy and Departments thereunto alluded to helonging; to give directions for the performance of all sen ices that may he required in the Ci,il of Naval hranches thereof; to sign by themselves or their secretaries all orders necessary for carrying their directions into execution, and generally to supervise and direct the whole naval and marine establishment of Great Britain.lc'

The Admiralty merely executed, rather than originated, national strategy. Its link with the Treasury conformed to the submission of estimates and accounts to Parliament. It had further, minor administrative roles: paying off ships, purchasing prizes, dispensing with accounts. organising court-martials. The naval officer's point of contact with home, with the government. with the civil branch of the navy was always through the Admiralty. It was through the Admiralty they received their orders and instructions, and sent their despatches.

17

Grievances concerning the navy were sent to the Admiralty. This was true of victualling complaints; annotating a letter sent describing abuses in the contracting for staves, ~1ulgrave wrote, 'Keep', but noted 'his charges of abuse in the Conduct of the Victualling Board should be addressed to the Admiralty Board collectively.18

The Admiralty was not a stranger to criticism. Throughout the 1770s and 1780s, it had come to be known as a department where delays were common place. 19 Middleton complained of the 'sluggish manner in which business goes through the Admiralty'. 'It is needless to remind your lordship of the many remonstrances I have been under necessity of making from time to time of the notorious remissness in official correspondence' .20 The division of duties among clerical staff had not been devised by any coherent plan but had grown up haphazardly as the staff itself grew in response to the increase in paper

16 Williams, 'Sandwich', pp. 15-16. 
17 Wilkinson, The British Navy and the State, p. 20. 
18 MA 22/9, W Budge to Lord Mulgrave, 13 January 1810. 
19 Mackesy describes the Admiralty as both 'united and formidable' and 'wayward and independent', also 
commenting on its over-centralisation. Mackesy, War For America, pp. 15, 19, 163-5. . 
20 Middleton to Sandwich, 15 September 1779, G.R.T. Barnes and Lt. Cdr. J.H. Owen, ed. The Pnvate 
Papers of John, Earl of Sandwich, Vol.3 (NRS, 1936) p. 181. Middleton to Sandwich, The Private Papers 
of John, Earl of Sandwich, Vol.4 (NRS, 1938) p. 371. 

work. As such, in wartime, 'the machinery began to get clogged' .21 Although the Admiralty constituted the political arm of the navy, departmentalism in the naval adnlinistration meant that different boards had different responsibilities unaffected by political changes in the Admiralty. A sudden change in the membership of the Board did not disturb the nayy's business.