

It was always to be a difficult choice between the threat of the enemy and the threat from the climate. The Baltic Sea, not known for its serenity, made victims of many ships. In 1808, a convoy was lost in the Sound when trying to force its way through the ice. In 1810, the Minotaur was wrecked returning from the Baltic. In 1811 the last convoy to leave the Baltic was hit by a storm, with the loss St George, Defence and Hero. This 'Melancholy Fate', as termed by A.N. Ryan, shocked the nation: 'the deaths of 2,000 men of the Baltic fleet were a loss heavier by far than those suffered in any of the great . N I . W ,48 sea-battles of the RevolutIonary or apo eOIllc ars.

Depending on the weather, the last convoys would leave the eastern Baltic by early October to avoid winter storms and the sea freezing over. Every winter the Baltic would freeze over for between two to three months bringing further problems, as the majority of

46 SRO, HA 93/6/1/237, Saumarez to Baron de Rajalin, 5 August 1808. 
47 TNA, ADM 1/9/306-7, Saumarez to Admiralty, 7 December 1809. 
48 A.N. Ryan, 'The Melancholy Fate of the Baltic Ships in 1811 " MM, Vo1.50, No.2, (May 1964), p. 131. 

the fleet sailed back to English Ports, leaving a number of smaller ships to be victualled in dock in the Baltic. "The proportion must be calculated for the time it will be necessary for the large Ships to remain in the Country', wrote George Hope, anticipating the winter months ahead in the Baltic, "and for the number of smaller vessels that may be kept out during the winter months' .49 On the one hand, this meant that the fleet returning to Britain could rest, and re-victual, before heading back to the Baltic the following spring. On the other, it left a considerable challenge of timing to the Commander in Chief. Should he return early, ensuring his fleet's safety from storms and ice, or should he risk the latter, in the hope of ensuring every last merchant ship could be convoyed home? Such decisions weighed heavily with Saumarez and his written conversations with Baltic merchants would often take an exasperated tone as the year neared its end.

Dealing with the ice during those winter months lead to further victualling problems. Keats spoke of 'the impediments arising from the Season', in particular 'the difficulties I experience in providing the Ships with Provisions and water especially'. 50 Talking of a convoy. Captain Bathurst reported that HMS Magnet had run aground, and that he was 'sorry to say that the whole got so entangled in the ice as not to be able to get through' .51

The process of removing a ship from the ice is recounted well by Boteler:

It was getting rather late in the year when we returned to Wingoe Sound, and I well remember thrashing through the ice, occasionally brought up by it, and our having capstan bars over the bows to save the copper: all the fore part of the ship was covered with ice. the ropes so frozen as with difficulty to run through the blocks. However, we got into Wingoe. in perfect smooth water, and one morning there was a sort of film over it, and by the evening thick ice had formed, and next morning the ship was hard and fast in ice five or six inches thick .. .1 don't know how long we were frozen up, but I recollect the fun of clearing a transport of provisions with our boats on skids. In the end we were relieved by ice-saws, sent I believe from England. We set to work, and by cutting ~ur squares of ice, which with the capstan bars, handspik.es, and hooks we sh?ve~2 under Ice on either side, till we made a canal, and warped the ShIp to open water outsIde.