

The Inain departments subsidiary to the Admiralty were the Navy Board, the Victualling Board. alongside the Transport Board, and the Ordnance Board. The Admiralty had seniority oyer the subordinate boards, appointing commissioners for each. Each was subordinate to the Admiralty, and although the boards were similarly ranked, the relative longeyity of each department influenced its status. For example, the newest, the Transport Board. which had been re-established in 1794 after a half century's absence, lacked the standing of its neighbours. The oldest, the Navy Board, was largely left to its own deYices. Although the senior body, the Admiralty's control over the Navy Board was 'often meaningless'. since the Navy Board was left to its own expertise: 'to avoid a situation \\'here the amateurs of the Admiralty were directing the experts in the Navy Board' .22 The Navy Board administered the dockyards, contracted for and administered all naval stores and equipment except for ordnance, food and medicines and, before 1794, transport. It was also responsible for ship design, compiling the estimates that the Admiralty would submit, the payment of wages and appointing dockyard personnel. The

Navy Board was made up of professional men, frequently naval officers or shipwrights. 23

Like the colleagues in the Admiralty, the Navy Board had not always been considered the most effective branch of government. Middleton complained in July 1779 that 'as it now stands I cannot be one hour absent while the [Navy] Board sits' .24 Studies, such as that by M.l Williams, have shown that in providing the Navy with naval stores, it was actually largely successfu1. 25 In this, the Navy Board and Victualling Board communicated with

21 Williams, 'Sandwich'. p. 18. 
22 Wilkinson, The British Nav)' and the State, p. 23. 
23 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 20. 
24 Middleton to Sandwich, 9 July 1779, Sandwich Papers, Vol. 3. 
25 MJ Williams stated that 'from the point of view that their primary task was to supply the Navy, the could 
scarcely have done more'. As the Navy Board themselves wrote in 1782, 'our magazines are so fully 
supplied that we shall have difficulty I finding room for what is already ordered'. Williams, 'Sandwich'. 
pp. 325, 328. 

ach ther directly and a the newer department, 'the Victualling Board was part of the na al e tabli hment and con idered to be inferior in rank to the Navy Board'. 26 The bu ine of the Victualling Board wa 'to provide, either by contract or otherwise, all the Pr n , and al 0 certain Stores, required for Your Majesty's Navy; arranging and di tributing the wh Ie to everal port and places at home and abroad'. 27

Figure 6: Nayal Administration and the Provisioning of Fleets, January 1808

Contract0rs for 
food tuff: 
Ship-owners 

The Admiralty were in contact with commanders' needs and requirements, the Victualling Board with merchant contractors who provided foodstuffs. Earlier in the Napoleonic War, the Navy Board had conveyed much of the correspondence between the Admiralty and Victualling Board, as shown in the diagram above. As such, all orders and correspondence between these two passed through the Navy Board. The onset of war in 1793 however witnessed an increase in the scale and responsibilities of other naval