

59

Providing transport tonnage for Baltic operations would require careful management between 1808 and 1812.

The challenge for the Victualling Board in supplying the Baltic fleet was considerable. Mulgrave may have underestimated the challenge when he hoped provisioning arrangements were in order in July 1808 but the Victualling board was certainly sure of its ability to transport large amounts of victuals to a foreign fleet. It was confident in its ability to forge new victualling contacts, especially with Britain's allies the Swedes. Yet problems deriving from the geography, weather and climate would influence Baltic provisioning throughout the 1808-1812 period, as this chapter has demonstrated, and chapters 6 and 7 will also show. The challenges facing the Baltic fleet in 1808 in ensuring regular and quality provisions must not be underestimated nor forgotten in any analysis

57 NMM, HNL 13/17 f.7 22 September 1809. 
511 NMM, HNL 13/17 f.1 0, 29 September 1809. 
59 NMM, HNL 13/17 f.ll, 9 October 1809. 

of its success. It is important that we consider the challenges faced by the Baltic fleet since they greatly influenced victualling decision taken throughout 1808 to 1812, but particularly in 1808 and 1809. The task would be taken up by the commanders in the Baltic. in particular Sir James Saumarez. More importantly it was be taken up by the nayal administration of Great Britain, and it is to the naval administration that this thesis will turn to next.

Chapter 4: Naval Administration and the Provisioning of Fleets Abroad

E\\:ry neglect of sen'ice sincc I havc been in office has originated in London. If the public officers ~)~ \\ho~e orders every preparation and movement depends, are not diligent, regular and punctual, it IS of httle consequence what your admirals and generals are. - Charles Middleton to Lord Shelburne, 11 September 178i

The importance of a well-functioning naval administration to ships at sea was not lost on Charles Nliddleton. a man who spent much of his career reforming the civilian branch of the Royal Navy. As he witnessed during the American war of 1776-83, there was little advantage having ships and fleets on active service if the infrastructure to support them was inadequate. The victualling of the Baltic fleet, as indeed of any fleet, rested on the naval administration that supported it. This chapter will examine the system that executed victualling operations putting them in the context of British government.

British Politics and Strategy

At the head of government was the Cabinet, the executive branch comprised of members of the legislature, the House of Commons and House of Lords. It was here that 'strategy' (as we would today term it) was determined. It was a cabinet decision to send a fleet to the Baltic. Once there it would be maintained by the naval administration. 1808, the year in which the Baltic fleet came into existence, also marked a much broader movement to ratchet up the British war effort. The Duke of Portland was at the head of this new ministry, though as Dixon has noted, 'he did not regard personal parliamentary activity as one of his obligations,.2 An increasingly ill man, Portland's lack of force enabled his ambitious ministers to take on more responsibility, bringing increased organisation and drive to British war planning. In particular, George Canning the Foreign Secretary and Lord Castlereagh at the War Office took control of the war against France.