

9

A go\,ernment determined to wage war at a new level depended on the success of its departmental administrative system. David Syrett commented that anyone studying British administration is 'immediately struck by inordinate delays that attended the implementation of military decisions reached by cabinet'. Secretaries of state put the Cabinet's plans into execution and kept government administration working: they alone had the power to coordinate the actions of various departments.

1o

The Cabinet determined strategy. while it fell to the Foreign Office, the War Office, the Board of Ordnance and the Admiralty to execute it. The Secretary of State for War had also to try to work with several authorities who enjoyed great independence, and 'most of which were of doubtful efficiency: namely the Board of Ordnance, the Transport Board, and the Commissary General' .11 The Admiralty oversaw subordinate boards with differing responsibilities: the Victualling Board, the Transport Board, the Navy Board, and the Ordnance Board.

As Hilton has noted, 'the co-operation achieved between such fiercely independent bodies as the Foreign, War and Home Offices, and the undertaking of operations keeping them secret, and if necessary shredding files, all required sophisticated planning' .12 That this was sometimes lacking should not be surprising, Bartlett for one emphasising that 'it

x Watson, Reign of George 1/1, pp. 488-9. 
9 Perceval to Wellesley, Jan 1810, BL Add. Ms. 37295, quoted in Philip Harling, The Waning of 'Old 
Corruption ': The Politics of Economic Reform in Britain, 1779-1846 (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) p. 
133. 
10 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 5. 
11 CJ Bartlett, Castlereagh (Macmillan, London, 1966) p. 52. 
12 Hilton, England 1783-1846, pp. 85-6. 

\\'as no easy matter to keep the cumbrous machinery for the conduct of the war in motion, and to synchronise its working for the speedy equipment and despatch of British expeditions to the Continent or overseas. It was not surprising that delays and deficiencies in equipment frequently occurred, though he did note that on the whole expeditions were assen1bled and despatched relatively quickly, especially while Castlereagh was in office, 'once the cabinet had made up its mind to act' .13 Indeed, the Duke of Portland's government was particularly adept at enforcing the departmentalism. As Perceyal wrote, 'it is not because the Duke of Portland is at our head that the Go\,emment is a Government of Departments, but it is because the Government is and must be essentially a Government of Departments that the Duke of Portland is at our

h d· 14- ea .

The Admiralty and the Naval Administration

Once a strategic decision had been made, its implementation fell upon naval administration. The decision to arrange a victualling shipment to a fleet was the Admiralty" s. The Admiralty was the highest level of naval administration. Headed by the First Lord of Admiralty, and made up of commissioners, the Admiralty was the political arm of the navy, the sole representative of the navy in Cabinet. If the navy had a role in forming national strategy it was in this capacity. Aside from Cabinet decisions, it governed the naval branch of government, issuing orders on operational and tactical matters. Most of its work was routine: as Wilkinson argues, 'the Admiralty was not necessarily a weak body but. .. its powers and responsibilities were quite limited and its capabilities for effecting change or directing policy were very restricted' .15 Decisions of strategy came from Cabinet, with orders emanating from the Secretary of State for War. The Admiralty's role was the operational arm: assigning ships and captains in line with the orders of Cabinet, issuing orders for ship movements, assigning convoys, recruiting