

49 TNA, ADM 1/6/382, Captain George Hope, Memo, 1 August 1808. 
50 SRO, HA 93/6/1/458, Keats to Saumarez 28 December 1808. 
51 SRO, HA 93/6/1/477, Captain Walter Bathurst to Bertie, 7 January 1809. 
52 Bonner-Smith, Captain John Harvey Boteler, pp. 39-40. 

Victuallers too would be vulnerable, such as when the President victualler was lost in December 1809.

53

The loss of a victualler could cause serious problems for isolated fleets. Dixon wrote that 'I am seriously concerned to acquaint you that the President Vict. One of t\\'o under the escort of the Osprey & considerably the largest was wrecked on the night of the 11 th during a very heavy Gale of wind ... she sailed upon the Rocks & in a very short time was dashed to pieces'. The Thea victualler arrived with the Osprey and entered port also in great peril. Dixon sent information detailing the quantities of provisions left in the Baltic, leaving it to the Admiralty to judge whether or not a further supply should be sent OUt.

54

The following year, Captain Honeyman of the Ardent reported 'the loss of the Jean Transport', and asked for another to replace it 'without delay, in order that the Island of Anholt may not suffer from this accident. .. we have to request you will forthwith provide us with another Vessel, capable of conveying to

Anholt a supply of Provisions to the extent of about 180 tons' .55 These problems with victualling were compounded by the fact that there was no naval base in the Baltic. The Mediterranean benefited from a number of British bases in particular Gibraltar on its western edge. and Port Mahon in Minorca, where victualling operations were centred. Alongside their lack of precedents to guide them, Saumarez' Baltic fleet did not have the luxury of British naval ports. Moreover, the Victualling Board had been able to transport fleets of victuallers through the Bay of Biscay to Lisbon, but had never attempted the same through passages as dangerous as the Great Belt. As Ryan argued, 'the want of a base in the Baltic was not as serious as had been the want of a base within the Mediterranean; but it had its inconveniences and perils' .56

There would also be problems securing tonnage to transport provisions to the Baltic fleet. As we will see in Chapter 5, the victualling system was dependent on hiring tonnage to transport provisions. James Thornton, the agent in South Shields for Henley and Sons, ship-owners who chartered their ships out to the British government agent, wrote of the difficulty he had had in securing tonnage to go to the Baltic in September, particularly

53 TNA, ADM 1/9/349, Dixon to Saumarez, 16 December 1809. 
54 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1227, Dixon to Saumarez, 14 December 1809. 
55 TNA, ADM 110/62/390, VB to the TB, 24 September 1810. 
56 Ryan, 'Melancholy Fate', p. 131. 

places away from the main commerce routes. 'I have used every Endeavour to get [a] Vessel at our Port and the Neighbouring Ports without affect, Money will not tempt them to go to the Anholt to discharge Cargo this day of the year' he wrote. The climate and the likelihood of being taken by Danish gunboats were huge disincentives for ship-owners deciding whether to allow their vessels to travel to the Baltic. Thornton went on to say that a friend of his 'did write for vessels there and offered 50/ ton to load scotch coals .. .1 hope \\'e shall have answer tomorrow or Sunday, 1 still flatter my self that money will tempt some of them in Scotland'. 57 Indeed, two days later the agent believed he had found a vessel to go, but was informed that 'I am sorry to say 1 have received letters from Leith that the owners of the Ship Christian as advised to you 24th have refused to let her go to the Anholt. .. Gentlemen, 1 am doubtful shall not get vessel to carry coal direct to the Anholt that use every means 1 can till 1 here from you to the contrary' .58 Two weeks later after considerable delay, the Ann came forward to supply the necessary tonnage, but even then on the condition that it would go to Gothenburg first and indeed at some price: "I am to be paid the sum of one hundred Pounds per keel in full on the safe delivery of the Cargo" recorded the ship owner.