

A favourabk breeze brought us to the Entrance of the Baltic but here I fear we are likely to be detained by the adverse currents which are so strong that even with a fresh breeze we can make no way against them, and we have been obliged to anchor at different times - it is \ery trying to our Patience, anxious as I have [been] for some time to join the ships in the Baltic: a large Convoy is following us under the same predicament, and I wish only a few of the wealthy Merchants were on board to witness the causes of the delay to their Trade - without so unreasonably ascribing it to the negligence of Officers. 42

Captain Graves of the Goliath wrote to Hood in 1808 speaking of the difficultly 111 passing through the Belt. 'I cannot help expressing the great degree of embarrassment I feel', he wrote, 'in the responsibility that will attach itself to me, in going through the difficult navigation of the Belt without Pilots' .43 Even beyond the Sound and Belt there were further dangers. A number of French corsairs operated continuously during the period from bases on the south coast of the Baltic.

44

It is easy to forget now but geographical factors played a huge role in 18

th

century, in

particular the extreme difficulty in making progress against the wind.

45

Prevailing westerly winds made entering the Baltic easier than leaving it. And indeed, ships travelling in either direction could spend days waiting for suitable winds. This could

41 TNA, ADM 801145, Keats, Memo, 15 September 1808. 
42 Saumarez to Martha Saumarez, 8 July 1808,24 May 1809, Voelcker, Sauamrez vs. Napoleon, p. 46. 
43 NMM, MKHI11 0, Captain Puget, HMS Goliath, to Hood, 17 May 1808. 
44 A.N. Ryan, 'The Defence of British Trade with the Baltic 1808-13', English Historical Review, Vol. 
LXXIV (1959) p. 449. 
45 N.A.M. Rodger, 'Weather, Geography and Naval Power in the Age of Sail', Journal of Strategic Studies, 
Vo1.22, No.2, (1999), p. 178. 

delay \'ictuallers and putting at risk the whole fleet. Saumarez wrote in 1808 that 'the contrary Winds have prevented these last five weeks the arrival of the Victuallers I expected from England with the Provisions for the Squadron under my command. It was not until four days since that they have been enabled to join Rear Admiral Sir Samuel Hood off Moen Island, and I waited here for those supplies in order to proceed off Hango Add and join the Squadron of His Swedish Majesty' .46

Both the Sound and Belt were treacherous routes, for different reasons, and to different extents. Mistakes made in 1808 were not repeated in 1809. In late 1809, Saumarez contemplated the relative merits of sending merchant ships under only a light convoy, to ensure their arri\'al in Britain. As he commented to the Admiralty, he wondered:

whether under the present circumstances of the Season I am of opinion His Majesty's Ships may with safety be sent upon this service .. .1 do not consider it in the safety of His ~ lajesty' s Ships appointed for the protection of the Trade and those stationed in the Belt to defend them against the Attack of the Danish Gun Boats, that they should be ordered to remain in the Baltic to a later Period, particularly after the disastrous events that occurred last season, when so many of His Majesty's Ships were lost, and others exposed to imminent Danger, besides the number of valuable Vessels which were wrecked and fell into the hands of the enemy.47