

26 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 9. 
27 Commission of Naval Revision, Tenth Report, p. 4. 

) 92

departn1ents, particularly the Victualling, Ordnance and Sick and Hurt Boards. On top of this was the creation of the Transport Board in 1794, with sole authority over the hiring of tonnage. There was also a pressing wartime need to speed up inter-departmental con1munication.

The Nay)' Board's role in the provisioning process was seen to serve only to slow down yictualling arrangements. In July 1808, three months after Saumarez had sailed for the Baltic, the Admiralty ended this labourious practice, advising that from this point on, direct correspondence between the two was necessary. 'Whereas', they wrote to the Victualling Board:

W~ ha\'~ had under our consideration the practise hitherto adhered to, by this Board, of causing the orders and directions, issued for Victualling His Majesty's Ships and Vessels, when Commissioned. and Fitted and refitted, and completed for Foreign, or Channel s~r\'ice, to be conveyed to you through the medium of the Navy Board. And it being our intention for the purpose of giving celerity to the Victualling of Ships and Vessels under the circumstances above stated, that in future our orders for the supply of their provisions, shall in all cases be addressed immediately to your Board; and you are ... to cause the utmost dispatch to be used, in carrying the same into effect. 2R

This was but one example of naval administration reforming itself. The diagram below shows the naval administration, concerning the provisioning of fleets, throughout the rest of the Napoleonic Wars.

28 TNA, ADM 2/154/448-9, Admiratly to the Victualling Board, 12 July 1808.

Figure 7: Na\lal Administration: the Pro\'isioning of Fleets, August 1808

Ship-owners

There were two way in which provisions could be ordered to a distant station. Initially, in 1808 and 1809, the Admiralty would receive a request from a Commander in Chief for provi ions. For example, a letter of the 16 August 1809 from Vice Admiral Sir James Saumarez, reque ted that a supply of Provisions of all species for twelve thousand men for two months could be sent out to the Baltic 'as speedily as possible, for the use of His Majesty's Fleet under his Command in the Baltic'. 29 In addition, the Victualling Board oversaw victualling demands, and took on greater responsibility for ordering and managing shipments of foodstuff. By 1810, it was the Admiralty and Victualling Board, who by paying attention to the state of provisions in the Baltic, were deciding and organising victualling shipments themselves.

Orders for the provisioning of a fleet always came from the Admiralty. Often a shipment of victuals would be requested by an Admiral by letter, to which the Admiralty would .

29 TNA, ADM 111/192, 11 September 1809.

respond by ordering the Victualling Board to arrange the necessary amounts. While this order to the Victualling Board could be done by letter, it was sometimes done verbally, for example on one occasion in 1809, 'The Chairman having represented that he has been \'erbally directed by the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, to cause a further supply of Provisions to be forthwith sent out for the use of His Majesty's Ships in the Baltic' .30