

The Victualling Board officials could be very deferential to the Admiralty, even when they had better access to victualling information than their overseers. A letter from Rear Admiral Dixon in 1809, representing that the Squadron under his command had only three months' provisions remaining and requesting that a further supply of two months provisions of all species would be sent out soon, prompted diffidence rather than an assured response. The Victualling Board wrote to the Admiralty and requested 'such directions thereon as to their Lordships may appear expedient; stating however at the same time that two months Provisions for the whole of the squadron under the command of Sir James Saumarez, the Commander in Chief in the Baltic have recently been forwarded in Victuallers from Deptford ... with which Shipments it is probable Rear Admiral Dixon was unacquainted at the time he made his application' .34 Again, it was felt necessary to gain Admiralty authorisation when sending out deliveries. It should be remembered that the Admiralty's power over the Victualling Board was not merely bureaucratic. Since Victualling Board commissioners were appointed by the Admiralty, deference on the part of Victualling Board officials should not strike us as surprising. Certainly the Victualling Board was an obedient servant to the Admiralty: in 1811 they wrote that 'the arrangement formed for sending out supplies to the Baltic Fleet at periods fixed upon by the commander in Chief, has been grounded upon an order from the Lord's

33 TNA, ADM 111/192,26 August 1809. . 34 TNA, ADM 111/192, 13 October 1809. The Admiralty's reply arrived three days later, statmg that no further supply was needed, see TNA, ADM 111/192, 16 October 1809.

COl1unissioners of the Admiralty' and, 'we cannot presume to deviate from it, nor is it for us to question its propriety' .35

Authorisation aside, the Admiralty was happy to leave the Victualling Board to its expertise in the area of provisioning. Its orders appear less dictatorial, delegating authority to officials who knew their business. By 1810, it was common practice for commanders to write directly to the Victualling Board; the absence of virtually any Victualling Board correspondence in the Admiralty 'in-letters' is testament to this. 36 In 1809, a request by Saumarez for four weeks' provisions for his fleet, was given a simple 'refer to Viet. Bd.' Admiralty notation.

37

Writing directly to the Victualling Board saved time, and enabled the Victualling Board to demonstrate its specialist knowledge and expertise with minimal Admiralty interference or friction.

The maIn tasks in administering the provlslOmng system were 111 the hands of the subordinate Boards, in particular the Victualling Board and Transport Board. The responsibility for organising the victualling of the Baltic fleet would be shared by the two boards. The Victualling Board was responsible for the production of foodstuffs, either through its victualling yards, for example at Deptford, or by securing contracts with merchants to supply the necessary amounts of provisions. They obtained year long estimates for the provisioning requirements up to a year at a time and were responsible for producing and contracting for these amounts. In August 1808 the Victualling Board requested the Admiralty to estimate the number of men 'intended to be provided for' the following year, so that they could have sufficient warning to direct such supplies of beef and pork to be procured. 38 The organising of shipments of victuals to fleets in home and foreign waters was therefore just one of many important tasks (albeit a crucial one). Also important was the constant management of contracts for all varieties of foodstuffs. The Victualling Board could not produce the huge quantities of provisions needed to supply the 140,000 seamen in service and turned to the private sector to furnish them.