

It would be the failures of the Transport Board that placed the greater strain on the victualling system. It is wrong therefore to say, as Morriss does, that 'hire, dispatch, return and reuse became a regular, generally trouble-free routine until 1816 when the Board was dissolved' .53 This is inaccurate given the huge transport shortages faced in the Napoleonic War. The trials of the Transport Board will the analysed in the next chapter.

51 Charles Middleton to Lord Shelburne, 11 September 1782, Barham Papers, Vol. II, p. 66. 
52 Williams,'Sandwich'. p. 40. 
53 Morriss, 'Colonization, Conquest, and the Supply of Food and Transport', p. 318. 
103 

Chapter 5: The Transport Board, the procurement of transport tonnage and the management of privately-owned resources

!he professional knowledge of the members at that Board would prevent purchase of hire of Improper \~ssels; and the competition being removed, the tonnage wanted would be obtained at a fair and reasonable rate. by several Boards bidding against each other, the price will be raised, and \essels unfit for the sen ice frequently engaged.! - Commission on Fees, 1788

The Transport Board, re-created in 1794 after a seventy year absence, was intended not 
only to remoye competition between the other boards, but also to rationalise the whole 
system of procuring transports. Britain's disparate empire had always required transport 
seryices: before 1794 each naval board, be it Victualling, Ordnance or Navy, had secured 
its own tonnage. Following the problems securing tonnage during the American war, and 
with the arriyal of a new conflict in 1792, the Transport Board was brought back into 
existence, largely at the prodding of Charles Middleton, at the time Comptroller of the 
, 
N ayy. - Its central task was the procurement of transports for the use of the other 
government departments, both army and navy. The British state, not owning enough 
tonnage meet the demands of wartime, harnessed the assets of the mercantile private 
sector. contracting with merchants for the hire of vessels. 

A delay in securing tonnage would have huge consequences for the victualling system. Fleets in foreign waters, such as in the Baltic, depended on the Transport Board's ability to secure a constant supply of transports on which the essential provisions could be shipped. As in the 1780s, the majority of ships contracted to the Navy entered under charters which ran for an indefinite period of time. As Syrett wrote of the 1780s, the success of the British war effort depended to a considerable degree on the ability of naval administration to charter sufficient shipping on a long-term basis.

3

It is not the purpose of this study to consider the full challenges that faced the Transport Board, only to consider

1 Commission on Fees, Fifth Report, vol. VII, p. 190. 
2 M.E. Condon, 'The Establishment of the Transport Board - A Subdivision of the Admiralty - 4 July 
1794', MM, 58, (1972), p. 73. 
3 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 77. 
104 