

their part in the victualling system. As with their colleagues in the Victualling Board, the success of the British war machine would depend in no small part on the success with which the Transport Board could harness the resources of the private sector. Its relationship \yith the ship-owners and merchants that provided the ships will be the focus of this chapter, analysing how and with what success the Board procured and managed its transports. This chapter will outline how the Transport Board contracted for tonnage and how it adapted to changing circumstances.

Contracting for Tonnage

There were two forms of transport freight. Firstly there was short-term transport procurement for particular serVIces. Secondly there was long-term shipping with transports hired for specific periods. The latter, the long-term transports, were the backbone of the Transport service. They were termed 'Transports on Tonnage', that is vessels hired at a certain rate per ton each month, and 'Transports on Freight'.4 However, short-term, specific hires could make up for temporary shortages in transport tonnage. These were of particular importance to the Board since they were a means of increasing the amount of tonnage available at short notice. During times of high transport demand, these were common means by which transport tonnage could be raised in the short-term. The Board's ability to secure short-term tonnage gave it huge flexibility.

Short-term specific hires could be beneficial to the merchant. With the transport only being hired for the outward journey, it would free up vessels to return with a valuable cargo on board. Alternatively, they could be organised to bring back supplies for the navy. The introduction has shown how transports could be used to bring back naval stores from the Baltic after serving their use as victuallers. They could also return with victualling stores for general use in the victualling yards. In 1811 for example, the Board arranged that 'it will be more to the advantage of this Department to be furnished with Transports for the conveyance of the eight hundred Tons of Provisions to Rio de Janeiro

4 Commission of Naval Revision, Ninth Report, p. 9.

than to haye such Provisions sent out on Freight, by reason we purpose having the vessels loaded back with Rice' . .5

The process by which transports were procured was similar, whether for short-term or long-term hire. The Ninth Report of the Commission of Naval Revision, reporting in 1809. stated that when transports were wanted, the demand was usually signified by sending notice to Lloyds Coffee House, 'where Ship Owners and Brokers continually resort'. Current rate of hire were already established. 6 The Board then awaited tenders. An un sent tender lies in the Henley records and provides an example of how this was organised:

\\'e beg leaYe to offer to your Honble Board our ship Alina 226 Tons, Register ~kasurement. lying at Union Stairs Wapping for a Regular Coppered Transport at six months certain at the rate of Twenty Five Shillings per ton per Kalendar Month and to be subject to all the rules and conditions of the usual printed Charterparty. We beg leave to obsene that this \ esse! is adapted for the service of your Honble. Board, having Heights in her Hold and 'tween decks, and also that she is in complete readiness for any voyage she may be ordered upon (saving the extra stores requisite in the Transport Service. 7