The Transport Board's desire to remove itself from its subordinate position in the naval hierarchy indicates more clearly than anything else that it was very much part of it. While it certainly attempted to distance itself from the Admiralty, helped by the direct link to the Treasury and its other duties hiring for the Ordnance Board and the army, when it came to the organisation of victualling shipments to the navy, the Transport Board was very much one of the subordinate boards to the Admiralty. The Admiralty issued the formal orders for victualling the fleet, the other boards complied. The Victualling Board,

4!! TNA, ADM 1/3763/515-537, 7 February 1811. 
4'J Ibid. 

having requested the necessary tonnage from the Transport Board, was free to complain to the :-\dnliralty if it showed any negligence in the duty of procuring tonnage. Indeed, the Victualling Board appears to have taken some relish in doing so, so often were their complaints. A letter to the Admiralty in September 1808 was written

for the information of their Lordships. that upon the receipt on the 6 th inst. of their Lordships abon:mentioned directions. we, on that day, applied to the Transport Board requesting they would cause liS to be furnished with all possible expedition, with proper Vessels for the conveyance of the Provisions we were directed to send out for the aforesaid service; to which application not any reply has hitherto been given to us by the Transport Board. 50

This was the first of many letters of complaint, throughout the period 1808-12. It should be stated that in hiring tonnage from a mercantile sector reluctant to hand shipping over to the government (and forgo the lucrative trades in the Indies) the Transport Board had one of the most challenging jobs in naval administration.

The Admiralty would again be involved when transports were ready to sail; on being told by the Victualling Board that the 'delivery' was ready, it was the Admiralty'S responsibility to organise a convoy. Victualling transports were generally added to trade convoys heading to the Baltic. Important deliveries could be assigned their own convoy howe\'er.

The supply of provisions would therefore require no little coordination between the two boards; indeed, all victualling arrangements were conducted between the Victualling and Transport Boards. Only in dire circumstances would the Admiralty be forced to intervene. During the first two years of the Baltic fleet's existence, imperfect cooperation between the two would lead to severe problems in the victualling system and intervention from above. The problems that Middleton complained of in the 1780s were not yet fully solved by 1808. In the same letter to Shelburne with which this chapter began, Middleton complained he had endeavoured to enforce reform 'by every means in my power, for

50 TNA, ADM 110/58/239/41, VB to Admiralty, 16 September 1808.

these four years past, but nobody will understand it' .51 Twenty years later the importance of the nayal administration to British power was feeding through. Pitt's steady investment in the naval establishment throughout the 1780s, and the various commissions into the efficiency of all of Britain's military departments highlighted a growing understanding of the importance of the governmental boards to the British state. Williams wrote of the administratiye system in the 1780s thus: 'Sandwich then was at the head of an Administratiye System. the customs and rules of which were already deep rooted in tradition. It was a system which was formidably thorough, conscientious and conserYatiYe. imbued with the notion that the utmost care and economy must be preseryed in the expenditure of public money. Inflexibility was characteristic of all parts of the system. Fear of departing from precedent, of acting without due authority governed nearly all officers and officials'. 52 As we have seen the naval administration that was responsible for proYisioning foreign fleets during the Napoleonic Wars were instinctive reformers. The transfer of authority to the Victualling Board and Transport Board was a rationalisation of the victualling service. Each could concentrate in their areas of expertise.