

th

century naval administration letter format than bureaucratic superiority. That the Transport Board 'had already directed the masters of transports where to embark [and] ordered its own local agents to manage these embarkations', was again the Transport Board fulfilling its designated duties rather than undermining the Admiralty. The 'dependence' of other government departments on the Transport Board did not give that Board 'an authority that seems to have exceeded its apparent subordination to the Admiralty'. 47 If there was a dependence it was a mutual dependence, as one cog in a machine depends on another. Indeed, the fact that the Transport Board informed the

45 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 37. . . 
46 Roger Morriss, 'Colonization, Conquest, and the Supply of Food and Transport: The ReorganIzation of 
Logistics Management, 1780-1795' War in History, No.14, p. 317. 
47 Ibid, pp. 317, 322. 

Admiralty that transports were ready for a convoy, rather than ordering a convoy, hints at their respecti\'e authority.

It is certainly true that the Transport Board tried to emphasise its independence from other na\'al departments. In 1811, it wrote to the Admiralty stating that only over naval concerns were they to be considered to be in the naval hierarchy: 'the services relating to the Transport Department are placed, by Patent, under the authority of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury. and those which have reference to sick and wounded seamen and Prisoners of W~u', under the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty' .48 The distinction was important for the Transport Board always emphasised its link to the Treasury rather than with the Admiralty (this explains the direct line on the diagram above between the Transport Board and the Treasury). When asked if there were any reforms that could be implemented 'with advantage to the public service ... and whether any, and which of them, would require, previous to their adoption, the Sanction of Parliament. .. · the Boards only recommendation was bitter swipe at the Admiralty:

The only alteration upon which it appears to us necessary to obtain the sanction of the 
Legislature. is the following. According to the Act. .. 25 George III, Cap.31, the Navy 
Board only are authorised to pass the Accounts of the Victualling Board with the 
treasurer of the Navy. The accounts of this office with the treasurer of the Navy have 
hitherto been passed in the same manner, by order of the Lords of the Treasury, but as 
there seems an Impropriety in the Commissioners of the Navy passing accounts of an 
office with which they have in fact nothing to do, we deem it proper to submit to their 
Lordships the Fitness of this Board being authorised to pass their own Accounts with the 
Treasurer of the Navy, the propriety of which measure we have indeed been given to 
understand, the Commissioners of the Navy are likewise about to submit to the Lords 
Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury for adoption. 
4LJ 

