

The Admiralty informed the Victualling Board of a fleet's needs. To give an example, in ~1ay 1809. they wrote to the Board that:

Vice Admiral Sir Js. Saumarez. Commander in Chief of the Baltic hath in his letter to our Secretary of the loth Instant submitted the expectation of sending out to him in the Great Belt. .. a proportion of Provisions of all species, for two months, for twelve thousand l\len: \Y c do hereby require and direct you to give the necessary orders accordingly: letting us know when the Vessels which you may employ on this service, may be ready.3!

Occasionally, when discussing specific supplies of individual foodstuffs, some commanders would write directly to the Victualling Board, leaving it to that board to gain Admiralty acquiescence. 'Having taken into consideration your letter to our Secretary', the Admiralty wrote in August 1809, 'the Copy of one which you had received from Rear Admiral Dixon, requesting supplies of Live Oxen, and Vegetables for the use of His Majesty" s Ships under his orders in the Great Belt; We do hereby require & direct you, to send out to the said Rear Admiral, with as little delay as possible a supply of Potatoes & Onion for the use of the ships under his command, for two Months' .32

It was crucial to have either Admiralty or Treasury authorization to arrange a shipment of provisions: the hierarchy of naval administration was clear. On one occasion in August 1809, the Transport Board wrote to the Victualling Board, requesting that the latter would 'immediately supply Provisions for 20,000 Men for one month, for the use of the Infantry and Cavalry Transports in the ScheIdt; and stating that they will provide conveyance thereof whenever this Board shall report to them the quantity required'. The Victualling Board was adamant that Admiralty authorisation must be secured first. They wrote to the Transport Board in reply that 'there is not any instance of Provisions being furnished by

30 TNA, ADM 1111192, 16 August 1809. 
31 TNA, ADM 2/156/185-6, Admiralty to VB, 19 May 1809. 
32 TNA, ADM 2/156/441-2, Admiralty to VB, 19 August 1809. 

this Departlnent, and sent out of the Kingdom without the immediate directions of the Lord ConlInissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, His Majesty's Secretaries of State or the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty'. The Victualling Board were not simply sticklers for procedure. They did propose a compromise, 'in order that no time may be lost in the' execution of the service mentioned in their letter', they acquainted the Transport Board that 'the Tonnage required for the Provisions in question will be equal to 1,200 Tons, and that the necessary orders will be given to our officers to have the Provisions in readiness to be shipped on board the vessels that may be appropriated to receive them, the moment we receive the requisite authority for supplying the same'. Higher authority had to be received first. The Treasury order for the same came through on the 31 August. 33