

Both the Victualling Board and Transport Board had links with the merchant community. On the 9 September 1809 for example, the Transport Board wrote to James Henley, asking that 'I am commanded by the Commissioners for Victualling His Majesty's Navy, to request your attendance at the Board on Monday morning at 11 o'Clock,.8 The following day, after the meeting, the Henleys submitted a tender to supply the island of Anholt in the Baltic: 'we beg leave to tender to send a vessel to the Island of Anholt with a cargo of Coals fit for the lighthouse there, quantity not less then 60 Chaldrons and no more than one hundred Chal.' . No doubt the Board had hinted at a price that was likely to be found acceptable. The Henleys tendered for 'freight over sea, Duty at Six pound ten shilling per Chal. Five days to be allowed for the quantity .. .In case the vessel

5 TNA, ADM 111/191, VB to TB, 24 April 1811. 
6 Commission of Naval Revision, Ninth Report, p. 10. 
7 NMM, HNL 14/5 f.l0 (no date). 
H NMM, HNL 13/17 f.3, 9 September 1809. 

is ... detained damages at the rate of three pound sterling per day, the days to be taken from alongside at the expense of the government'.9

Ho\\' much this suggests preferential treatment for certain ship-owners is hard to judge. It is unlikely to say the least that their meeting was related to anything other than the prospectiYe tender. Certainly the Henleys were well known to the Transport Board and had a lengthy history of supplying the Board with shipping. It was logical for the Board to patronise merchants it knew to be reliable and had a proven history of delivering what was needed. As such, the Transport Board's courting of the Henleys amounts to intelligent management of the mercantile sector for their own ends. Some ship-owners were powerful men. with contacts in government. On one occasion, several of Isaac Solly's ships were detained in Swedish ports, prompting much fury in London. It testifies to Solly's influence. and to Britain's need for hemp that Canning instructed his consul in Sweden 'relative to the detention in the Ports of Sweden, of several ships & their property' to 'desire that you will make the necessary Representations to the Swedish Government on this subject, and use every exertion in your power to procure the Release of the ships in question' .10 That Solly's influence went as high as the Foreign Secretary should not be surprising. The next day, Canning attached a list of the ships employed by Mr Solly bringing Hemp from Russia to this Country for the use of His Majesty's Navy, desiring that Merry, the Minister at Stockholm, would 'use your utmost Endeavours with the Swedish Government to procure the immediate Release of such of these ships as may have been detained in the Swedish Ports, and that you will do everything in your power to protect the whole of them from any molestation in the prosecution of their voyage to England' .11

Once tenders had been received and accepted, the ship in question was examined. The Transport Board wrote a report in 1811 outlining the procedure. 'When a ship that has been tendered to the Board for a Transport, has passed the Regular Surveys, jointly made by the Inspecting and Surveying Officers, as to her fitness and has been reported by them