

Once an order to provision a foreign fleet was received, the Victualling Board would then request the necessary tonnage for its delivery from the Transport Board. The Transport Board was located in Dorset Square:n As such, it was a thirty minute walk from the Victualling Board offices in Somerset House on the Strand to the Transport Board offices; close enough to ensure letters could be exchanged daily, but crucially just far enough to preclude much in the way of verbal communication and decision-making. All Victualling Board correspondence with the Transport Board was therefore written. So while this was in no small part to ensure official business could be substantiated and minuted in case a board's activities came into question, it was also a geographical necessity.

The Transport Board's domain was the delivery of all stores worldwide, not just food provisions. In 1809 the Transport Board's duties were listed as 'the hiring and appropriating of ships and vessels for the conveyance of troops and baggage, victualling, ordnance, barrack, commissariate, naval and military stores of all kinds, convicts and stores to New South Wales', with many other smaller services' .44 This would take place on government owned ships, but much more commonly on hired vessels or 'freight', which were paid relative to their tonnage to transport victuals to the fleet. Just as the Navy Board had done before the hand-over of control of transports, the Transport Board controlled the owners and the masters of ships through the 'power of the purse', to use

42 TNA, ADM 1111192, 11 September 1809. . 
43 This is now Cockspur Street, running into eastern Pall MalL and is not to be confused WIt~ the Do~set 
Square near Paddington. See John Tallis' London Street Views J 838-40 (London TopographIcal SOCIety 
reprint, 2002) p. 85. 
44 Commission of Naval Revision, Ninth Report p. 9. 

Syrett's phrase.

The Board would withhold a major part of a vessel's freight until its charter had been completed. If it was breached, a fine would be placed on the freight of the offending ships. Irregular or negligent acts were reported, while the Transport Board would be informed when a ship separated from its convoy; compensation could then be awarded. Just like their colleagues in the Victualling Board, the Transport Board relied on mobilising resources from the private sector to organise the vast amounts of transport shipping needed to fulfil the British state's needs. The Board's trials and tribuations in doing so will be the focus of the next chapter.

The Transport Board tried to maintain a spirit of fierce independence from the Admiralty and its subordinate nayal boards. This has since confused historians. Morriss for example argues for the Transport Board's relative independence: 'although nominally subject to the Admiralty, the Transport Board possessed an authority that was independent of the existing nayal boards and derived directly from the king through his secretary of state. So far as the management of transports were concerned, the Admiralty took a secondary, if not subordinate role' .46 Cabinet orders could devolve directly on to the Transport Board, as in 1794 in which Transport Board reminders are deemed to be orders to the Admiralty. However, it is wrong to read too much into the Transport Board's tone. That the Transport Board felt it necessary to 'remind' the Admiralty of these particular orders when applying for a convoy was not an example of independence, more a function of 18