

49 TNA, 1/3763/515-537, 7 February 1811. 
50 Ibid. 

Twn Months. at the end of Ten Months; and a Payment of Two Months whenever Eight Months shall be ~ue. ka\ing always at least Six Months Pay in Arrear for the Security of the Government.'I1

The Transport Board thus deferred payment, allowing them to run the transport service on credit. While the ship was in service, it was the Transport Board that held the power. If a ship on short term service was delayed because of a naval order, for example from a Comnlander in Chief. the Transport Board allowed for 'Interest on Transport-Office Bills added thereto for the Number of Tons abovementioned, for so long a time as the said Ship or Vessel shall be continued in His Majesty's Service'. In September 1809 the Board agreed to pay the owner of the Ann, 'if detained more than ten days after arrival in discharging the Cargo to be paid four guineas per day demurrage'. 52

Howeyer. this could work the other way, and with much stronger penalties. Negligence on the part of ~lasters or ship-owners meant ships could be mulcted. It was agreed in the contract between the respective parties, 'that upon the Loss of Time, Breach of Orders, or Neglect of Duty. by the said Master being made appear, the said Commissioners shall haye free Liberty, and be permitted to mulct (fine), or make such Abatement out of the Freight and Pay. as shall be adjudged fit and reasonable' .53 The Ann was ordered that 'the Master does engage to proceed immediately with the Provisions under-mentioned, Wind and Weather permitting, and to make the best of his Way thither, on the Penalty of having Four-pence per Tun a Day abated from his Freight Bill, in Case of any Neglect or Delay h· P . 'i"+ on IS art.-

This was a serious issue. By March 1811, the Harry Morris reported to the notary public in Portsmouth. It had served its Baltic portion of service as contracted: the vessel Harry Morris of London had passed all of the Transport Board's criteria, and had laden at Shields with a cargo of coals and bound to Anholt. It arrived at Yarmouth and received orders from the Resident Agent there to proceed to this part to join the convoy for

51 NMM, HNL 13/20, f.8, 4 September 1810. 
52 NMM, HNL 13/17 f.ll, 9 October 1809. 
53 NMM, HNL 13/20, f.8, 4 September 1810. 
54 NMM, HNL 34/30, f.3, 5 May 1800. 

Lisbon.55 In this latter capacity it had disappointed the Board. The Harry Morris had missed the convoy to Lisbon and Henleys and Son was mulcted of part of its fee. Two seamen had deserted. the master had not caught the wind and the ship had missed the Lisbon conYoy. The Henleys were not paid while it waited for the next convoy. Added to this. they were fined for having a vessel undermanned. 56 The Transport Board was unimpressed. writing to Michael Henley and repeating their intention to 'stop the Pay, and to charge a Mulct against the Transport Harry Morris ... [the Transport Board] ... see no reason to alter their decisions in this case' .57

The Transport Board would remember this indiscretion. Three months later the Harry iHorris once again tendered to serve for the Transport Board. On the 4 June, the Board wrote to Henley. 'in return to your letter of the 1 st Instant, offering to fit the Harry Morris, 240 tons. three months Transport for a six months Coppered Ship; I am directed by the Board to acquaint you, that she is not approved of for a six months Coppered Transport' .58 Partly this was due to the lower demand for transport tonnage. As we have seen. 1809 saw the high point of tonnage requirement but this demand had receded slightly by 1811. However, although there was no overriding need for tonnage, and the Transport Board could select its preferred ships, it is interesting that it should turn down this particular Henley ship. Indeed, the Transport Board continued to hire other Henley ships: for example, the Ceres and the Grape in 1811.