

Payment for freight by the Transport Board was done on credit. The government always insisted on six month's payment being reserved, 'to enable Government to indemnify itself for any claims which it may have upon the owners' .48 No ship hired was paid month by month, being paid only a proportion of what was owed during its service. As the Transport Board made clear in 1811, in a response to an Admiralty request for 'a

44 Michael Duffy, Soldiers, Sugar and Seapower: the British Expeditions to the West Indies and the War 
against Revolutionary France (Oxford University Press, 1987) p. 191. 
45 Condon, 'The Administration of the Transport Service', p. 3. 
46 Hall, British Strategy in the Napoleonic War, p. 42. . ' 
47 NMM, HNL 13120, f.8, 4 September 1810. Although it should be added that Henley's dId at one pomt 
have ships in the West Indies trade. 
48 Commission of Naval Revision, Ninth Report, p. II. 

statement of the order in which the various Expenditure of this office ... are authorised', it explained that a bill was issued for two months hire, payable 90 days after the initial date by the Treasurer of the Navy. After the ship has been in service for six months, a further payment of two months' hire was Inade, provided a certificate under the hand of an Agent for Transports could be produced, stating that she was still employed, complete in men and stores and fit for the service in which she is engaged. An additional bill for two months freight was issued at the end of ten months. Payments for two month's hire were repeated. This meant that after a transport had been in service for fourteen months, a 'reserye of six months' Pay' was kept up, a deposit to cover any stores belonging to the Government being lost or damaged during the course of the service. This ensured that Government had the means of indemnification for any time lost, whether through neglect of the master or crew. or from inability of the ship for performing the services on which she may haye been employed.-+ 9

When a ship was discharged from serVIce the owners were required to produce certificates from the necessary departments, as evidence of their having accounted for all goyernment stores and cargoes supplied to them by the Victualling, Ordnance or Navy Boards, before the balance of freight remaining due was allowed to be paid. Only when these certificates had been handed in, considered by the sub-Accountant and the General Accountant. and then laid before the Board for approval and allowance, was a Bill made out for the balance due.5o The Transport Board ensured this was written into every contract. For example, the contract for a Henley ship in 1810 stated clearly that

After the said Ship or Vessel shall have been in the Service Three Months, and the sa~d Michael Henley and Son, or the Owners or Master shall have produced to the SaId Commissioners a Certificate, to the Effect contained in the Margin hereof, from the Commanding or Senior Officer of His Majesty's Ships, or Agents for Transports, under whose Orders and Directions such Ship or Vessel shall happen to be ... Ship or Vessel, shall have and receive a Bill of Imprest, made out and registered for One months Freight More and after the said ship or Vessel shall have been in the service for Six months, and the S~id Michael Henley and Son or the Owners, or the Master of the said Ship or Vessel, in behalf of the Owners shall have produced to the said Commissioners, a like Certificate thereof, as before the said Michael Henley and Son shall have and receive and Bill of Imprest, made out and registered for Two Months Freight more; and a further Payment of