

59

Although the Transport Board was often needy. it refused to be browbeaten into accepting incompetence in its service.

The Transport Board was prepared to penalise ship-owners who lent their ships. Such orders came from the very top of government. Perceval, the Chancellor and later Prime Minister, had in 1808 highlighted, the 'very many delays, and not a few

55 NMM, HNL 13/20, f.18, 16 March 1811. 
56 NMM, HNL/13/20, 16. . 
57 NMM HNL 13/20 f.19 18 March 1811. Six months later, the TB actually reduced the Mulct, chargmg 
compen;ation only fo'r the 'five days the Henley ships had cost them: 'the. Board ~re pleased to remit, to five 
days, the Mulct imposed upon the Harry Morris, Coal Transport; that bemg the tIme actually lost to 
Government by her not sailing under the Hotspur's' Convoy for Lisbon'. NMM, HNL 13120, f.24, 5 
November 1811. 
5R NMM, HNL 13/20, f.21, 4June 1811. 
59 NMM, HNL 13/23, f.3 25 June 1811. 

accidents ... occasioned by the desertion, indiscipline, and want of Seamanship - both of 
Masters and Men in the Transports .. .1 believe this is the constant complaint on every 
occasion when a large body of Transports is employed'. 60 The neglect of a master could 
absolve the board of any responsibility to buy the vessel. In early 1810, the news of the 
loss of the President victualler in the Baltic broke in London. Rear Admiral Dixon wrote 
to the Transport Board, complaining of the misconduct of the master of the President 
victualler. "in consequence if his having gone to England without waiting upon him to 
give an account of the disaster ... Let a copy thereof be delivered to the Accountant for 
Stores. in order that the impropriety of the Master's conduct may be strictly investigated 
before any Certificates be granted to enable the Owners to receive payment of the 
Freight. And acquaint the Rear Admiral therewith, thanking him for the 
. . . 61 
commUnICatIon. 

The transference of risk onto the merchant was made clear by the Commission of Naval Revision. The storekeeper signed a bill of lading, and provided blank receipts to the master of the vessel, for respective pursers to sign as provisions were handed over to Royal ~a\'y ships. These receipts were transmitted immediately on the transport's return, accounting for the whole cargo, and were answerable financially for any discrepancy.62 The Transport Board could be forgiving: it was in the Board's interest, after all, not to anger potential future lenders of freight. When the Ceres, another Henley ship, reported problems unloading its carriage on the Island of Anholt, the Transport Board was more understanding. 'The Ceres delivered one Boat's load as three Chaldrons of Coals, after which the whole of the Boats belonging to the Island were employed in delivering Bricks and Tiles from the Philesia Transport that no Boats came to the Ceres till after the Philesia had delivered her cargo, which was about the i h or 8 th day of September'. There were clear time limits in the charterparty (contract) that the ships were following. The Ceres was required to lay at the Island of Anholt for the purpose of discharging its cargo