

Essential was the practice of giving, signing, and keeping Bills of Lading (specific receipts for ships) and other indents for supplies received on Board and the acceptance that they were accountable for the same. A log-book of the wind and weather was kept. At the end of the service, this would be delivered to the Transport Office, 'upon Oath, if required'. together with all orders and instructions that he received.

26

The Freedom was a transport in the Baltic between April and December 1808. Its records and receipts remain, listing many receipts for supplies bought during 1808. Also kept for the ship's and owner's records were wage accounts, portage bills and receipts for dues.27

When under contract, and when sent to a fleet, the transports came under the orders of the Commander in Chief. As such, they could be ordered wherever they were needed. John Stables, Master of the Ann of Leith, reported that he left the port of Leith laden with ninety-six tons one hundred-weight of coals for the Island of Anholt. On arriving at Gothenburg he applied to the Commander in Chief, Sir James Saumarez, for a convoy to

24 TNA,ADM 111/187,11 June 1808. 
25 NMM, HNL 13/20, f.8, 4 September 1810. 
26 NMM, HNL 13/20, f.8, 4 September 1810. 
27 NMM, HNL 59/81 f.2-31 April-December 1808. 

Anholt. \vhen he received orders from him to stop in Hawke Roads, Gothenburg to supply the Royal Navy ships on that station, 'the quantity of twenty-four Tons, sixteen hundred weight one quarter and twenty pounds of coals by weight and also the further quantity of Forty six. Chaldrons and Thirty Bushels of Coals by measure as appears by the receipts hereunto annexed'. Later under the orders of Captain Reynolds of His Majesty's ship the Tribune. 'and also by verbal orders from Admiral Dixon's captain', he applied to Captain Barclay of His Majesty's ship Minotaur for instructions, 'which he received and in conformity thereto sailed from Gottenburgh on the ninth day of January last for the port of Leith \vith the remainder of the coals on board' .28 Once signed, a merchant vessel was for all intents and purposes a government vessel.

The Transport Board's relationship with Contractors

What were the incentives for contracting with the Transport Board? Wartime shipping profits outside government service could be large. Hall states that it was 'hard to stop civilian owners taking advantage of the nation's needs to make inflated profits' .29 In a time of unprecedented commercial prosperity, it was more advantageous for a merchant to put his ship to a trade than let it to government. 30 This being true, the question should be asked, why did any enter government service? In practice, the fear of capture played a part in a ship-owner's decision and could encourage him to enter into government service. For the Transport service to procure shipping, they were forced to enter the open market and offer freight rates which could compete with those in civilian carrying trade.

31

Given the risk of capture, particularly prevalent in the Baltic with Danish gunboats a constant risk through the Sound, the safe, steady profits available with the Transport Board were attractive. This did not necessarily mean however that the sole incentive was financial. Added to this was the small amount of effort that went into managing a ship in the pay of the Transport Board. As Simon Ville has noted, 'the Henleys saw advantages