

IL

Source. TNA, ADM 110/60/90-1.

As the Victualling Board later minuted, the accountant for stores 'having prepared and laid before the Board an Account of the quantity of Provisions remaining in the several Stores at Home and abroad', would then go on to show 'the number of Days the same

12 TNA, ADM 110/60/90-1, 150-1, 'A Statement of the Provisions sent to the Baltic and of those under orders for that station ... ' VB, 13 June 1809.

will serY\~ the Men Victualled at the respective stations,.13 As such, a detailed system of receipts and note-taking was practised, with Saumarez keeping a strict eye on provisions. For example, in May 1808 he sent a memorandum observing that 'several of the weekly accounts of the squadron sent to the Commander in Chief having been very incorrect which has rendered it impossible to ascertain the quantity of each species of provisions on board'. He then directed that 'the Captains and Commanders of the squadron pay particular attention to filling up the different columns as follows. In the Column for Beef is to be expressed the no. of weeks remaining of that article, allowing it to be served agreeably to the standing orders of half flour half beef. The no. of weeks flour is to be marked in the same manner. In the column of Suet and Fruit the no. of weeks of each is to be expressed in the separate columns' .14

The masters of the respective transports kept the receipts on delivering the provisions they carried to the fleet. The master was told to collect all his papers together, including owner's accounts and receipts of the supplies delivered. On taking command of troops on the Island of Anholt in late 1809, the efforts of Captain Edward Nicholls in securing provisions from the Victualling Board gives an excellent picture of the seriousness with which the board took the constant receipt taking. The Victualling Board minutes note a letter from Nicholls, 'requesting to be furnished with Instructions for his future guidance in accounting for the Provisions &c under his charge'. The board transmitted in reply a printed copy of the 'General Instructions' given to the Pursers of other ships and vessels in the Royal Navy, desiring that

He will conform to the regulations therein required to be observed, in all cases ... and that he will be very particular in obtaining all the requisite Vouchers for the purchases of Provisions &c which he may at any time make as required by those instructions ... acquaint him that he may continue to draw upon us for the proportion of three hundred men; but not to consider the same as an absolute grant, but only as a temporary allowance until the passing of his accounts in this Office, when the expens~s he shall actually have sustained can be clearly ascertained. Desire therefore, that he WIll cause a daily account to be kept of the Expenses to which he may unavoidably be subjected in providing necessaries for the use of his Garrison.

15

13 TNA, ADM 111/195, I May 1810. 
14 NMM MKH 112 General Memo, 6 May 1808. 
15 INA ADM 1111193, 9 November 1809. It should be mentioned that Nicholls did not prove up to this 
task. In' 1811, Lieutenant G Champion, Commander and Purser of the Snipe Gun Brig, wrote to the 