

That said, once on a station. a transport could be retained there indefinitely. In practice, there was little sense in this being done in the Baltic. Dependent on supplies from England. keeping transports in the Baltic made little sense. In other theatres, such as the ~1editerranean. this was practised. On 12 December 1799, Keith wrote explaining that he had 'directed the two Victuallers named in the Margin [Lord Nelson, Amphitrite] to be dispatched to Lisbon for the supply of such of His Majesty's Ships in the River Tagus as may be in want of Provisions'. He did state that after unloading them, they would 'proceed to England under protection of the first Convoy' .70 This suggests that Keith was sensitive to concerns of contract length. However, the resident agent for transports in the Mediterranean, William Day, writing to Keith, stated 'should your lordship think it right to send Transports to the Tagus; I have to request that your lordship will be pleased to direct that one or two may be sent with them that I may detach them with the different divisions of transports as the service may require,.71 Clearly, keeping transports beyond their time was loophole taken advantage of many times. The Friton, William & Mary, and Zephyr transports were kept at Minorca employed in conveying cattle from Leghorn. A further 1,842 tons of transport shipping was kept at Minorca as victuallers, 1,713 at

Palermo, and 2,355 kept at Gibraltar. 72

69 NMM, HNL 34/30, f.2, 16 June 1800. . 70 NMM, KEIIL/23/121, Keith to Matinger, acting agent victualler, 12 December 1799. KeIth also wrote a week later, ordering that 'I have to desire that you will proceed without delay to clear such of the Transports as it may be advisable to return to England' under the protection of convoy. NMM, KEIIL/231l46, Keith to Mottley, 21 December 1799. 71 NMM, KEIIL/1/5, Day to Keith, 12 December 1799. , .. . , 72 NMM, KEliLIl/143-5, TB to Keith, 8 March 1800. See also Davey, Withm HostIle Shores.

In 1800 Keith instructed Lieutenant Lamb, by now the resident' Agent for Transports and Victuallers'. that he would soon 'have occasion in a very few weeks to embark at Leghorn for Minorca. about four thousand five hundred men and three thousand horses with the necessary baggage and stores'. He desired that he would go about 'refraining thither. as many Transports and Victuallers as will be fit for this purpose ... or, if these should not be a sufficient number, all that can possibly be cleared and fitted for this sen'ice·. Need overcame maxims of early 19

th

century property rights. Keith made it clear that 'it is not my intention that any are to be hired,.73 The Victualling Board condoned this practice. stating in July 1800 stating that that 'the Victuallers hired for the purpose of transporting Provisions to the Mediterranean, are invariably taken up on monthly pay' after their terms. 'for the purpose of their being removed to such Ports, and at such times as the Commander in Chief may direct' .74 This was not commandeering by name: ho\\'ever it was certainly a blurring of the line between state and private property.