

The Transport Board thus proved adept at managing the resources of the private sector for its own ends. Using higher freight-rates and ensuring that the ship's procurement could be extended after the length of the contract, the Board took an increasingly large number of vessels into the transport service in the years 1807-12. It should be remembered that loaning a ship to the Transport Board was a more secure option than pursuing the more lucrative and more dangerous mercantile trades. To continue to procure freight, the Transport Board found it necessary to raise the freight rate to unprecedented levels for this essential service.

The procurement of transports was a crucial part of the provIsIomng chain. Naval administration had two levels of concern during the Napoleonic Wars. Firstly, could they get it done, and supply what was needed? Secondly, could they provide it at the cheapest possible price? For the Victualling Board, the first was never an issue: they would spend the war attempting to achieve the best possible price for their efforts. For the Transport

73 NMM, KEIIL1241207-8, Keith to Lamb, 17 April 1800. 
74 TNA, ADM 111/156, 11 July 1800. 

Board, the supply of transports could be a cause for concern. The Transport Board was anx.ious to avoid paying over the odds: it would be wrong to suggest economy was not an objective. However, this desire could be overridden by a more basic need, the chronic want of transport tonnage. The rise in freight rates to 25 shillings demonstrated that, at times. the Transport Board did become desperate and economy was put on the back burner. As such. problems of supply could impact on the victualling system in a way that was never an issue for the Victualling Board. This thesis will now look at the adnlinistrative developments between 1808 and 1812 for the supply of the Baltic fleet in which problems hiring tonnage would have considerable impact.

Chapter 6: Victualling the Baltic Fleet, 1808-1809

In October 1808 Vice-Adtniral Sir James Saumarez visited the Swedish squadron and witnessed first hand the devastating consequences of an ineffective victualling system. 'On board their ships'. he informed the Admiralty, 'I found 1500 Sick all much affected with scury)'. accompanied with dysentery, low fever, and a few Catarrhal complaints ... all apparently sinking under general debility and despondency; in many instances amounting to insanity. which too frequently terminated in the unhappy sufferer committing suicide ... ·. The situation was worse on land: 'in their hospitals I found 3864 suffering under similar disease', he continued.!

The poor health of the Swedish forces is a measure against which the efforts of the Royal Navy to supply itself through the Napoleonic Wars can be judged. Employed in the same Baltic region as the Swedish Navy, how was it that the British seamen stationed there did not come to suffer from such problems? A monthly return of sick and wounded on board the Baltic squadron at the end of 1808 found only four cases of scurvy amongst over 11,000 seamen, compared to forty five cases of rheumatism and thirty two cases of Venereal Disease. 2 This is made all the more impressive when one considers the challenges of distance, geography and politics Chapter 3 outlined.