

The lack of pro\'isions did effect operations, albeit in a small way, notable the brief detention of the 1H ars and Africa, having to travel out off their station to collect provisions. 'I send Captain Hope the account of the distribution of provisions made, of which the Centaur is full' wrote Hood to Saumarez. 'The Mars and Africa return to their stations immediately. The detention of the Brunswick and Edgar 1 hope you will ... write Admiral Keats by the Eralus of my intentions that such other victuallers may follow as may be necessary for the Implacable & Goliath thought the Centaur's supply will I hope be all that may be necessary until your orders arrive'. 24

Hood too complained to Saumarez of shortages, as supplies took longer to reach the eastern Baltic. 'You will be informed that the Two Victuallers that have joined me. I had hopes that the Freedom would have been one of them as there is a material deficiency in the supply, particularly bread. Neither the Edgar nor Brunswick having anived, it is my intention to take such Provisions as possible in the Centaur. The cause of the delay of those ships I imagine from Admiral Keats' detour. . .I shall be ready for anything and this

22 For a more detailed analysis of victualling timeliness throughout the period 1808-1812 see Chapter 9, pp. 
230-240. 
23 Hano is on the southern tip of Sweden near Karlskrona. SRO, HA 93/6/1/237, Saumarez to Baron de 
Rajalin, 5 August 1808. 
24 SRO, HA 93/6/1/235, Hood to Saumarez 6 August 1808. 
142 

wind is now favourable for the other victuallers if they are on their way' .25 As Hood's testimony reveals. the delays had been exacerbated by 'Admiral Keats' detour', namely the sudden need to provide provisions for a Spanish army numbering 10,000 men. This whole episode demonstrates the remarkable flexibility the victualling system provided, rather than its mismanagement.

In August 1808 Saumarez was ordered to assist in the removal of a Spanish army from Denmark. and organise its transportation back to the Iberian Peninsula, to join the nationalist revolt there against French rUle. 26 The operation placed a strain on a new and untested supply system, adding ten thousand soldiers to the number to be fed, to all intents and purposes doubling the complement of mouths to feed in the Baltic.

Figure 12: The Repatriation of Spanish Soldiers from Denmark, 1808

JUTLAND

NORTH SEA

HELIGOLAND ~

MECKLENBURG

HANOVER

BALTIC SEA

25 SRO, HA 93/6/1/234, Hood to Saumarez 5 August 1808. . . . , 26 For a full account of this operation see James Davey, 'The repatnatlOn of Spa~Ish soldIers from .. Denmark, 1808: The British Government, Logistics and Maritime Supremacy', In The Journal of Military History, Vol. 74, No.4 (October 2010).

The troops were retrieved from the Danish port of Nyborg then taken to the Island of Langeland. south east of Funen, which as Keats explained, 'is a productive island and where they could support themselves till transports were ready,.27 A convention was entered into between the Spanish commander, La Marques de Romana and the governor of the island guaranteeing non-hostility and a sufficient supply of provisions provided by the island, which was fertile enough to produce it, albeit for only a few weeks. Most important was a plentiful supply of water.28