

From the length of harassing, and detached service the Crews of His Majesty's Ships Superb, Brunswick, Dictator, Sa/sette, Lynx, Prometheus and Tartarus have endured; which has deprived them of necessary vegetable refreshment to ess~ntial to remedy and check the peculiar disposition this climate and its bad water has .to ~nduce Scurvy ... a?d understanding that this country cannot afford our squadron mdIspensably reqUISIte

45 INA, ADM 111/191,3 April 1809.

~upplies of fresh n:getables during the winter, to suppress the growing and dangerous I~t111~ncc of scun'y. Under these circumstances I cannot delay making known to you my kars. that should the crews of any of the Ships before mentioned be necessitated to suffer the sc\erity of the winter here, there are strong reasons to dread that we must lose a num~er o~' yaluable liyes ... From this statement I must beg leave to submit to your consIderatIOn the expediency of either requiring occasional supplies of vegetables from England. or recommending the ships I have particularly to be delivered as soon as possible by healthy fresh ships, which would prove the most happy means to preserve health.-t6

Jamison was paranoid after seeIng the state of the Swedish fleet. He need not have worried, as the superior supply system continued to support the Baltic fleet. Neither was the Admiralty concerned, despite having meetings with Saumarez over the winter of 1808-9. In the Admiralty's reply a few months later, his request was refused. 'I have receiyed and laid before my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, your letter of Yesterdays date. inclosing one from Dr Jamison, Physician to the Fleet under your command' they wrote. and must 'acquaint you that they do not think it necessary to put any yegetables on Board the Gorgon, as the fleet must in a short time be supplied on their station, with what may be necessary' .47

The naval administrators and Saumarez began to plan for the future. The winter months when Saumarez was back in London provided an opportunity to meet and discuss where improvements for the next year could be made. It provided an opportunity to correct mistakes and failures and refine the victualling system. This happened every winter. In 1809 for instance, the Victualling Board reported that the Admiralty were attempting to reduce the number of ships carrying provisions to the Baltic. Fewer, larger ships would be used. It was recorded in the minutes that 'it is the desire of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty that the said Provisions be conveyed in as few Vessels as possible; and that Vice Admiral Saumarez has verbally expressed a wish to the same effect to the Chairman; and request they will let us know whether it is in their power to appropriate to

46 SRO, HA 93/6/1/460, Dr Jamison to Keats, 28 December 1808. 
47 SRO, HA 93/6/1/628, Admiralty to Saumarez, 27 April 1809. 

the said ser\'lce Vessels of a greater tonnage than those they have engaged' .48 Much \,ictualling planning was done verbally, and therefore was left out of the minutes. Although there is no written evidence therefore, we do know that these personal conferences took place, and that improvements were made. Again in the winter of 1810, the Chairman of the Victualling Board, wrote that 'in a conference he has had with Sir James Sall1llare~ upon the subject of the mode it may be expedient to adopt for furnishing the supplies in question, it was agreed that it would be necessary to send out four months Provisions of all species for fifteen thousand Men, and that the same should be forwarded