

Troops' .35

He need not have worried: a fleet of victuallers was already set to leave London. The Victualling Board had shown considerable efficiency and confidence in the success of the operation. They organised and sent a shipment of eighteen victuallers which arrived a mere two weeks after rationing had been introduced.

36

Two weeks after the letter was written a shipment of eighteen navy and army victuallers arrived in Langeland which in

32 TNA, ADM 80/145, Keats Order Book, 8 August 1808. TNA, ADM 80.145, Keats' Order Book, August 
20 1808. 
33 TNA, ADM 1/6/399-400, Saumarez to Admiralty, 6 August 1808. 
34 TNA, ADM 1/6/399-400, Saumarez to Admiralty, 6 August 1808. 
35 SRO, HA 93/6/1/264, Saumarez to Keats, 17 August 1808. 
36 The need to feed the unexpected Spanish army explains the need for four deliveries of victuals froI? 
Deptford in 1808, especially the two so close together, on the 6 and 22 September. The former was mmed 
largely at replenishing the huge amounts of the previous delivery (the 15 July) that had been consumed by 
over 9,000 Spanish soldiers. 

Keats' words placed 'us quite at ease on the subject of Provisions', and enabled him to end the rationing.-

n

They were cutting it close, but it again demonstrates how the Admiralty and its subordinate boards were capable of responding to immediate events, and nlore than adequately providing for them.

Certainly there were still victualling problems, particularly at the end of the year, as the majority of the tleet began its migration back to British ports for the winter. Rear Admiral Dixon complained to Keats in December 1808 that 'the River [the Gata Alv] is Frozen and we can get no more Water'. Further to this, a supply of provisions had arrived, enabling Dixon "to complete all the ships to 25 January, and I have gone to Two thirds allo\\'ance of Bread from this day ... I am getting very low in Spirits and other Provisions' .38 Keats himself repeated victualling problems; 'If the weather which we have had for this week past is the usual for the Season, it is time to quit the Belt .. .1 am also under some embarrassment on the score of Provisions, the ships, notwithstanding I took what I could from the Mars on her passage down [back to Britain] and ... tho' it is now a fortnight since I sent to Gothenburg, no Victualler or Sloop with a temporary

supply has yet made its appearance' .39

This apparent shortage is something of a mystery. We can certainly be sure it was perceived rather than real. Saumarez wrote of how he would:

direct Rear Admiral Keats to remain at Marstrand during the Winter, for the purpose of protecting the Trade of His Majesty's subjects, and of His Ally the King of Sweden; holding himself, and the ships, and vessels under his orders, in constant readiness to cooperate with the Swedish fleet. .. causing him to be supplied with such stores of all species as can be spared from the Ships which are ordered to England; leaving all provisions ordered for the supply of the Ships under my command, at the disposal of the Rear Admiral. ,to