6 P. E. TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

‘great, but think how bad things could have been if x or y had occurred”) or
“upward” counterfactuals to inspire greater effort (“Do not be complacent
about the present, think how good things could have been and, by implica-
tion, could yet become”).

(4) Need for cognitive consistency: The well-documented aversion to im-
balanced or dissonant couplings of events should motivate people to rule out
counterfactuals that link bad causes (like Stalin) to good outcomes (like ac-
celerated economic growth) or that link good causes (like foreign aid) to bad
‘outcomes (like increased dependency and corruption of recipient regimes).
Pressures for cognitive consistency should also motivate people to defend
“core beliefs.” For example, people who believe that “evil is avoidable”
should be strongly motivated to generate counterfactuals that undo moral
catastrophes. But people of different political persuasions may define moral
catastrophe differently. For many conservatives, the root of evil in Soviet
history goes straight back to the Bolshevik revolution of 1917 (which should
be a focal point of “if only” speculation); for many social democrats, a noble
socialist experiment was corrupted by Stalinist tyranny (which should be a
focal point of “if only" speculation). ‘These predictions fare reasonably well
against the evidence (Chaper 3, Breslauer).

‘The list is a lengthy and unparsimonious one. Here we simply want to add
that there are always two levels at which motives may influence counterfac~
tual reasoning: private thought (affecting what we truly believe) and public
posturing (affecting what we say we believe and want to induce others 10
believe). Most psychologists think that the motives listed here do indeed
shape privately held plausibility judgments of counterfactuals, but few
would deny that public impression management is also at work (Tetlock and
Manstead 1985)—a judgment with which most of our contributors seem to
concur. This volume contains suggestive evidence that the closer we get to
prescriptive policy debates, the greater the temptation to use counterfactual
arguments as rhetorical tools to justify either what one plans to do or has
‘already done (Chapter 3, Breslauer; Chapter 5, Lebow and Stein; Chapter 6,
Herrmann and Fischerkeller).

How should we respond to this extended list of cognitive and motivational
threats to the validity of thought experiments? We urge a middle-ground
response between arrogance and despair. The arrogant response is, of
course, to argue that although mere mortals may fall prey to these biases,
serious professionals are surely immune. We judge this response arrogant
because there is already abundant evidence that a wide range of profes-
sionals working on important tasks are susceptible to many of the effects
sussed here (Dawes 1991). Moreover, some of our contributors report
evidence of certain hypothesized biases in the scholarly literature (Chapter
3, Breslauer, Chapter 8, Kiser and Levi). The despairing response is, of
‘course, to argue that the biases identified by psychologists are inevitable—