

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS, 7

that they have hopelessly contaminated all counterfactual arguments ad-
vanced thus far and will contaminate all counterfactuals advanced into the
foreseeable future. The former response is too dismissive of the psychologi-
cal literature; the latter takes it too literally. The appropriate response in our
view is to acknowledge cognitive biases and to make good-faith efforts to
hold each other accountable to standards of evidence (such as those sketched
in this chapter) that check the most serious and pervasive of these biases
(Tetlock 1992b). All research methods are subject to contamination and mis-
interpretation; it is only prudent to beware of potential biases in the most
subjective of all methods of inquiry, the counterfactual thought experiment.

Conclusion

‘There is something about the topic of counterfactual thought experiments in
world politics that makes people feel a bit uneasy, even defensive. To be
blunt, it feels like epistemological slumming. As social scientists, we are all
too familiar with the prestige hierarchy for methods of drawing causal infer-
ence. At the top of the scientific pecking order is experimentation in which
‘we can manipulate hypothesized causes and then either hold everything else
constant or randomize extraneous influences across treatment conditions.
Experimental control of this sort is obviously out of the question for most
questions in world politics. We cannot rerun the tape of history: splicing a
Gorbachev in or out, delaying or accelerating key technological develop-
ment, or tinkering with this or that aspect of macroeconomic policy.

Social scientists often resort to statistical control when experimentation is
ethically or practically problematic. But statistical arguments themselves of-
ten rest on counterfactual assumptions (Fearon 1991) and are, in any case,
extraordinarily difficult to make for many issues that loom large in security
debates. For example, what kind of regression or time series analyses will
allow us to estimate the causal contribution of nuclear weapons to the “long,
peace” between the United States and Soviet Union between 1945 and 19917
There are simply too many confounding variables—a problem we can alle-
viate but not eliminate through judicious selection of comparison cases and
meticulous process-tracing of decision-making protocols,

So where does that leave us? Probably still feeling uneasy: we seem to be
stuck with quite literally a third-rate method, counterfactual thought experi-
mentation. The control groups exist—if indeed “exist” is the right word—in
the imaginations of political analysts who are left with the daunting task of
reconstructing how history would have unfolded if causal variables of the
past had taken on different values from the ones they actually did. The
whole exercise starts to look hopelessly subjective, circular, and nonfalsifia-
ble. What is to stop us from simply inventing counterfactual outcomes that

