u P. E, TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

decisive difference between the occurrence and nonoccurrence of the target
event (and perhaps only the target event), by ruling out counterfactuals in
which the antecedent and consequent are separated by such wide gaps of
time that itis silly to suppose that all other things can be held equal, and by
linking antecedent and consequent with connecting principles that are faith-
ful to what we know about how people at the time thought and about the
constraints within which people at the time had to work. This complex set of
rules contains potential contradictions, but it does capture the flavor of most
idiographic forms of counterfactual analysis (Chapter 3, Breslauer; Hart and
Honoré 1959; Nash 1991).

Variants of the minimal-rewrite rule appear at several points in this vol-
ume, Scholars often invoke the rule to challenge or defend the legitimacy of
considering certain counterfactual antecedents. For example, Lebow and
Stein (Chapter 5) use this criterion to eliminate the “early warning” counter-
factual that “had President Kennedy issued a timely warning in the spring of
1962, Khrushchev might not have sent missiles to Cuba.” According to
Lebow and Stein, the antecedent is implausible because it requires rewriting
too much history. They note that “in April, before the conventional buildup
began, Kennedy had no reason to suspect a missile deployment, and months
‘away from an election campaign, had no strong political incentive to issue @
warning.” To sustain the antecedent, then, we have to rewrite history to alter
oth the political incentives and the evidence confronting the U.S. govern-
ment, Using a similar standard, Khong (Chapter 4) argues for the plau-
sibility of the antecedent in the counterfactual that “if Britain had confronted
Hitler over Czechoslovakia, he would have backed down and World War I
‘might have been avoided.” According to Khong, the decisive factor in Brit-
ain’s unwillingness to risk war at the time of Munich was neither the mem-
ory of World War I nor the unfavorable military balance, but Chamberlain's
personal conviction that he could negotiate a diplomatic solution with Hitler.
Khong finds historical evidence that inffuential politicians, including Eden,
Cooper, and, of course, Churchill, favored a strong stance against Hitler as
carly as 1937. Hence, to the extent that any of these men could have been
prime minister at the time of Munich, the antecedent becomes plausible.

Scholars also use the minimal-rewrite rule to assess the plausibility of
connecting principles. For instance, Lebow and Stein (Chapter 5) assess
Khrushchev’s counterfactual claim that had the Soviet Union not deployed
missiles in Cuba, the United States would have invaded the island. Lebow
and Stein point to recently uncovered evidence that even before the missile
deployment, no influential members of the Kennedy administration wanted
to attack Cuba. The option had been considered but decisively rejected.
Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara had been impressed by Cu-
ban popular support for Fidel Castro and the ability of the Cuban militia to
overwhelm the invasion force at the Bay of Pigs. Revised intelligence esti-
mates indicated that a successful invasion would require massive U.S.

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS, 25

forces, which would have to remain in an occupational role for an indefinite
period. Kennedy and McNamara were deterred by these costs and resolved
not to attack unless there were dramatic political changes inside Cuba.
It is worth emphasizing that consistency with well-established historical
facts may often be a necessary but is rarely a sufficient condition for estab-
lishing the plausibility of counterfactuals. As Breslauer (Chapter 3) notes,
‘most counterfactual claims advanced in the Sovietological literature were
consistent with historical evidence. He observes that “the problem was not
invention of facts, but gaps in established bodies of facts, which allowed for
‘multiple interpretation of the meanings of those pools of evidence.”

4. Consistency with Well-Established Theoretical Laws

Just as we need historical and logical constraints on counterfactual reason-
ing, we also need theoretical constraints on the connecting principles we use
to link antecedents and consequents. Otherwise, we cannot rule out counter-
factuals that start from reasonable antecedents but end in far-fetched conse-
quences by invoking preposterous principles of causality such as: “If Oswald
hhad not shot Kennedy, then someone else would have done so, because
Kennedy was astrologically fated to die by assassination,” or “If North Ko-
rea had conquered South Korea in 1950, the economy of the South would
have grown even more rapidly than it actually did because of the wisdom of
the policy of self-sufficiency of the Great Leader Kim Il Sung.

Ideally, we could ground all counterfactual inferences in extensively vali-
dated scientific laws of the sort we drew upon in the match-lighting condi-
tional. But do we have theoretical laws of comparable scope and power in
the behavioral and social sciences? Some contributors, such as Lebow and
Stein (Chapter 5), reject the notion that there are any well-established theo-
ries of international politics. They evaluate counterfactuals concerning the
Cuban missile crisis by relying largely on case-specific political and histori-
cal standards. Other contributors, such as Kiser and Levi (Chapter 8), enthu-
siastically embrace deductive theory as a means of disciplining otherwise
unruly “what-might-have-been” speculation.

‘The economic historian Robert Fogel is perhaps the preeminent advocate
of the view that it is reasonable to rely on strong theory to fill in the missing
counterfactual data points. Theory-guided counterfactuals are absolutely es-
sential for assessing the economic impact of policies and technologies:

‘The net effect of such things on development involves a comparison between what
actually happened and what would have happened in the absence of the specified
circumstance, However, since the counterfactual never occurred, it could not have
been observed and hence is not recorded in historical documents. In order to deter-
‘mine what would have happened in the absence of a given circumstance, the
economic historian needs a set of general statements (that is, a set of theories or
