

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 
1763-1816 



imsfft 



, ■ pPprJr 


li y .V/7/77/' . 1 lil ■!(*/' 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA: 

FIRST ESTABLISHMENT AND STRUGGLE. 



jncrn' 



FRENCH IN INDIA 

1763-1816 



By 

S. P. SEN, B.A. (i.OND.), D.PHII... D.riTT. (GAT.) 
DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY* UNIVERSITY OF (M.Cin I'A 



n #£\ 

f. \ 





\ /• V 

\ - \ 

Y 

V ; v7 \ 





o \ 

: S | 

§ l 

y .4// Mi'Jih Reset xteM 

/ Copyright, 1(^8, by S l\ Si n. 

O 


5 * 4 ' — 


fV. •• 605-^7 


Edition, February 1958. 


— S^r 






Published by Kirma K I . MUKHOPAwiyay, 

6/1 A, Uandiharam Akrur Lane, Calcutta-ii!. 
Primed by Gossain k Co. (Printers) Private l to.. 
71, Grime l ane, Calcutta-1*. 



MliRE v 


MW/sr^ 


V R E V A C E 

The present work is the first attempt to write a compre¬ 
hensive history of the French in India during the eventful 
period, 1763 to 18 ih. The period was less thrilling in drama¬ 
tic interest than the time of Dupleix, Bussy and [.ally, but 
nonetheless of deep historical interest, since it was during these 
years that the political destiny of India was slowly but definitely 
taking a new shape. The year 1763 marked the dose of the 
most dramatic phase of Anglo-French rivalry in India. That 
rivalry, however, did not end so abruptly but continued for 
nearly another half a century It was not till the end of the Re¬ 
volutionary and Napoleonic: Wars that the old dreams of the 
French faded away, and they accepted as final their position 
in India settled by the Treaties of 1814-1 5, a position in which 
there was no more possibility of a political rivalry with the 
English. / Thus, the principal object of the present work is to 
carry on the story of Anglo-French rivalry in India from the 
point where it is generally assumed to have ended to the time 
when it really came to a final close. But while putting emphasis 
on the political projects, intrigues and actual military efforts 
of the French to retrieve their fortunes in India, sufficient 
attention has also been given to the internal history of the 
French Settlements, including administration, economic condi¬ 
tion, trade and commerce etc., so as to make the work a com¬ 
prehensive history of the French in India for the period under 
review, and not merely an account of the later phase of Anglo- 
French hostilities, like Malleson's Final French Straggles in 
India and o) the Indian Seas. 

For convenience of treatment the work is broadly divided 
into four sections. The first deals with the period from the 
re establishment of the French in India after the Treaty of 17(13 
to the outbreak of the Anglo-French war in 1778. leading to 
the capture of all the French Settlements; the second covers the 
period of war, from 1778 to 1/83; the third traces the course 
of events from the conclusion of peace to the outbreak of the 
next war in 1793; an d the fourth covers the period of the Re¬ 
volutionary and Napoleonic Wars, which dealt the hrial blow 




A 





w French political aspirations in India. Fo avoid repetitions 
of well-known events of Indian history during the period under 
review and constant explanatory references to the policies and 
actions of the Indian Powers, there has been given at the begin 
ning a fairly long introductory account of the general political 
situation in India, with particular reference to those Indian 
Princes with whom the French had some connections. Then 
comes the first section of the work. It begins with a sketch of 
the French policy in India, the condition of the French Com¬ 
pany and the character of the French administration under 
Louis XV and Louis XVI, to show that Fran ce had neither any 
]: best will nor a dequa te reso urces to retrieve her lost position 
in India after the Seven Years’ War. Phis account of conditions 
in France is followed by two Chapters on the internal history 
of the French Settlements in India from 1765 to t^2# and thro 
on the diplomatic projects of various French agents in India 
and relations with the country Powers. The second section, 
consisting of six Chapters, deals with the policy of inaction of 
the French during the critical first two years of the war, the 
despatch of an expeditionary force to India in 1781, the brilliant 
naval actions of de Suffrcn, the land operations under Duche- 
min, Hoffelfae and Hussv, relations with the country Powers, 
and the effect in India of the sudden conclusion of peace in 
Europe. I he third section has two Chapters on the tortuous 
course of \nglo-French negotiations in India for the execution 
of the Treaty of 1783 and the revival of French trade and 
commerce after the establishment of a new Company of the 
East Indies. Then follow two Chapters on the internal histor) 
of the French Settlements from 1783 to 1793, anc * ^ na ^Y a 
Ghaptet on French relations’ with the country Powers during 
the same period. The fourth section has two Chapters on the 
Anglo-French conflict in the East during the Revolutionary 
and Napoleonic Wars, resulting in the total extinction of the 
French power after the capture of the Isles pf Txafl fe and 
Bourbon. The last Chapter deals with the return of the 
French to India under the terms of the 'Treaties of 1814 and 
1815, which restored all French possessions, but with such 
severe limitations as to eliminate the possibility of any further 
political rivalry with the English. 

After giving an outline of the general scheme, it is necessary 





to Held a few words about how fai the present work may claim 
to have covered new ground. Ft may be observed at the outset 
that while many scholarly books have been written on the 
history of the French in India down to 1763, particularly on 
the twenty years of the most dramatic phase of the Anglo 
French conflict in this country, there is not a single work, either 
in French or in English, dealing with the later period, after 
17H3. Mallcson's book, Final French Struggles in India and on 
the. Indian Sms. admirable in its own way, covers only a part 
of the period and deals mainly with the Anglo-French conflict 
during 1778 to 1783. There arc again very good French 
biographies of Bussy and de Suffren, giving a detailed account 
of the same phase of Anglo-French conflict, but a toinprehen 
sive history of the French in India during the eventful period 
from 1763 to 18*6 had yet to be written. The present svork, 
based principally on unpublished records, is the hist of the 
kind, dealing with all the different aspects of the history of the 
French in India from 1763 to i8i<>,—political, military, 
administrative, economic and commercial. Thus, for the first 
time a connected account has been given of French political 
projects and diplomatic activities a the Courts of the various 
Indian Princes during the half-century following the Treat) 
of Paris, 1763. Secondly, the important administrative changes 
of 1770, 1785 and 1791-93 have been treated in detail for the 
first time, as also the difficulties faced by the French authorities 
in India due t ojftck of finance and more t o lack o f interest .jm 
the part of the Home Government. Thirdly, Anglo-French 
commercial disputes and French rading activities in India 
during the period under review have been discussed in full. 
Another feature of the work that may be mentioned here is the 
account of the revolutio nary rno vcmetifs in the different Settle 
nicrtls, following the news of the Revolution in France. That 
interesting episode in the history of the French in India is not 
very well-known, although Madame Labernadic has written 
a most fascinating book on the subject. 

About the period of the war, 1778 to 1783, the* present work 
has covered nearly the same ground as Malleson’s Final French 
Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas ; but it gives a more 
detailed account, based on original records, of French naval 
and land operations and of French relations with the country 




Hrf)Wers than Malleson’s book. Besides, many erroneous views 
of Malleson, Roux, and other historians about persons and 
events have been sought to be corrected in the light of original 
documents not noticed by them. To give just a few examples, 
An attempt has been made to explain the conduct of Duchemin 
and Hoffelize, who have been accused of cowardice and pusilla¬ 
nimity by nearly every historian of the period (except Marti- 
neau). The difficulties facing Bussy in 1783-83 have also been 
brought out clearly to prove that he did not deserve that con¬ 
demnation which he has generally received from historians. 
Then again, great care has been taken to describe the delicate 
relations between the French and Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan, 
their conflicting interests and lack of good-will and co-opera 
tion. That analysis is intended to bring out one of the prin¬ 
cipal causes of the failure of the French expedition in 1783-83. 

1 he treatment of French policy and activities in the East 
during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars has not been 
detailed as in the earlier sections of the book. The reason 
is that in 179; France lost all her possessions in India, and 
since the present work is concerned mainly with the French 
in India, French projects and activities outside India are of 
interest only to the extent that they were connected with the 
principal rheme of our story. Nevertheless, a critical analysis 
of the Eastern policy of Revolutionary and Napoleonic France 
and a connected account of French diplomatic, military and 
naval efforts relating to India have been given as fully as 
required by the general plan of the present work. 

Only a few words need be said here about the sources 
utilised, as a more detailed account will be found in the Biblio- 
fP' a phy at the end. In writing a history of the French in India 
l have naturally depended more on French than on English 
■ecords. It is only on a few aspects of the subject that Eng¬ 
lish records are of any material value, like the Anglo-French 
war of 1778*83 or French diplomatic activities at the Courts of 
*hc Indian Princes injurious to English interests. But for the 
major part of the work materials could be supplied by French 
records, mostly unpublished. At the same time I have been 
careful to avoid giving a mere one-sided account, and wherever 
English sources are available or throw some light on the subject, 

I have utilised them to cneck up or to supplement the account 


imSTfiy 



taken from French sources, as will be found particularh in the 
second section of the work dealing with the war of 1778-8^. 
Where it has not been possible to come to a definite condu- 
sion, J. have given both the English and the French version- so 
as to enable the reader to form his own judgment. In con¬ 
nection with the use of original records, it may be mentioned 
here that 1 have relied more on the correspondence, memo ires 
and reports of persons who took an active part in the events 
narrated than on second-hand information, either contem¬ 
porary or later. At; the same time, in judging the conduct or 
the motive of an actor in respect of any event J have carefully 
subjected it, wherever possible, to the criticism of persons not 
so directly involved. 

About the original records, I may state that l made a most 
exhaustive use of all the French manuscript documents, pre¬ 
served in the Archives of Pondicherry, about five-six11 s of 
which relate to the period under review. It is a matter of deep 
regret that all the documents were taken to France at the time 
of the transfer of the French Settlements to the Indian Union. 
The Pondicherry records were almost complete for the purpose 
of reconstructing the history of the French in India from 1763 
to 1 793- There were only a few major gaps which had to be 
filled up with the help of documents preserved in the Biblio- 
th&que Rationale and the Archives of the Ministries of Colonies, 
Navy, War and Foreign Affairs in Paris. I have math full use 
of all the relevant documents preserved in these Archives, as 
also those in the India Office (Commonwealth Relations Office) 
in London, so as to make rny account is complete as possible. I 
must, acknowledge here my debt of gratitude to Madame Yv. 
R. Gaebete, President of the Sociite de L'Hi toire de Utlal de 
Pondichtry, to M. Schermack of the Socidte des Amis dc In 
Bibhothtque Rationale, et des Grandes Biblioth&ques de France, 
Paris, and to the French Consulate in Calcutta for their kind 
help in getting copies of records horn the Archives of Pondi¬ 
cherry and Paris. I am also thankful to Miss Sujata Ghosh, 
Mrs. Snigdha Roy and Mr. Pranab iliswas for their kind help 
in preparing the index. 


Calcutta, 
December 1, 1957. 


S. P. Sen 


MINISr^ 


CON T EN TS 




°AGE 

Preface 

Map : India in 1765 

CHAPTER 1 

THE POLiriCAI SCENE IN INDIA • 1 

I The Expansion of the English Power. II The Mughal Emueior. 

HI Oudh. IV The Marathas. V Hyderabad. VI Mysore. VII Hie 
Nawab of the Carnatic. VIII Basalat Jang. 

CHAPTER II 

the government, the company and french policy 

IN INDIA ... ... ^ . 7 -- , : * 7 

i The Policy of Dupleix. II The Seven Yeats War and the Destruc- 
tion of French Hopes. Ill The Treaty of Paris and the Restoration 
ot French Territories. IV The Compagnie dev hides Orientates. 

V Law s System. V! The Re constitution of the Compagnie des Indes. 

VII Trade and Finance of the Compagnie des hides. \ 111 the End 
of the Compagnie des Indes. IX The French Government after the 
Seven Years' War. X The Government of Louis XVI. 

CHAPTER III 

PONDICHERRY (1765-1778) . •; — 55 

I Reconstruction after 1765. II Plans of Fortifications. Ill Organ isa- 
lion of the Army. IV System of Civil Administration. V Economic 
Condition. Vi Appointment of Bellecoinbc as Governor, 1777. 

VH Outbreak of War and Preparations for Defence. VIII Siege of 
Pondicherry and Capitulation. 

CHAPTER IV 

OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS (1765-1778) ... 81 

chandkrnagORF: I Condition in 1 7 ^ 5 - ^ Laws pj an of making 
Chandernagore the principal French Settlement in India III Ad¬ 
ministration of Renault de Saint-German. IV Administration of 
Chevalier: difficulties witli the English. V Subordinate factories 
make: i Condition in 1765. II The aggressive policy of Duprat. 

III Repentigm and Relations with the neighbouring Principalities. 

IV MaW from 1775 to * 779 - — calicut — sijrat — karikal yanam 

MASUUPATAM. 


... v . i'i 
... xvii 


CHAFTER V 

DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS: CHEVALIER. MADEC, MODAVE AND 
GENT II. 


CHAPTER VI 

DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS: TAW DE LAURISTON AND BELLE* 

COMBE ... ... ... ••• - l 54 


WN IST/fy. 



XIV 


CHAPTER Vll 


dipi xr*i A 1 K ’ pko j ec;ts : $4int-lub in , 

OT^I-RN 

chapter v III 


MONTIGNY AND 


Page 

t8o 


FRENCH A( IIVlTiLS IN THE EAST (1779 1781) 

J Failure 10 laJce advantage of English difficulties in India. II Nego¬ 
tiations between Souilla. and Haidar broken off by the timidity of 
crOrvcs. ' 7 


218 


CHAPTER IX 

HI SUFFREN AND NAVAL ACTIONS IN INDIAN WATERS 

I Early career of de Suffren. II De Suffren and new methods of naval 
wailare. Ill Departure of dt Suffren for India. IV Naval action at 
Porto Praya. V The Cape saved. VI Arrival in the Isle of France: 
•Souillac > preparations to send an expeditionary force to India. 
\ll Departure from the Isle of France and arrival in Indian waters. 
\ HI First naval action in Indian waters (17th February 1782). 
1 \ l anding of troops at Porto Novo and departure of the fleet for 
( cvlon. X Second naval action (12th April). XI De Suffren ordered 
back 10 (he Isle of France: his refusal to leave Indian waters. 

• vll Return to the Coromandel Coast; Project of an attack on Negu 
patain. XXII Third naval action (6th July). XIV De Suffren's 

return to Cuddalore and interview with Haidar Ali. XV News of 

the arrival of Bussy in the Isle of France and of the despatch of 
reinforcements under d’Aymar. XVI Capture of Trinkomali. XVII 
Fourth naval action (3rd September). XVIII Decision to winter at 

\inm. xix Return from Achin and junction with Bossy's expedi¬ 
tionary force. 7 r 

CHAPTER X 

THE FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC ... 

[ inactivity of the French army. II Landing of troops under 

Duchemin. Ill Relations with Haidar Ali (March julv 1782). IV l)e 
Launay sent by Bussy to negotiate with Haidar. V Death of 
Duchemin: Defence of his conduct. VI Hoffclize taking command of 
the French arm;. Relations with Haidar (July-November 1782). 
MI Death ol Hiidar: Relations of the French army with Tipu 
(December 1782— March 1783). 


CHAPTER Xr 

BUSSY'S EXPEDITION 

J Bussy's views mi India; Mimoire of ^77. II Bussy’s appointment 
to command the expeditionary force: MJmoire of 1781 III Roval 
Instruction to Buvsy. IV Departure from Paris to arrival in the 
Me of France. \ Arrival in the Isle of France: Despatch of a per 
sona! representative to Haidar and of reinforcements to de Suffren 
v I Busty s departure from India unavoidably held up. VII News 

irrjr "n-a..,.,, t,,,,,, , he i* u r.> an « p « aS 


272 


295 


misTfy 




CHAPTER Ml 


1 U SS V S RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 


Page 


I Pussy’s views on alliance with some of the Indian Powers. 
I! Correspond curt, between Buss\ and Tipu. Ill Examination of 
french relations with Tipu. IV Relations w'iih the Marathas. 
\’ Hussy’s Correspondence with the Maratha Darbar. VI Relations 
with Ni/.«m Ali. VII Relations with the Mughal Emperor. 


CHAPTER XII i 


I HE WAR IX I HE CARNATIC 

T Difficulties lacing Bi ssv. II The English arm\ marching on 
Cuddalore. Ill Pussy’s efforts to lay in stocks of provisions. IV The 
engagement of 13th June and the withdrawal of the French to 
C uddalore. V The French fleer at Trinkomaii. VI De Suffren’s 
return to the Coromandel Coast. VII The last naval action (soth 
June 1783). VIII fhe Sortie of 241 h June. TX News of the con¬ 
clusion of Peace in Europe. 


CHAPTER XIV 


ANG 1,0 FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS AND THE LAST DAYS OF 
BUSSY 

I I he terms of Peace. II Cessation of hostilities between Tipu and 
the English. Ill Hussy moves to Pondicherry. IV Return of De 
Stiff ren to Frame. V French gO'*l offices and Anglo-Mvsore negotia¬ 
tions. VI Anglo French negotiations for the execution of the Peace 
I reals : the- question of Trinkomaii. VII Hussy's views on future 
French policy in India. VIII The question of shifting the centre of 
French power from Pondicherry to MahC IX Death of Bussy. X An 
Esrimate of JBussy. 


CHAPTER XV 


RESTITUTION OF TERRITORIES AND REVIVAL OF TRADE atfi 
1 Restitution of 1 errilories. II Anglo-French Commercial Conven- 
tion. Ill The establishment of the Company of Calonne and its career 
of misfortune. IV The trading operations of die Company. 


CHAPTER XVI 



PONDIC HERRY (1785-1793) 

1 Pondicherry after the War. 


T* x Pondicherry after cipituiation. 


mmsT/fy. 



XVI 

hapter XVII 


OTHER FRENCH SET 11 KM ENTS (1785-1793) 

i havdi'kn (,uke: I Conditions during 1785 89. II The adinmis 
nation of Montignv. Ill i he beginning of the Revolution. IV The 
course of the Revolution (May to October, 1790). V The Mission of 
Mottet. VI l he failure of the new Commandant, dc Cana pie. 
VII Conflict between Pondicherry and the Isle of France: Despatch 
o| two rival Missions. VIII The new Constitution and Alter— 
Matte : I Condition of the Settlement after restitution. II Le 
I elliet and the beginning of the Revolution. Ill Administration of 
Farther: restoration of peace— CAUctnr and surai'—-kakikal : I Ad¬ 
ministrative measures from 178^ to 1791: insurrections of peasants 
and workers. II The Revolution and After (1791-1793) yanam- 
MAHUMPATAM. 


CHAPTER XVIII 

RF.I ATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS (1785 1793) 
l Change in French Policy. II The Despatch of Castries outlining 
relations with Indian Powers. Ill Relations with the Marathas. 
IV Relations with Nizam Ali. V Relations with Mysore. VI Rela¬ 
tions with Minor Powers. \ Ii Report of Teacaflier to the National 
Convention. 


CHAPTER Xl\ 

REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA ... ... 533 

l Th : Isles of France and Bourbon. II French Privateers. Ill French 
Adventurers in the Service of Indian Princes. IV Tipu and 
the French. V The Egyptian Expedition and French Plans about 
India. 

CHAPTER XX 

I HE I.AST PH ASE OF ANGLO FRENCH CONFLICT ... ... 560 

l French Hopes in India alter the Treaty of Amiens. II French 
Naval Activities in Indian Waters III French Agents in India and 
Dccaen’s Project of Invasion. IV The Treat\ of Finkenstein and the 
Mission of General Gardane to Persia. A' The Capture of the Isles 
of France and Bourbon. 

CHAPTER XXI 

THE RETURN OF THE FRENCH ... ... ... 598 

bibliography ... ... .. ... 60} 

Index ... ... ... ... ...612 


Mi ft REV l A 1 IOXS : 

P.A. Pondicherry Archives. . 

AN -Archives Nation ales, Paris. 

N.A.—National Archives of India. 

B.N.F.Fr.- Bibliothecjue Nationals (Paris), Fnnds Fran^ais. 

B. N.F.Fr.(N.A.) Bibiiothequc Nationale (Paris), Fonds Francais. 

Nouvelles Acquisitions. 

C. R.O India Office (Commonwealth Relations Office), London. 





NJ-AB 


f ''PANIPAt/qt' 

\DF.LHr% 


BHUTAN 


LUCKNOW^ BIHAR 
V, BWAffc ^TW A, 
firir^'BEN.XficS SAHeesjx 
' / MUIVWOABACh 

JENGAL I 

X,f- CPINSURAH 
CHANOERNAGORE 1 

r\ / 


IT 4 T 74 




[imccA 

&ot>cf>a 


<y MARATHA \ 

^oo^^tAies f 

JfVo l 

V HAGPUR p 


1} ROACH 
SURAT 


M/yUL 


RASSEIN 

SALSETTEli 

BOMBAY 


'6ANJAM 


\ POONA' 


VIJAYA0UR6 


TASUUPATAM 


(mat U PALL I 


ARABIAN 


\HANDY 


\ATTlCALOA 


CEYLON 


COLOMBO 


XVII 


! NDIA IN 1765 


SCALE* 

o so 200 AooMiles 


NV ^'<^GUNTUR oV, - 7 

SORfc/ ^ \PUUCAT 

~— t ±Aar~ -- 


~~~ UVtYDVjKtl' ' XPUUCAT 

M^ALOpk'^OPEj*^ ^AORAS 
MA NO A LOREK iMOflAS 

-CXMV^OffE^ - 

T'LUCH£Rf{vy> MYS0F * £ jQ~JINl»t'-(SCUDU,\i.QrtE 
vAt'EY) XAftKAL n p CRro ROVO 

CALICUrXS Jzj' Z+giTnANQUEBAR 

PO V W A 6 0 ^ 

l‘ 4 v\ 74 VJJP£t | NEGAPATAM 
COCHlN^r" ? 

JRINKOHAU 


BAY OF BENGAL 


80 °' 


88 


L.P- 































































MINfSr/^ 


CHAPTER 1 




THE POLITICAL SCENE IN INDIA 

A detailed study of the history of the French in India from 
1763 to 1816 requires, as a necessary introduction, a short sketch 
of the political condition of India during that eventful period. 
It was an era of transition from the old order to the new, 
from the political chaos and confusion following the disruption 
of the Mughal Empire to the emergence of peace, ordered 
government and administrative units in the 19th century. The 
events of the period arc all well-known; the leading personalities 
and their policies have long been subjects of controversy among 
historians; and their merits and demerits have been discussed 
most thoroughly in numerous contemporary and later works. 
It is neither possible in a short sketch, nor necessavv for out 
main purpose, to go over those details once again. All that 
need he attempted here is to give a very brief account of the 
principal Indian Powers during the period under review. It 
will help us to get a better view, against the background of 
the wider political setting of the country, of the policies and 
aspirations of the French, their intrigues and diplomatic rela¬ 
tions, and finally the failure of all efforts to revive their lost 
influence and power. 

1 . The Expansion oj the English Tower. 

The most dominant factor in the Indian political situation 
during our period was the emergence of a new Power, which 
by the end of the century stood forth as the inevitable heir to 
the Mughals. The English first obtained their political control 
over Bengal in 1757, and although for a few years they main 
mined the fiction of the Nawab’s independence, their power 
w’as visibly demonstrated the making and unmaking of 
successive rulers,—Mir Jafar being replaced by Mir Kasim and 
the latter again by Mir Jafar. The treaty with Najmuddaulah 
in February 1765 brought the entire administration under the 
effective control of the English, through a minister to be chosen 

% > r '\*y' . , . ' - ■ ; . * 



4 k then’ and holding office at ihcii pleasure. A few months 
later their position was further strengthened and regularised 
by the Imperial grant of the Omani of Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa. There followed a few years of dual government, ended 
by their assumption of full powers of administration under 
Warren Hastings. At the same lime their independent posi¬ 
tion in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa was signalised by the discon¬ 
tinuance of the payment of 26 lakhs of rupees promised to the 
Eniperoi in return for the grant of Dnran . Thus the fiction 
<>f Mughal suzerainty was torn by the cold logic of facts. 

Once entrenched in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, the English 
v re soon led by circumstances to extend their influence even 
turther. I he battle of Buxar (1764) put tfie whole of Oudb at 
their mercy, hut they were prudent enough not to extend their 
direct control over the country. This apparent self-denial on 
their part was prompted by two reasons: fust., their lack of 
adequate resources to hold such a vast area; and second, their 
b ar of rousing the hostility of other Indian Powers and uniting 
them in a common opposition. So by the treaty 0! 1765 the 
country was restored to the Nawab, Shuja-ud-daulah, for 50 
lakhs of rupees, with the exception of two districts. Kora and 
Allahabad, which were bestowed on the homeless Emperor, 
Shah Ahan II, in exchange for the grant, of Diwani. Thus, 
by a single deal the English regularised their position in Bengal, 
Bihar and Orissa, obtained a grateful alls in the Nawab of 
Otidh, secured a buffer state to guard their western frontier, 
and kept the wandering Emperor closely attached to them by 
giving him a home and deluding hopes, repeated year after 
year, of restoring him to his ancestral capital. After 1765 the 
English position in north India remained unassailable, parti 
cularly after the impressive demonstration of their military 
power in the conquest of Rohilkhand (1774), the march of 
Goddard’s army across the sub continent' (1778-79), the capture 
of the Gwalior Fort (1780) considered impregnable till then, 
and the decisive defeat inflicted on Sindhia (1781), the only 
Indian Power who could come near to challenge the English 
position in the north. 

in the south too the English came to acquire increased 
political and military importance during the period under 
review. Bombay first came into prominence as a result of 


mtSTffy. 



THE rOUTlOAI, SCENE IN INDIA 


<SL 


conflicts with the Marathas [row 1775 to 1782, and Madras 
grew in importance ami power as a result of successive wars 
with Mysore between 1767 and 1799. Neither of the southern 
Presidencies possessed, however, military resources and territorial 
revenues adequate to sustain them against their formidable 
Indian adversaries, and they were saved from utter destruction 
only by the support of the Bengal Government,—military, 
diplomatic and financial. Indeed, the preservation of the 
English power in the south during the critical years, 1775 to 
1783, was due to the assumption of over all control and respon¬ 
sibility by the Bengal Government. It ensured unity of action, 
in spite of grave divergences of opinion as between Bombay 
and Madras and also as between the two southern Presidencies 
and Bengal. The concentration of authority with respect to 
diplomatic relations and military operations was first made by 
North's Regulating Act of 1773 and further strengthened by 
Pitts India Act of 1784. But apart from these two Parlia¬ 
mentary Acts, it was the exigencies of the military situation 
that placed Bombay and Madras under the control of the 
Bengal Government. 

The thirty years from 1763 to 1793 constituted an eventful 
period for the two English Presidencies in the south, Bombay 
made its first territorial acquisitions on the mainland, but what 
was more important was that it embarked on that policy of 
intervention in the internal politics of the Maratha Confederacy 
which was destined to end in the total destruction of that Power, 
lor Madras also the period was clearlv indicative of the future. 
The English had established military control over the Carnatic 
and assumed responsibility for its defence, while keeping 
administrative authority in the hands of the Nawab. It gave 
rise to many difficult problems, the only solution to which lay 
in tearing off the fiction of the Nawab’s independence, as in 
Bengal, and the assumption of full powers by the real masters. 
"1 hen again, the acquisition of the Northern Sarkars in 176b 
necessitated the establishment of close diplomatic relations with 
Hyderabad and the promise of English military assistance against 
all enemies. It was the commencement of a process which 
was to lead to the Subsidiary Alliance in Wellesley’s time and 
the establishment of effective English control over that state. 
Finally, it was during these years that the Madras Presidency 


WHlST/fy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


considerably enlarged by the acquisition of new territories, 
mainly at the expense of Mysore. At the end of the period 
the English emerged as undoubtedly the strongest military Power 
in the south, as they had become in the north after Plassey 
and Buxar. 

Till i79 ;a the English had to reckon with not only the 
Indian Powers but also with the French, who, if not a formidable 
antagonist, 'still retained enough capacity for trouble and 
constituted a potential source of danger. With the final extinc¬ 
tion of the French power in 1793. the English found their way 
dear for a further advance and extension of their political 
dominion. They had already attained the position of being 
the strongest power in India. In the closing years of the 18th 
century they proceeded to carry their work to its logical cortclu- 
sion, the achievement of full sovereignty over the entire sub¬ 
continent. The three Indian Powers who still retained their 
independence and had some military strength left: wore liquidat 
ed one after another. Hyderabad was induced to enter into a 
treaty of Subsidiary Alliance (1798) and thereby to barter away 
its independence for a guarantee of protection against its two 
powerful neighbours, the Marathas and Mysore. Mysore, which 
had been dismembered and crippled in 1792, was finally crushed 
in 1799. I hen came the turn of the Marathas. 'Faking 
advantage of the internal strife among the Marathas, the English 
imposed the Treaty of Bassein (1802) on the Pcshwa, the nominal 
head of the Marat ha Confederacy. It led inevitably to the 
second Ynglo-Maratha war, which put the English position in 
India beyond any effective challenge. In north India Sindhia s 
power was decisively broken, and the Mughal Emperor became 
a protege of the English. The English gained indirect control 
over most of the Maratha states, and although by the. political 
settlement of 1805 they showed a policy of moderation not 
required by the results of the war, the formidable nature oi 
their military power was clearly brought home to their adver¬ 
saries. Thus, even before the final extinction of the Maratha 
power in 1817-18, the English had attained the position of 
de facto sovereign power in India, which received international 
recognition by the treaties of 1814 and 1815 at the end of the 
Napoleonit Wars. 

The extension of the English power in India in the closing 


Ml HtSTftr 


1MK I'OtrUCAL SCENE IN INDIA 



<SL 


years of the 18th century and the early years of the 19th 
lay, in a sense, in the inexorable process of history l! was 
inevitable, once the English had established a decided military 
superiority over the Indian Powers. But it may be observed 
that, one important motive force for the expansion of the English 
power to its logical conclusion was the fear of French rivalry, 
even after 1793 when all the French possessions in India had 
been captured and the political influence of the French totally 
eliminated. It was the French menace that precipitated the 
fall of Tipu. It was again the presence of French military 
adventurers in the service of Hyderabad and of the Marathas 
that prompted the English to eliminate that potential source 
of danger by bringing the two Indian Powers under effective 
English military control through treaties of Subsidiary Alliance. 
In that sense it may be said that the French by their potential 
threat, more imaginary than real, helped the expansion and 
consolidation of the English power in India 


IE The Mughal Emperor. 

Among the Indian Powers the premier position was held 
by the Emperor of Delhi, not because of any real political and 
military importance but for his shadowy claim of suzerainty 
over all the other Princes. In reality, the Empire was a mere 
name and the Emperor reduced to a puppet in the hands of 
his all-powerful ministers. On the murder of Emperor 
Alamgir JJ in 1759 his son Prince Ali Gauhar, then a homeless 
wandering adventurer, assumed the Imperial title* as Shah 
Alam IF. He was not as worthless a person as he turned out 
to be in later life, but gave some promise of being able to 
retrieve the Imperial dignity from the depths into which it had 
fallen. In the earlier part of his career he gave proof of vigour 
and energy, if not persistent yet remarkable on occasions. As a 
Prince destined to inherit the throne, he had fled away from 
the capital to save himself from the tyrant, Firuz Jang, who 
was ruling the Empire in the name of his father, the puppet 
Emperor Alamgir II. Friendless and penniless, he wandered 
from place to place, struggling desperately against adversity 
and trying to gain allies and collect adventurous bands round 
him with the object of recovering the eastern provinces of the 

B 



MlNISr^ 



Empire from the English. His successive attempts on Patna 
and a raiding incursion into Bengal were frustrated by the 
quick moves of the English, but he faced all hardships with 
courage and cheer. If the Prince had died young, or if he had 
disappeared completely from the political scene after 1760, his 
11 me would have been hallowed with the same romantic glory 
as that of the Young Pretender in British history. But fate 
denied him that chance, and he lived to be one of the most 
despicable figures who ever sat on the throne of Delhi. 

Shah Vlam if had his first taste of ease and affluence after 
making his final peace with the English in 1765, But living 
under their protection at Allahabad, he constantly sighed for 
the throne of his ancestors and dreamed of restoring the old 
Imperial authority. For years the English humoured him by 
promising to restore him to his capital as soon as the rains were 
over, but in the end he realised that the ‘English rains* would 
never stop and that if he was to return to Delhi he must look 
to other quarters for help. Just about this time th< Marathas., 
recovering from the terrible shock of Panipat, returned to north 
India to regain their lost position, and nothing was more 
natural than that Shah Alam should throw himself into the 
arms ot the southerners in the hope of being at last; restored to 
his ancestral capital. Negotiations were hastily concluded in 
1771, and despite the advice of the English and of the pro- 
English and peace-loving party in the Darbnt the Emperor set 
out for his capital, where he was installed in January 1772 with 
the help of his Maratha allies. 

Shah Alam regained the Imperial capital at last, but what a 
sad inheritance it was! Rebellions and foreign invasions had 
so completely obliterated all landmarks that it was difficult, to 
recognise any trace of the old Empire. The authority of the 
Imperial Government was confined to the city of Delhi and 
its environs, and all around subordinate vassals had raised 
themselves up a* independent potentates. The Nawab o r Oudh, 
the nominal Wazir or Chancellor of the Empire, and the Nizam 
of Hyderabad were too powerful to be disturbed. The eastern 
provinces, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, had permanently passed 
into the Jlands of the English, and even the annual tribute of 
26 lakhs of rupees promised by them in 1765 was discontinued 
after 1770 The Marathas were back in north India to 


Ml Htstjfy 



THE POUTICAI, SCENE IN INDIA 


<SL 


establish their authority which had been shattered on the 
fateful field of Panipat. Then there remained lesser Powers, 
the Ruhelas and the Sikhs, the Jats and the Rajputs. For the 
next sixteen years after the return of Shah Alam to his capital, 
the Imperial Government was engaged in vainly trying to sup¬ 
press these Powers and to revive a fragment of the old Empire. 
But in the end all efforts proved fruitless, ami lar from there 


being a revival of even a shadow of the old glory, the Imperial 
authority was prostituted by successive petty tyrants to gain 
their selfish ends, and the Imperial farnil) was subjected to the 
grossest insult and cruelty ever recorded in history at the hands 
of the Ruhela chieftain, Ghulam Qadir. The feeble lamp of 
the war-torn and desolate Empire would have flickered abruptly 
in 1788 but for the timely protection given by Mahadaji Sindhia 
which hept it burning for a few years more. Finally, after the 
defeat of Sindhia (1803) in the second Anglo-Maratha war the 
shadowy Emperor passed under English protection and ceased 
to have any political importance. Ehe Empire of the Mughals 
came to an unceremonious end as the British Raj became an 


established fact. 

The failure of all attempts to resuscitate the Empire may 
be attributed to three principal factors: the character of Shah 
Alam; the chronic financial difficulties; and the want of a suit¬ 
able leader among the nobles and generals of the Empire, gifted 
with imagination to plan and vigour to carry it out. In contrast 
with his earlier career of adventure, after his restoration at 
Delhi Shah Alam lost himself completely in the pleasures of the 
hareth, and the only initiative he occasionally took in politics 
was in spinning webs of backstair intrigues which proved 
entirely futile. It was impossible that the Empire could be 
revived under such a shadowy figure. The second factor was 
financial distress. The outlying parts of the Empire had been 
parcelled out among powerful vassals, who professed allegiance 
to the Emperor but paid no tribute. Even the crownlands were 
diverted for the purpose of maintaining the minister in power 
and his army. The only way of relieving the financial distress 
was to exact tributes from refractory vassals, but that required a 
huge initial outlay on military preparations beyond the capa¬ 
city of the Imperial Government. 

The third factor was the depraved character of the nobility 




THK FRENCH IN INDIA 


o! the Empire. Most of them, like Abdul Ahad Khan, belonged 
to the category of polished courtiers. The onlv man who 
towered above the puny figures of the time Was Najaf Khan. 
This Persian adventurer offered the only hope of a partial 
restoration of the Empire. He was a fine soldier and con¬ 
siderably strengthened the Imperial army by a combination of 
Mughal cavalry with European-trained infantry battalions. lie 
paid particular attention to the improve mein of the artillery 
and secured the services of European adventurers like Madec, 
Sombre and Modavc, with their well-trained and well-armed 
contingents. But, unfortunately, Najaf Khan was kept out of 
effective control of affairs too long bv the machinations of his 
rivals, and when at last he came to power at the end of 1779 
it was only for a short period. With his premature death in 
1782 vanished all hopes of resuscitating the Empire. 

When such was the condition of the Empire, it is not a little 
surprising at first that the French in their diplomatic plans 
from 1765 to 1783 should have so much relied upon it as an 
important factor in the coalition of Indian rowers to be formed 
against the English. Some of the French agents, like Chevalier, 
no doubt overrated the military strength of the Empire and the 
abilities of the men who were in control of its affairs. But at 
the same time it cannot be overlooked that with all its weakness 


the Empire could yet have played an important part in the 
projected coalition against the English, if sustained by French 
troops and French money. The prestige of the Imperial name 
was still very high, and the adherence of the Emperor to the 
coalition would have considerably strengthened the forces 
arrayed against the English. During the first Anglo-Maratha 
war the 7> oona Court made strenuous efforts to gain the co¬ 
operation of the Emperor, and the Government of Calcutta in 
alarm sent a confidential agent, James Browne, to Delhi to 
counteract the Maratha intrigues. Both sides knew well the 
value to be attached to the adherence of the Emperor to the 
projected coalition. 


III. Ondh. 


Besides the Emperor, the only other north Indian Power 
who deserves some notice here was the Nawab of Oudh, ruling 


imSTffy 



THE POLITICAL SCENE IN INDIA 


Si 


WA vast area from the border of Bihar to the course of 
anges in the west. During the early pari of our period at 
least, Oudh had not passed so completely under English, control 
as to lose all political importance. Tim principality, originally 
subject to die Mughal Emperor, was made virtually independent 
by the all-powerful Wazir or Chancellor of the Empire, Safdar 


Jang, aboil the middle of the 18th century. On his death in 
1754. lie was succeeded by his son, Shuja-ud-daulah, who ruled till 
1775. Shuja-ud-daulah also was appointed Wazir of the Empire, 
but for all practical purposes lit ruled as an independent 
Prince, deriving his strength from his own armed forces and 
the vast territory he had under his direct control. In 1759 he 
gave some token help to the fugitive Prince AH Gauhar in his 
attempt to recover Bengal and Bihar, and in 1763 he not only 
gave shelter to the expelled Nawab of Bengal, Mir Kasim, but 
even went to war with the English in his support. I he decisive 
defeat at Buxar in 1764 and the treaty of alliance which follow¬ 
ed in 17O5 opened a new chapter in the history of Oudh. The 
principality passed gradually under English control, although 
the Nawab long retained his independence so far as internal 
administration was concerned. Bv the Treaty of Allahabad 
Shuja ud-daulah got back all his territories, with the exception 
of Kora and Allahabad which were given 10 the Emperor. From 
the English point of view' the arrangement was most politic, 
particularly when they were not ready to annex Oudh and 
assume direct responsibility for its defence. It secured the 
friendship of Shuja-ud-daulah and created a convenient buffer- 
staLe to guard their western frontier against sudden invasion. 

Till his death in 1775 Shuja-ud-daulah remained true to his 


connection with the English out of convenience, although for a 
few years after 1765 French intrigues ir north India centred on 
him as a possible ally for an invasion of Bengal, lie had in 
his service a number of French military adventurers, the most 
prominent of them being Gentil, whose possible influence on 
him was dreaded by the English. The supposed danger was 
finally removed in 1775, when on the death of Shuja-ud-daulah 
the English exerted effective pressure on his successor, Asaf-ud- 
daulah, to dismiss all the Frenchmen in his service. Anyway, 
even the presence of French officers did not materially affect 
the friendly relations between Shuja-ud-daulah and the English. 


MIN isr^ 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


y the Treaty of Benares, 1773, Shuja-ud-daulah got back the 
two lost districts of Kora and Allahabad which the Emperor 
had wanted to transfer to his Maratha protectors. Shortly after 
he also received English military assistance for the conquest of 
the Rob ilia country. Under Asaf tid-daulah the English grip 
over Oudh was further tightened. Although the Nawab retain¬ 
ed full independence in internal administration, he became 
completely dependent on English military support and was kept 
under close observation by their agent at his Darbar, It was 
impossible for him to get rid of the English alliance and follow 
an independent policy; and from this time the principality of 
Oudh lost all real importance as a factor in north Indian 
politics. “ \ 


IV'. The Marat has. 


In the south there were three principal Powers, all jealous 
of the extension of the English dominion and therefore poten¬ 
tial allies for the French,—the Maratha Confederacy, Hyderabad 
under Nizam Mi and Mysore under Haidar Ali. Of these the 
most important was the Maratha Confederacy. It was the 
strongest from the military point of view, and about the middle 
of the 18th century it even appeared as the Power destined to 
seize the whole inheritance of the Mughal Empire. But the 
greatest obstacle to any united and concerted effort on the part 
of the Marathas was the decline of the authority of the central 
government and the consequent increase of power of the 
dependent chiefs. The vigorous and united state built up by 
Shivaji became partially decentralised not long after his death 
under the pressure of military necessity, and what controlling 
and paramount authorit) there still remained in the hands of 
the central government was shattered beyond repair in the 
second half of the 18th century by the disaster of Panipat and 
the dispute over succession to the Peshwaship which started 
shortly after. The process of decentralisation went so far that 
the chiefs of the outlying parts, the Bhonsla, the Gaikwar, the 
Sindhia and the Holkar, assumed virtually independent author¬ 
ity, till one of them, Mahadaji Sindhia, even overshadowed the 
central government. That was why although the Maratha Con¬ 
federacy as a whole represented the strongest military factor 




THE POLITICAL SCENE IN INDIA 

and would have been the most important ally for the 
French, a treaty with the Poona Government was of little con¬ 
sequence unless similar terms could be arranged with all the 
chiefs after overcoming their mutual rivalries and jealousies. 

The death of Peshwa Balaji Baji Rao in June 1761, under 
the shock of the Panipat disaster, opened an unhappy chapter 
of dispute for the headship of the state, leading ultimately to 
the ruin of the Maratha power. Balaji Baji Raos successor, 
Madhav Rao, being young was placed under the guardianship 
of his uncle Raghuriath Rao. The latter, although personally 
brave and having military talents, proved to be weak and vacil 
luting in politics and gave the English their first opportunity 
to exploit the internal divisions oi the Marathas. Immediately 
after the death of Balaji Baji Rao the Nizam decided to attack 
the Marat has, taking advantage of their military weakness after 


the Panipat disaster; and although the plan was ultimately 
abandoned owing to the defection of the Nizam's Maratha 
troops, the incident was important in history as it was then for 
the first time that Raghunath Rao turned to the English at 
Bombay for military assistance, a policy which was destined to 
prove so fatal to the Maratha power. 

Madhav Rao, on coming out of liis period of tutelage, 
proved to be a much abler man than his uncle in directing the 
affairs of the state, and had he lived long enough he might have 
been able to retrieve the Maratha fortunes even after the shat¬ 
tering blow at Panipat. His prudence and tact were demons¬ 
trated by his conduct towards his erratic uncle, Raghunath Rao. 
who even took to arms against the Poona Government with the 


help of Nizam Ali, ever on the alert to exploit Maratha dissen 
sions to his own advantage, Madhav Rao was wise in diplomacy 
and vigorous in war, and under him the Marathas won a series 
of victories over Nizam Ali and Haidar All as a ho in northern 
India. Indeed, the growing power of the Marathas alarmed 
the Bombay Government so much that in 1767 the latter sent 
an agent named Mostyn to Poona to report on the state of 
affairs there and to prevent an alliance of the Marathas with 
Nizam Ali or Haidar Ali, which could not but be dangerous to 
the English position in the south. But unfortunately for the 
Marathas, ihe career of the young and vigorous Peshwa was cut 
short in November 1772. The death of Madhav Rao proved 


misTfy 



THE FRENCH IN 1ND; 


<SL 


^ fatal the Maiiftha power than the disaster of Panipat. 
a immediately opened the floodgates of internal .strife and 
consequent foreign intervention. 

Mudhav Rao was succeeded by his worthless brother 
J f ,n Rao - J ust ljdorc l»is death Madhav Rao. wanting to 
guard against internal dissension, had released his uncle, 
aghunath Rao, from prison and had entrusted Narayan Rao 
hts ere. But relations between the uncle and Che'nephew 
uerc not happy, and Raghunath Rao was again kept confined 
U ‘ * P a,ac « at Poona. The intrigues of Raghunath 

.to and his wife bore fruit, and on the goth August myn there 
no r out a mutiny in the army resulting in the murder of 
^ i.i i:. ao. Raghunath Rao was next acknowledged as the 
eshwa. lmt hts power was short-lived because of the opposition 

Phadnuvd! J,U1 ' tCrS hCade<1 1)V Sakharam Bapu and Nana 

Raghunath Rao’s first care as Peshwa was lo fight against 
"" i and Haidar All, both of whom were always on the 
u.eu to exploit troubles among the Marat has. Nizam Ali was 

P ,‘rr ,1" o a,U V bUI thrOU S K the “placed generosity of 
treiH U l ' - a ° 1C <iul not sufler any loss of territory for 

m"; H, a ^ mS so iS 0,d . fricnd Raghunath Rao next turned 
j !>ut ' n the f’idst of a victorious campaign 

:; ,s M,ddc,dv recaUed hy the news ?* the birth <* a pi*. 
Pedn ' b d ai M- a " Ra °' who was at OIlce proclaimed as the 
adta ll ' , M * n,Stenal P art > at Poona. Raghunath Rao 
success ' oona, but although he gained some initial 

. i ' ! ! ,iun y f he Ministerial party and might have 

,. k, n “ P lbr °PPOshio n by a swift march on the capital, at 

and ‘Zn..7 POr T e T mCnt he '° St his i"‘%»ient, vacillated 

Sindhn Hit 01 '’ '- VUh thC h0pC ° f S ainin o alliance of 
nm H .° i ar i aml ‘he English of Bombay. While the two 
n '** 11 Maratha chiefs showed no inclination to help 
1 :1 !’ * he £n ^ ish readl, y agreed through their 

Hrnnb'u atqU1,e S SeUe ' Bassein «"» the waller islands near 


from^m H r ba V aU , th0ritiCS had thdr eycS M thtse territories 
bom some tune back, and the news that the 


,,i ... l *“ 11 me Portuguese were 

coocluion rT q o ei th '' m frorn tfu “ Marat has precipitated the 
' 1 '“■> “I S..«t (March ,775), bv which .he 


mmsT/fy 



English agreed to offer niilitan assistance to Raghunaih Rao 
in exchange foi the cession of the coveted territories. It was 
thus that the English gained their first opportunity to interfere 
in Maratha politics. The island of Salsette was captured by 
them in Decembej 1774, even before the conclusion of a define 
live treaty with Raghunaih Rao, and an army under Col. 
Keating took the field with instructions to conduct Raghunaih 
Rao to Poona. But in spite of a few initial successes this 
expedition came to nothing. The Supreme Government in 
Calcutta, newly appointed under the Act of 1773 with powers 
of control over the subordinate Presidencies, grew alarmed at 
the prospect of a prolonged war with the Marathas, ordered 
Bombay to withdraw its troops immediately, and sent Col. 
Upton to negotiate a treaty of peace and friendship with the 
Poona Government. On the tst March 1776 the Treaty of 
Purandhar was signed, by which the English gave up the cause 
of Raghunaih Rao but were allowed to retain Salsette. 

Relations, however, did not improve between the English 
and the Marathas. The Bombay Government continued to 
give shelter to Raghunath Rao and at the same time com- 
plained that the Poona Court was putting obstruction in the 
way of the implementation of the treaty. The thing was that 
the Bombay Government was most unwilling to give up its 
policy of territorial acquisition, which was required for the 
safety of Bombay and security of commerce with the interior 
of the country. It thus took the earliest opportunity to break 
the treaty and resume hostilities. Three factors were responsible 
for this development; first, the approval by the Court of Di^ec 
tors of the policy of the Bombay Government in respect of the 
Treaty of Surat; second, the appearance of Saint-Lubin at 
Poona for negotiating a Franco-Maratha treaty which alarmed 
the English greatly; and third, the outbreak of dissension be¬ 
tween the leaders of the Poona Government, Sakharam Bapu 
and Nana Phadnavis. On the overtures of Sakharam Bapu the 
Bombay Government at once agreed to intervene in Maratha 
politics and overthrow Nana Phadnavis and his party from 
power. Hostilities were resumed in November 1778. On this 
occasion the policy of the Bombay Government was approved 
by the Supreme Government in Calcutta, and the latter even 
sent a strong army under Col. Leslie (after his death the corn 


iHt FRENCH IN INDIA 

nas given to Col. Goddard) to inarch overland to Bombay, 
admittedly a daring project, which more than anything else 
demonstrated to rhe Indian Powers the military strength of the 
English. 6 

/ he expedition sent by the Bombay Government met with 
a disastrous failure, partly because of the smallness of the force 
and the mismanagement of the military operations, and partly 
because of the unexpected support that the Poona Government 
under Nana Phadnavis got from all the important Maratha 
chiefs. In January 1779 the English were forced to a humiliat¬ 
ing treaty at Wadgaon, and although the treaty was promptly 
repudiated by the Bombay Government, it had the effect of 
shattering their military prestige in the eyes of the Indian 
Powers, lo some extent the position was retrieved by the 
campaigns of Goddard in Gujarat, the capture of the Gwalior 
i*ort by Popharn and the defeat inflicted on Sindhia at Sipri by 
Carnac, which raised the English name again. The English 
promptly captured Bassein and the other islands they coveted, 
tnd Goddard moved up to the Bhor Ghat to secure the Konkan 
tud threaten Poona. But the difficulty of maintaining a large 
fcice during the rains in the face of an elusive enemy of an 
overwhelming numerical superiority led to the withdrawal from 
the Bhor Ghat, leaving the Marathas at libertv to pillage the 
Konkan. 

The English were at this time at war with Haidar Ali and 
had suffered severe reverses at his hands. The Madras Govern¬ 
ment made a frantic appeal to Poona for peace, and the Supreme 
Government in Calcutta also, alarmed at the possibility of a 
general alliance among the Marathas. Nizam Ali and Haidar 
Ali, at once hastened to end hostilities with the Marathas. 
Through the mediation of Sindhia the Treaty of Salbai was 
concluded in May 1785. The treaty provided for a general 
pacification in south India, including in its scope the Bhonsla, 
Nizam Ali and Haidar Ali; the restitution of all conquests made 
since the Treaty of Purandhar; and the exclusion of other 
European nations from the Maratha dominions. Although on 
the surface the trean was honourable to the Marathas, it really 
marked the end of the first chapter of the disintegration of the 
powerful Confederacy. It was brought about by several factors: 
the internal dissensions at Poona, the defections of Mudaji 




misr^ 


^ • G oi^\ 

THE POLITICAL SCENE IN INDIA 

of Berav and Fateh Singh Gaikwar of Baroda, 
the north-Indian imprests of Mahadaji Sindhiu which impelled 
him to remain on friendly terms with the English. A part of 
the responsibility must he shared by the French, who raised 
hopes in the hearts of the Maratha leaders without being able 
to fulfil them, as will be described in later chapters. Relying 
on the promises held out by the French, Nana Phadnavis 
delayed the final exchange of ratification till February 1783- 
The failure of the French to give them any military assistance 
so alienated the Marathas that after 17H3 they definitely 
abandoned the idea of an alliance with I 4 ranee, and the later 
political overtures from Pondicherry received but scant consi¬ 
deration at Poona. 

The later history of the Marathas may be sketched very 
briefly, as being unconnected with the hopes and plans of the 
French. Although the French sought to maintain diplomatic 
relations with the Marathas for some time more, with empty 
promises of military assistance against the English on the out¬ 
break of the next war in Europe, the Marathas could hardly 
place any reliance in them and turned back completely from 
the idea of an alliance with the French. Franco-Maratha 
diplomatic relations practically came to an end with the with¬ 
drawal of the French envoy, Montigny, from Poona in 1788, 
although occasional exchange of letters between Pondicherry 
and Poona continued till 179:3. 

After the Treaty of Salbai the Marathas turned their atten¬ 
tion to the extension and consolidation of their dominions, 
avoiding any conflict with the English and maintaining out¬ 
wardly friendly relations with them. In north India Sindhia 
established his secure control, taking the Mughal Emperor 
under his protection. But for a temporary eclipse in 17 $ 8 » die 
Maratha power in north India remained unchallenged till the 
second Anglo-Maratha war in 1803-5. 1 R south India too the 
period saw* a marked increase in Maratha power. The Marathas 
defeated Tipu in 1785-87 and the Nizam of Hyderabad in 
1795. In the third Anglo-Mysorc war (1790-92) the Mara¬ 
thas co-operated with the English and made substantial terri¬ 
torial gains in return. 

Thus, down to about the close of the century the Maratha 
power maintained its vigour despite the lack of unity among 




MIMSr#, 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


r different chiefs and particularly the personal rivalry between 
nilhij and Nana Phadna is. But the situation changed 
tlur abruptly after the accession of Baji Rao H (son of the 
<1 English ally, kaglmnath Rao) as JPeshwa in 1796 and 
aaie worse after the death (1800) of the astute diplomat and 


statesman, Nana Phadnavis, who had guided tlie destiny of the 
Marathas for more than two decades. Within two years of the 
death ol Nana Phadnavis internal strife among the Marathas 
took such i violent form that Baji Rao II. driven out from 
Poona, sought the assistance of the English and concluded a 
treaty of Subsidiary Alliance with them. The Treaty of 
Bassein (*802) gave the English an opportunity of establishing 
themselves at the heart of the Maratha dominions. Their 
position was challenged by the other members of the Maratha 
Confederacy, hindhia, Bhonsla and Hoik ir, but the second 


Anglo Maratha war demonstrated more clearly than before the 
military superiority of the English. All the Maratha states had 
to recognise the fact and agree to new relations with the 
English, which considerably curtailed their independence. 
After the second Anglo-Maratha war, there set in such a rapid 
process of decay and disintegration in all the Maratha states 
that when the final hour of reckoning came with the 
English, none of them was in a position to give a real light. 

1 he Power which had once aspired after the inheritance of the 
Mughal Empire suffered an inglorious exit from the political 
scene. 


V. Hyderabad. 

Next to the Maratha Confederacy in importance was 
Hyderabad, not so much for its military strength as for the 
crafty diplomacy of its ruler. Nizam Ali. Originating from 
the Mughal Viceroyalty of the Deccan, Hyderabad became 
virtually independent in the second quarter of the 18th century 
under Nizam uEmulk. From 1751 to 1758 it was the scene of 
French milkary exploits which later showed the way to their 
more successful rivals, the English. It was in Hyderabad that 
for the first time Bussy demonstrated how an Indian state could 
be kept under effective foreign domination while outwardly 
preserving its independence. The connection between Hydera- 


Miwisr^ 


THE I’OMTICAL' SCI ME IN INDIA 

^UiSf+aiui Fiance was so close that during the French expedition 
of 1782-83 Bussy and all the Frenchmen who had knowledge of 
Indian affairs felt confident of the support of their traditional 
friend and ally. 

When Bussy left Hyderabad on the summons of Lath in 
1758. the five Northern Sarkars, the stronghold of the French, 
fell into the hands of the English. In order to regularise their 
position they obtained from the Emperor, Shah Alain, a grant 
of these territories by the Treaty of Allahabad in 1765. But 
although armed with the Imperial grant, they had to come to 
an agreement with Nizam All before they could take possession 
of the territories. By the Treaty of Mutual Assistance, con¬ 
cluded in November 1766, the Northern Sarkars were ceded to 
the English for an annual tribute of 9 lakhs of rupees, and in 
return the English agreed to furnish the Nizam with troops 
against his enemies, the tribute for the Sarkars to be remitted 
every vear that he might require such military assistance. The 
treaty of 1766 was in fact directed against Haidar Ali, whose 
increasing power had alarmed both the English and Nizam Ali 
Since Nizam Ali was at this time in league with the Marathas, 
there was thus formed a ‘Triple Alliance’ to curb the overween¬ 
ing ambition of Haidar. 

Bui the diplomatic relations among the three southern 
Powers were quickly changing, and alliances were formed with 
as much rapidity as broken. The frontier districts between the 
three states were always changing hands, and each Power was 
ever on the alert to take advantage of any temporary weakness 
of the others. Since 1761 Nizam Ali had attacked rhe Marathas 
three times, first, to take advantage of the expected disorder 
following the death of Baiaji Baji Rao; second, in alliance with 
Raghunath Rao; and third, in alliance with Janoji Bhonsla. 
But after these three attempts Nizam Ali drew closer to the 
Marathas with a view- to check the ever-growing ambition of 
Haidar. In 1767 the English, Nizam Ali and the Marathas 
attacked Haidar. 7he Marathas w*ere quickly bought off. and 
Nizam Ali also withdrew from the English alliance for a time 
and Coined with Haidar But in 1768 he changed sides once 
more and renewed the alliance with the English. It did not, 
however, affect the course of the war with Haidar. Victorious 
in the field, Haidar appeared before Madras in March 1769 




WNISTffy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


actually dictated peace. I he English had to conclude a 
nsive alliance with him which was incompatible with their 
treaty with Nizam Ali, since each alliance was directed against 
the othe t. 

B) the treaties of 1766 and 1768, the English were given 
possession of only four of the Northern Sarkars, the fifth one, 


Guntoor, to remain under Basalat Jang, Nizam Alt’s brother, 
for life. But they were anxious to acquire Guntoor earlier, 
lor two reasons: first, to round off their territories along the 
coast; and second, to eliminate the French menace, since Basalat 
J. ng had taken in his service a body of French troops coni 
mantled by de Lall£e. The declaration of war with France in 
1778 made the menace more pressing than ever, and the Madras 
Government opened direct negotiations with Basalat Jang, with¬ 
out any reference to his suzerain and brother, Nizam Ali. 
Basal.i» Jang also, anxious to get the protection of the English 
against Haidar’s aggression, readily agreed in 1779 to rent 
Guntoor to them. It gave mortal offence to Nizam Ali. who 
replied to the English by taking into his service the French 
troops dismissed by his brother. Basalat Jang. There were 
under him two great French captains, de Lai Ice, and Aumont, 
ami French influence in Hyderabad, once the scene of Bussy’s 
glorw seemed quite promising when Montigny first arrived at 
Poona about the middle of 1779. Nizam Ali went, even further 
ami started active negotiations for a ‘Triple Alliance’ between 
him. Haidar AU and the Marathas. In spite of mutual 
jealousies which prevented any permanent bination of the 
three southern Powers, the negotiations did nor* meet with any 
difficulty, since both Haidar Ali and the Marathas were at this 
time at war with the English. The plan of the allied Powers 
was not merely to harass the English position in the south, but 
also to send an expedition to Bengal with the help of Mudaji 
Bhonsla. 

i he English were very much alarmed at the prospect of 
such a powerful coalition and at once set about breaking it up 
before it had the time to become fully cemented. They entered 
into negotiations with Mudaji Bhonsla with a view to detaching 
him from the coalition and bought off the expeditionary force 
sent against Cuttack. Sindhia was conciliated by holding out 
to him the prospect of leadership of the Maratha Confederacy, 


THE POUTICAJU SCENE IN INDIA 



earnest appeals for peace were sent out iron) Madras to the 
Poona Government. Finally, the menace of the coalition was 
for the time being completely removed by conciliating Nizam 
Ali, its prime mover. The action of the Madras Government 
in acquiring Guntoor from Basalat Jang was disowned by the 
Supreme Government in Calcutta and the territory was restored. 
Nizam Ali went back to his old alliance and friendship with 
the English. He did not, however, dose the doors upon the 
French but, like a wily diplomat, maintained at least an appear 
ance of friendship towards them, whom he claimed as the 
traditional allies of Hyderabad. 

In the third AngloMysore war (1790-92) the Nizam, like 
the Marathas, cooperated with the English and was rewarded 
with territorial gains at the cost of Tipu. But he was soon to 
learn that English friendship was an inconstant thing. When 
he was attacked by the Marathas in 1795, he received no 
help from the English and suffered a disastrous defeat. It is 
not surprising that after this lesson his relations with the English 
became cool and he sought to improve his military position by 
augmenting the French force in his service under Raymond. 
It did not mean, however, that there was any connection between 
Hyderabad and the Revolutionary Government in Paris, nor 
that Nizam Ali really expected any help from that quarter as 
against the English. When Wellesley arrived, the French men¬ 
ace loomed very large in the imagination of the English. So 
he promptly turned to eliminating that danger by procuring 
the dismissal of all the French troops then in the service of 
the different Indian Princes. His first success was in winning 
over the Nizam of Hyderabad, who, afraid of his stronger 
neighbours, signed the treaty of Subsidiary Alliance (1798) 
offered by Wellesley, dismissed all French troops, and bartered 
away his political independence lor a guarantee of English 
protection. 

VJ. Mysore . 


The third important Power of south India was Mysore, 
ruled by an adventurer of remarkable vigour and ability. 
Starting his career in a humble capacity in the service of Nanjraj, 
the chief minister of the Raja of Mysore, Haidar Ali rose step 
by step, increasing his wealth and military strength, until in 



Ml NtSTftf 


^ • G o^X 

I HE FRENCH IN INDIA 

was in a position to supplant his pa 
ih< >ur t of government himself, keeping the nominal Raja 
in dose confinement. His rise to power was helped not only 
by the internal troubles in Mysore but also by the opportunities 
presented by the Anglo-French conflict in the Carnatic, which 
gave him his first lessons in European methods of warfare. It 
was during the Carnatic wars that began his close connection 
with the French which remained the traditional policy of 
Mysore throughout the rule of his family. 

Under Haidar Ali ibe decadent state of Mysore was suddenly 
raised to a political and military importance which it had never 
enjoyed before, fn the course of a few years it absorbed nil 
the petty principalities lying beyond its original frontiers and 
came to extend up to the river Krishna in the north and the 
Malabar Coast in the west. Such a rapid expansion was made 
possible by a variety of factors,—-the remarkable abilities of 
Haidar both in war as well as in diplomacy; the anarchical 
conditions which prevailed in the south as a legacy of the 
prolonged wars of succession in the Deccan and the Carnatic; 
the weakness and disunity of the petty chiefs, Maratha, Pathan 
and \ayar, who were (rushed one after another; the decline 
of the Maratha power as a result of the disaster of Panipat and 
even more of the internal dissensions after 177a; and finally, 
the jealousy and suspicion between the Courts of Poona and 
Hyderabad Which prevented any concerted action to check the 
rising Power in the south. 

Immediately after his usurpation of power in 1761 Haidar 
Ali started on a career of conquest and by 1763 considerably 
extended his dominions in the north, the most important 
acquisitions being Sera and Bednore. The northern drive 
brought him inevitably into conflict with the Marathas and for 
many years the territory lying between the Tuugbhadra and 
the Krishna remained the bone of contention between the two 
Powers. Although Haidar had counted on the decline of the 
Maratha power after the disaster of Panipat, he was soon dis¬ 
illusioned, and throughout the rule of the young and vigorous 
Pcshwa Madhav Rao he suffered repeated checks to his ambi¬ 
tions It was not till the outbreak of internal dissensions among 
the Marathas. following the untimely death of Madhav Rao. 
flMt Haidar got his opportunity to extend his dominions as far 




WNtSTffy 




I NK POI.mC.AI 

lyj j.V / • / 

\ J 

'" ,rt |{h us the river Krishna. 


SCENE IN INDIA 


<SL 


mu t> v.iiv f ^,v-i He received his first check in 17 ^ 4 * 

when the Peshwa himself came with an army vastly superior 
to his own and inflicted a decisive defeat, on him. Haidar had 
to give up most of his new acquisitions and purchase peace by 
paying a huge sum of money as tribute. But immediately after, 
in he turned his arms in a different direction and con¬ 

quered the Malabar country from petty Nayar chiefs. Before 
he had the time to consolidate his hold over the newly aequnct 
territories he had to face a new danger a combined attac k by 
the three neighbouring Powers, the Mar at has, Nizam Ah and 
the English, the last acting on behalf of the nominal ruler o 
the Carnatic. Haidar succeeded in breaking up the coalition 
by diplomacy. The Marathas were purchased with money and 
Nizam Ali was even induced to enter into an alliance with him 
against the remaining Power of the coalition, the English, 
alliance did not last long but it served Haidar’s purpose, and 
after two years of indecisive campaigns he practically dictated 
peace to the English in 1 7 ® 9 ■ 

Bv the peace treaty the English engaged to enter into a 
defensive alliance with Haidar, which was flatly contradictory 
to their earlier treaty with Nizam Ali. Besides, they had no 
real intention to render military assistance to the ambitious 
nilet of Mysore, whose rise to power constituted the gravest 
source of danger to the Carnatic. Haidar soon found it out 
when in 1771 be was again engaged in a war with the Marathas, 
who appeared this time bent on his total destruction and refused 
to be purchased with money. He was, however, saved by the 
sudden death of Peshwa Madhav Rap and .he outbreak of 
internal d’ssensions at Poona, which even enabled hun to take 
the offensive. It was from this time that lie found his path 
cleared of all obstacles. Although in 177-1 he had to face 
another Maratha invasion under Raghunath Rao, who succeed 
<*d his murdered nephew Narayan Rao as Peshwa, he -'as again 
saved by the news of a sudden revolution at Poona which placed 
the Ministerial parly opposed to Raghunath Rao in powci. 
Haidar at once entered into a pact with Raghunath Rao, who 
ceded to him all Maratha rights south of the Krishna in return 
for financial assistance for his war against the Ministerial parts. 

Although Raghunath Rao did not succeed in establishing 
his authority at Poona even with the help of his English allies. 


c 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


^eypucL served Haidar well and he quickly consolidated his 
hold over the territories ceded to him. By taking the side of 
Raghunath Rao, however, he incurred the enmity of the 
successful Ministerial party at Poona, who in 1777 induced 
Nizam Ali to make a joint attack on him. Haidar saved him¬ 
self by buying off Nizam Ali’s general and then inflicting defeat 
on the Marathas. But soon after, in 1779, threw' up Raghu¬ 
nath Rao and entered into a pact with the Ministerial party 
at Poona, by which he retained all the advantages he had 
secured by his agreement with Raghunath Rao in return for 
joining a coalition of the Marathas and Nizam Ali against the 
English. Haidar had his own grievances against the English, 
their refusal to honour the treaty of 17^9 with respect to 
giving him military assistance against his enemies; their occupa¬ 
tion of the Sarkar of Guntoor and lending troops to Basalat 
Jang, his enemy; the traditional dispute with the Nawab of the 
Carnatic, a prot£g£ of the English; and finally their capture of 
Mafic in defiance of his warning that it would be considered 
as an act of hostility against him. Thus the stage was set for 
a three Power attack on the English. Although English diplo 
macy succeeded in detaching Nizam Ali from the coalition, 
Haidar started the war in 1780 which lasted for nearly four 
years. 


At the end of the war in 1784 Mysore stood as the leading 
military power in south India, which roused the jealousy of 
tlu Marathas and Nizam Ali. In 1785 the two Powers com¬ 
bined and declared war on Tipu who had succeeded his father 
in December. 1782. Tipu thought it prudent to purchase 
peace in 1787 by paying a large sum of money and ceding a 
row districts. / he coalition of the Marathas and Nizam Ali 
did not, however break up at once, and when at the beginning 
of 1790 the English declared war on him, following his attack 
on their ally, the Raja of Travancore, he found both the 
Powers ranged against him in alliance with the English. The 
treaty imposed upon him in 1795 narked unmistakably the 
beginning of his fall, the final destruction being postponed by 
a few years more. 


Mysore under Haidar and 1 ipu was always considered as 
the special ally of the French, Such an impression, however, 
was based not so much on real connections as on the hopes 


MINlSr^ 


£** ' G °* 


I HE POLITIC#A). SCENE IN INDIA 

"entertained by each side to make use of the other tor its own 
advantage. As we shall see in later chapters, there was little 
basis or a solid agreement between them and no real unity of 
interests despite their common animosity against the English. 

In spite of this, however, both sides maintained die illu¬ 
sion of a close friendship and co-operation against the English, 
even after 1793 when the French lost all their bases in India. 
In the end this illusion did not bring any benefit to eithei 
party, but only helped the expansion of the English power. 
When Wellesley came out to India, he found Tipu engaged 
in set ret negotiations with the French in the fsle of li met.. 
The French expedition to Egypt and the indiscreet proclama¬ 
tion of Malartic, Governor of the Isle of France, calling for 
volunteers for service under Tipu. roused English suspicions 
still further about French designs on India. 1 he suspicions 
might or might not have been justified, but they served as. a 
good pretext for English action against Tipu, to crush him 
completely and deprive the French of any base in India. The 
war of 1799, which ended in the destruction of Mysore as an 
independent State, was the result of the policy of maintaining 
the illusion of Franco-Mysorean friendship, which did not in 
reality exist. 

VII. The Nawab of the Carnatic. 

Before concluding our review of the Indian Powers in the 
south a brief notice may be taken of two other Princes, 
Muhammad Alt and Basalat Jang, who although of no practical 
importance played nevertheless an interesting part in the 
tangled politics of the period by rousing the jealousy and fca>- 
of the principal competitors in the field. Muhammar *. 
Nawab of the Carnatic, owed his position entirely to the Eng¬ 
lish. He was their candidate in the succession dispute; it was 
their arms which had defeated his rival and his French suppor¬ 
ters; and it was their victory in Europe and America that had 
made France recognise him in the peace treaty as the lawful 
ruler of the Carnatic. It was not surprising therefore that the 
English should have continued, even after peace, that font- 
plete military control over the Carnatic which they had estab¬ 
lished during the war. On the other hand, what was surprising 




win/s r ff) . 


IMK FKFNCH IN INDIA 

unlike as in Bengal where the establishment of miii- 
rny control was followed within fifteen years by the assump¬ 
tion of complete administrative power, the English continued 
to preserve th< independence of the Nawab of the Carnatic so 
far as internal administration, including revenue, was concerned. 
Not only that, they even secured from the Mughal Emperor 
by (be Treaty of Allahabad of 1765 the severance of the 
traditional dependence of the Nawab of the Carnatic on the 
Subaclar of the Deccan and handed over to him the admiuis 
tration of the Northern Sarkars, ceded to them by Nizanr Ali. 

Ibis seeming prescrvance of the independence of the 
Nawab was due to a number of factors,—the initial reluctance 
oi the English to assume administrative responsibility; the 
complete control which they had over the person of the Nawab 
who lived at Madras with his whole family under close guard; 
the garrisoning of his principal forts by English troops and the 
presence of a large number of English officers in his army; and 
finally the influence ol the persons, including most of the 
Company's servants at Madras, who were interested in lending 
tnoiun to the Nawab at exorbitant rates of interest, the loans 
being secured b) the assignment of revenues of particular 
disn ins. Muhammad Ali was quick to realise the importance 
of the last factor and tried to utilise it to influence the policy 
>>[ the English Government of Madras. For a time he played 
■ us game with success and made use of the English to conquer 
the rich principality of Tanjore for him in 1773. although he 
v »> not allowed to retain it long. But the Nawab and his 
English creditors over-reached themselves, and shortly after 
shirt orders were sent from England to restrain their corrupt 
inllucncc over the Madras Government. During the second 
\tigloMysore war (1780-84) the Nawab was even deprived of 
hE administrative independence, the control being taken over 
the English Government for the more efficient prosecution 
of the war. Although he was restored in his authority at the 
etui of the war. the control over administration was once more 
taken up by the English during the third Anglo-Mysore war 
(* 79 °- 9 *)» Thus long before the discovery of the Nawabs 
treacherous correspondence in 1799* leading to the permanent 
assumption of the administration of the Carnatic by the Mad- 




THE POLITICAL SCENE IN INDIA 



<§L 


i'as Government, the indications were quite dear about the 
objective of English policy. 

Even when Muhammad Ali retained his nominal indepen¬ 
dence his real position was universally known, and none of the 
Indian and European Powers who maintained WakiU at his 
C ourt considered him to be a political factor of any importance 
He was, however, an adept in intrigue and kept up an illusion 
in the minds of many about his real intentions. That was the 
part he played in the tangled politics of (he south. 


VIII. Basalat Jang. 

Basalat Jang was the younger brother of Nizam Ali, equally 
ambitious and crafty but far less able. His importance in the 
complex, political situation of the south was derived from two 
factors,— first, occupation of the .Sarkar of Gimtoor, interposed 
between the Carnatic and the four Sarkars ceded to the English 
by Nizam Ali; and second, employment of a body of French 
troops in his service, commanded first by Z6phir and later by de 
Lallde. He thus tame to be feared by the English as a source 
of danger to their power in south India, particularly because 
of his control of a small seaport at Motupalli which enabled 
him to keep up regular communication with the French. To 
eliminate this danger the English were anxious either to get 
earlier possession of Guntoor, which by their agreement with 
Nizam Ali in 1766 was to be retained by Basalat Jang for his 
life-time, or to prevail upon Basalat Jang to dismiss the French * 
contingent irx his service. They tried the second alternative» 
first hut without success, as Basalat Jang required a body of f> 
European troops to further his ambitions. He was on un-j 
friendly terms with his brother, Nizam Ali, and at conflict wilhh 
Haidar Ali; and he even entertained hopes of conquering theft 
Carnatic with the help of the French. But in 1779 his fortunes e 
were at a low ebb. Pondicherry had fallen to the English and e 
Haidar was threatening his territories. He then threw himself 
into the arms of the English, dismissed the French contingent 
in his service and rented the Sarkar of Guntoor to the Madras 
Government, in return for the assistance of a body of English 
troops for the defence of his other possessions. The English , 
were thus freed from one source of danger, but it brought them 


misr^ 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

TimTconflict with Nizam Ali, who reseated their occupation of 
Glintoor without any reference to him and in reply attempted 
to form a coalition of the three southern Powers against them. 
To conciliate him Guntoor was restored to Basalat Jang next 
year. After the latter's death in 1782, the Sarkar remained in 
the possession of Nizam Ali until finally made over to the 
English in 1788. Anyway, with the English occupation of 
Guntoor in 1779 Basalat Jang lost what little political impor¬ 
tance had been attached to him till then. 




misr/fy. 


CHAPTER U 




the government, the company and french 

POLICY IN INDIA 

After the sketch of the political condition of India from 
1763 to 1816, we may proceed to a brief review of the nature 
of French political ambitions in India, the history of the 
Compagnic des I rides and the condition of the French Govern¬ 
ment after the Seven Years’ War. It will help a better under 
standing of the French activities in India given in the succeeding 
chapters and will also offer an explanation for the contract 
between the zeal of the Frenchmen in India for a revival of 
political influence in this country and the indifference of the 
home authorities. 

I. The Policy of Dupleix . 

Every student of Indian history will admit the importance 
of the part played by the French in giving a new turn to India’s 
political destiny in the 18th century. Of the four great Euro¬ 
pean nations who came to India for trade, the French appeared 
last on the scene. Rut they were the first to conceive the 
ambitious project of building up a large territorial empire in 
India. It was possible for them to do so because of the political 
condition of India in the first half of the 18th century. But 
equally important, at least, was the genius of one man, Dupleix. 
It was Dupleix who first showed the way of intervening in the 
internal disputes of Indian Powers and of acquiring political 
control over vast territories through puppet Indian Princes. 

There is <ome difference among historians about the exact 
nature of the political ideas of Dupleix. 1 he admirers of 
Dupleix hold him up as a pioneer among empire-builders and 
credit him with a mature and well-thought-out political plan, 
which failed only because of the apathy and negligence of the 
French Government and the Company. Thus Henri Martin in 
his monumental Histoire de France writes about Dupleix: 
“The genius of a Richelieu had matured in a Factory. Dupleix 





was the first to realise the inevitable result of the contact 
between the static societies of the East and the progressive 

societies of Europe.; lie had seen Asia, like America 

and like the whole world, destined to submit to the law of the 

European races .Dupleix judged India destined to be 

conquered, not by other Asians, like those who had ravaged her 
before, but by Europeans: among the European powers, Portu¬ 
gal had (alien and Holland was declining; there remained only 
Eranee and England. Dupleix was determined to give India 

to France.His plan was as much prudent in respect 

of means as audacious in respect of the final objective ” l 2 . For 
f he failure of Dupleix to achieve this ambitious project, Martin 
put the entire blame on the French Government and the Com¬ 
pany. “Asia would have been ours if, with Dupleix and Bussy 
in India, we could still have Louis XIV and Colbert at Versailles, 
or if wc could have only Law. But in place of Louis XIV and 
Colbert, wc hat! Louis XV and Madame de Pompadour and the 
inept merchants who directed the Company of the Indies ' 3 . 
Again, “There is not a single instance in modern history of a 
nation being betrayed to this extent by its own Government*’*. 

On the other hand, Alfred Martineau, who has written the 
most sober and authoritative biography of Dupleix, asserts that 
Dupleix did not start with any conception of empire*building, 
that he was gradually driven to it by circumstances he had not 
foreseen earlier, and that the failure of his project was due at 
least as much to his own wrong moves and miscalculations as 
to the indifference of the home government. As Martineau 
states, “If the psychologist could penetrate with certainty into 
the thoughts of statesmen, there would be little, very little 
indeed, in then actions which would appear to him inspired by 
high ideas, particularly by foresight and plans for the future. 
Chance and self-interest guide them more than one would like 
generally to confess. Dupleix did not escape this common law. 
Coming to India with the sole object of making money, he was 
led unexpectedly b\ the course of events and by a sort of frnan 
vial necessity to .1 policy of territorial expansion which he had 

1 Mania -Histoirc de France, Vol \Y\ pp. 307 308. 

2 Ibid. p. 458. 

a Ibid, p. 464. 




FRENCH frOMCY IN INDIA 


<§l 


not foreseen earlier, and even the vaguest idea of which he 
did not form for the first time til) twenty seven years after his 
arrival in the peninsula'* 1 * . Analysing the motive which 
prompted Dupleix to conceive the idea of a colonial empire, 
Martineau writes, “Constantly embarrassed in his trading opera¬ 
tions by the delay or insufficiency of funds coming from France, 
he came slowly to the idea that 'he only means to get rid of 
such embarrassments was to find money in India, without wait 
ing for funds from i nrope and without having to seek the 
assistance of bankers. That made it necessary to have a fixed 
territorial revenue, the* collection of which could be assured 
only by the exercise of a political power. T hus was first con* 
ceived and later developed more fully in the mind of Dupleix 
the idea of creating for our advantage a sort of colonial empire 
in India, where we would be practically the masters under the 
authority, more nominal than real, of Indian princes, who 
would owe their thrones or their security to us. But this idea, 
which was to change the face of India and in a certain measure 
that of the world, was not in his mind at any time before the 
year 1749 or perhaps before 1750”*. Discussing the causes of 
the failure of Dupleix, Martineau has emphasised the wrong 
judgment and blind obstinacy of Dupleix himself. No doubt, 
at the beginning, the error was legitimate; but in the later 
stage, when came an unending series of misfortunes and disillu¬ 
sions, it became evident that the substance was being sacrificed 
for the shadow. The blindness or the obstinacy of Dupleix 
was the principal cause of his fall’* 3 . 

In spite of such divergence of opinion about the origin, 
nature and practicability of the political conceptions of Dupleix, 
the fact remains that he had indicated a new way which was 
to lead one day to the establishment of European domination 
in India. Mis importance in history is not lessened by the fact 
that he himself did not succeed in his efforts. His failure may 
be explained in various ways,—his own wrong moves and 
miscalculations, the lack of supp ort from the Fre nch Govern¬ 
ment and the Company, or, most important of all, the futida- 


1 Martineau- Dupleix ci t lndc Yrangaisc, Vol. I. Introduction, p. vi. 

3 Ibid, Vol. II, Introduction, p. ix. 

3 Ibid, Vol. Ill, p. 418. 




miST/fy. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<§L 


weak ness jjf JEraiice in a colonial struggle, as demon 
strated clearly i;i other theatres of conflict too diiring the Seven 
Years’ War. Rut the value of his political conception was realised 
by the French as well as by their more successful rivals, the 
English. Jt is not really true that the French Government and 
the Company did not appreciate the importance of Dupleix's 
project. But for his reverses in the Carnatic, he would not 
have been so abruptly recalled. Even when he was replaced 
by G Mleheju, it did not mean a complete reversal of his policy 
or a throwing away of any of the material advantages secured 
by him. Godeheu’s treaty with the English in 1754 still left the 
French in possession of the additional territories round Pondi¬ 
cherry and Karikal which had been acquired earlier; in occupa¬ 
tion of important posts in the Carnatic; and in enjoyment of 
the extensive jagir of the four Northern Sarkars with a 
controlling authority in Hyderabad. Thus, not a single material 
advantage had been sacrificed, except the extremely doubtful 
prospect of securing the mastery of the Carnatic. If the Seven 
Years’ War had not broken out shortly after, the French would 
have got time to consolidate their position thus secured, making 
it easier to realise the political project of Dupleix. 


II. The Seven Years' War and the Destruction of 
French Hopes. 


During the Seven Years’ War France made earnest efforts 
to retain the advantages she had secured in India and even to 
ensure the realisation of Dupleix’s project in full by eliminating 
the English completely from the Coromandel Coast. That there 
was no indifference on the part of the French Government is 
admitted by the eminent historian Henri Martin, who is other¬ 
wise so critical of the Government of Louis XV. France sent 
out jo India stron land and n aval forces, which she could 
spare consistent with her and America w 

her interests were more vitally affected. Martin only dislikes the 
choice of the leader. Daily, and regrets that “such a person had 
been given the resources which Dupleix never had at his 
disposal from 1747 to 1754” 1 . Ultimately the French suffered 


1 Maittn-'-ffij/oirtf de France , Vol. XV, p. 538. 





a decisive defeat, and far from realising the ambitious project 
of Dupleix or retaining the advantages left to them by the 
treaty of Godeheu, they even lost all their old settlements and 
< lories in India. Chandernagore was the first to be captured 
by the English iri March <757, followed by the expulsion of 
the French from all the subordinate factories in Bengal. The 
recall of Bussy from the Deccan in 1758, to strengthen Lally's 
forces for the war in the Carnatic, left the Northern Sarkars 
exposed to an English attack from Bengal. The Sarkars were 
promptly lost together will/ the two old settlements of Ma.suli- 
paiam and Yanam, and French influence in the Dec can, so 
laboriously built up by the genius of Bussy, was completely 
destroyed. Nor were the French more fortunate in the 
Carnatic. Their offensive operations miscarried, ail their 
strongholds in the Carnatic were lost one by one, and finally 
they suffered a most decisive defeat at Wandiwash (January 22, 
1760). After a blockade of several months Pondicherry capitu 
lated on the 16th January, 1761. Karikal had been captured 
earlier; Mahe on the Malabar Coast and the two remaining forts 
in French hands in the Carnatic. Jinji and Thiagar were also 
lost in the course of the year. 

That was the disastrous end of the policy initiated by 
Dupleix so far as the French were concerned, while their more 
successful rivals, the English, taking their inspiration from the 
same ideas built up a vast empire in India. The net result of 
the Seven Years’ War has been stated by Voltaire thus in his 
Precis du Siicle d<: Louis XV: “At l ast t he re jw as Jeft to 
French in this part of the world only regret for having spent 
immense sums for over forty years for^ main taming a Company 
which never made the least profit, which never pa id to its 
shareholders and creditors from the profits of its commerce, 
winch in its Indian administration lived only on secret brigan¬ 
dage and which had been sustained only by a part of the farm¬ 
ing of tobacco granted to it by the Kinffi a memorable and jpu 
haps useless example of the little knowledge which the French 
have had so far about the grand and ruinous commerce of 
India”*. 

1 Voltaire —Precis du Sidclr de Loui\ XV (Oeuvres Completes, XXII), 

P 3m. 


WNlSTffy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


<tt doubt Voltaire ricvt 1 had any sympathy for the policy 
of Dupleix, but there are other French historians also who have 
condemned the French colonial adventure in India during the 
Seven Years' War. Martineau in his biography of Bussy points 
out that Bussy had no genuine interest in the task assigned to 
him by Dupleix and that his idea of a sound colonial policy 
was entirely different from that of Dupleix, In his celebrated 
letter of 1755 Bussy had represented to Dupleix "that our 
settlements on the coast were sufficient for our commerce and 
that therefore it was useless and perhaps dangerous to remain 
in the: Deccan, where we would run the risk of being obliged 
to take sides in the quarrels of the country princes to the detri¬ 
ment of our commerce" 1 * . Bussy believed that the real strength 
of a country lay in t homogeneous territory, sufficiently large 
to resist attacks, anything beyond which "is a luxury and some¬ 
times a danger Martineau does not hide his preference for 
the policy of Bussy to that of Dupleix, although he admits thai 
the policy of Dupleix "was entirely the modern theory of 
colonisation, a theory which triumphed after his death, and 
one can quite understand why it found so many apologists 
later" 3 4 . But he asserts that at the time it was conceived b) 

Dupleix, "no polic\ was more inopportune. It wou ld hav e 

been much more useful to retain in Europe all our land and 
naval forces, an 3 it is perhaps because we dispersed them to 
Canada and India, particularly to Canada, that we lost the 

Seven Years’ War. At that time.the primary interests of 

France required her to confine her attention to Europe. When 
the house is on fire, one does not think of the stable; it is 
Voltaire who was right"; 1 . 

Flic failure of the French in India in the Seven Years' War 
is generally attributed to a number of factors,—the rashness and 
arrogance of Lally, the violent discord between Laliy and the 
Company's officers at Pondicherry, the acute want of money 
which crippled French military operations, the recall of Bussy 
from the Deccan, the had choice* of officers, the timidity of 

1 Martinrau- Bussy n i’/nde Franfaist, p. 445. 

- Ibid, p. 450. 

3 Ibid, p. 449. 

4 /bid, p. 450. 




miST/fy 



FRENCH POLICY IN INDIA 

/ • J 

^^Fgwwhich deprived Lally of naval support at every cri 
moment, and many others. It is useless to try to assess the 
extent to which each of these factors contributed to the French 
defeat. The French Government, shaken by the intensity of 
public opinion, found a scapegoat in Lally. who was s entence^ 
to death for %etFaymg the interest of the nation”. Voltaire 


condemned it as '‘one of those murders which are committed 
with the sword of justice” 1 . Even Martin who is so strongly 
critical of Lally has to observe, 4t The real criminal on whom 
posterity would fasten the responsibility for the loss of India. 
wauTnot Comte de Lally* hut the King who had ordered his 
death”*. Voltaire perhaps diagnosed more correctly than most 
French historians of later days the real cause of French failure 
\n India in the Seven Years’ War. “The re al can.se was the 
same as in other parts of the world; the su periority of the Eng¬ 
lish fleet, the carefulness and perseverance of that ua.tifiin its 
credit, its ready money and that spirit of patriotism which is 
stronger in the long run than the trading spirit and the greed 
for riches** 5 . 

The war in the later stage had proved so disastrous to 
France in every theatre of conflict that by 1762 the French Gov¬ 
ernment was forced to the necessity of IfeETng peace at any 
cost. The Preliminaries of Peace were signed at Fontainebleu 
on the 3rd November 1762, followed by the conclusion of a 
definitive treaty signed in Paris o n the 10th February 1763* The 
terms of the Treaty of Paris were jJmos^jushinjr for France. 
“France had lost the flower of her nivy, herjast..dominion ..in 
North America, the remains of the conquests, of Dupleix. and 
Bossy, her best possessions on the western coast of Africa and 
several in the Antilles. England had acquired an enormous 
increase of territory and an overwhelming arrogance of tone. 
For the first time since the Middle -Ages she had defeated Prance 
by her own strength and almost without allies, France, on the 
contrary, having several powerful auxiliaries' she had defeated 
France only bv the superiority of hei 


1 Voltaire-—/• ragment: s on India t p. 86. 

2 Martin — Htstoirc de France, Vol. XV, p. 572. 
9 Voltaire, op . cit., p. 74. 

4 Martin, op. cit., Vol. XV, p. 597. 




minis 


I HE FRENCH IN INDIA 


inimitable style has described the result of the war thus: 
4 ‘hi tht course of this disastrous war, the State lost, the most, 
br illia nt part of the nation's youth, more than half the money 
in circulation, its navy, "its commerce, it ; Trc 3 it. One would 
think that ii would have TJeen very easy to avert such great 
misfortunes by coming to a compromise with the Engl ish for a 
small territory in dispute in Canada. But some ambitious 
persons, just to prove their worth and their necessity to the 
State, precipitated France into this fatal war. It was the same 
in 1741 The amour-propre of two or three persons was suffi¬ 
cient to desolate the whole of Europe. France was in such a 
pressing needjof peace that she considered those who concluded 
the treaty as benefactors of the country. The debts which 
pressed heavily on the State were much greater than those of 
even the reign of Louis XIV. Only the extraordinary expenses 
for the war in just one year amounted to four hundred millions; 
let one imagine the rest from that. France would have lost 
heavily even if she had been victorious” 1 . 

III. The Treaty of Paris and the restoration oj 
French territories. 

By Art. 11 of the Treaty of Paris France was given back 
all the settlements and factories she possessed in India iti 1749. 
This pur her back in her old position before Dtipleix launched 
his ambitious schemes for the mastery of the Carnatic and the 
Deccan. Only one exception was made, in the case of Chander 
nagore. The French were deprived of the right of fortifying 
the place or constructing any kind of defensive works and of 
introducing troops in the settlement beyond the number required 
for the maintenance of internal law and order. This restriction 
had to be accepted in recognition of the reality of the situation 
in Bengal, There the English had obtained complete masters 
and could not be expected to suffer the existence of any foreign 
fortified settlement with a large* number of troops constituting 
a threat to their position. Together with their settlements and 

1 Voltaire- Precis du $*#cle de Lotus XI (Oeuvres Completes, XXII), 

p m 









MWisr^ 



FRENCH POLICY IN INDIA 



L 


$6$ the old trading rights and privileges of the Frencl 


e also recognised by the treaty. 


Thus, with the exception of the restriction regarding 
Chandernagore the treaty of 1763 seemed to have placed the 
two nations, the French and the English, in the same relation 
to each other as had existed in 1749. But in reality a profound 
change had come over in their respective positions in India 
by the steady expansion of the English power, and when the 
French returned to India in 1765 they found the old balance of 
power completely upset. In 1749 both the nations were on a 
footing of equality in Bengal and on the Coromandel Coast, 
while neither of them had any political influence in the interior 
of the country. In 1765 while the French position remained 
nearly the same, the English had obtained the mastery of Bengal 
and the Carnatic; Oudh was at their mercy; they were in 
occupation of the Northern Sarkars, wrested from the French, 
and the ruler of Hyderabad had been reduced to a subordinate 
ally dependent on their protection; even the Mughal Emperor 
was living as their pensioner. The dream of Dapleix had 
come true, but for the benefit of his adversaries. 

After the conclusion of peace in Europe, Jean L aw de 
La ur is ton was appointed Governor of the French settlements in 
India and Roy al Commissioner for taking possession of the 
settlements from the English. Law de Laurision had been the 
Chief of the French factory at Kasimbazar in 1757, when the 
English moved against it after the capture of Chandernagore. 
Law then started on hi 5 career of wandering and adventure, 
taking service under Prince Ali Gauhar, later to become Emperor 
Shah Alam II, and being taken prisoner by the English in Jan¬ 
uary 17(11. His courageous behaviour won for him due recogni¬ 
tion on his return to France at the end of the war. He was pro 
moted to the rank of a Colonel and created a Chevalier of .St. 
Louis. Finally he was appointed Governor of the French settle 
meats in India in 1764. He received his instructions on the 18th 
March 1764, started for India on the 1st April and landed at 
Madras on the 59th January 1765. He took possession of Kaiikal 
on the lBth February and of Pondicherry on the nth April 1765. 
The other French possessions were also restored in the course 
of the year. 

The French came back to India in 1765 and their first 






WNIST/fy 



oug!n was o 11* build their position on the same footing of 


equality with the English which had existed before the war. 

1 lie very hum ilia ujxg terms of the Treaty of Paris made them 
determined to work for a revival of their lost political influence, 
ft was no doubt too late to attempt a restoration of the old 
balance;of power. But Frenchmen in India, whether officials 
or adventurers in the service of the Indian Princes, were full of 
hopes and believed that they could still retrieve the position of 
their nation by building up alliances with important country 
Powers. Thus, down to the next outbreak of Anglo-French 
hostilities in India during the War of American Independence 
they submitted to the French Government innumerable diplo¬ 
matic and military projects which, however, received little serious 
attention in Paris for the first ten years. For an explanation 
for this contrast between the zeal and optimism of Frenchmen 
in India and the indifference '>f the home authorities, we have to 
turn to the conditions in France after the Seven Years' War. 
The re-establishment of the French position in India, as 
envisaged by those who drew up the diplomatic and military 
projects* required the support of the French Company and of 
the French Government. But the French Company, which had 
never much vitality, had become completely moribund after 
1763 an d was suppressed in 1769, while the attention of the 
French Government was fully absorbe d by internal troubles and 
Euro pean complications, leaving it little mclmauon to think 
of its distantTncTfan possessions. Nor was the corrupt and effete 
administration of Louis XV, dominated by the King’s mistresses 
who had the power of appointing and dismissing ministers, 
really in a posinorT to adopt any bold and Imaginative policy 
in colonial matters. 


IV. The Compagine des Indes Orientates . 


To understand the situation of the French Company at the 
end of the Seven Years’ War it is necessary to trace very briefly 
its earlier history, revealing two principal sources of its weak¬ 
ness, — organi sation and finance. French trading ventures in the 
East started really from 1664, after the establishment of the 
Compagnie des Indes Orientate v, although some abortive at¬ 
tempts had been made earlier by the Compagnie des mers 





FRENCH POLICE IN INDIA 



i rtentales (1G04), the Compagnie des Moluqucs (1615) and the 
Compagnie d’Orient (1642). I he establishment of the 
Compagnie des hides Orientales was due principally to the 
initiative of Colbert, and it started its career with the advantage 


of full governmental protection and patronage. The Company 
was given trading monopoly in the East for fifty years, with 
the power of acquiring territories, maintaining forces and making 
war and peace. But the organisation, virtually sponsored by 
the State, had little public enthusiasm and support behind it, 
and that remained the greatest, source of its weakness through¬ 
out. French capital was shy and Colbert had to resort to every 
conceivable method of persuasion and threat to raise money 
for the Cotnpany. The first subscriptions raised represented in 
reality a forced loan. 

Colbert had hoped that once given a start, the Company 
vo ufd i rtcou rse of time be able to draw more and more on the 
spirit of enterprise of the business and capitalist class B it 
that hope wfc> never realised. \\ ithin a decade the Compare s 
commercial operations practically came to an end for want of 
money. In 1683 Colbert tried to save the situation bv permit¬ 
ting private merchants to take part in the Eastern trade, pro¬ 
vided they made use of the Company’s vessels and paid a 
commission of 10% to the Company on their exports and 
imports, besides the normal freights. Although this measure 
was intended to enable the Company to strengthen its financial 
resources, it really resulted in inducing the Company to follow 
the easy-going method of allowing outsiders to make use of its 
trading privileges and living mcre h on the com missions^and 
freights paid by them. C olber t’s death in 1683 was a great 
:,knv lb the Company. Whaler o t . recov ery jherg. 

yet might Have been for the Company were destroyed by the. 
long wars in which France was engaged in the closing years of 
the 17th and the early years of the l&th century. 

During the War of the Spanish Succession the financial 
condition of the Company became so Tad tKat it w f as compelled 
10 suspend its tra ding operations and to le av e its lactorics in 
India to their fate. The situation was saved ir. bvThe 

enterprise oFsome merchants of St. Malo, who entered into 
agreements with the Company for continuing the trade of the 
Indies on their own account by paying commissions to the Com- 





MINlSr^ 



paay for the use of its trading rights and privileges. In 1715, 
on the expiry of the fifty years’ ten * of trading monopoly in 
the East, the Company’s privileges were extended for another 
period of ten years. But the Company, anxious to retain its 
legal rights, was not in a position to make any use of them 
itself. So it transferred its rights to a newly constituted Society 
of Merchants of St. Malo on nearly the same terms as before. 
This agreement, however, lasted only for five years, till 1719, 
when the Compagnie des Index Orientates was amalgamated 
with Law’s Compagnie d* Occident under a new name, the 
Compagnie des Indes, to which was entrusted the whole of the 
colonial trade of franc?. The new Company took over all the 
establishments, ships and merchandise of the old Company, 
together with its debts both in France and in India. 

Apart from the shyness of capital and lack of business enter¬ 
prise in France, another factor which crippled the French Com¬ 
pany was the reversal of die commercial polic y of Colbert after 
the latter’s death and the triumph of the Protectionist doctrine. 
In 1686 the Frenc h Government prohibited the importation of 
primed cloth from India in th e in ter est o f home manufactures, 
This measure was the result of the rivalry between manufactur¬ 
ing^ and comjnercial interests, which became increasingly acute 
after the death of Colbert. In 1702 the Company sustained 
another setback by the prohibition of the importation of silk 
manufactures from India. Finally, in 1709 the prohibition of 
the importation of all kinds of cotton goods from India marked 
the complete victory of Protectionism. 

Discussing tire lack of success of the Compagnie des hides 
Orientates , Kaeppelin observes: ‘Thus the Company after 
iifty-five years of its existence had not succeeded in laying down 
a solid foundation for the French in India or even in establish 
ing a regular commerce” 1 . The main causes of this failure 
were: 1 hc^rtgicTcontrql of the State, depriving the shareholder 
of any independence or initiative; the Protectionist policy of 
the Government, which hit the most profitable branch of the 
Company’s trade; the lack of capital necessary for sustained 
commercial activity; and the European policy of Louis XIV, 

1 Karppelin —La Compagnie des bides Orientates et Francois Martin, 

p- 645- 


MIN ISTfiy 


FRENCH POUCV IN INDIA 



involving continuous wars 
Company’s existence. 


Sl 

for nearly half the period of the 


V. Law's System. 

1 he incorporation of the Company in Law s novel and 
complicated financial system resulted ultimately in further 
shaki ng of public confidence in commercial ventures. It is not 
necessary here to go into the details of the principle under¬ 
lying Law’s system atid the methods adopted in its application. 
The essence of Law’s system was an extensive use of credit in 
all financial transactions and the virtual replacement of metallic 
currency by paper money in normal circulation. I here was 
nothing basically wrong wdtb the system, provided the credit 
structure was not unusually inflated and paper money thrown 
into circulation out of all proportion to ihe metallic reserve. 
Unfortunately, these cautions were not observed. 4 The Com 
pany was united with Law s Bank and took over the entiie 
management o f th e finances of the State,, including the national 
debt, law’s system seemed to promise miraculous results, which 
roused the credulity and greed of all sections of the people. 
The Bank started issuing paper c urrenc y without any limit. 
The .Company’s shares also were multiplied with an amazing 
rapidity, and public confidence shot up their value in an 
abnormal craze for getting rich quickly. 

The inevitable result followed in 1730. Some adverse 
reports led to suspicions about the st abil ity of the system. 1 hen 
the suspicions deepened into panic 5rid finally came the crash 
towards the end of 1730. Law tried various methods to avert 
the catastrophe but in the end fled away to Holland. T h< 
administrators of the Bank and of the Company were arrested 
and thrown into prison. Liquidators were appointed by the 
Government for the two bodies. So far as the Company was 
concerned, its privileges were suspended and an examination 
of its accounts was ordered. Holders of shares were required 
to present them for verification. Out of 135 034 shares presented 
only 50,000 were accepted as genuine and the rest cancelled 1 . 

1 Barbicr— La Compagnie tran<;nise dcs Indes, p. 33. 

(Revue Historiquc de Unde Fran^aisc, Pondicherry, III, iqiQ)* 




Mr msr/fy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

“Ta spite of the unhappy ending of his system. Law had demon 
sfrated the power of credit and rendered useful services so far 
as the Compagnie des ltides was concerned. He had in effect 
revived the vitality of an organ, tried and discredited. He had 
given it a powerful impulse and the development of the Com¬ 
pany in the course of the 18th century owed much to him” 1 2 . 

VI. The Re-constitution of the Compagnie des Indes. 

1 he failure of Law’s system did not mean the end of the 
Company. After the storm had passed and the situation h id 
cleared up somewhat, the Company received a fresh lease of 
life. The French Government was keen on preserving the 
Company and helping it to develop on proper lines. An arrSt 
of aand March 17*3 reconstituted the Company and defined 
its relations to the State. In 1725 all its old privileges were 
confirmed a$d at the same time its past liabilities wiped oft. 
But while reconstituting the Company the Government was 
not willing to give it much freedom of action. “In place of 
leaving it master of its own destiny under broad State control, 
the Company was placed under strict dependence on the Gov¬ 
ernment, which considerably hampered its working and became 
one of the important cau ses o f its ruin. The spirit of initiative 
and hardy enterprise, which would have perhaps been en¬ 
couraged if the shareholders interested in the development of 
the Company and in its success could have directed its opera¬ 
tions without any restraints, was thus from the beginning dis¬ 
couraged or paralysed by such subjection to tutelage” 8 . 

For keeping the Company under proper surveillance there 
was set up a Conseil des Indes, with members selected by the 
King from among the officers of his Council and of th< Vav\ 
TmcT also prominent merchants. The* twelve Directors of the 
Company were likewise" to be selected by the King. The only 
concession made to the shareholders was that they were to elect 
at their annual meeting eight S ynd ics to look after their interests. 
In fact, no annual meeting was called till 1745, when on a strong 
representation from the shareliolders they were given the right 

1 Bat bier —-La Compagni/ b ran^aisr des hides, p, 24. 

2 Ibid, pp. 25 26. 





FRENCH POLICY IN INDIA 


<§L 


fleeting twelve persons from whom the King would choose 
six Syndics. But even this concession was not maintained in 
practice. The Directors were also reduced to the status of 
simple clerks and the real management of the Company lay in 
he hands of the King’s agents. 

In 1730 a Commissary appointed by the King was intro 
duced into the administration of the Company. 1 he result is 
described by Abb 6 Raviiai: “From this period there was an 
end to all freedom of debate; there was no longer any cornice 
lion between those vvJVo had the management of affairs, and 
the pr opri e tors; 110 immediate intercourse between the managers 
and the government. All was directed by the influence, and 
according uTtfie views of the Court. Mystery, that dangerous 
veil oF arbitrary administration, concealed all the operations h 
In i745~the King appointed two Commissaries. "From this time 
two parties were formed. Each Commissary had his own .scheme, 
his own favourites, and endeavoured to get his own projects 
adopted. Hence arose divisions, intrigues, informations, and 
animosities, which though they originated in Paris, extended as 
far as India, and there broke out in a manner so fatal to the 
nation” 2 . To remedy the situation a third Commissary was 
later appointed. “This expedient, however, served only to 
increase the evil. Despotism had prevailed while there was but 
one; division ensued on the nomination of two; and from the 
moment three were appointed, all was anarchy and confusion”." 

At the same time the Company was de priv ed of the pos 
Ability of acc umul ating a regular floating capital for its com¬ 
mercial transact 1011 s. From the very beginning of the Fr nch 
Company it. had been the practice to pay the shareholders a 
fixed dividend irrespective of the results of trade. From 1723, 
by a Royal Order, the re constituted Company was required to 
pav to the shareholders a dividend of 15° livres per sharr 1 hese 
dividends were paid from the only secure source of the Coin 
p my’s income, the monopoly of the sale of tobacco which had 
been granted to the Company in discharge of the Government’s 
obligation for the large sum of money lent by the Company 


1 Abb£ Raynat-~/l Philosophical and Political History of the Settle- 
ments and Trade of the Europeans in the East and West Indies (tr. by 
Justamond), U. p. 375, 2 Ibid, p. 376. 3 Ibid . 


Ml NIST/f^ 



THE FRENCH TN INDIA 



under Law's administration. In 1723 the monopoly of the rale 
of tobacco yielded a profit of million livres and it rose to 
more than 8 millions in 1735. 1 2 'This secure source of income, 
which should have been turned to accumulate a lloating capital 
for the Company for its commercial operat ions, was diverted for 
the benefit of the shareholders. 

'fire shareholders, thus assured of a fixed dividend, were 
not much interested in the success of the Co mg atiy^ Trade. The 
Company, deprived of the means of raising a fl oati ng capital, 
had to live on credit and publiexonbdence. Before the out 
break of the War of. the Austrian Succession, the Company had 
enjoyed a fairly long period of prosperity, but it could not suc¬ 
ceed in constituting a floating capital from the profits of its 
commerce. As long as the shareholders received their dividends 
and the Directors their emoluments, nobody ‘worried about the 
future. As Barbier has observed, “This explains to a large 
extent the inertia encountered by Dupleix in his difficult hours 
when the success of his venture required unanimity of efforts” 3 . 

VII. Trade and Finance of the Compagnie des lndes. 

Under such a defective organisation not much commercial 
development could be expected. But surprisingly enough the 
Company showed remarkable commercial expansion down to 
the outbreak of the Seven Years’ War. The foundation was 
laid by Law, who in 1719 acquired for the Company the port of 
Lorient which was to remain in its possession till 1764. There 
the Company built a magnificent naval station and arsenal. 
Law had also given a strong impulse to the construction and 
acquisition of ships, and ifter the fall of his system he left to 
the Company more than a hundred ships of different tonnage. 
These initial advantages helped the Company in the expansion 
of its commerce. From 17*5 to 1759 the Company sent out to 
India an average of 20 vessels a year, while the returning 
vessels numbered on an average 15 a year. During the same 
period the Company spent #72,4*6,39* livre; for the purchase 

1 Barbier—La Compagnie Franca tie des lndes, p, 28. 

(Revue Historkjue de Tlnde Fran9t1.se, Pondicherry, III, 1919). 

2 ibid, p. 29. 



miSTffy 



FRENCH POUCY IN INDIA 


( Qih in India, which it sold in France for 532,000,000 livres, 
with a net profit of 253,069,631 livres 5 . 


<§L 


rhe period of the greatest prosperity was from 17*5 to 
1740. These was not much diminution of trade during the 
War of the Austrian Succession or even in the period from 1 75 1 
to 1755. Thus the common impression that the policy of 
Dupleix had gravely hampered commercial operations is not 
quite correct. It was the Seven Years War which dealt the 
most fatal blow to the Company’s trade. From 1759 to 17(4 
the average annual profit amo unted ho on ly 4 00,000 byres. After 
the war there was a revival of trade and the profit rose to 
11,000,000 livres on the eve of the suppression of the Company 
in 1769’. 

During the days of its prosperity the Company made a net 
profit of aoo% on its Indian trade, after deducting all costs. 
The Company could have realised more but for the high figure 
of general costs amounting to 5*% of profits. Besides, the 
prohibition of the imp ortat ion intgjjance.olcertain categories 
of silk and cotton goods, constituting the most profitable 
branch of the Indian trade, act ed as a deterrent, to the expan¬ 
sion of the’ Company V trade" The competition of the stronger 
English and Dutch Companies prevented the French Company 
from securing a wide market lor these goods outside France., 
Then again the Company's policy of annual sales glutted the 
market at one time and failed to take advantage of increased 
prices in times of scarcity. Finally, smuggling and other 
dishonest practices on the part of its agents reduced the profits 
of the Company. 

But the most serious handicap for the Company’s trade was . 
the lack of any Hoating capital, which made the Company 
dependent on various financial expedients to meet ike irnme 
diate situation. Having to face an uncertain future from day 
to day, the Company was not in a position to tlunk of long¬ 
term plans or to undertake projects expected to yield rich 
profits in some distant future. As Barbier observes, l lie 


1 Barbier -Ixi Compagnie b'^an^aise dcs I tula, p. 70. 

(Revue Historiquc de l’lnde Fran<^i*e, Pondicherry, HI, 1919) 
* Ibid, p. 71, 



.dSSwiis of men who obstructed the conceptions of Dupleix can 
be better explained b\ this” 1 . 


The anit of 22nd March 1723 which re-constituted the 
Company fixed the Companycapital at 112 million livres, 
representing 56,000 shares (48,000 full shares of 2,000 livres 
each and 80,000 tenth shares of uoo livres each), the farming 
of tobacco which was then valued at sj million livres and the 
farming of the ‘domaine d’Occident’ which was taken awa) 
from the Company in 1725 fox 300,000 livres. Io these 
revenues were added in 1723 and 1724 the monopoly of the 
sale of coffee in France and of the issue of lotteries. I he 
farming of tobacco was later handed over""to the State for an 
annual payment of ij million livres. 

Down to the outbreak of the War of the Austrian Succes¬ 


sion the Company managed to meet all expenses from these 
fixed revenues and the profits of commerce. But the extraordi¬ 
nary expenses of the war combined with its losses created a crisis 
for the Company in 1745. The s uspen sion of the payment of 
dividends in that year first brought home to the shareholders 
the gravity of the situation. The payment of dividends, at a 
much 'rSfuccd rate, was resumed in 1746. After the war the 
revival of trade held out hopes for the Company to be able to 
make good its losses and to look for better days. 

But while the Company was trying to carry on by means 
of borrowing and other financial expedients, it found itself 
called upon 10 meet additional expenses arising out of the 
enterprises of Dupleix. “In these circumstances it is easy to 
understand that being always faced with the prospect of an 
immediate bankruptcy the Company showed an increasing 

hostility to the execution of the plans of Dupleix.It 

refused to envisage military and political projects which 
appeared certainly onerous for the present and with an uncer¬ 
tain prospect for the future” 2 . However, the condition of the 
Company was not wholly desperate and a few years of peace 
and commercial revival would have helped its recovery. But 
the Seven Years' War dealt it a mortal blow, from which re- 


‘ Bar bier— La Cornpagnir fran#aise des l tides, p. 77. 

<Kevin Historic oe <\e llnde Fra»i<;aise, Pondicherry, III, 1919). 
2 ibtd, p. 90. 



Ml MSTfty 



FRENCH POLICY IN fNDIA 


became extremely difficult, specially because ol the 
colossal expense on the reconstruction of the settlements in 


India, completely destroyed !>y the English. 


VI ff. The end of the Compagnie des Indes. 


There was, however, an earnest effort on the part of the 
Company to retrieve the situation. In 1764 the shareholders 
nude a representation to the Government stating ffiat thtT 
primary responsibility for the mismanagement and losses of the 
Company lay with it and praying that the Company might be 
treed from strict Governme n tal control. They secured their 
object partially, and by an Mit of 1764 Governmental control 
was considerably relaxed and the direction of the Company 
reorganised. At the same time in order to secure the interests 
of the shareholders the Government stipulated that “a sufficient 
fund should be detached from that portion of the contract 
which was then free, to secure to every share a capital of 1,600 
livres and an interest of 80 livres” 1 . 

The reorganised Company made strenuous efforts to put 
things in order. The most pressing debts were paid out of 
the permanent revenues, und by means of loans and lotteries 
sufficient money could be raised for commercial operations Jn 
fact, the trade of the Company revived with surprising rapidity, 
not falling much short of the level reached in its better days. 
But this seeming prosperity was wholly artificial. The real 
position of the Company was desperate. The Company began 
its trading operations reckoning upon a larger capital than it 
really possessed. Its debts mounted rapidly. It had to face a 
keener competition in India from the English than before the 
war. Moreover, its credit in India was ruined, and it had to 
undertake a heavy responsibility for reconstructing and main¬ 
taining its settlements in India. 

T he desperate position of the Company soon attracted the 
attention of the Government. The Government, warned by 
the repeated loans floated by the Company, determined to 


1 Aot>c Rayrial- A Philosophical and Political History of the Settle¬ 
ments and Trade of the Europeans in the East and West Indies (tr. by 
Jmtamond), II. p. 381. 



THE FRENCH fN INDIA 


<SL 


fiiirr into the suite of its finances. The immediate occasion 
for it was supplied by the Company itself. It appealed to the 
Government for assistance and furnished detailed statements 
about its financial position. The Government published the 
ufcments. and immediately the Company became the object 
of bitter public c riticis m. It may be noted th.u there were 
many in France who were strongly opposed in principle to the 
preservation of a monopoly Company. Others opposed the 
Company in the hope of getting a share of the profitable eastern 
trade for themselves. In the public controversy of the time 
the Company found an ardent supporter in Necker, later to 
become so celebrated as Finance Minister. The most severe 
critic of the Company was Morellgj, a noted economist 

>f the time. He thoroughly exposed the hopeless condition of 
the Company, giving full details of the Company's finances at 
different periods. 

Morellet’s forceful attack combined with public condemna¬ 
tion sealed the fate of the Company. The Company’s term of 
concession was to last till 1770. but the Government suspended 
its privileges bv a decree on the 13th August 1769. Although 
n did not mean permanent suppression, the shareholders of the 
Company deemed it prudent to liquidate the concern promptly 
in a manner that would secure the interests of their creditors 
and the remains of their own fortunes. For this purpose they 
offered to give up to the King all the Company’s ships, thirty 
in number; all the warehouses and other buildings belonging 
to them at Lorient and in India; the property of their settle¬ 
ments and factories together with the manufactures dependent 
on them; all naval and military stores; and lastly 2450 slaves 
then owned by the Company. The total was valued at 30 
million livres, to which the shareholders added i6| million livres 
as being due to them by the Government. The King agreed 
to the Company's proposal, but chose to reduce the purchase 
money to 30 millions in all. An ddit was issued in January 
1770. creating a perpetual annuity of i,soo,ooo livres upon a 
capital of 30 millions for the benefit of the shareholders 1 . 

1 Abbe Raynal I Philosophical and Political History of the Settle¬ 
ment* ami Trad> of the Europeans in the East and JVest Indies (tr. by 
Jmtamond), II. pp. 391 39a. 




mmsr/fy 



That was the end of an institution which, as Barbiei notes. 

‘ was not devoid of either greatness or power and which, better 
directed, would have obtained immense results'”. That is 
certainly true, but. as it stood after the Seven Years War the 
organisation had no vitality left and was not in a position to 
undertake ambitious schemes for the re-establishment of French 
political influence in India. 

IX. The Trench Government after the Seven Years’ War. 

If the French Company was not in a position to undertake 
ambitious political projects in India after the Seven Years’ War. 
the French Government, which took over all the Company s 
possessions in India in 1770, was in no better position. The 
Government of Louis XV had neither the will nor the strength 
to follow a vigorous foreign policy. It seas not due to the 
absence of any able minister, for Choiseul, who remained the 
leading figure in the ministry front 1758 to 1770, certainly 
belonged to the best tradition of French statesmanship. T he 
real reason was the character of the administration , pres ided 
over by a dissolute king an d dominate d by intriguing mi| 
tresses and fi^uYr cabitH "<s hd liaa^ ihc~poWCT of appointing and 
removing ministers and diet iting the policy of th< Goy u 
No constructive forms'and' nV amsistetu policy in home and 
foreign affairs were possible under such an administration. In 
fact, the later period of the reign of Louis XV is remembered 
in history as the pre paratory.jtkage for the Revolution. As 
Henri Martin has summed up: "The end of the reign of Louis 
XV shows only ruins, which accumulate and prepare for the 
grand ruin:"""the buttresses and the outer-works have fallen: it 
will not take long for the main edifice to crumble down into 
tbe abyss"*. 

In spite of the losses of tbe Seven ^ ears War and internal 
ivw Mic like the suppression of the Jesuits and the conflict 
between the (..town and the Parle nents. French policy, both 
internal and external, showed surprising vigour under^ the able 

1 Barbirr La Comftagnie Fran^aise des 1 rides, p. 95 (Rt’vue Historiquc 

I'lndc Fmn^aise, Pondicherry, III. 19*9) 

2 Marlin Hhtoire dp France, Vol. XVI, p, nop. 






mtSTfiy 



THE FRENCH VS INDIA 


(tioa of Chqrieul. The basis of Choiseut's policy was to 
prepare the country for a return match with England and to 

For that, 


.ivengc the defeat and losses of the Seven Years’ War. 


he took in hand a thorough re-organisation of the army and 
the navy. As Martin has pointed out, it was the reforms of 
Choiseul which laid the foundation of the glories of French 
arms during the War of American Independence and the 
Revolution. Choiseul paid particular attention to the develop 
ment of the navy, .so essential in a colonial war. The French 
navy, which had been practically annihilated in the Seven Years' 
War. could boast of {*>4 ships of the line and 50 frigates in 1770 
uhen Choiseul left office. Not only that, the efficiency of the 
officers and crews had greatly improved, the artillery of the fleet 
had been renewed and the arsenals and storehouses were filled 
with war materials. It has been said that the great expenses 
which Ehniscul incurred for his ambitious programme of 
military anS naval reforms contributed to the financial bank- 


ruptcy of the Government. But that is certainly not true; the 
cause of the financial ruin lay elsewhere, “the regime of privi 
leges and abuses which weighed heavily on the society, and 
which had become, so to say, identical with the society" 1 . 

hi f>reign policy Choiseul recast the system of alliances 
as dictated by the real Interests of France. The Austrian 
alliance, which had cost France so dear in the Sevcn~Years' War. 
he wanted to subordinate to the Family Compact with Spain. 
Spain was a more certain and natural ally and, in view of her 
navy and overseas territories, a more important ally in a 
colonial war with England. Choiseul thus endeavoured to 
establish closer relations with Spain, and to encourage Spain 
in reorganising tun navy, as preparatory measures for the 
inevitable war with England. But his work was cut short by 
his sudden dismissal in 1770, ostensibly on the grounds that 
his support to Spain over the question of the Falkland Islands 
had brought France on the brink of a war with England and 
that he was supporting the Parlements then at conflict with the 
Crown. But the real cause of his fall was the displeasure of 
Madame du Barri. 


Choiseui’s plan relating to India deserves some notice here. 


1 Martin —Histoire dr France, Vol. XVI, p. *48. 


Ml MSTfiy 



boon after the end of the Seven Years’ War he started prepara¬ 
tions for the next trial of strength with England, in which an 
expedition to India was to constitute an important part of the 
over-all French strategy. Choiseul believed that in any war 
with England the principal objective of France should be a 
direct invasion of the island. But for that invasion at least a 
temporary naval superiority in the Channel was an essential 
pre requisite. Since even the combined forces of France and 
Spain were not calculated to give that superiority, it was 
necessary to weaken the English fleet in home waters by creat¬ 
ing diversions in outer seas. One of these diversions was to be 
a threat against India, where England had such large vested 
interests that she could not fail to send a strong naval squadron 
there to ward off a French attack. The Isle of France could 
serve as a convenient naval and military base for a surprise 
attack on India, and for three years, from 1768 to 1770. a large 
number of troops and ships were sent there in accordance with 
the general plan. Thus when the Falkland Islands dispute 
arose between England ;md Spain in 1770, which seemed to 
bring the prospect of war very near, French preparations had 
already gone far for putting ChoiseuTs plan into execution. 
But a part of the French fleet at Port Louis in the Isle of 
France was destroyed by a storm in 1770. Shortly after, the 
dismissal of Choiseul led to the abamWjfcment of his plan and 
the recall of most of the troops and ships from the Isle of 
France. 1 

The fall of Choiseul was one of the most glaring symptoms 
of the rot in the administration. The great minister, who had 
done so much to revive the power and prestige of France, was 
sacrificed to the whims of a woman, desjpite his acknowledged 
ability and despite the open"*expression of public support for 

1 For details regarding Ohoiscul's plan, see I aeour-Gavet— La Marine 
tnili Loire de In France sous Louis XV: Cast ex— Les hides miliUdrts de la 
marine ou XVfILme siMe. See also the Report of Capt. Lockhart Russel, 
54th July 177a, on the French defences in the Isles of France and Bourbon, 
the plans of a French expedition to India in alliance with sonic of the 
country Powers, and the strength of the French forces in the islands even 
after the abandonment of Choiseul's plan. Russel had been sent by Cartier, 
Governor of Bengal, and he did his espionage v/ork very well (C.R.O.— 
The French in India Series, Vol. XVII). 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

hiri. Choiseul was dismissed and banished to his country se<n 
of Chanteloup. It was then that for the first rime since the 
Jm >n<k\ i portion of the court and high society manifested 
publicly an\ formidable opposition to the government. All 
that was great in France made it a point of honour to go and 
felicitate the Duke de Choiseul in his retreat, and gave the 
appearance of a triumph to his disgrace*' 1 . Louis XV, who so 
quietly yielded to the persuasion of his mistress had to repent 
later. When he heard of the partition of Poland, he was for 
a moment indignant at being counted for nothing in Europe. 
‘Ah he exclaimed, “if Choiseul had been here, things woidd 
have gone on otherwise’*. 

After the fall of Choiseul, the ministry was dominated for 
the remaining vears of Louis XV’s reign by a triumvirate, con¬ 
sisting of Maupcou as Chancellor, Abb£ Terr ay in charge of 
Finance and Duke d’Aiguillon as Foreign Minister. Maupeou’s 
great achievement was the abolition of an old institution of 
Fiance, the Parlements 9 which in spite of serious defects consti¬ 
tuted the onlv organ of opposition to royal despotism, and the 
creation of a new judicial organisation more subservient to the 
King’s will. D’Aiguillon’s tenure of the Foreign Office resulted 
in completely destroying the influence which Choiseul had built 
up for France in European diplomacy. Till the ministry of 
Vergennes France suffered a total eclipse in European politics. 
Poland was partitioned by Russia, Austria and Prussia and the 
Crimea was conquered from the Turks by Russia, with France 
helplessly looking on. The third member of the triumvirate, 
Abbe 1 ‘crray, was responsible for a gross mismanagement of the 
finances. He had no constructive plan and his only object was 
to find resources by any means whatever to meet the growing 
expenses of the State. He made no attempt to check the 
monstrous extravagance of the Court and Louis XV continued 
to exhaust the treasury hv his disgraceful prodigalities. Abb£ 
Terray’s reforms “struck at the fluids of the State, and were 
nothing but a real and shameful bankruptcy. The assessment 
of the contributions was at the .same time raised beyond all 
measure, and Terray destroyed the most glorious work of 
Machault, the regulation for the free circulation of grain in the 




1 Bonnechose --History of Fra net. p. 468. 


FRENCH POLICY IN INDIA 

interior of the kingdom. Terray abolished it for the sake of 
embarking in infamous speculations, of which the alarm and 
misery of the people guaranteed the success” 1 . 

As to the King, when everything was crumbling down 
round him, he “continued to offer to all the spectacle of his 
shameful debaucheries, and the still more dangerous example 
oFTvot blushing at them...... He joined a sordid avarice to 

his depraved tastes, and created for himself a private wealth, 
which he increased by the most odious means: at a period of 
famine, he, as well as his minister Terray, speculated upon the 
misery of his people, by gambling upon the augmentation of 
the price of corn: at length, devoured by ennui, tired even of 
pleasures, disgusted with everything, he died of the small pox, 
on the 10th May, 1774. at the age of sixty-four” 2 . 

X. The Government of Louis XVI. 

The next reign began with a better augury and in the 
midst of high public expectations. “France expressed nothing 
but joy at being freed from the filthy old man who had for so 
long stood as the shame of the nation. Little was known about 
the new King, who had lived till then in seclusion, like his 
father before him; but it was believed that he did not resemble 
in any way his grandfather, and that was sufficient for the 
people”*. Louis XVI was a good and well-meaning prince and 
sincerely desired to abolish abuses in administration and to sec 
France restored to a position of glory and prestige. But his 
greatest weakness was indecision of will, which marred the 
prospects of reform and hastened the Revolution. Louis XVI 
made a good beginning by selecting able ministers, but he failed 
to give them that strong and consistent support without which 
they could not carry out any programme of reforms. Besides, 
being weak in mind he allowed himself to be dominated by his 
wife, Marie Antoinette, who interfered in the affairs of State 
much in the same way and with the same results as Madame 
de Pompadour or Madame du Barri in the reign of Louis XV. 

1 Bonnechos c—History of Franee, p. 470. 

3 Ibid, p. 471. 

* Martin— Hisioire de France, Vol. XVI, p. 310. 






IMF FRENCH jfN INDIA 


On his accession Louis XVI chose as his guide old Maure* 
pas, who in the preceding reign had been a victim to the hatred 
of Madame de Pompadour. Maurepas was noi a great man, 
but he had the sagacity to choose able ministers, like Turgot 
for Finance, Vergennes for Foreign Affairs, Malesherbes for the 
King’s Household and Saint-Germain for War. Vergennes, who 
retained charge of Foreign Affairs till his death in 1787, was an 
astute diplomat and knew well how to further the real interests 
ol France, without attempting the impracticable. His policy 
was in fact a continuation of that of Choiseul, to avenge the 
defeat at the hands of England and to recover the prestige 
which France had lost during the Seven Years' War. Like 
Choiseul, lie sought to weaken the Austrian connection and 
to strength* n the Spanish alliance. The revolt of the American 
colonists against the mother country gave Vergennes the oppor¬ 
tunity for a return match *idi England. His diplomatic 
ability is proved by the fact that during this war he carefully 
avoided all Continental entanglements, which had crippled 
French eflorts in the colonial struggle with England during 
the Seven Years’ War. He also succeeded in securing a com¬ 
plete diplomatic isolation of England in Europe. Although in 
the end France did not gain much material advantage from 
the American War, the foreign policy of Vergennes undoubtedly 
restored the reputation of French arms and the prestige of 
France in European diplomacy. 

Vergennes was ably seconded by the Minister of War, Saint- 
Gerniain and later Marquis de Sigur, and by the Minister of 
Marine and Colonies, de Sartine and later Castries. Naval 
construction, which had proceeded rapidly under Choiseul, was 
resumed on the eve of the Yrnerican War. and by 1780 the 
number of ships of the line had increased to 79. After the 
death of Vergennes, much of the result of his diplomacy, 
particularly French influence in Holland, was lost by the 
timidity and incompetence of his successor, Montmorin. France 
again sank into a position of little importance in European 
politics, as after the fall of Choiseul. 

While Vergennes was trying to restore French influence 
and prestige, two other able ministers. Turgot and Malesherbes. 
were attempting to introduce financial and other internal re¬ 
forms, which, if successful. Would have perhaps averted the Revo- 


MINIS T fry 



^tuTion. i'urgoi wanted to suppress some of the glaring abuses 
and burdensome privileges and to make the nobility contribute 
to taxes in the same proportion as the third estate. He tveu 
proposed ro accustom the nation to the discussion of public 
interests through provincial assemblies. Malesherbes attempted 

hr abolition of the lethes de cachet, which arbitrarily disposed 
oi the liberty of citizens, and the reduction of the ruinous 
extravagance of the King’s Household. The attack of the two 
ministers on privileges and vested interests ltd to the growth 
of a formidable league in the Court against them. They 
could have survived this opposition, in which a leading part 
was taken by the Queen, if they had received a strong and deter¬ 
mined support from the King, but that could not be expected 
from a person like Louis XVI. Malesherbes, who realised this, 
resigned office in May 177b, while Turgot was dismissed two 
days later. 

Fortunately France found another able? minister in Necker, 
who held charge of Finance from October 177b to May 1781, 
f his Genevese banker had such a high reputation as a financier 
of talent and integrity that his name alone offered a sufficient 
guarantee to the capitalist class and earned the confidence of 
the lenders. Meeker continued in a modified way the pro¬ 
gramme of reforms initiated by Turgot. His policy was based 
on reducing expenses to a level with receipts, relying on taxation 
in ordinary times and taking recourse to loans onl> when 
circumstances imperatively demanded it, and instituting regular 
audit of accounts to facilitate loans by creating public confidence. 
Meeker’s management of the finances proved eminently successful 
and provided France with the resources necessary for the 
American War. But the opposition of the Court cabal and of 
some of his own colleagues in the government undermined his 
position with the King and led to his resignation in May 1781 
in the midst of the war. 

With the fall of Necker ended all hopes of reform. He was 
succeeded by Joly de Fleury and later by IVOrinesson, neither 
of whom had any financial ability and merely tried one exped¬ 
ient after another without any avail. Then came the man who 
completed the ruin, from which there was no recovery. Galon ne, 
a brilliant man with a light rnind and an audacious character, 
became the Minister of Finance in 1783 on the recommendation 

£ 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

of (he Court ladies. His policy was directly opposite to that 
of Necker. He aimed at increasing public confidence in the 
financial position of the State by an artificial show of prosperity 
and extravagant expenditure. To keep up this show he con¬ 
tracted loans in a reckless manner, and then at last when he 
had exhausted his credit he was forced to reveal the true 
position. He had to admit that in a few years the loans had 
risen to 1640 millions and that a deficit of 150 millions existed 
in the revenue. This frightful revelation excited a general cry, 
which led to the resignation of Calonne in 1787. 

Calonnc had left the financial machine so hopelessly out 
of gear that it was impossible for anyone to set it right. For 
about a year Bricnne tried to save the situation by new taxation, 
which led to a conflict with the Parlement. of Paris (revived 
after the accession of Louis XVI) and raised the first demand 
for a States General. Bricnne ended by announcing a national 
bankruptcy in August 1788 and a temporary suspension of all 
State obligations. He was promptly dismissed and Louis XVI 
recalled Necker to the ministry, as the last expedient to meet a 
desperate situation. But then it was too late. The Ancien 
Regime had come to the brink of the abyss and was destined 
to disappear completely in a few months. 




MIN/Sr^ 


CHAPTER l?I 




PONDICHERRY ( 1765 * 1778 ) 

I Reconstruction after 1765. 

Following the Treaty of Paris, 1763, Pondicherry, which 
had been in English hands since the 16th January 1761, was 
restored to the French on the 11th April 1765 1 . T he old town, 
founded by Francois Martin in 1674 and embellished and raised 
to political importance by DuplciX, had been destroyed so 
systematically by the English after the capitulation of 1761 that 
when Law de Lauriston arrived from France in 1765 to take 
repossession of the place there was hardly a single house which 
remained intact, and it was difficult to recognise even the out¬ 
lines of the old town in the heaps of ruins which lay all around. 
I: was not only the walls, fortifications, offices and Governor s 
palace which had been demolished in an attempt to eliminate 
forever a dangerous political rival to the neighbouring English 
settlement of Madras, but even the houses belonging to private 
persons, Europeans and Indians alike, and churches were not 
spared from the general destruction. With the exception of 
two Hindu temples nothing remained to indicate the once 
flourishing and populous settlement 2 . 

Le Gentil, the French naturalist, who visited Pondicherry 
after its restitution compared the destruction of the place to 
that of Jerusalem in ancient times. The comparison was 

1 Curiously enough the records relating to the restitution of the prin- 
ripal settlement are not preserved in the Pondicherry Archives although 
then arc records relating to the restitution of the other settlements. 

2 It may be noted heie that Duplex also had not treated Madras 
much better in 1746. against which Voltaire wrote: 'This barbarism 
inflicted a good deal of suffering on innocent colonists without doing any 
good to the French'*. (Precis du SticU de. Louis XV; Oeuvres Computes. 
sol. XXII, p. 259) In 1758 Lally had ordered the destruction of Fort 
St. David and would have dealt with Madras too in the same wav if he 
had succeeded in capturing the place. It is better to recognise that the 
war between the English and the French was fought a oulrance , each side 
determined 10 eliminate the other permanently from the coast. 


!HE FRENCH IN INDIA 

rendered more apt by the wholesale depopulation of the plate. 
The principal officers, like l.ally, were taken captive to Eng 
land; some were lucky enough to escape and offer their services 
to Indian Princes like the Nizam and Haidar Ali; while of the 
other military personnel a large number accepted service under 
the Tnglish, in order to escape from the hardships of prison 
life, on condition that they would not be required to fight 
outside Bengal, thereby eliminating the possibility of their 
having to fight against France or her allies in India. Of these 
persons some remained faithful to the English and attained, 
like Claude Martin, high military ranks in the English service. 
But a large number, like Ren£ Madet, only looked for an 
opportunity to desert and offer thcii services to the different 
Princes of north India. Indeed for the next twenty-five years 
hundreds of French officers and soldiers were scattered over 
north India in the service of the Indian Princes. I hey were all 
the remnants of the army which had capitulated at Pondicherry 
in 1761. The civilian French population of Pondicherry took 
refuge for the most part in the friendly Danish settlement at 
Franquebar, as also in the Dutch settlements at Sadras, Porto 
Novo and Negapatam. There they remained for four years in 
the neighbourhood of Pondicherry, without any organisation 
and financial resources, and sustained only by the hope that 
peace would enable them to return to their old homes. 

When Law took over in April 1765. Pondicherry was com¬ 
pletely in ruins and for the first few months of his administra¬ 
tion he took up his residence in the village of Oulgaret, included 
in the French possessions and just a short distance to the west 
of the town. The other officers also were accommodated in the 
surrounding villages pending the reconstruction of the town. 
The first task of the administration was to clear the debris and 
erect administrative and military buildings as quickly as 
possible. The efforts of the administration were supplemented 
by the tenacity and enterprise of private persons, who now 
returned to Pondicherry after nearly four years of exile in the 
neighbouring foreign settlements. 1 hey lodged themselves in 
tents and improvised huts and set about re-building their 
houses on the old sites. ~Lhe speed of reconstruction was almost 
a marvel, md in the course of just three years a whole new 
town had been built on the ruins of the old. and that in spite 




misTfy 



oT the difficulties presented by lack of materials. Stones had 
to be procured from as far off as Jinji and wood from the Isle 
of France. One advantage the builders had, namely that the 
foundations of most of the buildings had remained intact, the 
English having destroyed only the walls; and the bricks from 
the demolished buildings were largely utilised in the work of 
reconstruction. Le Gentil gives us a graphic description of the 
work o reconstruction and of the new town as it stood in 17*18, 
three years after the re-establishment of the French at Pondi¬ 
cherry' 1 ; and his description is fully corroborated by the accounts 
of Bourcet, the engineer entrusted w ith the work of retonstiuc- 
tion. “The untiring work of the French in the reconstruction 

of Pondicherry recalls to me the ant.In fact even the 

ant is not seen to work with so much diligence as the French 
woiked during this fhsi period/* In the course of just live 
months the streets had been cleaied of debris, and about 200 
European and 2,000 Indian houses had been built. Before the 
end of the first year a powder magazine had been constructed 
on the site of the old Fort and several warehouses and Govern¬ 
ment offices had been built. 

The new town grew up within the old limits and most of 
the priVate houses were built on the old sites, but internally 
there were many changes in the layout of the streets and in 
the sites of the government buildings. The town was divided 
into two parts by a canal which separated the European from 
the Indian quarter. The first stretched from the sea to the 
canal, and the latter from the canal to the line of fortifications. 
In the centre of the European quarter was the parade ground 
of the old citadel.. It was now planted with trees and on its 
four sides were erected new government buildings,—the Gover¬ 
nor's palace and the Administrative office on the north, ware¬ 
houses on the south, and military barracks Oil the east and 
west. It was in the layout of the streets that a great change 
was introduced. The new streets were all straight, stretching 
from east to west and from north to south and cutting each 
other at right angles. They were Ixirdered with rows of trees 
and presented a pleasing view to the eye. In the work of 
reconstruction much attention was paid to beauty; trees were 


1 loyage dans les msr& d’ Vlnde. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

everywhere and gardens laid out before private houses. 
One interesting point that ma\ be noticed in connection with 
the reconstruction of the town is that the temples and mosques 
that were re built were made of a strangely low height, because 
of the opposition of the Christian missionaries who did not 
like places of heathen worship towering above the other 
buildings. 

Together with reconstruction there was a rapid increase in 
the number of population. According to I.e Gentil, three 
years after the re-establishment of the trench at Pondicherry 
die European population numbered about 1.200, including the 
garrison, and the Indian population about 60,000. The prin¬ 
cipal reason for the great influx of Indian population during 
this period was the war in the Carnatic, which drove thousands 
of people from the neighbouring areas to find a secure shelter 
in the French settlement, Madras being regarded as insecure 
because of the victories of Haidar Ali against the English. 

II. Plans of fortifications. 

The re building of the town inevitably raised the problem 
of security from external attacks and thoughts had to be given 
to the question of fortifications. The question, when it began 
to be tackled seriously, was complicated by the fact that houses 
had been built on the old sites and the interior reconstruction 
of the town had been going on spontaneously without anv 
reference to the project of fortifications which might be adopted 
in future. It was this factor which forced the hands of the 
engineer entrusted with the erection of fortifications and made 
it necessary for him to lay down a project in conformity with 
the interior reconstruction which had been almost completed, 
and not solely in conformity with military requirements. 
Before the war the defence of Pondicherry was based principally 
on .1 pentagonal citadel, strong enough to resist a prolonged 
siege, with an outer wall round the whole tow’n. I he citadel 
had been completely demolished by the English, and after the 
w*ar the question arose whether to base the defence of the place 
on a new citadel, to be constructed either in the north or in 
the south, or to include the entire town within a continuous 
and high wall defended by bastions at regular intervals. Given 




PONDICHERRY 




the same cost a citadel could be built in a more solid manner 
than a long line of wall all round the town. Moreover, a 
citadel could be effectively defended by a small garrison, 
whereas an open town surrounded by a long line of fortifications 
would require a much larger number of troop. So the ques- 
tion of fortifications was largely dependent on the amount of 
money available and on the number of troops that could be 
sent from France. 

There was from the outset a difference of opinion between 
the advocates of two schools, one favouring the construction of 
a citadel and the other the inclusion of the entire town within 
a continuous line of fortifications. But the issue had to be 
decided by the practical necessity of circumstances, namely that 
the internal reconstruction had been nearly completed and any 
plan of defence must take within its sweep the whole of the 
newly-built town. There was another difference of opinion in 
connection with the project of fortifications. The traditionalists 
wanted, even if the old citadel could not be restored, to utilise 
as far as possible the old lines of outer fortifications; while their 
opponents wanted to start with a clean slate altogether, build* 
mg on an entirely new plan and not taking any account of the 
old works. Some even proposed to shift the town wholesale to 
the south, utilising the Cocoanut Island in the river Arian* 
coupora for the purpose. Here too the issue had to be decided 
by the necessity of circumstances, since the town had already 
been reconstructed and there was thus no question of changing 


the site. 

At the time of leaving France Law de Lauriston was given 
an experienced engineer named Bourcet. In 1766 Bourcet sub¬ 
mitted his plan of fortifications, which, as he estimated, could 
be executed in two to three years’ time and at a very small 
tost, not more than three million livres (or twelve lakhs of 
rupees). His plan was based on the following considerations: 
(1) the reconstruction of the town bad already been completed, 
and it was necessary therefore to enclose the whole of it within 
the line of fortifications to be built; the enclosure of a large 
area was all the more necessary in order to provide a safe 
shelter to the workers engaged in the manufacture of coin 
modules for the trade of the French Company; (2) speed in 
construction was essentially necessary, since nobody knew how 


minis 



"tong the French would be left at peace either by the English 
or by the country Powers; and (3) both from the point of view 
ol speed as well as that of economy, the new fortifications should 
follow as far as possible the lines of the old, so that full use 
could he made of the old ditch surrounding the town and as 
rmwh of the glacis as remained, and even the materials of the 
new works could be largely taken from the ruins of the old. 

hut Bourcci. who had the full confidence of Law, was on 
dial account Opposed by the Conseil Suptrieur under the leader¬ 
ship of Novell eau during Law’s absence from Pondicherry, 
i he Con sal Superieur represented to the Company in Paris 
dial the execution of Bourcet’s project would require an expendi 
tm of sixteen million Hvres. This wide difference between 
the estimates of Bourcet and of the Conseil Superieur puzzled 
the authorities in France, and instead of sanctioning Bourcet'S 
plan they sent some new projects for the consideration of the 
Pondicherry Government. Thus much valuable time was im- 
luussaiilv lost and in a memoire widen at the end of 1767 Law 
noted with regret, “It will require at least two years to have 
an\ definite replies, and during this interval to what dangers 
mav not be exposed, specially with the handful of men and 
the small quantity of arms and ammunitions that we have?” 1 
In fact, as we shall notice later, it was the procrastinating polity 
ol the Paris uthoriiies which led to repeated delays and changes 
of plan, with the? result that even thirteen years after the restitu¬ 
tion of the place when the English began their attack in August 
1778, the defensive works had not yet l>ecri completed and the 
French were left to fill in the gaps with hasty and improvised 
constructions. 

In the mimoire referred to above, Law expressed his opinion 
that while the Conseil Superieur had greatly over-estimated the 
cost without taking into account that much of the materials 
would he taken from the old works. Bourcet on the other hand 
had slightly under estimated it and that the real cost would be 
in the neighbourhood of five million livres. Any wav. in 1768 
Bourcet’s plan was accepted and he started the work in i/bq. 
Fhc'ptan consisted of the construction of a high and wide wall, 
mostly earthwork for speed and economy without losing any 


1 P.A. ms. too. 



PONDICHERRY 

five capacity for resistance, to lx? defended by bastions at 
regular intervals on three sides, north, west and south. The 
east was protected by the sea and the south by the river Arian- 
nmpom; and Bourcet provided in his plan for inundating the 
land outside the walls on the west and the north, to be con¬ 
nected with the liver and the sea, in order to provide greater 
security to the town, hi the course of the year 1769, apart 
from the wall of earthwork, Bourcet had constructed to a 
considerable height four bastions on the north, and one on 
the south. 

The work was in fact proceeding very rapidly when there 
came a sudden set-back. The opponents of Bonnet’s plan 
raised a clamour that the hastily constructed earthworks would 
be washed away by the rains and that the vast extent of the 
area of the fortifications would require a much larger garrison 
for defence than what Pondicherry could ever possibly have 
Added to this clamour was a personal quarrel between Bourcet 
and some members of the Conseilj and all these resulted in the 
sudden recall of Bourcet and his replacement by another 
engineer from France, named Desclaisons. This sudden change 
had the effect of undoing all the work that had been done 
before, for Desclaisons at once abandoned the plan of Bourcet 
and proceeded to erect fortifications in a more solid manner. 
He expressed contempt for the earthwork raised by Bourcet 
and started construction with brick and lime. Then again he 
‘was dissatisfied with the plan of the bastions, already constructed 
to a considerable height by Bourcet. and thought it necessary to 
pull them down before erecting new ones on his own lines. 
All these entailed a huge expenditure and what was more 
important required at least twenty years of peace, while both 
money and materials were lacking and Pondicherry ran a great 
risk in keeping itself exposed to external attacks for such a long 
period. Law', who was fully alive to the danger of the situation, 
made strong representations to Paris against Desclaisons and 
finally secured his recall in 1771. Thus the work was held up 
again till the return of Bourcet in 1775. 

After the recall of Desclaisons the matter was considered 
afresh by the Minister of Marine, dc Boynes. Finally, Bourcet 
was sent back to continue the work he had already started. 
It was not an easv task for him since some of his work 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


been undone by Dcstlaisons. Anyway, in 1775 he con 
strutted three bastions on the west and one on the south 


Further, he installed a battery to guard the eastern side. But 
the work, was again held up by the death of Bourcet at the end 
of 1776. Just before his death Bourcet drew up a detailed 
me moire, dated October 177b, relating to the fortifications of 
Pondicherry, which according to his desire was submitted by his 
brother to the new Governor, Bellccornbe. in January 1 777 * 1 
1 he brother of Bourcet submitted a memoire of his own also to 
Beileeombc at the same time. 3 In 1776 controversy had again 
been raised at Pondicherry and in France as to the utility of 
Bourcet’s plan of fortifications, and the two mdmoires were 
written with a view to justify the plan. They give us a detailed 
account of the defensive works already constructed. The con¬ 
troversy, however, went on for some time and little was done to 
continue the work of construction begun by Bourcet, until the 
storm apprehended by Law burst in July 1778. It was only 
when the English troops began to move against Pondicherry 
that Bellecomhe hurriedly called upon Dulac, the successor of 
Bourcet, to fill in the gaps in the line of fortifications. Bui it 
was then too late, and the fall of Pondicherry after a short 
siege may be attributed largely to the dilatory policy of the 
Paris authorities and their indecision and change of plan, 
although the French had sufficient time after 1765 to put their 
principal settlement in India in a proper state of defence. 3 


HI. Organisation of the Army . 


Related to he subject of fortifications was the question 
of troops and their organisation, since, as we have seen, the 
adoption of Bourcet's plan required the maintenance of a very 
large garrison. Here too there was the same neglect and pro¬ 
crastination on the part of the Company’s authorities and the 
French Government alike. The number of European troops 


*JP.A. ms. a$o. 

2 Ibid, ms. *37. 

3 l*or an account of the different plans of fortifications, see Catalogue 
dcs cartes, plans et projets d'etudes du depot des ancicnnes archives de 
i’lndr bv Major H. G. Tranche!!. 


MIN/STyjy 



PONDICHERRY 


<8L 


out to Pondicherry was far too inadequate, and because of 
hi(k of funds and arms little attempt could be made in India 
to raise and train up a large sepoy force to make up lor the 
deficiency in the European element. In the correspondence of 
the two successive Governors, Law and Bellecombc, who had 
charge of the Pondicherry Government from 1765 to 1778, we 
find repeated representations to Paris for permission and neces¬ 
sary funds to raise a large body of sepoy troops well in advance 
of the next outbreak of war. But both the authorities of the 
Company and, after the suppression of that body, the French 
Government were lamentably slow to appreciate its necessity, 
believing that the exigencies of a war in India could be met 
when it actually broke out bv the despatch of an expeditionary 
force from France and that there was no necessity of making 
preparations in advance. 

Writing two arid a half years after the restitution of 
Pondicherry, Law regretted that there were only “500 European 
soldiers, of whom at least 130 invalids, the majority being dis* 
abled for service, and 400 sepoys recruited last year who hardly 
know vet how to load their guns; it will require much before 
they can be put man for man on a footing of equality with 
those of foreigners. They have not even been organised in a 
manner that I would have liked, having been raised during my 
absence and with the greatest precipitation on account of the 
general discontent which the imprudence of \1. Boyelleau had 
caused here/’ 1 2 As regards arms Law gave an equally dismal 
picture: "We are very weak in artillery and musketry. Forty 


pieces of cannon, six to twenty-four pounders, of which several 
very bad and all very badly mounted, constitute all the defence 
of the place. The guns of our soldiers arc good, those of our 
sepo)s are very old. That is all our musketry. There is not a 
single spare gun in the arsenal so that we do not know how to 
arm the employees and the inhabitants’*. Much information is 
available about the Company’s military forces in India and of 
the expenses incurred on them from a detailed list drawn up 
in 1769 and preserved in the Pondicherry Archives. 1 The list 
was drawn up in all probability in view of the replacement of 


1 P.A. ms. 100. 

2 Ibid, ms. 135. 


miSTffy 



THF. FRENCH IN INWA 


<SL 


lompany’s by Royal Administration in 1770. The infantry 
was organised in one battalion, known as the ‘Battalion of 
India*, divided into 10 companies. At Pondicherry there were 
40 officers, including the fitat Major , and 560 men. There was 
also a company of artillery consisting of too men including 
officers, about half being stationed at Pondicherry. The sepoy 
forces were organised in 6 companies of 100 nun each including 
officers. 

A great change in military organisation followed the estab 
lishment of Royal Administration in 1770. By a Royal Ordin¬ 
ance, dated 40th December 1774, the Battalion of India was 
replaced by the Regiment of Pondicheiry. 1 It was divided into 
two battalions, each consisting of 9 companies, one of grenadiers 
and eight of fusiliers. Some time later the artillery force was 
also re organised. There were after 1770 two separate companies 
of artillery, one belonging to the Royal Corps and another 
attached to the old Battalion of India. By a Royal Ordinance 
of 3rd February' 1776 the two separate companies were amal¬ 
gamated and formed into onr autonomous artillery company 
tflf gunners and bombardiers. 2 * The organisation of the sepoy 
force also underwent a change. By a Provisional Regulation, 
dated 12tli November 1773, Law re constituted the sepoy force 
into one battalion of 11 companies, one of grenadiers and to 
of fusiliers. One curious innovation that Law introduced was 
that one company was to consist wholly of pariahs or outcastes 
converted to Christianity. 9 The motive we cannot guess; it 
might have been his dislike to mix up castes in the army, not 
unlikely to cause resentment among the upper-caste men; or it 
might have been his belief that the Christian pariahs would be 
more loyal than other Indians. However, the innovation was 
abolished by a Royal Ordinance dated January 20, 1776, which 
stipulated that men ‘’of all religions shall be admitted into 
service, without any distinction or pre-eminence of one sect over 
another. His Majesty desires that never shall am separation by 
sect or caste be made in the Company but that they be mixed 


1 P.A. im. 17*. 

2 /bid, ms. at*. 

31 /bid, in??. 183. 


MlWfSjgjj. 



PONDICHERRY '>.% 

■JK' 

KtiuHstinclly as loyal soldiers of one and the same King/ 1 
After the fall of Pondicherry in 1761 a large number ol 
Frenchmen belonging to the armed forces were scattered all 
over India and took to the career of military adventurers in the 
service of the various Indian Princes. 1 hey were technically 
deserters from the French army, but in view of the inadequate 
strength of the garrison at Pondicherry it was thought desirable 
to take them back into service again. Moreover, many of them 
had shown great organising ability, had risen to positions ot 
eminence and power and had acquired great influence over the 
country Powers; their roadtnission into service would have been 
of inestimable value in any military operations in India. So a 


Royal ArrSt of January 13, 177b declared a general anme*t> 
for all these deserters and efforts were made to give it due 
publicity in different parts of India. 2 But this declaration of 
amnesty produced little effect, and as the mr moires of Law 
testify, few of the Frenchmen in the service of the Indian 
Princes cared to avail themselves of this opportunity to rejoin 
the service of their nation. The thing was that in spite of tfj£ 
patriotic sentiments of many of them they did not like to give 
up their positions in the service of the Indian Princes* where 
they were perfectly happy, earning more money and enjoying 
more authority than what they could have expected in the 
French army at Pondicherry. 


IV. System of Civil Administration. 


In the administrative organisation a sharp dividing line 
was marked by the suppression of the Company and the estab¬ 
lishment of Royal Administration in 1770. Both before and aftei 
this date the system was defective and gave rise to numerous 
practical difficulties in the conduct of governmental affairs. 
The defects of the system of administration under the Company 
were brought out most clearly by Law in his rntmoire of 1767, 
The administration of all the French possessions in India was 
vested in a Conscil Superieur having its permanent seat at 


* P.A. ms. a 17. 

* Ibid, ms. *15. 

* Ibid, ms. 1G0. 



misr/fy 





rondichcrry since 1701. Prior to bat date the Cornett Supcrtcur 
had been established at Surat It was both an administrative 
as well as a judicial body. At the head of the Council was the 
Governor, appointed by the King, although responsible to the 
Company for the conduct of affairs in India. The number of 
members of the Council was not fixed. Like the Governor, all 
the members were appointed by the King. They did not all 
reside at Pondicherry but were posted in the different settle 
menu. At Chandernagore there were several such members and 
they had the exclusive right to form the local Council, headed 
by the Commandant. At other places, like Mah<^, Karikal. 
Yanam etc., only the Chief of the settlement was a member of 
the Comeil Suptrieur, the other members of the local Council 
being ordinary employees of the Company. All official com¬ 
munications from Paris were first received at Pondicherry and 
then forwarded to the settlements directly dependent on Pondi 
cherry, and these in turn sent them on to subordinate factories, 
where they existed, as in Bengal. 

The Governor was not endowed with am author its to 
override the Council. When Law came out to India in 1765. 
he came in the additional capacity of a Royal Commissar for 
taking possession o! the French settlements in India from the 
hands of the English, and so far as that special mission was 
concerned the instructions of the King gave him absolute author¬ 
ity. But later in his ordinary capacity of Governor and Presi 
dent of the Conseil Supdrieur he was hound by the decision 
of a majority of the Council and was not permitted to do any¬ 
thing on his own authority. This restriction was often vexa¬ 
tious. specially in dealing with the country Powers. Law sent 
repeated representations against it and wanted overriding 
authority with respect to certain matters. Another inconveni 
ence against which Law complained was dual responsibility,—to 
the Minister arid to the authorities of the Company. The 
Governor "must undoubtedly be in correspondence with rhe 
Minister and as a consequence in the case of receiving orders 
(from him) of which the Company may well have no knowledge 
at all and which may even be opposed to their intention, it 
is easy to see the embarrassment which results for him. This 
embarrassment does not arise from any uncertainty as to which 
to obey, the order of the Minister or that of the Company, but 


WNlSTffy 



PONDICHERRY 


v%Jpp some means to defend himself before the Syndics and the 
Directors, to whom fie is responsible for his conduct, If the 
Minister happens to change he is left, without any support. 
1 his difficulty..... is not one of the least that M. Duplcix 
had to encounter/’ 


The Company was suppressed in 1770 and all its posses¬ 
sions in India were taken over by the King. For nearly three 
years the administrative system remained as before with only a 
few changes necessitated by the transfer of authority. But with 
the appointment of Foucault as Intendant and Commissaire- 
Ordonnateur and his arrival at Pondicherry in October 1773 
the administrative system underwent a complete change. The 
possessions in India were brought under the same form of 
government as existed in the other colonies of France. The 
executive power was divided into two hands, the Governor and 
the Intendant, each supreme in his own sphere and not depen 
dent on the other. The former was entrusted with political 
and military affairs. Relieved of administrative duties, his ^ol< 
concern was to deal with the country Powers The Intendant 
was entrusted with the whole civil administration, including 
finance, police, justice, shipping and commerce. Neither the 
Governor nor the Intendant was fettered in his sphere of action 
bv the majority opinion of the Comeil SupMeur, since that 
body wms deprived of all administrative power and converted 
into a purely judicial tribunal with the Intendant as the Presi¬ 
dent. The defects of this system of government and the com 
plications it gave rise to were stated in detail by Law in a 
lengthy mimoire dated January ai, 177b. 1 Law disclosed that 
soon after the transfer of authority in 1770 he had sent a proposal 
to France for the establishment of a small consultative committee 
in place of the old Comeil Superieur , with power to the 
Governor to override the decision of the majority if he thought 
it necessary. In 1773 he objected to the introduction of a 
colonial form of government in India, but his warning about 
the possible difficulties that might arise were not heeded in 
France and the change was effected in October of the same 
sear with the arrival of the first Intendant and Ordonnateur, 
Foucault. 


P.A. rm. ti$- 



In his mJmoire of 1776 Law criticised the new administrative 
system on several grounds. In the first place, the colonial form 
of government was wholly unsuitable to Indian possessions, 
since the circumstances in India were entirely different and it 
vas necessary for the government to deal with a large alien 
population and maintain political relations with the country 
Powers Secondly, the division of authority between the 
Governor and the Intendant . with little interconnection between 
them, was bound to lead to confusion, since many of the func¬ 
tions given to both were allied and could not be performed in 
isolation In case of a difference of opinion between the 
Governor and the Intendant there would be a complete dead¬ 
lock, which could be resolved only by a positive order from 
Paris, but that would take time and much harm might be 
caused during the interval. The danger would be specially great 
in a time of war, and military operations would be paralysed 
if the Governor had constantly to dispute with the Ordonnatnn 
for money and supplies. Thirdly, in the division of authority 
the Governor had been relegated for all practical purposes to a 
position of secondary importance. He was not given any share 
in the c ivil administration and had thus no control over the 
administrative personnel. AH branches of civil government, 
like justice, police, finance, shipping and commerce, were 
exclusively under the control of the Intendant. Even in the 
sphere of jurisdiction of the Governor the Intendant had 
effective power of control since finance was in his hands, and by 
simply refusing to supply money he could prevent the Governor 
from pursuing a policy in political and military affairs not liked 
by him. Lastly, the possible intention for the introduction of 
the administrative change was to increase the importance of 
the Governor in the eyes of the country Powers by giving him 
full authority in political and military affairs unfettered by any 
committee arid relieving him of the cares of ordinary 
administrative duties. But in reality the effect was just the 
opposite, as the country Powers were shrewd enough to detect 
the powerlessness of the Governor and the real importance of 
the Intendant, thus giving them full opportunity to exploit the 
division of authority to their own advantage. Law concluded 
his mtmoirc by stating, “the manner in which the machine is 
set up today does not make it possible in a country like this for 


miST/fy,^ 



two brothers, even twins, to work in concert, unless one of 
them is determined to pass over blindly whatever the other 
wishes.*' 


V. Economic Condi non. 

Let us turn next to the economic situation in the settlement. 
Pondicherry had one great advantage for trade and commerce, 
namely the roadstead, which was one of the best on the eastern 
coast, fhe principal articles of merchandise in this region for 
European trade weie cotton goods of various kinds. As Law 
stated in his mdnunre of 1767* in Normal times when there was 
no political disturbance in the surrounding area, and provided 
the English did not put any undue restrictions on French trade 
through the Nawab of the Carnatic, the French could procure 
goods for export worth two million livres from the neighbour- 
homi of Pondicherry, and if their other two settlements were 
included, namely Yanam and Masulipatam, the total export 
trade of the eastern coast could be valued at four million 
livres 1 . That was the maximum that the French export trade 
could amount to, but to reach it two essential conditions were 
required besides absence of political disturbances and freedom 
from interference by the English. 1 he first was that the French 
must he in a position to advance sufficient money to the weavers 
at least eight months earlier; and the second was that they 
must bring a large quantity of money from Europe, since the 
total value of the sale of their European goods on the eastern 
coast did not exceed one million livres just only a quarter of 
the value of their probable export trade. But because of the 
financial distress of the French Company after 1765 these two 
conditions were lacking and, as Law stated, for the remaining 
period of the Company's life the export trade was consequently 
limited to two million livres per year, and that also with the 
greatest difficulty. In France there vvas an impression that if 
the Company's commercial monopoly was abolished and the 
trade of India thrown open to private merchants, more capital 
would be attracted and there would be a great improvement 
in the trade between France and India. Accordingly the mono* 

i Roughly one rupee was equivalent to livres at the time 
F 


miSTffy 



territories passed into the hands of the Kin# and the trade of 
India was thrown open. 

But this measure far from improving the situation made 
u even worse. In the first year of the suppression of the Com¬ 
pany the value of the French trade at Pondicherry fell to half 
tue previous amount, although in the succeeding years it 
recovered to some extent. In fact, after 1770 followed a period 
of acute financial distress at Pondicherry, with no money even 
to pay the civil and military employees and to purchase provi 
sions for the inhabitants. One important reason was the 
defective system of collecting revenues. Under the Company’s 
administration all the sources of revenue like land, betel. 


tobacco, alcohol, customs both by land and <*ea etc. were farmed 
out to private persons, mostly Indians, and in some cases con¬ 
nected with the administrative officials including the Governor. 
Law stated in his mimoire of 1767 that the total revenue from 
ail sources amounted to 80.000 rupees or 200,000 litres just 
one fifth of the amount required to meet the current expendi¬ 
ture. After 1770 there was an increase in the yield of revenue, 
but the increase in expenditure was even greater. The pa\ 
inent of salaries was often in arrears, and even the construction 
of fortifications was held up for lack of funds. One important 
result of the financial distress at Pondicherry and of the decline 
in trade and commerce was the rapid exodus of the Indian 
population from the town. As we have seen, soon after the 
re-establish men t of the French at Pondicherry, the Indian 
population there rose to 60.000. According to Bourcet, the 
engineer, who took a careful statistics of population, cattle 
etc., towards the end of Law’s administration the number of 
Indian inhabitants declined to.27.000. As Mme l^bernadie has 
expressed: “Like rats leaving a sinking vessel the natives began 
to withdraw from a town which disappointed their hopes and 
which did not assure them either work or security." 1 


1 I^abeinadie— L* FiVux Pvndichtry, p. 347. 


MINfSr/jy 



PONDICHKRRY 

Appointment of Bellecombe as Governor, i/ 77 - 



In January 1777 Law was succeeded by Bellecombe as 
Governor of Pondicherry. The new appointment coincided 
with a fresh vigour in French colonial policy. Throughout the 
period of Law's administration at Pondicherry the policy of the 
French Government was one of total indifference to the future 
of the Indian possessions. All the diplomatic mimoires of 
Law for the building up of an anti-English coalition of the 
Indian Powers were quietly shelved in Paris, and his repeated 
demands for men and money for the defence of Pondicherry 
and the other settlements were equally ignored. The French 
Government had fallen into a kind of stupor in the closing 
vears of the reign of Louis XV. from which it began to recover 
slowly only after the accession of Louis XVI. I he improvement 
became specially noticeable after de Sartim assumed charge of 
the Ministry of Marine and Colonies in 177(1. While on the on< 
hand measures were taken to improve the state of the navy, 
an essential pre-requisite for any colonial effort, on (he other 
the diplomatic mimoirts submitted to the Minister came to 
receive more and more attention, and for the first time the 
authorities evinced an earnestness to restore French influence 
in India. The War of American Independence came as a lucky 
opportunity for France to reopen the conflict with the English, 
without which nothing could be done to improve the French 
position in India. 

But the French Government did not move last enough to 
keep pace with the rapid drift of circumstances in Europe. L 
took such a long time in going through, slowly and cautiously, 
all the diplomatic and military projects submitted by officials, 
that when hostilities actually broke out in Europe in 177*. it 
had not yet come to any decision regarding the diplomatic and 
military actions to be taken in India. Not only had it not 
taken any step to establish a ring of alliances in India; what 
was still more unfortunate, it had even neglected to take the 
necessary precautions to meet a sudden ayack on the Indian 
possessions by improving their defences. 

The arrival of Bellecombe with two men -of-war and 



miSTQy 



W 



5 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


assurances of a vigorous action on the part of France raised 
high hopes in all the French settlements in India, but, as It 
actually turned out, when hostilities started all on a sudden in 
August 1778, the French were not even prepared to defend 
their own possessions. For this debacle no blame attaches to 
Bcllecombe, who did all that he could to urge upon the Govern 
merit in Paris the necessity of sending immediate reinforcements 
of men, money and materials to put the French possessions in 
India in a proper state of defence, and the need of taking active 
steps for the formation of alliances with important country 
Powers, like Haidar Ali and ihe Marathas. Anybody who takes 
the trouble of going through the mimoircs of Bellecombe will 
appreciate his political judgment and foresight and his earnest 
efforts to improve the French position in India. Although 
he. did not have any previous knowledge of the Indian political 
situation, he took little time to learn all the intricacies of the 
problem from his predecessor in office, Law dc Lauriston, whose 
presence at Pondicherry, even after laying down the reins of 
office, was of inestimable value to his successor. He purposely 
went, to Mah6 to meet Haidar Ali personally in order to smooth 
over the recent difficulties created by the imprudent actions of 
Duprat and Repcntigny and to establish cordial relations with 
him, preliminary to ;he conclusion of a solid political and 
military alliance. It was entirely due to the slowness of the 
Government in Paris to adopt a definite policy with respect to 
India and its failure to take prompt steps to improve the 
defences of the Indian possessions that when war broke out 
again rather suddenly in 1778, the French in India were l iken 
completely by surprise. No Indian Power moved to their 
assistance, and all their settlements fell into the hands of the 
English without any resistance, except Pondicherry which stood 
a siege for 77 days, 

A ll. Outbreak of mar and preparations for defence. 

It has been noticed already that there was a fresh vigour 
in French foreign policy with the accession of Louis XVI in 
contrast to the later years of the reign of Louis XV. The 



imSTffy 




American Independence was 
upon by France as a lucky opportunity to take revenge on her 
traditional colonial rival. She began to give secret help to the 
colonists from the beginning of their revolt against the mother 
country, and early in 1778 she formally recognised the inde¬ 
pendence of the Colonies and openly joined the war against 
England. 

The first rumours of the outbreak of war between England 
and France reached Pondicherry about the end of June 1778 
through letters arriving by way of Suez. Early in July Belle- 
combe, taken by surprise by these rumours, wrote to the Madras 
Government to ascertain the real position. The English reply 
was couched in vague terms, but Bellecornbe understood and 
at once started making hasty preparations to put the town in a 
proper state of defence. The task was difficult indeed, consider¬ 
ing the incomplete state of the fortifications and the inadequacy 
of troops and arms. Thanks to the constant change of plans 
and the negligence of the French Government to send money, 
in July 1778 Pondicherry was in a fully exposed condition. 
There were large gaps in the line of fortifications; the ditch 
intended to surround the town on the north and west had been 
dug in a haphazard manner with unequal depths, which at 
places did not go beyond just one foot; of the thirteen bastions 
planned to guard the three sides of the town, north, west and 
south, only five were in a tolerable state; and none of the four 
batteries to defend the eastern side was ready for action. The 
garrison consisted of 5G8 men of the Regiment of Pondicherry, 
153 men of the artillery, and 428 sepoys, with 141 pieces of 
cannon of all calibres. 1 They were wholly inadequate to defend 
the long line of fortifications extending to nearly five miles in 
circumference. Moreover, there were not even adequate stocks 
of provisions in the town to last a prolonged siege, although 
repeated warnings had been given earlier in numerous mtmoires 
to the French, Government to lay in stocks for one full year, 
since in case of a war with the English the whole of the Carnatic 
would become enemy territory and the food supplies to Pondi¬ 
cherry would at once be cut off. 

It was in this perilous condition that Bellecornbe received 

1 Labernadie —*JLe Vieux Pondichdry, p. 352. 



<§L 

looked 



imSTffy 


nil-: FRENCH IN INDl/v 

the reply of the Madras Government on the 13th July 1778, 
which, though vague, confirmed his suspicion about the state 
of war between the two nations, and he immediately set about 
making preparations for defence as best as he could. He called 
upon Olilac, me chief engineer to complete the fortification, 
interrupted after the death of Bourcet. Nearly 5,000 men were 
hastily collected and put on the work, and in the course of the 
month, by strenuous efforts, Dulac succeeded in filling up the 
gaps in the line, improving the bastions, digging the ditch in 
a regular way, and clearing the land outside the line of fortifica¬ 
tions up to a considerable distance. At the same time Belle* 
combe took prompt measures to increase the number of troops, 
both Eutopean and Indian. All the European citizens were armed 
and two new corps were raised, one of the higher bourgeoisie, 
of 56 men, and another of the lower bourgeoisie, of 55 men. 
Horses were purchased from private persons and a small corps 
of Dragons, numbering only 17* Wils organised and placed 
under the command of Madcc, who had left north India in 
disappointment and had been living at Pondicherry, waiting to 
return to France. There were also raised a corps of Topasses 
(of mixed Portuguese-Indian origin) for the artillery and 
another for the infantry. A sepoy force of 249 men was raised 
from the Palli caste and placed under the command of du Saus- 
soir. Sepoy troops were also recruited from other ranks, and 
we know from a record in the Pondicherry Archives that one 
Nalletambyrao presented himself with 150 men and was at 
once appointed by Bellecombe as captain of that company. 5 
Further, on the news of the danger to Pondicherry, de Boistel, 
the Chief at Karikal, evacuated that place and arrived with his 
small contingent of 1 2 European troops, 109 sepoys, 16 Topasses 
and a few pieces of cannon. 

Thus when the English forces first came within sight of 
Pondicherry and encamped on the heights of P6nmbe (Red Hill) 
on the 8th August, the French had put themselves under a 
sufficient cover against any surprise attack and had increased 
their garrison to 988 Europeans and 1.153 sepoys, including 




1 P. A. ms. 307. 


minis**. 



PONDICHERRY 




i. 1 They al.so took care to lay in stocks of provisions 
as much as they could from the neighbouring areas, taking 
advantage of the month’s time that they got before the appear¬ 
ance of the English forces before Pondicherry, which cut off all 
further supplies. When the English began their attack, the 
French had sufficient troops, provisions, munitions and money 
to hold on for a lew months, till at least ihe expected reinforce¬ 


ments from the Isle of France arrived. 

Bellecombe was rather fortunate in that just at this moment 
of crisis for Pondicherry there was a small french naval squadron 
in Indian waters under the command of I :onjoly, recently 
arrived from the Isle of France. To the King’s ships under the 
command of Tronjoly Bellecombe added a few private vessels, 
which he acquired and armed for naval action. 1 hus the 
French had a respectable looking squadron, superior in fact to 
*he English naval forces in Indian waters at the time, both in 
men and in guns. The French squadron consisted of the 
Brillant (64), the Pourvoyeuse (40), the Sartine (24), the 
Lauriston (24) and the lirisson (26); while the English squadron 
under Sir Edward Vernon consisted of the RipOn (60), the 
Coventry (28), the Cormorant (14), the Seahorse (24) and the 
Valentine (24), the last two being Company’s vessels armed for 
war. For the French, therefore, the military prospect at the 
beginning of August was not altogether discouraging. I hey 
had the means to defend themselves on land, and on the sea 
they had even a slight superiority over the English. 

Everything, however, depended on the continued presence 
of their naval squadron in Indian waters. If the french could 
inflict a defeat, on the English at sea, it would not only ensure 
the safety of Pondicherry, but would even enable them to take 


1 European troops: 


Regiment of Pondicherry 

... 671 

Artillery 

... 163 

Dragons 

... 17 

Upper bourgeoisie 

... 5 6 

Lower bourgeoisie 

• 55 

Sailors and gunners 

26 


988 


Indian troops: 

Sepoys of the garrison 

... 428 

Sepoys from Karikal 

... 109 

New recruits 

... 236 

Sepoys of the Palli caste 

... 249 

Topasses (Infantry) 

66 

Negroes and Topas3es 

(artillery) 

... 65 

1.153 


(Labernadie —Le Vieux Pondichdry , p. 353.) 




misrfi). 



The offensive and attack some English possessions on the coast. 
Even if the English squadron could not be defeated, the mere 
presence of the French ships before Pondicherry would prevent 
the English from pressing their attack by land. The roads 
were difficult, anti the only way of transporting provisions and 
munitions for a close and prolonged investment of Pondicherry 
was by sea, and that route would he closed to the English as 
long as Tronjoly remained before Pondicherry, The key to the 
defence of Pondicherry, therefore, was the presence of Tronjoly's 
ships. The French could at least hold on till the arrival of 
reinforcements from the Isle of France. To strengthen the 
navy Bellecombe gave large quantities of munitions and 800 
men from the garrison to Tronjoly. Fhe latter was asked to 
attack the English fleet a out ranee and under no circumstances 
to copy the example of cFAch£, whose sudden departure from 
the coast had left Lally without any naval support and con¬ 
tributed to the defeat of the French in the previous war. 

Fronjolv encountered the English squadron not far from 
Pondicherry on the 10th August. The action was lively and 
lasted for two hours, but the result was indecisive. One of 
the French ships, the Sartine , was captured by the enemy, but 
on the whole the English suffered more damage to their ships 
and more casualties among their men than the French; and 
if the French squadron had been led by a more daring com¬ 
mander like de Suffren, he would have pursued the English and 
turned the indecisive action into a victory. But Tronjoly was 
too old and timid, and thought it prudent to retire to Pondi¬ 
cherry. There he landed the killed and the wounded, number¬ 
ing 88, and then fearing further encounters with the English 
fleet he decided to leave the coast and return to the Isle of 
France. Bellecombe assured him that he would not ask him 
for further action against the English fleet and implored him 
just to remain before Pondicherry under the protection of the 
coast batteries. But nothing could persuade Tronjoly to change 
his mind, and on the morning of the 21st he suddenly left 
Pondicherry with his ships without even the courtesy of leave- 
taking. 1 The people of Pondicherry could not believe at first 

1 For a different version of the naval action and an explanation of 
fhe conduct of Tronjoly see Admiral Sir Herbert Richmond —'The Navy 
m tndia, 1763-1783. pp. 82 84. 


PONDICHERRY 



<SL 


I ronjoly hail finally left the coast, and ir Was not till a 
lew days later that they realised that Tronjoly had copied the 
example of d'Ache in 1759. 

J he action of Tronjoly was. in fact, still more criminal 
than that of d’Acht 4 , since he even took away with him the 
huge quantities of munitions and the 800 men given to him by 
Bellecombe. If he had returned the munitions and the men. 
it would have considerably strengthened the defence of Pondi* 
cherry In his official report to the Minister about the incident 
Bellecombe vehemently complained against the conduct of 
1 ronjoly and bitterly regretted having given him, in full faith, 
munitions and men winch weakened the defence of the town. 1 2 
In another letter to the Minister, dated and January 1779". 
Bellecombe reported the arrival on the 16th November (1778) 
>f a frigate, the Subtile, sent by the Governor of the Isle of 
France with reinforcements for Pondicherry. But it was then 
too late, as Pondicherry had capitulated a month earlier. 
Bellecombe attributed the fall of Pondicherry entirely to the 
conduct of Tronjoly* If the latter had just remained on the 
coast without even fighting against the English fleet, it would 
have enabled Bellecombe to hold on till the arrival of reinforce¬ 
ments from the Jsle of France. Pondicherry could have been 
saved if the French ships had just remained on the coast till 
October, when the expected monsoon would have compelled 
the English to withdraw their forces. In fact, therefore, it was 
the sudden departure of Tronjoly which sealed the fate of 
Pondicherry. 


VIII. Siege of Pondicherry and Capitulation. 

The English forces under the command of Sir Hector 
Munro, encamped on the heights of P£rirnb£ (Red Hill), to the 
** Pondicherry, on the 8th August. They consisted of 
2100 Europeans, including artillery, no field-pieces, 10 battalions 
of sepoys, and 2 regiments of cavalry. The English General 
seil( a summons to Pondicherry to surrender, to which Belle- 
combe gave a spirited reply that he took the summons to be 

1 V N. Mininere ties Colonies: Cx— 15a, p. 293. 

2 \. \. -Ministtere lie | a Marine: ft-4, CL, p. tfkj. 


MINISr^ 



just u military convention and not indicating any hope in the 
mind of the English General that it would be accepted. It 
caused, in fact, not a little surprise to Munro, as he knew the 
weak state of Pondicherry’s defences and did not expect much 
resistance from the French In spite however of their over¬ 
whelming superiority in number, the English forces kept them 
selves at a respectful distance from the limits of Pondicherry 
as long as I ronjoly with his squadron remained before that 
place. I heir principal difficulty was that they could not bring 
up their supplies of provisions and munitions quickly on 
account of the bad condition of the roads. The quickest and 
the easiest route of transport was the sea, which was closed to 
them by the presence of Tronjoly’s squadron. 

The departure of Tronjoly from the coast gave the English 
their opportunity to bring up supplies by sea and to form a 
closer ring round Pondicherry. Their forces on the heights 
of leiimbtf immediately advanced and encamped near the limits 
of the town. The English squadron also, freed from all danger 
landed troops and supplies at Sadras and Cuddalore, to the 
north and south of Pondicherry. For want of a fleet the French 
remained only helpless spectators and could do nothing even to 
prevent the concentration of enemy troops on the banks of the 
Ariancoupom. In the north the English set up four batteries 
dose to the town to bombard the Bastion nord-ouest and the 
Bastion de Madras. In the first week of September the ring 
closed in upon Pondicherry. 1 he English set up batteries in 
the south and west as well, and their squadron threatened the 
sea-front protected by feeble and improvised works. On the 
8 th September began a vigorous cannonade on the town from 
thtce sides. Some of the bastions were badly shaken, particu¬ 
larly the Bastion de I'Hopital in the south-east, and several 
breaches were made in the walls. 

The position of the besieged was daily growing more pre¬ 
carious. They had not the means to prevent the landing of 
fresh troops and supplies close to the towm, and their garrison 
was much too inferior in number to make a determined sortie 
and drive out the enemy fort es from their positions. The only 
thing that they could do was to engage the besieging forces in 
surprise raids and skirmishes, and to resist the besiegers as 
long as possible from within their line of fortifications; but 



PONDICHERRY 


1§L 


even that period of resistance was limited by them depleted 
stocks of munitions and provisions. Capsulation was only a 
question of time, unless Pondicherry could hold on till he 
setting i.i of the rainy season in October when the besieging 
forces would be compelled to withdraw. But, as it actual > 
turned out. eVten the weather was unfavourable to the I-rench. 
and the rains started much later than the usual time. 

Yet, in spite of the bleak prospect, the small french gamso . 
at Pondicherry put up a surprisingly stubborn resistance, " m 1 
won the unstinted admiration of the Png in , 

liero of the skirmishes outside the fortifications was Mac ec, 
was given a Captain’s commission by Bellecombe and p act 
charge of the small group of cavalry. Within the town bo 
Bellecombe and his predecessor in office. Law de Laurist 
showed great courage and untiring energy, mspuing the 
garrison to hold on at all costs and organising defence at evetv 
vulnerable point. In the course of his constant visits to the 
fortifications Bellecombe even received a bullet wound fro 
which, however, he quickly recovered. But by the middle of 
October munitions had run short, only three barrels of powdei 
remained, and further resistance was impossible. Bellecombe 
bitterlv regretted having given large quantities of munitions to 
Tronioly which a. this critical moment would have enabled the 
garrison to hold on for some time more. But men. regret could 
not change the military situation. The artillery had been for 
the most part silenced, several of the bastions were it, rums, 
the ramparts crumbling and the garrison completely worn down 


bv 77 days of continuous action 


:7 days or commw™ 

On the itth October Bellecombe resigned himself to the 

. _ r . - ^rvoicrin nr rfsl ihe 


inevitable and called a council of war, consisting of the 


Tntendant and senior civil and military officer,. The decision 
was unanimous, to stop further resistance and to capitu.ate on 
terms honourable to the nation. 1 he next a ^' 11 

and 17th October, were taken up by negotiations. On t c \ t 
ihe capitulation was signed. The terms were the most honour 
able that any garrison under similar circumstances could extort 
from the besiegers > The victors expressed their appreciation 


' P. A. ms. 309 (terms o£ capitulation). A plan of Pondicherry in 
1778 and an account of the siege will be found in Vibart s History of the 
Madras Engineers, pp. 130-155. 


rtiNisr^ 



of the c ourageous defence of Pondicherry in the following terms: 

I he brave defence made by Major General Bellecombe and 
his garrison deserves, with reason, all the marks of honour. 

I hat is why it is permitted to the garrison to march out through 
die Vilnoor gate with the honours of war; arriving on the glacis 
the men will pm down arms in bundles at ihe command of their 
own officers, and will also leave there the drums, cannons and 
mortars It is permitted to all officers in general to keep their 
arms, and on the special demand of General Bellecombe the 
Regiment of Pondicherry will keep its colours”. By the terms 
of capitulation all the French officers and men with their families 
and belongings were to be sent to the Isle of France. The 
I.nglish promised to take care of the wounded left behind and 
to preserve the right of private Frenchmen to live in the town 
and carry on trade and commerce. It is to be noted that the 
engagements were scrupulously observed by the English. On 
the afternoon of the i8th the Vilnoor gate was thrown open, 
the French garrison marched out and 6000 English troops 
entered and occupied the town. The English were so much 
surprised at the small number of the garrison, only 49^ 
European troops, that they suspected large numbers to be in 
hiding in private houses, and their suspicion was not dispelled 
<tll they had carried out extensive searches all over the town 
for die next few days. 


chapter, iv 


OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS ( 1765 - 1778 ) 
Chandernagore 
I. Condition in i~ 6 y. 

The settlement at Chandernagore was founded by Bourreau- 
Deslandes in 1690.' But it was not till ihc Governorship of 
Dupleix (1731-1741) that the place assumed any importance. It 
was Dupleix who enlarged and embellished the town and made 
it a great commercial centre. Chandernagore was captured by 
the English on the 84th March 1757 and was restored to the 

French on the 85th June 1765- Law dc Lauriston wcn * !° 
Bengal in person to take ovet the principal settlement and its 
subordinate factories, which had been under English occupation 
for eight years. During this interval the position of Chander¬ 
nagore had altered greatly. In the first place, the English had 
gained complete mastery over the province, reducing the French 
settlement to a mere commercial establishment with no political 
importance whatsoever; and even then its trading operations 
lav at the mercy of the English. In the second place, the lace 
of the town had changed. The old Fort d'Orleans had been 
destroyed, most of the large buildings were in rums, the streets 
were deserted, the population had dwindled from 60,000 in 
1757 to 24,000 in 1765 s , trade and commerce had disappeared 
and the citizens had sunk into sloth and lethargy. Visiting 
the place in 1774, Comte de Modave wrote in his Voyage du 
Bengale d Dilhi: “This town, formerly so flourishing, presents 
to the eye nothing but sad pictures of heaps of ruins and deserted 
s’reels, without buildings and without inhabitants. A sad and 
profound silence attests its present misery as much as it recalls 

' About the origin of Chandernagore, see S. P. Sen’s article Jarmans 
and Pnrawanas for the establishment of the French in Bengal (Indian 
Historical Records Commission Proceedings, 1946). 

2 Martineau —Etnt Politique de I’Inde en 7777 par Law de Lauriston, 

p. 29. 


miSTfty 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

memory of its eclipsed splendour. In these ruins the French 
are. what they are everywhere ordinarily, proud of their past 
opulence and consoling themselves in their present misery by 
the hope of a happier future, and on such a slender foundation 
suffering cheerfully their present troubles in the ever-flattering 
hope of sharing, before long, the immense wealth of their rivals 

.The settlement of Chandemagore is at present nothing 

hut a shadow of what it was twenty-five years ago. The stipula¬ 
tions of our last treaty with England do not leave any reasonable 
hope of seeing the situation change". 1 

By the terms of the Treaty of Paris, 1763, the French had 
regained their old trading rights and privileges in Bengal granted 
to them by the Parawanas of the local rulers. T he trade of 




Bengal was the most important branch of the commercial opera¬ 
tions of the French Company. The principal articles of trade 
were silk, cotton goods of many varieties, opium and saltpetre. 
As Law wrote in his me moire of 1767, 2 “Everybody knows that 
Bengal is the principal place for the commerce of the Company; 
it is even the only place which can procure sufficient profit to 
cover our expenses in India. This commerce should go up to 
lour ship-loads, each worth a million and a half livres at least. 
If the Company is ever obliged to give up Bengal, it must of 
necessity result in giving up everything, except perhaps its 
commerce in China”. But in spite of the trading rights of the 
French, recognised by the treaty of 1763. the English tried to 
use their political power to gain a monopoly of Bengal’s com 
mcrce and to oust other European competitors from the field; 
and from 1765 to 1778, when Chandemagore again fell into 
the hands of the English, the French made continuous protests 
without avail against the violation of their trading rights and 
privileges. As Law wrote in his memoire quoted above, "From 
the manner in which things are developing, it is much to be 
feared that it (the extinction of French trade in Bengal) will 
come very so n as a result of the conduct of the English. To 
that are directly leading their continuous vexations to our 
manufactures, the excessive demands of merchandise made by 


1 A. N,—Ministtere des Colonies: C-s, 256. 

2 J\ A. ms. 1 oc\ 



wnist^ 



OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


•<SL 


Company (going up to twenty million livres per year) 
anti the extent of their private trade which goes at least to 
equal that of the Company. These indicate sufficiently that 

their object is to force us to withdraw. To remedy 

his evil it is absolutely necessary for our Ministers to intervene 
in the matter. There must be the most peremptory orders to 
the Directors of the English Company, and given in a manner 
that neither they nor their employees in India could elude their 
execution”. 


The settlement of Chandernagore was small in area. Its 
normal revenue, from all sources, amounted to fifty to sixty 
thousand livres a year. By the treaty of 1763 the French were 
not allowed to maintain any troops or to construct fortifications, 
and the settlement was exposed to attack from any quarter. It 
lay totally defenceless and could be compelled to surrender at 
the first summons. Moreover, the town being situated far 
inland, the inhabitants had no means of escape in the event of 
a sudden war. That was why Law advised the authorities of 
the Company in his noire of 1767 spend as little as pos¬ 
sible on building constructions at Chandernagore, and to pass 
orders for the quick disposal of all articles of export and import 
without keeping them in stock for long. At the time of taking 
possession of the settlement Law tried to make the English 
agree to some relaxation of the treaty provisions with regard 
to troops and fortifications, but all that he could achieve was 
the consent of the English to the keeping of 25 French soldiers 
and 300 sepoys, commanded by 3 European officers, with 20 
pieces of cannon, only 6-pounders, in the interest of the security 
of French trade and commerce. He commented in his trufn:oire : 


“This small body of men together with about 100 Europeans 
in various situations that there are in the colony may be suffi* 
cient to shelter us from the attacks of brigands and marauders 

.in a time of trouble, but in case of a war what can be 

done? If we are not in a position to defend ourselves at 
Pondicherry, we are even in a much worse position in Bengal. 
The colony of Chandernagore, being situated so far inland, 
does not have even any door for escape. It follows necessarily 
that it must surrender to the enemy at the first summons . 


1 


WiNfsr^ 


THE FKKNCI1 IN INDIA 



<§L 


L a w's plan of making Chandernagore the principal 
French settlement in India. 


When Law went to Bengal to take possession of Chandcr- 
nagorc, he had, perhaps, an idea of making it the chief French 
settlement in India. Ihe conjecture is supported by the fact 
that he took with him to Chandernagore most of the members 
of the Gonseil Supcrieur at Pondicherry, leaving there only a 
small section which was to act on the orders and instructions 
from Chandernagore. It is also supported by the fact that 
Law knew Bengal much better than south India. He was the 
Chief of the French factory at Kasim bazar at the time of the 
English capture of Chandernagore in 1757, and during the 
course of his adventurous wandering after being forced to leave 
Kasimbazar he took service under Prince Ali Gauhar, later to 
become Emperor Shah Alam II anti acquired art intimate 
knowledge of men and politics in north India. When he 
returned to Bengal in 1765 he 1] dght have felt it necessary to 
keep a vigilant watch on north Indian politics, sc* as to take 
advantage of any opportunity to create a French sphere ol 
influence in the disintegrating Mughal Empire. Pondichem 
was far away and had no direct communication with north 
India. On the other hand, Chandernagore could serve as a 
convenient observation post for the French to watch develop¬ 
ments in north India and to maintain secret diplomatic relations 
with the Princes there. 

Anyway, if Law had any idea in his mind to make Chander¬ 
nagore the principal French settlement in India, he <oon 
abandoned it for two reasons. In the first place, he realised 
that the situation in Bengal and north India, as he knew it in 
1757, had changed completely. Ihe English had gained 
effective control of the country as far as Allahabad and had 
taken both the Mughal Emperor and the Nawab of Oudh under 
their protection. Thus there was little that French diplomacy 
could do in north India, specially when the Princes there proved 
so weak and undependable. On the other hand, under the 
existing circumstances the French would do better to turn to 
south India and enter into clo-e relations with the Marathas 
and Haidar Ali, the only two Indian Powers whose alliance 
would be worth having. It was the opinion expressed by Law 


mtSTQy 



OTHER FRENCH SKTIl.EMfcMS 


<§L 


in several o£ his mnnoires. In the second place, soon after 
Law had established the Conseil Supirieur at Chandernagore 
there started a conflict between that body and the remnant oi 


the Council still functioning at Pondicherry. I he latter, 
under the leadership of Boyelleau, the senionnost member of 
the Council, refused to recognise the authority of the Council 
at Chandernagore, and asserted that wherever the. Govemot 
might i!loose to reside for the time being, the Conseil Supirieut , 
under the terms of the Royal Edit of 1701, had its permanent 
seat at Pondicherry . 1 The conflict went to such a length that 
:<t. the beginning of 17 1’7 Law, together with the members of ihe 
Council established at Chandernagore, had to return to 
Pondicherry . 2 


HI. Administration of Renault de Saint-Germain. 


While leaving Chandernagore Law appointed Renault de 
Saint-Germain to take charge of the settlement. I he latter hail 
been occupying the same post in 1757 "hen Chandernagore 
was captured by the English. Renault de Saint-Germain 
remained in office only for a few months. He was an old man 
of seventy and lacked in firmness in dealing with the English 
on the question of the violation of French trading privileges 
recognised by the treaty of 1763. The English, in their bid to 
gain a monopoly of the Bengal trade, tried every means to 
evade the execution of the treaty provisions by putting new 
restrictions on French trade and commerce, either directly 
through their own agents or indirectly under the guise of the 
authority of the Nawab. I he French records of the time con¬ 
tain a large number of letters exchanged between the Councils 
of Chandernagore and Calcutta on this subject and a huge 
mass of complaints from French agents in the different sub¬ 
ordinate factories against the activities of the English agents 
or of the agents of the Nawab acting under English instigation . 4 


1 P \. mss. 2416, 2417. 

2 Ibid, mi. 109—Royal arr^t dated loth February 1769 finally settling 

the conflict. * Ibid. im*. 2420, to 2450. 

* Gaudart —Catalogue des man nscrits des Artaennes Archives de l I ndt 
Franftiiie, Vol. Ill (records of the different factories in Bengal from 1765 
10 1778). 

G 


NIINIS^J, 



1113* I Kl- NCII IN INDIA 


<SL 


The principal subjects of complaint on the French side 
were: ill-treatment of French agents which sometimes went to 
the length of using physical violence; the establishment of an 
English monopoly over the trade in saltpetre, the French being 
made to depend for their supplies on the English; the subjection 
of French shipping to vexatious inspection by the English and 
of French goods in transit from and to the subordinate factories 
to the exactions of internal customs by the Nawab’s officers; 
the difficulties encountered by the French in getting regular sup¬ 
plies of silk a Kasimbazar, of opium in Bihar, and of fine cotton 
goods at Dacca, difficulties which they attributed, not without 
some reason, to the tyrannous control of the English over produ¬ 
cers and manufacturers, compelling them to sell to the English 
Company first and threatening them otherwise with dire con¬ 
sequences. 1 The French made vehement protests against these 
restrictions on their trade and commerce, but their protests 
were of no avail in the face of the determined policy of the 
English to keep the lucrative trade of Bengal a close monopoly 
for their Company and private merchants. It is interesting to 
note from the records of the period that attempts were made 
to secure a close alliance between the French and the Dutch 
t ;> protect their trading rights in Bengal against violation by 
the English, but they ultimately came to nothing. 2 


IV. Administration of Chevalier.: difficulties with the 

English. 


Evidently it required a more energetic and vigorous person 
than a septuagenarian like Renault de Saint-Germain to deal 
with the English, and so in July 1767 he was replaced bv Jean- 
Baptiste Chevalier. Renault de Saint-Germain was allowed to 
retain the honours and prerogatives of his office in recognition 
of his past services. He died at Chandernagore in 1777. Under 

About Anglo-French commercial disputes in Bengal horn 1765 to 1778, 
a large mass of records will be found in C.R.O .—French in India Series. 
Voi. VI, pp. 3-53 (claims of the French and arguments opposing them), 
pp. 133-240 (Proceedings of th< Supreme Government from 1773 to 177* 
concerning, disputes with the French'); Vol. VII- Disputes with the French, 
1773-1776; and Vol. IX, pp. 1-16. 

3 P, A. mss. 2420, 2431. 


MIN/Sr#^ 



O r UK.R FRK.NGH SK'I'Tl -KMKM ir» 


@L 


im-Baptistg Chevalier there was a brief revival of (he 
importance and commercial prosperity of Chandernagore. 
Politically, Chevalier belonged to the school of Law dt* 
Lauriston, but while Law changed his attitude, Chevalier 
believed even after 1765 that it was still possible for France to 
create a sphere of influence in north India by taking advantage 
of the disintegration of the Mughal Empire. The success of 
C hevalier’s administration at Chandernagore, at least in the 
earlier part, was due principally to the close personal relations 
he maintained with Verelst, the Governor, and other members 
of the Calcutta Council. It was because of this factor that 
recriminations about restraints on French trade in Bengal 
ceased for a time, and till the suspension of the privileges of 
the French Company at the end of 1769 Chandernagore became 
again a busy commercial centre.' Three or four ships came to 
Chandernagore annually with goods from Europe and returned 
with the merchandise of Bengal; and from Chandernagore ships 
were also sent to Mocha, the Persian Gulf, Pegu, Siam and 
Indo-China. With the revival of commercial prosperity there 
was a revival of the attractions of social life also at Chander¬ 
nagore. The small house at Gorelty. built by Dupleix as Country 
residence for the Governor/was transformed by Chevalier into 
a great palace, the architectural beauty of which was an object 
of admiration to all and where came every week-end the 
Governor and members of the Calcutta Council to escape from 
the worries of official duties. 

Taking advantage of the close personal relations with the 
Calcutta Government Chevalier thought of improving the 
defences of Chandernagore by slightly twisting the meaning of 
certain provisions in the Treaty of Paris, 1763. Under this 
treaty the French were forbidden to construct any fortifications 
or other defensive works ai Chandernagore, bur for hygienic 
reasons they were allowed to dig a narrow ditch round the 
town for the drainage of water in the rainy season. Chevalier 
had hoped that by giving this ditch sufficient width and depth 
he could turn it into something useful for the defence of the 


1 The letters of ihc Syndics and Directors of the French Company to 
iho Council at Chandernagore during ihis period show the increased 
volume of French trade in Bengal (Gaiidart —Catalogue dc% Manuscrits , 
Vol. III). 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


town against any surprise attack. In spirit it was without 
doubt a violation of the treaty, but through his personal friend¬ 
ship he gained the consent of Verelst. the English Governor, 
and it was through the latter’s intervention that necessary 
permission was obtained from the Nawab. Accordingly, the 
work was undertaken at the beginning of 1768 and a Dutch 
engineer named Ogerdias was employed for the purpose. It is 
interesting to note that in his zeal for ensuring the defence 
of Chandernagore Chevalier did not inform the authorities of 
the Company in France about the construction of the canal 


until it was completed, and in a letter dated isth December 
1768 the Syndics and Directors of the Company expressed their 
disapproval of the conduct of Chevalier in spending so much 
money on the construction of the canal and particularly employ¬ 
ing a Dutch engineer for the purpose. 1 

While the work was in progress the English Council in 
Calcutta raised no objection, but suddenly in May 1769, taking 
advantage of the absence of Verelst from Calcutta, accused 
Chevalier of breach of faith. It was alleged that while Verelst 
had given his consent only to the digging of a small ditch for 
the drainage of rain water, the French had constructed a deep 
and wide canal as a purely defensive work in violation of the 
treaty of 1763. I he English Council sent Lt. Col. Campbell to 
inspect the work and the latter reported that the canal was 40 
to 50 feet wide and 10 to 12 feet deep, with an earthwork 
constituting a rampart 40 to 67 feet wide and 8 feet high. As 
another proof of bad faith, the English Council alleged that 
Chevalier had actually spent three lakhs of rupees on the 
project while the original estimate he submitted to Verelst was 
one lakh only. The breach of faith was all the more repre¬ 
hensible as the English, out of a feeling of mutual friendship, 
had consented of their own will to some relaxation of the 
treaty provisions regarding the maintenance of troops at 
Chandernagore. The Calcutta Council then sent a peremptory 
demand to Chandernagore to fill up the canal at once, and on 
the refusal of Chevalier the English sent troops and workers 


1 P. A. ms. 2472. 





to demolish the rampart and fill up the canal. Chevalier and 
the Chanderriagore Council protested vehemently against what 
they considered to be a high-handed action on the part of the 
English, but the susceptibilities of the latter had been roused 
so much that they paid no heed to the French protests. 1 

After this incident the relations between the English and 
the French deteriorated again, and' the records of Chandemagore 
are full of complaints from the French agents in the subordinate 
factories against the high-handed actions of the employees of 
the English Company, fhe complaints mounted more and 
more till the capture of Chandemagore in 1778 on the outbreak 
of hostilities in Europe. Chevalier felt his position helpless 
against the growing tyranny oi the English, and from 1769 he 
wrote pressing letters to the Ministry in Paris to intervene 
and bring pressure on the English Company through the 
Government of London to respect the treat) provisions relating 
to French trading rights and privileges in Bengal. But the 
ellete Ministry during the later years of the reign of Louis XV 
did not take any action and did not even reply to Chevalier’s 
letters. Finding no hope of getting any relief from France, 
Chevalier turned to the Indian Princes for succour. Through 
his own agents, like du Jarday and Montvert, or through French 
military adventurers in the service of Indian Princes, like Gentil, 
Madec and Visage, he carried on intrigues in all the north 
Indian Darbars with a view to induce them to attack Bengal 
and to harry arid devastate the province so thoroughly that the 
English, deprived of their sources of revenue, could be compelled 
to come to terms. 

These diplomatic projects of Chevalier, which will be dealt 
with more fully in the next chapter, were cut short by the 
outbreak of war between France and England and the sudden 
capture of Chandemagore on July 10, 1778. Lt. Col. Dow, who 
was sent from Calcutta to seize the French settlement, was 
greatly disappointed at not being able to seize Chevalier, 
regarded by the English as their most, dangerous enemy, who 

1 P. A. mss. 2491, 2492, 2494, 2495. 



escaped from his house through the help of his wife. 1 Three 
weeks later, however, Chevalier was arrested at Cuttack and 
handed over by the Marat ha Governor of the place, Raja Ram 
Pandit, to the English envoy, Alexander Elliot, who was then 
on his way to Nagpur on a special diplomatic mission. It was 
an irony of fate that Chevalier was betrayed by the agent of 
an Indian Prince on whom he had counted so much in his 
diplomatic intrigues. He was later released on parole and 
permitted to return to France. 2 Let us now turn to the 
subordinate French factories in Bengal. 

V. Subordinate Factories . 

Dependent on the chief settlement ;*.t Chandernagore were 
five factories, at Kasirnbazar. Patna, Dacca, Jougdia and Bala sore, 
and a few marts, known as Aurangs, where French agents 
procured supplies from weavers. Kasirnbazar, situated very 
close to Murshidabad, the capital of Bengal, was the principal 
centre of silk trade. “It is from the neighbourhood of Kasim 
bazar, within a radius of twelve to fifteen leagues and even 
more, that people procure raw silk and an enormous quantity 
of silk goods of various kinds, the sale of which is in the hands 
of the English, the Dutch, the Armenians and the people of 
the country”. The French possessed a large village which 
yielded an annual revenue of 3506 livres. Before the last war 
they had a fine house with a large enclosure for the manufacture 
of raw silk, but it had been destroyed, and after 1765 they 
built onlv two godowns to stock the raw silk which they pro- 

1 For the French version of the capture of Chandernagore and flight 
of Chevalier, see the report by Hocquart, commandant of the forces 
at Chandernagore —B. N. F. Fr. (N.A) 9566, pp. 89**300. For the English 
version, see Forrest— Selections from Letters, Despatches etc.. Foreign 
Depart me it. Government of India, III, pp. 639^653; also C.R.O .—French 
in India Series, Vol. IV, Extract of the General Letter from Bengal, 17th 
August 177^ 

- About the arrest of Chevalier, see Elliot's letter to Hastings and 
the Calcutta Council in Bengal Past and Present, Vol. II, Part II, pp. 
4*ar-413; and Vol. IV for exchange of letters between Chevalier and the 
Calcutta Council. Sec also C .R O.— French in India Series, Vol. IV, Parole 
signed in Chevalier, 1st October 1778. 

■' P. \. ms 100 (Law’s mimoire of 1767)* 


miSTffy 



OTHER FRENCH SE'ITH-MEN I S 9 I 

■•Vi -v v ^^i. fl'irf y , 1 

- 

cured from other merchants Law wrote, “ I his method 
appears less costly than manufacturing being done by us. i he 
silk, it is true, is not as nicely wound or as equal, but this 
difference does not compensate for the expenses required by 
the re-establishment of the factory in the same condition in 
which it had been before". 1 According to his estimate in 1767, 
the French could procure from this region raw silk of various 
qualities worth $00,000 livres. 

Patna was an even more important centre of trade. ‘ It is 
from this province (Bihar) that saltpetre, opium and various 
kinds of white and printed cloth are procured. I t om this 
region are also procured borax which conn s from 1 ibet and the 
adjoining areas and even gold, because I remember that the 
Dutch chftfs were very much interested iin this branch of 
commerce ' 2 . The French had no house of their own at Patna, 
They had one rented house just outside the town as residence 
lor the Chief of their factory and another one to serve as ware¬ 
house for the goods coming from Europe, like cloth, lead, 
iron, copper etc. for which there was a good market at Patna, 
as also for the goods purchased in the province. Before the 
last war the French had a busy trade at Patna. Their purchases 
were worth a million livres and their sale of European goods 
amounted to two to three millions. But after 1765 their trade 
was seriously hampered by the English, who made use of their 
political power to establish a commercial monopoly. For the 
purchase of saltpetre the French were entirely dependent on 
the English, and their supplies of opium also were severely 
restricted by the pressure which the English put upon the 
producers. In fact, it was from the Patna factory that the 
largest number of complaints against English tyranny reached 
Chandernagore, and the dispute was intensified^)}’ the personal 
enmity between Carvalho, the Chief of the French factory, and 
Rumbold, his English counterpart. 

At Dacca the French had a large commercial house, which 
had been saved from destruction by the generosity of the agent 
of the English factory there. Dacca was an important centre 
of trade, its speciality being fine cloth, known as muslin, as 
also embroidery. After 1765 the French trade there was valued 


1 P. A. ms. 100. 


* Ibid. 


mtSTffy 



TI 1 F. FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


Ttt five to six hundred thousand livres per year. “Under more 
favourable circumstances trade could be extended to the value 
of i,500,000 livres, but for that it is necessary to have money 
in hand always, so that the worker could be kept continually 
employed by 11s, without which he is at once engaged by 
others’ . 1 For a few years Dangercux, later to become Cbm 
rnandant at Chandernagore, was the Chief of the French factory 
at Dacca. He was replaced by an Indian agent, who in Nov cm 
her 1773 was publicly beaten by the orders of the English 
agent, Harwell, as the result of a private quarrel. Failing to 
get any redress from the English Government in Calcutta the 
French closed their factory at Dacca. 2 3 Further down Dacca and 
situated dose to the sea was another French factory at Jougdia 
(it had long since disappeared under water) not far from the 
English factory at Lakshmipur. The whole area was inhabited 
by weavers, "who manufacture very high quality doth called 
Ramans and Buff etas. Every year we procure both for the 
Company as well as for private persons goods worth 7 to 8 

hundred thousand livres. The English take three or 

four times more”. 1 

The fifth factory was at Balasore, an equally important 
centre of doth trade. “People manufacture there very beautiful 
and fine cloth named San as of Balasore, very suitable for 
making shirts, it is in my opinion the only Indian cloth 
which comes very close, from the point of view' of glaze and 
cleanness erf thread, to the beautiful Dutch linen. There is 
also a good quantity of iron in the country”. 4 The French 
had a fine house at Balasore which had been destroyed during 
the war. After 1765 the Company ceased to have any trading 
operation there, although private French merchants carried on 
some business. The factory at Balasore was maintained 
primarily for the safe transport of letters from Bengal to Pondi¬ 
cherry by the land route. 5 


1 Law’s mdnwirc of 1767—P. \. ms. joo. 

2 For the English version of the incident, sec Forrest — Selections from 
Letters, Despatches etc.. Foreign Department, Government of India. 
Vol. t. pp. 109-110 (Sec. Sel. Com. Fro. 20th June 1774) 

3 Law's memoire of 1767 . V, A. rns. 100. 

1 Ibid. 5 Ibid . 




miST/fy. 



I. Condition in 1765. 

The settlement of Mahe dated back to 17*1 when the 
French occupied the territory from the ruler of Kadattanad, 
one of the numerous petty states then dotting the Malabar 
Coast. The origin of this settlement has been traced in detail 
by Martirieau in his Les Origines de Mohr de Malabar. It is 
out of place here to sketch the history of Mahe during the 
troublesome days of Dupleix and Laily. Suffice it to note that 
it capitulated to the English on the 8th February 1761 and 
was not restored to the French till the 20th October 1765. 
In violation of the terms of capitulation the English had 
destroyed not only the forts but also most of the houses of the 
settlement, including those of private persons, and the act 
of pillage and destruction was completed by the ruler of 
Kadattanad to whom the English had handed over the settle¬ 
ment. In 1765 Law de Lauriston sent Captain Plusquellec to 
take possession of Mah£ from the agents of the English Com¬ 
pany at; Tellicherry, but although Plusquellec arrived in March 
various difficulties were raised and negotiations dragged on for 
nearly eight months before the place was restored to the 
French. 1 Plusquellec protested to the Tellicherry Council 
against the destruction of private property in violation of the 
terms of capitulation and demanded three lakhs of rupees as 
indemnity. Needless to say that it was rejected by the English, 
Plusquellec further demanded that the English should notify 
the ruler of Kadattanad, to whom they had handed over the 
settlement, about the restitution and should procure a formal 
declaration from him recognising the rights of the French over 
the territories restored. While agreeing to the first proposal, 
.he English rejected the second. Another point of difficulty 
was the demarcation of boundaries. Finally, after much 
wranglings, on the 20th October 1765 Plusquellec received 
possession of the settlement of Mah£ and its dependencies 

1 be documents relating to the restitution of Mah6 and the negotia¬ 
tions preceding it are preserved in the Pondicherry Archives, mss. 4444 
44 5 * 


misrfy 



with the places where stood the fortification*, the Fort Make , 
the Fort St . George , the For/ Dauphin, the For/ Condi and the 
Grand Calaye with their dependencies as we possessed them at 
the beginning of the year 1749 - 1 

Mahe, like Karikal on the eastern coast, w r as situated on a 
river sufficiently deep for navigation by medium-sized vessels, 
but the sand-bar at the month rendered entry difficult. The 
principal article of commerce was pepper which grew' in abund¬ 
ance all along the coast. The other important, articles were 
cardamom and sandalwood, but the total value of the French 
trade was quite modest, not exceeding eight to nine hundred 
thousand livres a year in normal and peaceful times. 1 here 
was indeed scope for greater trade but lack of funds constituted 
a serious difficulty. Law in his memoire of i 7^7 considered the 
maintenance of the settlement at Maht£ to be uneconomical, 
since in exchange for the small amount of commerce carried on 
there the French had to incur a heavy expenditure on the 
maintenance of a large garrison, rendered necessary by the 
uncertainties of the political situation in the neighbouring areas 
requiring constant vigil and military preparedness. a In order 
to understand this observation of Law it is necessary to look 
at the political condition of the Malabar Coast at the time. 

About the middle of the i8 tli century the Malabar region 
was par elled out into a number of small principalities ruled 
by Nayars, a class of feudal aristocracy. In the immediate 
neighbourhood of the French settlement was the principality 
of Kadattanad, stretching from the river Mahe in the north to 
the Kotta in the south. To the north of the river Mah£ lay 
the two principalities of Kottayam and Kurangod, and furthe? 
north lay the principality of Kolattanad or Chirakkai, under 
the rule of the Kolattiri family who had originally held sway 
over the entire region. I o the south of Kadattanad were the 
principalities of Calicut and Cochin, equally feeble powers 
and weakened by many vears of internecine strife, which in fact 
had given the European nations, the Portuguese, the Dutch, 
the English and the French their, first foot-hold on the Malabar 
Coast. In the extreme south of the peninsula was the kingdom 
of Travaneore, which was rising in importance and power since 


1 P. A. ms. 1451. 


* Ibid, ms. too. 


MINIS 



the middle of the 18th century. In 1766, taking advantage of 
the enfeebled state of the Malabar principalities, Haidar Ali 
led an invading army and quickly overran the whole country 
from Chirakkal to Calicut. But in spite of his ruthless policy 
Haidar failed to subdue the Nayars completely. Down to 
1792, when the Malabar region passed under English control, 
there were chronic revolts against the rule of the Mysore Nawab, 
followed by brutal suppressions. It was these political turmoils, 
Haidar s invasion, rebellions of the Nayars and their suppres¬ 
sion, as also the internal feuds among the Malabar chiefs 
themselves which Law had in mind in 1767. 1 We shall notice 
later how the French settlement of Mahe was dragged into 
these conflicts by the forward policy of two successive Governors, 
Dupr'at and Repen tigny. 

In the midst of these political turmoils the french settle¬ 
ment lay in a poorly defended state. It was bordered on the 
south and east by a chain of hills, where the French had built 
three small forts, demolished by the English in Vj6i. lo the 
north of Mahe, on the other side of the river, the French had 
built another fort on a hill overlooking the settlement. The 
territory belonged to the Nayar ruler of Kurangod. But this 
fori had also been equally destroyed, and in 1765 settle¬ 
ment stood completely exposed on three sides. Law wVote in 
1767, “We are not thinking at all of reconstructing these works 
on account of expense. It will soon be necessary, however, to 
decide either to quit Mah6 or to make this expense . The 
principal part of the settlement was limited to a small area a 
the month of the river, surrounded by a wall with a few 
batteries for defence. The garrison consisted of 120 french 
soldiers and about 150 sepoys and fopasses. There were 30 
pieces of cannon. About the defensive strength ol Mahe Law 
remarked, ‘T even believe that in a general way they (the 
citizens of Mah6) are better provided than we here (at Bondi 
cherry) in arms and munitions of all kinds; but that is not 
saying much, it does not prevent their feeling greatly troubled 
if a serious attack is made”. 2 

1 For a more detailed account of conditions in Malabar at this time 
see Madras District Gazetteers : Malabar and Anjetigo Districts, Vol. I, 
PP- 57 75 * also N. K. Sinha Haidar Ali , pp. 144*16$. 

2 P. A. ms. hm>. 



Law considered that neither for trade nor for defence was 
Mahe worth retaining, and in his me moire of 1767 he suggested 
two alternative places for transferring the settlement. One 
was Colachel in the kingdom of Travancore, close to Gape 
( omoritt, and the other was Karwar, a little to the south of 
Goa, original 11 y belonging to one of the petty Princes on the 
coast and annexed b> Haidar Ali to his own dominions. About 
the first Law wrote, “GoU&chte, two or three leagues from Cape 
Comorin, in the kingdom of Travancore, mid have been 
more suitable to our Company. It would be possible to have 
a trade there worth three million livres every year in pepper, 
white doth and other articles produced bn the Malabar Coast. 
The king of Travancore had invited us and had even pressed 
us to establish a settlement in his territory from the time ot 
Messieurs Dumas and Dupleix. I do not understand how this 
affair did not materialise. The English and the Dutch have 
established themselves in the kingdom of Travancore and 
theN are doing well there”. 1 About the second place, Karwar, 
Law stated that it offered great commercial as well as military 
advantages. “There is a little bay capable of accommodating 
thirteen or fourteen ships of the line and is equal to a port 
since vessels are in perfect safety there in all seasons Just 
near the month there is a small island which every ship entering 
the bay must pass by. A small fort may be constructed there. 
There is also a fairly large river falling into the bay, in which 
light vessels can enter.” Law did not think it impossible to 
secure the place from Haidar Ali “in spite of his inveterate 
hatred towards all Europeans; but for that it would be neces¬ 
sary to enter into an engagement with him, promising to help 
him on all occasions, and he is such a man that it would not 
be possible to elude the execution of the articles of a treaty 
with him.” It is interesting to notice here that in 1770 Law 
pursued his project further and asked Picot, Governor of MaM, 
to collect secretly all information about Karwar through the 

» The Raja of Travancore had made the overture in 1741 in view of 
the threatened attack by the Dutch and their allies among the Malabar 
chiefs. But the victors of Colachel m August removed the danger and 
the plan ot an alliance with the French tell through. See Panikkar the 
Dutch in Malabar, p. Ch). 


Ml NIST#,, 



OTHER FRENCH SETTl.EMKNTS 


<8L 


rm of a French ship, the tphigenie, proceeding to Goa . 1 2 3 
Picoi did not favour the Karwar project because of its proxi¬ 
mity to Goa and of the huge cost it would entail. On the 
other hand, he proposed the capture of the Maratha port of 
Viziadroog. The Karwar project, however, lingered in the 
ninds of the French for some time more and we find it men¬ 
tioned again in a report by Tronjoly to BeMecombe in 177^ “ 
as also in the metnorre on Mah 6 by Martin in 1 7 ^ 4 * 


II. The aggressive policy of Duprat . 

Although the settlement at Malic was not very important 
either from the commercial or from the military point of view, 
the forward policy adopted by its two successive Governors, 
Duprat and de Repentigny, brought it into great prominence 
during the period under review and almost led to a war between 
the French and Haidar Ali. It is necessary therefore to go into 
some details of the history of the settlement during this period, 
since it took Haidar Ali a long time to forget the incidents 
and become reconciled to the French. After the restoration 01 
the settlement in 17G5 Picoi de la Motte was appointed 
Governor, and he remained in charge till 1773 and again from 
1775 till the capitulation of the place in March 1779- * here 

was nothing remarkable in the first part of his administration 
except the transfer of the settlement, like all the other Fiench 
possessions in India, to the King consequent on the suppression 
of the Company in 177°* During his absence on leave Duprat 
assumed charge .is Governor in November 1773. I he new 
Governor had an undue notion about the power and prestige 
of his country. On his own responsibility, and even in direct 
violation of the instructions from Pondicherry, he undertook 
the task of extending French political influence on the Malabar 
Coast, unmindful of the resources at his command and of the 
difficulties to be encountered. As he expressed himself in a 
me moire, “1 have never looked at things except in a great way. 

1 The instructions to the captain, his report on Karwar and Scot’s 
letter to Law on the subject are preserved in the Pondicherry Archives, 
mss. |454, 4455. 

2 P. A. ms. 251. 

3 Ibid, ms. 4536. 



umsTffy 



I have believed all through my life that a man can do what a 
man has done, and many have done great things". 1 The result 
of this kind of ambitious idea was that within a few months of 
his assumption of office he dragged the French into a serious 
conflict with Haidar Ali from which they could extricate them¬ 
selves only by a great loss of prestige. 

Duprat's ambition led him to imagine that he could turn 
the Zamorin of Calicut into a vassal Prince and utilise him for 
the extension of French political influence on the coast. It 
will be remembered that Haidar Ali had subjugated the territory 
of the Zamorin a few years back, but taking advantage of a 
temporary eclipse of Haidar’s power the Zamorin returned and 
installed himself at Calicut in 1773. Haidar Ali sent a 
formidable force under Srinivasa Rao against the Zamorin, who 
in his distress sought for military assistance from the French at 
MahC Duprat, without waiting for instructions from Pondi¬ 
cherry and without calculating the risks involved, at once agreed 
to give military help to the Zamorin. At (he beginning of 
1774 he landed at Calicut with too men and three pieces of 
cannon, taking with him a frigate, the BelU-Poule, which was 
at Mahe at the time. The French flag was hoisted on the citadel 
and the palace, and on the 12th January 1774 a treaty was 
concluded with the Zamorin, by which the latter placed his 
country under the protection of the King of France and granted 
to the French a complete monopoly of trade and the right to 
build forts wherever they liked. On their side the French 
guaranteed to protect him against all enemies. 

Duprat had embarked on a light-hearted adventure, but 
he had soon to give serious reflection to the consequences of 
his action when Srinivasa Rao, Haidar’s general, arrived with a 
large force. It was only for the wise patience of Srinivasa Rao 
that a conflict was avoided between the French and their tradi¬ 
tional ally, Haidar Ali, in which Duprat's handful of men 
could have offered little resistance. The Zamorin fled away 
from Calicut and the French also withdrew to Mah£ in February 
1774. The withdrawal was as humiliating as the adventure 
had been rash, and moreover it did not conciliate Haidar, 
since Duprat was more imprudent in his letters than in his 


1 B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.), 9366, p. 400. 


MINIS?*, 



OTHER FRENCH SETT! J-.MF NTS 


<SL 


is. Before Haidar s forces had arrived, Duprat had written 
to him that he had come 10 take possession of Calicut with a 
battleship and that he was expecting two more with 4,000 men 
as reinforcement. In a proud tone he advised Haidar that his 
interests would be better served by an alliance with a powerful 
nation like the French. After the capture of Calicut by Srini¬ 
vasa Rao, Duprat again wrote to Haidar telling him haughtily 
that he had withdrawn of his own will and not in fear of 
Haidar’s army. He also reminded Haidar of Ins obligation to 
the French for their past help. 

Duprat’s action and more so his letters created in the mind 


of Haidar a deep suspicion and animosity against the French, 
whom he had all along regarded as his allies. He was in 
regular and friendly correspondence with Law de Lauristori, 
Governor of Pondicherry, and even at the time of the Calicut 
incident he had in his service a French corps which received 
regular reinforcements from Pondicherry. Naturally, when Law 
made professions of friendship towards him and tried to draw 
him into a close alliance with France against the English, 
Haidar doubted his sincerity as he could not believe that 
Duprat could have behaved in the manner he did without 
definite instructions from Pondicherry The Calicut incident 
alienated Haidar from the French and rendered the diplomatic 
efforts of Law extremely difficult. It was not till four or five 
years later that Haidar was reconciled to his old allies. 1 

1'hc discomfiture at Calicut and the reprimand he received 
from Law did not put a stop to the imprudent conduct of 
Duprat, and he soon got the French entangled in another 
conflict with Haidar Ali. At the time of the first occupation 
of Mahi the French had acquired through treaties concluded 
with the king of Kadattanad in 1723 and 1727 a monopoly of 


1 B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.), 9366—Duprat*s letter to Law de Lauriston, dated 
29th January 1774, dealing with the treaty with the Zamorin of Calicut 
(pp. 190-191); Law's letter dated 21st February 1774, severely reprimand 
ing Duprat for the Calicut fiasco (pp. 200-203); a detailed rnemoire of 
Duprat, dated 14th February 1774, dealing with the negotiations with the 
Zamorin and reproducing all the letters exchanged between Duprat. and 
the Zamorin, Haidar Alb Russel who commanded the French corps undet 
Haidar, and Srinivasa Rao (pp. 400*423). The last is also to he found 
in the Pondicherry Archives, ms. 1465* 


MINI ST/f 



trade in pepper, cardamom and other spices over an area of 
three leagues along the coast, having the river of Mah£ as the 
only outlet. But as the French owed money to the king of 
Kadattanad and had not sufficient funds to buy all the produce 
of the country, for mans years they had relaxed their monopoly 
right and had allowed the king of Kadattanad to sell the 
surplus produce to the English at Tellicherr>. hi his anxiety 
to restore French prestige after the Calicut fiasco Duprat stub 
denly decided to enforce the 'treaty right of commercial mono¬ 
poly and refused to allow any relaxation. It meant total ruin 
for the king of Kadattanad, since the French while enforcing 
their treaty right were not in a position to buy all the produce 
themselves. He protested, but only in vain, and Duprat 
declared that all cargoes of pepper sold in violation of the 
French monopoly right would be confiscated, holding out a 
threat that a large number of troops would shortly arrive to 
enforce the treaty right. In a letter to the chief of Haidar AH’s 
fleet dated 12th March 1774 Duprat declared that, the French 
had a monopoly of trade in spices in the kingdom of Kadattanad 
and that if Haidar Ali wanted pepper he must buy it from the 
French at MahC Haidar Ali protested both in his name and 
in the name of his protege, the king of Kadattanad, and called 
upon Duprat to re establish freedom of trade. Without reply* 
ing to him direct, Duprat wrote to Srinivasa Rao on the 23rd 
April that the King of France was a much greater sovereign 
than the Nawab of Mysore and that he would under no circum¬ 
stances yield to the ruler of Kadattanad. The haughty tone 
of the letter was deliberate and meant to cover up the humilia¬ 
tion of the Calicut episode, and for the second time it brought 
the French on the verge of an armed conflict with Haidar Ali. 
It was only averted by the prompt action of Law who, as soon 
as ho came to know of Duprat’s indiscretion, recalled him and 
sent do Repentigny from Pondicherry to replace him. De 
Repentigny took over charge in September, and Duprat in 
indignation resigned his Colonel’s rank in the French army in 
order to take service under Nizam Ali. By an irony of fate he 
was arrested by Haidar’s men while passing through Mysore 
territory, and he would have been made to pay dear for his 
past imprudence but for the pressing intervention of Law which 
secured him his liberty. 




‘ G Qv $ 


OTHER FRENCH S3ETTCF.MENT.S 

III. Repcntigny and relations with the neighbouring 
Principalities. 

Repen tigriy’s first task as Governor was to remove the cause 
of conflict with Haidar by reversing the policy of Duprat and 
restoring the commercial status quo which had existed before 
Duprat s time. But although Repentigny was anxious to main¬ 
tain peaceful relations with his neighbours, particularly with 
Haidar Ali, he too soon got himself entangled in difficulties 
which might have produced serious consequences for the little 
French settlement. The young Prince of Chirakkal. heir to the 
throne, had been living at Tellicherry as a pensioner of the 
English since the conquest of the country by Haidar Ali in 
1766. The example of Duprat in relation to the Zamorin of 
Calicut raised an ambitious hope in the mind of Hodman, the 
English Chief of Tellicherry, of restoring the Prince of 
Chirakkal to his territory and extending English influence on 
the Malabar Coast through him. He was encouraged in this 
idea by the estrangement between the French and Haidar Ah 
caused by the imprudent policy of Duprat. So he stood as a 
mediator to establish peace between the Prince of Chirakkal 
and Haidar and to re instate the Prince in a part of his old 
territory as a vassal of Haidar. As a price of his mediation 
he got from the Prince the grant of a monopoly of all pepper 
in his future territory, to be sold to the English at half its 
normal value. The English sent an agent named Rodriguez 
Dominguez to Scringapatam in October 1774 with a lakh of 
rupees to win support for their scheme at the Court of Haidar. 
The mission succeeded, and the Prince of Chirakkal himself 
visited Scringapatam to pay homage to Jus suzerain. He came 
back in December 1774 and installed himself at Cannanore. 
Being an agent of the English and a vassal of Haidar, he was 
naturally hostile to the French at Mahe. 

Once installed at Cannanore the Prince proceeded to 
increase his dominion by conquering the neighbouring ttrri 
lories. He overran Kottayam and threatened the Nayar ruler 
of Kurangod, whose territory lay to the north of the Mahe 
river. The Nayar of Kurangod, who had no force to oppose the 
invasion, lied away and took refuge at Mahe. Repentigny 
received him honourably and took him under hrench protec- 




H 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

he Prince of Chirakkal overran the territory of Kuran- 
g(?d and threatened to attack Mah£ with 4,1x10 men. Repentigny 
had only 300 men, including sepoys, to defend the place. But 
his courage did not fail him. Advancing with his handful of 
men he inflicted three severe defeats on the Prince of Chirakkal 
in February and March 1775, whereupon the latter retired to 
his own territory. In order, however, to avoid a future attack 
with larger forces Repentigny hastened to enter into negotia 
lions with the Prince of Chirakkal. The latter agreed to 
recognise the Nayar of Kurangod in return for a tribtite of 
80,000 rupees, and since the Kurangod ruler did not have 
any money Repentigny advanced him the amount, which was 
raised by loans from private persons at Mah£. Thus peace 
was concluded between the Prince of Chirakkal and the French, 
which upset the calculations of the English. 1 

IV. Make from J775 to iyyp. 

Picot returned from France and resumed office as Governor 
m December 1775. For the next two years nothing remarkable 
happened, and the French were left at peace w r ith their neigh¬ 
bours. There was no revival of ominercial dispute with the 
ruler of Kadattanad; the Prince of Chirakkal completely forgot 
his recent war with the French, and the Nayar of Kurangod, 
vho had been saved by the French, paid back his debt with 
total indifference. Even Haidar Ali seemed to have got over 
the affronts he had received from Duprat, although there always 
remained a lingering suspicion in his mind that the conduct of 
Ditprat showed what he could expect from the French if they 
ever got a secure footing in India. Anyway, at least outwardly 
he remained on friendly terms with the French and even agreed 
10 *he cession of a few villages on the northern side of the 
Mah£ river. Negotiations for this purpose which had been 
started by Picot were concluded by Bellecombe, Governor of 
Pondicherry, during his visit to Mahe at the beginning of 1778. 

1 B.xN.F.Fr. (N.A.) 936(3 —letter of Repentigny to the Minister, dated 
31st May 1775 (pp. 430-31). This volume and also 9215 contain the corres¬ 
pondence of Repentigny and Picot with the Minister in Paris giving a full 
account of French relations with the principalities on the Malabar Coast. 




NIINlSr^ 



OTHER FRENCH SRTTI.JEMENTS 


__his short stay at. Mahe Bellecombc also settled the 

question of repayment by the Nayar of Kurangod of the money 
advanced to him by the French while he had been attacked bv 
the Prince of Chirakkal. 27,000 rupees for the cxpey.se* of the 
war and 80,000 for paying the tribute demanded. By this 
settlement, concluded on the 16th April 1778’ the Nayar of 
Kurangod recognised the suzerain right of France and agreed 
to the' annexation of a part of his territory to Mahd. 1 

With the outbreak of war between the English and the 
French in 1778 Mahe was again faced with a grave danger. 
I> had neither money nor troops to organise an effective defence. 
After the fall of Pondicherry in October 1778. Picot wrote 
frantic letters to Haidar Ali, begging hint ter take the Fiench 
settlement under his protection and to send money and troops 
for it defence. 2 For a time the fear of Haidar Ali deterred 
the English from attacking Mah*, the only surviving French 
settlement in India, but in March 1779 they sent a considerable 
force under Braithwaite and Mahe capitulated on the 19th on 
honourable terms. The garrison was accorded the honours of 
war and the English gave a solemn pledge not to destroy any 
public or private property, a pledge which they violated after¬ 
wards. Some time later when hostilities broke out between 
Haidar Ali and the English the former captured Mahe and laid 
siege to Tellicherry. But three years after his forces were driven 
out of Mahe and the English completed their work of destruc- 
tion begun in 1779. 




Calicut 


Subordinate to the settlement at Mahe was a small factory 
at Calicut. It was of no political consequence and its trade 
was of negligible amount. As Law wrote in 1787, “We have 
there only a simple employee who has nothing to do for t >rce- 
fourths of the year ". It was only for a very short period, in 
1774. that the Calicut factory came into some prominence 
because of the aggressive policy of Dnprat, which almost ec 

>)bi^ Z. ^uV'Ucr dated 3rd November i 77 ») :m(l .“*•' 45*6 (letter 
dated 21st January 1779)* 


HMSr/fy 



rm french in ixima 


<SL 


a war with Haidar Ali. After that unhappy episode the 
factory relapsed into complete unimportance as before. 

Surat 


Besides Mahe and Calicut the French had also another 
factory on the western coast, namely at Surat. During the 
period under review the Surat factory had no commercial 
importance whatsoever. It had, however, great historical 
interest because it was at Surat, then the greatest trading centre 
in the East, that Caron established the first French factory in 
India in i6fi8. 1 It was from Surat that French agents went to 
the Coromandel Coast and established factories, first at Masuli- 
patarn and later at Pondicherry; and down to the close of the 
17th century Surat retained its primacy as the principal French 
establishment in India. But with the development of Pondi¬ 
cherry under the able guidance of Francois Martin, Surat gradu- 
alh declined in importance, till in 1701 the transfer of the 
Conseil Souverain from Surat to Pondicherry made the latter 
the principal French establishment in India. But even before 
t.i.ii the Surat factory had lost its commercial importance and 
after the close of the 17th century its trading activities had 
totally stopped. It was due partly to the effects of the conti¬ 
nuous Anglo-French wars in the closing years of the 17th 
century, but principally to the fact that the French Company 
had contracted huge debts at Surat which it was unable to 
repay. But the factory was still maintained, even after 1759. 
when Surat passed under English control. 

During the period under review an attempt was sought 
to be made to revive the trading activities of the Surat factory, 
Inn the main difficulty was the opposition of the Nawab and 
the local merchants of Surat, which arose from the capture of 
an Indian vessel by the French Admiral Comte d’Estaing in 
* 759 - As a reprisal the local authorities had ordered the cap¬ 
ture of any French vessel that might happen to touch at Surat. 

1 The Farinan of Enipcror Autangzcb, dated 11th August 1666. per 
mining the trench to establish a Factory at Surat, is preserved in the 
Pondicherry Archives, ms. 5057. For the early history of the Surat 

actory see S. P, Sen- The French in India: First Establishment amt 
Struggle, 


MIN/Sr^ 



Referring to this matter in his me moire of 17(57 Law wrote: 
This capture was made in violation of a French passport that 
we had given; that provides a rightful cause to the proprietors. 

It is absolutely necessary therefore to pay some compensation 

it we want to re-open this branch of commerce.", 

There were great commercial possibilities at Surat, “the key to 
the entire commerce of India through the facility of marketing 
goods from all parts of Hindusthan.” Law considered that 
Surat offered a very lucrative market “for our woollen cloth, a* 
thousand Objects of hardware, our Lyon doth, copper, and 
lead/' and cited the example of the English and the Dutch 
whose “annual sales are worth four to live million livres“. 
The principal commodity of Surat was cotton “which is sold 
in all parts of India for the manufacture of cloth ’. Among 
other articles of export were printed cloth, useful for the trade 
of the African coast, wheat and other provisions. 

The French had a modest house at Surat, outside the town 
proper, in a locality commonly known as the ‘French garden' 
which had been acquired by them from the time of their first 
establishment in India. They did not enjoy any independent 
status and had not even the right to hoist their flag over their 
factory building. There were neither troops nor fortifications 
of any kind to defend the factory. As Law stated in his 
me moire of 1767, “Surat is a place where we have no means to 
defend ourselves. If the English want to drive us out from 
there, a simple summons is sufficient’. But he believed that 
there was a good reason for the English to leave the French 
at peace, unless they suspected some intrigues on their part 
with the neighbouring country Powers. “As this place has 
always been regarded as neutral and as it is even to the interest 
of the English that it should be neutral so as to be able to make 
use of the name of the local people in carrying on trade in a 
time of war without any risk, it is to be believed that they will 
leave us at peace as long as they do not suspect any intrigue in 
these parts from us/’ But while expecting the English to pre¬ 
serve the neutral character of the place, Law stated in his 
niimoire that it was a vulnerable point of attack for the French, 
“in case our naval forces permit it and there is nothing better 
to do”. In fact, in most of the numerous French memoires of 




the period Surat is invariably mentioned as a possible point of 
attack, next in importance only to Bombay. 


Although completely defenceless and having no commercial 
activity whatsoever, the factory at Surat had considerable poli¬ 
tical importance as a convenient observation point for the 
French to watch the conflict between the English and the Mara- 
thas and to take advantage of any setback to the English power. 
Surat could serve as a base for carrying on secret negotiations 
with the Marathas and also for supplying information about 
the defences of Bombay. The existence of a factory at Surat 
also kept open the route to Delhi from the western coast, neces¬ 
sary for establishing political relations with the northern 
Darbars. It was because of the importance of Surat that the 
French Government maintained a Consul there, who was also 
the Chief of the Company's factory. During the period under 
review Anquetil de Briancourt functioned as Consul and Chief 
of the factory. But he does not seem to have taken much 
interest in political matters, as may be gathered from the pau¬ 
city of reports sent hv him on the Auglo-Maratha conflict or 
relating to the negotiations with the Maratha Court carried on 
by Saint-Lubin. 1 Anyway, he remained in complete ignorance 
of the outbreak of war between the English and the French in 
1778, till he was arrested together with the other Frenchmen 
in the factory on the 3rd November. 13 

Karikal 

The French possessions at Karikal in the kingdom of 
Tanjore were more extensive in area than anywhere else, includ¬ 
ing even Pondicherry. But throughout the conflicts of the 18th 
century Karikal remained outside the theatre of military and 
political activities. Nor did it have much importance from 
the point of view of the Company's trade and commerce. 1 he 
fact was that the whole of the Kaveri delta, comprising the 
kingdom of Tanjore, was purely agricultural in economy, and 

t He did, however, send some reports to de Sartine, Minister of Marine 
and Colonies, relating to St. Lubin’s negotiations at Poona. One such 
packet, including St. Lubin’s letters, was intercepted by the English; 
C.R.O .—French in India Series, Vol. IV. 

sp. A. ms. 5067 letter of Anquetil giving details about his arrest. 


minis 



OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


§l 


ikal simply fulfilled the purpose for which it had been, 
founded by Dumas, namely to serve as the granary of Pondi¬ 
cherry. In this fertile region the Danes first established a 
settlement at Tranquebar in 1616, followed by the Dutch at 
Negapatam in 1660. The French also, at the invitation of the 
Raja of Tanjore, established themselves perhaps at. Kaveri 
patnam in 1688 but abandoned it twenty years later. It was 
in 1738-39 that taking advantage of the Raja’s need for money 
and Chanda Sahib’s successful war against Tanjore that the 
French came to acquire Karikal, the fort of Cardangery and a 
large number of villages in the neighbourhood, which were 
added from time to time as the Raja of Tanjore took .succes¬ 
sive loans from the French. They had to pay an annual tribute 
of 2,000 pagodas to the Raja, which was entirely remitted by a 
treaty concluded between him and Chanda Sahib in 1749. 

After the Seven Years’ War Karikal and its dependent 
villages were restored by the English on the 18th. February 
1765. 1 Law de Lauriston took possession of Karikal first and 
established his administration there temporarily, as Pondicherry 
was in complete ruins. One great, point of controversy that 
arose at the time of the restitution of Karikal was about the 
annual tribute payable to the Raja of Tanjore, Law de Lauris- 
tou claiming that it had been remitted by the treaty of 1749 
and the English refusing to recognise that treaty. Law left 
soon after to take possession of Pondicherry, making over charge 
tp Fleurin. The settlement was successively administered by 
Le Comte, de Boistel, Hocquart, Dumirouet and Boistel again, 
till it was evacuated on the 9th August 1778 on the outbreak of 
war with the English. 

Karikal’s importance lay in the production of rice and it 
served as the granary of Pondicherry. But although the whole 
of Tanjore was extremely fertile, being intersected by many 
small rivers, in the French possessions agriculture suffered 
greatly and much of the lands remained uncultivated for lack 
of population. It was due principally, as Law pointed out in 
his memoire of 1767, to the religious policy of the French, which 
acted as a deterrent to attracting cultivators from the neighbour* 

1 The official documents relating to the restitution of Karikal are pre¬ 
served in the Pondicherry Archives mss. 5285 to 3289. 




THE IRENOH l\ INDIA 



<SL 


over-popu 1 ated areas, karikal, being very close to (lie sea 
and situated on a river in which even large vessels could enter 
throughout the year if the sand-bar at its mouth was cleared, 
offered great commercial advantages. “This settlement is 
necessary to the Company as much to help provisioning Pondi¬ 
cherry as for procuring cargoes for its ships. It is possible to 
draw from this place during a period of peace and by advancing 
money well in time diverse kinds of white and printed cloth, 
specially suitable for the commerce of the African coast, worth 
7 to 8 thousand livres.” The principal rivals of the French 
in this region were the Dutch at Negapatam; but although the 
English were not directly settled there, through their control 
over the Carnatic, of which Tunjore was a tributary state, the\ 
drew “much greater advantages than all the other nations.” 

Apart from commercial facilities. Karikal offered political 
advantages as well, in view of the not too friendly relations 
between the Raja of Tunjore and the English. As Law stated 

in his me moire of 1767, “Karikal.belonging to a 

Prince who perhaps cannot but be extremely jealous of the 
English power of which he finds himself a tributary vassal would 
make an establishment very suitable from the point of view 
of defence, specially if we had a fortified place there. It could 
serve as a general warehouse for all kinds of provisions and 
equipments necessary for a squadron.” Other advantages were 
that, “the roadstead is sufficiently good, the bar there is less 
strong than at Pondicherry, and besides there is this river in 
which loaded vessels can enter throughout the year, which is a 
great advantage.” It was not easy, however, to exploit the 
political advantages, since the English were as much masters of 
Tanjore as of the Carnatic. “We have a treaty with the king 
of Tanjore of nearly the same character as with Muhammad 
AH Khan. There is no question of any alliance, offensive or 
defensive. This Prince would not have been sorry to make 

it.but on the other hand, it being not possible to 

preserve the secret it may draw us into troubles with Muham¬ 
mad Ali Khan or rather with the English under his name”. 

Nor was anything done to fortify Karikal effectively cither 
by the Company or by the French Government which took over 
in 1770 in spite of the repeated advice of Law and Bellecombe 
in all their memoires . The small fort which the French had 




wmsr^ 



on the river before the war had been completely destroyed, 
and in 1765 the place was totally exposed. Law commented 
later, I do not see thai the Company has any intention of 
constructing the smallest work there.” Hie only defensive 
work built at Karikal alter its restitution was a small redoubt 
“which we have constructed in haste and where the small 
number of European residents can take refuge. It. can accom¬ 
modate at the most 40 men.” Not only were there no fortifica¬ 
tions, the garrison kept there was so inadequate in number as 
could offer little resistance to any surprise attack. There were 
$ officers, 30 European troops, 50 sepoys and five pieces of 
cannon, constituting all the artillery. “As regards the armoury, 
it is quite as brilliant as that of Pondicherry, sinev it contains 
nothing. The procrastination of the Company and of the 
French Government later resulted in the evacuation of the 
place on the <j.th August 1778 immediately after the news of 
the outbreak of war. 

Van am 

1 he settlement at Yanam dated from 1733, although it was 
abandoned for a few years before the time of Dupleix. It 
acquired considerable importance during the occupation of the 
Northern Sarkars by the French. After the treaty of 1763 
the settlement was handed over by the English to Jean Jacques 
Panon, authorised by Law, on the 15th May 1765. The official 
document relating to the transfer mentioned that the French 
were given back possession of the village of Yanam, the village 
of Cainpoupalam and the lands dependent on them “withexemp 
tion from all export and import duties”. 1 Soon after taking 
possession of the settlement Panon obtained a Patau ana from 
the ruler of Rajamundry granting the French full liberty of 
trade at Yanam. and another one from Nizam Ali calling upon 
the Zamindars of the Sarkar of Mustaphanagar not to hinder the 
commerce of the French. 2 Yanam was situated in the province 
of Pcttapur in the jurisdiction of the Raja of Rajamundry, a 

1 p A. ms. 5099. 

3 I hose and the earlier Patawanas are preserved in the Pondicherry 
Archives, mss. 3098. 5100. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


of the Subadar of the Deccan. The French had a modest 
building there, situated about a league from the sea, on a river 
in which only small vessels could enter. The establishment 
was very small, including Panon, the Chief, and four or five 
other employees. There were no fortifications or troops. 

The French trade at Yanam was not negligible. As Law 
stated in his mJmoire of 17(17, “It is from Yanaon that we get 
our best Guinees. It is possible to have a commerce here worth 
more than a million livres per year under circumstances more 
favourable than those in which we are placed now, but always 
by giving advances much earlier, what we have never been in a 
position to do. From this place are also procured teak wood, 
oils, rice and other grains both for men as well as for animals.” 
Apart from commerce Yanam had another importance, ‘the 
advantages which may be derived in a time of war from the 
alliances that we may conclude with several Rajas who sooner 
or later cannot fail to be dissatisfied with the English.” A 1 
though the English gained an effective control over the Sarkars, 
the settlement at Yanam enabled the French to enter into secret 
relations with the local chiefs. 


Masulipatam 

The settlement at Masulipatam dated as early as 16G0 and 
was the second earliest French establishment in India after 
Surat. VVe need not go into the details of the vicissitudes of 
fortune of the Masulipatam settlement. Suffice it to remember 
that it came into great prominence during the succession dis¬ 
putes in the Deccan, when Muzaffar Jang ceded to France the 
town of Masulipatam and its neighbouring villages, yielding 
a revenue of four and a half lakhs of rupees. This possession 
was lost to them after the recall of Bussy from the Deccan, and 
when the French returned to their settlement in 1765, Masuli- 
patam had become an English town. 1 

The building of the French settlement at Masulipatam, 
together with a village named Francepeth about two miles to 
the north west of the town, was handed over bv the English to 

1 All the j Formans and Parawanas relating to the French settlement 
at Masulipatam arc preserved in the Pondicherry Archives, mss. 5158-5170. 


OTHER FRENCH SETI’I.EMKNTS 

ques Panon on the 6 th May 1765* 
restitution, preserved in the Pondicherry Archives, drl 
not mention any right of exemption to the French from customs 
duties , 1 * and although Panon claimed the same trading privileges 
for the French as they had in January • 19 > die English refused 
t„ recognise the rights derived from earlier Farrmn and 
Parawanas .* The settlement was administered in succession by 
Mangin. Louyer and Perichon till it again fell into the hands 
of the English in 1778- 

The settlement house was a small building, situated on 
the river about half a league from the sea. i here wcie no 
fortifications or troops, and the French, completely at the mercy 
of the English, bad to restrict their commercial operations within 
limits allowed by them. 1 he value of the French trade did not 
go beyond 100,000 livres per year. Law in his mernoire of 
1767 estimated that "in a period of equilibrium between the 
European Powers it would be possible to procure irom Masuli 
pa tain printed cloth of all kinds worth 7 to 8 hundred thousand 
livres every year.” To the English Masulipatam was an impor 
tant market for their goods from Europe, like cloth, lead, < oppci. 
iron, coral, etc., because of the communication they had with 
all the commercial centres in the interior of the Deccan, which 
the French did not have. 

As at Yanarn, the settlement at Masulipatam had a political 
apart from its commercial importance. It enabled the French 

10 open secret communications with Nizam Ali, the Subadai 

of the Deccan, a “sworn enemy of the English.* 

it is only for that reason that it is convenient for us always to 
have somebody in these quarters in order to know everything 
that happens and to take advantage of the circumstances when 

11 will be possible for us.” 3 


1 P. A. ms. 5171. 

s/fcid, mss. 5174 aw! 5175; also C.R.O.— French in India Series, Vol 
VI. pp. 115-127. 

3 P A. ms. 100. 


<SL 

1 he official docu 



m jac 
ment of 



MWJSTfy, 


CHAPTER V 




DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS: CHEVALIER, MADEC, 
MODAVE AND GENTIL 

The two preceding chapters have dealt with the history 
of the French settlements in Lidia from 1765 to 1778 In the 
present and the two following ones we shall review the diplo¬ 
matic projects formed bv Frenchmen in India, including 
Governors and other officials as well as private adventurers in 
the service of the Indian Princes. There are in the Archives 
of Paris and Pondicherry hundreds of letters and memoires 
from Frenchmen in India dealing with such projects of diplo 
malic alliances and military operations. Many of them were 
no doubt absolutely chimerical; nevertheless in a detailed 
history of the French in India during this period it is neces¬ 
sary to notice how they felt, what they tried to achieve and the 
means they sought. Considering the amount of interest felt bv 
contemporary Frenchmen, it will not be out of place here to 
review the projects in some detail. For convenience of 
analysis, the various projects have been grouped into three 
sections: the first dealing with north India; the second dealing 
with the political memoires of two successive Governors of 
Pondicherry, Law de Lauriston and Bellecombe; and the third 
dealing with south India. In the first section we shall review 
the projects of Chevalier, Governor of Chandemagore, and of 
three military adventurers in the service of the Indian Princes, 
Madec, Modave and Gentil. 

Chevalier 

One of the most important persons who submitted projects 
to th French Government for diplomatic alliances and military 
operations in India was Jean Baptiste Chevalier, Governor of 
Chandemagore from 17G7 to 1778. T rained in the school of 
Law de Lauriston and possessing an intimate knowledge of 
north Indian politics, Chevalier was a most colourful personal¬ 
ity, with an optimism sometimes bordering on facile imaginative 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS- I 



ness and with a blind patriotism which on occasions brought 
on him ridicule even from his compatriots. He kept himself in 
constant touch with the Princes of north India and with the 
French military adventurers scattered all over the sub-continent, 
intrigued at every Darbar , and never doubted for a moment that 
it was possible for France even at that late hour to drive the 
English out of Bengal with the help of some of the Indian 
Princes. At an earlier period, when the English had not vet 
become (irmly entrenched In Bengal, an energetic man like 
Chevalier might have achieved much in furthering French 
political influence in north India. But, unfortunately for him 
and for his country, he came ten years too late, when the English 
had already established their firm grip on Bengal, Bihar and 
Oudh, and France had fallen into a strange state of lethargy 
in colonial matters as a result of the frustration of her earlier 
efforts. Under the circumstances all that Chevalier could do 
was to carry on secret pourparlers with the north Indian Princes 
for an alliance with Franca* and a combined attack on Bengal 
(just an alluring mirage), and to write frantic letters to the 
Government in Paris to send immediate and large-scale military 
assistance to these shadowy allies,—letters which down to the 
death of Louis XV did not receive even the scantiest attention 
in Paris and remained for the most part unanswered. As a 
consequence. Chevalier had to suffer the disappointment of 
ending his career as a mere intriguer, and although the English 
in Bengal considered him as their most dangerous enemy, to 
his own countrymen he remained a ridiculous figure who merely 
put forward fantastic projects. 

In the preceding chapter we have seen how for some time 
after assuming charge of the French possessions in Bengal 
Chevalier tried to secure his national interests by a polk) of 
friendly and amicable relations with the English. He was i 
very pleasing and genial host, and his palace at Goretty, near 
Chandernagore . 1 was the rendezvous of most of the Calcutta 
celebrities of the time, including the Governor. For a time 
the policy of personal contact succeeded, but in 17% there was a 
sudden setback and the English grew increasingly jealous of 

1 Goretty was separated troin Chimdemagore by a small snip of terri¬ 
tory not belonging to the French. 


vwisr/fy 


IHE FRENCH IN INDIA 

ir. recovery of ihc French fac tories in Bengal. I he 
defensive canal round Chandernagore was forcibly filled up. 
and the English used their political power in the Province to 
obstruct French trade and commerce despite the provisions of 
the treaty of 176$. On several occasions they even went to the 
extreme and used physical violence against, the employees ol 
the French Company in the subordinate factories. They sub 
jected all French ships moving up the Ganges to a humiliating 
search and they put every difficulty they could in the way of 
the French procuring supplies of cotton goods, opium and salt 
petre, the principal articles of commerce in the Province. When 
repeated protests to Calcutta failed to secure respect for treaty 
provisions, Chevalier turned as a last, resort to the north Indian 
Princes and tried to form an anti-English coalition strengthen¬ 
ed by French troops. 

A connected account of Chevalier’s diplomatic intrigues in 
the different north Indian Darbars and the policy he wanted 
France to pursue in order to drive the English out of Bengal 
may be gathered from the large mass of letters he wrote to the 
Ministry in Paris from 1769 to 1778. 1 We may discern three 
distinct periods in hfs ideas about French intervention in Indian 
politics: the first from 1769 to the installation of Shah Alain 
on the Imperial throne at Delhi in 1 77 2 ^ second from i 77 2 

to the broaching of the Tatta project in 1774; and the third 
from 1775 to 1778. when all diplomatic projects were cut short 
by the sudden outbreak of war and the prompt capture ot 
Chandernagore b\ ihe English. In the first period Chevalier s 
policy was rather vague and not based on any definite line of 
action. He thought in a general way that the rapid expan 
sion of English power had so much antagonised the north 
Indian Princes that it was quite an easy task to combine all 
of them in a joint attack on Bengal, provided they were assured 
of French military and naval assistance. Chevalier did not 
think yet of any concrete alliance with one or two important 
Powers but wanted to gain thy co-operation of every possible 
ally,—the old Nawab family of Dacca, dispossessed of its rule 
over Bengal by Alivardi Khan: the existing Nawab of Mur- 
s hi da bad, a puppet of the English, but believed to be chafing 




the e( 


1 B.N.F.Fr (N.A.) 9366. 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS' - 1 




under their control: Mir Kasim, the ex-Nawab of Bengal, who 
was making frantic efforts all over north India to gain military 
assistance for the re-conquest of the Province from the English; 
Shuja-ud daulah, the Nawab of Oudh, who, although an ally 
of the English after the treaty of 1765, was smarting under the 
humiliation of defeat; the Maratha ruler of Berar and Cuttack, 
Janoji, desirous of extending his power over Bengal, and the 
three Maratha Chiefs, Sindhia, Holkar and Visaji Krishna, wlio 
had been sent to north India with a formidable army to restore 
rhe lost Maratha influence in that region and who found their 
path barred by the expansion of English power during the 
interval of the eclipse of Maratha authority after iy6i. It is 
difficult to understand how Chevalier could have combined into 
even a loose coalition all these assorted elements having con¬ 
flicting interests and divided by sharp jealousies and suspicions. 
Anyway, he thought he could do it, provided only that France 
came out with an assurance of military and naval assistance 
to the Indian allies. One significant thing to notice is that 
during the first period he did not attach any political importance 
to the Mughal Emperor, Shah Alain, then living at Allahabad 
as a pensioner of the English, and did not want to include him 
in the ring of French allies. 

In the second period, from 1772 to 1774, Chevaliers policy 
took a more definite and concrete shape. He dropped the idea 
of a number of heterogeneous allies and concentrated on a 
solid alliance with the Mughal Emperor, Shah Alain, now 
installed at Delhi. He advocated a policy of strengthening the 
hands of the Emperor and enabling him to assert his authority 
over his former vassals, who had assumed virtual independence, 
by lending him 5,000 French troops and organising a latge sepoy 
force trained and armed in the European fashion. In that case 
the mere extension of the Emperor’s authority would mean 
an extension of French political influence in north India, and 
when the opportune moment would come, there could be 
launched a joint attack on Bengal by land and naval forces. 
Chevalier made repeated representations to the French Govern¬ 
ment to send immediately 5,000 troops to the assistance of the 
Emperor. But although he meant only to strengthen the hands 
of the Emperor and not to launch an immediate attack on 
Bengal, the French Government felt, and with good reason, 


WHiSTffy 



I IIF FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


;a i Ik despatch of 5,000 troops to Delhi, even as volunteers 
joining the Imperial service, would be at once regarded by 
the English as a casus belli. So the French Government, un¬ 
willing to re-open hostilities on the Indian issue, turned a deaf 
ear to the urgent representations of Chevalier. The latter 
next tried to achieve his purpose by collecting round the 
Emperor all the French military adventurers scattered in 
different parts of India. But while he succeeded in attaching 
Madec to the service of the Emperor with his whole contingent, 
the French troops in the service of the Nawab of Oudh, of 


Basalat Jang, of Haidar Ali and of ti e numerous petty Princes 
all over the country refused to join the Imperial service merely 
for the uncertain prospect of extending French political influ¬ 
ence in north India. 

In the third period, from 1775 to 1778. Chevalier changed 
his plan to obviate the difficulty of English opposition. The 
new plan was based on a solid alliance with the Emperor and 
the cession of the province of Tatta or Sirnl to the French. 

I he French were to keep a large garrison in Tatta and lend a 
small corps of troops to the Emperor. In case of necessity the 
whole body of French troops st itioned in the newly acquired 
territory could move on to Delhi, effect a junction with the 
Imperial forces and swoop clown on Bengal. The advantage 
of this plan over the previous one was that since Tatta was 
situated far away from the English possessions in India, the 
English were not likely to oppose the landing of French troops 
there with the same vehemence with which they would oppose 
the sending of 5,000 French troops direct to Delhi. The plan, 
in fact, was conceived not by Chevalier but by Madec whom 
he had persuaded a few years back to give up the service of 
the Jats and join the Emperor. But once Madec had forwarded 
the plan, Chevalier took it up with great enthusiasm and sent 
urgent representations to the French Government to accept 
the terms of alliance proposed through Madec by the Emperor 
himself. Fortunately for him, there was a fresh vigour in 
French administration from 1776, and for the first time the 
representations of Chevalier received due attention in Paris. 
But even then the French Government moved very slowly, 
much valuable time was lost in weighing the pros and cons 
of the project, and when at last in 1778 it sent Col. Montigny 


MIN/Sr/jy 



to India to give a final report on the Tatta project, two essential 
requirements for its successful execution had disappeared. 
Chandernagore had fallen into the hands of the English, and 
Chevalier had been arrested. Madec also had left the Imperial 
service in disappointment at the lack of encouragement from 
France, and with his departure from Delhi the French lost 
whatever political influence they had there. Let us now see 
in more detail the diplomatic projects of Chevalier in their 
three distinct phases from his own letters to the Ministry in 
Paris. 

The first time that Chevalier drew the attention of the 
French Government to the political situation in north India and 
held out the prospect of an anti English coalition was in a 
letter to the Minister of Marine and Colonies, Due de Praslin, 
dated 10th January, 1769. 1 After complaining about the 
tyranny and constant vexation of the English in Bengal, 
Chevalier stated that the Nawab had been so completely under 
their control that all the letters he wrote to Murshidabad, the 
capital of Bengal, were sent, to Calcutta where the replies were 
drafted. But at the same time Chevalier felt that at heart the 
Nawab was friendly towards the French and was willing to 
secure their alliance to rid himself of the yoke of the English. 
“If there remain any credit and authority with him he would 
soon give us the most convincing proofs of his goodwill. Even 

the Emperor .does not speak of the French except 

with respect and admiration. He regards them as being destined 
to be his liberators from captivity, and all the Princes of 
Indoustan have the same sentiment. There is not one among 
them who is not ready to employ his forces and his money in 
our favour as soon as he finds us declare against the English . 
Chevalier then suggested that if France ever thought of inter¬ 
vention in India, the best means of combining the Indian 
Princes against the English was to send an expeditionary force 
to Bengal. “It is at Chatigan that our troops should land; 
there would be no reason to fear the opposition of the English, 
as they would be fully occupied in defending their frontiers 
against the Marathas and other Princes who could be induced 
by us to draw them there and keep them engaged*’. 

1 B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9306, pp. 19. 

I 



mtsrfiy 



In a letter dated March 15, 1769 1 Chevalier gave a more 
detailed plan of operations in Bengal and showed the ease with 
which allies could be procured against the English. “The 
Muslim Government at Dacca is without force and is animated 
by hatred against the English. Therefore* far from offering 
any resistance it will surrender to us, specially if we take 
care to declare ourselves as liberators”. Once the French had 
captured Dacca, Chevalier recommended that they should 
liberate the descendants of Sarfaraz Khan, the old Nawab of 
Bengal. The house of Sarfaraz Khan was very popular, and 
although the Princes of the family could not render any material 
help, Chevalier believed that “it would be sufficient to put 
forward their names, and we shall draw from this phantom 
all the advantages that we may be in need of. We shall summon 

the Nawab of Moxoudabad to place himself on our side. 

The beginning would be made by proclaiming at Dacca the 

eldest son of Safrescan, named Aga Baba.He would 

then be recognised in all the parts of the Province lying to 

the cast of the Ganges.We would not leave at peace 

the part lying to the west unless the Nawab of Moxoudabad 
allies himself with us. From that moment the war would be 
finished quicklv, and we shall suddenly find ourselves having 

reached our goal.The Nawab would help us not with 

forces, because he does not have any, but with money, credit 

and influence.We can count on Sojadaolah. 

who is only waiting for the favourable moment to declare him¬ 
self on our side.W T e can equally count on the deposed 

Emperor; he docs not have any troops, but his name would 
always be of great weight in facilitating all our intrigues and 
our policy”. Chevalier then referred to the friendly overtures 
he had received from the Maratha ruler of Bcrar and Cuttack. 
“The Chief of the Marathas of Katek, sworn enemies of the 
English, had made overtures to me in writing and had proposed 
to leave us half of Bengal or an equivalent annual revenue il 
I would furnish him men and munitions for the conquest of 
Bengal. I have eluded the request by honest pretexts”. The 
other Princes of the country had also made offers of alliance to 
Chevalier. “Only the pleasure of being able to satisfy their 


* R.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9:^66, pp. 10 24. 









mtsr/fy 



hatred against the English would draw these people to co¬ 
operation with us.Jhere is not a soul in Bengal who 

would not make any contribution to facilitate, through our 
medium, the total expulsion of the English. I hey are only 
waiting for a favourable occasion, and it is in the French that 
they put all their confidence’. 

Writing to the Controller-General of Finance on February 
2\, 1770,* Chevalier reiterated his view' that the Princes of 
India were ready to combine together and join with the French 
in an attempt to drive the English out of Bengal, 
restrains them and none has the courage to be the first to raise 
the standard of Liberty. They content themselves with sighs 
for the French and desire to see them declare themselves openly 

in order to rally round their standard at once.If ever 

we carry the war to this country, we shall find here as many 
allies as there are Princes”. 

In a letter dated January 6, 177 1, 3 addressed to the Minister 
of Marine, Chevalier again referred to the overtures he had 
received from the Marathas, Mir Kasim and the Emperor, and 
recommended the despatch of pooo troops from the Isle of 
France to be lent to these Powers. That would enable the 
French to fight as auxiliaries of the Indian Princes, although 
legally France and England remained at peace in Europe. The 
English could not object to this policy as they themselves had 
followed it in the past. “The Marathas know the superiority 
of Europeans to their own troops, and for that reason they 
desire to have a certain number of Europeans to oppose the 
English. As a result. Janoji, one of the principal Maratba 
Princes, with whom 1 have always been in contact and whose 
territories border on Bengal, has written to me to sound my 
intentions and to know if 1 would like to furnish him a corpv 
of seven to eight hundred men with arms and artillery, while 
offering to advance me all the expenses. This request has 
again been supported by three other Chiefs who command all 
the forces camped near Delhi, numbering 200,000 cavalry, and 
I have been assured that the Emperor himself would write to 
me to persuade me to agree to the request and to join our 

» B .N.i'.Fr. (N.A.) 9366. pp. « 5' s 9 

2 Ibid, pp. 77-104. 



VWSTk 



fortes to his by a treaty. He is not unaware of the large 
number of troops rhat we have in the Isle of France and seems 
to have based his expectations on that*'. To these overtures 
Chevalier had replied in an evasive manner, but in order to 
maintain close relations with the Powers for use in future he 
thought it necessary to send French agents to the various 
Darbars . Visage, a surgeon by profession and later to enter 
the service of Shuja*ud*daulah, was sent to Janoji and was 
further entrusted with letters for the other principal Maratha 
Chiefs as also for Mir Kasim. Another person, du Jarday, 
formerly an employee of ihe French East India Company at 
Pondicherry, was sent to Delhi in the guise of a Muslim. He 
was to meet the Emperor and the three Maratha Chiefs there 
and was to send information regarding their projects. Chevalier 
next referred to the ease with which French troops could be 
maintained in India at no cost to France. “It is easy to main¬ 
tain, without having to spend a sou, a thousand men under 
Janogy, an equal number under Kashim All, and about three 

times the number under the Emperor.By this means 

we would acquire the alliance of all the Princes, their friend¬ 
ship, their protection, and in addition a part of their riches. 
Excellent officers could be employed under the different Princes 
for organising sepoys and training them in our exercises and 
manoeuvres”. 

In the second period, after the restoration of Shah Alam 
at Delhi, Chevalier’s policy took a more definite and concrete 
shape. An alliance with the Emperor and strengthening his 
authority by placing a body of French troops at his service 
became the corner-stone of his diplomacy. An alliance wit! 
the Emperor was all the more useful to France since he was 
supported by the Marathas, the strongest Power in India and 
the only one likely to have the courage to attack the English 
position in Bengal. So from the beginning of 1772 Chevalier 
made pressing representations to the Government in Paris to 
conclude an alliance with the Emperor and send 5,000 troops 
to his assistance. At the same time he also made frantic efforts 
to rally round the Emperor all the French military adventurers 
scattered in different parts of India. While he failed in the 
case of those who were in the sendee of Shuja-ud-dau 1 ah and 
Basal at Jang he succeeded in persuading Madec to give up the 



MIN/Sr^ 



service of the Jat Raja and join the Emperor even at a great 
personal loss. It is interesting to notice that while in his 
letters to the Minister Chevalier repeatedly stated that it was 
the Emperor who was asking for French military assistance, 
in his letters to Madec persuading him to join the Imperial 
service he wrote that his main purpose was ihat once in the 
confidence of the Emperor Madec could induce him to take in 
his service a body of French troops. 

In his first letter dated January 20, 1772, Chevalier urged 
Madec to join the service of the Emperor and to induce him 
to accept two to three thousand French troops from the army 
stationed in the Isle of France. 1 It was followed by a second 
one, dated July 34, 1772, in which Chevalier wrote that the 
Indian Princes were getting impatient of English tyranny and 
could be persuaded to welcome French troops as liberators. 
The person most wronged by the English was the Emperor, 
and Madec was to turn to him first and inform him that 
Chevalier could send to his assistance any number of French 
troops that he might want. Du Jar day, whom Chevalier had 
sent to the Emperor, was to give Madec full details of his 
diplomatic project. 2 In the third letter, dated August 16, 
1772, Chevalier again urged Madec to enter the Imperial service, 
get into the confidence of the Emperor and press upon him 
the utility of a corps of French troops. 3 Then came the most 
pressing call from Chevalier which finally decided Madec. 
“Leave the service of the Raja as quickly as you can and join 
the Emperor. Once near him, you will show him the necessity 
of augmenting your corps and how much it will be for his 
safety, and then it will be for him 10 supply the necessary 
funds/' 4 

The first time that Chevalier definitely proposed the des 
patch of French troops to the assistance of the Emperor was in a 
letter to the Minister dated August 30, 1772. 5 After stating 
the change in the Indian political situation brought about by 
the restoration of the Emperor at Delhi with the help of the 

1 Barb£ — Le Nabob Rene Madec, p. 61. 

2 tbid > PP* 73*75* 

3 Ibid, pp. 78 80. 

* Ibid, pp. 82 83. 

* B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9366, p. 133. 


mtsrqy 


THF. FRENCH IN INDIA 




Marathas, Chevalier wrote that the Emperor had asked hint 
if he could procure a body ol 5,000 1' re rich troops fot his 
service. But, as we have seen already, the initiative really 
came from Chevalier himself. Anyway, the attitude of the 
Minister was extremely discouraging. He was entirely opposed 
to giving any provocation to the English 1 2 forming alliances 
with the country Powers. In a letter ( .ced September 29, 
1772 Chevalier expressed great surprise and resentment at this 
attitude and recommended, that the best course for the french 
was to quit India completely rather than show their humiliation 
and impotence to the country Powers. 

In spite of the rebuff, however, Chevalier did not remain 
inactive but pursued his old policy of forming diplomatic 
alliances with some of the country Powers in the hope of ulti 
timely being able to bring the French Government to his point 
of view. Through the efforts of his agent at Delhi, du Jarday. 
terms of alliance with the Maratha Chief Mahadaji Sindhia 
were drawn up. which were communicated by Chevalier to the 
Minister in his letter dated February to, >773 " teuns * n 

substance were: (t) in case of a war between the French and 
the English Sindhia was to declare himself an ally of France; 
(x) if there arrived a French expeditionary force in India 
Sindhia would join it with his forces; (3) the Marathas would 
conduct the French army if landed on the Orissa or Gujarat 
Coast, and would supply free of cost provisions and animals for 
transport; (4) if the English were driven out of Bengal the 
Peshwa was to get back all that legitimately belonged to lum; 
(5) the two parties would remain permanently allied; (6) the 
treaty must be ratified by their respective sovereigns. 

On February 28, 1773 Chevalier wrote a long letter to the 
Minister of Marine and Colonies, de Boynes, giving details of 
the political situation at Delhi and the results of his negotia 
tions, and reiterated once more his demand lor a body ol 
French troops for the assistance of the Emperor. 3 After narrat¬ 
ing the course of events which led to a dispute between the 
Emperor and his former allies, the Marathas. the sanguinan 


1 B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 0366, p. 136* 

2 Ibid, p. 137 

J Ibid, pp. 1^8*147. 



battle in the capital, and the severe treaty imposed by the 
Marathas, Chevalier wrote that even when the Emperor was 
forsaken by all, it was necessary for France to come to his help 
and strengthen his authority by lending him a body of troops. 
He was doing all that he could to persuade French military 
adventurers, scattered in different parts of the country, to join 
the Imperial service “1 have induced the French party under 
Basalat Jang, commanded by Zephir anc since his death by 
Gard£, to offer its services to the Fmperor. For this purpose 
I have sent sieur Mottereau to Delhi, where he is to negotiate 
this matter. It may be regarded as concluded if the Emperor 
agrees to pay the expenses both for the maintenance as well as 
for the transport of troops. They consist of 600 Europeans, 
well-armed and disciplined, 900 Topasses (of mixed European 
and Indian descent), 4,000 sepoys trained and armed in the 
European fashion and a train of 12 pieces of artillery". It 
may be noticed here that this plan of Chevalier never material¬ 
ised, and although the exact reason is not known it may be 
presumed that the fundamental difficulty lay in the financial 
distress of the Emperor. Chevalier went on narrating how by 
his persuasions Madec with his corps of 200 European and 
3,000 sepoys had abandoned the service of the Jat Raja and 
had joined the Emperor, how he acquired great influence and 
credit ai the Imperial Court, how he fought bravely against 
the Marathas in defence of the Emperor, and how after the 
battle he retained the confidence of the Emperor and at the 
same time earned the respect of the Marathas. Chevalier felt 
confident that if given marks of official recognition by the 
French Government, a patriotic and enterprising person like 
Madec could be of immense use in furthering national interests. 

In the next letter, dated April 15, 1773/ Chevalier informed 
the Minister that he had received an envoy from the Emperor 
and the Marathas with solicitations to join the common cause. 
The envoy had also brought the treaty proposed by the 
Marathas, the terms of which appeared to Chevalier quite 
advantageous from the French point of view. The French 
would not be put to any expense for the 5,000 troops to be 
supplied, and in addition they would be granted, complete 


4 B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9366, pp. 148 157. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


rcedoin of trade throughout Hindu,sthan. If they joined the 
coalition as auxiliaries they might be given possession of Bengal 
in the same way as the English held it, provided they paid thirty 
lakhs of rupees annually to the Emperor and twenty-five lakhs 
to the Marathas. In short, Chevalier considered the treaty to 
he a satisfactory basis for effecting a political revolution in 
north India, absolutely necessary in the interest of French trade 
and commerce. But the crux of the difficulty lay, as Chevalier 
should have understood, in the financial distress of the 
Emperor; and in a letter dated October 3, 1773 1 Chevalier 
complained that while the Emperor repeatedly asked for French 
troops he made no move at all to advance money for the 
purpose. The political calculations of Chevalier Were totally 
upset by the sudden outbreak of dissension at Poona, and in 
a lerter dated February 2, 1774 2 he informed the Minister that 
the Maratha Chiefs had hurriedly returned to their capital, 
leaving the Emperor alone The Emperor’s envoy had gone 
back to Delhi, and no further move could be taken with respect 
to his proposal for French troops unless he advanced money to 
rover the expenses. Another loss to the French was the death 
of Janoji, but Chevalier maintained close relations with his 
successor Mudaji. 

The correspondence of Chevalier became less frequent 
during 1774-75, no doubt because of the repeated disappoint¬ 
ments he received from the Government in Paris since the first 
representation he made in 1769 for the despatch of a body of 
French troops to the assistance of the Indian Princes. In a 
letter dated January 23. 1775 Chevalier expressed his regret 
that the inactivity of the French had allowed the English to 
gain increasing predominance in the different Durbars, and if 
things continued like that, in a few years’ time the French 
would be turned out completely and England would rule over 
India like a despot. He then proposed that if nothing was 
going to be done to stop the progress of English power in 
India, it was better for the French to leave India at once with¬ 
out exposing themselves to further humiliation. 3 


1 B.N.V.Fr. (N.A.) 9366 pp. 158-166. 

2 lbid, pp. 192*196. 

3 Ibid, pp 233-236., 


mtSTQy 



It was towards the end of 1775 Madia: put forward 

his project for an alliance with the Mughal Emperor on the 
basis of the cession of the province of Tatta or Sind to France. 
For the next two and a half years the Tatta project held the 
attention of the French Government and of other persons who 
were interested in the matter of restoring I rench influence in 
India. There were two reasons for the I atta project to have 
received more consideration from the Government than the 
earlier plan of Chevalier The first was the change of adminis¬ 
tration, lethargic do Boynes being succeeded by the more entei* 
prising de Sartine at the Ministry of Marine and Colonies. 
The second was that the Tatta project was an improvement on 
Chevalier’s earlier plan and was less likely to rouse the suscep 
tibilities of the English since Tatta lay far ofl from the existing 
English possessions in India. It is not a little surprising that 
while making repeated representations to Paris for an alliance 
with the Emperor and for the despatch of a body of French 
troops to his assistance, an astute person like Chevalier did not 
think of a means by which the opposition of the English could 
he eliminated, and conceded to Madec the credit of a project 
which in essence was the same as his with one important im 
provement, namely a territorial cession to France in an area 
lying far off from the English possessions. Anyway, although 
Madec was the originator of the project, it was at once accepted 
by Chevalier with enthusiasm, and in fact without Chevalier s 
support Madecs plan would not have received any considera¬ 
tion in France. 

The full details of the Tatta project will be found in the 
next section relating to Madee’s diplomacy. Here wc need 
only indicate the broad outline of the plan and the efForts of 
Chevalier to put it into execution. I he basis of the project 
was the cession of the town and province of I atia to France 
by the Mughal Emperor in return for a solid alliance. That 
would give the French an opportunity to maintain a large body 
of troops in the ceded territory and a small corps in the direct 
Nervice of the Emperor to help him in establishing his authority 
over his recalcitrant vassals. When the opportune moment 
arrived, the entire lx>dy of French troops maintained in 1 atta 
could be moved on to Delhi, where they would be joined by 
the Imperial troops, and the combined forces could make a 



sudden attack on Bengal. In order to keep the matter a close 
secret the Emperor asked Madec to write to the French Govern 
inent direct without going through the official channel of 
Chevalier, but Madec realised that he did not have sufficient 
standing for carrying on negotiations independently. So from 
the beginning he approached Chevalier for his active support, 
and in fact it was the representations of Chevalier which were 
responsible for the serious consideration given to the f atta 
project in France. But things moved very slowly, and for the 
whole of 1776 and the early part of 1777 Chevalier did not 
receive any response from 1 'ranee. In a letter dated August n, 
1776 he urged the immediate necessity of accepting the Tatta 
proposal and warned the Government that the Emperor was 
losing courage and patience. 1 As late as kebruary * 7 // 
Chevalier remained without any hope. In a letter to Due de 
Ghoiseul, dated February 8, 1777 he wrote. “All that I write 
remain unanswered, which proves a very mortifying indifference 
towards me and a lack of confidence in my talents and capacity 

.1 wish that the arrival of Monsieur Law in France will 

make known how much important it is to take into the most 
serious consideration the question of India. 

It was only about the middle of 1777 that Chevalier received 
the first favourable response from Paris, and in a letter to the 
Minister, dated August 31. he wrote that as soon as he received 
definite orders he would send des Blot tieres on a reconnoitring 
voyage to Tatta.* But there was again a prolonged silence. 
Even as late as February 18, 177® we find Chevalier reg* ’tLing 
in a letter to the Minister the dilatory policy of the Govern 
meat and warning him that unless steps were taken promptly 
the French would be totally expelled from the country* l he 
thing was that after long deliberations the French Government 
decided at the end of 1777 to send out Col. Montigny to see 
things for himself and report on the feasibility of the Tatta 
project. In the meantime one essential factor for the success 

< B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9366. pp. 275-279. 

» Ccnlil MHnoires sur l' Indousto ;• ou Empire Mogol, pp. 4*5‘4*”- 

1 A.N.— Colonies: Scrie Noire, Vol. 34: see also Chevalier’s letter to 
the Minister, dated 15U1 December 1777. m connection with the mission 
of l)esblotti£res—B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9366, pp 189-290. 

* B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9366, pp. 289-290 




MIN ISTfy 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS ’—t 

of the project was removed by the departure of 
Madec from north ludia in 1777, in sore disappointment at the 
lack of response to his proposal. Madec bitterly complained 
to Chevalier for having received no letter from him since he 
first put forward his proposal in 1775. But. as will he evident 
from the correspondence of Chevalier given in the next section, 
it was not because of Chevalier’s negligence but because of 
circumstances over which he had no control that Madec did 
not receive any letter from him. In fact, Chevalier sent a 
personal agent named Montvert with letters for the Emperor 
and his Minister, and Montvert was instructed to work in 
accord with Madec and carry through negotiations with the 
Emperor. Montvert failed in his duty; he did not proceed to 
his destination and did not even inform Madec about the object 
of his mission. That was why Madec was kept completely in 
the dark till April 1777. when he received the first communica¬ 
tion from Chevalier, informing him of the favourable attitude 
of the French Government towards his Tatta project. 1 But it 
was then too late, Madec could not be shaken from his decision 
to quit north India; the Emperor had also changed his mind 
and negotiations had to be started afresh. 

The prospect of a successful execution of the Tatta pioject 
was finally removed by the outbreak of war between France 
and England and the sudden capture of Chandernagore on 
July 10, 1778. Lt Col. Dow, who was sent from Calcutta to 
seize the French settlement, was particularly instructed to arrest 
Chevalier, regarded by the English as their most dangerous 
enemy. But Chevalier escaped from his house through the 
help of his wife. Three weeks later, however, he was arrested 
at Cuttack by the Maratha Governor of the place and handed 
over to the English. It was an irony of fate that Chevalier was 
betrayed by the agent of an Indian Prince on whom he had 
counted so much in his diplomatic intrigues. He was later 
released on parole and permitted to return to Europe. Back 
in France at the end of 1779. Chevalier tried once more to 
persuade the Government to accept his views about the plan 
of military operations in India, but by that time he had fallen 
into political disgrace and lost all credit in Government circles. 

1 Bar hi Lr Nabob Rene Madec, p ail. 




executi 


mi mr/}y 



All his plans regarding diplomatic alliances and military 
operations in India were treated with contempt, and in spite 
of In's long experience in India and his intimate knowledge of 
the Indian political situation he was not even consulted when 
the French Government decided to send out an expeditionary 
iorcc under Btissy in i7$id One thing that rnay be said in 
conclusion about Chevalier is that whatever discredit he might 
have earned by his unrealistic approach to the Indian political 
situation, there cannot be any doubt about the sincerity of his 
patriotic fervour; and therefore the political disgrace into 
wdiich he fell after his return to France had everything tragic 
about it. 

Madec 

Chevalier’s project centred on an alliance with the Mughal 
Emperor and the despatch of a large body of French troops to 
Delhi with the immediate object of re-establishing his authority 
over his vassals and the ultimate one of making a joint attack 
on Bengal. I he main difficulty of this project was that the 
despatch of a large body of French troops to Delhi was sure to 
be regarded by the English as a direct threat to their own 
position in Bengal. Objection on this ground was raised by 
both Law at Pondicherry and the Minister of Marine and Colo¬ 
nies. de Boynes, in Paris. A variation of Chevalier’s project 
was put forward by Madcc, one of the most famous French 
adventurers in the service of the Indian Princes. To be sure, 
Madec got his inspiration from Chevalier, but for whose 
patriotic exhortations he would probably have ended his career 
as a mere military adventurer and would not have taken any 
part in political negotiations. To be sure again, Madec’s pro¬ 
ject was essentially the same as Chevalier’s, namely strengthen¬ 
ing the authority of the Mughal Emperor with a large body 
of French troops, with the ultimate object of attacking the 
English in Bengal. The difference lay in that Madec tried to 
obviate the opposition of the English by securing from the 
Emperor a grant of the province of Tatta or Sind, situated far 
away from the English possessions in India, where the main 

1 B.N.F.Fr. (N A.) 9366, pp. 305.309. 


mtST/fy 



body of the French troops would be kept while a very small 
force would be maintained at Delhi in the direct service of 
the Emperor. English suspicion would be lulled into sleep, 
and when the favourable moment (or action would arrive, the 
entire French forces in the province of I atta could be taken to 
Delhi and employed in a large-scale invasion of Bengal from 
the north, while at the same time a 1 rench fleet moving up the 
Ganges would lay siege to Calcutta. I hus Madec s plan was 
calculated to take away the opposition of Law and dr Boynes 
to Chevalier's project. 

Ren6 Madec, like most of the French adventurers of the 
period, first came to India during the time of Dupleix and 
fought in the Carnatic wars. He was taken prisoner after the 
fall of Pondicherry in 1761. and gained his release by taking 
service under the English. He fought, on the side of the 
English against Mir Kasim at Rajmahal, but at heart he wanted 
an opportunity to escape and take to the career of a militan 
adventurer. He got his opportunity during the first mutiny in 
the English sepoy force on the eve of the battle of Buxar, 
escaped with some of his compatriots and took service under 
Shuja-ud-daulah, the Nawab of Oudh. He was wounded at 
the battle of Buxar and was later dismissed by Shuja-ud-daulah 
under English pressure. Madec then found employment first 
under Ghaziuddin Khan, son of the famous IVazir, and then 
under the Rohillas, and finally joined the Jats in 1767. 1 Ft 
was while in the service of the Jats that Madec came under the 
influence of Chevalier, who was thinking of strengthening the 
authority of the Mughal Emperor by the adhesion of the 
numerous French soldiers scattered in different parts of India. 

Chevalier's first letter to Madec was dated 2nd April ^ 77 1 - 
Madec was exhorted to work as an agent of France md not 
merely as the chief of a private army, and he was assured of 
official recognition and reward for any service that he m.ght 
render to the nation. There was a long gap, and the second 
letter that Madec received was dated 20th January 1 77 s? * 2 ^ or 
the first time Chevalier asked him to join the service of the 

1 For an account of the early career of Madec, see BarW: Le Nabob 
Hen A Madec, pp. 1-44. 

2 Ibid, p. 61. 


UWlST/fy 



Mughal Emperor and to he ready to invade Bengal with the 
Imperial and Maratha forces. The third letter was dated 24th 
July 1772, in which Chevalier made a pressing request to Madcc 
to join the Imperial service immediately without caring for any 
personal sacrifice. He was also asked to confer with du Jarday, 
whom Chevalier was sending to the Delhi Court for negotia¬ 
tions. 1 

Madcc was placed in a difficult position by the march of 
the Imperial arms against the Jats. If he fought against the 
Emperor he would upset the diplomatic project of Chevalier; 
if on the other hand, he deserted the Jats and went over to 
the Emperor he would lose his arrears of salary amounting to 
two lakhs of rupees. But while he was secretly negotiating 
with the Emperor, he received another pressing letter from 
Chevalier: “Leave the service of thc’(Jat) Raja as early as you 

can and attach yourself to the Emperor.The thing is 

how to raise the Nation from its past misfortunes and to revive 
its glory and splendour. Begin then preparations for it, and I 
count very much on you for succeeding in an object as prais- 
worthy and as glorious’'." Madec gave his reactions in his 
Me moires in the following words: “I was too flattered that the 
Government believed me to be capable of deciding the fate 
of my Nation in India not to show him (Chevalier) on my 

side rny eagerness to support his views with all my efforts. 

At last th repeated solicitations of M. Chevalier and my love 
for rny country made me soon forget the debt due to me by the 
fats.” He at once concluded negotiations with the Emperor 
and passed into his service on a salary of Rs. 40,000 per month 
with a title of nobility. 3 

Thus out of patriotic: motives Madec left the Jats, sacrific¬ 
ing the arrears of salary due to him amounting to two lakhs of 
rupees, and in November 1772 entered the Imperial service. He 
remained there only for three months and suffered the loss of 
his entire camp during the Maratha attack on Delhi. But his 
personal reputation was enhanced by his stubborn defence and 
he was offered a very lucrative employment under Sindhia, the 

* Barb6-~£* Nabob Ruie Madec. pp. 73 * 75 * 

2 Ibid, pp. 82-8$. 

• IMd, PP- 33-84. 




MIN IST/ff, 


DIPLOMA nc PROJF< TS — f 



chief of the Maratha forces in north India. Although the offer 
was accepted, the repeated personal misfortunes and the lack 
of any response from the French Government to Chevalier's 
diplomatic project, which had inspired him to offer his services 
to the Mughal Emperor, so discouraged Madec that at the end 
of February 1773 he decided to quit India and return to France. 
He, however, tried to safeguard the interest of the nation and 
the success of Chevalier’s project by leaving his corps intact in 
Sindhia’s service under the command of Chevalier’s agent, du 
Jarday. 1 

Madec finally left the camp of Sindhia in June 1773, and 
passing through the Jar country he reached the territory of the 
Raja of Gohad who received him warmly. But from there he 
was not allowed to proceed further bv the strong remonstrances 
of Chevalier. His presence at Delhi and his active collabora¬ 
tion formed the very foundation of the plan proposed by 
Chevalier to the Government in Paris, and hence Chevalier 
frantically tried to prevent Madec's departure. Ultimately 
Madec had to return to Sindhia’s camp, but he did not remain 
there long. As Sindhia moved towards Deccan on the outbreak 
of dissension at Poona, Madec was unwilling to go so far away 
from Delhi, the centre of Chevalier’s diplomacy. 1 hrough the 
good offices of Genril, a French military adventurer like him, 
he entered the service of Shuja-ud-daulah but had to leave 
immediately after under English pressure. However, Shuja-ud- 
daulah secured for Madec a profitable employment under Najaf 
Khan, the General of the Mughal Empire. In accordance with 
the prevailing system Madec was assigned a Jagir or landed 
estate, which lie was to administer and from the revenues of 
which he was to maintain his contingent. His headquarters was 
at Bari, not far from Agra. Thanks to his good administra¬ 
tion and sLrict care in financial matters he was able to secure a 
steadily increasing revenue, with which he could gradually 
enlarge his contingent and turn it into one of the best fight¬ 
ing units in India at the time. 2 

Writing to the Minister in January 1775 * Chevalier referred 
to Madec thus: ‘ We have at Delhi a Frenchman, Madec, who 


1 Barb £—Lt Nabob Rene Madec f p. 106-Madec’s letter to Chevalier 
defending his conduct. 2 Ibid, pp 111-116. 


whist^ 





deserves the .mention of our Government. He enjoys the 
greatest influence over the Emperor in whose service he is, at 
the head of an army of nearly 10,000 men, both infantry and 
Cavalry/' 1 * In fact, Chevalier, who had set his mind on the 
project of an alliance between France and the Mughal Emperor, 
had reason to feel happy at the increasing strength of Madec’s 
contingent and at his steadily rising influence at the Delhi 
Court, since Madec vvas intended to be the principal instrument 
for the execution of his plan. But from France he received 
no encouraging response whatsoever, and in 1775 he gave up 
all interest in his project in despair, until towards the very end 
of the year Madec’s arrangement with the Emperor about the 
cession of Tati a revived his hopes and renewed his old ent hu¬ 
siasm. On the other hand, since the beginning of 1775 Madec 
also lost interest in Chevalier's project, partly for lack of res 
pome from France and partly for the disappointment of not 
getting a King's Commission as Captain which had been pro¬ 
mised to him by Chevalier when the latter first induced him 
to join the Imperial service to further the interests of the 
nation. 3 However, the opening of the Tatta project brought 
Chevalier and Madec into close co-operation again. 

It was about the middle of 1775 that the Tatta project was 
first mooted, although the exact time cannot be ascertained. 
On this 'point there are two letters on which we can depend 
foi some indication, at least for forming a guess. The first is 
a letter from Modave to Moracin at Pondicherry, dated 19th 
October 1775, which he stated that the Mughal Emperor 
first made the proposal to him some time after his joining the 
Imperial service, i.e., some time after April 1775. 3 The second 
is Madec's letter to the Governor and Intendant of the Isle of 
France, dated 10th October 1775 in which Madec stated that 
the proposal was first made to him by the Emperor a few 
months back when he was at Delhi on a temporary visit. 4 As 
regards the first overture in the matter, both Madec and 
Modave agree that it came from the Emperor himself, who was 

1 A.N.—Min ; st£ie d( s Colonies: C-a. 140. 

3 Barlxi —Le Nabob Rend Madec, pp. 127-129. 

a P. A. rus. 283—Correspondence of Modave. 

4 Barb6. op. cit., pp. 158-159. 


miSTffy. 



anxious for an alliance with France, and in order to procure 
a body of French troops without giving any overt cause oi 
grievance to the English he made the offer of ceding the pro¬ 
vince of Tatta. But then the two differ as to which of them 
was first taken into confidence by the Emperor and asked to 
negotiate with the French Government. It was Madec who 
actually sent the proposal to the authorities in France, and in 
his letter (to be quoted later) to *he Minister, de Sartine, he 
stated that it was to him alone that the Emperor first broached 
the subject. Modave on the other hand, in the letter referred 
to above, claimed the credit of being the first person to he taken 
into confidence by he Emperor and asked to negotiate with 
the King of France. It was, as he stated, because of the great 
esteem in which he was held by both the Emperor and his 
chief minister, Abdul Ahad Khan, who considered him as the 
fittest instrument for negotiating with the French Government. 
But out of gratitude for Madec, who had helped him in getting 
employment under the Emperor, he asked the Emperor to con 
tact Madec for forwarding the proposal to France. It should 
be noticed here that the Emperor had no direct dealing with 
the Governor of Pondicherry, Law, although the latter had been 
in his service when he attacked Bihar as Prince Ali Gauhar; 
and although he was in communication with Chevalier in 
Bengal, he did not like to send his proposal to France through 
him lest it might leak out to the English who were dominant 
in Bengal. Emile Barte in his biography of Madec ridicules 
the claim of Modave to have taken any active part in the dis¬ 
cussions at the Delhi Court with regard to the Tatta project.’ 
It is interesting, however, to note Madec's letter to the Gover¬ 
nor and Intendant of the Isle of France, dated Agra, loth 
October 1775 (referred to above): "A few months back this 
monarch (the Emperor) expressed to me a great desire to enter 
into relations with the King (of France). I was not in a posi¬ 
tion to pursue the matter, having been obliged to return to 
my estates. Fortunately, there was at Delhi a person to whom 
I could entrust this task. In fact, the Emperor, who had esteem 
and respect for this person, did not make any difficulty in dis¬ 
closing to him all his plans. As a result the Emperor took the 

1 Barbel/ Sabnb Rent \tadrc. pp. 155-158- 


J 


MIN IST/fy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


:ision to write to the King.” There is hardly any doubt 
that it refers to Modave. 

The proposal in essence was that the Emperor would cede 
the town and province of Tatta to France in exchange for a 
small body of French troops to be permanently employed in 
the Imperial service. The French would naturally make Tatta 
their principal establishment in the East, and keep a consi¬ 
derable number of troops then. That would enable the 
Emperor to expect French military help on a large scale in case 
of a war with the English. Tatta was far away from the Eng¬ 
lish possessions in India, and English susceptibilities were not 
likely to be roused by France sending a large body of troops 
for the occupation of that far-off province. Indeed, it was 
only through the possession of Tatta that France could render 
am considerable military help to the Emperor in times of 
necessity, as otherwise the despatch of a body of French troops 
to Delhi would have been regarded as a casus belli by the 
English. While the proposal was put forward, it was made 
clear that merely a grant from the Emperor would not put the 
French in occupation of the province; they would have to 
wrest it from those who were in actual possession, which the; 
could easily do with a few thousand men. The Emperor asked 
Madec to send the proposal to France giving all the necessary 
details, and he himself addressed a letter in general terms to 
the King of France and another one to the Governor of Pon¬ 
dicherry expressing full confidence in Madec. His chief minis¬ 
ter, Abdul Ahad Khan, also wrote a similar letter to the Fremh 
Minister, de Sartine. Unfortunately, these letters are lost and 
we know of thetn only from the correspondence of Madec, 
Modave and Chevalier. 

Before we turn to Madec’s letter to the French Minister, 
with its two accompanying memories giving full details about 
the Tatta project, it is interesting to examine the diplomacs 
of Shah Aiam in making the proposal. For more than three 
years he had been intriguing with Chevalier for a body of 
French troopsfland since France did not evince any interest 
in the matter he now* proposed to give her sufficient induce¬ 
ment by offering a remote territory which did not really belong 
to him and which had been torn away from the Mughal Empire 
by the Afghan rulers many years ago. If France accepted the 


miST/}y 


mp i.oma ric t'KojF.f;is-~i 


>:s 



offer; the Emperor would be in an advantageous position by 
holding the balance between the English in Bengal and the 
French in the lower Indus valley. It was a piece of subtle 
diplomacy by which the Emperor could improve his position 
without any cost whatsoever. 

Madec’s letter to the Minister, de Sartine, 1 began with an 
account of his own career, which was necessary because of his 
lack of official standing or social position in France. He next 
explained why he was sending the Emperors ptoposal ditcct 
and not through the more regular channel of Chevaliei or Law 
de Lauriston. It was because of the insistence of the Emperor 
himself, who was afraid that the secret might leak out to the 


English if transmitted through (ihandernagore 01 Pondicherry- 
When Madec pleaded that he was not sufficiently well-known 
to the Government in France to be able to deal with such 
important political negotiations, the Emperor replied that he 
would remove the difficulty by writing to Law to inform the 
French Minister that lie had full confidence in Madec. 1 hen 


Madec narrated how during a temporary visit to Delhi a few 
months back he was called by the Emperor in secret and told 
the following: "I would like to know from yon if I may draw- 
some help and support from your nation. We are in general 
very little informed about the state of affairs in Europe. I 
am nor unaware, however, that the King of France is the 
greatest and the most powerful of the European Princes. But. 
I am afraid the events of the last war have made your nation 
lose interest in the affairs of India. I think so principally 
from the little effort it has made since the Peace to re-establish 


itself in its old possessions and to present itseh there on a 
respectable footing. Nevertheless, 1 would very much like it 
to think seriously of securing a solid ground there and of estab 
lishing dose relations with me. the English are, it is said, 
your natural enemies, and I have just grounds to consider them 
as mine too. If therefore I know the disposition of the King 
of France, I would propose things to him which would b( 
mutually useful to us. The French establishments, surrounded 
on all sides by English possessions, must remain in a state of 
mediocrity till the time when a new war will change the face 


i Barbe— Le Nabob Rent Madec, pp. 140047* 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

of things. It is nor there that I can help the French. But iJ 
the King would desire other possessions, I can cede them to 
him, which according to me would be extremely advantageous; 
and I ask you to write to France, conveying my ideas and 
also seeking to ascertain the intentions of the King". Madec 
represented that he did not have any official status in France 
for such an important mission, but the Emperor replied that 
in order to add weight to his proposals he would write a per¬ 
sonal letter to the King of France, worded in general terms and 
without going into details, but stating that he had entrusted 
Madec to make liis intentions known to the King. He actually 
handed over the letter to Madec, and Abdul Ahad Khan, the 
chief minister, also gave him a personal letter to the French 
Minister, de Sartine. 

Madec continued: "It is for you now to decide if the 
Nation can draw any advantage from the dispositions of the 
Emperor, but I must inform you of them. He proposes to 
cede to the King the town and Soubafi of Tatta-Bakar. It 
is a province situated at the mouth of the Scindi, towards 25 
degree of the northern latitude. The advantages of this cession 

have been given in a memoire attached to this letter. 

I must not conceal from you that the Emperor in deciding to 
make such an important cession was induced principally by 

his own personal interests.He hopes that the French 

established at Tatta-Bakar, will be either wholly or partially 
at his disposal and that he will make use of them to suppress 
the insolence of the great vassals of his Empire on one side, 
and on the other to show to the English a corps of French 
troops ready to oppose their ambitious claims*’. 

Attached to this letter were two memoires giving details 
about the project, one "on the town and province of Tatta- 
Bakar" and the other "on the present political state of affairs 
in Hindusthan". In the first memoire 1 Madec stated that the 
province of which Tatta was the capital included four Sarkars 
and fifty Parganas and had a revenue of twenty-four lakhs of 
rupees, equivalent to six million livres. The town, being 
situated on a large river and surrounded by a strong wall, offered 
great advantages for commerce as well as defence. The pro- 



1 Barbe —Lr Nabob Rene Madec, pp, 161-165. 



mtsTfy 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS —t 


vince also was easily defensible, being surrounded by forests, 
deserts and mountains, and the only access was either down 
the rive?’ from the north or up from the south. The river was 
navigable almost in its entire course i.e., four to five hundred 
leagues. Tatta could not he reached from the sea by large 
ships, but medium-sized vessels could move up with ease. The 
place had great commercial possibilities because of the rich 
hinterland, the Punjab, the famous products of which would 
be attracted there for export if a European settlement was 
established. Madec next pointed out that the grant of the 
Mughal Emperor did not mean an easy and immediate posses¬ 
sion for the French. “The fact is not concealed in this 
Mdrnuire that the Emperor in transferring to the King the 
proprietorship of this town and Sou bah only gives up his own 


rights without engaging himself to hand over to him imme¬ 
diate possession.” T he country was actually in the possession 
of the king of Kandahar and partly of the Sikhs. But it was 
not difficult to wrest it from their hands, since no opposition 
was to be expected from the people in general, and what little 
resistance there might be from the ruling classes could be met 
by M a few cannon shots". 

“The nature of things will make Tatta and its Soubah the 
principal establishment of the French nation in India. It is a 
country completely new to Europeans. It has not been in the 
least devastated by the long succession of wars and calamities 
which have afflicted the Empire for thirty years The Moham¬ 
medan Government is, by its very nature, extremely tyrannical 
and aggressive. Experience shows us that Indians accommodate 
themselves perfectly to European administration as soon as 

they are put under the yoke.For this operation to 

have complete success, it is necessary to employ a corps of 3,000 
troops which will suffice for taking possession of the place and 
maintaining order there". As regards the expenses of the 
military operation. Madec expected that they could be met 
from the revenue of the province and from the contributions 
to be levied on the neighbouring vassals of the Emperor. Since 
the Emperor had been prompted to make the cession by the 
hope of getting a body of French troops in his service, Madec 
suggested that out of the 3,000 men to be sent to Tatta a 
detachment of 1,000 should remain with the Emperor. Madec 


THE TRENCH IN INDIA 

stressed the need of raising 12,000 sepoys, since effective 
military operations in India required a sepoy force at least 
four times larger than the European element. It was necessary 
therefore to send from France additional arms to equip this 
huge body of sepoy force and also a large artillery of the besi 
standard then known in India. If the Minister accepted the 
proposal regarding Tatta, Madec begged to be given the com 
mand of the detachment to remain in the service of the 
Emperor. '‘Besides a knowledge of affairs in general of this 
country and of the manner to deal with them, a perfect under¬ 
standing of the language is an advantage which requires a long 
time to acquire. My own troops, which the King can already 
consider as his own, will augment the forces of this detach¬ 
ment; and I dare assure him that being accustomed to the 
method of warfare practised in this country they will be very 
useful to His Majesty’s service”. 

In the second memoire Madec aimed at giving a picture of 
the political condition of the Mughal Empire at the time. 1 
“My object in this memoire is not to seek out the causes which 
have precipitated the Mughal Empire to fall into the condition 

of decadence and anarchy in which we find it today. 

I wish simply to describe its present condition and to give a 
correct and precise idea about the ambitious plans of the 
English**. Madec then narrated how alter the invasion of Nadir 
Shah the Emperor lost not only his prestige but also his rights 
of sovereignty. The land beyond the Indus passed under 
Afghan rule, and that between the Indus and Delhi, under the 
control of the Sikhs. The Rohillas and the Nawah of Oudh 
became virtually independent. The Jats, the Rajputs and the 
Marathas all carved out dominions at the expense of the 
Emperor. “The Emperor in the midst of so many diverse 
interests.can only play a very tragic role. Neverthe¬ 

less, if chance would place on the throne of the Mogol a young 
prince having vigour, courage and ambition, it is probable 
that he will quickly recover a part of his rights which his 
predecessors had lost.” 

Madec continued: “The Prince who occupies the throm 
todav appears to be as suitable as any other to carry through 

• Barbt -Lr Nabob Rene Madsc, pp. 170*176. 




then 




MIN ISTffy 



this great revolution. He attained .sovereign power at a mature 
ge. He has more understanding and knowledge of the world 
and of its affairs than what men like him generally have”. 
After referring to his adventures as a Prince, Madec wrote, 
“From the knowledge of his character that I have, 1 dare affirm 
that he would conduct himself in a different manner il he 
were assured against the fear of the English by an alliance 
with us”. He then stressed the necessity of preventing the 
Emperor from throwing himself into the arms of the English. 
“The English are working with great perseverance to change 
the views of the Emperor towards them ..... He will not 
decide that way until he is forced to do so as his last point of 
defence, I mean, when he will feel that he has no more help 
or hope from any quarter. That is the real spirit of the letter 
which he wrote to the King. It is important to examine fullv 
in France if it would suit the interests of His Majesty to abandon 
this Prince to his fate and to leave the ground free to the 
English”. 

The original intention of Madec was to send his letters to 
France direct without the intermediary of Chevalier. It was 
partly because of the insistence of the Emperor on maintaining 
the closest secrecy and partly because of Madec s disappointment 
at not getting a King’s Commission promised by Chevalier. 
Anyway, he soon realised that in view of his lack of official 
status his proposal to the French Government had no chance 
of being even considered seriously unless suppoited by Chevalier, 
the accredited representative of France in Bengal and specially 
entrusted with dealing with the Mughal Emperor. So he com¬ 
municated his proposal to Chevalier in November 177J}, 1 and 
it was in fact due to Chevalier s active interest that the Tatta 
project received serious consideration in 1 ranee. How much 
Chevalier’s support to the proposal was useful will be evident 
from the following letter of Kerscao whom Madec had sent to 
carry his letters to the Isle of France, to be transmitted from 
there to Paris. “He (the Governor of the Isle of France) has 
sent your letter to the Minister; you are in very high favour 

.I did very well to have brought letters from Chevalier 

because it is on them that M. De Ternay (the Governor) based 


a Barb£-~/.* Nabob Rent! Madec, p. 135. 



Ml NlSTffy 



nimself in writing to the Minister”. 1 This is fully confirmed by 
the letter of the Governor and Intendant of the Isle of France 
to the Minister in Paris. “M. Chevalier, commandant of the 
French establishment in Bengal, must have informed you of the 
readiness of the Mogol Emperor to transfer the proprietorship of 

latta to the King. 1 he commandant must have added 

that the Mogol Emperor was induced to make this cession only 
by the consideration of iiis own interest and in the hope that 
he would be able to get for his service some French troops 
sent for the administration of Tatta. Nothing is more Appro¬ 
priate to confirm these dispositions of the Prince than the 
mimoire which we have the honour to forward to you herewith 
and which has been sent to us by one M. Madec, with whom 
M. Chevalier has been in correspondence for a long time.” 2 

Fortunately for Madec and Chevalier, there was a change 
in the attitude of the French Government in 1776. As the War 
of American Independence seemed imminent, the French Gov 
ernment for the first time began to give serious consideration to 
the various proposals for diplomatic and military interference in 
India. An interesting document in the Colonial Archives 
throws light on the favourable reception given to the Tatta 
project in France at the beginning of 1776. 3 It is entitled 
Secret Affairs: Picture of the political conditions in India on 
the 1st of March 1776”; and although unsigned it is perhaps 
the summary of an opinion presented to the King by the 
Minister, de Sartine. “The Mogol has made proposals to us by 
two different intermediaries, one by sieur Chevalier and the 
other by sieur Madec. Through Chevalier the Emperor asks 
for a corps of four to five thousand men to be sent to Delhi. 
TKrough Madec he offers to cede us his rights over Tatra and 

its dependencies.on condition that a corps of troops 

would be sent to him from Tatta. These two proposals accord 
perfectly with our existing diplomatic relations in India”. The 
author then observed that although the proposal sent by Madec 

1 Rarbc - -Lc Nabob Rene Madec, p. 161. 

* fbid, p. 160. 

3 Reproduced almost in full by Barb£, pp. 177-179. 



misr/t,. 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—I 



was not considered as seriously as that by 


Chevalier, 


<SL 

because 


Madec being a soldier of * fortune was regarded less reliable, 
his proposal was in fact even better. I he ultimate object of 
both the proposals was the same, namely to strengthen the 
position of the Emperor; bur. Madcc’s proposal was better for 
two reasons: first, the resentment of the English would he much 
less if the French troops were sent in the first instance to a 
distant place like Tatta than if they were sent direct to Delhi; 
and second, the possession of Tatta would give the French a 
safe base where reinforcements could be sent without any 
English opposition and where the French forces in north India 
could retire if military exigencies required the abandonment 


of Delhi. 


But while the French Government was considering the 


Tatta project in a leisurely fashion, things were changing fast 
in India. Madec suffered some military reverses whicn entailed 
heavy financial losses and a weakening of the strength of his 
corps. His relations with Najaf Khan, the General of the 
Emperor, became strained, culminating in his being deprived 
of his old Jagir in exchange for one much less lucrative, f hen 
for nearly eighteen months since he first forwarded the proposal 
about Tatta he did not receive any news cither from Chevaliei 
or from France, and he naturally concluded that there was little 
possibility of the proposal being accepted. 1 he sudden change 
in his fortune and the lack of response to his Tatta project 
decided Madec early in 1777 to leave north India and return to 
France bv way of Pondicherry. The thing was that soon after 
he wa informed by Madec about the I atta project, Chevaliei 
sent an agent named Montvert with letters for both Madec 
and the Emperor. Montvert was authorised to negotiate with 
the Emperor, in concert with Madec, for the grant of a Fat man 
ceding Tatta to France. It was Montvert's negligence which 
was responsible for Madec getting no news from C hevalier till 
April 1777. But the mischief had been done, Madec had made 
up his mind' to quit north India, and no amount of persuasion 
from Chevalier could dissuade him. He wrote to Chevalier 
that because of the long delay in accepting the olTer it was 
difficult to persuade the Emperor to renew it; and then leaving 
negotiations with the Emperor in the hands of the Raja of 
Gohad and Visage, entrusted with the command of the remnant 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


his corps in the Raja's service, he started for Pondicherry 
about the end of May 1777. 1 

The departure of Madec from north India dealt a severe 
blow to French diplomatic enterprises centring round the Court 
of Delhi. But before the news reached Paris the French Govern 
rnent had decided to send out Col. Montigny to India to report 
from first hand knowledge on the feasibility of undertaking the 
Tatta enterprise. Montigny was instructed to work in concert 
with Madec and to conclude negotiations with the Mughal 
Emperor. He arrived at Agra about, the middle of 1778, and 
there learnt for the first time that Madec had left. He, how 
ever, remained at the camp of Najaf Khan for some time, 
collected information about Tatta and ultimately wrote to the 
Minister that it was the most fantastic project that had ever 
been submitted to the Government.. It is not unlikely that if 
Madec had remained in north India, his mere presence would 
have changed things and Montigny might have been brought to 
a more favourable view about the Tatta project. 2 

It is not the place here to pass any judgment on the Tatta 
project. Its advantages and the ease with which it could be 
executed were stated most dearly by Madec in his letters to 
the Minister noticed already. On the other hand, its difficulties 
and disadvantages were pointed out equally clearly by Law and 
Bellecombe in their mimoires, as we shall see in the next 
chapter. Where contemporaries like Chevalier and Madec on 
the one hand and Law and Bellecombe on the other, all equally 
competent and experienced in Indian affairs, differ so widely, 
it is difficult to pass anv judgment. But one thing may be 
said here in the light of the actual results of the French expedi¬ 
tion of 1782-83, and that is if instead of frittering away her 
resources on the Coromandel Coast France had attempted a 
landing at Tatta and a conquest of the province, she might 
have achieved some tangible success. She had for practically 
the whole period naval supremacy in Indian waters, and her 
land troops totalled the number demanded by Madec, namely 

1 Vor the exchange of correspondence between Chevalier and Madec, 
see Barb£--Le Nabob Rent Madec, pp. «10-217. 

2 It is interesting to note that many years later the plan of conquering 
Sind was revived under Napoleon Bonaparte—Archives ties Affaires Etran- 
v^res: Asie, Memories et Documents, Vol. IV. 


Mtsrtu 



L>! p r OMATIC PROJ ECIS —t 


<8L 


,_ men. With these resources she might have established 

her power in Sind, where there was little possibility of an active 
opposition by the English. Whether her conquest of Sind would 
have led to any further result, namely a solid alliance with the 
Mughal Emperor and an eventual attack on Bengal, may be 
regarded as doubtful; but even without that, the expedition 
would not. have been as barren of results as ii actually 
turned out. 

Mon Avr 


While nothing the projects of Chevalier and Madec for 
the establishment of French influence in north India and in 
the province of Tatta, it is worthwhile turning our attention 
to the correspondence of another noteworthy Frenchman of the 
period, Comte de Modave. 1 2 Modave no doubt came to India 
purely as a soldier of fortune, to seek service under one of the 
Indian Princes. But as a cultured, enlightened and patriotic 
Frenchman he could not altogether escape the natural desire to 
advance his national interest, although being primarily con¬ 
cerned with his own private gain; and that gives his corre¬ 
spondence not a negligible importance in connection with the 
French plans and projects of the period. 

Louis-Laurent Dolisy, Comte de Modave, first came to 
India in 1775. Before that he was for some time Governor of 
Madagascar and later turned into a planter. His plantation 
scheme brought him financial ruin, and it was in order to 
retrieve his fortune that he came to India in search of a military 
career under one of the Indian Princes. From Pondicherry 
he came to Bengal where he remained for eleven months, aos. 
of the time in Calcutta. He had thus an opportunity of seeing 
from close quarters the English military strength and system 
of civil administration. In a letter to Bellecombe, dated i>t 
May 1777/ he wrote that, contrary to the wishful thinking of 
many Frenchmen, the English position in Bengal w r as quite 


1 His letters are preserved in the Pondicherry Archives (ms. 283) and 
form an important collection of original manuscripts there. One letter in 
particular, written to Bellecombe and dated 1st May i 777 > 15 °I the 
greatest importance as containing; a detailed narrative of his adventures 
in India. 

2 P. A. ms. 283. 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



:cure, bein based on two firm foundations, military strength 
and a benevolent civil administration. The English had 3,700 
European troops, divided into three Brigades stationed at 
Calcutta, Kasimbazar and Patna. There were 27,000 sepoys, 
divided into battalions and commanded by European officers. 
I here was a large and well-served artillery supporting each of 
the three Ini an try Brigades. “I have seen this military machine 
tnd I have examined it carefully. 1 can assure you that it 
is not to be slighted in any wav, and that being supported by 
the internal resources of the country and the fort of Calcutta 
it can be quite sufficient for defence”. He had also seen the 
fort, a plan of which, he believed, must have been sent to 
Bellecombe by Chevalier Who had taken it secretly from the 
office of Major Polier (also a Frenchman), the chief engineer 
of the fort. Modave had great praise for the English admini¬ 
stration in Bengal and particularly for Hastings, whose politi 
cal sagacity was responsible for making “the British Govern¬ 
ment loved”. Hastings had established law and order in 
the province, recognised the proprietary rights of landlords and 
attempted to combine the principles of English law with the 
laws and customs of the Hindus and Muslims. The interests 
of the natives were completely protected by law, and in fact 
sometimes the scale of justice turned so much in their favour 
that, as an Englishman complained to Modave, “it was difficult 
to get justice against a Bengali”. 

from Bengal Modave went to Lucknow in the hope of 
getting employment under Shuja-ud-daulah. There were 
many well-known Frenchmen in the service of the Nawab of 
Oudh at the time, like Gentil, Aumont and Visage. Through 
their efforts Modave succeeded in getting an appointment on a 
monthly salary of four thousand rupees. But immediately after, 
the sudden death of Shuja-ud-daulah in January 1775 upset all 
arrangements. The English put effective pressure upon his 
successor not to give any employment to Modave, and in fact 
all the Frenchmen in the service of the Nawab of Oudh were 
thrown out. Modave next thought of employment under the 
Emperor, Shah Alam, and wrote to Madec, who was then in the 
service of Najaf Khan and had great influence in the Imperial 
Court. He reached Delhi in April 1775 and through the good 
offices of Madec secured a profitable appointment in the Imperial 



service. He was given a salary of 2,500 rupees a month, besides 
an extra allowance for his personal retinue, After the terms 
had been settled Modave had his first audience with the 
Emperor, where he was received “with the .same solemnity which 
since then I have seen practised for an ambassador of Timur 
Shah, king of Kandahar". For his residence he was given the 
palace of Shayista Khan. A part of the troops under his com¬ 
mand was garrisoned there, the remainder being stationed in 
the fort to guard the person of the Emperor. I h( fort of 
Salimgarh and the whole of the Imperial artillery were also 
to have been placed under his control. 

In the letter to Bellecombe referred to above, Modave gave 
a brief account of the negotiations with the Mughal Emperor 
about the cession of Tatta to France. He wrote that after the 
terms of appointment had been settled he used to go ‘ to the 
Da-bar of the Minister (Abdul Ahad Khan) every day and three 

or four times a week to the audience of the Padcha . 

This Prince expressed to me a great desire to enter into corre¬ 
spondence with the King (of France). 1 believe, it came from 
a hope to secure some military help with which to impose 
his authority on his great vassals.I corne to this con¬ 

clusion because of the attempts which this Prince made on 
several occasions to open a correspondence with the King of 

England.As I felt myself greatly obliged to Madec, l 

wished to turn in his favour the desire which I saw in the Padcha 
to write to the King. I rnyself made the model of the letter. 1 
It was translated into Persian. The Minister of the Padcha 
wrote on his side to M. de Sartine. Madec gave an account to 
the Minister of the object of this letter and of affairs in Hindu- 
sthan in general. The Padcha had authorised him to offer to 
the King Paraivanas for the town of Tatfa-Bakar and of the 
the province of Sind”. Modave then continued that the 
despatch of the Emperor's letter to Chancier nagore, to be trans 
mitted from there to Paris, met with an accident in the Ganges. 
“The letter of the Padcha was so much spoilt that it was no 
longer presentable. The packet of Madec for M. Sartine 
did not suffer from this accident. The Minister must have 

1 The original draft is given in Modave's Voyage du Uengale il Delhi. 
A. N. Ministfcrc des Colonies: C 2, 256. 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


cceiyed it, but 1 do not know what conclusion he will draw 
from it in the absence of the letter of the Great Mogol to the 
King mentioned in the despatches. There were duplicates of 
all these documents i n the hands of Madec. I do not know if 
he has made any use of them, since l left Hindusthan a feu 
weeks after learning of the disaster to the packet”. 

In another letter, addressed to Moracin, Intcndant at 
Pondicherry, and dated 19th October 1775, Modave gave an 
account of the part he had played in the negotiations. "This 
negotiation which I had conducted at Delhi required, as you 
can well understand, some details to show its merit in France, 
ft is for this object that I have come to Agra where Madec 
resides. As a result, he has sent to the Minister a short account 
of his personal history, a detailed and well-thought-out account 
of the intentions and views of the Padtcha and a political 

sketch of the present state of the Mughal Empire.and 

he added to ii a md moire on the town and Sou bah of Tatta 
Bakar, with some observations on the advantages of this acquisi 
don and on the means not only to secure but also to extend 
them. That is the principal object of the account which 

M. Madec has rendered to the Court. I did not wish to be 

named in it in order to leave him the credit for it and also 
not to bring misfortune on the affair. If it succeeds, 1 shall 
be well rewarded for my troubles by the advantage that the 
Nation may draw out of it”. 

Within a few months Modave had reason to feel dissatisfied 
with the service of the Emperor, who was profuse in his pro* 

mises bur had neither the means nor the will to fulfil them. 

He never received even half the salarv he was entitled to, and 
whenever he complained he was told that he should not worry 
about petty matters and that the Emperor had great schemes 
in his mind for him. In his distress he turned to Madec once 
more, who agreed to take him in his service. Modave stayed in 
Madecs camp for nearly five months, down to the siege of Dig. 
at the end of which finding his condition no better he decided 
to quit and asked Madec to settle his accounts Madec was in 
great financial embarrassment after his recent defeat at the 
hands of the Rohillas and could pay only a quarter of the sum 
due to Modave. But he told Modave that he was shortly 
going back to Europe and in compensation of his arrears of 



misT/ff 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—T 


<SL 


ary would give him a part of his army, one Infantry battalion 
with artillery. Modave accepted the ofTer and wrote to the 
Emperor that he was returning to his service with a well-armed 
and well trained force. He received letters of welcome from the 
Emperor and his minister. Abdul Ahad Khan, but as he was 
starting from Agra his arrangements were suddenly upset. 
Aumont, who had through the good offices of Modave been 
placed in charge of the administration of Madec's estates, now 
instigated Madee to take back the battalion he had given to 
Modave. Madec stopped Modave at Agra and demanded back 
his battalion on the ground that he had decided to postpone 
his departure from India on a recent communication from the 
Imperial Court (March 1775). Modave felt it useless to return 
to Delhi alone and decided to take the route to Hyderabad in 


the hope of getting employment under Nizam Ali. 

On his arrival at Hyderabad Modave got an opportunity 
to present himself to Nizam Ali, but met with disappointment 
because of the instigation of a noble of the Court who was a 
pensioner ol the Madras Government. He then wrote to 
de Lai lie. and having received an encouraging response from 
him he went to Adoni, where he was given an appointment by 
Basalat Jang on a monthly salary of 600 rupees. 

Modave regarded his service under Basalat Jang as purely 
temporary and hoped constantly to be able to find a better 
employment under Nizam Ali. He realised that the only way 
of attracting the notice of Nizam Ali was by organising a small 
corps of his own, well-armed and trained in the European 
fashion. His main difficulty was lack of money with which to 
procure arms. In a letter to Moracin, Intendant at Pondi¬ 
cherry, dated 1st May 1777, he begged to be supplied with Soo 
guns on credit, promising to repay the entire amount in 
eighteen months. He also entreated Bcllecombe, in a second 
letter of the same date, to send him a letter of recommendation 
to Nizam Ali, and gave him an account of an interesting inter¬ 
view he had with the chief minister a few days after his arrival 
at Hyderabad. The minister told him that in spite of the 
pressure of the English against employing any Irenchman in 
his army, Nizam Ati was willing to offer him an appointment 
if he could give him service in the manner he wanted; and in 
that connection the minister enquired if he could raise a corps 


^_“%l 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

ean troops. Modave replied that “there was a large 
number of discontented and ill-paid men here and there who 
would not fail to join me as soon as they caine to know that 
1 was in a position to receive them’’, but he added that he could 
render greater service than merely collecting a number of vaga¬ 
bonds. lie would “form a corps of sepoys, supported by a 
good artillery and led by white officers’’. He was then told 
tfi.it although the English and the French were at peace, he 
would be required to fight against the English if the Nawab 
broke with them, to which Modave replied that "from the 
moment J would be in his service his enemies would be mine”. 
Next the minister complained that while Nizam Ali had been 
trying for years to open a correspondence with Pondicherry and 
had even written to France, he had not received any response 
to his overtures. He asked if Modave could help in transmit 
ting a letter from Nizam Ali to the King of France and in 
getting a satisfactory reply, Modave replied that he “was not 
properly qualified to undertake a mission of that sort", but he 
pointed out that it would be irregular to address a letter directly 
to the King when there was at Pondicherry a General of the 
highest rank and depository of the authority and confidence 
of His Majesty", assuring the minister that the new Governor 
w.mld give a prompt and favourable reply. Modave wrote to 
Bcllecombe, “This conversation was in the form of an inter¬ 
rogation. All my replies were written down and stamped with 
my seal and later this report was sent to the Nawab, but I 
have not heard anything further about it”. He was left with 
an impression that if he had a corps of troops under him he 
would have been immediately offered employment by Nizam 
Ali. and that was why he implored Bellecontbe to give him a 
letter of recommendation and to induce Moracin to send him 
the guns he required. As regards the political attitude of 
Nizam Ali, Modave wrote, “It is certain that this Prince has a 
sentiment of affection and preference for the French nation, 
but the great power of the English on the Coromandel Coast, 
and, between you and me, the Tittle response he has found at 
Pondicherry have somewhat damped his goodwill”. 

From a note addressed to de LalWe, dated 10th July 1777, 
we learn that Bellccombe sent a letter to Modave for Nizam 
Ah dealing with the order of the King “to establish the old 




wnist^ 



diplomatic: proj Ecrrs —t 


f: 


correspondence and friendship which existed before between 
our nation and the Princes of the House of Nizaio-til-Muluk’*. 
But there is no document to show whether Modave presented 
the letter to Nizam Ali and with what result. All that is 
known is that Modave suddenly fell ill and retired to Masnli- 
patam where he died on the sand December r 777 * 1 


Gentil 


in connection with French diplomatic projects relating to 
north India we may notice the efforts of another eminent 
Frenchman of the period, Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gentil, who tried 
to create a sphere of influence for his nation through an alli¬ 
ance with the Nawab Wazir of Oudb. Io be sure, Gentil did 
not play the same important part as Chevalier or Madec, and 
his diplomatic efforts never took any definite shape. But even 
then he cannot be left out of any account of French diplomacy 
in India because of his long residence at the Court of Shuja- 
ud-daulah, nearly twelve years, his intimate friendship with 
the Nawab, and his efforts to increase French influence in that 
area by organising a corps of French troops and persuading 
the Nawab to turn to France to protect him against the aggres¬ 
sion of the English. Moreover, he was given an official status 
bv the Government in Paris as the accredited French Resident 
at the Court of the Nawab of Oudh, and was honoured with 
the Cross of St. Louis in recognition of his patriotic efforts. 
Although after 177a Chevalier did not place any trust in Shuja- 
nd-daulah, whom he regarded as having been completely won 
over by the English. Gentil. who was in closer contact and 
knew Shuja-ud-daulah better, believed that the Nawab’s sub¬ 
mission was not genuine, that at heart he wanted to regain 
his independence and lost territories, and that he was waiting 
only for the completion of administrative and military re* 
organisation before declaring himself openly against the English. 
Gentil wrote in his Memohes that shortly before his death 
Shuja-ud-daulah had told him that given a few years’ more 
time the English would be extirpated from Bengal. It was 
his unexpected death in January 1775 that upset the cakiila 

1 lb A. ras. 5180. 

K 



is of Gentil and led to the total extinction of French 


I MF. FRENCH IN fNDIA 



influence in Oudh. 

Gentil first came out to India in 175 2 with a regiment 
of Infantry and distinguished himself in service under Dupleix, 
Bussy and Lally. After 1761, like many of his compatriots, 
he offered his services to the Indian Princes. He first attached 
himself to Mir Kasim, Nawab of Bengal, and took part in 
his light against the English. The most noteworthy event oi 
his career during this period was his attempt to save the 
English prisoner; at Patna, killed by Sombre under the orders 
of Mir Kasim. Soon after he took service under Shuja-ud- 
daulah and earned his confidence and espect. to such an extent 
that after the battle of Buxar he was chosen to carry on 
negotiations with the English. The successful conclusion of 
the negotiations increased the prestige and influence of Gentil. 
who became an intimate adviser of the Nawab and specially 
charged with re-organising and training the remnants of the 
army which the treaty with the English permitted the Nawab 
to maintain. The Nawab even expressed a desire to take 
in his service a corps of French troops, and Gentil, who was 
also anxious to increase the influence of his nation in Oudh 
as a counterpoise to the English domination of Bengal, succeeded 
in forming at once a small corps of 400 men, later increased 
to 600. by collecting the French deserters from English service. 
Madec, the most prominent of these deserters, was appointed 
sergeant-major of the French corps. It was Gentil s generosity 
which saved such a large number of his compatriots from 
starvation. Most of them, however, as Modave remarked in 
his Voyage da Bengal e d Delhi, were scoundrels and unfit for 
military service and they repaid Gentil with base ingratitude. 
According to Modave, far from increasing French influence 
in Oudh. they only brought discredit on their nation. How¬ 
ever, Gentil felt that the mere presence of these Frenchmen 
in his army would inspire confidence in the Nawab of Oudh 
in the willingness of France to offer him military assistance. 
He did not doubt the sincerity of Shuja-iul-danlah’s profession 
of friendship towards the French and believed that by gradual 
persuasion he would be able to conclude a treaty of alliance 
between the Nawab and the King of France. 

Gentil proceeded slowly and did not put forward any 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS— 



definite scheme of alliance 



But he kept himself in touch with 


the French Government and sent reports on the political situa¬ 


tion in Oudh. In a letter, dated January 17. * 77 ^* Boynes, 
the Minister of Marine and Colonies, thanked him for the zeal 
he showed in working for national interest. f know that 
you enjoy the complete confidence of Shuja-ud-daulah. Con¬ 
tinue to keep up the goodwill of the Nawab in favour of the 
nation, and lie assured that I shall procure? from His Majesty 


due recognition of your services" . 1 Modave in his f oya^t du 
Jiengale d Delhi narrates an interesting incident about this 
period. A private French merchant named Debraux came nom 
Ghandernagote to Fyzabad, then the c apital of Shuj t-tid daulah. 
H< had a meeting with Gentil and their conversation drifted 
to the possibility of an invasion of Bengal by the combined 
forces of the Nawab and the French, later he stole from 
Gentil's room a Parawana dealing with some commercial con¬ 
cessions granted by the Nawab to two Englishmen. 1 hen he 
hastily returned to France and posed as having been sent by 
the Nawab of Oudh to negotiate an alliance with France. W< 
produced the Parawana as the Nawab s letter of authority. 
When it was translated and appeared to contain only com¬ 
mercial details, he pretended that the letter was in code and 
ultimately succeeded in imposing upon the credulity of tin 
Minister. The Minister was favourably impressed and tried 
to pursue the matter further. Debraux was sent out to India 
as the Chief of the French factory at Patna, and Gentil was 
rewarded with the Cross of St. Louis. I he whole thing was 
done’ behind the back of Chevalier, who was taken completely 
bv surprise. Am way, even before Chevalier c ame to know 
about the matter it leaked out to the English, and it was 
strongly rumoured in Calcutta that Shuja-ud-daulah, acting 
on the advice of Gentil, had written to the King of France 
for a military alliance. Although this particular inciden of 
Debraux was a pure hoax, Shuja-ud-daulah was nevertheless 
inclined to come to an agreement with France for military 
assistance. In an interview with Modave he said that he wanted 
help from France but the main difficulty was that nothing was 
kept secret in the Government circles in Paris, and as an 


1 Gentil-At ^moires sur l’ In dons tan ou Empire Mogpl, p. 423* 


mtSTffy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

he pointed out that the granting of the Cross of 
St. Louis to Gentil was known in Calcutta much earlier than 
at Chandernagorc. 1 

Although the Dehraux incident had no real importance, 
it had a profound effect on the English. Down to that time 
they had no objection to Gentil remaining in the service of 
Shuja-ud-daulah, although they brought pressure on the Nawab 
to dismiss some of the other Frenchmen, like Madec. But 
now they became suddenly aware of the possibility of the 
danger of an alliance between the Nawab and the French, and 
in order to eliminate such a danger they tried to persuade 
Shuja-ud-dauiah to dismiss Gentil as well. Shuja-ud-daulah 
was unwilling at first, and to the pressing demands of the 
English he replied, “1 am under great obligation to M. Gentil. 
Without him I would not have known you at all and would 
not have concluded any peace with you. He is very much 
attached to me and l shall be sorry to lose him. You see 
the reason why I take Frenchmen in im service; if I refuse 
his men, he would leave me. 1 herefore, 1 would rather break 
with you than send him ha* V’. 2 In fact, lar from dismissing 
him, Shuja-ud-daulah on the other hand increased his salary 
from 45,000 to 32,000 rupees a year. The English were, how¬ 
ever, persistent in their demand, and in a letter to the Minister, 
dated November 15, 1773, Gentil wrote that at the time of 
taking leave from Shuja-ud-daulah the Governor of Calcutta 
asked him to dismiss Gentil. adding that being a friend and 
at ally of the English it was not proper for the Nawab to 
keep a French officer under him. Shuja-ud-daulah at first gave 
his usual reply, but when pressed very strongly on the point 
hr ultimately agreed to dismiss Gentil as soon as he could 
find a suitable pretext. 3 But the sincerity of Shuja-ud-daulah 
is proved bv the fact that the pretext never came as long as 
he lived. It was only after his sudden death in January 1775 
that his weak successor, under the pressure of the English. 

1 Connected with the idea of an alliance between Fiance and Shuja-ud- 
daulah there is an interesting mdmoire in the Archives of the Colonial 
Ministrv (C-2. Vol. 117). written in 1770. It will be noticed in Chapter 
VII. 

- Centil — Me moires sue llndoustan ou Empire Mottol, pp. 272-275. 

3 BA F.Fr, (N.A.) 9566, pp. 462-466. 




WNlST/fy 



DIPLOMATIC PR< EJECTS —l 


<SL 


feed Gentil after nearly twelve years of loyal service. 
Gentil, if he had liked, could have taken service under the 
Emperor, Shah Aland, who offered him satisfactory terms. But 
he had a poor opinion about Shah Alain's abilities, and think¬ 
ing that his political design could not be furthered under such 
a timid and weak-minded ruler, he rejected the offer and 
returned to Chandernagore on his way back to France. He 
must have utilised his stay at Chandernagore by discussing 
with Chevalier the prospects of French intervention in north 
Indian politics, and the latter gave him a letter addressed 
to the ex-minister Choiseul. 1 

Gentil returned to France in 1778 and was rewarded by 
the King with the rank of a Colonel. He spent the remaining 
years of his life in quiet and literary pursuits and died in 1799. 
Apart from the political interest of his long residence in Oudh, 
Gen ii has a claim to fame for another reason, perhaps more 
important. He was one of the earliest Europeans to attempt 
to make Indian civilisation and culture known to the West. 
He spent an enormous amount of money in purchasing Sans¬ 
krit, Bengali, Arabic and Persian manuscripts and presented 
them fo the King on his return to France. In fact, the begin¬ 
ning of Indological studies in France may be traced to the 
first collection of Indian manuscripts made by Gentil. For 
this reason alone Gentil deserves to be remembered in India 
more than any other Frenchman, more than Dupleix, Laily or 
Bussy, who played such an important part in the political 
history of the country. 2 


1 Gentil —Mi moires sur Vlndoustan ou Empire Mogoi, pp. 423-428. 

2 Apart from collecting manuscripts, Gentil was also the author of 
the following works: (1) Histone Numsmatiquc de t'Inde; (2) Histoire 
A b re gee de l'Empire Mogoi; (3) A hr cgee geographique de I'Inde ; (4) His- 
toite des radjahs de Vlndoustan. depiiis Barht jusqu’d Petaurah. 


I mST/ly 


CHAPTER VI 




DIPLOMATIC: PROJECTS: LAW DE LAURISTON 
AND BELLECOMBE 

I,AW DE LAUKISVON 

In the present chapter we shall notice the political views 
of two Governors of Pondicherry, Law de Lauriston (1765-1776) 
and Beilecombc (1777-1778). as expressed in their mimoin > 
and letters to the Minister. The 6rst official despatch of Law 
that may be reviewed is the Memoire sitr les diverse* Nations 
Ewoptennes ^ tab lies dans /’ Unde, written in 1767. 1 After 
giving a detailed account of the conditions of the various 
European settlements in India, including their administration, 
revenues, trade and commerce, military strength, and relations 
with com* try Powers, Law discussed at length the means 
required by the French io achieve equality in political influ¬ 
ence with the English. Although he admitted that no improve¬ 
ment in the French position in India could be made without 
another trial of strength with the English, he advocated a 
policy of maintaining peace for at least four vears in view ol 
the completely defenceless condition of the French settlements, 
which in their existing state could be easily captured by the 
English in less than a month from the declaration of war. 

o 

Nothing of course could be done to save Ghandernagore, but 
the four years of peace could be utilised by the French to 
strengthen the garrisons in the other settlements, particularly 
at Pondicherry, to train up a large sepoy force, to enter into 
solid agreements with some of the country Powers, and to 
draw up a detailed and clear-cut plan of military operations 
in India, 

I iw suggested the following measures for the period of 
peace. First, the French should try to create an impression 
among the English that thc\ were not much concerned about 
their lost possessions in India, and that in any case they were 


1 P. A, ms. ux>. It is a lengthy document of 165 pages. 


MINlSr^ 


DIPLOMA 11 C PROJECTS—II 

a position to resume hostilities till six or seven years 
later. Second, the person who would command the expedi¬ 
tionary force should be given detailed instructions one year 
before the commencement of hostilities so that the french 
could be on the move well in advance of the formal declara¬ 
tion of war. “The English took us by surprise during the 

last war. It should be wished that they may be paid 

back in a similar fashion” 1 . The advance information was 
also necessary to secure the alliance of some of the country 
Powers. The political situation in India changed so swiftly 
that in making arrangements with the Indian Princes it was 
necessary to hx a definite date for the commencement of hosti¬ 
lities; and even if there be no declaration of war in Europe 
by that date, French troops must nevertheless appear as the 
auxiliaries of the Indian Princes. Third, positive orders and 
necessary funds must be sent at the earliest opportunity foi 
fortifying Pondicherry, Mah£ and Karikal, and for raising a 
sepo) force of two thousand men. to be organised in such a 
fashion that it could be quadrupled in an instant without 
augmenting the number of officers. It was also necessary lor 
the French to possess a port in India where their vessels could 
find shelter in all seasons and undergo repairs. The most 
suitable port for that purpose was Trinkomali, and an attempt 
could be made to secure from the Dutch the old French terri¬ 
tory in the Ba) of Trinkomali, with the right of erecting 
fortifications, but on the clear condition of refraining from 
communicating with the interior of the country or carrying 
on trade and comerce, so as not to injure the rights and 
interests of the Dutch. Finally, steps must be taken to put 
the Isles of France and Bourbon in a proper state of defence 
and to store there all the munitions and other equipments 
required for military operations in India. 

Law next stressed the need of having naval superiority 
in Indian waters. He admitted that the French could wage 
a purely maritime war, the object being to destroy the enemy’s 
trade and commerce, for which it would be sufficient to have 
about a dozen frigates cruising near the mouth of the Ganges, 
off Ceylon, along the Malabar Coast, at the entrance to 
the Red Sea and in the Persian Gulf. But for a wider kind 
of warfare, necessitating large-scale land operations in different 





I'HE FRENCH IN INDIA 



(St 

..fsJV 


of ihe country, the French must have an effective 
Iperiority. “F Fe, who will be master on the sea, will be so 

on land as well sooner or later. That is an incontestable axiom, 
at least so far as colonies are concerned". 

Regarding the plan of operations, Law indicated four 
points of attack,-—Calcutta, Madras, Masulipatam and Bombay. 
Of the four, he considered Calcutta as the most desirable for 
delivering the first surprise attack, since Bengal was the source 
of the English power in India, although he admitted that the 
opposition to l»e encountered there would be much greater 
than anywhere else. For a surprise attack on Calcutta the 
french would require fi.ooo European troops, 2,000 sepoys and 
about 2.000 marines. With these numbers it was reasonable 
to expect, success, although the English had about 4,000 
European troops and 25.000 well trained sepoys; but the main 
difficulty lay in piloting a large number of troopships from the 
mouth of the Ganges and that in secrecy. The next point 
of attack was Madras. Provided the French had naval supre 
niaey, an expeditionary force of 4,000 European troops, 4,000 
sepoys and 2,000 marines would be sufficient to compel the 
English, who had only 2.000 European troops and 12.000 
sepoys, to shut themselves up within the fort of Madras. It 
was likely that they would avoid any decisive engagement 
before the arrival of reinforcements from Bengal. So it the 
siege of Madras dragged on for a long time, the French would 
have 10 do two things: first, to secure the alliance of Haidar 
Ali who would overrun the whole of the Carnatic, and second, 
to send a few strong frigates to the mouth of the Ganges to 
intercept reinforcements from Bengal, ff, however, such con¬ 
siderable land forces be not available as would be required 
for an attack on Calcutta or Madras, the first blow could be 
delivered against Masulipatam. The capture of that place and 
the possession of the Northern Sarkars through an alliance 
with Nizam Ali would drive a wedge between the English 
possessions in Bengal and those on the Coromandel Coast. 
For success in this enterprise naval supremacy would be 
an essential requirement, to intercept reinforcements from 
Bengal to Madras. Land operations would require about 2,000 
European troops and an equal number of marines and of 
sepovs. provided the English could be kept engaged in the 


MiN/sr^ 


diplomatic: project is -n 




Carnatic with the help of a southern Power. I he fourth point 
of attack was Bombay, which would provide the French with 
a good port for all seasons. The possession of Bombay would 
make it easy to capture Surat and all the small English factories 
on the Malabar Coast. For a successful attack on Bombay 
the French would require ai least 3,000 European troops, 


besides marines. 

Finally, Law urged the necessity of making an official 
declaration about the aims of the French policy in India, in 
the form of a manifesto to the different Indian Powers. It 
must be unequivocally stated that the French had no intention 
of carving out dominions in India, that they had come onl\ 
to liberate the Indian Princes from the yoke of the English, 
and that they would keep no more territories to themselves 
than what would be required to meet their expenses in India. 

We may next notice another memoire of Law entitled 
Observations sur Vit-at politique dc l hide, written in Feb¬ 
ruary 1777 and intended to enlighten Bellccombe, his successot 
as Governor of Pondicherry, on the political situation in India 
and the means required to revive French influence with the 
help of some of the Indian Powers. 1 In this memoire Law 
gave a detailed account of the position of the English in India, 
their military strength and their policy with respect to the: 
country Powers. He also discussed the strength of the prin¬ 
cipal Indian Powers and their mutual relations, always based 
on jealousy and suspicion. He drew a dear pic ure of the 
weak and defenceless condition of the French settlements, and 
then gave his views on how to build up an anti-English coali¬ 
tion among the country Powers. 

While discussing the policy of the English with respect 
to the country Powers. Law wrote that it was based on the 
principle of perpetuating the existing division and disunity 
among them in order to keep the English possessions safe 
from any combined attack. The only Indian Powers who gave 
some cause for anxiety to the English were Nizam Ali, his 
brother Basalat Jang, the Marathas of Poona and Haidar Ali. 
Although there was no direct clash of interests between the 
English and Nizam Ali, they kept a strict w r atch on his rela- 


1 P. A. ms. 238. It was published in 19 1 3, being edited by Mmtineau. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


ions with Haidar Ali and the Maiathas, Basal at Jang gave 
them some worry b) keeping in his service a party of French 
troops commanded by de Lai lee. With Haidar Ali, their 
former enemy, the English were for the time being on friendly 
terms, i bis rapprochement was the direct consequence of 
the arrogant conduct of the French Commandant of Mahc, 
Duprat and Repentigny, who had interfered in the quarrels 
of the neighbouring Princes and had not only gone against 
Haidar’s interests but had even threatened him with war. 1 
Although the actions of the two Chiefs were promptly dis¬ 
owned by the Pondicherry Government, they \ih a deep 
impression upon the mind of Haidar, who came ro look upon 
the French with increasing suspicion. The coolness between 
the French and Haidar was prompth exploited by the English 
at Bombay and I ellicherry, who tried to win over Haidar to 
their side and succeeded in obliterating the old bitterness of 
the first Anglo-Mvsore war. How far the English had won 
over Haidar was evident from their venturing on the first war 
with the Marathas tor the possession of Salsette and Bassein, 
which they would not have undertaken if they had not been 
sure about the friendly disposition of Haidar. In his bitter¬ 
ness against the French Haidar not only became reconciled 
with his old enemies, the English, but even approached the 
Dutch authorities at Cochin for a body of Dutch troops to 
replace the Frenchmen in his service, although ultimately the 
project did not materialise because of the refusal of the Batavia 
Government. Law considered it a very difficult task for the 
French to gain back the friendship of Haidar and to persuade 
him to enter into an anti-English coalition with the Marathas 
and Nizam Ali But at the same time he felt that Haidar's 
friendly relations with the English need not wonry the French 
very much, since in the ultimate analysis his policy would 
depend entirely <>n his own interest, and he would throw over 
the English the moment he would find that he had anything 
to gain by allying himself with the French. The fact was 
that "he is a soldier who thinks only of himself, who at heart 
detests Europeans of whatever nation they may be, who will 
nevertheless make use of them for his own interests because 


1 Sec Chapter 1 \ , section on Mah£. 


MIN ISTfiy 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—II 


nows their milirarv talents’. Hence the French also in 


their eagerness to gain his alliance must not think that they 
could control his policy with their troops in his service as the 
English controlled the policies of their Nawabs and Rajas. 

The Power about which the English had reason to feel 
most concerned was the Maratha Confederacy. II all the 
members who compose it are united and well cliiectcd, it a loin 
would suffice to destroy the English power because of the 
manner in which the Mara thus make war; burning and devas¬ 
tating the country, they would destroy the source of revenue 
and consequently deprive the English and their allies oi the 
means of maintaining their forces. I hat is the only Pov* ei, 
moreover, .sufficiently spread out to be able to attack the 
English in all their possessions at the same time, in Bengal 
as well as on the Coasts of Orissa. Coromandel and Malabar . 
But the English had succeeded in creating disunity among the 
Marathas, a situation which they had fully exploited m their 
recent war. 


Law next referred to the prevailing indifference in France 


to her Indian possessions. Ti here was a growing feeling that 
it was not necessary for the French to make any exertions for 
the destruction of the English power in India, which must 
fall one day by the sheer weight of its own expansion. People 
believed that there must rise an Indian genius one day, who, 
profiting bv the experience of European military technique 
and combining all the Indian Powers together, would succeed 
in driving out the English. Such an impression. Law con¬ 
sidered, was based on “the memory of an unfortunate ^var, feat 
of exposing oneself (to further losses) and spirit of economy”. 
The indifference was all the more regrettable since it was not 
impossible for the French to overthrow the Englis power with 
the help of a coalition of the Indian Princes. In fact, such 
a coalition together with the terms of an alliance with France 
had been proposed by the Marathas as early as 177*- 
Minister must have been informed about it and the whole 
circumstances must have been clearly explained to him by 
M. Beylie who reached France at the beginning of 1 77 a 
While not minimising the difficulty of forming a coalition of 
Indian Powers, Law did not think it insuperable. The pioject 
put forward by the Marathas in * 77 * ^ or an i since among 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



ein.selvcs, Nizam Ali, Basalat Jang and the French could be 
revived once move in spite of ihe events which had taken 
place since then, but the greatest problem was how to draw 
Haidar Ali also into the league. “To succeed in making a 


treaty of peace between him on one side and the Maruthas, 
Nizam Ali and Basalat Jang on the other would be a master¬ 
piece of diplomacy”. Law offered some suggestions for the 
successful formation of an anti-English coalition: to fix a 
definite time in advance for the arrival of French forces in 


India; to allot to each Power a particular region for military 
operations in order to avoid jealousy and dispute; to draw 
up a definite plan of division of territories among the Con¬ 
federates; and lastly to make a solemn declaration that the 
French had no intention of carving out a dominion for them¬ 
selves. except what was required to meet their military and 
administrative expenses. Finally, Law advised the necessity 
of winning the favour and support of the great Seths or bankers, 
who by virtue of their wealth wielded tremendous influence 
over all die governments in India and who were largely instru¬ 
mental in bringing about the revolution in Bengal in 1757. 

About the plan of operations. Law again discussed the 
relative advantages and disadvantages of four points of attack. 

_Calcutta, Madras, Masulipatam and Bombay. He advocated 

the concentration of all French forces in one theatre rathei 
than distributing them in small detachments in different part., 
of the country. As necessary preparations for the outbreak of 
hostilities he urged the need of fortifying Mah6, Yanam and 
karikal, besides Pondicherry, and suggested an important 
administrative change, namely the concentration of authority 
over all the French possessions to the east of the Cape of Good 
Hope in the hands of one Commandant-General with his seat 
in the Isle of France. The Commandant-General was to have 
a deputy under him, who would be responsible for maintaining 
relations with the Indian Powers and in times of war would 
have complete control over all military affairs. The Governor 
of Pondicherry was to be concerned with only routine* adminis¬ 
trative work, including trade and commerce, with control over 
the subordinate settlements. The subordination of the Indian 
settlements to the Isle of France was necessitated by the fact 
that the latter being an isolated post was better suited than 


MiN/sr^ 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS U 

Pondicherry to serve as a base for making secret military pre¬ 
parations without the knowledge of the English. 

Law next gave a comparison between the military resources 
of the English’and those of the French. The French did not 
possess a single base in India in a proper state of defence and 
the arsenal of Pondicherry did not have adequate munitions 
either for offence or for defence. It was difficult even to arm 
a small detachment of 400 persons for a campaign. Iheie 
were only 200 men in the artillery, 800 in the Regiment of 
Pondicherry of whom not more than 500 being fit for active 
service, and 200 sepoys with no experience of war. Law con¬ 
sidered that even in a time ol peace Pondicherry must have 
an artillery force of 400 men and a garrison of 2,000 Europeans 
and 2,000 sepoys, the latter being so organised as to be capable 
of being quadrupled in number on the outbreak of war. As 
against the meagre resources of the french, the English had 
‘{5,000 sepoys in Bengal, 20,000 on the Coromandel and 
Or: sa Coasts, and 15,000 on the Malabar Coast. They had 
about 10,000 European troops in all, 4,000 in Bengal, about 
the same number on the Coromandel and Orissa Coasts, and 
2.000 on the Malabar Coast. Besides, they possessed through 
out the country “fortified places, well-stocked with munitions 
of all kinds, and immense revenues which enabled them not 
only to augment their forces but also to cross us in our nego¬ 
tiations with the Indian Princes", it was all the more neces¬ 
sary' therefore that the French must make a good beginning, 
since the advantages of the English might be neutralised to 
some extent only by a brilliant success in the first attack. 

Law concluded his meinnire with an account of the I reach 
partisan armies in the service of the different Indian Princes, 
with a view to dispel the prevailing notion in France that their 
number was cpjire considerable and that they could be all 
recalled and induced to join the expeditionary force lo be 
sent out to India. He stated that the total number of such 
Frenchmen was by the most favourable calculation not more 
than 800. In the service of Haidar AH there was a small cavalry 
force of 100 men, the majority being French, commanded by 
Russel who had succeeded Hugel after the latter s death. I he 
Commander and the three or four officers under him held 
King s commissions Law kept up a regular correspondence 






umisTffy 



ith Russel, but in secret, in order not to rouse the jealousy 
of lire English and of Muhammad Ali, Nawab of the Carnatic. 
Under cover of an affected indifference be used to send Russel 
additional men from Pondicherry from time to time to streng¬ 
then his corps. There was another small force, known as the 
Swiss party, in the service of Basalat Jang, commanded by 
dc l.allde who had served under Hussy. The corps consisted 


of three to four hundred men, belonging to different nation¬ 
alities, the majority being French. Unlike Russel s corps, de 
La tide's was not authorised by the French Government. At 
the beginning of Law’s administration the party was com¬ 
manded by Babel, commonly known as Zephir. 1 he latter 
had earned such military distinction that the English had 
asked the Pondicherry Government for his recall, to which 
l,aw had replied that Zephir arid his men were not under his 
orders. After the death of Zdphir the corps was commanded 
for a short while bv Garde, who was succeeded by de Lallee. 


As with Russel. Law kept up a secret correspondence with tie 
LaUde also. The men belonging to his corps were paid and 
treated bettor than those antler Russel, and there was also a 
greater measure of liberty and equality among them, which 
was the reason why more men at Pondicherry wanted to join 
de Lallce's corps in preference to Russel s. Law was doubtful 
about the extent to which France could derive any benefit 
from these two partisan armies in her hour of need, since 
there was little ground to believe that they could put effective 
pressure upon their masters to give full co-operation to i!:e 
French. He next referred 10 the two partisan armies in the 
north in the service of the Mughal Emperor, one under Madec 


and the other under Sombre. Matters force at the time was 
very weak in European element, only tso men. Sombre's 
force was much larger, but he was concerned only about his 
own advancement and could not be induced to take any risks 
for serving France There was another partisan leader named 
Rouveau in the service of the. ruler of kalpi. He had origin¬ 


ally belonged to Law's corps in the service of Prince Ali Gauhar 
and had later served under Zephir, Garde and dc Lallee. 


There was lastly a small french force under Lanois in the 
service of the Raja of Travancore. Although the French 
Government had declared a general amnesty to all deserters 


misTfy 



who had taken service under Indian Princes, Law entertained 
the gravest doubt about how much it would succeed in making 
them quit their existing positions and rejoin the service of 
their nation. 

The next m&moire of Law that we may notice is the 
Reflexions sur la Proposition de faire passer 4,000 homines A 
Delhi et sur la Province de Tatla , dated ph June 1777'. In 
it he discussed the practicability of Chevalier's project,—an 
alliance with the Mughal Emperor, despatch of pnoo French 
troops to India, occupation of the province of Tatta and a 
joint attack on Bengal. He started by showing the impossibi¬ 
lity of sending 4,000 troops to Delhi with the ultimate intention 
of delivering a joint attack on Bengal without a previous 
alliance with some of the great Powers of India which were in 
a condition to facilitate the march ol the french army. 1 here 
were two reasons for it : first, the march of a French army to 
Delhi would inevitable lead to a war with the F.ngli h, and 
second, the appearance of 4,000 French troops to support the 
Emperor would at once unite all the vassals against him for 
fear of an attempt to restore the old Imperial authority over 
them. There might be some who would argue that even if the 
attack on Bengal did not materialise, the alliance with the 
Emperor and the despatch of 4.000 troops to India would at 
least enable the French to acquire the province of J atta. which 
from the commercial point of view would compensate them for 
their losses in other parts of India. But that was a wholly 
wrong impression, since Tatta did not produce any article 

which could be exported to Europe. 

Law then declared that for succes in the enterprise again# 
Bengal the essential prerequisite was an alliance with the 
Marathas, the most warlike nation in India and having the 
most extensive dominions. With their help the French could 
easily land troops on the Orissa Coast and attack Bengal cithci 
from the south or from the north-west. Even if it was neces¬ 
sary to send a body of troops to Delhi, the best and the shortest 
routes were those which passed through Maratha territories 
from the Malabar Coast. In any case, without an alliance with 
the Marathas the French could do nothing. The despatch of 

. Martincau EM Politique de Pled, m , 777 par Law de I.aurnton. 



THF FRENCH IN INDIA 



'A.mpys to Delhi without any reference to them would at once 
set them against the French and even throw them into the arms 
of the English. 

Lastly, Law declared that, the confident expectation of an 
easy success against the English entertained by Chevalier was 
entirely baseless and that the French must be prepared for a 
stiff resistance. Chevalier had underestimated the military 
strength of the English, who had in fact 10,000 European 
troops and ho,000 sepoys well-trained and disciplined. He had 
besides overlooked that an attack on Bengal would automati¬ 
cally lead to hostilities on the Malabar and Coromandel Coasts, 
where the French must have sufficient forces to oppose the 
English, Thus, as Law concluded, if an attempt Was to be 
made against the English. “It is necessary to employ large 
resources; small means will never be sufficient.” 

There is another memoitr of the same date, 4th June 1777. 
Supplement aux observations stir Veldt actuel dc VlndeS The 
object of this mthnoin was to specify the demands which the 
French could make upon the English for territorial and com 
mercial concessions in India if the latter wanted to avoid a 
war. Law stated that his previous mrmoires had amply 
demonstrated that the French could not expect to re-establish 
their position in India on a satisfactory footing except by 
employing military measures on a large scale or by impressing 
upon the English that they were in a position to do so. From 
the beginning of his administration he had made repeated 
representations to the Minister for the adoption of vigorous 
measures in India; but it was not till the appointment of Belle- 
combe that the French Government began to pay serious atten¬ 
tion to the in liter. Law stated “mam membires and observa 
tions have been submitted on India which may be of help in 
planning a line of action if it is a question of open war.” But 
he believed that even without going to the extremity of open 
hostility the French could improve their situation in India 
considerably by negotiation, if they were in a position to threaten 
the English with immediate and large-scale war. The English 
could not welcome a war in India since they stood to lose more, 

1 P. A. ms. 255; .tIso published by Martincau in Etat Politique dc 


l* tndc 


Ml NISTffy 


I>1 FI „OMATIC PRO J ECTI'S— II 



ibr 


and in order to avert hostilities they would be willing to make 
some concessions to the French. Negotiations for that purpose 
must be carried on in Europe, and not in India, by the Minis 
ters of the two countries, and a representative of the English 
East India Company must also be associated in order to prevent 
the employees of the Company in India from creating dilhcu! 
tics in the implementation of ihc treaty, as they had done on 
many occasions in the past. 

As regards the demands to be made, Law classified them 
into two categories, general and local. In the first category h< 
included the restitution of all the old rights and privileges 
granted to the French by the Formans and Parawanas of the 
Mughal Emperor and Provincial Governors, the right to 
establish trading stations anywhere in India and to export and 
import commodities without any restriction, the validity <l 
French Dastaks or commercial passports, and freedom of 
navigation in all the rivers. In the second category were m 
eluded, so far as Bengal was concerned, freedom of navigation 
in the Ganges, freedom of export and import, Ireedorn o 
trade in salt, opium and saltpetre, cession of a territory adjoin¬ 
ing Chandernagore and yielding a revenue of two lakhs of 
rupees, and right to maintain aoo European troops, 1,000 sepoys 
and 50 artillerymen with 40 pieces of cannon and to construct 
a canal round the town, the previous one completed in i 7 <’ s 
having been destroyed by the English. As regards the Orissa 
Coast, the French were to ask for complete liberty of trade at 
Vanam with some territorial concessions, exchange of then 
settlement at Masulipatam for a new one to be established at 
Motupalli or elsewhere, and restitution of the old settlement 
at Gan jam. On the Coromandel Coast the French were t<» 
demand the abolition of the customs houses at Pondicherry 
belonging to the Nawab of the Carnatic, the cession of a tern 
tory yielding a revenue of eight to nine lakhs of lupees a year 
and stretching along the coast from the river Markam or 
Allamparve in the north to Porto Novo in the south, that port 
inclusive, with a breadth of ten to fifteen leagues. Cuddalore 
would be included in that area, bringing an additional revenue 
of one lakh of rupees. At Karikal the French were to ask for 
the four Parganas which they formerly possessed, yielding an 
annual revenue of one lakh of rupees, together with complete 




L 


mtSTfiy 



^freedom of navigation in the river. On the western coast the 
French were to ask lor liberty of trade at Surat and strict orders 
to the English authorities at fellicherry not to do anything 
which might injure the interests of the French at Mah£. 

We may next notice another interesting document, De 
mandes et. Questions faites d Af. Law par Af. de Bellecombe et 
Reponses de M. Law. 1 It contains .Law’s replies to a number 
of questions put to him by his successor in office, Bellecombe, 
regarding the administration and commerce of the French 
settlements in India and relations with the country Powers 
One would get here a precise summary of Law’s views about 
the existing condition of the French and the means by which 
it could be improved, which had already been expressed in 
numerous memories and letters. In reply to one of the ques¬ 
tions of Bellecombe about the Powers allied to the French, Law 
stated that there was no formal alliance with any country 
Power in view of the orders of the Government prohibiting anv 
interference in the internal quarrels of the Indian Princes or 
in a dispute between an Indian Prince and a European Power. 
Moreover, the political situation in India was so quickly shift¬ 
ing that it would serve little practical use to conclude a formal 
alliance long in advance, since the engagements contracted 
might be disowned when the occasion came. During the period 
of his administration Law had tried to cultivate friendly rela¬ 
tions with the important country Powers, including the Mughal 
Emperor. Ehey were all interested in a common objective, the 
destruction of the English power in India, but subordinated 
the collective interest to their mutual rivalries and jealousies. 
In the absence of a general combination of all the Powers, 
which was extremely difficult to achieve, the French must 
con lent themselves with forming alliances with some of them. 
Negotiations were already in progress with rhe Mughal Emperor. 
Haidar Ali and the Marathas, and talks could also be started 
with Nizam Ali and Basalat Jang. About the advantages and 
difficulties of such negotiations Law referred Bellecombe to his 
Observations stir Mat politique de VJnde. 

In reply to another question of Bellecombe Law gave full 

1 P* A. ms. s$6. The questions put by Bellecombe are dated 9th 
January 1777 and law’s replies are dated 31st March. 


MINlSr^ 



particulars about the agents, official and non official, main¬ 
tained by the Pondicherry Government at the Courts of the 
different Indian Princes as also in the various European settle¬ 
ments. At the Court of Haidar Ali there was a permanent 

i Vakil, a Brahmin named Krishna. The official representation 
was required both in the interest of the settlement at Mahd as 
well as in that of the French corps under Russel. I he Wakil 
was honest, intelligent and loyal and was paid Rs. too per 
month. There was no paid official agent at the Courts of 

Nizam Ali, and Basnlat Jang, but Law had kept up a regular 

correspondence with tie Lallee, who commanded the Swiss 
party in the service of Basalat Jang and was loyal to Trance. 
\t the Court of Muhammad Ali there was an official Wakil 
named Venkata Rao. who passed on every information of 
interest to the French. He was paid Rs. fio per month. Occa¬ 
sionally Law used to send BeyliC a member of the Pondicherry 
Council, to get full details about any interesting development. 
He also made use of two servants of Muhammad Ali, Shiva 
Rao, who for many years was paid an allowance of Rs. ,‘jo per 
month, and Khoja Hassan Khan, who was remunerated with 
annual presents. Both of them were useful agents for getting 
all the secrets of Muhammad All's Court. Before the capture 
of Tanjore by Muhammad Ali in * 773 » ^ a J a ,,set ' to ma * n 
tain a Wakil at Pondicherry whom the French also paid Rs. .45 
per month. But the practice was not resumed after the 
restoration of the Raja, and French relations with Tanjore were 
conducted through the Commandant of Karikal. I he only 
European agent employed was de Montvert, whom Law had 
permitted Chevalier to send to the Court of Delhi to conclude 
negotiations about the proposal of an alliance made by the 
Emperor. There was no regular paid agent at the Maratha 
Court at Poona, but there were two persons of great use to the 
French. One was Raza Ali, son of Chanda Sahib, their okl 
ally, who had a close relative at Pondicherry named Mir 
Mahmud Raza; and the other was Dada Rao. who was in the 
service of Muhammad Ali and a brother of Shiva Rao. 1 hesc 
two brothers were the sons of Naga Rao, who had been 
employed by Bussy on political missions. Naga Rao had died 
eight or nine years back in the service of Muhammad Ali. Law 
had intended to enter into negotiations with the Maratha Court 





through the channel of the two brothers, who were closely 
allied with Khoja Hassan Khan, and he had been waiting only 
for the formal orders of the Minister. The French had no 
regular agent at the various European settlements. It would 
have been useful no doubt, but lack of f unds stood in the 
way. However, the Diwan of Pondicherry used to carry on 
correspondence with persons at Madras under the pretext of 
commerce and could get in that way much valuable informa 
lion. Frequently sepoys in disguise were also utilised for the 
purpose, and Law recommended that his successor should try 
to find out men from the sepoys having talents for secret 
service. 

Lastly, we may notice Law’s Memoire MHilaire sur V hide' 
written in 1780, when two years after the outbreak of war the 
French Government was seriously contemplating for the first 
time the despatch of a strong expeditionary force to India, li 
was one of the many military mimoires submitted to the Gov¬ 
ernment at the request of the Minister of Marine and Colonies, 
who sought the opinion of persons having a detailed knowledge 
of Indian politics. The plan submitted by Law is interesting 
not only for its contents but alsp for the difference between its 
recommendations and the actual organisation and plan of 
operations of the expeditionary force sent to India shortly after. 
Law began his memoire bv stressing the immediate need of 
sending a strong expeditionary force to India in place of the 
existing policy of the French Government to concentrate 
entirely on ihc European and American theatres. There were 
two reasons; first, if England retained her position of supre¬ 
macy in India it would give her an undue dominance in the 
European political system, and second, England could never be 
defeated in Europe unless the steady flow of wealth from India 
could be stopped by a direct attack on her position there. 

Law next dealt with the four points of attack against the 
English and the prospect of gaining allies among the country 
Powers. He stated that although in his memoire of 1767 he 
had expressed his preference for Bengal, and failing that the 
Coromandel Coast, as the first theatre of operations against the 
English, things had changed greatly since then, making it 


* P. A. nis. 321, 


Ml NlST/fy 



i>IPl OMATIC PROJECTS—If 


.(si. 


extremely difficult for the French to deliver their first attack 
in either of the two regions. Under the circumstances the first 
attack could be delivered either on the Orissa or on the Malabar 
Coast, of which the second was decidedly preferable. Law then 
discussed the advantages offered by the two regions. “The 
English not being in a strong position on the Orissa Coast, we 
can easily land there at several points and ally ourselves with 
the various Rajas who want nothing better than to throw off 
the yoke of the English. It is even possible, with the help of 
Nizam Ali, Viceroy of the Deccan, to whom really belong the 
four Sarkars. to seize the English possessions round Masulipa- 

tarn and to lay siege to the place.Vizagapatam may 

be captured without much trouble, thus cutting off the English 
communication between Bengal and the Coromandel Coast, 
specially if our naval squadron can defeat that of the enemy 
and achieve supremacy on the sea.” 

Law continued: “The safest theatre to begin our opera¬ 
tion* is undoubtedly the Malabar Coast, where we may have or? 
our side both the Marathas and Hyder Ali Khan who have 
been at war with the English for a long time. It is Bombay 
itself which should be attacked at the earliest possible moment 
or when the English least expect it. That place being captured, 
we shall have an excellent port for our vessels. Surat will fall 
automatically, and by the treaty which we shall be able to 
conclude with the Marathas and Hyder Ali Khan whose various 
ports will be open to us, all the small English settlements along 
the coast will be ours, and we shall thus open out for ourselves 
routes both to Delhi and to the Carnatic.” While expressing 
his preference for the Malabar Coast as the first point of attack. 
Law, however, observed that the principal objective of the 
French should always be Bengal, and all the earlier operations 
were to be regarded as merely preliminary steps to an attack 
on that province. Bengal was the source of the English power 
in India, and with its conquest English resistance in other parts 
of India would end automatically. If it were possible to attack 
Bengal first. Law would have advised that course, but since it 
would take a long time to collect all the resources necessary for 
such an enterprise, arms, men and allies, he advised the begin¬ 
ning of operations on the Malabar Coast as the first preliminary 
move. 




On the Malabar Coast the French should try to gain the 
alliance of both the Marathas and Haidar Ali. It was no doubt 
a difficult task because of the intense jealousy and suspicion 
between the two, but Law believed that “by means of skilfully 
conducted negotiations we shall succeed in conciliating the 
interests of Hyder Ali Khan with those of the Marathas, in 
uniting them by exposing all the wickedness of the English 
policy, and in engaging them to work in concert with us in 
order to reduce the power of that nation”. If the French 
secured the alliance of both, they could also expect to win over 
Nizam Ali to their side by promising the restitution of the 
Carnatic and the four Sarkars. If, however, the French had 
to choose between the Marathas and Haidar Ali, preference 
should be given to the former. “If we are with the Marathas, 
even without Hyder Ali Khan, Nizam Ali will still be with us; 
but if we have only Hyder Alt on our side and the Marathas 
against, Nizam Ali will also probably be against us, because 
the increasing power of Hyder Ali Khan disturbs him gn tly.” 

Law next referred to the forces required by the i ench 
for the Indian enterprise. The English had in India 8 ships 
of the line and 20 frigates, and their land forces consisted of 
about 10,000 Europeans and 60,000 sepoys. Against such a 
formidable enemy the French must have an army very strong 
in European element, since they would be lacking in the sepoy 
element which would take a long time to raise and train up. 
Law estimated that the French would require a naval force of 
12 ships of the line and an equal number of frigates and a 
land force of 12,000 Europeans and 2,000 African troops. A 
further reinforcement of 3,000 Europeans should also be kept 
ready in the Isle of France. Law then discussed at length the 
time and plan of operations. He wanted to take the English 
by surprise and capture Bombay at 1 time when their fleet 
would be absent from the western coast during the interval 
between two monsoons. He therefore advised that the expedh 
tion should start from France in December 1780, reaching the 
Cape of Good Hope in April 1781. From there the Supreme 
Commander was to send instructions to the Isle of France to 
despatch all available troops and ships to the Bay of St. 
Augustin in the island of Madagascar according to a pre¬ 
arranged plan. Then the fleet was to start from the Cape at 


miSTfiy 



ihe beginning of June 1781 and after being joined by the re 
inforcements at Madagascar, without stopping at the Isle of 
France, was to reach the Malabar Coast about the middle of 
August when the weather would begin to improve. Bombay 
could then be easily surprised and captured, particularly as the 
English fleet would he away from the western coast at the time, 
and nobody could expect that a French expeditionary force 
could come straight to India without stopping at the Isle of 
France for some time. The success of the enterprise, however, 
depended on the maintenance of complete secrecy. After 
capturing Bombay by surprise, the French should take the 
earliest opportunity to meet and destroy the English fleet, 
which would facilitate their further operations against Bengal 
and the Coromandel Coast. The first task of the Supreme 
Commander, after taking Bombay, was to gain the alliance of 
the Marathas, Haidar Ali and Nizam Ali, which would enable 
the French to attack the Carnatic and the English possessions 
on the Orissa Coast. At the same time in order to facilitate 
the invasion of Bengal, the principal object of the French enter¬ 
prise, negotiations must be started with the Mughal Emperor, 
the Nawab of Oudh, the Nagpur branch of the Marathas, and 
the influential Seths or bankers of Bengal. The actual time of 
the expedition to Bengal, either before or after the reduction 
of the English settlements on the Coromandel Coast, should be 
left to the discretion of the Supreme Commander, fo assure 
success, Bengal must be attacked simultaneously from three 
sides, north, west and south, in cooperation with the Indian 
allies. 

Such was the plan of military operations put forward by 
Law. We shall notice later the comments of Bellecombe, who 
did not share the optimism of Law, but agreed with him on 
two points,—hist, that the French must have naval superiority 
in Indian waters, and second that Bombay must be captured 
before beginning operations elsewhere. Here it will be in¬ 
teresting to note how the organisation and plan of operations 
cf the expeditionary force under Bussy differed from the scheme 
submitted by Law. In the first place. Law wanted the expedi¬ 
tionary force to reach India by August 1781, which would have 
given the French much longer time for military operations. As 
it was. the first instalment of the French force reached India 



Ml HIST*,, 



Till FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


TfTMarch 1782 and the resi in March 1785. just before the news 
of the armistice stopped ail hostilities. In the second place, 
Law envisaged an expedition on a much larger scale than 
actually sent under Hussy, (he French squadron under de 
Suffren was considerably weaker and the land force was only a 
quarter of what was proposed by Law. In the third place, Law 
recommended the operations to begin on the Malabar Coast, 
with the first blow being struck against Bombay, whereas the 


French in 1782-83 frittered away their efforts on the Coro¬ 
mandel Coast and no attempt was made to land troops on the 
western coast. Finally, while Law attached greater importance 
to an alliance with the Marathas than with Haidar Ali, the 
French in 1782-83 clung to their connection with the Mysore 
ruler, while the proposals of the Marathas were treated with 
undue caution and mistrust. 


Bellecombe 


We turn next to the political views of Belleconibe who 
succeeded Law as Governor of Pondicherry in January 1 7 / / * 
The first memoire of Belleconibe that we may notice is a repoit 
on the political situation in India, dated 24th January I 77 ®- 1 
It was his first general report to the Minister of Marine and 
Colonies since his assumption of office at Pondicherry. Belli' 
combe first dealt with the political situation in north India. 
He wrote that from the reports received from Chevalier in 
Bengal it appeared that the position of the Mughal Em per 01 
had improved considerably mainly due to the courage and 
ability of his general, Najaf Khan, an extraordinary man, as 
skilful in war as astute in diplomacy. le had a well-trained 
army including European partisan forces, and bis e&rliei sue 
cesses held out reasonable hopes for further expansion and 
consolidation of the Imperial authority. Beilecombe had also 
been informed that Asaf ud-daulah, the Nawab of Oudh, was 
tired of English control, but he doubted whether the Nawab 
would have the coinage to throw off the yoke of the English 
and ally himself with the Emperor. Another important power 
in the north was Raja of Gohad who was constantly extending 


1 F. A. im *89. 


miSTffy 



Ins dominion and had a cavalry of nearly fifty thousand. He 
had also purchased the remnant of Madec’s force under the 
command of Visage. He was pro French in sympathy and was 
in close alliance with Najaf Khan. 

Bellecombe next referred to the internal dissensions among 
the Marathas, which were being fully exploited by the English. 
Although the latter had concluded peace in 1776, they were 
making fresh preparations for war, either to renew hostilities 
against the Marathas or in anticipation of a war with the 
French. Even in the latter case they were sure to attempt a 
change of Government at Poona in order to be free from any 
possible danger from that quarter. It might not be very diffi¬ 
cult for them, since besides the alliance with Raghoba they 
were in communication with the Maratha ruler of Nagpur as 
well as with Sindhia. Writing about Haidar, Bellecombe stated 
that he was steadily improving his position, partly by military 
sirengih and partly by diplomacy He had recently succeeded 
in breaking up the formidable coalition formed against him by 
the Marathas, Nizam Ali and Basalat Jang, and having detached 
the last two had inflicted a crushing defeat on the first. Belle 
combe believed that the English would try to exploit the enmity 
between the Marathas and Haidar Ali. If the attention of the 
Marathas could be diverted to an attack on Haidar’s territory 
and their forces kept occupied far off from Poona, the English 
could make a surprise move ancl capture the Maratha capital. 
By drawing the Marathas of Nagpur to their side they would 
be able to keep in check Nizam Ali and Basalat Jang. 

With regard to the Coromandel Coast, Bellecombe had 
received information that Madias was full of rumours about 
the imminence of a war with France. Military officers on leave 
were being recalled, new sepoys recruited and provisions hastily 
stored. The rumours had also reached the Orissa Coast. Some 
of the petty Rajas in the Northern Sarkars had written to 
Bellecombe and even sent Wakils to him, pledging their support 
to the French in case of a war with the English. About the 
situation in Bengal, Bellecombe had received letters from 
Chevalier that the English, apprehending an imminent out¬ 
break of war with France, were recalling all their troops from 
the north western frontier. The withdrawal of English troops 
would make it easier for the Emperor and Najaf Khan to free 


WHISTfiy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


from English domii (ion, specially if Asaf-ud-daulah 
joined them, and even to invade Bengal. But by themselves 
Indian Powers would never be able to defeat the English. A 


successful invasion of Bengal required a three-pronged attack 
by the Imperial forces, the Marathas of Berar and the French. 
While Xajaf Khan led an invading army from the north, a 
combined Franco-Maratha force was to penetrate through the 
west, while the principal French force was to move up the 
Ganges and attack from the south. The English were not 
unaware of such a danger, and in order to draw the Marathas 
of Berar to their side they had sent an agent for negotiation. 
On the French side too, Chevalier had been authorised to send 
a Wakil to counteract the persuasions of the English. Belle- 
combe had also authorised Chevalier to send a Wakil to the 
Emperor at Delhi, but, he observed with regret, it was useless 
to negotiate unless the French could show that they had 
adequate military forces to fulfil their engagements. Under the 
existing circumstances “the treaties that we may wish to con¬ 
clude with the Powers will only serve to make them realise 
more and more how little they could count on us. One may 

prepare the ground, it is true.but what is the use of 

concluding a treaty without being assured of the power of 
fulfilling it?”. 

There is another mi moire of Bellecombe of the same date, 
j*4th January 1778, Observations sur les Cipayes. 1 In it he 
stressed the importance of a sepoy force in a wav with the 
English and the necessity of recruiting men long in advance of 
the outbreak of hostilities. I he second point of interest of the 
mimoire is that Bellecombe here gave his views as to whether 
the French should choose the Marathas or Haidar Ali if both 
of them could not be brought together into a coalition against 
the English. The third point of interest is that the mimoire 
contained a scathing criticism oi Saint Lubin, which w f as also a 
condemnation of the policy of the Minister of Marine and 
Colonies. Such outspoken comments from a Governor of 
Pondicherry are astonishing indeed. 

The mimoire began with a warning that in a plan of mili¬ 
tary operations in India that might be drawn up in France 


1 P. A. ms. 290. 




DIPl .OM A no PROJECTS—fl 



There was a great risk of neglecting a vital point through 
ignorance, namely, the necessity of raising a large body of 
sepoy troops, to be trained and disciplined in the European 
fashion, long in advance ol the outbreak of war. Bcllecombe 
stated that the necessity of having a large sepoy force arose 
simply from the fact that it would never be possible for the 
French to bring from Europe sufficient troops to be able to face 
the overwhelming nunlber of the English forces in India, which 
included about sixty thousand sepoys, besides those in the 
service of vassal Princes like Asaf ud-daulah and Muhammad 
Ali. People in France had no idea about the efficiency and 
fighting quality of the Indian sepoys, but in truth #< if the 
English win, it will be by the number and the valour of their 
sepoys.” Moreover, if the French had only European troops 
for their operations in India, it would be extremely difficult to 
make good any losses in their number. Bringing fresh troops 
from Europe would involve huge expense and waste of time, 
leaving aside the risk of transport. Thus the loss of 20 Euro¬ 
pean soldiers would be of much greater concern to the French 
than that of 500 sepoys to the English. 

Bellecombe then dealt with the second wrong impression 
in France that any number of sepoy troops could be raised in 
India within a month of the outbreak of war. He pointed 
out that the fate of the French operations in India would 
depend largely on the result of the first encounter. At the 
very start, therefore, the French must have an adequate force to 
oppose the enemy. That necessitated the raising of a sepoy 
force well in advance of the declaration of war, since it took a 
long time to get the right type of recruits and to train and 
discipline them in the European fashion. Bellecombe then 
suggested that immediate orders should be sent by the Minister 
to increase the existing sepoy force of 500 to at least 2,000. 
The force was to be organised in four Battalions of 500 each 
or better eight Battalions of 250, with an adequate number of 
European officers. The number of sepoys could then be 
quadrupled in a short while, as the new recruits in each Com¬ 
pany would be quick to learn from the old ones and there 
would be no sudden demand for European officers. 

Bcllecombe next discussed the difficulty of uniting Haidar 
Ali and the Maratbas in an anti-English coalition and the 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

of having to choose one of the two for an 
alliance. His opinion was that under the existing circumstan¬ 
ces an alliance with Haidar Ali should be preferred. He gave 
two reasons for his choice. First, Haidar All's troops were 
better trained and disciplined and therefore more dependable 
in action than those of the Marathas; and second, an alliance 
with. Haidar would at least create less difficulties for the French 
than an alliance with the Marathas. If the French chose 
Haidar, the Marathas would at least remain neutral and not 
join the English, since there were numerous causes of dispute 
between them. On the other hand, if the French allied them¬ 
selves with the Marathas, there vva every possibility of Haidar 
openly joining the English out of jealousy for the Marathas 
and fear of an increase in their power. It was not in the least 
difficult for Haidar to join the English, since for many years 
he had no cause of complaint against them, had even received 
valuable services from them and was therefore anxious to 
retain their friendship. Considering the matter from the 
opposite point of view. Bellecombc raised the question that if 
the French were to have one of the two Powers as their enemy, 
which one should they choose? Fie himself thought that in 
the existing state of affairs the enmity of Haidar Ali was more 
to be dreaded than that of the Marathas. It was not so live 
or six years earlier. Haidar Ali was then in a sorry state, while 
the Marathas stood as the leading Power in India. But since 
the outbreak of internal dissensions, the Maratha power had 
rapidly declined, while Haidar Ali was getting stronger every 
day. Another thing to be considered was that the French did 
not have to fear the enmity of the entire Maratha nation. The 
Marathas were so much divided among themselves that if the 
English secured the alliance of one party, the other party was 
sure to join the French. 

The third subject dealt with in the me moire was Saini- 
l.ubin's mission to Poona. Bellecombe passed severe strictures 
on Suint-Lubin s character and competence, calling him “an 
adept in intrigue and falsehood'*, who had successfully ex¬ 
ploited the credulity of the French nation" since his return 
from India in 1770. BcUecorobe knew his antecedents too 
well. He had entered the service of Haidar Ali in 1766, and 
had not only deserted him in 1767 on the outbreak of war with 




rmsr# y 



the English, but had even taken up his residence at Madras, 
where his activities were shady in character. On his return to 
France n 1770, he explained that he had gone to Madras to 
play upon the English and ruin them by intrigues and inter¬ 
nal dissensions. He imposed upon the credulity of the French 
Government and the public with so much success that he was 
granted a considerable pension and was regarded as the only 
person capable of creating a revolution in India. Bellecofttbe 
then bitterly observed, Today it is really our nation and the 
Ring’s Minister that he is playing upon; L give him that credit 
without however meaning to do so.” Saint-Lubin was given 
access to the official records at Versailles, and like a clever man 
he utilised all the memoires on India down to 1772. These 
mnnoires mostly recommended an alliance with the Marathas 
in preference to that with Haidar Ali; hut, as Bcllecornbe 
pointed out, Saint-Lubin was completely ignorant of the 
change that had come over since 1772 in the relative positions 
of the two Powers. Finally, Saint-Lubin submitted a nifrnoive 
of his own to the Minister. It was well received, because of 
the style of writing and of the omission of the difficulties to 
be encountered in its execution. Unfortunately for the French, 
although the political situation in India had changed com¬ 
pletely by 1776 and the Minister had been informed about 
all the developments, he ultimately accepted the plan of Saint- 
Lubin and decided to send him out to India to execute it. 

Bellecombe had information that the Poona Government 
had considerable misgivings about the bonafides of Saint-Lubin. 
It was not in the least surprising, since the Marathas were not 
“unaware of the tricks of Saint-Lubin while he waf with the 
\ T abab Haidar Ali Khan and of his precipitate flight from his 
camp to go and serve the English”. The essential point for 
the success of a mission like that of Saint-Lubin was not only 
to unite the different. Mar at ha Chiefs subject to the Govern¬ 
ment of Poona but also to bring about a solid understanding 
among the Marathas of Poona, those of Berar, and Haidar 
Ali. But to work for such a coalition "it required another man 

than Saint-Lubin., to be guided in his operations by 

the Commandant-General of the nation, without whose inter¬ 
vention the country Powers cannot give their confidence to any 
person whatsoever, specially to a person like Saint-Lubin known 



minis ^ 



rn be an adventurer, on whose word or good faith no one can 


rely". 

I he third me moire of Bellecombe that we may notice is 
the Reftcrions sur le md moire de M. Law, dated 1781 1 It was 
written as a comment on Law’s Mimoire Militaire sur L’lndc 
of 1780. In his mimoire Law had submitted two plans of 
military operations in India, one on a larger scale, requiring 
15? men-of-war, 1* frigates, and 12,000 European troops; and 
another on a smaller scale, which was in essence the Tatta pro 
ject of Chevalier. Bellecombe wholly rejected the second plan, 
as diverting the attention of the French from what should he 
their real objective. "Our real interest is to establish ourselves 
solidly in India. The English have forced us out, and the 
honour of the nation requires our re-entry at least on a footing 
of equality with them and taking revenge for all the out 
rages they have committed. What would people think of us 
if they see us attempt to usurp the country of an Indian Prince 
in place of recovering the territory taken from us and of 
driving the English out of their own establishments? Would 
it not be a dishonourable confession of our own impotence?” 
As regards the larger plan. Bellecombe preferred it without 
sharing the unreserved optimism of Law. He was of opinion 
that military successes in India would be of no avail unless 
the French were equally successful in Europe and America. 

I he means demanded by Law, supposing that the Government 
can employ them, would never suffice to drive the English 

out of India.if we do not have in other parts of the 

world an absolute superiority over that Power”. If victory 
favoured the English in Europe and America, they could gain 
back their Indian possessions by the treaty of peace. Thus 
Bellecombe agreed to the despatch of a large expeditionary 
force to India only it the military situation in Europe and 
America permitted. 

For success in the Indian enterprise the beginning was 
most important, and Bellecombe therefore recommended that 
the first attack should be delivered with forces superior to 
those of the English. The destruction of the enemy fleet was 
an essential preliminary, which would enable the Freoeh to 


1 P, A. ms. 3*3. 


Ml NISTffy, 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—fl 


<§L 


their troops to any point they liked. Beltecoinbc agreed 
with Law that the first attack should be delivered on Bombay, 
the possession of which would give the French a safe shelter fox 
heir ships in all seasons and a secure base for their future 
operations. As regards the strength of the expeditionary force, 
Bellecombe thought that it should start with ships and 
8,000 European troops. Such a force would not cost l 4 ranee 
much additional expense. She had already to maintain a con¬ 
siderable number of troops and ships in the Isle of 1 *ranee for 
fear of an attack by the English. But the best defence for the 
Isle of France was to carry the war to the centre of the English 
possessions in India. Thus all the troops, vessels and money 
t employed for the defence of the Isle of France could be diverted 
to the Indian expedition. The 3.000 troops maintained in 
that island, added to the 4,000 to be sent from France and the 
Regiment of Pondicherry, would make the total of 8*000 rc 
quired for the Indian expedition; and the major portion of the 
twelve to fifteen million livres spent in the island could be 
utilised for the same purpose. 


urnsT/f 


CHAIIEK VII 




DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS: SAIN L-LUBIN, MON TIG NV 
AND OTHERS 

In the present chapter we shall notice the diplomatic 
projects and activities of two agents sent to India by the 
Minister of Marine and Colonies on the eve of the outbreak of 
war between France and England in 1778. I he efforts of both 
the agents, Saint-Lubin and Montigny, were concentrated 
principally on forming an alliance with the Maratha Con¬ 
federacy, and although they did not bear fruit they are of deep 
interest, as showing the trend of French policy in India during 
the War of American Independence and the reactions it pro¬ 
duced on the southern Powers and the English. Besides the 
work of these two semi-offic ial agents, we shall also notice a lew 
anonymous inemoires, which will complete our review of French 
diplomatic projects between 1765 and 17^3 

Saint-Lubin 

The French diplomatic agent who gained the greatest 
notoriety in the eyes of the English, even more than Chevalier, 
was Pallcbot de Saint-Lubin, whose mission to Poona was 
viewed with great alarm by the Governments of Bombay and 
Calcutta. The extent of their panic is best illustrated by the 
large mass of documents relating to Saint-Lubin s activities 
preserved in the Bombay Archives and published by Forrest 
in his Selections from Letters Despatches etc., Bombay Secre¬ 
tariat , Maratha Series. It is rather surprising that the English, 
who were so much alarmed at Saint-Lubin s activities, felt 
little concern about Montigny, who remained at Poona for a 
longer period and whose diplomatic net was cast wider. It 
is all die more surprising, because Saint-Lubin was after all an 
impostor and could not have done any material damage to 
English interests in India. With the exception of Comte de 
Modave, who expressed a high opinion about Saint-Lubin, 
all the other contemporary Frenchmen in India, including 


miSTfiy 



Bellecombc, Governor of Pondicherry, considered him as a 
mere unprincipled adventurer, who had for a time successfully 
imposed on the credulity of the Minister of Marine and 
Colonies, de Sartine. No one thought of him as anything but 
a successful knave, or attached the slightest importance to his 
negotiations with die Maratha Government. Bellecombe made 
a violent and sarcastic attack on him in a mimoire dated 24th 
January 1778, noticed already, even though he knew that Saint- 
Lubin enjoyed the favour of the Minister and had been sent 
out to India b> him. The contemporary estimate of Saint- 
Lubin's character is fully borne out by his own letters and 
narratives, preserved In the Archives of the French Colonial 
Ministry, dealing with his exploits in India at dilferent times, 
which in ridiculous self-exaltation surpass anything that may 
be conceived. It is true that most of the French adventurers 
in India in the second half of the 18th century were not remark¬ 
able for their integrity and moderation. Most of them were 
prone to exaggerate things, either out of self interest or prompted 
by an undue /cal for the national cause. But none of them 
distorted facts and gave out utterly false stories in the same 
manner as Saint-Lubin, 

Although we are not concerned with the details of the 
early career of Saint-Lubin, a brief notice is nevertheless neces¬ 
sary for a proper appreciation of the man. Saint-Lubin first 
carne to India as a medical assistant attached to the regiment 
of Lally. According to his own version, he devoted himself 
to the study of Indian languages in order to prepare himself 
for a diplomatic career, and in 1759 he was sent by Lally on a 
secret mission to Bengal. It is not known what exactly he did 
there, but in a letter written to the Minister, de Sartine, much 
later he claimed to have seized the plans of the fortifications of 
Calcutta and what was a rather amazing exploit, to have 
kidnapped the engineer, causing a long delay in the construc¬ 
tion of the fort. In 1763 we find him back in Paris, frequent/ 
mg the antechambers of ihe Minister and the Company’s offices. 
He succeeded in gaining the confidence of the authorities in 
France, and with official encouragement he returned to India 
in 1766 and entered the service of Haidar All. We do not 
know his exact position there, nor can v,e attach any importance 
to the claim he made in a letter to dc Sartine in 1775 that he 

M 


U\mST#y 


^ 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

‘Chief Engineer, Commander of the ai 
the six thousand sepoys constituting the Nawab s 
guard". He made equally fantastic claims about his exploits 
while in the service of Haidar Ali, taking a leading part in 
numerous battles, capturing towns and forts almost single 
handed, repulsing myriads of Maratha cavalry and initiating a 
plan of a general confederacy of Indian Powers against the 
English these exploits were however not known to anybody 
but himself. What is known is that he suddenly left Haidar 
Ali on the outbreak of wav with the English and, curiously 
enough, took up his residence at Madras. I he insinuation of 
Belleconibc may not be unfounded that, being an unprincipled 
opportunist, Saint-Lubin deserted his patron and offered his 
services to his enemy. Saint-Lubin however explained that his 
object was to help Haidar Ali by sowing dissension among the 
English at Madras. Anyway, after some time he suddenly 
vanished from the Indian scene and re appeared in Paris in > 77 °- 
Back in France, Saint-Lubin renewed his intrigues, always 
styling himself as the “ex-general of Haidar Ali and giving 
out pretentious stories about his initimate connection with the 
Maratha Raja. His tenacity and persuasive skill gained for 
him die confidence of the Minister, dc Sartine, a few yeais 
later. The time was opportune for him. With the outbreak 
of the War of American Independence France began to stir 
herself from the lethargy which had seized her during the 
later days of Louis XV, and for the first time the Government 
began to pay serious consideration to the numerous memoires 
and projects submitted since 1765 f° r re-establishment of 

French influence in India. Having wormed his way into the 
confidence of the Minister. Saint-Lubin gained access to these 
secret papers and utilised them to prepare a scheme of his own. 
The basis of his scheme was an alliance with the Marathas 
France was to send a body of troops to the assistance of the 
Poona Government, and in return she was to secure a port on 
the western coast, preferably Chaul, complete freedom of tiadc 
in the Maratha dominions and assurance of Maratha protection 
of her settlements in India against English attacks. In his 
scheme Saint-Lubin took good care to secure his own advance 
mem, and suggested that for its implementation he himself 
should be scut out as the accredited representative of the French 



and General of 


<SL 

tillery 


mtST/fy 



Government, with full control over the negotiations with the 
Poona Government. He succeeded in his efforts to such an 
extent that he secured his appointment as a special diplo¬ 
matic agent to the Court of Poona, quite independent of the 
control of the Pondicherry authorities; and although he was 
not accorded full official status, to prove his bonafide he was 
given a letter from Louis XVI addressed to the Pcshwa and 
another from the Minister, de Sartine, addressed to Nana 
Phadnavis. 

It cannot be definitely ascertained whether in sending Saint- 
Lubin on a special diplomatic mission the French Govern mem 
was influenced by some earlier overtures from Poona. James 
Madjett, a disgruntled member of Saint-Lubin’s entourage, 
writing to William Lewis, the English agent at Poona, in Nov 
ember 1777 stated, “Some overtures transmitted to the Court 
of France from India had first given rise to the step taken 
relative to an alliance with the Marathas*’. 1 It was perhaps 
not improbable, since Law also in his mhnoires referred several 
times to the overtures made by the Marathas in 1772. Madjett 
also gave some interesting details about the origin of Saint- 
Lubin's mission in his evidence to Mostyn, the English repre¬ 
sentative at Poona, in May 1777. 2 According to him it was 
the mimoites of Bussy which inspired Saint-Lubin and Dumas 
(for some time Governor of the Isle of France) to work out a 
plan of Franco-Maratha alliance, which received the approval of 
the Minister of Marine and Colonies. The original plan w r as 
that the two were to start together from France w ith 2,500 men. 
to be reinforced by 500 more from the Isle of France. But in 
the end Saint-Lubin, who was jealous of Dumas and wanteef to 
have full control of affairs for himself, represented to dc Sartine 
that before despatching troops to India he should be sent out 
first to study the political situation and to come to an agreement 
with the Maratha Government. The proposal was accepted and 
thus Saint-Lubin started alone for India. 

In order to keep his mission a close secret Saint-Lubin 
travelled in a private capacity. He successfully duped a 

1 Forrest — Selections from Letters, Despatches, etc. Bombay Secretariat, 
Maratha Series, pp. 291*296. 

* Ibid, pp. 290*291. 


MINIS/*,, 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


ordeaux merchant named Laffonde, who was induced to freight 
a boat and equip it with merchandise for India and China in 
the hope of making a huge profit. Saint-Lubin christened 
the boat Le Sartine as a mark of flattery to the Minister. The 
merchandise taken at his suggestion consisted entirely of military 
stores, 15,000 muskets, all out of use, a small quantity of muni 
tions, uniforms for troops and a large number of buttons with 
the queer design engraved on them of the French fleur-de-lys 
encircled b) a crescent, which the inventive genius of Saint- 
Lubin considered appropriate for French soldiers serving as 
allies of the Marathas, Evidently the object of Sam-Lubin was 
to equip an army in India, while to Laffonde he held out an 
assurance that the goods could be sold at a high price to the 
Indian Princes. 

The letter of James Madjett to William Lewis, dated 
November 9, 1777, gives certain details about Saint-Lubin’s 
departure from France and his activities in India. 1 Saint-Lubin 
was accompanied by two Santy brothers, the elder of whom 
acted as his secretary, and one dc Corcelle, a young man of 
high connections to whom he had held out assurances of a 
good carter in India. He maintained a \t*il of secrecy over 


his departure* from France, but arriving at Chaiil on the 16th 
March 1777, he threw it off and openly assumed the airs of 
an Ambassador of the King of Franco. He insisted on a grand 
ceremonial reception by the Governor of the place, which was 
accorded to him. From Chaul he sent his secretary, de Santy, 
to Poona to announce his arrival and to arrange for his journc\ 
and reception at the Maratha capital. To keep up his prestige 
as *the accredited representative of the King of France, he 
demanded for his reception a large number of elephants, horses, 
camels, palanquins etc., and although his demands were not met 
in full, the Maratha Government did make a grand show to 
receive him. As the English representative at Poona. Mostyn, 
wrote to the Governor and Select Committee of Bombay, “l 
cannot help here observing the difference of his reception and 

mine on this occasion.Indeed in every respect they 

paid the greatest attention to the French*’. 1 


1 Forrest Selections . Maratha Series, pp, 291-296. 

1 Ibui, ,>p. aWt-ai*) (letter dated May 19, 1777). 




WNtSTfty 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—HI 


Saint-Lubin started from Chaul on the nth April, and 
travelling by way of Poona he reached Purandhar, where the 
Peshwa and the Ministers were for the time being, early in 


May. He was, however, kept waiting for a few days before 
being granted an audience, and it was not till the isth or t |tli 
of May that he was introduced to the Peshwa and his ministers. 
At the audience he presented as his credentials the letter of 
Louis XVI, addressed to the Peshwa, and that of de Sartine to 
Nana Phadnavis. 1 he activities of Saint-Lubin after this for mat 
affair are somewhat shrouded in mystery, and our principal 


source of evidence, namely Madjeu, could not throw much light 
on them, as he left Saint-Lubin soon after. However, it appears 
that the French adventurer moved with the Maratha Court to 
Poona, where he had several secret conferences with Nana 
Phadnavis, resulting in the drawing up of a treaty of alliance. 
The terms of the treaty cannot be definitely ascertained, but 
it appears from the various sources available to us that the 
principal basis of the agreement was the despatch of a body of 
French troops to the assistance of the Maratha Government in 
exchange for the cession of the port of Chaul and the fort of 
Rewadanda, complete freedom of trade for the French through¬ 
out the Maratha empire, and protection of the French settle¬ 
ments in India against any attack. 

In his letter to Lewis dated 9th November 1777, Madjeu 
stated that although he had parted company with Saint-Lubin 
in May, he received information that towards the end of June 
Saint-Lubin sent a circular to all the Frenchmen residing at 
Poona to meet at the house of Nana Phadnavis to be witnesses 
to the taking of oaths by the tw'o ministers relating to the 
treaty of perpetual alliance just concluded. He himself did not 
attend the ceremony, but he had “heard it repeatedly mentioned 
by different, gentlemen who were there that there was some 

written instrument.I have never been able to learn 

the particulars of the agreement with Nana, but 1 have heard 


1 Letter from James Madjeu to William Lewis, November 9. 1777 
(Forrest, pp. 291-296). But Mostyn writing to the Governor and Select 
Committee of Bombay on May 19, 1777, stated that Saint-Lubin had his 
audience on the 8th May (Forrest, pp. *88-290). It should be noticed that 
Madjctt was with Saint-Lubin at Purandhar and it was not till after the 
audience that he left him. 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


if general the basis of it was the sending out a body of troops 
to assist against the enemies of Nana”. Madjett continued that, 
about the beginning of August Saint-Lubin sent his secretary’s 
brother, Pascoal de Santy, to Surat with a packet for de Sartine 
and instructed the French Consul at Surat, Briancourt, to send 
hun to Europe as expeditiously as possible. Madjettt had also 
heard that Saint-Lubin sent very encouraging reports to France 
about the result of his negotiations with the Maratha Govern¬ 
ment, He then gave his general opinion about the character 
of Saint-Lubin and the bonafide of his diplomatic mission. 

He is a man capable of insinuating himself into the esteem 
and confidence of most men, of deceiving, misleading and betray¬ 
ing them .... but after the strictest scrutiny there has never 
yet been the least ground to doubt, that in consequence of 
overtures from hence, he has been sent out at least to examine 

the state of affairs here.How far this may be true I 

leave you to judge from the simple circumstances of Mons. Picot 
at Mahi and Mons. Briancourt at Surat having acknowledged 
him and answered his drafts. It is true that Mons. Bellecombe 
disowns him as Ambassador extraordinaire from the King of 
France, but still it seems he knew of his coming out. From 
the smallness of his appointment and no staff being sent out 
with him, it should seem that it was meant he should act as 

covertly as possible.hut 1 believe he has been led into 

an ostentatious display here, ruinous perhaps to the purpose he 
has been sent for, the better to impose himself on this Govern¬ 
ment, as a person of great importance, in hopes of attracting 
such presents as would make him perfectly easy on the event of 
public affairs”. 

About the outcome of his negotiations with the Maratha 
Government, we may notice here a letter from Saint-Lubin 
himself, written from Poona on July *6, 1777 and addressed to 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs in Paris, one of his patrons in 
the Government. “Monseigneur, kindly accept the homage 1 
am offering you of my first success in the career open to my 
zeal and activity. The mission to the Maratha Court with 
which His Majesty has honoured me has been fulfilled and all 
my hopes in this regard have been achieved. The treaty of 
alliance and commerce between the two Crowns has been signed 
and solemnised by oaths. The alliance has plated our estab* 




DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—III 

Tfshmerits under the protection of the foremost power of Hindu- 
sth in. The freedom of commerce, extended to our merchants 
through the whole extent of the Maratha dominion, is sheltered 
from the molestations from which they suffer in the rest of 
India; and the Maratha ports, open to our vessels in all seasons, 
assure them all the resources that can be expected from a war¬ 
like, maritime and commercial people who have made common 

cause with us.’V But although the letter speaks of only 

commercial advantages, from the English records it seems that 
there was at least a tacit, if not a formal, agreement about the 
cession of the port of Chaul and the fort of Rewadanda in 
return for the despatch of a body of French troops to the 
assistance of the Maratha Government. Indeed, it was not so 
much the commercial advantages as the political and military 
terms of the agreement which threw the English into a panic 
and induced them, more than anything else, to intervene in 
Maratha politics and overthrow the regime which was favour¬ 
able to the French alliance. 

As to the military terms of the agreement, some light is 
thrown by the intercepted letters of Saint-Lubin addressed to 
the Portuguese Governors of Goa and Daman. 2 It cannot be 
really ascertained whether the French Government had ever 
any intention of sending troops to India merely in response 
to the requests of Saint-Lubin, but the fact that the latter 
wrote to the Portuguese Governors to allow French troops to 
pass through their territories to the Maratha dominion suggests 
that Saint-Lubin had, either falsely or with some official 
encouragement from Paris, held out an assurance of French 
military assistance to the Maratha Government. Whether that 
military help was intended merely to bolster up the authority 
of Nana Phadnavis as against his former associates in the 
Government, who had broken away from him in March 1778, or 
for the general purpose of strengthening the resistance of the 
Marathas against English aggression, it is not relevant to discuss 
for our present purpose. What matters here is that Saint-Lubin 
and Nana Phadnavis appear to have entered into an agreement 

* Archives du Miniature dcs Affaires Etxang&res: Asie, M^moircs ef 
Documents, B ill—Indes Orientates, Chine, Cochin-Chine, 1660-177*, p. 451. 

Forrest Selections ..... Maratha Series, pp. 323*3*7. 






MINIS 


^ ‘ Go ^X 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

despatch of a body of French troops to Poona. In a 
letter to the Captain-General of Goa, dated 12th March 177ft. 
Saint-Lubin informed him that French ships and troops might 
he arriving shortly at Goa and requested him to allow the ships 
to reni,tin in the port and the troops to pass through Portuguese 
territory to the Maratha dominion. 1 He wrote a similar letter 
on the same day to the Governor of Daman.® On the 26th 
April 1778 he wrote another letter to the Captain-General at 
Goa. repeating his request to allow two French regiments to 
pass through Portuguese territory in order to assist the Ministers 
of the Maratha Darbar “to put a stop to the disorders resulting 
from the death of their sovereign”. Fo remove suspicion about 
his honafide. Saint-Lubin explained the reason of his quiet 
arrival at Poona without the customary marks of an Ambassador 
Extraordinary, and then stated that he was shortly going to 
send his secretary with a packet recently received from the 
Prime Minister of Portugal to disclose the whole affair to him 
in person. All these statements were perhaps a piece of the 
deceit and falsehood which characterised the whole career of 
Saint-Lubin, but it was only natural that the letters, when inter¬ 
cepted by the English, threw them into a fever of excitement 
and confirmed their previous suspicions about, the existence of 
a secret military agreement between the French and the 
Marathas. 

Much of the activities of Saint-Lubin at Poona came to 
be known to the English through his own indiscretion in 
antagonising members of his retinue to such an extent that 
they sought the protection of the English representative at 
the Maratha capital and gave out the whole story, or at least 
as much as w f as known to them. One of them was James 
Madjett, who left him in May 1777. and it was on his statements 
that the English based their information about the intrigues 
of Saint-Lubin. Another was de Coredle, who had been lured 
by Saint-Lubin to accompany him to India by the prospect of a 
good areer. He was alienated by Saint-Lubin’s haughty 
behaviour and also perhaps by the realisation that he had been 




1 Forrest —Selections . . . Maratha Series , p. 3*3. 
3 Ibid, p. 3*4. 

* Ibid, 3*5-317. 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS —T11 



duped. Saint-Lubin, who wanted to keep his negotiations at 
Poona secret even from men of his own entourage, suspected 
that Madjett and de Corcelle were sending adverse reports to 
France and giving out information to the English. On this 
ground their rooms were searched and their baggages pillaged, 
and Saint-Lubin even went to the extent of making an attempt 
on the life of de Corcelle. The two men then sought the pro¬ 
tection of the English representative at Poona, which furnished 
a cause of conflict between the English of Bombay and the 
Maratha Government. The Peshwa’s letter to the Governor of 
Bombay, dated January 27. 1778, accused the English repre¬ 
sentative at Poona of a breach of diplomatic etiquette in giving 
protection to two men of Saint-Lubin's party who were detected 
writing false reports to France. 1 ft is interesting to notice that 
the Supreme Government of Calcutta, in a letter to Mostyn, 
dated December 29, 1777, expressed strong disapproval of the 
policy of giving protection to the two Frenchmen, whose bona 
fides moreover were not above suspicion 3 The Captain of the 
Sartine , Coronet, and the Supercargo, Warnet, were also 
alienated from Saint-Lubin, whose dilatory policy prevented a 
quick disposal of the cargo of armaments and delayed the 
departure of the ship for China till the favourable season had 
passed. Coronet was thrown into prison by the Marathas on the 
accusation of Saint-Lubin and was set at liberty only after the 
revolution in the Poona Government in March i 77 ^- s He 
returned to Europe, but Wamet stayed on at Poona even after 
the departure of Saint-Lubin, looking after the disposal of the 
cargo of the Sartine and carrying on a lucrative business for 
himself. He was still at Poona when Montigny came on his 
second mission to India in 1781 and rendered him valuable 
help in his negotiations with the Maratha Government. 

Saint-Lubin remained at Poona till July 1778. The abrupt 
end of his diplomatic mission was brought about by a revolu¬ 
tion in Maratha politics in March 1778, resulting in a tempo¬ 
rary eclipse of the power of Nana Phadnavis, and the extreme 
pressure that the English brought to bear upon the new Govern - 

1 Foircst —Selections . . . Maratha Series, p. 307. 

s Ibid , p. 308. 

* Ibid, pp. 310 312 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


to dismiss the French agent. SainNLubin had carried on 
bis negotiations principally with Nana Phadnavis, who 
dominated the Maratha Government till the revolution. The 
leaders of the new Government, Moroba, Sakharam and the rest, 
although ex-colleagues of the fallen Minister, did not share his 
extreme pro-French sympathies and were rather inclined to come 
to a settlement with the English at Bombay and their protege, 
Raghunath Rao. Before the revolution they had sought the 
armed assistance of the English to overthrow Nana Phadnavis, 
and the latter were happy to get in that way an opportunity 
to intervene in Maratha politics to secure their principal object, 
the dismissal of Saint-Lubin from Poona and the prevention of 
any FrancoMaratha alliance. After the revolution the new 
Government followed a wavering policy for some time with 
regard to the French, but ultimately the pressure from the 
English proved too strong and Saint Lubin was obliged to leave 
the Maratha capital in July. 

SaitU-Lubin was not the man to admit the failure of his 
diplomatic mission. In order to cover up the discredit of his 
sudden departure from Poona he gave out the story, quite in 
keeping with his past, that he was returning to Europe on 
another secret mission. This time he was being sent by some 
of the prominent Maratha leaders to hasten the despatch of 
French troops to India in accordance with the terms of the 
treaty concluded in 1777. Saint-Lubin starred from Daman by a 
Portuguese boat and travelled by way of the Red Sea and Suez. 
Back in France, he was besieged by his creditors, the principal 
being Laffonde who had freighted the ship, the Sartine; and 
unable to meet their demands he was thrown into the prison of 
Bastille, where he spent his time in writing mimoire after 
mimoite to clear himself of all accusations. Later he was 
transferred to the prison-asylum of Charenton, from where he 
escaped and took refuge at Treves, there he spent his remain¬ 
ing years as a wig-maker, perhaps a fitting climax in the career 
of one who had for the best part of his life successfully practised 
the profession of an impostor. 

As a successful impostor, Saint-Lubin had the distinction of 
counting among his victims not only the Ministers in France 
but also the English Governments of Bombay and Calcutta, 
who appeared icrriblv alarmed at his negotiations with the 





Maratha Government and made frantic efforts to get him out 
of Poona. There is a large mass of correspondence in the 
Bombay Archives concerning Saint-Lubin s activities, and it 
will be interesting to follow from these letters how the course 
of English policy towards the Maratha State was influenced by 
their fear of the French adventurer. The English representative 
at Poona, Mostyn, began to send alarming reports to Bombay 
from the moment of Saint-Lubin’s arrival. Thrown into a 
panic by such reports, the Governor and Council of Bombav 
wrote to the Governor-General and Council in Calcutta on 
May 10, 1777, expressing the fear that if through Saint-Lubin s 
intrigues the French succeeded in obtaining the port of Chaul 
or any other in the immediate neighbourhood, it would be 
harmful to English trade and commerce and dangerous to 
Bombay in a time of war . 1 Mostyn, in a letter dated May 19* 
informed the Bombay Council that the object of Saint-Lubin s 
mission appeared to be the cession of a port on the western 
coast to the French and permission to establish a factory at 
Poona. He continued that he had pointed out to the Maratha 
Durbar the ambitious nature of the French and had been 
assured by two influential members of the Government that no 
agreement would be concluded with the French which would 
he detrimental to the English. 2 He enclosed a report on Saint- 
Lubin’s mission based on the evidence of James Madjett. 3 

The most pro-French leader in the Maratha Government 
was Nana Phadnavis, and the English realised that his removal 
from office was necessary to prevent a Franco-Maratha alliance, 
they were seeking a pretext to achieve their end, when in 
December 1777, by a stroke of extreme good fortune, they 
received secret overtures from some influential leaders of the 
Darbar, Sakharam Bapu and his associates, for English armed 
assistance for the overthrow of Nana Phadnavis. I he dis¬ 
gruntled leaders expressed their willingness to come to a settle¬ 
ment with the English proteg£, Raghoba, and to bring him 
back to Poona. The Bombay Government at onc.c seized the 
opportunity of intervention in Maratha politics, mainly because 


1 Forrest —Selections 
5 Ibid, pp. 188-190. 
5 Ibid, pp. 190“291. 


Maratha Series, p. 288. 








the removal of Nana Phadnavis was necessary to prevent an 
alliance dangerous to the English. 1 * 3 What is more important is 
that, unlike on the previous occasion when Bombay was 
censured by Calcutta for its policy of intervention in Maratha 
politics, it received (his time the full approval of the Supreme 
Government, mainly because of the necessity of averting the 
supposed French menace. The resolution of the Calcutta 
Council, dated February 2. 1778. permitted the Bombay Govern¬ 
ment to accept the overtures of the disgruntled Maratha 
Ministers with a view to destroy the pro-French element in the 
Poona administration. Among the terms of compensation to 
be demanded for military assistance was the exclusion of 
European settlements on any of the maritime coasts of the 
Maratha dominions without the previous consent of the 
Governor-General and Council.* 

Ai this juncture the English met with unexpected go<xl 
luck. On the sfith March 1778 Mostyn wrote to the Governor 
of Bombay, informing him about the sudden revolution at 
Poona, leading to the overthrow of Nana Phadnavis and the 
coming to power of Moroba. Sakharam and their associates who 
had sought English assistance before That made things easier 
for the English, because as long as Nana Phadnavis remained 
in power it was impossible for them to prevent a French occupa¬ 
tion of (.haul without being accused of open aggression. On 
this subject the Governor General and Council, writing to the 
Bombay Government on February 46, 1778, had expressed 
the opinion: “As we have no property, nor pretensions to 
property in the port of ( haul, we cannot authorise you to use 
any overt measure for preventing the French from forming an 
establishment at that place, however dangerous their neighbour¬ 
hood may be to your Presidency. This must be effected by 
other means, that is. by an appeal to that power which alone 
can give them the right of possession”. 4 At the same time 
the Governor-General and Council, writing to the Bombay 
Government on March 23, 1778, expressed the gravest anxiety 

1 Forrest —Selections . . . Maralha Scries, pp. 300-30* and 306 (Consul¬ 

tations—December 10, 1777 and January 19, 1778). 

3 (bid, pp. 309-310. 

3 (bid, pp, 310.312. 

4 Ibid , pp, 313 314 



misrfy 



at the prospec t of a Franco-Maratha alliance. V\ c regard the 
Marathas as the only native and the French as the only foieign 
power in the East Indies, capable of affecting the influence 
which the English nation had acquired in it. The former 
were prevented from giving us an immediate or effectual trouble 
bv internal distractions, and the inequality of their number to 
the effect of our discipline; the latter by their want of landed 
property or any alliance which might supply it. Art liancc 
formed between them would at once relieve all their mutual 
wants, and afford them all the requisites to dispute with us 
on equal terms the dominion of the East Indies 

After the revolution at Poona the Bombay Gon eminent, 
expected an immediate reversal of the policy of Nana Phadnavis 
with regard to the French and instructed its agent Mostyn, to 
secure the dismissal of Saint-Lubin and the severance of all 
connections with the French. Mostyn, however, reported from 
Poona what he considered to be a breach of faith on the pan of 
the new Government, 1 2 whereupon the Bombay Council expressed 
grave anxiety and urged the need of taking military measures. 
"Upon a review of our late advices from Poona, we bud too 
many instances of duplicity in the Darbar to let us doubt, but 
that they will mean to continue the same line of evasive conduct 
so long pursued by that Government. Mons. de SainoLubin 
is still permitted to remain at Poona, although his dismissal 
was the very first object of our instructions to Mostyn aftei 

the late change in the administration took place.I he 

Governor-General and Council must be desired to inform us 
what measures thee intend to pursue if the Darbar s a ns we i 
with respect to their connections with the l'rench should not 
prove satisfactory". 3 

It was from this anxiety to avert the French menace that 
arose the necessity of military intervention in Maratha affairs, 
with the restoration of Raghoba to power as a convenient 
pretext; and it was for the same reason that the proposal of 
the Bombay Government received the approval of the Governor- 


1 Forrest —Selections . . Maratha Scries, pp. 3 * 4 7 ' 

2 Ibid, pp. 3*2-3*3, 

3 lbtd, pp. 318*520. 



misr/ff. 



C.crural and Council in Calcutta. 1 On October is* the Bombay 
Government resolved to take immediate military action for 
conducting Raghoba to Poona, but the real object of the expedi¬ 
tion was to remove the French menace, as stated dearly in 
the minutes of Carnac and Mostyn a The principal reason for 
English military intervention in support of Raghoba is further 
brought out clearly l>v Article XV of the treaty concluded with 
him. “Raghunathrao Bajirao Pradhan hereby engages and 
agrees that no European settlements shall be allowed to be made 
on the maritime coasts or in any other part of the Maratha 
dominions without the consent of the Company or of their 
representatives being previously obtained, and that no manner 
oi intercourse or connection shall be maintained between the 
Maratha Government and the French nation”. 3 It is not 
relevant for our purpose to go beyond this treaty and deal with 
the resumption of AngloMaratha hostilities consequent on it. 

It is no doubt true that French intervention in the War of 
American Independence in 1778 gave some ground to the 
English to feel alarmed at the prospect of a Franco-Maratha 
alliance. But considering the character of Saint-Lubin and 
his antecedents, it can hardly he denied that in their panic 
about the safety of Bombay the English allowed themselves to 
he duped by hi n even more than the Ministers in Paris, 4 

Montignv 

About the diplomatic mission of Montigny, covering a 
period of nearly ten years, from 1778 to 1788, our principal 
source of information is his own voluminous correspondence 
preserved in the Pondicherry Archives. 4 Many interesting 
details are also available in a long and anonymous memoire 
preserved in the Biblioth&que Xationale, Paris—. Memoire et 
Reflixiom sur les negotiations Ae la cour de France ax’ec les 
Marathas, et particuliirernenl sur celle dont a Hi charge 

* Forrest Selections . Maratha Series, p. 32S. 

2 Ibid, pp. 328 331. 

3 ibid pp. $34-338. 

4 A critical account of Saint Lubm’s mission to Poona is to be found 
in iViblioihcque Nationalc M*. Fr. 12093. 

5 Mss. 5316 to 5364. 



misr/ir 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—HI 


1C 


_ ^^Montigny . 1 Montigny’* diplomatic work in India may 

be divided into two periods, the first from 1778 to 1779, and 
the second from 1781 to 1788, when he left Poona to take up 
his new appointment as Commandant at Chandernagore. It 
will be remembered that in 177® a new vigour was noticeable 
in French colonial policy, particularly after the outbreak 0! 
the War of American Independence, which opened out a 
prospect of renewal of conflict with the old colonial rival. 
England. For the first time the French Government began to 
pay serious attention to the numerous mrmoires and projects 
for military intervention in India which had been submitted 


% 


since 


j765 and had been quickly shelved in the Ministerial 


archives. The project which attracted the attention of the 
Government most was the one sponsored by Madec and 
Chevalier in 1775. Its principal features were, as noticed 
already, an alliance with the Mughal Emperor, a conquest of 
the province of Tatta and a joint attack on Bengal when the 
opportune moment came. The Minister of Marine and 
Colonies, de Sartinc. approved of the project, but before accept¬ 
ing it merely at the suggestion of Madec and Chevalier, he felt 
it necessary to send an enterprising military officer to India to 
explore the practicability of the Tatta project and, in concert 
with Madec, to conclude negotiation with the Court of Delhi 
relating to the proposal of alliance made by the Emperor and 
Najaf Khan. Unlike Saim-Lubin. however, Montigny was 
required to keep in close contact with the Governor of I'ondi 
cherry and to follow his instructions. 

Montigny started from France early in > 777 . P ;issil ^ 
through Austria, Turkey and Egypt he reached Surat by a 

Portuguese boat about the middle of 1 77 s - *' ro '" Slir< ’' ’* 

wanted to go to Tatta according to his instructions, but contrary 


1 B.N.F.Fr. mix,;,. Written in .784 n >'’ no " ‘!!LTTf 

of the failure of Montigny'* mission as also of the earner P 
Chevalier ami SaiM-Lubin to negotiate a Franco-Mat at ia 3 u i s 

* Ibid. It was also arranged .hat the Governor of Pondicherry *ouId 
be informed about his mission and ordered to pay hint 5,000 iv 
meet his expenses in India, but, as we shall sec later, no tnney m ^ 
lion was sent and Montigny found himself in great finance strai s T * 
arrival in India <P. A. ms. 5**0). He was left completely stranded partt- 
eularlv aPcr the capitulation of Pondicherry m October, 17, 


MINIS?#;, 



THE T RENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


rids prevented a landing at the mouth of the Indus, and so 
he proceeded to Agra, where he expected to meet Madec. He 
reached Agra on the ist August “after two months of the most 
painful jourm % y”, as he wrote to Bellecoinbe. 1 There he was 
disappointed to learn that Madec had left north India for 
Pondicherry about ten months earlier. He carried a letter 
from the Minister directing Madec to confer with him on the 
project of an alliance with the Mughal Emperor, with special 
reference to the occupation of Tatta. Matter's absence there 
fore upset his calculations. Montigny wrote several letters to 
him from Agra, begging him to return, but, as he feared, the 
letters were possibly intercepted by the English during the siege 
of Pondicherry. 2 At Agra Montigny met Visage, a lieutenan. 
of Madec. entrusted with continuing negotiations with the 
Imperial Court. Through the help of Visage he secured several 
interviews with Najaf Khan and had an opportunity of discus 
sing the project of alliance which formed the principal object 
of his mission. 

Montigm gave his impression to Bellecoinbe in a Letter 
dated October 1778. About the Tatta project, he observed that 
front the particulars he had received from reliable sources it 
appeared to be an indiscreet one. The province had been dis¬ 
membered from the Mughal Empire about thirty years ago and 
was in the occupation of Taimur Shah, Prince of Kandahar, 
who had in his service the best troops in Asia. From Visage 
he had learnt that a draft treaty of alliance had already been 
drawn up at the instance of Najaf Khan and a copy had been 
sent to Bellecoinbe for his approval. He then referred to his 
interview with Najaf Khan “the onh Prince with whom it was 
necessary to treat at this C ourt, having at his disposal all the 
forces and seals of the Empire.” “I told the Prince that 1 had 
been sent by the Minister to consult first with M. Madec on 
the subject of a memorandum which he had sent to the Couit 
and about which he (Najai Khan) knew; that afterwards I had 
been charged to declare on behalf of the Ministry that it was 
being seriously contemplated in France to send troops to this 
country; but that having learnt that he had entered into an 


1 P. A. ms. 5318. 
* Ibid, ms. 53*5- 


misTfy 



DIPLOMATIC PKOJ 1 C IS—HI 


<8L 


o emcnt with you, I had nothing more to say than that I 
would wait at his Court pending new orders. Me replied to 
me that he would keep his word which he had given, that he 
was ready to attack the* English if he was sent 800 soldiers and 
200 gunners, whom he undertook to maintain at his own cost 

.He asked me several questions about the state of 

the arm) and navy in France, to which l replied in a 
manner calculated to make him form a favourable opinion 

.I believe, I can assure you that he is sincerely disposed 

towards our nation. His own interests drive him that way; but 
if the Prince does not receive any help from us, that may put 
the matter in doubt.” 1 2 

Montigny remained in the camp of Najaf Khan^till about 
the middle of 1779, when he proceeded to Poona in accordance 
with the instructions of Bcllecombed He passed thiough 
Hyderabad, where he stopped for a time at the camp of de 
Laltee, then in the service of Nizam Ali, having been dismissed 
earlier by Basalat fang. From there he wrote to Raudouin, 
Secretary to the Minister of Marine, in June 1779 * giving him 
an account of the impressions he had foimed about the attitude 
of the Mughal Court. He wrote that Najaf Khan was so much 
anxious for an alliance with France that he entrusted him with 
a letter for the Minister of Marine and even decided to send 
Pauli, who commanded the contingent of Sombre after the 
latter's death, on a diplomatic mission to Paris. Many of the 
leading personalities of the Darbar were also pro-French in 
sympathy. “Thcv are waiting for my return to this country 

with armed forces. I have up there a project . ..which 

is easy of execution immediately after landing troops in India. 
Without armed forces, however, none of the political and 
militan speculations will succeed”. At the same time Mon 
tignv held out a warning against putting much reliance on 
the various projects sent to Paris by French agents in India. 
“Do not make any arrangements regarding the Court of Delhi 

before I may have the honour of seeing you. Do not 

count on the Tatta affair, which is the most foolish project that 
has e\er been submitted to the Government." He wrote in con- 


1 P. A . ms. 5318. 

2 Ibid , ms. 5320. 






UWtST/fy 





tlusion, “i have a general plan about India, which my travels 
and observations have enabled me to make and which I am 
eager to submit to you; and 1 do not make an exaggerated 
assertion in telling yon that I am not afraid of discussing it in 
the presence of people most enlightened about this country.” 1 

Montigny reached Poona iti July 1779. He did not sta) 
long at the Maratha capital, being anxious to return to France 
to report on the state of affairs in north India and the prospect 
of an alliance with the Mughal Emperor. When he arrived at 
Poona, Montigny found the Marathas still Hushed with their 
recent victory over the English at Wargaon. Talks were in 
progress at Surat between their Wakil and Col. Goddard. He 
rightly guessed that there was little prospect of drawing the 
Marathas into an alliance with France until the result of the 
negotiations was known. At the same time there was a strong 
rumour about the despatch of a naval squadron by France, 
and Montigny expected that if it arrived in time the Marathas 
would break off negotiations with the English and enter into 
an alliance with the French. In a letter to de Lall6e he wrote, 
“If the English ask for peace with the Marathas it is possible 
to believe that they fear the arrival of the French, and as a 
measure of good policy they will not put themselves against 
two Powers.” 2 I11 the same letter he also wrote about the 
current alarm at Poona about the coming of Goddard. “Col. 
Goddard is expected here with two battalions; that is the 
rumour current throughout Poona; if that is true, you can 
take it that my stay here will be very short.” 

In another letter to de La! 16 e, dated 7th November 1779. 
Montigny wrote about his interview with Nana Phadnavis. 
“On the 28th October Nanafernis called for me and also M. 

Wamet.He appeared to me to be most anxious 

to know if M. de Saint-Lubin had been sent to the Maratha 
Court by order of the King. 1 replied to him that he could 
rest assured that I knew it to be so from the Minister. I 
thought that he would push things even further, but he 

stopped there..Between ourselves. I believe that he has 

made some arrangements with M. dc Saint-Lubin on which he 

1 P. A. ms. 53 * 5 * 

3 Ibid, nw. 53*8 (letter dated September 19, 1779). 




whists 



until time 


Shortly after Montigny left Poona, and early in January 
iy8o he started from Goa by a Portuguese ship for Europe. 
At the Maratha capital he had found himself in acute financial 
distress, and but for Warnet who lent him money for the 
expenses of his return journey, he would have been left com¬ 
pletely stranded. On his return to France, Montigny won 
due recognition for his services. He was promoted to the rank 
of Colonel and was made a Chevalier of St. Louis. 

It was only for a few months that Montigny remained in 
France, anti was soon sent out to India on a second mission. 
Towards the end of .780 the French Government had taken 
a definite decision to send an expeditionary force to India, and 
as a preliminary measure > *as felt accessary to prepare tie 
ground by diplomatic contacts with some of the Indian Powers. 
Since France had lost all her territorial possessions in India 
n was all the more necessary fo; her to gain the alliance of 
some important country Powers before the arrival of the 
expeditionary force. Montigny advocated an alliance with 
the Marathas. as the firs, step to the formation of a wider 
coalition which was to include the Mughal Emperor, Noam 
All and Haidar Ali. During his first mission to India he had 
formed the impression that the Maratha Confederacy consti¬ 
tuted the strongest and the most helpful ally that 1 ranee could 
have in India. As against the current opinion in I ranee which 
considered Haidar Ali as the most useful and effective ally 
against the English, Montigny held that a preference for the 
ruler of Mysore would alienate from France other Indian 
Powers, who despised him as an upstail and usurper an 
feared his aggressive designs On the other hand, an alliance 
with the Marathas, besides gaining for the French the cst 
fighting material in India and an opportunity for n»iUcaiy 
operations on the Malabar Coast, would also bring on their 
side Nizam Vli of Hyderabad who was then on the friendliest 
of terms with the Marathas Further, with the active help cm 
the Maratha Confederacy on their side, the French might with 


1 p, A. ms. 5330. 


mtSTfiy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


css difficulty be able to induce the Imperial Court at Delhi 
to take the risk of a joint attack on Bengal. Thus, as Mon¬ 
tigny calculated, French interests would be best served by 
attaching greater importance to an alliance with the Marathas. 

Montigny's arguments impressed the new Minister of 
Marine and Colonies, Marquis de Castries, who selected him 
for a second diplomatic mission to India. He was not, how 
ever, appointed an Ambassador, nor did he put forward any 
pretence on that score like Saint-Lubin. In a letter to Piveron 
de Morlat, the French agent it the Court of Haidar Ali, he 
wrote, “When you will do me the honour of writing again, 
you will oblige me. Sir, by not giving me the title of Ambassa¬ 
dor. I have not the ridiculous vanity to apply to myself a 
title which I do not have. The ranks which I hold from the 
King and the confidence with which the Minister honours me 
are quite sufficient for my amour-propre ." 1 Although Mon- 
tigny was sent particularly to the Court of Poona, his instruc¬ 
tions were couched in general terms and permitted him to 
carry on negotiations with other country Powers as well, with¬ 
out, however, any final authority to conclude treaties. He was 
placed under the control of the Governor of the Isle of France 
and was given a number of blank commissions to be distribut¬ 
ed at his discretion among the French officers in the service of 
the Indian Princes. 3 


Montigny started from France in March 1781, just a few 
days in advance of the departure of the naval squadron under 
de Suffren. On his way he stopped for a short period at the 
Cape of Good Hope. France had assumed responsibility for 
the defence of that Dutch colony and had decided to send 
troops under Conway escorted by de Suffren's naval squadron. 
Montigny had instructions from the Minister to wait at the 
Cape till the arrival of Conway, making note of the state of 
defences and drawing up a military map of the place. But at 
the polite insistence of the Dutch Governor, who assured him 
of full co operation with the French, he had to cut short his 
stay at the Cape. Leaving for Conway his observations on the 


* P. A. im. 5337. 

3 B.N.F.Fr, 12093. 





state of defences of the colony, Montigny started for the isle 
of France in June. 1 


In the meantime the political situation in India had taken 
a turn favourable to the French. Both Haidar Ali and the 
Marathas, then at war with the English, sought French military 
assistance. Haidar Ali entered into negotiations with Souillac, 
Governor of the Isle of France, through Piveron de Morlat, 
who had been formerly ProcureurGeneral at Pondicherry and 
since the fall of that place residing at the Mysore Darbar as 
French diplomatic agent. The Marathas also had decided to 
send an agent: named Zainul Abedin to the Isle of France to 
get the assistance of 2,000 French troops, offering to pay 60,000 
rupee- per month for their maintenance.* When Montigny 
arrived in the Isle of France, he found Souillac busy making 
preparations for sending an expeditionary force to the Coro¬ 
mandel Coast to co-operate with Haidar Ali. Although he 
would have liked to divert the expeditionary force to the 
Malabar Coast to assist the Marathas, it was too late to alter 
the arrangements already made. Montigny arrived at Goa in 
October 1781 and met there the agent of the Poona Govern¬ 
ment. Zainul Abedin, ready to start for the Isle of France with 
the proposal of military co-operation noticed above. He 
stopped the agent from proceeding further, with the assurance 
that he had been sent by the French Government to negotiate 
a treaty of alliance. 

Starting from Goa about the middle of October, Montigny 
reached Poona at the beginning of November. Giving his 
first impression about the political situation at the Maratha 
capital in a letter to Souillac dated 20th December, Montignv 
wrote that the coalition of the three southern Powers against 
the English had broken up, although friendship still subsisted 
between the Marathas and Haidar Ali. Hie English were 
trying to win over the Marathas against Haidar Ali by offering 
to give up all their recent conquests. Montigny feared that the 
offer had made such a favourable impression that the Poona 
Government would be* inclined to conclude an early peace. 
Nizam Ali also, alarmed at the successes of Haidar, was secretly 

1 P. A. ms. 5331. 

» B.N.F.Fr. 12093. 


MIN tSTfiy 



trying to conciliate the English. One principal grievance of 
the Marathas, as also or Ninon Ali, against the French was their 
preference for Haidar Ali. and Montigny had a good deal of 
difficulty to explain why the French had decided to start their 
military operations on the Coromandel Coast in concert with 
Haidar and not on the Malabar Coast, as proposed by the 
Marathas in the agreement with Saint-Lubin. Montigny tried 
to soothe the feelings of the Marathas lay saying that the French 
would begin operations on the Malabar Coast as soon as the 
principal expeditionary force would arrive. 1 

During the early months of 178s Montigny was in constant 
correspondence with Pivcron de Morlat, the french agent at 
the Court of Haidar. Their letters reveal the strenuous efforts 
they made to cement the friendly relations between the Mara¬ 
thas and Haidar Ali and to form a powerful coalition against 
the English in south India. It is interesting to notice, however, 
the difference in the viewpoints of the two French agents. 
Piveton de Morlat laid greater emphasis on an alliance with 
Haidar. “In the brilliant situation in which Aydei Aly Khan 
stands, master to-day of nearly the whole kingdom of the 
Carnatic and at the head of an army considered formidable in 

this country.I do not sec any Prince of India alliance 

with whom could be more suitable to us." a On the other 
hand, Montigny attached greater importance to an alliance 
with the Marathas, as noticed already. In his letter to Piveron 
he gave an account of the efforts he had made to prevent the 
Marathas from concluding peace with the English and forming 
an alliance with them against Haidar. He wrote that he had 
succeeded in preserving the friendly disposition of Nana Phad- 
navis towards the French, and in inducing him to break off 
talks with the English and to dismiss the English envoy who 
had come to Poona in January, by holding out assurances about 
the immediate arrival of a French expeditionary force. But 
he feared that all his diplomatic persuasions would be of no 
avail if then was an undue delay in the coming of the expedi¬ 
tionary force. In order to hasten it Nana Phadnavis even 
wanted to send a letter to Souillac through a Frenchman named 

1 P. A. ms. 533.1. 

* Ibid, ms. 333ft. 



MiNisr^ 



Chauvigny. The latter, however, went only up to Goa, from 
where he was recalled in March, on the news of the arrival of 
the naval squadron under dc Suffren. 

i he news of the arrival of a strong naval squadron under 
dc Suffren and of the landing of troops under Duchcmin re¬ 
inforced the diplomatic efforts of Montigny and induced the 
Maratha Government, to put. forward a conctete proposal of 
alliance with France. After two months of negotiations a 
draft treaty was finally drawn up in June 1782.' 1 he docu¬ 

ment bore the title "Agreements proposed by Srimat Raja Sri 
Madhu Rao \ a ray an Pant Pradhan to Louis XVf, King of 
France and Navarre”, and the preamble explained, 
agreements have been made with M. de Vlontigny, French 
Colonel, sent to the Court of Poona, who according to his 
instructions will subrni. them to M. Dnchemin, General of the 
French Army in India, so that he may decide regarding these 
agreements”. The treaty contained twenty-four articles, of 
which only the important ones need be noticed here. By the 
first article both parties agreed not to make separate peace 
with the English. “But if circumstances compel one of the 
two nations to conclude peace with the English, it will not do 
so without first informing its ally about it.’ The second 
article stated that on the arrival of the French forces in India 
the Maratha Government would place at their disposal the 
port of Chau I and the fort of Rewadanda. But all the troops 
and military stores were to be withdrawn as soon as the french 
conquered another port from the English. By the third article 
the Maratha Government promised to supply workmen and 
transport animals to the French army, and by the fourth it 
agreed to stand security to native bankers to advance eight 
lakhs of rupees to the French army for its subsistence during 
the first four months. The next five articles dealt with the 
division of territories to be conquered from the English. T he 
French were to retain Surat and Bombay with its dependencies 
and would also have the right to establish factories at Broach 
and Cambay but not to maintain troops there. All other 
conquests were to be handed over to the Marathas. Booties 


ip. A. ms. 5341. 



of all kinds were to be equally divided between the two allies. 
Article 19 stipulated that if the Marathas wanted to invade 
Bengal, rhe French must give them military assistance, and in 
return they would be given a suitable Jagir. Another interest¬ 
ing article was the seventeenth, which stated that the French 
must allow "free exercise of the religion of the Hindus'* in all 
the territories under their control. These were in brief the prin 
cipal provisions of the draft treaty of alliance proposed by the 
Poona Government. 

Writing to Duchemin about the draft treaty on the 30th 
June. Montigny expressed the opinion that the terms offered 
by the Marathas were the best that the French could expect 
under the circumstances. He strongly urged their immediate 
Acceptance and the despatch of naval and land forces to the 
Malabar Coast, without which the Marathas would not make 
any move at all. “The advantages which are presented to you 
on the Malabar Coast, the possession of the port and the island 
of Bombay, of the town and fortress of Surat, of factories at 
Broach and Cambay whic h the Marathas are offering us, cannot 
fail to draw' your attention and to incline yon unhesitatingly 
to conclude agreements with a Court whose alliance and 
support are so necessary to our interest in this part of the 
world.’’ He continued: "The English are so convinced of 
the truth of what I am submitting that they are making their 
best efforts to draw to their side this Power by offering all 
accommodation." Montigny felt strongly against relying too 
much on an alliance with Haidar who was disliked by all the 
southern Powers. "Their jealousy and resentment have been 
strengthened anew as they sec this ambitious soldier being 
supported and sustained by a French army”. He feared that 
the result of such a policy would be the formation of a strong 
coalition against Haidar which would be ruinous to French 
interests. The best course of action for the French was to 
form a solid alliance with the Marathas. "With that we check 
Nizam Ali and counterbalance the English forces by » diver 
sion, useful and effective for our projects on the Coromandel 
Coast.” Montigny concluded: "I am very happy for having 
been able, during the eight months that I have been living 
among the Marathas, to persuade them to reject the proposal 
of the English and to make the Regency desire to negotiate 


WNlST/fy 


diplomatic: projects- -hi 




with us. 1 would be very much grieved to day if I saw the 
happiest occasion disappear by losing a Power so important for 
the success of our projects in India’ . 1 

The fears expressed by Montigny in the last line came out 
to be true and the project of a Franco Maratha alliance did not 
materialise. Two unforeseen difficulties appeared and inter¬ 
posed a long delay in the consideration of the proposals. First, 
news was received at Foona in August 1782 that Bussy had 
arrived in the Isle of France as the Supreme Commander of 
the French expeditionary force. The authority to take a deci 
sion on the Maratha proposals was then transferred to him 
from the hands of Duchemin. Second. Warner and Chauvigny, 
who were being sent to the Isle of franco with the Maratha 
proposals, met with an unfortunate accident on the way. I heir 
boat, the Lizard , was captured by the English in the neutral 
port of Tranqucbar in October." Chauvigny was taken priso 
ner, and although Warnet could escape with all the important 
documents, it was not till February * 7^3 that Bussy received 
the Maratha proposals on his arrival at Trinkomali. Even 
then Bussy did not come to a quick decision and tried to 
temporise as long as possible in order to keep the Marat has 
under a delusion. The thing was that, apart from the fact that 
Bussy did not consider the terms of the treaty to be quite 
favourable for the French, he had a positive distrust of the 
Marathas from the very beginning. He openly accused the 
Marathas of double-dealing, since while putting forward pro¬ 
posals for an alliance with the French they were at the same 
time, and quite unknown to Montigny, carrying on negotia¬ 
tions with the English. Thus in spite of the frantic appeals 
of Montigny to accept the Maratha proposals at once, Bussy 
simply marked time, until the suitable moment for action 
passed with the conclusion of peace between England and 
France. 

In a letter 10 Bussy, dated 26th August, Montigny wrote, 
*T handed over your letter to Nana Fernis, the Regent of this 
Court and I cannot express to you, my General, how much it 


* P. A. ms. 554*. 
3 Ibid, ms. 5545. 



MMST/ty 



has pleased this Prince. ‘The face of things is going to change* 
said he in a transport of joy, ‘this French General knows India 
very well, h was a friend of the great Nana*. He has repeated 
to me several times the passages in your letter in which you 
state that the King does not want to make conquests of terri¬ 
tories.. .but only to restore them (to the Indian Princes).” 
Montiv ay then urged the necessity of quick action and imme¬ 
diate acceptance of the Maratha proposals. “Everybody is very 
well-disposed at this Court, but it is time that you should arrive 

.The English are making the greatest efforts here to 

persuade the Regency to negotiate peace with them and to 

unite this Power with Nizam Ali against Haidar, our ally. 

1 am occupying myself unceasingly in counteracting the efforts 
of our enemies at the Darbar , and I have the positive promises 
of the Regem y that it will not negotiate with them if the agree¬ 
ments which it proposes to conclude with our nation are 
accepted.’’ 1 2 Montigny concluded by suggesting that the French 
should begin by capturing Surat, which would serve as a con¬ 
venient base of operations on the Malabar Coast and free the 
French from dependence on Maratha ports and territories* A 
few days later Montigny wrote to Aumont, a French officer in 
the service of Nizam Ali, announcing to him the arrival, of 
Bussy in the Isle of France and urging him to make all efforts 
to persuade Nizam Ali to ally himself with the French. He also 
wrote to Tahawar Jang, the chief minister of Hyderabad, and 
asked Aumont “to meet him and make him feel that now is 
ti e moment for a great revolution, the result of which will 
he very favourable to the Princes of India.” a 

The first expectation of Montigny that the arrival of Bussy 
in hr Isle of France would be followed by speedy and decisive 
action did not materialise, and in two letters to Bussy, dated 
a*nd December 1782 and 16th February 1783*. he frantically 
urged the avoidance of further delay, which might ruin all 
prospects of building up an anti English coalition in India. 
In the tirst he wrote, “Time i< passing and the formidable ex¬ 
peditionary force, announced such a long time back, has not 

1 p A - ms 5545 - 

2 Ibid, ins. 5346. 

s I hi A, ms. 5345. 





WNISTffy 



appeared yet. Nana Fern is remains the only one i nflexible up 
to the present to the pressing solicitations of the English ant 
of several great Maratha Chiefs whose Wakils do not cease to 
intrigue in favour of our enemies.” He continued, ‘'Comman¬ 
der de SuHren has written to me on your behalf to induce the 
Marathas to make a move against Bombay in order to create 
a diversion to the attack which the English seem to have 
planned against Mysore. I am fully aware of the advantage 
which such a diversion will give to the position of Ayder Aly 
Khan; but this Power (the Marathas) will not move unless 
strongly supported by our forces, and but for the very imme¬ 
diate hope of being allied with the French and being supported 
by them it would have agreed to the English proposal a long 
time back.” Repeating once more that the four principal 
Powers of India were favourably disposed towards the French. 
Montigny wrote, "You can count on the Regency of Poona 

f .by concluding solid agreements with it at once and. 

may add, by giving it an assured promise to operate on t lie 
Malabar Coast during the next monsoon.” He hid also received 
encouraging letters from Hyderabad which confirmed that 
Nizam AH was willing to seek the alliance of the 1-tench and 
that he intended to send Aumont as his Wakil to Bussy as soon 
as the latter arrived in India. Finally, he had received a letter 
from the Emperor of Delhi, informing him “that he will not 
giant an audience to the English agent, whom the Council of 
Calcutta has sent to him, in the expectation that our foites 
will arrive in India soon.” In the second letter, written in 
February 1783, Montigny expressed great concern and dis¬ 
appointment at the delay in the arrival of Bussy. Although 
he was trying to keep the Indian Powers well disposed towaids 
the French, he feared that the situation might change com- 
pletelv if the French delayed too long in concluding alliances 
and starting effective military operations in India. About the 
Maratha Court in particular he wrote, "Nana Fernis yet appears 
to be holding firm against the machinations of the Englisii 
and their partisans, but it remains to be seen if he will keep 
all his promises to me. The death of Ayder Aly Khan 
and the enterprise and successes of the English against Mysore 
might easily change the face of things”. 

Bussy arrived at last in March 1783. but Montigny s hopes 



misr/ty 



about the immediate conclusion of an alliance with the Mara¬ 
thas and starting operations on the Malabar Coast did not 
materialise. Bussy made no move at all to gain the co-opera¬ 
tion ol he Man thas and Nizam Ali, except writing a few letters 
which produced no effect whatsoever. Montigny’s hopes were 
finally destroyed by the sudden cessation of hostilities at the 
beginning of July, following news of the conclusion of peace 
in Europe. He was greatly disappointed at the unexpected 
turn of events, but he did not lose heart. He continued his 
diplomatic efforts to keep (he Marathas and Nizam Ali friendly 
towards the French, by assuring them that the peace just con¬ 
cluded in Europe was only a temporary arrangement and that 
immediately on the outbreak of the next war France would 
send another large expeditionary force to India. About the 
possibility of an alliance with the Marathas, he never despaired. 
In a letter to Bussy, dated 20th October 1783, he wrote that 
Nana Phadnavis had assured him again “that whether the war 
cominued or peace was made, the Regency had a most sincere 
desire to preserve the friendship of the French and to form 
an alliance with our nation; that he knew the perfidy of the 
English and did not rely on the faith of their promises; that 
they hud already deceived him fhree times and that he would 
gladly break with them if he could do it with safety, that is 
to say, in co-operation with our forces.” Monrigny continued 
that the Marat ha Government had decided to maintain a 
permanent 1 Vakil with Bussy and had selected a Brahmin 
named Gopal Rao for the purpose, who would shortly start 
with Maiarois, a French engineer whom Bussy had sent to 
Poona some time earlier. 1 In another letter, dated 14th Decem¬ 
ber, Montigny wrote, “I saw Nana Fernis and spoke to him 
about the treaty which lie had concluded with the English, a 
copy of which the Minister (of Marine) had sent you. He told 

nu .that it was quite true that being pressed by the 

Chiefs of the Regency and specially by the English, he had 

acquiesced in their peace proposals..that he had been 

compelled to conclude these agreements in order to gain time 
and to give time to the French to appear on the Malabar Coast 


1 P A ms. 5551. 




MIN IST^ 



I>l V LOMATIC PROJECTS — III 




The Prince charged me to tell you, my General, that 
his intention was always the same.... namely that if the 
French came in force on the Malabar Coast, he would join all 
the forces of the Regency with ours to destroy or drive away 
the English.” Montigny added that Nana Phadnavis appeared 
“convinced of the advantage which the Ma rath as could draw 
by gaining the friendship of the French, and he charged me to 
tell you again that nothing was dearer to his heart than form¬ 
ing a close alliance with our nation.” 1 

The diplomatic activities of Montigny in the next period 
till his recall from Poona in 1788 and his work of administra¬ 
tion at Chandernagore, from 1789 to 1791, will he dealt with 
in later chapters. In concluding this section a few remarks 
may be made about the feasibility of his project of a Franco 
Maratha alliance. In his reports to the Minister in Paris Bussy 
considered the project as wholly unreal, and without question 
ing the integrity of Montigny, as in the case of other French 
agents, he regarded the latter as having been duped by the 
Marathas. Bussy felt convinced that Nana Phadnavis was not 
sincere in his profession of friendship for the French. He had 
secretly made peace with the English at the very moment that, 
he was making proposals through Montigny for an alliance 
with France. It was on the same ground that Montigny had 
been criticised by the author of the Memoire et Reflexions 
sur les negotiations cle la Cour de France aver les Marathas 
etc . 7 It is no doubt open o speculation whether Nana Phad¬ 
navis would have plaved the game if the French had accepted 
his proposal of alliance in 1782. It is not unlikely that his 
negotiations with the French were not inspired by any sincer¬ 
ity of motive, but only to rouse the jealousy and fear of the 
English, so as to be able to wring out more favourable term? 
from them. This view may even seem to be supported by the 
protracted nature of the negotiations which led to the Treaty 
of Salbai, the treaty having been concluded in May 1782 but 
the exchange of ratifications being delayed till February 1783. 
But when we consider that Nana Phadnavis had no reason to 


ip. A. ms. *340. 
2R.NF.Fr. 1*093. 




prefer the English to the French, that the terms of an alliance 
with France which he had proposed were most favourable from 
the Maratlui point of view, and that the success of the Allied 
Powers would have opened out to the Marathas a brilliant 
prospect of political aggrandisement, it is difficult to under¬ 
stand why, even as an opportunist, he would have held back 
at the last moment, if the French had quickly accepted his 
terms and had landed an effective force on the Malabar Coast. 

Miscej a.AMocs Projects 

Besides the more noteworthy persons whose diplomatic 
projects and plans of military operations we have noticed, there 
were many others of lesser importance who professed to take 
a keen interest in the revival of French influence in India and 
expressed their views in numerous md moires to the Minister 
of Marine and Colonies. Ihe Archives of Pondicherry and 
Paris contain hundreds of such mvmoires submitted between 
1 and 178;^ by non-official persons, many of whom preferred 
to remain anonymous. Their number is so large that it is 
impossible to make even the briefest reference to all of them; 
nor will it serve any useful purpose, since most of them do not 
contain anything new but merely repeat the views expressed 
in one or other of the projects we have noticed already. It 
wii) therefore be sufficient to pick out just a few of them by 
way of illustration and give only the briefest summary possible. 

W r e may take up first an anonymous memoire, Commerce 
a Colonies de Vf ^£-(1774-75), preserved in the Pondicherry 
Archives 1 . The author stated that there were two plans that 
could be adopted to destroy the English power in India. First 
was the plan suggested by Choiseul which could be adopted 
onh in the event of a war in Europe between England and 

P* A. ras. 201. It bears the original date 20th December 1774 but 
u\i- i>3gv were added at the end’ on 28th December *775, giving an 
account of ihc political developments in India during the intervening 
pevuxl. Ihe memoire deals mainly with the trade and commerce of the 
different European nations in India and it is only in the last few pages 
that the author discussed the question of how to destroy the English power 
in India. r 


mmsTfy 



1>1 PI,OMATIC PROJECTS—HI 


*SL 


Its basis was a swift and surprise attack on Bengal 
by an expeditionary force of live thousand men, aided by a 
strong naval squadron. But its defect was that it: could be put 
into execution only in a time of war, and even then its success 
was rather doubtful, since secrecy, the essence of the plan, 
could not possibly be maintained. The English, once they 
came to know of the French intentions, would have sufficient 
time to put their possessions in India in a proper state of 
defence, and in that case the few thousand French troops, tired 
by a long voyage and completely unfamiliar with the theatre 
of operations, could be repulsed with ease. I hus the net result 
would be an immediate conquest by the English of all the 
French possessions in India. 

The second plan involved a long and complicated pro¬ 
gramme of preparations but. was more certain of execution. 
The author of the me.moirc observed, “In order to produce a 
revolution in Hindusthan it is necessary that the natives of the 
country should want it, that they should have both the desire 
and the ability to unite their efforts, and that they be aided 
and led by a European nation, which has gained their confi 
dence and friendship, by expert military knowledge, a large 
artillery and good troops/’ He then stated that the French 
had, by their military exploits and diplomatic ability during 
the time of Dupleix and Bossy, gained the admiration and 
friendship of the Indian Powers, but its effect would be evident 
only when the French could show sufficient military forces in 
their different settlements. As a preliminary measure, therefore, 
the French were to complete the fortifications of Pondicherry, 
maintain a garrison of 2,000 European troops and 1,000 sepoys 
and lay in stocks of provisions for at least a year. At the same 
time they were to maintain a large number of troops and ships 
in the Isle of France, ready to be sent out to India at the first 
signal of war. When these preliminary measure were taken, 


1 ChoiseuTs plan has not been included in our review since its 
principal objective was not the destruction of the English power in India 
but a direct invasion of England by taking advantage of a tempotary naval 
superiority in the Channel. In that plan the Indian expedition was to 
serve as a mere diversion in order to lure away a considerable part of the 
English navy from home waters. A broad outline of Choisetil s plan has 
been given in Chaptct II. 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

to maintain a number of 
diplomatic agents at the Courts of Haidar J 
Janoji Bhonsla, Shuja~ud-daulah and Emperor Shah Alain, in 
order to keep them friendly towards the French and ready to 
join them actively when the occasion arose. With the co¬ 
operation of the country Powers, success in war would be 
assmed if the French had an army of 10,000 men, supported 
by a squadron of six ships of the line and a number of frigates. 
I hr first attack should be delivered against Bombay as the 
best means of inducing the Maratbas to cooperate actively. 
While the expeditionary force from the Isle of France would 
be engaged against Bombay, the forces at Pondicherry in concert 
with Haidar Mi were to attack Madras. After the fall of 
Bombay, the Marathas and Shuja-ud-daulah were to invade 
Bengal from the north and attract the English forces to the 
frontier, while the French naval squadron would move up the 
Ganges and attack Calcutta. Further, an alliance with Nizam 
Mi Would enable the French to land troops on the Orissa 
C,0,1st and occupy the Northern Sarkars, since most of the 
English troops there were likely to be recalled for the defence 
of Calcutta and Madras. 

Another anonymous memoire preserved in the Pondicherry 
Archives that we may notice here is —hires sur Vlnde dans !e 
uipport de rival it e qu’ont nos fitablissements avec ceux des 
htglais, dated 1st October 1 775 - 1 h began with a discussion 
of the inequality between the position of the English and that 
of the French. The author then observed that there were two 
methods by which this inequality could be removed. The first 
was bv opening negotiations between London and Paris with 
a view to obtain additional territories round the French settle¬ 
ments, large enough to yield an adequate revenue to cover all 
expenses. The second was by a war with the English, the 
o’ r xt being not to make conquests but rather to restore the 
u rr Tories in English possession to their original owners, so that 
the English and the French would remain in India merely as 
commercial rivals, placed on an equal footing in relation to 
th< Indian Powers. I he author o‘ the mimoire was inclined 
u think that the second was the only feasible method, and he 



<SL 

able and loyal 
i, the Peshwa, 


1 P. A. ms. si\. 


HUHST/fy 



I>IPl.OMATIC PROJECTS-III 


•<§L 


muuerided that preparations for war should be completed 
within the next three or four years. These were to include 
the construction of solid fortifications at Pondicherry, storage 
of provisions for two years, training a sepoy force of 2.000, 
conclusion of alliances with the Marathas and Haidar Ali, cul¬ 
tivation of friendly relations with Basalat Jang who had a 
French corps in his service, and gaining the co-operation of 
Sombre and Madec who had large and welFtrained armies 
under their command and had great influence at the Imperial 
Court at Delhi. The author specially emphasised the need 
for an alliance with the Marathas, whose extensive dominions, 
bordering on English possessions all over India, and large 
cavalry force, swift, light arid very effective for ravaging the 
enemy territories, made them the most formidable foe to the 
English. In view of the importance of an alliance with the 
Marathas it was necessary for the French not merely to main¬ 
tain a permanent diplomatic agent at the Court of Poona but 
also to spend considerable sums of money to win over the 
principal ministers. The agent to be kept at the Court of 
Poona could also be entrusted with the maintenance of 
diplomatic relations with Nizam Ali and Basalat Jang With 
7,000 European troops, 2,000 sepoys and a naval squadron of 
20 vessels, the author felt confident of success if the command 
was entrusted to an able and experienced person like Bussy. 

We may notice a third anonymous memoire preserved in 
the Pondicherry Archives ,—Notes sur la situation des Anglais 
dans Vlndouslan. Although it is not dated, from the contents 
it appears that it must have been written in 1776, on the eve 
of the coming of Bellecomhe as Governor of Pondicherry. 1 The 
author began by exposing the falsehood of the notion enter¬ 
tained by most of his compatriots about the ease with which 
the English power in Bengal could be destroyed and the readi- 


1 P. A. ms. 233. In the Catalogue des Manuscrits des Ancienncs 
Archives de VInde Fvangaisc, Vo]. I, Gaudarr states that the mimoire was 
possibly drawn up by Law to enlighten his successor, Bellecornbe, on the 
political situation of the country. But there are two reasons to think that 
it was not written by Law; first, the views expressed here regarding the 
Tatta project are entirely opposed to the known views of Law on the 
subject (P. A. nr. 321); second, in this document the writer once uses 
the first person but just two lines later refers to Law in the third person. 


O 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



ness of the people to rise in revolt as soon as France declared 
wan On the other hand, the English administration in Bengal 
was both efficient and popular. “The people are treated well; 
businessmen have a prosperous trade and their wealth is 

assured.Justice is administered with a severe impartiality 

.and no precautions are omitted to establish the Eng¬ 
lish authority on a firm basis.” Turning to the possibility of 
gaining allies in north India, the author stated that Shuja-ud- 
daulah, the Nawab of Oudh, had been friendly towards the 
French, but his successor was a mere tool in the hands of the 
English. The Emperor, Shah Alam, and his ministers, Abdul 
Ahad Khan and Najaf Khan, were inclined in favour of the 
French, but there was a real apprehension of the Emperor 
ultimately throwing himself into the arms of the English 
because of the rapid expansion of English power and the little 
prospect of gaining an\ foreign help to stop it. 1 he only 
factors that prevented the Emperor from taking that step were, 
first, his experience of English hospitality at Allahabad, and 
second, his hope of gaining the alliance of France, negotiations 
for which had been already started through Madec. 

The author of the mi moire next referred to the Iatta 
project and dealt with the advantages that France could draw 
from the occupation of the province,—a large revenue and a 
prosperous trade. But apart from these advantages, the I atta 
project also furnished the only feasible method of operating a 
revolution in India. The English position in Bengal was too 
firmly entrenched to be challenged by a direct attack. ‘The 
English, solidly established in Bengal, masters of the Coroman¬ 
del and Orissa Coasts, in possession of Salsette, Broach and 
Surat, and without am rivalry with any European nation, arc 
about to seize the whole of Hindusthan. The only means by 
which we may effect a happy revolution is a double alliance 
with the Mogol and the Marathas through the cession of Tatta- 
Bakar.” After the occupation of Tatta a part of the French 
troops could be sent to Delhi., The first operation would be 
to re-establish the empire in its ancient splendour and there 
would afterwards be formed all the projects that might appear 
suitable.” Negotiations could then be started with the Mara* 
thas, Nizam AH, Basalat Jang, Haidar Ali and even Muhammad 
AH, Nawab of the Carnatic, 



mtSTfiy 



Next we may turn to a memoire, preserved in the Archives 
of the Colonial Ministry in Paris— L'fitat de la Nation Anglaise 
en Bengale et lc ProjeI d’Altaque de Calcutta .. 1 2 It is also 
anonymous and was written about the end of 1770. The 
author first gave an account of the military strength of the 
English in Bengal and the enormous territorial revenues they 
derived from the province. Next he sketched out a plan of 
attack on the English position in Bengal. It was based on 
simultaneous invasions from the north as well as from the 
south. Calcutta was to be attacked by 2,500 French and 2,000 
African troops. At the same time there was to be an invasion 
from the north by 1,400 French troops joined with the forces 
of Shuja-ud-daulah, Nawab of Oudh. A successful invasion 
of Bengal from both sides was possible with the help of a naval 
force' of three battleships, three frigates, seven transport vessels 
and one corvette. The execution of the plan depended on a 
solid alliance with the Nawab of Oudh, and the author of the 
memoire suggested that negotiations should be opened with 
him at once through Gentil. It was also necessary to gain the 
co-operation of some of the petty Rajas on the Orissa Coast to 
facilitate the landing of French troops and their passage to the 
territory of the Nawab of Oudh. The only importance of this 
document is that it furnishes an interesting variation of the 
later plan of Chevalier and Madec, which was based on the 
co-operation of the Emperor Shah Alain. It shows that before 
turning to the Emperor, art idea was entertained in some quar¬ 
ters of making an alliance with the Nawab of Oudh as the 
basis of French policy in India. 

Then wc notice two mdmoires , both anonymous, preserved 
in the Archives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Paris. 
The erst is, — Memoire sur la necessity d'entretenir un Ambus 
sadeur d la cour de Delhi dated October 15, 1781.* f he 
author stressed the importance of an alliance with the Mughal 
Emperor as the basis of French policy in India. No doubt the 
Empire had been disintegrated, the Emperor had been shorn 
of all real authority, and his vassals had assumed virtual 

1 A. N.—Ckdonics; C-sr, Vol. 117, M£iuoircs G£ri6raux. 

2 Archives du Ministere des Affaires Etrang£rc$ Asic: Mgmoircs ct 
Documents, Vol. Vil. 


nwtST/iy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 




independence. Nevertheless, ail the Indian Princes were still 
connected with the Empire, however nominally it might be, 
and an alliance witii the Emperor was the best means to estab¬ 
lish relations with them. Moreover, the principal object of 
the French was to destroy the English position in Bengal, and 
that was not possible except through an alliance with the 
Emperor and a joint invasion of Bengal from the north. The 
author suggested that Chevalier was the best person to be sent 
as Ambassador to the Imperial Court of Delhi for concluding 
a sol id alliance. He was a member of the nobility of the 
Mughal Empire and knew the country, its language and politics 
better than anybody else. 

The views expressed in the second document, Mernoire sur 
I'lnde,' were diametrically opposite. The author ridiculed all 
peculations about effecting a revolution in north India and 
driving the English out of Bengal by an alliance with the 
Mughal Emperor. Any scheme based on such an alliance was 
absolutely fantastic, since the Emperor was too timid and too 
weak in military strength to be able to give any effective help 
to the French. Moreover, if the French allied themselves with 
the Emperor, all the vassal Princes, alarmed at the possibility 
of a revival of the old Imperial authority over them, would 
;t once combine together and seek the help of the English to 
prevent such a development. Any attempt by the French to 
re-establish the disrupted Empire was sure to be resisted by all 
the vassal Princes combined. 

Finally, let us notice two other anonymous mimoires belong¬ 
ing to the Madec collection and quoted by Emile Barb£ in his 
Le Nabob Rent Madec. The first one is dated 10th June 1777 
and addressed to de Sartine, Minister of Marine and Colonies. 
The author of the mimoire was extremely optimistic about 
destroying the English power in India and did not take into 
account any difficulty lying in the way. He thought that an 
alliance between the Fiench and the Mughal Emperor would 
induce Asaf-ud-daulah, the Nawab of Oudh, to cast his lot with 
them and free himself from the yoke of the English. 1 heir 


1 Archives du Ministfcre <tc$ Affaires Etrangfcrcs—>Asie: Mewoires et 
Documents, Yol. VII. 

3 BartxS !—Le Nabob Rene Madec, pp. 181*188. 





combined forces would be sufficient to push the English as far 
back as Calcutta, and if at the same time France sent a strong 
expeditionary force with some ships to attack Calcutta, the Eng¬ 
lish would be compelled to surrender. The author did not 
think that France would have to incur any considerable expen¬ 
diture. since she could get financial help from her Indian allies. 
Therein lay the weakest point of his plan, since he had no 
valid reason to assume that the Indian Princes had both the 
money and the will to finance French military operations. 

The second document is, Memoire sur L*Empire Mogol.' 
It is undated, but while Bar be suggests that it might have 
been written in 1781 or 1782, from the contents it is clear that 
it must have been written some time after the conclusion of 
peace in 1783. The author gave a derailed account of the 
existing state of the Mughal Empire and the growth of the 
English power in Bengal and north India,' and then ho sug¬ 
gested a means of effecting a revolution in India. He did not 
refer to the Tatta project at all, but simply proposed that 
France should send a small corps of a thousand men to the 
help of the Emperor. The command should be given to 
Madec, than whom nobody knew India better. For the first 
few years the corps was only to help the Emperor in establish¬ 
ing his authority over his vassals. This was to be followed by 
the conclusion of an alliance between him and Asaf-ud daulah, 
the Nawab of Oudh, and a joint attack on Bengal. The author 
was very optimistic and did not see any difficulty in his way. 


1 Barb 4 ~Le Sabob Rent Madrr, pp. 199-209. 


MIN IST/fy 


CHAPTER VI!I 




FRENCH ACTIVITIES IN THE EAST ( 1779 - 1781 ) 

I. Failure to take advantage of English difficulties in India. 

We have seen in the preceding chapters how the French 
in India refused to recognise their defeat in the Seven Years’ 
War as final. T he memory of the earlier successes of Dupleix 
and Bussy was still fresh in their minds, while they attributed 
their later reverses merely to ill-luck and to he insufficiency 
of the resources at their command due to the indifference of 
the home Government. T he very nature of the treaty of 
iffy, which sought to reduce the French in India to absolute 
political impotence, inspired in them a determination to pre¬ 
pare the ground for a return match. From the morrow of theii 
defeat, all of them, either in official service or in the employ of 
tfie country Powers, were confident of a renewal of the conflict 
and looked forward to the day when it might be possible for 
them to strike against their adversaries under more favourable 
circumstances. The peace of 1763 was considered only as a 
breathing-space, to be utilised for making preparations for the 
inevitable renewal of the conflict,—by fortifying the settlements, 
strengthening the garrisons and building up alliances with 
some of the important country Powers. For more than a 
decade, from the re-occupation of their settlements in India in 
1765 to the outbreak of the next war in 1778, they drew up 
innumerable plans of diplomatic alliances and military opera¬ 
tions. some of which we have noticed in detail already. 

Till 1776. however, the enterprise and initiative of the 
French agents in India met with little response from the Gov¬ 
ernment *in Paris, and all the projects were quietly shelved in 
the ministerial archives. But with the outbreak of the War of 
American Independence there came about a change in the 
policy of the French Government. For the first time it began 
to stir itself from the lethargy which had seized it since the 
disasters of the Seven Years’ War. I he War of American 
Independence appeared as an opportunity to take revenge upon 


FRENCH ACTIVITIES IN THE EAST 

the traditional enemy of trance, and the Government in Lai is 
came to pay more serious attention to the numerous plans sub¬ 
mitted for the destruction of the English power in India. In 
1777 it even invited suggestions from men with experience of 
Indian affairs, including past heroes like Bussy. Hoping to 
take advantage of England’s preoccupations in America, the 
French Government planned to despatch an expeditionary force 
to India, and as a preliminary step it sent out diplomatic agents, 
like Montigny, to study the political situation in India at first 
hand and to build up a ring of alliances against the English. 
Nevertheless* the Government proceeded very slowly and cauti¬ 
ously while events were moving fast in Europe and America* 
with the result that when in 1778 France openly intervened in 
the war against England, not only had she not completed her 
preparations for the despatch of an expeditionary force to India, 
she had not even taken any material step to secure her posses¬ 
sions in India from a surprise attack by the English. By the 
end of 1778 all her possessions (except Mahe which capitulated 
early in the following year) fell into the hands of the English, 
and in 1779 France did not possess a single base in India where 
she could land troops. 

This setback diverted the attention of France for the next 
two years. Completely engrossed in the struggle in America, she 
made no effort to send an expeditionary force to India, to carry 
the war to a quarter which supplied the sinews of war to her 
enemy. Thus she lost the splendid opportunity which offered 
itself in 1779*80, when the English were fighting against the 
Marathas and Haidar Ali, with Nizam Ali of Hyderabad being 
the third potential enemy. Most unwisely she allowed two 
valuable years to pass without any action, except sending a few 
ships and some troops for the defence of the Isles of France 
and Bourbon, which in fact were never threatened b) the 
English. These ships lay idle at Port Louis, and the troops 
were badly affected bv the enervating climate of the Isles, 1 he 
English did not have any considerable naval force in Indian 
waters at the time, and the appearance of the few French ships 
would have produced a heartening psychological effect on the 
southern Powers engaged in hostilities against the English. 

It was not till 1781 that the French Government could 
make up its mind about the necessity of sending a joint naval 




nums^ 



and military expedition to India. 1 he first step was the 
despatch of a strong fleet in March 1781 under one of the ablest 
naval commanders that France ever produced, de Suffren. This 
was followed in December by the despatch of an expeditionary 
force to India under the command of the old hero, Bussy. But 
it was then too late. By the time do Suffren arrived in Indian 
uafers, the Marathas had virtually withdrawn from the war. 
ami although Haidar Ali ’.mis continuing his victorious cam¬ 
paigns in the Carnatic, the small number of the troops landed 
by de Suffren on the Coromandel Coast in 1782, the inaction 
of the commander, first Duchemin and then Hoffelize, and the 
news of the imminent arrival of Bussy with further reinforce¬ 
ments of troops and ships prevented any well-planned co¬ 
operation between the French and Haidar. Finally, adverse 
circumstances delayed Bussy too long on the way, and by the 
time he arrived in India the war had practically come to an 
end in America and Europe. Within three months, before 
Bussy could cake any forward move, news reached India about 
the conclusion of the preliminaries of peace in Europe. For 
the failure of the French to take advantage of the English 
difficulties in India during the critical years 1779 t0 1781, the 
blame attaches mainly to the Government in Paris, which 
concentrated all its attention on America as the principal 
theatre of operations against England, without any realisation 
of the importance of India. 

II. Negotiations between Souillac and Haidar broken off 
by the timidity of d'Orvcs. 

Let us notice very briefly the activities of the French 
during the critical years 1779 to 1781. We have seen in a 
previous chapter how Tronjoly in command of the small 
French fleet in Indian waters ignominously left Pondicherry to 
its fate in 1778 during the siege of that place and hastily with 
drew to the Isle of France. De la Brillane, Governor of the 
Isle of France, sent some help to Pondicherry in response to 
the urgent demands of Bellecombe, but it arrived too late, 
when the place had already capitulated to the English. He 
then contented himself by merely taking measures for the 
defence of the Isle and waited for reinforcements from France 


Ml HIST/fy 


• G o^ 


FRENCH ACTIVITIES IN THE EAST 

on further ventures in India. It was a critical 
period, and a de Suffren with a strong fleet could have changed 
the face of things. But instead of de Suffren, the French 
Government sent out in December 1778 the unimaginative 
d’Grves with four ships to secure the defence of the Isles of 
France and Bourbon and to prey upon English shipping in the 
East. After the arrival of d’Orves in 1779 I ronjoly had a 
fairly strong fleet under his command, with which he coulu base 
encountered the weaker English squadron under Admiral 
Hughes and could have saved Mah£. But instead of turning* 
to India he merely made some fruitless attempts to prey upon 
English shipping, and ultimately came back to anchor at I ort 
Louis, 

By this time Brillane had been succeeded as Governor of 
the Isie of France by a more energetic man, Souillac, who was 
determined to intervene in the war in south India, fortu¬ 
nately for him, early iti 17^0 he was sent further reinforcements 
from France, a few ships and 15 transport vessels carrying the 
regiment of Austrasie under the command of Duchemin de 
Cherineville. Another good fortune was that the indolent 
T ronjoly was succeeded by d’Orves (September 1782) in com¬ 
mand of the fleet, which now consisted of six ships of the line, 
a frigate and two corvettes. Souillac thought that the time 
had come for an active operation against the English in south 
India, where they had been reduced to great distress by two 
formidable enemies, the Marathas and Flaidar Ali. 1 he latter 
carried the war to the Carnatic to cut off the principal source 
of revenue of the English and commenced his operations with 
some striking victories. In September 178°* By a brilliant 
manoeuvre, he cut off and took prisoner at Perambalcom ail 
entire English detachment under Col. Baillie, consisting of 
3,720 men including 500 Europeans. 1 He next captured Arcot, 
the capital of the Carnatic, and laid siege to a number of forts 
at Am bur, Vellore, Wandiwash, Permacoil and Chingleput. 2 
It even seemed for a moment that Haidar would be able to 

Mallcson —Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas, 
p, 5. For details see Wilks —History of Mysoor , IT. pp. 21*26. 

2 Wilks, op. cit. II, p. 35. 



to emb; 



TfU FRENCH IN INDIA 

ihe whole of the Carnatic, and Madras, which had an 
inadequate defence, was thrown into a panic. Souillac saw 
his chance and entered into negotiations with Haidar through 
Piveron de Morlat, formerly Procxirtur-G&niral at Pondicherry. 
J 1 trough . this French agent at the Court of the Mysore Prince 
Souillac proposed a treaty of alliance as the basis of joint 
operations against the English. By it the French engaged 
themselves to conquer the Carnatic and to drive the English 
out of south India. In return Haidar was to cede to them a 
territory with an annual revenue of two crores of rupees, 
besides the town of Madras and other English possessions in 
the south. Haidar was also to supply the cost of the expedi¬ 
tionary force at the rate of six lakhs of rupees for one thousand 
troops. 1 

While negotiations on this basis were in progress, Souillac 
decided to send out the fleet under the command of d’Orves 
with a regiment of troops on board to come to a definite under¬ 
standing with Haidar and to prepare the ground for large-scale 
military operations against the English in south India. The 
expedition sailed from che Isle of France on the 14th October 
1780. and appeared before the Coromandel Coast, off Cudda- 
lore. on the 25th January 1781. Had d’Orves been a man of 
even average imagination and enterprise he would have at once 
seized upon the splendid opportunity of destroying the English 
power in south India which presented itself on his arrival 
before the Coromandel Coast. 1 he small English licet under 
Admiral Hughes was then on the western coast; Madras was 
defended by only 500 European troops, and the army under 
Sir Eyre Coote, which had taken the field against Haidar, consti 
tuted the only English force in the south. On the news of 
Coote's march south about the middle of January, Haidar 
raised his sieges and concentrated his troops with a view to cut 
off communication between the English army and Madras. 
Coote moved slowly, strengthening the garrisons of the prin¬ 
cipal forts on the way. and suppressing a revolt of the citizens 
of Pondicherry, who had risen in arms and freed themselves 

1 Ma’.leson— Les. Demitres Lillies des F an^ais dans VInde et sur V 
Octcn I tulien, p. 6 ( Note du traducteur). 



overrun 



NIIN/Sr^ 



FRENCH ACTIVITIES IN THE EAST 


-twin the English yoke on the news of Haidar's victories in the 
Carnatic. From Pondicherry Coote proceeded south towards 
Cuddalore, while Haidar followed him in a parallel line to the 


west, thus cutting oil his supplies from the interior of the coun¬ 
try.* The only route open to the English for drawing supplies 
was the sea, which also was closed by the appearance of the 
French fleet under d'Orves. 

In February the position of the English arms before 
Cuddalore became highly critical, and the only means of ex¬ 
tricating itself from this difficulty was to draw Haidar to a 
pitched encounter. But Haidar was clever enough to see 
through the weakness of the English position. If he could hold 
on for some time avoiding a pitched battle, he could starve the 
English army to submission; and the destruction of this army 
meant the destruction of the only force which the English had 
in south India. The whole of the Carnatic and even Madras lay 
exposed to Haidar’s army.' Haidar requested d’Orves to co¬ 
operate with him at that opportune moment by landing the 
regiment of troops he had on board and by keeping the fleet 
on the coast. But d’Orves was not the man for the occasion, 
and rather mysteriously lie refused not only to land the troops 
but even to keep his fleet on the coast to cut oft the supplies 
of the English. The action of d’Orves amounted to a criminal 
neglect of national interests in much greater degree than that 
of d’Actofr (1759) or of Tronjoly (1778). Without running any 
risk whatsoever, by simply keeping watch before Cuddalore, 
he could have reduced to submission the only English army in 
the south. But he suddenly decided to leave on the 151I1 
February for the Isle of France, with an empty assurance to 
Haidar that he soon expected to return to the Coromandel 
Coast with more adequate forces. By this one step, bettaying 
timidity and selfishness, d’Orves at once cut off the negotiations 
which Souillac had entered into with Haidar, and was prin- 


1 For an account of Cootc’s march see his letter dated 1st March 1781, 
Secret Select Committee Proceedings, Fort William, 57th April 17H1 
(Forrest -Selections from Letters, Despatches etc. Foreign Department, 
Goircrnmcnt of India, III, pp. 762*765) 

2 For the desperate position of the English see Willcv History 
of Mysoor, H. pp. 42 44. 


IHK FRENCH IN INDIA 

V responsible for the lack of sincere co-operation between 
Haidar and the French at a later period. 1 

Commenting on the conduct of d’Orves, Souillac wrote: 
"By this surprising obstinacy of M. d’Orves, about which l 
sent a report to the Minister at the time, we lost the occasion, 
never to come again, of becoming the absolute masters of the 
Coromandel Coast. This army of Cuddalore, consisting of 
fourteen thousand men of whom three to four thousand were 
Europeans, composed the entire English force in that part. 2 
Madras could not have defended itself, and the junction of our 
troops with those of Haidar Ali would have enabled us to con¬ 
quer Fanjore and Masulipatam with all its dependencies.” 3 A 
contemporary English writer remarked, “Had the French 
admiral left only two frigates to block up the road of Cudda¬ 
lore, consequences might have happened as fatal to the interests 
of Great Britain in the East Indies, as flowed in North America 
from the Convention of Saratoga.” 4 

1 he departure of d’Orves saved the English army at 
Cuddalore, but Haidar* left to his own resources, carried on the 
fight in as intrepid a fashion as before. Although defeated in 
a number of pitched battles, 5 his mobile forces carried fire and 
devastation all over the Carnatic, reducing the English to a 
helpless distress; and thus the military situation stood, when in 
March 178s a French expeditionary force under Duchemin was 

1 the action of d’Orves was justly condemned by Coote himself in 
the report of his campaign dated 1st March. “I need not take up your 
tiim with commenting on the conduct of the French Admiral, or describ¬ 
ing the injuries we must have suffered, and the risk we must have run, 
if he had acted with common spirit. I may with safety advance that we 
are cntirel) indebted to his irresolute behaviour for the little security we 
now enjoy on this coast. He drew Hyder from Arcot with strong assur¬ 
ance of support and when he came near, failed in the performance,”— 
Secret Select Committee Proceedings, Fort William: 27th April 1781 
(Forrest— Selections from Letters , Despatches etc., Foreign Department , 
Government of India , III, p. 765). 

I he real strength of the English army is given by Wilks —History 
of Mysoor, II, p. 36 (footnote): 8000 infantry, 800 cavalry, 62 pieces of 
artillery; the European troops numbered 1600. 

1 Roux — Le Bailli de Suffren dans VInie, p. 55. 

4 Mallcson — Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas, 
p. 9 (footnote). 

3 Wilke op, cit II, pp. 56-86. 




MIN IST/fy 



landed on the Coromandel Coast by de Sutfren to co-operate 
with Haidar against the English. At this point it is necessary 
o turn back to the beginning of 1781 and trace the course oi 
events connected with the despatch of an expeditionary force 
under de Suffren. 


misT/t 


CHAPTER IX 




DE SUFFREN AND NAVAL AC I IONS IN INDIAN 
WATERS 

I. Early career of de Stiff ten, 

Pierre Andre de Suffren was born in Provence in July 1729,' 
and was the third son of the Marquis of Saint Gamut. We 
need not go into the details of his early career. From his 
boyhood he was prepared for a naval career, and in 1743 he 
joined the navy at the age of fourteen. The young Provencal, 
for whom the French Government had to create one dav an 
additional post of Vice-Admiral, started his career from the 
bottom of the ladder and rose step by step to the position of a 
commander. De Suffren had his first experience of naval 
combat in February 1743 on board the Solide in an action 
against the English fleet under Matthews, off loulom The 
next memorable naval action for him was in October 1747, 
when the English Admiral Hawke defeated a French fleet off 
Cape Fin is ter re and captured six French ships. Among the 
prisoners taken was dc Suffren himself, who remained in 
captivity till the conclusion of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle 
in 1748. On his return he joined the Order of Saint-Jean de 
Jerusalem and went to Malta, but he came back to France in 
*754 ° n the eve of the outbreak of the Seven Years* War. In 
1756 he took part in the French expedition against Port Mahon 
which achieved success, but next year he was again taken 
prisoner by the English when Boscawcn attacked the French 
Mediterranean fleet in the neutral Portuguese port of Lagos, 
t wo years later he obtained his release through an exchange 
of prisoners. The ability and courage of de Suffren won due 
recognition in France after the peace of 1763- In 1777, 011 the 
eve of the French intervention in the War of American Inde¬ 
pendence, he was given the first command of a battleship, the 

1 Roux— Lt Btixlli de Suffren dans l’ltide, p. 3. Malleson wrongly 
gives the date 1726 (Final French Struggles, p. 11). 


mtsTfy 



Fantasque. Next year he took part in the naval expedition to 
America under Comte d’Estaing and gave abundant proof of 
his dash and intrepidity. It was only a fitting reward to his 
past record that when in 1781 the French Government decided 
to send a naval squadron to the East, the choice of the Minister. 
Marquis de Castries, fell upon de Suffren to command it. 

II. De Suffren and new method Is of naval warfare. 

The Indian expedition, by giving de Suffren for the first 
time independent command of a fleet, enabled him to show 
his real genius and made him immortal in the annals of naval 
warfare. It was during the years 1781 to 1783 that he found 
himself in a position to apply his new tactics of naval combat, 
which differed entirely from the tradition followed till his time, 
and which later paved the way for the glories of Nelson. 
Indeed, this particular aspect of de Suffren’s genius deserves 
some special mention, for it is not very widely known that much 
of the credit generally given to the illustrious English Admiral 
of having introduced the modern method of naval warfare 
should go in reality to dc Suffren. 

In the r8th century the tt dition of naval warfare had 
hardened into a rigid system of ‘fighting in line’. 1 Under this 
system the battleships proceeded in a single line one after 
another (from which originated the name of ‘ship of the line', 
indicating a battleship), and the other ships, frig,lies, corvettes 
etc., simply formed the retinue of the procession. I he line 
formed by the battleships was a rather closed one, only the 
length of a ship being the distance separating one from another, 
f was a sort of moving wall, and possessed in fact certain 
advantages—mutual help, order and proper surveillance. Mote 
over, this closed-line formation spared the necessity of having 
to fire from both sides of the deck at the same time, since the 
enemy fleet could be only on one side. It was of particular 
advantage to France (and that was the principal reason for its 
adoption there), because France could never get the requisite 
number of sailors to man her navy. Under the line system 

* In France it was Tourvilte who first developed a tradition which 
later turned into an unchangeable svstera under his successors. 


umrfty 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

^>(hc navy could do with a smaller number of men, since the 
ships had to lire from only one side of the deck at a time, and 
the closed formation of the line prevented the risk of any battle¬ 
ship being caught between two fires by the enemy. 

Another point to notice about the system is that the fleets 
in action moved in parallel lines at a respectable distance from 
each other. It was always a moving fight and the combatants 
never came within close quarters. Because of this method of 
lighting, the fleet in those days was not looked upon so much 
as an offensive weapon as an aid to land operations. It was 
employed not for the primary object of destroying the enemy 
'hips, but only for carrying troops, munitions and provisions 
to a particular point, or at most for assisting the army in siege 
operations. This use of the navy deserves to be noted, if one 
is to appreciate the departure from tradition made by dc SufFren. 
He gave a new offensive character to the navy, and raised it 
from its secondary position of being a mere aid to the army. 

De SufFren departed from the traditional system even more 
markedly in the new tactics of attack. Abandoning the principle 
oi; fighting in line, he adopted that of concentration of fire. 
General firing all along the line gave place to ‘attack in sections’. 
By proper manoeuvring he woul^d create a temporary inequality 
in the relative strength of the two fleets in action, and then 
keeping the test of the enemy fleet immobilised, he would take 
erne section between two fifes and concentrate his whole attack 
on it. T he thing is that, in the line formation, although there 
was no gap to allow an enemy ship to pass through ,and thus 
put one unit between two fires, such a gap always existed in 
the extreme rear. The last ships of the line could always 
double the rear of the enemy and thus put it betw r een two fires 
In this way, by doubling the rear of the enemy line and con¬ 
centrating the fire on a section of it, isolated from the rest, 
the whole fleet could be destroyed part by part. It was this 
method which dc SufFren invariably adopted as his fixed 
principle of attack, departing \yholly from the tradition of the 
rime and ushering in the era of modern naval warfare, for 
which the credit of originality is usually given to Nelson. 1 

* La \ arende -Suffreyi cl scs ennernis, pp. 105*120. For a more 
detailed discussion ot de Suffren’s originality see Comte Bouet-Willaumea— 
Rcitaillcs dc ter re cl dc mers. 




MIN ISTQy 



De SufTren put his strongest and best armed ships in the rear, 
and these were the ships employed in the real action, while the 
others simply kept the rest of the enemy line engaged and 
immobilised. 

As in the tactics of attack, in the strategy of war too SufFren 
was an innovator. In France the navy was looked upon simply 
as a watchdog of the army. Suffren first showed the importance 
of naval action in a colonial war. He held that a war must 
commence with direct naval action. That was to be the first 
offensive, which, if successful, would enable the employment of 
the land force effectively and with certainty of success. The 
credit due to Suffren for his originality of conception and 
execution is not lessened by the fact that in his operation in 
Indian waters from 1781 to 1783 he did not achieve complete 
success, which would have justified more demonstrably the 
soundness of his new methods, it should not be overlooked 
that his failure to achieve complete success was due to the fa< t 
that his ideas were too novel to be fully comprehended by his 
officers, many of whom, besides, were mortally jealous of him 
and denied him that co-operation which would have made his 
operations as glorious as those of Nelson. 

Ill Departure of de Suffren for India. 

We have seen already how from 1778 to 1780 the French 
Government concentrated all its attention on the American 
theatre of operations and neglected to take advantage of the 
English difficulties in India during that critical period. It was 
only after the replacement of de Sartine by dc Castries as 
Minister of Marine at the end of 1780 that things began 
to change, and the French Government came to realise the 
importance of sending an expeditionary force to India. I he 
first step taken was the despatch of a naval squadron under 
dc Suffren in March 1781, followed by the departure of the 
main expeditionary force under Bussy in December. I he 
decision to despatch a naval squadron under dc Suffren was 
taken not so much for the Indian expedition, but primarily 
to save the Dutch colony of the Cape of Good Hope from falling 
into the hands of the English. Holland had joined the war 
in December 1780, and early in 1781 it became known that 


p 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

intended to send an expeditionary force to 
("ape. At the request of the Dutch, France agreed to send troops 
to the Cape to save it from the intended attack. De Suffren’s 
mission was to transport these troops to the Cape in advance 
of the English Meet under Commodore Johnstone, carrying an 
expeditionary force under General Medows. After landing the 
troops at the Cape, de Suffren was to proceed to the Isle of 
France to reinforce the fleet, that lay there under the command 
of d'Orves. The French squadron consisted of live ships of the 
line, the 11 eras (74), the Annihal (74), the Vengeur (64), the 
■trtcsien (64), and the Sphinx (64), a frigate, the Fortune, and 
seven transport vessels, carrying troops belonging to the regi¬ 
ments of Austrasie and Pondicherry under the command of 
Conway. 1 

The appointment of de Suffrcn to the command of the 
squadron was due mainly to the recommendation of Comte 
d’Estaing to the Minister. Marquis <|e Castries, who in his 
order of appointment expressed high appreciation of de Suffren s 
merit. But nevertheless, it created a good deal of jealousy 
among other officers, sonic of whom were senior to him in 
service, and that was one of the reasons for the lack of co-opera¬ 
tion he received from many of his captains. Before sailing 
from Brest with his squadron de Suffren went to Versailles to 
take leave of the King, and there is an interesting anecdote 
about his visit. At the palace the usher had some difficulty 
in conducting de Suffren to the Royal audience through the 
great crowd of courtiers and hangers-on. and de Suffren 
remarked, “I thank you for the trouble that you are taking 
toclav, but you will set that on my return I shall be able to 
make my way myself It reflected clearly the confidence of 
de Suffrcn about the glories that he was going to wdn in the East. 

Although dc Suffren was elated at the prospect of winning 
fame, he felt disappointed that he was to have the official desig¬ 
nation of commander only till he reached the Isle of France, 
when he was to serve as second-in-command to the timid and 
incompetent d'Orvcs, although retaining the honours and 
prerogatives of a Chef d’escadre. He expressed his feelings 

1 Journal df Hard du HailU de Suffren dans I’lnde. \>. 5. 

7 Ron\ /> Railh de Suffren dans I'Inde, p. 65. 




miSTfiy 



'uTaletter from Brest on March 18. 1781 to Madame clc Seillans, 
his life-long friend and the object f)f his loyal devotion 1 2 . I 
atn going to India in command of a division of live battleships. 
M. le Marquis de Castries has given me the appointment with 
the best grace in the world and in a way very flattering to me; 
but he has not done what he should have; he has not made 
me Chef d'escadre, and 1 shall Ik- in command only till 
I join my senior already in India. In truth, there will be eleven 
ships, and the least happy circumstance may put me in charge 
of a good squadron and win me glory, that smoke for which 

we do so many things . In the Indian waters 1 shall 

have the honours and prerogatives of a Chef d’escadre; I have 
learnt it just at this moment. It is a secret which I have not 
divulged even to my relatives . 

For the success of the primary mission of de Suffren, namely 
to forestall Johnstone and land French troops at the (.ape of 
Good Hope, speed in completing preparations for the departure 
of the squadron was of the greatest importance, specially when 
it became known in France about the middle ol March that 
Johnstone had already started. The normal delay in fitting 
out a naval squadron in France was on this occasion cut short 
by the personal interest of the Minister, Marquis de Castries, 
who went to Brest in person to enthuse the sailois and hasten 
the departure of the ships. On March 15 a fast-moving frigate, 
the Fine, was sent olf in advance with Chcvreau, Intendant in 
the Isle of France, and Montigny, appointed to act as agent 
at the Court of Poona, to announce to the Dutch at the Cape 
and to Souillac in the Isle of France the departure of a naval 
squadron under de Suffren*. The frigate arrived in the Isle of 
France on July to, and enabled Souillac to make hasty prepara¬ 
tions for the despatch of an expeditionary force to India. 

On March 2* de Suffren. who had taken for himself the 
Heros, a ship destined to justify the name in the fullest measure, 
started from Brest with his squadron in company with another 
division under Comte de Grasse proceeding to America. All 
the ships sailed together up to Madeira, where they parted 

1 t,eiter& of Bailli de Suffren, published by Ortolan in the Moniteur 
l r mver$et, 5th November 1859. 

2 Rou \ ~Le Bailli dc Suffren dans I'lnde, Pp- 65.66. 




NllN/Sr/f,, 


THE FRENCH in IN 01 A 



<§l 


company at the- beginning of April, the division under <lc Grasse 
proceeding towards west and that under de Suffren continuing 
its route to the Cape. While passing oil the island of Madeira 
on April 3, the French came to know front the local fishermen 
that an English fleet had preceded them a few days earlier ‘ 
It was evidently the fleet under Johnstone which had started 
from Spithead on March 13. It consisted of five ships of the 
line, the Hero (74). the Monmouth (64), the Isis (50), the Jupitei 
(50), and the Romney (50); three frigates, all with 32 guns, the 
Active, the Jnson and the Diana; and some lighter armed traits 
port vessels. There were 37 sails in all, with 2,000 troops on 
board. On April 11 the English fleet reached Santiago and 
entered the Hay of Praya. belonging to the Portuguese, to 
procure water and provisions. 3 


IV. Saval action at Porto Praya. 


|>e Suffren had instructions to proceed straight to the C:\pc 
of Good Hope, but when the fleet reached Santiago on April ih, 
one of the ships, the irthien, wanted to enter the Bay of Praya 
10 procure water. Although the presence of the English fleet 
there Was not known to the French, de Suffren thought it. 
prudent not to allow the ArtJsien to proceed alone and ordered 
the rest of the squadron to follow her into the bay. I he 
Ariisien, moving first, made the surprising discovery, and 
signalled the presence of 37 English ships in the bay. De 
Suffren at once made his decision to deliver a surprise attack 
and throw the enemy into confusion and disorder. 1 he decision 
was rather remarkable in that he had strict instructions to 
proceed straight to the Cape without any interruption of his 
course, and secondly that he had no authority to deliberately 
take the risk of an action against the slightly superior fleet of 
Johnstone. Indeed, if the result of the fight had turned out 
unfavourable to the French, de Suffren would certainly have 
been condemned by the Government for his rashness, because 
the traditional view of the navy's task was entirely different 
from what dc Suffren conceived it should be. On the other 


1 Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren d 4 jm V hide, p. 9. 

2 Ibid , pp. »$CtQ. 


wiwisr/fj. 



hand, de Suliven fell that the best way of saving the Cape was 
to cripple the English fleet by a surprise attack, and no bettet 
moment could be chosen for it than the occasion which pre¬ 
sented itself at Praya. The English ships lay anchored without 
any ordered formation and in an unsuspecting mood. As de 
Suffren surmised, a large part ol the crew must be ashore in 
search of water and provisions, which reduced the effective 
strength of the fleet and put it at a considerable disadvantage. 

It was no doubt a violation of international law to attack in a 
neutral port (Praya belonged to the Portuguese), but de Suffren 
had a bitter experience of the supposed sanctity of international 
law as he himself had been taken prisoner in 1757 when thc 
English attacked the French fleet in the neutral Portuguese port 
of Lagos. 

Thus calculating the advantages of the situation, de Sulnen 
instantly decided to deliver a surprise attacf. At half-past ten 
in the morning, leaving the transport vessels under thc prone 
lion of the frigate Fortune, he signalled to the rest of the fleet 
to follow in line formation. His own ship, the Heron, dashed 
forward and took up a position between two English ships, the 
Hero and the Monmouth, opening a terrific fire. 1 he Annilmt 
also tame up close, but the other three ships failed to render 
the co-operation which was expected of them. For more than 
an hour anti a hall the two French ships fought stubbornly 
against an enemy overwhelmingly superior in number. But 1.1 
the end considering the heavy damage and casualties in personnel 
that they had suffered in the unequal fight, the Anmbal having 
lost all her masts, and there being no hope of any assistance 
from the other three ships, de Suffren ordered withdrawal, and 
the Heron and the Annibal manoeuvred out of thc bay, conti¬ 
nuing their fire in defiance of the enemy. 

Although de Suffren was greatly disappointed at the outcome 
Of the action, for which the failure of the other three ships to 
execute orders was mainly responsible, he had achieved some 
tangible success. The English fleet had been so much crippled 
and thrown into confusion that when the French ships sailed 
out of the bay, it was not in a position to follow up and attack. 
At half-past three in the afternoon the English fleet sailed out 
of the bay, and made a move to give thc chase, but ii was soon 
stopped by 1 tic determined action of the French who stood 


mtST/fy 



THE FRENCH fN INDIA 


<SL 


Jpgs-. 

ready for the fight, ii was not (ill night that the Wench shij 
proceeded on their course southwards, and then with all the 
lights on, so as to draw the English fleet to a pursuit. But the 
hut had in fact sustained so much damage that Johnstone 
thought it prudent to re-enter and anchor in the bay for repairs 
to his ships, which took several days. The delay thus inflicted 
rendered the English expedition to the Cape useless, as 
de Suffren was able to land troops there earlier, and from that 
point of view the vigorous action at Praya had achieved success. 1 

De Suffren’s own sentiments about the action at Praya were 
expressed in two letters to Madame de Seillans. In the first, 
dated ajrd November 1781. he wrote: “I have some anxiety 
about the manner in which the affair of the Praya would be 
taken (in France). M. de Castries has written me a very 
kind letter, merely on the report of the English (about the 
incident), but when he will receive my letter he would be even 
more satisfied”. In the second letter, dated 5th December 1781, 
he wrote: “The Praya could and should have immortalised 
me; 1 missed or was made to miss a unique opportunity. With 
my five ships I could have dictated a peace, and that a glorious 
one. Your friend would have been worthy of you: Europe 
would have honoured him. But nothing doing; this combat is 
of the number of those which have decided nothing and which 
will be forgotten in the crowd. One may be blamed or praised 
according to affection, jealousy, caprice or chance”. 2 


V. The Cape saved. 

After withdrawing from the Bay of Praya the five French 
ships proceeded quietly on their route to the Cape, the convoy 
having been sent in advance under the protection of the frigate 
Fortune. So confident was de Suffren that the English were 
not in a position to give the chase that he undertook .large- 

1 For details of the action at Praya: A. N. -Ministtve de la Marine. 
ft*4. Vol. 198: Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren dam VInde, pp. 1*19; 
Fa Varende -Suffren el ses ennemis. pp, 149-160; Roux —Le Bailli dr 
Suffren dans Vlnde. pp. 69-76; Cast ex—La Manoeuvre, de la I*raya; Malle 
soil Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas, pp. 13-17* 
Admiral Richmond —The Navy in Ir.dia. 1763-1783, pp. 143-150. 

- Ortolan- Moniteur Universes (5th Novemhci 18?$). 


mtSTfiy 


J)K ST I I RtfN AND N AVAIL ACTIONS’ 




repairs to his ship on the high seas--a rather remarkable 
operation with an enemy fleet so close by. 1 On June 23 the 
French squadron reached the Cape and anchored in the Simon's 
Ray, where the injured were landed and sent to hospital, and 
the troops, consisting of the regiments of Austrasie and a part 
of the regiment of Pondicherry, under the command of Conway, 
disembarked for the protection of the Dutch settlement. 2 
Through the efforts of de Suffren and Conway necessary 
defensive works were hastily constructed, and within a fortnight 
the place was sufficiently ready to meet all attacks. It was not 
till 24th July, one month after ihe arrival of the French, that 
the English ships came in sight of the Cape, but it was then 
too late and they passed on and anchored in the Buy of 
Saldanha, from where they sailed off four days later. 3 

De Suffren had to prolong his stay at the Cape for a month 
more in order to complete the repairs to his ships, the Annibal 
particularly being in a miserable plight. On August 15 there 
arrived two frigates from the Isle of France, the Consolante 
and the Fine, the latter having been sent in advance from Brest 
to announce in the Isle of France the despatch of a squadron 
under de Suffren. Both Sou iliac and d’Orves wrote to 
de Suffren to come to the Isle of France at the earliest possible 
moment. 4 De Suffren accordingly left the Cape on August 28, 
and after a rather unhappy voyage the ships reached Port 
Louis on October 25 1 


VI. Arrival in the Isle of France: Souillacs preparations to 
send an expeditionary force to India . 


In the meantime Souillac, who had been informed of the 
decision of the French Government to send a strong expedi¬ 
tionary force to India under the command of Bussy, took prompt 
steps to raise additional forces in the Isles and to procure 
munitions and provisions for the assistance of the expedition. 
A man of great energy and patriotic zeal, he was soon able to 
raise a corps of 2.8B8 men, including Africans, which was 

1 Journal de Hard dti Itailli dr Suffren dans l'hide, p. 20. 

3 Ibid, p. 36. * 3 Ibid, pp. 40-41. 

1 Ibid, p. 45. s ibid, pp. 6061. 


MIN/Sr^ 



THE FRENCH I\ INDIA 


<SL 


tindei ihe command of Duchcniin, pending the arrival 
of Hussy, not a very happy choice, since Duchemin was a sailor 
and not a soldier. There were in the port under the command 
of d'Orves six ships of the line, three frigates, and a few corvettes; 
and this force was considerably strengthened by the arrival of 
de Suffren s five ships and a frigate, making a total of eighteen. 1 
Sou iliac, who had been in contact with Haidar Ali, decided to 
send out without any further delay the troops under Duchemin 
to the Coromandel Coast, as the first contingent of the French 
expeditionary force to India. Even the indolent d’Orves could 


not liiul any plea to postpone departure, after the considerable 
reinforcements brought by de Suffren. 

The decision of Sou iliac and d'Orves naturally dated 
de Suffren, who wanted some real action and not an idle life 
m the enervating climate of the Isle of France. It is interesting 
to notice here, front two letters to Madante de Seillans. his 
impressions about life in the Isle which he came thoroughly 
to detest, and fiis hopes and fears about the outcome of the 
expedition on which he was going to set out from Port Louis 
on December 7. In the first letter, dated 23rd November, he 
wrote; “We are going to India with large forces and we 
should expect success, but there arc innumerable reasons which 

make me fear that we may not achieve it. A spirit of 

independence and cupidity reigns here among the chiefs and 
tlicit subordinates, so that it is difficult to hope for anything 
good. I have the greatest desire to return and 1 have asked 
permission for it with all earnestness”. In the second letter, 
dated 5th December, he wrote: ' [ a m second-in-command of a 
beautiful squadron. Vf. d’Orves, who is its chief, shows me great 
consideration, but since he is so good as to be almost feeble. 


the confidence which he reposes in me is shared with the public. 
1 he little prospect that there is of achieving anything good 
with men of such character has made ine earnestly desire to 
return. I have received .1 warm welcome from the public here, 
but not the same reception from the sailors who have been 
here for five years without having done anything. This country 


1 Journal df ilord Hu Bailtt He Sufjrm dans I'Inde, p. I14, for a list 
oi the names of the ships, their artillery strength and the names of their 
captains. 


WNlST/ty 



effeminates people, with its large number of beautiful women. 
,n(l fife full of pleasures. The people here make money in 
commerce and that is much better than making wat. 


Our squadron is well-armed for achieving great things, but the 
qualities we shall lack are intelligence and self-confidence, which 
are rather rare among us. If wc cotne back from India without 
doing anything, my decision is made, rather to return to I* ranee 
than remain here in the port for six months. I serve to make 
war and not to make court to the ladies ol the Isle of 
France.” l 

These letters offer a sufficient explanation why during the 
whole course of the war de Suffren never left Indian waters 
for even a brief rest in the Isle of Fiance, as others had done 
in the past. Rather than returning to the enervating island, he 
went to Achin in north Sumatra to winter his ships, disregard¬ 
ing the wishes of many of his officers. The second complain! 
of de Suffren. about the feeble character of his chief, d'Orves. 
was removed by the timely death of the latter on the way to 
India, which gave de Suffren the opportunity he had wanted all 
along, to lead the squadron himself. But the third complaint 
of de Suffren, jealousy of the officers who had been long in the 
Isle of France, persisted till the end of the campaign and was 
largely responsible for his failure to achieve success in as full 
a measure as he could have expected. 

VII. Departure from the Isle of Frame and arrival in 
Indian waters. 


Preparations for fitting out the expeditionary force were 
completed in a month and a half, and on December 7 > > 7 ^' 
the French fleet, consisting of > t ships of the line, 3 frigates 
3 corvettes, a brulot and c, transport vessels carrying the troops 
under Duchemin sailed off from Port Louis. 1 The original 


1 Ortolan —Moniteur Universcl (5th November »# 59 )- 
a Journal de Hard du Itailli de Suffren dam Nnde <p. 65) gives the 


following list: 

L’Orient (74V-d’Orves (chef 
d’cscadre) 

U Hews (74Y de Suffren 


Le Bizarre (64)— de Lalandelle 
Le Vengcur (64)—de Forbin 

Le Sphinx (64)--du Ohilleau 

— Contd. 





THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



Mcstinatiou chosen was the Coromandel Coast, but d’Oives who 
had agreed to it at the instance of dc Suffren changed his mind 
during the voyage, in keeping witli his usual timidity, and 
altered the course towards Ceylon On January 22, the Hews 
made a lucky capture of an English ship, the Hannibal of 50 
guns, which was coming from St. Helena and proceeding towards 
Madras. 'The sailors were dispersed among the French ships, 
theii places being taken by Frenchmen,, and the name was 
changed to the Pelit-Annibal. I he captain gave out the 
information that 5 English ships with 800 troops on board were 
on their way to India. 1 

A few days later d’Oives, who had been in indifferent 
health for some time, fell seriously ill, and on the 3rd February 
his condition becoming very critical he handed over the com¬ 
mand to de Suffren.* Six days later, on February 9, d'Orves 
died,* a rather fortunate event for the French, which alone 
made possible the glorious naval actions during the next 
eighteen months. No sooner had dc Suffren assumed command 
than he ordered the course to be changed north, towards Madras. 
He wanted to begin his operations in India with a spectacular 
- demonstration, an attack on Madias itself if possible, and on 


— Could . 

l/Annibal (74) — dc Tromelin 
Lt f SMre (64) — dc Pall ie re 
Le Brilldnt (64)- dc Saint* Felix 
Le Flamand (64) dc Cuvexvillc 
L* Artesian (64) dc Maurville 
f.'Ajax (64) — dc Bouvet 
Im Be Hone (3s)— dc Cillart 
La Fine (46) -de Salvert 
La Pourvoycusc (40) dc GaUcs 
La Subtile (114) — dc Beaulieu 


La Sylphide (14)—de Troulin 
Le Diligent (to) Mace 
l.c Pulveriscur —Joycuse 
Transports: Le$ Boris Amis, 


VOriston, 

Les Ttois Amis, Le Brinon, 

Le Maurepas, Le Daliram. 

La Vi lie-Unique, La Sainte-Annc, 
Le Toscan, Le Hyder (Haidar's 


vessel) 


1 Journal de Hard du Bailli de Suffren dans Linde, pp. 80*82: Roux — Le 
Bailli de Suffren dans Linde, p. 85. There is a letter preserved from one 
of live prisoners taken on the Hannibal , David Philips, containing a 
report of the activities of the French till the beginning of April, when 
he escaped and reached Madras- Secret Select Committee Proceedings. 
Fori William. 29th April 1782 (Forrest— Selections from Letters, Despatches 
ett . foreign Department, Government of India . lit, pp. 860-862). 

- Journal de Herd du Bailli de Suffren dam Unde, p. 86. 

Ibid, p. 90. 


mtsrfty 



DE SUFFREN AM) NAVAf. ACTIONS 


the 4th February he assembled all the captains on his ship to 
devise the best method of attacking the English fleet if it lay 
anchored before Madras. 1 Unfortunately for de Suffren, the 
l*tench squadron lost several days in arriving before Madras, 
but for which it could have taken at a disadvantage the English 


fleet anchored there, before it had received some reinforcements 
on the 9th February. Strong winds and currents carried the 1 
French ships as far north as Pulieat, and on the return voyage 
also they were carried along southwards to Pondicherry, where 
on the 11th a high-ranking officer named de Canaple was 
sent ashore to inform Haidar about the arrival of the French 
expeditionary force. Then the wind having changed its course, 
the French proceeded north again and arrived before Madras 
on the 14th, 2 


VIII. First naval action in Indian waters 
(17th February ry82). 


The English fleet under Admiral Hughes, consisting of 
9 ships of the line and 2 frigates, lay anchored close to the 
shore within range of the fort battery. On the 15th the French 
ships approached nearer, within two shots from the English 
fleet; but with all his dash and intrepidity de Suffren had the 
clear judgment to realise that the English fleet was in too 
advantageous a position under the protection of the shore 
battery to be attacked. At eleven o’clock he called all the 
captains to his ship to ascertain their opinion about 
the best course to follow. He himself suggested that it: was 
dangerous to attack the English fleet in its position of vantage, 
and that it would he prudent to proceed south and land the 
troops on board. Ducheniin and all the captains were of the 
same opinion, except one, de Salvert, the young and daring 
captain of the frigate Fine, who urged that a spectacular begin¬ 
ning was necessary to create a favourable impression upon the 
potential allies of the French and that it was possible for the 
French squadron to pass between the coast and die English 


1 Journal dt r Bnrd du BniUi de Suffren dam I'Indr, p 86. 
- lbid f pp. 90-91. 


misty 



THF FRF.N'CH IN INDIA 



ships. 1 But de Suffren thought it wise not to risk his ships 
between two fires and decided to follow the route to the south. 

About live in the afternoon the English ships were noticed 
raising anchor and moving out to the open, and although at 
first it appeared that they were proceeding to take up their 
former position of mchorage before the arrival of the French* 
squadron, the quick eye of de Suffren did not take long to 
detect that the intention of the English was to chase and 
capture the French transport vessels. He at once signalled to 
the convoy to get between the squadron and the coast, and 
ordered the Fine to watch the movements of the English fleet. 
But in the darkness of the night the Pourvoyeuse, which was 
in charge of the convoy, lost contact with the transports, and 
the Fine also tailed to keep watch on the English ships, which 
succeeded in getting in between the French squadron and the 
transports, it was not till about midday on the 16th that the 
French realised the position De Suffren ordered all the ships 
to follow' quickly and in the afternoon they came up within a 
league and a half of the English fleet. Admiral Hughes, seeing 
the French come up so close, ordered the chase to be abandoned 
and recalled his ships to form into line. This enabled all the 
French transports, except the Gris ton, to escape and proceed 
at full speed towards south 

All through the night of the liith and the morning of the 
17th the two fleets manoeuvred for position, and it was not till 
half-past three in the afternoon that they could join action. 3 

i Journal dr fiord flu Hailli de Suffren dans Tltide , p. 93 • 

- Ibid, pp. 93-95; Roux l.e Hailli dr Suffren dans l’Inde, pp. 88 89. 

a Table of the two squadrons; 


English 


French 


The Eagle (64) — Reddel 
The. Monmouth (64) — Alms 
The Worcester (64) — -Wood 
The Burfttrd (6.^ — Reiner 
The Superb (74)—Hughes 
/he Hero (74) — Hawker 
The his (54)—Lvnniey 
The Mon area (74V — Cell 
The Exeter (64) -King. 


l.e Heros (74)—de Suffren 
VOriern (74)-— 1.a RaUiere 
l.e Sphinx (64)- Du Chilleau 


Tc Vengeur (64) - De Forbin 


U Petit Annibal (50)—De Galles 


L Annibal (74)—De Tromelin 
Le Severe (64)—De Cilia i t 


L'ArUsien (64)—De Maurville 
I:Ajax (64)-—Bouvet 


Le Brillani (64)—De St. Felix 
Lc FJatnand (54)—Dc Cuverville 



miST/ty 


<g,\ 
f I 

y rn SI FT REN AM) NAVjjU. \< TIONS 

The French fleet had .1 decided superiority in the number of 
ships and of guns, and if all the captains had given their 
sincere co-operation to do Suffrcn. there is little doubt that th< 
English squadron would have been destroyed. But that 
opportunity, which would have changed the entire course of 
the war. was lost because of the jealousy of the captains and 
their deliberate and culpable negligence to follow orders. In 
the first place the action, which could have commenced much 
earlier in the day, was delayed till afternoon by the failure ot 
several ships to take up their positions promptly, in spite of 
the urgent signals from the H tv os. Secondly, when the Hero.s 
led the attack, directing its fire against the Exeter and later 
against the flagship of the English, the Superb, the other four 
ships of the French first division, the Orient , the Sphinx , the 
Fengeur and the Petit-Antiibal , followed the orders, and 
approaching the rearguard of the English within close range 
concentrated their attack on the Isis, the Monarca and the 
Exeter . But the entire second division, under the command 
of Tromdin, consisting of the Annibal , the Severe, the Artisien, 
the Ajax, the Brillant and the Flamand , remained completely 
inactive and at a long distance from the English, disregarding 
the orders of de Suffrcn to turn the enemy lint' and put it 
between two fires. The Ajax did in (act move out to join the 
fight but had to turn hack on the orders of 1 romclin. 

After a vigorous encounter for more than three hours, when 
night fell and the weather also became unfavourable, de Suffrcn, 
finding no hope of drawing the second division of the fleet into 
action, signalled to slop the combat. It came as a great relief 
to the English, who had suffered much greater losses than the 
French, and enabled Hughes to escape with his fleet front a 
position in which he faced sure and decisive defeat. Indeed. 
French historians have criticised de Suffrcn for not having 
pursued the English fleet, thereby missing an opportunity never 
to return, 1 But SuffrciVs explanation was clear,—-it was hardly 
prudent for him to continue the fight w ? ith half the squadron 
in an openly non-cooperative attitude. When the morning 
broke, the English ships had disappeared, having sailed off to 
the south. De Suffrcn called all the captains on board his 




1 Roux —lx Bailli dc Suffren dons Vtndr , 93 * 



~mip, where those who had been guilty of bad conduct in the 
previous day’s action apologised and promised to mend their 
ways in future, which, as later events showed, they never did. 1 


IX. Landing of troops at Porto Novo and departure 
of the fleet for Ceylon. 

On the 18th the French squadron sailed south for Pondi 
cherry, where de Suffren expected to get into contact with 
Haidar Ali ami enter into a formal agreement with him. But 
when it. appeared before that place on the 19th, Piveron de 
Mori at came on board the flagship to inform de Suffren that 
he had been sent by Haidar to ask him to proceed to Porto 
Novo and land the French troops there. 2 De Suffren once 
proposed to seize Negapatam, which with the other Dutch 
settlements in India had fallen into the hands of the English 
soon after Holland had entered the war in Europe. But 
Duchemin lacked courage, and his objection to the daring 
project led tie Suffren ro proceed to Porto \ T ovo, which was 

1 For details of th< na al action: \. N. Ministere de la Marine. 
B |. Vol. 207; Journal dr Hard du Bui lli dr Suffren dans Blade, pp. 95- 
9S; Roux — l.e Bailli de Suffren dans Vtnde , pp. 89-94; La Varende— 
Suffren et sex ennemis, pp. 187-301; Malleson Fowl French Struggles in 
India and on the Indian Seas, pp. 21 24; Admiral Richmond — The Navy 
in India, 17630783 pp. 191-302. 

I he English version is different, not so much about the details of 
the action as about its result. The English Admiral flattered himself 
that in spite of the decided inferiority of his fleet, he had succeeded in 
frustrating the French design of an attack on Madras (letter of Hughes 
to 1 he Governor-General and Council, dated 17th March). The Calcutta 
Council regarded the result of the naval action as a victory for the English 
and ordered "that a general discharge of the artillery in the garrison of 
Fort William he made tomorrow morning in commemoration of this 
event’". A letter of congratulation was also sent to Hughes in the follow¬ 
ing terms; “WT regard your action with the French fleet as the crisis 
of our fate In the Carnatic, and in the result of it we see that province 
relieved and preserved, and the permanency of British power in India 
firmly established*'—Secret Select Committee Proceedings. Fort William, 
1st April 1781 (Fori cst- Self tic s freon Letters, Despatches etc.. Foreign 
Department, Government of India, III, pp. 851-854). The same senti¬ 
ment of satisfaction i? expressed in the letter of the Madras Government 
to the Company (Love— Vestiges of Old Madras, III, pp. 259-260). 

2 Roux —Le Hailli de Suff ren dans ITnde. p. 94. 


miST/ly 



reached on the 21 si. Here the squadron remained for more 
than a month, much to the chagrin of de Suffren, who wanted 
to take the earliest opportunity to meet the English fleet in a 
second action. But he was unavoidably detained at Porto Novo 
b\ tlie disembarkation of the troops, the negotiations with 
Haidar Ali which dragged on for a long time, and the difficulties 
of procuring provisions and other necessaries foi lack of money. 

On 1 he 35th February Piveron de Morlat arrived from 
Haidar's camp with a message of goodwill from the Prince, 
and in return two French officers, de Moissac and de Canaplc, 
were sent to Haidar to compliment him on behalf of de Suffren 
and Dtichemin and to come to an understanding for co-operation 
between the French and the Mysore ruler. 1 Haidar agreed to 
supply provisions for 3,000 men of the French army, and also 
to send 6,000 sepoys and a few regiments of cavalry for co-opeia 
tion with Duchemin's forces. 2 The disembarkation of troops 
was completed by March io, a but the greatest difficulty of 
de Suffren was lack of money to buy provisions and other neces¬ 
saries. The sale at Tranquebar of the prizes captured in Indian 
waters did not fetch an adequate amount, 4 and de Suffren had 
to put up with the constant grumblings of his captains, 
accustomed to the soft and easy life of the Isle of France. All 
that he could do was to write a pressing letter to Souillac on 
the 12th March asking for more men. money and munitions.* 

On the 23rd March the French squadron left Porto Novo 
and sailed south towards Ceylon in the hope of meeting the 
English fleet once more.® The prolonged stay of de Suffren 
at Porto Novo had given a much needed respite to the English 
fleet, which had gone to Trinkouaali after the action of February 
17 and after a brief sojourn had returned to Madras, there to 

i Journal dr Bord du Bailli de Suffren dans ilnde , p. un. 

a Roux —Let Bailli de Suffren duns Ilnde. pp. 94 95 ; also Sc!ea ^ c,el 
Committee Proceedings, Fort William, 1st April and mb J l,ru 1 , 
tellers of Fallofieid and Cooic to Macartney (Forrest: Selections from 
Letters , Despatches tic., foreign Department, Government of India, HI. 

pp, 854, 869). 

* Journal de Hard du liailli de Suffren dans I lnde, p. 105. 

* Ibid. p. tot. 

* Roux Le Bailti de Suffren dans I’lnde, p. 'J 1 ' 1 

» Journal dr Bord du Bailli dr Stiff ten dans 1 ‘Indr, pp. 104105 


TIIE FRENCH IN INDIA 

forced by iwo more ships, the Magnanimc (64) and tin 
Sultan (74). The French also received at the same time a 
reinforcement of one ship of the line, the Bizarre , and three 
frigates, the Pourvoyeuse^ the Bons-Awis and the Bellone. 1 

In spite of all difficulties and vexations de Sinfren was in 
high spirits and was looking forward to another encounter 
with the enemy. His confidence is lulls expressed in a letter 
written to Madame de Seillans on the 1st April, “The English 
have not appeared again since the combat of the 17th February 
1 am on the sea; I would very much like to give you good 
news shortly, hut for that it is necessary to meet and fight the 
English. I am in a superb position, commanding 1 2 ships of 

the line.1 now very much fear that M. de Castries 

may grant mv prayer to return which I had made to him, as 
nowhere else could I be employed in such a brilliant 
way.”. 2 

Second naval action (iatfi April), 

De Suffren guessed correctly that the enemy, unwilling to 
meet in a second action, was likely to take the route to 
Trinkomali for shelter, and so he directed the course of his 
squadron that way. On April 9 the English ships were sighted 
off the cast coast of Ceylon proceeding towards Trinkomali, 
and de Suffren at once ordered his ships to move fast and bar 
the way. On the 10th the Fine made a lucky capture of an 
English boat, carrying an agent who had been sent from Madras 
to persuade the king of Kandy to conclude a treaty. The 
papers seized showed that, the mission wa> a failure and that 
the king of Kandy had refused to have any relations with the 
English.' For two days Hughes tried to manoeuvre to avoid 
an action with the French, but on the 12th finding the route 
to Trinkomali barred he had no other option but to order his 
ships to form a battle line. The action started about midday, 
de Suffren leading the attack. The French had a superiority in 

1 Roux —Le Bailli de Suffren dans Finds, p. 95. 

a Ortolan —Moniteur Universel (5th November 1859). 

5 Journal de Bord dti Bailli de Suffren dans VInde , p 113; Roux, 
op. cit , p. 97 






miSTfiy 



DE SUFFKKN AND NAVAD AC HONS 


mum her of ships and of guns and oa upied a more advantage¬ 
ous position than the English. But, as on February 17, they 
failed to achieve any tangible success because of the old jealousy 
of some of the captains and their culpable negligence to follow 
orders . } 

When the action started, the front section of the French 
line remained inactive. Ihe I’mgeur and the Artiini kept 
themselves at a safe distance and practically took no part in 
the fight, disregarding the repeated orders of de Suffrcn. The 
same disregard of orders was shown by a part of the rear, 
formed by the? Severe, the Ajax and the Annihnl . Happily 
two ships of the rear, the Flamand and the Bizarre, came tip 
close to the English line and concentrated their fire on the 
Isis, the Hero and the Worcester. On the French side the brunt 
of the light fell on the centre, formed by the Petit AnnihaL the 
Sphinx , the Hires, the Orient and the Brillant. The French 
attack was so vigorous that the Monmouth was reduced to a 
miserable plight and was about to he captured when it was 
rescued by a brilliant manoeuvre by the Hero. On the other 
hand, the French flagship suffered so badly under the con¬ 
centrated fire of the enemy that at five in the afternoon when 
the Anisien failed to come up to its rescue in spite of repeated 
signals, de Suffren left his ship and passed on board the Ajax , 
which was then for the first time drawn into the conflict. 

By this time the two fleets had exactly reversed their posi¬ 
tions and the English ships began to approach the coast, when 
the combat was brought to a sudden close by the outbreak of a 



1 'table of the two squadrons: 
French 

Lt Vengeur (64)—Di Forbin 
LArtcsien (64)- Dc Maurvillc 
Le PetiTAnnibat (50)—De Gatles 
Le Sphinx (64) Du Chilleau 
Le Hews (74)—De Suffren 
VOrient {74)—Dc la Fallible 
Lc Brittant (64)—Dc St. Felix 
Le Sartre (64)—Dc Cillart 
L'Ajax (64)—Bouvet 
L'Arwibal (74)—Dc Tromelin 
L< Flamand (56)- -De Cuverville 
Le Bizarre (64)—l alandellc 


English 

The Exeter (65)—King 
The Sultan (74)—Watt 
The Eagle (64)-—Rcddcl 
The Burford (64)—Reiner 
The Monmouth (64)-—Alms 
The Superb (74>-~Hughc5 
The Monarca (74)—-Gell 
The Magnanime (64)—Wolseley 
The his (56)—Lurolry 
The Hero (74)*- Hawker 
The Worcester (64)—Wood 


Q 



terrific storm about siv in the evening. Both the English and 
the French had to devote all their energies against the forces 
of nature which threw the ships into such a state of confusion 
that the erstwhile enemies lay mixed up in a strange manner 
all night. When morning broke, neither side was in a position 
to renew the light, both being engaged in repairing the ships. 
In the previous day's action the two sides had suffered almost 
equal casualties, but the damage sustained by the Engli.-h 
slaps was heavier; and thus when on the. 19th April de Sulfren 
re formed his line in a new order anti came back to the attack, 
the English fleet taking shelter behind the island of Provcdicn 
refused to be drawn into a second action. Finding it impossible 
to draw the enemy out of his impregnable position, de Suffien 
proceeded towards the port of Batticaloa while the English 
fleet entered the port of Trinkomali. 1 

XI. De Suffien ordeted back to the Isle, of Frame: 
his refusal to leave Indian waters. 

In spite of the readiness of the French for a second action 
their position was far from happy, and on the itith April 
de Sulfren sent two boats to the Isle of France, with a pressing 
request to Sou iliac to send immediate reinforcements of men, 
munitions and natal equipments to (*alle in the south of 
Ceylon. 5 The French fleet reached Batticaloa on the goth April, 
the debt being caused by strong currents. De Sulfren was 
detained there for more than a month by the necessity of lcpait 
ing his ships, procuring provisions and munitions and recruiting 
men. During his forced sojourn at Batticaloa he received some 
ships with munitions and provisions sent from the Isle of France. 
At the same time the Pnlvdriseur brought him the duplicate of 

. tor details of the combat: A. N. —Min is tire tie la Marine. B-4. Vol. 
*07; Journal de Hard du Bailli de Suffren dam flnde, pp. .141*5: Roux ‘ 
lx fiailli de Suffren dans Vlnde. pp 99 -ip 6 : La Varende—Suffren et ses 
ennemi . pp. 205 *16; Malleson-FirwJ French Struggles in India and on 
the Indian Sees. pp. 25 *6; Admiral Richmond--The Navy :n India, 
/ 7 <Sj / 7 $ 1 , PP- 210-227; letter of Admiral Hughes dated 1st May, in Secret 
Select Com. Proc,, Ft. William, 23rd May 1782 (Forrest— Selections from 
i nters. Despatches, etc., Foreign Dept., Govt, of India. Ill pp. 865-865. 

! Rmi\ -/ Bailli dc Suffren flans VfnH*, P 


misTftf 



1)1 StJtlREN \N1) XAVV1. ACTIONS 


*8L 


^liF^ninisterial orders (the original having been sent by the 
Expedition which had been wrecked 01 the Coromandel Coast 
between Karikal and Franquebar some time before), calling up¬ 
on de Suffren to return to the Isle of France immediately to 
escort Hussy's expeditionary force to India. I hat put de Suffren 
in an extremely difficult situation, having to decide between 
obedience to the peremptory orders of the Minister and the sure 
destruction of the fleet under the timid leadership of the second- 
in-command, Tromelin, since the Fnglish licet, yet intact, was 
oniv at a short distance, in the port of i rinkonvuli. intimately 
he did what was required of him in the national interest. He 
refused to leave Indian waters and explained his reasons in 
a most convincing manner in a letter to Souillac, dated May i. 

“At Batticaloa. 1 found the Puhtcriseur which 

handed over to me the duplicate of the despatches sent by the 
corvette. Expedition. Let us pass over the regrets of the past 
and examine the present situation. I he intention of the King 
was that the squadron should return (to the Isle of France) in 
March and start back at the end of April, reinforced and 
repaired: that is no longer possible. Forty-five days for carry¬ 
ing the troops to Ceylon, forty for the voyage, forty-five lor 
repairs, thirty for the return voyage, in all tfio days. I hat 
would mean a loss of six months, and God alone knows what 
the enemies can undertake during that time. It would be 


wrongly interpreting the intentions of the King and of yours to 
undertake at the end of April what you had thought of at the 
end of February; and if after my repeated assurance not to 
leave the coast, and if after the certainty that you might arrive 
at from the news sent by the Boris Amis and the Chasseur dial 
the corvette had not arrived here \et, you had thought it too 
late and had sent the convoy already in response to nay repeated 
demands, what would 1 do in the Isle of Francer Moreover, 
if 1 quit the coast after my combats, M. Hughes, whom I had 
defeated on February 17 and April 12. would not fail to declare 
that I rnyself had been defeated." 

Happily for France, Souillac was clear-sighted enough to 


realise the position and he fullv endorsed the view’s of de Suffren 


in a letter to the Minister, dated 18th June. Justifying the 
decision of de Suffren not to leave Indian waters, he observed: 
“Consider, Monseigneur, the turn that affairs in India might 



mtSTfiy 



tttwi' taken during this long interval; Haidar Ali would have 
surely made peace with the English; all the other Indian Princes, 
who are watching the issue of the conflict to decide their policy. 


would have shown themselves more submissive than ever to a 
nation whom they do not love but fear; our troops on the 
mainland would have been faced with a grave danger and it 
would have been rather fortunate if they could have passed on 
to Ceylon, against which colony all the efforts of the English 
would have been directed, it may then be said that the bold 
policy which M. de Suffren has adopted has saved India and 
prepared the success of Vf. le Marquis de Bussy’V 

The bold determination of do Suffren, however, was not 
shared by many of his captains, who had been longing for a 
return to the life of indolence and pleasure in the Isle of France 
and now seized upon the opportunity presented by the 
ministerial orders. When they murmured in protest against the 
decision of dc Suffren to stay on in Indian waters, they were 
silenced by the brave words of their leader, ‘‘Rather to scuttle 
the squadron before the walls of Madras than to run away from 
Admiral Hughes. Let those who can conceive of such an 
ignpminous action come and tell me, and they will know my 
resolution”.* 


XII. Return to the Coromandel Coast—project oj an 
attack on Negapatam, 

On June 3 the French squadron sailed out of Batticaloa 
for the Coromandel Coast. The destination was Cuddalore, 
recently captured by Duchemin’s forces. Oil the 4th, as the 
French passed by Trinkomali, they noticed the English flee; 
still anchored there. 1 * 3 On* the 5th they arrived before Trauque- 
bar. where they anchored for two weeks in order to procure 
provisions and naval equipments. Here they met three Dutch 
boats sent from Batavia with money, munitions, provisions and 
naval equipment* for the French squadron. The boats had 

1 Roux Le Baitli de Suffren dam Linde, p. 109; Mallcson — Les Drr- 
uUres Julies des Francais dans !' /tide, etc,, p. 27 (the two letters have 
been reproduced in the translator's note). 

a Roux. op. cL, p. 110. 

3 Journal de fiord du BailL dc Suffren dam l' Jude, p. 15a. 



gone to the east coast of Ceylon where the French squadron 
was supposed to be. but at the sight of the English fleet at 
Trinkomali they bad diverted their course and had taken shelter 
at Tranquebar. 1 The French also received some quantities of 
provisions sent by Haidar. 2 * Their ships sailed from Tranquebar 
on the aoth June and on the same day anchored before 
Cuddalore. ‘ 

While at Tranquebar de Suffren had scut his trusted officer 
de Moissac to Haidar Ali’s camp near Cuddalore. Ft was neces¬ 
sary, in order to assuage the feelings of Haidar whose relations 
with the French army under Duchemin had cooled consider 
ably, because of a number of factors that will be analysed in 
the next chapter. In his deep disappointment at the conduct 
of the French army under Duchemin, the only thing that 
prevented Haidar from coming to terms with the English, who 
were earnestly seeking peace, was the news of the glorious 
exploits of de Suffren, which held out hopes in the heart of 
the Mysore ruler that he might yet achieve a crushing victory 
over the English in co-operation with the intrepid French 
Admiral. Indeed, although contemptuous of Duchemin, he 
expressed the greatest admiration for de Suffren. To Piveron 
de Morlat, the French agent at his Court, he expressed his 
sentiments thus: “Write to this extraordinary man that I have 
the greatest desire to see him. to embrace him and to express 
to him all my admiration for his heroic valour”. To his 
generals he said, “At last, the English have found a master. 
Here is the man who will help me in exterminating them. I 
hope that before two years have passed there will not be a 
single one of them left in India and they will not have even an 
inch of territory”. 4 

Arriving on the Coromandel Coast, de Suffren learnt for 
the first time of the stiained relations between Duchemin and 
Haidar Ali and that made him more anxious than ever to 
conciliate by some bold action an ally whose whole-hearted 
co-operation was absolutely necessary for the success of French 

1 Journal de Hord du liailli de Suffren dam I'lnde, p. 132. 

* Ibid., p. 136. 

5 Ibid., pp. 13^*138. 

4 Hoax — Le Bailli de Suffren dans I’lnde, p. 11a. 


WNtSTffy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


il 


military operations in south India. I 'hat was why he sent 
de Moissae from Trantjuebar to Haidar’s camp on the toth 
June, with a proposal for his co-operation in making a surprise 
attack on Negapatam.' It may he remembered that he had this 
project in mind much earlier, hut had been prevented from 
attempting it only by the objections raised by iHichemin. Hr 
now came back to it, with the added confidence that Negapatam 
could not expect to be relieved by the English fleet, which was 
yet. lying anchored at I l inkomali. 

De Moissae returned from Haidar’s camp to Cuddalore on 
the atst and reported to de Sulfren the great admiration which 
the Mysore Prime felt for him. Haidar readily consented to 
<|e Sufi ten’s proposal of a surprise attack on Negapatam and 
placed ’.(km) troops at his disposal for the purpose. He 
expressed a great longing to meet de Sulfren, but would postpone 
the interview till after the latter’s return from Negapatam. 
At the same time he complained bitterly that the French array 
under Duchemin, while encamped at Vilnoor, had taken no 
part in his successful operations against the English, nor had 
given him any co-operation in the capture of the fortress of 
Permacoil. 1 As a proof of his friendship Haidar also sent latge 
quantities of provisions for the French squadron. 8 

In return for the friendly assistance, de Sulfren sent all the 
English prisoners on board to Haidar for custody, an affair 
which later led to bitter complaints on the part of the English. 
In fact, the responsibility for this must be largely attributed 
to the Madras Government which had refused till eatliei 
proposals of de Sulfren foi an exchange of prisoners. The 
evident intention oi the English was to embarrass the French by 
havin ,r to maintain a large number of prisoners on board, which 
would* constitute a heavy drain on their depleted stocks of 
provisions Moreover, the French did not have any territorial 
possession in India, where the large number of English prisoners 
could be kept in safe custody. I he only way that they could 
..ft out of their embarrassment, after the refusal of the English 
to an exchange of prisoners, was to transfer them to the custody 
of Haidar Ali. That was the reason given by the author ol the 

■ Journal de Bor «f du Bailli de Suffren dans VInde, p. 138. 

2 Ibid . p. i jo 


WNlST/fy 


ftK SUFFREN AM) NAVAL ACTIONS 



* 5 " 


Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren dans Unde , stating the 
opinion of the French Admiral himself. 1 2 It is interesting how¬ 
ever to note that in a letter to Souillac, dated June 2. 1782. 
de Suffren gave an altogether different reason: “It is more in 
order to increase his (Haidars) confidence in me than as a reply 
to the actions of Macartney, Hughes and Coote that I am 
entrusting the English prisoners to him”.' Anyway, although 
in transferring the prisoners to the custody of an ally de SuHren 
took every care to assure proper treatment to them, 3 it was his 
ignorance of Haidar’s methods of dealing with prisoners of war 
that led him to take the step, which not merely inflicted 
incredible sufferings on the prisoners but also created great 
diplomatic embarrassment for the French at a later period. 4 * 

At the end of June de Suffren embarked 700 troops of the 
regiment of Austrasie under the command of d’Espinassy, with 
soo sepoys and siege materials, both to replace the disabled 
sailors as also to take part in the attack on Negapatam.® When 
preparations had been completed, the French came to learn 
that the Fnglish squadron had left Trinkomali and had anchored 
before Negapaiam on the 2nd July. 6 It was a great disappoint¬ 
ment to de Suffren, who had expected to take Negapaiam by 
surprise. He did no however abandon his project and decided 


1 Journal de Bord du Bailli dr. Suffren duns Unde , p. 140. 

2 Roux —Le Bailli de Suffren dam Unde, p. 11G. 

3 Journal dc Bord du Bailli de Suffren dam Unde, p. 140. 

* C.R.O., Yol. XII—Extract* uom the Proceedings of the Calcutta 
and Madras Councils relating to the conduct of Lhc French in delivering 
the Fnglish prisoners to Haidar All. Wilks has severely condemned the 
action of de Suffren. He, however, admits the difficult situation in which 
the latter was placed and the undue delay on the part of the English 
to reply to the French proposal of an exihangc of prisoners, which he 
explains as due to difficulty of communication and diffetcncc of opinion 
between Coote and the Madras Council. His charge against de Suffren 
is thus reduced to the latter not having waited sufficiently long for the 
English reply {History of Mysoor, II, pp. 152-153). William Hickey in 
his Memoirs, 1782 to 1790 (p. 59), states that he was told by de Suffren 
at Trinkomali in January 1783 that there were two reasons which led 
him to transfer the English prisoners to Haidar,—the silence of Macartney 
and the reply of Hughes, expressing his inability to accept the proposal 
of exchange. 

* Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren, pp. 140-141. 

* Ibid. 


THF. FRY.SCU IN INDIA 

on proceeding ro Negapatam and encountering the English fleet 
once more. His squadron was in a sorry plight after the two 
previous actions of February 17 and April 12, and on the eve 
of his departure from Cuddalore he wrote a pressing letter to 
Sou iliac for more men and money. 

“1 have embarked 700 Europeans and 800 sepoys; that is 
quite sufficient to attack the English and take Nega 

patam. I did not wish to embark a single person 

without the knowledge of the Nawab. I am leaving here on 
land 800 sick; send me men and money, with reinforcements 
everything will go well, but without them nothing can be done. 
Misers is so great here that even with merchandise it is difficult 

to procure money.(The Dutch of Batavia) sent me 

300,000 florins, out of which I have given 50,000 to the Dutch 
(of Ceylon) and 100.000 to the army: you see in what a state I 

am. it is a wonder that the squadron can carry on 

with so little money. I am starting to-morrow to attack 

them (the English); if I am lucky, 1 shall at once lay siege to 
Xegapatam”. 1 

XIII. Third naval action (6th July). 

The French squadron started from Cuddalore on the 3rd 
July, and on the 5th it noticed the English fleet anchored 
between Nagore and Negapatam. De Suffren gave orders to his 
ships to proceed in line of battle. I he French had a superiority 
in the number of ships as well as of guns and had every reason 
to face a third encounter with the enemy with confidence. 
But at three in the afternoon the Ajax lost its topmast and the 
mi/eu topmast by .1 violent wind and shower, and was forced to 
leave the line, giving its place to the Vengeur. Shortly after 
the English ships also, taking advantage of a change in the 
direction of the wind, sailed out to the open and approached 
within two shots from the French squadron. For the whole 
night the two fleets lay anchored, watching each other at a 
short distance, and early in the morning of the 6th they 
prepared for action. Great was the surprise of de Suffren when 

1 Roux »--Lc Bail 1 1 de Suffren d*t*s l r fade, p. »t8 (letter dated 2nd 
July , 17$*). 









I>F. SUFFREN AND NAVAI. ACTIONS 

he learnt that th<' Ajax had not been able to complete its 
repairs yet, and he vvas stupefied when its captain, Bouvet 
wanted permission to take his ship to the nearest pou foi 
repairs. He sternly refused permission, but some time Liter 
when the French ships were manoeuvring for position before the 
signal for action was given, the Ajax quietly withdrew leaving 
de Suffren in a position of inferiority in guns to his enemy. 1 

J he action started about eleven o'clock. The English 
Admiral bad given orders to his ships, each one to engage a 
French vessel, the two sides being equal in number. I he 
cannonade was terrific and continued for two hours. On the 
French side the brunt of the attack was taken by the fUirnand 
fighting against the Hero and the Exeter, the Annibal against 
the his , the Swire against the Burford, the Brillant against the 
Sultan, the Herns against the Superb , and the Sphinx against 
the Monarca. But the Petit-Annibal , the Artisien and the 
I engeur remained content by firing from a long distance against 
the English rear, while the Bizarre and the Orient lay totally 
inactive Two hours of heavy cannonade inflicted severe 
damage on both sides, the Elamand and the Hero being com¬ 
pelled to leave »he scene of action. About one o’clock a sudden 
veering of the wind threw all the ships into the greatest con¬ 
fusion and distress, and stopped the combat. Hughes, whose 
(feet had sustained a damage at least equal to that of the trench, 




1 Table of the two squadrons: 
French 

Lc Flarnand (50)—Dc CuverviUe 
L*Annibal (74) — De Tromclin 
l c Severe (64)—De Ciilart 
Tc Brillant (64)- De St. Felix 
Lc Hfros (74)-—De Suffren 
De Moissac 

lx Sphinx (64)—Du Chilleau 
I>e Petit-Annibal (50) — De Galle^ 
VArti uen (64)- De Maurvillt 
tj* Yengeur (64)—De Forbin 
lx Biiarre (64) l alandellc 
VOrient (74)—La Paitlifcre 
Lc Diligent —Mac£ 
lei Fine —De Salvert 
Im Subtile —De Kermadic 
Lc Br&lat — De Joyeuse 


English 

The Hero (74}—Hawker 
The Exeter (64)—King 
The Isis (5G)—Lumley 
The Burford (74)—Reiner 
The Sultan (74)—Watt 
The Superb (74>—Hughes 

Maclellan 

The Monarca (74)—Gell 
The Worcester (64) — Wood 
The Monmouth (64)—Alms 
The Eagle (64)—Reddcl 
The Magnanime (64)—Wolselcy 
The Sea Horst 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


t the scene of action first and proceeded to anchor between 
Ncgapatam and Nagore, while de Suffren, who was also in no 
better position to renew the light, went to anchor before 
Karikal and next day proceeded towards Cuddalore, forced to 
abandon his project of attacking Negapatam.' 

An interesting incident in connection with the action of 
the (Hh July deserves mention here. The Seveie, engaged in a 
fight with the Sultan, was reduced to such distress that its 
captain, Cillart, thinking it useless to continue the fire, ordered 


the flag to be hauled down iri token of surrender, in spite of 
the fact that three other ships, the tnnibal, the Sphinx and the 
Hero.s stood close by. The Sultan also ceased fire; but imme¬ 
diately after the other officers of the Severe, defying the 
. authority of the captain, hoisted the flag anew and opened lire 
on the Sultan. The latter, not prepared for a renewal of the 
attack after surrender and badly damaged in the action, retired 
from the scene. Next day when the French ships were moving 
off to Cuddalore. Hughes made a demand to de Suffren for the 
surrender of the Severe, claiming his right by international rules 
of warfare. De Suffren who had not yet received the report of 
Cillart replied that the hauling down of the flag was just an 
accident, that the ship had no intention of surrendering, which 
was evident from the immediate renewal of tin* fight, and 
that even if it had surrendered it could have been re-captured 
easily by the three ships which stood close by 2 . 


1 For details ot the action: A.\. Viittisthe dc la Marine, B-.j. 

Vol. xoy; Journal di Bard du Baillt dr Suffren, pp. 142-146; Roux-. 

I.e Bailtt dr Suffren dam l'hide , pp. 119-124; la Varend *' Suffren et ses 
rnnetnis, pp. *17-230; Mallcson- final French Struggles in India , pp. 35*39, 
Admiral Richmond l'he .Wiry m India, rjb\1781, pp. 236-247. 

For the English version see the report of Admiral Hughes; Secret 
Select Committee Proc., Ft. William, 8th August, 1782 (Forrest Selections 
from Letters, Despatches, etc,. Foreign Dept.. Govt, of India, III, 
pp H77-S81). The Supreme Govt, in Calcutta took it as an English 
vic tory and ordered that the guns of the fort be fired in commemoration 
of the vinon'*. 

- Journal df Bord du Hailli dr Suffren dans V Inde, p. 146; La 
Varende- Suffren rt ses ennemis, pp. 231-236; Roux Le Badli de Suffren 
dans VInde pp, 1*4126; letter of Admiral Hughes,—See. Set. Com. Proc., 
Ft. William. 8th August 1782 (Forrest—„s run from Letter, Dr .patches, 

etc.. Foreign Dept., III. p. 881). 


muisr/ff. 



Bui although de .Suffrcn liad thus explained oil (he strange 
action of the Severe, he was exasperated by the persistently bad 
conduct of some of his captains, which was mainly responsible 
for his failure to achieve the success against the English which 
he could have confidently expected. His patience had reached 
its breaking point, and immediately on reaching Cuddalore lu 
removed four captains front their posts, sending the three most 
guilty ones to France to stand their trial, and made a wholesale 
re-organisation in the command of the ships. 

Reporting to Souillac on the subject in a letter dated 31st 
July he wrote. “There arc three captains who have to be sent 
to France: (1) M de Cillart for having shamelessly brought 
down his (lag: (a) M. de Maurville (of the 1 rttsien) who on 
the 6th far from effacing had only aggravated the wrongs which 
he had committed 011 February 17, April 12 and June 5. 
(3) M lc Comte de Forbin (of the Vengeur) who far from mend¬ 
ing his bad conduct of April 12 bad conducted himself equally 
badly". Bouvet, the captain of the Ajax., was let off lightlv in 
view of his age. ailing health and past bravery, and was merely 
removed from his command. These actions, although drastic, 
were absolutely necessary to restore discipline among the officers 
and men of the squadron. 1 

XIV. De Suflrcn's return to Cuddalore and interview 
with Haidar Alt. 

Flic French squadron arrived at Cuddalore on the 8th July. 
On the 25th Haidar Ali with his whole army approached the 
place and encamped at a distance of two leagues to the norm. 
He had travelled a long way with the express purpose oi meet 
ing dc Suffrcn, whose glorious exploits had roused in hts mind 
a feeling of genuine admiration. On his arrival tlu French 
garrison at Cuddalore gave a salute of 21 guns and at the same 
time all the ships in the roadstead fired in honour of the august 
and brave ally. De Sulfren sent de Moissac to the Nawab's 
carnp to offer his compliments, and on the atith lw himself 

I Journal dr fiord du Bailli dr Suffren dans l’ I tide, pp. 149-150; I-a 
Varende- Suffren rt ses ennemis. pp. *56-24*; Roux t* Bailli de Suffren 
darn Unde. pp. 127 128; Malleson - Final French Struggles m India, p. 59. 


MtN/sr^ 


THI IKENCH IN INDIA 



started for the interview with Haidar .VIi which had been desired 


so ardently on both sides. He was accompanied by some of 
the captains o! his squadron and a battalion of sepoys and made 
first for the amp of Duchemin at Manjakuppam to meet the 
General on his sick-bed. There he was joined by two chiefs •>; 
the Mysore artnv with a large escort of cavalry sent by Haidar 
Ali. 


From Manjakuppam de Sulfren made a ceremonial journey 
to the Nawab’s camp, where the whole body of Mysore troops 
presented arms. After a brief halt at the camp of Piveron 
de Morlat. in the evening he was taken to the Darhar of the 
Nawab who welcomed him with all the warmth of the heart 
of a warrior, fhe first meeting was taken up with an exchange 
of flattering compliments and rich presents, in keeping with the 
traditions of an Eastern Court. It may be noticed here that 
the presents offered b\ de SufFrcn to the Nawab did not cost the 
French anything. I hey had been captured on an English 
vessel some time before and had been intended for the Emperor 
of China. Io the regret of de SufFrcn th.it Haidar Ali had 
not approached the coast .sufficiently near to have a view of his 
squadron, the latter replied thai he had nothing more to desire 
after having seen the person who commanded it. and who com¬ 
manded it so gloriously. After the ceremonies of the first 
introduction were over, de Sulfren retired to the camp of Piveron 
de Morlat, where he spent the night, and next day he was 
invited to a banquet by the Nawab. Being a gourmand, he did 
full justice to the rich Indian food served, which embarrassed 
others who had accompanied him. At the end of the banquet 
he remained in secret conference with the Nawab for a long 
time and in the evening returned to his fleet. On the 28th 
he had his third meeting with Haidar, and next day he took 
his final leave of the Nawab to return to the coast. 

The prolonged talks of de Suffren with Haidar Ali had 
the effect of soothing the bitter feelings of the latter at the 
conduct of the French army under Duchemin and induced him 
to furnish supplies required for the army. The confidence which 
Haidar had in de Suffren, combined with the news brought 
by de Launay on the 28th July of the arrival of Bussy in the 
Isle of Frame with a strong expeditionary force, persuaded him 
further to remain on the eastern coast to cooperate more 


misr^ 



OF SUFFRJ N AM) NAN AI. At t IONS 


■<sl 


lively with the French forces, in spite of the fact that his 
presence was urgently required on the Malabar Coast threatened 
by an English force sent from Bombay, Thus from every point 
< >f view do Suffren \s personal interview with Haidar was 
eminently successful. That it did not lead to anv tangible 
military success was due to the lack of enterprise on the part 
of Hoffelize, who assumed command of the French army after 
the illness of Duchemin, and to the unfortunate turn of circum¬ 
stances which delayed the arrival of Biissv in India till some 
time after the death of Haidar. 1 * 3 


XV. News of the arrival of Busty in the Isle of France and of 
the despatch of reinforcements under clAymar . 

Arriving at Cuddalore after the action of the 6rh July, 
de Suffren was confronted with immense difficulties. His ships 
had sustained heavy damages, and for want of materials and of 
a safe port it was difficult to undertake thorough repairs. The 
generosity of Haidar, no doubt, had supplied the squadron 
with provisions, but lack of funds and shortage of men and 
ships could not be solved except by fresh reinforcements from 
the Tsle of France. Indeed, so miserable was the plight of the 
squadron that none but the bravest heart could have faced the 
prospect of another encounter with the English fleet with 
equanimity. Writing to Sou iliac on July ‘30. de Suffren 
described his position thus: M l can assure you that it is not 
an easy affair to remain on the sea without money, without 
magazines, with a squadron very badly equipped in part, and 
after having sustained three battles; it is. I believe, a matter of 
good fortune, but I am at the end of my resources .* 

Happily for de Suffren, it was about this time that he 
received the first heartening news of the despatch of consider¬ 
able reinforcements from the Isle of France. While he was 


1 For an account of the meeting of de .Suffren with Haidar Ali: 
Journal dc Bord du Bailli de Suffren dans Vlnde, pp. ifP-ijS** ^ oux — 
le Bailli de Suffren dans Unde, pp. 131-1 ^5: Cunat -Hisloire du Bailli 
de Suffren, p. 190; Malleson— Final f rench Struggles in India, pp. 42-43; 

la Varcnde —Suffren et ses enneinis, pp. 1144-348. 

3 Roux. off. cit., p. 129. 


MINISr^ 



engaged in negotiations with Haidar there arrived at Cuddalore 
on the 28th }uiv cle Launay, Commistaire General of the arms 
of Hussy. It was from him that do Sulfren learnt about the 
arrival of Hussy in the Isle of France with two ships, the Saint- 
Michel (60) and the Illustre (74). a cutter, the Muird, and a 
few transports carrying troops. Immediately on his arrival 
Hussy had sent d< I.aunay by the Lczard to open negotiations 
with Haidar. Launay had landed at Galle in the south of 
Ceylon and journeyed overland to Jaffina. Crossing the narrow 
strait he took the land route to Tranquebar, from where he 
was carried to Cuddalore by a French frigate, the Bellone. 
De Launay informed de Suffren that arrangements had been 
made for the immediate despatch front the Isle of France of 
the lirst detachment of Hussy's expeditionary force under the 
command of d’Aymar, consisting of two ships of the line, the 
Saint-Michel and the lllustre, a frigate, the Consolante, and 
several transports carrying troops, provisions and munitions. 
D’Aymar had instructions to join de Suffren ai Batticaloa where 
the French stjuadron was believed to be at the time. 1 It was 
the happiest news that de Suffren could expect, and he at once 
set about making hasty preparations to proceed to Batticaloa to 
meet the reinforcements sent under d’Aymar. 

The news of the reinforcements also revived in the mind 
of de Suffren a desire which he had cherished from the first, 
namely to capture Trinkonrili, the best port in Indian waters 
capable of accommodating even the largest fleet and protecting 
it against all attacks. Nobody knew better the difficulty of a 
fleet to carry on sustained operations in Indian waters without 
the possession of such a safe shelter to fall back upon in times 
of necessity. The news of the arrival of reinforcements under 
d* Ay mar decided de Suffren to attempt his long-cherished project 
and take Trinkomali by surprise. He knew’ that the Fnglish 
fleet was anchored before Madras, and although it had been 
reinforced bv two ships, the Sceptre (64) and the San-Carlos 
(44), it was not likely to suspect his design and proceed in time 
to the relief of Trinkomali. 

1 Journal dr Bind du Baillt dr Suffren dans Unde, p. 155. 


mtST/fy 


1>F SUM REN AM) WWI ACTIONS 

XVI, Capture of Trinhomali . 

Keeping his main project a complete secret and giving out 
that his intention was merely to go to Batticaloa to meet, the 
reinforcements under d’Aviuar, de Suffren started from Cud- 
tlalorc with his squadron on the ist August. He had, however, 
taken care to embark some troops and a company of gunners 
for the siege of Trinkomali 1 . On the t)th August the squadron 
arrived at Batticaloa and on the atst ii was joined by the ships 
despatched from the Isle of France under the command of 
d’Aymar. The troops (600 men belonging to the regiment of 
the Isle of France), munitions and provisions brought by 
d’Aymar were promptly distributed among the ships ot the 
squadron, and on the agrd de Suffren sailed for frinkomali. 2 
His determination to capture Trinkomali was strengthened by a 
letter from Bussy received at. Batticaloa, expressing regret that 
the French had not started their operations in Indian waters 
by seizing that valuable port, but there is no reason to think 
that he undertook the project merely at the suggestion of Bussy. 
An enterprising naval commander like de Suffren did not 
require the suggestion of anybody else to realise the value 
and importance of such a port as Trinkomali. 

On the *5tii the French squadron arrived before Trinkomali 
and anchored at the entrance to the bay. Some time later it 
moved further inside and anchored in the back hay to the 
north-west of the fort of Trinkomali both for the safety of 
the ships as well as for the protection of the landing operations. 
On the little isthmus there stood two forts, originally Dutch 
but captured by the English in 1780, the fort of Trinkomali 
in the north and that of Ostenburg in the south, with the town 
in the middle. In the evening dc Suffren sent an armed boat 
to explore the coast and find out a suitable place for landing. 
7lie spot selected was about a league to the north-west ol the 
fort of f rinkomali. exactly the same place where the English 
had landed for their attack on the f ort. De Suffren under¬ 
stood well that he must race against time, because there was 
no knowing when the English fleet would re-appear, compelling 

1 Journal de Hind du Hailli de Suffren (Urns l'lttde, { 154. 

1 [hid., p. 160. 





him to lift iht’ siege and face another naval encounter, with 
doubtful prospects. At three o’clock on the morning of the 
26th there were landed 2,300 men, including 600 sepoys, 500 
marines and a few hundred Malayans, lent by the Dutch for 
the occasion, the rest belonging to the regiments of Austrasie 
and the Isle of France. It was not a little surprising that the 
English made no attempt to oppose the landing. In three days’ 
lime, ybth to 28th, thanks to the enthusiasm which the presence’ 
of dr Stiff ret) had inspired in his men, the French had raised 
three batteries, one to the west and two to the south west of 
the fort of Trinkomali, in spite of the incessant fire of the 
enemy. On the 29th the French batteries went into action 
and produced considerable effect on the walls of the fort. On 
the morning of the 30th dc Suffren summoned the Governor 
to surrender, and after brief negotiations the fort capitulated on 
honourable terms. The defending troops were to be allowed 
to come out with all the honours of war and were to be 
transported to Madras. 

The neighbouring fori of Ostenburg also capitulated on 
similar terms on the* 31st. The garrison in each of the forts 
numbered nearly 150 European troops and 300 sepoys. The) 
had sufficient munitions and provisions to stand a prolonged 
siege. What forced them to capitulate so early were, first, 
lack of water, and second, a belief that de Suffren must have 
won a decisive victory over the English fleet and was thus free 
to continue the siege indefinitely. They, therefore, hastened 
to capitulate, iri order to secure the best terms possible. On the 
other hand, the French also, apprehensive of a sudden rc-appear- 
ance of the English fleet, were anxious to get possession of the 
forts at the earliest possible moment and were willing to offer 
honourable terms of capitulation. On September 1 the English 
garrison embarked on the French ships, and de Suffren had just 
time to make arrangements for the occupation of the forts when 
next day the English fleet appeared before Trinkomali. 1 

1 For the capture of Trinkomali: A.N.— A # intslire de la Marine, 
B.-.j. Vols. 207 and 268; Journal dr Bord du Bailli dr Suffren dans 
I'Inde, pp. itii-i6t>: T.a Varcndc - Suffren et ses etmrmis, pp. 252-255; 
Roux — Lc Bailli de Suffren dans l hide, pp. 140 145; MaUcson — Final 
French Struggles in India , pp. 45-46; Wilks —History of Mhsoor . It, 
p. 1,16: \dmiral Richmond — The Nary in India, 176}-178), pp. 267-271. 


NlINlSr^ 





XVII. Fourth naval action (yd September). 

After the action of the 6th July the English fleet Jay 
anchored at Negapatam for a few days and then proceeded 
north to Madras where i» arrived on the 20th. Although it 
received there reinforcements of two ships, the Sceptre and 
the San-Carlos, it had sustained such a heavy damage in the 
action off Negapatam that it was compelled to remain at Madras 
for a considerable period for repairs. In the meantime Hughes 
was not without anxiety about the safety of I rinkomali, know¬ 
ing the intrepid character of his adversary, and he sent two 
ships, the Monmouth and the Sceptre, with troops and muni¬ 
tions for the defence of the forts there. On his way to 
Batticaloa from Cuddalore de Suffren had once thought of 
exploring the Bay of Trinkomali. but be was so preoccupied 
with an accident to his ship that he abandoned the idea and 
thus lost the opportunity of seizing the two English ships 
there. On the 11th August a French frigate, the Bellone, had a 
sharp encounter with an English frigate, the Coventry, not far 
from Batticaloa where the entire fleet of de Suffren lay 
anchored. 1 Although a weaker vessel, the Coventry could escape 
but not before noticing the presence of the French fleet at 
Batticaloa. Scenting mischief, it sailed hurriedly to Madras to 
give the information to Hughes, w j ho lost no time in proceeding 
to Trinkomali to protect it against a surprise attack. 2 But he 
arrived just forty-eight hours too late, only to see the French 
flag Hying over the forts and the fleet of de Suffren safely 
anchored in the bay. 

At the sight of his old adversary Suffren at once prepared 
for action, but some of his captains, led by tie I romelin, second- 
in-command, tried to persuade him not to seek battle unneces¬ 
sarily. The French were, as they argued, in an advantageous 
position. They were in occupation of the forts and theif ships 
were safely lodged in the bay, where Hughes would not dare 
disturb them. Fresh reinforcements under Bussy would riot be 
long in coming, and till then it would he wiser for them to 
avoid an action which entailed the risk of a loss of all their 

1 Journal de Bord dv Baillt de Suffren dans I'lnde, p. 158. 

2 Maltese m - Final French Struggles in India, pp. 47 * 4 ^* 

R 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

advantages. In fact, however, the spirit which animated 
these officers wa k s not so honest, as might appear from their 
arguments. Jealousy of de Suffren, the fatigue of several succes¬ 
sive actions, a longing for the life of indolence and pleasure 
in the Isle of France, and principally the strong resentment at 
the disciplinary action taken by de Suffren after the combat of 
the 6th July, were the real motives which prompted the captains 
to dissuade de Suffren from another encounter with the English. 
On the insistence of the captains de Suffren merely agreed to 
put off his decision till he knew the exact strength of the English 
fleet When the Bell one, sent out to reconnoitre, reported that 
Hughes had only is ships of the line, de Suffren. turning to 
Ironiefin, observed in a firm voice, If the enemy had superior 
forces, I would have retired; against equal forces I would have 
great difficulty in restraining myself from a combat; against 
inferior forces there can be no hesitation; let us then fight and 
let the signal be given ’. 1 

There could not be any further argument; but the resent¬ 
ment felt by the recalcitrant captains cost de Suffren very dear 
in the action which followed. From the point of view' of 
national interest he had no doubt made the wisest decision in 
not losing this opportunity of destroying the English squadron, 
weaker in both the number of ships and of guns, before it was 
joined by the expected reinforcement under Bikerton. The 
destruction of the English fleet on this occasion would have 
placed south India at the mercy of the French and their ally, 
Haida Ali. It was an opportunity not to conic again, and in 
spite of all his past glories dc Suffren would have incurred 
severe condemnation if he had decided to miss it. On the 
other hand, he should have known from his past experience 
that success depended to a very large extent on the co-opera 
fion of all the captains, and he should have considered whether 
that co-operation would be forthcoming in view of the feeling 
of extreme resentment on the part of many of them. As it 
actually turned out, h was grossly betrayed by these officers, 
placing him for a moment in the gravest peril. 

On the morning of September 3, the French ships sailed 
out of the bay to meet the enemy fleet. Dc Suffren had ordered 

1 Roux —Le Bailii de Suffren dom If fide, pp, 148-149. 




MINIS/*,, 


OK SUFFREN AN1) NAVAL ACTIONS 




them to proceed in the line of battle and approach the enemy 
within dose range before opening fire. But due to tin deli¬ 
berate evil intentions of the captains the ships in the front and 
rear sections manoeuvred so clumsily that the line had not been 
properly formed even by two o’clock, when the French came 
up within the range of a cannon shot from the English fleet. 

) fie French had fifteen ships in the line, including the frigate 
Consolante, while the English had twelve. Due to bad 
manoeuvring two ships of the French centre, the Petit Annibal 
and the Sphinx, left their allotted positions and joined the five 
ships of the front section, while another, the Flavian d , left the 
centre and joined the rear section. On the other hand, the 
Ajax, belonging to the rear section, joined the centre. Thus 
the centre, with which de Suffrcn bore the brunt of the fight, 
consisted of only three ships, the Her os, the // lust re and the 
Ajax . 1 

De Suffren, who intended to light it pistol range, gave 
repeated signals to his ships to proceed at full speed and close 
up with the enemy fleet before opening (ire. Impatient at their 
slowness and clumsy rnanoeuvrings, he repeated the signal once 
more at half-past two, and in order to draw attention to the 
signal he fired a shot. His intention was completely misunder- 

1 Table of the two squadrons: — 


French 


English 


/ Artesian (64)- Dc St. Felix 
Le Severe (64) — Dc* Langle 
Le St. Michel (64) — D'Aymar 
L'Orient (74) —La Paillterc 
Le Jirillant (64) — Dc Kersauson 
Le Petit-Annibal (50)— De Gallcs 
Lc Sphinx (64)— Do Ghillcait 
fc Heros (74) De Suffrcn 
VtUmtre (74)—-Dc JBruycres 
Le Flamand (yo ) — Dc Salvert 
L'Ajnx (t>4)— Dc Beaumont 
La Comolante (40)— Dc P£an 
L'Annibal (74)— De Troraelin 
l Tengeur (64)-- Dr Guvcrvillc 
L Bizarre (64)— Latandcllo 
Ijo Fine (36) 

Ijc. HcUonr (36) 

Lm Fortune ( 18 ) 


The Exeter (O4)—King 
The Isis (56)—Lutnley 
The Hero (74)—Hawker 
The Sceptre (64)—Graves. 

The Burford (74}—R«Hncr 
The Sultan (74)—Watt 
The Superb (74)—Hughes 
The Monarc a (74)—Gelt 
The Eagle (64)—Reticle! 

T h e Magna n i rn elfisfr— -W ol sc Icy 
The Monmouth (64)—Alms 
The Worcester (54)—Wood 
The San Carlos (44) 

The Aclive (40) 

The Medea (38) 

The Coventry (a8) 

The Sea Horse (21) 

The Combustion (io) 


miSTfiy 



stood, and it was taken as a signal for fire all along the line. 
The French squadron was yet in a state of hopeless confusion. 
The Vengeur and the Consolante of the rear section were 
ordered to double the tail of the English line, but they failed 
to do so and concentrated their fire on the Worcester and the 
Monmouth, while the other three ships, the Flamand, the 
Annibal and the Bizarre, remained inactive. The five ships of 
the front section, reinforced by two others of the centre, the 
Petit-Annibal and the Sphinx , remained content by firing from a 
long distance. Titus de Suffren at the centre found himself 
in ,an unequal fight with only three ships, the Hiros, the 
lllustre and the Ajax. Mis signals to d’Aymar and Tromelin 
to come to his help were disobeyed and the unequal fight went 
on till about four o'clock. Then noticing that the French 
centre stood the risk of being surrounded by enemy ships, the 
Artisim stirred into activity and opened a terrific lire, which 
put out of action two ships of the English front, the his and 
the Hero , the Exeter having been obliged to withdraw earlier. 

In spite of this powerful diversion by the Artesien , joined 
later by the BrillatU, the position of the French centre was 
extremely critical. At one moment the main mast of the Hiros 
fell broken, bringing down the flag. Furious at the '‘Hurrahs” 
of the English who took It as a sign of surrender, de Suffren 
thundered out to his men, “Bring all the flags on board and 
cover up my ship with them". The courage of the commander 
infused fresh enthusiasm in his men, and the Hiros started a 
terrific fire again, putting out of action the Burford, the Sultan 
and the Superb , till dc Suffren was informed that 1,800 shots 
had been fired altogether and that the munitions had been 
totally exhausted. In order to deceive the enemy the Hiros 
even kept on firing blank shots for some time. 

About half-past five the whole of the front section at last 
catne to the rescue of the centre and joined action. The tide 
now turned wholly in favour of the French. The English 
ships, already badly damaged in action, were now engaged 
bv the seven French ships of the front section, which had so 
long taken no part in the battle and were thus in a perfect 
condition. However, it was too late to assure any decisive 
result, and as night fell the combat stopped and the two 
squadrons drew apart. Taking advantage of the darkness of 


MINI ST/f 



me night, the English ships sailed away for Madras, and the 
French squadron, not in a position to pursue the enemy, 
remained at the scene of battle till (>th September, when it 
started back for Trinkomali. On the 7th one of the ships, the 
Orient , was wrecked at the entrance to the bay and the squadron 
was held up there for ten clays It was not till the 17th that 
the ships could anchor in the Bay of Trinkomali in their old 
position. 1 

The battle of Trinkomali showed in an even more glaring 
manner than before how much the French chances of success 
were ruined by jealousy on the part of some of the captains 
and by their flagrant disobedience to orders. The shameful con 
duct of these captains was so apparent as to call forth comments 
even among the English, who condemned these officers as 
“unworthy to serve so great a man". 2 Dc Suffren himself gave 
an account of the battle in a letter to Souillac, dated *grd 
September: “1 began the combat 15 against 12, as I had pur 
the Comolante also in the line. But what you will not believe 
is that there were only the Hrros, the 11 lustre and the Ajax 
which fought at close quarters. Vet all. yes all, had the greatest 
facility to approach, and you, who are a sailor, how can you 
be persuaded that having gained the head of the line anybody 
can fail to approach it, and that for vessels with good speed?" 3 
To the Minister of Marine also he wrote thus, "I have just 
missed an opportunity to destroy the English squadron. I had 
14 ships and the Comolante which 1 had put in the line. 
Admiral Hughes was escaping without a fight, or to put it better 

fleeing in an orderly manner. It was not till half-past 

two in the afternoon that I could join him. My line having 

1 For details of the naval action: A.N.—MinisUrre de la Marine, 
It-4, Vole 207 and 268; Journal dc Bord du limiti de Suffren dans l' hide, 
pp. 166-178; La Varendc — Suffren el ses ennemis, pp. 2;,5-266; Roux— 
le Bailli de Suffren dam Vlndc , pp. 147-159; Malleson— Final french 
struggles in India , pp. 48-55; Admiral Richmond — The Navy in India, 
rjtyn&j, pp. 274-285; Letter of Hughes dated 8th Sept.-Sec. Sel. Com. 
Proc., Ft, William, 23rd Sept. (Forrest— Selections .... Foreign Dept., 

Ill, pp. S97-898). Hughes admitted that his ships had suffered very severe 
damages. 

- Malleson Final French Struggles in India , p. 55. Even the Cal * 
ta t^azetle admitted that de Suffren was very badly seconded. 

* R° ux Le Bailli de Suffren dans Unde, p. 156. 




MIN tS7Q y 



mi i *hi \c;h jn inuia 


<SL 


on nearly formed, I attacked and gave the signal (to mv 

ships) to approach (the enemy). Only the Hnos % the 

llhistre and the Ajax fought at. close quarters and in line. The 
others, without any regard to their posts and without making 
any manoeuvre, fired from a long distance, or it is better to 
sav outside the range of a cannon'*. 1 

Although the battle of Trinkomali met with ill-success, 
it had one tangible result. It virtually saved the French force 
at Cuddalore from the English army under Cootc advancing 
to lav siege to that place. If Hughes had joined Coote with 
his squadron in a perfect condition, the fate of Cuddalore 
would have been sealed. As it was. when Hughes returned to 
Madras with his badly damaged ships, the English Council was 
so panic-stricken and apprehensive of an attack on Madras itself, 
knowing the intrepid character of de Suffren, that it at once 
recalled Quote's forces for the defence of the city. De Suffren 
tame to know it from the Bellone , which had been sent to the 
Coromandel Coast immediately after the battle of Trinkomali. 2 
To Sou iliac he wrote on September ig, “For some days l was 
in the greatest anxiety; I knew that M. Coote was near Cudda¬ 
lore and I was not in a position to go to the relief of that 
place. The arrival of the Bellone, which brought me the news 

of the retreat of this general, has quietened my anxiety. 

The combat (of Trinkomali) has prevented his (Hughes) 
combination with Coote and has forced him to retire to 
Madras’*. 3 

One of the earliest tasks of dc Suffren after the battle of 
Trinkomali was to deal with the captains who had been guilty 
of deliberate bad conduct* But although he had every reason 
to take drastic steps, as he had done after the action of the 
Grh July, lie thought it prudent to deal leniently with them, 
and on the request of four of them, de Tromelin, Saint-Fclix, 
de Lalandelle and dc Galles. he granted them permission to 
return to the Isle of France. 4 In a letter dated September 
he reported the matter thus to Marquis de Castries. “Messrs. 


1 I a Varcude— Suffren el ses ennemis , pp. ^68-^69. 

3 Journal de Hard du Bailli de Suffren dans l'Indr, p. 176. 

3 Roux — Le Batlli de Suffren dans i/nde, p. 159. 

* pp. 159-160; Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren dam Unde, 

p. 178; l/a Varendc, Off. Cit p. 267. 


misr/f,. 





fiTLalandelle, dc Tromelin, de Saint-Felix and dc Galles have 
asked permission to leave their ships. I have been too dissatis¬ 
fied with them not to grant the permission with pleasure. If 
I do not remove several others, it is only due to want of 
suitable persons to command their ships'. 1 2 


Will. Derision to winter at Achin. 


The French squadron remained at Trinkomali till the 1st 
October, when it sailed for Cuddalore with the intention ol 
wintering at Achin in north Sumatra, Trinkomali requiring 
considerable time and labour to be made suitable for the pur 
pose. Although the ships had been repaired as best as possible 
under the circumstances, de Suffren was faced with great dilh- 
cutties for lack of munitions, provisions and naval equipments, 
and on the day of his departure from Trinkomali lie wrote to 
Souillac: "I am going to the rendez-vou .> (Achin, where lie 

had asked Bussy to meet him); I do not know whether I shall 
be able to reacli the place; my position is most embarrassing 
Send me, at Trinkomali, as much munitions, provisions 

and naval equipments as you can . 

Starting from Trinkomali on the tst October, dc Sullren 
reached Cuddalore on the 4th On the way he learnt about 
the capture of a cutter, the Uzard, by the English in the neutial 
roadstead of Tranquebar. He suffered an even greater 1111s 
fortune when one of the ships of the squadron, the Bizane. 
was wrecked on the sand-bar just oil Cuddalore and could not 
be saved even with the best efforts. 3 I hese successive disasters 
grieved de Suffren all the more, as he learnt ahout the same time 
of the arrival at Bombay of Bikerton's squadron of six ships 
of the line. The junction of Bikerton with Hughes would 
make the fight grossly unequal, at least till the arrival of Bussy 
with reinforcements. De Suffren thus thought it prudent to 
leave the Coromandel Coast and to go to Achin in north 
Sumatra for wintering his ships, having already sent infoima 
tion to the Isle of France asking Bussy to proceed straight to 

1 La Varende — Suffren et sex ennemix , p. * 7 ° 

2 Roux — Le Bailli dc Suffren dans Vlndc. p. 160. 

1 lbid. t p. 16s; Journal dc Bord du Bailli de Suffren, pp. ifc 2 -i& 3 * 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

Aehin and join him there. But in order not to betray the 
weakness of his position he gave out that he was returning to 
rrinkoiuali to winter there, and to make the deception more 
real he* even took on board a lew officers and provisions for the 
garrisons of the forts there. 

De Suffren started from Cuddalore on the 15th October, 
just escaping a violent storm which caused great damage to 
the English fleet anchored before Madras. Hughes was com¬ 
pelled to leave the Coromandel Coast and he proceeded to 
Bombay for wintering there. Just four days after his departure 
'Biker ton arrived with his squadron, but not finding Hughes 
before Madras he returned to Bombay where the two squadrons 
joined in December. De Suffren was therefore rather lucky 
in escaping from the Coromandel Coast just in time, as he 
could have hardly saved himself against the much superior 
English fleet if Bikcrton had joined Hughes in time. The 
danger to de Suffren was all the more apparent in that the 
Dutch, who had eight warships at Batavia, made no move to 
come to the assistance of the French squadron.' 

I he French squadron reached Aehin on the 2nd November. 2 
The author of the Journal de Bard du Bailli de Suffren dans 
l f hide wrote about tills place, 5 "Achen is an excellent port for 
wintering, as much for the safety of the ships as for the supply 
of provisions which arc in abundance there. Water is very 

easily procurable from the river.it is not necessary to 

go much high up to find sweet water. We have been permitted 
to buy wood from the Pulo Way'. Although food was 
extremely cheap, the writer did not like the place for its un¬ 
healthy climate. “The number of our sick has increased in 
place of diminishing". It was because the country was full of 
marshes and little streams and suffered innundations during 
rains. I he people were lather ferocious; and jealous of their 
women, "although not of a tempting beauty", they disliked the 

! Rous.- L.c Bailli de Suffren dans I'Inde, pp. 163-165; Love— Vestiges 
of Old Madras, III. pp. *61-26*. Love states that Bikerton's ships actu¬ 
ally joined the squadron ot Hughes before the latter lett the Coromandel 
Coast but that even then Hughes left foi Bombay disregarding the protests 
of the Madras Government. 

3 Journal de Bord du llailli de Suffren , p. 191. 

3 Ibid., pp. 199-200. 




MINIS?*,. 



!>!•: .SUFFKKN AND NAVAI. ACTIONS 


ision of foreigners. On arrival at Achin, de Suffren sent 
de Moissac to negotiate with the king for the supply of wood 
and provisions for the squadron. The lattei showed himself 


at first unwilling to render any help, having never seen such a 
large number of warships and being apprehensive of their real 
intentions. But de Suffren was extremely cautious and took 
care to avoid giving any cause of complaint to the king or to 
the people of the country, retaining the sick on board and not 
permitting his men to go ashore. The wise conduct of 
de Suffren reassured the king of his friendly intentions, and 
he agreed to supply the squadron with whatever the French 
wanted. 1 

On the 24th November there arrived from the Isle of 


France the Due de Chartres with munitions and provisions, 
and also with the news of the naval defeats in Europe and 
America and of the outbreak of an epidemic on hoard the 
ships brought by Peinier to the Isle of France which delayed 
Hussy's departure for India. 2 It was a most disheartening news 
for de .Suffren, with only eight ships and a few thousand men 
at Achin. and with no definite news about the time of Bussy’s 
coming to join him 3 . But he was not the man to yield himself 
to despair, and learning about the same time that Hughes had 
left for Bombay, he decided on taking advantage of the absence 
of the enemy fleet from the eastern coast to prey upon English 
merchant shipping and to attack Ganjarn and other English 
possessions on the Orissa Coast. 


\f\. Return from Achin and junction with Bussy's 
expeditionary force. 

After having repaired his ships as best as lie could, de 
Suffren left Achin on the 20th December and made for the Orissa 
Coast# detailing two fast-moving vessels, the Pelit-Annibat and 
the Helione , to the mouth of the Ganges'to intercept shipping 


1 Journal dc Hard du Bnilli de Suffren, pp. 192 194; Roux— Lt Bailli 
dr Suffrrn dam Vlnde, pp. 165 166. 

1 Journal de fiord du Bailli de Suffren, p, 196. 

Ik expressed his feelings in a letter to Madame de Seiilans, dated 
;i«tb November (Ortolan— Moniteur Univcnel, 5th Nov. 1859). 



THE FRENCH IN iNOIA 


<SL 


7<J 

& 

tniing from Bengal.’ On the 8th January 178•>,, the squadron 
anchored off Ganjam, but though de Suffren had a definite 
intention of attacking the place, he had to give up the plan 
as the nature of the road made a landing extremely difficult 
without the assistance of light country boats 2 . Disappointed 
in their main objective, the French were successful in cap 
luring a number of vessels carrying provisions and merchan¬ 
dise. I he most important capture was an English frigate, the 
< oven tty , which was proceeding unsuspectingly and was seized 
on the nrh January. It was from the captain of this frigate 
that de Suffren came to know of the sudden death of Haidar 

Yli on the 7th December and of the uncertain prospect facing 
the allied Franco-Mysorean forces, Haidar’s son Tipu then being 
far away on the Malabar Coast 1 De Suffren at once decided 
to abandon his projects on the Orissa Coast and to return to 
Cuddalore to assure himself of the position of the French army 
and of tlie co-operation of Haidar's successor 4 . 

Leaving Ganjam on the 15th January, de Suffren arrived 
before Pondicherry on the yh February. There he learnt the 
details of the death of Haidar and of the conduct of the French 
army in assuring the peaceful succession of his sort, Tipu 5 . 
The squadron arrived before Cuddalore on the 6th and five 
days later started for Trinkomali. 6 On the 15th while the 
ships lay anchored at Porto Novo, Piveron de Morlat came to 
see de Suffren and informed him that the new Nawab, Lipin 
intended to return to the Malabar Coast at once to save his 
possessions from the invading army under Matthews. That 
would deprive the French army of the assistance of a valuable 
ally and put it in an extremely critical position on the Coro¬ 
mandel Coast. 1 he attempts of Hoffelize in command of the 
French army to persuade Tipu to stay on the eastern coast till 
the arrival of Bussy's expeditionary force had proved fruitless, 
as there was no knowing when Kussv would come. Piveron 


Journal de Bord <Tu Btulli de Suffren, pp. 199*01. 

; Roux-—/> Hailli de Suffren dan* Vlndc , p. 166. 

1 Journal de Bord du Haiilt de Suffren . pp. 208-211; Love— Vestiges 
of Old Madras, III, pp. 264 *66. 

1 Journal de Bird dtt Bailli de Stiffren, pp. 213*217. 

5 Ibid pp. 221*222. 

* Ibid., pp. 222 *23. 


MINIS T/fy 



was sent to de Suffren in the hope that having so much influ¬ 
ence over the father, he would be able to pievail upon the 
son to stay on the Coromandel Coast for some time more. De 
Suffren accordingly sent a letter to the Nawab through Piveron 
de Mori at. but, as we shall sec later, the uncertainty of Bussys 
arrival and the rapid successes of Matthew’s army ultimately 
compelled Tipu to leave for the Malabar Coast at the begin¬ 
ning of March.’ 

On the 16th the squadron started from Porto Novo and 
reached Trinkoinali on the 23rd. I hree days later there 
arrived a corvette, the Naiade, from the Isle of France with a 
letter from Bussy announcing his departure from there on the 
10th December. On the 1st March de Suffren sent de Moissac 
by the same corvette to the Coromandel Coast to inform 1 ipu 
of the imminent arrival of Bussy’s expeditionary force. 2 1 he 
expeditionary force had in fact gone to Achin in the expecta¬ 
tion of meeting de vSuffren there, and from Achin it came 
back to Trinkomali where it arrived on the 10th March. At 
long last de Suffren was relieved of his extreme anxiety, aim 
being joined by de Peinier’s division of three ships of the line 
and a frigate he could look forward with some equanimity 
to the prospect of an encounter with the combined English 
forces under Hughes and Bikerton, although yet superior to 
his own. 3 


’ Journal de Bord du llailli de Suffren, pp. 11*5-226. 
3 Ibid., pp. 230-231. 

- 1 Ibid., pp. 232-233. 


CHAPTER X 




THE FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 
I. The inactivity of the French army. 

In order to present a connected narrative we have carried 
the story of French naval operations in Indian waters rill the 
arrival of Bussy at Trinkoraali in March 1783, without making 
any mention of French military activities in south India since 
the landing of troops under Duchemin at Cuddalore in March 
1783. It is time, however, that we interrupt the course of 
the narrative of dc Suffren’s glorious exploits and trace the 
history of French military operations till the arrival of Bussy 
in India in March 1783. This story presents a striking con¬ 
trast to the one just narrated. While in the course of one 
year dc Suffiren had encountered the English fleet on four 
occasions, had captured Trinkomali, the finest port that a 
navy could have in Indian waters, and had raised the prestige 
of France in the eyes of thr Indian Powers to a point never 
before reached except during the time of Dupleix, the French 
army under Duchemin remained totally inactive for the whole 
period, taking little practical part in the military operations 
of Haidar Ali in the Carnatic, and the only tangible achieve¬ 
ment it could show was the capture of Cuddalore, defended 
by only a very small garrison. For this lack of enterprise and 
failure to take advantage of the English distress in the Carnatic, 
responsibility has been thrown largely on Duchemin by both 
English and French historians, who condemn him in the 
severest terms. Malleson has even gone to the length of stating 
categorically that any one of the three thousand troops Duche- 
min hail under him would have made a better general. 1 It 
will be our endeavour here to trace the course of events in 
.some detail to find out how much Duchemin really deserved 
this condemnation, and how much he was restricted by diffi¬ 
culties over which he had no control and by the initial lack 

1 Malleson— Fiuat French Struggle* in India, p. 20. 


Ml NISTfiy 



THE FRJSNCH ARMY IN r 1 HE CARNATIC 



of a full understanding with an ally without whose co-opera¬ 
tion no military operation was possible. It is not of course 
the purpose of a historian to deliberately paint black as white, 
but it is undoubtedly his duty to analyse all the facts of a 
situation to arrive at. a correct appreciation of the causes of 
success or failure. 

The appointment of Duchemin to command the first expe¬ 
ditionary army in India was rather unfortunate, since he was 
a sailor and not a soldier, having no experience of land war¬ 
fare. His long stay in the Isle of France had accustomed him 
to a life of ease and comfort; his health was failing and unable 
to bear the strain of an active campaign. The first expedi¬ 
tionary force of less than 3,000 men, organised mainly by the 
initiative and efforts of Souillac, Governor of the Isle of France, 
and not by the French Government, was intended merely as 
a preliminary enterprise, to prepare the ground Cor the prin¬ 
cipal expeditionary force under Bussy which was expected to 
reach India by the,middle of 178s; and it was only as a tem¬ 
porary and stop-gap arrangement that Duchemin took the com¬ 
mand. That really determined Duchemin’s policy in India, 
a policy marked by a lack of that enterprise to be expected 
of the commander of an expeditionary force. As he under¬ 
stood it, his task was only to establish a solid base in India 
to facilitate the landing of the principal expeditionary force 
under Bussy, and to enter into a close alliance with Haidar 
Ali, so that the main force under Bussy could go into operation 
immediately after landing. Like most others, including Bussy, 
who submitted memoires to the French Government on the 
subject of military operations in India, Duchemin thought 
that if the French were to strike, they should strike with a 
large and effective force which could assure success. Opera¬ 
tion by a small force was considered useless for the main pur¬ 
pose in view, the destruction of the English power 'n India; 
and in keeping with the views generally held in France 
Duchemin was not inclined to undertake any large-scale enter¬ 
prise till the arrival of Bussy. expected by the middle of 1782. 


i Duchemin hail also positive instructions from Souillac ot to risk 
his small force in any major operation till the arrival of Bussy. ’Vour 
corps, Monsieur, will be so considerably reduced that it will not he at 


MINf Stfiy. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


is not for that general policy that Duchemin can be con¬ 
demned. He is to be condemned rather for his failure to 
realise the weakness of the English position in the Carnatic 
and to depart from the general policy at opportune moments 
to take advantage of the enemy’s distress. 

II. Landing of troops under Duchemin . 


It was on the 10th March 178* that the expeditionary 
force under Duchemin was landed at Porto Ntovo, the place 
having been selected at the wishes of Haidar Ali. The French 
force consisted of 2,868 men, belonging to the regiments of 
Austrasie and the Isle of France and to the legion of Lauzun. 1 
Prior to disembarkation and after the naval action off Madras, 
de Suffren had suggested to Duchemin a surprise attack on 
Negapatarn, but the latter objected and preferred to effect a 
landing under safer conditions. It will be remembered that 
long before the despatch of the expeditionary force from the 
Isle of France, Souillac had entered into communication with 
Haidar Ali through the French agent at his Court, Pivcron de 
Mortal, but all hopes of cementing an alliance were destroyed 
b\ the ignommous flight of d’Orves from the Coromandel Coast 
in 1781. leaving Haidar alone to fight with the English. From 
that time Haidar came tc entertain a deep distrust of the 
French, which coloured his future relations with that nation 
and prevented him from entering into a solid and whole¬ 
hearted alliance. 

When tie Suffren and Duchemin arrived at Porto Novo 
on the 2i5i February 1782. their first task was to resume the 
threads of negotiations with Haidar, who was campaigning 
victoriously in the Carnatic, and whose son, Tipu, had just 
won a striking success in Tanjore, capturing an English detach 

.ill ]>< >'-4ible 10 hazard large-scale operations, ’and further you will be 
ronfo -ming yourself to the intention of His Majesty, who desires that no 
risk be taken before the arrival of alt the forces that he has decided to 
vrnl out.’'—better of Souillac to Duchemin, dated 18th January 1782 
(H de Closets il'Errey—/Wri,y Chronologique de Vhistoire de Vfnde 
hancaist, p. 50). 

1 Roux /.<■ Baillt de Suffren duns VInde , p. 85; Journal de Bord 
dfi Bnilli de Suffren gives an inaccurate figure, 2500, p. 64. 


MINIS T Ry 


THE FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 

Braithwaite. 1 * Haidar on his side was glad at the 
prospect of the assistance of a French expeditionary force. So 
he hastened to send Phcron dc Morlai to welcome de Snffren 
and Duchemin at Porto Novo and ordered the Governor of 
Chidambaram to protect the disembarkation of French troops 
against any attacks by the English garrison of Cuddalore. 3 
After the visit of Ptveron tie Morlat on the 25th February two 
senior officers, de Moissac and <le Canaple, were sent on behalf 
of de Suffren and Duchemin to compliment the Nawab and 
to prepare the ground for opening negotiations.* I hey returned 
on the 7th March with an encouraging reply, and immediately 
after the French started the landing of troops, munitions and 
artillery. 4 As yet, however, no definite understanding had been 
reached about the nature and terms of co-operation between 
the two allies. After disembarkation French officers were again 
sent to Haidar’s camp to draw up the exact terms of alliance, 
but from the first the effect of Haidar's distrust of the French 
became apparent and he tried to evade the question of a formal 
alliance. Negotiations dragged on for a long time, and it was 
with deep regret that de Snffren left Porto Novo to seek the 
English fleet for a second encounter. 

III. Relations with Haidar ( March-July , 1^82). 

The early relations with Haidar Ali are so important for a 
correct appreciation of the difficulties and failings of Duchemin 
that it is worth while tracing their course in some detail. 
That will help us to determine how much the condemnation 
made b' Malleson and even by Bussy was really deserved, 
and how much it was due to a lack of understanding of the 
peculiarities of the situation in which Duchemin was placed. 
Not that Duchemin was a hero and failed only as a victim of 
circumstances. In fact, with more courage and intrepidity he 
could have obtained a few successes over the English at the 
beginning, and that would have evoked the admiration and 

1 Wilks History of Mysoor, II, p. 109. 

3 Journal de Bord du Iiailli de Suffren, ftp, 101-10a. 

a Ibid. 

4 Ibid. t p. 103. 




MIN/STyjj, 



THF, FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


ifidence of Haidar, which would have gone a long way in 
getting from him that wholehearted cooperation whic! the 
French had expected. Bui it should not be overlooked that 
JDuchetnin’s instruction was first to enter into a definite treaty 
of alliance with Haidar, the terms of which had been laid down 
by Souillac himself. According to these terms the French were 
to offer military assistance to Haidar and conquer the Carnatic 
for him, and in return Haidar was to bear all the expenses 
of the French army, besides allowing the French to retain a 
few- English towns, including Madras. 1 It was not unnatural 
therefore for Duchemin to try to get these terms accepted by 
Haidar first, before undertaking any military enterprise, it 
was in fact all the more necessary, since the problems facing him 
on landing. lack of funds, of provisions and of transports, 
could not be solved without such a definite treaty of alliance. 
On he other hand, Haidar was irritated at the insistence of 
Duchemin on the conclusion of a formal treaty before under 
taking anv military enterprise. The desertion of d'Orves in 1781 
had made him too distrustful of the French to he willing to 
enter into a formal treaty of alliance with them before having 
some concrete proof of their earnestness and courage. It was this 
fundamental difference which influenced the conduct of the 
French expeditionary force. While in order to obtain the ex¬ 
penses of military operations in India from Haidar the French 
tried to make out that they had come only to serve his interests, 
Haidar was shrewd enough to understand that they had come 


1 there is a detailed criticism of the terms by the Minister of Marine 
and Colonics in his letter to Souillac dated 10th April 1782. A. N.: 
Miitlst&rc des Colonies. C-a, Vol. 153, p. 148. Marquis de Castries did not 
like any pjemature agreement on the division of the spoils of victory and 
he particularly objected to the article by which the French were to acquire 
some additional territories to be conquered from the English. It was, he 
declared, going against the wishes of the King, who wanted the liberation 
ot the Indian Princes from the yoke of the English and not making any 
territorial conquests. It was necessary to avoid giving the impression to 
• he Indian Princes that the French only wanted to take the place of the 
English. Castries also did not like the peremptory demand made by 
Souillac to maintain the independence of the French army from the con¬ 
trol of the Mysore ruler. Such a tone betrayed distrust of Haidar and 
was bound to displease him. Finally, he did not favour the demand, as 
an essential condition of rlie treaty, for an advance of 24 lakhs of rupees 
by Haidar. 


rnisr^ 


• G %>\ 


THE FRENCH ARMV IN THE CARNATIC 

in their own interests as well, and must therefore give proof 
of their ability and enterprise before they should be given any 
assistance. Thar also explains the difference in his attitude 
towards de Suftren and Duchemin. 

About the condition of the French army after disembarka* 
lion at Porto Novo ami the course of negotiations with Haidar 
AH* there are two interesting letters, both dated 22 nd March 
1782, written by two soldiers, and also a mernoire by de Canaplc, 
who, along with de ChcrmeviJIe, had been sent by Duchemin 
to negotiate with Haidar. The first of these letters stated that 
the troops were landed at Porto Novo on the nth and were 
supplied with necessary provisions by Haidar. On the 19th 
Duchemin sent two envoys to the Nawab, de Chenncville 
(Duchemin'$ brother) and de Canaple. “Until their return we 
do not know what to do. However, we have made .1 depot 
at Chalembron for our own artillery, baggages and hospitals 

.Bader (Haidar) has his camp about ten leagues from 

Pondicherry. We are only waiting for transport to carry our 

things to the depot at Chalembron.Happily Tipousaeb, 

the son of the Nawab, arrived here at last on the 16th. He is 
encamped at three kosh from Porto Novo: as a result the 
depot will be protected if w r e make any movement”. The 
writer then referred to the state of indiscipline among the 
ranks and the mutual jealousy among the officers. Some sepoy 
troops were recruited and placed under die command of 
d’Houdeloi and Boissieux, but they were only a famished and 
Untrained rabble. From where shall we start our operations? 

It is said from Cuddalore. But it is better to say that one 
does not know what is to be done. The Nawab does not like 
any movement without his orders . We are waiting im¬ 

patiently for the return of our last ambassadors. In the mean¬ 
time the Nawab has sent provisions and a lakh of pagodas’*. 
After referring to an interview' between Tipu and Duchemin 
when the former enquired whether Bellecombe would be return¬ 
ing to India shortly, the writer stated. “1 report this incident 
to prove that M. Duchemin is believed here to have come only 
in temporary command of the army.** 1 * 

The second letter, written by a son to his father in the 

1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 107*111. 

S 







Ml HiSTfiy 



THK FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


of France, was similar. “The army was disembarked on 
the 10th of this month and the disembarkation of the artillery 
is in progress. Yesterday the siege artillery was dragged to 
Chalcmbron. the most convenient place for a depot”. The 
writer then referred in a most feeling way to the devastations 
of the neighbouring countryside made by Haidar's army. 
"MM de Chenneville, Piveron and Canaple started on the 18th 
for the camp of Haidar. Nobody knows the object of their 
mission. I believe that on their return we shall start on our 
march for capturing Cuddalore. This fort is commanded by 
a Lieutenant-Colonel and has a garrison of 60 or 80 white 
troops and some sepoys. It appears that from there we shall 
move to Tanjore to capture rhe few towns preserved by the 
English. .. The Nawab has sent a lakh of rupees merely 
on ihc receipt of the general. I do not know if he will continue 
his generosity”. The writer concluded by referring to the cam 
paign of mutual villification by some of the high-ranking 
officers. 1 

The memoir? of de Canaple 2 gives a detailed account of 
French relations with Haidar from the landing of troops at 
Porto Novo in March to de Sulfrcirs meeting with the Mysore 
ruler in July. After the arrival of the French at Porto Novo 
in February, de Canaple and de Nfoissac were sent in company 
with Piveron de Mori at 10 the camp of Haidar. 1 hcv had 
instructions 'o recall to Haidar the past promises he had made 
to gain the military assistance of the French and to ask him to 
tonclude a definite treaty of alliance. Dc Canaple observed 
Lhat this insistence on a formal treaty before the commencement 
of military operations was indiscreet on the part of the French 
and was the fundamental source of all the later difficulties that 
beset them. "The Nawab replied to this address only in a 
vague way, assured M. de Piveron that he would furnish all the 
supplies required by the army, and added that such an im¬ 
portant treaty could not be concluded except between him and 
M Duchemin. He also gave orders to his Treasurer to send 

a lakh of rupees to the French army at Porto Novo. 

Next day he gave the French envoys leave to depart in a Darbai 


1 Joi: *nal dc Bossy, pp. m r.j. 
* Ibid,, pp. 114-125. 




mtSTQy 



j’HE T RENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 


<SL 


ceremom where the I Vakils of the Mavatha Gouit and also of 
Nizam All were present. In order to impress these Wakils 
and to prevent their masters from entering into a treaty with 
the English. Haidar had previously prepared a speech to be 
delivered by the French envoys to the effect that the King of 
France had declared war on England to avenge the capture 
of Pondicherry and to free the Indian Powers from the yoke 
of the English. 

After the return of the French envoys, the troops, muni* 
tions and artillery were landed from the ships. Haiclai was 
anxious to see the French army commence operations imme¬ 
diately, but the disembarkation and the transport of gum 


along sandy roads naturally caused some delay, and in the 
meantime Duchemin sent two envoys again, his own hrothci 
de Chertneville and de Cana pie. to the camp of Haidar Ali 
“in order to conclude the treaty of alliance which his instruc¬ 
tions urged upon him peremptorily’, the envoys tried to 
persuade Duchemin to agree to some modifications of the terms, 
hut the latter replied that his instructions left him no discretion 
to alter them. Haidar Ali on his side felt irritated at the 1 rench 
General occupying himself with negotiations, when it was 
necessary to commence operations to take advantage of the 
consternation in the English army, and among the citizens of 
Madras. He made some indirect remarks on the subject to 
M. de Chenneville, who tried to make the Prince understand 
the necessity forcing Duchemin to that conduct. 

Negotiations were started between the French envoys and 
three Brahmin agents of the Durbar. Haidar agreed to all the 
French terms which related to the distribution of territories 
vet to be conquered, but when the question of the pay of the 
French arnn came up. he flatly refused to give more than a 
lakh of rupees per month for 3,000 Europeans and wanted 
an official list of all the officers and men together with their 
salaries. This demand amounted clearly to a suspicion of th( 
good faith of the French General, whose pretensions about the 
strength of the army and the expenses required lor it were not 
believed by Haidar. He expressed open derision for the French, 
and on being told that the latter intended u> inarch against 
Cuddalore, he simply remarked that it was an easy affair and 
that if he had known that the French wanted the plact he 



mtsTfy 



would have asked his son to rake it for them on his wav to 
Porto Novo. Finally, the French envoys returned and Haidar 
sent one of his own agents, Benaji Pandit, to Duchemin with 
the apparent object of continuing the negotiations. 

In the meantime Cuddalore had surrendered to the French 
at the f«rsi summons (8th April). 1 But the place was found 
to be so unhealthy and diseases had taken such a heavy toll 
on the French troops that it was decided to encamp the army 
at Manjakuppam, four miles to the north of the town. The 
arrival of Benaji Pandit at Cuddalore did not lead to the 
conclusion of a treaty. The fundamental difference persisted 
about the amount of money to be paid for the salary of the 
troops. “The disproportion between our means and our claims 
daily increased by the reduction of our troops''. Another 
tricky question arose when Haidar demanded that Duchemin 
must agree to continue the war in India even though peace 
might be concluded in Europe between France and England. 
In his anxiety to hasten the conclusion of the treaty Duchemin 
agreed even to this astounding condition, with some mental 
reservation that he would wriggle himself out of the obliga* 
tion when the actual occasion arose. But the treaty was not 
concluded, and by his action Duchemin had merely played into 
the hands of Haidar and betrayed his incompetence at nego¬ 
tiations to the shrewd eye of the Nawab. In the meantime 
the army was reduced to great financial distress and murmurs 
of discontent increased daily. 

De Canaple then continued to give an account of the shabby 
treatment accorded by Haidar to Duchemin. From Cuddalore 
the French army moved to Vilnoor near Pondicherry and thence 
to Permacoil, to join Haidar w r ho was laying siege to that place. 
Haidar made no move to meet Duchemin, and the French army 
remained inactive and allowed Permacoil to be taken by the 
Mysore forces alone. After the fall of Permacoil on the 16th 
May. Haidar and the French marched towards Wandiwashr 
It was on the way to Wandiwash that Duchemin was able to 

1 For the capture of Cuddalore see Wilks —History of Mysoor , II, 
PP* * 33**341 love —Vestiges of Old Madras, III, p. *40 (letter from Fort 
St. George to the Company). The English garrison consisted of only 400 
sepoys and 5 European artillerymen. 

s Wilks, op. cii II, p. 154. 





meet Haidar for the first time. But far from suggesting con¬ 
certed efforts, Haidar asked Duchemin to withdraw his army 
back to its original camp near Pondicherry, as he had received 
information that Sir Eyre Coote was marching to the relief 
of Wandiwash. It was a disappointment to Duchemin, parti¬ 
cularly as it created the impression that the French fled away 
precipitately in the face of the English. I here was no alter¬ 
native, however, and the French fell back upon their original 
position near Pondicherry. Shortly after this retreat Haidar 
separated himself completely from the French. On the goth 
May he moved, without his allies, towards Arnee to forestall 
a surprise attack by Coote on his principal supply depot in 
the Carnatic. Nor did he seek the help of the French when 
after Coote's withdrawal to Madras in June he proceeded to 
lav siege to Vellore. The French were forced to remain 
inactive ail the while, in great financial distress, and with their 
commander, Duchemin, lying seriously ill. Relations with 
Haidar reached a breaking point, when the arrival of de Suffren 
in July and his interview with the Nawab improved matters 
to some extent. 

Thus in the memoir e of de Canaple we see another ver¬ 
sion of the conduct of the French army, different from the one 
usually given by historians, both English and French, who 
have condemned Duchemin rather severely for his timidity, 
his refusal to co-operate with Haidar and his failure to take 
advantage of the weakness of the English army before Wandi- 
wash, when the destruction of that army would have meant 
the end of the English power in south India. 1 De Canaple, 
being one of the envoys sent by Duchemin to negotiate with 
Haidar, may perhaps be accused of having given a rather one¬ 
sided picture with the intention of exculpating himself and his 
chief, Duchemin, of the charges of timidity and inaction, throw- 
ing the entire blame on Haidar for his refusal to accept the 
French terms and the co-operation offered by Duchemin. It 
is quite possible that de Canaple, being only human, tried to 
save the face of his countrymen by giving a somewhat coloured 
version of the relations with Haidar Ali. But, as w f e shall see 
later, even persons violently prejudiced against Duchemin and 

1 M a Meson f inal French Struggles in India, pp. 30-31. 


nil; FRKXCH IN INDIA 

failed to establish conclusively the charge of timidity 
a gainst them and. on the other hand agreed that the attitude 
ot Haidni towards the French wa- neither sincere nor friendly. 

When Hussy arrived in the Isle of France in June 1782, 
he received numerous reports about the bad conduct of Duche- 
miu and his officers. T here were two principal charges against 
hem. cupidity and inaction. About the first, Bussy wrote in 
his Journal : the cupidity shown by the principal officers, 
beginning with the Chief, must not only be displeasing to him 
(Haidar) but must also injure the interest of the army in rela 
non to a man like Haidar". 1 2 Again. 44 it will be difficult to 
make Haidar Ali forget the conduct of the General and of 
.jomc of the principal officers of our army, who by their shame 
ful cupidity have inspired in him the greatest distrust for the 
entile nation. Bussy stated that the opening of negotiations 
with (he french cost Haidar thirty thousand rupees paid to 
Duchemm, ten thousand to his brother do Chennevillc and 
two thousand to de Ganaple. 3 4 About the second charge, Bussy 
wrote to Marquis de Castries from the Isle of France, "You 
will be very much surprised to learn that the detachment 
landed under the command of Duchcmin has not fired a single 
shot and has left Haidar Ali to make his own campaigns with 
out offering him any troops. As a consequence, this Indian 
has conceived as much distrust of him as admiration for Mon. 
de Sufiren. and but for the latter and the news of my arrival 
in the isle of France Haidar Ali Khan would have long con 
eluded peace with the English."* 

IV. De Lannay sent by Hussy to negotiate with Haidar. 

Bussv was so furious at what he came to know about the 
conduct of the first expeditionary force that shortly after his 
arrival in the Isle of France lie sent de Launay as his personal 
agent to Haidar, with orders to Duchcmin to hand over the 
command to Uoffclize and return to Colombo. He sent similar 

1 Journal de Bussy, p. 

2 Ibid., p, 107. 

3 Ibid., pp. ujy 114. 

4 Malle *©!*-,Let Demiirpt Luttes dfs Frau fait dam ilndt ct tur I’OcrSati 
inditn, p, 31 (translator's note). 




miST/ty 


THE FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 

for the removal of a large number of the principal 
officers. 1 It was a drastic action prompted by a belief about 
the bad conduc t of these,persons. But when de Launay arrived 
at the camp of Haidar at the end of July and had several 
interviews with him, he sent a report to hussy on the and 
August, in which he made little mention of the bad conduct 
of the French officers, and on the other hand gave a detailed 
account of the insincere and unfriendly attitude of Haidar. 
The officers were removed according to Bussy ’s orders, but 
Duchemin, who was lying seriously ill and had already resigned 
his command to Hoffelize, remained at Cuddalore as Lhe slate 
of his health did not permit him to go to Colombo as directed. 2 3 

Be Launay arrived at Cuddalore on the 28th July and had 
his first interview with the Nawab on the 31st. Shortly before 
that de Suffren had a meeting with Haidar, which because of 
the high esteem of the Mysore ruler for the brave Admiral 
improved for the time being his relations with the French 
army. Haidar complained to de Suffren about the refusal of 
Duchemin to co-operate with him against the English, justifying 
his own action in stopping money and provisions or the army; 
but de Suffren succeeded in persuading him to forget his past 
bitterness and to agree to continue supplies for the French 
army. It is doubtful, however, how much de Suffren would 
have succeeded in overcoming Haidar’s antipathy towards the 
French army, but for the timely arrival of de Launay bringing 
news of the imminent coming of Bussy with- a large expedi¬ 
tionary force. 

Dc Launay sent a detailed report to Bussy on the 2nd 
August about his interviews with Haidar, which revealed an 
attitude on the part of the Mysore ruler not very friendly 
towards the French. It was on the 31st July that de Launay 
had his first formal interview with Haidar Ali at ten o’clock 
in the evening. He was accompanied by two high-ranking 
officers, de Cossigny and d’Espinassy, and an escort of troops 
given to him by Hoffelize, who had taken the command of the 
army some time before owing to the illness of Duchemin. After 




1 Journal dc Bussy, pp. 38-40. 

3 Ibid., p. 101. 

3 I bid., pp. 140-147. 


mtsr/ty 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


to the Nawab. De Launay left the Durbar after having been 
given rich presents worth 3,000 rupees. He had expressed his 
unwillingness to accept money which Haidar had wanted to 


present him at first. 1 his incident, a customary thing in an 

Eastern Court, is interesting, as helping ns to understand the 
real nature of the extortions alleged to have been made by 
Duchemin, de Ghenneville and de Canaple. 

On August i de Launay had another meeting with the 
Nawab in the evening. He read out to Haidar an extract 
from the instructions of the King of France to Bussy, stating 
that the Carnatic should belong to Haidar. De Launay dec 
Pared further that he had been instructed by Bussy to write 
to the different Princes of India in consultation with Haidar, 
announcing Pussy’s imminent arrival, to which Haidar replied 
that he would indicate in a few days* time the allies to whom 
de Launay should write. Haidar showed greater interest about 
the time of Hussy’s arrival, and he urged de Launay to write 
to him to hasten his departure from the Isle of France. 

De Launay felt rather disappointed at the attitude of 
Haidar. “He seemed to me to be quite tired of the war, and 
the English were always in correspondence with him.”’ De 
Launay referred to a letter written by Sir Eyre Coote some time 
before with the object of detaching Haidar from his connection 
with the French, in which Cooie painted the French national 
character in the darkest colour. This letter was not without 
some effect on Haidar, as became evident when in a moment 


of anger, on the report of one of his men having been killed 
by a French soldier at Pondicherry, he read out Coote’s letter 
to Piveron de Morlat and observed bitterly that, he could nevei 


1 For she abortive negotiations started by Sir F.yre Coote see Secret 
Select Committee Proceeding, Fort William, 26th August (lonest 

Selections from Letters , Despatches etc.. Foreign Department , Government 
of Indio, III, pp. 885-895). 


WIN /STfo 



expect any good out of the French connection, and that the 
French were “a nation—frivolous, without character, and 
never keeping promises or faith when opposed to their interests . 
To de Lauiiay Haidar spoke in appreciative terns of the char¬ 
acter of Duchemin but referred to the army under him in the 
most derisive fashion. “What can be done with at most a 
thousand Europeans that you have at Cuddalere in a position 
to inarch, and even these hardly in a condition to make tapid 

inarches?. How can troops like them be opposed to those 

of the English who are always maintained in a perfect state 
and are able to march in one day what we could scarcely do in 
three?” Haidar definitely refused to plan any concerted mili¬ 
tary operations before the arrival of Bussy and urged de Launay 
repeatedly to write to Bussv to come as promptly as possible. 

In his report to Bussy de Launay described the miserable 
plight of the French army at Cuddalore, which lay entirely 
at the mercy of Haidar. The latter could at any moment 
reduce it to starvation by refusing to supply money or by 
leaving the Carnatic for the Malabar Coast, as he was actually 
contemplating, in which case the English could capture (,ud- 
dalore with ease. In a postscript de Launay referred to Haidar’s 
agent with the French army, Benaji Pandit, who had been in 
the pay of the English for fifteen years, and who was employed 
by Haidar deliberately to keep the door open for a compro¬ 
mise with the English. De Launay told, this agent that he 
strongly resented the disparaging remarks made by Haidar about 
French troops, and asked him to communicate it to his master. 
It produced some effect on Haidar, who invited de Launay to 
the Darbar next evening to meet three Maratha Wakils just 
arrived from Poona. At the Darbar he handed over a draft, 
on the model of which dc Launay was to write to Nana Phad- 
navis, and in order to impress the Maratha Wakils he asked 
de Launay to repeat all that he had said before about the 
intentions of the King of France with regard to Indian Princes 
and about the strength of the expeditionary force under Bussy. 
The Wakils expressed great admiration for Bussy, recalling 
his past exploits, and urged dc Launay to write to him to come 
without any loss of time. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

Death of Duchemin—defence of his conduct. 

L'he letter of de Launay throws sufficient light on the 
relations between Haidar and the French army and explains 
the inactivity of the latter as against the general condemna 
tion of historians passed on Duchemin. In fact, the position 
of Duchemin was far from enviable. With barely 1,000 Euro 
pean troops fit for service, with no money and provisions, with 
the principal officers constantly quarrelling and intriguing, 
with no support or cooperation from Haidar, and finally with 
definite instructions from Souillac not to risk the small force 
in any encounter with the English before the arrival of Hussy, 
Duchemin could hardly be expected to work miracles and 
destroy the English power in south India. It was indeed for¬ 
tunate for Duchemin that he did not live long to suffer the 
distress of an intolerable situation, and soon death came to him 
as a relief. He had been lying seriously ill since June and 
breathed his last on the 12th August. 1 

There is an interesting letter from Duchemin’s secretary, 
Rohillard, to Souillac, dated 18th August.. Robillard wrote that 
on his death bed Duchemin had one regret only, that he had 
not been able to explain the difficulties of his position in detail 
to Souillac, and that was why he asked his secretary to corn 
irumicate his feelings to Souillac after his death. The first 
difficulty against which Duchemin had to contend was the 
spirit of jealousy and intrigue among his officers. The second 
difficulty was lack of money. Duchemin had been condemned 
by some for not having fortified Pondicherry in preparation 
for the arrival of Bussy. but none cared to enquire where the 
money was to come from for such an enterprise. Then again, 
he had been criticised for not having left the Coromandel Coast 
and gone to Trinkomali to secure a base there, but his critics 
overlooked the effect it would have produced on the future 
course of the war. Haidar would have concluded peace with 

1 Letter of MoiUvcrt from Cuddalore Journal de Bussy, p. 149; 
Journal de Bord du Builli de Suffren dans VInde, p. 174; Roux gives the 
date of Duchemin’s death as 13th September (JLc Baiili de Suffren dans 
Ctnde p p. 160) and Malleson repeats it ( Final French Struggles in India, 
p. 57). But the first two sources are obviously more reliable on this 
point. 





miSTQy 



THE french ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 


^English, and Bussy on his arrival would have found no 
landing base on the Coromandel Coast. Finally. Hudien 
2 reproached with timidity in keeping his army * 

Cuddalore, but what could he do in the face ol k h 

letter from Souillac, dated ,8th January ,78* V U ^ 
will be so much reduced m effective strength na 1 • 

he oossible to take the risk of any large-scale operations, and 
: ES&’-d. operations «, .HI be tonformtng .. the 

intern ion of Hi. wh. <’«*« "" "f 'eidel 

before the arrival of all the forces that u ha. Seel 

.,end. ’ Dud.emin could have justified h.s conduct by disc . 

ing -his letter to others, but he thought « 

it secret. Robillard concluded h.s letter thus. hese arc the 

things which Puchemin charged me to infonn you so that you 

£?£ your judgment on the criticisms which you must have 

heard against him .” 1 


% 


VI. Hoffelize taking command of the 1< remit army- Relations 
with Haidar (. July-Novcmber 17S2). 


ib v • ..;ti ■ «i ire ceded in command of the army by 

Duchemm was succeeneo w . . tr He 

fo.nie d’ Hoff el ire. Colonel of the Regiment of Austrasic. He 
was an abkr general, of cool and calculating temperament and 
I sober Judgment. But even he could do nothing to uuprove 
relations J widt Haidar, and the French army continuedo 
remain inactive at Cuddalore, without moneyed prov ^ ^ 
and with increasing discontent among q{ vdlore 

remembered that Haidar was engager m valiant French 

tllT ld-5 

- Cuddalore fill the 

de Launay. 1 hen on the news or o y i-s ddaT 

marched Bu^^had preceded him 

hastened back l - supplying provisions 

bv unexpectedly rap.d marches. *“» brf<)IC 

to the besieged garrison had withdrawn 
Haidar could arrive. The latter then ton.tnued the uege. 

directing operations from Arcol. 


Journal de Bussy. pp« S87-S89. 


Ml NlSTfy 



While he was thus engaged in the siege of Vellore and 
his .ton campaigning far south in Tanjore, the small French 
army at Cuddalore lay fully exposed to a surprise attack. Coote, 
desirous of taking advantage of the isolated position of the 
French, planned to make a rapid march along the coast and 
take Cuddalore by surprise before Haidar could come to its 
rescue. It was a brilliant stroke and would have surely sue 
ceeded, but for the news of the naval action off Frinkomali on 
the 3rd September and the heavy damage inflicted on the 
English fleet. Starting quietly from Madras, Coote hastened 
along the coastal route and on the 6th September encamped 
near Pondicherry, just a day’s march from Cuddalore. He 
expected the support of the fleet and waited for siege artillery 
to come up before proceeding further. But on the 11th he 
received the unexpected news that Trinkomali had been taken 
by the French and the English fleet had returned to Madras in 
a badly damaged condition. That at once compelled him to 
abandon his plan and hurry back to Madras to cover it against 
a surprise attack by Haidar’s forces. 1 There was, indeed, reason 
for grave anxiety about the safety of Madras. The fleet was 
badly damaged, the garrison inadequate in number, and the 
neighbouring countryside desolated by one of the worst famines 
recorded. If Coote’s communication with Madras could have 
been cut off, tin: fate of that city would have hung in the 
balance. Fortunately for the English, no combination was 
possible between Haidar and the [French. Hoffelizc indeed 
proposed to Haidar a combined attack on Coote, but it was 
declined, and thus one of the best opportunities was allowed 
to slip away. 

In a letter to Souillac dated 17th October 1782, Hoffelize 
wrote, ‘ I made every possible attempt, when the English had 
advanced against Cuddalore, to persuade the Nawab to take 
them by the rear, to order Tipu to join me and then to march 
in concert against the enemy. That movement would have 
compelled him to attack at a disadvantage or to lay down arms. 
But nothing could persuade the Nawab. I sent M. de Boissieux 
u him for that purpose, but. he told him repeatedly that he 
did not want to undertake any enterprise before the arrival of 

1 Wilks — History of Mysoo r, II, p. 149. 



THE FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 


<§L 


_forcemeats to us. and that we were too weal, in view of 

the troops that we had lent to the squadron. " 1 2 In the same 
letter Hoffclize also wrote about the miserable condition of the 
army and the way it was treated by Haidar. 1 he Naivab 
does not. want to give any more money. He has supplied only 
live lakhs since our landing, and salaries are in arrears for five 
months. I am afraid that in the end he will refuse us even 
provisions. He considers as rather abnormal the expenses of 
the administration and of hospitals, anti he asks whether the 
white eat more than the black. 


An account of the plight of the army for lack of funds is 
also contained in anothei letter, dated 21st October, and 
written by Mottais tie Narbonne who was in charge ol the 
finances. Mottais wrote that if funds were not forthcoming 
immediately, desertions which had already begun would increase 
rapidly. The Nawab had stopped payment altogether, but 
Mottais had urged de SufTren who had great influence over him 
to write to him for money. Even if the letter had some effett. 
Mottais did not think that Haidar would pay more than a lakh 
or two, which would be wholly insufficient, and he therefore 
implored Souillac to send money as promptly as possible to 
enable the army to subsist till the arrival of Bussy, which could 
not be expected before the beginning ol 17d■ ’ 


VII. Death of Haidar— Relations of the French army with 
Tipu {December 1782 — March ij-S j). 


Fortunately for the French, they were left undisturbed by 
the English for a few months after the frustration of then 
projected attack on Guddalore in September. I he English 
army withdrew to Madras, and Sir Eyre Coote, who was in had 
health, returned to Bengal to spend the winter there, leaving 
the command to General Stuart. Operations in the Carnatic 
remained suspended till the beginning of the next ear. In 
the meantime Haidar died on the 7'h Hecember and was 
succeeded by his eldest son, Tipu. His death was caused by a 
malignant abscess on the neck which defied all medical ticat 


1 Journal dc Bussy, pp. 289-590. 

2 Ibid., pp. 290-292. 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

went. 1 Shortly before his death he had asked 
him some French doctors, and the latter sent Rochard. the chief 
phvsician. and Noel, the chief surgeon of the army. An imme¬ 
diate operation was deemed necessary, but Haidar postponed it 
for three clays to wait for the auspicious moment fixed by his 
astrologers. This loss of time proved fatal, and the operation, 
when made, was too late to save his life.' 

The news of Haidar’s death was kept a dose secret till the 
succession of his eldest son, Tipu, was assured. The latter was 
at the time engaged in campaigning on the Malabar Coast in 
the neighbourhood of Paniani against an English force under 
Col. Macleod.* There were ambitious chiefs in Haidar’s army 
who wanted to take advantage of the situation to divide the 
territories and riches of their dead master among themselves, 
even going to the length of seeking the help ot the English. 
Such a chaotic development, which would have injured beyond 
repair the prospect of the expected French expedition under 
Bussy. was prevented by the prompt and courageous action ol 
the small French contingent in Haidar's army led by Bouthcnot 
and t oulet. and by the rapid march of Hoffelize with his troops 
to the neighbourhood of Haidar’s camp. Thus it was through 
the efforts of the French that order was maintained in the late 
Nawab’s arms, and the ambitious chiefs were held in restraint 
,ill the arrival of Tipu and his quiet succession. 4 It was a 
repetition of an old incident, when Bussy in similar circum¬ 
stances had assured the succession of Salabat Jang to the ruler- 
ship of the Deccan. 

Although Haidar had not shown himself very Fnendh 
towards the French, his sudden death was a material loss to 
them, since his successor. Tipu, was even less favourably in¬ 
clined. Nor did the latter inherit the military genius and 



<SL 

Hoffelize to send 


i Wilks History of Mysoor, U. p. 167. 
s Roux—J-** BatUi dr Suffrrn dons Unde, p. 171. 

3 Wilks. ot>. cit II. pp. 165166. 

4 Journal d Bord dn Bnilli dr Suffrrn dans Vlnde , pp. 2*1 *2* 


Roux* op cit . pp. 171-17*- , , _ 

Wilks however gives the entire credit of seeming the quiet succ s* 
sion of Tipu to two Hindu officers of Haidar, Poomea and Kishen Row, 
and minimises the part played bv the French -History of Mysoor, II, 
pp. 168*17*. 


MINISr^ 



I HI FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 2(iT 

ual acumen of his father. Piveron de Morlat, the French 
agent at the Court of Haidar, gives the following interesting 
impression about the difference between tne father and the son 
in a letter to de Suffren, dated 9th February 178*. ‘Although 
1 ipu Sultan seems desirous of following the projects of his 
father and of remaining an ally, he has neither the ability 
nor the genius, nor the military talents of th< late Nawab .. . . 
Haidar Ali Khan was the most extraordinary Prince that had 


ever appeared in \sia. He had formed his vast estates our of 
nothing by sheer force of arms. Bv his genius he was able to 
preserve them till the end, and when he died he was a terror 


to the whole of India and to the English nation.Tipu 

Sultan has suddenly inherited all these vast possessions, immense 
treasures and a large army which have made him very arrogant. 
Would to God he may know how to preserve these advantages 
so long as wc may have need of him! The late Nawab was. 
moreover, a sincere friend of the French; he had given con¬ 
vincing proofs of it till his last moments. He reposed great 
confidence in me and gave me publicly marks of his kindness 

everyday.Tipu Sultan knows well my relationship with 

the late Nawab and his good-will for me, so that he treats me 
w ith much honour and kindness; but when it comes to business, 
what a difference in genius, foresight, action and manner of 
government between him and the great man who is no more.” 1 

The death of Haidar and succession of Tipu was followed 
by a change in the course of the war in south India. 
Down to the end of 1782 it was Haidar who was always on the 
offensive. His original possessions were safe because of the 
preoccupation of the Bombay Government with the Maratha 
war, so that he was allowed to harry and devastate with 
impunity the rich province of the Carnatic and hit the English 
at their most vulnerable point. But from the end of 1782 
there came about a great change. The arrival of Bikerton with 
his squadron considerably strengthened the English fleet. The 
Maratha war was brought to an end and a definitive treaty 
concluded. The Bombay Government was thus left free to 
divert its energies to the Mysore war and to adopt the most 
effective plan of operations, namely to carry the war to the 


Roux — Le bailli dr Suffrcti dam l‘I tide, j p. 168-16<*. 




miSTffy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

IVTalabar possessions •( I ipu and thereby lorce. him out 
Carnatic to defend his own dominions. An expeditionary 
force under Matthews was landed at Rajainutidroog at the 
month of the Mirjy, and early in >7^3 it captured in quick 
succession nearly all the strongholds of the Mysore Nawab, 
Onore, Bednore Mangalore etc., encouraging all the disaffected 
elements to rise in revolt against the Nawab s rule.' 

The news of these startling reverses naturally alarmed 
Tipu and inclined him to leave die Carnatic ancl hasten to 
defend his own dominions. That, however, would have meant 
the extinction of the small French army at Cuddalore and the 
loss of the only landing base on the Coromandel Coast for the 
expeditionary force under Bussy expected to arrive shortly. It 
was therefore as much important to the French that. I ipn 
should remain on the Coromandel Coast till the arrival of 
H lISS y as it was to Tipu himself to hasten back to his own 
territories. We have seen already that when the French squa¬ 
dron lnv at Porto Novo on its return from Achin, 1 .veron tie 
Morlat came to meet de Suffren on the 15th February and asked 
him to write to Tipu to induce him to remain on the eastern 
coast till the arrival of Bussy. Tipu was to be tolcl not to feel 
extremely concerned over the temporary loss ol his western 
territories and he was to be assured full military help by the 
French to reconquer them after the arrival of Bussy s expedi¬ 
tionary force.’ De Suffren accordingly wrote a _ pressing letter 
to Tipu, but it couM hardly produce any efl in the face of 
the rapid successes of the Fnglish and the ui. rtamtv of the 
time of Bossy's arriv "* 

Shortly before he <>ok his dec; • '"ave the Coroman¬ 
del Coast. Tipu one, formed a project oi , -1 clung against 

Wandiwash and encountering the English army, under Stuart 
who had moved to that place to destroy its fortifications. But 
in spite of all the persuasions of Hoffclize to make a rapid 
match and draw the enemy, to an action, the slow movement 
of Tipu allowed Stuart sufficient time to withdraw from Wandi- 




t Wilks —Hnlory of Mysoor, II, pp. soo *09. 

2 Journal (if Nor,I r/u Hailii tic Suffren. p. 2*5. 


misTfy 



THE FRF.\Cl1 ARMY IN 1HF CARNATIC 


<SL 


;ilt«r completing his wort of destruction. 1 Commenting 
on this affair. Hoffeli/c wrote tode Suffren on February as. "I 
believed for a moment that the Na wall would take a deter¬ 
mined and vigorous resolution and that we would at last decide, 
at little Cost, the result of the campaign in this part of the 
country; hut the Nawab is absoiuteh worthless. He has not 
ibe least military conception, and all that I could do was to 
prevent his Might at the approach of the enemy. I be KngliMi 
on their side were very much embarrassed. It appeared mi from 
their destruction of Wand i wash and their withdrawal from the 
place,'’ 


In the same letter Hoffeli/c reported that shortlv after this 
incident I ipu took his decision to leave the Coromandel Coast 
lor his western possessions and on the 20th February sent hall 
the army in advance. He also pressed Hoffeli/c to lend bint 
a body of French troops, and the latter was obliged under the 
circumstances to give him (*>o men belonging to the regiment 
of the Isle of France under the command of de Cossigny. fhc 
French troops started on their march on the 23rd to join the 
advance party sent by Fipii. Hoffeiize was left with barely boo 
men, but he got an assurance from the Nawab that ho himself 
with the rest of his army would remain on the eastern roast 
till the arrival of Bussy. But Hoffeli/c felt sceptical about 
the value of the Nawab.s assurance. Tipu had decided to send 
PiYeron de Morlat to Trinkomali to hasten the arrival of 
Bttssy, but Hoffeli/c suspected that it was just a pretext to get 
Ptyeron out of u way, so as to be better, able to carry on 
negotiations wit ne English. The latter had made favourable 
proposals, whirl the Nawab had not kept concealed from 
Hoffelize.* 


<* T*" • # •' v- 

1 \\ ilks- — Hit tor 1 > Mysoor, II, p. 178. Stuar{ proved to be an un¬ 
enterprising General. He failed to take advantage of tbc political tin- 
' ertainiv in itie enemy rarnp following the Midden death of Haidar. He 
d»d not begin to move til! January (1783) and then merely undertook the 
d< mi in non of the forts of Caranjoly and Wandiwash to prevent their 
falling into the hands of Ttpu. It was a most hasty action, specially at 
a lime when it wax quite apparent that the pressure on the Malabar 
fjiavt would inevitably draw Tipu out of the Carnatic. 

’ Journal de Russy, pp. 317-318. 

Macartney, Governor of Madras, gave a peace-feeler in February 
0783 ). There was an unofficial exchange of envoys, hut the negotia 

T 


Ml WSTffy 



No sooner had Fipu sent an advance party with a body of 
French troops to his western possessions than he began to show 
his determination to follow them himself with the rest of his 
army. It became increasingly difficult for the French to per 
suacle him to remain on the Coromandel Coast till the arrival 
of Bussy. Early in March de Launay came to Trinkomali to 
report the situation to de Suffren. 1 l)e Snffren at once sent de 
Moissac to Tipu to inform him of the imminence of Bossy's 
arrival and to persuade him to change his mind, but de Moissac 
could do nothing, as Fipu had already left the Coromandel 
Coast before he reached Cuddalore. Hoffeiize reported the 
matter to de Snffren in a letter dated Hth March.* He could 
not induce Fipu to change his mind, and all that lie could 
do was to get from him 4,000 sepoys and 8,000 cavalry to to 
operate with the French expeditionary force undei Bossy. Ht 
was told by Eipu that he had given orders to his officers to 
supply provisions and transports to the French army, but 
Hoffeiize doubled his sincerity and felt that the French could 
not expect anything from him. Deserted by 1 ipn all on a 
sudden and left with a small corps of 600 men, Hoffeiize with¬ 
drew in the direction of Cuddalore from the neighbourhood 
of Wandiwash, to wait there for the arrival of Bnss\. 


tion^ proved abortive (Wilks —History of Alysoor, II, pp« 254**55)* 
Macartney** move was strongly condemned by the Supreme Government 
in Calmtta—-Sec. Sol. Com. Proc., Fort William, nth March 1783 
(Forrest —f itters. Despatches etc. Foreign Department, Government of 
Indio, ill . pp. 9 *t* 9 *| 0 > 

1 Journal de Hussy, p. 316 (Be Suffren/s letter to Bossy, 9th March) 

2 lhid, pp. S 2 5'$* 6 ’ 


Ml NISTQy 


chapter xr 




B USSY’S EXPEDITION 
I, Hussy’s views on India : Af/t moire of ty-in* 

We have carried the story of French land and naval opera 
rions in India clown to the arrival of Hussy at Trinkomali in 
March 1783. At this point it is necessary to stop and turn 
back to trace the course of events since the first decision of 
the French Government to send an expeditionary force to India. 
It will be recalled that even before ihe outbreak of war between 
England and France in 1778, the French Government had 
started giving serious attention to the various cheines of dip 
lomatie alliances and military operations in India submitted 
by official and non-official agents. The new vigour in French 
policy, in contrast with the lethargy of the later days of Louis 
XV, became marked in 1777, when the Minister of Colonies, de 
Sartine, began to examine seriously the feasibility of putting 
into execution the plan submitted by Chevalier and Made* 
and actually sent out two agents to India, Saint-Lubin and 
Montigny, to see things at first hand and report. It was about 
this time that the Minister also sought the opinion of the old 
hero of the Deccan fame, Bussy, on the practicability of the 
various schemes submitted. The lengthy reply given by Bussy 
on that occasion constitutes an important historical document 
and is highly interesting, as giving us his detached and well- 
considered views on the possibility of restoring French influence 
in India long before he was called upon to assume command of 
an expeditionary force sent for the same purpose.' It is worth¬ 
while therefore to notice this reply of Bussy in some detail 
before taking up the actual story of the despatch of an expedi¬ 
tionary force to India under his supreme command towards 
the end of 1781. 

Bussy began his observations with a scathing criticism of 

1 B.N.F.Fr, 8985 —Reflexions de Bussy str I’Etat des Affaires dans 
Unde (also published in Mariineau’s Journal de Bussy, pp. 1551* 17a). 


• G <W 



the various schemes submitted for diplomatic alliances and 
mi!it.us operations in India. Most of the mtmoire.s and pro 
jet ts relating to our establishments in Asia, which have been 
presented to the Minister, have been dictated by ignorance. 
cupidiiN or the extreme need for some employment, no matter 
at what price. Onlv the advantages of a plan or of an evpedi 
tion are shown, without any mention of the difficulties, which 
are either overlooked or purposely concealed. Without an 
adequate knowledge of the true politics of Indians, of their 
diverse interests, and of their manners and customs, these 
people assume thorn to he similar to ours, and on that illusory 
basis they construct a system absolutely unreal. M As against 
the reckless optimism and contidence of the persons who had 
submitted schemes to the Minister, Hussy struck a note of 
warning, pointing out the immense difficulties that lay in the 
wav. “We must not cherish any illusion. The reestablish 
men! of our position in India is ver\ difficult, very expensive, 
and the result doubtful, if sufficient means are not employed, 
i n present this enterprise in any other light is to deceive the 
King and the Minister.” Most of the persons who had sub 
nutted plans claimed to speak from local experience, but their 
knowledge was confined to the geography of the various parts 
of India, which was much Icsn important than the knowledge 
“of the different interests of the \siatit Princes, the intrigues 
in their Dnrbai s or councils, their secret dissensions, then 
inconstantv, their ever-changing views and jhojects. their lavish 
but empty promises, then continuous wars and momentary 
treaties, the interests which divide or unite them, and the 
possibility or impossibility of moving them to action either in 
concert or separately." Hussy then .stated that for the gitid 
auce of the Minister he was giving a true account of the politi¬ 
cal conditions in India, based on his own knowledge of the 
various matters mentioned above. 

It was true that all the Primes of India were tired of 
English control and were anxious for an opportunity to shake 
off iheir yoke, but they would not make any move at all untd 
they saw. another European Power taking the Held against the 
common enemy with equal military strength. In the meantime 
the English were gradually expanding their power in north 
India. It seemed only a matter of time when they would he 


miST/fy 





'JBIe to reduce even the Mughal Fmpcror to the position of flic: 
Nawab ol the Carnatic, and that would email the virtual 
expulsion of the French from the country. In the Deccan the 
English had concluded a very favourable treaty with Ni/am Ali 
on the basis of the cession of the Northern Sarkars to them. 
Ni/am Ali was in too uneasy a position because of lack of 
money and constant fear of Marat ha aggression to be of much 
help to the French. The only way of bringing him to the side 
oi the French was to advance him money and assure him of 
the restoration of the Carnatic, which originally formed a part 
of his Viceroyaliv 

\noihei possible ally was his brother, Ba salat Jang, who 
had in liis service a well-disciplined French corps of three to 
four hundred men. “He is soliciting help from us. but in 
spite of his offers and promises he is in such financial distress 
that even more than his brother, Nizam Ali, far from being 
able to supply us money, he is in need of financial help from 
us.’ He wanted a body of French troops and in return he 
agreed to cede the Sarkar of Condavir to the French, but Bussv 
was of opinion that the possession of Condavir, near Mnsuli- 
patam under English control and 130 leagues from the Nawab’s 
principal territory, would be inconvenient for the French, 
Hussy, however, thought it proper to maintain friendly relations 
with Basalat Jang, who would at least be useful in supplying 
provisions and pack animals. But he was against the idea of 
maintaining small contingents with numerous Princes, who 
might be involved in hostilities among themselves. Moreover, 
in ease France was engaged in large-scale military operations in 
India, not much effective assistance could be expected from 
these small contingents in the service of the Indian Princes, 
and their union with the French expeditionary force would be 
positively harmful, in spreading the contagion of indiscipline 
and desertion. The French could expect some help front the 
N a walls of Cuddapah, Savanur, Bankapur and Kurnooi. I hr 
Pat bans of those regions constituted first-class lighting mate 
rial, and with money the French Could procure a few thousand 
horsemen from among them. 

About Haidar Ali, Bussv stated that he would have been 
the principal ally of the French “for his riches anil the position 
of hi* dominions, if reliance could have been placed on this 


miSTQy 



Mohammedan, who loves money more than anybody else, and 
thinks of nothing but his own interests, to which he is prepared 
to sacrifice everything.” However, it was necessary to keep 
him friendly, since he would be positively dangerous as an 
enemy. As regards Muhammad Ali, Nawab of the Carnatic, 
who was completely under the control of the English, it was 
quite possible through secret negotiations to win him over to 
i he French side by an assurance of restoring him to full sovei• 
cignty over the Carnatic. One great difficulty for the French in 
winning over Nizam Ali, Basalat Jang, Haidar Ali and Muham¬ 
mad Ali to their side was that all of them coveted the possession 
of the Carnatic, and it would be bad faith to promise the same 
thing to all. But through skilful negotiations it was not im¬ 
possible to find out some accommodation among them, specially 
if the French assured full support to the ambitions of the Inst 
three Princes in other directions. 

The Power whose alliance would be most valuable to the 
French was the Maratha Confederacy. “The Maratha nation 
to-day dominates the whole of the Mughal Empire. I had 
predicted this predominance as early as 1 753 * a * so 
decadence of the Mughals in the south of the peninsula, as may 
be ascertained clearly front my correspondence with Dupleix. 
Since then I advised preference for an alliance with the 
Marathas to that with Muslims. Such a policy deserves all the 
more attention on our part, since one of the principal chiefs of 
the Marathas is seeking our alliance and their own interests 
seem to accord well with ours. It is all the more import an > 
to attach the Marathas to us. since if they went against us it 
would bo difficult for us to procure all the supplies necessary 
for the success of our operations." Bussy was in favour ol an 
alliance with the Marathas only for political and military 
reasons and not commercial. The Marathas being a community 
of only warriors and cultivators, there was little scope for trade 
and commerce in their dominions. The principal interests of 
the Marathas, where they came in conflict with the English, 
were to free the Raja of .Tanjore, one of their race, from the 
yoke of the English, and to levy Chouth in the Carnatic, the 
Orissa Coast and in general in all the territories tinder English 
control. By giving definite assurances on these matters, the 
French could without much difficulty attach the Marathas to 



BUSSV S EXPEDITION 295" 

tliciTside. 11 • c Marathas were divided into two sections, the 
principal group living near the Malabar Coast and the othci 
belonging to Berar and Cuttack, it was from the former that 
the French had received some overtures for an alliance, and 
Bussy advised the opening of immediate negotiations. The 
first thing to be done lo win over the Marathas was to give a 
solid assurance about the levying of Chouth in all the terri¬ 
tories to be conquered from the English. 

An alliance with the Marathas was absolutely necessary, 
since it would provide the French the most convenient point 
for starting their operations against the English. “Either in 
order to find a base of operations, Pondicherry being of no use 
for the purpose, or forced by other circumstances, it may so 
happen, it may even be more advantageous to begin our opera¬ 
tions on the Malabar Coast, by landing our forces in the neigh 
bourhood of Bombay so as to be able to be quickly joined by 

the Marathas of that region.Bombay could be 

captured from the English even before our junction with the 

Marathas. This success..would decide all the Powers 

in out favour, besides giving us an excellent base for our 

troops as well as for our fleet.From there our 

army will march with the Maratha allies towards the Coro 
mandel Coast, collecting on the way the contingents of several 
small chiefs, Muslim and Maratha, and specially of Basalat 
Jang. The whole will constitute a formidable army with which 
to invest Madras. Through a combined move our fleet will 
also arrive there at the same time, ft tnay be confidently 
expected that the investment of the town from all sides will 
assure us victory/' 

An alliance with the other group of Marathas, namely ol 
Berar and Cuttack, would also be of great use to France if she 
“accepted the offer, made by the Emperor of Delhi, of the 
occupation of Tatta. From there it would be easy (if the 
journey be at all practicable) to join our forces with those of 
the Emperor with the object of making a joint attack on 
the English (in Bengal) and putting them between our com¬ 
bined forces and those of the Marathas (of Berar and Cuttack)/* 
Bur about the feasibility of the Tatta project Bussy felt quite 
diffident. In the first place, the French would have to acquire 
the province of Tatta by force of arms, which would entail a 





MIN/STy^ 


• COi/- 



huge expenditure, since no revenue could be expected from the 
territory till the conquest was complete. In the second place, 
from Tatta about 1,000 French troops would be despanhed to 
Delhi to join the Emperor. But this number, reinforced b\ 
,000 sepovs as suggested by Made and Chevaliei, would be 
wholly inadequate in a war with the English. In the third 
place, the troops despatched to Delhi were likely to be 
employed in operations against the recalcitrant vassals ol the 
Emperor, who was more interested in consolidating his position 
round Delhi than in sending an expedition to distant Bengal. 
Bussv therefore suggested that France should ally herself with 
those Powers who would give her effective help to achieve a 
quick victory, rather than embark on an enterprise where 
success was so distant and uncertain. At the same time he 
advised that the offer of the Emperor should not be rejected 
straightway. On the other hand, the Emperor should be kept 
favourably inclined with an encouraging reply. 

yfor success in the projected expedition to India, two things 
were of fundamental importance: first, diplomatic negotiations 
must precede military operations: and second, the French 
^expeditionary force must arrive in India in sufficient strength 
^ and with adequate money and munitions so as not to be 
dependent on the assistance of any Indian ally from the begin 
ning. <s/The more we have been humiliated in thi> part of the 
world, the more indispensable it is, if we come back here with 
die intention of re*cstablishing ourselves, to be in a position 
when mu alliance would be sought by others rather than us 
begging for their assistance; to be their protector instead of 

being their protege. It is infinitely better not to make 

am attempt than to do it in a half hearted way. As regards 
the details of military operations in India, Bussy did nut like to 
fix any definite plan in advance* “lit Asia the scene is so 
quick h changing that the interests of the Powers and the state 
of aha i s vary from dav to day. l ines operations must be 
guided by the actual circumstances at the lime*’ 

4 fu$$v ended his tnemoire with a warning that whether the 
v s English met with success or failure in north America, dies 
are sure to turn their attention to India and send stronger 
forces there in order to consolidate their position and to coni 
pen sate themselves either for the loss of their American colonies 



WiN/sr^ 



BUSSV 5 EXPEDITION 


§L 


the expenses jneutral in subjugating them: and that 
)v the end for ever of all out hopes of establishing mu 


position in India.” He therefore urged upon the Minister the 
luxessitA of seizing. »lit* opportunity offered b\ the American 
war and striking agaitist^Jthc English power in India without 
any loss of time. 


II. /bevvy A appointment to com mat hi the cxpetl it lotto n 
force: Ate moire of /7<Vr. 


We have noticed the views <>l Bossy, expressed in 1777. 
regarding the possibilities of French military operations in 
India and the factors necessary for success* It cannot be defi¬ 
nitely ascertained what impression Bussy's nuhnoirc produced 
on the Minister, and whether he had been tipped from that time 
to take the command of the expeditionary force proposed to 
be sent out to India. The thing was that although the french 
Government seemed to have been seriously contemplating the 
adoption of one or other of the various plans submitted lot 
military operations in India, nothing came out in a concrete 
form, and its policy continued to be vacillating nd half hearted. 

Milieu hostilities broke out between England and France earlv 
in 1778, not only had France taken no decision about the* 
despatch of an expeditionary force, even the ordinary precau¬ 
tions about the safety of her Indian possessions had been 
neglected, with the result that within a few months all ol them 
fell into the hands of the English, and the French did not 
have a single landing base in India. I hroughout 1770*80 
France concentrated alt her attention on tin American thcatir, 
and it was not till 1781 that she took the decision which she 
should have taken three years earlier, to send a strong expedi¬ 
tionary force to India. It was only natural that Hussy should 
have been invited to assume the command ol the expeditionary 
force, as none else in France could claim the same halo ol 
military success in India. No doubt he had grown too old and 
had been living in France for twenty years in virtual retire¬ 
ment, but nevertheless his very name was expected to appeal to 
the Indian Princes, whose alliance was necessary lor the success 
of the enterprise. 

When the expedition had been decided upon and Bussy 


mtsTfy 


-v\Rt ■ Go?-. 



had been invited to assume command, lie gave expression to 
his views, in a mSmoire. to the Minister, on the Indian political 
situation and on his poor chance of .success in view of the reduc¬ 
tion made by the Minister in the numbejr of troops and the 
amount of money demanded by him 1 Yl is worthwhile analy- 
iug this document to know the views of Hussy just on the eve 
of his departure from France. As in the rnemoire of 1777, 
Bussy again severely criticised the irresponsible persons who 
had represented to the Minister the ease with which the pro¬ 
jected Indian expedition could be brought to success. “I have 
always been surprised and sometimes made furious by the absurd 
iictions that had been submitted to the Minister both as 
regards the certainty of an easy success of an expedition 
undertaken with poor means, and as regards the assistance of 
every kind that could be expected from Asiatic Powers, consider¬ 
ing the promises made by these Indians, false and light-hearted 
people and friends of hyperbole, who give definite promises 
about everything, men, money etc., without having the capacity 
or frequently even the will to keep them. I have therefore no 
hesitation in stating that the only factors which have prompted 
these fanciful projects are ignorance, cupidity or the extreme 
need of getting employment, no matter at what price.” 

Hussy next compared the relative positions of the English 
and the French in India, in order to bring out dearly (lie 
difficulties (hat lay in the way of the successful execution of 
any of the projects. “The English possess there large territorial 
revenues, sonic very strong forts in all parts of the peninsula, 
fully provided with all things necessary, a large number of 

native troops, very well disciplined. The French arc 

destitute of everything, and the Powers whose alliance wc could 
have counted upon and who arc supposed to be at war with our 
enemies may be at peace with them today.” Hussy was refer- 
ring to the Marathas and Haidar AH. He then warned that 
not much help could be expected from the Dutch. ‘‘Vexed and 
humiliated by the English in India for a long time, they yet 
seem to prefer them to us.” The task before the commander of 
an expeditionary force was very heavy and onerous; it included 

1 ‘lhe tnetnoire has been published by Martineau as Preface to ihc 
Journal dc Bussy , pp. if9. 



Ml Nlsrfy 



bussy s Extern rioN 


<8L 


sislencc of the army, the formation of alliances, ihc prr 
vention of intrigues and treacheries quite common in the 
Indian Durban, the protection of the possessions of the 
Kuropcan allies, the planned and concerted conduct of naval 
and land operations so as lo conquer from the English their 
vast possessions and to assure a peace which would put both 
tlic nations on a footing „of equality in India, “ lo present 
this enterprise as easy and capable of being executed with 
feeble means is to deceive the King, ill Nation and the 
Ministers.” 

^ Bussy then repeated what he had stated in 1777, that the 
French must arrive' in India fully equipped for carrying on 
operations independent, of the help of any Indian Prince, as it 
was then only that their alliance would be eagerly sought by 
the country Powers. “The more humiliated we have been in 
this part of the world, the more indispensable is it that we 
should come back in a state sufficiently imposing to make our 
alliance desired by the Princes of the country, in place of having 
to turn to them ourselves or begging for financial help, specially 
during the earlier stages. It is necessary that we should appear 
as their protector in place of being their proteg6, since in the 
latter case we arc sure to be treated with contempt by nations 
who base their conduct, their confidence and their esteem 
entirely on fears or hopes.” As an instance ol what little 
financial assistance could be expected from Indian Primes, 
Bussy pointed out that Najaf Khan had written to Chevalier 
for an advance of 50 lakhs of rupees to commence operations 
against the English. The only two Powers who could afford to 
give financial help to the French were the Marathas and Haidar 
Ali. But “the former only took and never gave mom ..’ and 
if by accident Haidar agreed to supply money, the French must 
place themselves under his control and conduct their operations 
to suit his own interests. 

Bussy next gave his opinion about the object that France 
should sc?, before herself in undertaking the Indian enterprise. 
It was only to destroy the English power in India, and not to 
build up a territorial empire for herself. He expressed him* 
self in favour of returning the possessions to be conquered 
from the Engli h to their original rulers. “By such a policy, 
worthy of the generosity, greatness and sense of justice of the 


WNfS7ft. 


Tilt FRENCH IN INDIA 

wc shall win as iuntil as possible the gratitude and aftach- 
incnt ol tlu* Asiatics and we shall gain allies who mu\ i>c* able 
10 llc, P ,,s to achieve success under die present circumstances.” 
Hm while advocating the general principle ol retiirtiing all 
conquests to their original owners. Bussy urged ihe importance 
of t eta in ling some territorial possessions round each French 
settlement in India in ordet to procure sulhcicut revenue lor 
its administrative and military expenses. 

l*or success in the enterprise' Bussy lead demanded eight to 
lime th ousand troops and ten million livres net to meet the ex¬ 
penses alter his arrival in India, The number ol troops and the 
amount of money constituted the barest minimum. The 
English had the same number of European troops in India, 
besides 70,000 well-trained sepoy . an element which the French 
lacked entirely. Bussy also wanted at least equality in naval 
sUength with the English. 1 he Minister, however, decided 
on considerable reductions both in the number of troops and 
in the amount ol money. In his uttnionc Bussy gave his replies 
to the proposals oi the Minister, stating definitely that in view 
ol the reductions made, he could not guarantee any success, but 
could only assure the best possible utilisation of the wholly 
inadequate means given to him lor the Indian enterprise. The 
Minister proposed to give six to seven thousand men, naval 
superiority in Indian waters, and absolute authority to Bnssy 
beyond the Cape ol Good Mope. Half the sum demanded for 
the expenses of the operations in India would be paid in cash 
and 1 he other hall in bills drawn on the Dutch Company at 
Batavia. Bussv replied that after the reductions proposed by 
the Minister, it would no longer be possible to attack am ol 
(Ik three principal settlements of the English. Calcutta. Bombay 
and Madias. Can anybody with six to seven thousand men. 
without allies and without any base delude himself with the 
hope oi being able to capture places furnished with all kinds 
oi provisions and protected bv three thousand Europeans' and 
a large number of sepoys? Bussy did not like to fix any point 
ot attack or lay down any definite plan of operations in advance, 
and concluded his nuf moire bv stating that “all that can be 
promised is to make the best use possible of the means that 
the Government will be in a position to furnish. ’ 

A comparison between the tone of the two hicwoucs of 



MHtSTfty 



missy s F\rF.mnoN 


Sl 


7 ancl 17S1 is iignificant Although in both of them we 
notice a keen realisation of the immense difficulties that lav 
in the way of success, the tone in the second is dearly more 
diffident than in the first. Specially when the Minister made 
considerable reductions in the number of troops and in the 
amount of money demanded, it virtually took a wax all Hussy's 
enthusiasm for the project; and when he finally set out for 
India, he was actuated not so much b\ an expectation of win¬ 
ning glory as by a sense of duty and a spirit of lovallx to the 
king. Me undertook to lead the expedition with little enthu 
sias.ru and little confidence of success. 


Ilf. Royal Instructions to Bussy. 


Before we take up the actual story of Hussy's expedition 
from the time of his departure for India, it is nccessarv u> notice 
one more document of importance, nameh the Mnnoire of the 
King dated nth November 17X1. intended to serve as instruc¬ 
tions to Hussy, who was given the official designation of 
Lieutenant-General and Commander-in-Chief of dl the* land 
and naval forces beyond the Cape of Good Hope, 1 The 
mnnoire began with a statement of the reasons lor the despatch 
of the expeditionary force. "The formidable power which the 
English have created in India, the degree of strength which 
the riches they have acquired in that pan of the world have 
given them in Europe, and (mails the necessity of putting 
limits to the exclusive empire which that nation has specialh 
usurped in the Eastern waters, have determined the King to 
attack this power in the very centre of the empire it has 
created." 

The memoire next stated the desire of the King to con¬ 
centrate all authority in the hands of Hussy and to leave him 
absolute discretion in the conduct of operations. Division of 
power had led to evil consequences in the past, and in order 
to avoid them in future the King had decided "to place under 
the orders of sieur Marquis de Hussy all his possessions, his 
troops and his squadrons beyond the Gape of Good Hope. 
His Majesty leaves him full discretion in the matter of opera 


1 i*. A. ms. 330; .tiso B.N.F.Fi. (N.A.), 1)433 (p. 64). 



tions and of the arrangements to lie made; he will be free to 
employ the land and naval forces at his will and to direct them 
iri a manner which he may consider to be the most suitable for 
the interest and the glory of the armies of His Majesty. The 
knowledge which Marquis de Bussy has of the country and the 
state in which he may find India on his arrival will determine 
his operations; no fixed line of operations is laid down for him.” 

The object of the expedition was stated clearly in the 
imhnoire , as only liberating the Indian Princes from the 
yoke of the English and not making any territorial conquest. 
“Sieur Marquis de Bussy must have been informed that the' 
intention of the King is not to keep the conquests which his 
forces may make in India. He should make known this 
generous intention in advance, or at the time of disembarkation, 
and should declare to the Princes of the country that His 
Majesty will restore to the original owners tlie conquests which 
may be made from his enemies, and that his only object is to 
weaken the power of the English in India and to establish 
and preserve an equilibrium which will assure to these Princes 
the peaceful possession of their states. It is to he hoped that 
this demarche will induce the various riders to help the execu¬ 
tion of His Majesty’s views by creating diversions or by some 
other methods ” The memoire next referred to the amount of 
money and the number of troops given to Bussy for the expedi¬ 
tion. A sum of five million livres was paid in cash and an 
equal amount in bills drawn on the Dutch East India Company. 
Bussy w r as given 4,000 troops from France, to be reinforced by 
another 4,000 from the Isle of France, making a total of 8,000 
men. This number was considered adequate, since although 
the English had a much larger number of troops in India, the 
total number that they could concentrate at one particular 
place was not likely to exceed 4,000^ As against the sepoy 
force of the English, the French could expect assistance in 
men from the Marathas and Haidar Ali. 

IV. Departure f rom Paris'to arrival in ihe Isle of France . 

Let us now trace the course of events from the time of 
Bussy’s departure from France in November 1781 till his arrival 
ip India in March 1783. Fortunately for us, the task has 



bussy's expedition 

leen rendered quite easy by the existence of two most authentic 
sources, namely (he Journal de Bussy y published by Mart mean 
in 1932, and the voluminous correspondence of Bussy preserved 
in the Pondicherry Archives and forming one of the most 
important and complete collections of documents there. 1 The 
Journal is a detailed and precise diary of events from day to 
day, beginning from 13th November 1781 and ending on 31st 
March 1783. It was written in a style clear and direct, most 
characteristic of its author, who described the diary in the 
following terms while sending an extract from it to Marquis 
de Castries: “It is the depot of my actions, about which I must 
render account to the King, to his Minister and to the State. 
It is equally the depot of my thoughts, about which I do not 
have to render account in the same way, hut ir is a satisfaction 
for me to confide them to you.” 2 

Bussy left Paris on the 13th November 1781 and travelling 
via Bayonne and Madrid arrived at Cadiz, where he embarked 
on the Sami Michel ((>4) and started for India on the 4th January 
1782, accompanied hv the Illtistre (74) and a cutter, the Lizard 
(18). These ships were to have been joined at the island of 
Teneriffe in the Canaries by a second squadron under 
de Spulanges, escorting a large number of transport vessels, 
which had started from Brest on the tofh December. But the 
English fleet had kept a close watch on Brest, and on the 12th 
the French squadron was dispersed and forced back to port, 
13 or 14 of the transport ships being captured. 3 Unaware 
of this disaster, Bussy waited at Teneriffe for a few days, 11th 
to 16th January, and then started for the Cape of Good Hope, 
where he arrived on the 10th April. He remained there for 
nearly three weeks to make all necessary arrangements for the 
proper defence of the colony against any English attack and 
also to procure provisions. It will be remembered that France 
had already sent a body of troops under the command of Comte 
de Conway for the defence of the Cape. At the request of the 
Dutch Governor, Baron de Plettenberg, Bussy left 1,667 troops 


1 I*. A. mss. 3C9 to 398 (Bussy s letters before his arrival in India). 

2 Ibid, ms. 397 Bussy’s letter to Castries, 181I1 December 1781?. 

3 Soulanges once more started in AptiI 1782 but was again forced 
Iwk to Brest, 


lAINlSr^ 



there on the understanding that they would be sent to the 
Isle of France as soon as the immediate threat to th< colony 
was over. 1 


Ii was at the ( ape that Bussy came to know of the dispersal 
of the comoy which had started from Brest on the loth Decem¬ 
ber. ! wo of the ships belonging to this convoy, the Marquis 
dr Castries and the Xrptunc Royal, arrived at the Cape about 
the same time, carrying troops and munitions, which were 
landed, together with two detachments of the regiment of 
Modoc on board the Saint Michel and the Ulustre , foi the 
defence of the Dutch colony. In order to meet a deficiency in 
the mini her of the crew, the French took (5 Dutch sailors on 
condition of sending them hack from the Isle of France. 2 
On the 281I1 Bussy started from the Cape with his two ships, 
two transport vessels, and two Dutch vessels, the Indian and 
th Hnlavia, which also accompanied him to the Isle of France. 
Before his departure he wrote to the Dutch authorities at 
Batavia and in Ceylon, asking them for five million livres 
according to the Franco-Dutch arrangement made in Paris. He 
dso left detailed instruction* to the French agent at the Cape, 
Percheron, to make all necessary arrangements for the prompt 
departure for the Isle of France of the naval division under 
Peiuier which had started from Brest in February and was 
expected to arrive at t he Cape shortly/* 1 

V. ] rural n the Isle of France Despatch of a personal 
^presentalive to Haidar and of reinforcements to 
de Stiff ren . 

Bussy arrived in the Isle of France on the 31st May. He 
had learnt, while at the Cape, of the despatch of the first 
expeditionary force to India under Duchemin. His original 
intention was to stav in the Isle of France onlv for a short 
while and to proceed to the actual theatre of operations without 
•u \ unnecessary delay. Flic news he received on his arrival in 

1 1 \ nis. 471 (Bnssy's letter to Castries, 17111 April 1782), ms, $73, 
(let 1* r to IMetwnhei!*, 18th April). 

* Driti. iik, (Bussy‘s truer to I'lettcnberg, 24th April, 1782). 

Journal dr Hussy, pp. 23*^5. 


miSTffy 



the Isle of France about India convinced him of the immediate 
necessity of his presence there. But unfortunately for him, 
his plan was totally upset by two unforeseen factors; first, his 
own serious* illness which at one time seemed to turn fatal; 
and second, the long delay in the arrival of troops transported 
by the convoy under Peinier and then the outbreak of disease 
among the troops, which sent more than half the number to 
hospital immediately on arrival. That was why, in spite of 
the urgency of the Indian situation and much against his will, 
Bussy was compelled to prolong his stay in the Isle of Frame 
till December. 

On his arrival in the Isle of France Bussy was informed 
by Sou iliac about the development of events in India since 
the despatch of the first expeditionary force,—the two naval 
combats engaged by de Suffren, the losses he had sustained and 
the immediate need in which he stood of reinforcements of 
men, money and munitions, the inactivity of the army under 
Duchemin, the greed of the officers and their mutual jealousies 
and intrigues, and finally the cold relations between Haidar 
Ali and the French expeditionary force. Souillac was in the 
midst of making preparations for sending reinforcements to 
de Suffren when Bussy arrived. While continuing that work, 
Bussy felt it necessary to take some immediate step to improve 
the political situation in India by announcing to the country 
Powers his imminent arrival with a formidable army, and 
specially by Hying to undo the bad impression created in the 
mind of Haidar by the conduct of the commander and other 
officers of the first expeditionary force. For that purpose he 
derided to send de Launay, the Gommissaire of the army, to 
India as his personal representative. De Launay’s instructions 
were to proceed to Galle in Ceylon to meet de Suffren, who 
was expected to he there, and from Ceylon to cross over to 
the mainland and go to the Court of Haidar Ali, where he 
was to reside till the arrival of Bussy. De Launay was also to 
open a correspondence with Montigny at Poona and with all 
the other French agents in the different courts with a view 
to put some fresh hope and courage in the minds of the Indian 
Princes. Bussy also sent orders through de Launay for a whole 
sale re-organisation of the French army at Cuddalore, recalling 
a number of officers, including Duchemin, whose bad conduct 

u 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


was supposed to have alienated Haidar Ali. 1 2 De I.aunay started 
from the Isle of France on the 19th June by the cutter, LeznnL 
and wi 1 vc noticed already his arrival in India, his interview 
with Haidar Ali, and the reports he sent to Bussy from 
Cuddalore. 

While despatching de Launay mainly for diplomatic work, 
IHissy also felt it necessary to send some immediate reinforce* 
meats to de Suffrcn, who had sent frantic appeals for help to 
Sou iliac from Ceylon. He sent a squadron under d’Aymar, con¬ 
sisting of two ships of the line, the Sctint-Michel and the 
Illustre, two frigates, the Consvlante and the Fortune, and nine 
transport vessels carrying 700 troops, munitions and provisions. 
The squadron started from the Isle of Fiance on the 25th June, 
end its junction with de Suffren’s fleet has been noticed 
already. 3 

VI. Bussy's departure for India unavoidably held up. 

In spite of ill-health which began during his short stay 
at the Cape of Good Hope, the deplorable state of the French 
expeditionary force under Duchemin and the adverse effect it 
might produce on the country Powers had led Bussy to think 
seriously of proceeding to India in person with d’Aymar s 
squadron; and it was not till the last moment that he finally 
gave up the idea. The principal factor that induced him not 
to proceed to India at once was the delay in the arrival of 
Peinieis convoy. As he wrote in his Journal, “It is certain that 
if T had started from the Isle of France for India with only the 
two battleships that I had brought with me from Europe, Haidar 
Ali Khan, the Marathas and all the other Powers of Asia would 
have thought that there was nothing more to be expected from 
the French than the five or six hundred men that I would have 
been able to take with me, in spite of all the assurances that 1 
could give them that I was expecting considerable reinforce¬ 
ments ... . They would have believed on the contrary that 

1 Instructions to dc Launay in Journal dc Bussy, pp. 38-41. 

2 Journal de Bussy, p. 53; see also Uussy’s letter to Castries for a 
detailed report since his departure from the Cape o{ Good Hope, V. A. 

ms. 380. 


mtsTfy 


^ ' G0 W\ 

HUSSY’S EXPEDITION 

the six or seven hundred men with whom I would have arrived 
constituted the utmost efforts that we could make in Europe.” 
Bussy thought it prudent therefore merely “to announce 
promptly to the Prim es of Asia niv arrival in the Isle of France, 
where i was waiting for considerable reinforcements. By that 
means 1 would he able to preserve all the advantages that i 
expect to draw from the desire which they have always 
expressed for my return and from their hopes of being effectively 
helped.” 

Souillac also fully agreed with this view, and in a note 
to Bussy he wrote, “The essential point is to inspire confidence 
among the Princes of India; 1 have been announcing to them 
since three years hack the arrival of large forces from Europe. 
It was at the instance of Haidar Ali Khan, who was beginning 
to doubt the sincerity of my promises, that I sent hint the major 
part of the forces that f had in the Isle of France, representing 
it as merely the advance party (of the principal expedi¬ 
tionary force). This despatch has produced the: good effect 
of putting an end to the waverings of the Prince, who was 
beginning to be moved by the solicitations of the English. The 
question now is to preserve and to increase his confidence as 
well as that of the other Princes. That will come necessarily 
from the announcement made by Bussy himself that he has 
arrived in the Isle, from where he is preparing to start imme¬ 
diately with formidable resources.” Souillac warned that his 
arrival in India with inferior means would “lose all the credit 
attached to the name of M. de Bussy.' 1 he second factor 
which prevented Bussy from starting for India immediately 
was a violent attack of scum, w hich persisted for the next 
few months and at one time seemed almost to turn fatal. 1 
Bussy has been blamed unduly by some historians for having 
wasted valuable time in the Isle of France when his presence 
in India was urgently required, but the reasons stated above 
give sufficient excuse in his defence. 

On the 7th July Bussy came to learn of the arrival of 
Peinicr’s convoy at the Cape of Good Hope on the jqth May. 
From there Peinier had sent a ship, the Naiade , in advance to 

1 Journal clc Hussy, pp. 49-52 (Views of Bubsy and Souillac .about pobt- 
poning B ussy’s departure for India). 




Nil UlSTftr 


THF FRENCH IV JNDrA 

the Isle of France to announce his intention of leaving the 
( * a P e about the beginning of July. The captain of the Naiade 
informed Bussy about the widespread outbreak of disease among 
•he soldiers and sailors, which compelled Pejnier to land 1,300 
sick persons at the Cape. It was a great disappointment for 
Hussv, who was waiting only for the arrival of Peinier’s convoy. 
A few days later he also learnt that the second convoy, which 
was to start from Brest in March, was expected at the Cape 
shortly, but since he had decided to leave the Isle of France 
immediately on the arrival of Peinier's convoy and had already 
sent instructions to de Suffren to meet him at Achin, he 
despatched a corvette, the Helene, to the Cape to conduct the 
second convoy straight to Achin. 1 On the 29th July there 
arrived about 1,500 uoops, of whom more than a thousand had 
to be sent straight to hospital. 2 * Peinier with the rest of the 
convoy arrived on the 15th September. The condition of the 
later arrivals was equally bad, and altogether about 1,800 men 
had to be kept in hospital. The disease among the troops 
uas mainly scurvy which broke our in an epidemic form and 
took a hesivy toll. It continued in an intense form till Novem¬ 
ber and completely upset all the plans of Bussy, who himself 
fell so seriously ill as to cause great anxiety about his life 4 
To add to his difficulty,, the Governor of the Cape refused to 
send back the French troops temporarily lent by Bussy for the 
defence of the colony. 5 

Thus in spite of die arrival of Peinier’s convoy. Bussy 
was compelled by the unfortunate turn of affairs to remain in 
virtual inactivity till the end of November, as it was obviously 
out of the question to lead an expedition to India with sick 
‘Old dying troops. However, the four months from August to 
November were not totally wasted. There was much to he 

1 Journal de Bussy , pp, 56-57. The second convoy under de Soulanges 
st01 ted from Brest; in April But was intercepted by Barrington and forced 
b.»*k to port. \o further attempt was made to send reinforcements to 
Bossy. 

* Ibid, p. 59. 

• P. A. ms. 390-— Bussy to Cnmvay, 25th September, 17Ki*. A much 
higher ntiniljer of ihe sick, 2.700, is given in the Journal de Buss y tinder 
date September 29 (p. 132). 

4 Journal dr Butty t f»6. 

IV A. ms. 3H2 — Bussy'* letter to Castries 9th July. 1762. 






hussy's expedition 



§L 


nc to reorganise the commissariat, to settle the question of 
pay and clothings ol: the officers and men, to procure provisions, 
and to look to other matters connected with fitting out an 
expeditionary force. In spite of his ill-health Bussv showed 
uncommon activity in tackling these various problems, and the 
pages of his Journal offer the best testimony to the sympathetic 
care and meticulous attention he paid to the minutest details. 
What is frequently overlooked behind the glory or the tragedy 
of a military expedition is the importance of this silent and 
patient work of preparation, which in reality should redound 
to the credit of a commander to the same extent as a brilliant 
victory in the field. Thus, although it is out of place here 
to go into the details of the administrative decisions and 
measures taken by Bussy, nobody who wants to form a correct 
appreciation of the qualities of Bussy as a general can overlook 
tlie pages of his Journal dealing with the little known work of 
preparation between August and November. 

VII. News from India. 


During these months of forced stay in the Isle of France 
Bussy was continuously [receiving reports from India, from 
various sources, which caused him more and more anxiety, 
specially in view of his inability for the moment to do anything 
to improve the situation. About the middle of September he 
received letters from dc Suffren, Duchemin and de Launay. 1 
In his letter, dated Guddalore 30th July, de Suffren, while 
expressing delight at Bussy’s arrival in the isle of France, 
showed great concern at the uncertainty of the arrival of 
Peinicr's convoy, which necessarily imposed an unexpected delay 
in Bussy's coming to India. In the meantinie the unitary sit¬ 
uation in south India was rapicTly deteriorating for the French, 
and by the time that Bussy might arrive, de Suffren feared that 
it might not be possible for them to carry on operations on the 
Coromandel Coast. He had with great difficulty persuaded 
Haidar Alt to remain on the Coromandel Coast so long only 
on the assurance of the speedy arrival of Bussy with his expedi¬ 
tionary force, but now that Bussy’s coming was unavoidably 


1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 97-102. 


THT FRENCH IN INDIA 

it would be difficult to prevent Haidar from leaving 
the Carnatic and moving off to the Malabar Coast. In the 
absence of Haidar it would be impossible for the French to 
maintain themselves on the Coromandel Coast; since the 
Carnatic had been so thoroughly devastated that they could not 
expect to procure any provisions and transport cattle. In that 
case Bussn would have to land either in the region to the 
north of Madras which had not suffered any devastation, or 
on the Malabar Coast, where Haidar’s assistance would be 
available. Do Suffren then gave an account of his interview 
with Haidar and expressed his intention of wintering his fleet 
at Achin, where he asked Bussv to join him. 

Bussv naturally felt alarmed about the fate of the French 
expeditionary force in India, now reduced to Boo men only 
from the original number of nearly 3,000, if Haidar actually 
left the Carnatic, It Was obvious that this small force with 
artillery, munitions and other stores would fall into the hands 
of tin English, and it was an extremely difficult task to transport 
them safely to Ceylon, specially in view of the fact that the 
junction of Bikcrton with Hughes would give the English a 
decided naval superiority. All that Hussy could do for the 
moment was to send three ships from Peinier’s fleet (which had 
arrived on the 15th), the Pendant , the Argonaute and the Naiade, 
to reinforce de Suffren. 1 instructing him to allow a part of the 
French troops to accompany Haidar Ali if the latter decided to 
leave the Coromandel Coast, and the rest of the force with the 
heavy artillery*, munitions etc. was to be transported to Ceylon. 
The Dutch island was then to serve as the base of operations 
for the French. 2 

On the 19th October-Bussy received further letters from 
India. The letter from dc Launay, dated Cuddalore 2nd 
August, contained a detailed account of his negotiations with 
Haidar The various reports he received convinced Bussv all 
the more of the urgent necessity of his arrival in India to 
avert a further deterioration of the situation. On the 25th 
October Bussy came to know from de Suffren’s letter to Souillac 

1 journal dc Hussy t p. 105. 

2 Ibid, p. 106. 

! Ibid. pp. 140*147 (ihe letter has been noticed already). 




misT*), 



BUSSY S EXPEDITION 


<SL 


capture of Trinkomali and the fourth combat with the 
English fleet on the 3rd September. 1 The capture of ITinko- 
rnnli was no doubt extremely happy news, but de Suffrcn 
was in great need of further reinforcements, particularly in view 
of the imminence of Biker ton’s junction with Hughes. On the 
5th November there reached another letter from de Suffrcn to 
Sou iliac, informing him of his extremely critical position and 
of his imminent departure for Achin. where he expected to he 
joined by Bussy. 2 3 Early in December while Bussy was in the 
midst of preparations for departure from the Isle of France 
there arrived several letters from India, all written about the 
middle of October, from de Launay, Hoffelize, Mottais de 
Narbonne and a private Frenchman, describing the pitiable 
state of the French army at Cuddalore, without money, without 
provisions, and shabbily treated by Haidar Ali.‘ 

On the 7th November Bussy received a packet of letters 
from the Minister, Marquis de Castries, written between Decem¬ 
ber 1781 and June 1782. One of these, dated *6th February, 
communicated to him the substance of a plan of operations in 
India proposed by Chevalier to the Minister. Jt was the old 
plan of Chevalier, namely an attack on Bengal by French forces 
from the south and by the Imperial array under Najaf Khan 
from the north. Bengal was the vital centre of English power 
and prosperity, and once Bengal had fallen, Madras and Bombay 
could not resist very long. So Chevalier suggested that Busss 
should lead his expeditionary force straight to the mouth of 
the Ganges for an attack on Bengal. He took good care to 
make some provision for himself in the plan. In order to 
make a concerted attack on Bengal with the help of Najaf Khan, 
it was necessary to send a diplomatic agent to Delhi to conclude 
a treaty of alliance with the Emperor, and Chevalier considered 
himself as the most qualified person for such a mission in view 
of his title of Mughal nobility and his long experience in India. 
He was prepared to undertake the mission provided he was 
given a high official status to impress the Indian Princes. In 
sending the proposal of Chevalier to Bussy, the Minister 


1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 178-187. 

2 Ibid, p. 225. 

3 Ibid, pp. 289-294. 


misr/fy. 



THE FRENCH JN INDIA 


<SL 


plained dial lie did it only for the consideration ol Buss) 
and that he had not the 'lightest intention to impose any 
particular plan of operations on him. 

About the plan of Chevalier, Bussy wrote in his Journal 
that from the time of his departure from France he had given 
serious consideration to it, but it appeared to him as extremely 
difficult of execution. On his arrival in the Isle of France, 
he had written to Montigny to negotiate with the Imperial 
Coin: and had also charged do Launay to write to Najaf Khan. 
But there were insurmountable difficulties in the way of the 
execution of the plan. It was impossible lor the large ships 
ol the French squadron to move up the Ganges, nor did the 
French have country boats to transport their artillery front the 
mouth of the river. Secondly, the plan required a decided 
n.ual superiority for the French and mastery of the Coast of 
Oiissa for an easy transport of troops. Regarding the value 
of Chevalier s title of Mughal nobility, Bussy regarded it as 
entirely chimcrcial, and he was definitely of opinion that with¬ 
out an assistance of money and troops it was impossible lo 
induce Najaf Khan to co-operate with the French. 1 


Vfll. Departure from the Isle of France. 


Fho epidemic of scurvy which had upset the plans of Bussy 
and had prolonged his stay in the Isle of France began to 
subside by the beginning of November, and from the middle 
of the month Bussy started making preparations for his 
departure. The disease had taken a heavy toll, and Bussy had 
at his disposal only 11,275 troops, including those who were still 
l)ing in hospital and not likely to be released for some time. 
In order to make up this deficiency he decided to take some men 
from the regiment of the Isle of France, whose place would 
be taken by the troops to be left behind in hospital. Thus 
die total number that Bussy could take with him remained 
'■*75 About a month was taken up by necessary preparations, 
and on the nth December Bussy gave his final instructions to 
Peinier for departure on the tSth. The destination laid down 


1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 228-231. 
- Ibid, pp. 237*238. 


&USSY*S EXPEDITION 

was Achin where de Suffren was expected to be wintering his 
ships, but in case Peimcr did not find dc Suffren\s squadron 
there he was to proceed to Trinkornaii. 1 Before finally embark 
ing on the Pendant on the 18th, Bussy left detailed instructions 
fur Souillac about sending the later convoys of troops that: 
might arrive in the Isle of France. 2 Although short of troops 
himself, Bussy did not like to withdraw the regiment of Pondi¬ 
cherry from the Cape of Good Hope, where it. was needed not 
so much for the defence of the colony as lot maintaining 
French influence at that strategic point, the Dutch authorities 
being rather lukewarm in their co-operation with the French. 

Bussy left the Isle of France without much hope or con 
fidence. He appeared quite diffident about the future and 
wrote in his journal : “At. last i am embarking today at five 
in the afternoon, a convalescent, and yet much weak, from a 
cruel illness lasting for more than five months, which on several 
occasions appeared to carry me to the grave. It is certain that 
placed in my situation most other persons would not have 
proceeded further. But the confidence with which the King 
has honoured ine, the favours which His Majesty has granted 
me, the noble dealings of the Ministers, and finally the 
importance which has been attached to the expedition entrusted 
to me have determined me to sacrifice the little health that I 
still retain and to start for India in spite of the paucity of my 

present resources. In fact nearly all the two thousand 

and two hundred men 1 am taking with me have suffered from 
a pestilential malady which has completely wasted their vitality. 
Most of them arc still convalescents; the voyage that I have 

to make is long.; the malady may develop again.; 

and when I shall arrive at my destination 1 shall find there a 
thousand men at the most, because in forming a guess from 
the various reports received.the troops under the com¬ 

mand of d’Hoffelize. without including those distributed among 
the ships of the squadron, may at best come up to this number. 
It should be noticed that these forces are far below the number 
stipulated in my instructions, which fixed the number of troops 
that I was to have at io,5(X); this being reduced by ship 

1 Journal dc Bussy, pp. 295-296. 

2 Ibid, pp. 297-299. 







WiWsr^ 


THl FRENCH IN INDIA 



<§L 


recks 


s and by the necessity of garrisoning ihe Cape would 
h ive remained at 8,000 to 9,000. . . . My situation presents a 
prospect sufficient to discourage all others except me, but my 
zeal has not been destroyed by the major obstacles 1 had to 
surmount since the moment of njy departure from France, and 
I can see quite clearly, without, being frightened, all the other 

obstacles which remain for me to face.; the principal 

( ilc is to re-establish discipline among the troops, who are in 
India, on my arrival there and to bring them out of the shameful 
langour in which Messieurs Duchemin and d'Hoffelize have 

allowed them to remain.. /’ l Hussy also expressed his 

opinion about the inhabitants of the Isle of France and their 
“spirit of cupidity and rapine" and laid down certain broad 
principles about re-organising the administrative structure there. 

On the same day (18th December) Bussy also wrote two 
letter* to Marquis de Castries, sending him an extract from 
his Journal and giving him a detailed account of the course of 
events during his stay in the Isle of France, the news he had 
received from India and the prospect facing him there with 
3.000 troops in all and inadequate financial resources. 2 * 

Bussy finally left the Isle of France on the 18th, atid after 
a week s stay at the Isle of Bourbon, from the 19th to the 
26th/ started for Achin, the rendez t oils fixed for joining 
de Suffren’s squadron. The destination was reached about the 
end of February 1783, but Bussy was surprised at not finding 
de Suffren’s squadron there, nor could he get anv information 
about where it had gone to. On the 2nd March he called for 
the opinion of the naval officers, and all of them advised him 
to proceed immediately to Trinkomali. 4 Bussy accepted the 
advice and on the 10th March the French ships reached Trinko¬ 
mali, where they made the happy discovery of de Sulfren’s 
squadron. Bussy was given an enthusiastic reception by 
de Suffven, who came to meet him on board his ship, the 
Pendant* De Launay also, who had come to Trinkomali some 
time earlier in expectation of Ins arrival, met him and gave 


1 Journal dt' Busty* pp. 299-303. 

2 P. A. mss. 397 398. 

4 Journal dr Busty, pp. 3<>3'3ot». 

4 Ibid, pp. 310 314. 





litin a detailed account of the military situation on the 
Coromandel Coast. 


nussv's EXPEDITION 



IX. A nival in India, 


In view of the urgency of the situation in India Bussy 
thought it necessary to hurry the preparation for his departure 
and to proceed at once to the Coromandel Coast. It was not 
an easy affair because of the deplorable state of de Su[Iren's 
squadron. Many of the ships required thorough repairs, and 
the deficiency in the crew personnel amounted to 1,800 men. 
De Suffren himself declared that it was impossible to take out 
his fleet before October. But the situation brooked no delay, 
and it was decided to convoy Bussy’s expeditionary force by 
five ships of the line, which necessitated taking out all the men 
from the other seven ships. 1 Bussy’s original plan, before his 
.arrival at Trinkomali. was to land his troops between Karikal 
and Negapatam and to lay siege to the latter place. Negapatam 
would serve as a mpfe secure base than Cuddalore, and its 
possession would give the French communication with I anjore 
and Madura from where provisions could be procured. But 
Bussy had to change the plan when he learnt that the English, 
perhaps apprehensive of his imminent arrival on the Coromandel 
Coast, had destroyed the fortifications of that place as well as 
those of Wandiwash, Caranjoli and Vellore. 2 He was thus 
compelled to lead his expeditionary force to the only base which 
the French possessed in India, namely Cuddalore. 

Immediately after his arrival at 1 rinkomali Bussy received 
the proposal of the Marat ha Government for a treaty of alli¬ 
ance, sent by Montigny through Warnet and Chauvigny. 3 
Although he did not fully approve of the terms proposed, he 
appreciated the diplomatic work done by Montigny to keep the 
Marathas and Nizam Ali friendly towards the French. In view 
of the alarming report brought by de Launay that 1 ipu, tired 

J Journal de Bussy , pp. 322*323' 

2 Ibid, pp. 319*320. 

Mi wilt l>e remembered that the boat hv which they were travelling, 
the lizard, was captured by the English at Tranquebar in violation of 
Danish neutrality. Chauvigny was taken prisoner, but Warnet could 
luckily escape with all the* important papers. 


MIN IST/fy 


THE FRENCH IN INWA 




of waiting for Bussy, was about to start to? the Malabar Coast, 
do Sufiren sent do Mois.sac immediately on B ussy's arrival at 
Trinkomali to announce the news to the Mysore ruler, bussv 
also sent two senior officers for the same purpose, Comte de la 


Marck and Marquis de la Rochethulon, with letters assuring 
Tipu of the same support from France as had been given to 
his father. 1 The two missions were, however, entirely fruitless, 
as Tipu had left the Coromandel Coast even before the arrival 
of de Moissac. 3 De la Marck and de la Rochethulon sent 
their letters to Tipu by messengers and waited at Cuddalore 
for Bussy. 

Bussy finally left Trinkomali on the 13th March with seven 
>lups of the line and nine fast transport vessels/ 1 As he started 
on the last lap of his journey to India, the prospect lying 
before him appeared absolutely bleak, and he wrote in his 
journal: “As regards our present situation 011 the Coromandel 
Coast, it is such that I would not have undertaken the task of 
the re-establishment of our nation after peace with such a small 
number of troops as had been given to me for waging war.” 
The French had no ally to count upon. Tipu Sultan was 
extremely lukewarm and undependable, and another potential 
ally, B isalat Jang, was dead, rumoured to have been poisoned 
by his brother, Nizam Ali. The Dutch were unfriendly, and 
in spite o< the best efforts of dc Launay the Dutch authorities 
at Batavia and in Ceylon refused to pay the five million livres 
stipulated in Paris, on the ground that they did not have an) 
money and, secondly, that they had already furnished immense 
supplies to de Sutfren’s squadron. The Dutch refusal to pay 
money was a. great blow to Bussy, who was left with only five 
million livres, not expected to carry him through for more than 
four or five months. Apart from the normal expenses of the 
army after his arrival in India, he had to meet heavy arrears 
of pay due to the troops under Hoffclizc. Bussy had thus very 
good reason to regret bitterly that the Minister had not accepted 


1 Journal dc Bussy, p. 331. 

3 ibid, pp. 325 326 (letter of Hoffclizc to de Suff mi, 8th March 1783). 
a Ibid, p. 319. 

* Ibid, p. 323. 



his advice to provide him with ten million livres in cash, as he 
had proposed in his mtmoire} 


On the 1 Oth the French ships reached Porto Novo, which 
was selected as a more convenient place for landing troops Mian 
Ctiddalore. The smaller vessels, however, carrying provisions 
and munitions were sent to the latter place." ft was at Porto 
Novo that Hussy learnt, from a letter of Hofleli/e, that Tipu 
had already left for the Malabar Coast. He also learnt that 
Hughes was to start from Bombay with fifteen ships about the 
middle of February, ft was thus necessary for the French to 
complete their landing of troops, munitions and provisions as 
quickly as possible, and allow de Suffren to return at once with 
his ships to Trinkomali which lay exposed to an English attack. 
So the disembarkation of troops went on all through the night 
ol the ifith, and on the next day they marched to their camp at 
Manjakuppam near Ctiddalore. 4 By the 22nd the landing of 
munitions and provisions at Ctiddalore had also been completed, 
and immediately after de Suff ren returned with his ships to 
Trinkomali. He, however, assured Hussy that he would come 
out with his squadron to meet the English fleet if the latter 
attempted an attack on Cuddalore, which was a rather insecure 
military base.’ 

About his feelings on arrival in India, Hussy wrote in his 
Journal , “I am without allies, without provisions, without means 
of transport, and in a country devastated beyond imagination. 

I have only five millions to procure all these things as also to 
meet the other expenses necessary for an army; only the pay of 
the troops, apart from other normal expenses, will amount to 
nearly a million a month in spite of the reforms that 1 want 
to carry out.”® The letter of Falk, the Dutch Governor of 
Ceylon, showed clearly that no help was 10 be expected from 
that quarter. 7 The Danes of Tranquebar appeared definitely 
more favourable to the English, and they often violated the 

1 Journal de Buss y, pp. 324-385. 

2 Ibid, p. 325. 

3 Ibid, p. 327. 

4 Ibid, pp. 329 330. 

* Ibid, pp. 341-342. 

6 Ibid, p. 329. 

7 Ibid , p. 328. 


miST/fy 



code of conduct laid down for neutrals; 1 while the letters of 
Uoffeli/e convinced Hussy of the bad faith of l ipu and of 
the general he had left behind to assist the French, Sayyid 
Sahib, who refused to do anything to facilitate the landing of 
French troops and munitions. 2 

Bussy had at last arrived in India with his long-advertised 
expeditionary force, but what a bleak prospect was it that faced 
him,- with, inadequate troops and money, without any allies, 
without provisions and without even a secure base of operations! 


1 Journal dc Bmsy. p. 337. 

a Ibid, pp. 334*335 (letter dated 18th March 1783). 


imSTfiy 


chapter xn 




BUSSY’S RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 
I. Busty's views on alliance with some of the Indian Powers. 

The first task of Bussy on arrival in India was to get into 
contact with the country Powers whose alliance was necessary 
lor the success of the military operations against the English. 
It was all the more necessary, since Bussy had at his disposal 
wholly inadequate resources, only 3,000 European troops and 
five million 1 ivies which could carry him through for four or 
five months at the most. He found himself without any provi¬ 
sions, without any means of transport, and without any secure 
base even, Cuddalore being a fully exposed place hardly suitable 
for defence. It was obviously impossible foi the French to 
launch any large-scale, independent operations against the 
English possessions, unless the energies of the English were 
diverted by simultaneous attacks from other quarters. From 
the outset, therefore, they were dependent on the support and 
co-operation of some of the Indian Powers. It was a strange 
irony that Bussy should have arrived in India in such a Mate 
as to compel him to solicit the help of the country Powers, 
when he had stressed so strongly in his memo ires of 1777 and 
1781 the need of being independent of such assistance, at least 
during the early stage of the operations. As he argued then, 
a few initial successes won by the French with their own efforts 
would induce the country Powers to seek their alliance, in¬ 
stead of the French having to beg for their support. 

The four principal Powers whose co-operation formed the 
basis of all the numerous projects submitted to the French 
Government since 171)3, with varying emphasis on one or 
other, were the Mughal Emperor, the Marathas, Nizam \li 
and Haidar AH. But, as we have seen already, in spite of all 
the intrigues and reports of the French agents at the various 
Darbars for more than a decade, no definite treaty of alliance 
had been concluded with any one of these Powers by the time 
the French Government despatched an expeditionary force 


MINIS rtf ^ 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


er Bussy at the end of 1781. The result was that when 
Hussy actually arrived in India in March 1783 to execute the 
ambitious project of overthrowing English domination, there 
was not a single country Power on whose co operation he could 
count. Bussy had to start practically from the beginning official 
negotiations with the country Powers, and a shrewd person 
like him must have realised that it was poor diplomacy to make 
overtures for an alliance and military co-operation after 
hostilities had already started. He could not indeed have 
expected much out of these negotiations, and in fact the letters 
which he wrote to the Indian Princes did not show any keen¬ 


ness of desire on his part to hasten negotiations for an alliance 
with any of them. His whole policy, as revealed by his letters 
and secret instructions to French agents at the different courts, 
was merely to hide time. 

One great source of embarrassment for Bussy in dealing 
with the Indian Princes was the adverse reaction created in 


the minds of most of them by the French having already com 
initted themselves in support of Haidar and his son Tipu, who 
were hated by every other Power as usurpers, ambitious to 
expand their dominions at the expense of their neighbours. 
As Bussy wrote in his Journal, “What will Nizam Alt, the son 
of Basalat Jang and the other Princes whom I am seeking to 
win over and who are all interested in the destruction of this 
Nawab (Tipu), think of the French detachment being associated 
with his army? Will dt not confirm their impression, as it 
must, that our intention is always to support the son of Haidar 
Ali Khan and that consequently they can put but little reliance 
on what I am telling them in my negotiations?” 1 It is quite 
true that French military support to Tipu proved highly 
embarrassing to Bussy in his dealings with the other Powers, 
bui it deserves to be noted that during his stay in the Isle of 
France he had authorised the support of a French detachment 
to Haidar if the latter left for the Malabar Coast. The thing 
was that however much it might alienate the other Powers, the 
necessity of the military situation compelled the French to seek 
the help of the Nawab of Mysore and to give him support in 
return. Their only base in India, Guddalore, lay within his 


1 Journal de Bussy, p. 


lrnsr/t). 



^riMiction and they were absolutely dependent on him for the 
supply of provisions and means of transport. That was why. 
of all the Indian Princes it: was to Haidar that Bussy thought 
it necessary to announce first his arrival in the Isle of France, 
and it was to him that he sent a personal envoy, do Launay. 
It was to Tipu first that he announced his arrival at TrinkomaU 
and sent two senior officers to convey his message. Even when 
he learnt that Tipu had suddenly left tor the Malabar Coast, 
virtually abandoning the French to shift for themselves, it was 
to him first that he announced his arrival in India. 

Referring to relations with Tipu, Bussy wrote in his Journal 
under date 21st March: “It (his letter to Tipu of the same 
date) shows how much I am still anxious to manage the Nawab 
although his departure from the coast has the appearance of 
desertion, judging from the little consideration he paid to the 
storage of provisions for us and to the supply of means of 
landing and other necessaries required by an army on march 

.I have begun the task of opening negotiations with 

the Marathas, the Subadar of the Deccan and other Princes, 
but always keeping Tipu in good humour, because it is impor¬ 
tant under the circumstances.” Bussy, however, was strongly 
opposed to any alliance with Haidar Ali or l ipu Sultan. 
“These two brigands or tyrants did never deserve, either by 
birth or by their conduct, the slightest consideration from His 
Majesty. Both of them are looked upon and treated by every¬ 
body in India as belonging to these two categories only. All 
the Princes of Asia and even the lowest of the outcastes view 
them with horror. In fact it was only by monstrous extortions 
that the father could achieve power, and it is by continuing 
the same methods that he and his son could maintain themselves 
in power till the present. This alliance (French connection 
with Haidar and Tipu) is one of the principal causes which 
have kept all the Princes of Asia at a distance from the French 
nation, reducing 11s for the moment to a dependence on those 
resources alone which Tipu Sultan would like to supply us. 
Since my arrival here I have come to realise more and more 
the little hope that may be entertained about this precarious 
Power, and everything confirms me that the only alliance which 
was suitable alike to the dignity of the King as to the interests 
of the nation was that with Nizam Ali, Subadar of the Deccan 


V 



MIN tST/fy 



I HF, FRENCH IN INDIA 


at. Prince desired nothing better than an alliance with us, 
but he complained that France had neglected him too much. I 
am trying to win him over again, without being able to say yet 
what will be the result of mv negotiations.” l 


II Correspondence between Hussy and Tipu. 


Let us now notice the correspondence that passed between 
Bossy and Tipu till the news of the conclusion of peace. 
B ussy’s first letter to Tipu was from Trinkomali, dated nth 
March. Tipu was still believed to be in the Carnatic. Bussy 
informed him of his arrival in Ceylon and wrote that he was 
sending two high-ranking officers, de la Marck and de la 
Rochethulon, to convey to him his compliments and to concert 
joint measures against the English. 2 We have seen already 
how the two envoys were disappointed on their arrival at 
Cuddalore. Tipu had already left for the Malabai Coast, and 
Pussy's letter was sent to him by messenger. Bussy sent a 
second letter to Tipu on the 21st, from Cuddalore. 3 He wrote 
that on his arrival at Trinkomali he had sent two principal 
officers of his army to convey to Tipu his condolence on the 
death of his father and to “renew to him all the assurances that 
de Launay had been charged to give to the late Nawab.” fie 
expressed deep regret at Tipu's absence from the Coromandel 
Coast “at a time when it was most necessary for us to combine”, 
and he implored Tipu to return to the Carnatic at the earliest 
possible moment. Bussy informed Tipu that he had arrived at 
Cuddalore with 4,000 troops and ihat he was shortly expecting 
a reinforcement of the same number. A Danish ship, lately 
arrived at Tranquebar, reported having seen this convoy at 
the Cape of Good Hope. Perhaps as a reminder of Tipu’s 
obligation to the French at the time of his succession, Bussy 
expressed satisfaction at the services rendered by Hoffelize in 
maintaining order in tihe Mysore army after the death of 
Haidar. Finally, Bussy requested that pending his return to 


1 Journal dr Bussy, pp. 339-340. 

2 P. A. ms. 487* 

J Ibid, ms. 49j; «dso Journal de Bussy t pp. 338*339. 



WHlSTffy 



BUSSYS RKLATIOXS WITH INDIAN POSNERS 


Sl 


the Carnatic. i ipu should give strict orders to his officers to 
supply provisions and means of transport to the French, 

In a letter bearing the same date (March sn) and presum¬ 
ably a reply to the earlier letter from Bussy, Fipu expressed 
satisfaction at. the arrival of Bussy with his expeditionary force, 
but stated that if he had arrived earlier their combined forces 
could have defeated the English and captured Madras. He 
then explained how the invasion of his territory by the English 
and their capture of Bednore and Mangalore had compelled him 
to leave the Coromandel Coast, but he had taken care to leave 
35,000 troops under the command of his brother Mir Moidin 
Ali Khan for the assistance of the French. He informed Bussy 
that in ten or twelve days’ time he would move against Bednore 
which he expected to capture, and that lie hoped to go to the 
Coromandel Coast within a month and a half and unite with 
the French expeditionary force. They would then be able to 
undertake concerted operations against the English. In the 
meantime he asked Bussy to send de Stiffren’s squadron to his 
assistance at Mangalore. On the margin of this letter Bussy 
wrote the following comment, “these thirty-five thousand men 
are really twelve or fourteen thousand bad cavalry and bad 
infantry, and even of these twelve or fourteen thousand men, 
three thousand left for Tanjorc about seven or eight days 
back.” 1 Evidently, Bussy could not rely on the good faith of his 
supposed ally. 

On the »6th Bussy replied to Tipu’s letter, explaining the 
reasons which had delayed his arrival in India. He had come 
with 4*000 troops, 5 ships of the line and 36 transport vessels, 
and in two months’ time he expected a further reinforcement 
of 4,000 troops. Bussy wrote that from Tipu’s letter he quite 
appreciated the compelling necessity which had made him 
leave for the Malabar Coast, and that he had communicated 
Tipu’s desire to de Suffren to go to Mangalore with his 
squadron. But he feared that the season was far too advanced 
to allow de Suffren to undertake a voyage to the Malabar Coast. 
He, however, assured Fipu that it was the intention of the 
King of France to give him all possible military assistance, 
without any thought of keeping to hiniself any of the con- 


1 1\ A. ms. 495. 


MINIS 



(jnests to be made in India. If Bussy “had found on arrival 
means of transport for my artillery, I would have at once 
marched against the English and laid siege to Trichinopolv, 
which I would have handed over to Mir Moidin Ali Khan, as 
being subject to the province of the Carnatic and consequently 
to him. the Nawab, whom l recognise in advance as the lord 
ol the Carnatic," Bussy continued that “in order to execute 
this project favourable to his (Tipu’s) interests it is necessary 
that he on his side should send me a large number of transport 
cattle and about too camels, on cash payment if necessary, to 
drag my artillery and mortars and to carry bombs, bullets 
and other munitions, and that he should also give orders 
to Mir Moidin Ali Khan to furnish me with all supplies of 
this kind that he may be able to procure." While asking him 
to return to the Coromandel Coast at the earliest possible 
moment, Bussy urged that pending his return he should semi 
him at once all the supplies he needed, since any delay would 
be detrimental to their joint interests. He reminded Tipu 
that he had landed at Cuddalore, and not at some point to the 
north of Madras, only to be able to give him military assist 
ante, and he referred once again to the support of a French 
contingent having been given to him by Hoffelize. 1 

Bussy also wrote to Piveron de Morlat, who was entrusted 
with handing over the letter to Tipu referred to above. He 
gave Piveron de Morlat a frank account of the condition of 
the expeditionary force, and stated that it would become 
positively hopeless if Piveron failed to persuade Tipu to send 
the supplies needed so badly. 3 In his Journal under date 26th 
March Bussy commented on the faithlessness of Tipu and of 
his agent, Mir Moidin Ali Khan. Tipu had informed him of 
having left thirty-five thousand troops for the assistance of the 
French, but in fact they numbered only twelve to fourteen 
thousand, and of the worst sort. Tipu had also written to him 
to ask Moidin Ali Khan for all the supplies he needed, but 
the latter had neither the means nor the will to procure them. 
"Look at these Asiatics! If they are to be believed, they have 
given the irtOst positive orders and they have provided every 

1 I*. A. ms. 496; also Journal dt- Hussy, pp. $49-350. 

- Journal, dr Hussy * p 330. 


BUSSV S RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 



g in abundance, but the object of all these emphatic and 
fine promises is only to deceive those who arc simple-minded 
enough u believe in them.” 1 

Bussy became even more convinced of the duplicity of 
f ipu and of the officer he had left behind to assist the French, 
Mo id in Ali Khan, commonly known as Sayyid Sahib, when four 
days later he received the news that the latter had suddenly 
decided, on a rather flimsy pretext, to separate himself from 
the French army under Hoffelize and to march off south with 
the entire body of Mysore troops. The news was communica¬ 
ted in a letter from Krishna Rao, Tipu’s agent at the French 
camp, to Rajappa Ayyar, the interpreter of Hoffelize. 51 The 
letter stated that Sayyid Sahib had asked Hoffelize to send a 
high-ranking officer to his camp to receive an important com¬ 
munication. De Villeneuve, commanding the regiment of 
Austrasie, was sent accordingly. Sayyid Sahib told him that 
an English detachment under Colonel Lang had started from 
Trichinopoly with ist battalions of sepoys, 1,000 European 
troops, and some forces supplied by the Poligars with a view 
to attack the fort of Karoor. The commander of the fort had 
ask 'd for immediate relief, which had decided Sayyid Sahib 
to march off at once with the entire army of the Nawab under 
his command. Sayyid Sahib also proposed that Hoffelize should 
accompany him with the French contingent. Bussy com 
mented on the margin of the letter, “This news is the const 
queuee of the secret instructions which Tipu has given to 
Sayyid Sahib to remain with him (HofFclize) only for a short 
while and then under some plausible pretext to cross the Ghats 
himself as well, because it is certain that Colonel Lang does 
not have more than 500 men under him, including three and 
a half quarters of the garrisons of Tanjore and Trichinopoly, 
and that he has taken with him only 4 battalions of bad sepoys 
and a few thousand Poiigar troops. The whole thing shows 
the bad faith of Tipu as also of the chiefs whom he has left 
with M. d Hoffelize.” The letter of Krishna Rao continued 
that de Villeneuve replied that he could not inarch south with 


1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 350-351. 

J P. A. ms. 197 (letter dated 28th March), 
on the 30th (Journal de Bussy , pp. 358*361). 


Bussy received the news 



Sayyid Sahib without ttussy’s order, and that it the Mysore 
contingent suddenly departed, it would leave the door open to 
the English to advance against Cuddalore. De Villeneuvc asked 
Sayyid Sahib to write to Bussy for instructions, but although 
Bussy was only 12 leagues away and a reply could have been 
received in a few hours, Sayyid Sahib replied that he had 
no time to lose and must start at once to save his master’s 
territory, 

Tipu, as we have seen, was most anxious to get the assist¬ 
ance of the French naval squadron in his operations against 
the English on the Malabar Coast. On the 30th March he 
wrote to de Suffren, recalling to him the assurance he had 
given to go to Mangalore with his squadron and asking him 
to come quickly, so that after the destruction of the English 
power on the Malabar Coast he could pass on to the Coro¬ 
mandel Coast and join with Bussy. 1 To Bussy’s letter of the 
26th March Tipu replied on the 2nd April, assuring him that 
he had given positive orders to his officers to supply everything 
needed by the French and asking him again to send de Suffren’s 
squadron to the Malabar Coast to assist him in operations 
against the English. 2 3 On the 30th April Bussy wrote to 1 ipu, 
confirming the conversation he had with Muhammad Usman, 
who had been sent to him by Tipu, and announcing the return 
of Piveron de Morlat to Tipu’s camp. Bussy added that if 
Tipu could not come to the Coromandel Coast, he should send 
eight to ten thousand cavalry and a large number ol transport 
cattle. He regretted that it was only the lack of means of 
transport for his artillery which had prevented him from fore 
stalling the English, who were advancing towards Cuddalore 
with land and naval forces/ i'his letter was sent through 
Piveron de Morlat, and a second letter in identical terms was 
sent through de Lallee who was also returning to Tipu’s camp. 4 * 

Tipu replied to Bussy on the 31st May. assuring him that 
he had sent orders to his officers to supply transport cattle, 
horses, and camels to the French. 6 Bussy wrote to 1 ipu again 

1 i\ A. ms. 503. 

2 Ibid, ms. 510. 

3 Ibid, ms. 517. 

4 Ibid, ms. 518. 

6 Ibid, ms. 527. 


MIN/Sr^ 



HUSSY s RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 


<SL 


ic 18th June, urging him to come to the Coromandel Coast 
without delay and to send in advance a large body of cavalry. 
He also informed Tipu that he had received through Muham¬ 
mad Usman a letter in Marathi which Tipu had desired him 
to address to the Poona Durbar and that he had done so with 
out making an) changes in it. 1 In the next letter, dated 2nd 
July, Buss) informed Tipu that he had received news of the 
conclusion of peace between France and England and that he 
was sending an agent to give hint all the details that ought to be 
communicated to an ally. Bussy advised Tipu to make peace 
with the English likewise, and offered his good offices for that 
purpose. 2 

HE Examination of french Relations with Tipu. 

From this review of correspondence between Bussy and 
Tipu and from the observations made by Bussy in his Journal , 
one thing becomes clear, -that there was little spirit of friend¬ 
liness and cooperation on either side, a factor that was to a 
large extent responsible for the barren result of the French 
military operations. The thing was that, on his side Bussy 
never liked the idea of a close alliance with Haidar and Tipu. 
In his memoires of 1777 and 1781 as also in his Journal he used 
very strong language against them, calling them usurpers, 
brigands and tyrants, hated by all the Powers of India. The 
reports which he received from de Eaunay about Haidar’s 
treatment to the French army under Duchemin (and later 
under Hoffelize) and the sudden departure of Tipu from the 
Coromandel Coast, leaving the French absolutely unprovided, 
only confirmed the view's he had held previously that little 
reliance could be placed on the co-operation of the Nawab of 
Mysore. In spite of all that, he had to placate Tipu out of 
necessity for the supply of provisions and means of transport, 
which Tipu atone could provide and without whi(h the posi 
tion of the French army would be desperate. 

On their side, both Haidar and Tipu had strong distrust 
of the French. It had its origin from the cowardly desertion 


1 P. A. m 530-531. 
* Ibid , ms. 53a. 


MWlST/ty 



^ cl’Orves in 1781, at a moment when the co-operation of the 
French would have placed the English power in south India 
completely at the mercy of Haidar. Haidar could never forget 
that incident, which coloured all his later relations with the 
French. For more than a year after that he was left entirely 
to his own resources without any help from the French* and 
when finally a small French contingent was landed at Gudda- 
Joic under Duthemin, he naturally expressed unwillingness to 
furnish all the money and provisions required by it before it 
had given proof of its ability and enterprise in the field. It 
was quite legitimate for him to expect that since the French 
had come to fight a common enemy, as much for their as for 
his advantage, they must bear a part of the expenses of the 
operations without trying to shift the entire burden on their 
ally. Then again, Haidar waited for a long time for the much 
advertised coming of Bussy with a formidable expeditionary 
force, and the frustration of his hope naturally soured his rela¬ 
tions with the French. After Haidar’s death, 1 ipu also waited 
lor some time for the arrival of Bussy and did not ultimately 
leave the Coromandel Coast till he had received alarming 
reports of sweeping English successes in his territories on the 
Malabar Coast. The defence of his own possessions was more 
important to him than conquests in the Carnatic, and therefore 
his departure for the Malabar Coast was quite justifiable, nay 
imperative, in his own interest, however much the French 
might regard it as a base desertion unworthy of an ally. 

1 hus it appears that down to Tipu’s departure from the 
Coromandel Coast, both >ides had reasonable defence for their 
conduct. After the separation of the Mysore and French forces, 
the interests of the two parties became entirely different. For 
the time being Tipu had no concern with what happened in 
the Carnatic. Engaged in the west against the invaders of his 
territory , his supreme need was the assistance of the French 
lleet on the Malabar Coast, for which he solicited both Bussy 
<md de Surtreu. On the other hand, the French had little 
immediate concern with what happened on the Malabar Coast. 
It was impossible for them to send their fleet there, leaving 
Irinkomali and Cuddalore completely exposed to an attack by 
the combined fleets of Hughes and Bikerton, which had been 
reported to have started from Bombay in February and were 


MINIS Tf)y 


bossy's RELATIONS WISH INDIAN POWERS 


m 



expected on the eastern coast any moment. The French 
regarded the ( oromandel Coast as the principal theatre 
operations, and their supreme needs were,—a body of cavalry, 
provisions and transport for their artillery, for which Bussv 
wrote repeatedly to 1 ipu, without success. On this point it 
seems, after examining both sides of the picture, that 1 ipu 
would have acted more wisely and his interests would have 
been served better if he had offered some co-operation to the 
French, as he could have done without detriment to his opera¬ 
tions in the west. Large-scale operations by the French on the 
Coromandel Coast would have diverted the attention of the 
English to some extent and would have, perhaps, partly 
relieved the pressure in the west. As it was, the French army 
remained completely immobilised and could do nothing to 
relieve the pressure on f ipu, 

IV. Relations with the Maralhas. 

Next let us notice Hussy’s relations with the Marathas In 
his two previous memoir$s, discussed already, Hussy had laid 
emphasis on an alliance with the Marathas, who constituted 
the only Power capable of giving effective help to the French 
in their operations against the English. It may be recalled 
that a Franco-Marath a alliance was a pet project of all the 
persons who submitted schemes to the French Government, and 
in fact the Maratha Confederacy occupied such a dominating 
central position in India that without its active co-operation it 
was impossible for the French to expect success in any parr of 
the country,—in Sind or in Bengal, in the north or in the 
south. On their side, the Marathas, since the outbreak of 
hostilities with the English, had also evinced an interest in 
forming an alliance with France, the most ardent advocate of 
that policy in the Poona Government being Nana Phadnavis. 
It is difficult to ascertain which side took the initiative in 
opening negotiations. We know that the first time such nego¬ 
tiations were started was during the visit of Saint-Lubin in 
b ut if the evidence of one of the associates of Saiut- 
Lubin is to be believed, it appears that Saint-Lubin had been 
sent from France in response to an overture from Poona. But 
then we do not know whether the Poona Government took the 



move .entirely on its own, or on the basis of some earlier over* 
hires made by Chevalier from ( handernagoie. 


After Saint“Lubin the contact between the French and the 
•Marathas was renewed by Montigny in 1779 during his short 
visit to Poona on his way back to France from Delhi. The 
next step taken was in 1781, when the Poona Government 
decided to send an agent named Zaitiul Abedin Khan to 
Souillac, Governor of the Isle of France, with some definite 
terms of alliance. The terms, not much different from those 
proposed through Montigny in 178*, required the French to 
land two thousand troops at Chaul. to capture Bombay and 
to co-operate with the Marathas in their operations against the 
English, in exchange for which they would get Bombay in full 
sovereignly and trading rights in the Maratha territories, 
besides al the expenses of the military expedition. 1 Zainui 
Abedin Khan however proceeded only up to Goa, where in 
October he met Montigny, just arrived from France on his way 
to Poona, having been sent by the French Government to 
negotiate a treaty of alliance with the Marathas. 

At Poona Montigny carried on prolonged talks, which 
resulted in the drawing up of articles for a treaty of alliance, 2 
The terms were similar to those proposed in 1781, except that 
the French were to land a force of 10,000 troops and were to 
get Surat in addition to Bombay. Bui they were to pay their 
own expenses, and neither party was to conclude peace without 
previous consultation with the other. This draft treaty was to 
have been submitted to Duchemin, the commander of the first 
French expeditionary force landed at Ciulclalore in March 
1782, but by the time it was completed news reached Montigm 
about the arrival of Bussy in the Isle of France. The Maratha 
proposals were therefore sent to Bussy through VVarnet and 
Ghauvigny. bur the boat b\ which they were travelling, the 
/ fzard, was captured by the English at Tranquebar. Chau 
viguy was taken prisoner, but Warnet could escape with all the 
papers, which were later sent to Trinkomali, where Bussy 
received them on His arrival in Match 1783. 

Bussy also received at the same time a pressing letter from 


1 Mari in eau —Bussy ct Unde Frattgaise, pp, 349-351. 

J tor details sec chapter VII, the section on Montigny, 


uMisr^y 



^tontigpy, urging him to accept the terms of the Manuhas at 
once to prevent their concluding peace with the English. But 
while appreciating the zeal and sincerity of the French agent 
at Poona. Bussy could not persuade himself to accept the draft 
treaty without, modifications to several of its articles, parti¬ 
cularly to that one which required the French to continue the 
war in India even after the conclusion of peace in Europe. 
What made him even less inclined to accept the treaty at once 
A’as the strange policy of the Poona Government. As Bussy 
came to know, the Marat has were carrying on negotiations for 
peace with the English at the same time that the proposals for 
an alliance with France were being drawn up. Bussy, how¬ 
ever, did not like to reject the terms altogether, but preferred 
to play for time. From Trtnkomali he sent the proposals to 
Paris for the consideration of the Minister . 1 Reaching Cudda- 
lore, he got fuller reports from Warner about the state of affairs 
at the Poona Court, and in order to gain time he at once wrote 
to Nana Phadnavis and Hari Pant Phadke, informing them of 
his arrival in India with the first batch of the expeditionary 
force, the second batch being expected shortly, and assuring 
them that he would proceed to the Malabar Coast to co-operate 
with the Maratha forces against the English as soon as he had 
brought the operations on the Coromandel Coast, already 
started, to a successful conclusion. At the same time he sent 
detailed instructions to Momigm about the com!act he was 
to follow at Poona, the main point being to play for time to 
prevent the conclusion of a definitive treaty of peace between 
the Marathas and the English. He also gave Montigny a 
frank picture of the state of his army and of the reasons which 
prevented him from going to the Malabar Coast, He. how¬ 
ever, expressed a definite hope of being able to go there after 
the arrival of reinforcements which he was expecting shortly. 

It was quite easy for Bussy to lay down a line of conduct 
for Montigny, but: for the latter to follow it was an impossible 
task. As Montigny complained, how could he keep the Mara 
thas friendly towards the French and how could he prevent 
their concluding peace with the English, when they saw the 
french little inclined to accept their proposal of alliance, and 


1 journal de Bussy, p. 32 j. 



far from cooperating with them on the Malabar Coast giving 
full military support to their mortal enemy, 1 ipu Sultan? 
1 he Iran tic: letters of Montigny from Poona bring out clearly 
the embarrassing situation in which he was placed. One 
conclusion i v inescapable about Bussy’s diplomacy in relation 
to the Marathas. However much he might have stressed the 
importance of a Marat ha alliance in the past, on his arrival 
in India he showed little anxiety to draw the Marathas closer 
to the French. It is true that his hands were somewhat tied 
by the fact that the first French expeditionary force had been 
landed on the Coromandel Coast to cooperate with Haidar, 
which compelled him to select that region as his theatre of 
operations in India, but even then he could have done a little 
more to conciliate the Marathas than merely writing two letters 
and holding out vague promises to be redeemed at some distant 
and uncertain date. 

V. Hussy a Correspondence wit h the Maralha Darbar. 

Let us next notice Bussy’s letters to Nana Phadnavis and 
Hari Pant Phadke as well as his instructions to Montigny. In 
his letter dated March 28, 1783, Bussy informed Nana that he 
lud received Nana’s reply to the letter he had sent in August 
1782 through de Launay, in which Bussy had stated that the 
policy of the Ling of France in sending an expeditionary force 
to India was to drive the English out of the country and to 
restore all conquests to their original owners. Bussy then 
continued that he was extremely happy at the friendly disposi¬ 
tion of the Court of Poona and that he soon hoped to renew 
his M old connection with the family of Baji Rao.” Referring 
to the terms of alliance proposed through Montigny, Bussy 
wrote that he had duly received them from Warnet and that 
he w'as only waiting for the arrival of further reinforcements 
ol men and munitions before finalising “the arrangements 
which are to Cement a durable and indissoluble treaty of 
friendship between the French and the Marathas, which will 
be sent to him immediately through M. de Montigny”, in whom 
Nana should place the fullest confidence. Fie then expressed 
regret at not having been able to land on the Malabar Coast 


HUSSY'S RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 

his operations there and at being obliged to wait till 
the next favourable season before proceeding there. In the 
meantime he urged Nana to complete his military preparations 
and to keep the enemy engaged wherever he could . 1 2 In the 
letter to Hari Pant Phadke, written on the same date. Hussy 
thanked him for his friendly sentiments for the French and 
wrote that he was giving serious consideration to the terms ot 
alliance proposed by the Peshwa. He urged Phadke to use all 
his influence with the Peshtva to induce him to continut 
hostile operations against the English. He assured Phadke 
that he would proceed to the Malabar (.oast in the next f.tvour- 
able season and asked him to have full confidence in Montigny. 

To Montigny Bussy sent certain instructions for his guid¬ 
ance, recommending a continuation of the old line ol conduct, 
to keep the Poona Government friendly till it was possible for 
Bussy to give his final decision with regard to the terms of 
alliance. Montigny was to emphasise the value to the Marathas 
of an alliance with France, and to stress the contrast between 
the aggressive actions of the English and the moderate and 
friendly policy of the French, backed by a superiority in naval 
and military strength. He was to keep a strict watch on every¬ 
thing that happened at the Poona Dm bar, particularly in rela¬ 
tion to the English and Tipu. He was also to do everything 
that “prudence and diplomacy allow under such circumstances 
to keep the Poona Government in the constant hope of receiv¬ 
ing military help from the French in the next season. He was 
to speak highly of the strength of the expeditionary force 
already landed and of that expected shortly, and to declare the 
firm determination of Bussy to go to the Malabar Coast unless 
prevented by physical incapacity. T he whole object was in 
one word to gain lime, which is the essential point, and to 

utilise it for.facilitating the modifications that 

1 cannot dispense with to the articles of the treaty proposed by 
the Regency, of which some are absolutely inadmissible.” 
Finally, Montigny was to remove, by offering suitable excuses, 
the misgivings caused to the Marathas by the landing ol ihe 

1 P. A. ms. 498 ; also Journal tie Busty, pp. ;)53‘354- 

2 P, A, ins. r,oo; also Journal dc Bussy, p. ^ r >4' 






THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


reach on the Coromandel Coast and their co operation with 
Tipii. 1 

While giving these detailed instructions to Montigny, 
hussy also sent him in secret code a picture of the real state 
of his expeditionary force and the reasons which prevented him 
from accepting the Maratha terms at once and going to the 
Malabar Coast. Hussy wrote that the army consisted of 3,500 
Europeans 3,000 to 4.000 Africans and 4,000 sepoys, not yet 
trained and disciplined, to which could be added 8,000 to 10.000 
men including cavalry and infantry left by l ipu K and on the 
sea the French had a squadron of \ \ ships of the line fit for 
service. He. was expecting in April or May the arrival of de 
Soulanges with 4 ships of the line and 4,000 troops. As against 
this strength, the English were reported to have not more than 
3,000 European troops and 20,000 sepoys in the north, the same 
number of men in the south and 15 ships of the line in good 
condition. It was likely that they would receive further re¬ 
inforcements soon. Hussy stated that it was no longer the ques¬ 
tion as to what he should have done, i.e., whether he should 


have commenced his operations on the Malabar Coast and that 
by the capture of Bombay. The fact that a small French con¬ 
tingent had already been landed on the Coromandel Coast and 
had been carrying on operations in concert with Haidar Ali, 
had obliged him to disembark his expeditionary force there. 
Then the death of Haidar, the absence of Tipu from the coast 
and the reduction of his troops prevented him from taking any 
immediate advance step with regard to beginning operations 
elsewhere. Moreover, before adopting any definite policy in 
that direction it was necessary to know the real intentions of 
die Maruthas and of Nizam Ali and the existing state of affairs 
in their Darhar w It resulted from these difficulties that how¬ 
ever much Hussy desired an alliance with the Marathas and 
Nizam Ali. he could not do anything for the time being without 
running the risk of being suddenly abandoned by 1 ipu, who 
might make his own terms with the English. He would be in 
a stronger position, however, to declare his policy openly after 
ihe arrival of de Soulanges with reinforcements. 4 


1 Journal de Uus*y, pp. 354-356. 
J Ibid, pp. 356 - 357 * 



HUS.SV'S Rl.J ATION'S WITH INDIAN l>OW I RS 


At the same time Warnec also wrote to Moutignv that it 
tvas the definite intention of hussy to go to the Malabar Coast 
at the earliest favourable opportunity and that nothing but: 
physical incapacity would make him give up the project. He 
added that he would be sent back to Footia immediately on 
the arrival of de Souhtnges, with authority for Montigm to 
conclude a treaty with the Marathas, and till that time Mon- 
ligiiy was to exercise all his prudence and skill to convince the 
Poona Government of the sincerity and earnestness of the 
french. Monr.igny was also to explore the possibility of con¬ 
cluding a wider pact her ween the French, t he Marathas and 
Nt/ain Ali, giving only vague assurances for the time being and 
without commuting himself to anything definite. 1 

Mut concludes the review of the diplomatic relations 
between Bossy and the Marathas, and nothing further was done 
lor the whole period till the news of the conclusion of peace 
in Europe. In the chapter dealing with Montignv’s diplomacy 
we have noticed the frantic letters written by the French agent 
at Poona to Bossy and the disappointment he suffered at the 
altitude of Bussy irr cold-shouldering the Marathas while there 
was yet a chance of drawing them to the side of the French. 


VI. Relations with Nizam Ali. 


Of all the Indian Powers Bussy had a special preference 
lor an alliance with the Nizam of Hyderabad, ft was only 
natural, because the Deccan was the scene of his early opera 
lions, which had won for him great reputation both as a soldier 
and as a diplomat. Secondly, Hyderabad still constituted an 
important Power, whose co-operation would be of immense 
value in operations against the English. Finally, Bussy could 
count on the support of Nizam Ali, whose life had once been 
saved and who had been rescued from prison by his personal 
intervention. Thus on his arrival at Guddalore Bussy wrote 
to Nizam Ali, to his principal minister, Nawjab Tahawar Jang, 
and to Aumoni, a French officer in his service, with a view to 
draw Hyderabad to the side of France and to induce that 
Power to begin operations against the English for the recovery 


1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 557 358. 


misruf, 


• Go ^X 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

Sarkars in their occupation. But situated 
rs he was, with an inadequate force and entirely dependent 
on Tipu for supplies of provisions and means of transport, 
Bussy could do little more than give just a vague assurance 
of French support. There was no concrete proposal of any 
military alliance or any plan of combined operations against 
the English. Under the circumstances he could not have surely 
expected that Ni/am Ali would take any rash action against a 
formidable Power like the English without any definite assur¬ 
ance of military support from the French. In fact, apart front 
the general instructions given to Montigny to explore the 
possibility of a Franco-Maratha-Hyderabad alliance, Bussv 
showed little anxiety or seriousness to draw’ Nizam Ali into a 
war with the English. Perhaps, he had hoped that after the 
arrival of the expected reinforcements and some initial French 
successes against the English, Nizam Ali would have better 
inducement to join the French openly, and in the meantime 
all that could be done was to keep him on friendly terms so as 
to prevent his joining the English against the French and Tipu. 

In his letter to Nizam Ali. dated 28th March, Bussy 
informed him that he had received a copy of the letter written 
by him to Montigny at Poona and that he felt extremely happy 
to know his desire “to renew the old relations which have 
continued since such a long time back between France and the 
House of Ni/am-ul-mulk.” Bussv next confirmed what he had 
written in a letter sent through de Launay, announcing his 
arrival in the Isle of France, that he had been sent by the King 
of France with large forces to drive the English from India 
and to restore the Territories lost by the- Indian Princes. Fie 
had on arrival in India received reports about Nizam Alt's 
friendly feelings for the French from Montigny and Aumont, 
in whom he asked Nizam Ali to repose complete confidence. 
He knew Aurnont who had once served under him. Bussy 
then asked Nizam Ali not to listen to the proposals of the 
English, nor to give them any help. The instructions he had 
received from the King enjoined on him giving military help 
to Nizam Ali for the recovery of the four Northern Sarkars 
bom the hands of the English. He finally exhorted him to 
send his troops at once to recover the Sarkars or, failing that, 



four Northern 



Ml NIST/fy 



BUSSYS RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 


casi to prevent the English from drawing any money or 
provisions from there. 1 

Bussy wrote at the same time to Nawab Tahawar fang, 
the principal minister of Nizam Alt, expressing great satisfac 
tioti at the reports of Mon tig ny and Aumont about his attach¬ 
ment to the French nation. He urged Tahawar fang to pre¬ 
vail upon Nizam Ali not to listen to any proposals that might 
lx* made by the English and to assure him of French military 
support for the recovers of the four Sorchcm Sarkars. 2 To 
Aumont also Bussy wrote on the same date, acknowledging 
receipt of the letters he had sent by way of Poona and express 
ing deep satisfaction over the demarches he had made to win 
over Nizam Ali to the side of the French. Bussy informed 
Aumont of the contents of his letter to Nizam Ali and asked 
him to repeat the assurance contained in the Royal Instruc¬ 
tions about French military help being offered to all the Indian 
Princes for the recovery of their lost territories from the hands 
of the English, Aumont was to urge upon Nizam Ali not to 
listen to the proposals of the English, and as a mark of friend- 
1 ip for the French to give orders to the governors of all his 
provinces not to allow the English to draw any help from there. 
Bussy advised Aumont to proceed very cautiously and not to 
give any details till the real intentions of Nizam Ali were 
known. He was not to proceed too far about giving assurance 
of French military support without positive orders from Bussy. 
l or the time being he was merely to try to persuade Nizam Ali 
to take the field against the English on his own account for 
! he recovery of the four Northern Sarkars.'' 


VII. Rclalions with the Mughal Emperor. 

fhcre remained the Emperor of Delhi as the only other 
Power with whom it was worthwhile for the French to nego¬ 
tiate. It may be recalled that long before the outbreak of war 
in Europe several projects centring round an alliance with the 
Emperor had been submitted to the Government in Paris, But 

1 l’< A. ms. 501; also Journal th Bussy, pp. 331-352. 

R A* nis. 199; also Journal de Bussy, p. 352. 

3 1 *' A. ms. 502; also Journal de Bussy, pp. 352-353. 

W 


misrfy 



Bussy, who did not know north India from personal experience 
and who was suspicious of the bonafides and veracity of 
Chevalier and Madec, appeared all through sceptical of the 
utility of an alliance with the Mughal Emperor. All his 
previous noire $ bring out clearly his attitude on this subject. 

He was thus never very eager to take up seriously negotiations 
with the Court of Delhi, and became even less so when on Ivis 
arrival at Cuddalore he learnt through Montigny’s letters of 
the death of Najaf Khan, the only strong man in that Court 
who could have given some little effective help to the French. 1 2 
So all that he thought necessary in the case of the Emperor 
was to send him a letter, couched in vague and general terms, 
through Montigny who was charged with maintaining diplo¬ 
matic relations with the Courts of Delhi and Hyderabad 
besides that of Poona. It was dated 17th April.* Bussy wrote 
to the Emperor that he had received a copy of the letter sent 
to Montigny, in which the Emperor had expressed his readiness 
to join the French to “destroy the English power in India." 
He then stated that he had been sent by the King of France 
wi lt 10,000 European troops and 20 warships to drive the 
English out of India and 10 reinstate the Indian Princes in 
their lost territories. He had already landed on the Coroman¬ 
del Coast and was shortly marching against the English. Fie 
begged the Emperor not to enter into any negotiations with 
the English and assured him of French military support in 
accordance with the instructions of the King. He hoped to 
send Montigny soon to the Court of Delhi to lay before him 
all the details, and he begged the Emperor to repose complete 
confidence in Montigny. For the rest, Bussy simply asked 
Montigny to inform him about developments at the Court of 
Delhi from time to time. 3 It may be noted that the outbreak 
of dissensions among the lieutenants of Najaf Khan for success¬ 
ion to his position completely destroyed what little prospect 
there might have been to induce the Court of Delhi to take 
a decided policy with regard to an alliance with France. 

1 Journal de Bussy, p. 340. 

2 A. ms. 514: N. A. Calendar of Persian Correspondence, VI, Nos. 
H 3 and 835, also see No. 832 (letters from Nawab Amirul Utnara of Ajcot 
to Mahdi Quli Khan) and No. 834 (letter of Montigny to the Emperor). 

3 Journal dc Bussy, p. 358 . 


CHAPTER Xltl 


THE WAR IN THE CARNATIC 
I. Difficulties facing Bussy. 

Having noticed Bussy’s diplomatic; ovei ures to the vai ions 
Indian Powers, let us next turn our attention to the military 
situation from March to the end of June, when news arrived 
about the conclusion oi? peace in Europe. Fortunately h>i tis, 
most authentic documents are available iri the reports sent by 
Bussy lo the Ministers, Marquis de Castries, Marquis de Segui 
and Cpmte cie Vergcnnes, 1 and in the letters exchanged between 
Bussy and de SuftVen. 2 ^ Hie situation facing Bussy on his 
arrival in India was bad enough to discourage any commandei 
of an expeditionary force, and in order to explain the ultimate 
lack of success of the French army it is hardly necessary to put 
undue emphasis on the old age and supposed timidity and 
indolence of Bussy, as Roux and. following him, Malleson have 
done. 

In the first place, the French lacked a secure base on the 
coast. Cuddalore was a rather unfortunate choice, and Duche- 
min would have done better, as suggested by de Suffren, to 
attempt the capture of Negapatam, which would have provided 
the French army with a more secure base. As it was, the 
French position was wholly indefensible against an attack by 
a superior force. Cuddalore was surrounded by a weak am 
low wall, which could be easily scaled. Ihere were thirteen or 
fourteen bastions, small and almost crumbling and situated at 
a great distance from one another. Nor was there veil an 
ordinary ditch round the place. 1 It was in such a defenceless 
base that the first expeditionary force had landed numcious 
pieces of heavy artillery and large quantities of munitions, a 

1 P. A. mss. 406 to 409. 

2 Ibid, mss. 582 to 634. 

^ Ibid, ms. 332— Notes sur Goudclour. 1782 (an anonymous account 
written for the informal ion of the French army for an aiiack on 
Cuddalore). 



WNIST/fy 



fact which Bussy regretted deeply. When during his stay in 
the Isle of France he heard of Haidar s intention to leave the 
Carnatic, his greatest anxiety was about the safety of the 
artillery and munitions stored at Cuddalore, and he at once 
sent out instructions to transfer them to Ceylon if Haidar really 
left the coast.' But nothing was done at the time, since Haidar 
did not actually leave; and when Bussy came, it was his con¬ 
cern about the fate of the small French contingent under 
Fluffelize and the safety of the artillery and munitions stored 
at Cuddalore which made him decide to land his expeditionary 
force there, and not at some*place to the north of Madras as 
he had originally contemplated. 2 In his detailed report to 
Castries on the military operations in India, while referring 
to the weakness of Cuddalore as a base, Bussy deeply regretted 
that the first expeditionary force had not followed the advice 
of de Suffren and seized the neighbouring temple of Chidam¬ 
baram, a “post infinitely better as a military base, very strong 
by itself, and capable of being further strengthened by all the 
extra works that one would have liked to add.” 3 

In the second place, Bussy found himself with forces wholly 
inadequate to carry on independent operations against the 
English. If Tipu had been in the Carnatic, the small French 
expeditionary force, joined with the Mysore army, could have 
taken the field against the English with boldness and some 
hope of success. But as it was, the French were left entirely 
to their own resources, and even the nominally large detach¬ 
ments of cavalry and infantry, left by Tipu under the command 
of 8ayyid Sahib for co-operation with the French, suddenly 
deserted them on a rather flimsy pretext and moved south. 
The defection of Sayyid Sahib deprived the French of a useful 

i Journal dr Bussy , p. 106. 

I*. A. ms. ‘599 (Bussy’s letter to Castries, 31st March 1783). 

■ / bid, ms. 402 (Bussy’s letter to Castries, 9th September 1783). It 
may be observed here that the French did perceive the importance of 
Chidambaram and did occupy it for some time but were ultimately thrown 
out on the orders of Haidar (Letter of David Philips, taken prisoner by 
the French — See. Sel. Corn. Proc., Fort William, 29th April, 1782; Forrest— 
Selections from Letters , Despatches etcForeign Department, III, pp. 860- 
\ forcible occupation of the temple would have at once broken 
off the alliance with Haidar and would have perhaps led to worse conse¬ 
quences. 


WMSTffy 



cavalry arm, which would have turned the scale in their 
favour, as will be noticed later, by stopping- the march of the 
English army on Cluddalore. Bussy realised the importance of 
an Indian infantry force to counteract the sepoy force of the 
English, and soon after his landing he passed orders for raising 
live sepoy battalions of i f <x)o each, to be trained and officered 
by Europeans, each sepoy battalion being attached to one of 
the five European regiments. 1 It was, however, hardly to be 
expected that the French would be allowed sufficient time to 
raise and train up an entirely new force, and when the English 
moved against Cuddalore Bussy had at his disposal just 2,000 
sepoys. 2 As regards European troops, Bussy had under him 
about 2,500 men, besides the first expeditionary force, now 
reduced to a bare few hundred. Against these numbers, as 
Bussy wrote in his report to the Minister, the English could 
put: into the held 3,000 European troops, 12,000 to 14,000 sepoys 
and 1,500 cavalry with 84 cannons of different calibres. They 
had, besides, 500 Europeans and 3,000 sepoys for the defence of 
Madras and a reserve of 150 Europeans and 1,000 sepoys at the 
Great Mount.* There was even more inequality in naval 
strength. I he junction of Bikerton’s squadron with that of 
Hughes had given the English 18 ships of the line, besides a 
Eirge number of frigates and transport vessels, all in perfect 
condition. The French had, on the other hand, only 15 ships 
of the line, some of them undergoing repairs at Trinkomali, 
and there was such a grave depletion in personnel that they 
could not face a naval action without a reinforcement of 1,800 
men, which it was impossible for Bussy to spare from his own 
force. 

f he third difficulty of Bussy arose from lack of money, 
provisions, and transport for artillery. Before starting from 
France Bussy had wanted to be supplied with a net amount of 
ten million livres to meet the expenses of his operations after 
his arrival in India. But the French Minister came to an under 

1 P. A. ms. 508. 

* Ibid., ms. 40s. 

Ibid. About the strength of the English army under Stuart, Wilks 
gives ihe following numbers: Europeans—2945; Sepoy*-n, M 5; the arrival 
of reinforcements from England increased the number of Europeans to 
MOO -History a f Mysoor, II, p. i8t. 


nwsrtiy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


cling with the delegates of the Dutch East India Company 
m Paris with regard to the defence of its possessions in the 
East, and in place of giving Bussy ten millions in cash he gave 
only half the amount in cash and the other half in bills drawn 
on the Dutch authorities at Batavia and in Ceylon. We have 
seen already how greatly disappointed Bussy was when on his 
arrival in India he learnt from de Launay about the refusal of 
the Dutch authorities to honour the bills. Bussy thus suddenly 
found his financial resources reduced to live million livres. 
which even at a most moderate calculation could carry him 
through for not more than five months. Moreover, even these 
meagre resources were saddled with previous liabilities, the 
obligations to meet the arrears of salary due to the troops under 
Duchemin (and later under Hoffelize) and to reimburse the 
advances made by de Sutfren to the army, in these embarras¬ 
sing circumstances all that Bussy could do was to take lvis 
officers into confidence and to pass orders for the payment of 
only a part of the salaries in cash and the rest in bonds to be 
honoured later. 1 It was a most unwise arrangement made by 
the Minister for financing an expeditionary force, to depend 
on the uncertain co-operation of an alls, and one can quite 
understand the deep chagrin that Bussy felt when he suddenly 
found the arrangement upset on his arrival in India. 

Bussy suffered a similar disappointment with regard to 
provisions and transport for his artillery, for which he had 
counted entirely on the co-operation of the Nawab of Mysore. 
The Carnatic had been so thoroughly; devastated by Haidar 
that even with money it was impossible for the French to 
procure adequate provisions for the army, or means of trans¬ 
port for the artillery. Bussy wrote several pressing letters to 
T'ipu and the latter gave repeated assurances of having sent 
orders to his officers to supply all the requirements of the 
French army, But either because of the unfriendliness ol 
Savvid Sahib or because of secret instructions given by Tipu 
himself, as Bussy strongly suspec ted, the French were left with 
out any provisions and transports. In a letter to Castries, 
dated gist March, Buss\ wrote with regret, “We do not have 
even a single bullock to drag a mere one-pounder, and the chief 


v J'nirnal de Bussy , pp. 543-348. 


MWS Tf)y 



of the troops that the son of Haidar Alt had left to M. d'Hoffe- 
lize at the time of his departure has separated himself from 
d'Hoffelize under various pretexts; so that we are absolutely 
without any provisions and without any means to put the army 
on march.” 1 2 

In view of the difficulties recounted above,—the insecurity 
of the base., the inadequacy of military and naval strength, the 
lack of money, provisions and transport for artillery, and most 
of all the little prospect of getting any immediate co-operation 
from any Indian ally, Bussy had perforce to be on the defen 
sive for the time being* He was eager! \ expect ing the imminent 
arrival of reinforcements under Soulanges, which would double 
the army under his command and make the fleet at least equal 
to that of the English. 2 7 Ie therefore thought it prudent not 
to risk his small army in an) offensive operation against the 
English, which was further rendered impossible by lack oi 
transport for his artillery, but to follow a waiting game and 
stand on the defensive till the arrival of reinforcements which 
would enable him to take the held with confidence. Consi¬ 
dering the circumstances, an impartial historian cannot but 
approve, at least in a general way, the policy adopted by Bussy; 
and it. is rather surprising therefore to find Roux and, following 
him, Mallcson, both showing such great capacity for impartial 
judgment, condemning Bussy in the severest language possible 
for his timidity and lack of enterprise in adopting a defensive 
policy. 

Referring to Bussy, Roux wrote: ‘‘The old Governor of the 
Deccan, the military genius under Salabat, the illustrious 
lieutenant of Dupleix was now but an old mat), gouty and 
worried, ignorant of the new politics‘and of ihe real situation 
of the belligerent powers. His talents and his proverbial 
enterprise had been lost during a repose of 22 years in the midst 

of his immense riches.The 

vanity of this general.was bound u> have grave con¬ 

sequent* es which could not always be remedied by the genius 

1 P-A. ms. 399. 

2 The first two attempts to send a convoy under Soulanges in Decem¬ 
ber 1781 and April 17814 were frustrated by the English, as noticed already. 
Not discouraged, the Minister of Marine informed Bussv of his intention to 
make another attempt, but it was not actually done. 




mntsr#y. 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

Again he wrote: “Instead of following the 
counsel of Bailli de Suffren and of other experienced oflicers 
who had advised him to take the offensive in a daring way and 
to occupy die strong* position of Permacoil before General 
Stuart could seize it, Buss), resuming the old oriental practices, 
kept himself invisible in his camp like a rich Nawab. What 
a contrast in the eyes of our soldiers, between this indolent 
conduct of the Marquis and the indomitable activity of de 
Suffren, whom the Minister had very unwisely placed under 
ids orders, and specially the rapidity of action of Tipu Saeb, 
whose triumphs could not rouse among the French the spirit 
of emulation, gone to sleep for ever/'* 

Taking his inspiration from Roux, whose influence is 
unmistakable, Malieson wrote: “But the Bussy who returned 
to India in 1783 was no longer the hardy warrior who had 
electrified southern India in the years between 1754 and 1760; 
who had made of the Subadar of the Dekhan a French prefect, 
and whose capacity to dare had supplied the want of soldiers. 
If the Bussy of 1756, by his genius, his activity, his daring, his 
success, foreshadowed in some respects the illustrious warrior 
who just forty years later displayed the same qualities to 
conquer Italy, the Bussy of 1783, corrupted by wealth, ener¬ 
vated by luxury, and careful only of his ease, more resembled 
that scion of the House of Bourbon, once his sovereign, who 
consecrated all his hours to his mistresses, who left the nomina¬ 
tion of the generals of the armies of France to a de Pompadour 
and who banished a Choiseul on the requisition of a du Barry! 
IVussv, then, instead of acting with vigour, did nothing. He 
did not even show himself to his men. He kept himself, to 
borrow the language of one of his countrymen, ‘invisible in his 
tent like a rich Nabob*. Instructed by Colonel d’Offelize of 
the advance of the English, and informed by that officer that 
he pledged himself to maintain his force at Permacol, if he 
were but supported, Bussy not only refused, but abandoned 
every outlying fortification’ and fell back within Kadahir. 

1 Roux —Le Bailli de Suffren dans l* Inde, p. 177. 

2 Ibid., pp. 184-185. 

n Malieson —Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas . 
pp. G3-64. 




WNisr/f y 



Anybody who goes through the original records connected 
with Bnssy’s expedition cannot hut regard such sweeping obser¬ 
vations as unjustified and not based on facts. The only ex 
planation for such a dogmatic condemnation of Bussy is that 
Roux, the admiring biographer of de Suffren, deliberately 
painted Bussy black so that his own hero might shine all 
the more in contrast: and similarly Malleson, in his excessive 
zeal to do justice to the rivals of his own countrymen in India, 
sought to explain away their failure in 1783 by attributing* it 
wholly to the character and conduct of Bussy. 

II. The English army marching on Cud dal ore. 

Till the end of March Bussy was left in the dark about 
the English plan of operations. He sent a spy to Madras on 
the 20th. who-returned on the 31st and reported that the Eng¬ 
lish army w r as encamped to the west of the Great Mount and 
consisted of 10,000 sepoys and a little over 2,000 European 
troops with 78 pieces of artillery and a large number of 
transports. The spy had visited the camp on the 2(ith and 
had heard it rumoured that the army was going to march on 
Citddalore. 4 It was not, however, till about the end of April 
that the English forces were ready to move. By that time 
their fleet, much strengthened by the junction of Bikerton and 
Hughes, had arrived at Madras, thus rendering possible com¬ 
bined operations against Cuddalore. There had also arrived 
some reinforcement of troops from England, and Sir Eyre Goote 
was again sent down from Bengal to assume command. Goote, 
however, met with a tragic end. His ship, the Resolution , was 
chased bv some French frigates, and the fear of being captured 
by the enemy gave him such a shock that he had a stroke and 
died immediately after landing at Madras. 1 2 I he command of 
the English army thus remained with Stuart. 

1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 361-362. The English army, when it started 
from Madras, numbered *,943 Europeans and 11,545 sepoys. It received 
a reinforcement later at CuddalOre which increased the number of 
Europeans to 3,500 (W iiks History of Mysoor, II. p. 181). 

2 Eorrest Selections from Letters, Despatches, etc., Foreign Dept. y 
Government of India, Ml, pp. 943-945; Love — Vestiges of Old Madras, 
III, pp. 247-348. 



MINISr^ 


('HE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


On the ^ist April Stuart began to move south. Proceed¬ 
ing slowly, he occupied Chinglepm, where he halted for a few 
days to replenish his stocks of provisions. It was, however, 
evident that his intention was to move next to Permacoil and 
occupy that strong position. The French had at the time a 
small detachment under d’Houdelot at Tindivanam, near 
Permacoil, as an advanced post for observing the movements of 
the English. D’Houdelot was an intrepid officer, and in order 
to forestall the English he begged lfussy to send him some 
reinforcement to occupy Permacoil. For his refusal to accept 
the advice of d’Houdelot, Pussy has been rather unjustly 
blamed by historians like Roux. But being in command of the 
operations. Bussv had to take stock of the resources at his dis¬ 
posal and to examine all the possibilities of the situation before 
taking any forward move, t he detachment under d’Houdelot 
consisted of 616 men only, 180 volunteers, 36 hussars and 400 
sepoys. The rest of the French forces Pussy had organised in 
two Brigades, the Brigade (I’Acquitaine, consisting of 1,400 
Europeans and 850 sepoys, and the Brigade d’Austrasie, con¬ 
sisting of 1,309 Europeans and 900 sepoys. 1 With such a small 
number of men at his disposal, would it have been wise on the 
part of Bussy to allow his advanced detachment to take a for¬ 
ward move and occupy Permacoil, far away from the base at 
Cuddalore? If, as seemed quite likely, the detachment had been 
cut off and destroyed by the English, it would have further re¬ 
duced the strength of the French army, and then ihe whole 
blame would have been thrown on Bussy. Linder the circuiri 
stances, it would have been unwise for a commander to divide 
the forces under him and send stray detachments to far distant 
forward positions. On the other hand, military expediency 
dictated that all the available forces should be concentrated at 
a particular place to offer stubborn resistance to an eneniv 
superior in number. 

Thus in place of consenting to a forward move, as the 


1 r.A. ms. 40 a. In this reorganisation Comte d’Hoffelize was ap¬ 
pointed secont in v. .muiand, the Brigade d’Acquitaine was placed under 
Comte de la Marck, and the Brigade d’Austrasie under Baron d’Albignac. 
Each of the Brigades was equipped with 8 field-pieces and d’Houdelot's 
detachment with 4. The artillery park at Cuddalore was placed under 
the command of Summnont. The composition of the two Brigades is 


THE WAR IK THE CARNATIC 

'TEnglish began to march towards Permacoil, Bussy ordered the 
advanced detachment to fall back on Vilnoor near Pondicherry, 
and to remain there purely as an observation post. The Eng¬ 
lish occupied Permacoil on the 9th May and set about repairing 
the fort and laying in stocks of provisions and munitions. As 
their intention to march on Guddalore became quite clear. 
Bussv wrote pressing letters to Sayyicl Sahib to rejoin him with 
his forces, numbering 10.000 men, including both cavalry and 
infantry. Fortunately for him, Sayyid Sahib responded to the 
summons and promptly came to Guddalore to join the trench. 
It was a great relief to Bussy who needed a cavalry force very 
badly. A small detachment of horse was promptly sent to the 
assistance of d’ Houdelot. 1 he reinforcement encouraged 

d'Houdelot once more to think of bold moves, and it was with 
great difficulty that Bussy could restrain his intrepidity and 
bring him to a realisation of the military situation. In a let-tea 
dated 24th May he had to warn d’Houdelot in the following 
terms: “You must not at all consider your detachment at the 
moment as the vanguard of the army, nor even as a lighting 
corps, but simply as an advanced post to collect information 
about the movements of the enemy and to withdraw the 

moment he begins to march on us. 

Otherwise. I shall not hesitate a moment to recall the whole 
force here, it being not possible to send you more men/ 1 

A few days later, on the news of the English advance towards 
Koliyanur, Bussy ordered d’Houdelot’s detachment to fall back 




given below: 

Brigade d’Acquituine Brigade d'Austrasie 

Sepoy battalion ol Ac- Sepoy battalion of 


quitaine 

450 men 

Royal Roussillon 

450 men 

Sepoy battalion of la 


Sepoy battalion of Aus- 


Maick 

400 men 

irasic 

450 men 

Second battalion of Ac- 


Second battalion of 


quitaine 

600 men 

Royal Roussillon 

9,00 men 

First battalion of la 


First battalion of Aus- 


Martk 

450 men 

trasie 

500 men 

Second battalion of la 


Second battalion of 


Martk 

*550 men 

Austrasie 

500 men 


2,25b men 


2,200 men 

1 Marline an Bussy 

ct Vlntle 

J'ranfaisc, pp. 35435$. 








THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


nnaiyar river, the last line of defence for Cuddalore. 1 
Bussy decided to hold this line against the enemy. He cons¬ 
true ted a battery of six pieces at the mouth of the Ponnaiyar 
and formed his troops in a line along the southern bank of the 
liver, keeping the contingent of Sayyid Sahib at the left. The 
river Ponnaivar served as a quite secure line of defence. 
Although if remained practically dry in the month of June, the 
sandy bed was sufficiently wide and the little stream of water 
passing through it sufficiently deep to make fording difficult for 
an army with artillery and baggages, specially if the other side 
was held securely by the enemy. The French right stretched 
towards the sea up to a point where the river was not at all 
fordable, and the left was protected by a high embankment, 
where Bussy placed an advanced post to watch the movements 
of the enemy. 

On the 2nd June the English army came up to the river 
and formed a line along the northern bank parallel to the 
French. But the quick eye of Stuart at once detected the 
impossibility of crossing the river at that point, and in order 


1 In order to follow the movements of the two armies the following 

description of the environs of Cuddalore will be found useful, the 

principal river in the area is the Ponnaiyar, rising in the State of Mysore 

and Mowing due cast across the South Arcot District. It falls into the 

S(, a about six miles north of the old Cuddalore town. It comes down 
n short floods which dry up again. During high floods the river spills 
over into the Malattar and from it into the Gadillam, which flows into 
the sea just south of Fort Sr. David. From Gadillam at the foot of 
tort St. David there stretches a backwater along the eastern face of the 
old Cuddalore town, flowing into the sea just south of the town, at the 
mouth <'> the Uppanar. West of the old Cuddalore town is a low hill, 
only about a hundred feet above the sea. known as the Bandapollam Hill. 

Its modern name is Mount Capper and is within the present Cuddalore 

municipality. Ir is a part of the same line of hills to which the Red 
Hills just west of Pondicherry belong. The Bandapollam Hilt figured many 
times in he wars of the eighteenth century. It may be recalled that after 
the capture of C uddalore by the French in April 1782 the place was found 
<0 unhealthy that the army was encamped outside the town, at a place 
called Manjakuppam. Manjakuppam is about four miles to the north 
of the old Cuddalore town, being separated from it by the river Gadillam. 

It is now within Cuddalore municipality and is the official centre of 

the town Madras District Gazetteers South Arcot . I, for details. The 
volume contains two maps, one of Cuddalore town and the other of the 
whole district). 


misffy 


THE WAR IN THE CARNATIC 

gft flank of the French he marched his army 
west anti encamped at Ycllapakkam, The French also made 
an analogous movement and cauu to rest their right flank on 
the Ponnaiyar river and to turn their left flank south-westwards 
to rest on the hill of Bandapollain in order to present a straight 
front to die enemy. The English suddenly moved further to 
the west, and without the French knowing it in time they 
crossed the river Gadiliam on the 6th June at eight in the 
morning. If the French had a body of good cavalry, they could 
have easily prevented the crossing and could have attacked the 
English army at an advantage. But they failed to make any 
use of this opportunity, not because, as Roux says, of the 
timidity of Bussy, 1 but because of the lack of co-operation on 
the part of Sayyid Sahib, who refused to supply any cavalry t;o 
intercept the English. Bussv explained his difficulties in his 
report to the Minister, dated 9th September. Ml only I had at 
my disposal 1,500. good cavalry I would have attacked it (the 
English army) at an advantage while crossing this river, but 
Sayyid Sultan Sahib was wholly opposed to moving his cavalry 
forward: the heat was excessive and it was impossible for our 
troops to arrive before midday at the spot where, if they could 
have arrived at nine o’clock, the rear guard of the enemy ran 
the risk of being cut off. ’ 2 

Once having crossed the river, the English army inarched 
rapidly towards south-east, and turning the hill of Bandapollam 
took up its position on the 7th June to the south of Cuddalore, 
stretching in a line from the mouth of the Uppanar river to the 
eastern corner of the hill. It was a secure and advantageous 
position for the English. Their right flank was protected by 
the sea and they could feel secure of the support of their fleet, 
which anchored at the mouth of the river on the 8th and landed 

J Roux stales that Boissicux. Major d'Austrasic, told Bussy: “Just 
one* brigade will suffice. General, and rhe English will never return to 
Madras/’ Roux then comments, “The delay of the indolent Marquis 
saved the enemy from complete destruction." (Lc Bailli de Stiff ren dons 
I’lndc, p. 188). Malleson repeats the incident, evidently taking it from 
lou\. and blames Bussy for missing such an opportunity. He had 
arrived at a time of life when men no longer attack." (Final French 
Struggles in India, p. 65). 

2 P. A. ms. 402. 



towards 



NUM/Sty, 



The recently arrived troops of the Hanoverian regiment, pro¬ 
visions and munitions. Their left flank was also effectively 
covered bv a large grove of tall and leafy trees, which masked 
their movements from the enemy. On his side Hussy, as soon 
as he perceived the intention of the English to take up their 
position to the south of Cuddaiore, made a corresponding 
movement of his own army, which formed a parallel line, facing 
the English at a distance of eight to nine hundred yards. The 
French line stretched from an elevated ground near the sea to 
the south-eastern side of the hill of BandapoMam. Thus both 
the flanks were fairly well protected. In order to secure the 
right flank more effectively Buss) posted the sepoys of Sayyid 
Sahib on the sloping face of the Baiulapollam, To their left 
were placed 200 Europeans and 100 sepoys with 6 field-pieces 
under the command of Bcnth. The rest of the line, about a 
mile and a half in length, was occupied by the two Brigades 
of Austrasie and Acquitaine and d’Houdelot’s detachment of 
volunteers. The artillery was distributed in the following 
way: at the left were raised two batteries, one of four pieces of 
12-pounders and the other of four pieces of 8-pounders; to their 
right another battery of four pieces of 24-pounders, and at a 
short distance were placed 3 howitzers, the only ones that there 
were in the park; two more batteries of smaller pieces were 
set. tip at the left. Besides these, there was light artillery 
with each of the brigades, Bussy felt satisfied about the dis¬ 
position of the forces, and in his report to the Minister, dated 
qth September, he wrote, “The army in this position seemed to 
me to be quite capable of resisting the attacks of the enemies.” 1 

III. B ussy's efforts to lay in stocks of provisions. 

Before turning to the military operations, let us notice very 
briefly the efforts made by Bussy to lay in stocks of provisions 
in order to face a prolonged siege at Cuddaiore. We have 
already noticed his difficulties about procuring provisions due 

1 P. A. ms. 402. Wilks paid tribute to the French General in the 
following words: "Monsieur Bussy proceeded with the skill and rapid 
execution which distinguish his nation, in covering, with the most judi- 
<• oils field works, the position which he had assumed ."—(History of 
M y soar, II, p. 186). 


mtSTfiy 



THE WAR IN THE CARNAHtf 


tnAick of co-operation on the part of Sayyid Sahib, despite the 
assurances repeatedly given b\ ripu. There was a stock-taking 
on the i( 5 rh April of the provisions in the stores, the result of 
which was quite discouraging. 1 2 3 * 5 6 So as soon as Bussy c.unc to 
learn, about the end of April, that the English army had begun 
to move south, his first anxiety was to procure as much pro 
isions from Pondicherry as possible while that town still 


VAOtVSXJU? o M. ^ ^ £. 

remained free from English control and the communications 
between it and Cuddalore still remained open. T he measure 
created a good deal of dissatisfaction among the citizens 
of Pondicherry, who did not like to see their town denuded of 
its stocks, but it was removed by ail assurance from Bussy of 
returning equivalent quantities of provisions in future. At 
the same time the return ol Sayyid Sahib to Cuddalore facili¬ 
tated the augmentation of stocks. Bussy took every possible 
precaution to secure the safety of the stores and to prevent 
any communication between the Indian inhabitants of the town 
and the English. 9 

Bussy also wrote to de Suffren several letters during April 
arid May giving him information about the movements of the 
English army and asking him to send at least two months’ stock 
of provisions. 4 In a letter dated 10th April Bussy complained 
that not a grain of wheat or rice was allowed to enter Cuddalore 
by the Nawab’s men and he urged tie Suffren to send him 
provisions as quickly as he could. In reply to an earlier, letter 
of dc Suffren, in which the latter had written that the fleet 
was more in need of money than of rice,® Bussy wrote, “we 
have on the contrary more need of rice at the moment than of 
money/' In another letter, dated 22nd April, Bussy informed 
de Suffren that the English army was marching on Cuddalore 
and their fleet was also expected to arrive at the same time to 


1 1*. A. ms. 513. 

2 M irtineau —Bussy a l' hide Irangaisc, p. 354. 

3 Ibid., p. 355. 

1 The exchange of letters between Hussy and de Suffren (P* A. mss 
562-684) is very interesting and reveals a perfect understanding Ix'twcen 
the two over the common objective. It completely contradicts the sup¬ 
position of Roux about strained relations between them. 

5 P. A. ms. 586. 

6 Ibid., ms. 585. 


WtST/iy. 



lav a blockade before tlie place, against which he depended 
entirely on the co-operation of de Suffrcn, who could, by divert¬ 
ing the enemy fleet, enable supplies of provisions and munitions 
to reach Guddaiore. 1 Again on the 2nd May hussy wrote to 
tie Suffren about lack of provisions and munitions and urged 
him to come at once to prevent a blockade by the English fleet. 3 
He repeated the summons on the 6th May, 3 but on the 15th, 
being reassured by the arrival of Sayyid Sahib, he changed his 
mind and advised de Sufiren to remain at rrinkontali, 4 De 
Suffrcn on his side did all that he could to help the army at 
Cuddalore by sending large quantities of provisions, 1 and Bussy 
wrote to him on the 5th June that he had enough provisions 
and munitions to stand a prolonged siege. 0 

IV. The engagement, of 13th June and the withdrawal of 
the French to Cuddalore . 

Let us now turn to the military operations before Gudda¬ 
iore, We have already seen how the two armies took up their 
positions to the south of Guddaiore on the 7th. On the 8th the 
English Heel arrived before the place and landed troops, provi¬ 
sions, munitions and siege artillery. The next four days were 
spent in preparations. The French constructed some entrench 
men is before their camp and also some breastworks to keep 
rheir artillery under cover. Bussy had also another anxiety, 
about the large number of the sick, who were in hospital 
at Manjakuppam and who had to be quickly removed to Cudda¬ 
lore for safety. 7 On the 12th the French prepared for action 
dud the second battalion of Acquitaine went up to occupy an 
advanced po ition, its left resting on the Fakir's tomb where a 
battery of four pieces of 12-pounders had been set up, and the 

1 i\ A. YDS, 592. 

2 Ibid*, ins. 595. 

* Ibid,, 111s. 599. 

4 Ibid., ins. {>04. 

h Ibid., mss. 602, 605 and tk$. 

6 Ibid., ms, 610. 

7 Writing to de Suffrcn on the 30th May, Bussy complained of the 
ravages of dysentery among his troops and stated ihat (too men were 
already in hospital (P.A. ms. 606). 


miST/fy 



right resting on another battery of six pieces. 1 he let* flank 
and the centre were held securely, but the real weak spot was 
on the right, It will be remembered that the right Hank rested 
on the slope of the Bandapollam hill, where Hussy had placed a 
body of Mysore sepoys under the charge of de Canaple, who 
thought that the post was quite secure and that the English 
would not be able to bring up their artillery there. Imme¬ 
diately to the left was the post occupied by Benth with 200 
Europeans and. 100 sepoys. 1 he English at once detected the 
weak spot. They concentrated their hre on the Mysore sepoys, 
who fled away precipitately, leaving the slope of the hill to 
be occupied by the English. The latter brought up their artil 
lory to the spot, during the night of 12th June. « rected two 
batteries and rushed up several columns of infantry t.o hold 
the post securely and to enable a concentration of attack on 
the post occupied by Benth. Bussy, as soon a> he came to 
know of the flight of the sepoys and the occupation of their 
post by the English, realised the danger of Benth’s position. 
He visited the post at four in the morning of the 13th and 
reinforced it with a part of the regiment of Austrasie, sending 
information at the same time to Sayyid Sahib to come up to 
the spot at once with the whole body of his cavalry. 

The English began their attack on Benth's position at 
day-break, and under cover of their newly raised batteries tried 
to send up several columns of European troops, which were, 
however, repulsed. Ihe trench had a fathei weak artillciy 
on the right flank, consisting of two 18-poundei and fom 8 
pounder pieces, but it kept up a steady fire and inflicted heavy 
casualties on the enemy. About eight o clock Bussy, realising 
that the English intended to concentrate their attack on the 
right flank, left only the second battalion of Acquitainc to hold 
the left and withdrew the two battalions of la Marck to the 
second line. The second battalion of la Marck was sent up to 
the right when it was noticed that several columns of English 
sepoys were making an attempt to turn the French line. 1 he 
sepoys withdrew at once on the arrival of the reinforcement 
There followed a heavy cannonade all along the line till half 
past nine, when the English began to advance in several columns 
to seize the advanced post ol Benth 1 hey 7 were received with a 
terrific artillery and musketry fire, but their advance could not 


x 



M WlST/fy 



be stopped. Bcuth was killed in action together with a large 
part of his men, and the rest fell back to the ground held by 
the Brigade d’Austrasie, which then moved forward and charged 
the enemy with bayonets. At the. same time, perceiving that 
practically the entire English army had concentrated against 
the right flank, Bussy ordered the first battalion of la March 
to move forward and charge. The two battalions of A r;.oo 
and the first battalion oi la Marck succeeded in ousm; S the 
enemy beyond the post originally held by Be nth, but a fit r an 
hour’s hard lighting they had to fall back on their piv vo ^ 
position. The tide of the battle would have jph a need if the 
French had just 3,000 cavalry to assist them, bid in ue of 
the pressing summons of Bussy, Sayyid Sahib ^ 1 encamped 

about five leagues from the place, remained 1 >i:aiiy tractive out 
of fear or treachery. About midday the Engiisn *captubed the 
post held by Benth. The rest of the day passed in mere 
exchange of lire, the troops on both sides were tired and worn 
out by the excessive heat, and when night fell the two armies 
went to rest on the field of battle. 

Even after the setback of the 13th Bussy had intended 
to renew the fight next morning. But he changed his mind 
for two reasons. He had lost a large number of transport cattle, 
the only means of manoeuvring his artillery, and the Indian 
keepers had fled away with the rest. Secondly, having suffered 
heavy casualties he could not afford to risk the remainder of the 
small army under him against a numerically superior enemy. 
So he thought it prudent to withdraw his forces to Cuddalore 
and stand a siege there. All through the night of 13th 
June the wounded were carried to the town and the artillery 
was also dragged off by troops, for want of transport cattle, with 
the exception of nine small pieces which had to be left behind. 
Early in the morning oF the 14th the entire arm) retired within 
the walls of Cuddalore. 

The action of the 13th had inflicted heavy casualties on 
both ides. There was a large-scale massacre and few prisoners 
were taken; on the English side only 6 officers and 35 men, 
and on the French side one officer and 10 men. Of the French 
forces the second battalion of Acquitaine had been entrusted 
with protecting the batteries on the left, and the second 
battalion of la Marck had been sent up to prevent an attempt 


Ml MSTfiy 



1'HK WAR IN THE CARNATK.: 


English sepoys to turn the right flank. The main brunt 
of the attack of the English forces, consisting of nearly 3,500 
Europeans and 11,500 sepoys, was thus borne by the two bat¬ 
talions of Austrasie, the second battalion of Royal Roussillon 
and the first battalion of la Marck, numbering in all 1,750 men. 
The French had 15 officers killed and 25 wounded, some of 
whom died subsequently. The losses on the English side, cal¬ 
culated from intercepted letters, numbered 64 officers and 2,000 
sepoys killed and wounded. 1 

Having withdrawn within the walls of Cuddalorc, Bussy 
started making hasty constructions to put the place in a better 
state of defence. But it was an impossible task, and in the 
face of the combined operations of the English army and navy 
the French could have done little to defend the place. Their 
only salvation lay in the arrival of dc* SuffreiVs fleet, which 
could relieve the pressure on Cuddalorc by diverting the 
English squadron. Fortunately for them, at this critical hour, 
the intrepid sailor suddenly appeared before Cuddalore with 
his ships on the 15th to save the army once more from sure 
destruction. 


V. The trench fleet at TrinkomaJi. 


At this point it is necessary to retrace our steps and sec 
what de Saffron had been doing since his departure from Cudda 
lore in March after landing Bussy’s expeditionary force there. 
De Stitfren had to start back hastily from Cuddalorc on the 
23rd March, before even completing the disembarkation of 

' The account of the engagement is based mainly on Pussy’s rq>on 
!» the Minister, dated 9th -ScpL (P.A. ms. 402); A.V -Miftittfcrc dc la 
Marine, H 4 vol. 268 (combats soutenus par les troupes francais de 
Goudclour cn Join .783): and the letter of General Smart to the Madras 
Government, dated 15th June (Sec. Scl. Com. Proc, Port William. 3rd 
July, 1783: Forrest Selections from Letters, Despatches, etc. Foreign 
Dri>l" Govt . of Indite HE pp. 973*975)* Sce a,so Wilks— History of Mysoor, 
11, pp. 186-189. His comment 011 the result ot the action deserves to be 
quoted: “The retirement of the French on the same night, within the 
walls of Cuddalorc, evinced their sense of the operations of the day; 
but their being permitted during the night to draw off without molestation 
all their heavy guns from the exterior position, furnished equal evidence 
of the impression made on the English by a victory so dearly purchased. 


mtSTfiy 



artillery and munitions, for fear of meeting the reinforced 
English fleet expected to arrive on the coast any day. He, 
however, left Guddalore with only a part of the squadron, send¬ 
ing four ships, the Fend ant, the Saint-M ichel, the Cldopatre 
and t he Coventry, to cruise off Madras for two weeks in order to 
intercept a large convoy from Europe expected at Madras 
shortly , 1 The return voyage of dc Suffren to Trinkomali was 
unduly delayed by contrary winds, and it was not till 10th 
Apiil that he came within sight of the place. A frigate, the 
Bellone , which had been sent in advance to explore the approach 
to the bay, signalled the presence of ships. It was the 
English fleet returning from the western coast. In spite of.the 
superior number and the position of the English ships de Suffren 
took a bold decision to make a dash for the port, which he 
hoped to gain before the enemy could come up and bar the 
way. I lie daring move was successful, and in the evening the 
French ships quietly anchored at the entrance to the bay. 
Next clay they entered the port ol Trinkomali safely, and the 
only losses they suffered were two small transport vessels which 
fell into the hands of the enemy. 

J he first anxiety of de Suffren after reaching Trinkomali 
was about the four ships which had been left behind to cruise 
off Madras and which were unaware of the coming of the English 
squadron. So on the nth he sent a fast-moving boat, the 
Naiadc, commanded by Villaret de Joyeuse, to warn the ships 
of the danger . 2 it was an extremely perilous mission, and 
de Joyeuse humorously observed whether de Suffren would give 
him. together with his instructions, letters of recommendation 
addressed to Lord Macartney and Sir Edward Hughes. The 
very next day the Naiade was chased by the Sceptre, and after a 
hard fight, lasting for more than five hours, the French ship 
surrendered. The heroic conduct of de Joyeuse so impressed 
the English that Hughes embraced him and remarked that he 
would willingly lose all his frigates at such a high price . 1 
Fortunately, however, the four ships under Peinier gave up their 

1 Journal d< Hard du Bailli dc Suffren dans Vlndt, p. *37. 

2 Ibid., pp. 344**45. 

Bussy to Suffren, May 2 (F. A, Jns. 595); also Roux— Lc Bat Hi dc 
Suffren dans Vlnde, pp. 180-181, 


MiN/sr*^ 



THE WAR IN THE CARNATIC 

, r . —. 

cruise off Madras on the 13th, missing the English convoy 
escorted by the Bristol which arrived on the 14th, and just 
escaping the fleet of Hughes which arrived on the 15th. The 
fendnnt was in fact chased by the enemy during the return 
voyage, but having superior speed it escaped and all the four 
ships reached Trinkomali safely on April 21/22. 1 

Early in May de Suffren sent the Coventry to Cuddalore for 
information about the army. It returned on the 11th with 
letters from Bussy, who wrote that the English army was already 
on the march towards ( uddalore and that their navy was 
expected to arrive before the place to lay a blockade. 2 Even 
before that, Bussy had written to de Suffren about the possibility 
of the French army being blockaded at. Cuddalore, and had 
asked cle Suffren to come to its relief with provisions and 
munitions, in spite of the numerical inferiority oi the French 
squadron to the English. 3 It was an extremely hazardous 
venture for de Suffren to face an action with the decidedly 
superior English fleet, but his courage and patriotism rose to 
the occasion at the news of the dangers threatening the army. 
He sent a letter by the Coventry on the 4th May, informing 
Bussy that in spite of the triple disadvantage in which his 
squadron stood, in respect of tonnage, number of ships and 
personnel, he would sail out of Trinkomali and face the English 
squadron if Cuddalore was attacked. He, however, asked Bussy 
to give him 1,500 men to replenish the deficiency in the per 
sonnel, of his squadron. 4 

Bussy replied by the same boat on the 6th May that in 
spite of the inferiority of his squadron to that of the enemy 
de Suffren must come to Cuddalore at once, and that if he 
delayed “the army will be really exposed to the gravest dangers. 
Therefore, Monsieur, you must come out as soon as possible 
with your 15 ships. Three principal factors compel me to 
give you this order,—lack of provisions, inadequacy of munitions 
arid the pernicious effect which your absence cannot fail to 
make on the minds of the enemies, of the allies, and of all the 


§L 


1 Journal dr Bord du Bailli de Suffren dam VInde, :>p. 246-248. 

2 /bid., pp. 247-248 

P. A. mss. 592. 595, 597 letters, dated 22nd April, 2nd and 4th May. 

4 Ibid., ms. 598. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


Asiatics.” f ie, however, informed de Suffren that he could not 
spare 1,560 men from his army and that all he could provide 
to replenish the deficiency in manpower of the squadron was 
the detachment of volunteers together with 500 to 600 sepoys. 1 
On the 11th de Suffren replied to Bussv that he was making 
preparations with as much speed as possible to start for Cudda¬ 
lore. He expected to leave I'rinkomali on the 22nd and reach 
Cuddalore on the 25th. 2 3 4 

The next two weeks were taken up by hasty preparations. 
Repairs to some of the ships were hurriedly completed, and in 
order to man the ships of the line 250 Europeans and 300 sepoys 
were drafted from the garrison at Trinkomali and all the fri¬ 
gates and fifties disarmed, with the exception of the Cttopatie , 
the Coventry and the boats which were to carry provisions and 
munitions. Even then the number did not come up to three- 
fourth of the total complement. 1 A few days later Bussy was 
joined by Sayyid Sahib, and feeling more secure he wrote to 
de Suffren on the ir 7 th May not to leave Trinkomali. From 
1 he movements of the English army and navy he suspected that 
behind their apparent intention of laying siege to Cuddalore 
was the real intention of luring de Suffren out of Trinkomali 
with his weak squadron and forcing a battle on him before the 
arrival of the expected reinforcements. “A combat with three 

ships less.would reduce us for the rest of the campaign 

to our land forces only and consequently to little possibility 
of operations.’ 1 

But apart from this letter, de Suffren’s departure for Cudda¬ 
lore was delayed by the sudden appearance of the English 
squadron before Trinkomali on the 24th. De Suffren had only 
10 ships under him fit for service, but he made a bold show 
and prepared for a combat. Next day the English ships sailed 
off towards Batticaloa. T he movements of the English squadron 
appeared mysterious and de Suffren suspected that the real 
intention was to attack Trinkomali as soon as he left for Cudda¬ 
lore. So he postponed his departure for the time being, but 

1 P. A. ms. 599. 

2 Ibid., ms. 601. 

3 Journal dr Bord <\n Bailli dr Suffren dans l’ftide, pp. 249-250. 

4 l*. A. ms. Go;. 


THE WAR JN THE CARNATIC 

advantage of the absence of the English squadron sent 
and artillery to Cuddalore by two transport vessels, 
the Fendant, the Cleopatre and the Coventry . He 
u also wrote to Bussy.to send him some men for the frigates. 1 2 
v Bossy replied on the 30th May, again asking de Suffren not to 
j leave Trinkomali, except only in the case of Cuddalore being- 
blockaded by the English army and navy. The preservation 
of the French squadron was of the greatest importance, and 
de Suffren was not to take any risk.* On the 31 si the English 
ships reappeared before Trinkomali and remained there for 
two days, as if with an intention to attack. De Suffren again 
made a bold show with the few ships he had with him, but he 
was filled with anxiety about the ships sent to Cuddalore. He 
managed to send a small boat to warn Peinier of the movements 
of the English fleet. He wrote to Bussy on the 1st June, inform¬ 
ing- him of the reappearance of the English ships before Trinko- 
mali. “If l had the Cendant, I would have moved out. As 
soon as it arrives, if you send me some men to provide for the 
defence of Trinkomali, I shall move out, because, besides the 
risk faced by the ships we are expecting back, it is painful to 
have to put up with the enemy’s challenge everyday/’ 3 

The iast few words give the real motive which ultimately 
decided de Sufi t en to go to Cuddalore. It was not so much 
the wishes of Bussy, who wrote to him again on the 5th June 
not to leave Trinkomali and risk his squadron except when the* 
army was in serious clanger, 4 as the pride of a naval commander 
to take up the challenge of the enemy. The English ships left 
Trinkomali on the 2nd June and sailed off north to Madras. 
On the 10th the French ships which had been sent to Cuddalore 
earlier returned to Trinkoniali. They had been chased by the 
English squadron on their way back, but they managed to 
escape. 5 Three days earlier, on the 7th, there arrived a small 
boat, the Dromadaire, which had accompanied Peinier’s division 
to the Coromandel Coast, bringing the news of the critical 

1 P. A. ins. 605; Journal de tiord du Bailli de Suffren dans VInde, 
pp. 250-251; Roux— Le Bailli de Suffren dans VInde, pp. 185 186. 

2 V, A. ms.606. 

3 Ibid., ins. 608. 

4 Ibid., ms. 610. 

5 Journal de hard du Bailli de Suffren dam VInde, p. 255. 




tmstfy 



position of the army at. Cuddalore, which was facing the prospect 
of a siege by the English land and naval forces. The news of 
this great crisis determined do Suffren all the more to move 
out of Trinkomali and fight the English squadron to relieve 
Cuddalore. De Suffren only waited for the return of the three 
ships under Eeinier, and as soon as they arrived on the 10th 
he called all the captains to a council of war, explained to them 
the critical position of the army, and informed them of his 
decision to leave at once for Cuddalore in spite of the decided 
inferiority of his navy. He spoke with great emotion about the 
sacred duty of saving the honour of the nation. His words 
evoked an enthusiastic: response from the captains, who replied 
in one voice that the squadron must move out at once to save 
the army at Cuddalore and that they were prepared to face the 
risk of an action with the English fleet. 1 

VI. De Suffren*s return to the Coromandel Coast. 

On the nth June the squadron, consisting of 15 ships of the 
line, 3 frigates and a br&lot, sailed out of Trinkomali. It will 
be remembered that in order to make up for the deficiency in 
manpower, all the frigates, with the exception of three, had 
to be disarmed and their personnel distributed among the other 
ships. Even then and even with the addition of sepoys and 
lascars, the total personnel of the squadron hardly came up to 
three fourth of the full complement. Many of the ships had 
not yet completed their repairs, and the Illustre and the Saint- 
Michel still leaked badly. It. was in this state that the French 
squadron moved out to fate an action with the English fleet, 
consisting of 18 ships of the line, all in perfect condition and 
having undergone thorough repairs at Bombay. 2 

On the 13th June the French came in sight of the English 
squadron, which lay anchored to the north of Porto Novo to 
assist the operations of the army under Stuart. At the sight 
of the approaching enemy squadron, Hughes, rightly consider 
ing that the principal object of the campaign was the capture 

1 Journal de Bord du Ba>Hi de Suffren dans Unde, pp. 254*555 
sec also Roux Le Hailli dr' Suffren (Urns I’Inde. pp. 190-191. 

2 Journal de liord du Bnitli de Suffren dans Vlnde, pp. 255-256. 


HWisr/iy 



oTCuddalore, moved his ships further to the north and anchored 
before that place. On the ? 4th, as the trench ships approached 
closer, de Suffren gave orders to form into battle line, himself 
passing on board the frigate, Cleopatra, in pursuance of a recent 
Roval Order that the commander of a fleet must be* on a frigate 
and nor. on a ship of the line during an action. The object 
was to ensure the safety of the commander, and the order u a . 
issued following the capture of Comte de Grasse in American 
waters. De Suffren positively disliked giving up his position in 
the front line of battle, but he had to obey the Royal Order. 

De Suffren had intended to draw the English squadron to 
an immediate action, but for two days he was prevented by 
contrary winds from getting closer to the enemy who lav quietly 
anchored before Cuddalore. It was not till the ibth June that 
the wind changed its direction and enabled the Frehch fleet 10 
approach the enemy ships at anchor. Perceiving the resolute 
determination of the French to join action, Hughes thought i‘ 
necessary to accept the challenge, and in order to get the 
advantage of the wind for his ships to hear down on the enemy, 
lie left the safe anchorage before Cuddalore and moved out to 
1 he open. But he was disappointed in his expectations; the 
wind did not favour his manoeuvres ; on the other hand, the 
French ships made a resolute dash for the coast, and in the 
evening quietly anchored at the same spot which had been 
abandoned by the English just a few hours earlier . 1 This 
brilliant manoeuvre, by which de Suffren dislodged a superior 
fleet from its advantageous position without firing a shot, has 
been justly admired by Malleson in the following terms: “It 
is impossible to speak in terms of too high commendation of 
this display of combined genius and daring. To be.it on the 
open sea a fleet of equal or of greater numbers is no doubt a 
splendid achievement; but it is an achievement in which the 
lower nature of man, that which i.s termed brute force, has a 
considerable share. But to gain all the effect of a victory with¬ 
out fighting, to dislodge an enemy superior in numbers from 
a position of vital importance without firing a shot— that 

1 Journal de Botd du Bailli de Suffren dans l'hide, pp. 257-263: 
Roux — Le Bailli de Suffren dan, Unde, pp. 193-193; Wilks— History of 
Alysoor, II, pp. 191-192. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


V ^leed is an exercise of the highest faculties of man’s higher 
nature, a feat of intellectual power not often bestowed, but 
generally combined, when given, with that strength of nerve 
which knows when and how to dare.” 1 

By sheer audacity de Suffren had gained his objective 
namely to dislodge, at least temporarily, the superior enemy 
tieet from its advantageous position before* Guddalore and to 
establish contact with the besieged army. Two results followed 
from this success. First, the English military operations were 
seriously dislocated by the disappearance of ihe fleet from the 
coast before completing the landing of provisions and muni¬ 
tions. Second, de Suffren could now expect to replenish the 
deficiency of his personnel by drawing men from the army for 
the time being; and with that, reinforcement he could face an 
action with the superior enemy fleet with more confidence. 
De Suffren clearly realised that of the two enemy forces threaten¬ 
ing Guddalore one had to be destroyed first before the other. 
If he landed men from the ships to reinforce the army to attack 
the enemy land forces, it would dangerously expose his squadron 
to an attack by Hughes. The better course was to draft some 
men from the army, and with this added strength to go out 
and destroy the English fleet first; and then the army could 
be rein forced by the men of the squadron to attack the English 
land forces under Stuart. Bussy also agreed with this view and 
willingly lent troop for the naval operations, so necessary for 
the safety of the army. 

It is interesting to note from the correspondence between 
Bussy and de Suffren the perfect understanding that existed 


between the two. On the night of the 16th June Bussy wrote to 
de Suffren giving him an account of the action of the 13th. 
The army was in a perilous state, shut up within Guddalore. 
“where we are sure to succumb physically sooner or later/' 
The only hope of deliverance was if de Suffren could win a 
naval victory and then take on board the sick and the wounded, 
which would enable Bussy' as a last resort to make a large-scale 
sortie and take the rear of the English line. “Otherwise there 
would be no other recourse for us but to embark and go to 


1 MaMeson Final French Struggles in India, pp. 68-69. 


mtsTfy 


' G °^ 



TUF WAR IN THE CARNATIC 



fmikoinali.’’ 1 2 3 On the 17th de Suffren replied to Bii^sy that in 
spite of the inferiority of his squadron in the number of ships 
and their condition as well as in personnel, he fully agreed 
that it was necessary to win a naval victory to save Cuddalore, 
and he requested hussy to send him as many men as ho could 
to replenish the deficiency in the personnel of the squadron* 8 
Bussy promptly offered 600 Europeans and 600 sepoys, explain¬ 
ing, “it is all that is possible for me to do unless l embark 
myself with the whole army and thus leave India altogether.” 5 
I'he troops were hurriedly embarked on the 181h June and de 
Suffren wrote to Bussy that with these reinforcements he could 
now hope for success. If he could defeat the English squadron, 
he would return to Cuddalore and give Bus&y all the assistance 
he could to meet the land forces of the enemy. If on 1 lie other 
hand he was defeated, and if after a heroic resistance the army 
was forced to capitulate, Bussy should demand, as the hist 
article of capitulation, to be transported to Trinkomali. As 
long as we have this place* we shall have some existence at least 
in Indian waters.” 4 

VII. The last naval action (2 olh June). 

After hurriedly embarking the additional men, the French 
ships sailed off on the 18th to draw the enemy fleet into action. 
But for two days the latter, which was manoeuvring to the 
south-east of Porto Novo, avoided an engagement. Hughes had 
two reasons for it. First, although his squadron was superior 
in number, it was badly deficient in personnel, having suffered 
the loss oi about 3,000 men by scurvy in a little over a month's 
time, and it lacked in supplies of fresh water also. 5 But the 
second and the more important reason was that he wanted to 
manoeuvre into a position from where he could attack the 
French squadron with the advantage of the wind in his favour. 
That was the reason why he left his anchorage before Cuddalore 

1 P.A. ms. On. 

2 Ibid., ms. 613. 

3 Ibid., ms. 614. 

* Ibid .> riiss. 615, 617. Fov an account of the squadron before. Gudda* 
tore, see also Journal de. Bord dir liailli de Suffren duns VInde, j>p. $63-267. 

5 Malieson Final French Struggles in India , p. 70. 


tmsr/ty 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


on the i(itli, and why he repeatedly avoided an action with the 
French fleet on the 18th and the tydi, when the wind was in 
the enemy's favour. On the other hand, although 'he wind 
was in their favour, the French could not force a battle on the 
Fnglisb> whose superiority in number and speed enabled them 
to elude every time. 1 Hughes, however, got tired of fruitless 
manoeuvring*, and despairing of getting the advantage of the 
wind he at last prepared to aecept battle on the afternoon of 
the soth, relying on the advantage of the superiority of his fleet. 

It was rather late in the day, about half-past four in the 
afternoon, that the action was joined. It was the fifth and the 
last naval action fought by de Suffren in Indian waters. On 
this occasion his squadron was decidedly inferior to the enemy s 
in the number of ■ffiips and of guns, 15 ships of the line with 
1,008 guns -» against 18 ships ol the line with 120a guns of the 
English; but this disadvantage was amply made good in another 
way. After successive changes of command occasioned by past 
experience of insubordination and wilful neglect of duty, for 
the first time all the ships were now in charge of officers on 
whom de Suffren could put implicit reliance. For the first time 
all the captains were men who had given ample proofs of theii 
loyalty and devotion anti could be safely trusted to obey orders. 
Even the two old officers, de St. Felix and tin Chilleau. vied 
with each other in acts of heroism to efface the memory ot 
their past misconduct. Such an advantage of unstinted suppott 
and co-operation from his subordinates de Suffren had never 
enjoyed before, and it was a pity that he should have come to 
have it only during the last naval action he was destined to 
light in Indian waters.- an action which failed to be decisive, 
having commenced at the fag end of the day anil being teuni- 
nated by nightfall. 2 


1 Journal d< Hard dn Bailh de 

2 Table of the two squadrons: 

English 

the Defence (74) Newfthain 
The Is is (50}■—HoHaday 
The Active 

The Gibraltar (80}--Bikciron 
The Inflexible (f^p)—Che wind 
The Exeter ((4)—Smith 


Suffren duns Tlnde. pp. ^67-272. 

Trench 

Jr Sphinx (64V-Du Chilleau 
Jr Brillant (64V -Kersauson 
La Tine 

Le Fendant (74) — Render 
Jj Elam and (50)— de Salvert 
UAfax (64)—Mancelhhe 


miSTfiy 


I Hi* W AR IN TUt: CARNA l'IC 

the commencement of the action, the Flamand (50), 
belonging to the front, section, advanced close to the English 
line in an attempt to turn it. It was at once caught between 
two fires by the Exeter (64) and the Inflexible (64), and a 
torrent of shells poured upon it. The young and intrepid 
captain, de Salvert, was killed, but thanks to the courage and 
pluck of his able lieutenant, T rublet de Villcjcgu, the ship was 
able to extricate itself from its perilous position and rejoin the 
French line between the Fendant and the Ajax. In the centre 
of the line the Htiros (74), commanded by de Moissac, bowed 
itself worthy of the affection of d< Suftren. Aided by the 
IIlustre (74), it kept three enemy ships engaged, the Superb 
(74), the Momma (70) and the 'Burford (70), while the Argo¬ 
naute (74) and the Petit Annibal (50) fought against the Sultan 
(74) and the Africa (64). In the rear section the Yengeur (64) 
replied to the lire of the Mngnanime (64), and the Ilardi ((>4) 
resisted valiantly the attacks of the Bristol (5a) and the Mon- 
mouth (64) and forced them to keep at a respectful distance. 
In the front section the Fendant (74). after having put out of 
action the Inflexible ((>4), directed its attack against the Gibral¬ 
tar (80), while the Sphinx (64) engaged the Defence (74). About 
half-past live there broke out a serious Fire on the Fendant, 
which compelled Peinier to withdraw the ship for some time 
from the line of battle. The Gibraltar (80) at once dashed 
forward to capture the ship and to break the French line, but 
it was repulsed by the Flamand, an inferior ship with only 50 




The Worcester (64)—Hughes 
The Africa (64)—Macdonncl 
The Medea 

I tie Sultan (74)— Mitchell 
The Superb (74)— Hughes 
The Monarca (70)—Cell 
The Burford (70)—Reiner 
l he Sceptre (64)—Graves 
I hi Magnanime (64) —Mackenzie 
The Eagle (64)—Clarke 
The Hero (74)-— King 
The Bristol (50)—Ruraey 
The Monmouth (64) —Alms 
The Cumber la) ul (74)— Allen 


La ClSopatre (de Stiff ren) 

Lr Edit Annibal (50) - He Beaulieu 
L'Argonautc (74)—Dc Clavifcrcs 
Lc Hcros (74) — Moissac 
LAllustre (74)— Bruycres 
lc St. Michel (60) — De Beaumont 
Lc Vengeur (64) — Cuverviltc 
Lc Severe (64) — De Langlc 
VAnnibal (74)— D’Aytmi 
Le Hardi (64)— Kerhuc 
L’Artcsien (64)— De Vigncs 
La Consoiante (40) — Cosiebelle 
Le Coventry 


misT^ 



HIE FRENCH JN INDIA 

'guns. The Flamand kept up a stubborn cannonade and suc¬ 
ceeded in covering the Fendwnt, till the lire was put out, and 
compelling ;he Gibraltar to withdraw precipitately. 

While the battle was raging furiously all along the line 
for nearly two and a half hours, de Suffren was watching and 
giving orders from his frigate in the rear, the Clcopaire . It 
caused him great mortification not to be on board his ship, the 
Hiros, and in the thick of the battle, and nothing short of 
a peremptory Royal Order could have kept him away from the 
firing Vine. Even as it was, in his enthusiasm he risked his life 
several times and had to be respectfully reminded of the Royal 
Order by the captain of the frigate, dc Rosily, About seven in 
the evening darkness came to separate the two fleets and to put 
a stop to the dreadful cannonade. It must have come as a 
great relief to Hughes, who had failed to utilise his numerical 
superiority to turn the enemy line and who welcomed the 
approach of night as an opportunity to withdraw his fleet from 
the scene of battle. Even before the withdrawal there was a 
sensible diminution of fire from the English ships, and but for 
the rather abrupt stoppage, the combat might have been turned 
into one of the most decisive naval actions. Even as it was, the 
victory remained with the French, not merely in the technical 
sense, as stated by Malleson and Wilks, 1 that they had succeeded 
in driving off the English fleet from Guddalorc, but also in a 
more real sense, in that the English fleet had suffered such 
heavy damage that it deliberately eluded being drawn into 
another action which the French sought for the next two days, 
and ultimately withdrew to Madras. 

Ml through the night of the stoth June the French ships 
manoeuvred to remain in the neighbourhood of Cuddalare, 
fearing a return of the English fleet, and keeping ready for a 


> Malleson- Final French Struggles in India , p. 7 2 * Wilks —His tot y 
of Mysaor, If. p. 193. Th comment of Wilks on the result of the 
action may be quoted: “The English Admiral .... found the whole of 
his equipments so entirely crippled, his crews so lamentably reduced, and 
the want of water *0 extreme, that he deemed it indispensable to incur 
the mortification of bearing away for the roads of Madras, while Suffren 
wresting from his enemies the praise of superior address, and even the 
claim of victory, if victory belongs to him who attains his object, resumed 
his position in the anchorage of Cuddalore.” 


miSTffy 



THE WAR IN THE CARNATIC 


%L 


nil of the fight next morning. 'The English ships had put 
out their lights to cover their withdrawal and evade pursuit, 
while the French ships were gradually drifted by currents as 
iar north as Pondicherry. On the 21st at eleven in the morning 
the English ships were sighted to the south south east of the 
french, but they disappeared from view soon after. On the 
**nd at five in the morning the English ships were sighted 
again to the east-north-east of the French, in a most disordered 
state. De Suffren wanted to chase them and draw them to 
another action, but by the time preparations for the pursuit 


were ready,, the English ships, thanks to their superior speed, 
sailed off north and disappeared from view once more. De 
Suffren thought it fruitless to pursue an enemy who could 
always elude action by superior speed, and moreover he wa. 
anxious to return to Cuddalorc at the earliest possible moment 
in order to assist Bussy in driving off the English army under 
Stuart. 

Dc Suffren hastened to give an account of the naval combat 
in two letters to Bussy dated 21st June, in which he wrote: 
“In spite of our inferiority, the action is at. least doubtful if not 
to our advantage. As long as the squadron will have powder 
and guns I will not abandon you.” He also stated that contrary 
winds had prevented him from anchoring before Cuddalorc, 
but that he would return at the earliest opportunity. 1 Eussy 
replied on the 22nd, offering congratulations to dc Suffren, who 
was still before Pondicherry, and giving an account of the 
distress of the English army for lack of provisions after the 
departure of their squadron. 2 De Suffren thus thought it 
necessary to return to Cuddalorc at once and concert measures 
for dislodging the besieging enemy force before that place. He 
sailed from Pondicherry early in the morning of the 23rd and 
anchored before Cuddalorc at one o’clock in the afternoon. 
As he went ashore shortly after to meet Bussy, be was welcomed 
with a salute of 15 guns and with cries of “Vive lc Roi”, “Vive 
Suffren’ . by all the officers of the army who lined the coast 
and fought for the honour of carrying his palanquin. Bussy, 


1 P.A. mss. 620, 621. 
** Ibid., ms. 6 si. 



<N }* 6 ‘ G <W 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



•wHo was waiting to receive him on the steps of his office, greet¬ 
ed him affectionately and taking his hand introduced him to 
his officers in the most flattering terms; ‘Gentlemen, here is 
our saviour.” It was a proud tribute to the naval commander, 
who fully deserved it. 1 


VII. The, sortie of 2./(It June. 


Dc Stiffren had succeeded in driving off one cnenn from 
Cuddalore. There remained the other, the army under Stuart; 
to he dealt with. As we have seen, one of the principal reasons 
for cle Suffren's hasty return to Cuddalore in place of seeking 
another, more decisive, action against the English squadron, 
was to concert measures with Bussy for a large-scale attack on 
the besieging force before Cuddalore, and to dislodge it from 
there. The English army, iti spite of its nominal success on 
the 13th, was in great distress, as Bussy came to know from 
intercepted letters. The sudden disappearance of the squadron 
from the coast before completing the landing of provisions and 
munitions had completely dislocated the siege operations. 
Having suffered heavy losses in the action of the 13th and lack¬ 
ing provisions and munitions, Stuart could not venture any 
at ack on the French shut up within Cuddalore. Giving up 
the idea of an offensive, for the next few days he occupied 
himself merely with entrenching his position more strongly for 
defence. 2 The news of the poor state of the English army 
encouraged Bussy to think of a large-scale attack. Dc Suffren 
agreed with him, and in order to reinforce the army he con¬ 
sented to land 1,200 men of the squadron besides the troops 

1 For an account of the naval action of the 20th June and of events 
down to the return of c!e Suffren to Cuddalore on the 33rd: A.N.— 
MiriUterc dc ta Marine. B (, vol. 268. Journal dc Borcl du Bmlli fie 
Siiffren, pp. 275-279; Roux l.c Bailli dc Suffren dans l’lndc. pp. 194-200; 
Malleson Final Ftench. Struggles, in India, pp. 70-72; Richmond -The 
Navy in India. i-iyS]. pp. 355-375; letter of Hughes, dated 23rd June— 
Sec. Set. Com. Pro , Fort William, July 31 (Forrest Selections from 
Letters, Despatches, etc.. Foreign Dept., Ill, pp, 998-999). 

2 Bussy to dc Suffren, June 22—(P.A. ins. 622); Journal dc hard 
du Bailli dc Suffren dans VInde . pp. 279 280. 


m 


Ml NlSTQy 



vent to him on the i8th.' Prudence, however, dictated that 
before taking the risk of a large scale attack it was necessary 
to make a small scale sortie with picked men to find out the 
strength of the enemy entrenchments and to ascertain whether it 
would be feasible at all to take the enemy position by a frontal 
assault. Hussy called a conference of his officers on the 24th 
to decide about the plan of operations and invited the opinion 
of do Suffren as well. 2 

Regarding tin plan of making a small-scale sortie instead 
of delivering a large-scale frontal assault, both Roux and. 
following him as before, Malleson have passed severe strictures 
on Hussy and have suggested ;i sharp difference of opinion 
between him and de Suffren. Roux in his usual enthusiasm 
for his hero, de Suffren. states that he was sorelv disappointed 
at the lack of courage and initiative on the part of Bussy and 
retired to bis ship with a bitter observation, whether it was the 
intention of Bussy that he should take his ship ashore and 
fight the enemy there. Roux has poured ridicule on the small 
party sent out to make a sortie; he condemns Hussy for entrust 
ing the command to “a vile intriguer of recognised incapacity 
and considers the sortie to have been a total failure. Malleson 
also condemns Hussy for his timidity and suggests a sharp 
difference of opinion with de Suffren. 4 But neither in the 
Journal de Bord du Bailli de Sujjren nor in the letters ex 
changed between Hussy and de Suffren h there the slightest 
trace of any bitterness of feeling between the two men. Not 
is there any reason to suppose, if we examine the details from 
the letters of Bussy, that the plan of the sortie was either ill 
conceived or that it was absolutely fruitless. 

It was on the night of the 24th June that the sortie 
was made. The party consisted of 800 Kuropeans and 500 
sepovs. under the orders of Chevalier de Damas, officer in com¬ 
mand of the second battalion of Actjuuainc. I he plan was 
to march surreptitiously to the enemy entrenchments and to 

* The men were landed on the 24th, and it is interesting to note 
here that the author of the Journo! dr Haul du liailli d' Suffren dans 
VInde was appointed Aide-Major of the marines, p. 2K0. 

2 Bussy to de Suffren. June 24 (P.A. ms. 6at>). 

Roux— Le Bar Hi dr Suffrrn darts I’ Indr, p. 201 

* Malleson Final French Struggles hi Indio, p. 74. 

Y 


MHtSTfty 


THE FRENCH r\ INDIA 

a before day-break. The party marched 
in three columns, Darnas leading the centre, de la Rochcthulon 
ibe left, and de la Horde the right. The enemy entrenchments 
were reached in time, but the attack was delivered by the 
central column rather prematurely. The enemy got fully 
warned and had time to offer resistance. I he central column 
consisted of sepoys and marines, not accustomed to the discip¬ 
line and order in an army. At the first sign of resistance by 
the enemy, Darnas found himself abandoned bv his men and 
was taken prisoner. I he other two columns were more fortu¬ 
nate and were able to effect a safe withdrawal. The column 
°f Rochcthulon, which had advanced farthest and had a good 
view of the works of entrenchment, had even some moral con¬ 
solation in being able to carry off .two enemy standards. Oh 
the French side two officers were killed, three wounded and 
several taken prisoners. I he casualties on the English side 
were heavier, the sepoys firing on their own men in the dark¬ 
ness and confusion. The sortie was apparently unsuccessful, 
but it had achieved one useful result. It led to the discovery 
that the enemy entrenchments were too strong to be taken by 
a frontal assault. The only way of delivering an attack on the 
enemy was to turn the line on its left, but it was an extremely 
hazardous venture because of the long distance and difficulty 
of the roads. 1 

IX Xc:u\s of the conclusion of pence in Europe. 

For the next four (lays both sides remained in comparative 
inactivity, excepting some occasional cannonades. Bussy, rca 
lining the impossibility of taking the enemy entrenchments by 
a frontal assault or of turning the left of the English line, 
thought it prudent to wait for some time more when he might 
get a better opportunity of attacking the English at an advan¬ 
tage. The army under Stuart was in great distress for lack of 
provisions. The presence of the French squadron had cut off 
communications with Tranquebar and Negapatam by sea, and 
the depredations of the cavalrv of Sayyid Sahib had equally cut 

1 For an account of the sortie; Hussy's letter to dc Suffren. June 25 
(P.A. ni>. fijrtf); journal dc Hard <iu llailli dc Suffren dans Unde, 
ifHo-Hi* Wilks -Histoix of A fxsoor, J[, j>. if)j. 




tver. an attack • jin 


uwtsrfy 



THE WAR IN Tin: CARNATIC 


3 




....'"communications with the north. The English were sure to 
raise t!io siege sooner or later, and then alter they had aban¬ 
doned their entrenched position, the French could attack them 
at an advantage. 1 Do Suffren had also received information 
on the 251I1 about the arrival in the Isle ot France of six Hutch 
ships and the Legion of Luxembourg.- With these reinforce¬ 
ments the French could expect to take the offensive with nnne 
confidence and better chance of success. But these hopes of 
taking the offensive were suddenly frustrated by the arrival 011 
the ac)tl» June of an English frigate, the Medea, carrying the 
news of the conclusion of peace in Europe. 

That brought hostilities in India to a sudden and abrupt 
dove, The* news of the conclusion of peace in Euterpe was 
conveyed in a letter from Hughes to tie Suffren, in which the 
former wrote that reports had reached Madras from Bombay 
on the 171I1 June that Preliminaries of Peace had been signed 
in Paris on the 20th January and ratified by France on the yth 
February. The news was confirmed by some private letters 
from Europe and also newspapers which had reached India by 
the overland route. The Madras Government had promptly 
sent a boat to inform Hughes about it, but since be had left 
Cuddalore by that time, it was not till his return to Madras 
cm the 25th that he came to know about it. I hus he took the 
earliest opportunity to send the news to de Suffren, togethet 
with copies of private letters and newspapers which contirmed 
it. and he proposed an immediate cessation of hostilities pend¬ 
ing the arrival of official orders from Europe. While expressing 
surprise that no official information had been received yet either 
from the Government or from the Court of Directors, Hughes 
stated that there were nevertheless sufficient grounds to believe 
that the news of the conclusion of peace was correct. Macart¬ 
ney, Governor of Madras, also wrote to the same effect to Bussy 
and sent two Commissioners, Sadleir and Staunton, by tin 
frigate Medea •o settle the terms of the armistice.* 


1 Bussy to Castries, September 9 ,ns - t° 2 )- 

- l)c Suffren to Bussy, June 95 (IVA. ms 630); Roux Lc. Bailli de 
Suffren dans I'lnde, ]>. 202. 

a Husny to Castries. Sept. 9 (P.A. ms. 402); Journal <le Bord dll Bailli 
dr Suffren , p. 282. Sad lei f was a member of the Madras Council and 
Si aunt on wa** Private Secretary t«> Macartney. 


M WSTfiy 



PHE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


On the morning of iht 30th de Suffren went ashotfe to 
inform Bussy of the sudden turn of affairs and to give him the 
letters of Hughes and Macartney. The two English Cotnmis 
sinners also landed in the afternoon to carry on talks with 
Bussy for a cessation of hostilities. Although the news of 
peace came to de Suffren as a complete surprise and upset his 
plans which he was hoping to execute after the arrival of the 
expected reinforcements, he strongly urged Bussy to agree to 
an immediate armistice, particularly in view of the poor state 
of the naval squadron. Many of the ships were badly leaking 
and required extensive repairs. The personnel, already defi¬ 
cient by a quarter of the full complement, had been further 
reduced by the naval action of the sbth, there being more than 
five hundred persons on board seriously wounded. Under the 
circumstances, de Suffren declared, he could not hold himself 
responsible for the result of another naval combat, and so he 
advised Buss) to accept an armistice without delay. On the 
side of Bussy also there were equally valid reasons to agree ro 
an immediate cessation of hostilities. As he wrote in his report 
to the Minister on the 9th September: “The peace. . of what¬ 
ever little advantage it might be for the future of India, never¬ 
theless came at a happy moment to save the honour of the 
nation. Casualties in action and disease were reducing our 
land and naval forces ro such an extent that our situation 
would have become extremely critical, the English receiving 
help from Europe while we could not hope for any." 1 

In spite of these weighty reasons, however, two days inter¬ 
vened before the terms of the armistice could be (inally settled. 
Hostilities the sea were suspended from the ist July and 
on land from he 2nd. The question that presented some 
difficulty was how to include the French ally Tipu also in the 
arrangement. As the English Commissioners were not vested 
with sufficient competence to accept the terms proposed by 
Bussy. the latter sent on the 3rd two French Commissioners to 
Madras, de Launay and de Maurville, to settle with Macartney 
'he terms on which Tipu was to he invited to join the general 


1 P.A. ms« 40*. 


WNtSTfiy 



rHF W\K IN THE CARNATIC $T?~ 

paclhcationd 1 he course of the negotiations and the terms of 
the peace settlement will be discussed in the next Chapter. 

The extreme haste with which the Madras Government 
tame to announce the conclusion of peace in Europe and the 
eagerness it expressed for an immediate cessation of hostilities 
were rather significant commentaries on the military situation. 
Jfhe suspicion expressed by some was not perhaps altogether 
unfounded, that the English knew about the conclusion of 
peace even before their attack on the 15th, and that they had 
deliberately kept it secret from the French in the hope of being 
able to crown their military operations by some striking suc¬ 
cesses. Whatever truth there might have been in it. Hussy felt 
convinced, as he wrote in his report to the Minister dated 9th 
September, that the English move in announcing the conclu 
sion of peace in Europe “was a confession on their part that 
in the action of the 13th and in the sortie of the 25th as well 
as in the naval combat they had not achieved any decided 
advantage in spite of tin superiority of their forces; otherwise 
they would not have hesitated in keeping secret from us the 
news which they had received/’ 2 

That the military situation was definitely unfavourable for 
the English, to whom the news of peace came as a welcome 
relief, is borne out by the testimony of several English histo 
1 tails. Malleson in his usual impartial way writes, “The 
suspension of arms was most unfortunate for France. I he 
army of Stuart, before Kadalur, represented the last hope of 
the English in Southern India. It was reduced then by the 
want of supplies to the greatest extremities. An attack bv the 
French in force could have scarcely failed to annihilate it. 
With its destruction Madras and all Southern India would have- 
passed over to the French.” 3 Wilks also has expressed the same 
opinion. “The retreat of the English army, with the loss of its 
battering train and equipments, is the most favourable result 
that could possibly have been anticipated from a continuation 
of hostilities, and a crisis.was terminated bv the arrival 


’ H.A, mss. 639. 640; Journal dc B&rd du ftailli dr \ufjren dans 
Unde, pp. 283-28.1. 

2 P.A. ms. 40 a. 

3 Malleson — Final French Struggles in India, pp. 74*75 



WNISTffy. 


^ 

] Ht t KENCII IN iNbtA 

Of an English frigate beating a Hag of truce and Commissioners 
deputed by^the Government of Madras to announce to M. 
Bussy the certain intelligence of the conclusion of peace 
between their respective nations in Europe; perfectly aware of 
the condition of the army before Cudclalore, the Commis¬ 
sioners were instructed to declare that they, wen charged with 
positive orders to that army to abstain from hostilities, whether 
M. Bussy should accede to an armistice 01 decline it/* 1 

Before concluding this chapter a brief notice may be taken 
of the views of Bussy oil the plan of the expedition, as ex¬ 
pressed in his official report to the Minister dated pth Septem¬ 
ber. Bugsy, as was only natural, deplored the lack of success 
o! the military operations, for which he blamed the unexpected 
course of events in India before his arrival and the misfortunes 
experienced in European waters preventing the sending of 
reinforcements in time. But nevertheless he considered the 
plan of the expedition “as the best conceived and the most 
wisely combined” one that he had ever seen issuing out of the 
office of a Minister during his fifty years of active service. This 
opinion evidently was meant to please the Minister and did 
not express the real conviction of Bussy. For in his me,moire 
to the Minister at the time of his appointment in 1781 he had 
stated that after the severe reductions made in the number of 
troops and the amount of money he had demanded he could 
not. hold himself responsible for the result of the expedition. 
Anyway, he concluded his report of the 9th September by stating 
that he had fulfilled some of the objects of the Government, in 
protecting the Cape of Good Hope against an English attack 
and in aiding de Suffrcn to capture Trinkomali. “I have done 
all that was humanly possible, with the small means at my 
disposal, to answer to the views of the Ministry and to the 
confidence of the King and of yourself”. 2 




1 Wilks —History of My sour, 11 , p. K)6> 

2 P.A. ms. 40 2 . 


mtST/fy. 


C HAETlfiR MV 




’ANGLO FRENCH NEGO I IA i IONS AND I HE LAS I 
DAYS OF BUSvSY 

I. The terms of Peace. 

The Preliminaries of Peace between England and France: 
were concluded in January and the definitive treaty in Septem¬ 
ber 1783. But the restitution of territories in India was held 
up by nearly two years, because of an unusual delay in sending 
official instructions about the procedure of executing the treaty. 
In the absence of official instructions the representatives of the 
two Powers in India put different interpretations on the terms 
of the treaty relating to the restitution of territories. that 
was what prolonged negotiations from July 1783 to January 
1785, when ultimately the treaty was put into effect, some time 
alter the death of Pussy. The negotiations were, however, 
happily marked by a spirit of cordiality and compromise on 
both sides, without any sacrifice of what they considered to be 
their vital interests. Before turning to the course of these pro- 
t acted negotiations, it is useful to notice briefly the terms of 
the pcac relating to the restitution of territories in India. 

The first news of the terms of the Preliminaries relating 
to India came in the shape of instructions from the Directors 
of the English Company to the Governor-General and Counc il 
in Calcutta, dated 6th March 1783..* Marquis de Castries also 
informed Bussy of the conclusion of Preliminaries in a letter 
dated 15th March and sent instructions couched in similar 
language as that used by the Directors of the English Company. 1 2 
The terms of the peace laid down a simple restitution of terri¬ 
tories as they stood’in 1776, a return to the status quo ante 
helium . By the 13th Article, Chandernagore and all the other 
French factories in Bengal and Orissa were to be restored iunnc 

1 P.A. ins. 486. 

2 Ibid., mss. 488, 489. The instructions of Castries reached Bussy in 
Sept- ir^s (ms. 411). 



THE TRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


ucl\ iiftcv the ratification of the definitive treaty. French 
subjects in Bengal were assured of security and freedom of 
trade as they had cnjo\ed before. The English consented to 
allow Chandernagore to be surrounded by a canal, and on their 
side the French agreed not to erect any fortifications or maintain 
a large number of troops at Chandernagore, keeping the place 
as a purely commercial settlement. Article 14 of the Prelimin¬ 
aries- stipulated for the restitution of Pondicherry, Karikal, Mah£ 
and the French factory at Surat immediately on the ratification 
of the definitive treaty. With Pondicherry were attached two 


new districts, Vilnoor and Bah our, and with Karikal the four 

maganons or groups of villages which the French possessed 

before the commencement of hostilities. The English bound 
themselves to employ their good offices to obtain a formal cession 
of these territories from the Nawab of the Carnatic and the 
Raja of Tanjorc. Article if) of the Preliminaries related to the 
allies of the two nations in India, who were to be invited to 
accede to the peace, the accession to be made within four 
month*. If Haidar Ali (whose death was not known in Europe 
at the time of the conclusion of the Preliminaries) refused to 
accede to the treaty, war would continue between him and the 
English, and France must recall the troops lent to him. In 

case Haidar opposed the withdrawal of French troops, the 

English would give them all necessary military assistance. It 
was also expressly stipulated that Pondicherry and Karikal 
were not to be restored to the French until their troops had 
been withdrawn from the camp ol Haidar Ali. The terms of 
the Preliminaries were included in toto in the definitive peace, 
concluded on September if. 1783. The Madras Government 
received instructions about the execution of the treaty early in 
March 1784, 1 hut the instructions of Castries did not reach 
Bussv till June.* 


1 1 \A. ^n>. 73a — Macartney to Hilssv, 91I1 March 1784. See also 

C.R.C ). Vhv Frriwh in India Scries. Vol, XIII (Circular letter from the 
Stcrct Committee 10 Bengal. Madras and Bombay, dated 9th Sept. 1783, 
with a postscript of 19th Sept, to keep watch on the future machinations 
of the French). 

- Ibid., ms. |s?8~ Bussy to Castries, i*th June 1784. 





J he cessation of hostilities as between the English and the 
l iench presented no difficulty, as both sides welcomed it as a 
relief and, besides, thev were under the obligation to carry out 
the arrangement arrived at in Europe. But the question that 
presented a good deal of difficulty was to persuade Tipu to 
stop hostilities all on a sudden. It required all the diplomatic 
tact of Hussy to achieve the desired result, to establish a general 
pacification without making it appear that France had deserted 
her ally, which would have discredited her for ever in he eyes 
of all Indian Powers. On the one hand, it was difficult to 
persuade Tipu to stop hostilities at a time when he was expect 
ing Mangalore to fall. On the other, if Tipu refused to accede 
to the general pacification under Article ifi of the Preliminaries, 
the French would have to separate themselves from him, leaving 
him alone to bear the brum of an attack not merely by the 
English but also by the Marathas and Nizam Ali. There was 
provision for such a combined pressure on Tipu in the recent 
Anglo-Maratha treaty, and, besides, both the Indian Powers had 
their own grievances against the ruler of Mysore. Assailed by 
•such a combination, the fall of Tipu seemed inevitable, to be 
followed by a consolidation of English power in south India and 
the establishment of closer relationship between the English, 
the Marathas and Nizam Ali. It would have destroyed for¬ 
ever all French political ambitions in India, and that was wh> 
Busss was extremely anxious to persuade Tipu to join the 
general pacification. 

When the English Commissioners came to Cuddalorc on 
the goth June to arrange a cessation of hostilities wdth Bussy, 
they expressed their willingness to include 7 'ipu also iri the 
general pacification on condition that he released at once all the 
English prisoners in his hands. Hussy, in his anxiety to 
smoothen negotiations with Tipu and to draw him into the 
general pacification, opposed the condition suggested and pro 
posed that Tipu should be simply called upon to stop hostilities 
under Article ifi of the Preliminaries, leaving the question of 
the English prisoners to be settled by future negotiations. It 
was this difference of view w'hich prolonged the talks at Cudda- 
lore and ultimately decided Bussy to send two French agents 


TAWfSJyjy 


tilF FRENCH IN lNt>fA 

the matter with Macartney and the Madias G 
Fortunately, his viewpoint was accepted, thus making' h easier 
to arrange a cessation of arms between Tipu and the English. 

Biussy took the earliest opportunity to inform Tipu, in a 
letter dated 2nd July, of the conclusion ol peace 1 between 
England and France and to urge him likewise to make his peace 
with the English. He stated that he was sending a trusted 
person, Krishna Rao, to give him all the necessary details as 
to an ally ol France and to make him understand that his 
interests required the conclusion of peace with the English. 
“It seems to me that circumstances require that you should 

also work equally to make peace, and in this matter I promise 

you all the good offices I can offer. * With this letter he sent 
one from the English Commissioners, in which I ipu was invited 
to accede to the peace settlement and was informed that orders 
had been sent to the English officers to stop hostilities against 

him as soon as he agreed to do so on his side As a first proof 

of his desire to conclude peace, he was called upon to liberate 
all the English prisoners in his hands. 1 2 

It was only natural that f ipu should have at first appeared 
unwilling to slop hostilities, and he roundly accused the French 
of deserting an ally who had begun the war for their sake. 
But in spire of all his boastings that he would continue the 
war single-handed, he had the sense to realise that he had little 
chance of success without the assistance of the French contin¬ 
gent under Cossigny, which had been ordered by hussy to 
separate itself from Fipu’s forces under the terms of the 
armistice. Besides, Piveron dc Morlat, Cossigny and the chiefs 
of the European contingents in his service, dc Lai lee and 
Bouthenod, Used all their persuasions to make him accept the 
inevitable and conclude peace with the English, as otherwise 
lie ran the risk of being attacked by a combination of the 
English, the Marathas and Nizam AIL They also pointed out 
that far from accusing the French of desertion, he should feel 
grateful to them for having assured his succession on the sudden 
death of his father and for having protected his dominions oh 
the Malabar Coast from falling into the hands of the English. 



<SL 

>uncil. 


1 r. A. ms. 532. 

2 ibid. ms. 533. 


MIN/S 


<<& ‘ G <W 



TEwTiad also reason to Ice I grateful for the offer of Fiench good 
offices to secure favourable terms for him from the English. 
Finally, on the 2nd August an agreement for the cessation of 
hostilities was arrived at between Tipu and Major Campbell, 
commanding the English forces on the Malabar (oast, through 
the mediation of Piveron de Mortal, 1 At the suggestion of 
Bussy, Tipu sent about the? middle of September two Commis¬ 
sioners, Appaji Ram and Srinivasa Rao, to Madras to negotiate 
a definitive peace with the English. 

The question of peace with Tipu was of special importance 
to both the English and the French, as with it was connected 
the question of the English prisoners whom d Suffren had 
handed over to Haidar. It will be recalled that dc Suffren 
had proposed an exchange of prisoners, which was refused by 
the Governor of Madras. The latter had maintained his atti¬ 
tude even when warned by de Suffren that refusal would mean 
handing over the prisoners to the custody of Haidar Ali. Then 
on the 11th May 1783 Macartney wrote to Bussy proposing an 
e xchange of prisoners, including those vho had been handed 
over by de Suffren to the custody of Haidar Ali. 2 * * 5 Bussy replied 
on the 24th, agreeing to an exchange of prisoners but adding 
that since he had no authority over those handed over to Haidar 
Ali he could only request Tipu to return them/' Macartney 
wrote again on the 18th June that by the laws of warfare the 
prisoners taken by de Suffren belonged to France and that 
Tipu had no right to refuse to liberate them The Governor 
of Madras expressed his readiness to arrange an immediate 
exchange of prisoners if Bussy was prepared to include in the 
cartel those held in the custody of Tipu. 1 Matters rested at this 
point when aL the end of June the Madras Government inform¬ 
ed Bussy of the conclusion of peace in Europe. 

That sudden development solved the difficulty to .1 large 
extent and the cessation of hostilities was followed immediately 
b} an exchange of prisoners between de Suffren and Hughes and 
between Bussy and Stuart, without waiting for a settlement 

1 Wilks -History of Mysoot, II. pp. 2 17^220. 

2 1 J . A. ins, 685, 

s Ibid, ms. G86. 

1 Ibid , 111s. 687. 

5 Ibid t mss. 689-O91. 


mtstfiy. 



IHF FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


the question of the prisoners held in the custody of Tipu, 
Shortly after, the English prisoners held at Trinkomali and in 
the Isle of France were returned, as also the French prisoners 
held in Bengal and at Tanjore and Trichinopoly. There still 
remained, however, the question of the English prisoners handed 
over by dc Suffren to Haidar All. Macartney went on insisting 
that the French were under an obligation to procure their 
immediate release after the cessation of hostilities and that 
they could not put forward a pretext that they had no responsi¬ 
bility after the transfer of the prisoners to Haidar. He gave 
Bussy to understand that in case Tipu refused to return the 
prisoners it was his clear duty to join the English in bringing 
military pressure on him. Bussy obviously was faced with a 
rather delicate situation. On the one hand, under the rules 
of warfare he could not shirk responsibility for the prisoners 
taken by de Suffren and handed over, for whatever valid reason, 
to the custoch of Haidar. On the other, the French would be 
thoroughly discredited in the eyes of the Indian Powers if they 
joined with the English against their recent ally. The only 
solution to this difficult problem was the conclusion of peace 
between Tipu and the English, and this was one of the principal 
reasons for the extreme anxiety of Bussy to se< Tipu come to a 
settlement with the English. 


IH. Bussy m<nnrs to Pondicherry. 


\part from the question of the English prisoners held in 
the custody of Tipu, the relations between Bussy and Macartney 
were verv cordial and were inspired by a happy spirit of com¬ 
promise. We have already noticed the despatch of two French 
Commissioners to Madras to solve the differences between Bussy 
and the English Commissioners sent to Cuddalore regarding the 
conditions of the cessation of hostilities . 1 The mission of 
the French Commissioners was entirely successful, thanks to 
the compromising spirit of Macartney and ihe Madras Council . 2 
On July 40 Macartney wrote to Bussy that he had received 


1 P. A. mss. 692, 693. 
3 /bid., mss. 695-696. 


mtSTQy 


ANGLO-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 

news of the ratification of the Preliminaries by Fngl; 

Hussy wrote in reply on July r; that after the ratification of 
the Preliminaries, orders could be expected shortly from both 
the Governments for the restitution of territories. Pending the 
arrival of official orders, he asked permission to be allowed to 
take up his residence at Otxlgaret on the outskirts of Pondicherry 
for recouping 1 his health and to make some repair*, to the walls 
of Pondicherry to ensure the safety of the inhabitants against 
marauding bandits. In making the request he was careful to 
state that he had no intention of taking possession of Potidi 
cherry or hoisting the French flag there before the receipt of 
official Orders from the two Governments. 2 * The Madras Council 
appeared quite accommodating, and in a letter dated grd August 
Macartney informed Hussy that his request had been granted. 
Apart from the certainty that Pondicherry would ultimately 
be returned to the French, as Cuddalorc to the Fngjish. what 
induced the Madras Council to accede to Hussy’s request was 
his assurance that the French flag would not be hoisted at Pondi¬ 
cherry until the receipt of official orders from the two 
Governments. 

Shortly after, Hussy moved to Oulgaret, but when he sought 
permission for the French to assume the duty of maintaining 
law and order at Pondicherry, Macartney objected and replied 
that it could not be done before the official restitution. 4 In 
a letter dated 18th September Bussy sought permission to trans 
fer French troops and munitions from Cuddalore to Pondicherry, 
which was granted on the assurance that the French flag would 
not be hoisted at Pondicherry nor would the French assume any 
formal authority in the town before the official restitution.* 
Thus far Anglo-French relations were marked by a spirit of 
compromise and mutual understanding, but the cordiality dis¬ 
appeared over two issues, negotiations between the English and 
Tipu and restitution of Trinkomali. Before we proceed to 
discuss the difficulties connected with those two issues, let u* 

1 P. A. ms. 697. 

2 Ibid., ins. 698. 

• 5 Ibid., ms. 699. 

'Ibid., ms. 701 (Bussy to Macartney, 24th August) and ms. 705 
(Macartney to Bussy, 8th September). 

5 Ibid., mss. 705, 709. 




rnisr^ 



turn our attention for a while to the departure of tie Suffren 
from tlie scene of operations which had immortalised him in 
the history of naval warfare. 


IV. Re I urn af dr Suffren In France. 

For more than two months and a half after the cessation 
of hostilities early in Juh, de Snffren remained in uncertainty 
about the future movement of his squadron. He, however, 
expected that the squadron would be recalled to frame, and 
in August he took some of the ships to Trinkoinali for neces¬ 
sary repairs. 1 2 About the middle of September he went to 
Pondicherry, where Hussy had already moved, and there he was 
relieved of his anxiety by the arrival of Ministerial instructions 
relating to the execution of the Preliminaries.’ In a letter 
dated i(>lh March 1783 Marquis de Castries informed de Stiflren 
that since the English had decided to keep only five ships in 
Indian waters, he was to keep an equal number there under 
the command of Fcinier and send the rest back to France. He 
himself was permitted to return with his squadron. He was 
further informed that itt recognition of his services he had been 
promoted to the rank of Lieutcnafit-General. 3 It was highly 
flattering to de Suffren, and in a letter to his friend Madame 
de Seillans, dated and October 1783, he wrote : l am over¬ 
whelmed by the kindness of the Minister and that before the 
capture of Trinkoinali. which was not known till some time 
ifrer (the Minister’s letter of the iGth March).” 1 

In accordance with the instructions of the Minister 
de Suffren finally left Trinkoinali on the tith October with his 
squadron, keeping only live ships in Indian waters under the 
command of Peinier.’ De Suffren reached the Isle of France 
on the iath November and was given a magnificent reception 
which he fully deserved.* On the 39th he left for the Cape of 

1 journal d fiord du fiailli dr Suffren dans VJnde, p. 29 l - 

2 Ibid,, pp. 300-301. 

P. A. ms. 4c jo. 

1 Ortolan Monileur Universal (51b November 1H59). 

- Journal dr tim'd du Jluilli dr Suffren duns I’lmk, p|>. ;yi6-»,07 (also 
.Suffren to Hussy. ,ih October. 1783 IN T ,,ls 0* 

u Ibul . p. 317. 


ANCLO-FRENCII NFCOTIATIONS 



Good Hope. 1 There also he received an equally flattering recep¬ 
tion. and in a letter to his friend Madame dc Scillans he wrote 
on the 28 th, “The Dutch have received me here as their libe¬ 
rator. . . . . But among the compliments which have flattered 
me most, there is nothing which has given me more pleasure 
than the esteem and consideration shown to me by the English 
who are here. 2 If M. d’Orves had not been dead he would 
have died of jealousy.* ' After a short stay de Suffren left the 
Gape of Good Hope on the grd January 1784 and reached 
Toulon on the 26th March.* 

De Stiff rein has occupied such a prominent place in our 
narrative that, although it is not strictly relevant foi our pur 
pose, it is worthwhile to give a brief account of his last days in 
France before taking up the course of our story. Back in 
France, de Stiffren enjoyed a brief period of honour and glory 
which few of his countrymen had ever achieved, and then passed 
into oblivion, ending his career in circumstances the mystery 
of which has not yet been indisputably unravelled. From 
Toulon de Suffren hastened to Versailles where he was acc laimed 
as a national hero by one and all. including the King, the Queen 
and the members of the Royal family. It would be out ol 
place here to narrate some of the interesting anecdotes in this 


connection given b-v Roux/* Suffice it to note that de Suffren 
was accorded a fitting recognition for his services by the creation 
of a fourth post of Vice-Admiral lot him alone on the iSth 
April. 1784. It was in his home province, Provence, that he 
received (he greatest ovation. 1 he Estates of Provence struck 
a medal in his honour with the inscription: I he Gape pro 

tected; Trinkomali captured; ( uddalorc delivered; India 
defended; six glorious combats." Flic States General of Holland 
also sent him a gold medal struck in his honour and a let.tet 
of compliments to mark their sense of gratitude for the services 
he had rendered. 


An enterprising man like de Suffren could not long remain 


1 Journal dr Bord dtt Bailii de Suffren. p. 

2 n refers to the English squadron under Commodore King (Roux—* 
lr Bailii dr Suffren, p. 206). 

s Ortolan— Mnniteur Universe! (jtli November 1850)* 

4 Journal dc Bord du Bailii de Sitffien, pp. yit) and y\<). 

•'RnilX- lr Bailii dr Suffren duns Blade, pp. 210*311. 



mtSTffy. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


c, and as war clouds again hovered over Europe during 
1780-87 he was anxious to see active service once more. He 
was greatly disappointed when th< prospect of war was removed 
by what he considered to be a weak-kneed police on the part 
rf France, which lie criticised bitterly in some of his letters to 
Maclaine de Seillans. He was even more disappointed when 
be did not get the rank of a Marshal for which he applied in 


1787. He did not long survive the double disappointment 
spending the last days in comparative oblivion. The end came 
on the 8th December 1788. rather unexpectedly arid in circum¬ 
stances which have not been clearly explained b\ his bio¬ 
graphers. One thing however is certain. He did not die a 
natural death as the tradition of his house asserts, supported 
by some of his biographers. The evidence of Jal, the historio¬ 
grapher of the Navy is more credible that de Suftren was killed 
in a duel, but the cause of the duel is disputed b\ other bio 
graphers. Thus ended the career of one of the greatest naval 
commanders ever produced bv France. It is tempting to specu¬ 
late as to what would have happened if he had lived during the 
Revolutionary and Napoleonic daw He would have been at 
least a worthier antagonist of Nelson than Villeneuve, 


V. French good offices and higlo*Aiy$ore negotiations. 


We have already seen Bussy’s anxietv to persuade Tipu to 
stop hostilities, prompted by the fear that in case of a prolonga¬ 
tion of the war Tipu might be exposed to a combined attack 
by the English, the Marat has and Nizam Mi. and also that the 
French w mid be totally discredited in the eyes of the Indian 
Powers for having deserted an ally all on a sudden. It was 
mainly due to Bussy's elforts and the realisation of his own weak 
position, deprived of French help, that Tipu concluded an 
armistice early in August and decided to send two envoys to 
Madras to carry on negotiations for a definitive peace. In order 
to preserve the alliance and the credit of France in the eyes 
of the Indian Powers, Buss? was naturally desirous of taking 
part in the negotiations to secure the most favourable terms 
possible for Tipu. The latter also agreed, while intimating 
to Bussy the terms he wanted, to depend on his sagacity and 
wisdom to secure a favourable treaty: and it was decided that 


WHtSTfty 



rhr Mysore envoys to Madras would be accompanied by an 
accredited French representative. The English, oh the other 
hand, were extremely unwilling to allow French participation 
in the negotiations, hoping to be able to impose a severe treaty 
on Tipu. isolated from the French, or in case of a prolonga¬ 
tion of hostilities to crush him in concert with the Marathas 
and Nizam Mi. It was this difference which somewhat 
embittered the otherwise cordial relations between the English 
and the French. A further complication was introduced by 
the attitude of the Mysore envoys, who. cither on their own 
initiative or under secret instructions from Tipu as Bussy 
suspected, appeared unwilling to hold any communion with the 
French representative during the course of the negotiations. 
The situation was extremely delicate and required the utmost 
diplomatic fact and prudence on the part of Buss\. 

Let us now trace the course of events down to the con 
elusion of a definitive peace between Tipu and the English 
In reply to Bussy** letter intimating that Tipu had agreed to 
adhere to the Preliminaries under Article i6 and had decided 
to send two envoys to Madras for negotiations. Macartney wrote 
to Bussy on August 24 that he would be glad to receive the 
Mysore envoys and then added. Since happily there do not 
remain any other differences today than those between the 
Company and Tipu Sultan, only the agent of the Company and 
f ipu’s envoys will be sufficient to discuss and conclude these 
issues”. 1 In a despatch to Castries, dated 9th September. Bussy 
gave the reason for insisting on offering his good offices during 
negotiations between Tipu and the English, despite the rharac 
ter of the former and the unwillingness of the latter to set the 
French intervene. Bussy was doubtful if I ipu, left alone, 
would be able to secure favourable terms from the English. 
The ruler of Mysore was no doubt ' a man of bad faith, per¬ 
fidious like all Indians” and had inflicted great hardships on the 
French troops placed at his disposal, but, Bussy added, “despite 
all that, it is necessary for the French nation not to produce 
the impression of abandoning him under the present circum¬ 
stances; we may perhaps be in need of keeping him in hand 

’ P. A. ms. 700. 

X 


miSTQy 



for the future.” 1 On the i8ih September Bussy replied to 
Macartney's letter that since Tipu was considered an ally of 
the French within the scope of Article lb of the Preliminaries, 
the latter were entitled to offer their good offices during negotia¬ 
tions between him and the English. 2 

In offering his good offices Bussy experienced difficulty 
not only from the English but also from Tipu and 
his agent on the Coromandel Const, Sayyid Sahib, who 
despatched the Mysore envoys to Madras without previous 
intimation to the French- Bussy was naturally offended 
; ,nd wrote sharp letters to both i'ipu and Sayyid Sahib on 
the 18th September. In his letter to the former he recalled 
how France had organised a military expedition to India at 
the request of Haidar All Hie conclusion of peace in Europe 
had ended French military operations, and in response to 
Pussy’s appeal Tipu had agreed to a cessation of arms and 
to begin negotiations with the English for a definitive peace. 
But the attitude of Savyid Sahib was rather strange and open to 
suspicion. He deliberately delayed the departure of l ipu’s 
envoys to Madras, and finally sent them off without the know¬ 
ledge of Bussy, in violation of the previous arrangement by 
which they were to have been accompanied by a French agent. 
Bussv further added that he had written to Nizam Ali and 
the Marathas in the interest of Tipu. He requested I ipu to 
ask his agents to conduct themselves in a manner different 
from what they did: otherwise he would form the impression 
ihat the\ received secret instructions contrary to the spirit of 
the letters which Tipu had written to him. 3 4 In his letter to 
Sayyid Sahib Bussy complained against the sudden departure 
of l ipu\s agents for Madras, contrary to the prev ious arrange¬ 
ment that they were to be accompanied by a French agent and 
his interpreter/ 

Not to be baffled either by the dislike of the English or 
the uncooperative attitude of Sayyid Sahib. Bussy decided to 
semt ;t f rench agent to Madras separately to take part in the 

i 1\ A. ms. 403. 

3 fbia ms. 706. 

Ibid., ms. gp 

4 Ibid., ms. vi 1. 


WW/sr/fj, 



ANGLO-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 


3 ? 


<SL 


..^ 0 -..riations between the English and ripu. In a letter to 
Macartney, dated 24th September, he informed the Madras 
Governor that he was sending an experienced man named 
Martin to watch the course of the negotiations and to help 
the conclusion of a treaty lair and equitable to both sides. 
He further added that he was entitled to offer his good offices 
under Article id of the Preliminaries. 1 2 Martin and his inter¬ 
preter, Krishna Ran, accordingly left For Madras. Macartney, 
unwilling to have French interference in the negotiations but 
unable to prevent it directly, wrote to Bussy on the 25th 
October that Martin’s mission would have been more useful 
at the Durbar of ripu than at Madras, and that the good 
offices of the French were more urgently required for the 
release of the English prisoners in Tipu’s hands than for the 
negotiations for a peace treaty.* 

Martin’s mission, however, proved entirely fruitless 
During his stay at Madras for nearly a month he remained 
only a passive spectator and did not get. an opportunity even 
to meet Tipu’s agents. They were effectively guarded by the 
English, and besides they themselves appeared quite unwilling 
to establish any contact with Martin. On the latlci s tom- 
plaint Bussy wrote to Macartney on the 301I1 October, pro 
testing against the attitude of the English in preventing any 
contact between Martin and Tipu’s agents.* Macartney replied 
that, the English were in no way responsible lor it. I he 
instructions of the Nawab have undoubtedly guided the 
conduct of his Wakits”* Whatever it might have been, it was 
dearly useless for Martin to remain at Madras, and he returned 
10 Pondicherry early in November. 

At (he same time the scene of negotiations was also 
shifted from Madras to Mangalore. After some preliminary 
talks between the English representatives and Tipu’s agents, 
the latter were recalled and the Madras Government decided 
to send Sadleir and Staunton to Tipu’s camp to finalise nego¬ 
tiations.* In a letter to Castries, dated -<oth November, Bussy 


1 p. a. m». 708. 

2 ibid., ms. 712. 

Ibid., ms. 71 5. 

Ibid., ms. 719. 

s Ibid., ms. (Macartney 10 Hussy, and November 1783V 


MIN/Sr^ 


TffE FRENCH IN INDIA 

~ga\e an account of the course of negotiations between Tipu 
and the English. The latter, ‘‘seduced by the hope held out 
to him for a long time by the English to conclude a special 
treaty of alliance with him which would protect him from the 
Marat has under all circumstances”, showed himself determined 
to avoid French mediation. It was through this motive that 
J ipti had compelled de Cossigny to leave his camp with the 
French contingent, by ill treating him and refusing to supply 
money and provisions for his troops. That also explained 
why his agents avoided all contact with Martin at Madras, 
and why suddenly the scene of negotiations was shifted to 
Mangalore. Hussy however expressed satisfaction at the pros¬ 
pect of the conclusion of peace between Tipu and the English, 
although without the mediation of the French. 1 

It is necessary here to turn for a while to notice the open 
Tilt between I'ipu and Cossigny and the sudden departure 
of the latter from Mangalore with the French contingent, it 
will be recalled that when Tipu left for the Malabar Coast in 
March 178*5, he was given a French contingent of about 600 
men under the command of Cossigny. This contingent, 
together with those under de bailee and Bouthenod directly 
in I ipu’s service, had been largely responsible for Tipu*s sue* 
cesso against the English. At the time of the cessation of 
hostilities between the English and the French, Hussy sent 
orders to Cossigny to separate his contingent from the rest of 
1 ipu’s forces, but at the same time not to such a distance as 
would produce the impression that the French had suddenly 
deserted their ally. It was from this time that I ipu’s attitude 
towards Cossigny, which was never cordial, became definitely 
cold. The climax came towards the end of September (*783), 
when Cossigny suddenly left I ipu’s camp and took the route 
to I ellicherry without even having given any previous intima¬ 
tion to Bussy. 

The circumstances which led to this sudden move are not 
quite clear. Tipu was the first to write to Bussy complaining 
against the conduct of Cossigny, whom he accused of deliberate 
dishonesty and malversation. Cossigny on his side wrote to 
Bussy on the 10th October from Tellicherry, and also sent 




1 P. tm. 413. 


misr/fy 


Or 

ANGld-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 

an agent named Berneron to explain the whole circumstances. 
Cossigny\s version was that when Tipu found that no further 
help was to be expected from the French contingent, he began 
to inflict intolerable hardships and indignities on it in order to 
force it to leave the camp and thus relieve him of the burden 
of maintaining it. While not justifying Gossigny's conduct in 
suddenly leaving Tipu’s camp, Bussy did not believe Tipu’s 
accusation either. 1 Anyway, the rift was complete and there was 
no means of undoing it. Even de bailee and Boutlienod, who 
were directly in the service of Tipu, also wrote to Buss) for 
absorption in the French army, but Bussy could not do any 
thing for them because of financial difficulties. 

This incident made it even more embarrassing for Bussy 
to offer his good offices for negotiations between Tipu and the 
English. Bur he did all he could to give saner advice to f ipu, 
not so much for the sake ol the latter’s friendship as to main¬ 
tain the credit of France in the eyes of the Indian Powers, 
by giving the impression of not having deserted an ally. The 
English Commissioners left lor Mangalore about the middle of 
November, but although Tipu was impressed about the neces¬ 
sity of concluding peace, he kept s the negotiations protracted 
for a few months more in order to squeeze as much as possible 
from his conquests in the Carnatic, which had to be returned 
after the peace treaty. 2 Finally, on March n. 1784 a defini¬ 
tive peace treaty was concluded between Tipu and the English, 
which led to a restitution of territories and the release of the 
English prisoners handed over by de Suffren to Haidar. Thus 
one cause of anxiety for Bussy was removed. 3 

1 Bussy’s letter to Castries, 20th November 1783- (P. A. ms. 413); also 
Martineau —Bussy et Vinci c Fran false, pp. 385-386. 

2 Bussv to Castries, 6th January 1784 (P. A. ms. 417). 

3 For peace negotiations between Tipu and the English first at 
Madras and then at Mangalore see Wilks— History of Myoor, Vol. II, 
pp. 255*267. The treaty was signed on the 11th March. The Madras 
Government repo: ted it to the Supreme Government in Calcutta on the 
27th March, enclosing a copy of the treaty—Secret Select Committee Pro 
‘cedings. Fort William, 13th April 1784 (Forrest— Letters, Despatches etc,. 
Foreign Department , Government of India, Vol. Ill, p. 1069). In ordei 
to realise the danger in which Tipu stood after the cessation of Anglo 
French hostilities, it is interesting to notice that the Governor-General 
and Council in Calcutta strongly condemned the haste with which the 



rHF, t’RteNCH IN INblA 

Anglo-French negotiations joy the execution of the 
Peace Treaty : the question t>/ 7 r/nhouiah. 

Artglo-French negotiations for the execution of the peace 
treaty dragged on for nearly eighteen months, first because 
of ;i long delay in receiving news of the conclusion ol the 
definitive treaty, and second because of a sharp difference ot 
opinion over the question of the restitution of Trinkomali. 
As we have noticed already, relations between the French, and. 
the English were friendly and cordial down to the beginning 
of September 1783. In anticipation of the restitution of Pondi¬ 
cherry the French were allowed to move troops and munitions 
there and even to import provisions duty-free. Bussy> faced 
with acute financial difficulties, was anxious to get back pos¬ 
session of the French territories at the earliest possible oppor¬ 
tunity after the conclusion of the definitive treaty. In order 
to have the preliminary discussions completed beforehand, he 
wrote to the Madras Council on the 18th September, proposing 
the despatch of an English agent to Pondicherry to consider 
the problems relating to the restitution of territories pending 
the conclusion of the final treaty, 1 I he Madras Council 
accepted the proposal and early in November sent George I sac 
Hoissard to Pondicherry. On his ride, Bussy appointed Mon- 
ncron to carry on preliminary tjalLi for the restitution of 
territories. 3 

Madras Government had invited Tipu through ihe medium of Hussy to 
conclude peace. The move was characterised as at once impolitic and 
disgraceful." The Madras Government was given power merely to 
arrange a cessation of hostilities but not to conclude a definitive peace 
with Tipu. The restriction was, however, ignored and a treaty was con- 
. hided on the nth March, as noticed above. The Governor-General 
condemned the treaty for not including any reference to the Nawab of 
the Carnatic or to the Marathas, with whom the English had concluded 
in 1782 a treaty of alliance directed against the ruler of Mysore. The 
opposition of ihe Governor-General and Council to the treaty with Tipu 
was overborne by order from England.—Secret Select Committee Pro¬ 
ceedings. Eon Willliatn, 4th September 1783, 13th May and 13th July 
1784 (Forrest, Vol, III). 

U’. A. ms. 706. 

2 Ibid, mss. 710, 715, 716. 

3 Ibid, ins. 717. 





MIN ISTffy 


Anc; i o• r k n cat \ it;o l iations 




On tin: 29th December the Governor ol Madias sent 
instructions to Hoissard about the arrangements to be made 
for the execution of the treaty when concluded and informed 
Hussy that he was expecting shortly official confirmation of the 
signature of the definitive treaty. 1 2 * 4 O11 the vet February '1784) 
Macartney informed Hussy about the arrival of the Swallow, 
carrying official news of the signature of the definitive treaty, 
and he also sent him a ropy of the treaty early in March.” 
On his side Bussy had received no information from l ranee, 
and in the absence of official instructions it was difficult for him 
to proceed to the immediate execution of the treaty as the 
English wanted. He was, however, faced with an acute financial 
situation, and was thus anxious to get back possession of the 
old French territories in India at the earliest moment. So he 
wrote to Macartney on the ifith March that although he had 
received no instructions from his Government, h< was ready 
to proceed to the restitution of territories if the Madras Council 
thought it necessary. 1 Following this, towards the end of March 
the Madras Government, sent three Commissioners to Potidi* 
cherry, Floyer, Darlymple and Fallofield, to negotiate with their 
French opposite numbers, Monneron, Goutenceau and Moracin, 
about the execution of the treaty. 1 

The negotiations, however, dragged on for several months, 
being punctuated by proposals, counter proposals and tempo¬ 
rary suspensions of talks. Both sides were willing to proceed 
to the immediate restitution of territories, but one insuperable 
difficulty stood in the way, namely the question of Trinko- 
mali. This place had originally belonged to the Dutch, from 
whom it was captured by the English, who in turn gave place 
to the French. The arrangement made by Bussy for the occupa 
tion of Trinkoinali divided responsibility between the Ircnch 
and the Dutch, the former controlling the port and the two 


forts and the latter being in charge of civil administration. 
Evidently sovereignty remained with France. Bussy had refused 
to transfer the place completely to the Dutch, as the laitei had 


1 P. A. ms. 723. 

2 [bid, mss. 729, 732. 

*’ [bid, ins. 733. 

4 [bid, mss. 734-739- 


MINISr^ 



wauled, and his intention was to try to keep Trinkomali to 
France at the end of the war. 


The strategic importance of Triukomali was fully realised 
by both the French and the English. At the outset of the talks 
t/ie English proposed that the restitution of Triukomali be 
taken up along with that of Pondicherry and other possessions, 
as stipulated in die treaty. Now, the Anglo-French peace treaty 
did not contain any specific provision regarding Trinkomali. 
J he preliminary treaty was signed before the news of the 
capture of 1 linkomali by de Suffren had reached Europe. Even 
the definitive treaty, concluded on the 3rd September, did not 
contain any specific reference to Trinkomali. But Article 19 
related to the restitution of territories captured by either side 
during the war and not specially mentioned in the treaty. This 
clause evidently covered Trinkomali, and the execution of the 
treaty demanded that the French should hand over the place 
to the English. Bn ihe Anglo-Dutch preliminary peace treaty 
Trinkomali was to be handed over by the English to the Dutch. 
There was thus no doubt about the ultimate settlement: the 
French were to return Trinkomali to the English, who in turn 
were to give it back to the Dutch. 

But the difficulty arose a.s to the time and procedure of 
restitution. The English were anxious to get back immediate 
possession of Trinkomali from the French, and they claimed 
not to re transfer the place to the Dutch before the conclu 
sion of a definitive treaty between England and Holland. They 
even refused to allow the Dutch to have any part in the 
discussions at Pondicherry regarding the restitution of territories. 
On the other hand, Bussv suspected, and with reason, that once 
in possession of Trinkomali the English would not give it back 
to the Dutch. So he wanted to postpone the question of 
Trinkomali till the conclusion of a definitive treaty between 
England and Holland, when the double transfer of the place, 
from the French to the English and from the English to the 
Dutch, would take place simultaneously. In the meantime he 
proposed to proceed to the restitution of other territories in 
India between the English and the French. 

The question of Trinkomali broke up the negotiations at 
Pondicherry’ shortly after they were started, the English demand* 
ing an immediate restitution of the place and the French con- 


MMST/fy 



\N( . J O I RKNC 1 l NEGOTIATIONS 


*8L 


Tmg that they could not do it without specific orders from 
Paris. 1 On the 3rd May the English Commissioners wrote to 
the French delegates that they had received instructions from 
Madras to break off negotiations and return. 2 Only Darlymple 
remained, and in order to put pressure on the French to con 
dude negotiations at once Macartney threatened to hoist the 
English flag at Pondicherry*. Bussy found himself in great 
embarrassment. On the one hand he could not yield to the 
English demand about Trinkomali without official instructions 
from France, and on the other he was faced with acute financial 
difficulties which could be solved only by the restitution of 
territories. He wrote two frantic letters to Castries, dated 
1st and 51I1 May, giving an account of his financial difficulties 
and of the negotiations with the English, and hoping to be 
rescued from the embarrassing situation by the receipt of official 
instructions regarding the restitution of Trinkomali. 3 Although 
talks were suspended at Pondicherry at the beginning of May 
and the English delegates returned to Madras, all through the 
month correspondence went on between Bussy and Macartney 
to find out an avenue for the resumption of negotiations. 
Finally, Bussy agreed to hand over the port and the two forts 
at Trinkomali to the English if he did not receive contrary 
instructions from France by the beginning of July, and it was 
on this basis that Macartney agreed to resume negotiations 
and to send the English delegates again to Pondicherry. 4 * 

1 Negotiations were resumed early in June,^ but they were 
broken off again within a few days, after the arrival of a French 
frigate, the Precieuse, carrying the long-awaited instructions 
from Castries about the execution of the treaty. 6 According to 
these instructions the French were to hand over Trinkomali 
to the English, to be, re-transferred to the Dutch immediately 
after. Bussy at once communicated the instructions to the 
English delegates and also to Falk, the Dutch Governor of 


1 I*. A. mss. 763. 764 (Letters from the English to the French Com¬ 
missioners dated 23rd and 27th April 1784). 

2 Ibid , ms. 765. 

3 Ibid , mss. 4*6. 427. 

1 Ibid, mSvS. 74 »' 74 f>. 

Ibid, ms. 77 i. 

e Ibid, ms. 428. 



Ceylon But the English delegates refused to accept the pro 
posal of a simultaneous transfer of IYinkomali in the absence 
of Iresh instructions from Lout Ion. 1 * 3 * Negotiations were conse¬ 
quently broken off on the ist July. Bussy wrote to Macartney 
on the |th that although he had agreed to the immediate resti¬ 
tution of Trinkornali as the basis of the resumption of uegolia 
Lions in June, his hands were now tied by official instructions 
from Paris. If the English were unwilling to continue the talks 
on any other basis, he had to accept a second suspension of 
negotiations. He was however sending a frigate to fiance, and 
he invited Macartney to take the oportunity of sending an 
agent to Europe for further clarification of tlie disputed point.- 
Macartney replied on the 9th July, agreeing to suspend negotia¬ 
tions and to send an agent, Staunton, to Europe In the French 
frigate. 8 

Thus for the second time negotiations were suspended 
and the restitution of territories was delayed till the end of 
January 1785, when official instructions were received in India 
about the signature of a definitive treaty between England and 
Holland, which stipulated for a double transfer of Trinkornali 
simultaneously. Bussy, however, did not live to see the final 
settlement. He died on the 7th January 1785, and the task of 
taking back possession of the French settlements in India fell 
upon his successor, Coutenceau. He had, however, by clever 
and patient diplomacy succeeded in foiling the English plan 
regarding Trinkornali. In spite of the acute financial diffi¬ 
culties facing him, he refused to he jostled into a surrender of 
Trinkornali. As he wrote to Castries, Segur and Yeigenncs in 
August 1784, he felt convinced that once in possession of Trinko- 
inali, the English had no intention of giving it back to the 
Dutch ’ The eagerness which the English showed to hurt) 
through negotiations, their insistence 011 treating the restitution 
of t rinkomali as the lirst and the most essential item in the 
execution of the treaty, and the large number of troops and 
huge quantities of munitions* which they planned to send to 

1 P. A. ms. 778. 

» Ibid , 111s. 74I). 

3 Ibid, ms. 747. 

» Ibid, mss. 430, 437, 440. 


MINISr^ 


v ^ e ■ Go k^X 

A Nr t o I'RV.NCH N$GO I r A I IONS 

Hnnkomali at the time of taking possession confirmed his 
suspicions. He was all the more convinced that the English 
would try to keep Trinkoxnali to themselves l>v the under-hand 
support which they gave to the king of Kandy in organising i 
revolt against Dutch rule. It. redounded to the credit of Bossy's 
diplomatic ability that lie saw through the English plan and 
succeeded in foiling it. 

VII. Bussy’s views on future French policy in India, 

Before we close the chapter and turn to the history of the 
French settlements in India from 1783 to 1793. it remains for 
us to discuss the political views of Bussy regarding relations 
with Indian Powers and the future of French possessions in 
India. These views were clearly expressed in some of the letters 
exchanged between him and the Minister, Marquis dc Castries, 
during 1783-84. 

Bussy felt greatly disappointed at the sudden conclusion of 
peace, the news of which reached India only three months 
after his arrival. In fact, peace had been concluded in Europe 
without any reference to the military situation in India and 
without any consideration of the effect it might produce on the 
Indian Powers. For years French agents had carried on propa¬ 
ganda at the various Darbars about the intention of France 
to form a ring of alliances in India and to send a formidable 
expeditionary force to destroy the English power. Many of 
the Indian Princes had entered into negotiations, formal and 
informal, for French military assistance against the English, 
and they had been persuaded by the exaggerated statements of 
the French agents to pitch their expectations at too high a 
point about the strength of the expeditionary force sent under 
Bussy, expectations which were confirmed by the naval actions 
of de Suffren. They had no idea about the military situation 
in Europe and America, and the sudden cessation of hostilities 
between the French and the English, almost immediately after 
the landing of Bussy\s expeditionary force, came to them as an 
unexpectedly disappointing setback. It only created in their 
minds an impression that little reliance could be placed in 
France as an ally. Moreover, the terms of the peace, by which 
France did not get any advantage at all, made them convinced 




misT/fy 



about her military weakness. Even after Wandiwash France 
had not lost credit in the eyes of the Indian Princes, many of 
whom eagerly sought her alliance after 1763. But the peace 
of 1783 thoroughly discredited her and made the Indian Powers 
distrustful both of her military strength and of her consistency 
as an ally. 

After the sudden conclusion of peace, Castries felt it neces¬ 
sary to offer some explanations to the Indian Powers about the 
abrupt change in French policy. In a letter dated 24th April 
1783 he asked Bussy to inform the Indian Princes that it was 
their vacillating policy and delay in joining the French in an 
all-out. effort against the English that was responsible for the 
unexpected end of the French expedition. The peace was how¬ 
ever not a permanent settlement but a mere temporary truce, 
and as an effective preparation for the next outbreak of hosti 
lities Castries advised Bussy to persuade the Marat has, Nizam 
AH and Haidar Ali (his death was not yet known in Europe) 
to form an alliance with France. 1 

On the 9th September 1783 Bussy addressed a long 
mthnoire to the Minister dealing with political relations with 
the Indian Powers, 2 as a supplement to the report on military 
operations bearing the same date. 3 He frankly observed that 
the sudden conclusion of peace had thoroughly compromised 
French honour and reputation in the eyes of the Indian Powers. 
It came just at the moment when many of the Princes had sent 
Wakils for negotiations, and they were totally disconcerted at 
rhe unexpected development even before the arrival of the 
Wakils at Cuddalorc. Bussy was convinced that after the con¬ 
clusion of peace, on terms which did not secure any advantage 
u> France whatsoever, it was extremely difficult to vindicate 
French prestige in future before Indian Powers, specially when 
:hev had been fed for the last fifteen years with all sorts of 
assurances and promises by unscrupulous French agents at 
their Durban. Personally Bussy thought that the plan of the 
expedition was sound and would have achieved success but for 
some unforeseen factors, hut it was difficult to persuade the 

1 P. A ms. 5 i 5 . 

a Ibid, ms. 403. 

a Ibid, ms. 40a. 


MIN ISTQy 


KSCLO- -FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 

m _ . « * 
^Indian Powers to take the same view On the other hand, 

actual developments tended to show them the military superior¬ 
ity of the English, whose armed strength in India at the end 
of the war was much greater than at the beginning. 

Castries, as we have seen, regarded the peace as a mere 
truce and wanted Bussy to make diplomatic preparations for 
the next outbreak of hostilities. About the policy to be pursued 
with respect to the Indian Powers, although he preferred a 
general coalition, he was sceptical of the value of seeking the 
alliance of the ruler of Mysore, and urged Bussy to concentrate 
on cementing relations with the Marathas, who constituted the 
only Power in India capable of rendering effective help to the 
French. In a letter dated ist November 1783 he wrote. ‘The 
accounts which have been sent do not permit us to think that 
the son of Haidar Ali has retained the power of his father or 
has inherited his hatred against the English • ■ rhc 
Marathas have a consistency stronger and more suitable to 
operate a revolution in India. It is in this light that you should 
make all preparations for the next war and you should consider 
all other objects as subsidiary to it". 1 The adverse attitude of 
Castries towards the ruler of Mysore is also clear from his lette s 
of the 16th and 17th March 1783, in which he asked Bussy to 
leave the English and their allies free to take measures for the 
recovery of the territories conquered from them by Haidar Ali. 
He also informed Bussy about the conclusion of a special con¬ 
vention by which the English Company guaranteed military 
assistance to the French in case Haidar Ali opposed the return 
of the French troops placed at his disposal. 2 

Bussy criticised this policy, and in his reply, dated 28th 
September 1783, wrote that such a desertion of an ex-ally would 
thoroughly discredit the French in the eyes of the Indian Powers 
and would ruin all chances of forming an anti-English coalition 
in future. 3 It was in order to avoid that odium that, in spite 
of all the rebuffs he had received from Tipu Sultan and his 
agents, he still went on pressing his good offices for an equitable 
peace treaty between Tipu and the English. 




’ P. ms. 550. 

2 Ibid, mss. 489, 491. 
* Ibid, ms. 411. 



mtST/ty 



T'tL - 


Bus$\ iriecl his best to dispel the wrong impressions in 
France about lire policies of the Indian Princes created by the 
bdse and exaggerated statements of unscrupulous French agents 
at the different Day bars. He wrote two long letters to Castries 
lor the purpose, one dated 13 th. February 1 2 and the other 3rd 
March i/B-F** Fo the latter were attached two metnoires , the 
lust dealing with the state of the Mughal Empire and containing 
a detailed account of the military strength of the various 
Princes and chiefs in north India, and the second dealing with 
1 be history of the Marathn Confederacy and its policy towards 
I * nee. These are highly interesting documents and reveal a 
thorough grasp of the complications of the Indian political 
situation on the part of their author. 

In the letter dated 13th February Hussy stated that the 
main difficulty about the formation of an anti-English coalition 
in India was the acute jealousy of the Marathas against Haidar 
A 1 i. In fact, but for Haidar’s money the Marathas would have 
ended their conflict with the English much earlier and formed 
an offensive alliance with them against the ambitions ruler of 
Mysore. I hey ultimately did conclude a treaty with the 
English, which dearly indicated aggressive designs against 
Haidar. After the cessation of hostilities between the English 
and the French the Marathas wanted to attack Tipu, but con¬ 
sidering him as an ally of the French they sent a Wakil to 
Hussy to explain to him their motives and to justify their 
conduct. He had succeeded for the time being in persuading 
the Marathas not. to move against Tipu. He had done so f 
be cause although Tipu was faithless and unreliable, it was to 
the interest of the French to preserve concord and to bring 
together the Marathas. Nizam Ali and Tipu into an offensive 
alliance against the English, to come into operation on the 
outbreak of the next war between France and England. He 
had written to all the Powers on the subject, but although peace 
was preserved among them for ihe time being, he felt sceptical 
about the future. 

Bussy expressed himself very strongly about the method 
°f maintaining diplomatic relations with the Indian Powers. 


1 1 \ A. ITK. 420. 

2 ibid, ms, ^23. 


wuisr/fy 



AX’OLO-FRENCII nF.cotiatio ns 


<8L 


fife wanted to suppress outright the existing system ot keeping 
a large number of official and non-official agents at the different 
Durban, with no centralisation of Control, the activities of these 
agents remaining in most cases completely unknown to the 
Governor of Pondicherry. In place of Frenchmen he wanted 
to employ Indian WakUs, more conversant with the languages, 
manners and customs of the Darbars and better able to entei 
into their secrets. At the same time there was to be an absolute 
centralisation of control in the hands of the Governor of 
Pondicherry, who was to act as the only means of communica¬ 
tion between France and the Indian Princes. This change of 
system Bussy advocated on grounds of both efficiency and 
economy. 

Bussy criticised the French agents at the various Durban 
in the most scathing terms possible, characterising them as a 
pack of unscrupulous self-seekers who circulated all sorts of 
false stories in France about the Indian political situation just 
to win the ear and the favour of the Minister. As he wrote 
in ins report to the Minister dated <>th September 1783, these 
agents “bad sent to Europe only absurd fables • • • bo,u 

of their personal interest or their imagination ’.' I he only 
exception he made was in the case of Montigny, hut even in the 
case of Montigny, while giving him full credit lor zeal and 
honesty, Bussy considered him as totally unfit for the son ol 
work entrusted to him. In fact, far from being able to know 
Lhe secrets of the Poona Durbar, lie had been successfully duped 
bv the Marathas. While he had believed in their assurances of 
friendship for France and was putting forward to Bussy then 
proposals for an alliance, he was totally unaware of the fact 
that they had already concluded a treaty with the English, 
envisaging an offensive alliance against Haidar Ali, the Fiench 
ally. It was Malarois, whom Bussy had sent to Poona to contact 
Montigny, who told him for the first time about the existence 
of the Anglo-Maratha treaty. 

As regards other Frenchmen, Bussy wrote, they were “just 
Saint-I.at.bins, not equally criminal to be true, yet as much to 

he condemned.for having deceived the ministers and 

the nation in all their reports. It is surprising that there was 


1 P. A, in s - 405. 



miSTffy 



not a single one among them who was sufficiently honest, suffi¬ 
ciently truthful and sufficiently wise to have ended the ir 
me moires or the reports they sent with this single expression: 
such is the state of things at the moment 1 am writing, but 
within fifteen days and very frequently before this mtmoire 
would reach the Ministry nothing of what l am writing will 
exist or can serve as a basis for any sort of operation, because in 
Asia nothing is stable and a fresh development may arise every 
day”. It will be remembered that Hussy used nearly the same 
words in his me moire of 1777, referring to the reports of the 
French agents at the various Indian Darbars . Much of Bussy’s 
criticism was undoubtedly justified, but one c annot help observ¬ 
ing that while condemning the reports of unscrupulous agents 
Bussy went to the other extreme of undue caution. In fact. 
Bus y had all along been sceptical about the practicability and 
value of forming alliances in India. 

It was not merely for efficiency but also for economy that 
Bussy wanted to recall the large number of Frenchmen who 
acted as agents at the various Darbars. In contrast to the 
uselessness of the work they did. they spent money freely and 
made demands on Bussy which put him to considerable 
embarrassment. Writing to Castries on the 13th February 1784. 
he stated that Piveron de Morlat, the agent at the Court of 
Haidar and Tipu, “made enormous expense which only one of 
our great embassies in Europe alone would have justified”. 
In contrast to this huge expenditure “his letters never con 
tained anything but vague and chimerical projects”. Piveron 
de Morlat, “without knowing the state of our finances draws 
letters of exchange on me and compromises with the greatest 
light-heart edness the subsistence of the troops and the credit of 
the Nation”. Montigny also made “expenses as considerable as 

useless.he has been and will always be duped”. He 

“sends on his own authority and at great expense one French 
officer to the Court of Delhi and another to the Subadar of the 
Deccan, and gives promises and assurances with an incredible 
light heartedness which would have merely caused laughter if 
they had not also entailed dangerous consequences”. 1 Even 
Rousseau, the French Consul at Basra, wrote to the different 


1 I\ A. ms. 4x0. 


A NC U )-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 

of Asia that he enjoyed the confidence of the Minister, 
gave all sorts of promises and assurances and sent at!venturous 
agents to Indian Durbars. Bcaubrun, the French agent at Goa, 
had incurred a huge debt to finance this so-called diplomatic: 
work. Bussy thus considered it absolutely necessary to recall 
the French agents from the various Darbars to avoid further 
wastage of money. 

In place of the existing system Bussy wanted to concentrate 
all diplomatic work in India in the hands of the Governor of 
Pondicherry, who was to serve as the only channel of com 
munkation between the French Government and the Indian 
Princes. f o maintain contact with the different Darbars, the 
Governor of Pondicherry was to employ Brahmin Wakils accord¬ 
ing to the system of the country. These Wakils possessed diplo 
matic adroitness and finesse to an exceptional degree, and know- 
ing the languages and usages of the country they were better 
lined than any foreigner to get into the secrets of any Darbar. 
I'or normal diplomatic relations the English also employed 
Indian Wakils* It was true that these Wakils might be duped 
or that they might dupe the French Government, but even then 
Bussy considered the risks far less than if Frenchmen were 
employed as diplomatic agents. Moreover, the employment of 
Indian Wakils would certainly be preferable from the point of 
view of economy. 

Bussy objected with equal vehemence to keeping French 
troops in the service of the Indian Princes. After 1763 a large 
number of French troops got scattered all over India in search 
of career and fortune. They accepted service under various 
Princes, forming small European contingents. It had been 
thought by the French Government that these contingents would 
prove very useful to France in moulding the policies of the 
Indian Princes in case of a war between France and England, 
and the Pondicherry Government had given direct assistance and 
encouragement to the maintenance of these contingents. But 
Bussy was of the opinion that far from serving any useful 
national purpose, they were only discrediting France in the eyes 
of the Indian Powers. The French troops in the service of the 
Indian Princes were merely self-seekers and undisciplined 
bandits and had justly earned the contempt of their employers. 
As an illustration, Bussy cited the example of what was known 

AA 




mister 



as ihc Swiss contingent, commanded by de Bailee, in the service 
of Unsalat Jang. At the instance of the English, Basalat Jang 
dismissed the contingent at. a moment’s notice without even 
paying the arrears of salary. De Lidice then sought employ¬ 
ment first under Nizam Ali, then under the Marathas, and 
finally entered the service of Haidar Ali; but everywhere he 
was treated with ignominy, which impaired the prestige and 
reputation of the French nation. Bussv urged the immediate 
disavowal by France of any connection with the private contin¬ 
gents in the service of the Indian Princes, and he even opposed 
the idea of absorbing the troops in the French army, on the 
ground that they would spread indiscipline and demoralisation 
among the regulars. 

Bussy's scathing criticism was largely justified, as most of 
the Frenchmen in the service of the Indian Princes were just 
unscrupulous vagabonds, without any patriotic spirit or military 
talents sufficient to win the confidence and respect of their 
masters. But would he have modified his opinion about the 
utility of keeping Frenchmen in the service of the Indian 
Princes if he had lived on to see the achievements of de Boigne, 
Perron and Raymond? It is doubtful. These men had great 
talents and organising ability, had gained the complete con¬ 
fidence of their masters, and had earned their respect for the 
French name, hut from the purely national point of view they 
served and could have served but little useful purpose. They 
had organised armies and had won victories, but they could not 
have moulded the policies of their masters in the interest of 
their nation. The days of the young Bussv dominating the 
Deccan with his small contingent were over. 

VIIf. The question af shifting the centre of French power 
from Pondicherry to Mahe. 

In these political discussions about the future French poli<\ 
ii India one very interesting question arose,—whether in view 
of past experiences it would he preferable to transfer the centre 
of French power in India from Pondicherry to Mahe or else¬ 
where. The Minister of Colonies, Marquis de Castries, was 
very much in favour of such a transfer, while Hussy was entirely 
opposed to u. Castries first made the proposal in his letter 


mtSTfly 



dated 17th March 17S3. 1 He invited Bussy's opinion on the 
advisability of transferring the principal French establishment 
from the Coromandel Coast, where the English were strongly 
entrenched in power, to a convenient spot on the Malabar Coast, 
preferably Mahe. He gave the following objections to rebuild 
ing Pondicherry for the third time as the centre of French power 
in India. First, its proximity to Madras exposed it “to be 
invested in twenty four hours and to be besieged completely 
in ;i lew days' time", unless at least “it was turned into .1 strong¬ 
hold capable of resisting all attacks, frequently without any pre¬ 
vious warning or even declaration of: war as on the last occa¬ 
sion”. Second, the English had acquired such a dominating 
position on the Coromandel Coast that in case of war the French 
could not offer any prolonged resistance without the help of 
some country Powers. Pondicherry was too far away to receive 
speedy assistance from any ally. Third, for supplies of provi¬ 
sions and of raw materials for construction work, Pondicherry 
depended entirely on the Carnatic and ! anjore. 1 he Nawab 
of the Caranatic and the Raja of 1 anjore being under English 
domination, there was always (he risk of supplies being cut off 
at any moment. Fourth, the cession of Negapatam to the 
English closed all chances that there might have been of getting 
assistance from the Dutch. 

For these four reasons Castries favoured the transfer of 
the seat of French power in India from Pondicherry to some¬ 
where else. There remained two other places, Karikal and 
Mahe. Karikal suffered from the same disadvantages as Poncli 
c herry. On the other hand, Mah<£ seemed to be the most desir¬ 
able spot for the purpose, being situated at the borders of the 
dominions of the Marathas and of Haidar Ali, both potential 
allies of France in a war with England. One difficulty about 
Mahe was that the territory was too small and the conversion 
of the place into a military stronghold would require an enor¬ 
mous expense. But Castries hoped that the transfer of the 
principal French establishment to the Malabai Coast near his 
own dominion would offer such advantages 10 Haidar Ali that 
he would willingly agree to enlarge the French possession bv 
ceding some territory to the south of Mahe. Castries was so 


1 I 1 . A. ms. 491. 


MINIS r*y 



much in favour of the idea that in case Hussy approved of 
it, he gave him fxill authority to enter into negotiations with 
Haidar Alt at once for the cession of some territory contiguous 
to Mahe, provided he made no commitment in return, Which 
might lead to a rupture between England and France. He, 
however, relied on Hussy’s judgment and did not like to impose 
his will against the latter’s objections. 

Bussy replied to this letter on the 28th September 1783. 
discussing in detail his objections to the proposal. 1 The only 
disadvantage of Pondicherry was its proximity to Madras, which 
exposed it to a sudden attack. Karikal suffered from the same 
disadvantage after the cession of Ncgapatam to the English and 
the establishment of their hold over Tanjore and Trichinopoly. 
From that point of view the isolated situation of Mah£, far 
away from the English sphere of influence, offered an advantage. 
Hut Mah£ suffered from three serious disadvantages. First, the 
territory was too small and there was no scope for future e xpan¬ 
sion, being surrounded by the dominions of the potential allies 
of France. Second, in contrast with Pondicherry which could 
sene as the enireptit for the finest qualities of cloth, Mahe 
offered little commercial prospect, the neighbouring country¬ 
side producing only some spices. Another difficulty was that 
there was no suitable port, entry into the river being barred to 
large vessels. Third, the geographical situation of Mah£, touch¬ 
ing the borders of the dominions of Tipu and of the Marat has. 
would inevitably drag the French into the constant conflicts 
between the two Powers. “Nothing will ever destroy in the 
minds of the Marathas the hatred they have against the successor 
of Haidar.” It was true that Tipu ’‘will find his advantage in 
the establishment of the centre of French power on the Malabar 
Coast”, but Hussy asked, “should we expose ourselves to a rupture 
with England in defending this man of fortune?” He foresaw 
an imminent fall of the power of Tipu, and urged that like the 
English the French should also rely on their own strength and 
not on any possible assistance from an Indian ally. 

Bussy continued that whatever place might be selected for 
die principal French establishment in India, it was necessary to 
fortify it strongly and to maintain there a permanent garrison 


1 P. A. ms. 411. 


Ml HtST/fy 


ANCl.O-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 

of 1,800 European troops and 2,000 sepoys. If die French 
Government had the will and the means to make the necessary 
expenses for such an establishment, Pondicherry was the best 
place for defence, and incomparably better than Mahe where 
the hinterland was absolutely closed. On the other hand, if 
the Government thought that it could not afford such expenses, 
it was useless merely transferring the principal settlement from 
the Coromandel to the Malabar Coast. The only thing that 
could be done in that case was to leave Pondicherry without any 
fortifications, depending entirely on the goodwill of the English 
and treating the place merely as a commercial centre. 

Btissy wrote to the Minister again on the same subject on 
the 4th August 1784 and sent him tndmoires written by two 
experienced persons, both opposing the idea of transferring the 
principal French establishment from Pondicherry to Mah£.‘ 
The greatest objection to Mah£ was the certainty of the French 
being drawn into the constant quarrels between Tipu and the 
Marathas. Bossy also discussed the question of transferring the 
centre of French power somewhere else. One suggestion was 
establishment on the coast of Burma, but Bussy considered it 
inadvisable and impracticable. Pegu was a land of permanent 
anarchy. Rangoon was suitable for a settlement, but to conquer 
and preserve it required large military forces which had to be 
permanently stationed there. What little was known about 
the Andaman and Nicobar islands did not suggest the feasibility 
of establishing a settlement there. Bussy dismissed the projects 
regarding these places as absolutely chimerical and stated that 
only two places deserved serious consideration to be the centre 
of French power in India. Trinkomali was ihe most desirable, 

• nd Bussy recommended the opening of negotiations with the 
Dutch for the cession of that place. Next to Trinkomali was 
Pondicherry, best suited for defence; but Bussy was definitely of 
the opinion that it would be sheer folly to rebuild Pondicherry 
for the third time as the principal establishment in India, if the 
French Government was not prepared to make the necessary 
expenses for its defence. 

In the same letter Bussy also gave his opinion about the 

1 P. A. m*. 430 (the two nithnoires were written by Martin and 
Lagren£e) 




ttifc t^RfcNcM in iNbrA 



<SL 


future of the French power in India, ft was in a way his last 
political testament, coining just five months before his death. 
It was a gloomy future that he foresaw, considering the state of 
affairs in India after the peace and the neglect with which 
France treated her Indian possessions. The English had gained 
such an accession of strength that the existence of the French 
possessions in India and even their peaceful trade and commerce 
depended entirely on the goodwill of the former. The peace 
had so thoroughly discredited France in the eyes of the Indian 
Powers that there was little hope of getting any allies in future, 
unless France purchased them with money, or by sending 
superior land and naval forces to India had achieved some 
initial large-scale successes over the English. About the policy 
to be pursued to redeem French position in India, hussy wrote: 
“Send here superior land and naval forces with a large amount 
of money for distribution. In that case you will be able to 
gain the attention of the Asiatic Princes. Win some successes, 
atul you will then be able to persuade them to take your side. 
I hat is the crux of the matter, specially for us who today do 
not have, nor expect to have, allies. Anything different that 
may be said to you on this subject will have originated from 
charlatanism which has kept the truth covered for such a long 
time”. As regards trading operations, they depended entirely 
on the political and military position of the French in India, 
and since it was not imposing, French trade would lie at the 
mercy of the English. 

Finally, Hussy summed up his observations in the following 
words: “'There is not the slightest hope, based on reason, to 
have an establishment in any part of India with an area of 
land sufficient to meet its annual expenses. There is not the 
slightest hope to form any alliances from which we could draw 
the least advantage. There is not the slightest likelihood of 
being able to carry on in India a trade, free, secure and in¬ 
dependent. in conformity with the engagements of His Brit tank: 
Majesty contained in the definitive treaty. In the present situa 
tion of the nation or tfic future, as 1 foresee it, our commerce, 
claimed to be free, will always be dependent on the 

English. If the Ministry has neither the will nor the 

ability to make Pondicherry, before the outbreak of a fresh 
war, an impregnable place, as it is capable of being made, my 



mmsr/fy 





advice would be not to make more than the indispensabh 
expenses to reconstruct and pallisadc its ditches and to leave 
the other settlements also as they are.” fn fact, Bussv was so 
much dejected, thinking of the future of the French in India, 
that in the same letter he begged for permission to return to 
France. But he was destined not to see his counin any more, 
and breathed his last on the 7th January 1785 in the land where 
he had acquired his glory and reputation. 

IX. Death of Busty , 

Hussy's career came to an abrupt end on the 7th January 
1785. His death, though sudden, was not altogether unexpected. 
Although he was not too old, only sixty live at the time 
of his death, twenty years of inactivity and a life of ease and 
luxury had sapped his vitality. He had been keeping 
indifferent health even before leaving France. In the Isle of 
France he was taken seriously ill, which for a moment 
even seemed to turn fatal. Before he had fully recovered from 
that illness he started for India, where he passed through a very 
strenuous time which did not end even after the cessation of 
hostilities. It was to recoup his health that, he changed his 
seat from Cuddalore to Pondicherry in September 1783, but the 
strain of protracted negotiations and administrative worries and 
anxieties proved too much for him. He died suddenly of heart *n 
failure. There was a rumour that he had been poisoned, but 
it was absolutely baseless. 1 

Immediately after Bossy's death Coutenceau, the second-in- 
command, assumed authority pending orders from France. On 
the next day, 8th January, he wrote to Castries, informing niin 
of the death of Bussy and of his assumption of office temporarily, 
pending official instructions. 3 He added that he had also 
written about the event to the Governors of all the European 
nations in India and to all the Indian Princes with whom the 
French were in correspondence. Coutenceau further informed 
Castries that although he had been told by all the officers of 
Bussy that: the latter had been accorded the honours of a 

1 Martineau —Hussy et Unde Frangaisc, p. 427. 

3 1\ A. ms, 452. 




mtsTfy 



Marshal of France at all the places where he had landed during 
his voyage from France to India, he had searched all official 
papers and had found nothing to cor roborate that Bussy enjoyed 
that rank. So he had given instructions that the funeral honours 
to be accorded were to he in keeping with the official rank of 
Bussy. Although Coutenceau had justification for denying to 
Bussy the funeral honours of a Marshal, his dislike of his late 
chief had been very pronounced ail along, and that explains 
why Bussy was buried, like all others, in the cemctry attached 
to the Church of Notre Dame des Angcs at Pondicherry. In 
1787 the body was disinterred and placed in a tomb within the 
Church as a mark of special honour by the then Governor, 
Cossignv. In 1793, however, there was a re-transfer to the 
ccmctrv outside, as the result of a decision taken by the Revolu 
tionarv Colonial Assembly; and although Bussy's tomb still 
exists, it is rather doubtful as to where exactly his remains lie 
buried. A sad end for one who had earned a lasting fame in 
history! 1 

X. An estimate of IUissy. 

In the history of the French in India Bussy occupies a 
position only next to that of Dupleix. It w r as his military 
exploits, from the siege and capture of Jinji, considered im¬ 
pregnable at the time, till the secure establishment of a French 
protege as the ruler of the Deccan, which gradually expanded 
the horizon of the political ambition of Dupleix. There was no 
abler lieutenant of Dupleix than Bussy to carry out his ambi¬ 
tious projects. And yet the two men were entirely different 
in their temperaments and political ideas. Dupleix, a man of 
strong imagination and unbounded ambition, was alone respon 
sibie for laying the grand scheme of building a French empire 
in India. The credit for initiating the new colonial policy, 
which was adopted by other European nations after him, 
belonged entirely to Dupleix; Bussy, on the other hand, while 
serving as the instrument for carrying out that policy, was 
never in sympathy with it. His famous letter to Dupleix in 

1 Murtmeau —Hussy ti l’ Inde bran$ai$e, pp. 4*8-44* (about Hussy’s 
tomb). 


Ml NIST/fy 


ANGLO-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 


4 



175^ from Hyderabad, wanting to be recalled to Pondicherry, 
was a sufficient proof that he neither shared nor comprehended 
the political views of Dupleix. 1 It was only out of a sense of 
discipline and obedience to his chief that he stuck to his post 
in the Deccan, much against his own liking. All his later 
mdmoires and letters, after the first phase of the Anglo-French 
conflict in India, indicate that he had little sympathy for the 
idea of building up an overseas empire. Fie assumed command 
of the expeditionary force to India in 1781 not with the object 
of reviving the policy of Dupleix, but only to embarrass England 
as far as possible during the War of American Independence. 
The pessimistic note in the mtmoires and letters of Bussy really 
sprang from this lack of sympathy for the cause of empire 
building. 

Popular ideas have always based the greatness of Bussy on 
his military genius. He stands out in popular imagination as 
a great conquering hero, who first showed the way how Indian 
Powers could be subjugated by a European nation with a 
mere handful of well-armed and disciplined troops. His other 
qualities have been almost wholly overshadowed by what are 
considered as brilliant military exploits,—the capture of Jinji. 
the daring march to Aurangabad at a distance of 900 miles from 
Pondicherry with a handful of French troops, his successful 
establishment of a French prot£g£ as the ruler of the Deccan 
against the opposition of internal as well as external enemies, 
and his securing the grant of a large territory which not only 
made the French army of occupation independent of the 
Hyderabad Government but even made it possible to linance 
French military operations in other parts of India. It is not 
difficult to understand the reason for this popular conception 
of the greatness of Bussy, for military exploits more readily 
capture the imagination of men than the less spectacular 
qualities of statesmanship, although more successful and of a 
more enduring value. 

In fact, however. Bussy s real claim to greatness rests not 
so much on his talents as a soldier as on his capacity as a 
shrewd diplomat and a wise and far-seeing statesman. The 
capture of Jinji was not in reality such a brilliant feat of arms 


1 Martineau —Bussy et I’lnde Franfaise, pp. 79*80. 


as is commonly supposed. Nor was the march across 900 miles 
to die northern limit of lire Deccan such an impossibly daring 
venture, when we consider the absolute- lack of resistance and 
the complete confidence with which he started about the over¬ 
whelming superiority of a small number of: European troops 
to badly armed and badly trained Indian hosts. In the French 
military tradition Bussy could hardly claim a position even in 
the second rank of men. 

What really distinguished Bussy and gave him the title to 
a permanent place in modern Indian history was his uncom¬ 
mon ability as a diplomat and a statesman. Most of his sue 
cesses were due to clever negotiations and tactful handling of 
delicate situations. In the Deccan enterprise his achievement 
was not the march to Aurangabad, but the preservation of poli¬ 
tical control over the country against stubborn and ill concealed 
opposition. He had a deep and penetrating eye, and possessed a 
perfect understanding of the Indian temperament. He was the 
first European who showed how a large part of India could be 
effectively held under European domination, not so much by 
force of arms as by a skilful management of the puppet ruler and 
the leading personalities of the Darbar and a combination of 
firmness with an apparent respect for the government, laws 
and usages of the country and obedience to the will of the ruler. 
Bussy’s work did not last long, but the example he set was 
readily copied by the English with more enduring success. 
The new chapter of Indian history, which saw the beginning 
arid the rapid expansion of English political domination in this 
country, owed much to the initiative and the methods of Bussy. 

The career of Bussy falls into two clearly marked divisions,— 
first, when as a young man and an able lieutenant of Duplcix he 
carried French arms as far as Aurangabad and brought the 
whole of the Deccan under temporary French domination; and 
second, when as an old man of 63, with a failing health and a 
legendary reputation, he arrived in India in command of an 
expeditionary force sent for the purpose not of building a 
French empire but of destroying the empire built by England, 
following the way that he and his former chief, Duplcix, had 
first indicated. Between these two divisions of his career lay a 
period of about twenty years in France, spent in inactivity 
luxury and comfort. In dealing with Bussy’s career in India 


WNtsr/ff, 



_ Anglo i r*;nch negotiations 

V X. •TT > ./ ^ 

\ iy 

v% 

^rnost historians have painted him as much in black in the 
second pail as in bright colours in the Inst. The only excep¬ 
tion is Marllucau, who has given a truer and a more dispassion¬ 
ate view of the whole career of Hussy. 

The thing is that in discussing the earlier phase of the 
life of Hussy the imagination of the historian is easily caught 
by spectacular deeds in war and diplomacy, the absence of 
which in the later phase has inclined him to a condemnation 
of the man for vanity, cowardice and muddle-hcadcdncss. 
I’hc: change in the Indian political situation, the seen estab 
lishment of English power, the difficulties and accidents which 
Hussy had to face, and the wholly inadequate resources and the 
little time he had for military operations in India,—these factors 
are almost completely overlooked; and the failure of the French 
expedition in 1782-83 is attributed, with scant justice, to the 
timidity and incapacity of the commander. Little notice is 
taken of the sustained and plodding work of army administra¬ 
tion, and little credit is given for the skilful diplomacy displayed 
by Hussy in delicate negotiations with the Dutch, Tipu Sultan 
and the English. While the events of 1782 83 do not entitle 
Hussy to be ranked as a great military hero, which he in fact 
never really was, nobody who takes the trouble of going through 
his voluminous correspondence, memoir es y Journal and other 
relevant documents connected with the French expedition to 
India can fail to discern the same patience, the same dogged 
tenacity against adverse circumstances, the same capacity for 
sustained work, and the same ta<t and diplomatic fmcs.se as lie 
had displayed during the earlier phase of his career. 


V 


Ml UlST/fy 


CHAPTER XV 



<SL 


mrrioN of territories and rfvivai 

OF FRENCH TRADE 


I. Restitution of territories. 

Although hostilities in India between the English and the 
French ceased in July 1783, it was not till nineteen months 
later that the restitution of territories took place in accordance 
with the terms of the peace treaty. We have seen already the 
cause of this delay, even after official news of the definitive 
peace had reached India in March 1784. Anglo-French nego¬ 
tiations for the execution of the treaty w r ere broken off in July 
1784, pending fresh instructions from London, Bussy, who 
in September *783 had taken up his residence at Oulgaret, in 
the country house built by Law de Lauriston, had expected an 
early restitution of territories and had shown great anxiety 10 
come to a compromise with the English over disputed points. 
Rut he was destined not to see the French flag fly again over 
Pondicherry. It was not till December 1784 that the Governor- 
General and Council in Calcutta received definite instructions 
from London about the procedure to he followed for the resti¬ 
tution of territories. V copy of the instructions sent from 
Calcutta reached Madras about the middle of January 1785, 
shortly after the death of Hussy. 1 It was Hussy’s interim succes¬ 
sor, Coutenceau, who had the good fortune to see the final 
execution of the peace treaty. 

On the tgth January the Madras Government nominated 
Moyer as its agent to hand over Pondicherry, with the two 
districts of Vilnoor and Bahour, to the French and to receive 
from them the possession of Cuddalore. 2 On his side, Couten- 
ceau appointed de Boistel to carry out the restitution of terri* 


1 P. A. ms. 455 (Coutenceau to Castries, 22nd January 1785). 

3 Ibid, ms. 804; also C.R.O.— The French in India Series, Vol. XII: 
Proceedings of Fort Si. George relating to the restitution of French terri¬ 
tories on the Coromandel Coast in consequence of the Treaty of 1783 


RESTITUTION OF TERRITORIES 

Pondicherry with its suburbs was restored to the 
French on the ist February, and the two districts of Vilnoer 
and Bahour on the loth. 2 A minor difficulty arose over the 
retention of the customs-posts of the Nawab of the Carnatic 
in these territories, but ultimately the French had to yield. 
The other French possessions in India were also restored soon 
after. On the 26th February de Boistel received possession of 
Karikal, with the territories belonging to it before the war, 
from Fallofield representing the Government of Madras. 1 lh< 
factory at Masulipatain and the village of Francepeth. situated 
about two miles to the north-west of the town were handed 
over to Le Forestier on the 16th March. I he settlement at 
Yanam was also restored about the same time. In Bengal 
Chandernagore arid its subordinate factories were restored to 
Dangereux, who had been sent there as commercial agent a few 
months earlier. 6 Marin received possession of Mahe on the 
15th August. 7 The factory at Surat was not handed ovei till 
1788. In that year de Bruix wa appointed French Consul ai 
Surat and in May he received possession of the factory house 
and the garden belonging to it.* 

IF Anglo-French Commercial Convention. 

Even after the restitution of territories disputes between 
the two nations continued till 1787 over the question of the 
commercial privileges of the French.* Hie question assumed 
special Importance because of the rapid expansion of English 

* r. A. im. 455. 

s Ibid, ms. 463. The Nawab of the Carnatic had objected to the 
cession of Vilnoor and Bahour; see bis letter to Macartney, dated 27th 
March 1784 and Macartney’s reply dated 1st April; C. R. O.— The French 
in India Series, Vol. VIII, pp. 411-425. 

3 P. A. ins. 476. 4 Ibid, ms. 3986. 

Ibid, ms. 5190. 

* C. R O. —The French in India Series, Vol. XII--Wilton’s Narra 
live of his Transactions with the French on the restoration of French 
possessions in Bengal in consequence of the treaty of 1783. 

1 P. A. ms. 4540. 

* Ibid, mss. 5073, 5074. 

»C. R. O .—The French in India Series, Vol. VI: Reports by Francis 
Russel Esq., Solicitor to the Rt. Hon’ble the Board of Commissioners for 




WNlSTt 



power in India between 17(13 and 1783, which nullified in effect 
tin coin mere ial privileges enjoyed by the French Company 
under the -Farmans and Para connas of the Indian rulers. The 
abolition of the French Company in 1769 and later the out¬ 
break 0! hostilities gave the English in Bengal an opportunity 
to establish a monopoly over sail, opium and saltpetre* the 
most lucrative branches of trade. After the conclusion ot 
peace in 1783. the English found themselves threatened with 
the prospect of losing their monopoly position and of having 
to share the trade of the country with the French on equal 
terms. Fhe three Articles of the definitive treaty, 13th, 1qt.l1 
; nd 15th, which re lated to the restitution of territories in India, 
also contained specific provisions assuring* complete freedom of 
commerce to all French subjects in India, trading either indivi¬ 
dually or collectively through a Company, and enjoyment of 
all commercial rights and privileges belonging to the old 
French Company. 1 Immediately after the conclusion of the 
Preliminaries the Directors of the English Company had sent 
detailed instructions to the Governor General and Council in 
Calcutta about the execution of the treaty provisions relating 
to trade and commerce. The Directors wrote, “You will assure 
to French subjects a trade, secure, free and independent, such 
as had been enjoyed by the last French Fast India Company, 
whether the said subjects carry on commerce individually or 

through a Company. We desire that you take 

measures in this respect as may convince them of our sincere 
intention to assure France die full effect of this article and to 
remove any occasion for dispute between the two countries/’ 2 

1 tie affairs of India on the claims of the French, Dutch, and Danes to 
exclusive privileges in fhe East Indies- (0 French claims to trading pri 
vileges in Bengal and arguments against them, pp. 3-53, (2) Sketch of 
French claims in consequence of the treaty of peace, 17H3, pp. 128-132; 
(3) Report on the monopolies in the trade of salt, opium and saltpetre, 
PP .375 4%; also Vol. XVII—Sketch of the Salt Trade in Bengal so far 
as iv necessary to explain the claims of the French to art exemption from 
additional import duties in that article of commerce (1787). 

* Ciaudart—-L« Privileges du Commerce Francois dans Vlndt, p. 8. 

~ l\ A. ms. 486; Circular l etter, dated 6th Match 1783, from the Court 
of Directors to their several Presidencies in India relating to the execu¬ 
tion of tlit* Treaty of 1783 (C. R, O. The French in India Series, Vol 
lx. pp. 7 <> %)• 



RESTITUTION OF TERRITORIES 

"— 

l!_^9Mfn spite of the clauses of the treaty and the instructions 
of the Directors of the English Company, numerous difficulties 
arose, particularly in-Bengal, in giving effect lo the provisions 
relating to French trade and commerce, the English were 
naturally unwilling to share trade with the French on equal 
terms in territories conquered by them, and virtually under 
their sovereignty, such as Bengal and Bihar, they raised all 
kinds of difficulties for French trading operations. Disputes 
and minor incidents of violence were of daily occurrence. 1 he 
most serious of these incidents in Bengal was the firing on a 
French corvette, the Esfmance, from the English fort a* Budge- 
Budge in December 1785. In violation of the time-honoured 
freedom of navigation in the Hooghly, respected by all the 
European nations from the beginning of their settlements in 
Bengal, the English had established a customs-post at Budge- 
Budge and claimed the right of inspecting all foreign ships 
going up the river. The captain of the Espirance refused to 
submit to such a demand, whereupon the English opened fire 
from their fort. 1 Dangereux, who was in charge of the 
Chandernagore settlement, protested to the Government in 
Calcutta against tilts and other daily violations of the trading 
rights of the French, without getting anv redress. At Vfasuli- 
patam also difficulties arose about the freedom of French trade. 
Le Forestier, the Chief of the French factory carried on an 
acrimonious correspondence with the English local authorities 
and later with the Government of Madras on the subject of 
the exemption from customs duties of all French exports and 
imports, and in the end he gained a favourable decision from 
the Madras Council recognising the rights of the trench. 2 

Disputes still went on. and in order to end them finally 
the Governor-General and Council in Calcutta decided in 1786 
to send Colonel Cathcart to the Isle of France to negotiate a 
Commercial Convention with Souillac, the French G >vernor- 
General. After a prolonged discussion of all the disputed points 
a Convention was agreed upon and signed on the 30th April, 

1 V A. ms. 2664 (letter of the captain of tin* Esperarue ro Dangereux, 
si!i December 1 y8r } . and the latter's protest to the Calcutta Council). 

2 fhid, mss. 520.-;, 5207, 5212-5215, 5217, 52*9. 




I HI FRENCH |\ fNDIA 



<sl 


>jt;u to the approval of the English and French (Governments. 1 2 
I he English Government, however, disapproved of the Conven¬ 
tion, not because of its terms, which were adopted in a later 
agreement. but on the ground that the Governor General and 
Council in Calcutta had no right to conclude .< Convention 
with a foreign Power. Negotiations were resumed in Europe 
in 1787 between the two Governments, unci a new Convention 
was signed at Versailles on the 31st August with a view to 
remove all disputes in the execution of the provisions of the 
treaty of 1783 relating to French commercial rights and privi¬ 
leges." By the first Article of this Convention the English gave 
an assurance of freedom of trade to French subjects in the 
Carnatic, Madura, Tanjore, Northern Sarkais. Bengal, Bihar 
and Orissa. By the second Article the French right to import 
salt into Bengal was restricted to 200,000 maunds. The whole 
quantity was to be sold to the English Company at 120 rupees 
for 100 maunds. By tin third Article the English agreed to 
deliver to the French in Bengal .18,000 maunds of saltpetre and 
300 chests of opium at prices current before the last war. 
By the fourth Article French sovereignty was recognised over 
the settlement at Chandernagore and subordinate factories at 
Kasitnbazar, Dacca, Jougtlia, Balasore and Patna. By the next 
Article French commercial houses elsewhere in Bengal were 
placed under the laws of the country. 

In transmitting a copy of this Convention to Conway, 
Governor of Pondicherry, on the 241I1 November 1787, Comte 
de Montmorin, Minister of Marine and Colonies, expressed 
satisfaction at the termination of the long-standing disputes. 3 
He also sent a copy of a letter written bv the Directors of the 
English Company to Cornwallis on the subject of the Commer- 


1 l\ A ms. 904 (containing all the papers relating to the negotiations 
as well as the terms of the Convention finaly drawn up); also C. R. C.-~ 
rhe french in India Series. Vol. IX, pp. 1-58- Abstract of the advices 
from Bengal on the subject of carrying into execution the 13th article 
of the definitive treaty and restoring the French to their former trade 
and Establishments in that country with some remarks on the rights 
claimed bv the French and a copy of the Convention concluded by Colonel 
Cathcart and the French Governor-General at the Mauritius. 

2 Ibid, ms. 1002 (Copy of the treaty). 

3 Ibid, ms. 1031. 


misr^ 



While Mill claiming the right to impose 
and to control navigation in the Hooghly, 
directed not to exercise the right so as to avoid 
Further disputes with the French. 1 From 1 7^7 * 793 » when 

the French possessions in India again fell into the hands ol: 
i he English, their trade was freed from all restrictions and was 
plated on an equal footing with that of the English. 1 


III. The establishment of the Company of Cal on in: and its 
cafeer of misfort. um\ 


1 he conclusion of peace and restitution of tenitoties was 
followed by a sudden development of French trading activities 
in India, such as had not been seen for many years. I he last 
days of the Compagnie des Indcs had witnessed a steady decline 
<>! trade and commerce, and after its abolition in 17**9 French 
trade in India had dwindled almost to nothing. I he main 
factor responsible for the rapid expansion of French trading 
activities in India after the war was the establishment in 17^.% 
of a new Com pa gf lie des hides , commonly known as the Com¬ 
pany of Galonnc from the initiative taken by Calonne. the 
Control eiir-General. The Company was established by a Royal 
Irret dated 24th April 1785 , and another Arrit of the 15th May 
appointed twelve Administrators, of whom one, Moracin, was 
appointed Administrator-General in India. 5 It was granted a 
monopoly of trade in the F,ast for fifteen years. 1 he share 
capital, originally fixed at uo million livres, was later allowed 
to be increased to 40 millions by a Royal Arret dated -nst 
September 178b. 

The Company of Calonne, which started on such a large 
scale and with high hopes of being able to capture a substan¬ 
tial part of the Eastern trade, had a most unfortunate career. 
It was established at an inauspicious moment, just on the eve 
of the Revolution, which threw France into a long period of 
chaos and confusion. For the lust live years die Company 


1 V. A. ms. ioosj. 

2 About the history of French trading privilege* in India a connected 
account will he found in Caudart’s La Privilege* du Commerce Fran ( <,i> 
duns Vtnde. 

3 p. \. mss. 831. 836. 

kv> 





showed unusual vigour in pushing French trade in the Fast, 
investing a considerable amount of capital and reaping profits 
which fully justified its ventures. The very success of the new 
Company, however, proved its undoing, by rousing the jealousy 
of the other French merchants against its privilege of monopoly 
in a branch of trade which proved so lucrative. On the out¬ 
break of the Revolution the enemies of the Company carried 
their opposition to success in the National Assembly, which in 
April 1790 abolished its monopoly privilege and threw open 
the Eastern tr-de to all French merchants, f he sudden aboli¬ 
tion of its monopoly privilege, just five' years after its establish¬ 
ment. was a staggering blow to the Company. But it made a 
heroic struggle for survival, and for the next three years it 
carried on trading operations in tin East as a private organisa- 
tion, on a somewhat diminished scale but with profits which 
were as great as before. It roused the jealousy of its enemies 
once more, who in order to better achieve their object brought 
an accusation that the Company had placed large sums of 
money at the disposal of Louis XVI to organise a counter¬ 
revolution. Although entirely baseless, the charge was upheld 
bv the Convention, and In three successive decrees, dated 26th 
July and 8th October 1793 and 3rd September 1794, the Com- 
pain was totally abolished and its property confiscated. It was 
also forbidden for any trading society to assume the name of 
the Compagnie des [tides in future. I lie shareholders of the 
Company put up a stubborn light, brought up their case befoie 
even successive Government in France, and it was not till 187ft 
that the matter was finally closed. 

IV. i'he trading operations of the Company. 

Regarding the trading operations of the Company of 
Calonne, detailed information is available in the correspon¬ 
dence of the agents of the Company in India with the Adminis¬ 
trators in Paris, preserved in the Pondicherry Archives and 
published by Gaudart in 1931.‘ For the first five years, when 

1 V. A Reg is ires 11, 14 ( hwentaire des dfipiennes Archives de Vltule 
h 1 nncaise)', Gaudart-’ -CarresfjoHdancc des Agents a Pomtichery de In 
uoitvelte Cnmpngnte des hides nvec les Adnunistratenrs it Paris, 1788-180^. 


miST/fy 


RESTITUTION OF TERRITORIES 

joyed monopoly privilege, the direction of ns 
affairs in India was in the able hands of Moracin, Cornmissaire * 
G&nJral of the Marine and Ordonnatei.tr at Pondicherry. He 
had been living in India since 1765, and while serving as 
a Suite Official he also carried on private trade and amassed 
a considerable fortune. His trade connections had gained 
him high reputation at Madras and Calcutta. He was 
therefore the ablest man to direct the affairs of the Company 
in India, but it soon proved inconvenient to combine the func¬ 
tions of an administrator with ihose of a commercial agent. 
The interests of the Government and of the Company some- 
ttines appeared incompatible, and Moracin received many 
complaints from the Administrators in Paris of a sacrifice of 
the Company s interests. In September 1789 he resigned from 
the posts of Commissaire -(ren etal and Ordonnateur in order to 
free himself from administrative responsibilities and to be able 
to devote his whole attention to the affairs of the Company. 
But a few months later lie accepted another position which put 
him into great embarrassment in the discharge of his functions 
as the agent of a commercial organisation, wit!) a monopoly 
privilege which made it unpopular among the citizens of Pondi¬ 
cherry. On the 1st March 1790 he was elected President of the 
Committee set up by the citizens of Pondicherry on the news 
of the Revolution in Paris. The Committee demanded the 
abolition of the Company’s monopoly privilege, and Moracin, 
as President, had to support it, as he realised that opposition 
was wholly fruitless. Soon after, the French National Assembly 
decreed the abolition of the Company’s privilege and threw 
open the Eastern trade to all merchants, news of which reached 
India by an English boat which arrived in Calcutta in August. 

The credit of the Company, already somewhat impaired by 
the attacks of its adversaries, thus suffered a heavy blow. 
Moracin, finding himself in a difficult position, handed over his 
charge to a committee on the 1st February 1791, and on the 
iftth left for France, where he assumed the duties of an 
administrator of the private trading society which succeeded 
ihe old monopoly Company. In the meantime the Company 
appointed Simon Lagrenee de Mezieres as its Agent-General in 
India. The latter had also been resident in India for a long 
time and had been an employee of the old Compagnie des 




ompany en 


WHIST 


mi. FRI'NC H IN INDIA 

hides. He had, like Moracin, great ability and commercial 
experience. But he remained at his post only for a brief period. 
The new trading society, successor 10 the old monopoly Com¬ 
pany, wanted to reduce administrative costs by replacing salaries 
by a 3 per cent commission to its employees. At the same time 
the number of agencies was also reduced to four,—Pondicherry, 
Bengal (the agency had been shifted from Chandernagore to 
Calcutta on the outbreak of troubles in the french settlement), 
Mahe and Canton. At Pondicherry the direction of affairs was 
placed in the hands of a committee of three, Combemale, Blin 
dc Grincourt and Richardin. till the total suppression of the 
Company in 1 793 * 

During the lust five years, when the Company enjoyed 
monopoly privilege, the volume of its trade was quite consi¬ 
derable. Every year it sent out a large number of ships, and 
the cost of annual equipments averaged nearly 15 million livres. 
Lts trading operations extended from Canton to Mocha and 
Suez. Extension of trade to the latter region was of special 
importance, facilitating the establishment of a quickei postal 
service, by which, letters from Paris could reach India in less 
than three months in place of six or seven months by the other 
route, via the Cape, The principal articles of Eastern merchan¬ 
dise carried to Europe by the French ships included, besides the 
cotton manufactures of various types of the Coromandel Coast, 
saltpetre from Bengal, pepper from Mahe and coffee from 
Mocha, cowries, sandalwood, rattan-cane, raw' hide, senna, gum- 
arabic, incense, myrrh and ostrich feathers. I he Company 
sent out. to India both European merchandise as well as consi¬ 
derable sums in cash. For many years the French settlements 
in India had not seen such an influx of money as between 178b 
and 1790. Even then the agents of the Company had a difficult 
task in making all the purchases demanded from India, their 
value far exceeding the amount received in cash and merchan¬ 
dise, Money for the balance had to be found by drawing bills 
on the Company in Paris: Moracin’s credit and reputation 
stood so high at both Madras and Calcutta that his personal 
guarantee made the bills readily acceptable at those places. 
After 1789, however, on the news of the Revolution in Paris 
and of the persistent attacks on the monopoly privilege of the 




mtsT/fy 



Company, it became extremely difficult for Moracin to find 
ctedit, in India against bills drawn on die Company. 


just before the outbreak of the Revolution the Company 
had once thought of seeking from the Government all the rights 
and privileges regarding territorial administration in India 
which had been granted to the earlier Companies of Colbert 
and Law. At its request Moracin drew up an estimate of the 
revenues and expenses of the different French settlements in 
India. The revenues amounted to 1200,000 litres, and the 
expenses, as fixed by the home Government in 1789, to 700,000 
litres. Moracin wanted the balance of 500,000 livres to be 
spent on a programme of construction of defensive works in 
(he various settlements. 1 However, the idea fizzled out on the 
outbreak of the Revolution, and a few months later the Com 
pany lost even the single privilege which it enjoyed, namely 
monopoly of trade. 

1 he abolition of (he monopoly privilege of the Company 
brought about a sudden reduction in the volume of trade. The 
successor to the monopoly Company suppressed some of the 
agencies, those at Mocha and Yanam, 10 reduce the cost of 
establishment; and as the political situation in France deterio¬ 
rated there was a rapid fall in the demand for Eastern mer¬ 
chandise. The Company, however, carried on its trading 
operations, although on a diminished scale, down to the siege 
and capture of Pondicherry in August 1793. The terms of 
capitulation had assured property rights and liberty of trade 
to the citizens of Pondicherry, and the Company could have 
continued its commercial operations even after 1793. Blit the 
total suppression of the Company and the confiscation of its 
goods in France prevented the continuance of ; ts trade in India 
under the terms of capitulation. 


1 Gaudart —Cones pondance des Agents a Pondichety de la nouvelle 
C&mpagnie des Indes avec les Admimslrnteurs a Paris, pp. 33-49 (letter 
dated toth September 1789). 




CHAPTER XVI 




PONDICHERRY ( 1785 * 1793 ) 

L Pondicherry after the War. 

Pondicherry, after its restitution in 1785. was in a rathei 
sad plight, facing economic hardships and political uncertainty. 
Ihere was a general spirit of despair and frustration among 
the inhabitants. Their trade and commerce had been ruined 
completely during the war. Nor did the peace bring them any 
consolation. They had hoped for economic recovery after the 
war, but were rudcl) disappointed by the establishment of a 
new Company with a monopoly of the Eastern trade. Only 
the inland trade was left open to private merchants, but in 
view of the political situation in the country, it did not amount 
to much, and came to be virtually restricted to the sending of 
2 cm>, 000 maunds of salt to Bengal under the Commercial Con¬ 
vention of 1787. All hopes of a revival of the political status 
of Pondicherry were equally destroyed by the policy adopted by 
the home Government after the peace of 1783. the war had 
completely dislocated the finances of the French Government 
and had brought it to the verge of bankruptcy. The Govern¬ 
ment had thus little liking for colonial expansion; its primary 
concern was to make economies in administration. In this 
drive for economy even the ordinary requirements of defence 
of the Indian possessions were neglected. The Indian settle¬ 
ments were denuded of practically all European troops, muni¬ 
tions and other military stores belonging to Bossy's expedi¬ 
tionary force, and only a small number of sepoys were retained 
for the maintenance of law and order. Besides, all the French 
possessions in the East were grouped into one administration, 
under a Governor-General with his seat in the Isle of Franco. 

Thus all on a sudden Pondicherry lost its pride of place 
as a capital and found itself reduced to the status of a depen¬ 
dency. The policy of the French Government after 1783 was 
to retain the Indian possessions merely as commercial centres 
and not for any political or military objective. It was a com- 


WNisr/f y 


FONt>lCHfcRft\ 

crsal of the policy pursued lor nearly half a ecutuiy; 
and the abruptness of the change made it all the more uiipopu 
la 1 among the inhabitants of Pondicherry' and of the other 
settlements, who accused the home Government of a betrayal 
of national interests, in giving up all political ambitions in 
India and leaving the settlements at the tender mercy of the 
English. It was this feeling of resentment at the policy of the 
home Government that was largely responsible for the outbreak 
of revolutions in the different settlements live years later. 

It. Succession of Governors. 

The history of Pondicherry, as indeed of the other French 
settlements in India from its restitution in 1785 to its capture 
by the English in 1793, falls into two clearly marked divisions, 
the first from 1785 to 1790, and the second from 1790 to 1,93. 
The interest of the first period lies in the efforts made by suc¬ 
cessive Governors to re-organise the administration in accord¬ 
ance with the strict economy measures prescribed by the home 
Government. In the second period interest is centred on the 
activities of the citizens of Pondicherry following the news of 
the Revolution in Paris. To a large extent it was the adminis¬ 
trative measures of the first period, rousing bitter resentment 
among the inhabitants of the colony, which influenced the 
course of events in the second. 

7 he period from 1785 to 1790 was marked by a rapid 
succession of Governors,—six in the course of live years. It 
was hardly conducive to administrative efficiency, and no Gov 
ernor remained in olfice for a sufficient length of time to devote 
himself to the urgent work of reconstruction and to carry out 
ameliorative measures. Ihc quick changes in office produced a 
feeling of political uncertainty, as each Governor, fearing un¬ 
popularity, tried to pass on to his successor the thankless task 
of executing the administrative reforms ordered by the Ministry 
in Paris. On the sudden death of Buss) in January 1785, 
Coutcnceau, next in command, assumed charge pending instruc¬ 
tions from Paris. He, however, remained in office only for a 
lew months and had just the time to take possession of the 
French settlements in India from the hands of the English. 
Even before the death of Bussy the Ministry had decided to 



nt f' r#'V 




nominate Sou iliac, Governor of the Isle of fiance, as hi> 
successoi while granting Hussy’s request for permission to return 
to franco. 1 Souillac arrived from the Isle of France in May 
1785, hut he remained at Pondicherry only for four months 
and a half. In October he left for the Isle of France 1 to take 
up his new post as Governor-General of all the French posses¬ 
sions in the East, in pursuance of an administrative reorgani¬ 
sation decided upon by the French Government in May 1785. 
Souillac had merely carried to Pondicherry the instructions ol 
the home Government about the economy measures to be 
introduced, but he did not get the time even to begin their 
execution. He left as his successor at Pondicherry Charpentier 
de Gossigny, who, it will be remembered, had been in command 
of the French detachment placed at the disposal of Tipu in 
178*5. Gossigny remained in office for nearly two years, but in 
order to avoid unpopularity he proceeded slowly in the execu 
tiou of the instructions of the Ministry. In September 1787 
he left Pondicherry to take up his new appointment as Gover¬ 
nor of the Isle of Bourbon. 

Gossigny was succeeded as Governor of Pondicherry by 
Comte de Conway, who had been in command of the French 
troops at the Cape of Good Hope during the last war. Conway 
was in office for two years, and made himself thoroughly un¬ 
popular in trving to execute all at once the administrative 
changes and economy measures prescribed by the Ministry. 
The fact of his Irish origin added to the public: resentment and 
roused suspicion among the French in India, who still regarded 
the name of Lally, also of Irish origin, as synonymous with 
treachetv. The extent of the popular feeling against him is 
evident from the following remark of Bury de St. Fulgence* a 
prominent citizen and a wealthy merchant of Pondicherry: 
“ A man as restless, as violent and as wicked as our General is 

never lit to govern colonies. It is to be hoped that 

a second attack of apoplexy will rid us ol this man. - In 
October 1789 Conway left for the Isle of France to take up his 
new appointment as Governor-General, nominating de Fresno 

1 P.A? ms. 700. 

2 l ahcriiadic- - Im Revolution el /r> Etoblisscnients Eu/rtffl?< 

Vlfidfi p. 18. 


dam 



misT^ 



PQNDICHERRV 


<8L 


Governor of Pondicherry. To de Fresne was left the task 
of completing the execution of the instructions of the Ministry 
and particularly sending all the remaining European troops to 
he Isle of France, Leaving Pondicherry completely defenceless. 
I he ‘evacuation* of Pondicherry was, however, prevented by 
the arrival of the news of the Revolution in Paris and the 
combination of the citizens of the colony to oppose the with¬ 
drawal of troops. De Fresne proved to be a very capable 
administrator, and it was mainly due to his tact and sangfroid 
that the excesses of a popular revolution were averted at 
Pondicherry. 


Hi. .idministriltive re-oeganimtion and economy measures. 


Let us next turn our attention to the administrative 
reforms carried oui during the live years between the restitu¬ 
tion of Pondicherry and the Revolution. 1 he new regime was 
inaugurated by two Royal Ordinances granting an amnesty to 
all army deserters. 1 The first measure of administrative re¬ 
organisation was the establishment of a new Conseil Supericu) 
at Pondicherry by a Royal Mit of August 1781, which sup¬ 
pressed the old Conseil established in February 1776. 2 The 
new Conseil consisted of the Governor, the Intendant, the 
senior most administrative officer and a few merchants or dis¬ 
tinguished citizens nominated by the Governor. It was vested 
with both civil and criminal jurisdiction and also functioned 
ns a court of appeal for cases coming from the other settlements. 
The main difficulty in the working of tlie new Con ee was that 
the members were not paid any salary, and it was hard to find 
distinguished persons sufficiently public spirited to offer hono¬ 
rary services. The measure of economy ultimately proved a 
failure, and it was found necessary to create other paid posts 
for those nominated as members of the Conseil * Besides the 
Conseil Superieiir, there was established a Committee of Admin¬ 
istration by Conway soon after his assumption of office at 


1 P. A. mss. 800, 822. 

2 Ibid, ins. 787. 

* Ibid, ms, 859 (letter from Min de Griucourt to Marin at Mahe, 
dated 8ih Oct. 1785, giving details ot the new administrative setup and 
its defects). 



lilt; FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


fdichcnw in 1787.* I he function of this Committee was to 
help the Governor in the administration of the different scute 
incuts in India. Conway also re-established in December 1787 
a Consultative Chamber, composed of Indian notables.'*’ This 
body had been first set up in January 1778 by an arret of the 
(louseil Super)cur. 

Ihe most important of the measures of administrative 
re-organisation decided upon for the sake of economy was the 
amalgamation, by a Royal Edit of May 1785, ol all the French 
possessions east of the Cape of Good Hope into one Govern¬ 
ment, The seat of the Governor General was to be Port Louis 
in the Isle of France. Under him were to be two Governors, 
one residing in the Isle of Bourbon and the other at Pondicherry. 
The Governor of Pondicherry was vested with administrative 
control over the other settlements in India, but their relation¬ 
ship with the Pondichcrrv authorities and with the Government 
of Port Louis was not very clear. While being subordinate to 
die Pondicherry authorities in matters of normal administration, 
they, particularly Chundernagore, had also the right of directly 
approaching the Government of Port Louis. Such a relation¬ 
ship was bound to lead to confusion, and in fact it was one ol 
the contributory causes to the disorders at Ghandernagore in 
1790. l he shifting of the capital from PonciicherD to Port 
Louis was of great political significance, indicating that France 
had definitely abandoned her ambitions in India. For it was 
obviously impossible to maintain close diplomatic relations 
with the Indian Powers and to plan military intervention front 
such a long distance as the Isle of France. The shifting ol the 
capital had its natural sequence in the withdrawal of all Euro¬ 
pean troops, munitions and other military stores to the Isle of 
France. Pondicherry was henceforth to stand as a defenceless 
city. ,1 mere commercial centre without an\ political significance. 

Considerable efforts were made by every successive Governor 
to reduce the cost of administration by abolishing many posts 
and lowering scales of salary. The number of clerks was 


1 P. X. ms. 1006 (containing the Proceedings of the Committee from 
17S7 to 17S9). 

3 Ibid., ms. logy. 


miSTffy 



reduced to eight and that of interpreters to two. 1 2 3 * 5 there i$ in 
the Pondicherry Archives a detailed account of the monthly 
expenditure of the Government muter different heads, drawn 
up in September 178!) I>y Moraciu, the Iniendant. I tie total 
amount fixed for Pondicherry by the home Government was 
228,000 livres. Even greater economy was introduced in the 
military department than in civil administration. Since Pori 
dicherry had ceased to be a capital and had lost its political 
importance altogether, there was no need to maintain troops 
there. All the European troops were ordered to be withdrawn 
to the Isle of France, only a sepoy force to be left a; Pondi¬ 
cherry, more for police duties than tor defence. Even the 
strength of this force was to be reduced to 2200 men, with seven 
European officers/ 1 It, was, however, found difficult to execute 
the order of withdrawing all European troops to the Isle of 
France, leaving Pondicherry completely defenceless, and there 
remained nearly three hundred of them in February 1790, 
when the Bienvenue carried the instructions of Conway for the 
completion of the ‘evacuation* of Pondicherry The opposition 
of the citizens and the political wisdom of dc Fresne prevented 
the execution of such a drastic order. 

In an important political despatch, dated 14th February 
1787, Castries outlined to Souiilac the policy of. the French 
•Government with respect to the Indian possessions. 1 I he 
administration of Pondicherry, Mahc, Karikal, Yanani and 
Chandernagore was to be retained by the King, while that of 
the other settlements and factories was to be transferred to 
the new Company of Galonnc. 1 here was absolutely no need 
of rebuilding the fortifications at Pondicherry. In the exist¬ 
ing state of affairs it would be sufficient to protect the town 
with a ditch and, if necessary, with some earth-works. 1 his 
directive of Castries put an end to the plan of defence con¬ 
struction at Pondicherry, a scheme of which was drawn up 
by the engineer, La Lustiere, in September i/^V* Lusti&re 
had taken in hand the construction of a military hospital, 

1 1 \A. ms. 859. 

2 Ibid.., 111s. 917. 

3 Ibid., ms. 859. 

1 Ibid., ms. 960. 

5 Ibid., ms. 887. 


mtsrffy 



Hbarfracks and arsenals, and the completion of the canal running 
through the town,, started under Law to divide the Indian 
from the European quarter. Re had travelled to Jaifmapatam 
in Ceylon for procuring materials of construction. 1 Bui his 
scheme had to he finally abandoned when Castries gave his 
second directive in June 1787 that he considered it quite 
sufficient to encircle the town with a sloping earthen wall 
‘ just to prevent desertion and to maintain order*’. 3 

In Vpril 1789 more stringent instructions were sent from 
frame with the object of making further economy in adminis¬ 
tration. 1 he total expenses of all the French possessions in 
India were fixed at 700,000 livres. and the sepoy force was to 
be further reduced to one battalion of 560 men only/ These 
orders Cionwav received at the time of his departure fqr the 
Ish of Fiance in October, and for their execution he left 
instructions to his successor, cle Fresne. 1 Conway’s .instruc¬ 
tions arc highly interesting, showing the object to be pursued 
In the administrators in the different settlements. They were 
to concern themselves with developing commerce, rendering 
prompt and impartial justice and augmenting revenues. Thus 
political objective was totally lost sight of. In the light of 
th< definite abandonment by France of her previous policy in 
India, the attempts to do honour to the heroes of the past 
appear rather curious. The remains of Bussy and Duchemin 
were reburied within the Capuchin Church and tombs were 
constructed for them befitting national heroes. For the first 
time the name of Dupleix was sought to be permanently 
preserved by giving it to one of the bastions of Pondicherry. 8 

IV. Revenues and expenses of the different settlements. 

A detailed account of the revenues and expenses of the 
different French settlements iti India is available in a letter 
Moment. dated 10th September 1789 and addressed to the 

1 l\ A. mss. 971, 978, 989. 

* /bid., ms. 987. 

3 Ibid , mss. 1133, 

1 Ibid., ms. 1162. 

’ ibid., ms. 1095 (letter from Minister Fa 1 uzerne to Conway,. toth 
Oct. 1788). 


misr/fy 


^ ' 60 V\ 

poM>rc:irjp;RRv 

rftfttrtmslrators of the Company in Paris. 1 The occasion for 
drawing up this account was the desire of the Comply u> 
lake over from the. Government the aihninistration of the Indian 
possessions. The project, however, did not materialise, and 
shortly after the outbreak of the Revolution the Company was 
even deprived of its commercial monopoly. 

Moracin estimated the total revenues of Pondicherry at 
483,000 livres. (1 rupee--aA livres). I hey were distributed 
under seven heads: (i) territorial revenue of the ten villages 
originally belonging to Pond id terry —30.000 livres; (2) terri¬ 
torial revenue of Vilnoor and B a hour, consisting of eighty-two 
villages, added to Pondicherry by the treat) of 1783—100,000 
livres; (3) seigneurage from the minting of coins—100,000 livres; 
(4) fanning of the cocoanut trees on the high-ways -30,000 
livres; (5) tax on imports by land and sea (kept in abeyance 
for three years from the restitution of Pondicherry as special 
relief to the citi/.ehs)4^6,ooo livres; (6) fanning of the sale of 
betel, tobacco, arrack and other spirituous liquors— 100,000 
livres; (7) other sources—27,000 livres. Next came Karikal. 
Besides the original possession consisting of fourteen villages, 
the treaty of: 1783 added lour other territories (which Dupleix 
had obtained from the Raja of Tanjore in 1749 and which 
were lost to the French by the treaty of 1763) known in French 
official records as MtigAtis ox Maganoits . I he total revenues 
of Karikal amounted to 150,000 livres, of which territorial 
revenue constituted the principal part. Mahe yielded a total 
revenue of 6,000 livres. which. Moracin hoped, could be raised 
to 15,000 to 20,000 if Tipu returned the villages granted to the 
French by an arrangement between Haidar and Bellecombe 
in 1777, as a ^ so the territory of the ruler of Kadattanad 
which was under French control before the war and which 
came to be occupied bv Tipu. Yanam produced a total income 
of nearly 8,000 livres, consisting of territorial revenue and sonic 
local taxes. There was scope for a considerable increase of 
revenue by fully exploiting the rich salt beds ol the place. 

There remained only Chandernagore. It yielded a substan¬ 
tial revenue from the sale of salt, opium and saltpetre, which 

1 Gaiidart Corrtspondance des Agents a Potidichiry de la notivelle 
Compaqnte de< 1 tides avec la Administrateurs d Paris, pp. 35-49* 






THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

ilised for giving doles to poor French families in the 
different settlements. The territorial revenue of Chandernagore 
amounted to 60,000 livres. By the Commercial Convention 
of 1787 the English agreed to hand over to the French adminis¬ 
tration in India 300 chests of opium and 18,000 nraunds of 
saltpetre at Patna price, the sale of which yielded a profit of 
100.000 livres and 45,000 livres respectively. By the same treaty 
he French were allowed to import into Bengal 200,000 maunds 
of sail. The trade in salt was actually carried on by private 
French merchants from the different settlements, to whom 
permits were sold by the i 'Government, The sale of these 
permits (and not the profits made by the merchants) yielded 
an income of 500,000 livres. Thus the total revenue amounted 
to over 500,000 livres, of which nearly 445,000, being die profits 
of' the Government from die sale of salt, opium and salt¬ 
petre. were utilised for charity. One effect of ibis arrangement 
was that the inhabitants of Chandernagore bore a grudge against 
the other settlements for depriving them of what they consi¬ 
dered to be their legitimate due, the full benefit of the trade 
in Bengal. 'This feeling was of great consequence and was 
largely responsible for the refusal of Chandernagore to submit 
to the Pondicherry authorities during the revolutionary days 
of 1790-33. 

As regards expenses, drastic reductions were made for die 
sake of economy. In April 1789 the French Government sent 
instructions to Conway, newly appointed as Governor-General, 
to limit the expenses of the Indian settlements to 700,000 livres. 

I hat entailed, besides cuts in civil administration, the with¬ 
drawal of all European troops from India and the reduction 
of the sepoy force to 500 only. In his letter Moracin strong!v 
argued against such a policy, which would leave the French 
settlements in India defenceless not only against external attacks 
hut also against internal commotions. He urged the need of 
maintaining at least 500 European troops, including about 100 
men h artillery, and 1,200 sepoys, and he showed how it 
rould be done within the financial means of the French adminis¬ 
tration in India. The total revenues of the different settle¬ 
ments amounted to nearly 1.200,000 livres a year, which would 
he fully available for civil and military expenses if the income 
derived from the sale of opium, salt and saltpetre be not spent 




Nil Nisrqy 


POND! CHERRY 

~mrcharity. Since the home Government had fixed the total 
expenses at 700,000 livres, there Would be left a balance of 
500,000 livres, which could be utilised for the maintenance of 
500 European troops and the construction of some defence 
works at Pondicherry considered absolutely necessary. 

V. f he beginning of the Revolution. 

The five years following the restoration of territories in 
1785 were marked by the accummula ion of a series of griev¬ 
ances for the inhabitants of Pondicherry,—the deprivation of 
trading facilities by the establishment of a new monopoly Com¬ 
pany, the loss of the status of a capital for their town and its 
subordination to the Government of the Jsle of Prance, the 
drastic reductions in civil administration, the withdrawal ol 
practically all European troops and munitions, the refusal to 
construct defence works considered absolutely necessary in the 
light of past experience, and in short the general apathy and 
indifference of the home Government to the future of 1 he 
Indian possessions. Pondicherry was in a highly agitated 
frame of mind and required only a slight spark to start a 
conflagration. 

Since the beginning of 1790 news had been reaching 
through English sources about strange happenings in Prance 
following the meeting of the Siates-Gencnd. On the 22nd 
February 1790 thgre arrived a boat front the Isle of France, 
the Bicnvenue , carrying the orders of Conway to complete the 
withdrawal of European troops, artillery and munitions from 
Pondicherry, and also authentic news about the Revolution 
in Prance. The news of the Revolution was bewildering but 
nonetheless pleasing to the citizens, who attributed all their 
hardships since 1785 to the indifference and incompetence ol 
the Ministry of the old regime. What agitated them move was 
the move to take away the remaining 260 European soldiers 
and 30 artillerymen, leaving them completely defenceless at a 
time when war was going on between Tipu Sultan and the 
English and there seemed ever;, possibility of hostilities spread¬ 
ing to the borders of the French settlement. Excitement ran 
high, and following the example of Paris the citizens ol Pondi¬ 
cherry met in a General Assembly on the 25th February in 





^ffoni ol (he Government House to express their deter munition 
fo lesist the execution of the Ministerial orders regarding the 
withdrawal of troops. Iltey also demanded the formation of 
a citizei militia and the handing over to them of the arsenal 
afid the powder magazine. I hat was the beginning of the 
revolution at Pondicherry. which, thanks to the tact of the 
Governor, cle Fresne, and the sobriety and wisdom of the lead¬ 
ing citizens, was kept within proper limits and did riot dege¬ 
nerate into lawlessness and anarchy as in France or even at 
Port Louis or Chandernagore. 

On the 26th February the citizens met again and decided 
to send a deputation to the Governor to present their demands. 

I he deputation consisted of. six persons and the demands pre¬ 
sented to the Governor were signed by 83 citizens,—a rather 
significant fact, showing that the origin of the movement was 
due to the energy of only a small part of the European popu¬ 
lation, no, to speak of the Indian inhabitants, who were left 
out completely. De Fresne had the coolness and sagacity to 
meet the novel situation and assured the citizens’ delegation 
ot his sympathy and support, thus avoiding a possibility of 
clash between the revolutionary elements and the established 
authorities. O i the 98th anonymous posters on the door of 
the (.hurch of Notre Dame des Anges invited all the citizens 
to meet next day in the house of a leading merchant, Bury de 
St. i ulgence. I he invitation met with a good response, and 
on 1 he 1 st March the citizens formed a General Assembly under 
the presidentship of Morticin, the Administrator of the new 
Compact lie das hides . in order to present the grievances of 
the French in India to the National Assembly in Paris. I)e 
bn sue accepted the situation with a good grace, and on the 
2nd March at; .1 solemn ceremony held at the Government 
House itself he administered to the members of the General 
Assembly the oath of loyalty to ‘the Nation, to His Majesty 
<md to the Laws It is interesting to notice here that the 
Fiend) citizens of Pondicherry were in no mood to cam the 
new Revolutionary principles of .‘equality* and ‘fraternity’ to 

1 tor an ac-vount of the beginning of the revolution at. F&ndicherry 
oinaiiu- , a Revolution et les Etablisserrients Franrais dans Vhide 
PP- * 4 - 30 . 






PONDICHERRY 


§L 


Ten logical conclusion by admitting the Indian inhabitants 
in the General Assembly. The latter were deliberately ex¬ 
cluded in spite of their desire to join the movement* From 
the beginning to the end the revolution in India was confined 
only to the ..French citizens and did not t ouch the Indian inhabi¬ 
tants, who merely looked on as curious spectator,)* 

Soon after the oath-taking ceremony the General Assembly 
proceeded to the election of a permanent Committee of 65 
members, to remain in office for eighteen months. The prin¬ 
cipal task of the Committee was to place before the National 
Assembly in Paris the wishes and grievances of the French 
citizens in India, in conformity with a decree of that Assembly 
inviting the opinion of each colony about the system of 
administration best suited to promote the welfare and pros¬ 
perity of its inhabitants, The first Committee actually re¬ 
mained in existence from March to September 1790. Entering 
into office on the 14th March, it proceeded at once* to the 
drawing up of six me moires for the National Assembly, on the 
model of the Cahiers drawn up on the eve of the meeting oF 
the States-Gcneral in France. The first of the memo ires dealt 
with the situation of the French in India before the arrival 
of the Bienvenue ; the second prayed for the privilege of send¬ 
ing two representatives from India to the National Assembly; 
the third was an exposition of the advantages of trade with 
India; the fourth demanded freedom of commerce; the fifth 
dealt with the necessity of political and military influence in 
India as a prerequisite to trade and commerce, and insisted 
on freeing Pondicherry from subordination to the Isle of 
Fiance and maintaining it as a strong and well-defended place; 
and the last discussed the question of forming alliances with 
some of the Indian Powers 1 The me moires were entrusted to 
Kerjean (a nephew of Dupleix), Dclarchc and Beylie, who 
started by the Royal Elizabeth at the end of March. On their 
arrival in France, Kerjean and Delarche delegated their powers 
to Monneron in accordance with the instructions of the Com¬ 
mittee. 


1 P,\. Reg. 50 ( hwcnicuK' des Anciennes Archives de Vlndr Frangaisc). 


cc 


Ml HIST/tf 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

The Revolution from April jygo to June *79/. 

After the departure of the delegates for France there fol¬ 
lowed a period of calm for about four months. The Com 
miitec of Representatives worked in accord with the Governor, 
who also adapted himself to the new situation with the best 
grace possible. Measures were taken to form a citizen militia, 1 
and in May some additional troops were sent to Pondicherry 
from the Isle of France to increase the number of the garrison 
to .joo. a —two steps which gave satisfaction to the revolutionary 
elements. During the interval there broke out a revolution 
at Chandernagore, which speedily degenerated into anarchy, 
as will be narrated later. The Committee of Representatives 
at Pondicherry under the influence of sober and steady people 
expressed condemnation of the lawless actions of the Chander¬ 
nagore revolutionaries, which brought it into conflict with the 
Committee of Representatives of the Isle of France. 3 In the 
Isle of France also extremists had gained control of the revo¬ 
lutionary movement, leading to differences with the established 
administrative authorities, so much so that towards the end of 
July the Governor-General Conway returned to France, leaving 
Cossigny as his successor. 4 

Although Pondicherry was free from the excesses which 
characterised the revolutionary movement at Chandernagore 
and the Isle of France, it was not altogether free from 
mischief-makers out to foment troubles. In June the Com¬ 
mittee of Representatives complained to d-e Fresno against 
these troublesome elements and demanded their expulsion.'* 
Matters came to head in August during discussions in the 
Committee about the formation of a municipal body for Pon¬ 
dicherry. there were sharp differences over the question of 
admitting Indians into that body, their cause having been 
espoused by the extremists just to gain power. In one of the 

1 P. A. ms. 

l Ibid ., ms. 11*46. 

■“ Ibid., mss. 1278, 1285 (Fetters from the Pondicherry Committee to 
tin Committee of the Isle of France, 22nd July and 17th August 1790). 

1 ins. 1279 (Letters from Conway to de Fresne, 25th July, *790). 

Ibid., 111s. 1260 (Extract from the Register of the Deliberations of 
the Representative Committee). 




M rnr Ry 



"exciting sittings of the Committee, held on the noth August, 
the latter were thoroughly worsted, thanks to the energy of 
t ie President, Comte de Givrac. Seven of them were con¬ 
demned as dangerous agitators and shipped hack to France.' 
These men pleaded their cause before the National Assembly 
in Paris, and ultimately in March 1792 obtained u decree 
acquitting them of the charge and permitting them to return 
to India. 

The menace of troublesome elements led the Committee 
of Representatives to convoke a General Assembly of citizens 
in September The latter proceeded to the setting up of a 
Municipality, electing a Mayor and five members. It also con¬ 
stituted a new permanent Committee of 27 members, inviting 
lor the first time representatives from the other French settle 
merits in India. 2 These measures restored peace at Pondichem 
for a few months, and the Governor, the Municipality and 
(he second Committee worked in perfect accord. In March 
1791 a letter was received from the deputies of the Pondicherry 
citizens in the National Assembly in Paris, containing the 
information that rhe National Assembly had accepted two re¬ 
presentatives from India and had decreed the abolition of the 
trading monopoly of the Calonne Company/ This recogni¬ 
tion by the National Assembly and the acceptance of one of 
the principal demands of the citizens of Pondicherry somewhat 
emboldened the second Committee. Assuming an exaggerated 
air of importance, it came into conflict with the Governor and 
the Municipality, and Pondicherry was again threatened with 
disorder and administrative dislocation. The situation, how¬ 
ever, was saved by convoking for the third time a General 
Assembly in June 1-791, which ended the authority of the Com¬ 
mittee. The latter, before passing out of existence, addressed 
an appeal to the citizens recalling the services it had rendered 
during the few months of its office/ 

1 P. A. ms. 1299 (Letter from the General Assembly of Citizens at 
Pondicherry to the National Assembly of France, (3th Sept. 1790). 

- Ibid., ms. 1319. 

} Ibid., ins. 1290. 

4 Ibid., ms. 1399. for a detailed account of the work of the Com¬ 
mittee and the General Assembly from April 1790 to July 1791 see Regis- 
kTS 5° M (Inventaire des Anciermes 1 rc hives de VInde hrarupaise, 
Pondichdry ), 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


The Const it ution of July jjyx and the work of the 
Colonial Assembly (July r791—Sept. 1792). 


I he third General Assembly proceeded to the formation 
of a new organisation for all the French settlements in India. 
Meeting in the Capuchin Church on the 5th July 1.791* c 
adopted a project of constituting a Colonial Assembly of 21 
members, 15 for Pondicherry, 3 for Chandernagorc, and one 
each for Karikal, Yanain and MahG In each settlement all the 
French inhabitants, not below the age of 25 and having lived 
in India for at least two years, were to constitute a General 
Assembly for electing representatives to the Colonial Assembly. 
There was also provision for the election from each settlement 
of supplementary members to take the place of the regular 
ones in case of their temporary absence. The Colonial Assemb¬ 
ly was to be re-elected by half every year. Foreseeing the possi¬ 
bility of opposition on the part of some of the other settlements 
to join the Colonial Assembly, the Constitution fixed a time¬ 
limit for the election of their representatives. If within that 
period any settlement failed to elect its representative 
or representatives, the Colonial Assembly was to make 
up the number by taking more representatives from Pondi¬ 
cherry. The Colonial Assembly thus constituted was to exer¬ 
cise the legislative power delegated to each colony by the 
National Assembly by its decrees of 81 li and 28th March 1790. 
fhe executive power was to vest in the Governor, and the 
judiciary was kept as it was. It was also expressly stipulated 
that no taxes could be imposed without the consent of the 
Colonial \ssembly. 1 


The new Assembly was set up on the 6th July, with re¬ 
presentatives from Pondicherry alone. On the 11th it sent 
circular letters to the other settlements to send their repre¬ 
sentatives, 2 but only Karikal and Yatiam responded to the invi¬ 
tation. \Iah£ did not send any representative, and Chander¬ 
nagore, where extremists had gained control, Hatlv refused to 
recognise the authority of the Colonial Assembly and drew 
up a new constitution for itself with the support of the Assembly 


1 P. A. ms. 14'.>3 (Constitutional Dec ice of the General Assembly). 

2 Ibid, nis. 142b. 


mIIST/fy 



PONDICHERRY 


Sl 


he Isle of France. There started an acrimonious dispute 
between Pondicherry, Chandernagore and the Isle of France. 
The Colonial Assembly of Pondicherry protested against the 
intervention of the Isle of France in the affairs of Chander¬ 
nagore, denied its subordination to the Government of the Isle 
of France, and asserted that Pondicherry alone had authoritx 
over all the French settlements in India. 1 Finally, it sent its 
President. Fumeron, to Chandernagore on a conciliatory mission, 
which however proved a failure. 2 On the other hand, the 
Chandernagore Committee issued an appeal for insurrection to 
the Pondicherry garrison, which the latter rejected with 
contempt.® 

The Colonial Assembly, elected in July 1791, remained 
in power till December 1792, when it was replaced by a new 
organisation following the arrival of two Civil Commissioners, 
I.escallier and Durnorier, sent by the French National Assembly. 
For the most part: the Colonial Assembly worked in perfect 
accord with the Governor, and peace was preserved at Pon¬ 
dicherry. The period was marked by a few exciting events 
and patriotic demonstrations. On the 2nd August the new 
tri colour flag was hoisted in a great public ceremony. 4 On 
the 14th April 1792 was held another public ceremony, when 
before a gathering of all the citizens the decree of the National 
Vssembly concerning the organisation of St. Domingo as a 
model for all the colonies was read out. The meeting took 
an enthusiastic decision about the abolition of all titles of 
nobility and of the arms and honours pertaining to them 
On the 16th April there was another ceremony in com memo 
ration of the acceptance by the King of the new Constitution 
and an amnesty was declared for all guilty of violation of laws 
in connection with the revolutionary movement. Again on 
the 14th July the citizens of Pondicherry celebrated the anni¬ 
versary of the fall of the Bastille and the regeneration of the 
French Nation. They took an oath of loyalty to the Con¬ 
stitution, and there followed a military review and a grand 
patriotic feast. 


‘P A. mss. 1440. 1443, 1445, 1457. 

2 Ibid ,, mss. 1462-1464. 

Ibid., mss. 1475-1477. 1 Ibid., ms. 1453. 



lHk FRENC H IN INDIA 

f he first constructive work of the Colonial Assembly was 
the drawing up on the 3tel August 1791 of 29 articles to serve 
as the basis of a new constitution lor the French settlements 
in India. The constitution was practically the same as that 
drawn up by the General Assembly on the 5U1 July. One 
interesting feature was that the Colonial Assembly had to 
include four representatives of the Indian inhabitants when 
it discussed any matter concerning them. The Assembly was 
to be re-elected in full every two years. It was to meet once 
a week, on Thursdays, and its sittings were to be held in public. 1 
The next work of the Colonial Assembly was Lire re-organisa¬ 
tion of the Municipality on the 3rd September, electing the 
popular Comte de Civrac as Mayor and reducing the number 
of members to four. 2 * It. also elected two deputies from India 
for the new Legislative Assembly in Paris, choosing lor the 
purpose Moracin, who liad returned to France at the end of 
1790, and a Bordeaux merchant named Corbin, who had taken 
a leading part in the agitation for the abolition of the mono¬ 
poly privilege of the Company of Galomic. In September 1792 
the Colonial Assembly tried to impose the Civil Constitution 
of the Clergy on the priests, with the result that only two 
Capuchins and two Jesuits accepted it while the rest Id Pon 
dicherry and took refuge at Madras.* 1 

VTII. hrival of livo Civil Commissioners /row France: 
administrative and other reform > 

(September 1792 --A 1 ay 179^). 

In France the Revolution had created a new interest in 
the Indian possessions. In October 1791 the National Assembly 
took a decision to send 600 infantry and 140 artillery troops to 
Pondicherry, with the eventual plan of increasing the garrison 
of that colony to 1,000 European troops, 1,000 sepoys and two 
artillery companies. 4 It was not, however, till September 1792 

1 IV A. ms. , j- j (Constitutional Decree of the Colonial Assembly). 

- Ibid., ms. i.|Si. 

' l or details about the work of the Colonial Assembly see Registers 
31-54 {Invent a ire des An defines Archives de Vlrtde Fmn$aise, Pondichery). 

4 P. A. ms. 1505. 




Ml NISTfiy 



PONbrciifeRfcV 


Sl 


additional troops, numbering loss than joo, actually 
arrived at Pondicherry. There also arrived at the same lime 
an engineer, dc Phclinc*, charged with the construction of 
fortifications at Pondicherry. 1 * In January 1792 the National 
Assembly also decided to send four Civil Commissioners to 
supervise die new organisation of the Eastern colonic. In 
February they started for the Isle of France, from where two 
of them, Lescallier and Dumorier, were to proceed to India, 
in July the Civil Commissioners arrived in the Isle of France, 
where a month before Malartic had succeeded Cossignv as 
Governor-General. 3 4 The news of the coming of two Civil 
Commissioners on behalf of the National Assembly was 
enthusiastically welcomed by the citizens of Pondicherry, and 
the Colonial Assembly looked forward to seeing its work of 
re-organising the administration of the French settlements in 
India being placed on a solid legal footing with the recog¬ 
nition of the National Assembly. As it actually turned out 
the Civil Commissioners introduced a more sober and moderate 
note in the revolutionary zeal of the citizens. Lescallier was 
the first to arrive at Pondicherry on the ;oth September, 
Dumorier remaining in the Isle of France for a few months 
more to complete his work there. 1 

At Pondicherry Lescallier was accorded a v arm recep¬ 
tion. He was a man with previous experience of colonial 
administration, having been Ordonnateur for some time at 
St. Domingo. The first thing he advised was the election of 
a new Colonial Assembly on regular lines, prescribed by law 
and in conformity with the provisions of the French Constitu¬ 
tion of 1791. The new Assembly was to consist of 12 mem¬ 
bers, with an equal number of supplementary members. T hey 
were to be elected only by active citizens. The qualifications 
required to become an active citizen were: to be born French 
or to become a French citizen qi conformity with the French 
Constitution of 1791; to be at least 25 years Of age; to own 
property worth 500 rupees and to reside in the colony for at 
least one year, or to pay a rent of 5 rupees per month with a 

1 1\ A. 111s. 1834. 

J Ibid., mss. 1575, 1628, 1053, 1650. 

3 Ibid., mss. 1798, 1564. 

4 Ibid., ins. 1845, 1848- 


miSTfiy 



minimum period of two years* residence. The list of active 
citizens at Pondicherry drawn up in November 179 2 included 
only 314 names. T hey were followed by the names ol 14 
Fopasses or men of mixed PortugViese-lrtdian origin, who were 
also made eligible as electors on the following conditions: 
being legitimately born of free parents; owning property worth 
500 rupees or paying a rent of 5 rupees per month; and being 
able to read and speak French. 1 

A new (Colonial Assembly was elected on the basis of these 
provisions in December 1792. It was the fourth and the last 
Assembly. Leaving to this body the task of drawing up a 
scheme of re-organisation of all the French settlements in India. 
Lescallier took in hand a number of reforms in the military 
economic and religious spheres. One interesting* measure of 
reform was the prohibition of slave-trade in pursuance of the 
King’s instructions to the Civil Commissioners dated 22nd 
February 179s. 2 With the help of the engineer, de Phelines, 
who had arrived in September, the debris of the olcl fort were 
cleared and the construction of the canal through the town 
continued. There was a new survey of the villages belonging 
to Pondicherry, and huts were built for the homeless pariahs. 

The assumption of virtualh all governmental functions 
by Lescallier relegated de Fresne, the Governor, to a secondary 
position The latter, disgusted at his diminished importance 
in the colony where he had been mainly responsible for the 
preservation of peace and order, and tired of the acrimonious 
correspondence he had to carry on with the Governor-General. 
Conway, Cossigny and Malartic in succession, over Chander 
nagore affairs, finally returned to France towards the end of 
January 1793- handing over charge to TouffreviUe, Comman¬ 
dant at Karikal . 3 In February arrived Chermont, appointed 
by Malartic as Governor of Bondicherry, and with him also 

1 The list of citizens [s 10 be found in P. A. ms. 1903- For details 
of the re-organisation and the work of the new Colonial Assembly see 
P. A. Registers 57.58 (Jnventaire dts Ancierwes Archives de I'Indc Fran¬ 
co ise , Pond i ch ery) . 

2 P. A. mss. 1633, 1861. 

3 Ibid., ms. 1909 (dispute between de Fresne and Lescallier) and ms, 
1951 (departure of de Fresne from Pondicherry). 


miSTfiy 


PONDICHERRY 



§L 


ihe other Civil Commissioner destined foi 


India. 

At the end of March the citizens of Pondicherry received 
with amazement, the news of the startling course of events in 
l 1 ranee,—-the treachery of the King, his suspension from office, 
the proclamation of a Republic, and the glory of Yalmy. They 
were seized with a delirium of patriotic and revolutionary 
exuberance, and on April i and 3 celebrated the dawn of a 
new era, with planting the tree of Liberty, illuminations, 
feasts and cries of "Vive hi Nation ”, "Vive la Republic/lie".' 
All the old forms and usages were discarded as Pondicherry 
parsed suddenly from the year 1793 to the second year of the 
Republic. The Revolutionary Calendar and even the Revo¬ 
lutionary method of salutation, with the hand being placed 
on the heart, were adopted all at once. Shortly after, the 
Colonial Assembly decreed the formation of a National Guard. 
Ihe delirium of revolutionary exuberance was, however, 
rudely shaken when towards the end of May alarming news 
began to reach Pondicherry about the outbreak of war 
between France and England. It suddenly woke up the revo- 
lutionaries to the danger in which thev stood in the defence¬ 
less condition of Pondicherry. The Colonial Assembly meet¬ 
ing* on the 26th decided to put off all pending business and 
to concentrate entirely on measures of defence in apprehension 
of an immediate attack. 


IX. The last English attach and capitulation of 
Pondicherty . 

At the beginning of June, Cherinont received definite 
information that the English were preparing to march against 
Pondicherry. On the 7th he called a council of war, consisting 
of the two Civil Commissioners, two representatives of the 
C olonial Assembly, the Ordonnateur, the Mayor and the Com¬ 
mander of the National Guard. Hasty preparations were 
started to improve the defences of the town and to bring in 
provisions in anticipation of a siege. It was, however, an 
impossible task to hold out long against a serious attack. The 


1 P. A. mss. uosii. 2023, 2025. 


misr^ 



Mil*: 1 RfcNCtt IN INDIA 



Ttmifical ions were in ruins and nothing had been done since 
1785 to reconstruct them. All that the engineer, <Je Phcliucs, 
could do in the course pi a month and a half was to improvise 
lilling up tire gaps at some places. The garrison consisted of 
jyo men belonging to the regiment of Pondicherry, 80 belong¬ 
ing to the artillery, and 400 sepoys. It was augmented by 
150 men of the National Guard, whose ardent patriotism could 
not unfortunately make up for their total lack of military 
experience, a company of Dragons erf 25 men, newly raised 
specially for reconnoitring work, an artillery company of 50 
men recruited from sailors, another company of 50 recruited 
from Fopasses, and 450 sepoys newly levied. The artillery 
consisted of 140 pieces in all. of which only ii were of suffi¬ 
ciently long-distance calibre. There was a large stock of 
powder., but kept in such an exposed condition as to constitute a 
source of danger to the town in case of an enemy bombardment, 
flic munitions sent from the isle of France were inadequate 
lor a prolonged siege, and the shells were for the most part of 
different calibres from the guns used. There were sufficient 
provisions to last for three months, but the funds in the treasury 
were hardly adequate to meet the expenses for more than a 
month. Frantic efforts were made to replenish the treasury. 

I he patriotic zeal of the citizens succeeded in raising a con¬ 
siderable sum of money from voluntary contributions, and 
mail) of the Indian farmers of lands willingly advanced 
money to organise defence. 1 

Preparations ol other kinds also were made. In order to 
release every available person for military work the Municipal 
organisation practically suspended its functions, and the 
Colonial Assembly delegated its authority to a temporary com¬ 
mission of three. Women and children were sent out to 
1 ranquebar for safe shelter. To prevent treachery, the Colo¬ 
nial Assembly passed a decree on the 20th June prohibiting 
any bods from going out without the special permission of the 
Governor. 2 

1 Dmils of military preparations made arc contained in 1\ A. mss. 



Council of War) and ms, *195 (report by the Governor, Chermont, after 
the fall ol Pondicherry), 


1 P. A. ms. 3 i$ 2 . 


J?OM>iCHir.Rk\ 


On the 12th July the English army came within sight of 
PondicheiT) and encamped on the heights of Peri tube. On 
the 15th three English ships anchored before the place to 
complete its encirclement, The army consisted ol 24,000 men. 
including (>,000 Europeans, and had a powerful artillery. I he 
English had thus an overwhelming superiority in men and 
guns, and such was the exposed condition of Pondicherry that 
the town could have been taken by .a daring surprise attack. 
Bui the memory of the heroic resistance offered by Pondicherry 
on several occasions in the past made the English unduly 
cautious and induced them to lay a regular siege. On the 
same day that the English army encamped at Perimbe, Chcrmont 
issued a proclamation declaring Pondicherry to be in a state 
of siege. 1 Although he had no illusion about the precarious 
position of the settlement, his patriotic spirit and the enthu¬ 
siasm of the citizens inspired by the news of the victory of 
Valmy induced him to put up as good a show of resistance 
as was possible under the circumstances. There was no hope 
of getting assistance from any of the Indian Princes. Chcr¬ 
mont made vain appeals to Tipu and Nizam Ali for interven¬ 
tion, but neither of them even sent a reply. He wrote frantic 
letters to de Vigie and Raymond, commanding European con¬ 
tingents in the Mysore and Hyderabad armies, to induce their 
masters to send assistance to Pondicherry. But he was equally 
disappointed, since neither Tipu, who had received no help 
from the French in his recent war with the English, nor Nizam 
Ali was prepared to embroil himself with the English for the 
sake of a Power which had abandoned all pretensions to poli¬ 
tical importance in India and seemed destined to disappear 
altogether. 2 It was the logical result of the policy followed 
by the French Government with regard to Indian possessions 
since the conclusion Of peace in 1783. 

Even the last hope of external help, some reinforcements 
from the Isle of France, was clashed to the ground by the 
end of July. On the 27th Chermont read before the war 

1 I\ A. ms. 2153. 

2 Ibid. ms. 2.140 ((.hermont to de Vigie, commanding French 
contingent in the service of Tipu, 4th July 1793) and ms. 2195 (Cher- 
mom’s report on the fall of Pondicherry). 


miST/fy. 



council letters from the Governor-General 'Malartic and Vice 
Admiral de Saint-Felix, which had been brought by a. frigate, 
the Gy bile}.. The frigate could come only up to Tranquebar, 
from where the letters were sent to Pondicherry by land. In 
place of the expected news of reinforcements, Pondicherry 
received a mere questionnaire as to how far the English in 
India were in a position to send an expedition against the 
Isle of France. The members of the war council were sadly 
disappointed at the neglect by the mother country and the 
indifference of the chiefs of the Isle of France. From a letter 
written after the fall of Pondicherry by the President of the 
interim Committee to which the Colonial Assembly had dele¬ 
gated its authority, it appears that the responsibility for leav¬ 
ing Pondicherrv to its fate belonged entirely to the Revolu¬ 
tionary Government of Paris and not to the chiefs oJ the 
Isle of France, 3 

In spite of the failure of the last hope of getting any 
external help, the war council remained fixed in its deter 
initiation to defend the place to the last. This strong attitude 
did not deceive the English, who undoubtedly came to know 
about the mission of the Cybele. At the beginning of August 
both General Braithwaite, commanding the English army,’ and 
Cornwallis, commanding the fleet summoned Pondicherry to 
surrender, to which Gherinom gave a heroic and dignified reply 
expressing his determination to resist. At a meeting of the 
Colonial Assembly held on the 3rd August Chermont's reply 
was acclaimed with cheers, and the citizens of Pondicherry set 
themselves to defend the town at all costs. Upon the refusal 
to surrender, the English opened bombardment of the place 
and advanced closer. Dc Phelines once suggested a sortie, but. 
in view of the overwhelming numerical superiority of the 
investing army the suggestion was considered inadvisable. 1 he 
English bombardment soon created a havoc, putting out of 
action ail the long-range guns of the French and destroying a 
large number of houses. The English attacked not merely with 
guns but also with propaganda. They dropped into the town a 
large number of leaflets, bearing the portrait of Louis XVI and 

1 1\ A. ms. 2164. 

2 Ibid., ms. 2190. 



WHlSTfiy. 




PONIflCHERRA 


scription, “I die innocent”, Journals giving news of the 
iding of the King, the treachery of Duniouriez and the 
civil war in the south and west of France were also thrown into 
the town to create dissension among the citizens. 

The enemy propaganda had its effect, but even more deci¬ 
sive was the military situation which rendered further resist¬ 
ance absolutely fruitless. On the 20th August Cherrnont called 
a meeting of the war council in which he advised immediate 
capitulation in order to avoid further destruction of the town. 
Two days later the Colonial Assembly and the Municipality 
also came round to the same opinion and authorised Cherrnont 
to open negotiations with the English. Cherrnont entrusted 
the task of negotiation to Touffreville, and after only a few 
hours’ discussion the terms of capitulation were drawn up and 
signed on the 23rd. The terms were as honourable as the 
French could expect under the circumstances. Pondicherry 
was to be handed over to the English, who gave an assurance 
to respect the personal liberty of the citizens and their rights 
of property, the soldiers were to surrender their arms and 
standards and were to be taken to Madras, from where they 
would fee sent back to Europe. 1 


X Pondicherry aftei Capitulation. 


So abrupt was the development of events that the three- 
member Commission authorised bv the Colonial Assembly to 
draw up a new constitution for the French settlements in 
India was in total ignorance of the capitulation till the last. 
The members were quietly deliberating on the clauses of the 
constitution, when the entry of the English troops into the 
town woke them up for the first time to the reality of the 
situation. The capitulation of Pondicherry was followed by a 
counter-revolution, and many of the officers and citizens threw 
up the tri-colour cockade and wore signs of mourning for the 
King. The English authorities gave permission to all French 

1 On the siege and tall of Pondicherry (here is a detailed ntimoire 
by Cherrnont (P. A. ms. 2195), which was drawn up to defend his con¬ 
duct against unfavourable comments made by his opponent including 
Lescallier. For the terms of capitulation see f abeinadie La Revolution 
ft les Etablissemcrifa Frangais dans I'lnde, pp. 160162. 


miSTfiy 




1 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


>rizens to leave the town and go wherever they liked. Only 
a few took advantage of this permission and left for the Isle of 
France, while the rest continued to live at Pondicherry, doubt- 
I'ss because of the uncertainty of the political situation in 
France* According to an English census taken in 179G there 
were 82*5 Europeans in the town, including women and 
child rend 

Pond i cherry was admin i $tered successively by Genera 1 
Braithwaite and Col. McLeod, and except for petty vexations 
like billetling of officers in private houses and occasional arrests 
of suspected persons, there was nothing to disturb the normal 
life of the place. The most sensational incident during the 
period of English occupation was in 1799, when on a suspicion 
that some people were plotting to leave Pondicherry and join 
1 ipu in his war with the English, there was a thorough search 
of all the private houses and a large number of French men, 
including some of the most prominent citizens, were arrested 
and thrown into prison.- 

Lescallier, one of the Civil Commissioners, taking advan 
tage of tin permission granted by the English, left Pondicherry 
in November 1793 for the Isle of France, from where in Octo 
her 179,4 he sent a detailed report to the National Convention 
in France on the events at Pondicherry leading up to the 
capitulation, and on the means to be adopted by France to 
destroy English power in India in co-operation with some of 
the country Powers. 1 2 3 Chermont continued to live at Pondi¬ 
cherry till his death in 1798. In order to dear himself of the 
charge ot cowardice and pusillanimity in agreeing to capitulate, 
he wrote a long and detailed mernoire on the siege and fall of 
Pondicherry. 4 He attributed the fall of Pondicherry not 
merely to the lack of fortifications and adequate troops, but 
also to the spirit of indiscipline and insubordination in the 
army engendered by the revolutionary movement, and the 
dissension between the civil and military authorities created 
bv the arrival of the two Civil Commissioners from France. He 
had from the beginning of his office as Governor realised the 


1 I.abernadie —Le Vteux Pnndichery, p. ,408. 

2 Ibid., p 409. 

a P. A. ms. 1*200. 

4 Ibid., ms. 2195. 


miSTfiy 



PONDICHERRY 


.§L 


Sequences of the state of affairs, ami had warned the 
Minister of Marine that Pondicherry could not be defended in 
a war with the English. In April he had even asked lor pet 
mission from the Governor-General to retire. His personal 
opinion was to evacuate all troops and munitions from Pondi¬ 
cherry, since defence was absolutely out of the question, hut 
popular opinion, intoxicated with the news of the successes 
of the Republican arms in Europe, was vehemently opposed to 
it. He yielded to the wishes of the citizens in deciding to 
defend Pondicherry, only hoping that opinion might change, 
enabling him to end a meaningless resistance. 1 

The fall of Pondicherry in August 1793 practically dosed 
the long chapter of Anglo-French rivalry in India, which had 
begun since the time of Dupleix about half a century earlier. 
For ihe next twenty-three years the capital of French India 
remained under English occupation, and when it was finally 
restored in December 1816, the French came back under entirely 
changed circumstances. By the treaties of 1814 and 1815 
France definitely recognised English sovereignty in India, and 
received back her old possessions on the clear stipulations that 
-he was not 0 erect am fortifications in any of the settlements 
and not to maintain troops beyond the requirement of police 
duties. Thus Pondicherry in 181 (> was entirely different from 
what it was before the capitulation of 1793, the centre of 
French rivalry to the expansion of English power in India, and 
from the historical point of view it ceased lo have any special 
significance. 


1 Chermont expressed the same opinion in a letter to Larcher at 
Mah<k dated 27th November 1703. P. A. ms, 2194. 


CHAPTER Wll 


OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS ( 1785 - 1793 ) 

(ji\mii:kna( ore 
1 . Conditions during iySySg. 

Hie history of Chandcrnagorc after restitution, like that of 
Pondicherry. falls into two dearly marked divisions r ^~a period 
ol: administrative reforms from 1785 to 1789; followed by 
a period of revolution from 1789 to 1793. Also as in the 
ease of Pondicherry, the revolution came as the result of the 
policies and actions of the administration in the first period, 
which, however honest in intentions, caused widespread discon¬ 
tent. among the citizens There was this difference* however, 
that while at Pondicherry the revolution was kept within 
proper limits thanks to the tact of the Governor and the 
sobriety and moderation of the popular leaders, at Chander- 
nagorc the movement, being dominated by a few selfish men. 
soon degenerated into chaos and anarchy, which continued till 
the capture of the place by the English in 1793. 

Chandcrnagorc and the five subordinate factories at Patna, 
K a si inbazar, Dacca, Jougdia and Baktsore were restored to the 
French early in 1785. Dangercux, who had been sent to Ben 
gal in 1784 to look after French commercial interests there, was 
appointed as the first Commandant. Although Chaiulernagore 
had completely lost its political importance as a.result of the 
consolidation of the English power in Bengal, it had neverthe¬ 
less great commercial promise. The newly established Com¬ 
pany of Caionne took in hand an ambitious programme of 
developing the lucrative Bengal trade, taking advantage of 
Article 13 of the Treaty of Versailles (1783), which guaranteed 
to the french all their old trading rights and privileges. But, 
as we have noticed already, for two years the English put every 
obstacle in the way. Naturally anxious to monopolise all the 
trade of Bengal, they put their own interpretation on Article 
13 of the treaty, severely restricting French commercial 



OTHER FRENCH SI* I PI. ft ME NTS 

I hey established a monopoly over the trade in salt, 
opium and saltpetre, used their political power to obstruct 
French purchases in Bengal, and arrogated to themselves the 
right of inspecting every foreign hi p in the Hooghly* 
Numerous conflicts arose between the two nations, which did 
not cease till after the conclusion of a separate Commercial 
Convention in 1787. 

Dangereux was replaced in October 1787 by Mottet. His 
period of administration had achieved little in reviving French 
trade and commerce in Bengal, the principal task entrusted to 
him. Nor was Mottet, who remained as Commandant till the 
end of 1788, more successful in this respect. Mottet was 
succeeded by Montigny, who, it will be remembered, was till 
then the French Resident at the Court of Poona. Montigny’s 
appointment as Commandant at Chandernagore was due to he 
recommendation of Conway, Governor of Pondicherry, who 
had been impressed by his tact and ability, and considered him 
-s the most suitable person to take charge of the French 
settlement: in Bengal, then in a very miserable condition. 
Taking up the reins of . administration at Chandernagore, 
Montigny applied himself to three tasks,—reviving French trade 
and commerce in Bengal, effecting administrative reforms, and 
augmenting revenues. As a diplomatic agent he had given 
proof of his skill and ability, but as an administrator he proved 
far less competent. Although honest and well-meaning, he was 
hasty and ovetzcalous. In trying to execute his programme of 
reforms all at once, he rode roughshod over the opposition 
of the vested interests and naturally created a large number of 
enemies. In fact, it was his policy which was largely respon¬ 
sible for the outbreak of the revolution in 1790. 

When Montigny first took charge of Chandernagore at the 
end of 1788, the settlement was in a poor state. There is a 
vivid contemporary account left by a French military officer 
named Yvon who visited the place in 1789b The French 

1 He was the same person who, as will be noticed later, was sent 
to Chandernagore in 1791 as a Conciliation Commissioner. His account 
of Chandernagore in 1789, Notes mr lc ngale, is a lengthy document 
of more than 100 pages,—P. A. ms. 1142- It has been summarised by 
M. Bardet in an article “Chandernagore in 1789“ published in the 
‘Reim? Historique de Vtnde fmn$aise”, Vol. IV, Pt. II 




L>D 


misr^ 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


labitants, accustomed to depend on English doles during the 
period of occupation, were much too sunk in sloth and idleness 
to take any initiative in trade and commerce. Most of the 
houses were in ruins, and the few good ones were owned by 
foreigners, principally English. The town, which had been 
practically built by Dupleix and had once enjoyed political 
importance and commercial prosperity, wore a deserted appea¬ 
rance. 

In spite of this poor state, however, ( handernagore still 
constituted the economic centre of the French establishments 
in India. Territorial revenues constituted a small part of 
(heir total income, the major portion coining from the sale in 
Bengal of salt and opium. The Commercial Convention of 
1787 allotted to the French in Bengal 300 chests of opium, 
which were sold by auction in Calcutta and brought a substan¬ 
tial income to the Public treasury. Before Montigny’s time 
the trade in opium was in private hands, but he made it a State 
monopoly, which brought a profit of twelve to fifteen hundred 
thousand livres annually. The other important branch of trade 
wav salt. The Convention of 1787 allowed the French to 
import into Bengal 200,000 maunds of salt, which were bpughi 
bv the English in Calcutta at a fixed price, 120 rupees for 100 
maunds. It was made a State monopoly and permits were 
f -id. at the rate of 20 rupees for 120 maunds, to private mer¬ 
chants to import salt into Bengal. These permits were distri 
buted among the various French settlements in India on the 
basis of the number of European population in each. There 
was an office, first at: Chandernagore and later transferred to 
Calcutta, entrusted with the delivery of the imported salt to the 
English. The latter did not pay cash to individual merchants, 
but made over the entire price 10 the Government of Chander- 
nagorc, which in its turn distributed the amount among the 
permit holders, after deducting *]h% for meeting establishment 
charges and for providing relief to the poor in the various 
settlements. “'Thus the sale of permits of salt was a resource 
for 1 he State, die vile of salt brought an income to private 
persons, and in addition the percentage deducted from the total 
sale proceeds augmented a fund for the relief of the 


MIN tST Ry 


OTHER I RENCH SJETTl,1CMENTS 


m 




lu.‘ trade in salt was the only considerable source 
of income for the French settlements in India, and since 
Chandernagore was the centre of this trade the role of the 
Commandant there was more commercial than political. 

11- 7 he Administration of Montigny. 

Montigny set his mind to the task of restoring economic 
prosperity and carrying out administrative reforms. The estab¬ 
lishment of a State monopoly over the sale of opium produced 
an increased revenue, and the system of granting permits for 
die importation of salt was beneficial to both the State as well 
as private persons. Montigny cut down unnecessary expenses, 
increased grant to the hospital, and introduced a French pilot 
service for guiding vessels from the mouth of the Hooghly 
About the earlv period of his administration we have a report 
by Montigny himself, ‘The Present State of the French Settle¬ 
ments in Bengal”, dated 29th May 1789. 3 Monfigny’s zeal for 
reform was his undoing and raised for him a host of enemies. 
He was denounced by vested interests as a despot, ‘whose long 
residence at the Court of the Marathas had accustomed him to 
all the manoeuvres of an abject policy”, and who “believed that 
he could employ the same means for administering Chancier- 
nagore.” 3 Certain it is that Montigny proved less tactful at 
Chandernagore than at Poona. With more prudence and fore¬ 
sight !te might have been able to leave a peaceful administra¬ 
tion in Bengal. As it was, lie found fault with most of the 
higher officers and diw.ssed them one after another. He was 
emboldened in this course by the support he received from his 
patron, Conway, who had been appointed Governor-General in 
October 1789. 

Mottet, the ex-Commandant, had continued to remain at 
Chandernagore as Ordonnateur and President of the Provincial 
Tribunal. Montigny obtained an order from Conway for 
MottcPs return to Pondicherry. He then suppressed the office 

< l ab< rnadie- La Revolution r! hs EtablisscnienLs Frangais dans l’hide. 

' p. *07. 

2 P. A. ms. 2690. 

a Ibid, ins. 2712? (Griefs des Citoyrns, drawn up by die Revolutionary 
elements at Chandernagore, 19th June 1790). 



Ml HlST/fy 




rmtruKNCH in india 

of Qrddnnn/eur and assumed the powers of the President 
of the Tribunal himself. He dismissed the three Assessors of 
the Tribunal,' de Verinnes, Auvernais and Tingiet de Neuville, 
and filled their places with men of his own choice. Having 
thus gained complete control over the Tribunal, he turned 
against Richemont, the Proem-air, and Merrier (formerly 
secretary of de Suffren), the Registrar of the Court. They were 
accused of grave financial irregularities, arid Montigny obtained 
orders from Conway for their dismissal Mcrcier fled away 
from Chandernagore with the public funds left, in his custody. 
Richemont, who was to continue in office till the appointment 
of a successor by Conway, was accused of complicity in Merrier’s 
escape, brought for trial before the Tribunal and suspended 
from office, which was then given to one of the partisans of 
Montigny, de Bret cl, pending* the arrival of a permanent incum¬ 
bent. Montigny next turned to the Tribunal fot' Indians and 
drove out de Verinnes from the office of Zamitylar or President. 
The latter was compelled to resign, after accusations of grave 
irregularities had been brought against him. In a word, 
Montigny in bis zeal for reform moved too far and too fast, 
and soon there was ranged against him the major part of the 
population of Chandernagore. 1 

Added to this were two other sources of trouble.—-first, the 
administrative anomaly about the relationship between Chan* 
demagore and Pondicherry, and second, the outbreak of 
revolution at Pondicherry. The relationship between Pondi¬ 
cherry and Chandernagore was not quite clear. Although 
Chandernagore was under the supervision of Pondicherry, there 
was no effective controlling authority in the latter, and the 
Commandant of Chandernagore was directly dependent on the 
Governor-General in the Isle of France. Since Montigny was 
the nominee of Conway, the Governor-General, having replaced 
Moitet. a relation of de Fresne, Governor of Pondicherry, and 
since he showed little deference to the Pondicherry Govern¬ 
ment, being assured of Conway’s support, he was disliked by 
the Governor and the Conseil Supcrieur at Pondicherry. 
Secondly, the arrival of the Bienvenue in February 1790, with 

1 For a list of the charges against Montigny sec Gnrfs dcs Citoyens, 
P. A. ms. 5712. 




MiNisr^ 



OTHER FRENCH SF. ITl EMF.NTS 


___ if - vv,s °f ^ ie Revolution in France, was followed by an 
upheaval at Pondicherry, where the people in imitation of their 
brothers of the Metropolis sei up a General Assembly of citizens 
;md a National Committee to control the authority of the 
Governor. There was an exuberance of the spirit of liberty 
.uul democracy, and people scented tyranny everywhere. In the 
crusading temper of the General Assembly Montigny appeared 
to be a veritable despot, trampling over the rights and liberties 
of the citizens of Chanclernagore. 

After being suspended from office by the Conseil Provinc ial 
at (Jiandernagore, Richemont went, to Pondicherry early in 
1790 and took his case to the Conseil Superieur. This latter 
body, of which the members were not well-disposed towards 
Montigny, annulled the judgment of the Conseil Provincial and 
ordered for his restoration to the office of Procureur. Riche¬ 
mont also look his case before the General Assembly of 
citizens, where he was hailed as a martyr to the cause of liberty, 
and his complaints against Montigny were included in the list 
of grievances to be placed before the National Assembly in 
Paris. 




Hi. Beginning of the Revolution. 


Richemont fell fully avenged and returned to Chanderna- 
gore on the 28th April 1790. By ihe same boat by which he 
travelled there came from the Isle of France Villau des Rabincs, 
the new Procureur appointed by Conway. The arrival of 
Richemont started a general conflagration, helped by the tact 
lessness and indecision of Montigny. Finding that his title to 
the office of Procureur, derived from the decision of the Con¬ 
seil Superieur, was of no avail, when a new incumbent had 
been appointed by the Governor-General, Richemont tried to 
gain his ends by means of a popular revolt such as he had just 
witnessed at Pondicherry. On the 30th April he called a 
meeting of his adherents, giving it the name of General 
Assembly of citizens, although it was attended by only 
persons. Ihe issues placed before it were a Curious mixture 
of the personal grievances of Richemont and the interests of 
the citizens in general. A petition was drawn up, requesting 
the Conseil Provincial 10 declare the appointment of the new 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


rocureur invalid. It was followed by further preparations for 
a popular revolt. Cockades of Liberty were distributed and 
Iresh invitations were issued to citizens to meet on the 3rd May 
to deliberate about, the “welfare and tranquility of the colony.’' 

I he General Assembly met on the morning of the 3rd. It 
was intended to put pressure on the Conseil Provincial, sclic- 
dtiled to meet a few hours later on the same day. The 
Assembly elected de Verinnes as President and Tinglet de 
Neuville as Secretary, both of them victims of Momigny‘s high 
handedness. A small committee was also elected, and Riche¬ 
mont found a place in it by unanimous voice. The meeting 
began with the taking of oath to “the Nation, the Law and the 
King’. Even Frimont, the commander of the army, and other 
military officers present took the oath. Richemont then rose 
to narrate the revolution at Pondicherry, and easily roused the 
selfish instincts of the citizens of Chandernagore to the cause 
of revolt by promising that they could procure from the 
National Assembly in Paris the entire benefit*accruing from the 
sale of opium and saltpetre, without having to share it with 
the citizens of other French settlements. While the Assembly 
was in session, a small deputation went to the Cornell Provin¬ 
cial with the petition of the 30th April. The petition was 
summarily rejected, whereupon the Assembly declared the 
Gonseil dissolved and elected a new one in its place, in which 
Richemont was restored to his old post of Procureur. The 
people then went in a procession, occupied the Council House 
and installed the new Tribunal. 

The revolution was in motion, and a summons was sent to 
Montigii) to appear before the Assembly, take the oath of 
loyalty to the Nation, and recognise the legality of the new 
order. At his own request he was given twenty-four hours to 
think over the matter. The Assembly met again on the 4th May 
to receive the reply of Montigny. The latter, intimidated bv the 
strength of the opposition, vacillated and tried to gain time by 
feigning illness. The Assembly sent a deputation with a 
peremptory summons to Montigny to appear in person and 
give his reply without delay. Montigny yielded and appeared 
before the Assembly, where he was presented with four 
demands: to recognise the legality of the Assembly, to approve 
all its past and future actions, to place the troops under its 


MNlSTffy 



OTHER TRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


Sl 


its wishes. Montigny wanted further time, which was brusquely 
refused. He hesitated for a time and then offered full sub¬ 
mission, accepting all ihe demands and taking the oath of 
loyalty to the Nation. There was at once a change in the 
atmosphere. Montigny was hailed as a patriotic leader, and 
the Assembly burst into shouts of “Long live the Nation, long 
live Montigny/’ 1 

There was an apparent reconciliation, and if Montigny had 
the tact and prudence of de Frcsne, Governor of Pondicherry, 
he could have kept the balance even between himself and the 
Assembly. But that was not to be. Montigny had no interi 
(ion of keeping his promise to the Assembly, and soon petty 
conflicts arose between him and the Committee appointed by 
the Assembly. The climax came on the Qth May, when the 
Committee made a demand that Montigny should inform the 
foreign Powers about the change in the administration of the 
colony. Montigny wavered and took time, bin when the 
Committee met again on the wth and pressed its demand, he 
flatly refused to recognise the legality of the Assembly and its 
Committee. Phis open defiance on the part of Montigny 
necessitated the calling of the Assembly on the 14th.* But 
Monti guy's courage failed him, and on the 13th evening he 
lied away secretly to Chinsurah with his family. When the 
Assembly met on the 14th the members learnt with surpiis< 
about his escape. Frimont, the commander of the troops, 
declared that Montigny had left a letter for him, stating that 
he was going to Chinsurah for a few days and asking him to 
maintain order in the colony. In the absence of the intended 
victim the only course left for the indignant Assembly was to 
vote for his dismissal, and Frimont was called upon to assume 
the functions of the Commandant. Frimont, a prudent man, 
declared that he could not accept the office from the hands of 
the Assembly, but he agreed to be in charge of the troops to 
maintain order in the colony under the direction of the 


> F01 the beginning of the revolution at Chandernagore see P. A. 
ins. 2C98 — Proceedings of the meetings of the General Assembly of citizens 
from 30th April ro 14th May 1790. 

2 Ibid, ms. :?t >97 -Extract from the Deliberations of tlie National 
Committee of citizens, 9th May, 1790. 


mtStffy 



Assembly. The proposal was accepted and the Assembly 
entrusted its own Committee with the functions of the Com¬ 
mandant, pending the arrival of a new incumbent;. 1 


IV. The course of I he Revolution (May to October 

The Revolution had triumphed, but there soon broke out. 
differences of opinion leading to large-scale desertions. As the 
administration passed into the hands of a clique moved by 
selfish interests and severely vindictive measures were taken 
against all those supposed to be adherents of Montigny, saner 
elements realised that they had been befooled by Richemont 
and others like him, and from the end of May most of them 
fled away to foreign settlements in order to escape from the 
new tyranny. The climax came when in June even the Presi¬ 
dent of the Committee, do Verinnes, and a member. Peonna, 
resigned from their offices and soon after retired to Seiariipore, 
where Montigny had Shifted from Chinsurah. There was a 
widespread alarm at Chandernagore that the French emigres 
under the leadership of Montigny were planning to capture 
the colony by force. 2 It is true that Montigny was planning in 
that direction and had secured some help from the English of 
Calcutta. The Governor-General, Cornwallis, had declared 
that he would treat with nobody else but Montigny as the 
representative of the French nation in Bengal. 3 But many of 
the deserters from Chandernagore had no intention of joining 
Montigny. Anyway, in terror of an attack by the partisans of 
Montigny, the Committee at Chandernagore decided to arm all 
citizens as a defensive measure. This led to another piquant 
situation, the withdrawal of Frimont with his troops on the 
34th June from Chandernagore to Goretty, the residence of the 
Commandant built by Chi valier, He was asked to explain 
liis conduct and summoned to return to Chandernagore. 
Frimont replied that he had withdrawn to Goretty on his own 

1 P. A. ms. $698- Proceedings of the meetings of the General Assembly 
of citizens. 

- Ibid. ms. 2699—letter from t| le Citizens’ Committee to Frimont, 23rd 
June, 1790- 

a Labernadie — La Revolution C f i es Ft ablisse merits Francis da us Vlnde, 
j). (quoting the letters of Cornwallis to de Fresne and Conway). 


mtsTfy 



OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


iSL 


rtative and not as an agent of Montigny. The withdrawal 
had been forced upon him by the action of the Committee in 
arming all citizens without consulting him, and that he did not 
recognise the authority of the Committee to summon him back 
to Chandernagore/ The Committee thereupon raised a volun 
leer militia and took all possible defensive measures against an 
attack by Montigny and his partisans. 

During his exile at Serarnpore Montigny wrote to de 
Fre.sne, Governor of Pondicherry, narrating the events at 
Chandernagore and accusing the Pondicherry Government of 
complicity, through the encouragement given to Richemont. 
On the other hand, the Assembly and the Committee at 
Chandernagore also wrote to Pondicherry, narrating events from 
their point of view. They sought the protection of the Pondi¬ 
cherry Government and wanted a new Commandant. 1 2 3 One 
thing became clear in this battle of recrimination., that Montigny 
must be removed from office if peace was to be restored at 
Chandernagore. The determination of the citizens of Chan¬ 
dernagore was clearly expressed in their letter to the Committee 
of citizens at Pondicherry dated 39th May: “Whatever mav 
happen, we would rather perish than return to the chains of 
despotism. France will avenge our death/’ 4 It seems that 
much of the excesses of the revolution at Chandernagore could 
have been averted if the Pondicherry Government had been 
authorised to send another person to replace Montigny soon 
after his flight from Chandernagore. But because of adminis¬ 
trative anomaly, the decision to remove Montigny from office 
had to be taken by the Governor-General, and it was not nil 
July that Conway gave up his protege under the pressure of 
the Assembly of Citizens of the Isle of France. 5 

Montigny, tired of his exile at Serarnpore and being 
encouraged by the withdrawal of Frimont to Gore tty, moved 


1 P. V. ms. 2699 —-letters from the Citizens' Committee to Frimout 
and from Frimont to the Committee, lxnh dated 24th June 1790. 

2 Ibid. mss. 2702, *738 (letters dated 27th May and 24th August 1790). 

3 Ibid , mss. 2703, 2712, 2723, -727, 2731, 2739 (letters dated 29th 
May, 19th June, 29th June, 1st July, 71I) July, 6th September, 1790). 

1 Ibid, ms. 2703. 

5 Ibid., ms. 2736. 


THE FRENCH 7N INDIA 




to that place on the 30th July and installed himself in the old 
chateau of the Commandant. He had collected a small parti¬ 
san army and had also obtained some pieces of cannon from 
the English. On his arrival at Goretty, Frimont withdrew 
and encamped outside the chateau, indicating that he had no 
intention of joining his former chief. Montigny set up the 
old administration at Goretty, and since the trade in salt was 
dependent on direct payment between the Calcutta Govern¬ 
ment and the Commandant of Chandernagore, he was able to 
stop the trade of his opponents, hoping thus to bring them 
back to their senses. On the other hand, the Committee at: 
Ghandernagore felt, alarmed at Montigny’s presence so close to 
the town and greatly concerned at the stoppage of the trade 
of the citizens. 

The situation could not be allowed to continue long. On 
the 1st. September news arrived at Chandernagore about the 
dismissal of Montigny by Conway under the pressure of the 
Assembly of the citizens in the I si ■ of France. There was great 
fo) and excitement in the town, and the Committee decided 
to take the initiative and attack Goretty. The citizens’ militia 
surrounded the chateau on the night of the 2nd September. 
\1 though Montigny had adequate forces to put up a stiff 
resistance, his dismissal by Con-wav had so overwhelmed him 
with grief that he surrendered himself without any opposition. 
Next morning Montigny and his partisans as well as Frimont 
and his troops were brought back to Chandernagore and kept 
in prison. An interesting incident followed. Cornwallis, a 
friend of Montigny, wanted to intervene to save him and his 
partisans from the tyranny of the Chandernagore Committee. 
A pretext for intervention was ready at hand. Goretty was 
separated from Chandernagore by a small strip of English 
territory, nul on the ground that the Chandernagore Com¬ 
mittee had violated English sovereignty by moving troops across 
this corridor without his previous consent, Cornwallis demand¬ 
ed the release of all prisoners captured at Goretty, and he tried 
to press his demand by surrounding the small colony with 2,000 
troops. 1 he Committee was adamant and declared that the 
least movement on the part of the English would be the signal 


WWSTfty. 



O i'H'KR FRENCH Sr. I 11 EMENTS 

killing all the prisoners, whereupon the English troops were 
iminediately wi t hdrawn. 1 

Montigny was interrogated for several days, but. he refused 
to answer the charges brought against him, not recognising the 
legality of the Committee. 2 3 The Committee finally decided, 
perhaps for fear of another English intervention, to send him 
to France for trial by the National Assembly. On the ist 
October Montigny and some of his adherents were put on 
board a small armed boat, the Chundernagor , renamed the 
Patriote to carry them to the mouth of the Hooghly, where a 
larger vessel was waiting to transport them to the Isle of France. 
On the 5th, while the boat was still in the Hooghly, an English 
officer, Major Apple) , came on board and demanded the surren¬ 
der of Montigny and his fellow prisoners. On the refusal of 
the captain, four English schooners attacked the French boat 
and compelled the surrender of the prisoners, who -ere then 
taken to Calcutta. Appley refused the boat to ) l further 

until satisfaction had been given by ihe Chanel .. O ore Com¬ 
mittee for the violation of the Treaty of Versailles in moving 
troops to Gore tty without the permission of the English.* The 
Assembly of Citizens at Chandernagore sent a strong note of 
protest to Lord Cornwallis against his high-handed intervention 
in favour of Montigny and his partisans, to which no reply 


Montigny lived in Calcutta for four months and had the 
satisfaction of seeing his successor. Mot let . meeting with no 


1 On the capture of Goretty and the attempt of the Calcutta Govern¬ 
ment to rescue the prisoners see P. A. ms. 2739 (letter from the Citizens’ 
Committee at Chandernagore to the Citizens’ Committee at Pondicherry, 
hth September 1790) and Labernadie— Im Revolution et les Etablissements 
Franfais dans T'lnde , pp, 227-230. 

2 P. A. ms. 2765. 

3 Ibid, ms. 2777. 

‘ I bid, ms. 2778; see also ms. 2779 for a detailed account of the 
dispute with the Calcutta Government after the capture of Goretty, lead¬ 
ing to the attack on the C hander ndgvr (letter from the Citizens’ Com¬ 
mittee at Chandernagore to the Citizens’ Committee at Pondicherry, 10th. 
October 1790). C. R. O. -The Trench in India Series, Vol. XIII Com 
plaints against the conduct of the British Governments in India having- 
been made by the inhabitants of Chandernagore and transmitted to Europe 
for the consideration of the French National Assembly. 



ft) . [s' If* 

luck at Cha ndernagore and forced to take refuge in 
Calcutta soon after his arrival. On the. 10th February 1791 be 
left Calcutta, with a touching farewell message to his friends 
and adherents, assuring them that he would secure justice for 
all on his arrival in France. 1 

V. The Mission of Mattel. 

It has been noticed already that one of the principal diffi¬ 
culties in the way of a peaceful settlement at Chandernagore 
was the extreme unpopularity of Montigny and the inability of 
the Pondicherry Government to replace him by a more tactful 
officer without the sanction of the Governor-General. However, 
the recall of Montigny by Conway and its sequel made it 
possible for de Fresnje, Governor of Pondicherry, to deal with 
the problem of pacifying Chandernagore. The task was made 
even easier for him by the appointment of Cossigny as Gover¬ 
nor-General in August 1790? The latter was mild and con¬ 
ciliatory in temperament, and while informing tie Fresne of his 
assumption of office and of the appointment of de Canaple to 
succeed Montigny at Chandernagore, he stated that in all 
matters relating to the settlements in India he would depend 
on the advice of the Governor of Pondicherry, being the man 
on the spot. 3 Thus feeling that he would be allowed some 
freedom of action and fearing that it would take some time for 
de Canaple to reach Bengal, cle Frcsne decided to send a tactful 
and competent person immediately to pacify the troubles at 
Chandernagore. Moreover, the English Government in Cal¬ 
cutta had been pressing him to nominate an official represen¬ 
tative in Bengal with whom it could deal about the question 
of opium and salt. As an interim arrangement, therefore, de 

• 1 abernadie -La Revolution rt les Etabiisse. merits FrangaU dans 
l'hide, pp. 249-250. t here is an anonymous memoire in the Pondicherry 
Archives (ms. 2783), La Revolution de Chandernagor on relation des 
troubles qui out lieu fives cell, colonic en 1790, giving a complete ana 
impartial narration of the course of events at Chandernagore during the 
early part of the Revolution there. 

2 r. V. mss 1279 -Conway to de Fresne, 25th July, * 79 n. 

:t /inl.y mss. 129th 1297 -Cossigny to de IVesne, September, 1790. 


mmsr/fy 


OTHER FRENCH «ETT1 .IvMENTb 

to send Mattel, who had previous experience 
of Chandernagore administration. 

Moltet started from Pondicherry at the end of September 
1790. According to his instructions, on arrival in Bengal he 
was to inform the Chandernagore Committee about the pro¬ 
visional nature of his appointment, pending the arrival of de 
Canaplc. He was to consider himself more as a conciliator 
than as an administrator. The principal object of his mission 
was to rc-esta blish ordered economy in the settlement, which 
had broken down completely since the Revolutionary Com¬ 
mittee came into power. There was in fact much to be done 
in this sphere, as Moitet himself found on bis arrival in Bengal. 
Trade and commerce had come to a standstill, hardly any vessel 
taking the risk of going up to Chandernagore for fear of 
pillage. Many of the private French merchants had fled away 
and taken refuge at foreign settlements like Chin surah, Seram- 
pore and Calcutta. Indians also had emigrated in large num¬ 
bers, and even those that remained had their goods transferred 
to safer custody in Calcutta. The Revolutionary Committee, 
regardless of the state of the treasury, indulged in an orgy of 
extravagance, spending in the course of 1790 nearly ten times 
the amount sanctioned under the old budget. Money for this 
extravagance was found by emptying the Government treasury 
and laying hands on the funds and goods of the Company. 1 
Extortions were also made from the Bengali inhabitants of 
Chandernagore under the euphemistic name of ‘forced loan . 

Mol tot arrived at Chandernagore on the 5th November 
1790 and was given a most humiliating reception. Immediately 
after his arrival he Mas led before the Committee “almost like 
a criminal*', as he wrote to de Fresne, and was subjected to a 
critical interrogation for several days on the object of his 
mission. The Committee finally decided to accept him as ihe 
head of the executive, but reducing his authority almost to 
nil. Till the drawing up of a new constitution for Ghanderna- 
gore, control over finance, police and justice was to remain in 
the hands of the Committee. Mottet was to have no relation 
with the Chiefs of the Danish and Dutch settlements in Bengal 
for the support they had given to Montigny, and from the 



decided 


1 V. A. ms, 2781 (Protest of the Company’s agents at Chandernagore). 



English Government of Calcutta he was to demand reparation 
for the outrage committed on the ship, Chandernagor. He 
was bound to execute the laws promulgated by the Committee, 
and only as a matter of grace he was allowed to correspond 
with the Governor of Pondicherry. Mottet was unwilling to 
accept such humiliating conditions, but fearing personal danger 
from a flat refusal, he merely sought an excuse to get out of 
Chandernagore. On the plea of having to settle the question 
of opium and salt with the English Government, he left 
Chandernagore early in December and took up his residence 
in Calcutta, from where he sent a detailed report, to de 
Fresne, 1 

In January 7791 there broke out dissensions among the 
members of the Revolutionary Committee at Chandernagore. 
Those who were opposed to the growing tyranny of Richemont 
were accused of plotting to overthrow the existing regime, 
and sentenced to varying terms of imprisonment. 2 Most 
of the prisoners succeeded in escaping from Chanderna¬ 
gore. Mottet realised that the only way to stop the lawlessness 
and anarchy at. Chandernagore was to employ force, and he 
sought the permission of Cornwallis in Calcutta to move 
French troops through English territory. As a last attempt he 
sent an appeal 10 the Chandernagore Committee to bring it to 
reason, but, as could have been expected, the appeal was in 
vain. Shortly after, on the mh February, the newly appointed 
Commandant, de Canaple, arrived in Calcutta. Mottet was 
only happy to transfer to him the thankless task of pacifying 
Chandernagore, and himself returned to Pondicherry. 

VI. The failure of the new Commandant , de Canaple. 

De Canaple had been Commandant at Malic from Novem¬ 
ber 1787 to April 1790, and we shall see later the wise and 
efficient manner in which he guided the affairs of the settle- 

1 About Mottet’s mission in Bengal, full information is available in 
the collection of his correspondence during this period preserved in the 
Pondicherry Archives (ms. 1304). The collection also includes the instruc¬ 
tions given to Mottet by de Fresne and the letters of de Fresne to the 
Chandernagore Committee. 

a P. A. mss. 2784, 278C, 2791. 


Ml NIST/) 



menl before the outbreak of the revolutionary troubles the e. 
Returning to the Isle of France with the intention of going 
back to Europe, he was appointed by Cornvay Commandant 
of ('handernagore in July 1790. He started from the Isle oi 
France at the beginning ol September .1790 with two 'sets of 
instructions, one from Conway and the other from his successor, 
Cossigny, both of which enjoined on him the adoption of mild 
and conciliatory methods. Arriving at Pondicherry m Decern 
ber, tie Canaple asked for more detailed instructions from de 
Fresne, Accordingly, the latter gave him another set of ins¬ 
tructions, sending at the same time a copy to the Chander- 
nagore Committee, with an appeal to accept de Canaple with 
a good grace. 1 

In his instructions de Fresne made provision for the con¬ 
tingency of the new Commandant not being acceptable to the 
Chandernagore Committee. He was in that case to take up 
his residence in Calcutta, get himself recognised by Cornwallis 
and the Chiefs of the other foreign settlements as the accredited 
representative of France in Bengal, and to occupy himself with 
the sale of opium and salt. De Fresne’s apprehension turned 
out to be true. De Canaple arrived in Calcutta on the mli 
February 1791, and from there he sent a letter to the Chamler- 
nagore Committee together with a copy of the instructions he 
had received from de Fresne, explaining that in view of Mottefs 
experience he had thought it prudent not to proceed straight 
to Chandernagore without getting some definite assurances 
from the Committee. 2 The Committee in reply expressed 
surprise that having pledged his loyalty to the Revolution, 
Canaple should be afraid to come to Chandernagore, and it 
also felt indignant that he should ha\c brought instructions 
from the Governor of Pondicherry, whose authority ihe citizens 
of Chandernagore no longer recognised. 3 Canaple thereupon 
decided to remain in Calcutta, concerning himself with the 
sale of opium and salt. Towards the end of June he was struck 
with a mortal disease, to which he succumbed on the 5th 


1 P. A. mss. 1330, 1331, *782. 

2 Ibid, ms. 2787. 

3 Ibid , ms. 2788. 


“August. 1 After his death the Fnglish Government sealed up 
the office of the French administration in Calcutta, pending 
the arrival of a new Commandant. 

While Canaple lay dying, the Chandernagore Committee 
secretly sent a deputation, consisting of Longchamp and Ricard, 
to the Assembly of the isle of France to lay before that body 
its grievances against the Commandant. At the same time it 
addressed a fiery appeal to the Pondicherry garrison to revolt 
against the authority of de Fresnc and the reactionary Assembly 
of that place." The appeal had onl) the effect of widening 
the rift between Pondicherry and Chandernagore, but the 
deputation to the Isle of France produced far-reaching results, 
one of which was an open breach between Pondicherry and 
the Isle of France, both adopting contradictory polities to 
pacify troubles at Chandernagore. 

VII. Conflict between Pondicherry and the Isle of Prance, 
Despatch of two rival Missions, 

The Assembly ol the Isle of France had from the beginning 
of the troubles at Chandernagore supported the anti-Montigny 
revolutionary faction. As a result of the deputation of Long- 
champ and Ricard, it brought pressure on Cossigny to inter¬ 
vene in the affairs of Chandernagore, and in July 1791 the 
latter decided to recall de Canaple and to send two Concilia 
don Commissioners to Bengal, Gautier and Yvon The news 
of this decision reached Pondicherry at the beginning of 
August. De Fresne 00P it as a personal rebuff. He com¬ 
municated to the Pondicherry Assembly a full report on the 
Chandernagore situation, together with all the correspondence 
exchanged between him and the Governor-General on the sub¬ 
ject. 3 On the 7th August the Pondicherry Assembly passed a 
resolution protesting against the intervention of the Isle of 
France in the affairs of Chandernagore by sending a Concilia¬ 
tion Commission. Emboldened by the fact that the National 
Assembly in Paris had accepted its deputies as the accredited 
representatives of French India, it claimed that Pondicherry 


1 l\ A. ins. 2805. 

- ibid,, mss, 2800-2803. 


3 Ibid., mss. 1443, 1 445 - 


miSTfiy 


O IIIER f'KENCH SETI I EMJENTS 

no way subordinate to the Government of the Isle of 
Franee, and that it alone had full control over the other Indian 
settlements. 1 Finally, at the instance of the Assembly do Fresne 
decided to send its President, Fumeron, to Bengal, not as 
Comm and ant, for he had no power to make such an appoint¬ 
ment. but simply as an “agent to look after the interests of 
the nation/* Fumeron was to try to bring the Chandernagore 
Committee to reason and to-induce the citizens to elect repre¬ 
sentatives to the new Colonial Assembly at Pondicherry, failing 
which he was to convoke a meeting of the emigres to elect 
representatives for Chandernagore. 2 

The Conciliation Commissioners from the Isle of France 
reached Chandernagore on the 10th September, and two days 
later Fumeron arrived in Calcutta. Both the Commissioners 
and Fumeron had the same objective, to restore order at 
Chaudernagove; but their instructions were so entirely contra¬ 
dictory that no agreement was possible. Soon after their 
arrival in Bengal, Gautier and Yvon at Chandernagore and 
Fumeron in Calcutta entered into a lengthy correspondence, 
each side trying to convince the other of the reasonableness of 
its point of view. 3 The stand taken by the Conciliation Com¬ 
missioners was that the citizens of Chandernagore should be 
left alone to set up the system of administration they liked, and 
that the Pondicherry Government had no right to assert its 
control over Chandernagore against the will of its citizens and 
contrary to the policy of the Government of the Isle of France, 
which alone was responsible for the administration of all the 
French settlements in the East. Secondly, since opium was an 
article of Bengal, Chandernagore alone had the right to enjoy 
the benefit from its sale, but. as a matter of compromise it 
would be willing to sacrifice a small part of it for the other 
French settlements in India. Fumeron, on his side, denied the 
proposition that Pondicherry had no control over Chander¬ 
nagore, and on the other hand claimed that the Government 
of the Isle of France had no right to interfere in the affairs of 

i 1>. V ms. 1457 —Deliberations of the Colonial Assembly, 7 th August 

J 7 Q1. 

- Ibid., mss. 146*, 1463 (Instructions given to Fumeron by the 
Colonial Assembly). 

3 Ibid., m$s. 2815. 2817, 2819. 

EE 




THE FRENCH IN IN IMA 




clernagorc. Secondly, he declared that granting auto/ 
Chandernagore under the existing circum,stances would 
amount to perpetuating a tyrannical regime which had driven 
out all the respectable citizens from the settlement. Thirdly, 
oil the question of opium he took his stand on a recent order 
of the Minister, allocating the income from the sale of that 
article to the general revenues of the French settlements in 
India, to be distributed by the Pondicherry Government. The 
controversy was finally put an end to by the decision of the 
Calcutta Government on the 5th October to recognise Fumeron 
as the official French representative in Bengal and to hand 
over to him the quantity of opium fixed by the Anglo-French 
Convention of 1787. 1 It was a signal, victory for Fumeron and 
the Pondicherry Government, since deprived of the revenue 
from the sale of opium the autonomy of Chandernagore was 
untenable. 


VIII. 7 he new Constitution and A ft a. 


Not to be baffled by the English recognition given to 
Fumeron, the Conciliation Commissioners and the Revolu¬ 
tionary Committee at Chandernagore proceeded to draw up a 
new constitution for the settlement. A general assembly of 
the citizens was held for the purpose on the 17th October, ft 
was not attended by the emigres, who as a mark of protest 
convoked another assembly in Calcutta a few days later. 2 On 
the flth November the General Assembly of Chandernagore 
drew up a new constitution, which was put into effect, forth¬ 
with. 3 Only it ' broad features ina\ be noticed here. Chander¬ 
nagore was declared completely free from the control of Pondi¬ 
cherry. There was to be a representative of the King, but the 
real powers were vested in a General Assembly, consisting of 
all the active citizens, i.e. of 25 years of age or over and 


1 P. A. mss. 28.21 (Calcutta Council to Fumeron, 51h October 1701) 
ami 38*3 (Fumeron to dc Fresnc, f 5 th October). 

2 Ibid, mss 2831, 2833, 2835, 2837. 

3 Ibid, ms. 2842 — Constitution Provisoire dc la colonic de Chanda 
nagor; also Reg. 92. Inventaiu • dcs Aneiennes Archives dc Vhide Frongaise, 
Pondich£ry: and Labernadie Im Revolution et les Eslablisse merits Frangois 
dam VInde, pp. 279-290. 


mtstfL 



OTHER FRENCH SET Tl.ElMENTS 


<SL 


om idled in the settlement. It was to elect an Assemble 
Administrative, which was to meet only once in three months, 
and a smaller body, the Directoire which was to be in charge 
of the administration during the intervals of the meetings of 
the Assemble*; Administrative . The General Assembly, which 
was to meet only once a year, was also to elect two judicial 
tribunals, one for Europeans and another for Indians. For 
the second tribunal also the judge was to be a Frenchman, but 
lie was to be assisted by some Indian Assessors, to be elected 
bv the Indian inhabitants. That, was the only crumb of 
‘equality and ‘fraternity’ thrown out to Indians. 

After the introduction of the new constitution Gautier 
returned to the Isle of France in December, leaving Yvon as 
Commandant at Chandernagore. Shortly after Richemont also 
left for the same destination t.o plead the cause of the citizens 
of Chandernagore against the tyranny of the Pondicherry 
Government. His mission was successful, and he returned to 
Bengal in June 1792. In the meantime Cossigny sent a formal 
order to de Fresne to recall Fumeron at once and not to inter¬ 
fere further in the affairs of Chandernagore, pending the 
arrival of Civil Commissioners from France, who were expected 
shortly. It was a rebuff for de Fresne, but he had nevertheless 
to obey the order of the Governor-General. I he departure of. 
Fumeron from Bengal was delayed by a few months on account 
of the death of Yvon, and of the replacement of Cossigny by 
Malar tic as Governor-General, which held out a hope that the 
Government of the Isle of France would give more discretion 
to the Pondicherry authorities in settling the affairs of Chan¬ 
dernagore. But that hope was also broken when Malartic 
wrote to de Fresne, asking him to recall Fumeron and to leave 
the affairs of Chandernagore in the same state in which they 
had remained during the time of Cossigny . 1 I o crown the 
discomfiture of de Fresne. Malartic appointed Gautier as Com¬ 
mandant at Chandernagore. Gautier was not, however, destined 
to return to Bengal. He arrived at Pondicherry with Lescallier, 
one of the Civil Commissioners, and remained there till the 
capture of the place by the English. Fumeron left Calcutta in 

1 F. A. ms. 1888 — de Fresne to Malartic, 31st October 1792. 



THE IUENCH IN INDIA 


V; 

tober 179^, and back a; Pondicherry he resumed his place 
as President of the Colonial Assembly. 

For six months more anarchv reigned at Chandernagore, 
and the emigres in Calcutta continued to live in destitution 
and poverty. Finally, all discords and enmities among the 
French in Bengal were set at. rest by the sudden arrest of all 
the cmgres in Calcutta and the capture of Chandernagorc by 
the English on the nth June 1793, following the arrival of 
news of the outbreak of war in Europe. There is no record 
to show what resistance was offered by the citizens of Chander- 
nagore,—perhaps none at all. 


<SL 


Mahe 


I. Condition of the Settlement after restitution. 

Mahe was restored to the French on the 15th August 1785. 1 
The place had suffered complete destruction at the hands of 
the English, in violation of the terms of capitulation of 1779. 
At ihe time of taking possession, Marin, who was appointed 
Commandant, wanted a detailed list of the damages caused 
during the period of occupation, but the English representa¬ 
tives refused to supply any. 2 On his own part he drew up a 
me moire for the information of the Pondicherry Government 
on the pillage and destruction committed since the capitulation. 3 
According to this report, iri 1779 the English had ravaged the 
settlement in a systematic way, pulling down the Government 
House and removing all the materials to Tellicherry, and 
destroying even the church and private dwellings. In Novem¬ 
ber 1780 they handed over the place to the ruler of Kadattanacl, 
who pillaged it once again. Shortly after, Mahe was captured 
by the forces of Mysore, who then laid siege to the neighbour 
ing English settlement of Tellicherry. In 1783 the tide turned 
again, the English drove out the Mysore troops and retook 
MaKC For the third time the place was given up to plunder 
and devastation. 


1 P. A. ms. 4540. 

3 Ibid , ms. 4541 (declaration by Marin). 

3 Ibid, ms. 4547. 


MIN ISTfy 



Thus Mahd had suffered such thorough destruction that 
when the French retook possession in 1785 they had to start 
from the beginning in reconstructing their settlement from the 
ruins of the old. Yet, curiously enough, it was this place which 
the French Government had seriously proposed, after the end 
of the hostilities, to be turned into the principal establishment 
in India. We have already noticed the exchange of corres¬ 
pondence on this subject between Bussy and the Minister. 
Marin, who took possession of the settlement in August 1785, 
acted as Commandant till November 1787, when he was suc¬ 
ceeded in that office by de Can a pie/ himself remaining as 
Ordonnateur, De Canaple remained in office till April 1790, 
when he returned to the Isle of France, being succeeded as 
Commandant by Le Tellier. During the first five years all the 
energies of the administration were taken up by the work of 
reconstruction. The task was stupendous, and both money 
and materials were lacking. The revenue of Mahd was insuffi¬ 
cient even to meet the normal expenses of the settlement, and 
the acuteness of the financial difficulty is brought out clearly 
by the annual statements of income and expenditure and the 
correspondence on the subject between the authorities of Mah£ 
and the principal settlement preserved in the Pondicherry 
Archives. 1 Some relief was obtained by taking a loan of 
twenty thousand rupees from the agents of the new Company, 
de Court and de Boyer, which was utilised for the more pressing 
needs of reconstruction,—building a new Government House, 
a powder magazine, a prison and a church. 2 

Nothing, however, could be done to put the place in a 
tolerable state of defence, even against raids of bandits from 
neighbouring territories. There was no money to construct a 
vail or to restore the old earthen ditch which surrounded the 
settlement. The garrison was hardly adequate even to main¬ 
tain internal law and order. Besides a couple of European 
officers, it consisted of about forty sepoys and an equal number 

1 P. A. mss. 4535 (i Mdmoire of Menesse, giving an estimate of the 
expenses for the reconstruction of Mah6), 4545 (MJmcire of Marin), 4544. 
• 155 *» 4557 > 4599 - 4651 (annual statements of income and expenditure from 
1785 to 1789). 

- Ibid, mss. 4/554, 4561. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


of Thevars, a low caste people of the locality. 1 * 3 4 The only time 
that flie citizens of Mah£ had some feeling of security was 
during the occasional visits of warships.- The Moplahs of the 
coast constituted a special source of danger, and they frequently 
took advantage of the exposed condition of the French settle 
mem to carry on their raids of depredation with impunity. 
One such incident took place just before the arrival of de 
Cana pie, when some Moplahs of Calicut seized the Nayar of 
Kuraugod, a vassal of France, from his residence at Mah6 
guarded by a detachment of sepoys, and carried him off to 
Calicut; where he was hanged by Tipu’s orders on a charge of 
having dishonoured a Moplah woman. :i About another Moplah 
incursion de Canaple wrote to Conway at Pondicherry in 
April 1789, when a band raided some villages belonging to the 
French, carried off twenty Hindu inhabitants, and converted 
them to the Islamic faith after the painful method of circumci¬ 
sion.* Nor were the Hindu Nayars of the neighbourhood less 
troublesome, and in his letters to Pondicherry de Canaple 
frequently complained of the vexations caused by them. 

Apart from the worries caused by the raids of bandits, the 
Commandant at Mah6 had frequent troubles with the authori¬ 
ties of the neighbouring English settlement of Fellicherry, who 
adopted various methods to obstruct the trade of the French, 
and even occupied some territories transferred to them by the 
Nayar of Kurangod when he placed himself under their pro¬ 
tection. Repeated protests against the English pretensions 
proved of no avail, and the Commandant of Mahcj had tamely 
to submit to the situation, contenting himself with complaints 
to the Governor of Pondicherry. Nor were relations with 1 ipu, 
the nominal ally of France, any happier, and throughout, his 
period of office de Canaple had to complain frequently about 
the vevations caused by Tipu’s agents to the supply of goods 
and provisions to the French settlement. These agents often 
terrorised the people of the villages belonging to the French. 
Canaple wrote several times to Tipu, who assured him that. 

1 P. A. mss. 4556, 4695 (strength of the garrison in December 1787 
and October 1790). 

~ ibid ms. -i ;,97 (de Canaple to the Minister, 18th December 1788). 

3 Ibid., ms. 4555 (de Canaple to Conway, 8ih December 1787). 

4 Ibid., cos. 46*4. 


Ml UlSTffy 



orders had been sent to his agents not to give any trouble to 
the French. That, however, did not improve matters, and 
Canaple bad to write to the Governor of: Pondicherry to take 
up the question with Tipu. Conway also complained of the 
interception of goods and letters passing through Tipu’s 
territory but failed to get any redress. 1 Far from stopping the 
vexatious activities of his agents, Tipu complained to Conway 
against the Commandant of Mahe and wanted his recall. 2 It 
is rather curious that such were the relations of Tipu with tin* 
French at the very time that he was sending an embassy to Paris. 

One source of inconvenience for the French at Mahe was 
that the territories belonging to the settlement were not in 
one compact area. The settlement proper was small, about 
two miles in area. It had received some additional territory 
from the Nayar of Kurangod, but situated at some distance. 
Before the last war Bellecom.be> during his visit to MahG had 
secured for the French three villages from Haidar Ali. but. 
they were not contiguous to the original settlement When 
de Canaple first arrived at Mahe, he suggested to Conway to 
propose an exchange of territory with Tipu to make the French 
possessions more compact, which would free them to some 
extent from the vexations of Tipu’s agents. 3 In 1789 Tipu 
himself made a proposal to Conway to exchange the three 
villages given by his father for some other territory with an 
equal revenue. 4 The proposal, however, did not materialise 
for lack of agreement about the location of the territory to 
be given in exchange. 5 

When de Canaple first arrived at Mah£, he was full of 
hopes about turning it into a prosperous settlement and a 
flourishing centre of trade. Writing to Conway on the 20th 
February 1788, be referred to the great commercial advantages 
of Mah6 and pointed out that it could be turned into an 
important centre of trade not merely for the products of the 
Malabar Coast, mainly pepper, but also for those of the Arabian 

1 P. A. mss. 881, 882, 901, 926, 4565. 4577, 4615, 4624. 

2 Ibid., ins. 1 

3 ibid, ins. 4555. 

4 Ibid., ms. 4634 (Tipu to Conway, May 20, 1789). 

5 Ibid., ms. 1199 (Observations of de Canaple on Tipu’s offer of ex 
change of territories). 


Ml HIST/fy 



Coast, specially gum-arabic and borax. 1 2 In 1789 he drew up 
another meinoire on the commercial possibilities of the place, 
but stated that they could not be realised unless France showed 
more interest in the development and security of the settlement 
than what she had done since 1765/ Two years of adminis 
nation, however, convinced him that there was little prospect 
of his being* able to develop Mah£ into a prosperous settle 
menu When the French Government had decided to withdraw 
troops from Pondicherry as an economy measure Mahe could 
expect little relief. In September 1789 de Canaple wrote to 
Conway, “For two years I have been a witness to the agony 
of this settlement; spare me from being a witness to the 
afflicting spectacle of her death". At his own request he was 
relieved of his office and permitted to return to Europe. 3 4 5 In 
April 179° left Mahe for the Isle of France. 1 His later 
career has been noticed already in connection with the history 
of Ch a nd ern a gore. 

II. /-<'• l filter and the beginning of the Revolution . 

De Canaple was succeeded provisionally by Le Tellier, who 
had been in command of the sepoy force. In the detailed 
instructions he left for his successor, de Canaple particularly 
recommended a cautious and prudent policy towards the Nawab 
of Mysore, avoidance of traffic in arms which might give the 
English a cause of grievance, and maintenance of peace and 
order in the settlement. 3 Le Tellier remained in office till 
October 1791. During his administration the old difficulties 
in relation to Lipu and the English persisted and became even 
more pronounced. During the Anglo-Mysore war the English 
seized the territories of the Nayar of Kurangod on the plea of 
their belonging to Tipu, although the French claimed them 
to be a part of their possessions. The English also searched 
and sometimes seized French ships navigating between Manga 
lore and Mahe on the plea of their carrying contraband goods. 

1 P. A. ms. 4571. 

2 Ibid., ms. 4652. 

3 Ibid., ms. n86. 

4 Ibid., ms. 4673. 

5 Ibid., ms. 4668 (instructions dated 10th April 1790). 


imSTffy 


onII R FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 

A prolonged correspondence followed between Le Tellier and 
Taylor, the Chief of the English settlement at Tellicherry, but 
the French failed to get any redress. 1 

Difficulties with Tipu and the English were not the only 
preoccupation of Le Tellier. The main interest of his period 
of administration was the beginning of the revolution at Mahe> 
following the example of the other French settlements in India. 
It is not known exactly how and when the revolution com¬ 
menced at Mahe. The first somewhat connected account about 
the beginning of the revolution there is to be found in Le 
Tdlier’s letter to de Fresne, Governor of Pondicherry, dated 
5th April 1791, from which it appears that the revolution 
started about six months earlier. 2 The maker of the revolu¬ 
tion was one Boyer, agent of the new Company, While the 
administration was languishing for want of money, Boyer had 
at his disposal large funds, part of which he utilised on his own 
account to win popularity among the citizens. The news of 
the revolution in Paris and in the Isle of France gave him an 
opportunity to come into prominence and seize power. From 
Le Tcllier’s letter to de Fresne, mentioned above, it appears 
that early in December 1790 the citizens of Mahe constituted 
a Colonial Assembly with Boyer as President. The approval 
of the Commandant was sought, but he was told plainly enough 
that his disapproval would not affect the decision of the 
citizens. The Conseil or court of justice was abolished and 
its place was taken by a committee set up by the Colonial 
Assembly, which also organised a National Guard, placed 
under the command of Menesse. The Committee arrogated 
to itself all the administrative functions, including control over 
finance and police. Le Tellier was a timid person, and having 
no definite instructions either from the Isle of France or from 
Pondicherry about the policy lie was to follow in the new 
< ircumstances. he gave way to every demand of the Colonial 
Assembly and its Committee. 

In April 1791 the arrival from Pondicherry of an employee 
of the Company, named de Gondreville, brought about a 

1 P. A. mss, 4683, 4G87, 4688, 4691-4693, 47 ° 1 » 47 °C 47 ° 8 ' 47 * n 47 * 4 - 

47 *>> 1737 ' 473 8 ' 474 S> 475 <h 5 °* 4 - 

2 Ibid., ms. 4767. 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


porarv change in the situation. Under his persuasion 
Boyer realised that he had gone too Ear in disorganising the 
machinery of administration in the settlement, and at a session 
of the Colonial Assembly, held on the 16th April, it was decided 
to restore the authority of the Commandant and of the old 
Cornell. The makers of the earlier revolution satisfied them¬ 
selves by merely establishing a municipal body, of wh eh 
Boyer was elected Mayor.' Thus calm was restored for the 
time being. But shortly after troubles started once more out 
of a personal quarrel between Boyer and the commander of 
the National Guard, Menesse, supported by a private merchant 
named Langlade. The ali-powerfid Mayor had his opponents 
arrested and brought for trial before the Cornell. The trial, 
which lasted for more than three months, caused great, excite¬ 
ment among the partisans on both sides. Ultimately, Lang¬ 
lade escaped from prison, and Menesse was sent to Pondicherry 
to be tried by the Consetl Superieur} In October Le Tellier 
was replaced by Larcher as Commandant. 4 He left Malic in 
‘January 179.2 and went 10 the Isle of Prance. 

11 L Administration of Larcher — restoration of peace. 

Larcher, who succeeded Le Tellier, was a stronger person 
and knew how to deal with the state of affairs such as had 
developed at Mahe. Within a short time he succeeded in 
gaining control over the si nation and calming the excitement 
which had arisen over the affair of Menesse and Langlade. 
During the Inst few months of his administration the main 
preoccupations of Larcher were the relations with Tipu and 
the English, who were still at war. Tipu’s men often made 
incursions into French territory, while the English insisted on 
searching every French vessel for contraband of war. They 
carried their practice to such a length as to board and inspect 
a French ship, the Jeune Circle, in the roadstead of Mahe: 
and on another occasion they attacked a French frigate, the 

1 1 \ A. mss. 4673 (Proceedings of the Assembly, 16th April 1791) and 
4674 (letter of Le Tellier to de Fresne, 18th April, 1792). 

2 Ibid., mss. 4788, 4789. |8u (letters from e 1 ellier to de Eresne 
dated 4th July. 30 th July and 16th September 1 79 l 2 3 )- 

3 Ibid., mss. 4814, 4815, 


IAI NISTq 



OTHER ) REN OH SETTLEMENTS 

'folue. Larcher vehemently protested to Cornwallis, who 
commanded the English squadron, against such high-handed 
actions but failed to get any redress, Cornwallis insisting on 
the right of a belligerent to search neutral vessels for contraband 
of war. 1 2 * 4 

In May 1792 the Conseil Supdrieur at Pondicherry gave 
its judgment in the case against Men esse. The charge against 
him was dismissed, and he was awarded damages against his 
accusers. Fortified by this judgment, Menesse returned to 
Mah<£ in June. Langlade having tome back earlier. Imme¬ 
diately after his arrival Menesse, joined by his supporters, 
demanded the summoning of a General Assembly, ft met on 
the 24th June, and under the influence of the judgment of the 
Conseil Superieur , vindicating Menesse and condemning Boyer 
and his associates, it elected a new Committee of nine mem¬ 
bers, Menesse and Langlade getting the largest number of 
votes and the party of Boyer being defeated. Boyer and the 
other municipal officers resigned.* When, however, the new 
Committee asked for recognition from the Commandant, 
Larcher refused on the ground that the proceedings of the 
General Assembly were irregular. But at the same time he 
accepted the resignation of Boyer from the post of Mayor. 
Thus by one stroke he sought to get rid of both the factions. n 

There started a dispute between the new Committee and 
the Commandant, which was ended by summoning another 
General Assembly on the 8th July.' Harangued by Larcher, 
the new Assembly took a decision to restore all authority to 
the administration and not to set up either a committee or a 
municipality, pending the arrival of the Civil Commissioners 
who had been sent out from France to reform the adminis- 


1 P. A. ms. 4820 (Larcher to Cornwallis, 24th October, 1791), ms. 
4822 (Larcher to Cornwallis, 1st November), ms. 4823 (Cornwallis to 
larcher, 3rd November), ms. 4824 (Cornwallis to Larcher, 5th November), 
ms. 4830 (Larcher to de Fresne, 18th November), ms. 4833 (a detailed 
account of the capture of the Rcsoluc by an officer on board), ms. 4849 
(Larcher to de Fresne, 20th January 179a). 

2 Ibid., mss. 4893, 1S94 (Proceedings of the Assembly, ,ph June, and 
of the new Committee, 25th June 1792). 

' Ibid., ms. 4897 (Larcher to Menesse, 28th June 1792). 

4 Ibid., ms. 4901. 


misty 



THL FRENCH IX INPIA 


<SL 


ive organisation in the different settlements. 1 This sudden 
turn in affairs took both the contending factions by surprise, 
who now complained against Larcher to the Governor of 
Pondicherry; Larcher tried to defend his conduct, 2 * but de 
Fresne felt that he had gone too far hi taking an active part 
in local politics. However, the situation was saved by a letter 
from Lescallier, one of the Civil Commissioners who had 
already arrived at Pondicherry, informing live citizens of Mahe 
of his intention to visit the settlement in October 1793- a That 
stopped all further troubles, and the General Assembly decided 
not to introduce any innovation till the arrival of the Civil 
Commissioner. In January 1793 Lai her could report to de 
Fresne that calm had been restored at YlahC 4 

Although faction-fighting had stopped, Mahe was faced 
with a new danger when news reached about the outbreak 
of war between England and France. On the 21 si June 
Larcher summoned a General Assembly to communicate the 
news to the citizens and to concert measures for the defence 
of the settlement against an impending attack by the English. 
He gave a frank account of the situation,—the old fortifica¬ 
tions completely destroyed, and the garrison consisting of 
88 sepoys with three European officers. Marin, the Ordonna- 
teu) , informed the Assembly about, the state of the treasury, 
containing only six thousand rupees, and about the inadequate 
stock of provisions. The Assembly set up a Political Com¬ 
mittee to decide how to meet the sudden danger. It met on 
the same date and came to the conclusion that defence was 
out of the question. It informed Larcher that the only thing 
that could be done was to capitulate on honourable terms, 
that would save the dignity of the nation and the interests of 
the citizens of Mahe.* Accordingly, when on the 13th July 
Col. Hartley, commanding the English forces on the Malabar 
Coast, sent a detachment of troops under Captain George 


1 P. A. mss. 4902, 4903. 

2 Ibid., ms. 4933 (Larcher to de Fresne, 28th September 1792)* 

'• Ibid., ms. 4948 (Larcher to de Fresne, 30th November 1792), ms. 
4962 (citizens of Mah£ to Lescallier, 7th January, 1793). 

4 Ibid., ms. 49t>3 (Larcher to de Fresne, 9th January 1793). 

•' Ibid., ms. 4988 (Proceedings of the General Assembly, 21st. June 1793, 
and of the Committee elected by it). 


miST/fy 



OTHER FRENCH SETTFEMENTS 



ackei 


vcn/ie and surmnond Larchcr to surrender the settlement, 
the latter made no difficulty in accepting the terms of capitula¬ 
tion brought by Mackenzie. The English offered to accord 
full honours of war to the French garrison and promised to 
respect the rights of property of private citizens. Following 
die acceptance of the terms. Malic was surrendered to the 
English on the 16th July. 1 


Calicut and Surat 


Only a brief notice need be taken of the two French 
factories at Calicut and Surat; during the period under review. 
As we have noticed already, the administrative re organisation 
of the Indian possessions decreed by the French Ministry in 
1787 transferred the charge of the subordinate factories to the 
newly established Company. 2 At the beginning of 1788 the 
factory at Calicut was handed over to the Company's agent, 
dc Court. 3 but the Company failed to revive French trade 
there and the factory remained in a moribund condition. In 
1792 after the conclusion of the Anglo-Mysore war, the English 
puFed down the flag from the French factory, claiming sover¬ 
eignty over the whole district of Calicut as a result of their 
treaty with Tipu. The protests of Larch er, Commandant of 
\fahe, were ignored, 4 Finally, in June 1793, on the news of 
the outbreak of war in Europe, the English dosed the French 
factory altogether. 

The French regained possession of their factory at Surat 
in 1788, with the arrival of Bruix as Consul. The factory, 
however, ceased to be of any commercial importance during 
the period under review. Bruix has left an interesting 
memoire on its chequered history since its first establishment 

1 P. A. ms, 4992 (correspondence between Hartley and Larchcr and 
the terms of capitulation). 

2 Ibid., ms. 960 (Castries to Souillac, 14th February 1787). 

; Ibid., im. 4558. 

4 Ibid., mss. 4862, 4863 (correspondence between Larcher and Taylor, 
C hief of Tellicherry, ^April 4-4, 1792)* ms. 4870 (correspondence between 
l archer and de Fresnc, April 1792), ms. 4957 (correspondence between 
the authorities of Mahe and Tellicherry). 


mtsr/fy. 



’THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


wo years. 1791 to 1793, he was away in the 
He returned to Surat in April 1 793 * asK ^ * n 
spite of the outbreak of war he was allowed by the English 
to remain in charge of the factory till J 79 r 

KaRIKAE 

1 . Administrative measures from ij #5 to ijpx • 
insurrections of peasants and workers. 

During the period under review Karikal kept; up its tradi¬ 
tion of not laying any claim to political importance and 
existing merely as the granary of Pondicherry, although it also 
experienced in a mild way the shock of the Revolution, and 
its small French population of fifteen attempted in their humble 
way to play the drama of the Revolution. It was on the 261.I1 
February 1785 that de Boistel, sent front 1 ondicherry, ictook 
possession of Karikal with its dependent territories from Fallo- 
field, agent of the Madras Government. 1 2 It may be remem¬ 
bered that de Boistel had been Commandant at Karikal in 
1778 before the outbreak of war with the English. In 1785 
he resumed his functions only for a few months, till his death 
in June. The most important event during his short adminis¬ 
tration was his attempt to establish political relations with 
the Raja of Tanjore, which met with a sharp rebuff from the 
English, who claimed sovereignty over the kingdom and refused 
to allow a French embassy escorted by a small sepoy force to 
enter the town of Tanjore, 3 

De Boistel was succeeded by de Mainville, who was replaced 
by Marguetiat in 1788. The principal preoccupation of the 
administration at this time was to increase cultivation, and the 
records of the settlement of this period, preserved in the Pondi¬ 
cherry Archives, contain interesting details about the method 
of cultivation, the distribution of the produce between the 
peasants and the Government, and the steps taken to encour- 

1 V. A. ms. 3074* 

2 Ibid., ms. 3986 (official document of restitution). 

3 Ibid. ms. ’,989 (correspondence between Courenceau. Governor of 
rondicherry. and Madras Government). 



age the extension of tillage. 1 Another preoccupation of the 


administration was to develop the industry of weaving and 
dyeing of cotton fabrics, for which purpose a large number 
of workers were invited from inland to settle in two villages, 
Soupayapouram and Cassaoudy. Besides agriculture and the 
manufacture of cotton goods, Karikal had also another economic 
importance. It was one of the two centres, Yanam being the 
other, for the manufacture of salt, the export of which to Bengal 
was practically the only avenue of trade open to the French 
in India and constituted an important source of income to 
the Government. 

In 1787 Karikal experienced a grave agrarian disturbance. 
Bellecombe had made a regulation in 1777 laying down an 
equitable distribution of the produce of agriculture between 
the tiller and the State. In 1787 the Indian farmer of lands 
Xaverimoutoupolle, sought to change the basis of distribution 
to the detriment of the cultivators, who in protest refused to 
till the lands and left French territory in a body. The total 
stoppage of cultivation in the villages of Karikal was too 
alarming for Pondicherry, and Conway, then Governor, prompt¬ 
ly sent de Fresne to Karikal to effect a satisfactory settlement 
with the cultivators. De Fresne succeeded in his mission and 
the cultivators returned to their fields early in 1788. 2 Shortly 
after there was a similar disturbance among the salt-worker 
also, who demanded an increase in their share of the produce, 
and the matter was satisfactorily settled by a regulation made 
by Conway in May 1788. fri 17<> 1 there was again a serious 
agrarian disturbance, which arose out of the grievances of the 
cultivators against the farmer of lands. It even assumed the 
nature of ail insurrection when the cultivators were joined 
bv the Visiadors or local constabulary and toll-collectors. Fhc 
Pondicherry Government had to intervene once more, and de 
Fresne sent <lc Touffreville with 100 European troops to restore 
order. De Touffreville was also appointed at the same time 
Commandant at Karikal. By a policy of severity combined 
with moderation he succeeded in putting down the insurrec - 


1 P, A. mss. 3988, 4050. 

2 Ibid., ius. 4042. 

3 Ibid., ms. 4049. 



Tin FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


in cl persuading die cultivators and the V/smdoKs (o 
return to their work* Peace was fully restored by April 1792.' 
These popular movements among the Indian inhabitants at 
Karikal were something new in the history of the French posses 
sions in India, and stood in marked contrast to the docility 
of the indigenous population in the older settlements. I he 
only probable explanation was the large number of the Indian 
population at Karikal and their being comparatively well off 
than the population in the other settlements. 1 2 

II The Revolution and After (179/-9?). 

The European population, on die other band, proved 
more docile, and the news of the Revolution produced a milder 
effect at Karikal than at the other settlements. there was, no 
doubt, an attempt to set up a civic organisation based on the 
normal Revolutionary pattern, but there* was no disturbance 
Of the peace, and happy relations were maintained with the 
Commandant and the Pondicherry Government. The first 
news of the Revolution in Franca brought by the Bienveniu 
in February 1791 and the establishment of the lust Citizens 
Committee at Pondicherry did not produce even a ripple in 
the peaceful life at Karikal. It was only in April 1791 when 
the second Citizens’ Committee at Pondicherry sent a ciiculai 
letter to all the other French settlements in India, inviting 
them to nominate their representatives in the Committee from 
among its own members, that there was some excitement among 
the citizens of Karikal. Partly because of their opposition to 


a small group of Pondicherians monopolising all power 10 the 
exclusion of the people of the other settlements, partly 
because of the injustice which they felt had been done to them 
by the Pondicherry Government in the matter of the distri¬ 
bution of salt permits, the citizens of Karikal decided to set up 
a civic organisation of their own to protect, their interests. In 
May they established a municipality and elected Bom oust as 


1 l abtrmadie —La Revolution cl les Etablisscmcnts Frangats dans 
l’ltide, pp- 169-170. 

2 There is a compleec census of population in 1789 preserved in the 
Pondicherry Archives, ins. 4112. 


MiN/sr^ 



Mayor. The Pondicherry Committee objected to this move 
as illegal and sought to interfere in the internal affairs of 
Karikal. 1 Shortly after, the second Committee at Pondicherry 
was replaced by a Colonial Assembly intended to be representa¬ 
tive of all the French settlements in India. In July this new 
body also declared the municipal organisation at Karikal 
illegal and invited its citizens to elect a deputy for the Colonial 
Assembly at Pondicherry. The Karikalians then showed a 
more conciliatory attitude. On the 16th July they called a 
General Assembly of citizens, consisting of 17 persons only, 
which decided to abolish the municipality and to establish in 
its place a committee of three members. It also elected a 
deputy and an alternate for the Colonial Assembly ai Pon¬ 
dicherry. 2 

From that time all was quiet at Karikal. and its citizens 
willingly took directives from Pondicherry on every matter. 
In September they expressed their indignation over the “in¬ 
cendiary letter’' of the Chandernagore Committee, inciting the 
Pondicherry garrison to revolt . 3 In January 179 2 they sent a 
memoire to the Pondicherry Assembly on the needs of the 
settlement. They prayed for money to dig irrigation canals 
for the improvement of agriculture, to broaden the mouth of 
the river so as to allow the passage of larger vessels, and to 
construct a wall and a ditch round the town and maintain a 
garrison of 300 sepoys and 50 European troops in ordci to 
attract by its security wealthy merchants from outside. 1 hev 
added that the money spent on these improvements would in 
a short while be fully compensated by increased receipts on 
different heads. 4. There was no money, however, and the 
Pondicherry Assembly confined its reply to a mere expression 
of sympathy . 5 In July there was a rift between the priests 
and the citizens of Karikal over the question of the acceptance 

1 Labernadie —La Revolution el les Etablissements Frangais dam I'lndc, 
pp. 170-171. 

2 P. A. mss. 4248, 4249, 4258 (Proceedings of the Citizens* Assembly. 
1 Gtli July and 18th September 1 79 1 )* 

3 Ibid, 4260. 

4 Ibid., ms. 4282 (Proceedings of the Citizens* Assembly, 20th Janu¬ 
ary 1792). 

5 Ibid., ms. 4297. 

FF 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


of the Constitulion of the Clergy, which was settled for the 
time being, but in 1793 it led to the withdrawal of the priests 
from the settlement. 1 In December 1792 Lescallier, who had 
come to Karikal to reorganise the settlement, invited the citi¬ 
zens to meet in a Primary Assembly to elect a deputy for the 
reconstituted Colonial Assembly at Pondicherry. The Kari- 
kalians elected Baissac, a merchant of Pondicherry, as their 
representative. 2 3 

In May 1793 Lescallier was again at Karikal, accompanied 
bv the other Civil Commissioner, Dumorier. The object of 
the visit was to investigate the charge brought by the Pondi¬ 
cherry Assembly against the Commandant of Karikal, Touffre- 
vilie, of putting difficulties in the way of supply of provisions 
to Pondicherry, which was beginning to feel alarmed at the 
prospect of a war with the English and was trying to lay in 
stock in time. The accusation was, however, found to be 
quite unjustified.* The end was approaching fast, in June 
the imminence of the war was no longer a matter of conjecture, 
and in order to strengthen the defences of Pondicherry by all 
available forces, Chermont, the Governor, sent an order to 
fouftrevillc to come to his assistance with the garrison at 
Karikal, leaving that settlement to the English. On the 19th 
June Touftreville evacuated Karikal with its small garrison, 
and immediately after William Mitchell, the English Resident 
at Nagore, took possession of the settlement. Thus, as in 1 77 ^» 
Karikal surrendered itself without a fight in the interest of 
Pondicherry. 


Yanam 


About Yanam there is nothing much to notice. The 
records relating to this settlement in the Pondicherry Archives 
are very meagre, and those that exist are nearly all of the 
Revolutionary period. On the whole the history of Yanam 

1 1 \ A. mss 4342, 4346, 4349 (Proceedings of the Citizens’ Assembly, 

July August *792). 

3 Ibid., ms. 4375 (letter of Lescallier, 23rd December), mss. 4377 M 379 
(Proceedings of the Citizens’ Assembly, 28111.29th December). 

3 Ibid., ms. 4409 (letter of the Civil Commissioners to the Colonial 
Assembly at Pondicherry, 6th May 1793), 


WIN IST/fy 



OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


during the period under review was uneventful, except for a 
brie! interlude of excitement in 1791, when the handful of the 
French population there, only fifteen in number, tried to play 
the drama of the Revolution in their own way. Yanam was 
restored to the French in February 1785. Martin, who retook 
possession of the settlement from the English, was succeeded 
for short terms as Commandant by Mallendre and Bluter, but 
for the major part of the period the post was held by the famous 
traveller, scholar and scientist, Sonnerat, well-known for his 
three volumes of Voyage aux hides One a tales el en Chine. 
The task of the Commandant at Yanam was not very exacting 
since the place had no political importance whatsoever and its 
inhabitants wanted nothing better than to be left in peace to 
carry on their trading activities. Yanam had some commercial 
importance. It was, like Karikal; a centre for the manufacture 
of salt, and in fact Yanam salt constituted the major part of the 
quantity imported by the French into Bengal. Yanam was also 
an .important centre of cotton goods and supplied a large part 
of the return cargo of the French ships visiting India. The 
handful of French citizens at Yanam were fully occupied by 
these two lucrative branches of commerce and had no interest 
in political or administrative matters, which were left entirely 
to the Commandant. Thus the news of the Revolution and 
the formation of the first Committee at Pondicherry left the 
citizens of Yanam cold. It was commercial jealousy which 
gave rise to the first disturbance in the peaceful life of the 
settlement. 

Sonnerat carried on private trade, utilising for that purpose 
his official position as Commandant, which put the other mer¬ 
chants of the place at a disadvantage. In July 1790 two of the 
prominent merchants, Lc Canne and dc Mars, complained to 
de Frcsne and the first Committee at Pondicherry against 
Sonnerat for abusing his position for his private benefit and 
wanted his recall. 1 The complaint produced no effect, 3 and 
for some time all was quiet at Yanam. It was only in April 



! IV A. mss. 5102-5104 (Letters ot Le Canne and dc Mars to the Picsi 
dent o£ the Assembly at Pondicherry and to the Governor, 5th July 1790). 

2 Ibid., ms. 5105 (President ot the Pondicherry Assembly to de Mars, 
171I1 July). 


imiST/fy 


HE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


1791, on the receipt of the circular letter of the second Com¬ 
mittee at Pondicherry sent to all the settlements., that the 
citizens of Yanam thought, of Seizing the occasion to get rid of 
not so much a tyrannical administrator as a powerful commer¬ 
cial rival. They set. up a Colonial Assembly, elected a per 
rnanent Committee of three, and adopted a new Constitution 
for the settlement, by which the Commandant was divested of 
practically all his powers, which were transferred to the 
Assembly and its Committee. Sonnerat thought it prudent to 
yield before the storm and gave his consent r.o all the measures 
passed by the Assembly. Perhaps, he did it all the more 
willingly in order to be left free to devote his time to scientific 
studies. The Assembly was not content with merely taking 
away the powers of the Commandant; it decided to reduce his 
emoluments. Finally, it elected Danzas, a member of the: 
second Committee at Pondicherry, to represent Yanam on that 
body. 1 

The enthusiasm of the citizens of Yanam, however, met: 
with a sharp re bull from Pondicherry. Danzas, after consulta- 
lion with the President of the Pondicherry Committee, wrote 
to the citizens of Yanam pointing out the illegality of their 
actions in usurping all authority from the Commandant and 
asking them to convene another General Assembly to cancel 
their previous decisions and to represent their desires to the 
Pondicherry Committee. 2 3 The letter of Danzas created a 
division among the citizens. The minority dissociated them¬ 
selves from the earlier decisions and wanted to restore all 
authority to the Commandant, a while the majority wrote to lire 
Pondicherry Committee giving an account of the events of the 
past few months and defending their conduct. 4 In July the 
citizens of Yanam were invited to elect a representative to the 
newly set up Colonial. Assembly at Pondicherry. I hey elected 
Fermier as their deputy, but the difference between the majority 
and the minority continued and seemed impossible of solution. 


1 l*. A. ms. 5110 (documents relating to die Colonial Assembly at 
Yanam, April-Junc 1791). 

* Ibid., ms. 5108 (letter of Danzas, and February, 1791). 

3 Ibid., ms. 5112. 

* Ibid,, ms. 51 u. 


OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


^ mm ;■ & 

Hie main point of dispute was control over police and justice. 
In August both parties joined in appealing to the Colonial 
Assembly at Pondicherry to send a Conciliation Commissioner. 
At the same time the majority decided to refer the question to 
the Indian inhabitants of Vanam, whether they would like to 
see the control over police and justice vested in the Committee 
or in the hands of the Commandant alone. It was something 
new in the whole history of the French in India, when the 
European citizens, failing to agree among themselves, decided 
to seek the opinion of the Indian inhabitants. The motive 
was, however, obvious, but the dispute could not be settled in 
that way, for both parties could collect a number of Indian 
inhabitants to support their points of view. 1 

In September there arrived two Conciliation Commission¬ 
ers from Pondicherry, Mery d’Arcy and La Faye, but till the 
middle of October they failed to bring about a compromise and 
were about to return, when on the 16th there took place an 
incident which gave a sudden turn to the situation. It aiose 
from the insulting conduct of a Frenchman to an influential 
Brahmin merchant of the place, who gathered four hundred 
men for retaliation. The small European population was in 
grave danger, and the two Conciliation Commissioners could 
with difficulty pacify the crowd by promising justice. The 
threat of a popular rising had the immediate effect of bringing 
the two contending parties together. The General Assembly 
met on the same day and decided unanimously to restore all 
powers to the Commandant to avoid further troubles with the 
Indian population. 2 From that time the citizens of Yanam 
gave up all interest in politics and went to the other extreme 
of abolishing the representation of the settlement in the 
Pondicherry Assembly. 3 All through 1792 they remained im¬ 
pervious to the appeals of the Pondicherry Assembly not to 
abolish their representation on that body and not to disinterest 

1 P. A. mss. 5115, 5116, 5119, 5121-5126 (letters from the Pondicherry 
Assembly. Proceedings of the Assembly at Yanam and the views of the 
Indian inhabitants. July-August 1791). 

2 Ibid. ms. 5130 (letter of the two Conciliation Commissioners to de 
Fresne, 16th October), ms. 5134 (Proceedings of the Citizens’ Assembly at 
Yanam, 16th October), ms. 5135 (Sonnerat to de Fresne, 17th October). 

3 Ibid, ms. 5139. 



themselves altogether from the administrative re-organisation 
of the different settlements. 1 


It was not till the beginning of 1793 that the citizens of 
Yanam decided to give up their attitude of indifference. Meet¬ 
ing in a Primary Assembly in January of that year, according to 
the procedure laid down by the Civil Commissioners, they 
elected their representative for the newly set up Assembly at 
Pondicherry. Resuming their interest in political affairs 
rather unwillingly because of the old rebuff from Pondicherry, 
they returned to their attack on Sonnerat and wrote to the 
Pondicherry Assembly for his recall'.* 1 At the beginning ol 
June the Pondicherry Assembly replied that although Sonnerat 
could not be recalled for want of more definite charges, he 
would be forbidden to engage in private trade and that the 
citizens of Yanam could take away from the Commandant the 
powers which they had willingly given in October 1791. Yanam 
at last got its opportunity to turn the tables on Pondicherry, 
but the outbreak of war soon after and the prompt seizure of 
the place by the English prevented the citizens from enjoying 
their sweet revenge. 

Masulipatam 

Close to Yanam was the factory at Masulipatatn. 1 he 
French possessed there the factory proper within the town and 
a small village named Francepeth about two miles away. Little 
is known of the Masulipatam factory during die period under 
review, and the few records concerning it preserved in the 
Pondicherry Archives deal only with the first two years after 
its restoration to the French. The only possible explanation 
lor this is that at the end of 1787 the Masulipatam factory was 
transferred to the control of the newly established Company 
of Caloupe, and thus it ceased to have any official connection 
with the Pondicherry administration. In 1 77 8 the factory at 

1 p. a. mss. 5*45 (letteis from the President of the. Pondicherry 

Assembly to the Citizens of Yanam, 2nd and 15th April 1792) ms. f, 
(reply of the citizens of Yanam, r,th May). 

2 Ibid*, mss. 5147* 5 1 5°» 5*5 2 * 5 l 55‘5 l 57* 

s Ibid; ms. 5,53 (Proceedings of the Citizens’ Assembly. »5tl» April 
1793)- 


M1N/Sr^ 



OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


49 


§L 


Masulipatam together with the village of Francepeth liad fallen, 
like the other French possessions in India, into the hands of 
the English. During the period of occupation a part of the 
territory of the French factory was encroached upon by the 
English for the construction of a new Government House. 
This caused great embarrassment to the English after the peace 
treaty, by which all the French possessions in India had to be 
restored, and they had to agree to give to the Frenc h another 
suitable territory in place of the old. It was on the 161.I1 
March 1785 that Le Forestier retook possession of the factory 
and the village of Francepeth from the English. 1 Till about 
the end of the year correspondence went on between Lc 
Forestier and the English Council at Masulipatam about the 
proposed exchange of territory. Le Forestier took full advan¬ 
tage of the embarrassing position of the English in having 
constructed buildings on a territory which now legally belonged 
to the French. He thus refused to accept merely a territory 
of equal size but demanded in addition the value of the cons¬ 
tructions made by the English on French territory, which was 
estimated at 500 gold pagodas. 9 The demand had to be accept¬ 
ed by the English in order to get out of a difficult situation." 

In another matter, however, the French failed to get their 
demand accepted. The peace treaty had assured them the 
enjoyment of all their old trading rights and privileges, which 
so far as the Masulipatam factory was concerned included 
exemption from all duties on imports and exports. At the 
time of taking possession of the factory in March 1785, L< 
Forestier was assured by the English authorities that no diflS 
culty would be placed in the way of the freedom of French 
trade and commerce.* Yet, when some of the neighbouring 
Zamindars began to impose duties on goods meant for the 
French factory and Le Forestier appealed to the English audio 
rides to use their influence to stop such exactions, the latter 


ip. A. ms. 5190. 

2 /bid, ms. 5197 (Forestier to the English Council at Masulipatam, 
Sfoth May 1785). ms. 5199 (Foiestier to the Pondicherry Government, 3rd 
June). 

3 Ibid, mss. 5201, 5208. 5*09. 

4 Ibid, ms. 5191. 


WNtST/fy 


H IN INDIA 


/ene. 1 Not only that, even 
the English authorities began to levy customs duties on goods 
v k x.poi ted bj the French, and when Le Fores tier protested 
against it as a violation of the peace treaty, the Madras Gov¬ 
ernment conceded that only goods belonging to persons living 
within the factory would be exempt from customs duties but not 
those belonging to persons living outside. 2 It was in fact a 
part of the general Anglo-French dispute about the interpreta¬ 
tion of the commercial clauses of the peace treaty which we 
have noticed already. 


1 P A. ms. 5205 (Forestier to the English Council at Masulipatam.. 
i^th August, 785), ms. 5206 (English reply, 19th August), tns. 5*07 
(Forestier to Souillac at Pondicherry, 25th August). 

-Ibid., mss. 521**5214, 5217, 5218, 52*1 (letters exchanged between 
Forestier, Governor of Pondicherry and the English Council at Masuli- 
patam on French trading rights). 



tfj THE FRENC 

expressed their inability to im 


misr^ 


CHAPTER XVIII 



RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS (1785-1793) 

I. Change in French Policy. 

During the period under review French political ambitions 
in India and relations with the country Powers underwent a 
complete change from the earlier period. The Seven Years' 
War, in spite of the disasters it; had brought to the hopes and 
ambitions ot the French, had not damped their spirit altoge¬ 
ther.. They looked upon it merely as a temporary misadven¬ 
ture, and from the moment of their re-establishment in 1765 
they began to cherish once more the old dreams of the time of 
Dupleix, although in a somewhat changed form necessitated by 
the altered circumstances. During the thirteen years which 
elapsed before the outbreak of the next war in 1778, a large 
number of Frenchmen in India, including Governors and 
subordinate officials, diplomatic agents, military men and 
adventurers of fortune, showed feverish activity in laying down 
grandiose plans of alliance with the country Powers and mili¬ 
tary operations against the English. I hey flooded the Ministry 
of Marine and Colonies with memoires and letters. In France 
also the hope of reviving the lost position in India had not 
altogether disappeared, and from time to time the Government 
showed spasmodic interest in the various schemes submitted, 
an interest which increased with the approach of the War of 
American Independence. No doubt, many of the plans oi this 
period were absolutely fantastic, but they all bring out one 
thing clearly, that the old ambitions had nor died out com¬ 
pletely and that the French were thinking and planning in 
terms of a return match with the hope of being able to recap¬ 
ture their lost position. 

After 1783 the situation changed completely. During the 
next ten years, prior to the renewal of hostilities in 1793. the 
earlier political dreams faded away, and France evinced an 
increasing lack of interest in Indian affairs. The Peace Treaty 
of 1783 restored to the French all the territories and commer 


s. THE FRENCH M INDIA 

privileges which they had possessed in India before the 
outbreak of the war. Yet, they lost their old enthusiasm about 
the future of their position in India; and in place of the 
plethora of political and military projects of the earlier period, 
there was an increasing indifference to looking beyond the 
immediate prospect or thinking of anything but the immediate 
problems. In contrast to the earlier period, general memoires 
on the Indian situation and political and military projects 
became far too scanty. Not only did all enthusiasm for draw¬ 
ing up plans for the extension of political influence in India 
evaporate all on a sudden; there was little interest even in 
the consolidation and preservation of the existing possessions. 
This sudden change may be attributed to three factors. First 
was the frustration of the attempt made in 1781-83. France 
had put forward vigorous efforts to retrieve her lost position. 
She had sent a large expeditionary force under a brilliant hero 
of the past, and a strong navy in support under one of the 
ablest naval commanders she ever produced; but in the end she 
failed to achieve any tangible success. The second factor was 
the rapid extension of English power in India. In the recent 
wars with the Marathas and with Haidar and Tip'll thev had 
proved their worth in the field of battle as well as their ability 
in diplomacy. After 1783 there was little eagerness on the part 
of any Indian Power to challenge English domination. 

The third factor was the approaching collapse of the 
Anrien Regime , which diverted the attention of France from 
colonial ventures to concentrate entirely on the solution of 
internal problems. This is not the place to discuss in detail 
die causes that led to the fall of the Anrien Regime and 
ushered in a new ere in France and in Europe. It is sufficient 
to remember that the prospect of financial bankruptcy was one 
of the most important factors leading to the Revolution. The 
French financial system had been creaking for a long time under 
the weight of the thousand and one abuses associated with the 
Anrien Regime. Intervention in the War of American Inde¬ 
pendence had put the last straw on the camel's back, and. after 
1783 total collapse became not only inevitable but also immi¬ 
nent. This had its effect on Colonial policy. For a few years 
efforts were made to reduce expenditure on colonies in a vain 
attempt 10 save the existing financial structure. Thus it was 




RELATIONS' WITH fNTMAN POWERS 


that the management of the factories at Masulipatam, Calicut 
an:I Surat was transferred to the Company of Calonne, that the 
Indian possessions were grouped with the Isles of l 4 ranee and 
Bourbon into one Government, dial their administrative ex¬ 
penses were severely curtailed, and that orders were sent out for 
the withdrawal of all the French troops from India. 

In this drive for economy all political ambitions in India 
had to be sacrificed. But it was not merely the financial 
embarrassment of the Government which was responsible for 
the change of policy. Equally important was the fact that 
with the approach of the Revolution attention in France was 
concentrated entirely on internal reconstruction; for the time 
being secondary questions, like the future ol overseas colonies, 
were pushed out of: mind. With the outbreak of the Revolu¬ 
tionary War in Europe, France entered on a new phase of her 
history. She was fired with a new mission, and her gaze was 
Fixed on the Continent. The wonderful successes of her arms 
against the whole of monarchical Europe gave her a new 
intoxication, which took many years to pass off. It was only 
natural that she readily sacrificed her overseas possessions 
in order to be able to concentrate all her energies in the fulfil 
ment of her new mission in Europe. 

It was the financial embarrassment after 1783 , coupled 
with total indifference to political ambitions in India, that 
shaped French relations with the country Powers during the 
period under review. For some time after 1785 the French 
Government still wanted the maintenance of close diplomatic 
relations with the Indian Powers in order to build up an anti- 
English coalition for the next wav but enjoined on the local 
authorities in India the avoidance of any definite commitment. 
Successive Governors, like Souillac, Conway, Gossigny and de 
Freshe. and diplomatic agents, like Momigny and Godard, 
stressed the importance of maintaining close relations with the 
country Powers with a view to form an anti-English coalition, 
but the unwillingness of the French Government to enter into 
definite commitments or to go beyond verbal assurances of 
friendship and support was not conducive to inspiring confi 
donee among those whose alliance was sought. French officers 
in the service of the Indian Primes, like Aumont; Raymond, 
Piron, de Lallee and Vigie, repeatedly begged for troops and 



THK FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


in order to increase their contingents. They held out the 
assurance that it would increase French political influence over 


the country Powers, and 
authorities in India to 


would further enable the French 
draw upon the assistance of these 
national contingents in case of a war with the English. But 
in spite of the strongest recommendations of de Freshe; these 
prayers were rejected by the French Government, engrossed 
after 1789 in the immediate problems at home. 

Thus French relations with the country Powers between 
,: 7§$ and 1793 followed a course of drift, without any definite 
objective. The Deputies of the French Indian possessions in 
the National Assembly in Paris expressed regret at the indiffer¬ 
ence of the home Government to Indian affairs and urged a 
more vigorous policy for ensuring the safety of the possessions 
and for drawing closer relations with the country Powers. The 
representation went unheeded. In 1794, after the fall of all 
the French possessions in India, Lescallier, one of the Civil 
Commissioners, sent a detailed report to France on the Indian 
political situation and urged a more active policy to recover 
the lost position in the East. But that report was also shelved, 
and it was not. till after the Treaty of Amiens that, thanks to 
the imagination of the First Consul, France turned her atten¬ 
tion once more to the East. The revival of interest, however, 
proved to he short-lived and came to an end with the renewal 
of hostilities in Europe. 


II. The Despatch of Castries, outlining relations 
with Indian Powers. 

The policy which the French Government wanted to 
pursue in relation to the Indian Powers after 1785 was outlined 
in a despatch of Marechal de Castries, Minister of Marine, 
dated 14th February 1787. 1 It was written in reply to a report 
on the Indian political situation and the future of French 
possessions drawn up by Souiliac in* September 1785. In his 
despatch Castries declared that since the Mughal Emperor had 
ceased to count among the important Powers of India, it was 
useless for the French to maintain diplomatic relations with 


1 V. A. ms. 960. 


MW$wr 



RELATIONS W mi INDIAN POWERS 


him and to keep an agent at his Darbar. It meant, in effect, that 
the French were not to concern themselves with north India 
any more, and signified a definite abandonment of the policy 
advocated by Chevalier and Madec before the last war for an 
alliance with the Emperor. As regards the Maratha ruler of 
Nagpur, whose co-operation Chevalier had sought to facilitate 
an attack on Bengal, Castries wrote that it would rto doubt be 
wise to cultivate friendly relations with the Bhonsla Raja, but 
at the same time it was necessary to observe strict circumspec¬ 
tion in dealing with him. He was so closely watched by the 
English that it would be unwise to reveal to him all the French 
plans. 

Castries also felt that it was useless to maintain close 
diplomatic relations with Hyderabad. Nizam Ali appeared to 
have definitely passed into the orbit of the English, and in any 
case he would not take any positive move in the interest of 
the French. So Castries suggested that Aumont, who had been 
.serving as French diplomatic agent at the Court of Nizam Ali, 
should be recalled, as also all the French military adventurers 
scattered throughout India. Castries continued that the Mara- 
ihas undoubtedly constituted the strongest Power in India, but 
not much co-operation could be expected from them. As he 
expressed, the Marathas "have so little interest to ally them¬ 
selves with us that they are not likely to take the measures that 
we may recommend to them.'’ Even then, the Minister felt, it 
would be necessar) to deal with them with tact and prudence, 
without however making great demarche to win them over. 
Montigny was to be replaced at Poona by a Brahmin Wak'd, 
not because he had proved inefficient, but because the appoint¬ 
ment of a Brahmin would be more in conformity with the 
usages of the country. 

There remained only one other Power, Mysore, which 
because of its persistent hostility towards the English appeared 
the natural ally of France. In order to win over Tipu it was 
necessary to convince him "about the desire we have to co¬ 
operate with him to prevent the English from remaining the 
masters of India.” .The special solicitude to win over I ipu 
was not to mean, however, that the French should take sides 
in internal politics and give help to Tipu against other country 
Powers. Castries clearly stated that the objective of French 


UWIST^ 



policy in India was to preserve peace among the country 
Powers, to keep them all united in one block, so that with the 
outbreak of the next war in Europe the French could attempt 
to turn them against the English. Under the existing cir 
cum:stances, however, as pointed out by Monti guy in his 
letter to Souillac iti November 1785, 1 such a plan was difficult 
of execution. It was impossible to preserve peace among 
Tipu, the Marather, and Nizam Ali and to keep them united, 
waiting for a far-off eventuality of a common war against the 
English. Finally, referring to Muhammad Ali, Nawab of the 
Carnatic, Castries approved of the reserve with which Souillac 
had received his overtures. The Nawab had, perhaps, found 
his position too galling, but his connection with the English 
was so effective that he would never be able to break it, unless 
the French achieved resounding military successes in India, 

After noticing the general polity advocated by the Minis 
ter, let us next trace in more detail French relations with the 
Marathas, Nizam Ali and Tipu Sultan during the period under 
review. 

III. Relations '.with the Marat has. 

At Poona, it will be remembered, Moritigny had been 
working as French diplomatic agent since 1781. We have 
noticed in detail the efforts he had made to bring about a 
Franco-Mar,ttha alliance and their ultimate failure. He still 
remained at his post after the conclusion of peace in 1783, but 
his task became increasingly difficult in the new circumstances. 
Bussy was strongly prejudiced against the Marathas, and his 
views seemed to have prevailed upon the Ministry at home# as 
would be evident from the outline of policy laid down in the 
despatch of Castries. Montigny, however, did not lose heart 
and persisted, down to his recall from Poona about the. middle 
of 1788, in trying to establish closer relations between the 
French and the Marathas. The main difficulty for him was the 
impression at Poona that the French were in alliance with 
Tipu. Montigny was hard put to it to convince the Marathas 
that ihe French had no intention of giving military help to 

% 


1 P- A. ms. 5356. 


miSTfty 



fipu in his aggressive designs against other country Powers, 
i he French did, in fact, observe strict neutrality during the 
;\;/r of .1785-87 between the Marat has and Nizam Ali on one 
side and Fipu on the other. The Governor of Pondicherry 
also offered his good offices for mediation and even sent a 
special envoy named Godard to Poona. But the policy of 
neutrality failed to create any favourable impression among the 
Marathas, who gradually drew away from the French; and after 
the recall of Montigny from Poona in 1788, Franco-Maratha 
relations virtually came to an end. 

Soon after his assumption of office as Governor of Pondi¬ 
cherry in May 1785, Sou iliac entered into correspondence with 
the two most important Maratha leaders, Sindhia and Nana 
Phadnavis. 'lo Sindhia, who had established his control over 
what remained of the Mughal Empire, Souillac wrote that be 
had been entrusted by the King of France to inform the 
Emperor of Delhi and the other Princes of India of his inten¬ 
tion to liberate them from the tyranny of the English and to 
restore their lost territories. Souillac expressed a hop, that 
when the suitable occasion would come, Sindhia would agree 
to work in concert with the French against their common 
enemy. 1 It was a vain hope, as Sindhia had already made a 
definite understanding with the English, and there' was little 
likelihood of his joining hands with the French. 

Souillac also wrote to Nana Phadnavis. with the object of 
removing the threatening conflict between the Marathas and 
Tipu and trying to bring them into an alliance beneficial to 
both. There had arisen serious causes of dispute, and since 
Souillac professed friendship for both parties, Nana Phadnavis 
sought to explain to him the Maratha grievances against Fipu 
and to justify the adoption of military measures unless Fipu 
gave up his aggressive designs. 1 ' On the rumour that Souillac: 
intended to pay a visit to the Malabar Coast towards the end 
of 1785, Nana Phadnavis also sent Montigny to Goa on a special 
mission to explain the Maratha views to him. Souillac did not 
ultimately go to the Malabar Coast, but the views of: the Poona 
Government were fully explained by Montigny in a letter to 

1 P. A. ms. 838. 

s Ibid., ms. 871. 


miSTfiy 



him, da fed 30th November 1785. 1 It was an important political 
despatch and deserves a somewhat detailed analysis. It dealt 
with three principal matters,—the causes of the conflict be¬ 
tween I ipu and the Marathas and Nizam Ali; the reasons 
which had compelled the Marathas to conclude peace with the 
English; and the difficulty of preserving a coalition of Indian 
Powers during a period of peace. 

Montigny wrote, “ I he object of the Regency in deputing 
me to you. Monsieur lc Vicomte, was to inform you on its 

behalf as also on behalf of Nizam Ali.of the just motives 

which had determined it to take up arms against 1 ipu 
and 0 give you at the same time a proof of its moderation and 
the special desire it has to agree to your views about the main¬ 
tenance of harmony among the Princes of India”. Montigny 
continued that when he came to know that Sotiillac would not 
come to the Malabar Coast,, he sent to Nana Phadnavis and 
Hari Pant Phadke some extracts from Sou iliac’s despatch of 
4th October, 4 ’the most appropriate to show to the Regency 
)our earnest desire to see the differences arisen between it and 
Tipu removed, as also the pressing exhortations you have made 
to that Nawab to unite himself with the Marathas on terms 
which may be reciprocally useful.” Regarding the fear of the 
Marathas that the French would give military help to Tipu 
against them, Montigny wrote: ”1 laid great stress on your inten¬ 
tion not to send any help to I ipu..; that the orders 

of the King had an express stipulation that the French were 
not to mix themselves up in the divisions which might arise 
among the Indian Princes, except only to re-establish peace and 
unity among them; that never at a moment of rupture between 
two Powers, whose alliance and support we sought, would we 
furnish means to one against the other.; that more¬ 

over the Regency ought to be assured that our relations with 
fipu were of a nature which could not be contradictory to those 
we were seeking to form with the Marathas.” 

Montigny hoped that the assurance given by Souillac would 
have a salutary effect on Nana Fhadnavis, but he feared that 
it Tipu did not desist from aggression, the Marathas and the 
Nizam would be forced to resort to arms against him. For 


1 P. A, 111s. 5356. 





RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 




the threatened conflict Montigny put the entire blame on Tipu. 

J he letter which Tipu Has written to you in the form of a 
manifesto to justify his enterprises against the place of Nar- 
gounde belonging to a friend and ally of the Regency, is only 

an attempt to colour the injustice of his conduct. 

Tipu is carrying to excess all the wicked qualities of his father 
without having many, nearly all, of his virtues. It is the 
opinion of the whole of India about this Nawab, and our 
nation will also know it, perhaps too late.” 

Montigny next referred to the main ground of French pro 
judico against the Marathas, namely their inactivity during the 
last Anglo-French struggle and conclusion of peace with the 
English at a time when they were making overtures to the 
French for an alliance. While condemning the policy of the 
Marathas and declaring that if they had looked far ahead and 
In id worked in the interest of India as a whole, there would 
have been a great revolution in the country against the English, 
Montigny admitted that there were very strong reasons to 
induce them to conclude peace. “I am quite convinced, Mon¬ 
sieur le Vicomte, that if the Marathas as also Nizam Ali had 
moved in their respective spheres against the English while we 
attacked the latter on the Coromandel Coast in concert with 
Haidar Ali, this general and combined attack would have 
created a great revolution and forced the English to fight on 
all fronts. I even think that India would have been able to 
recover her freedom completely if the French had had the time 
and the means to take Bombay or Madras before the arrival 
of the news of peace.” But, Montigny added, the inaction of 
the Marathas would "cause you less surprise when you notice 
that at this time the English had made the greatest sacrifice 
in their favour b\ restoring to them all the territories they had 

conquered.and that they had added to these great 

advantages the abandonment of the person of Raghoba to the 

Regency of Poona.Whai more remained for the 

Marathas to desire? Nothing but the humiliation of the Nawal# 
(of Mysore), whose ambition and tyranny became formidable 
to them as also to the Souba (the Nizam), and most particularly 
because they knew him to be supported by a French army. 
Undoubtedly, it would have been desirable if the Marathas 
had sacrificed their own interests..to the greater one, the 


GG 






WNlSTfiy 


the Trench in inuia 

genera! libertion of India; but where i 
Asiatic Power which is capable of making such a sacrifice for 
distant prospects, for uncertain successes?” The increase of 
Haidar’s power, the defection of Nizam Ali from the coalition 
against the English, and the outbreak of dissensions among the 
Marat,ha Chiefs were very strong inducements for Nana Phad- 
navis to conclude peace with the English. 

Moutigny next referred to the general attitude of the 
Marathas in the matter of co-operating with the French against 
the English, as proposed by Souillac in his despatch, and the 
difficulty of maintaining a coalition of Indian Powers during 
a period of peace. He wrote, “Nana Phadnavis is always in 
the same disposition with respect to the English, whom he 
greatly detests. In fact, can he ever forget that they did every¬ 
thing possible in order to drive him from the important place 
he occupies?” But, he continued, the Poona Government 
would not entertain any fresh proposal of alliance with France 
until it had received a reply to the one made in 1782, and 
which, as Bussy had informed Nana, had been forwarded to 
the King of France for his approval. In view of this attitude 
Moutigny thought it to be “very difficult to induce the Mara 
thas to conclude a treaty concerning the general plan of union 
proposed in your last despatch, as also the special one of union 
between Sindhia and rhe Regency, particularly in the existing 
circumstances/’ 

Moutigny added that on Ins return to Poona he would 
make further overtures to the Maratha Government as proposed 
by Souillac. “As for the project of persuading the Regency 
to send a corps of army to Bengal by way of Katek in concert 
with the Raja of Nagpur and joined with our troops landed 
in that part, nothing could be more in the designs of the Court 
of Poona, because it itself had expressed the most earnest 
desire about such a move by Article 19 of the Treaty it had 

proposed in 1782 and to which no reply has yet been given. 

I may say that if the Marathas had already suggested this 
expedition in 1782, as it is well-known from their proposals, 
they are today in a better position than ever to execute this 
grand project because of the elevation of Sindhia to the gene¬ 
ralship of the Empire. The Raja of Nagpur will enter with 
difficulty into the arrangement, unless he is sure of a very 



<SL 

s that 


TAIN/sr^ 



imminent rupture between France and' England. He has much 
to fear from I he English by the proximity of his country of 
Katek to the possessions of the Company.” Moreover, he was 
so closely watched bv ' he Council of Calcutta that it was 
impossible to make the least move without the English being 
informed about it. 

Monrigny concluded: “Nizam AH, although under nearly 
the same inquisition, will be less difficult to persuade. What¬ 
ever it may be, 1 consider it as very difficult to induce in 
advance, during a time of peace, the majority of the Princes of 
India to accept the project of a union such as might be turned 
into a general coalition against the common enemy. The fear 
which they have about the English power, the uncertainty of a 
rupture (between France and England), and the interval be¬ 
tween now and the outbreak of a new war suspend the effect 
A their resentment and restrain them to a state of the greatest 
circumspection. They promise, and will promise, to make 
common cause while we would come with impressive forces 
capable of operating on a large scale; but till then it will be 
very difficult to persuade them to make solid agreements with 
us. That is at least what. I have grounds to think, from the 
knowledge which I have been able to procure about the 
policies of the Durbars .” 

From 1785 to 1787 Franco-Mar at ha relations centred on 
the conflict between the Marathas and Tipu. Souiliac and, 
following him, Cossigny counselled patience and moderation to 
both sides in the interest of the final objective of keeping the 
Indian Powers united till the outbreak of the next Anglo- 
French war. But their efforts were in vain, and in December 
1785 the Marathas, in alliance with Nizam Ali, started hostili¬ 
ties against Tipu. Cossigny then tried to convince the Poona 
Government that the French were determined to observe strict 
neutrality and gave repeated assurances that they would not 
lend any military assistance to Tipu. He even offered his good 
offices to bring about a peace settlement and sent a special 
envoy named Godard for the purpose. But nothing could 
wholly dispel the misgivings of the Marathas, who still believed 
that the French looked upon Tipu with a special eye of favour. 
Since Tipu was their worst enemy, they gradually drew away 
from the French and walked into the orbit of the English, as 


<SL 

Hi : FRENCH rx I MM A 

became quite ev ident in 1790 when they entered into in often- 
sive mid detensive alliance with the English against Fipu. 

In December 1785 Cossignv wrote to Man a P had navis, 
informing him of his assumption of office as Governor of 
Pondicherry and acknowledging receipt of his letter to .Souillac 
in which he had explained the Maratha grievances against 
fipu. Gossigny advised a policy of moderation and compro¬ 
mise in the larger interest, and stated (what had become a stock 
expression in French diplomatic Correspondence with the conn 
try Powers) that it was the intention of the King of France to 
send another large expeditionary force to India on the next 
favourable occasion in order to liberate the country Powers 
from the yoke of the English. 1 On the news of the outbreak 
of war between the Marathas and Tipu, Gossigny expressed his 
deep concern in a letter to Montigny, dated 8th March 1.786. 

He informed Montigny that he had already written to Nana 
in the same strain as Souillacs letter of October 1785, that 
“the English would one day take advantage of the disunion 
among the Princes of the country. If the Marathas, Nizam Ali 
and Tipu had been less concerned about their temporary 
interests, th v would have been able to keep their eyes Fixed 
on the increasing power of the English;*’ Gossigny knew that 
the English had sent an envoy named Mulct to Poona, but that 
they had not accepted the proposal made by Nana for joining 
the coalition against Tipu. He believed that the English were 
‘‘undoubtedly quite content with the injury the Princes of the 
country are inflicting on one another.” 2 

In order to pacify the conflict Gossigny sent a military 
officer named Godard on a special mission to Poona in August 
1786. Godard’s mission, however, proved fruitless, and in 
November he returned to Pondicherry, with a letter from Nana 
Phadnavis addressed to Souillac, presumably in reply to 
Souillars letter o! October 1783d In October Gossigny wrote 
to Montigny, urging him to exert lii.s diplomatic ability to the 
fullest extent to destroy the English plan of exploiting the 
division among the Indian Princes and 10 try to bring the latter 

1 r. A. ms. 871. 

2 I hid. ms. 894. 

a Ibid., ms. i. |8 (Gossigny to Montigny. 1st December 1786). 




misr^ 




RlXATtONS WriH UNIMAN POWERS 


against their common enemy. 1 In December 
Cossigny wrote to Montigny again, informing him that he had 
sent a letter to Nam Phadnavis ottering his good offices to bring 
about, peace between the Marathas and Tipu. 2 The Poona 
Government had earlier made overtures to Cossigny for French 
help through its Wahil at. Pondicherry named Gopai Rao. 
Cossigny repeated his offer to mediate. He wrote to Nana 
Phad navis again on January 5, 1787, urging him to conclude 
peace with Tipu. He stated that the English and the French 
had pledged themselves by the Treaty of Versailles not to give 
military help to any Indian Power. If, however, the English 
gave help to Nizam AH in his war against Tipu, France had 
adequate forces to compel them to respect the treaty condition ." 

In spite of the fact, that peace was condudcd in 1787, an 
event in which the part played by the French was not very 
evident, the Marathas were not much persuaded to believe in 
their professions of friendship, specially when shortly after they 
found Tipu sending an embassy to France to draw closer his 
relations with that country. Another cause of bitterness be 
tween the French and the Marathas arose from the depredations 
by Maratha pirates cm French shipping on the Malabar Coast, 
for which the French sent sharp warnings to the Poona Govern¬ 
ment, although the latter was not in reality directly responsible. 
One such notable incident was the capture of the Adelaide in 
1786. The captain of the ship, Dayot, a cousin of Madame 
Cossigny, and four other officers were held to ransom. Cossigny 
wrote to Montigny to demand compensation from the Poona 
Government for the outrage, and, in case of refusal, to warn 
Nana Phadnavis about the presence of six French warships in 
Indian waters. 1 The matter, however, dragged on for years 
before satisfaction could be obtained. 5 That the depredations 
of Maratha pirates continued becomes evident, from a letter 


J P. A. ms. 9*4. 

2 Ibid., ms. 944. 

3 Ibid., mss. 951, 953. 

* Ibid., ms. 907 (Cossigny to Montigny, 15th April, 1786). 
s p. A. ms. 983 (Cossigny to Marin at Mahe, nth May 1787), ms. 9S1 
(Cossigny to Montigny, 26th May), ms. 999 (Cossigny to Montigny, 6di 
lugust), ms. looti (decisions of ihe Advisory Committee at Pondicherry, 
September 1788). 


mtSt/fy 



tinted 14th March 179# sent by the Pondicherry Assembly to 
the National Assembly in France, which complained about 
Marat ha piracy and urged the need of a French naval station 
on the Malabar Coast. 1 

Regular diplomatic relations between the French and the 
Marathas came to art end with the recall of Montigny from 
Poona in May 1788, following the receipt of the despatch of 
Castries of February 1787. 2 It is a pity that very little is khown 
about Montigny’s diplomatic work from the date of his last 
letter, written to Souillac in November 1785, to the middle of 
1788, when his mission at Poona suddenly terminated and he 
returned to Pondicherry. His own correspondence came to an 
abrupt end. and the records of Paris and Pondicherry Archives 
help us little to lift the curtain of oblivion. In his Bussy el 
Linde Frangaise, Martineau states that some time before the 
death of Bussy (January 1785) Montigny went on a diplomatic 
mission to Delhi and Hyderabad. But there is nothing in 
Montignv $ correspondence or any other document to corro¬ 
borate it. On the other hand, from the last letter of Montigny 
it appears that he had proposed visiting the different Durbars 
of India, but had noL received any orders from Pondicherry 
down to the end of 1785. In Michaud’s Biographic Universelle 
it is stated that while at Poona Montigny received the title of 
Nawab from the Mughal Emperor in 1785. It is not known 
on what source this statement is based, but there is nothing to 
support it in the available correspondence of Montigny. From 
Michaud again we learn that in 1788 Montigny was sent on a 
diplomatic mission to Hyderabad. It is not possible to ascer¬ 
tain the object of the mission or the period of his stay at 
Hyderabad, since available records do not throw any light on 
the subject. All that can be gathered, and that, from the 
correspondence of a French officer in Maratha service named 
Montreal!, is that Montigny was suddenly recalled to Pondi¬ 
cherry by the orders of the Minister of Marine and Colonies, 
and that he left Poona at the end of May 1788. 1 He travelled 

1 P. A. ms, 1674. 

2 find ins. 960, 

Reg. u 6 (~)—tnventaire dts Anci/nnes Archives de Unde Franchise, 
Pondicherry. 


mtSTfiy 



RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 


•§L 


^via Hyderabad, where he halted for a few days, and readied 
Pondicherry about the middle of August. From Moiureaid 
correspon deuce we also learn that Montigny was in great finan¬ 
cial distress at the time of leaving Poona and borrowed a large 
sum of money from Montreal!, which remained unpaid even 
after Montigny’s return to France in 1791. 

Not much need be said here about the value of Montigny's 
diplomatic work at Poona. For years he. strove earnestly .Vo 
bring about a close alliance between the French and the 
Marathas, which, if it. had materialised, might have given a 
different shape to the later course of events. He had his critics, 
and Bussy roundly called him a dupe of the Poona Government; 
but even his bitterest critic admitted that he was not an adven 
turer of the type of Saint-Lubin, but had honesty of purpose 
and a genuine spirit of patriotism. 


IV. Relations with Nizam Ali. 


Although Montigny came to India in 1781 as the French 
representative accredited to the Poona Durbar , his mission also 
included maintenance of relations with Nizam Ali and the 
Mughal Emperor, and we have already noticed how be kept 
himself in touch with the Darbars of Delhi and Hyderabad. In 
1785 Aumont, 1 one of the French officers in the service of 
Nizam Ali, gained the confidence of Gossigny, Governor of 
Pondicherry, and was appointed by him special diplomatic 
agent it the Darbar of Hyderabad. He retained his post a an 
officer in the service of Nizam Ali, but received nonetheless a 
regular allowance from the Pondicherry Government for work 
ing as French agent at Hyderabad. Aumont seems to have 
gained some influence over Nizam Ali and Mushir ul Alulk, his 
Diwan. In 1787 he was sent to Pondicherry with the ostensible 
purpose of repairing the Nizam's jewels, but perhaps it covered 
some political object. 2 Anyway, in October 1787 we find 
Aumont writing from Pondicherry to Nizam Ali and to his 

1 For earlier career see Chapter V (sections on Madec and Modave). 

2 Bengal Secret and Separate Proceedings, ^91X1 October 1787 in 0 . R. O. 
—The French in India Series, Vol. XI, pp. 820-323—about Aumont’s visit 
to Pondicherry and exchange ol letters between Nizam Ali and de Cossigny, 
September 1787. 



uiwan, Mushir^ilMulk, that he would .return to Hyderabad as 
soon as repairs to the jewels had been completed, and Conway, 


THE FRENCH TN INDIA 



the new Governor of Pondicherry, had received news from 
Europe. 1 It may be recalled that in 1787 there were rumours 
of the possibility of a renewal of Anglo-French hostilities in 
Europe over the sudden turn of developments in Holland. We 
also find Aiunmit praying to the new Governor, Conway, for 
retention in the post of French Resident at the Court of Hvdcra 
bad, and begging him to pay the charges for repairs to the 
Nizam’s jewels as a friendly gesture. 2 3 

Conway, who succeeded Cossigny as Governor of Pondi¬ 
cherry in September 1787, wrote to Nizam All in October, 
assuring him of the continuance of the closest friendship that 
had always existed between France and the House of Nizam- 
ul-Mulk.* It is not known definitely how Conway received 
Aumont* s professions of loyalty and service to the nation. But 
from a letter written by Nizam AU to Conway some time later, 
it appears that the latter had a positive suspicion against 
Aumont and had written to Nizam Ali to keep strict watch on 
him. Conway had further expressed his intention to send 
somebody else shortly to work as French representative at 
Hyderabad. 4 There is no means of knowing why Aumont fell 
into the bad grace of Conway, nor does it appear that the 
Pondicherry Government actually appointed somebody else as 
official representative at Hyderabad. On the other hand, later 
contact between Pondicherry and Hyderabad was maintained 
through two other officers in the service of Nizam Ali, Raymond 
arid Piron, as we shall notice presently. 

In spite of the dislike of Conway, Aumont, who went back 
to Hyderabad early in 1788, still continued to work for some 
time as intermediary between the Pondicherry Government arid 
the Darbar of Nizam Ali. In September 1788 while forward 
ing a letter from Nizam Ali to the French Governor, Aumont 
wrote that he still remained a good patriot and was always 
reach to place himself at the disposal of Conway to supply hint 

1 P. A. mss. 1008, 1019. 

2 Ibid., ms. 1017 (letter dated 20th October 1787). 

3 Ibid., n»ss. 1015, 1019. 

• Martineau Lettres et Conventions des Gouverneurs dc Pondichdry, 
PP* 339 - 3 - 1 °- 



RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 

vs of everything that happened at the Court of Hyderabad. 
He then gave an account of the arrival some time back of an 
English agent from Calcutta and of the grand reception accord¬ 
ed to him. 1 Although the object of the visit was kept a close 
.secret* Aumont could learn from reliable sources that it was 
to procure the cession of the Sarkar of Guntoor and to persuade 
Nizam Ali to join the English in a coalition against Tipu. 
Aumont thought that the mission had little chance of success. 
“The English would not succeed here as easily as among the 
Marathas. It is not that there is less greed for money here 
than among the Marathas. The real reason is that Mughal 
indolence lias no liking for the risks and fatigues of war. in 
contrast to the love for pillage among the Marathas, a nation 
of born brigands.” 2 Aumont's prediction was. however, totally 
falsified. Nizam Ali did cede Guntoor under English pressure 
and did join the war against Tipu two years later. 

Aumont was mortified at french inactivity to prevent 
Nizam Ali from entering into a close alliance with the English 
in 1790, which seemed to presage the loss of what little influence 
the French still had in Hyderabad. He gave expression to his 
feelings in a letter to de Fresne. Governor of Pondicherry, in 
September 1790 after getting news of the Revolution in France 
and the effect it had produced it Pondicherry He wrote that 
lie had received de Fresne s letter sent through one Bellevue, 
who had come to Hyderabad in search of employment. Fie 
doubted very much whether Bellevue would get any appoint¬ 
ment, since the situation in Hyderabad had changed completely 
for the French, and the Government was not anxious to increase 
the number of Frenchmen in its service. Indeed, if the Dixvan 
had had his own way, all the existing Frenchmen would have 
been dismissed, but. he was held in restraint, only by Nizam Ali 
who had still some liking for the French. Aumont continued 
that the English were trying to exploit the news of the Revolu¬ 
tion in France to discredit, that country in the eyes of the 


1 It referred to the mission of Captain Kennaway; see Forrest— Selec¬ 
tions from the State Papers of the Governors-General of India , Cornwallis, 
F PP- 35 - 36 . 

~ P. A. mss. r ; u>52 (Atimont’s account of the reception given to the 
English embassy by the Nizam), 5253 (Aumont: to Conway, 3rd September 
1788). 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


inn Princes, but he hoped that the National Assembly would 
pay more attention to India than the ministers of the old 
regime, who had lost for France the high esteem which India 
originally had for her Hoping a revival of French influence 
in India as a result of the Revolution, he wrote, “l am too old 
to see the return of the French to this brilliant theatre, but 1 
am nevertheless always optimistic, I console inysdf with the 
belief that a change of system will give France her original 
lustre,’' 1 

About the time that the English were trying to secure 
Guntoor from Nizam All, there was an informal overture from 
the latter to cede the district to the French, in exchange for a 
guarantee of protection against the English and Tipu. It may 
be remembered that in May 1788 Montigny was recalled from 
Poona, and on his way to Pondicherry he made a brief halt at 
Hyderabad. It was through Montigny that Nizam Ali made 
an informal and verbal proposal about the cession of Guntoor. 
Montigny reported it to Conway on his arrival at Pondicherry, 
and the matter was referred to the Advisory Committee, set up 
in 1787 to assist the Governor. In view of the existing situa¬ 
tion of the French, however, the Advisory Committee recoin-''' 
mended in September 1788 the adoption of a non-committal 
policy, and asked Conway to write a simple letter of compli¬ 
ments to Nizam Ali in reply to his proposal without under¬ 
taking any definite engagement. 2 No wonder that soon after 
Nizam Ali, in order to secure his territories from Tipu’s aggres¬ 
sion. ceded Guntoor to the English and entered into a close 
understanding with them. 

Baffled in his attempts to gain French protection or to 
secure the alliance of Tipu, for which overtures were made in 
1788”, Nizam Ali finally turned to the English and entered into 
an offensive and defensive alliance in July 1790. But although 
he joined the war against Tipu, he was not very happy about 
his connection with the English. During the progress of the 
war he realised that, the destruction of Tipu would merely 
increase the power of the English and enable them to subdue 

1 P. A. ms. ,-,*54 (letter dated 18th September 1790). 

2 Ibid., ms. 1006 (Proceedings of the Advisory Committee). 

{ Wilks —History of Alysaor, II, pp. 334-535. 



RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS r>VB 

5 ther states, including their allies. Thus towards the end 
of 1791 he turned once more to the French and tried to get 
from them European troops and arms in order to be indepen¬ 
dent of English military assistance for the protection of his 
territories, which had forced him into the war. Me had in his 
service a number of French officers, and it was through them 
that he opened overtures to Pondicherry. One of them was 
Raymond, who later acquired great reputation and influence 
in Hyderabad, somewhat recalling the days of hussy in the 
Deccan, Another notable person was Piron, who later suc¬ 
ceeded Raymond in command of his contingent after the 
latter’s death in 1798. 1 

Raymond, who had fought in the French expeditionary 
force during the previous war and had joined the service of 
Nizam Ali in 1785. opened his first political contact with the 
Pondicherry Government towards the end of 1787. In a letter 
dated 1st December he introduced himself to Conway, then 
Governor of Pondicherry, giving an account of his earlier 
career and the strength of the contingent under his command. 
He pledged his loyalty to France and expressed his readiness 
to supply to the Pondicherry Government all news about 
Hyderabad. 2 For a time this did not lead to any important 
development. But from the end of 1791 the two French 
officers, Raymond and Piron, became actively engaged in nego¬ 
tiations with the Pondicherry Government for procuring troops 
and arms. It was at the instance of Nizam Ali, who was 
anxious to draw away from the English alliance, that Raymond 
entered into correspondence with the Governor of Pondicherry. 
Writing to de Fresne on the ^Qth December 1791, Raymond 
gave an account of the state of war against Tipu since the 
withdrawal of the English from Seringapatam in June and the 
unwillingness of the Marathas and Nizam Ali to continue the 
war any longer. T hey had become conscious of the dangers 
that eventually threatened them from the side of the English 
if Tipu was completely crushed, and they were thus anxious to 


1 For careers see Compton —European Military Adventurers of Hindus 
tan; Malleson -Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas; 
Wesson— les Adventurien Frangais aux Itides, 

’ P. A. rus, 5352. 


misr^ 



conclude an early peace. Raymond stated that he was sending 
the letter through Pirori, who was going to Pondicherry on a 
special mission. 1 Piron’s departure for Pondicherry was held 
np ‘or a. few days, and taking advantage of this delay Raymond 
wrote a second letter to de Fvesne on the 3rd January 1792,. 
giving further news of the war and particularly of the defeat 
of the Nizam’s army before Goorttmconda, in which several 
French officers were taken prisoners. 2 * 

It Was on the 12th January 1793 that Raymond made his 
definite proposal to dc Fresnel He wrote that Nizam Ali had 
asked him to increase the number of troops under his com 
mand, to a strength sufficient to enable him to dispense with 
the contingent placed at his disposal by the English, and to 
seek the help of the Pondicherry Government for the purpose. 
Raymond urged de Fresne to consider the proposal as a great 
opportunity for the French nation, assuring him that “Nizam 
Ali has been attached to the French since his boyhood and 
that he will never be their enemy to help a Power whose ambi¬ 
tion has given him just ground for distrust.” At the moment 
lie had allied himself with the English against Tipu, but that 
was only for taking revenge on the ruler of Mysore for the 
capture and destruction of Adoni in 1786. 4 

Raymond then continued that if by supplying troops and 
guns France helped the formation of a contingent of 10,000 
men in the service of Nizam Ali, it would be as good as being 
at her own disposal. At the first signal from Pondicherry, it 
would move to any quarter indicated, possibly strengthened by 
additional troops lent by Nizam Ali. Raymond explained that, 
by his contract w ith Nizam Ali, he was the master of the troops 
under his command together with their arms and baggages, and 
was at liberty to dispose of them in any way he liked in case 
of a European war. He then outlined a plan of campaign for 
the next war with the English. His troops would move inline- 

1 P. A. tns. 1.56*. Both Raymond and Piron had taken part, in the 
war, .-id fragments of the Journal of theii campaigns are preserved in 
the Pondicherry Archives (ms. 1569). 

2 Ibid., tns. 5255. About the engagement at Goorrunicondu see also 
Wilks— History of My soar, II, pp, 515-516. 

P. A. ms. 5256. 

4 It was in July; Wilks, op. cit., II, pp. 296 298. 


MWtSTffp 



REKA 1 IONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 


4 m the outbreak of war and occupy the Northern Sar 
kai>\ which would greatl) facilitate French operations on the 
Coromandel Coast. Nizam Ali could be drawn over to 'he 
side of the French by assuring him of protection from Tipu’s 
aggression, and Tipu being an ally, such a guarantee would 
not create any difficulty. The only condition that Nizam Ali 
would require for an alliance with the French was the restora¬ 
tion of the Northern Sarkars. Raymond concluded that consi¬ 
dering the existing political situation the French Government 
would do well in helping him to augment Ids corps, as desired 
by Nizam All. It would not cost the French any money; all 
that was required was to supply guns and enterprising officers, 
of whom there were many in the different settlements in India. 

De Fresno was favourably disposed towards the proposal 
of Raymond. While forwarding Raymond’s letter to the 
Minister of Marine on the 5th March 1791?, de Fresne expressed 
his high appreciation of the integrity and military qualities oi 
Raymond. He emphasised the assurance given by Raymond, 
to leave the service of Nizam AH and place his contingent at 
the disposal of the French Government immediately on the 
outbreak of a war with the English. He also confirmed the 
view of Raymond that Nizam Ali was well-disposed towards 
the French, and stated that the tremendous growth of English 
power after the victory over Tipu had made Nizam Ali all the 
more inclined towards the French. While recommending the 
acceptance of Raymond's proposal, de Fresne pointed out that 
it would not cause any embarrassment to the French Govern¬ 
ment and would not disturb peace with the English, since there 
was to be no direct negotiation with Nizam AH. Outwardly, 
the French Government would be merely permitting sale of 
arms to Raymond and allowing army officers to join his con¬ 
tingent. There were both plenty of arms at Pondicherry and 
a large number of men in the different settlements anxious to 
seek good careers in the service of the Indian Princes. 1 So 
favourably disposed was de Fresne to the idea of having a 
French contingent in the service of Nizam Ali that a few days 
later he recommended to the Minister the award of a Cross of 


§L 


P. A. ms. 1657. 


MW/sr^ 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


Louis to I’uon, who had come to Pondiehmy for nego¬ 
tiations. 

Raymond repeated his prayer for arms and Officers in tvvo 
letters to de Fresne, written from Seringa patani on March 6 . 
Hoping for a successful outcome of Piron’s mission, he wiotc 
that after the latter's return ite himself would go to Pondi 
cherry to negotiate-about more important affairs on behall ol 
Nizam AH. Raymond informed de Fresne of the conclusion 
of peace between Tipu and the allied Powers, and expressed 
great admiration for the courage and tenacity of the Mysore 
army. He defended himself against the charge of disloyalty, 
for fighting against Tipu, an ally of France, and lor taking in Iris 
employ deserters from the French contingent in I ipu s service 
commanded by de Vigif, after the latter’s defeat and capture 
before Seringapatam on the 8th February. Regarding the 
second charge, Raymond contended that the deserters had left 
Vigic’s contingent because of low salary and bad treatment; and 
regarding the first, he stated that the honour of a soldier and 
gratitude towards an employer had compelled him to take part 
in the war, but that he had seized every opportunity to urge 
upon Nizam Alt the necessity of concluding peace, and to im¬ 
press upon him the danger, that threatened his own power after 
the total destruction of Tipu. 1 On the 13th March Raymond 
wrote to de Fresne again, informing him about an interview 
he lvad with Nizam Ali. The latter was anxious to know the 
result of Piron’s mission. He proposed to Raymond to raise a 
second contingent and to procure additional arms for the pur¬ 
pose from Pondicherry. Raymond once more urged de Fresne 
to seize the groat opportunity for promoting national interests." 

There is a gap in the correspondence of Raymond pre¬ 
served in the Pondicherry Archives, and it is not known defi¬ 
nitely what reply de Fresne gave to his prayer for men and 
arms, it appears, however, front some later correspondence 
that de Fresne was quite willing to accommodate Raymond in 
an indirect way. Desertions became, suddenly frequent among 
the men of the Pondicherry garrison, and in a letter written 
in June 1792 to the Governor-General, Cossigny, de Fresne 


* P. A. mss. 5302, 5303. 
2 Ibid, ms. 5304. 


misr^ 



RELATIONS Wall INDIAN POWERS 




that the desertions at Pondicherry were connected with 
the recruitment started by Raymond. 1 2 3 Piron returned to 
Hyderabad in July, after having made an arrangement, with de 
Fresne about the supply of arms and other equipments through 
Mercier, a wealthy private merchant, formerly a Government 
officer. 

In July 179a Raymond informed de Fresno about tin panic 
created in the Deccan by the sudden appearance of the power¬ 
ful Marat.ha chief, Sincllria, with a formidable army, as a result 
of which Nizam Ali had pressed his demand on Raymond to 
increase his corps immediately. Raymond stated that he had 
already recruited 3,000 sepoys and had sent 20,000 rupees to 
Mcrcier for arms and uniforms. He had authorised Mercier to 
procure them, if necessary, from Negapatam or Madras." In a 
letter dated 1st October Raymond informed de Fresne that at 
the demand of Nizam Ali he was raising another sepoy force 
of 5,000 men, and had sent 50,000 rupees through his adjutant, 
Chemith, to Mercier for procuring additional arms and uni¬ 
forms. He further stated that he was sending a letter from 
Nizam Ali relating to a long-cherished political project, about 
which he would write in detail later." Unfortunately, the 
letter of Nizam Ali is not preserved in the Pondicherry Archives. 
Perhaps, it. might have referred to the old project of an alliance, 
Raymond added that he had been authorised to go to Pondi¬ 
cherry and enter into negotiations as soon as Sindhia returned 


to north India. 

About this time Raymond received news from his agent at 
Pondicherry, Chemith, that de Fresne had changed his mind 
and was unwilling to supply arms according to the previous 
arrangement, out of suspicion about his intentions. In a letter 
dated 4th October, Raymond regretted that de Fresne’s ears 
had been poisoned by some persons, and declared dial he was 
prepared to go to Pondicherry and answer any charge that might 
have been brought against him. He wrote, “Would I have 
addressed you, my General, with so much confidence if I had 
wanted to deceive you?” Raymond added that his enemies 


1 P. A. ms, 1775. 

2 Ibid., ms. 5257. 

3 Ibid., 111s. 5258. 


WNlSTfty 



l HE FRENCH rN INDIA 


<SL 


aa done him a great injury, riot so much by stopping the 
supply of arms as by depriving him of the good opinion of de 
Fresnel Shortly after, Raymond received a letter from de 
Frcsne, explain mg the reason which prevented the latter from 
keeping his promise. It referred to the changed situation at 
Pondicherry and the coming of the Civil Commissioners from 
France. 1 2 Anyway, Raymond was satisfied with the explanation. 

The matter was allowed to rest there for the time being, 
but, was taken up once more in June i 793 • before that de 
Frcsne had been succeeded by Chermont as Governor of Pon¬ 
dicherry,. The latter had written to Nizam Ali and Raymond, 
informing them of his assumption of offcc. In reply to that 
letter, Nizam Ali wrote on the ist June 1793, assuring Chermont 
of the continuance of his friendship for France, and expressing 
a fervent hope that his old request for arms and other military 
equipments, made to the previous Governor, would receive 
more favourable consideration from him. He added that he 
had entrusted Raymond to write in detail about the things 
needed, and hoped that it would be possible for Chermont to 
send them at the earliest opportunity. 3 4 5 On the same date 
Raymond also wrote to Chermont, renewing his request for 
arms and other equipments and assuring him that in case of 
need his contingent would be entirely at the disposal of France ’ 
]>v the time these letters reached Chermont, the condition 
of Pondicherry itself had become desperate on account of the 
outbreak of war with the English, and there could be no 
question of supplying arms to Hyderabad. On the 25th June 
Chermont wrote to Nizam Ali, informing him of the sudden 
change in the situation which prevented him from keeping his 
request for arms, having need of all the available resources for 
the defence of Pondicherry itself. He, however, assured Nizam 
Ali that he was expecting strong reinforcements from France, 
and on their arrival lie would be in a position to give a more 
tangible proof of his friendship for the Nizam/ It was, in 


1 P. A. ins. 55159. 2 Ibid, ms. 5360. 

3 Mardneau — Lettn \ cl Conventions des Gouvcrneurs dc Pondicherry, 

V- 398 . 

4 P. A. ms. 5362. 

5 Mardneau, op . ciL, p. 400. 


miSTfy 


HE NATION'S WITH INDIAN POWERS 

pious wish, and shortly alter Pondicherry capitu¬ 
lated to the English. 

V. Relations with Mysore. 

There was a general feeling among the French that the 
ruler of Mysore was their traditional, and in fact natural, ally 
in India, That impression originated from the time of Haidar's 
first co-operation with the French, while he was still an 
unknown soldier in the service of the Hindu ruler of Mysore. 
It was strengthened when Haidar came to power, his rise being 
to some extent due to the help tendered by the French, and 
more particularly to the military lessons he had learnt from 
them. After 1765 the factor that kept up the feeling of friend¬ 
ship between Haidar and the French was their common 
animosity towards the English As we have noticed already, 
nearly all the French nicmoives of the period dealing with 
military operations in India envisaged a close alliance and co¬ 
operation with Haidar. That alliance was, however, sought to 
be based on too fragile a foundation, and not on a real politi¬ 
cal understanding and unity of interests. While professing 
friendship and co-operation, each side was in reality anxious 
to make use of the other for its own advantage. While 
the French were principally concerned with the destruction of 
the English power and sought for that purpose the co-operation 
of the three southern Powers, the Marathas, Hyderabad and 
Mysore, which necessitated some check on the ambitions of the 
last, the ruler of Mysore was more concerned about the aggran¬ 
disement of his own power and was eager to utilise the friend 
ship of the French not merely against the English but also 
against the other two Indian Powers, the Marathas and Hydera 
bad. We have already noticed how during the war of 1779-83 
many fair chances of success were lost for the French anti 
Haidar because of lack of trust and co operation between them, 
which gradually deepened into bitter relations, scarcely con¬ 
cealed. Tipu was even less enthusiastic about the friendship 
of the French and less willing to conciliate their feelings than 
hi s father. What he wanted was not so much a general 
alliance with France as a corps of French troops in his service, 
to be retained as long as it suited his interests. 

11 a 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

)d under review Tipif's relations with the 
French’ presented a striking contradiction. While on the one 
hand, he showed an eagerness for drawing closer to France, 
addressed several letters direct to Louis XVI with presents for 
him and Marie Antoinette, sent an embassy to Paris in 1787 
and proposed sending another in 1792, in his relations with 
the French in India he showed little eagerness to win their 
goodwill or even to avoid measures likely to alienate them. 
As we have noticed already, his agents gave repeated vexations 
to the French at xYlahe, and all the protests of the Commandant 
of Mahe and the Governor of Pondicherry proved of no avail, 
french goods and letters passing through Tipu’s territories 
were constantly intercepted, and the land communication be¬ 
tween Pondicherry and Malic was virtually cut off Obviously 
such dealings were not calculated to establish friendly relations. 

After the conclusion of peace in 1783, the policy of the 
French was to cultivate good relations with Tipu, Nizam Ali 
and the Marathas, and to try to keep them united for a future 
eventuality of war with the English. For that purpose it was 
necessary to eliminate all causes of friction among the three 
Powers and to preserve harmony by an appeal to their long¬ 
term interests. That policy, however, was frustrated when 
towards the end of 1785 war broke out between Tipu and a 
combination of the Marathas and Ni/am Ali. All the three 
Powers had expressed their views and explained their motives 
to the French Governor, Souillac, but the appeals of the latter 
could not prevent hostilities breaking out. All that the 
French could do was to make known to the contestants their 
neutrality in the conflict, but there persisted an impression 
among the enemies of Tipu that the French were really in 
sympathy with him. That impression arose from the existence 
of a French contingent in Tipu’s service, commanded by dc 
La l lee, and also from the outward anxiety shown by Tipu to 
draw closer his relations with France. 

Early In 1786 Tipu addressed a letter to Louis XVJ, 
expressing a fervent hope that the traditional friendship 
between Mysore and France would continue, in spite of all the 
efforts made by their enemies to destroy it. He bestowed high 
praise on Cossigny, Governor of Pondicherry, for his efforts to 
preserve friendly relations, wanted him not to be transferred 




During the pc 


Ml NtSTfiy 



relations with imhan powers 




^ondicherry, and even recommended him lor promotion 
to the rank of Ucutenant-General. 1 It may be recalled that 
after the conclusion of hostilities in 1783, Tipu had accused 
(his same Cossigny, then commanding the French troops placed 
at his disposal, of cheating and embezzlement and had sent 
charges against him to Bussy, who considered them to be 
unfounded. In 1780 Tipu had need of French goodwill, and 
that explained his change of attitude. In his letter to Louis 
XVI Tipn also announced the birth of a son and sent him 
presents, which included a gun manufactured in his own 
foundry. The eagerness of Tipn to maintain good relations 
with the French was also manifest by the orders he sent to his 
officers to stop giving troubles to the citizens of Malic 2 , and 
by the successful conclusion of the mission of Momierbn sent 
to his Day bar for the settlement of all outstanding disputes 
between him and the French, including the account of the 
advances made by him to the French expeditionary force before 
the arrival of Bussy.' 

The apparent improvement of relations in 178b prepared 
the ground for the next, step, the despatch of an official embassy 
to Paris in 1787, That was in fact the first instance of sending 
a formal embassy by an Indian Prince to a European Power. 
The real object of the embassy is not quite clear. It seems, 
however, that, the intention was not so much to enter into a 
definite military alliance with France, which, Tipu must have 
known from past experience, could not be reached so-easily, but 
rather to impress upon his enemies in India, the English, the 
Marathas and Nizam Ali, that he was on terms of closest 
friendship with a strong European Power. If it had been his 
object to secure a definite military alliance with France, he 
would have surely prepared the ground by holding preliminary 
discussions with the Governor of Pondicherry or the Governor- 
General in the Isle of France. It does not appear from 
the correspondence of either Cossigny or Souillac that such 
discussions had been proposed by Tipu. Anyway, Tipu s 
embassy headed by one Muhammad Osman Khan started from 


1 p. A. ms. 878. 

2 Ibid, ms. 937. 

a ibid, ms. 941 (Cossigny to Marin at Malic, isi December 1786). 


WHisr/fy 



THE I RVACH IN INDIA 


<SL 


Mangalore, with a huge retinue and rich presents, by a trench 
corvette, the Aurore, towards the end of 1 7 ^ 7 - t’ievre Monne 
rpn, the captain of the ship, had special instructions from 
SouiUac to proceed straight to trance without stopping any¬ 
where on the way, and while approaching the French coast to 
hoist the flag of Tipu. 1 2 Michaud in his Histaire des Pfogrls 
cl de lit Chute de VEmpire de Mysore gives a brief account of 
the reception of the embassy in Paris and of the result of the 
mission.’ The King gave a public audience to the embassy on 
the >rd August 1788. Spectacular shows, banquets and other 
entertainments were* arranged in honour of the distinguished 
visitors, and even de Suffren held a reception at his residence. 

If the mission had any real political object, it proved 
to be entirely fruitless. The French Government, standing on 
the eve of the great storm which was to burst a tew months 
later, was not prepared to make any military commitments at 
the time. Bur the presence of Tipu’s embassy in Paris was 
sought to be utilised by the French Company for its own 
advantage. As early as 1785 Moracin, the Administrator in 
India of the newly established French Company, had submitted 
a me moire to Souillac on the possibilities of French trade with 
Mysore. 1 In 1788 the French Company sought to take advan¬ 
tage of the presence of Tipu’s embassy in Paris to propose a 
Commercial Convention, by which the Company would secure 
a monopoly of all exports from Tipu’s kingdom and of all 
imports of European goods, and in return it would supply to 
Tipu guns and other arms as well as French artisans that he 
might "require. The proposals, dated 4th October 1788, sub- 
milled to Tipu through his Ambassadors, staled that the 
French would purchase every year the entire produce of pepper 
of his territories and fixed quantities of sandalwood, cardamom, 
gum, elephant tusks, raw cotton, yarn and woven doth, and 
would supply in return all the guns and munitions of wat 
required by Tipu as well as other European goods. I ho pro¬ 
posals were accompanied by a letter of the same date from the 


1 P. A. TlliS. 996. 

2 Vol. I, pp. 138-139. 

1 Roux U Bailli de Suffrrn dans VIndC , p. 228. For a detailed 
account of the embassy see Tantel -CAmbamd* de Tippoii Sahib a Paris. 
* P. A. ms. ^297. 


mtsr/fy 



Administrators of the Company to Tipu, , t .nd another letter, 
dated 10th October, which stated that at the request of die 
Ambassadors the Company had advanced money to them to 
recruit artisans in France to be taken to India. 1 The Ambassa¬ 
dors also secured the services of a French physician and a 
French surgeon, Willemet and Barrout. 2 The embassy re¬ 
turned to India about the middle of 1789. It may be men¬ 
tioned here that the proposed Commercial Convention did not 
materialise, and the French artisans who accompanied the 
Vrnbassadors to Mysore did not receive very good treatment 
either. Some time later the Governor of Pondicherry had to 
intercede in favour of these unfortunate men, and to protest 
to Tipu against the restrictions imposed on their freedom of 
communication with Pondicherry, in violation of the engage¬ 
ments entered into with them. 3 

While Tipu had expressed his desire to send an embassy 
to Paris, (he Flench also decided to maintain a regular diplo 
malic agent at his Darbar . During the last war Piveron de 
Morlat had worked as French agent, returning to France after 
the cessation of hostilities. In April 1787 Castries wrote to 
Cossigny at Pondicherry that Piveron de Morlat would be sent 
back to resume his post at Fipu’s Durban, and in September 
the Pondicherry Government appointed an army officer, named 
Desvaux, to work as French agent at Tipu’s Darbar, pending 
the arrival of Piveron de Morlat. 5 It does not appear, how¬ 
ever, that either of them did actually take up the appointment. 
In 1789 France appointed Comte de Macnamara, Commando 
of the naval squadron in Eastern waters, as a special envoy to 
Tipu. He came to Mahe in 1790 and had an interview with 
Tipu in April at the port of Chetuvayi. Nothing is known 
about the outcome of this interview, except that Tipu gave 

1 P, A. mss. 1089 (proposals of the Company), 1090, 109.1 (letters from 
the Directors of the Company to Tipu, dated 4th and 10th October'); also 
5 2 9 *k 

2 Ibid,, ms. 1097. 

3 Ibid, ms. 1115. 

* Ibid , ms. 977. 

5 Ibid, ms. 1006 (decisions of the Advisory Committee). 


mtSTfiy 



some rich presents for the King of France. 1 In a letter written 
in Nov ember 1790 to Marin at Mahe, Gossigny, while inform¬ 
ing him of the murder of Macnamara in the Isle of France as a 
result of revolutionary troubles there, expressed an apprehen¬ 
sion that if Tipu had submitted any political or military pro¬ 
posals to Macnamara for communication to the French Govern¬ 
ment, there was no means of knowing it after the tragic end 
of Mucnamara's career. 2 

About the end of 1788 Tipu sent to Pondicherry the 
officer in command of the French contingent in his service, de 
Lai lee, with some verbal proposals about drawing his relations 
closer to France. 3 There is, however, no record which throws 
any light on the nature of the proposals. In May 1789 Tipu 
wrote to Conway at Pondicherry, requesting him to end some 
naval officers who could give detailed information about Ceylon, 
Jeddah, Molucca, Borneo, China, France and England. 4 In 
July he wrote to Conway again, thanking him for having sent 
the naval officers he wanted and requesting him to send a 
printer with a printing machine/’ In June, on the rumour of 
the Dutch going to cede Cochin to the English. Tipu wrote to 
Conway that the French should try to purchase the place from 
the Dutch/ He was in fact prompted not so much by friend 
ship for the French as by the fear of another English establish¬ 
ment close to his territories. It was about this time that 
Tipu’s Ambassadors returned to Pondicherry with letters and 
presents from the King of France. Tipu thanked Conway for 
the splendid reception given to them in Paris and stated that 
he was eagerly waiting to meet the distinguished French noble 
who was coming with his Amahssaclors. 7 It might have referred 

1 P. a. ms. 4671 (Macnamara to the Commandant of Mahe, 27th April 
fioni Chciuvayi), ms* 4673 (Commandant of Mah£ to the Governor 

of Pondicherry, joth May). Chctuvayi was a small port on the Malabai 
Coast, between Ponnani and Cochin (Madias District Gazetteers : Malabar 
and Anjntgo. p. 451). 

2 Ibid ms. 1323. 

a Ibid, ms. in? (Tipu to Conway, 14th Dec. 1788). 

4 Ibid , 111s. 1136, 

a Ibid, ms. 1143. 

* Ibid, ms. 1137. 

r ftf&rtin c’d\v~~het.tres et Conventions des Gouverncurs de Pondichery, 
pp. 401-402. 


mtsTfy 



to the Comte de Macnamara* Commander of the French Navy 
in Eastern waters, who escorted the Mysorean Ambassadors 
back to India, and was himself appointed a special envoy to 
Tipu. Or, it might have referred to the Comte de Civrac, who 
had resigned from the French army at the end of 1787 with a 
view to proceed to India and enter the service of Tipu Sultan. 
In giving this news to Conwaj at Pondicherry, the Minister, 
Comte de Montnioriri, mentioned particularly that Civrac was 
an important person and enjoyed the favours of the Queen 
and of the Princesse de LambaUe, 1 Civrac, however, ultima tel' 
changed his mind on arrival in India and remained at Pondi¬ 
cherry, where he tool; an important part in the events of the 
Revolutionary period. 

During his next war with the English and their allies, the 
Mnvathas and Nizam Ali, which started in 1790, Tipu turned 
to Pondicherry for troops to augment the European contingent 
in his service, commanded first by de Lall£e, and after his death 
in October 1790 by de Vigie So the news that orders had been 
sent from the Isle of France for the complete withdrawal of 
troops from Pondicherry, which, as we have noticed in a pre¬ 
vious chapter, brought about the first political upheaval in that 
settlement, came to Tipu as an unpleasant surprise, since the 
withdrawal of French troops from India would deprive him of 
the only means of augmenting his European contingent or of 
impressing his enemies by a show of friendship with the French. 
In May 1790 de la Satie, one of the French officers in Mysore 
service, wrote to de Fre&ne that Tipu had expressed surprise 
and indignation at the news of the withdrawal of troops from 
Pondicherry. Tipu had asked de la Salle to write to de Fresrie 
that if the measure had been forced upon the French by lack 
of money, they could have approached him, and he would have 
gladly made some contribution for the maintenance of troops 
at Pondicherry, since he felt that the ultimate effect of Live 
withdrawal of French troops from India would be to encourage 
the aggressive designs of the English. 2 In June de la Salle 
wrote to de Fresne once more that Tipu had asked him to 
convey his assurance of the protection of Pondicherry against 

1 P. A. ms. 1035 (loiter dated 2nd December 1787). 

2 Ibid, ms. 5300. 


mmsTffy 


’ Go *2\ 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

an English attack and to inform the Governor that he was 
shortly sending letters and presents for the King and Queen of 
France. 1 These letters and presents were sent shortly alter 
through one of the principal officers of Tipu, Zainul Abcdin, 
who was despatched on a special mission to Pondicherry. 2 The 
mission, as will be seen presently, related to getting some 
French troops from Pondicherry. 

On the 13th October 1790 de Vigie, a cousin of de Lai lie, 
wrote to de Fresne, informing him of his appointment by Tipu 
to succeed de La lice in command of the French contingent 
after the latter’s death in action at Darrapur on the 7th. Be 
Vigie assured de Fresne of his loyalty to his country, and 
promised to send him regular news about all developments in 
the kingdom of Mysore. 1 In December de Vigie sent one of 
his officers, named Pigeard, to Pondicherry with the object of 
getting 100 French troops for his contingent. His request was 
fortified by a letter from Tipu to de Fresne, appealing to the 
traditional friendship between him and the French, and asking 
for a reinforcement of 100 men for Vigie’s contingent. Tipu 
also enquired about the truth of the rumours prevalent about 
the imminence of a war between England and France. 1 To 
this letter de Fresne replied with an assurance that he would 
do his best to supply the troops wanted by Tipu, but since he 
could not do so on his own authority, lie was writing to the 
Governor-General, Gossigny, to send troops from the Isle of 
France. De Fresne also contradicted the rumour of an immi¬ 
nence of war between England and France, and concluded by 
expressing fervent hopes about a resounding victory for Tipu. 5 
On the fith January 1791 Tipu wrote to de Fresne, in reply to 
a previous request from the latter, that he had given peremp¬ 
tory orders to his army not to molest any of the French posses¬ 
sions during the course of the war with the English. Fie added 
that he was sending a letter for the King of France and another 

» I*. A. his. 1263. 

' Martineau- Lettrcs et Conv<'nfiotis des Gouvemcu'% de Pandichtfry, 

PP- 3 6 5-3&<k 

3 P. A. ms. 5301. 

* Martineau, op. cit p 364. 

3 Ibid** pp. 364-365. 





WIN tSTfy 


RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 


525 ! 



for the Governor-General. Cossigny. 1 De Fresne m reply 
thanked I ipa for the assurance of protection ol the French 
possessions and expressed hopes lor Iris victor) in the war.- 

Early in 1791 de Fresne made an attempt to end hostilities 
between Tipu and his enemies. The war had placed the 
French in a difficult position. Unable to do anything to help 
l ipti, they were not prepared to see the total destruction of 
his power., which would lose for them the support of a valuable 
ally in a future contingency. De Fresne was thus anxious to 
prevent a continuance of the war and thereby save as much as 
possible of Tipu's power. In January 1791, taking advantage 
of Tipu’s presence at Permacbil, not far from Pondicherry, he 
sent a trusted agent named Leger, with a letter urging Tipu to 
end hostilities in the interest of the common people to whom 
the war meant only misery and devastation and proposing to 
offer his good offices to bring about a satisfactory .settlement. 
In his reply to de Fresne, dated 25th January, Tipu appeared 
willing to accept the offer of French good offices and sent an 
officer, Abdul Nabi Khan, to Pondicherry to discuss the details.' 1 3 
It may be mentioned here that nothing came out of the French 
overtures to Tipu’s enemies, and the war dragged on for nearly 
a year more. Perhaps, cle Fresne was encouraged to offer his 
good offices by the hope of the defection of the Marathas and 
Nizam Ali from the English alliance. Anyway, in February, 
out of gratitude for his offer, Tipu sent cle Fresne a beautiful 
grey horse as a present. 4 He also sent letters and presents for 
the King and Queen of France, and in April proposed to send 
Leger on a special mission to Paris.’ ft was inspired by 
rumours of an outbreak of war between France and England. 

De Fresne took a keen interest in the progress of the war 
between Tipu and his enemies, kept himself fully informed of 
all the developments in the military situation in their minute 
details, and regularly sent long reports to the Minister in Paris 
and to the Governor-General in the Tsie of France. But what- 

1 Marfineau. Jetties el Conventions des Gouverneurs cle PondicMry , 

pp. 360-3^. 

2 Ibid ., p. 367. 

3 Ibid., p. 368. 

4 Ibid., p. 369. 

3 Ibid., pp. 370*572. 




ever might have been In's personal desire to do something to 
prevent a total destruction of Tipu’s power, his hands were 
tied not only by the lack of resources and internal troubles at 
Pondicherry but also by the instructions from the Ministry at 
home to preserve a strict neutrality in the war. It may he 
recalled that the outbreak of the war in India almost coincided 
with the beginning of the Revolution in France. Convulsed 
by such an unprecedented upheaval, which only increased in 
momentum as time passed, France had neither the means nor 
the will to interest herself in the fate of an Indian Power, 
however important it might be to her as an alls in a future 
war with England. 

In October 1791 the Minister of Marine wrote to de 
Frcsne, acknowledging receipt of his letters relating to the war 
in India. Although he feared that the power of Tipu might 
be totally crushed, he expressed satisfaction that de Frcsne had 
so far preserved strict neutrality in accordance with his instruc¬ 
tions. 1 Thus de Frcsne had merely to look on till Tipu was 
thoroughly worsted at Seringapatam in February 1792 and was 
Compelled to accept very drastic and humiliating terms of 
peace. In March de Frcsne informed Cossignv and the Minister 
of the conclusion of peace. In his letter to the former, after 
giving the terms of peace, de Fresne bitterly observed, “It is a 
peace shameful for a Prince who has all along been attached 
to our nation and whom we have not given any support 
whatsoever/’- In his letter to the Minister de Fresne gave a 
detailed account of the final action of the campaign before 
Serinagapatam and the humiliating terms of peace imposed on 
Tipu. He also made some interesting observations on the 
fighting quality of Indian troops and the admirable example 
of valour and tenacity given by Tipu’s army against adver 
saries overwhelmingly superior in number. About Tipu him¬ 
self, de Fresne remarked that he had more energy and deter¬ 
mination than real military talent. He had failed to utilise 
his resources to prevent the English front crossing the Ghats 
and carrying the war into his own territory. He had badly 

1 P. A. ms. 1501. 

- Ibid, ms. 1653 (letter dated and March). 


ftEJ.ATiONS WITH INDIAN fOWIRN 



guarded Bangalore and the organisation of the defences at 
Seringapatam had left much to be desired. 1 

Even after the crushing terms imposed upon Tipvi. de 
Fresnc felt that the French could yet do something to resusci¬ 
tate his power by supplying volunteers to augment the Euro 
pean contingent in his service. That assistance, combined with 
the expected defection of the Marathas and Ni/am Ali from the 
English alliance, gave out. some hope of a restoration of the old 
balance oj powe^ in south India So immediately after the 
Conclusion of peace, at the instance of de Fre.sne. Duplessis, the 
commander of the Pondicherry garrison, drew up a detailed 
scheme of raising a mixed contingent of 1800 men, 1200 
Indians and 600 Europeans, for taking service with Tipu. The 
scheme was intended to be v seru: to Paris for the approval of the 
Government through Leger, who, it will be remembered, had 
been desired by Tipu in 1791 to go on a special mission to 
France on his behalf. 2 

In July 1792 de Fresnc wrote to the Minister of Marine 
on the subject, forwarding at the same time a letter from Tipu 
requesting him to supply some French troops to augment the 
contingent under de Vigie. He stated that the gai i.son at 
Pondicherry was too small to permit him to accede to the 
request, and moreover Frenchmen proceeding from Pondi¬ 
cherry to join Tipu were likely to be stopped by the English 
while passing through the intervening territory under their 
control. The only means of sending men and munitions to 
Tipu was through the port of Mangalore on the Malabar Coast, 
and de Fre ne stated that he was sending a copy of Tipu’s letter 
to the Governor-General in the Isle of France, from where it 
would be easier to send men direct to the Malabar Coast, De 
Fresne also informed the Minister that Tipu intended sending 
another embassy to France, and added, *'I had greatly con 
demned the move in 1787. It seems to me that nothing could 
be more embarrassing for us in Europe and injurious in India.’* 3 

Early in 1793 another appeal was made for some troops 
from Pondicherry to increase the French contingent in 

1 F. \. £) 1656 (letter dated 51 h March). 

2 ibid. , iris. *"1664. 

Ibid., ms. 1807 (letter dated 30th July 1792). 


misr/f 


TMK FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


ipu’s service. This time it was made by de Vigie himself in 
two letters, dated i6th February, addressed to de Fresne and 
the Civil Commissioners who had arrived at Pondicherry some 
time earlier. Before that the news of the establishment of a 
Republic in France had reached the French in Tipu’s service, 
and the latter decided to send a message fo the Civil Commis¬ 
sioners at Pondicherry, expressing jubilation attd professing 
loyalty to the country. 1 In forwarding the message to the Civil 
Commissioners, de Vigie sought their help to increase his con¬ 
tingent by 500 Frenchmen and 2,000 sepoys. He prayed that 
joo men be sent to him every vear from France and that the 
Pondicherry Government be authorised to supply him arms 
and other military equipments on cash payment. 2 To de 
Fresne de Vigie sent a copy of his,- letter and begged him to 
press his appeal for men and arms on the Civil Commissioners. 3 

The appeal, however, hardly got the time for serious con¬ 
sideration at Pondicherry or for transmission to France. Events 
were moving fast, and in June definite news reached India 
about the outbreak of war between England and Revolutionary 
Fiance. Pondicherry was in a poor state of defence, and it was 
now the turn of the French to seek assistance from Tipu. In 
a letter to de Vigie, dated 4th July, Ghermont, the new Gover¬ 
nor of Pondicherry, stated that he had already informed Tipu 
of the outbreak of war between the English and the French 
and had appealed to him to take advantage of the opportunity 
to break with the English and join in an alliance with the 
French. He urged de Vigie to use his influence with Tipu to 
persuade him to join the war. 4 Ghermont’s appeal to Tipu 
remained unanswered, as was only to be expected. Since 1785 
the French had remained aloof and had not given any support 
to Tipu in his wars. They had not even acceded to his request 
lor some French volunteers and arms, and it could hardly be 
expected that Tipu would allow himself to be lured to com¬ 
plete destruction in 1793 by a vain offer of alliance with France. 


» P. A. ins. 5305. 

2 Ibid., ms. 5306 (letter dated 16th February 1793). 

3 Ibid., ms. 5307 (same date as 5306). 

4 Ibid., ms. 2140. 


RE CATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 



VI. Relations with Minor Powers. 


It remains for us to notice very briefly French relations 
with some of the minor Powers. With the Nawab of the 
Carnatic the French continued to maintain diplomatic rela¬ 
tions, keeping a regular I 'Vakil at his Darbar, named Venkata 
Rao. 1 But these relations had no political significance what¬ 
soever, as the Nawab of the Carnatic had passed completely 
under English domination and had even taken up his residence 
at Madras, where he was closely watched by the English. French 
relations with the Nawab of the Carnatic during the period 
under review were confined to an occasional exchange of letters 
of compliments between the, Governor of Pondicherry and the 
Nawab Muhammad Ali Khan and his son; while the work of 
the French Wakil at the Nawabs Darbnr was merely to send 
news about Madras, including gossips and rumours, to the 
Government of Pondicherry. 2 3 

In 1788 Conway, the Governor of Pondicherry, received 
offers from the chiefs of Rarnnad and Madura ol cessions of 
territories in return for French military help in liberating the 
two principalities from the yoke of the Nawab of the Carnatic.’■ 
It was obviously impossible for the French to accept the pro¬ 
posals, which would have involved a war with the English. 

Early in 1792 there came a similar proposal from the king 
of Kandy in Ceylon. The latter, tired of Dutch domination, 
sent a secret embassy to Pondicherry, expressing friendship for¬ 
th c French and proposing to cede to them some territories on 
the coast which had been unjustly usurped by the Dutch in 
violation of their treaty with him. The motive was obvious, 
to escape from the rigid control of the Dutch by inviting 
another European nation into die island; and acceptance of 
the proposal by the French would have involved war with the 
Dutch, who claimed sovereignty over the whole island. It was 
not seriously entertained, and de Fresile gave a vague and 
evasive reply, containing merely empty sentiments of goodwill 


1 p. A. ms. 10*9 (Conway to the son of the Nawab of the Carnatic, 

23rd November 1787). 

3 Ibid., mss. 1025, 10£} 8> 1047-1049. 

Ibid., mss. 1063, 1113. 



for the king of k'tnciv. Some oi the letters of the members of 
the secret embassy were intercepted by the Dutch, who at once 
sent sharp protests to the Governor of Pondicherry and threa¬ 
tened to close all the ports of Ceylon to French shipping. 1 It 
led to some hitter correspondence between the Governments of 
Pondicherry and Colombo, and later dc Fresne sent a full 
report of the Whole episode to Cossigny, the Governor General, 
arid to the Minister in Paris. 2 

VII. Report of LexcaUia to the Xational Convention . 

We may conclude this chapter on French diplomatic rela¬ 
tions with the country Powers with a brief reference to the 
report on India dated 15th October 1794 drawn up by Lcscal- 
licr, one of the Civil Commissioners, for submission to the 
National Convention and the Executive Council in Paris. 1 It 
Was written from the Isle of France, where Lcscallier had gone 
after the fall of Pondicherry in 1793. Lcscallier prefaced the 
report as an account “of the interests of the French nation in 
India and of the means i have foreseen or prepared for the 
prosperity and glory of tlu Republic and for bringing about 
the fall of tlu odious colossus of the English power in these 
rich and vast regions." Fie started by asserting that in spite 
of the loss of all her possessions in India France could still 
revive her power and influence, if only she could make it clear 
to the Indians that she stood for the principles of justice and 
liberty, while the object of English policy was domination and 
conquest. I he French would in that case be invited by “men 
of all castes and all religions" as liberators, “as their unique 
hope”. Lcscallier did not envisage France to become a great 
territorial Power in India; on the other hand, lie wanted her 
to remain content with only a few possessions, “with the 
consent and goodwill of Indians”, the revenues of which would 
he just sufficient to meet the administrative and military 
expenses, 

1 t\ A. mss. 524C), 5-47 (letters from the Dutch Governin' amt Coun¬ 
cillors at Colombo to dc Fresne, dated 18th March and 29th May 1792). 

2 Ibid, nls. 1787 (de Fresne to Cossigny, 28th June 1792), ms. 1791 (de 
Fresne to the Minister, 29th June). 

3 Ibid , ms. 2200. 


iMMsr/fy 


‘ Go ^>\ 

RELATIONS Wl'lil INDIAN POWERS 

' l^csc'iIIicr continued that since any successful operation 
in India against the English would depend entirely oh the 
support and co-operation of the country Powers, he had tried 
to establish close relations with them during his short stay at 
Pondicherry. In order to avoid the risks involved in commu¬ 
nicating through intermediaries and interpreters, he had learnt 
Hindusthani and Persian and could thus get into direct contact 
with the Indian Primes. He had corresponded with Tipu and 
had tried to give him a correct idea of the Revolution in 
France to counteract the propaganda of the English. .Lescallier 
reproduced the translation of a note handed over to him on 
the eve of his departure from India by an agent ol I ipu, as 
expressing the views of his master. Tipu was unwilling to 
enter into any alliance with France unless the latter guaranteed 
not to conclude peace without his concurrence. Evidently, it 
had reference to what he considered as letting down by France 
in 1783. Secondly, he wanted that the French expeditionary 
force to be sent to India was to be placed under his orders, 
and he explained, ‘’your Generals do not know the method of 
making war in India, although quite experienced in European 
warfare/’ 

Lescallier had also been in communication with the Raja 
of Tanjore, who was ready in July 1793 to make a concrete 
proposal about establishing closer relations with France. The 
talks had failed only because ol the sudden outbreak of war. 
He had further opened correspondence with the Princes of 
Madura and Ghirakkal to draw them closer to France, and had 
also carried on talks at Karikal with the secret embassy sent 
by the king of Kandy. Although he could not give an imme¬ 
diate decision in favour of the latter’s proposal, he got an 
assurance that the king of Kandy, who had originally thought 
of approaching the English failing to get any help from the 
French, would not start negotiations with any other foreign 
Power before eighteen months, by which time a definite reply 
was to be expected from France. When Lescallier started from 
Tranquebar in November 1795, he had an interview with the 
Ceylonese representative, who even proposed to go with him 
to the Isle of France to get an early decision from the autho¬ 
rities there, but later changed his mind thinking of the risks 
of the long voyage. 




THE 1K1 \C!l r.\ INDIA 



<SL 


Lescallier concluded that although he had no direct deal¬ 
ing with the other Princes, he felt, certain that all of them, 
including those outwardly allied with the English, would 
throw in their lot. with the French when the opportune 
moment came. Many of them had French contingents in their 
service, which could be of great help when the time for action 
arrived. Pending the return of the French to India, Lescallier 
had arranged a means of maintaining relations with the coun¬ 
try Powers, through a dispossessed Nawab who had expressed 
his readiness to carry on secret diplomatic work at the various 
Durbars. Lescallier also referred to the friendly overture^ he 
had received from Pegu and Cochin-China and the good com¬ 
mercial opportunities that France had in those countries. 

That was in brief the report of Lescallier. It is hardly 
necessary to examine the reliability of the statements made 
and of the hopes held out, since the report of the Civil Com 
missioner was not given any importance whatsoever and pro¬ 
duced no reaction on the Government in Paris. For years 
France was to remain too busy with her difficulties and 
ambitions on the continent of Europe to think of her few 
lost possessions in India. 'The only interest of the report of 
Lescallier lies in the fact that through it we hear for the last 
time the voice of the old optimists, who during the period 
from 1763 to 1780 had flooded the Ministry of Marine and 
Colonies with all sorts of projects about .diplomatic: alliances 
and military operations in India, After this date that, voice 
became practically silent, with only a feeble revival during the 
days of the Consulate; and when the French came back to 
India in i8if> their old dreams had completely faded away. 


CHAPTER XIX 


REVOLUTIONARY FRANCK AND INDIA 
L f he Isles of trance and Bourbon. 

I he English had captured prompt iv all the French posses 
sions in India immediately on the outbreak of the Revolutionary 
War. But the French were not driven out altogether from the 
Fast. They retained for seventeen years more two outposts in 
the Indian Ocean, the Isles of France and Bourbon, which 
served them as bases for carrying' on the struggle against the 
English, by organising commerce-raiding expeditions, carrying 
on intrigues with Indian Princes, watching political develop¬ 
ments in India and making preparations for landing troops 
there when circumstances might turn favourable. Not that they 
really could do much, during Lhe seventeen years that thev 
retained possession of the Isles, to threaten the English position 
in India. But they inflicted severe damage to English trade, 
ana by their threats of military intervention kept the English 
authorities in India constantly on the qnbvive. In the end, 
however, these activities only helped the further expansion of 
English power in India and the elimination of the French totally 
from the East by the capture of the Isles of France and Bourbon. 

We have noticed already the administrative re organisation 
of the French possessions in the East on the eve of the Revolu¬ 
tion, by which the Indian settlements were united with the 
Isles of France and Bourbon into one government, under a 
Governor-General with his seat in the Isle of France. This was 
prompted by three motives : desire for economy in adniinistra 
don, realisation of the impossibility of executing ambitious poli¬ 
tical projects in India at the time, and rather exaggerated ideas 
about the strategic importance of the Isles for launching large- 
scale military and naval expeditions to India. The Isles of 
France and Bourbon, however, were set ill not regarded as 
important for themselves, but as only helping the realisation 
of French political ambitions in India better than the Indian 

ii 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

settlements. If the French were to take the English by surprise 
in India, preparations for war could not be made either in 
the ports of France or in the Indian settlements, but only in 
the Isles of France and Bourbon, where secrecy could be main- 
rained. The distance of these Isles from India was long enough 
to elude vigilant watch by the English, and yet not too long to 
prevent them from being effective bases for launching an attack 
on India. “Situated about a month’s voyage from the coasts of 
India, the Isle of France could constitute an arsenal of the first 
order, on condition that it was equipped with all necessary 
materials and that troops and a naval squadron were sent there, 
not at the moment of the declaration of war but in a time of 
peace*’. 1 

But the possession of the Isles had disadvantages as well, 
as experience amply proved. If the Isles served as useful bases 
for French naval operations, by providing safe shelters their 
possession induced French Admirals to leave Indian waters 
on the first reverse or mere fear of defeat That was how d’Ache 
and Ironjoh had behaved. Not without reason did Sonnerat 
observe, “The Isle of France was and will always be fatal to the 
establishments that the French have in India”. 2 3 De Suffren 
understood the demoralising effect of the possession of the Isles, 
and never returned there during the whole course of the war. 
It is worth quoting another contemporary opinion on the value 
of the possession of the Isle of France. “The Isle of France 
is considered as a fortress which protects our Indian possessions. 
It is as if one considers Bordeaux as the citadel for the protec¬ 
tion of our American colonies”. 1 Abbe Raynal perhaps gave the 
most balanced view on the subject: “There is so necessary a 
connection between the Isle of France and Pondicherry, lhat 
those two possessions are entirely dependent on each other; 
for without the Isle of France, there .would be no protection 
for the settlements in India; and, without Pondicherry, the Isle 
of France would he exposed to the invasion of the English from 

1 Prenlout—Z///e de France sous Decaen , Preface, p. ix. 

3 Sonnerat —Voyage aux Indes Orientates ct d la Chine , Vol. II. p. 366. 

3 Bernardin de Saint-Pierre —Voyage d File de France, Vol. I, p. *93, 




Miwsr^ 


REVOUJTIONARY PRANCE AM) INDIA 

Asia as well as from Europe'" 1 How true the last part proved 
to be in 1810! 

The news of the Revolution in France produced reper¬ 
cussions in the Isles of France and Bourbon as in all the settle¬ 
ments in India, and everywhere small groups of Frenchmen 
played the drama of the Revolution, each in their own way. In 
the Isles of France and Bourbon the extremists carried the 
day, the assembly of citizens seized all power, the administrative 
system broke down, and there was complete disorder and con 
fusion. The Commander of the French squadron in the East, 
Comte de Macnamara, was killed in November 1790 by a 
turbulent mob. Shortly after, the Governor-General, Conway, 
resigned in disgust and was succeeded by Cossigny, Cossigny 
also had no better luck. He soon got tired of the troubles in 
the Isles and wanted to be recalled. He was succeeded in June 
1792 by Malartic. sent, from France. With the new Governor- 
General also came four Civil Commissioners, Lahoucher, 
Dumorier, Lescallier and Tirol, to organise administration in 
the different French possessions in the East on the lines of the 
new Constitution for colonies decreed by the Constituent 
Assembly. In 1793 the outbreak of war lost for the French 
all their settlements in India, and the Isles of France and 
Bourbon also were practically cut off from the mother country. 
The Revolutionary Government of Paris was much too occupied 
with its own problems to think of the two small colonies in the 
distant Indian Ocean. They were thus left to their own 
resources for self-preservation. 

Under the Directory an attempt was made to draw the 
colonies closer to the mother country. In July 179b there 
arrived in the Isle of France twelve hundred troops under 
General Magallon and a small naval division. But the attempt 
to re-establish the authority of the mother country failed, 
because of the opposition of the Colonial Assembly to abide 
by the decree about the emancipation of slaves made by the 
Revolutionary Government of Paris. The economy of the two 
islands was dependent on slave labour. Besides, the emanci- 

1 Abb£ RaynaF .1 Philosophical and Political History of the Settle¬ 
ments and Trade of the Europeans in thc, East and West Indies (tr. by 
Justamond), II, p. 423. 



WNlSTfiy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


of slaves was considered dangerous for the security of 
(he small white population. Thus during the Directory regime 
the Isles of France and Bourbon continued to remain practically 
independent of the mother country. The situation changed 
under the Consulate, which modified the decree about the 
emancipation of slaves to suit the interests of the white popula 
lion of the two islands. It helped the re-establishment of the 
authority of the mother country over the islands, although the 
local assembly continued to function for a few years more, 
Malartic died in the Isle of France on the «8th July 1800 and 
was succeeded by Magallon, who retained office till the arrival 
of Dc :aen as Captain-General of all the French possessions in 
the East in August 1803. Decaen proved to be an able 
lieutenant of the First Consul, by whom he had been nominated. 
He promptly dissolved the Colonial Assembly., established a 
strong government, and by introducing a number of beneficial 
measures endeared himself to the people. 


11 . Freni h Frivaleers . 


During all this period the French of the two Isles were not 
indifferent to the great national struggle against the English. 
But distracted by revolutionary troubles and left without ade 
qitate military and naval resources for an expedition to India, 
they confined their efforts to < ommerce-raiding operations in 
Indian waters, which did not of course affect the dominating 
position held by the English in India, but nevertheless inflicted 
severe damage to their trade and commerce. They were not. 
however, inspired entirely, or even largely, by patriotic motives. 
The policy of commerce-raiding was imposed on them more h) 
the necessity of circumstances. They had to live, and being 
virtually cut off from the mother country till the Peace of 
Amiens, and not getting adequate help from her even after the 
Peace, they were forced to engage in privateering as the only 
means of survival. The prizes to be hoped for were enormous, 
since the English had obtained practically a monopoly of the 
Eastern trade during the war; while the risks involved for the 
French were nil. It was not possible for the English to maintain 
an adequate naval force in Indian waters to assure protection 
to all their merchantmen; and with ordinary daring and skill 


REVOLUTIONARY FRANCfe AND IM>lA 


it was always possible to surprise and capture richly-laden ships, 
i here was again no fear of retaliation in kind, since the French 
had no trade of their own. It is necessary to bear this aspect 
of the situation in mind, although it must be admitted that 
among the French privateers of the period there were men 
who showed extraordinary daring and adventurous spirit, even 
at moments of the gravest crisis and in the face of superior enemy 
forces. Their conduct was in keeping with the best naval tradi¬ 
tion in any country, and drew admiration even from thei 
adversaries. 

It is beyond the scope of the present work to give a detailed 
account of the deeds of the French privateers during the Revolu 
tionary and Napoleonic Wars. They lead almost like romance. 
Curious readers may turn to the interesting pages of the Les 
Corsaircs Frangais sous la Republique et UEmpire by Gallois, 
Robert Surcouf by Canat, and the Final French Struggles in 
India and on the Indian Seas by Malleson. The large majority 
of the French and Creole population of the two islands lived on 
privateering, and even soldiers and sailors of the navy often 
deserted and took to this more lucrative profession. Success 
was so certain that merchants and capitalists were always ready 
to furnish money and supplies for equipping boats for such 
purposes. The privateers generally employed small, light-armed 
and fast-sailing vessels, with just a small crew. Some of these 
boats were built in the Isles, and some were the very ships 
captured earlier. Among the most well-known of the privateers 
were: Robert Surcouf, Potier de la Houssaye, Perroud, 
Lem&rne, Malroux and Dutertre. The losses they indicted ran 
into millions of pounds, and the panic they created among 
English traders may be gathered from the pages of the Asiatic 
Annual Register of the period* 

The degree of success of the French privateers may be 
measured from the fact that from 1793 to 1797 the English 
lost 1800 ships more than the French. 1 This figure is of course 
to be viewed in the light of the fact that practically all the 
trade was then in English hands, while French shipping had 
been swept off the seas. Even then one cannot get: away from 

1 From the Lloyds Register, quoted by Malleson in Final French 
St niggles in India and on the Indian Seas , p 81 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


JSL 


Jonchision that the French, without any navy worth 
name, had succeeded in dealing a heavy blow on the enemy. 
This success was due mainly to the privateers, although after 
Amiens there was a small French naval squadron in Eastern 
waters under Linois and later under Hamelin, which also 
engaged in commerce-raiding operations. Between the naval 
officers and the privateers there was acute jealousy, the 
privateers magnifying their role and the naval officers treating 
them with undisguised contempt. 

The attitude of the privateers is best illustrated by the 
advice given bv Surcouf to the First Consul in 1803. On the 
resumption of hostilities the First Consul sought the opinion 
of the ‘King of Corsairs' about the policy by which the French 
navy could be so re-organised as to be able to cause the greatest 
injury to the English, Surcouf replied that under the existing 
circumstances privateering was the only kind of war possible 
and profitable for the French, and that their policy should be 
to avoid great battles with the English fleets, but instead to 
construct, and send out large numbers of frigates and light 
ships which would speedily ensure the total destruction of 
English commerce. 1 No doubt it was a novel suggestion, which 
promised at least a temporary success. But, be it said to the 
credit of the First Consul, he refused to tarnish the honoui 
of the nation by scrapping up the navy and confining French 
maritime efforts to the depredations of privateers, ft would 
have been unworthy of a great nation, with a glorious naval 
tradition built up by Tourville, Duguay-Trouin. Jean Bart, 
Forbin and de Suffren. 

The operations of the daring privateers from the Isles of 
France and Bourbon during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic 
Wars had a striking success, but it was only temporary. It 
was never possible by this means to decide the couise of the 
Anglo-French conflict or to weaken in the slightest degree the 
dominant position held by the English in India. In the larger 
context the operations of the French privateers had only a 
nuisance value, which, but for the distractions of the Egyptian 
expedition and the second Anglo-Maratha war, would have 
been eliminated long before the final attack on the French 


1 Canal Robert Surcouf, p. *80. 


mmr/f 


REVO LI J T IONA R Y FRANCE AND INDIA 



Isles in 1810. It was the depredations of the privateers, rather 
than feeble French projects for an attack on India, which 
forced upon the English the necessity of capturing the Isles 
of France and Bourbon. 


III. French Adventurers in the Service of the Indian 
Princes. 


Although in 1793 the French lost all their possessions in 
India, to the English the French menace continued for ten 
years more, in a different form. We have noticed already that 
after the fall of Pondicherry in 1761 a large number of French¬ 
men found their way to the courts of different Indian Princes 
and took to the profession of military adventurers, selling their 
services to the highest bidders. Most of them were miserable 
wretches, as both Modave and Bussy testified, and brought no 
credit to their nation. Some of them had military talents and 
organising ability and served their masters well; only a few 
of them showed any inclination for advancing their national 
interests with the help of their military contingents and their 
influence over their masters. None of them, however, in the 
earlier period reached that position of eminence and power as 
was attained by their compatriots in the last decade of the 
18th century, the heyday of European military adventurers in 
India. By that time the superiority of European-trained and 
European-officered infantry battalions had been so decidedly 
proved that nearly all the Indian Princes sought to enlist Euro¬ 
pean military adventurers in their service for organising such 
forces. These adventurers were of all nationalities,—English, 
French, Dutch, German, Italian, etc., but the French were clearly 
more numerous than the others. They organised large infantry 
battalions with artillery, were assigned the revenue and adminis¬ 
tration of numerous districts, and acquired great influence in 
the counsels of their masters. The commanders of these armies 
became almost independent potentates, with their own estates, 
forts and arsenals, and even displaying their national colours. 
Naturally, when they were of the French nationality, they could 
not but be viewed with great alarm by the English. 

In the last decade of the 18th century French influence in 
this sense was rising in many of the important Durbars of India. 


mts 



f ipu had in his service ; French contingent commanded by 
de Lai lee, and after his death in action in 1790, by his cousin 
de Vigie. Bin it was neither numerous nor strong, and after 
;lu fall of Pondicherry in 1793 was deprived of the means of 
receiving regular reinforcements. T his contingent soon langu¬ 
ished and became a rabble, but: its Jacobinical enthusiasm 
became naturally a source of anxiety for the English. 

More important was the force organised by Raymond in 
Hyderabad. We have noticed already Raymond’s correspond 
ence with the Governor of Pondicherry, asking for arms to 
equip his contingent and pledging loyally to the nation He 
started with a small infantry corps of 300 men, which was raised 
to 1500 at the time of the Confederate war against Tipu (1790 
1792). After the war Raymond was even allowed by the English 
to select arms from the arsenal at Madras. 1 Obviously he was 
still not regarded by the English as dangerous, although he 
raised new battalions and put in the field nearly eleven 
thousand men at the battle of Kardla in 1795. Raymond’s 
corps fought bravely against the superior force of the Mara- 
thas, and might have achieved victory hut for the pusillanimous 
flight of Nizam Ali and his peremptory orders to Raymond to 
retreat Anyway, after this battle Raymond’s advancement was 
quick. Disappointed at getting no help from the English. 
Nizam Ali ordered the dismissal of the two English battalions 
lent by the Company’s Government for his protection (counter¬ 
manded immediately after, because of the rebellion of his son. 
Alt Jah), and asked Raymond to increase his battalions, which 
at the time of Raymond’s death numbered about 14,000. For 
the maintenance of this large army Raymond was given a 
territorial assignment, yielding a revenue of 18 lakhs of rupees a 
year and including the district of Kurpa on the sea coast, which 
enabled him to communicate with the French and co-operate 
with any expeditionary force that France might have sent. 

Raymond was a remarkable man. and acquired great influ¬ 
ence at the Darbar of Nizam Ali. No better tribute could have 
been paid to him than that by Malleson: ‘ ; No adventurer in 
India ever stood higher than he did. He was brave, magnificent, 
generous, affable and vigilant.No European of mark 


Wilks —llistory of Mysoor, II, p. 62$. 



miSTffy. 


REVOl imONARV FRANCK AND INDIA 

who preceded him, no European of mark who followed him, 
in India, ever succeeded in gaining to such an extent, the love, 
the esteem, the admiration of the natives of the country”. 1 
But it is doubtful whether “the one dream of his life was to 
carry out,, by the means still open to him, the schemes of 
Dulpleix, of Lallv, and of Suffren”. 2 ft is true that all the 
officers in Raymond’s army were Frenchmen, fervent Jacobins 
like him, that they fought under the French flag and the Cap of 
Liberty was engraved on their buttons, and that Raymond 
sometimes corresponded with the French adventurers in Mysore 
as with those in Maratha service. But there is nothing to show 
that he had any deep-laid political project in his mind or that 
he had any connection with the Isle of France or with the 
Revolutionary Government of Paris. Fortunately for his repu 
tat ion, Raymond died on the 25th March 1798, six months 
before the sudden crisis which destroyed his army without a 
single shot being fired. 

Raymond was succeeded by his second-in-command, another 
remarkable French adventurer named Piron. He was an even 
more ardent Jacobin than Raymond and less tactful and pru¬ 
dent. He roused the susceptibilities of the English by sending 
to Sihdhia's General Perron, a silver tree with a Cap of Liberty 
as a souvenir and by his open profession of hostile intentions. 
Perhaps, even these moves, whatever their worth, would have 
been ignored by the English, if at the same time the French 
menace had not suddenly loomed very large by the disclosure 
of Tipu's intrigues with the French and the news of Bonaparte’s 
invasion of Egypt. The new Governor-General, Wellesley, 
decided to act before the danger clouds thickened. His first 
step was to impose a new treaty on the Nizam, requiring him 
to disband the entire force created by Raymond and to receive 
instead four additional English battalions. Nizam Ali signed 
the treaty on the 1st September 1798, partly under English 
pressure and partly for fear of the overgrowing power of Piron 
and his Trench officers. English troops were quickly moved 
in. and on the 22nd October 1798 the ‘French army’, as Wellesle^ 

1 Malleson — final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas , 
p. 244. 

* Ibid . 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


ibed it, was surprised and disbanded without a shot being 
fired. The disbandment was rendered easier by the outbreak of 
a mutiny in Piron’s force, the men clamouring for arrears of 
pay and holding their officers in captivity, from which they were 
liberated by the timely arrival of the English troops, I he 
French officers were guaranteed security of life and property and 
taken to Chandemagore, from where they were to be sent to 
Europe. 

About the same time that Raymond started raising a 
European*trained infantry force for tiie Nizam, another able 
adventurer de Boigne, started organising a similar force for 
the Maratha Prince, Mahadaji Sindhia, who was making a bid 
for establishing his supremacy in north India. De Boigne was 
not a Frenchman but a Savoyard; the force he organised fought 
under the flag of Savoy, the White Cross; and the officers he 
appointed were taken front all nationalities, including English. 
But when he retired from Sindhia’s service in December 1795 
and the command was given to a Frenchman, Perron, French 
influence became decidedly predominant, and Sindhia’s infantry 
brigades became'as much a source of anxiety to the English as 
the force under Raymond arid Piron in Hyderabad. 

De Boigne’s whole career shows that he came out to India 
not to organise an anti-English force but only to seek fortune 
in trade or in the service of an Indian Prince. He started for 
India with letters of introduction from an English nobleman, 
Earl Percy, served for a time as an ensign in a regiment of the 
Madras Native Infantry, quitted the English service and yet 
won the patronage of the Governor-General Warren Hastings, 
entered the service of Sindhia with the help of the English 


Resident at his Durbar , Anderson, and with the consent of 
Warren Hastings, stipulated in his agreement with Sindhia 
that he would never be required to fight against the English, 
joined in very profitable trading operations in Oudh with the 
French deserter in English service, Claude Martin, and invested 
a large part of his private fortunes*in the English Company s 
papers. 1 


1 It was suggested later thai de Boigne went to Paris after the Treaty 
of Amiens and became the adviser of ihc First Consul about the means of 
reviving French influence in India. Wellesley wrote to General Lake on 
the 8th July 1803: M. Du Boigne (Scindiah's late general) is now the 


WNt$r/}y 


REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 

fust entered;the service ot : Sindhia in 1784, 
entrusted with raising two infantry battalions of 850 men each, 
equipped and trained in the European fashion, and was given 
a salary of one thousand rupees a month. 'Phis force proving 
its worth in establishing SindhiTs authority in north India, 
tie Boigne was asked in 1790 to raise it. to a corps d’armee of 
thirteen battalions of infantry with cavalry and artillery, arid 
later to three brigades of 18,000 regular infantry, 6,000 
irregulars, 2,000 irregular horse, 600 Afghan cavalry and 2,000 
guns. For the maintenance of this army, a vast area in die 
Doab, consisting of 52 di tricts and yielding a revenue of 
16 lakhs of rupees (later raised, to 22 lakhs of rupees), was 
assigned to de Boigne, which he administered as a virtually 
independent potentate. The fortress of Agra-was handed over 
to him to serve as his arsenal, and he fixed his headquarters at 
Aligarh. When Mahadaji Sindhia started for Poona in 1793, 
de Boigne was left practically as the ruler of north India. But 
the turn of Maratha politics after the sudden death of Mahadaji 
Sindhia in 1794 made him feel uneasy about the future, and 
it the end of 1795 he retired from Maratha service with the 
reluctant consent of Dauiat Rao Sindhia. Finally, he returned 
to Europe with enormous riches. 

After the retirement of de Boigne his position was taken 
by Perron. This French adventurer has left some boasting 
remarks that he had driven de Boigne from Sindhia’s service 
by his intrigues. It is difficult to say how far that is true. 
l)e Boigne had personal reasons to retire to Europe with his 
immense fortunes, and, besides. Perron was in frequent friendly 
correspondence with de Boigne after the latter’s return to 
Europe. Perron first came out to India in 1780 as a common 
sailor. He deserted his ship to seek fortune in the service of 
an Indian Prince. It was not till 1789 that luck favoured him 
and he was given the command of the second brigade newly 

chief conhdant of Bonaparte; he is constantly at St. Cloud, I leave you 
to judge why and wherefore?’' (Martin -Despatches, Minutes and 
Correspondence of the Marquess Wellesley , III, p. 183). There is, how¬ 
ever, no definite basis for this statement. De Boigne’s biographer St. 
Cenis makes no reference to it. Finally, in Compton's European Military 
Adventurers of Hindustan (pp. 98-99) there is a letter from the grandson 
of de Boigne. refuting the story of de Boigne s connection with Napoleon, 


•% 

being 



MIN/Sr^ 



<SL 


IH FRENCH IN INDIA. 

v . 

raised by de Boigne. Perron soon distinguished himself in 
battle and wen the confidence of his chief by his courage, enter¬ 
prise and devotion to duty. In 1793 fie was sent with his 
brigade to accompany Mahadaji Sindhia to Poona. He fought 
bravely at the battle of Kardla in 1795 and won the favour of 
Daulat Rao Sindhia, who appointed him to the command of 
his army in north India after the retirement of de Boigne. 

Under Perron the army was increased by two more 
brigades, and at the same time the character of the force 
changed. Perron showed marked favour to French officers, 
increasing their number and appointing them to higher tanks 
in preference to officers of other nationalities, many of whom 
left in disgust. It has been suggested that Perron had a deep 
laid political plan, of creating a strong French army either to 
throw off the allegiance to Sindhia and establish French domina 
lion in north India or to cooperate with an expeditionary 
force that might be sent from France for the destruction of the 
English power in India. It is, however, difficult to say how 
far that supposition is well-founded. Whatever Perron’s posi¬ 
tion might have been with his five brigades, if he had any 
political foresight, he must have realised that the English could 
never allow the establishment of French political domination 
in north India, and that his own resources were hopelessly 
unequal in any fight with them. As for his connection with the 
French Government, it is doubtful how much about him was 
actually known in Paris. After the Peace of Amiens the First 
Consul's instructions to Decaen included establishing contact 
with Perron; hut when Perron returned to France in 1805, he 
was coldly received by the Emperor, was not consulted on any 
of the projects relating to India, and he spent his days in 
total seclusion from politics. 

Perron enjoyed undisputed power for about six years. But 
on the eve of the crisis which ended his career in 1803, he fen 
his position shaky and committed a political blunder which 
hastened that crisis. The instigation of his enemies lost him 
the confidence of his master, Daulat Rao Sindhia, and he lost 
his judgment in trying to be over-alert to preserve his own 
power. Thus, when towards the end of i8ox he received a 
summons from Daulat Rao Sindhia to send a part of his force 
10 the assistance of the Peshwa, driven out of Poona by Holkar, 


REVOLUTIONARY 1 ? RANC,E AND INDIA 

he saw in it a sinister move to deprive hint of his power, and 
delayed to obey the summons too long to prevent the Pcshwa 
from concluding the Treaty of Bassein with the English, which 
made the second Anglo-Maratha war inevitable. When the 
war broke out in 1803, Perron, deserted by many of his trusted 
French officers and anxious to preserve bis private fortunes, 
surrendered to General Lake without striking a blow. Perron's 
army simply melted away, and the bubble of the french menace 
burst at the (irst prick. Only at Assayc and Laswari did the 
European-trained battalions offer a stiff resistance, revealing to 
the English how difficult would have been their task if they bad 
allowed the Marathas more time to organise armies on the line- 
introduced by de Boigne, Perron and Dudrenec. Perron 
returned to Europe in 1805 and lived in quiet retirement on 
the immense fortunes he had amassed in India. 1 

It is not possible to give in a short compass an account 
of all the French adventurers of the period, nor is it necessan 
for our purpose, since their activities had little political import 
ance. Mention may be made of only a few others, hrimont, 
Pedron. Bourquin and Dudrenec. Frimont was the commander 
of the small French force at Chandemagore and was arrested 
during the Revolutionary troubles there. Released from deten¬ 
tion, he went to Delhi to seek employment and was appointed 
commander of a brigade by de Boigne. His death in 1795 
proved a lucky opportunity for Perron, who thus became secofld- 
in-command under de Boigne and succeeded hint after his 
retirement. Pedron. who had served under Madec, became t.h( 
commander of one of the brigades under de Boigne in 1795. 
Unlike Perron, Pedron resisted the English at Aligarh in 1803 
and was taken prisoner. Bourquin, like Perron, was a deserter 
front the French navy. After a chequered career he rose n be 
the trusted lieutenant of Perron, but on the eve of the outbreak 
of the Second Anglo-Maratha war he deserted his chief and 
went over to his enemies, in an attempt to supplant Perron iti 
command of Sindhia’s force in north India. Defeated by the 
English near Delhi, he surrendered to General Lake in 1803. 
Dudrenec was also a deserter from the French navy and had 

1 For the career of Perron, see Martineau Lc (retierctl Ftrron f gdne 
ruiiitimc ties armtrs du Grand Mogol . 




miSTffy 


^6 • G0(^ 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

served under Madecv In 1791 he entered the service of Tnkoji 
Holkar, and his infantry battalions proved their worth at; the 
battle of Kardla in 1795. In 1801 driven by the hostility of 
Fukoji Hblkar’s successor, Jaswafit Rao, he went over to the 
latter’s enemy, Daulat Rao Sindhia. and was given the command 
of a brigade under Perron On the outbreak of the second 
Anglo-Maratha war, following the example of many other French 
officers, Dwdrenec surrendered to the English to save the remains 
of his private fortunes* 

; We have given a brief review of the principal French 
adventurers in the service of the Indian Princes in the last) 
decade of the 18 th century; Via lies on and, following him, 
several French? historians alsor have tried to emphasize the poli¬ 
tical importance of* their work; The have been pictured as 
agents of France, pursuing national interests,* and providing* k 
plausible hope for the establishment of French political influence 
over a large part of India. r Contemporary English opinion’also,' 
alarmed by the^ striking successes of; Trench arms m Europe 
and the intrepidity of Napoleon Bonaparte, magnified the threat 
to the English power iri India held out by the French-trained 
battalions in the service of the Indian Princes. The letters 
and. despatches of Wellesley’ show clearly the extent of his 
anxiety caused by the presence of large French armies’ in a 
position to co-operate with any expeditionary force that might 
be sent from France. The imposition of the treaty of subsi 
diary alliance on the Nizam iti 1798 and the second Anglo- 
Maratha war were both mainly prompted by the desire to 
eliminate the French menace. 

In truth, the menace was rather exaggerated and the poli¬ 
tical role of the French adventurers magnified beyond all pro¬ 
portions. The careers of these men clearly show that their sole 
objective was to amass- private fortunes as fast as they could, 
and then to return to Europe and live in enjoyment of their 
wealth. .Some of them could save in‘five to ten years’ time as 
much as a quartet to a half million pounds. A few of them 
demonstrated their Jacobinical leanings, but none of them had 
any definite political objective of establishing French power in 
India, either by their own resources or in co-operation with 
an expeditionary force that might be sent from France. There 
is nothing to show that these adventurers had any contact or 





Wl UlST/fy 



influence with the authorities of the Isle of France or with 
the Government of Paris. Down to the Peace of Amiens there 
was of course no question of France sending an expeditionary 
force to India. But the correspondence of Napoleon during 
the Egyptian expedition and the instructions of the Directory 
show how little w r as really known in France about the position 
and resources of the French adventurers in India. When 
Decaen was sent out to India in 1803 after the Treaty of Amiens, 
his instructions included just a vague suggestion about estab 
lishing in a surreptitious manner contact with Perron. I bus 
even before the destruction of the French forces in the service 
of the Indian Princes, it does not appear that the plans of the 
French Government relating to India depended to am very 
great extent on their co-operation. 

Nor w'ere the French-trained forces in the service of the 
Indian Princes quite so formidable by themselves as appeared 
in the imagination of contemporaries, and emphasized by Malle- 
son and others They were formidable as against the undisci¬ 
plined hordes of Pathans and Rajputs, but were no match to 
the English and their veteran sepoys. They had neither the 
number nor the resources to contest with the English for supre¬ 
macy in India. They had no cohesion in their ranks either, 
and showed up their real weakness at the first sign of danger. 
The ease with which a fully armed force of 14,000 men was 
disbanded at Hyderabad in 1798, the rapidity with which 
Perron’s army melted away in 1803. and the pusillanimity with 
which most of the French officers hastened to make terms with 
the English in an effort to secure their private fortunes show', 
despite the stiff resistance at Assaye and Las war i, the real nature 
of the French menace. Even less than the privateers in the 
Indian Ocean could the French adventurers in the service of 
1 he Indian Princes shake the foundation of the English power 
in India. 

IV. Tipu and the French. 

French military adventurers and their intrigues, far from 
shaking the foundation of the English power in India, only 
succeeded in strengthening it and completing the process of its 
expansion. But for the French-officered armies of the Nizain- 




' G Cw 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

and the Marathas, even Wellesley would not have thought it 
necessary to disturb the political relations with these two 
country Powers, leaving perhaps to time the extension of English 
control over them, helped by the process of their internal decay, 
already evident The treaty with the Nizam in 1798, the treaty 
with the Peshwa in 1802 and the second Anglo Maratha war 
were all necessitated by th< determination to remove the French 
menace. Nowhere, however, was the contribution of the French 
to the expansion of the English power in India better illustrated 
than in French relations with Tipu in the closing years of the 
18th century. It is difficult of course to determine what con¬ 
tributed more to the destruction of Tipu,—his own political 
folly, or the empty hopes held out by the French which lured 
him inio the trap laid by his enemies, the English. The rela¬ 
tions between the French and Tipu during this period revealed 
a blundering diplomacy on the part of both, Tipu inviting his 
own destruction, and the French helping the annihilation of a 
Power which could have given them a base of operations in India 
when they were really in a position to strike against the English. 

After the third Anglo-Mysore war (1790-92) which deprived 
Tipu of nearly half his territories and put the English in a 
more advantageous striking position than before, Tipu natur¬ 
ally nursed a grievance against the English and looked tor an 
opportunity to recover his territories with the help of the 
French, his traditional allies and at war with the English since 
1793. He had no knowledge, however, of the situation in 
Europe, the difficulties of the French in carrying the war to 
India or giving him any tangible help, and the anarchical con¬ 
ditions in the Isles of France and Bourbon, left to their fate 
by the mother country and not possessing resources even for 
self-defence. He had a small French contingent in his service, 
but the men of this contingent also were not better informed 
about the state of affairs in France. In order to acquire great 
influence in the counsels of the Mysore ruler they gave out 
exaggerated stories about the successes of French Revolutionary 
arms in Europe and the ability and readiness of France to give 
him substantial help against the English. For four years after 
the fall of Pondicherry in 1793 this propaganda did not lead 
to any definite result, except merely keeping alive Tipu’s hopes 
about getting French help some day. How unreal were these 




WHISTfty 



REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE \M> INDIA 


hopes would be es idem from the fact that during these years 
Tipu had no contact either with France or even wnh the Isles of 
France and Bourbon, and had thus no means of knowing the 
real situation. 

Then in die early part of 1797 an accidental ship-wreck 
a; Mangalore of a privateering vessel front the Isle of France 
opened up a means of coin mu nit at ion between Tipu and the 
authorities of the French Isles. The port was then in the 
charge of Ghularn Ali, who had been a member of Tipu’s 
embassy to France and had thus some slight acquaintance with 
the French language. Ripaud, the unscrupulous French pri¬ 
vateer, introduced himself as second-in-command in the Isle 
of France and having been sent as an envoy to Tipu to concert 
measures of co-operation against the English. He also declared 
that there was in the Isle of France a large army ready to 
embark for India. Ripaud was taken to Seringapatam, where 
he was received with great honour and generosity by Tipu, 
despite the warning of some of his ministers not to take an 
unknown adventurer at his word. 

Perhaps, to pose all the better as a representative of the 
Revolutionary Government of France, Ripaud harangued the- 
men of the French contingent in Pipit's service on Revolution 
ary doctrines and ideals and established a Jacobin Club at 
Seringapatam. It had its first session on the 5th May. Ripaud 
opened it with a passionate discourse, proposing burning of 
all symbols of royalty and hoisting the tricolour flag. This 
discourse was well received, and every one swore to defend 
the Republican Constitution and to sacrifice life for the cause 
of Liberty. The men of the French contingent in Tipu’s service 
were so impressed by the patriotic fervour of Ripaud that they 
asked him to draw up a new set of laws to govern their corps 
in keeping with Revolutionary ideals and practice. I he code 
drawn up by Ripaud was based on the laws during the Reign 
of Terror in France, including the setting up of a Revolutionary 
Tribunal at Seringapatam. On the 15th May the French 
assembled again for the ceremony of hoisting the National Flag, 
which opened with a salvo of artillery. After the ceremony 
Ripaud. who designated himself as the "Representative of the 
French Nation at the Court of Prince Tipu’, and a few pro¬ 
minent members went to the parade ground where the ‘Citizen 



JJ 


• miST/fy. 


■ G °V\ 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

Prince’ was waiting for them. There was again a salvo of 
artillery to solemnise the mutual protestations of eternal friend¬ 
ship between Tipu and the French Republic, followed by the 
planting of the tree of Liberty. Ripaud made a discourse on 
the importance of the ceremony, and then asked every member 
of the Society to take an oath in the following terms, “Citizens, 
swear hatred to all Kings, except Tipoo Sultan the Victorious, 
and the Ally of the French Republic: war to Tyrants, love for 
our Country and for that of Citizen Tippoo’k 1 

Tipu, with an amazing political blindness, trusted in the 
bonaltdes of the French adventurer and decided to send an 
embassy to the Isle of France and from there to Paris, proposing 
an offensive and defensive alliance with France and seeking 
five to ten thousand French troops and twenty five to thirty 
thousand Africans. Some of his wise ministers had the courage 
ro warn him that the sending of the embassy could not be kept 
secret, and that its leakage would draw upon Tipu the immediate 
hostility of the English, with no possibility of getting any help 
from the French in time. But like' a drowning man catching 
at a straw, Tipu persisted in his determination. To carrv the 
envoys to the Isle of France Ripaud’s boat was purchased, and 
in order to keep the object of the mission a secret, the boat 
carried a cargo of black pepper for the Isle of France and the 
envoys embarked in the guise of merchants. The envoys were 
entrusted with letters for the Governor and the executive author¬ 
ities of the Isle of France as also for the Directory in Paris. 2 

Of the four pensons selected for the embassy onlv two, 
Hussain Ali and Shaikh Ibrahim, actually started for the Isle 
of France, accompanied bv a French watchmaker who had been 
living at Seringapatam and was appointed as an interpreter. 
They sailed from Mangalore on the 17th December x 797 * J ust 
before the party started, the conduct of Ripaud and his 
lieutenant, who absconded with money, created some suspicion 

1 For details about the Jacobin demonstrations, see Proces Verbal des 
seances du club des Jacobins forme A Seringapatam in Michaud's Histoire 
des Progrts et de la chiitc do Pempire dc Mysore, I pp. 251-276; a i & ° 
Cast on net des Fosses —La Revolution et les clubs dans Vlnde Frangaise . 

2 Michaud, op. cit. t I, Pieces Justifies tives—IV, pp. 277-291. 




REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 

of Tipu; but having proceeded so far he decided not 
to give up the idea of sending an embassy to the Isle of France. 
Ripaud was charged to take the envoys straight to their destina¬ 
tion. But as soon as the French corsair was on the sea he 
treated the envoys very harshly, took away all their papers by 
force to see if they contained anything against him, demanded 
money from them, and even threatened to proceed to the Bombay 
Coast instead of to the Isle of France. At last after a painful 
voyage the envoys reached their destination on the 19th January 
1798. That was the last they saw of Ripaud, with whom they 
had no further communication during their three months' stay 
in the Isle of France. 

Tipu had enjoined on his envoys the maintenance of the 
strictest secrecy about their mission, and if the French Governor 
General Malartic had the least political sense and consideration 
for the safety of the Indian Prince who sought his help, he 
should have avoided giving any publicity to it. As it was, in 
spite of the initial hesitation of the envoys. Malartic gave them 
a public and ceremonial reception, little caring to reflect how 
injurious it might prove to Tipu. The envoys had audience with 
the Governor-Genera 1 several times, in which the latter gave 
them all assurances of help. Malartic confessed to the envoys 
that they had been wrongly informed by Ripaud about the 
strength of the land and naval forces in the Isles of France and 
Bourbon and that it was not possible to send any large-scale help 
at once. But he added that he was expecting reinforcements 
from France, that he would send Tipu’s proposal to the Directory 
in Paris, and that in the meantime he could secure volunteers 
for Tipu' s service. For this purpose he issued a public pro¬ 
clamation in the two Isles, stating the object of Tipu’s embassy 
ar| d calling upon citizens to enlist in Tipu’s service, by which 
thev would be doing a great patriotic duty and at the same time 
earning high salaries. 

Tipu’s envoys no doubt realised the danger of such a pro¬ 
ceeding. hut feeling perhaps that a greater danger threatened 
them if they failed to take back with them an adequate French 
force from the Isles, they agreed to it and even allowed the 
distribution of the leaflets containing Malartic’s proclamation 
from the very house in which they were lodged. The proclama¬ 
tion, however, did not have much effect, not even a hundred 





men enlisting for Tipu’s service. Among those who did were an 
army officer named Dubuc and a naval officer named Ghapuis 
who also posed to be vested with a political mission on behalf 
of the Government of the Isles. The open proclamation calling 
for volunteers was most indiscreet and served only to advertise 
to the world Tipu’s secret overtures to the French. The Isle 
of France was frequented by neutral vessels. Copies of the pro 
< lama lion reached Calcutta and London in June 1798. and that 
sealed the fate of Tipu. 

It is difficult to understand Malartic's conduct in the whole 
affair. Either we have to attribute to him lack of the com¬ 
monest political sense or we have to suppose that he was 
prompted mainly by a desire to impress the turbulent revolution 
ary elements, who held power in the Isles, by his patriotic 
fervour, and to divert their attention by giving them a cause 
which was both patriotic and financially profitable. One thing 
is certain, Malartic never really cared for what happened to 
Tipu. Although he despatched Tipu’s proposal to Paris by 
two frigates on the 5th February 1798, 1 and although he secured 
some volunteers for Tipu’s service, his real sentiments were 
expressed in a very rude letter to Tipu’s envoys, when they 
objected to the payment of high salaries to the volunteers 
as fixed by Malartic and wanted the terms to be settled by tipu. 
Malartic wrote to the envoys that Tipu could not expect officers 
and men on the same salaries as he had paid ten years earlier, 
nor could he expect the volunteers to go five hundred leagues 
and there to be informed about their salaries. Malartic 
brusquely declared that he had ordered the men not to dis 
embark at Mangalore until Tipu accepted the terms settled b' 
him. Then he added, “We have not at all sought for you; it 
is you who have come here to seek our help; therefore you must 
submit to the conditions that I propose”. 2 That was hardlv 
the language to be used about a Prince with whom an alliance 
was in contemplation. 

Tipu’s envoys started back from the Isle of France with the 

Michaud— Histoire des Progls et de la chute de Vempire de Mysore , 
I, pp. 290-291; letter from the governing authorities of the Isle of Frame 
to Tipu. 

2 {bid, pp. « 93'*94 


misr/ty 



Ql 


REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 

. X. •r *'' y/ ^ 

ltecrs on the 71I1 March 1798 and readied Mangalore on 
the stith April. Tipu must have been greatly disappointed at 
the result of his embassy. While he was expecting a large army, 
his envoys had brought less than a hundred volunteers and 
some letters from Malartic, the Governing Council in the Isle 
of France, Sercey commanding the French n$yal forces in the 
East, Magallon commanding the troops of the colony, Cossigny 
the ex-Governor-General and Descomber, the President of the 
Committee of Public Safety, all holding* out empty assurances 
of help at some unspecified date. Even at that stage Tipu could 
have saved the situation by sending back the volunteers and 
repudiating the embassy in order to set English suspicions at 
rest. If he had thought that his overtures to the French were 
not known to the English, he should have understood the signs 
of the coming storm from the war preparations started by the 
Madras and Bombay Governments in June 1798 immediately on 
receipt of the news of Tipu’s embassy in Calcutta. 

In fact, the new Governor-General Wellesley had made 
up his mind in June, 1 as soon as he got authentic news of Tipu’s 
overtures to the French, although it was not till November that 
he let Tipu know that he knew all about his embassy to the Isle 
of France. 2 This interval he employed for completing military 
and diplomatic preparations. It was not the Egyptian expedi¬ 
tion of Napoleon Bonaparte with its potential threat to India, 
authentic news of which reached Calcutta on the 18th October, 
that determined Wellesley to move against Tipu. His course 
of action had been decided much earlier, merely on the basis 
of Tipu's embassy to the Isle of France. Wellesley’s policy was 
clearly stated in a minute in the Secret Department, dated the 
12th August 1798. 3 “The act of Tippoo's ambassadors, ratified 
by himself, and accompanied by the landing of a French force 
in his country, is a public, unqualified, and unambiguous decla¬ 
ration of war.” 4 “That he has not yet received the 

1 Martin— Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 
Wellesley, I, p. 64 (Mornington to General Harris, 20th June 1798) and 
p. 240 (Governor-General in Council to the Governor in Council, Fort St. 
George, 20th June 1798). 

2 Ibid, pp. 326-328 (letter dated 8th November). 

* Ibid, pp. 159-208 

* Ibid, p, 172. 






THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


effectual succour which he has solicited, may be ascribed, either 
to the weakness of the Government of Mauritius, or to their 

want of zeal in his cause.but neither the measure oi 

his hostility, nor of our right to restrain it, nor of our danger 
from it. are to be estimated by the amount of the force which 
he has actually obtained.” 1 

In dealing with Tipu Wellesley displayed a consummate 
diplomatic ability Although he had made up his mind earlier, 
he never gave any hint to Tipu of his suspicion about his con 
duct till November, in order to draw the intended victim more 
securely into the net and to prevent Tipu from saving himself 
by a timely repudiation of his connections with the French. 
The time chosen for confronting Tipu with a disclosure of his 
overtures to the French was appropriate for his purpose, aftei 
the receipt of news of the Egyptian expedition of Napoleon 
Bonaparte and orders from London authorising Wellesley to 
take all precautionary measures. 2 He had now both the neces¬ 
sary authority to act and the reasonable hope that the presence 
of Napoleon Bonaparte in Egypt and the prospect of getting 
the expected help at last would prevent Tipu from repudiating 
his French connections and coming to terms with the English. 
It is difficult to say whether this was deliberately planned b> 
Wellesley. Facts however fit in nicely with that supposition. 

If it was the intention of Wellesley to lure I ipu to destruc¬ 
tion, the latter simply played into his hands. When in Novem¬ 
ber Wellesley wrote to Tipu, informing him of the french 
invasion of Egypt and the English naval victory at Aboukir.* 
and later announcing that he had full knowledge of 1 tpu s 
intrigues with the French/ Tipu was even then unwilling to 
throw up the French and receive an English envoy to settle the 
terms of a new treaty. For the next three months there was a 
fruitless exchange of correspondence between Seringapatam and 
Calcutta, the English trying to pin Tipu down to the vita 
derision, abandonment of the French connection or war, and 


i Martin— Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 

» /*!(/., ' pp. 61-64. (Secret Committee of the Court of Directors to 
Mornington, 18th June 1798; received in Calcutta in September), 
a Ibid., pp. 3XI-3SX (letter dated 4th November). 

4 Ibid., pp. 3*6 3x8 (letter dated 8th November). 



tAiN/sr^ 



REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 


<8L 


about his overtures to the French, which did not deceive the 
English. Not till the very last did Tipu understand how 
earnest the English were about forcing the issue, or realise 
how imaginary were his hopes about French help. But when 
at last he woke up to the reality of the situation and agreed to 
accept an English envoy in February 1799, it was too late and 
the English armies were already on the march. The war which 
followed ended on the 4th May with the fall of Seringapatani 
and the death of Tipu in action 


V. The Egyptian Expedition and French Flans about India. 


If ihe embassy to the Isle of France started Tipu's mis 
fortune, it was completed by the Egyptian expedition of 
Napoleon Bonaparte. The advance of this daring general as 
far as Suez caused much greater alarm to the Governments of 
London and Calcutta than Malartic/s proclamation, and made 
it an urgent necessity to crush Tipu before the possible arrival 
of a French force in India. In spite of the naval victory of 
Nelson, in spite of the lack of transport vessels at Suez to carry 
a French army to the Malabar Coast, and in spite of the known 
difficulties of the overland route to India, English anxiety about 
the threat to India was not dispelled till the final expulsion 
of the French from Egypt in 1801. It is beyond the scope of 
the present work to give a detailed account of the Egyptian 
expedition under Napoleon Bonaparte. We are here concerned 
with how far it was intended to affect, or could have affected, 
India. So we shall confine ourselves to a discussion of three 
questions only. Mow far was the expedition undertaken with 
the immediate object of proceeding to India? How far was an 
attack on India planned by the Directory? Finally, how far 
was such an attack really feasible? 

As regards the first question, there is nothing to show that 
the expedition to Egypt was planned either by Napoleon Bona¬ 
parte or by the Directory with the immediate object of its 
proceeding to India. It is true that one of Napoleon's favourite 
dreams was a march to India, in imitation of the classical 
example. But when he set out from France or even when he 
occupied Egypt, he had no definite idea of proceeding to India 





tHF FRENCH rto INfil4 



<SL 


either by the Red Sea route from Suez or by the overland route. 
After his conquest of Egypt he proceeded to Suez, but his acti 
vines there show that his plan was based on a long occupation 
of the country. He aimed ai developing the Red Sea ports, 
attracting commerce and constructing ships. The measures he 
undertook in 1798-99 did not indicate any idea of an immediate 
maritime expedition to India, but only making preparations 
for it 011 the basis of a long occupation of Egypt. It is signi¬ 
ficant to notice his favourite expression in his letters to the 
Directory: "The Power which is mistress of Egypt must 
become, in the long run, the mistress of India as well”. 

It is true that, in February 1799 Napoleon addressed a 
letter to Tipu, but his only object was to establish contact 
with Tipu and to know from him his actual situation. This 
letter, which was sent to the Sheriff of Mecca to be forwarded 
to Tipu, never reached the latter, but fell into the hands of 
the English at the port of Jidda. But it is so frequently cited 
as indicating Napoleon’s definite plan of proceeding to India 
from Egypt that it is worthwhile to reproduce it in full. 
Napoleon wrote to Tipu: ‘You must already have been 
informed of my arrival on the coast of the Red Sea with a 
large and invincible army, filled with a desire to deliver you 
from the iron yoke of England. I hasten to let you know rny 
desire that you send me, by way of Muscat or Mocha, news 
of the political situation in which you find yourself. I would 
further wish that you could send to Suez or to Cairo some 
intelligent person, possessing your confidence, with whom 1 
could confer ’. 1 That was all that Napoleon wrote. There 
was no proposal in this celebrated letter of a French expedi 
non to India. Napoleon promised nothing, but merely asked 
for information, preferably through a trusted agent of Tipu 
to be sent > Suez or Cairo. The study of the means by which 
his "invincible” army would contribute to the deliverance of 
Tipu from the iron yoke of England” was obviously to be 
postponed till the arrival of Tipu’s agent and was to be subject 
to the information that he would furnish. 

In truth, Napoleon’s Eastern projects centred round two 


Charles Roux —V A ngleterre et V expedition Fran false en Egypte, I, 


P 


WNlST/f), 



REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 


Sl 


Tns, an expedition to India and a conquest of the Turkish 
Empire. During his occupation of Egypt he had both these: 
project in mind. The existence of both at the same time shows 
that he had no precise plan of action. Both the projects were 
indeed mere figments of imagination, hut the dreams persisted 
throughout his life. In 1798-99 he perhaps thought more of 
the Turkish project, but in his reminiscences at St. Helena he 
became more enamoured of his Indian dream. The prisoner 
of St. Helena recollected a plan of operations far different 
from what was in the mind of the conqueror of Egypt. In 
recalling the past, he thought that his plan was to proceed 
overland (and not by the Red Sea) from Egypt to India, reach 
ing the Indus in four months, and that there was even a defi¬ 
nite time-table,—conquest of Egypt from July 1798 to October 
1799, and then march to India from November 1799 10 Febru¬ 
ary 1800. But it is interesting to note that in his reports to 
the Directory he made no mention of his projected invasion 
of India; and also that the Directory, if it had any plan at all, 
thought only of the Red Sea route. Finally, an expedition 
to India by any route entailed for Napoleon a long absence 
from Europe, which certainly was not in his contemplation at 
the time. All his letters from Cairo to his brother Joseph and 
to the Directory show that lie was very eager to return to 
France early. 1 

As regards the second question, how far an attack on 
India was planned by the Directory as a sequel to the Egyptian 
expedition, the Directory did entertain such a project in a 
vague way. but never made any serious efforts to put into execu¬ 
tion the preliminary measures necessary for the success of the 
enterprise. The Directory had indeed decided to establish 
contact with Tipu and had selected Piveron, who had been at 
his Darbar before, for the mission. But while Piveron should 
have been sent long before the Egyptian expedition started 
from Toulon, the Directory decided to send him with that 
expedition. As things turned out, Piveron could not start 
even then. He sailed from Toulon on the 16th August 1798 
by a dispatch-boat the Celere, and then could not go beyond 

1 Charles-Roux —VAngletcm et rexpedition Fran^aise en Egypt *, I, 
HP l 75 ’i 79 


i 



THfc FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


Again, while the Egyptian expedition was decided 
upon, the Directory also took a decision to send orders to the 
isles of Eranee and Bourbon to despatch all frigates and trans¬ 
port vessels in the Isles to Suez, to reach there at the same 
time as the expeditionary force. But these orders probably 
never reached the Isles, and iri any case no French ship went 
to Suez. 1 2 On the other hand, from a letter written by Talley 
rand to Bonaparte, dated 4th November 1798, it would appear 
that the Directory had no definite plan about India, and had 
arranged nothing with Bonaparte when the expeditionary force 
sailed from ioulon. A treaty is proposed between Tipu 
Sultan and the Isle of France. The Directory is sending you 
a copy. As this document is not signed, the Directory is not 
certain what degree of trust could be reposed in the proposals 
contained therein. The Citizen Louis Monneron is starting 
with a double mission, in which he is more competent than any 
one else, to attach more closely the African colonies to the 
mother country and to follow up the treaty proposed in the 
name of Tipu. If then your eyes turn towards India, Citizen 
Monneron will not fail to help you greatly." 3 It was just a 
very vague invitation to Bonaparte to “turn his eyes towards 
India", without furnishing him with any means for doing so. 
Probably after Nelson’s victory, the Directory, unable either to 
send any help to Bonaparte or to extricate the expeditionary 
force from Egypt, fell back on the hope of Bonaparte’s pro 
ceeding to India. As regards Monneron’s mission to the Isle 
of France, it did not materialise after all. But even if Monneron 
had started, he could not have reached India in time to nego¬ 
tiate with Tipu; and even if he had reached in time, he could 
not have changed the course of events and saved Tipu. “What 
Tipu needed was not ari ambassador but effective help, and 
that effective help the Directory was not in a position to 
offer him.” 4 


1 Charles*Roux —UAngltterre et Vexpedition Francaise en Egypt*, L 

pp. 5*28. 

3 Ibid., p. 229. 

* Ibid., p. *46, The treaty referred* to was the proposal carried by 
Tipu'jj envoys to the Isle of France and forwarded from there by Maiartic 
in March, as noticed already. 

4 Ibid. 


REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 


As regards the third question, how far an attack on India 
was feasible, it is certainly not possible to give any definite 
answer. Perhaps, an attack by the land route was “nothing but 
a dream, a figment of imagination, an amusement of fancy ”. 1 
But an attack by way of the Red Sea was possibly not so unreal, 
if the French had been able to move swiftly and make use of 
the surprise factor, that often decides the fate of a campaign. 
It should be noted that the news of the French expedition to 
Egypt did not reach Calcutta before the middle of October 
1798, that till then the English fleet in the EasL had left the 
Red Sea ports completely unguarded, and that till the arrival 
of reinforcements at the beginning of 1799 the naval force 
under Rainier was extremely weak. When these things are con¬ 
sidered, it is perhaps not very unreasonable to think that if 
the French had come to an understanding with Tipu before the 
expedition started front France, and if all available ships in 
the Isles of France and Bourbon, including those of the pri 
vateers, had been sent to Suez, to reach there exactly at the 
same time as the French army under Bonaparte, at least a large 
part of the expeditionary force could have been transported from 
Suez to Mangalore in safety. What would have happened if a 
French force under Napoleon Bonaparte had been landed at 
Mangalore before the end of 1798 I s one of those “might-have- 
beens of history” which it is better to leave to speculation. 


! Charles Roux. UAnghterrr el l'expedition Fray.raise en Egypt'’. I. 

p 178. 


CHAPTER XX 


l HE LAST PHASE Of ANGLO-FRENCH CONFLICT 

I. French Hopes in India after the Treaty of Amiens. 

The Egyptian expedition of 1798 1801 had no sequel, but 
Napole on Bonaparte soon found an opportunity to turn his 
attention to India during the short-lived peace following the 
Treaty of Amiens. The Preliminaries of London, signed on 
the 1st October 1801, provided for the restoration to France 
and her allies of all their possessions and colonies occupied or 
conquered by the English in the course of the war, with the 
exception of Ceylon, belonging to the Dutch, It may be noted 
that following the establishment of French control over Holland, 
the English had promptly seized in 1795 all the Dutch posses¬ 
sions in India and Ceylon as also the Cape of Good Hope. 
Because of the strategic importance of Trinkomali they refused 
to return Ceylon ro the Dutch, although they raised no objec¬ 
tion to the return of the Cape, which was of even greater 
strategic importance, for which they had to repent later. 
Between the Preliminaries of London and the Treaty of 
Amiens, signed 011 the 25th March 1802, the First Consul made 
a few cautious approaches to find out the attitude of the English 
to the return of the French in India and their attempting to 
improve their position from what it had been before the war. 
During the stay of the English Plenipotentiary, Lord Cornwallis, 
in Paris, the First Consul expressed to him a desire to nego 
tiate with an Indian Prince for the cession of some additional 
territories to the French, to which Cornwallis replied quite 
plainly that it would be viewed with great displeasure by the 
English and might Ultimately lead to the breaking off of peace¬ 
ful relations between the two nations. 1 The matter was drop¬ 
ped. But during the negotiations leading to the Treaty of 
Amiens the French Plenipotentiary, Joseph Bonaparte, was 
instructed to press for some specific stipulations in the treaty in 

1 Prentout — L’lle de France sous Decacn , pp 9-10. 


i 


miST/fy 


THE LAST PHASE OF ANGLO-FRENCH CONFLICT 

relation to the French possessions in India, guaranteeing to the 
French their political and commercial rights, ft was an indirect 
effort to improve the French position in India. The British 
negotiators were, however, insistent on a mere return to tin 
status quo ante bellutn. The French yielded on the point, as 
they were anxious for peace and were not inclined to jeopardise 
negotiations on the Indian issue. 

Although the Treaty of Amiens did not answer to his 
expectations, the First Consul was not willing to give up all 
hopes about improving the French position in India. He was 
not inclined to take any rash step which would rouse English 
suspicions and endanger peace, but at the same time he wanted 
his agents to make secret military and diplomatic preparations 
in India which could b< utilised by the French on the next 
outbreak of war. f o him India was not sufficients important 
to be worth risking a war with England, but he felt that when 
* war would break out on other issues, the French in Podia 
should be in a position to strike an effective blow. He realised 
the danger of sending out to India a large force, which would 
at once rouse the suspicion of the English. He decided instead 
to nominate an enterprising General to take charge of the 
Indian possessions, and to give him a large number of voting 
officers, who would be abb to train up a considerable bods 
of sepoy force, for taking charge of the Indian possessions his 
choice fell on General Decaen, the young hero of the battle ol 
Hohenlinden. The importance attached to the Indian enter¬ 
prise by the First Consul was evident from the fact that he 
refused to give Decaen charge of tiie Isles of France and Bout 
bon as well, in order to make him devote his whole attention 
to India alone. 

But while the First Consul was enthusiastic about the 
Indian enterprise, there was a growing realisation in France 
about the futility of attempting a revival of french political 
influence in India. The Memoirc sur Vital Colonial de la 
France a Vepoque de la paix d’Amiens, written bv die ex 
Minister of Marine Forfait, clearly expressed the opinion that 
the French had no future in India and should realise that fact. 1 
His successor as Minister of Marine. Deeres, in his report dated 




1 Prentout--////« de France sous Deccan, p. 14. 



7th May 1802 expressed the same opinion and wanted a con 
centration of forces in the Isles of France and Bourbon, leaving 
the Indian posses, ions in their existing state. 1 Even Decaen, 
on receiving his appointment, drew up a md moire on the same 
lines as Deeres. 2 3 This general lack of enthusiasm perhaps 
explains why Decaen’s expedition did not start from France till 
twelve months after the signature of the Treaty of Amiens, with 
the result that it reached India when rumours of a resumption 
of hostilities had become current and the English prudently 
decided not to return the French possessions in India. 

ft was on the 15th February 1803 that Decaen received his 
instructions from the First Consul. He was advised to be very 
careful nor. to rouse the suspicions of the English, but to deal 
with them with tact and dissimulation. At the same time he 
was ro establish secret contacts with the Indian Princes and to 
lay down plans for any future war. He was also to try to secure 
a strong base in India, to whatever nation it might belong. 
Portuguese, Dutch or English. Bonaparte's instructions ended 
thus: ’‘The mission of the Captain General is at first one of 
observation.: but. the First Consul, being kept well-in¬ 

formed by him and satisfied with the scrupulous execution of 
the preceding observations, may make it possible for him to 
acquire one day that glory which keeps alive the memory of 
men for centuries*'.' As will be seen, the lirst Consul forgot 
this assurance later and ignored all appeals from Decaen for 
timely reinforcements Although Decaen was chosen by the 
First Consul, he started on his mission with an initial dis¬ 
advantage, the intense dislike of the Minister of Marine, Deeres. 
It was because of the opposition of Deeres that the naval force 
under Linois, sent with the expedition, was not placed under 
DecaenV control. There was increasing jealousy between 
Decaen and Linois, who enjoyed the support and confidence ol 
the Minister, and that contributed not a little to the failure 
of the French enterprise in the East. 

The expedition started from Brest on the 5th March 1803, 
The naval force consisted of one ship of the line, the Jean- 

1 Prentout — Vile dtt France Decaen, p. 15. 

2 Ibid., pp. 17-18. 

3 Ibid., p. 27. 


MiNisr^ 



THE LAST PHASE OF VVGLO-FRKNCH CONFLICT 


§L 


xques Rousseau , renamed Marengo: three frigates, the 
italante, the Belle-Poule and the Semillanle; and two transport 
vessels the Cdte-cl’Or and the Mari e-Fran foise. Decaen had 
under him a corps of 1,350 men, a large proportion being young 
officers intended to train up a sepoy force in India. I he English 
ambassador in Paris, Whitworth, promptly informed his Gov¬ 
ernment about the large number of officers being sent out. 
indicating an ulterior motive on the part of the French. 1 2 
There was also a corps of Africans recently arrived from Gua¬ 
deloupe. So anxious was the French Government to avoid 
giving any cause for suspicion to the English, that Leger, who 
had previously served at Poncliche nr) as Ordonnateur was 
appointed Prefet Colonial in preference to a nephew of Dupleix, 
who had been first selected. 

The Belle-Poule, which left, the main expeditionary force 
during the voyage and sailed separately, reached Pondicherry 
on the 15th June 1803, the other ships arriving on the 11th 
July* On the Belle-Poule were Decaen \s Adjutant, Binot, with 
150 men arid the Prdfet Colonial, Leger. Binot carried with 
him Decaen’s letter addressed to the Governor-General and to 
the Governor of Madras, authorising him to take possession of 
Pondicherry. But by the time of the arrival of the Belle-Poule 
at Pondicherry, there were already strong rumours of an 
imminent rupture between England and France, and so the 
English authorities in India decided to tactfully prolong negotia¬ 
tions with the French over the restoration of their territories 
till the receipt of more definite news from Europe. In fact, 
Wellesley never liked the Treaty of Amiens, providing for a 
restoration of French territories in India, and had expressed 
his misgivings about a possible return of the French in his 
letter to Dundas dated 28th February 1798 - The English 
Government also was in a wavering frame of mind. On the 
Vh May orders were sent out. for the restitution of territories; 
on the 17th October counter orders were sent, recommending 
delay;' and on the 16th November restitution was ordered 


1 r rent out —-Vile cle France sous Decaen, p. 29. 

2 Martin— Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 
Wellesley, I, p. 31. 

* Ibid, III, p. 7 *- 


MINIS 



again. 1 Wcllt'sicy, however, paid little heed to these orders, 
and thought only of the security of the English position iti 
India. He issued instructions to the authorities at Madras to 
receive the French well when they came to Pondicherry, to 
treat them with cordiality, but to delay the restitution of 
territories until he was in a position to send definite orders. 

That was how matters stood when the Belle-Povie anchored 
before Pondicherry. Legcr and Binot were received with every 
mark, of honour by the English Commissioner, Cullen, and the 
officer commanding the English forces at Pondicherry. J hey 
were requested to land with all their men and were provided 
with suitable accommodation in the town. On the 19th June 
when the French disembarked the officers were invited to a 
supper and a ball, and the English Commissioner even proposed 
a toast to the health of the First Consul. But with all these 
marks of cordiality, Binot was politely told by the English 
representatives that they had received no official instructions 
about the restitution of territories, that they would write to 
the Madras Government, and would hand over Pondicherry to 
the French as soon as orders came. P>inot sent Decaen’s letters 
to Madras. The Governor of Madras wrote to Wellesley on 
the 18th June about the arrival of the Belle Poule. Wellesley 
received it on the 4th July, but on the 6th July he received a 
letter from Castlereagh, dated 16th March, informing him about 
the imminence of a rupture with France, 2 So on the pdi July 
Wellesley wrote to the Governor of Madras not only not to carry 
out the restoration of territories, but also to keep the English 
forces ready to be able to take all the French troops landed 
at Pondicherry prisoners as soon as he sent orders to that effect 
or the Governor of Madras came to know from other sources 
about the outbreak of war. 3 

Binot remained quite unaware of these moves of the English, 
although his suspicions were roused by the arrival of nine 
English ships at Cuddalore early in. July, of which two came 
to anchor before Pondicherry when Decaen reached there with 

1 Martin— Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 

Wellesley, III, pp. 9 8 99 * 

2 Ibid, pp. 179181. 

3 Ibid, pp. 183-185. 




mi$TQy 


THE LAST PHASE OF ANGLO-FRENCH CONFLICT 

the rest of the French expeditionary force on the nth July. 
Decaen was greatly surprised at seeing the English flag still 
flying over Pondicherry and two English ships anchored before 
it. He was irritated at Binot’s conduct for not having pressed 
for the restitution of territories more strongly. Decaen at once 
sent the Belle-Poulc to Madras, with a letter calling upon the 
Governor to arrange for an immediate restoration of Pondi¬ 
cherry. He himself refused to land with his force as long as the 
English flag flew over the town. In the afternoon of the same 
day the Belier , coining straight from France, brought the infdJ 
niation about the imminence of war, with instructions to Decaen 
to proceed at once to the Isle of France. As it turned out, 
the timely arrival of the Belier saved the French expeditionary 
force from falling into the hands of the English. But Decaen 
was faced with a difficult situation. There were English ships 
before Pondicherry, and if the English also had received 
similar information they would certainly obstruct the departure 
of the French ships. An escape from Pondicherry in the dark 
ness of the night was just possible, provided the closest seercr\ 
could be maintained. It meant, however, leaving Binot and 
his men behind, since any attempt to re-embark the troops all 
on a sudden would rouse the suspicion of the English. Finally, 
the Belle-Poule, which had been sent to Madras, would have 
to be left behind, with the risk of its being captured by the 
English. 

But all these considerations were nothing compared to the 
greater necessity of saving the expeditionary force from certain 
destruction by a timely escape from Pondicherry. Decaen 
decided to escape with the whole fleet the same night, as he 
feared that next day might be too late. He sent secret, informa¬ 
tion to all the men on board the ships about his decision, but 
not a word to those who were on land. He could not even 
afford to send any warning to his wife, who had landed in the 
afternoon to pay a visit to Madame Leger and who. fortunately 
for her husband, returned to the ship in time. Leger, who 
had accompanied her to the ship, decided to escape, leaving 
his family behind. Binot was to dine with the English Com¬ 
missioner that night. Instructions for him were left in a locked 
drawer, and it was just before the French ships sailed out that 
a man was sent ashore with the key of the drawer. Next 

KK 




UWlSTfiy 


' G <W 





morning Binot and his men were as much surprised a* the 
English at the sudden disappearance of the French ships. The 
English were naturally disappointed that their intended victim 
had escaped so quietly. They tried to capture the BeUe-Poule 
when it returned from Madras but the French ship eluded 
pursuit and proceeded to the Isle of France. The transport 
vessel Cdte-d’Or fell into the hands of the English, but was 
released on a strong protest from Binot, there being still no 
official news about the outbreak of war. On the 6th September, 
after official news of the war had reached Madras, the English 
seized another French transport vessel, the Marie-Frangoise, 
at. Negapatam. 

The instructions left by Oecaen for Binot were simply to 
the effect that if hostilities broke out, he was to try his best 
to secure an honourable capitulation. For nearly two months 
Binot found himself in an unenviable position, apparently at 
peace with the English and treated by them as before and yet 
expecting an attack at any moment. He secretly sent agents 
to the ruler of Tanjore and also to the Maratha chiefs then 
at war with the English. The activities of these agents will be 
noticed later. At last on the 6th September the crisis came. 
The Government of Madras. , immediately on receipt of the 
news of war, sent a detachment of infantry with a company oi 
artillery under Colonel Monypenny to join the two companies 
of sepoys stationed at Pondicherry. For Binot, with his 150 men, 
resistance was out of the question; and yet when summoned 
by Cullen and Monypenny to surrender at discretion, he 
adopted a spirited attitude. He protested that he had landed 
at Pondicherrv on the faith of a treaty, and that his detachment 
should be repatriated to the Isle of France at the earliest possible 
opportunity. When Monypenny threatened that if the French 
did not obev the summons to surrender at discretion, he would 
order his troops to march in and attack, Binot gave a dignified 
reply that in that case he would spare the English half the 
distance by advancing himself with his men. 

This courageous reply produced its effect, and the English 
agreed to permit Binot to send plenipotentiaries to Madras to 
settle the terms of capitulation with the Governor. Colonel 
Mainvielle and Captain Pariset were sent for the purpose. In 
the meantime Binot :00k advantage of the short respite to 


NUN/sr^ 



make preparations for resistance, and when that would no 
longer be tenable, he planned to move out of Pondicherry a* 
night, capture the English magazine at Vilno’or by surprise, 
and then march to Tanjore, where he expected a good recep¬ 
tion. On the 10th September an English ship, the Shermess , 
anchored before Pondicherry and landed more troops. On the 
same day the French plenipotentiaries returned from Madras, 
with a refusal from the Governor to Binot’s demand for repatria¬ 
tion. The English made a fresh summons lor surrender at 
discretion. Binot offered new terms of capitulation, hoping 
all the time that discussions would be prolonged till night, 
giving him an opportunity to execute his plan of retreating 
from Pondicherry arid marching to Tanjore. The terms lie 
proposed included according honours of war to the French and 
an assurance of their immediate repatriation to Europe. To 
his surprise the terms were accepted, and he had no more 
opportunity of putting his secret plan into execution. 1 On 
the 13th September the French detachment was taken to Madras, 
from where it was seni to the Cape of Good Hope. One of the 
officers, Delohr; went to the Isle of France to give an account 
of the capitulation to Decacn. Binot returned to Europe; he 
later distinguished himself in the battle of Austerlitz and died 
in action at Eylau. 

If. French Naval Activities in Indian Waters. 

The French expeditionary force, escaping from Pondicherry, 
reached the Isle of France on the 15th August. Towards the 
end of September the corvette Jierceau brought official news 
of the resumption of hostilities and also an order from the First 
Consul, nominating Decaen as Captain-General of the Isles of 
France and Bourbon. Decaen promptly informed Magallon 
of this order, took over office from him, dismissed the Colonial 
Assembly, and set up a strong administration such as the Isles 
had not seen since the outbreak of the Revolution. After 
consolidating his authority in the Isles, Decaen turned his atten¬ 
tion to the war against the English. With the small force at 
his disposal it was out of the question to undertake any enter- 


I' A. 111s. 2233—Binot’s letter to Dccacn, 21st October 1803. 


MiNisr^ 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


prise against India, but there was a sizable naval division under 
Linois which could be employed for preying upon the merchant 
shipping of the enemy, until the arrival of reinforcements from 
Europe would permit taking (he offensive against the English on 
a large scale. With one ship of the line and three frigates under 
Linois, it was possible for the French to inflict considerable 
damage to English trade and commene, as the success of the 
privateers earlier had proved. But the timidity of Linois and 
his quarrels with Decaen ruined all chances of success and 
rendered French naval activities in Indian waters of little real 
consequence. Decaen put the entire blame on Linois, and the 
latter, disgusted with Decaen s conduct, left for Europe without 
any authority towards the end of 1805, suffering the capture 
of his two ships by the English in March 1806. The naval 
division sent in *803 thus ceased to exist. 

With the expeditionary force under Decaen and Linois 
came also Cavaignac as French Resident at the Court of the 
Imam of Muscat. The First Consul, since the Egyptian expedi¬ 
tion. entertained the idea of establishing French political influ 
cnee in the Persian Gulf (necessary for an eventual project on 
India) through the Imam. On the 14th September 1803, a 
few' days before the news of the resumption of hostilities was 


known in the Isle of France, Cavaignac started for Muscat on 
board the frigate Atalantc. By the time he arrived at Muscat 
on the 3rd October, news of the outbreak of war had reached 
there. Since the Egyptian expedition the English had also been 
trying to establish their influence in the region of the Persian 
Gulf. Thus when Cavaignac arrived, the Imam under English 
pressure refused to have any dealings with the French. 1 The 
French mission promptly returned to the Isle of France, from 
where Cavaignac w r ent back to Europe about the middle of 


1804. 

On the 8th October 1803 Linois sailed from Port Louis in 
the Isle of France with the remaining ships of his division,—the 
Marengo , the BellePoule, the Seniillante and the corvette 
Berreau, leaving instructions for the Atalanle to join him at 
Batavia after returning from Muscat. The French squadron 
was sent to Batavia to warn the Dutch of the resumption of 


Preutout— L'lle de France sous Decaen, pp. 336 3s 8 - 


miSTffy 



THF, LAST PHASE OF ANGI O-FRI NCH CONFLICT 


hostilities, to carr) orne reinforcements ol troops for them from 
the Isle of France, and also to secure the co-operation of their 
fleet for a combined action against the English, panic tlarly to 
capture the rich China convoy of the English Company expected 
to start from Canton in January 1804. Linois, however, on 
his way to Batavia attacked the English establishment at Ben 
coolen on the southern coast of Sumatra, capturing two vessels, 
burning a few others and inflicting considerable damage on the 
English. But this action was most unwise, since it warned 
the English of the presence of a hostile squadron in those 
waters, while secrecy was essential for the success of the main 
enterprise against the China convoy. On the 12th December 
the French squadron reached Batavia, found the Dutch in an 
uncooperative mood, and then sailed lor the Straits of Malacca 
to lie in wait there for the China convoy. On the 14th Febru 
ary 1804, while the French were off Pulo Aor, they sighted 27 
English vessels. It was rhe expected China convoy, proceeding 
unescorted and without any suspicion of danger. If Linois 
had not suddenly lost his judgment, he could easily have cap 
tured the entire convoy, with a cargo worth £200,000. Captain 
Dance, commanding the convoy, surprised by the presence of 
the French squadron, took recourse to a ruse which succeeded 
completely. He put up the blue flag of the Royal Navy (in 
stead of the red of the merchant marine) on three large ships 
to give the impression that the convoy was being escorted by 
ships of the line. Linois was fully deceived by this ruse and 
by the confidence with which the convoy steadily proceeded 
on its course. Believing that he was confronted by superior 
enemy forces, he precipitately fled away after a short exchange 
of fire. 1 This encounter was rightly celebrated by the English 
as a great victory'. Captain Dance was created a peer and given 
a sword of honour and a large sum of money. The English 
Company distributed £50,000 among the officers and men of the 
convoy. 

From Pulo Aor Linois returned to Batavia and was joined 
by the Atalante there. Leaving the Belle-Pottle and the Atalante 
to prey upon English merchant shipping in the Bay of Bengal, 


3 Chevalier —Histoire de la Marine Frangaise sous le Consulate et 
l'Empire, pp. 596 298; Prentout —Vile de France sous Decaen, pp. 350-354. 


THE FRENCH IN INUIA 

started from Batavia on the 4th March with tbe Sernillanle 
and the Berceau and reached the Isle of France on the 1st April. 
Although during the cruise to Batavia and back Linois hart 
captured a few vessels, Decaen was indignant at. his timidity 
and his failure to capture the China convoy. There broke 
out a. violent quarrel between Decaen and Linois. Both of 
them sent reports to France Deeres the Minister of Marine, 
was inclined to shield his prot^gi, Linois, but the Emperor was 
furious. He wrote to Dccr&s* '‘All the naval expeditions which 
have been undertaken since 1 have been at the head of the 
Government have always failed because the Admirals see double 
and imagine, I do not know how. that one could make war 
without running any risk”. I11 another letter he wrote, “The 
least reproach that may he made to Admiral Linois is that he 
put too much prudence in the preservation of his ships. War¬ 
ships are not merchant vessels. It is honour that 1 would like 
to be preserved, and not a few pieces of wood and some men”.' 

The affair of Pulo \or had such a depressing effect 011 
Linois that he completely lost confidence in himself, and during 
the remainder of his slay in the East he did not go beyond a 
few infructuous cruises. He started on his second cruise on 
the 20th June 1804, with the Marengo, the italante and the 
Serrrillante , returning to the Isle of France on the 31st October. 
A few merchant vessels were captured, but the only remarkable 
event during this cruise was the encounter with an English 
man-of-war, the Centurion (60) in the road of Vizagapatam 
on the 18th September. Linois failed to make use of his oppor¬ 
tunities and to capture the English ship, which would have 
strengthened his fleet. 8 

Relations between Linois and Decaen became increasingly 
hitter, each sending complaints to the Minister against the other. 
On the 22nd VIay 1805 Linois left on his third cruise, with no 
intention of returning to the Isle of France any more. He had 
with him only the Marengo and the Belle-Poulc . The Semil- 
lante had been sent to the Philippines to inform the Spanish 

1 The two letters are quoted in Chevalier— Histoife de la Marine 
Franodise sous le Comulat et l*Empire, pp. 299-goo. 

a Chevalier, op. cit.. p. got: Prentout —L ite de France sous Decaen, 

[>• 3 6 3- 




Linois 


Ml H'STffy 





authorities there about the outbreak of war between England 
and Spain. The Atalante was undergoing repairs, and was to 
join Lirtois at the Cape of Good Hope at the end of September. 
On the 11 th July Linois captured a large vessel of the English 
Company, the Brunswick, off the Ceylonese coast, and then 
learning that the English had considerable forces in those waters, 
sailed for the Cape. On the way Linois met an English convoy 
of ten Company’s vessels, escorted by the Blenheim (74), off the 
east coast of Africa. After a short engagement with the Blen¬ 
heim , Linois thought it prudent to sail off to the Cape. There 
he was joined by the Atalante, but it was run aground in the 
False Bay, where the French ships had anchored, by a violent 
storm on the 3rd November. On the 10th November Linois 
left the Cape with his two ships to cruise off the western coast 
of Africa. Towards the end of January 1806, learning of the 
capture of the Cape by the English, he decided to return to 
France. On the 13th March the two French ships met an 
English fleet off the Canaries and were compelled to surrender 
after a brief encounter. 1 

With the exception of one frigate, the Semillante , the 
French naval division sent out in 1803 had disappeared. France, 
starting on a fresh career of European conquest, evinced little 
serious interest in Eastern projects and practically left Decaen to 
his fate in the Isle of France. From time to time the Emperor 
showed spasmodic interest, and even laid down grandiose plans 
of sending expeditions to India both by land and by sea. But 
his enthusiasm soon cooled down, as his attention was diverted 
by a fresh European crisis. After 1803 all the naval reinforce¬ 
ments sent to the East were five frigates, the CanonnUre and 
the Picmontaiu despatched in 1805, and the Caroline, the 
Manche and the Penns despatched in 1807. After the departure 
of Linois, the naval direction remained in the hands of Decaen, 
who constructed a few* small boats and purchased for the State 
some ships belonging to privateers, 10 strengthen the forces at 
his disposal for commerce-raiding operations. There was more 
vitality in these operations under Decaen’s direction than in 

1 Chevalier— His Loire de la Marine Frangaise sous le Consulat et 
l'Empire, pp. 303-306; Prentout —Vile de France sous Decaen, pp. 366. 

367- 


MINIS, 



the earlier period. Between 1805 and 1809 the French captured 
quite a large number of prizes in the Eastern waters and even 
displayed great, courage in a few encounters with superior 
enemy forces. It will be, however, a tedious narrative to at¬ 
tempt to give an account of their activities in detail, which 
really did not affect, much the main course of the war or even 
prevent the dosing in of the English ring round die French 
Isles. 

One instance of heroic conduct on the part of the French 
was the stubborn fight given by their frigate Psyche (an 
old privateering vessel converted into a frigate by Decaen) to 
the much stronger English frigate San Fiorenzo off Gan jam 
in the Bay of Bengal on the 14th February 1805. 1 The Psyche 
surrendered, but not before covering the French flag with glory. 
We have noticed that Linois had left the AUilante at the Cape, 
ft fell into the hands of the English, when they captured the 
place in January 1806. The Semiltante on its return from the 
Philippines was attacked without success by two English ships, 
the Sceptre (74) and the Cornwallis (40), in the road of St. Paul 
in the Isle of Bourbon on the nth November 1806. Later it 
went out on a cruise, captured several prizes, and being badly 
damaged in a fight with the English frigate Terpsichore (40) 
in February 1808 was scrapped and sold to private merchants. 
Of the frigates sent our in 1805, the Canonnitre reached the 
Isle of France at the beginning of 1806. Wanting to join the 
division under Linois, it started for the Cape, not knowing 
that the place had been captured by the English. On the way, 
off Natal, it had a sharp encounter with an English ship of the 
line, the Tremendous (74), on the 20th April. When he reached 
the Cape, Captain Bourayne of the Canonniere found the Dutch 
flag still flying. But as soon as he anchored in the Simon’s Bay, 
the Dutch flag was replaced by the English, and a heavy fire 
was opened on the French ship. It was, however, lucky enough 
to escape and return to the Isle of France. Not so fortunate 
was another French frigate, the Volontaire , which anchored 
unsuspectingly in the Table B;:y on the 4th March, and was 
then attacked and compelled to surrender. The two frigates, 

1 Chevalier Histoire de la Marine Frangaise sous le Consult et 
C Empire, pp. 301 303: Prentout— L’lle dr: France sous Decaen, pp. $& 7 * 37 °- 


misr^ 



The last PttASfc oi- a xci.o- frEnch conflict ' yr ? 

tlierCqtoonni&re and the Piemoritai.se, which reached the Isle of 
France at the beginning of 1806 remained in service for about 
two years, the second being captured after an engagement with 
the English frigate San Fiorenzo off the south coast of Ceylon 
in March 1808, and the first being scrapped and sold to private 
merchants. In March arid April 1808 arrived two more frigates, 
the Manche and the Caroline, which also engaged in commerce- 
raiding operations. But by the beginning of 1809 French acti¬ 
vities were being gradually restricted by the tightening of the 
English blockade of the Isles and the strict watch maintained 
by the English on their ports. By 1810 the French were put 
on the defensive, and the inevitable crisis approached. 1 


Ill 


French Agents irt India and Decaen* s Project, of 
hwasion. 


The employment of all available ships in the hies for 
commerce-raiding operations Decaen considered as a purely 
temporary phase, the ultimate object being an invasion of 
India as soon as adequate reinforcements arrived from Europe 
From the moment of his arrival in the Isle of France Decaen 
started collecting information about the political situation in 
India, the possibility of landing an expeditionary force and the 
chances of securing allies among the country Powers. Both 
he and his Adjutant, Binot, at Pondicherry employed a number 
of secret agents for the purpose. But these agents could hardly 
go far. The situation in India had changed completely from 
the days of Chevalier and Madec, when the French could hope 
to establish a network of intrigues in the different. Darbars. 
Before 1803 all the Indian Powers had been destroyed, with the 
exception of the Marathas, and the Maratha Power was also on 
the point of extinction when Decaen arrived at Pondicherry, 
Events were moving fast, and the army of Perron in SindhiaVs 
service, on which Decaen had banked, had melted away 
months before Decaen sent emissaries from Port Louis to that 
French adventurer. The English were very much alert and 

1 For details of French naval activities after the departure of Linois, 
see Chevalier —Histoire de la Marine Frangahe sous le Consulat et l*Empire, 
PP 3 ° 7 ‘ 3 l 5 : ancl P^entout — Vile de France sous Decaen, pp. 496-505. 


mtSTfiy 



ZM .<> 


all the French secret agents were arrested. The reports that 
these agents sent to Decaen were mostly a ridiculous composi¬ 
tion of ignorance of the Indian situation and wishful thinking. 
The French agents were quite confident of large help from 
many of the Indian Princes, not knowing their real position 
and the paucity of their resources. Their letters were frequently 
intercepted by the English and served only to let the English 
know which of the country Powers had to be kept under close 
observation. One thing is certain. The intrigues of these 
French agents could not have caused any harm to the English, 
and any French attempt at invasion of India with a few thou¬ 
sand troops, based on these reports, would have ended in 
disaster. 

During his stay at Pondicherry Binot had entered into 
secret relations with some of the country Powers, and had 
set up an espionage organisation which lasted long after his 
departure from India. He received emissaries from the rulers 
of Travancore and Tanjore and from some of the Poligars of 
south India. A few days before his capitulation at Pondicherry 
he also received a Brahmin agent from Sindhia, who came to 
solicit the French to land an expeditionary force on the Malabar 
Coast, between Bombay and Goa, with a promise of assistance 
from the Marathas. Binot, on his side, sent an officer, Muller, 
on a secret mission to Sindhia’s Court, and another officer, 
Dufayel, to take up his residence at Tranquebar as French 
official agent and to send secret reports to Decaen from that 
neutral port. The first report that Binot sent to Decaen was 
through Delohr, who was sent to the Isle of France after the 
capitulation at Pondicherry. Delohr drew a very rosy picture, 
depicting the whole of India in revolt against the English and 
ready to welcome the French. On the basis of these repotts 
Decaen drew up a detailed plan of attack and sent it to the 
French Government. An expeditionary force was to land on the 
Malabar Coast, preferably at Chaul. It was then to capture 
either Bombay' or Goa, to secure a safe shelter for Fiench 
ships. To ensure the success of this operation, there was to be 
a simultaneous attack on the Orissa Coast and also a diversion 
in the Mediterranean to keep the English busy in Europe. 
Decaen felt confident of getting substantial help from the 
Marathas, and for the success of the enterprise wanted only 


WiNisr^ 



THE LAST PHASE OF vN'GLOFRENCU CONFLICT 


(si. 


thousand troops, six ships of the line, two flutes and four 
frigates. 1 

Muller had started on his mission to Sindhia’$ Court in 
July 1803. In addition to being a good painter, Muller was a 
linguist, speaking English, German and Italian with ease arid 
having some knowledge of Persian and Hindustani as well. 
With only a hundred rupees m. his pocket, all the money that 
Binot could give him, and his painting box, he went to Madras 
where he passed’off as a German painter. From there he started 
in August, and after an adventurous voyage he reached Calcutta 
at the end of September. His plan was to proceed to Lucknow 
and then to Perron’s headquarters at Aligarh. But. when he 
reached Calcutta lit heard the news of the defeat and destruc¬ 
tion of Perron s army. It was no use going to Sindhia’s camp, 
and besides, Muller had spent all his money. He gave him¬ 
self up as a French officer, was kept interned in Calcutta for 
a few years, and then sent back to France in 1807. Even in 
detention Muller kept on collecting information and communi¬ 
cating with other French agents at Chandernagore and Seram - 
pore. At the time of leaving India he could send to Decaen 
in the Isle of France a very detailed mdmoire oi\ the political 
situation in the country and the means required for the success 
of a French expedition. He submitted a similar menioire to 
Talleyrand also.* 

After getting the encouraging reports of Delohr, in Novem¬ 
ber 1803 Decaen decided to send two emissaries, Courson and 
Durh6ne, to India to establish contact with Perron and through 
him to open negotiations with the Maratha Ptirxces for a com¬ 
bined attack on the English. Decaen did not know that 
Perron's army had already melted away and that Perron him 
self was at the time an English prisoner. The two officers, 
Courson and Durh6ne, were entrusted with letters for Perron, 
Sindhia and Holkar. To Sindhia and Holkar Decaen held 
out assurances of French armed assistance and the alliance of 
the French Republic. To Perron he wrote, urging him to 


1 Prentout — Vile de France sous Decaen, pp. 37^-379. 

3 Besson —Les Aventurieis Frdngais aux hides (1775-1820). pp. 23* 234 
(for caioer of Muller). 


WNiSTfty 


A* .-_ A.A 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

ihe Maratha Prince to remain favourably inclined 
toward* an alliance with France pending the despatch of French 
forces. He made a rather melodramatic appeal to Perron’s 
ambition and spirit of patriotism, by telling him how he could 
achieve immortality by cementing a Franco-Maratha alliance 
arid sending him a medal with an engraving of the First Consul’s 
image and a brhtet nominating him to the rank of ‘General of 
a Division in the Army of the French Republic’. 

The two French officers, accompanied by one Doublet who 
had been a merchant in India before, started from the Isle of 
France on the (jth November 1803 on 3 small boar, the Passe- 
Partout, captained by the noted privateer Dutertre. They 
reached the Malabar Coast early in January 1804 and landed at 
a point between Goa and Bombay. They had instructions to 
proceed inland in Indian guise, but before they could go far 
they were detected and examined by one of the local chiefs. 
Ultimately, they reached Poona and were handed over by the 
Maratha authorities to the English, who knew all about them, 
having seized their boat and being on the look out for the 
party which had landed. They were taken first ta Bombay 
and then to Calcutta, front where Courson and Durhdne were 
released in exchange shortly after. Dutertre was detained 
longer, foi his depredations on English trade and commerce. 
The net effect of the mission was to warn Wellesley of the 
plans of Decaen. 

Another agent of Decaen, Morenas, had slightly better 
luck. Starting from the Isle of France about the same time 
as Courson and Durhdne, Morenas reached the Danish settle* 
merit of Tranqutbar, where through the help of Dtifayel he 
secured a passage to Bengal. He stayed for a time at Chander 
nagore and then returned to the Isle of France. During his 
stay in Bengal he could contact Courson, Durhdne and Muller 
and could collect much information, which he sent on to 
Decaen with the help of Dufayel. • On the 2nd April 1804 
Morenas sent discouraging reports to Decaen. The English 
had won in the recent war with the Marathas. Perron had 
abandoned Sindhia and Bourquin had been defeated at Delhi. 
The Maratha Princes had concluded treaties with the English 
and sunk into the position of subsidiary allies. Morenas at- 




MIN IST/fy 




tW LAST PHASE OF ANGLO-FRENCH CONFLICT 


tributed the success of the English to the treachery of Perron 
and Dudrenec. These two men, as also Piron who had married 
a daughter of Dudrenec, “were all at Chinsurah, three French 
men who have done more to injure ihe interests of France and 
to advance those of the English Company than the English 
themselves”. 1 2 3 Morenas still did not despair, but thought that 
there were good chances of success if Decaen came with a large 
force. 

We have noticed already that Binot had sent Dufayel to 
Tranquebar to reside there as French agent. Dufayel was 
later confirmed in his post by Decaen. with a large salary and 
instructions to subscribe to the Mud ms Gazette foi collecting 
information. Tranquebar, being a neutral settlement, was a 
convenient point of observation for the French. The English 
were quite aware of the use the French made of this oportunity. 
Wellesiey had complained to the Danish Governor Anker in 
January 1799, 2 and had sent an English agent to Tranquebar 
in December 1800 to watch French intrigues.* 5 After the Peace 
of Amiens English influence at Tranquebar became very strong 
As Morenas reported in 1805 during his second visit to Trahque 
bar, only the flag was Danish, everything else was under English 
control. 4 Finally, in 1807 after the declaration of war b\ 
Denmark following the English attack on the Danish fleet at 
Copenhagen, Tranquebar was captured by the English. The 
French lost their only place of shelter in India. During his 
stay at Tranquebar Dufayel carried on his espionage work and 
sent regular reports to Decaen, In .1804 Dufayel wrote that 
the situation in India was quite favourable for the French, 
and that if Decaen came with a force of 10,000 men he could 
land at Pulicat and easily capture Madras. Many of DufayePs 
letters were intercepted by the English and served onl\ to 
disclose to them the network of French intrigue. After the 


1 Premout— L’lU de France sous Decaen, pp. 385 386. 

2 Martin — Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 
Wellesley , V, pp. 36-40 (letter dater 18th January 1799). 

3 Ibid, II, pp. 418-419 (Wellesley to the Governor of Madras, ist 
December 1800). 

* Btsson —Les Aventuriers Francois aux hides (1775 p. *34- 

Prentout, op. cit., p. 388. 


misr/fy 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

capture of franquebar Dufay cl was arrested and sent back to 
France. 1 

From the moment of getting the earliest reports from 
India Decaen began to write pressing letters to the Minister 
and to the First Consul, outlining a plan of invasion and 
asking for adequate land and naval forces. In order to impress 
on the authorities in Paris the urgency of the situation he 
even sent successive emissaries to France. The first was his 
aide-de-camp, Barois, who arrived in France ori the 25th March 
1804.® Barois, however, found the First Consul too busy with 
preparations for an invasion of England to turn his attention 
to India. Next came Cavaignac who returned to Paris on the 
12th July after the failure of his mission to Muscat. He found 
the attitude of Decr&s with respect to Decaen’$ proposals very 
cold and that of Napoleon also nor. at all encouraging.* On 
the 8th September 1804 arrived a third emissary, Lefebvre. 
During his interview, Napoleon questioned him closely about 
the chances of success in India with so few men as asked for 
by Decaen, and expressed grave doubts about the sincerity of 
the Marathas. 4 Lefebvre drew up a detailed mimoire on the 
Indian project, which did not rouse much interest in Napoleon 
at the time. But from the beginning of 1805 there was a 
sudden change in Napoleon’s mind. In a letter to the Minister 
of Marine, Deeres, dated 16th January 1805, Napoleon sug¬ 
gested a plan of sending an expedition to India. Three 
squadrons, starting from Brest, Rochefort and Fermi, were to 
carry 20,000 French and 3,000 Spanish troops and they were 
to be joined by 3,000 from the Isles of France arid Bourbon ’ 
Deeres raised objections to the plan. When the fourth cmis 
sary from Decaen, his own brother Ren£ Decaen, arrived and 
met the Emperor in July, he found that Napoleon had by then 
completely abandoned the Indian project. The expedition to 
England was more important, and war-clouds were again gather- 

1 Besson— Les Aventuricrs FYahf&is dux Indes (1775-1820), p. 235; 
Prentblit— Vile de France sous Decaen , p. 444. Decaens letters to 
Dufayel are to be found in P. A. mss. 2256-2248. 

3 Prentout, op. tit., pp. \391-392. 

3 Ibid., p. 395. 

* Ibid., pp 398-400. 

* Correspondence de Napoldon let, X, 8279. 




imtsrff 



THE I. AS I PHASE Of A NO LO -1 REN OH CONFLICT 


§L 


the Continent. 1 Napoleon was to come back to the 
Indian project in 1807-8, after obtaining complete mastery on 
the Continent. Till then the Indian project could lie in cold 
storage. During these years Deeres deceived Decaen by writing 
favourable letters, requesting him to continue to furnish more 
details about India, and assuring him of reinforcements in 
the near future. 

The Indian project, as revived in 1807-8, was not the same 
as laid down in 1805. In 1805 the expedition was intended 
to be sent by sea via the Ope of Good Hope, still in Dutch 
hands. In 1807-8 the expedition was planned to follow the 
land route to India, through the Turkish Empire, Persia and 
Afghanistan. The basis of the plan was provided by the Treat) 
of Finkenstein with Persia, which will be noticed in the next 
section. But the project of an expedition by the sea route was 
not altogether abandoned. It was to be attempted, although 
on a smaller scale than what was planned in 1805 and only as 
subsidiary to the main expedition by land. Such combined 
attacks were deemed necessary to ensure success. On the 16th 
July 1807 Deeres wrote to Decaen, informing him of the con¬ 
clusion of the Treaty of Finkenstein and of the mission of 
General Gardane to Persia, and requesting him to co-operate 
with Gardane. 2 3 Decaen sent his younger brother again to 
France to urge the importance of an expedition b\ sea. Rene 
Decaen arrived in Paris in January 1808. and by his persuasive 
skill struck the imagination of Napoleon and revived his old 
enthusiasm for a maritime expedition. Napoleon was converted 
to the acceptance of a plan based on simultaneous invasions 
by land and sea. with an attack on Egypt as a diversion. In 
April 1808 he woke up to the necessity of improving the con¬ 
dition of the navy, left neglected since 1805, and rebuked 
Deeres for not having sent any reinforcements to the Isles of 
France and Bourbon. 1 

In reviving (he idea of sending an expedition by sea 
Napoleon did not draw up as grandiose a project as in 1805, 


1 Pientout— Vile dr France sous Decaen , p. 410. 

- 2 Ibid., p. 460. 

3 Corrrsponda nee dr Napoleon Iec, XV 11 , 1374& (16th April 1808 . 1385- 
(11th May 1808), 13872 (12th May 1808). 


THE , FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


>ut one more practicable. He outlined his plan in his letter 
to Deeres dated 13th May. 1 2 Twenty ships carrying 4,000 troops 
were to start from Lorienr in October and make for the Isle of 
France, to be followed later by another twenty ships from Brest 
with 13,000 troops. At the same time the fleet at Toulon was 
to land 20,000 men in Egypt. In successive letters to the indo¬ 
lent Minister of Marine he urged him to draw up details on 
the basis of the general plan and make all necessary prepara¬ 
tions for the despatch of the expedition. 5 On the 10th June 
Napoleon gave precise instructions: 12 ships were to start 
from Nantes, 13 from Lorient and 31 from Brest, carrying a 
lota] of 19,600 soldiers and 10,600 sailors. 3 But while even 
the indolent Minister had been stirred into activity by the 
exhortations of the Emperor, the whole plan was upset by the 
national rising in Spain. Napoleon's attention was again 
diverted to the European situation, and he never got another 
opportunity to revive his project regarding India. It is not 
surprising that faced with the grave crisis in Spain, Napoleon 
should have abandoned the project of an expedition to ndia. 
What was really strange was that he neglected to take even 
ordinary measures to ensure the safety of the Isles of France and 
Bourbon. All that was done in 1808 was to send tw’o frigates 
with a hundred troops only. For the rest Decaen was left to 
his fate. 


TV. The Treaty of Finkemiein and the Mission of General 
Gar done to Persia. 


We may turn next to the main basis of Napoleon’s project 
on India in 1807-8, namely an alliance with Persia, which 
would provide a safe land route for the march of the French 
army to India. It. may be noted at the outset that Napoleon's 
Eastern policy was never characterised by either consistency or 
clarity of vision. His ideas were always vague, taking different 
shapes at different times and containing elements entirely con- 

1 Correspondence de Napoleon Ier, XVII, 13877. 

2 Ibid., 13915 (17U1 May 1808), 13960 (22nd May), 13981 (25th May), 
14022 (29th May), 14025 (30th May). 

3 Ibid., 14078. 


WtSTfiy 



HK F AST i’HASF OF ANCf O-FRKNCH CONFLICT 


5 « 


<SL 


ry At one time he thought of an alliance with the 
Turkish Empire and Persia, directed against Russia. At another 
time he thought of an alliance with Russia* Turkey and Persia, 
directed against the English power in India. Later again, he 
thought of an alliance with Russia and Persia, directed against 
both Turkey and the English in India. Nor did he see the 
apparent contradiction iri all the three schemes. Traditional 
enmity between Turkey and Persia, between Russia and 1 urkey, 
and between Persia and Russia made it impossible to build any 
stable system of alliance with either Turkey and Persia, or 
with Russia and Turkey, or with Persia and Russia. In trying 
to use these three Powers as pawns on his chessboard to serve 
his own purpose for the moment. Napoleon could never under 
stand that these Powers also could be interested in their own 
objectives. Talleyrand, who had a better sense of diplomacy, 
realised this and warned Napoleon of the futility of an alliance 
with Persia, but all the same he could not prevent the conclu¬ 
sion of the Treaty of Finkenstein in May 1807. 

Jr is difficult to say which side made the first overtures lor 
an alliance, France or Persia. It is quite probable, as Edouard 
Driault suggests, 1 that the initiative came from the side of 
Persia, and that the process of drawing Franco-Persian relations 
closer, which ended in the Treaty of Finkenstein, started with 
a letter from the Persian Shah Fath Ali to Napoleon, written 
in December 1804, and a letter from the chief minister Mirza 
Shafi to Talleyrand, written somewhat later. Persia needed 
help against both Russia and Turkey, and naturally looked to 
the rising Power of the West for an alliance. Napoleon at first 
was not much favourably inclined, but he sent nevertheless two 
agents, Roinieu and Jaubert. to Persia in 1805 to collect infor¬ 
mation, followed by several other agents. Romieu reached 
Teheran in October 1805 and died there of illness, while 
Jaubert, who had reached Teheran in July 1806, returned to 
the Imperial Camp at Warsaw on the 8th February 1807, the 
day of the battle of Eylau. Jaubert had been preceded by an 
ambassador, Mirza Riza Khan, sent by the Persian Shah, with 

1 Driault — 1m Politique Orientate dc Napoleon : Sebastiani et Gardane 
(18061808), pp. 172-173. 


LL 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


whom Napoleon, now anxious to create a diversion on the 
south-eastern frontier of Russia, had entered into negotiations. 

On the 4th May 1807, on the eve of the battle of Friedland, 
Napoleon concluded the Treaty of Finken&tein. He guaranteed 
the integrity of Persian territory, recognised Persia’s claim to 
Georgia, and engaged to secure the evacuation of Georgia by 
Russian troops. He also agreed to supply arms to Persia and 
to send a military mission to train up the Persian army. On 
his side, the Shah of Persia engaged to break off. relations w ith 
England and declare war on her. All Englishmen were to he 
expelled from Persia, and the Shah was to use his influence to 
secure the co-operation of the Afghan chiefs in an attack on 
India. Finally, he was to provide all help and facilities in his 
ports to a French naval squadron, 1 The treaty was based 
either on a deliberate diplomatic deception or on a refusal to 
recognise patent facts. Even before Friedland Napoleon was 
already thinking of peace and alliance with Russia, which, he 
should have known, would render that part of the Treaty of 
Finkenstein nugatory which alone was important to the Persians 
and only for which the Persians could be induced to break off 
relations with the English. When after long expectation the 
Persians found out that France had no intention of honouring 
her commitment in relation to Georgia, they welcomed the 
English mission under Sir Harford Jones and concluded a treat) 
with England. 

General Gardane, selected to head the mission to l eheran. 
was given detailed instructions by Napoleon about how he was 
to prepare the ground for an expedition against India. 3 I he 
expeditionary force of 20,000 troops might either proceed over¬ 
land from Aleppo or might be carried by ships round the Cape 
and landed at the entrance to the Persian Gulf. There they 
were to be joined by Persian troops, to be trained by Gardane’s 
officers. Gardane was to collect all information about the 
countries on the border of India, study all possible routes to 
the Indus, procure necessary supplies, and chalk out a plan of 
campaign. He was to communicate with the Marathas and 


1-Gardane —La Mission du General Gardane cn Verse, p. 71. 
« Correspondence de Napoldon 1 er f XV, 12563. 


misTfy 



THE LAST PHASE OF VMH.O-FnENUH CONFLICT 


Powers and find out the amount of help that 
could be expected in India, Gardane started from Warsaw 
on the 8th June, with a large staff of military officers, archaeo¬ 
logists anti geographers. The Persian envoy, Mirza Riza Khan, 
accompanied him. It was at Constantinople that Gardane got 
the news of the Treaty of Tilsit, which filled hirn with mis¬ 
givings about the prospects of his mission. He reached Teheran 
on the 4th December and was very well received by the Shah. 
The Treaty of Finkenstein was ratified. A military and a com¬ 
mercial convention were concluded, By the first the Shah was 
to purchase from France 20,000 muskets and was to place the 
island of Karrak at the disposal of the French. 

Gardane’s mission was primarily military, to train up the 
Persian army and to draw up a plan of invading India, i wo 
of his officers, Verdier and Lamy, did very good work in train¬ 
ing up the troops under Prince Abbas Mirza, while another 
officer, Fabvier, was entrusted with establishing a foundry at 
Ispahan and casting cannons. Fabvier started work in Febru¬ 
ary 1808, and in five months he cast more than twenty cannons. 
Gardane also drew up a detailed plan of march to the Indus. 
If the land route was to be followed, the French force was to 
start from Aleppo in March, proceed to Bir on the Euphrates, 
and then to advance by way of Baghdad, Basra, Busliire, Shiraz 
and Yezd to Herat. But the road was bad for heavy artillery, 
and, besides, the English could land troops on the coast of the 
Persian Gulf. It was better to proceed from Baghdad to Urfa, 
Hamadan, Khorasan and Herat. By this route it would take 
seven to eight months from Aleppo to the Indus. If it was 


§L 


possible to cross the Black Sea and land at Trebizond, a part 
of the army could proceed via Erzerum, Van, Hamadan and 
Yezd to Herat, and another by the Taurus mountains, Teheran 
and Khorasan to Herat. The march from Trebizond to the 
Indus would take five to seven months. Herat would be an 
excellent point of concentration. From there the road to Kabul 
and Peshawar was easy. Gardane felt confident ot the assistance 
of the tribal people in the Indus region, of the Sikhs and of 
the chiefs of Sind. Success appeared to be certain, if simult¬ 
aneously with the invasion from the north Decaen could land 


WIN ISTff^ 


' Got **X 

IHT FRENCH IN INDIA 

1,500 Creoles near Bombay. 1 But the whole plan was based 
on unreal foundations. “It was nothing but a dream and a 
chimera, and the reason was simple. The French alliance gave 
to the King of Persia nothing of what he had hoped for, and 
did not even save him from Russian aggression. It soon ap¬ 
peared to him useless and odious, and before long Gardane 
found himself up against insurmountable difficulties ' 2 

These difficulties began to appear from the middle of 1808. 
At first the Shah of Persia, his chief minister, Mirra Shah, and 
Prince Abbas Mirra were favourably inclined to the French 
alliance, with the obligations it involved. In May 1808 the 
English mission from India under Malcolm was not received 
by the Persian Court. But it soon dawned on the Persians that 
the French had no intention of honouring their commitments 
in respect of Georgia, and then they naturally turned their 
backs on the French and looked to the English for assistance. 
Hostilities between Russia and Persia ceased in February 1808, 
but the Russian General wanted to impose on Teheran a treaty 
retaining Georgia to Russia. The Shah of Persia sought, the 
intervention of France and wanted Russo-Persian negotiations 
to be carried on in Paris. Pending the conclusion of the nego¬ 
tiations, there was to be a Cessation of hostilities for a year. 
But Russia refused to agree, and the French Government also 
was not inclined to offer mediation. Gardane was placed in a 
very embarrassing situation. The Persian Government lost 
patience in August 1808, and the chief minister, Mirza Shaft, 
addressed a memorandum to him in very plain language, com¬ 
plaining that while Persia was fulfilling the terms of the alliance, 
France was doing nothing to restrain Russia. The crisis came 
in September, when the Russian General threatened to resume 
hostilities unless Persia accepted Russian terms immediately. 
Persia again appealed to the French Government, but there 
was no favourable response from Paris, except empty professions 
of friendship which exasperated the Persians. Garclane was 
informed by his Government that the Treaty of Finkenstein did 
not guarantee the recovery of the possession of Georgia, and 

1 Driault -La Politique Orientate dc Napoleon : Sebastian » ci Gardane 
(1806-1808), pp. 318-319. 

2 Ibid, p. 320. 





THE LAST PHASE OF AttCLO-FRENCH CONFLICT 


that he was :o bring about a compromise between Russia and 
Persia without any embarrassing commitment for France. Tatter, 
after the outbreak of the Spanish War, Gardane was informed 
that France could not think of Persia at the moment and that 
he was to extricate himself from the difficulty of his situation 
as best as he could. 

Russo-Persiari hostilities were resumed in October 1808. In 
pursuance of ministerial instructions from Paris, far from giving 
any help to Persia, Gardane even withdrew the two French 
officers, Verdier and Lamy, attached to the army of Prince Abbas 
Mirza. That was the breaking point for Persian patience. On 
the 53rd November 1808 the Shah called Gardane to an audience 
and told him plainly that unless the French came to his assist 
ance by the end of January 1809, he would enter into negotia¬ 
tions with the English. Knowing the attitude of his own Gov¬ 
ernment, Gardane started preparations for his departure. After 
the landing of the English envoy, Sir Harford Jones, at Bandar 
Abbas, the Shah again called Gardane to an audience. Gardane 
could yet give no definite assurance on behalf of the French, 
and the audience ended in an unpleasant note. On February 
4, 1809 Jones was given permission to proceed to Teheran. 
On the 8th Gardane met the Shah and told him that he had 
decided to leave, keeping only two agents at Teheran for some 
time more. 1 

Gardane left Teheran on the 13th February. Fath Ali 
wrote a friendly letter to Napoleon on the 14th, making no 
mention of Gardane’s departure. Immediately after he entered 
into negotiations with the English envoy and concluded a treaty, 
providing the same assurance against Russian aggression which 
he had previously sought from the French. Strangely enough, 
Napoleon was angry at Gardane’s conduct. He wanted Gardane 
to remain at Teheran to observe developments, till at least he 
was driven out by the Shah. In a letter to the Shah Napoleon 
informed him that he had disgraced and dismissed Gardane 
from service for having left Teheran without permission, and 
that he would shortly send another ambassador. He also wrote 
that he appreciated the reasons which had induced the Shah 


1 They left Teheran in April 1809. 



tHK FUfcNOft IN INDIA 

to accept the English embassy. It may be noted here that the 
second ambassador from France was never sent, and Napoleon 
abandoned completely his Eastern projects. 

V. The Capture of the isles of France and Bourbon. 

The tangible result of the mission of General Gardane was 
to bring home to the English the importance of the land ap¬ 
proaches to India and the necessity of guarding them through 
treaties of alliance with the Sikh ruler of the Punjab, the Amirs 
of Sind and Afghanistan arid the Shah of Persia. English diplo¬ 
macy was successful in sealing off the entire region to any future 
French attempt at penetration. In 1809 the French retained 
only the Isles of France and Bourbon and the doubtful prospect 
of getting assistance from their Dutch allies in Java. The 
English soon undertook the expulsion of the French from their 
last possessions in the East. Not that there was any appre¬ 
hension of an attack from the French Isles, but their capture 
was necessary to put a stop to the activities of the privateers, 
who had inflicted so much damage to English trade and com¬ 
merce. In fact, the English could have easily taken the islands 
during the Revolutionary War or after the resumption of hosti¬ 
lities In 1803. The real state of the islands was not altogether 
unknown to them. It is rather surprising therefore that in 
spite of heavy losses at the hands of the French privateers, the 
English did not undertake the capture of the Isles till 1810. 
The main reasons were,—the preoccupations of the English 
with affairs in India and the unwillingness of the home Govern¬ 
ment to authorise the Company’s Government in India to 
undertake any expensive and distant expedition. 

Wellesley was the first to conceive the project of sending an 
expeditionary force for the capture of Java and the French 
Isles. In 18oo, soon after the fall of Tipu, Wellesley organised 
a force for the ourpose from the armies of the three Presi¬ 
dencies. Trinkomali was chosen as the point of concentration 
for the force, and early in 1801 Major General David Baird 
was appointed to the command. But just at the moment the 
expedition was ready to start, it was diverted to Egypt to assist 
the army under Sir Ralph Abercromby, sent from England for 




mm? 


<5* ‘ e °SN 


the last phase of ANGLO -1 RtNCH conflict 

the expulsion of the French. 1 2 Then again in July 1803, even 
before the news of the resumption of hostilities had reached 
Calcutta, Wellesley proposed to Castlereagh the plan of an 
offensive against the French in the Indian Ocean. He wanted 
the capture of two strategic points, the Cape by an expedition 
from England, and the Isles of France and Bourbon by an 
expedition from India; 9 The plan, particularly the attempt 
on the French Isles, did not receive much favourable considera¬ 
tion from the Government in London. Wellesley also soon 
found himself completely preoccupied with the Maratha war, 
and all that he could do for the time being was to approve 
Admiral Rairiier’s action in sending a small naval force to 
establish a regular blockade of the Isles. This was useful not 
only for the security of commerce, but also for collecting infor¬ 
mation about French plans and preparations in the Isles. The 
blockade, however, did not prove very effective for lack >f any 
base near the Isles, and French privateers carried on their 
depredations as before. 

Wellesley left India in 1805. His two successors, Corn¬ 
wallis and Barlow, were much too occupied with arranging a 
political settlement after the Maratha war to pay any attention 
10 external matters. When Minto arrived in 1807, he took up 
once more Wellesley’s project. One part of the project, seizure 
of the Cape, had been effected already in January 1806 by an 
expeditionary force from England. There remained the capture 
of the French Isles and Java. But Minto had to wait for two 
years on account of the financial difficulties of the Company, 
the fear of disapproval by the British Cabinet of any action 
outside India, and the necessity of counteracting French intri¬ 
gues in Persia, Afghanistan and Sind. He could merely con¬ 
tinue the policy of a naval blockade of the Isles begun in 1804. 
The naval division sent to cruise off the islands was, however, 
too small to watch the numerous ports and prevent the ingress 
and egress of ships. Moreover, the cruise could last for only 
three months at a time, the nearest port facilities being avail¬ 
able only in India and, since January 1806, at the Cape. 

1 Martin- Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 
Wellesley , II, pp. 440 450 (Wellesley to General Baird, 10th February 1801). 

2 Ibid, III, pp. 193*03 (Wellesley to Castlereagh, 55th July 1803). 




rntsr^ 



From 1808 it became increasingly clear to the English that 
their ineffective blockade served no useful purpose. They must 
have a port of call near the French Isles, enabling them 
to maintain their blockade permanently. In the early part ol 
1809 Minto was authorised to send an expeditionary force to 
occupy the island of Rodriguez, about 300 miles to the east of 
the Isle of France, and from that base to maintain a*permanent 
blockade of the Isles of France and Bourbon. Accordingly, in 
May 1809 a small expedition of voo European troops and 200 
sepoys under Colonel Keating was despatched from Bombay by 
the warship the Belliqneux. Rodriguez was inhabited by only 
three Frenchmen and 70 to 80 slaves, engaged in growing 
vegetables for the needs of the larger islands. The English 
occupied Rodriguez on the 4th August without any opposition, 
and landed large quantities of ships’ stores and provisions. The 
island was converted into a depot for the refitting and revictual* 
ling of the blockading squadron. 

The occupation of Rodriguez did not at once make the 
blockade of the French Isles fully effective French ships could 
still sail in and out of the numerous ports in the islands, and, 
as the events of 1809-10 amply showed, they could still capture 
English vessels in Indian waters. But the occupation of Rodri¬ 
guez had one tangible result. The English could now maintain 
a permanent naval watch on the Isles, and ascertain the real 
state of the French defences by landing demonstrations on the 
coasts. It revealed to them, what they had vaguely suspected, 
the real weakness of the French. Encouraged by the informa¬ 
tion received, the English sent reinforcements to Rodriguez to 
make an attempt at landing in the Isle of Bourbon and to test 
the French defences. The plan was conceived by Commodore 
Rowley, in charge of the blockading naval squadron, and his 
able lieutenant Corbett, commanding the frigate Nereule, and 
was approved by Vice Admiral Bertie, commanding the English 
naval division at the Cape. On the 16th September 1809 an 
expeditionary force of 368 officers and men started from 
Rodriguez on board the Nereide, the Otter and a Company s 
cruiser the Wasp. These ships were joined on the 18th, off 
Port Louis in the Isle of France, by the Raisonable and the 
Sirius . The naval force was under the command of Rowley, 
while Keating was to lead the troops. 


THE LAST PHASE OF ANGlO-1 RfcXCH CONFLICT 



Early in the morning of the ^ ist the English detachment, 
raised to about six hundred men by the addition of sailors and 
marines, was disembarked to the south of Point de Galotte, 
about seven miles from St. Paul, the chief town on the western 
coast. The French commandant at St. Paul, Sainl-Mihiel was 
taken completely by surprise. The batteries defending the 
town were poorly manned, and no help could be expected in 
time from St. Denis, the capital, where General Bruslys. the 
Governor of the Island, had a very small force. Saint-Mihiel 
was so surprised by the English attack that he even forgot, 
until too late, to order the disembarkation of the no European 
troops on board the frigate Caroline , then anchored in the 
harbour. He, however, put up a very stubborn resistance till 
forced to capitulate. On the sand General Bruslys, when 
informed, disowned the capitulation, but immediately after, 
unnerved by the difficulties of the situation, he committed 
suicide. By the terms of the capitulation the English remained 
in possession of St. Paul for a few days and then started back 
for Rodriguez on the 2nd October, with all the captured public 
property of the town. They also took the French frigate, the 
Caroline, with her tw r o prizes, the Streatham and the Europe , 
and a few small trading vessels. 1 

The activities of the English after the occupation of 
Rodriguez made Decaen realise that they were in earnest and 
ready for a final offensive against the Isles. Due to the in¬ 
difference of the home Government, he was left with hopelessly 
inadequate resources to offer any resistance if the English 
attacked. Ever since the capture of the Cape by the English 
Decaen had been sending frantic appeals to the Minister Decr&s 
for reinforcements. At the end of 1808 three frigates were sent 
from France, of which only one, the Vdnus, under Hamelin, 
leached the Isle of France in March 1809, the other two being 
captured by the English. In May 1809 arrived another frigate, 
the Bellone, commanded by Duperre. Affairs on the Continent 
diverted the attention of Napoleon, and no further help was 
sent to Decaen. Needing troops for the defence of the Isles, 
Decaen issued a proclamation in August 1809, calling upon 

iC. R. O .—The French in India Series, Vol. I (B. I.. P. VI, G): 
Letter from Colonel Keating about the capture of St. Paul 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

slave-holders to place a certain number of slaves at his disposal 
for recruitment irt the army. But this order had to be with¬ 
drawn because of the opposition of the European population, 
who feared a general rising of the staves it they were armed.' 

It is curious to note that although the French had a few 
ships which could have assisted in the defence of the Isles, they 
were sent out to distant parts on commerce-raiding expeditions, 
even in 1809-10 when the English intentions about an attack 
on the Isles were getting clear. Thus it was that during the 
English attack on Rodriguez and St. Paul, all the French ships, 
with the exception of the frigate Caroline, were absent, giving 
the English an easy opportunity to land troops. The French 
ships returned at the beginning of 1810, and although there 
was an obvious ground to fear a return of the English to the 
Isle of Bourbon, three of the ships, the Bellone, the Minerve 
and the Victor, under the command o'. I)upend, were again 
sent out on a commerce-raiding mission in March 1810, while 
two others, the Venus and the Manche, under the command of 
Hamel in. were sent to Port Louis for repairs. It was the very 
time when Minto, encouraged by the success of the raid on 
St. Paul, had decided to send reinforcements for a determined 
attack on the Isle of Bourbon, without waiting for orders from 
England. In M arch-April 1810 the English blockading squa¬ 
dron off the French Isles was reinforced by three ships from 
the Cape, the Iphigenia, the Magidenne and the Nereide, while 
Decaen received one new frigate from France, the Aside. 

It was in March 1810 that Minto decided on the expedition 
against the Isle of Bourbon. 3 As before, Keating and Rowley 
were to command the land and naval forces. Large reinforce¬ 
ments were sent from India, bringing the number of troops 
under Keating to 3,650 men, of whom nearly half were Euro¬ 
peans. Minto was confident of success, and <nt at the same 
time Earquh.tr to assume charge as Governor of the Isle. The 
English reinforcements reached Rodriguez towards the end of 
June. On the 3rd July the expedition started, the destination 
being St. Denis, the capital of the Isle of Bourbon. In spite 
of adverse weather the English effected landings at three 

1 p veil tout Ulle de France sons Dccaen, p. 54 ^- 

2 Counter of Minto Lord Minto in India, p* 243. 





THE LAST PHASE OF ANCI.O-FRFNCH CONFLICT 


different points on the 7th and 8th July. Colonel Saint 
Suzanne, Governor of the Isle, had under him jBo men in all, 
three-fourths being Creoles. He offered as stubborn a resistance 
as was possible under the circumstances, until forced to capi¬ 
tulate in the evening of the 8th. The island was made over 
to the English, with all the public property. The French 
troops surrendered as prisoners of war, to be transported to the 
Cape or to England. In appreciation of the brilliant defence 
the officers were allowed o keep their swords and military 
decorations. Saint-Suzanne was sent to the Isle of France on 
parole. 1 

Although the English knew about the poor state of the 
defences of the French Isles, the ease with which the Isle of 
Bourbon was captured exceeded their expectations and embol 
dened them to start the offensive immediately against the Isle 
of France also, even before news of the earlier success had 
reached Calcutta and orders had been received from there. The 
watch on the Isle of France was tightened by a naval division 
under Commodore Pym, consisting of the Nereide, the Siriits 
and the Staunch , and attempts were made to explore landing 
spots on the coast. Finally, on the 13th August a small con¬ 
tingent was landed in the Isle cle la Passe, about three miles 
from the mainland and commanding the entrance to the 
harbour of Grand Port, on the south-eastern coast of the Isle 
of France. The Isle de )a Passe was easily captured and a 
small garrison of 130 men was left there. On the 20th August, 
three French ships under Duperre, :he Bellone, the Minerve and 
the Vidor , w T ith two captured English vessels, the Windham and 
the Ceylon, returned to Grand Port. They proceeded unsus¬ 
pectingly as the Tricolour was flying from the fort in the Isle 
de la Passe and on a frigate lying off the island. But as soon 
as the French ships passed close to the island, they were fired 
upon from the fort and the frigate, both hoisting English 
colours. Duperr£ succeeded in reaching the port, with the 
loss of one prize, the Windham, captured by the English, and 
anchored in an advantageous position close to the shore and 
protected by coast battery. 

On the 23rd came four English frigates, the Sirius (Capt. 


1 Printout -If lie de France sous Decaen , p. 55U. 


THfc FRENCH IN INDIA 

the Nereid e (Gapt. Willoughby), the Iphigenia (Gapt. 
Lambert) and the Magicienne (Gapt. Curtis) to attack the French 
ships at anchor. For the French the position was desperate, 
but they decided to fight to save the honour of their Hag. 
Decat-n had just time to reinforce the crews of the ships with 
all the available seamen in the island and to strengthen the 
coast batteries. He also ordered the naval division under 
Hamelin at Port Louis, consisting of three frigates, the Astree , 
the Martche and the Venus, to proceed to Grand Port at once. 
But before Hamelin could arrive, the combat had started and 
the result practically decided. Two of the English frigates 
were sunk and one captured. The last remaining ship, the 
Pphigenia, and the garrison in the Isle de la Passe also sur¬ 
rendered on the arrival of Hamelin. The combat, which 
lasted from 23rd to 28th August, ended in a brilliant victory 
for the French. 1 2 With the exception of one frigate, the 
Boadicea, and two corvettes, the Staunch and the Otter, then 
lying at St. Paul in the Isle of Bourbon, the entire English 
blockading squadron had been annihilated. Sixteen hundred 
soldiers and sailors, including four Captains, Pym, Lambert, 
Willoughby and Curtis, had been taken prisoners. The Isle de 
la Passe had been recovered. Well might a French historian 
take pride in the achievement of his countrymen; 3 but there 
is much also in the explanation of an English historian that 
the English disasters were “ascribable to no deficiency of 
courage or conduct, but to an imperfect acquaintance with the 
scene of action, and the want of sufficiently experienced 
pilotage”. 3 

The coinbat of Grand Port seemed a turning point for 
French fortunes. While of the English blockading squadron 
only one frigate remained, the Boadicea , the French now 
possessed seven frigates, including the Iphigenie captured from 
the English. Decaen was emboldened to think of taking the 
offensive. There were two plans before him,—to attack the 
island of Rodriguez which was the base of English operations 
and to intercept all ships proceeding to it; or to blockade the 




1 Prentout —Vile dd France sous Decaen, pp. 561*568. 

2 Ibid, pp. 568-569. 

3 Mill and Wilson History of Biitish India, Vol. VII, p. 333 * 


mtSlffy 


' eo C\ 

/ 

THE I, AST PHASE OF ANGI-O-FRENCH CONFLICT 

Isle of Bourbon to starve the English garrison into submission 
and to capture the last English frigate lying at St. Paul. Ulti¬ 
mately, the second plan was adopted. But in spite of a few 
initial naval successes, the French attempt failed, as the English, 
determined to launch an immediate attack on the Isle of 
France, sent large reinforcements from India, and the naval 
force under Vice-Admiral Bertie at the Cape also arrived to 
co-operate in the attack. On the 12th the French captured an 
English frigate, the Africaine, just arrived from England, but 
soon after abandoned her to Rowley, who tame up with the 
Boadicca, the Staunch and the Otter. On the 18th two French 
ships, the Venus and the Victor, captured an English frigate, 
the Ceylon , which had on board General Abercromby sent from 
India to assume command of the expedition against the Isle of 
France. But this unexpected success was nullified the same 
day, as Rowley followed in pursuit with his three ships, inflicted 
a defeat on the French, and compelled Hamelin to surrender. 

The second action of the 18th September ended the brief 
period of hope for the French. They had failed to make use 
of their temporary naval superiority. Early in October the 
arrival of Vice-Admiral Bertie in the frigate Slisus, indicating 
further reinforcements from the Gape, turned the scale definitely 
against the French. At the same time the French came to learn 
of large-scale troop concentrations in the island of Rodriguez, 
making it clear that the English were determined to launch an 
immediate attack on the Isle of France. The danger which 
Decaen had feared so long had actually come. With his few 
frigates and less than two thousand troops in all, he could 
hardly offer any resistance to a determined and large-scale 
invasion as planned by the English. At the end of 1809 Decaen 
had sent his aide-de-camp Barois again to warn the French 
Government of the desperate condition of the Isles and to urge 
the despatch of reinforcements. BarrJ reached France in 
February 1810, but met with total indifference from the Minister 
of Marine, Deeres. The Emperor too, busy with his marriage 
celebrations, had no time to think of a few distant colonies. It 
was not till June that Napoleon thought of sending some help 
to Decaen. He proposed to send 1500 troops and four or five 
frigates. But. before the reinforcements could be sent, the plan 
was upset by the union of Holland and France in July and the 




miST/ly 



consequent necessity of sending veiuK'rccinenis for th.e protec¬ 
tion of Java as well. There followed a long delay in maturing 
plans, while the time for action was passing away. All through. 
July to December plans were drawn up and revised, but no 
help was actually sent. 1 It may be noticed here that even if 
Napoleon had wanted, it was not easy tor him to send large- 
scale reinforcements, as all the French ports had been practically 
sealed by the British navy. 

Thus Decaen was left to meet the approaching crisis with 
the resources actually at his disposal. Of the six frigates only 
one the Astree , was fit for service, the others requiring extern 
sive repairs. He had about 900 officers and men in the army, 
besides 300 marines and artillerymen and 800 men belonging 
to the National Guard. The total at his disposal was thus 
only 35,000, but even of this number a considerable part con¬ 
sisted of Irishmen (prisoners of war induced to join the. French 
service), on whose loyalty Decaen could not obviously count. 
There were no less than five suitable landing points on the 
coasts of the island. With his limited resources it was not 
possible for Decaen to arrange for a proper watch at all these 
points. 

The same event, union of Holland and France, which 
delayed the despatch of reinforcements from France, decided 
the British Government and the Government of Calcutta to 
expedite sending an expedition first against the Isle of France 
and then against Java. It was to he a joint effort by forces 
front India and the Cape. General Abercromby artel Vice- 
Admiral Bertie were to command the land and naval forces 
respectively There was no time to be lost, since it was feared 
that reinforcements might soon be arriving from France. As 
Minto wrote to his wife on the 19th September 1810. “It is of 
great consequence therefore, that we should he at Port Louis 
to receive such supplies from France, rather than Monsieur 
He Caen”. 2 We have noticed already how the chances of war 
had made General Abercromby a prisoner of the French and 
how he regained his freedom. A few days later Vice-Admiral 
Bertie arrived at St. Paul in the Nisus frigate. On the 14th 


1 prentout —Vile de France sous Decaen , pp. ,584-587. 

2 Countess of Minto —Lord Minto in India , p. 245* 


fill* LAST 1'f I ASK OF ANGLO 1 RK.VCU CON FLIC I 


o 



October he started with five ships to blockade Port I i mis. He 
arrived oft that port on the 19th. and leaving three ships there 
he started at once for Rodriguez in company with General 
Abercrornby. On the way he fell in with the naval squadron 
from India under Rear-Admiral Drury. Bertie and Aber- 
cromby reached Rodrigue/ on the 3rd November. The divi¬ 
sion from Bombay had already arrived, and that from Madras 
reached on the firh. On the 12th came the troops from the Isle 
of Bourbon, and on the 21st those from Bengal. Although the 
expected troops from the Cape had not vet arrived, Bertie and 
Abercrornby determined not to wait any longer, for fear of 
losing the favourable season. On the 22nd the expedition 
started from Rodriguez. It consisted of twenty-one' ships, 
besides transports, carrying 11,306 fighting men. 

Early in the morning of the 29th November the English 
ships appeared oil the selected point of landing*, Grande 
Have, near the northeast extremity of the island and fifteen 
miles north of the capital, Port Louis. The English ships, 
anchored in the narrow passage between a small island known 
as Coin de Mir and the mainland. It was known to be a very 
risky place for ships, because of the reefs which barred the 
entrance; and Decaen never expected that the English would 
attempt a landing there, particularly because the troops would 
have to pass through an impenetrable jungle for five miles 
before reaching the high road leading to Port Louis. He had 
anticipated an English landing at a point nearer Port Louis, 
whence the march to the capital would be easier. Thus the 
English troops landed in the afternoon of the 29th, quite 

unnoticed and unsuspected by the defenders. It was not till 

tin v had crossed the dense forest and reached the high road 
late at night that Decaen realised that his calculations had 
gone wrong* Before he could do anything the English were 

already on the march towards the capital on the 30th. The 

French fought heroically, trying to obstruct the progress of the 
English army towards Port Louis. It was obviously impossible 
for Decaen with two thousand men to resist a force of more 
than eleven thousand. On the 1st. as the English appeared 
before Port Louis, the French force retired within the town. 
The English ships also had taken up positions in the harbour, 
ready to cannonade the town from the sea. Realising that 


WHlSTffy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


her resistance would only result in great suffering for the 
inhabitants of the town, Decaen sent a proposal for capitula¬ 
tion on the 2nd December, which was accepted on the 3rd 
with some modifications. The Isle of France was surrendered 
to the English, with all the ships in the harbours and all the 
public property. The French troops and crews of the ships 
were not to be treated as prisoners of war. They were to he 
transported to France with their arms and baggages by English 
ships. Decaen’s original demand that the French frigates were 
not to be surrendered and that the French troops were to be 
transported to Europe on these frigates w r as not accepted by 
the English. Even then, it must be admitted, General Aber- 
croinby gave the French much better terms than were war¬ 
ranted by the military situation. It was partly due to a 
soldier's admiration for a brilliant defence by a hopelessly small 
force, and partly due to a desire to bring hostilities to a speedy 
end. 


With the fall of the Isle of France disappeared the lasl 
vestige of French power in the East. That it was at all allowed 
to survive so long after the outbreak of the war in 1793 w r as 
due not to the strength of the French but to the hesitation and 
fears of the English to undertake an expedition against the Isles. 
As an English historian has observed, “Thus instantaneously 
disappeared the fancied strength of the Isle of France when 
once the vigour of British India emancipated itself from the 
visionary obstacles which the selfish fears of the British Cabinet 
had opposed, and the imperfect information of the Indian 
Government had encouraged .” 1 At the same time it is quite 
permissible for a French historian to regret that “on the 2nd 
December i8io, the sixth anniversary of the crowning of 
Napoleon, the Captain-General of the Isle of France found 
himself compelled, by the neglect, of the greatest Empire of the 
world, to surrender one of its most beautiful and important 
colonies’\* For Decacn, in particular, the date of the capitula¬ 
tion, 3rd December, was specially significant. It was the ninth 
anniversary of the battle of Hohcnlinden, the most glorious 
date in his military career. 

1 Mill and Wilson —History of British India, Vol. VII, p. 342. 

2 Prentout— L/Tle de France sous Decaen, p. ( 5 10. 


597 



THE l.AST PHASE OV ANGl.O-l-RENCH CON I'Ll CT 


Decacii returned to Fiance on die and April 1811 and was 
coldly received by the Emperor. A commission of enquiry was 
appointed to examine the causes of the loss of the Isle of France, 
but in the end Oecaen was acquitted of all charges of negli 
gence. Napoleon tried to make light of the loss of the Isle of 
J ranee b\ putting in an official note in the Monileur. ft ex¬ 
plained that the capture of the Isles of France and Bourbon was 
no real loss for France. These colonies had cost. France 20 
millions every year, with which ten ships of the line could be 
constructed. The colonies could he recaptured later, after 
France had built up a strong navy in five years. In the mean¬ 
time the possession of the colonies would weaken England bs 
necessitating a dispersion of her troops.’ Well might an in 
dignant French historian ridicule this note as a childish con¬ 
solation. unworthy of a great man like Napoleon. 2 


‘ Fremont L'lle de France sous Decani, pp. G17-f»8 
2 Ibid., p. 618. 


MM 


CHAPTER XXI 




THE RETURN OF THE FRENCH 

In 1816 the French possessions in India were restored. The 
Peace Treaty of 30th May 1814 stipulated for the restitution 
of all the settlements and factories which France had possessed 
in India on the 1st January 1792. This was followed by a 
Commercial Convention, signed on the 7th March 1815. Before 
that, the Government of Louis XVIII had taken prompt mea¬ 
sures to take possession of the settlements in India. A grand- 
nephew' of Dupleix, General Joseph Desnos de Kerjean, was 
appointed to head the administration in India, and he reached 
Pondicherry on the 6th May 1815. But by that time the 
situation had changed by Napoleon’s return to France, and 
there could be no question of restitution of territories. Aftei 
the final defeat of Napoleon, the Peace Treaty of 20th Novem¬ 
ber 1815 again provided for the restoration of French posses* 
vsions in India, subject to the same conditions as laid down in 
the earlier treaty. The French were not to fortify any of tlieii 
settlements, nor to maintain troops beyond the requirements 
of police duty. They were also to recognise English sovereignty 
over the Indian possessions of the East India Company. On 
the same day w r as signed in London a Convention settling the 
details of the execution of the treaty and completing in a way 
the Commercial Convention of 7th March 1815. 

After the treaty of 20th November 1815 the French Gov¬ 
ernment made new arrangements for the administration of the 
Indian settlements. In place of the military type of govern¬ 
ment, headed by General Kerjean, which had been decided 
upon after the treaty of 1814, was substituted the old type of 
civil administration under a Governor and an Intendant. In 
April 18x6 Comte Dupur and Joseph Dayot were appointed 
Governor and Intendant respectively and also Royal Commis¬ 
sioners for taking possession of the settlements and factories in 
India. 1 Thev started from France in two frigates, the Amphi- 

1 P.A. ms. 5384 (Royal Instructions for Comte Dupuy, dated 9U1 May 1816). 


imsrQy 



trite and the L.iconic, and reached Pondicherry on the 27th 
September 1816. Comte Dupuy at once proceeded to Madras 
to settle with r.he Governor details of the procedure of restitu¬ 
tion of territories. The Government of Madras issued a pro¬ 
clamation on the 2 ist October, calling upon all English subjects 
to leave the territories to be returned to the French. 1 A second 
proclamation of the 18th November declared that Pondicherry 
and its dependencies had been restored to the French that day. 2 
Captain James Stuart Fraser was appointed as English Com¬ 
missioner at Pondicherry to settle any differences which might 
arise in connection with the restoration of territories. On the 
4th December Fraser issued a proclamation that the territories 
had been finally handed over to the French. 3 On the same day 
the French flag was hoisted at Pondicherry, and the French 
celebrated their return by a grand ceremony. It is interesting 
to note that in connection with the restitution of Pondicherry 
nothing was said on either side, unlike as in the case of the 
other settlements, about the exact, limits of the territories 
returned ro the French. 

The settlement of Chandernagore was restored on the 16th 
December 1816. 4 Denis Dayot, brother of Joseph Dayot took 
possession of the settlement from Gordon Forbes, representing 
the Governor-General. Along with the principal settlement, the 
French were also entitled under the terms of the treaties and 
conventions of 1814 and 1815 to take possession of the subor 
dinate factories at Kasimbazar, Dacca. Jougdia, Patna and 
Balasore. The French Government was af first inclined to 
attacTi some importance to their recovery, arid even sent out 
Chiefs to take charge of these minor trading posts. Bui when 
it appeared that the old buildings were completely in ruins 
and that the administrative costs would far exceed the profits 
from the small amount of trade that could be carried on there, 
the French abandoned the idea of taking possession of these 
factories. Only the factory at Balasore was occupied for a 
short period. 5 On the 14th January 1817 Comte de Beranger 
took possession of Karikal with all its dependencies from the 


1 P.A. ms. 5593. 
3 Ibid., ms. 5409. 
5 Ibid., ms. 6340. 


2 Ibid., ms. 5400. 
4 Ibid., ms. 6272. 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 




Collector of Tanjore, John Thackeray. 1 Mahe was restored to 
the French on the 22nd January 1817. The Captain of the 
Amphitrite, Philibert, took possession of the settlement from 
Vaughan, Collector of Malabar. In the case of this settlement 
only there was some dispute between the parties, the French 
claiming targe territories which ihey possessed in 1792, by virtue 
of the cessions made by Tipu and by the neighbouring Nayar 
Princes, and the English refusing to hand over anything more 
than the town of Mahe 3 . The factory at Calicut was restored 
on the 1st February 1819 and that at Surat, in June 1819. 
Finally, the. settlement of Yanani and the factory at Masuli- 
patatn were also returned to the French early in 1817. 

The French could at last return to India after nearly a 
quarter of a century. But they came back under circumstances 
altogether different from what had existed in 1792. By the 
clear stipulations of the treaties of 1814 and 1815, relating to 
fortifications and maintenance of troops, their settlements in 
fndia ceased to have any political importance whatsoever. The 
dreams of Dupleix completely faded away, as the French had 
to accept the new situation, in which there was not the least 
possibility of a political rivalry with the English. The French 
possessions in India were to remain as a few small, scattered 
and undefended territories, lying entirely at the mercy of the 
English'; It was, however, not only the military stipulations of 
the treaties of 1814 and 1815 which altered the position of the 
French. What was equally or perhaps more important was the 
change in the political situation in India during the interval 
from 1793 to 181b, brought about by the rapid expansion and 
consolidation of English power over almost the entire sub-con¬ 
tinent. The territories under direct English rule had increased 
beyond all recognition, and all the Indian Powers with whom 
the French had maintained diplomatic contacts before had been 
brought into the system of Subsidiary Alliance established by 
Wellesley. By the time the French came back to India in 
1816, the English position had become so firmly consolidated 
that not even the boldest optimist among the French could 
dream of shaking it. Indeed, it was only because the French 
realised this fact and agreed to accept their new situation as 


1 P. A. ms. 6349. 


2 Ibid., ms. 6636. 


mtSTfiy 





final that their few scattered and undefended possessions were 
allowed to survive till the end of the British rule in India. 
Again, it was the realisation of the futility of holding on to a 
few isolated pockets against the will of the new Government 
of independent India, inheriting the position, and treaty rights 
of the earlier Government, that led to the final departure of 
ihe French and the transfer of their possessions to the Indian 
Union. 

# # * 

With the return of the French in 1816 ends the long story 
of Anglo-French rivalry in India narrated in the preceding 
pages. If the task of the historian be merely to tell the story, 
nothing further need be said. But perhaps at this point a few 
observations on the historical importance of the subject matter 
of the story may not be wholly out of place and considered as 
an infliction on readers. The real importance of the Anglo- 
French rivalry in the 18th century lay in the new turn it gave to 
India's political destiny. Ihe prolonged struggle for power 
between two European nations was mainly instrumental hi 
bringing India into dose contact with the West, with all the 
consequences which followed from it. One of these conse¬ 
quences, the political domination of India by a European 
Power, had absorbed the attention of historians and politicians 
so much that other results of the contact, historically more 
significant and durable, were frequently overlooked. Perhaps, 
this was inevitable, as long as India remained under foreign 
political subjection. Now that the chapter of Western domi¬ 
nation, after all a very short one in the context of India’s long 
history, has come to a close, and both the nations who fought 
for supremacy in India have been forced by circumstances to 
leave the scene of their earlier conflict, it is possible for us to 
take a more balanced view of the results of India's contact with 
the West. That is why me time is now appropriate to re tell 
the story of Anglo-French rivalry in India, not as an isolated 
event, but as the starting point of that historical process through 
which India could become a part of the ONE WORLD. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Unp'U blished Records 

The largest collection of unpublished records relating to 
the history of the French in India is to be found in the 
Archives du M mist ere des Colonies (Archives Nation ales). Paris, 
consisting of more than three hundred Registers. Of these the 
following are of interest for the period 1763 to 1816: 

(i) C 2 —48 to §5 (Compagnie des Indes, organisation, 
administration eti Fiance, 1764—1779); 56 (Indes 
Orientates, commerce, 1686—1788); 58—59 (Legisla¬ 
tion de la Compagnie des Indes, 1701—1776 and 
1778—1791); 105—100 (Chute et suppression de la 
Compagnie de.s Indes, 1763—1771); 107—110 (Projet 
d’une nouvelle Compagnie des Indes, M^moires, 
1771—1783); li? (Legislation de la Compagnie des 
Indes et nouvelle Compagnie, 1742—1776; 1785— 
1789); 113 (Commerce, projet d’une nouvelle com- 
pagnie, 1784—1785); 114 (Nouvelle Compagnie et 
commerce des Indes Orientales, 1785—1814); 243 
(liquidation de l’ancierme compagnie, 1794); 246— 
251 (administration en France, 1770—1793); 287, 290 
(Uegistre des deliberations et r&glements concernam 
les arinements de la Compagnie des Indes). 

(ii) Correspondance G<£*n6rale: C 2 —98 to 101 (1763— 

1770); 118—131, 135—152, 15 5—163, 160— 190 

(1771—1789). 

(iii) Correspondance Generate, sme S6rie: C 2 —208 to 
240 (1766—1791); 242 (1792—1794). 

(iv) Copies des lettres au Ministre. C*—257 to 260, 263 
—264, 267—268 (1773—1787). 

(v) Mimoires G6n£raux: C 2 —117, 153, 164—>165, 244— 
*45 (1763— 179 «)- 

(vi) Miscellaneous Correspondence: C 2 —252 to 254, 256, 
265—266, 291—299. 

(vii) S£rie B—215, 219, 224, 236—238, 252. 259, 265 (Inde 
Im&rieur, 1789—1808); 214, 218, 235, 251, 264 (lie 
de France et Reunion, 1789—1808). 



(viit) Me mo ires et Correspondance: C 2 —304 to 309 (1794 


—1808). 

In the Archives du Mini si eve de la.Marine (A.N.) are to be 
found papers rating to French naval activities in Indian 
waters. Fhe following volumes in Serie—B4 (Champagnes) are 
of particular interest: 150 (Coinbat livre devant Gondelour le 
jo aotit 1778); 196 (Prise de Chuudernagor le 18 juillet 1778— 
Capitulation de Pondichery le 17 oct. 1778—Extrait du Jour¬ 
nal de ML d'Orves, 1780—-8i); 197 (Journal du floras —Let ties 
anglaises sur la campagne de Suffren—Lettres du Marquis de 
Castries k Suffren); 198 (Champagne de Sulfren: Journaux de 
bold, Correspondance, Mimoires et Ordres—Combat de la 
Praya le *6 avril 1781—Division commandee par M. de Tron- 
joli); 207 (Champagne de Suffren, 1782: Combats des 17 fevrier, 
12 avril, f) juillet—Capitulation de Trinquemale le 31 aout— 
Combat du 3 sept.); 268 (Combat livre par Suffren le 20 juin 
178 j—Combats soutenus par Its troupes Franca is de Gondeloui 
en juin 1783—Prise de Trinquemale—Combat naval du 3 sept. 
1782—Sur la conclusion de la paix). 

Among the records of the Mini stir e de la Guerre> the 
following are of interest to us: 

(i) A 1 —3738 (Relations des combats entre les Franca is 
et les Anglais aux Indes, 1778—^1783). 

—3764 (Indes Orientales. Affaires Di verses, 1784— 
1788). 

—3785 (Ibid. Correspondance). 

(ii) Affaires de Vlnde—Con XLII, XIJV XLIX. LXV. 

Among the records of the Minist^re des Affaires Etrangeres, 
of particular interest is the series Asie : Mdmoires et Documents . 

In the Biblioth&que Rationale (Departement des Manus- 
crits) also there is a large mass of documents relating to tfhe 
history of the French in India. Of particular interest for us 
are the following: 

N. A. 9365—Correspondance de Law de Lauriston. 1762— 
1776. 

9366—Correspondance de Chevalier et Duprat, 1769— 
1776. 

9368— Correspondance de Bellecoinbe et de Piveron de 
Morlat, 1775—1783. 

9369— Relation du si£ge de Pondichery, 1778. 


miSTffy. 



937 °- 


i 2093 


ftlBtlOCftAPMV 

Relation de la campagne navale du Bail!i de 
Suffren (redige par le Chapehiin du Vengeur 
dapres les journaux cle bord, 1781—1784). 

9371— Campagne navale du Bailli cle Suffren (Par M. 
de Froberville, Lieutenant d'une Cortipagnie 
embarquee sur VAjox); memoir es stir la guerre 
dans Linde, 1781—1783. 

9372— (Sorresppndance de Hussy, 1781—1785. 

9373 — Correspond a nee: Conway, Cossigny, de Fresno 
(1785—1793). 

9374— Rapport de Chapuis envoyc par Malar tic aupres 
de Tippoo-Sultan (1801). 

94 ssf —Escadre de LJnde: D’Orves et Suffren, 1780— 
1784. 

943«—Campagne cle Suffren dans Linde; rapports, 
journaux de bord, leu res, rEcits de combat. 

9434 —Ca politique Fran^aise dans llnde: Lippoo 
Sahib, Evacuation de Pondichery, 1788—1789. 

9449 —Journal de la campagne du vaisseau le i'end-ant 
(1781—82). 

5072— Documents sur Lad ministration fran^aise dans 
Linde. 

5073- --Documents relatifs a Lexecution du traitc* de 

patx, 1783. 

-Correspond ancc du Comte Duprat, 1773—1774. 
-Meinoire sur Linde (Duval de L.erry), apres 17113. 
-Memoire et reflexions sur les negotiations avec 
les Marathes et particulierement sur celle dont a 
Ete charge M. de Mohtigny, 1784; miscellaneous 
memoires on Indian Powers. 


3 <> 59 ~ 

59 - 


In the old Pondicherry Archives also there was a very good 
collection of documents relating to our subject, partly originals 
and partly copies made in the 18th and 19th centuries. The 
special importance of the Pondicherry Archives was that all 
the old records (prior to 1816) of the various French Settle 
ments and Factories in India had been gathered at one place, 
thus making access to them much easier for students of history. 
Unfortunately, the entire collection was taken to France at the 
time of the transfer of the French Settlements to the Indian 


felftLidcftAPliV 

(irsr complete Inventaire of the Pondicherry 
x ecords, useful to scholars, was made by Martincau in 1914. 
Later an even more useful work was done by Gaudart, who 
made an admirable Catalogue of the large mass of old 
manuscripts, i his Catalogue, published in eight volumes by 
he Socidld de l Hist oi re de 11 tide Fvon guise, Pondicherry, is 
indeed of inestimable value to every one interested in the 
history of the French in India. Curiously enough, few of the 
records in the Pondicherry collection relate to the period before 
1765. and thus those who are interested in the beginnings of 
the French Settlements and the most dramatic phase of Anglo- 
French rivalry in India could find practically nothing there. 
On the other hand, nearly five-sixths of the Pondicherry records 
deal with the period 1765 to 1816. In fact, for this particular 
period the collection of manuscripts at Pondicherry was almost 
complete for a detailed study, with only a few important gaps, 
fhus, for the present work, undertaken long before the trans¬ 
fer of the Archives to France, Pondicherry records supplied 
the major part of the materials, only supplemented at places 
by records preserved in other Archives. 

If is hardly possible to give here a detailed reference to all 
the relevant records in the old Pondicherry Archives. Fuller 
and specific references have been given in the foot-notes of the 
text. All that: is necessary here is to indicate broadly the 
subjects covered by the records in the Pondicherry collection. 
That will at least show the extent of materials which were 
available there and the major gaps that had to be filled up 
from other sources. 

(i) the restitution of French Settlements and Factories 
in India in 1765; their internal history, administra¬ 
tion. defence, commerce etc.; relations with the 
Indian Powers and the English; capture by the 
English in 1778-79. 

with the Indian Powers. * 

(ii) 1 he same for the period 1785 to 1793; no records, 
however, about the Isles of France and Bourbon, 
and of the Commandants of the different Settlements 

(iii) Anglo-French commercial disputes. 

(iv) Correspondence of the Governors of Pondicherry 





BlftLldoftAt*MY 




(v) Political memoires and projects for reviving French 
influence in India. 

(vi) the war of 1778—1783 and the eighteen months’ 
negotiations in India for the execution of the Peace 
treaty; correspondence of hussy with the Ministers 
in France, de Suffren, Macartney, Indian Princes 
and French agents at various Darbars; no records, 
however, about the naval actions of de Suffren. 

(vii) memoires and correspondence of French diplomatic 
agents and military adventurers (Montigny, de 
LallCe, Aumont, Raymond, Piron, Modave); im¬ 
portant omissions being papers relating to the dip¬ 
lomatic activities of Che< alier, Gen til, Madec and 
Saint-Lubin, 

(viii) the revolutionary movements in the different French 
Settlements in India, 1791—1793. 


In the India Office (Commonwealth Relations Office), 
London, there is an extremely valuable collection, The t rench 
in India Series in 17 Volumes, in which one will find read) 
collected most of the important papers of the Governments of 
Bengal, Madras and Bombay concerning relations with the 
French. For the period under review the following Volumes 
are ol particular interest: I Miscellaneous Correspondence 
(1664—1810); IV Miscellaneous Papers (1752—1779); V Pro¬ 
ceedings of the Madras Government on the-complaints of the 
French relative to the interruptions of their commerce (1 77 1 
1775); VI Claims of the French, Dutch and Danes; VII-X 
Disputes with the French (1 773 —^ Political Relations 
between the English, French, Nizam and T ippoo (1785 
XII Miscellaneous Letters and Papers (1782—1813); XIV 
Correspondence relative to the expedition against the French 
Islands (1810). 


In the National Archives of India relevant materials are 
to be found in the records of the Foreign Department. Of 
particular interest are: Select Committee Proceedings, 1765 — 
1774; Secret Department Proceedings, i 777 ~ l 7 ^S^ an d Foreign 
Branch Proceedings, 1784 — 1816. Some materials are also to 
be found in the Public Department records. 


fUM.lOGRAPWY 

Published Records 

Corresppmtancc de Napoleon ler, Vols X, XV, XVII. 

Gauuart Catalogue des Mauuscrits ties Anciennes Archives de FInde 
I ran^aisc, 8 vols., Pondicherry. 

- Correspotidance des Agents ;i Pondidiery de la aouvelle Compagnie 
des lndes avec les AdminislrateUrs & Paris (1788-1805), Fondicheny, 

1 93 l * 

Gnanou Diacou—A rrets du Conseil Sup^rieur de PondichtVry, 8 vols., 
Pondicherry. 

Martineau—L et ties et Conventions des Gouverneuirs de Pondidiery avec 
different!* Princes Hindous des 1666 & 1795, Pondicherry, 1911-1914. 

—Journal de Bussy, Commandant gchuhal des forces de terre et de 
mer dans FInde du 15 noverabre 1781 au 51 mars 1783, Pondicherry, 
1982 - 

—fitat Politique de FInde en 1777 par Law de Fauristcm, Paris, 1913. 

- Men 10ires stir quelqucs affaires tie FEmpire Mogul par Law de 
Lauriston. 

—Correspondance du Conseil Sup^rieur de Pondichery et de la Com¬ 
pagnie (17*46-1767), 6 vols., Fondicheny. 

Mt>Kis journal de Bord du Bailli tie Suffren clans FInde, 1781-1784, Paris, 

ms. 

Calendar of Persian Correspondence (National Archives of India), Vols. V 
and VI. 

Forrf.s 1 Selections from the Letters, Despatches and other State Papers 
preserved in the Foreign Department of the Government of India 
(5'•7:1-1785), 3 vols., Calcutta, 1890. 

-Selections from the Letters, Despatches and other State Papers 
preserved in the Bombay Secretariat, Vfaratha Series, Vol. I, Bombay, 
1885. 

—Selections from Slate Papers of the Governors-General of India: 
Warren Hastings (2 vols.), Cornwallis (2 vols.), Oxford MCMX and 
MCMXXVI. 

Martin- --Despatches. Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 
Wellesley, 5 vols., 1836. 

Other Published Works (Contemporary and Later) 

Asiatic Annual Register. 

JBarbe, E.—Le Nabob Ren£ Madec, Paris, 1894. 

Barchou de Penhoen Histone de la conquete de FInde par FAngleterre, 
6 vols. 

Bkrnardin bE Saint-Pierre -Voyage & File de France. 

Besson, M.—Les Aventuriers Fran^ais aux lndes (1775*1820), Paris, 193*. 
— L’Aventurier Sombre et 'a Begum Jeanne. 

—Comte de Boigne, Chamb£ry, 1930. 

Bioves, A.—Les Anglais dans FInde: Warren Hastings (1772*1785). 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 



tev^&Ri), 1 \— Manuel du commerce des Indes Oricntales et tic la Chine. 
Bouine, Comte de — M emoirc sm la carriere n?ilitairc et politique de M. lc 
General Comte do Boignc, Chambery, 830. 

Bonnechose — History of France (tr. from Fr.)» 

BouetAV jijlaumez, Comte Batailies de terre et c\k mers. 

Boutet we Monvel La Vie mania lie de Bailli de Suffren. 

Bowring, I. B.~rtHaidar Mi and Tipu Sultan, Oxford, 1.895. 

Briggs, H. G.~ The Nizam ': His History and Relations with the British 
Government 2 vols., London, 1861. 

Cadell. P. . History of the Bombay Army, London, 1937 - 

Can at — R obert Surcouf. 

Castex — L a Marine Militaire dc la iranee du Will me sicclc. 

—La Manoeuvre de la Pray a. 

Castonnet des Fosses—LT nde Franca ise avaht Dupleix. 

— LTnde Francaise au XVIII-mc sifccle. 

—La Revolution et les Clubs dans Pintle Fran^aisc. 

Charles Roux, F. -Lc Projet Francis dc commerce avec Linde par Sue/ 
sous le regne dc Louis XVI. 

— L’Anglcierrc et P Expedition Fran^aisc cn figyptc, 2 vols. 

(m vauek —Histoire dc la Marine Francaisc, Paris, 1873. 

— Histoire de la Marine Franchise sous le Consulat ci I'Empire. Paris. 
1886. 

Closets d'Errey — P recis chionologique dc !’Histoire de 1’Inde lran^aisc, 
Pondicherry, 1934. 

Compton, H.— European Military Adventurers of Hindustan, 189a. 
Cijltru—D upleix, Paris, 1901. 

Cunat, Ch. — H istoire de Bailli de Suffren, Rennes, 1852. 

Daubigny, E. T.—Choiscul et la France outremer, 1892. 

Dauimn. G.—Journal Historique, 1777 1812. 

Dcmwuu., H. IL—Cambridge History of India, Vol. V, Cambridge. 1929. 
— Dupleix and Clive. 

Driault, E.— - La politique Orientale dc Napoleon: Scbastiani ct Gardane 
(1806-1808), Paris, 1904. 

Fraser, H.—Our Faithful Ally the Nizam, London, 1865. 
i ULLARTON, W. — View of the English interests in India; and an account 
of the military operations in the southern parts of the Peninsula 
during the campaigns of 1782, 1783 and 1784 (1787). 

Gaulois—L es Corsaires francos sous la Rcpubliquc et !'Empire, 2 vols 
1847. 

Gardane—L a Mission du General Gardane cn Perse, Paris, 186;,. 

Gaudart, E. — Les Privileges du commerce fran^ais dans lTude, Ponch 
cherry, 1935. 

GfcNTiL- — M^nioires sur JTndoustan ou Empire Mogol, Paris, 1822. 

Grant Duff — A History of the Mahrattas, Oxford, 1921. 

Gupta, P. C.—Shah Alain II and his Court by Polier, Calcutta, * 947 * 
Mannequin, M, — Essai Historique sur la vie et les campagnes de Bailli 
de Suffren. 


imsr*y 



U.kmman, L. Hisloirc do la rivalite des Fran^ais et des Anglais dans 


PIihU. 

Hickey's Memoirs, Vol. III. 

Holungberuy, W.—History of Ni/nrn Ally Khan, Calcutta, 1805. 

Hough, Maj.— Political and Military events in British India (1756-1849). 
Imperial Gazetteer of India, Oxford, 1909. 

Innfs Monro—A Narrative of the Military operations on the Coromandel 
Coast (1780-1784), London, 1789. 

Joijvfau Dubreuil —Dupleix, Pondicherry, 1941. 

Kafjppejun- - 1 a Compagme des Indes Orientales et Francois Martin. Paris, 
1908. 

Khan, G. fl.—Scir Mutaqharin (Tr.), 3 vols. 

Kincaid and Parasnis A History of the Martuha People, 1025. 

1 akfrnaime, Mme. V.— Le Vieux Pondicht-ry (1673*18115), Pondicherry, 
1936. 

—-I,a Revolution et ks Etablissements Fran^ais dans Plnde, Pondi 
cherry, 1929. 

I .acour-Gayet- La Marine militaire de la France sous Louis XV. 

La Varende—S uffrcn et ses ennetnis, Paris, 1948. 

Li, Bail. A.—Reik Madec, soldnt de fortune, Nabab et Roi aux Indes. 

Lf Conteur, J. Letters chiefly from India (military transactions on the 
Malabar Coast)—Tr. from French, 1790. 

Leon Guerin —Histone de la Marine. 

I.E Gbntil, M.—Voyages dans les mers de Plnde, Paris, 1779. 

Logan, W.—Mai r, 2 vols., Madras, 1887. 

Lowe -History of (he Indian Navy. 

Love, II. D.—Vestiges of Old Madras, 3 vols.. London. 1913. 

Madras District Gazetteers: Malabar and Anjengo Districts (Madras, 
icvo8); South Arcot District (Madras. 1906). 

Mahan - The Influence of. Sea Tower on History. 

Maistre de la Tour— Haidar Ali. 

Maii.eson —Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas (a !, ;o 
French tr. by Gaudart, Pondicherry, 1932). 

—The French in India. 

Martin, H.—Histone de France, Vols, XV, XVI. 

Martimau, A.—Dupleix et l’lnde Francaise, 3 vols., Paris, 1923-27. 

—Bussy et Plnde Fran<;aise, Paris. 1935. 

—Le G6i*£ral Perron, g<*n£ralissime des armies du Grand Mogol, Paris, 

—.Les Origines de Mahe de Malabar, Pondicherry, 1936. 

Mautort, L. F.~ mo ires (1752-1802), Paris, 1895. 

Michaud, J.—Histoire des Progrfcs et de la Chilte de PEmpire de Mysore 
sous les regnes d’Hyder Aly et Tippoo Saib, 2 vols., Paris, 1801. 
Mill and Wilson —History of British India, Vols. I\-VII. 

Minto, Countess of -Lord Minto in India. 1880. 

Mohibbul Hassan Khan— History of Tipn Sultan, Calcutta, 1951. 

Mom, J,—Transactions in India from the commencement of the French 


war in 1756 to the conclusion of the late Peace in 1783* 



mmsr/fy 


bibliography 



Ortolan l,cures de Bailli de Suffren (Moniteur Universe!—|ih Noverc- 
bte, 1859). 

Panikkar, K. M—Malabar and the Dutch, Bombay, 1931. 

Printout, H.—L’lle de Fiance sous Dccaen (1803-1810), Paris, 1901. 

Rapson, E, J.—The struggle between England and France for supremacy 
in India, London, 1807. 

Raynal, Am —.A Philosophical and Political History of the Settlements 
and Trade of the Europeans in the East and West Indies (tr. by 


Justamond), VoL II, London, 1776. 

Renee, A.—Histoire de la Marine Fran^aisc. 

Revue Historique de PInde Fran^aise, Pondichdry, VoL III, 1919. 
Richmond, Admiral— The Navy in India ( , 7 %* 1 7 ^.'))» Condon, 1931. 

Roux, J. S.—Lc Bailli dc Suffren dans Linde, Marseilles, 1862. 

Saint'“CH jiNF-s--Conuc de Boigne, Poitiers, 1879, 

Sardesai, G. S.—New History of rhe Marathas, 3 vols., Bombay, 1948. 
Sarkar, J. N.—Fall of the Mughal Empire, 4 vols., Calcutta. 

Sin ha, N. K.- Haidar Ali, Calcutta, 1949- 

SonnerAT —Voyage aux Indes Ovientales ct a la Chine, 3 vols., Paris. 1783. 
Sottas, J.—Histoire dc la Compagnie Royaie des Indes Orientates, 1905. 
Tantet, V.—L'ambassade de Tippou Sahib ^ Paris en 1788. Paris. 1899- 
Tranchell, Maj. -Catalogue des cartes, plans ct projets, Pondicherry, 

Troude Batailles navales de la France, 1867. 

Trublet —Histoire de la campagne de PInde sous les ordres dc M. le 
Bailli de Suffren. 

Vibart, Maj. History of Madras Engineers, London, 1881. 

Voltaire —Precis du Steele de I,ouis XV. 

—Fragments stir PInde. 

Weber —La Compagnie Franchise des Indes (1804* 1875), Paris, 1904. 
Wilks— History of Mysoor (Ed. by Murray Hammick), 2 vols., :Mysore. 
* 930 . 

Wilson— History of the Madras Army, Madras, 1888 1889. 


INDEX 


Abbas Mir/a, 583-85. 

Abdul A had Khan, 8, *$3-34, 136, 

>47. 213. 

Abdul Nabi Khan, 525. 
Abercrowby. 586, 593 96. 

Aboukir, 554/ 

Ach<£ (d*), 76-77, 233, 331, 534. 
Achin, 192, 267-69, 312, 314-15, 

317-18. 

Adorn, 147, 512. 

Aga Baba. 118. 

Agra, 131. 133, 142, 146. 196, 543 * 
Aiguillon (d'), 50. 

Aiv-la-Chapelle, 226. 

Alamgir IT, 5. 

Aleppo, 582-83, 

Aligarh, 543, 545* 575- 

All Gauhftt, 5, 9, 35, 84, 133, 162. 

All Jah, 540. 

Alivardi Khan, 114. 

Allahabad, 2, 6, 9-10. 17, 115, 214. 
AUampavve (river). 165. 

Arabur, 221. 

Amiens. 538. 

Amiens (Treaty of), 536, 544, 547, 
560-63. 577. 

Andaman, 409. 

Anderson, 542. 

Anker, 577I 
Antilles, 33, 

Antoinette, Marie, 518. 

Appaji Ram. 383. 

Applcy, 463. 

Arabian Coast, 475. 

Arcot, 221. 287. 

Arcy (d‘\. Men'. 489, 

Ariancouj>om (river), 59. 61, 78. 
Arnee, 281. 

Asaf ud daulah, 10, 172. '74 75, 

216-17. 

Assaye, 544, 547. 

Anmont. 18, 144, 147, 206. 339-41. 

495 * 497 * 507 - 9 . 

Aurangabad. 413-i4. 

A usterl itz (Battle of), 567. 

Austria, 195, 

Auvernais, 456. 

Ayraar (d’), 257^9, *64, 3 l °- 

Babel, 162. 

Baghdad, 583. 

Bahour, 380, 416-17, 433. 

Baillie, 221. 

Baird. David, 586. 


Baissac, 486. 

Balaji Baji Rao, 11, 17, 336. 

Baii Rao II, 15. 

Balasore, 90, 92, 420, 452, 599. 

Bandapollam, 353-54. 357 - 

Bandar Abbas, 585. 

Bangalore, 527. 

Bankapur, 297. 

Barbier, 42-43, 47. 

Bari, 131. 

Baroda, 15. 

Barois, 578, 593. 

Barri, Madame du 48, 51, 348. 

Batrout, 521. 

Basalat Jang, 18-19, 22, 25-26, 116, 
120, 147, 157-58, 160, 162, 16667, 
173, 197, 213-14, 296, 298-99. 320, 
324, 406. 

Basra, 404, 583. 

Basscin, 4, 12, 14, 16. 158, 545. 

Bastille, 190, 441. 

Batavia, 158, 248, 252, 268, 304, 308. 
320, 568-70. 

Batticaloa, 246-48, 258-59, 261, 362. 

Bay of Bengal, 569, 572. 

Bav of Praya, 232, 234. 

Bay of Saldanha, 235. 

Bay of St. Augustin, 170. 

Bay of Trinkomali, 155, 

Bayonne, 307. 

Beaubrun, 405. 

Bcdnore, 20, 292. 327. 

Belleeonibc, C2-63, 71-77, 7980. 

97, 102-3, 112, 142-48, 154, 

157, 166, 17279. 181-82, 186, 

196-97, 213, 220, 277, 43 : j f 475 * 

483- 

Bellevue, 509. 

Benares, 10. 

Bencoolen, 569. 

Bengal. 1-3/ 6, 9, 24, 31, 34-35, 56, 
60. 66, 81-87. 89-90. 92. 113-20, 
126. 128-30, 133, 135, 139-40. 143- 
44, 149-51. 156-58* 160-65, 168-69, 
171-74. 181. 195, 200, 204, 211-17, 
27CK 289. 290, 300, 315, 333, 349’ 
379-80, 384. 418-20, 424, 426. 

4 se 46.1. 576, 505. 

Benth, 357-58. 

Bcranger, Comte de, 599. 

Berar, 15, 115, 118. 174, 177, 299. 

Bernero^, 393. 

Berth-, 588, 593-95. 

Beylin, 159, 169, 437. 



INTftEX 


Bhonsla, u>, 14-16, 497. 

Bhonsla, Janoji, 17, 115, 119-20, 

124. 212. 

Bhonsla Mudaji, 18. 

Bhor Ghat, 14. 

Bihar, a, 6, 9. SO, 91, 113, 133, 419 
20. 

Bikerton, ah.* 267-68, 271, 291, 314- 

• 5 * 332 * 345 * 349 * 

Bmor, 563-67, 573-75. 577. 

Bit. 583. 

Black Sea, 583. 

Bliti dc Grincourt, 424. 

Rlottieres (dcs), 126. 

Bluter, 487. 

Boigne (de), 406, 54**45. 

Boissieux. 277, 288. 

Hoist el (de), 74. 107, 416-17, 482. 
Bombay, 2-3, 11*14, 105-6, 156, 158, 
160, 169-72, 178, 180, 189-94, 203- 
4, 207, 212, 267-68, 291, 299, 304. 
3 * 5 * 321, 332. 334. 538, 364, 375, 
r >«i. 55 1 * 574 . 576 , #4* 588 . 595 
Bonaparte, Joseph, 557, 560. 
Bonaparte, Napoleon, 4, 541, 547, 
553-60, 562, 578-82. 585-86, 589, 
392 - 94 , 597 - 98 . 

Bonvoust. 484. 

Bourayne, 573. 

Bourbon, 155, 495, 

Source t, 57V 59-62, 74. 

Bouvet, 253, 255. 

Bordeaux, 184, 442, 534. 

Bmirquin, 545, 575. 

Boscawen, 2 26. 

Bourreau-Deslandes, 81. 

Bouthenod, 290, 382. 393, 395. 
Bovelleau, 60, 63, 85. 

Hoyo (de). 473,' 477-70. 

Bovnes i^ic), 61, 125, 128, 151. 
Brailhwaitr. 103, 275. $48, 450. 

Brest, 230-31. 235. 307 8, 562, 578. 
580. 

Bret el (de), 456, 

Brianeourt. Anquetil de. 106, 186. 
Bvienne, 541. 

Brillanc (dc la), 220. 

Broach 203-4, 214. 

Browne, fames, 8. 

Bnux, 417, 481. 

Brush's, 589. 

Budge Budge, 419. 

Burma, 409 
Bush ire, 583. 

Bossy, 16-18, 31-32, 35, 110, 128, 
*53- 162. 167, 171-72, 183. 205-9, 
-11. 213, 218-20, 229, 235-36, 247- 
48, 256-59, 261, 267, 269, 271-73, 
275. 282-90. 292, 322-63, 366-67. 
57 *86, 388-416, 474, 498, 502, 

NN 


507, 511. 5 ‘ 9 - 539 ' 

Buxar. 2, 4. 9, 129. 150. 

Cadiz, 307. 

Cairo, 556-57, 

Calcutta, 8, 13-14, 65, 67-89 92, 

113-14. 117, >27, 129', 143-44, 151- 
52, 156, 160, 180, 189-92, 194, 

207, 212, 215, 217, 304, 379, 416, 
418, 420, 423-24, 454, 46c*), 462-68. 
470-72, 503/509. 552-55, r>59- 575 
76, 5 ^ 7 > 59 * 594 * 

Calicut. 94-95, 98-99, 100-104, 474, 
481. 495, 600. 

Calonrie, 53-54, 421. 

Calorme, Company of, 421-22, 431, 
489 - CP. 452, 490. 495. 

Garoac, 14. 

Cambay, 203-4. 

Campbell, 88. 383. 

Canada, 32, 34. 

Canaple (de). 243, 275, 277-82, 284, 

357> 464-68.473-76- 

Canaries, 307. 571. 

Carina norc, 101. 

Ca Uon, 424, 569. 

Cape Comorin, 96. 

Cape Finistcrre, 226. 

C ape of Good Hope, 160, 170, 200, 

229- 35, 304-5, 3078, 310-12. 317- 
18. 326, 378, 386-87, 424, 428-30, 
r/x), 567/ 571-72, 579, 582, 587, 

5 - 9 - 9 °. 592 . 594 - 95 - 
Caranjoli, 319. 

Carnatic, 3, 20-25, 3 °- 3 G 54*35, 69, 
73, 108, 129, 156-57, 162. 165, 
169-71, 202, 214. 220 24, 272, 27|. 
276, 28l f 284*85, 289. 291*92. 297- 
<)£’ - hi - 326-28, 332. 344. 346, 
38°- 393. 407. 4 * 7 * 420* 49 s < 529- 

Caron. 104. 

Carvalho, 91. 

Cassaoutly, 483. 

Castlereagh, 564. 587. 

Castries, Marquis dc, 52. 2<x>, 227. 

230- 31, 244. 266, 282, 307-8, 315. 

318. 343-44, 346. 379-80, 386, 389, 
391, 397-400. 402, 404, 406 7. 411. 
431-32. 496 : 9 s * 506. 521. 

Cavaignac, 568, 578. 

Ceylon, 155, 242-48, 252. 258, 308- 
lo. 314. 320-21. 326. 344. 346, 

398. 432. 522, 529 30, 560. 573, 

. 591 * 593 - 

Chanda Sahib, 107, 167. 
Chandernagore, 66, 81-92, 112, 114. 
117, 127, 135, 145, 151-54. 165, 

195, 209. 334. 378-80, 417. 419-20. 
424. 430-31. 433 - 34 - 436. 438, '440- 
41, 444, 452*58, 160-72, 476, 542. 


mtSTfty 



rvtf)' D/D' T ' 1 D 

( ihameloup. 50, 


Chapuis, 552. 

Charcnton, 190. 

Charpenrier, 428. 

< hatigan, 117. 

C haul. 182, 184-85, 187, I 9 V 9 »» *° 3 » 
334 * 574 ' 

Chauvigny. 203, 205, 319- 334 - 
Cheniith 515. 

Chcnhcville (de), 277 79. 282. 

Cherwont, 444-45, 447 ' 5 °> 4^6, 

528. 

Chetuvayi, 521. 

Chevalier, 8, 55, 86-90, 112 20, 124* 

35. »‘ 59 ’ l 44 > M 9 
167, 172-71, 178, 180, 195, 215-16, 
295, 300, 303. 315*16, 334. 342 * 
4 6o» 497 > 573 - 
( iuvreatt. 231, 

Chidambaram, 275, 277-78. 344. 

Chi l lean (du). 368. 

China. 82. 184. 189. 256, 522, 569. 
Chiriglcput, 231. 350. 

Chin surah, 459-60. 465, 577. 
Chirakkal, 94-95, 101-3, 531. 
Chniseul, 47-50, 52, 126, 155, 210. 
Ciliart (dr), 254-55. 

Civrae, Comte <lc, 439, 442, 523. 
Cochin, 94, 158, 523. 

C ochin-China, 532. 

Coin de fliir, 595. 

( olachcl, 96. 

Colbert. 28, 37*38. 

Colombo. 282-83, 530, 

Combenmle, 424. 

Condavir, 297. 

Conway. Comte de, 200. 230, 235, 
307. 420. 428-32, 434-35. 43 8 > 444. 
453* 455"57* 46162, 464, 467, 474. 
•176, 483, 495, 508, 510-11, 522-23, 

5 * 9 « 535 . 

Coote, Sir Eyre. 222-23, 251. 2G6, 
281, 284. 287-89, 349. 

Corbet, 585. 

Corbin, 442. 

Cored 1 c. 184, 188, 189. 

Corfu, 558. 

Cornwallis, 448, 479. 

Cornwallis (Lord), 120-21, 460, 462- 
63, 466 67. 560, 587. 

Coromandel Coas;, 30. 35, 104, 142, 
148, 156. 161, 164. 168-69, 171*73, 
201-e, 204, 214, 220. 222-25, 236. 
238, 247-49, 266-68, 271, 274. 286- 
87, 292-94, 299, 313-14. 318, 320, 
326-28, 330-33, 335-36, 338, 342, 
363-64, 390, 407, 409, 424. 501, 
513 - 

Coronet, 189. 


I N OCX 


Oossigny. 282. 293, 382, 392*93, 412, 
428, 438, 445-44- 464. 467 68, 47 r. 
495' m - o > 514. 518-19, 

521-22, 524-26, 530, 535, 553. 
Cossigny, Madame, 505. 

Courson, 575-76. 

Court (de), 473, 481. 

Couvenreau, 395, 398, 411-12, 416, 

4 * 7 * 

Guddalore, 78, 165, 222*24, 248-50, 
252, 254-59, 261, 266-70, 272, 277* 
78. 280, 283, 285, 287-89. 294, 309. 
31315* 3 1 9 ’ 2J • 8 S 3 " 2 4 > 3 s6 > 3 * 8 . 
3$0> 332, 33485 * 339 ’ 34 «* 45 » 

348-52. 354*56, 358-67, 370 - 7 ** 

375 * 377 - 78 , 381. 384-85. 387* 400, 
411, 416, 564. 

Cuddapah, 297. 

Cullen, 564, 566. 

Curtis, 592, 

Cuttack, 18-19, 115, u8, 127, 299. 
502-3. 

Dacca. 80, 90*92, 114, n8. 420, 452. 
599 - 

Dacia Kao, 167. 

Da mas, 187-90, 373-74. 

Dance, 569. 

Dangereiix. 92, 417, 419. 40 - 53 - 
Da.n/>as, 488. 

Darlympie, 395, 397. 

Darrapm. 524. 

Dayot, Denis, 505. 599. 

Davot, Joseph. 598-99, 

Debra ux. 151-52. 

Decacn (General), 544, 561-80, 585. 

589-90, 592-97.' 

Decacn, Rcn£, 578-79. 

Deccan, t6-2o. 24, 31-32, 34. 109 -id 
131, 169, 290, 297, 325. 339. 348. 
404, 406, 412-13, 536, 544, 547 * 
Deeds, 56162, 570. 57$*So, 

59 s * 

Demarche. 437. 

Delhi. 5-8, 81, 105, 114-17. D 9 -«>* 
124-25, 128-35. *38’ T 4 °’ 14 s ’ M 4 - 
146-47, 150-51, 163-64, 167. 169. 
174. 195, 197, 200. 207. 213-16. 
290, 300, 415. 334 - 34 *' 4 s * 

545 * 37 6 * 

Delhor. 567, 574*75. 

Dcortna. 460. 

Desclaisons, 61-62. 

Descomber, 553. 

Desvaux. 521. 

Dig. 141 - 
Doublet, 576. 

Dow, 89, 127. 

Drury, 595. 

Du hue, 552. 



INDEX 


Frimoni, 458*62, 545. 
Fumeron, 469-71. 
Fyzabad. 151. 


615 


Ducheuiln, 203-5, 220-21, 224, 236- 

87 . m> * *" 43 » « 4 &‘ 49 > * 5 ^ 57 ’ 
*72*1> $od-io, 313, 318, 331-32, 
384 . 43 ^* 

Dudrencc, 545-46. 577, 588. 

Dufayel, 574-78. 

Duguay-Trouin, 538. 

Dulac, 62, 74. 

Dumas, 96, 107, 183. 

Dum irouet, 107. 

DUmorier, 441, 443, 485-86, 535. 
Dumouriez, 4.49. 

Duadas, 563. 

Du prat, 95, 97-103. 158. 

Duperr£, 589-91, 

Dupleix. 27-35, 42 44, 67, 81, 87, 
93. 96, 109* 129’ 156; 153.- 
218, 272, 298, 412-14. 43 s 33* 437* 
45 1 • 493 ’ 54 D 544 » 5^3’ 598 , 600. 
Duplessis, 527. 

Dupuy, Comte, 598. 

Durhone, 575*76. 

Dutcrtre, 537, 576. 

Kgypt, 23, 195, 555-59. 

Frzerum, 583, 
tspinassy (d’), 251, 283. 

Estaing (d’), 104, 227, 230. 
Euphrates (river), 583. 

Eylau, 567, 581. 

Fabvier, 583. 

Falk, 397. 

I alkland Island, 48-49. 

Fallofield, 395, 417, 482. 

False Bay, 571. 

Fateh Singh, 15. 
l ath Ali, 581-86. 

Fermitr, 488. 

Ferrol, 578. 

Fihkenstein (Treaty of), 579. 581-84. 
Fiiuz Jang, 5. 

Flcurin, 107. 

Floury do Joly, 53. 

Floyer, 395, 416 
Forhin, 255, 338. 
fort Cond£, 94. 

Fort Dauphin, 94. 
fort, d’ Orleans, 81. 

Fort Gwalior, 2, 14. 

fort Rewacianda, 185, 187, 203. 

1 ort St. George, 94. 

Foucault, 67. 

Irancepeth, 110, 417, 490-91. 

Fraser, James Stuart, 599. 

Fresne (de), 425, 428-29, 432, 436, 
43 s > 456, 459, 461, 464-69, 471, 
477 * 480, 483, 487, 495-96, 509, 
5 15 -i6, 523-30, 

Fried land (Battle of), 582. 


Gadillam (river), 353. 

Gaik war, 10, 15. 

Galle, 246, 258, 266-67, 309, 

Gallois, 537. 

Ganges (river), 9, 114, 116, 129, 145, 
155-56, 165, 174, .212, 269, 315*16. 
Ganjarn, 165, 269-70. 

Gaiaane (General), 579-80, 582 86. 
Gard£, 162. 

Gautier, 468*69, 471. 

Gentil, 9 89, 112, 131, 144, 149, 

150-53, 215. 

Georgia, 582, 584. 

Ghulaiu Ali, 549. 

Ghulam Qadir, 7. 

Coa, 97, 187-88, 199, 201, 203. 334, 
105. 499 . 574 . 57 6 - 
Godard, 495, 499, 503-4. 

Goddard, 2, 14. 198. 

Godeheu, 30-31. 

Gohad, 131, 141, 172. 

Gondreville. 477. 

Goorumconda, 512. 

Gopal Rao, 208, 505. 

Gordon Forbes, 599. 

Goretty, 89, 113, 460-63. 

Grand Calaye, 94. 

(Grande Raye, 595. 

Grand Port, 591-92. 

Grasse, Comte dc, 231-32, 365. 

Great Mount, 345. 

Guadeloupe, 563. 

Gujarat. 14. 

Guntoor, 17, 19, 22, 25-26, 50910. 

Haidar Ali, 10 12, 14, 17-25,, 56, 58, 
72, 84, 94-100, 101-4, 11.6, 156- 
59, 161, 166-67, 169-77. 181-82, 199. 
202, 204, 206-7, 212-14, 219-25, 
as6, 242-43, 248-5*. 255-58, 262, 
270, 272-84, 286-91, 297-98, 302-3, 
308-11, 313-15, 323-26, 331-32, 336, 
338 , 344 . 34 ^ 47 . 380, 38.3-84. 390, 
393, 400-404, 406-8, 433, 475, 

494, ROl-2, 517. 

Hamadan, 583. 

Haraelin, 538, 589-90, 592-93. 
Harford Jones, 582, 585. 

Hari Pant Phadke, 335-37, 500. 
Hartley, Col., 480. 

Hastings, Warren, 2. 144, 542. 
Hawke, Admiral, 226. 

Herat, 583. 

Hocquart, 107. 

Hoffelize (d’) 220, 257, 270, 282-83, 
287-90, 292 94, 315, 317-18, 320- 


mNlSfffy 



is, $*<>. 328-39, 331, 344, 346'^- 
Hohenlinden (Battle of), 561, 59b. 
Jioissarcl, George Isac, 394-95* 
liolkar, 10, 12, 16, -,44, 546, 575. 
Holland, 343, 508. 

Hooghly, 4Mb 4 lfl * 453* 463- 
liouddot (d’> 277, 350-51, 354* 
Houssaye, 537. 

Huge], 161. 

Hughes, Admiral, 221*224 23940, 

244, 247-48, 251, 253-54, 2dl-l)2, 
265*71, 31415. 3*L 33-* 345» 349* 
360, 364-60, 368. 370, 373-76, 383. 
Hus&an AH* 550. 

Hyderabad, 3 0, 10, 15-17, 20, 30, 
35> H 1 > i 99* 2<»0 ;, 219, 339'4<>* 
34*1*3* 433* 147* 497* !><*>-u, 
5*5' l 7» 54*> 547* 

Indo China, 87. 

Indus (river), 196, 557, 582*83. 

Indus Valley, 135, 138. 

Island of Rodriguez, 588-90, 592-93, 

595. 

Island of Ieneriffe, 307. 

Isle de la Passe, 591-92. 
isle of Bourbon, 219, 221, 318, 428, 
43«* 533*36# 538-39, 548-51, 5f> 8 
59, 561-62, 567. 572, 578-80, 587- 
88, 590-93, 595* 597- 
Islc of France, 23, 49, 57, 75*77* 80. 
lOo, 170-71, 179, 183, 200, 201, 
205-6, 211-12. 219, 221, 230, 235- 
37, 240-48, 256-62, 206-67, 2O9, 
271, 306, 308-13, 315-18 324 25, 

334. :h«< 344. 373-75. 384. 386. 

411, (19, -1*6, 4*8-3*. 435- ; i(>. 438. 
44** 443- 146-48. 450 , 456-57 . 4 f 'i- 
63. 467-68, 471, 473, 476-78, 482. 
495. 5*9. 5* as *5. 5*7. 530-3'. 

533-39- 54'. 547-53- 555. 55»-59- 
561-62, 565-76. 578-8O, 5869I, 593- 

94* 596‘97* 

Ispahan, 583. 

Jalfinapatam, 258, 432. 
jarday (du), 89, 120. 131. 
jaubert, 581. 

Java, 586-87, 594. 

Jeddah, 522, 556. 

Jerusalem, 55. 

jinji, 31, 412-13* 

Johnstone, 230-34. 

Jougdia, 92, 4*o, 452, 599. 
joyeuse (Villaitr. de), 360. 

Kabul, 583. 

Kadamiiail, 93-94, 99*100, 102, 435, 
47«* 

Kalpi, 162, 


<SL 


Kandahar, 137, 145, 196. 

Kandy, 244. 399, 529*31. 

Kaidla, 540, 544, 546. 

Radical, 30-3.1, 35, 66. 74. 94, 10O 9* 
155. 160, 165; 167, 247, 254, 319. 
380, 107-8, 417, 431. 433* 4.4°> 444* 
482-87, 531* 599- 
Karoor, 329. 

Karrak, 583* 

Karwav, 96-97. 

Kashim A)i, 120. 

Kasim bazar,* 35, 84, 86, 90,. 144. 

420, 45** 599- 
Kaveri (river). 106. 

Kaveripatnam. 107. 

Keating (Colonel), 13. 588, 590. 
Kerjean (General), 598. 
kerjean, 437. 

Kerscao, 139. 

Khaja Hassan Khan, 167 68. 
Khurasan, 583. 

Kolatt.iri, 94. 

Koliyanur, 351. 

Konkan, 14. 

Kora, 2, 9-10. 

Kotta, 94. 

Kottayam, 101. 

Krishna (river), 20-21, 167. 

Krishna Kao, 32.9, 382, 391. 

Kurpa, 540. 

Kurangod. 94*95, 101*3, 474'7 6 * 
Kurnool, 297. 

Laboucher, 535. 
l a Faye, 489. 

Laffonde. 184, 190. 

Lagos, 226, 233. 

Lake (General), 545. 

Lakshmipur, 92. 

Lalandelle (de), 266 67. 
bailee (deb 18. 25, 147 46, 158, 162, 
167, 19S, 330/ 382, 392-93* 4°6* 

495- 5***4* 54°“4 l * 

Lady. 17* 30*33, 56, 76, 93, 153* 
t8i, 428, 541. 

La Lusti&re, 431. 

Lamballe, Princesse de, 523. 
Lambert, 592. 

La my. 583, 585. 

Lang, 329. 

Langlade. 478*79. 

Lanois, 162. 

Larcher, 478 81. 
l.aswari. 545, 547. 

Lannay (de), 256, 258, 282 86. 294. 
309-10, 313-16, 318-20, 325-26, 

33 1 - 336. 340* 377- 
Law de Lauristpn, 35, 55 56* 59 7** 
81-85, 87, 9196, 99, 100, 105. 

107-12, 126, 128, 133* *35* l 4*» 



iNPt'K. 


G 


t§L 


154-72, 183, |d>, 48 *- 
Law, 27, 35, 38*40, 42, 

Louyer, m. 

Le Comte, 107. 

Le Canne, 487. 

1 efebvre, 578. 

It ForeStier, 417, 4 * 9 ' 49 * 
l.eger, 525, 527, 563-65. 

Lege* (Madame), 565. 

Le Gentil, 55, 57 5 8 - 
Lememc, 537. 

Lescallter, 441, 443 * 44 . 45 ° > 47 *» 

480. 486, 496. 53 °“ 3 * 535 * 

Leslie, 13. 

Le Tellier, 473, 476-7B. 

Lewis, William, 183-85. 

Linois, 538, 562, 568-72. 


London, 398, 416* 


554 55 . 5 ) 8 °' 


5 ^ 7 . 50 8 * 

Longchamp, 408. 

[.orient. 42. 46, 580. 

Louis XV, 28, 30-31. 36- 47 . 5 °' 54 ’ 
71-72, 89, 113, 182, *95. 

Louis XVI. 71-72, 183, 185, 203. 

284. 422, 448, 518-19. 

Cue know, 144, 575. 

1 uvitinbourg, 375. 

Maiartney (Lord), 251, 3 ^°* 375 ’ 77 * 
382 85. 389-91, 39 fv 397 “ 03 > 

Madia ult, 50. 

Mackenzie, Captain George. [8i. 
MacLeod. CoL, 290, 450. 

Macnamara. Comte de, 521-23, 535 - 
Madagascar, 140, 170-71. 

Madec, 8, 56, 74, 79 . » 9 * i» 2 > u6< 
17, 125, 128. 147. 167, 173. *95 
96, 213-17, 293, 300, 308. 342, 497* 

545*46 573 . 

Madeira, 231-32. 

Madhav Rao, 11-12. 20-21. 

Madjjet, James, 183-86. 188 89, 191. 
Madras. 3*4. 14, 19. 24-25, 35, 55 * 
73-74, 147, 156. 160, 165, 169, 182, 

2 12, 222-23, 243-44, 248, 250, 258, 
260-61, 266, 268, 274, 276. 279, 
281, 287-89, 299, 304, 314 L 5 . 3 - 7 “ 
28, 344-45, 349, 360-63, 370, 375. 
377-78, 380, 382-85. 388-92, 394 95 * 
397, 407-8. 416 17, 419, 4 2 3 ‘ 2 4 * 
442-49, 482, 492. 501. 515. 5 2 9 * 
540, 542, 553. 563-67. 575 * 577 * 

595* 599- 

Madrid, 307. 

Madura, 319, 420, 529. 531. 

M a gallon, General, 535-36, 553, 5^7 • 
Mahe, 22, 31, 66. 72. 93-100, 101-4. 
155. 158, 160. 166 67. 186. 219. 
380, 406-9. 417, 424. 431, 433 * 


446, 466, 47 st-8'i, 513-19. r.*' * 2 - 

600. 

Mahmud Raza, 167. 

Mainvielle, Colonel, 566. 

Mainville (de), 482. 

Malabar Coast, 20-1, 30. 155. l 59 * 
161. 16364, 169*?*. !79* 201 ’ 2 - 
204. 206-10, 257, 270-71, 285, 29V). 
292, 299. 3 M* 3 * 4 * 7 * . 33 * • 

335 39* 382-83, 39 2 » 4 ° 7 “ 9 ’ b.)> 

4S0.' 499-5CX). 505 6, 527, 555 * 574 * 
576. 600. 

Malacca, Straits of, 509. 

Malarois, 208, 403. 

Malar tic, 23, 44344 * 44 »> 47 1 * 53 :. 

36, 551-53* 555 - 
Malcolm, 584. 

Malesherbes, 52-53. 

Malet, 504. 

Mallendri*, 487. 

Malroux, 537. 

Malta, 226. . 

Mangalore, 292, 327, 330, 3& 1 * 39 *“ 
93, 476, 520. 527, 549 * 5 °* 55*' 53 * 

559 * 

Mangin, 111. 

Manjakuppam. 256. 280, 321 35 ° • 

Marck, Comte dc la, 3*°* 

357 - 59 - 

Marguenai, 482. 

Marin, 417, 472-73, 48°* 5 22 * 
Markham (river), 165. 

Mars (de), 487. 

Martin, 391-9®* 4 8 7 * 54 2 * 

Martin, C laude, 56. 

Martin, Francois, 55. 97 * in 4 * 
Masulipatam. 3* % *° 4 * ll ° 1 *’ 

149, 156, 160, 165, 169, 224. 297* 
417, 419, 49 °' 9 ** 495 Go ° 
Matthews, 226, 270-71, 29** 

Maupeou, 50. 

Maurepas, 52. 

Mauritius, 554 * 

Maurville (de), 377 * 

Mecca, 556. 

Mediterranean, 226, 5/6. 

Medows, General, 230. 

Menesse, 477-79* 

Merrier (de), 456, 515. 

Minto. 587-88, 59°* 594 * 

Mirjy, 292. 

Mir Kasim, 1, 9 * 11 5 * 119 20, 129. 

MiV Moidin Ali Khan, 3^7-29* 

Mir Jaiar, 1. 

Mir/a Re/.a Khan, 581, 583. 

Miv?a Shaft, 581-82, 584. 

Mitchell, William, 486. 

Mocha, 87. 4-4 - 5 * 55 6 * 


INDEX 



<SL 


Modave, 8, Bj, 1 u», 132-3 |, >43-51. 

1 So, 339, 

;VUiissue, 243, 249-50, 255, a(><>, 271, 
275, 278, 294, 320, 369, 

Molucca, 522. 

Monneron, Pierre, 394*95, 437, 510 
20. 558. 

Moutigny, 15, 18, 116, 126, 14.;. 

180, 189. 194-209. 219, 231, 295, 
8.16. JH>. $84*4*. 4^-4* 453^5 • 
4O8, 495, 497'507' 5 10 * 

Monrinorin, Comte tie, 5a, 420. 523. 
Mantreau, 506-7. 

Montvcrt, 89, 127, 141, 167. 

Monypenny, 566. 

Moniba, 190, 192. 

Moracin, 132. 146-49. 395. 421, 423 
25. 43i-35> 44 s « 

Morellet, Abb6, 46. 

Morenas, 576-77. 

Miorlat, Piveron de, 200-2, 222, 242- 

4'b m * 2 5® W -1 c *74*75. *78* 
284. 291-93, 328, 330, 382-83, 404. 

5 2,1 557* 

MojStyn, 11. 183-84, 189, 191, 193-94. 
Mottais de Narbonne, 289, 315. 
Mot tel;, 453, 455-56. 463-67. 
Muhammad Ali, 23-25, 67, 108, 162, 
>75* *9&, 49$. 529- 
Muhammad Osman Khan,. 519. 
Muhammad Usman, 330-31. 

Muller, 574 75 - 
Mart to. Hector, 77-78. 

M urshidabad, 90, 114, 11718. 

Muscat, 556, 568, 578. 

Mushir uI-Mulk, 567-8. 
MustaphaiPigar, 109. 

Muzaffar Jang, no. 

Mysore, 3-4, to, 15, 19-24, 95, 100. 
156, 172. 199, 201, 207, 222, 246 
50, 256, 283, 29192. 320. 326, 

3*9 3 2 ’ 344* 346. 357- 3 8l > 588*90, 
401 2. 447, 472.. 497, 501. 512. 514, 
517-18, 5x0-21, 523-24, 54b 54 8 - 

Nadir Shah, 138. 

Naga Kao, 167. 

Nagore, 252. 254. 

Nagpur, 90, 171. 173. 497, 502. 
Najaf Khan, 8, 131, 14142, 144. 

• 7 2 74* 195*97. W’ 21 4. 3°3* &$- 

it>, 3i2. 

N a Her a mbyrao, 74. 

Nana Phadnavis. 12*16. 183, 185-87, 
189-93. 198. 202, 206, 2089. 285. 
333- 335*37’ 400 500. 502, 504-5. 
Nanjraj, 20. 

Nantes, 580. 

\arayan Kao. 12.21. 

Nargou-nde, 501. 


Natal, -72. 

Najm-ud dauiah, 1. 

Meeker, 46, 53 4. 

Negapatam, 56, 107 8. 242-48, 250. 
s 5- 354, 261, 274, 319. 343, 374, 
407-8. 515, 566. 

Nelson, 227-29, 388, 555, 558. 
Neuville, Tinglet de, 456, 458. 
Nicobar, 409. 

Nizam, 6, 11, 15, 17, 19, 339. 
Nizam Ali, 1012, 14 j 9. 21-22, 24 
26, 100, 109, 111, 147-49, 156-58, 
l60, 166-73, 197, 199, 201 2, 20. p 
2(>6-8, 212 14, X19, 279, 297-98. 

319-20, 323-25, 338-41, 381-82, 388 
9<>, 400, 402. 406, 447 , 497 * 564 ' 
507-16, 518-19, 5 2 3 * 5 * 5 , 5 2 7 - 54 °* 
42, 546 48. 

Nizam-ul Mulk, 16. 149, 340, 508. 
Noel, 290, 

North, 3. 

Northern Sarkars, 3, 17-18, 24-25, 
30 31. 35, 109-10. 156, 170, 17 3. 
212, 340 413 420, 513. 

Ondre, 292, 

Orissa, 2. 6, 159, 161. 379, 420. 
Orissa Coast, 269-70, 298, 316, 379, 
574 - 

Ormessori (d’)» 53. 

Gives (d’), 220-24, 230, 235-38, 274. 

s! 7 fi > 3 ;;-'. 387- 
()stenburg, 259-60. 

Oudh, 2, 6, 8-10, 113, 115-16, 129, 
138, 144, 149-52, 171-72, 214-15. 
217. 

Oulgaret, 56, 585, 416. 

Paniani, 290. 

Panipat, 4, 6, 7, 10. 12, 20. 

Vanon. Jean Jacques, 109-11. 

Paris. 19, 33-34. 36, 41, 54-55, 61-63, 
66, 68, 71. 82, 87, 89V 112-14* 
116-17, 12 4‘ 126, i<$> 131, 139-40 
142, 145, 149, 156, 181, 194, 197, 
209-10, 212, 2 1,5, 218-20, 306 7, 

3 S0 > 835 . 34 1 , 14 ’ M 6 * 375 * 397 

98, 422-24, 427, 429, 433, 435-37* 
439 , 44 s 44 $, 457 ‘ 5 8 , 463* -168- 

475 , 477 , &&**> 5 2 5 » 5 « 7 > 53 °. 

£ 3 *’ 535 , 54 l - 544 * 547 * 557 , 5 Go - 
563, 578 - 79 , 5 fi 4 85, 

Pariset, 566. 

Patna, 6, 90-91, 144, 420, 434. 452. 

559 * 599 - 
Pedron, 545. 

Pegu. 87. 409, 532. 

Peinicr, 269, 271, 308. 31014. 316-17, 
360. 363-64, 369. 386. 

Perambakom, 221. 



Perduron, 308. 

Percy, Earl, 542. 

Perichon, in. 

Perimb£ (Red HiU). 74 * 77 * 7 ^'* 447 * 
Perron, 406, 54 - 47 * 573 ’ 575 * 77 * 
penoud, 537. 

Persian Gull. 87, 155* 

Peshawar 583. 

Pettapur, 109, 

Phehnes (de), 444* 44 m 
Philibert:, 600. 

Philippines, 570, 57 2 ; 

P ent, 96-97, 108, 1 8 ( 5 . 

Pigeaxti, 524. 

Pennacoil, 221, 250, 280, 348, 350-51, 
525. 

Piron, 495. 508. 511-12, 5 1 4 * 1 5 ' 

541-42/577. 

Pitt, 3. 

Plasscy, 4. 

Plcitcnherg, 307. 

Plusqudlec, 93. 

Point de Galotte, 589. 

Potier, 144. 

Poligars. 329. 

Pompadour (Madame de), 28. 51 -52, 
548. 

Pondicherry. 15, 25, 30-32, $5*58, 
60-80. $3 85, 95. 97-100, 102 4 

106-9, 11 j-12. 120, 128-29, 13*$ 5 * 
i p 43, 146-48. 154-53, 157*58* 

if>0-62. 165. 167-68, 172. 174* * 19 ' 
181, 183, 194-96, 201, 210 1 8 * 220 • 
222-23, 23O. 2.35. 2.(2. 270. 277. 
27981. 2H4, 286, 288, 299, 307, 
* 7 * :•>»* 355 * 37 1 * 3 So * 3 8 4 ‘ 86 ’ 

39 i* 394 - 97 * 4 ° 3 * 4 0 5 * 1 3 - lio-iy* 
4-0, 422-(i. 443 * 52 , 455 59 * 46 1 * 
464-77, 479-80. 482-90, 499. 504-n, 
513 f( i. 521-31, 5 :vi 536 * 54 *• 

563 67, 573-74, 598 90. 

Ponniiyar (river), 352-53. 

Poona, 8, \1-16. 18-22, 124. 13 1 ’ 

157, 167. »73- 176 77, 180, 182-86, 
188-95. 197 205, 207. 209, 213, 231, 
285, 309. 331 * 33>-37* 339 t 2 * 1 ° 3 * 
K 53 . 155 * 497 90 * 5 <>i- 7 * 5 ’°* 543 * 44 * 
376 . 

Popham, 14. 

Pon Louis. 219, 221, 235, 237, 43 °* 
136. 568. 57 . 3 * 590* 594 * 95 * 

Port Mahon. 226. 

Porto Novo. 56. 165, 242-43. 27071. 
•-73-75* 277-78, 280, 292, 321, 364, 
: 3 V 7 - 

Porto Praya, 232-34. 

Ponkt, 290. 

Pauli, 197. 

Praslin. Due de, 117. 

Provcdicn, 246. 


Provence. 226. 387. 

Pulicat, 259, r> 77 * 

Pulo Aor, 569-70. 

Pulo Wnv, 268. 

Punjab, if/. ‘>86. 

Purandhar, 18. 

Pym, 592 

Rahim , ViHau dcs, {.57. 

Raghoba. 173. * 9 V* » 939 l* 5 °‘* 
Raghunatli Rao, 11-13, 16-17 • ~ l T -' 
190. 

Rainier, 559, 587. 

Raja AH- 167. 

Rajamundroog, 292. 

Rajaniundvy, 109. 

Rajappa Ayyru. 325. 

Raja ram Pandit, 90. 

Rajmahal, 129. 

Rangoon. 409. 

Raimi ad, JS-9* 

Raymond. 19, 4 <> 6 . 447 * H> 5 * :»<»*• 
511-16, 54 ° 4 2 - 

Red Sea. 155. > 9 ° 5.56 57. 559 * 
Renault de Saint Germain. 85 (1. 
Repentignv, 95, 97 * *<*>'*• H 5 8 * 
Ricard. 468. 

Richard in, 424. 

Richelieu, 27. 

Richemont . 456-58, 460 61, (66. 471. 
Ripaud, 549-51. 

Robillard. 286-87. 

Rochard. 290. 

Rochefort. 578. 

Roehcthulon (de luh 320, 326. 374 
Rodrigue/ Dominguez, 101, 5889), 

593 * 595 * 

Rohilkhand, 2. 

Roniieu. 58 1 . 

Rosily (de), 370. 

Rouveau. 162. 

Rowle). 588, 590, 59 ;. 

Rumbold, 91. 

Russel, 161-62, 167. 

Sad lciv, 375 * 39 *• 

Sadras. 56, 78. 

Safdar fang, 9. 

Saint-Fdix. 266-67, 368* 1(8. 
Saint-Germain. 52. 

Saint-Lubin, 106. 174, 176 77. 180-91, 
193-95, 198. 2oo, 295, 333 * 31 . m. 
507/; ' . 

Saint-Mi/annc, 591. 

Sakha iam, 12-13, i 9 °' 9 2 * 

Salabat Jang, 290, 347. 

Salbai, H l 5* 209. 

Salimgarh. 145. 

Salle, (de la), 523. 

Salsettc, 12-13. 214. 




Santiago, 232. 

Saury, 184, 186. 

Saratoga, 224. 

Sarfaraz Khan, 118. 

Sartine (de), 71, 75*76. 1.-25, 133 36, 
140, 145, 181-83, 185*86, 189-90, 
195, 216, 22 9, 295. 

Savanur, 297. 

Savoy. 542. 

SayyicJ Sahib, 322, 329-30, 344, 346, 

35 »-S 8 . 36*. 374 . 'm- 
Segur, Marquis dc, 52, 343. 398. 
Seillans (Madame dc), 231. 234, 

236, 244, 386-88. 

Sera, 20. 

Seramporc. 460-61, 465. 

Seringapatam, 101, 511, 514, 526-27, 

549 * 5 °, 554 - 55 * 

Shah Alarn, 2, 5-7, 17, 35, 84, 
114-15, iso, 134, 144, 153. 212. 
214-15. 

Shaikh Ibrahim, 550. 

Shayisia Khan, 145. 

Shiva ji, 10. 

Shi raj. 583. 

Shiva Rao, 167. 

Shiija-ud-daulah. 2, 9-10. 115, \i8. 
120, 129, 131, 144, 149*52, 212 
-14-15- 
Siam, 87. 

Simon I.agreri^c de Me/ieres, 433. 

Si mop*# Bay. 235, 572. 

Sind, 116. 128, 145, 333, 583. 
Sindbia. 2, 14*16, 115, 130-31, 173. 

499 - 5 <> 2 . 5 * 5 * 54 1 » 573 - 75 - 
Sindfiia, Daulat Ran. 543-44, 546. 
Sindhia, Mahadaji, 7, 10. 12, 124, 
j42-4b 
Sipri, 14. 

Sombre, 8, 150, 162. 197, 213. 
Sonnerat, 487-88, 490, 534. 

SoniUac, 201-2. 22022. 224, 231, 

*35*36, 243. 246-47, 251-52, 255. 
257. 26567, 273-74, 276, 286-89, 
309-n, 314-15, 317, 334, t»9* 

131- 495 - 96 - 498-500. 502-4, 506, 
518-20. 

SouJanges (de), 307, 338-39, 347. 
Sotipayapuvam, 483. 

Soussoir (du), 74. 

Spithcad, 232. 

Srinivasa Rao. 98-100, 383. 

Staunton. 375, 391, 398. 

St. Denis. 590. 

St. Domingo, 443. 

St. Fulgence, Bury dc, 428. 436. 

St, Helena, 557. 

St. Louis, 35, 199, 514. 

St. Malo, 37-38. 


<SL 

St. Paul, 572, 589-90, 592-94. 

Stuart. General, 289, 348-50, 352, 
364, 366*67, 371 72. 374, 377, 383. 
Suez, 73, 190. 424, 555-56, 558-59. 
Snffien (de), 76, 200, 203-4, 220 21, 
225-72, 274 75. -77* *61-83, 287, 
*91-93, 312-15, 317-21, 327, 

330, 332. 343-44. 348-49. 355-56- 
359 - 73 . 375 - 76 , 37 8 * 363-68, 393- 
396. 399 * 456. 320, 534, 538, 541 ■ 
Sumatra, 267, 569. 

Surat. 13, 66, 104-6, no, 157. ilk), 
186, 195, 198. 203-4. 206, 214 334, 
380, 417, 481-82, 495, 600. 
siliconf, Robert, 537-38. 

fable Bay, 572. 

fahawar }ang. 206, 339, 341. 

Talleyrand. 558. 575, 581. 

Tan jure, 24. 106-8, 167, 224, 274, 
288. 298, 319, 327, 3<9, 380, 384, 
407-8. 420, 133. 482, 531. 566 67, 
574. 600. 

Tatta, 11417, 1*5 *9* >3**34* 136*46, 
163. 178, 195-97, 214, 217. 299, 
300. 

fay lor, 477. 

Teheran, 581-85. 

Tellichcrry, 93, 100-1. 103. 158, 

*66* 392 * 172 - 474 - 477 - 
Ternay (de\, 139, 169. 433. 

Terray (Abbe), 50-31. 

Thackeray, John, fxx>. 

I biagar. 31. 

Tibet, 9*. 

Tilsit (Treaty of). 583. 

Timur Shah. 145, 196. 

Tindivanani, 330. 

Tipu, 5, 15, 19. 22-23, 270-71, * 77 - 
288-94. 319-22, 32433, 336-38, 

340/ 344 . 346 . 348 * 355 * 376 - 77 * 

381-85, 388-93, 401-2, 404, 408-9, 

415. 433 34 * 447 - 450 , 474 - 76 . 4 «»* 

494 * 497 * 5 °L 503-5* 5 ° 9 M. r > 1 7 2 ^- 
531, 540-41, 547-59, 586, 600. 

Tirol, 535. 

Touffreviilc. 44.4, 449, 483. 486. 

Toulon, 226. 387, 557-58, 580. 

Tourville, 538. 

Tranquebar, 107. 205. 243. 247-49. 

258, 267, 321, 326, 334, 374, 446. 

446 . 5 . 3 1 * . 574 . 576 - 76 . 

Travancore, 22, 94, 96, 162, 574. 
Trebizond, 583. 

Treves, 190. 

Trichinopoly, 328-29, 384, 408. 
Trinkomali, 155, 205. 243-44. 246-50, 
258-62, 2 65-72. 286, 288, 293-95, 

3 * 5 . S 1 /-*!. 325-26, 332. 334 - 35 . 

' 345 * 356 . 359 - 64 . 367* 37 8 * S% 8 7 * 


•w-t-SW- 5 I ’°> 5 s,i - . 
l'romclin, 241, 247. am <>2. -t>.|, 

266-67. 

1 ronjoly, 75 70 * 97 > 22 °' 21 ’ as *&' 

534 - . , 

1 ungabhadra, 20. 

Turgot, 51, 53. 

Turkey, 195. 

lippanai/ (river), 353- 
Upton, U 3 * 

Urfa, 583. 

Valentine, 75. 

Valmy, 443, 447 - 
Van, 563. 

Vaughan, 600. 

Vellapakkam, 353. 

Vellore, 221, 281. 287-88, 3 l 9 - 
Venkata Rao, 167, 529. 

Verdier, 583, 585. 

Verelst, 87-88. 

Vergenues Comte de, 52, 343, 39 **- 
Ventures (de), 456, 458, 460. 
Vernon, Edward, 75. 

Versailles. 28, 177. »jO* 8® 7 *, 
Versailles (Treaty of), 45a 4 6 3 « 5 ° 3 - 
Vigic (de), 447, 405 » 5 1 4 • 5 2 3 ' a 4 * 
527-28. 540. 

Villejegu de Iniblct, 369. 


\ illcnctive (dc), 329-30, 388. 
Vftn'oor. 80, 250, 280, 351, 380. 

416-17,433.367- 

Visage, 20, 89, 141, M 4 » ] 73 > 1 9 ”• 
Visaji Krishna, 115. 

Viaagapataiu 169, 570. 

Viziadroog, 97. 

Wadgaon. 14, 198. 

Wancliwash. 31. 221, 280-81. 292-94- 

3 4 °°- r 

Warnet, 189, 205, 319. 3 ‘M* 3 6 ' 339 * 
Warsaw, 581-82. 

Wellesley, 3. 19. 23. 54U 54 6 * M 8 ’ 
553-54, 563-64, 576. 586-87, 600. 
Wilks, 370. 

Willemet, 721 
W illoughby, 592. 

X a v erimou ton poll 483* 

Yamim, 31, 66, 69, 109-n, *60, 165, 
417. 425. 43 ' • 133 . 11 °. 483- 

486-90, 600. 

Ve/d, 583. 

Yvon, 453, 468 69, 471. 

Zainul Abedin Khan, 201, 334, 524 
Zephir, 25, 162. 




i* i 



