

The House, he observed, would recollect that in the year 1793, several gentlemen of the first character, members of that House, had been examined before the Committee, and stated that houses of known respectability could not, at that period, get money on good bills. At that time not one considerable house failed. He remembered well that there was hardly one house of those which stopped payment which did not afterwards pay in full, possessing more than the amount of all the claims made on the concern. The witnesses examined even had stated the manufacturers who had capitals to be the persons who felt the greatest distress. Under all the circumstances, the question then was, if the remedy resorted to in 1793 ought to be resorted to when the situation of things was different? The present Report, on the contrary, now went, as it were, to countenance the idea that there were manufacturers at present who had no capital at all. It staled, that such merchants could not obtain credit; as if it was to be considered a strange thing that there should be a want of credit where a merchant was not solvent. This was the difference between the Report in 1793, and that now before the House. He would not on this occasion anticipate what might be said on the subject—but he hoped that on some other occasion the House would not fail to discuss and inquire into this evil. The commercial and manufacturing classes were then straitened for want of a circulating medium; but were they so in this instance? At the present moment there was no deficiency of circulating medium, and if securities were unexceptionable they would not now he refused. There was not at present any want of facilities, but want of confidence. Let it be considered, that in the present state of matters the Bank of England, or any persons who advanced money, were partners in every speculation, to the extent of five per cent, without risk. Under these circumstances could it be surprising that there should be great readiness to give credit, and that it should be too greatly extended? In his opinion the great evil arose from too great 340 a facility of procuring credit. And here, without any thing injurious or offensive to the Very respectable individuals concerned, he could not help adverting to the sad catastrophe which had recently occurred in the city (the death of Mr. Goldsmid) to one of the contractors for the late loan, as a consequence of the facility of speculations to a large amount, beyond the means of the parties, and an illustration of his argument. Did gentlemen not see that the race of old English merchants, who never could persuade themselves to go beyond their capital, was superseded by a set of mad and extravagant speculators, who never stopped so long as they could get credit; and that persons of notoriously small capital had now eclipsed those of the greatest consequence; so that speculations now took place even in the lowest article of commerce? In this way had commerce become a sort of wholesale gambling, such as had never before been seen in this country. The state of our circulation was such as fully to justify these observations. In the present state of this country no good could be done by encouraging speculation. He wished that relief should be afforded to the manufacturers, but if any person could, on application, and giving personal security to the satisfaction of the commissioners, receive any part of the sum to be advanced, and, instead of applying it to relieve himself out of the particular embarrassment in which he is at present involved, engage it in general speculation, the only effect of the measure would be, to aggravate the evil which it was intended to remedy. Part of the sum so to be issued might even get into the hands of great speculators, who might use it for the purpose not of diminishing, but of increasing the risks to which they had been already exposed, in the hopes that they might thereby extricate themselves entirely. He saw nothing to secure us against overtrading, even with this sum so to be advanced, or that the relief would be actually given where it was due, and where it was really wanted. If so, the present measure would only go to add six millions to our circulation, and to raise the price of all our commodities. He wished his right hon. friend to consider if means might not be devised for confining the relief to those only who required it. If not, what security had we that a person obtaining part of this sum on credit might not employ it in speculating on the pubic 341 loan of the year? At a period such as the present, when there were such fluctuations in the markets, if the distribution of this relief was not properly looked into, there would be found gentlemen who would avail themselves of the measure to ground on it new and more hazardous speculations. When individual confidence was at the height, that formed a ground for an increase of the circulating medium; but when there was a glut of commodities in the market, such an increase was carefully to be guarded against. If not, we must goon from bad to worse, without ever getting at the root of the evil. Looking at the Report, therefore, he was at a loss to find what the parties meant by saying, that the country banks had no means of making any further advances to assist the manufacturers, as their property was already sunk in bad bills; while the merchants and manufacturers had their property sunk in exports to South America, for which they had had no return. These seemed to him rather as arguments against the conclusions come to in the Report, than in support of them. He had thus thrown out what occurred to him as doubts on this important subject, hoping that they might be removed in the course of the discussions, which the measure would not fail necessarily to receive in its future stages through the House.