

then rose and said, that, in the observations which he felt it his duty to make upon the statement of the right hon. gent., he wished to be understood as having no intention so to oppose the motion with which he had concluded, as to press the question to a division by taking the sense of the House upon it. The right hon. gent. himself had, he observed, admitted that the circumstances of the present period were not similar to those which characterised the distresses felt by the commercial world in the year 1793. In his opinion there was no similarity whatever between them. In the former period the continent of Europe, instead of being hostile to us, was, with the exception of France, not only friendly, but the greater part of it was in alliance with us, and France not only wanted the influence she now possessed and exercised over the surrounding nations, but she was unable to prevent their armies taking the field against her interests. At present, on the contrary, so far from the nations of the continent being friendly, we were altogether shut out from every amicable communication—from all commercial intercourse. The right hon. gent. had said, those who had entered into the early and largest speculations with respect to South America, had been punished for their rashness by bankruptcy, and that those now to be relieved were the victims of those speculations, and not the partners in the crime. For his part, he thought (whatever blame might be attempted to be thrown on those who had been most 334 venturesome) that the origin of the evil might be traced to the exaggerations, the falsehoods, and the misrepresentations which had been heard in that House. South America had been spoken of by the right hon. gent. and his friends as affording a market that would take all our merchandize, and that he looked upon as the great cause of the recent failures, and of the evils of which the mercantile world at present complained. The right hon. gent, had said the present state of things was to be considered as but temporary, though it might be of longer duration than the stagnation felt in 1793; and under these circumstances, he thought the same measure ought to be resorted to as had been adopted on that occasion. He could not agree with this. Was the market of South America glutted at pre sent? Had that country at present more of our merchandize than was sufficient for the consumption of one year? If that were the case, the British manufacturers must stand still till the stock shall be consumed. He could not tell to what amount that country might be stocked with the produce of our industry, but when 6,000,000l. were thus called for, he thought they had a right to conclude that things were in such a situation, that with out such assistance they could not right themselves in less than one, two, or per haps three years. The right hon. gent. had talked of the great increase of the trade of the country, but upon this point he appeared to labour under a mistake. Exports were not trade; but he had; spoken of them as if their amount was a sufficient proof of the flourishing state of our commerce. If we made extra ex ports, we ought to have returns; and if, in stead of this, what we sent out lay locked up in South America for two or three years, it was not thence to be inferred, that because our exports were large, our trade must be great. If men of adventurous and speculating dispositions were to carry their exports to an extreme, were the rest of the community to be called on to enable such men to persevere in their speculations, in fact, to enable them to give further credit until at length their returns may be received? This was-a species of relief which he, for one, could never consent to afford to those who had brought their distresses upon themselves by improvident speculations.