

The right hon. gent: had ascribed the present stagnation of trade and the die 335 tresses of the mercantile body to the state of the markets of South America principally. In this, however, he could not concur. The state of the European markets, on the contrary, appeared to him to be more immediately the operating cause, and what prospect of a change in them within any reasonable time could the right hon. gent, now Bold out? It had been said, that after a glut a brisk demand was to be expected, and a stagnation of trade was usually succeeded by a most advantageous change. He was aware that it had been so hitherto, but it had been so from events which were not such as were likely to occur again. The last time the French seriously directed their attention to the annihilation of our trade, they had been called from the borders of the ocean by the Austrian war. The Spanish contest had made a new diversion in favour of our commerce, but what prospect was there that such events would again take place? They had formerly been told by the right hon. gent, that the edicts of France had shut the markets of the continent against us, but that he (the Chancellor of the Exchequer) had found out an instrument which would soon open them again, and restore the trade of the nation. He then brought forward his Orders of Council, which had been sanctioned by Parliament. He would now ask the right hon. gent. if they had produced that effect, or if there were any probability of their accomplishing, within a short time, the object he had had in view? From the present restricted state of our intercourse, our colonies were rather burdensome than profitable, as their produce was locked up here, in consequence of our being unable to find a market for it on the continent. For the same reason, the conquest of the enemies colonies tended to increase the distress, because while France had colonies, she did not interdict colonial produce altogether, and much English colonial produce found its way to the continent with the produce of the French islands. From the moment France lost all her West Indian possessions, she could have no interest in allowing of such importations, and they were in consequence more strictly excluded than before.

It had been urged by the right hon. gent. in support of the measure he recommended, that, as it could do no mischief, it was worth a trial; and that if no harm was to be apprehended, whilst much good might follow from its operation, it was the 336 duty of Parliament to adopt it. But for his own part, he could not consider the experiment so perfectly harmless, or the measure so obviously safe thought it might possibly do good, and he wished it might; but it appeared to him impossible to return to that state from which they had been unfortunately led by their folly, in a way so very easy and free from danger. That spirit of enterprize which had led to such fatal consequences ought to be discouraged, that something like a stop should be put to such wild and unprofitable speculations. The right hon. gent, had told them that the money to be advanced would not in all probability be lost to the public. He did him (the Chancellor of the Exchequer) the justice to believe he would endeavour to name such Commissioners on the occasion as would do their duty, and look well to the application of the money; but when the House were called upon for 6,000,000l. in Exchequer bills, just after they had funded 12,000,000l. and when they reflected that all the circulating medium at present in the country was paper, it was their duty to consider how far they ought to countenance such extensive issues of paper money. He thought it was their first duty to narrow, as far as might be, the circulation of paper. Whether or not they had now reached that period at which it would be proper to put an end to it altogether, and restore the proper circulating medium, was a question on which he would not venture to decide, but he thought they ought to do something towards putting a stop to the extension, at least, of the paper circulation. It was a painful task to refuse solicited relief to sufferers, who suffered not for their own misconduct, but for the imprudence of others.—Feeling this, he would not take the sense of the House on the subject, but having made these few observations which he had thought it his duty to make, he should abstain from further opposition to the measure proposed. Doing this, he might not act strictly up to his duty, as he thought the principle of a tendency rather to do harm than good; but under such circumstances as the present, he had not resolution enough to oppose that which afforded any thing like a chance of alleviating the distress of those who claimed their assistance.