

said, it was not his intention, in what he should say, to question either the amount of the sum proposed by 337 the Report of the Committee, or the extent of the hardship under which the manufacturer laboured. He begged it to be believed, that, in the observations he should have to make, nothing was farther from his mind than to bear hard on those who were affected by the present state of the commercial credit of the country, particularly on the manufacturers, who were now, by the existing state of things, deprived of a market for their commodities. That class of persons was peculiarly entitled to the protection of Parliament, because from the situation in which they stood they could not have brought the calamity upon themselves by their imprudent and unjustifiable speculations, as they did but execute the orders they had received from the merchants, and were distressed in consequence of the latter being unable to make the proper returns. Notwithstanding the difficulties which must be felt on the subject, as well with respect to the efficacy of the plan, as on account of the inconveniences which might be expected to arise from it in a case where the necessity was so urgent, he would not in any way obstruct the measure in its progress. The difficulty which chiefly struck him, was in discovering in what respect the present period had any resemblance to the state of affairs in the year 1793. He also must own that he felt doubts, and only doubts, as to the efficacy of the measure proposed. If he felt more than doubts on this subject, he should oppose the proposition, but his difficulties being confined merely to doubts, which he should now state, it was not his intention to oppose the measure. He hoped his doubts might be removed, and if they went no farther than the objections stated by the right hon. gent. (Mr. Ponsonby), he should not now allude to them. The right hon. gent. had argued, that the state of commercial credit was not owing to a glut in the market of South America, but to the state of Europe. If he could be persuaded of this, he should not think the matter of so much importance. The successes of France had been progressive, and it naturally followed, that the trade to the continent should also have necessarily accommodated itself to those progressive successes and changes as they occurred; and so the evil must have been less severely felt, if it had not been for other changes. His doubts principally arose from an impression on his mind, that such a case had not been made out as had been proved in the year 1793. The present 338 Report was built principally on a theory of two respectable gentlemen, who said that great relief and also great good had been derived from the accommodation given in the year 1793. They agreed,' indeed, that there was a difference in the state of things at the two periods, but they did not state in what that difference consisted. The Report in the year 1793 laid it down, that the discredit under which paper then laboured had produced a deficiency in the circulating medium, and then went on to state, what, in the opinion of the Committee, would increase the quantity of that circulating medium. The stoppage of one banking-house had then occasioned a distrust of all. Within three months after that, with all the markets of the continent open to us, the markets and manufactories of England were in a state of total stagnation. The public securities were excessively depreciated, Exchequer bills and Navy bills were at 12 or 13 pet cent. discount, and it was impossible to gain discount for the most inconsiderable sum. Was that the case at present? Quite the contrary. Then there was a great deficiency and diminution of circulating medium. Was that the case now? Certainly not, but greatly the reverse. Public securities stood then at a discount. Now they bore a premium. At this moment there was no difficulty in procuring discount of bills with good names upon them. No later than that morning Navy bills were discounted at 4½ percent.—The Bank of England had now to complain, not that they had no funds with which to discount, but of a deficiency of good paper to discount. (Hear! hear! by Mr. Rose.) The right hon. gent, called hear! but if so, this was not the case in the year 1793. If he were to trace it back historically, the case of the year 1793 was as dissimilar from the present as could be in almost every respect. Then there was a fall, not on one commodity; but on every one. There was a rise in the value of money, and a fall on every other commodity whatever. It equally affected every person too, and was of short duration. There was then no want of market, there was no glut or stagnation of trade; but there was a want of individual confidence. Then there was a diminution of the circulating medium. Was that so now? Then the issues by the Bank of England were 14 millions, now they exceeded 23 millions. He wished gentlemen to consider the essential difference in the state of things 339 then and at the present moment. Now there was a demand in the country for good paper; and the Rank of England, so far from confining its discounts, has, in consequence of the want of good bills to discount, been purchasing largely of government securities. He wished the present Report had been more explicit.