

thought the difficulty of so serious a nature, that they were bound to do all they could to remove it. He agreed with the hon. bart. as to the propriety of equalizing the condition of parliamentary and private creditors, and' thought that though the relief might not prove to be sufficient, it was but right to make the experiment.

would not say that he was courageous enough to resist the vote at present, but he was anxious to be distinctly understood as not intending to pledge himself so far as to prevent his retracting, if at a future stage his conviction told him that it would be right. Of all those who had spoken, not one had expressed a sanguine notion of the success of the measure. The right hon. the Chancellor of the Exchequer had declined answering a question which he had put to him the other day, as to whether he was prevailed upon by importunity to accede to the measure, or was converted to it. If he might judge from the speech of the right hon. gentleman to-night, it appeared that he was no convert, but was persuaded by importunity. The hon. baronet (sir Robert Peele) had spoken with great feeling, but the question was not whether, they should yield to feeling, but whether, the grant of six millions was likely to be of advantage to the operative manufacturer? He characterised the Report as one of the most loose and ill digested that ever was laid before the House, and selected some parts from Mr. Gordon's evidence to prove an inconsistency in his statements. He charged the Committee with not attending sufficiently to the re-' solutions of the Deputation, and reminded the House that he had originally objected to the formation of the Committee, upon the ground that it was likely to be influenced by too large a portion of feeling. He wished that the Report upon the other Exchequer bills had been received before' this motion was made, and alluded to the representation of the flourishing state' of trade in the King's speech of last session.

agreed in one thing with the hon. gentleman who had just sat down, and that was the observation that the circumstance of the measure having been brought into the House should not prevent him, or any one, from voting against it, if upon a further view it appeared not to be beneficial. With respect to the hon. gentleman's assertion, that he (the Chancellor of the Exchequer) had yielded to importunity instead of being a convert to the measure, he would own that he had not the same sanguine hope as in the year 1793, but still he thought that it afforded a favourable chance of relief and ought to be tried. Although the most favourable circumstance in the other case did not exist in the present, still there were many favourable circumstances in this case which were not in the other. The market was not now open as it was then, but in 1793 there was a great fall in the stocks, the 3 per-cents. fell from near 100 down to 70, which produced a total loss of capital which could not be relieved by the measure. A right hon. bart. had stated what would in his opinion be the operation of it upon general credit. It was true, that in the former instance the writ of extent was unlimited, but it might be limited now if deemed expedient. The effect it would produce, he thought, must be to make the friends of the party more cautious of coming forward, unless he could give sufficient security in available property. There were now in the warehouses double the quantity of articles that were lodged in them the year before, and these were not merely applicable to the foreign market, but to the home one also, He differed in opinion from those who thought that by removing the Orders in Council they would open a market on the continent. It was not owing to the Orders in Council that the markets were closed, but to the Decrees of the enemy. He contended, that the Orders in Council, so far from being objectionable, had answered the purpose for which they were intended, by driving the tyrant of the continent to such an extremity as to burn all British commodities; an act by which he destroyed more of the property of his own subjects than of the British merchants. They had driven him to such an act as might afford a chance of ridding the world of its oppressor. He agreed with the hon. gentleman, that if he found he had been wrong, it would not be undignified to change his conduct; but he would beg of 350 that hon. gent, to keep his mind open, when he should come to the question, and be cautious of adopting it as a certainty, that the repeal of the Orders in Council was all the Americans wanted. He was: glad the House was inclined to agree to his proposition in the present stage, and declared his determination to change his conduct, if in the progress of the measure he saw any ground for so doing.