back of the complete sample regressions is the comparison of heterogenous regions that undertook very

different paths of socio-economic development even before the treatment. To reduce heterogeneity in

the sample, I then compare only regions located at a maximal distance of 50 km to a border. This border

separates those regions that kept the code for about 90 years from those in which the Code was either

never introduced or dismissed in 1815, after the Congress of Vienna. The results confirm the findings

from the complete sample analysis: Treated regions exhibit higher levels of trust in the SOEP data. This

is remarkable, as one would expect - in the absence of any treatment - spatially closely located individu-

als to be relatively similar in their attitudes. Indeed, a falsification test confirms this presumption. When

the border is moved artificially outwards to the North-East or inwards to the South-West and a placebo

treatment constructed, individuals in placebo treated regions do not show significant differences in trust

levels.

I try to dismiss further doubts about the independence of the treatment with pre-treatment regional char-

acteristics by comparing regional pre-treatment means of a set of variables identified by the literature

as historical determinants of current levels of social trust. Treated and untreated regions turn out to not

differ significantly with respect to those dimensions.

Arguably, the period of Napoleonic occupation did not only alter the law. In addition, the administration,

as well as the educational system were changed and old elites removed. My treatment variable, which

acts like a regional fixed effect, might rather proxy for the legacy of those changes. While I cannot

control quantitatively for all unobserved regional heterogeneity, those factors are likely of subordinate

importance compared to the legacy of the Napoleonic Code Civil. This is for a simple reason: Unlike

the other reforms Napoleon introduced, the Code Civil lasted even after the Napoleonic retreat in 1815

for several decades. While possible, it is not very probable, that the short run-reforms were the main

driver of the long-run change in beliefs. Historical evidence I will present supports this interpretation.

Moreover, the results hold true even within a the formal borders of the Prussian kingdom, in other words

holding kingdom characteristics constant.

The second part of the paper aims at shedding light on a possible channel and the immediate effects of

the Napoleonic institutions on cooperation in the 19th century. I first look at potential effects on eco-

nomic cooperation, focusing on sectors in which people interact frequently in business relations and rely

on trust and reciprocity, such as in trade, factory employment and craft. Indeed, treated regions show

a higher fraction of the population working as traders, factory workers or as craftsmen. To further test,

whether cooperation inside the work environment spilled over on cooperation outside the work-place, I


                                                     4
