gathered two different measures of 19th century social capital. First, I collected data on memberships

in gymnast clubs (Turnvereine) and the per capita share of volunteer firemen in associated volunteer fire

departments on the county level and find them to be positively associated with the treatment. Second,

I make use of a panel dataset measuring the number of shooting associations (Schützenvereine), having

been founded between 1700 and 1900 per county in the neighboring provinces Rhineland and West-

phalia. The panel data allows me to run regression yielding, that the number of associations increased

significantly faster in the second half of the 19th century in the treated province Rhineland compared

to its neighbor Westphalia. As this paper is one of the rare papers using additionally social capital data

from the 19th century, it allows to discuss briefly persistence in the last part of the paper.9

This paper relates and contributes to several strands of the literature broadly researching the effects of

institutions, culture and its interrelation. The first strand emphasizes the “deep-roots” of social capital

levels we observe today. It goes back to Putnam (1994), who argued that differences in social capital

between the North and South of Italy can be explained by the institutions associated with free and in-

dependent medieval city states in the northern part of Italy. This hypothesis is empirically tested and

proven to be valid by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008a). In the same spirit, Tabellini (2010) finds

in a sample of 69 European regions that past institutions in the 18th century measured by the constraints

on the executive are highly correlated with trust levels today. While those contributions characterize

past institutions broadly as democracy, my approach departs from this definition as it considers a legal

enforcement institution, and thus contains a precise mechanism for the observed positive relationship

between past institutions and beliefs. The paper closest in its methodology is Becker et al. (2011a), who

research the persistent impact of living in the Habsburg Empire, a kingdom characterized by its efficient

administration. Focusing on individuals living in an area within 200 kilometers of the Empire’s former

border, the authors find individuals living in its former territory today to show more trust in institutions.

Apart from historical institutions, other historical shocks have been found to alter norms and beliefs of a

societies’ inhabitants long-lastingly. Examples include the African slave trade, (Nunn and Wantchekon,

2011) and the surveillance apparatus in the former Communist Germany (Jacob and Tyrell, 2010).10,11


    9 Further evidence for the persistence of a particular cultural attitude, antisemitism, in Germany has been described by

Voigtländer and Voth (2012)
    10 Interesting in the context of this paper, Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) hypothesize, that the slave trade did not only

deteriorate social capital, but also paved the way for expropriate governmental institutions and a lax rule of law. In particular,
they identify the weak legal system to be an important factor of the persistence of mistrust in the affected regions. Unconstrained
political leaders are not forced to act trustworthy, and people can misbehave without being held responsible. Hence societies
are stuck in an equilibrium of distrust and bad institutions
    11 Aghion et al. (2010) provide further evidence for a potentially detrimental role of the state for trust in the case of extensive

regulation.


                                                                  5
