  L AW AND S OCIAL C APITAL : E VIDENCE FROM THE C ODE
                 N APOLEON IN G ERMANY∗

                                             Johannes C. Buggle†
                                    Sciences Po, Department of Economics


                                          First version: May 22, 2012
                                            This version: July 2, 2013


                                                       Abstract

Do legal institutions affect norms of cooperation? Using the introduction of the Code Napoleon during
the Napoleonic Wars in Germany as a historical experiment, I show that a positive shock to the quality
of legal institutions can increase social-capital long-lastingly. I find that individuals living in regions
where the Code Napoleon was used display higher levels of interpersonal trust in the data of the German
Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP). This result holds true conditional on past development levels, as well
as in a less heterogeneous border sample, separating regions that applied the Code Napoleon from those
that did not. Artificially moving the border and comparing regional pre-treatment characteristics support
the interpretation of a causal treatment effect. In addition, I show immediate effects of the Code Civil on
novel measures of 19th century social capital. The analysis of historical employment data furthermore
suggests economic cooperation to be a potential mechanism for the relationship between legal institutions
and social capital.

Keywords: Institutions, Long-Term Persistence, Social Capital.

JEL-Classification: N43, O10, P48, Z10




   ∗ I am grateful to Yann Algan for his ongoing support and encouragement. I thank Francesco Amodio, Davide Cantoni,

Pauline Grosjean, Marc Sangnier, Andrei Shleifer, Guido Tabellini, Joachim Voth and seminar participants at the FRESH
Meeting London, the UPF Reading Group on Persistence, the Spring Meeting for Young Economists 2013, and Sciences Po
for very helpful comments and discussions at different stages of this project. Valuable research assistance was provided by
Ferdinand Lutz and Malte Syman. I wish further to thank the DIW Berlin for making the SOEP data available, as well as the
GESIS Leibniz Institute for Social Sciences. All errors remain my own.
    † Contact: 28 Rue des Saints-Pères, 75007 Paris, e-mail: johannes.buggle@sciences-po.org.
