economic interaction are discouraged as individuals have high incentives to cheat. This contrasts with

an environment where legal enforcement is strong, and individuals, risking punishment by the law, are

incentivized to cooperate. In a nutshell, in the second state of the world trust will emerge as a by-product

of cooperation experienced in economic and social interactions.6 The reason why shocks affecting trust

can manifest itself until today, is that beliefs transmitted inter-generationally from parents to children

incorporate experiences made in the past in different institutional environments. A second distinctive

feature of this paper is that it analyzes a change in the quality of the law that has not been created by the

individuals for which it applies, but that has been imposed from outside. In other words, compared to

existing contributions correlating past institutions with current social capital, my identification strategy

is based on a rare historical experiment characterized by an exogenous change in the legal quality. Such

historical experiment creates furthermore an ideal setting for studying the effects of institutions on cul-

ture, as it accounts for the long-term dimension necessary for observing substantial changes in beliefs

over time. This important time-dimension is usually absent when analyzing current legal reforms or in

experimental designs.

The introduction of the Code Napoleon is characterized by a drastic movement from a weak of rule of

law to impartial legal enforcement in parts of 19th century Germany. The Code improved enforcement

by establishing establishing universal access to the law, commercial freedom and an impartial judicial

system. Using micro data from the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP), I show that those regions in

which the Code Napoleon was introduced display higher levels of social capital related attitudes today.

I start by comparing all regions that have used the Code Civil in the 19th century to regions that did not

apply it, taking the number of years the Code Civil was applied before 1900 as the treatment.7 Impor-

tantly, the positive association does not reflect simple differences in 19th century regional development

levels. It is robust to condition on historical controls, such as measures for past urbanization rates.

While the results suggest an effect of the Code Civil on contemporaneous levels of trust, there exist al-

ternative explanations that could account for the positive association observed. First, differences in the

initial social structure in regions applying the Code Civil might drive the results, if, for example, regions

with high initial social capital were more likely to be treated.8 In this case, rather than identifying a

treatment effect, the estimation would just pick up a path dependency of initial conditions. One draw-

    6 Supporting cooperation is, however, not the only channel through which the law can influence social capital. Legal rules,

e.g. the principle of equality, can potentially spread on a more direct way into the society and become moral norms over time.
     7 In 1900, a unified Civil Code was installed in all German provinces, the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch.
     8 Indeed, my identification strategy requires the adoption of the Code Civil to be uncorrelated with initial social capital

levels.


                                                               3
