                                                1      I NTRODUCTION

Social capital levels across and within countries are highly correlated with the quality of past and contem-

porary institutions (Putnam, 1994; Tabellini, 2008 and Tabellini, 2010; Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales,

2008a; Algan and Cahuc, 2013).1 However, empirical findings of a causal impact of impartial enforce-

ment institutions on norms of cooperation are almost non-existent. Identification is particularly difficult

as initial cultural norms of a society starkly influence the shape of its institutions. In this paper I make

use of a historical experiment during which a legal institution was imposed from outside to identify

the persistent impact of law on social capital. This historical experiment, the introduction of the Code

Napoleon in parts of 19th century Germany, constituted a dramatic positive shock to the quality of exist-

ing legal institutions. Centered around the most modern legal code at that time and establishing a third

party enforcement institution with the principle of equality before the law, the Napoleonic institutions

“encouraged the liberation of the individual from corporative bonds and the establishment of a civil soci-

ety" (Fehrenbach, 2008). My findings, estimated on the micro-level within a country, show that regions

that used the Napoleonic Civil Code throughout the 19th century display on average higher levels of

social capital.2 This supports the description of the positive social effects of the Code Napoleon and its

legacy persisting to the present day.3

My analysis contributes to the recently emerging literature emphasizing the weight of history and par-

ticularly historical institutions for current beliefs.4 However, it differs from the latter in two important

dimensions. First, rather then applying a broad definition of institutions, this paper considers a specific

type: the law. In line with recent theoretical models (e.g. Tabellini, 2008; Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales,

2008b), I expect impartial legal enforcement institutions to affect trust as they promote individual coop-

eration with anonymous others.5 Initially, in a society characterized by weak law enforcement, social and
     1 In a cross-section of countries one can observe a strong positive association between the quality of the legal system and

trust, as Figure 1 displays. Countries protecting individual property stronger and in which courts and judges are independent and
impartial display higher levels of interpersonal trust. This does not merely mirror an income effect, since the positive association
is robust to controlling for income and education (see Figure 2). It cannot be deduced, however, that there exists a causal link
going from the quality of the legal system to interpersonal trust. It is equally likely, that countries, in which individuals trust
each other to a higher extent, also have stronger preferences for protecting property and value more an impartial and independent
jury.
     2 Throughout this paper I apply a broad definition of “social capital” encompassing different measures used in the literature,

such as individual beliefs as well as outcome measures.
     3 The long-run consequences of the law for economic outcomes has been intensively documented by scholars researching

different legal origins. See for example López-de-Silanes et al. (1998) and La Porta, López-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008).
     4 See Nunn (2012) for a comprehensive summary of the literature relating history and culture.
     5 In the Appendix I propose a simple model of the type suggested by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008b), introducing

a third stage in the trust game, in which a court enforces contracts. The model enables me to make the cooperation decision
contingent on the quality of the enforcement institution. The model predicts, that increasing the quality of the law will lead to
more investment and higher levels of cooperation. Institutions can overcome the “no-trust-no-trade" equilibrium.


                                                                 2
