Several theoretical contributions have tried to explain the persistence of cultural norms that has been

documented empirically. The seminal contribution was made by Bisin and Verdier (2001). In their model

parents transmit cultural traits to their children taking into account their future expected payoff. Tabellini

(2008) builds on this model, and studies the determinants of cooperation and the evolution of norms

over time. In his model, an exogenous shock to the quality of the enforcement institution, that reduces

the loss of being cheated in a prisoners dilemma game, increases the scope of cooperation. Tabellini

further argues, that when individuals can choose institutions by participating in the political process,

good institutions will be reinforced. Shocks to the quality of institutions in the past are amplified by their

affect on culture. Not values, but beliefs are the dimension of social capital Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales

(2008b) model to be passed from parents to children in a framework of an overlapping generations model.

The model gives a rationale why differences in social capital originating in history are still observable

today.12

My paper is also related to contributions researching the short-term effects of punishment and contract

enforcement on cooperative behavior (see for example Fehr and Gächter (2000) for experimental evi-

dence; Fisman and Miguel (2007) for evidence from a field experiment). Most recently Cassar, d’Adda,

and Grosjean (2012) gathered interesting evidence for a causal link from institutions to norms of coop-

erations from experiments conducted in Italy and Kosovo.

Finally, my findings add to the analysis of the economic consequences attributed to institutions in gen-

eral (see for example Smith, 1776; Milgrom, North, and Weingast, 1990; De Long and Shleifer, 1993;

Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001; La Porta, López-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2008; Cantoni and

Yuchtman, 2012) and the Napoleonic institutions, as described in Acemoglu et al. (2011), in particular.13

A shortcoming of this fascinating literature describing strong and persistent links between institutions

and aggregated development is the lack of a detailed understanding of the channels going from insti-

tutions to economic outcomes. The results presented here do not only reinforce the interpretation of a

positive impact on cooperation and trade, but potentially provide one of the channels through which (ex-

ogenously imposed) institutions can be favorable for economic growth: individual norms of cooperation.

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives a brief description of the historical context needed for

the empirical part. Section 3 assesses the effects of the Napoleonic institutions on current social capital

outcomes, both in a sample of complete Germany and in a border sample. Section 4 shows the effects
   12 Empirical evidence of the intergenerational transfer of values can be found in Dohmen et al. (2012).
   13 Another strand of the literature disputes the fundamental role of institutions for economic development. See for example

Glaeser et al. (2004) for the debate on the importance of human capital versus institutions.


                                                              6
