      geoisie from buying land, and deterred the nobles from engaging in industry and commerce.

      (Lyons, 1994, p. 235)

In particular in the Rhineland the transformation was drastic, from a region characterized before the

Napoleonic occupation as a “particularly old-fashioned, pre-absolutistic, feudal system"19 (Nipperdey,

1983, p. 78), to being “ well advanced socially to the rest of Germany"20 , (Nipperdey, 1983, p. 78). This

happened, because "the French law and his idea of a society made up of free and equal property owners

have penetrated the civil movement"21 , (Nipperdey, 1983, p. 79).

Thus, the Napoleonic reforms laid the foundation for a modern society, in which a greater share of the

population was able to acquire property, to engage in trade and commerce, which was backed up by a

strong centralized legal institution. Birth was not anymore decisive for social status, since “ownership

of property in a free market” became the “main criterion for social stratification” (Sperber, 1992, p. 33).

Comparing the Rhineland to the rest of Prussia, Sperber describes Prussia as a far less progressive king-

dom, with social structures and institutions “too different from those [...] along the Rhine” (Sperber,

1992, p. 38). While in the Rhenish territories, “the tone was set by the bourgeois elite of bankers, mer-

chants, manufactures, rentiers, lawyers and notaries” (Sperber, 1992, p. 38), i.e. a large and important

bourgeoisie and middle class, the nobility was still highly influential in Prussia. This enlarged access to

the market and the participation of a greater share of the society resulted in more economic growth in the

affected regions (Acemoglu et al., 2011).



 3    E STIMATING THE E FFECT ON C ONTEMPORANEOUS S OCIAL C APITAL

This section estimates the impact of the Napoleonic institutions on survey data outcomes related to trust

and cooperation in current day Germany. I start by analyzing the association between the Code Civil

and current social trust in a sample of 16 historical territories covering almost the entire current Federal

Republic. To remove heterogeneity in characteristics potentially affecting the outcome variables, I then

restrict the sample to a border sample separating regions that applied the Code Civil for on average over

90 years from regions that applied it for only about 5 years. Next, I create a fictitious treatment by moving

the border to further test the existence of a “true" treatment effect. To address the concern of a violation

of the independence of the treatment with pre-treatment social capital levels, I finally compare mean

  19 Author’s translation.
  20 Author’s translation.
  21 Author’s translation.




                                                     10
