differences between the treatment groups of pre-treatment characteristics mattering for social capital and

discuss alternative explanations.



                                     3.1    Contemporaneous Data

Measures for contemporaneous social capital levels in Germany are created by using survey data from the

German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP) (Wagner, Frick, and Schupp, 2007). The SOEP asked questions

about personal attitudes in the years 2003 and 2008. I only make use of the 2003 wave, as it includes

a richer set of control variables. The outcome variable I am primarily interested in is interpersonal

trust. In the survey, respondents have to evaluate (“totally agree”, “slightly agree”, “disagree slightly”,

“totally disagree”) the following three statements related to interpersonal trust: “On the whole one can

trust people”, “Nowadays one cannot rely on anyone”, and “If one is dealing with strangers, it is better

to be careful before one can trust them”. I recode the variables on a scale from 1 to 4, such that the

highest value is assigned to the highest level of trust. The variable Trust is then computed as the average

out of the individual scores for each question. To undertake robustness checks I also construct two

additional variables measuring norms of cooperation. The SOEP asks respondents about the perceived

behavior of others with respect to fairness: “Do you agree that most people... a) exploit you if they had

the opportunity or b) would attempt to be fair towards you?”, as well as with respect to helpfulness:

“Would you say that for most of the time, people... a) attempt to be helpful? b) or only act in their own

interests?”. Out of those questions I construct two binary outcome variables, labeled Fair and Help, such

that the value 1 indicates a higher level of perceived fairness, respectively willingness to help. As Guiso,

Sapienza, and Zingales (2010) show for the WVS, answers from social value survey questions concerning

trust reflect the beliefs of the sender about the trustworthiness of the receiver. This is perfectly relevant

here in order to elicit the updating and persistence of beliefs following a exogenous legal change. As the

treatment should only affect measures related to cooperative attitudes, I additionally construct a measure

of the strength of family ties as a counterfactual. I use the frequency of family visits as a proxy for the

importance of the family. Individuals with strong family ties are likely to visit their family members

more often. The related question in the SOEP asks “Please indicate how often you take part in each

activity: Visits to and from family members and relatives”. The variable is measured on a 5 point scale,

where 1 indicates “daily”, 2 “at least once a week”, 3 “at least once a month”, 4 “seldom”, 5 “never”.

That is a higher score of the variable Family indicates weaker family ties.

The geographical level up to which individual observations can be located regionally is the county level.


                                                     11
