the urbanization rate in 1850, the longitude and latitude of the historical territory, and the distance of its

capital to Paris. The share of protestants has been shown to be a good proxy for educational attainment

(Becker and Woessmann, 2009) and protestantism goes along with values favorable for cooperation

compared to catholicism (Alesina and La Ferrara, 2002; Tabellini, 2008). Controlling for past influences

almost doubles the magnitude of the coefficient and increases its significance for all outcome variables,

as shown in columns (8) to (10). Having applied the Code Civil for a standard deviation of 37 years goes

along with 0.06 of a standard deviation higher level of trust, while 90 years go along with an increase

of 0.17 of a standard deviation in trust. To put this magnitude in relation, switching from catholicism to

protestantism increases individual trust on average by 0.006 of a standard deviation, being unemployed

reduces trust by 0.22 of a standard deviation, while having lived in the former GDR reduces trust by a

coefficient of 0.15 of a standard deviation in trust.



                                  3.3    Robustness of the Complete Sample

I will perform additional regressions in the framework of the complete sample to show the robustness of

the results in different sub-samples. Restricting the sample provides furthermore a possibility to mitigate

possible endogeneity concerns related to the adoption of the Code Civil. In the first specification I will

drop the historical territories Baden and Saxony, which choose to adopt the Code Civil - although this

choice was severely constrained in the case of Baden. The finding of a positive, significant effect is robust

to this specification, as column (1) in Table3 show. Next, only regions are kept in the sample that either

adopted the Code Civil through Napoleonic occupation, adopted it voluntarily or at least prepared its

adoption, as the two members of the Confederation of the Rhine Bavaria and Hesse-Darmstadt, did. The

idea is to compare places that almost got the Code Civil, with those having actually adopted it, removing

regions from the sample that rejected the Code Civil completely and did not consider its application.25

Thus, the sample is characterized by a lower degree of heterogeneity in the adoption decision. I still find

a positive, significant effect in column (2).

                                                  Table 3 about here

Going one step further, I consider only regions that adopted the Code Civil either voluntarily or prepared

to adopt it. This leaves me with the regions Baden, Bavaria and Hesse-Darmstadt. All three regions

where never directly occupied by Napoleon, but indirectly connected to the French Empire through the


  25 The classification of whether a region considered the Code’s adoption is taken from Arvind and Stirton (2010)




                                                            14
