Confederation of the Rhine, and as such pushed by the French Emperor to adopt its institutions. As

column (3) shows, Baden, the region that has actually adopted the Code Civil has significantly more trust

today. The estimated coefficient in column (4) shows that there exists a positive relationship between

the years of the Code Civil was in place and trust in a sample of regions that actually applied the Code

Civil for at least some years. This indicates that it is not the pure adoption of the Code Civil, but the

duration which matters for long-run changes in beliefs. Moreover, within a sample of regions that all

were occupied by the French Army in column (5) I find the same positive relationship between having

the duration of the Code Civil and trust today. While possibly all occupied regions experienced the same

Napoleonic effects of the occupation, those in which the Code Civil was used after the Napoleonic retreat

show higher trust today. Finally, within Prussia the positive association holds true (see column (6)), i.e.

holding kingdom characteristics constant from 1815 on.



                                           3.4    Identification

Up to this point this section has established a robust positive association between the application of an

impartial legal enforcement institution in 19th century German regions and trust in different samples.

Two explanations can potentially account for this finding: First, treated regions were characterized by

higher levels of social capital before the treatment took place. In other words, the treatment was not

distributed independently of the initial culture. In that case, the results from the estimation only picks

up path dependencies reflecting pre-treatment differences. Second, regions started out with comparable

levels of social capital and the Napoleonic treatment influenced social capital levels positively, i.e. there

existed a causal effect.

In the following paragraphs I will show that the evidence from a border sample (3.5 and 3.6) and the

comparison of pre-treatment characteristics (3.7) point overwhelmingly towards the second explanation,

that is a true treatment effect. Treatment in this historical experiment contains the adoption and continu-

ation of the Code Civil. The evaluation of the historical literature, as described above, suggests that the

selection and occupation of the territories by the French Army was not driven by economic or cultural

factors, but by geo-political motives. Equally important for the identification strategy is the question why

regions that adopted the Code Civil did not continue its application after 1815. The historical sources

give rise to the interpretation that the continuation largely depended on the outcome of the political bar-

gain at the Congress of Vienna and the level of reform-mindedness of local autocratic rulers, most likely

at conflict with the preferences and values of their citizens.


                                                     15
