1813) and Hesse-Kassel (1808-1814). In the indirectly controlled states of the Confederation of the

Rhine, Napoleon “pushed for the adoption of the Code” (Arvind and Stirton, 2010). Of those states only

Baden finally adopted the Code Civil in 1810, motivated by the fear of a potential Napoleonic influence

and incorporated in a larger agenda of defensive modernization (Acemoglu et al., 2011).

Crucial for the continuation of the Napoleonic institutions after 1815 was the reallocation of previously

occupied regions at the Congress of Vienna in 1815. As a result of the Congress, several of the old rulers

regained their power, rolling back the Napoleonic institutions in regions such as Brunswick, Saxony,

Hanover and Hesse-Kassel. Where territories were allocated to states that could not offer an alternative

civil code, as in the case of the Bavarian Palatinate given to Bavaria, those territories were commonly

allowed to keep the Code Napoleon (see Stein, 2004). Only in the case of Prussia that gained power

over regions in the West of Germany, in particular the territories of Westphalia and the Rhineland, things

were slightly different. While the Prussian rulers forced its new province of Westphalia to abandon the

Code Napoleon and to apply the Prussian Civil Code, the ALR, the neighboring province Rhineland was

allowed to keep the Napoleonic institutions (Stein, 2004). The Rhineland was in a special situation as

it has been part of the French Empire and as such had been applying the Code Civil for a much longer

time before 1815. The continuation of the Napoleonic institutions in this part was supported by “reform-

minded Prussian officials" that “played a crucial role in ensuring that [it] was not immediately swept

aside", (Rowe, 2003, p. 281). Although the continuation was also favored by local elites, who came to

acknowledge the value of the French institutions and who saw in the Code Civil a protection against

arbitrary authority of the new unknown rulers from the East, (Rowe, 2003, p. 281), they were not in the

position to decide. Importantly, the power to decide about the continuation of the Code Civil ultimately

lay in the hands of the new autocratic rulers and was therefore independent of the population’s opinion.

As a result, the Code Civil existed throughout the 19th century in the Rhineland (given to Prussia),

consisting of the areas West to the Rhine river and small parts on the right bank of the Rhine, formerly

belonging to the Duchy of Berg, the Bavarian Palatinate (given to Bavaria), the part left of the Rhine

belonging to Hessen-Darmstadt, as well as Baden.16,17 Figure 3 pictures the distribution of civil law in

Germany throughout the 19th century. Besides the regions using the Code Civil, most of the remaining

German regions either sticked to common law or applied the Prussian ALR throughout the 19th century.

                                                   Figure 3 about here

  16 Table B.1 in the Appendix lists the number of years the Code Civil was in place per territory.
  17 In the Rhineland only the districts Essen, Duisburg, Muehlheim (Ruhr) did not keep it.




                                                              8
