This geographical level is equivalent to the NUTS 3 level of the Statistical Units of the European Union

and includes more than 400 regions.22 To control for other influences of social capital I will include sev-

eral individual control variables, such as the respondent’s age and its square, dummy variables indicating

the gender of the respondent and whether the respondent was unemployed in the last year or not, as well

as the household income in the last month. To account for the legacy of the former Communist regime

in Germany I add another dummy that takes on the value 1 if the respondent lived before 1990 in the

former East of Germany. Education is controlled for using six different indicator variables for school-

ing and distinguishes between having no school degree at all, having attended a 9 year middle school

(Hauptschule), a 10 year middle school (Realschule), a 12 year secondary school (Fachhochschulreife)

or having obtained the highest secondary school degree after 13 years of school (Abitur). Furthermore,

I control for five categories of religious affiliation which are protestant, catholic, any other Christian

religion, a different religion that is not Christian or none religious affiliation at all. Since my focus of

attention lies on the intergenerational transfer of individuals’ beliefs from their ancestors that have lived

in the particular historical territory many years ago, ideally I would like to consider only individuals for

which I can identify the historical territory of their ancestors residence during the 19th century. Unfortu-

nately, the SOEP data does not provide information about the location of ancestors. The second-best in

order to reduce a possible bias caused by migration is to delete foreigners, that is non-German citizens as

well as second generation immigrants, from the sample. These individuals most likely share a different

culture, traditions and norms that are linked to their country of origin.23

                                                      Table 1 about here

The current location of each individual is matched with the 16 historical territories for which historical

data is available, i.e. historical territories are matched to current districts. Historical borders match

remarkably well with current district borders and cut only through very few districts. Current districts

that straddle a historical border will be assigned to a historical region depending of the historical location

of the districts current capital. As historical controls I include the territories urbanization rate in 1850

to control for mere historical income differences across territories, the initial urbanization rate and the

share of protestants in 1800, the longitude and latitude of the territories’ capital and its distance to Paris.

The source for the historical data is Acemoglu et al. (2011).24 Table 1 provides summary statistics for
   22 Because of the confidentiality requirements of the data on this detailed regional level it was accessed via a remote access.
   23 Against the deletion of immigrants one could argue, that past institutions persisted and influenced beliefs and values of all

citizens today. However, this is not the channel that is proposed here. In contrast, I argue that past institutions affected beliefs
and values in the past, and these attitudes persisted until today. See also Algan and Cahuc (2010) for the correlation between
trust of immigrants and trust in the home country.
    24 Table B.1 in the Appendix gives the territories included in the sample and the treatment.




                                                                12
