GIS measured distance of 50 km to the border. Figure 5 displays the spatial distribution of the treatment.

                                            Figure 5 about here

In contrast to the the complete sample analysis, it is more natural to define the treatment as a dummy

variable that takes on the value 1 if the region is located on the left side of the border, and 0 otherwise.

I will refer to the first group as the treated and the latter as the untreated. The treated group kept the

Code Civil on average more than 90 years and thus significantly longer than the regions on the right of

the border. Summary Statistics for the border sample are also displayed in Table 1.

                                             Table 4 about here

Table 4 shows the results of the regressions conducted. The first regression includes all border locations,

even those located in Federal States without within state treatment variation. The coefficient of the

treatment border controlling for individual controls is positive and significant on the 1 percent level.

Individuals living in the treated regions, have on average a 0.04 higher level of trust. To be able to include

Federal States fixed effects, I restrict the sample so that only federal states with within variation in the

treatment remain. Consequently I keep only counties located in the territories Rhineland, Westphalia,

Mark, Baden and Wuerttemberg. In column (2) an identical model as in column (1) is regressed, this

time using the restricted sample. The results are comparable in magnitude, although with a coefficient

of 0.05 a bit higher and significant on the 1 percent level. Column (3) to (4) show the robustness of

this result using the other two social capital related questions as outcomes. Column (5) to (7) include

controls for religion, education, economic controls as well as Federal States fixed effects that account for

unobserved heterogeneity on the federal state level. The treatment variable stays positive and significant

for all outcomes. The magnitude of the effect for trust (0.049) is larger then the influence of the personal

controls and religion, but smaller then the effect of education and economic controls. Having applied

the Code Civil results in about 0.1 of a standard deviation higher trust today. When the same model is

regressed using family values as a counterfactual attitude, I do not find a significant difference between

treated and untreated regions. This again supports the peculiar impact of the quality of institutions on

cooperation. In column (9), only the two historical regions Rhineland and Westphalia are compared,

thus excluding Baden, and Wuerttemberg. The exclusion follows the same reasoning as in the complete

sample analysis, as Baden, which did not directly adopt the Code Civil through French occupation,

is dropped. It is a particularly interesting specification as it allows to identify within Prussia effects,

as both, Rhineland and Westphalia were part of Prussia after 1815. In other words, holding all other



                                                     17
