Figure 4 shows the years the Code Civil was in place in a territory before 1900.

                                                    Figure 4 about here

The Code Civil altered the existing law in several dimensions, of which two stand out: First, it granted

equality before the law to all men, removing any form of privileged treatment for nobilities in front of the

court. This implied that the same rules applied to everyone, independent of income and status (Lyons,

1994, p. 95). This principle does clearly differentiate the Code Civil from all other legal sources at that

time. Although the ALR also contained the principal of equality before the law, in practice it was not

enforced. The Partimonialgerichtsbarkeit, the privilege of the landlords to administer the law, was still

allowed and practiced commonly in Prussia and in the rest of Germany. Equal access to an impartial

law increased law enforcement. It was furthermore fostered by the reformation of the entire judicial

procedures and the installation of new courts of appeal, as well as commercial courts.18

Second, the Code Civil guaranteed property rights and commercial freedom, including a “modern con-

ception of property ownership” (Lyons, 1994, p. 96). All individuals were granted absolute rights of

ownership and starting a business only required a business license from the local city administration

(Becker, 1985). Sperber (1992, p. 38) describes the civil liberties established by the Code Civil as having

been exceptional in early 19th century Germany. While the institutional reforms also included the ref-

ormation of the administration and the removal of old elites, compared to the Code Civil those were of

subordinate importance. As Rowe puts it, the “Napoleonic rule, far from making Rhinelanders used to

authoritarianism, endowed them with a new set of institutions that blunted it. Chief amongst these was

the law.” (Rowe, 2003, p. 281)



                                              2.2     Social Consequences

As a result of the Napoleonic occupation the entire social system that had been predominant for hundreds

of years was reformed and altered almost over night, with the aim of a more equal society. As the

historian Martin Lyons notes:

       [...] the abolition of privilege also removed the social barriers which had prevented the bour-

   18 In the territories left of the Rhine for example, ordinary people were appointed as Justices of Peace (JP), being in charge

of pre-trial settlements of minor cases. They were in particular appealed in labor conflicts in a more and more industrialized
society (Haferkamp), settling disputes in the market about the quality of work between masters and manufacturers, as well as
those between masters and journeymen or apprentices, who often broke contracts and left their masters on their own (Sperber,
1992, p. 55). “Courts would provide a remedy by ensuring the exact fulfillment of [...] contracts”, writes Sperber (1992, p. 56)
and refers to the manufacturing tribunals, which provided a form of “industrial mediation” between manufacturers, workers
and journeymen (Sperber, 1992, p. 55)


                                                               9
