the individual data for both the complete and the border sample. After the deletion of immigrants and

those territories, for which historical data is not available, more than 15000 individuals are observed and

included in the complete sample.



                                    3.2    Complete Sample Analysis

I will begin with estimating the effect of the Code Civil for current trust keeping a sample including all

German regions.

The following model is regressed:


                                                              0
                                 Yi,d,h = α + δ ∗ civilh + Xi,d,h ∗ β + ui,d,h                              (1)


where Yi,d,h measures one of the social capital related outcomes of individual i living in district d, be-

longing to historical territory h. civilh measures the number of civil years in historical region h before

the year 1900. The matrix Xi,d,h contains a list of individual controls, specified above.

                                              Table 2 about here

Results of the regressions are displayed in Table 2. Column (1) shows the basic correlation between the

Code Civil and individual trust, only controlling for macro-region fixed effects for the four macro-regions

north, south, east and west. The coefficient is positive, and significant on the 1% significant level. Thus,

individual trust is increasing in the number of years the Code Civil was used. This finding is robust to

using cooperation and fairness as outcome variables in columns (2) and (3). I then add individual controls

(age, age sq., gender), economic controls (household income, unemployment dummy), 5 categories of

educational attainment and 4 categories of religious denomination. As it is visible from column (4), the

coefficient of the Code Civil treatment decreases slightly - both in its significance and magnitude. Having

applied the Code Civil for one standard deviation of about 37 years increases trust by 0.015 in absolute

terms, a 98 year treatment increases trust by on average 0.04, or 8 percent of a standard deviation of trust.

In column (7) I regress the same model but now using the proxy for family ties as dependent variable.

Since the link proposed here goes from institutional quality to cooperation and not to other attitudes,

such as attitudes towards family, I do not expect to find a significant correlation. Indeed, as column (7)

shows, the coefficient of interest is positive, but not significant. Next, I control for historical determinants

on the territory level. In particular, I include the urbanization rate and the share of protestants in 1800,


                                                      13
