However, the treatment arguably is spatially clustered, as regions close to France have been more likely

to be treated.26 That implies that the complete sample specifications compare possibly heterogeneous

regions, geographically as well as culturally. Comparing a region located at the Baltic Sea with a region

in the South-West of Germany is problematic in several ways. Cultural differences might have been

fundamental, in a sense that those regions started out with different levels of social capital in the early

19th century. Differences in local characteristics, such as of geographical nature, e.g. the access to the

coast, and the paths of economic development undertaken are further potential influences of cooperation.

I would therefore like to compare more homogeneous, that is more closely located, regions.

I therefore restrict the sample to a border sample of individuals living in regions within a 50 km corridor

from the border, separating regions that applied the Code Civil for more than 90 years from those that

applied in only few year. This sample thus reduces heterogeneity in fundamental pre-treatment char-

acteristics, as closely located individuals can - in the absence of a treatment - be expected to express

relatively similar norms and values.

The border sample has two further interesting features, as it first defines the treatment only for regions

that adopted the Code Civil for a long time. If the institutional and legal reform had an effect on culture,

a slowly moving and hard to change variable, it is more likely that the effect of the Code Civil needed

several years to disperse. Indeed, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008b) estimate, that a shock requires

about 75 years (2 to 3 generations) to have a long-lasting effect on social capital. The timespan of

the longest adoption of the Code in the sample, more than 90 years, fits very well to this estimation.

Furthermore, the border specification allows to analyze effects within current Federal States. Being a

federal republic, Germany has transferred some of its administrative duties to the sixteen federal states

(Länder) that are, for example, in charge of the education system, but more relevant in this context the

police and court system. It is possible that current differences in the functioning of local institutions

influence social capital, and thus potentially bias the results.



                                                  3.5     Border Effects

The border sample analysis compares regions having applied the Code Civil on the East (left) side of the

border with regions having used either common law or the ALR on the West (right) side of the border. On

both sides of the border those regions are included in the border sample whose centroids have a maximal

   26 In the complete sample I partially account for this by controlling for the distance to Paris and measures for the longitude

and latitude.


                                                              16
