regions Rhineland, which kept the Code Civil, and Westphalia, which did not. One would expect a

positive association between the Napoleonic institutions on the number of associations created.



                                                4.1      Historical Data

The detailed historical data sources and the variables constructed out of them are listed in the following.



Trade Occupation, Income, Religion, Education, Population in 19th century Prussia The first set of

data covers employment shares and controls to be used on the county level in 19th century Prussia.

Starting in 1816, the Royal Prussian Statistical Office collected throughout the 19th century data on

population, education, religious denomination, occupation, and tax income. Several different waves of

the Prussian Statistics are used and combined. For measuring the development of the trade sector in 19th

century, I use the data on occupation gathered in 1849. The data lists the number of people working

in trade related jobs, such as wholesaler, mercer, spice-trader, or broker, and other occupations, such

as civil servants or servants “for the convenience of the lordship”. My measure of trade occupations,

Trade, divides the total number of people working in trade related jobs by the county’s population. I

also use the per capita share of individuals employed in factories, except mills, in 1849 as a measure

of industrialization, following Becker, Hornung, and Woessmann (2011b). I label this variable Factory.

Furthermore, the variable Craft gives per capita share of employment in craft, and encompasses jobs as

baker, tailor or music instrument maker. TrFaCr combines the previous three variables. Counterfactuals,

on which no effects are expected, are the number of people working as civil servants as a share of the

population, and the number of male servants per capita. Several controls taken from the 1864 dataset

are included, such as the share of Protestant and Jewish population, the share of females, the number

of elementary schools per capita. Following Becker and Woessmann (2009), the counties’ income tax

per capita in 1878 will proxy for per capita economic prosperity. The source of the data is Becker et al.

(2012), who compiled the data from the original Prussian statistics. Furthermore, I assign to every county

its geographic location, that is a measure for longitude and latitude.33



Gymnasts and Volunteer Fire Departments                The source for the gymnasts clubs and the fire departments

is the Second Statistical Yearbook of German Gymnast Clubs (Zweites statistisches Jahrbuch Deutscher

Turnvereine) from 1865 (Hirth, 1865).34 It lists all German gymnast clubs existing at that time and
  33 Table B.2 in the Appendix lists the territories included in the sample and the treatment.
  34 See Data Appendix for further information.




                                                              24
