Weingast (1990) emphasized the role of the medieval merchant courts for the evolution of interpersonal

exchange, De Long and Shleifer (1993) those of constraints on the executive for city growth and more

recently Cantoni and Yuchtman (2012) show that legal training in Universities and subsequent evolution

of legal institutions was causing greater market activity in medieval Germany. Closest to this paper is

of course Acemoglu et al. (2011), who established a relation between the Napoleonic institutions and

urbanization rates. I use the share of people working in trade related jobs, such as goods or money

trader, as a proxy for trade in mid-19th century Prussia. Trade, however, only measures the last step

of the production chain and therefore underestimates economic cooperation. To capture broader effects

on economic interaction, I include additionally employment in factories and craft. Trade, manufacturing

and craft professions naturally require not only a high degree of cooperation and trust, but they also profit

the most from a third party enforcement institutions.

As work-related cooperation increases, cooperation outside the workplace should be affected, too.

Outside-workplace cooperation basically includes all cooperative actions outside professional activities

that do not have the aim of an (immediate) economic payoff. This includes the participation in associa-

tions, or other forms of voluntary or political engagements characterizing an active civil society.32 Three

main forms of associations existed in 19th century Prussia. Those were the singer clubs, the gymnasts,

and the shooters (often jointly referred to as the “cloverleaf”) (Klenke, 1998, p. 20). Those clubs were

engaged in all kinds of community life, especially important for organizing big folk festivals (Klenke,

1998, p. 20). The markmen’s festival (Schützenfest), organized by the shooters were attracting some-

times hundreds of people. Data is available for two of the three kinds of associations, used as a proxy

for social capital in the 19th century. In particular, I look at the number of gymnast clubs in a cross-

section of Prussian counties. Gymnast clubs have another interesting feature I will make use of. Besides

being a sports association in which people where doing gymnastic exercises, they were also providing

a public good, as volunteer gymnast fire departments (Turnfeuerwehren) were created out of them. As

such they are the predecessors of contemporaneous volunteer fire departments. Since gymnasts were

in good shape, they were best suited to do the demanding job of a firemen at that time, which required

to run the hand-operated fire-engine and climbing into houses. Thus, many gymnast clubs created fire

departments where members worked voluntarily as firemen. The second data set being used is listing

the foundation of shooting associations from 1700 to 1900 for each county in the two Prussian provinces

Rhineland and Westphalia. I will analyze the development of shooting associations in the neighboring

   32 Associational membership has been used in several contributions to proxy for contemporaneous and historical levels of

social capital. The idea that social capital can be measured by the degree of associational activity goes back to Putnam (1994)).


                                                              23
