system was continued, i.e. on the level of the mayoralty, superior administration levels were adapted

to the Prussian one, which itself had introduced a civil administration under its reformer Stein in the

meantime (Rowe, 2003).



Political Rights     Changes in the elite structure might have led to a new balance of power and an increase

in citizens’ political rights. As the Rhineland was given to Prussia, its citizens ended up having the same

political rights as other Prussians. While the Prussian King promised to introduce a constitution and to

introduce a supra-regional parliament in 1815, he did not keep it. The lack of political rights is consistent

with recent data collected.31

These examples suggest that only the Code Civil endured the immediate period of French occupation

and could therefore impact beliefs in the long-run. Furthermore, the results of the both the complete and

border sample hold true even within Prussia, that is holding those variables constant



     4      T RADE E MPLOYMENT AND S OCIAL C APITAL IN 19 TH C ENTURY

                                                          P RUSSIA

The results from the previous estimations have shown that regions that applied the Napoleonic institu-

tions throughout the 19th century have higher levels of trust, more than 200 years after its installment.

However, 200 years is an enormous time span, and other shocks happening had the potential to destroy

or to generate social capital. The following section thus has two aims: It first aims at giving support

for the proposed channel going through economic cooperation, and second to show immediate spillover

effects on cooperation outside the work environment. It will do so by looking at employment in trade,

manufacturing and craft, as well as at 19th century associational participation within a sample of Prussian

counties.

I will begin by investigating a possible link between the Napoleonic institutions and employment in

trade, manufacturing and craft in 19th century Prussia. It is reasonable to expect the Code Civil to

having had a positive influence on commercial activities. Already Adam (Smith, 1776, p. 862) stressed

the importance of institutions for “[c]ommerce and manufactures [to] flourish”, Milgrom, North, and

   31 Tabellini (2010) measured the constraints of the executive on the regional level in 1800 and 1850 on scale from 1 (no

constraints) to 7 (democracy) and reports for both dates a value of 1 for the Rhineland and 2 for Baden. This is very much in
line with the quality of other German regions at that time, ranging from a minimum of 1 to a sample maximum of 3 (Bavaria)
and and an overall maximum of 4 (Bremen, Hamburg).


                                                            22
