to those using the composition of trade, factor employment and craft as dependent variable in columns

(5) and (6). Making use of the counterfactuals, I run the regression with the share of civil servants

and servants as dependent variables. The regressions, see columns (7) and (8), report non-significant,

negative associations between the Code Civil and the employment share in the civil sector, as well as the

per capita share of servants.



              4.3    The Impact on Gymnast Clubs and Volunteer Fire Departments

To assess the impact on the number of gymnast clubs and firemen, the following model is regressed:

                                                             0
                                    Gc,p = α + δ ∗ codec + Xc,p ∗ β + uc,p                               (3)


where Gc,r,p is one of the following dependent variables measured in county c in province p: Member

p.c. gives the per capita share of members in gymnast clubs. Firemen p.c. gives the per capita share of

voluntary firemen per county. Member gives the total number members in gymnast clubs. Firemen gives

the total number volunteer firemen per county. The variable codec is a dummy indicating whether county
                                0
c used the code civil or not. Xc,p includes the controls listed above.

                                             Table 11 about here

As Table 11 shows, there exists a positive correlation between the Code Civil and gymnast club member-

ship, as well as volunteer firemen departments. Columns (1) and (2) indicate that in counties applying

the Napoleonic legal code, the per capita share of club members and firemen is higher. Switching from 0

(no Code) to 1 (adopting the Code) increases the participation in gymnast clubs per capita by on average

about 35 percent of its sample mean. The number of volunteer firemen per capita increases by a magni-

tude of on average 20 percent of the sample mean for regions that adopted the Code Civil. This finding

is robust to using total numbers of members and firemen, as columns (3) and (4) show, and population is

controlled for. When education and the share of females are included in the regression, the coefficients

of interest stay significant on the 10 percent significance level in column (5), as well as in column (6).

Finally, regressions of the social capital measures on economic cooperation display a strong positive

correlation of membership in gymnast clubs, as well as voluntary participation as firemen, with trade and

factory employment. Table 12 shows this correlation in columns (1) to (6), which is robust to including

potential covariates in columns (7) to (12).



                                                     26
