common Prussian characteristics constant, the estimation produces a positive and significant coefficient.

Finally, column (10) includes urbanization in 1850 as a control. The result is robust to include alternative

historical controls, one by one, as shown in Table 5. Including those controls leads the coefficient to

decrease slightly, as well as its significance. The weaker results can be attributed to the limited regional

variation in this specification with only 5 historical territories.

                                               Table 5 about here

I find very similar results in a standard spatial regression discontinuity design, controlling for the dis-

tance, its square and distance interacted with the treatment variable, as shown in Table 6.

                                               Table 6 about here



                                         3.6     Moving the Border

In this subsection I conduct a falsification exercise similar to Becker et al. (2011a). The goal is to support

the identification of causal link, i.e. to show that the treatment effect found in the previous subsection

does not reflect a general West-East pattern, but a genuine treatment effect. To generate a false treatment

the border is moved twice. The first time it is moved outwards, that is to the North-East. This allows

to generate a placebo treatment comparing individuals living in regions unaffected by the true treatment

on both sides of the border. Then the border is moved inwards, that is to the South-West, so to compare

regions that have been treated on each side of the border. In both cases one would expect to find a non-

significant treatment effect. For the outwards shift because there did not exist a true long-term Napoleonic

treatment. For the inward shift because actually treated regions should be similar with respect to trust

levels. I construct two new borderlines, each being the joint outline of the regions included in the original

border sample. For the inward shift this is the common outline of the treated, for the outward shift this is

the common outline of the untreated group. I then follow the procedure above and include regions that

are located within a 50 km band on each side of the border, only keeping federal states having within

state variation in the placebo treatment. Regions on the left to the border are considered as having been

treated by an improvement in the law enforcement. See Figure 6 for a graphical representation of the

regions included in the different samples.

                                               Figure 6 about here




                                                       18
