the provincial level, and the limited number of observations make statistical tests inaccurate and to be

interpreted carefully. Other variables are available on the city level such that common statistical mean

comparison tests can be meaningfully interpreted. Table 8 reports the pre-treatment mean comparisons

of those variables.

                                                   Table 8 about here

For the variables on the territory level and the complete sample shown in column (1) and (2), one can

note that only for the number of years the French Army was present in a territory there exists a sta-

tistically significant difference. Treated regions were significantly longer occupied by the Napoleonic

Army, which thus had more time to install the institutions properly. Second, treated regions are located

closer to Paris, a characteristic important for whether a region was actually occupied or not.27 Third, the

number of territories from which the regions were created is larger in the treated regions. Changing the

institutions and going back to old institutions after the Napoleonic occupation was therefore much more

costly in the light of the integration of those many small states.28 The comparison of the urbanization

measures suggest that the treated regions were less urbanized before 1800. The literature on the determi-

nants of social capital usually claims, that protestantism is favorable for social attitudes and cooperation

(Alesina and La Ferrara, 2002; Tabellini, 2008). Thus, there exists a difference, while not significant, but

unfavorable for social capital levels in the treated group. While I report the same comparisons for the

regions of the border sample in column (3) and (4), the interpretation is not very meaningful given the

tiny sample size.

Next, I investigate city level data taken from Jacob (2010) for a maximum of 364 cities located in the

sample territories. Results are shown in the lower panel of Table 8. The data contains information about

whether the city was a free city, belonged to the Hanseatic Trade Cities, or was the seat of a bishop. I add

a fourth variable identifying the existence of universities before 1800. In the spirit of Guiso, Sapienza,

and Zingales (2008a) and Jacob (2010), past institutional characteristics associated with the free cities

and the associated creation of norms of cooperation could have led to divergences in social capital levels

before 1800. However, neither the treated nor untreated group had on average significantly more free city

states. As important as the free cities might have been the presence of the Hanseatic Cities, a corporation
   27 In contrast, one could reasonably assume, that, because of the closeness to France, people in the Western territory were

much more in favor of the Revolutionary ideas when it break out in 1789, and thus much more involved in political activities,
such as being member of Jacobin clubs. This was not the case. In the Rhineland for example, “there were hardly any local
Jacobins or self-styled patriots sympathetic to the Revolution” (Doyle, 1990, p. 352) compared to other parts of Germany, and
even if, these groups were small and consistent only of “scattered individual activists” (Sperber, 1992, p. 489).
   28 That a unified legal code made the integration of additionally gained territories easier was also emphasized by several

scholars (see e.g. Becker, 1985; Arvind and Stirton, 2010).


                                                             20
