where cooperative cultural traits potentially have been fostered through its trade activities. Jacob (2010)

for example finds that former Hanseatic cities show higher levels of social capital today. However, a the

t-test indicates, significantly less of the cities in the treated regions were Hanseatic cities. A further city

characteristic that is a positive correlate of social capital is the presence of a bishop. Again, I do not find

any significant differences between treated and untreated cities. The same holds for the presence of early

universities.

This simple exercise gives suggestive evidence that there was no clustering of important observable

determinants of social capital in the treated regions. The most plausible explanations for the persistence

of the Code Civil in some regions are thus the French occupation, as well as political factors, keeping in

mind that the role of initial cultural differences cannot entirely be ruled out.29



                                           3.8     Alternative explanations

I briefly discuss three alternative reforms Napoleon undertook that my treatment variable could capture,

besides the effect of the Code Civil.



Education The educational reforms initiated by the French Emperor, particularly in the Rhineland,

aimed at rearranging the school system to become free, equal and secular, introducing new school types,

and teaching French as the territories’ official language (Rowe, 2003, p. 120). This was the theory. In

practice, however, the reform was a failure. Shortage of teacher and money led to the decay of the school

system.30 With regard to higher education, the only academy created was the law school in Koblenz

(Rowe, 2003, p. 137). When Prussia took over the territory of the Rhine, it pushed back the leftovers of

the French rule, adapted the school system to the Prussian, and opened universities as in Bonn to educate

new bureaucrats for the Empire (Rowe, 2003, p. 134).



Administration Another Napoleonic reform consisted in the introduction of the civil administration

and its centralization. The new Prussian rulers, however, reformed the local and provincial government

immediately after the takeover of the Rhineland in April 1815. While the very local administration
    29 Arvind and Stirton (2010) research the question, what makes a region keep the Code Civil after the Napoleonic invasion.

They find that there is no single factor explaining the reception of the legal Code. Rather a set of factors was responsible,
including amongst others direct French control, and the number of territories the region gained in 1815. Direct French control
is surely an important factor, as well as the number of years the Code Civil was in in force before 1815. Those aspects made it
more costly to abandon the Code Civil afterwards.
    30 In the Rhineland three forth of the population could not read and write in 1814 and regular schooling was an exception

(Schmenk, 2008, p. 232)


                                                             21
