If the results found in the previous section are due to the true treatment moving the border and performing

the same regressions as above should not display an effect of the fictitious treatment variable on social

capital outcomes. Since no treatment took place in the regions that are placebo treated, they should not

differ significantly in the outcome variables.

                                             Table 7 about here

Results from this falsification test are shown in Table 7. Columns (1) to (4) display the results from mov-

ing the border outwards, columns (5) to (7) respectively the results from a moving the border inwards. As

it can be seen from columns (1), the one border movement suggests no statistically significant difference

in the way people trust between placebo treated regions and controls. The coefficient is already small and

increases further when state fixed effects are included in column (2). Controlling for other influences on

the individual level only leads to a change in the sign of the treatment coefficient in column (3). Finally,

including historical controls for initial shares of protestantism and urbanization rates do not change the

result, as shown in column (4).

The finding of a non-significant treatment effect holds true for regressions of the treatment generated

from moving the border inwards. While the coefficient of the fictitious treatment variable is now con-

stantly negative, it is still insignificant, as shown in column (5). This is robust to including Federal States

fixed effects in column (6), to control for further covariates in column (7) and for historical controls in

column (8). This exercise allows to infer that only in the original border specification, using the correct

border treatment, there exists a positive, significant and positive treatment effect for regions on the left

of the border. Hence, the falsification tests and the original results suggest a peculiarity attributable to

the Napoleonic influence.



                           3.7    Comparing Pre-Treatment Characteristics

While the border sample already cancels out much of pre-treatment heterogeneity, it is still possible

that differences in initial regional characteristics drive my results. Ideally I would like to observe and

compare regional pre-treatment levels of social capital. Since this is not possible given the lack of data,

comparing pre-treatment characteristics that have been shown to be able to explain social capital levels in

different contexts is the best feasible alternative. For this purpose I assembled data on several dimensions

having been identified in the literature to matter for social capital levels and at the same time might give

further insights about the reception of the Code Civil. For some variables this data is only available at



                                                      19
