furthermore provides information on whether the club had a fire department, and if yes, the number of

firemen. From this data, I construct the per capita amount of firemen per county, Firemen p.c., as a first

measure of social capital, and second the total number of clubs per county, labeled No of Clubs.



Shooting Associations As a last measure of social capital for 19th century Germany, I use a dataset

for the two Prussian provinces Rhineland and Westphalia that contains the number of German shooting

associations (Schützenvereine) founded per county from the Middle Ages to 1939 at a yearly level.35

I use the years from 1700 to 1900. The source is Plett (1991), who gathered this data by directly by

surveying current day shooting clubs about their year of foundation. In the data, a club is reported to

exist in year t, if its date of foundation falls in this year.

Summary Statistics for the variables generated out of the historical data sources are displayed in Table 9.

                                                   Table 9 about here



                       4.2     The Impact on Trade, Factory and Craft Employment

Table 10 displays the regression results of estimating the following model:

                                                                  0
                                      Yc,p = α + δ ∗ codec + Xc,p ∗ β + uc,p                           (2)


where Yc,p gives the relative occupational share in county c located in Prussian province p. The variable
                                                                               0
codec is a dummy indicating whether county c used the code civil or not. Xc,p includes the controls listed

above.

                                                   Table 10 about here

Counties applying the Code Civil are associated with a significantly higher occupational share in trade,

see column (1). Conditionally on other controls, adopting the Code Civil goes along with an increase

in the trade share by 0.004 in absolute values (column (2)), or about 0.66 of a standard deviation in

trade. Treated regions also have higher levels of industrialization, as measured by the per capita share

of employment in factories (column (3)) and a higher share craftsmen (column (4)). The effects are

equally large, as adopting the Code Civil increases factory and craft employment by about 50 percent

of the relevant standard deviation. They are furthermore comparable both in magnitude and significance

   35 See Data Appendix for further information.




                                                           25
