county (or province) level by applying county level (or provincial level) fixed effects as two of the regres-

sions use cross-sectional data, the overall picture points in one direction: Those Prussian counties that

belonged to the province of Rhineland and that kept the Code Civil, have had both a higher share of peo-

ple engaging in impersonal trade, factory work and craft, and at the same time more engagement in civic

associations. Assuming that all counties started out with comparable characteristics before Napoleon

imposed the Code Civil to those regions, the increase in institutional quality causally impacted trade and

associational participation. Those effects give a rational for the observed differences in contemporaneous

differences in trust.

Lastly, one could ask if there is evidence that cooperation persisted. Putnam (1994) for example shows

remarkable persistence of associational participation in Italy between 1900 and 1970 by using compa-

rable measures of club membership. To elicit persistence of cooperation, I therefore regress individual

responses for Trust on the employment shares, as well as per capita firemen and gymnast membership in

19th century Prussia.

                                              Table 14 about here

Table 14 displays that only the employment shares can explain current trust significantly (see columns

(1) -(6)). Both, firemen and membership do not show any significant association. One explanation for the

latter might be that the share of people that were actually engaged in historical associations are relatively

low and that historical and current indicators of social capital used are quite different. The positive

association between current trust and past employment holds even when the entire set of individual

controls is included in the regressions (see columns (7) - (12)). It seems that, consistent with my initial

hypothesis, economic exchange played an important role for generating trust.



                                          5     C ONCLUSION

This paper provides evidence that impartial legal enforcement institutions can increase norms of trust

and cooperation on the very local level. I explored variation in the quality of legal institutions generated

by the historical experiment of the introduction of the Code Civil in 19th century Germany. Results

obtained from the empirical analysis documented a strong complementarity between having applied the

Code Civil and contemporaneous norms of cooperation in the German SOEP dataset. Identification from

individuals living in closely located border regions, a falsification test consisting in moving the border, the




                                                      28
