comparison of pre-treatment characteristics, and the discussion of alternative possible influences point

towards a causal interpretation of these findings. In addition, the same positive relationship is obtained

from an additional source of evidence drawn from trade and social capital measures in 19th century

Prussia. The findings suggest persistence of values even within a contemporaneous country’s unified

legal framework and relates to the striking persistent effects of institutions described in the literature. As

beliefs generated by a strong law persist in this example, persistence of norms should be exacerbated in

societies where formal institutions persisted to be weak. Consequently, mistrust generated in the past by

a lax rule of law is one likely channel explaining current institutional failure characterizing many less

developed countries.

A remark on the interaction between institutions, social capital and growth concludes the paper. The

Napoleonic institutions did not only affect the social structure of the affected societies, those regions

also experienced higher economic growth than their untreated counterparts, as Acemoglu et al. (2011)

have shown. A joint feature of most contributions researching the effect of institutions on economic

outcomes is, however, that the question how better institutional environments transform into faster eco-

nomic growth remains unanswered. While the impact of institutions on aggregated economic outcomes

is convincingly established, whether institutions affect individual behavior of cooperation necessary for

economic transactions is unclear. Linking my results to this paper, an appealing conclusion would be

to emphasize the effects of institutions on individual cooperative behavior and the creation of norms of

cooperation and trust as a rational for this relationship, i.e. this “missing channel”. The “environment

conducive to innovation and entrepreneurial activity” the Code Civil created according to Acemoglu et al.

(2011), does then, besides the institutional framework, include norms and values favorable to economic

growth generated by those institutions. Thus, the Napoleonic institutions might have kicked off a feed-

back loop between norms of trust and economic payoffs, reinforcing each other mutually. To a certain

extent this remains speculation, as the question whether institutions are linked to economic outcomes

through the formation of social capital has not be answered quantitatively in this paper. Certainly, this is

an interesting avenue for further research.

Taken together, the results indicate that increasing the quality of legal institutions and allowing people to

interact economically has beneficial effects for interpersonal trust. This can amplify the positive effect

institutions have for economic development.




                                                     29
