

Napoléon needed conscription to accomplish his military objective of a French-dominated continent. It did not take long for him to run into an obstacle to his vision of a French mass army: draft dodging. Footnote 4 This was not a new phenomenon. Deserters have been, from the perspective of military leaders, a scourge as old as war itself. Whenever soldiers’ conditions approximated the intolerable—due to weather, lack of rations, or officers’ abuse—the option of abandoning camp became a palatable alternative. Often, this meant defeat for the few who had decided to stay. In some cases, whole armies had “vanished into thin air” due to desertion (Parker 1996, p. 57).

Desertion is even more of a threat to an army that relies chiefly on mandatory military service (Piano and Rouanet Reference Piano and Rouanet2020). Less than fully compensated for their services, and the risk war poses to their lives, conscripts face a higher temptation to “dodge” than do volunteers, whether domestic professionals or foreign mercenaries. As soon as the French government adopted large-scale conscription, draft evasion numbers skyrocketed. Within just a few years, 200,000 draft dodgers and deserters were roaming France’s countryside (Forrest Reference Forrest1989, p. 169). The inability to contain draft evasion threatened to put the country at a disadvantage against its many enemies. It also produced a wide array of social ills, including the rise of banditry and crime, as draft dodgers joined the French underworld to make a living while hiding from the authorities. If he wished to accomplish his plans for European dominance, Napoléon needed to find a solution to the problem of draft dodging first.

This article provides an economic analysis of the Napoleonic regime’s efforts to mitigate the threat widespread draft evasion posed to its military objectives. These actions can be understood as rational responses to the phenomenon of draft dodging under the specific circumstances of early nineteenth-century France. Rates of draft dodging varied drastically across departments, a variation that contemporaneous and historical accounts attribute to a combination of geographic characteristics and cultural factors. Local geography could frustrate the government’s efforts to administer conscription by providing draft dodgers with plenty of escape routes and hiding places. Cultural factors, such as a dislike for the revolutionary policies of the regime, could increase resistance to the draft, including among local officials.

In response to widespread draft evasion, the French regime adopted a policy of discriminatory conscription enforcement. The presence of draft dodgers within a region made it more likely for others to evade conscription, which generates a policy externality by congesting the government’s efforts to police and enforce a given conscription rate. To mitigate this congestion problem and reduce the overall number of draft dodgers at no extra cost, the government started setting a department’s conscription rate based on its marginal cost of enforcement. Departments where conscription was easier (harder) to enforce were now asked to contribute more (fewer) men to the nation’s armed forces.