

Predictably, fraud was widespread (Rouanet and Piano Reference Rouanet and Piano2020). People would pretend to be afflicted by all sorts of disqualifying medical conditions, often with the complicit assistance of their doctors. The introduction of the draft resulted also in a boom in marriages, as bachelors and their families rushed to find single women, many of them widows, willing to get wed for money (Pigeard Reference Pigeard2000, p. 236). Besides these instances of fraud, the most significant obstacle to the smooth operation of the draft was draft dodging. The Napoleonic regime, like the republican government before it, was aware of the danger it posed, and the “[administration of c]onscription overshadowed every problem of administration in Napoleonic France. In an immediate sense, given its imperial ambitions, the regime’s survival depended on it” (Woloch Reference Woloch1986, p. 101). Enforcing conscription was no easy task. Already following the levée en masse of 1793, draftees had to be “literally dragged from their homes” (Nafziger 1988, p. 11):

The extensive documentary evidence in the administrative records, especially the prefects’ reports, leaves no doubts that contemporaries regarded conscription as an unmitigated evil, to be resisted by all means (Woolf Reference Woolf2002, p. 159).

The inability of the regime to stop the hemorrhage of men from its ranks would end up contributing to the military defeats of 1812 and 1813—when eight out of every ten Frenchmen of age had been drafted into the armed forces—and, ultimately, to the fall of Napoléon himself (Delbrück Reference Delbrück1985, p. 414).

In post-revolutionary France, desertion took one of three forms. First, a man liable for military service may not show up altogether to his hometown’s draft lottery. Second, once drafted, he may go into hiding and never join his battalion. Finally, he may leave his unit after having joined it. The French government distinguished between these categories as a matter of law. It referred to those falling within the former two as réfractaires, or “draft dodgers,” while the latter was known simply as déserteur.Footnote 8 Draft dodgers accounted for the largest share of deserters; most conscripts “disappeared” before they had ever joined their battalions (Forrest Reference Forrest1989, p. 65). In the aftermath of the introduction of the Loi Jourdan, over 200,000 conscripts escaped their military obligations and never reported to their units (Forrest Reference Forrest1989, p. 169). By 1797, the country’s armed forces had shrunk from a nominal 700,000 men to an effective figure of 400,000. Draft dodgers accounted for much of the difference (Best Reference Best1998, p. 89).

Resistance to conscription varied drastically from one region to another. In some areas, draft defiance became “so strong as to turn into rebellion” (Best Reference Best1998, p. 90), while others showed much greater compliance. Historians of post-revolutionary France have identified a wide array of factors to explain this variation. Forrest (Reference Forrest1989) divides these into four categories: ideology, social forces, economic factors, and geography.