

This article contributes to the literature on administrative reform and nation-building in economic history. A growing body of research in the social sciences sees the modern nation-state as the result of a process of rationalization of public sector institutions (North, Wallis, and Weingast Reference North, Wallis and Weingast2009; Dincecco Reference Dincecco2015). This process involved the creation of professional bureaucratic bodies to allow governments to enforce policies and supply public goods more effectively (Balla and Johnson Reference Balla and Johnson2009; Johnson and Koyama Reference Johnson and Koyama2014; Cox Reference Cox2020; Hao and Liu 2020) and has been identified as key to economic development (Besley and Persson Reference Besley and Persson2010; Johnson and Koyama Reference Johnson and Koyama2017). Our argument is particularly relevant to existing work emphasizing the connection between warfare and state formation in Western Europe (Downing Reference Downing1992; Gennaioli and Voth Reference Gennaioli and Voth2015). According to this literature, pressure from military competition contributed to the decision of many European states to reform their fiscal regimes and increase their ability to tax (Besley and Persson Reference Besley and Persson2010; Dincecco and Prado Reference Dincecco and Prado2012). Our paper distinguishes itself from existing work in this field by providing an economic and empirical analysis of a specific historical case of nation-building efforts driven by the regime’s military needs. It shows that the latter prompted the Napoleonic regime to introduce an array of consequential domestic reforms, including the centralization of the administration of military conscription, the reliance on the national army for domestic policing, and the enforcement of the draft.

## DRAFT EVASION IN POST-REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE

Conscription was the cornerstone of France’s post-revolutionary military system. Between 1800 and 1813, the Napoleonic regime drafted more than 2.4 million Frenchmen to serve in either the army or the National Guard (Woloch Reference Woloch1986, p. 110). The foundations for the conscription system had been established with the Loi Jourdan of 1798.Footnote 7 In principle, once the government had identified the army size necessary to meet the country’s military needs, each of France’s administrative units—or departments—was to contribute the same percentage of its able-bodied male population between the ages of 20 and 25 (Forrest Reference Forrest1989, p. 39).

Draftees were selected by a random lot administered by local authorities. It was a slow and cumbersome process fraught with obstacles. Lack of communication between Paris and the rest of the country would often lead to confusion over how the system was supposed to operate. Local governments lacked the administrative capacity and often the will to enforce the law against their constituencies. Potential conscripts took advantage of any loophole in the system to avoid military service: The law allowed exemptions for men in poor health, men below a certain height, and married men.