

Recall that during Napoléon’s rule, the French legal code distinguished between two categories of desertion. The first category included individuals who failed to show up at the assigned battalion before the deadline once they were drafted. The second category regarded individuals who abandoned their fellow soldiers after joining the assigned battalion. Lacuée’s data provides figures only for individuals from the former category, which were often referred to as draft dodgers. We define the draft dodging rate as the proportion of people effectively drafted who dodged the draft.

Lacuée’s data was the source for several other variables we employ in our econometric exercise: the conscription, exemption, and replacement rates. The conscription rate is the percentage of the age cohort eligible for conscription that is drafted. The exemption rate measures the portion of young men in each cohort declared unfit for military service by the French government. Footnote 19 The replacement rate refers to the share of draftees who hired a substitute to serve in the country’s armed forces in their stead.Footnote 20 Data on military replacement is available only for the years 1806 through 1809.

We complement Lacuée’s data with data from other sources. For tax revenue per capita, we use data published by Peuchet (Reference Peuchet1805) for the years 1802/03. To account for variation in human capital accumulation, we collect data about literacy rates between 1816 and 1820.Footnote 21 Urbanization rates for each department are from Bairoch, Batou, and Chevre (Reference Bairoch, Batou and Chevre1988). We define urban population as the number of people living in a city of 5,000 inhabitants or more. Finally, we created a variable measuring the number of military relays per 10 km2 in 1795. As Arbellot, Lepetit, and Bertrand (Reference Arbellot, Lepetit and Bertrand1985, p. 17) explain, these relays were used “by young recruits to join their units” and ensured that troops traveling by foot could find “shelter for the night and a daily ration of bread.” While potentially endogenous to desertion rates, these relays were built before the formal adoption of large-scale conscription in 1798 and can thus be interpreted as having affected the central government’s enforcement costs.

Unfortunately, Lacuée’s data did not include the height of soldiers or their socio-economic background. We obviate this limitation by collecting data about the 1820 draft cohort in the Archives Nationales.Footnote 22 These include information about the average height of young men eligible for the draft and the structure of the local economy. We rely on the latter to construct an “agricultural sector” variable measuring the percentage of men eligible for the draft working on farms.

We employ these data to explore: (1) the sources of variation in the rate of draft dodging across France; (2) how the imperial government responded to this variation rationally by implementing a system of discriminatory conscription; and (3) how the system of discriminatory conscription enforcement affected France’s fight against draft evasion.