

Regions that had been historically indifferent to the principles and policies of the revolution, like those of Southern and Western France, were less willing to supply men for military service (Elting Reference Elting1997, p. 325). Similarly, communities in rural and more traditionally minded regions, like the Vendée, encouraged or failed to discourage draft evasion. Compliance with conscription was also associated with local economic circumstances. For instance, farmers seem to have been especially unwilling to abandon their fields for long stretches (Forrest Reference Forrest1989, p. 79). Finally, geography was an influence behind the relative prevalence of draft dodging:

Mountains, dispersed habitation, upland pasture, rocks and caves, treacherous marshlands familiar only to the local population, smugglers’ hill tracks that were part of a very private village connaissance all offered escape and evasion [to draft dodgers] (Forrest Reference Forrest1989, p. 124).

Contemporaneous accounts blamed high draft evasion rates on a wide array of geographical characteristics. Rugged regions offered potential draft dodgers plenty of hiding spots, such as caves and rocky coastlines. Departments further away from the nation’s capital were also often seen as prone to draft dodging, especially those sharing a border with another country.

The French government was keenly aware of the variations in geographical characteristics and their effect on draft evasion. In a report to the minister of war from 1806, the prefect of the department of Lozère attributed “the little success of the levy” to his department’s “mountains, its gorges, its woods and the toughness of the climate which … offer conscripts almost certain means to escape the searches and pursuits of the gendarmerie.” Footnote 9 The administrative correspondence between local prefects and the central government offers more evidence that public officials perceived geography as a major constraint to conscription enforcement. Footnote 10 A consistent theme of these reports is the difficulty of apprehending draft dodgers in “rugged” regions. In a letter to Paris from 1813, the prefect of the department of Lozère lamented that conscripts were escaping villages just minutes after the draft, but gendarmes could do little more than stand there as draftees climbed up the mountains near their villages and quickly disappeared into the woods (Waquet 1968, p. 199). Prefects and sub-prefects often complained about the difficulty of dispatching and receiving information about conscription enforcement from the more remote villages and towns in their district. Footnote 11 According to one prefect, “the extreme dissemination of [the administration’s] constituents” was to blame for the failure to eradicate draft evasion from his department, in part due to the difficulty of “maintaining [communications] with the mayors of the jurisdiction” (Deferrière Reference Deferrière1804, p. 380).

We find similar examples in the correspondence between Napoléon and his chief of police, Joseph Fouché. Footnote 12 In September 1804, the latter wrote to Napoléon that “[in the departments of] Loire, Lozère, and Tarn, mountains offer safe asylum [to draft dodgers] and make [their] prosecution almost impossible” (Fouché 1964, p. 285). In 1806, he reported that in the department of Pyrénnées-Orientales, “the mountains and the vicinity of Spain make the efforts of the gendarmerie futile,” while in the Hautes-Loire, conscription efforts were being frustrated “because the mountains make it almost impossible to catch fugitives.” The same problem seemingly afflicted the Italian border: on 6 August 1806, Fouché warned that hundreds of soldiers dispatched to Italy were abandoning their posts every month to return home via the many mountain passes in the Alps (Fouché Reference Fouché1913, p. 453).