

“An army should be ready every day, every night, and at all times of the day and night.”

—Napoléon BonaparteFootnote 1

Historians and social scientists now recognize the significant role military affairs have played in shaping the evolution of political institutions and, through the latter, their effect on long-run economic performance. The “military revolution” is the episode most often associated with this process of institutional change (Parker 1996; Downing Reference Downing1992; Gennaioli and Voth Reference Gennaioli and Voth2015). Key to this “revolution” was a series of innovations in military technology that took place between the late Renaissance and the eve of the French Revolution. Footnote 2 Most important among them was an improvement in artillery, which had profound consequences for the practice of war. Tall, thin walls gave way to the short and thick ones of the Trace Italienne, giving defensive warfare the upper hand in the second half of the sixteenth century. New tactics that relied on the coordinated use of firearms were introduced, to the advantage of larger armies (Latzko Reference Latzko1993). Average army size went rapidly from a few thousand to tens and, on a few occasions, hundreds of thousands. For instance, the French army numbered 50,000 men in the 1550s. The same figure was 150,000 by the 1630s (Parker Reference Parker1976, p. 206). Footnote 3

The tactical and technological changes brought about by the military revolution proved rather expensive for European rulers. Larger armies meant more salaries, uniforms, weapons, and rations. The growing effectiveness of gunpowder artillery required the construction of more extensive fortifications (Batchelder and Freudenberger Reference Batchelder and Freudenberger1983). Burdened with these new financial requirements, sovereigns initiated a series of reforms of their public institutions. As one military historian put it, “the growth of an effective bureaucracy was an essential prerequisite for the creation, control, and supply of larger and better-equipped armies” (Parker 1996, p. 147). Of particular importance were public institutions dedicated to taxation. Following the onset of the military revolution, European states moved away from a “domain model” of public finance—which had dominated the continent throughout the Middle Ages and relied on the exploitation of the ruler’s private assets—to more direct taxation of national output (Bonney Reference Bonney1999).

During the Revolutionary and Napoleonic periods, France became the leader of a “new military revolution” (Parker 1996, p. 149). One consequential element of the latter was the decision to abandon traditional methods for military recruitment, which rested mostly on foreign mercenaries and, to a lesser extent, domestic volunteers. Instead, the French government started to rely heavily on military conscription, an uncommon practice throughout the ancien régime. While France already introduced the principle of the military draft in 1793 (a measure formalized in 1798), it was only under Napoléon that conscription became foundational to the country’s military system and a permanent feature of French society. Every year during Napoléon’s reign, tens of thousands of civilians were forced to abandon their homes and villages and join the army for the following several years.