

To provide evidence of the determinants and consequences of France’s discriminatory conscription policy, we introduce an original dataset that uses documents from the Archives Nationales in Paris. Our dataset contains yearly department-level data on draft dodging rates, conscription rates, enforcement efforts, and other military and administrative variables for the period between 1806 and 1810. Footnote 5 We combine these with various measures of geographical characteristics, most prominently geocoded data on terrain ruggedness from Nunn and Puga (Reference Nunn and Puga2012), distance from Paris, traveling costs from Paris, and whether a department shared a border with a foreign country.

We leverage these data in a series of empirical exercises. First, we show that the prevalence of draft dodging was a function of the government’s enforcement costs by investigating the relationship between terrain ruggedness and the draft-dodging rate across departments. We find that a one standard deviation increase in the natural logarithm of terrain ruggedness raised a department’s draft dodging rate by 2.9 to 6.3 percentage points. We then perform a case study of Haute-Vienne, a department from the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region of France, for which we are able to access data at a smaller administrative (i.e., cantonal) level. The results of this case study show that a canton’s geographic characteristics predict draft-dodging rates at home but not desertion rates outside Haute-Vienne after soldiers have joined their unit. This is consistent with the view that geography affected the prevalence of draft dodging via its effect on the government’s ability to enforce the draft rather than via more indirect socio-economic channels.

Second, we provide evidence for the Napoleonic regime’s adoption of discriminatory conscription enforcement policy by showing a large, negative, and statistically significant relationship between a department’s ruggedness and its conscription rate. We find that a one standard deviation increase in the natural logarithm of terrain ruggedness predicts a conscription rate between 0.8 and 2.4 percentage points lower. We corroborate these results by way of an event study. In 1808/09, Napoléon’s minister of war, Jean-Gérard Lacuée, developed and then implemented a reform of France’s draft system. Our event study of Lacuée’s reform shows that it reduced the conscription rate in exactly those departments he had identified as especially impervious to the government’s conscription efforts. Back-of-the-envelope calculations based on these results suggest that there would have been 27 percent more draft dodgers roaming France in 1810 had the regime refused to ramp up its use of discriminatory conscription in 1809.Footnote 6

Finally, we discuss a series of reforms the Napoleonic regime introduced to address draft evasion in the medium and long run. These included the centralization of conscription enforcement, the use of draconian forms of punishment for draft dodgers (as well as their families and villages), and the involvement of the military in the fight against draft evasion.