

Our specifications also include the “Township density” variable, equal to the number of townships (the smallest administrative unit) per km2. The coefficient of this variable is expected to be negative: the more distant and thinly connected the townships are to each other, the more difficult it is to enforce conscription. The results in Table 1 are consistent with this expectation. Across all specifications, the “Township density” coefficient is negative. However, its magnitude is largely reduced when we include additional controls, as in Columns (4) and (5), and the coefficients become statistically insignificant. This may be due to the inclusion of the number of military relays per 10 km2 in 1795 as a control. This variable allows us to control for previous investment in military infrastructure—especially as the ease with which the movement of troops occurs is likely to be a determinant of draft evasion. However, township density and the number of military relays appear to be highly correlated, and our data may not be comprehensive enough to identify the independent effect of each variable. Footnote 32 Nevertheless, more military relays per 10 km2 within a department significantly predict lower draft dodging rates.

One potential concern concerning the validity of our results is that ruggedness may affect draft evasion indirectly through its effect on other, omitted variables. To address this issue, we use a wide range of controls collected from archival documents and primary sources. Hence Column (2) in Table 1 includes controls for a department’s wheat suitability and whether a department is adjacent to the seashore. Column (3) adds controls for economic outcomes, specifically a department’s urbanization rate and tax revenues per capita. In Column (4), we further include measures for a department’s literacy rate, the percentage of conscripts working in the agricultural sector, and the average height of able-bodied men of conscription age. Footnote 33 Including these variables addresses the possibility that ruggedness affects draft dodging rates via its effect on a department’s overall productivity.Footnote 34 Less productive departments may have lower educational attainment and nutrition levels, which may affect young men’s willingness to join the army or ability to pay for a replacement.Footnote 35 Similarly, poorer departments may have lower levels of nutritional investment, which may affect the average height of their populations. Since Napoléonic France had a minimum height requirement for its conscripts, lower average heights may reduce the need to evade the draft in the first place. Finally, Column (4) controls for the year a department was created, as this may proxy local administrative capacity.

In Column (5), we include one additional control: the number of military replacements hired within a department. The system of military replacement gave conscripts the ability to hire another man to serve in the army in their stead. This institution was made legal de facto on 16 April 1799, and formalized in 1800 and 1802. It was, however, heavily regulated by the Napoleonic regime, especially from 1806 onward. For instance, conscripts could only be replaced by men from the same department; replacements had to meet stricter physical and moral requirements, and so forth (Rouanet and Piano Reference Rouanet and Piano2020).Footnote 36 As a result, the ease with which replacements could be found varied substantially across departments. The results from Column (5) show that the portion of replacements is negatively related to a department’s draft dodging rate.Footnote 37 Including this variable only strengthens the coefficient for our main independent variable. Finally, Column (6) shows that our results are robust to including elevation as a control.