

Table 3 reports the results of five OLS specifications. Columns (1) through (4) have the same independent variables as in Table 1, except for the variable “Exemption rate,” which measures the percentage of men considered unfit for military service. Men shorter than 1.48 meters (or 4.85 feet), the hearing-impaired, and men afflicted by a wide array of diseases were exempted from military service. The local population’s health was thus a major constraint on conscription efforts. Naturally, we should expect the government to draft fewer men in regions with poorer overall health conditions.

We find a large and statistically significant effect of ruggedness on a department’s conscription rate. A one standard deviation increase in the natural logarithm of ruggedness predicts a fall in the conscription rate of between 0.8 and 2.4 percentage points.Footnote 45 An increase in the log of ruggedness from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the distribution predicts a decrease in the conscription rate by 1.2 to 3.3 percentage points. To put these results into perspective, the conscription rate across departments between 1806 and 1810 was around 29.6 percent. In other words, the probability of getting drafted fell by about 5–10 percent when living in one of the more rugged departments. Table 3 also shows that the coefficient on the natural log of ruggedness becomes much larger in Column (4). This result is not driven by the inclusion of military relays but rather by the fact that, in order to include the controls in Column (4), we must sacrifice over one-third of our observations.Footnote 46

The regressions in Table 3 also find that a one percentage point increase in the exemption rate led to a 0.3 percentage point decrease in the rate of conscription. A one standard deviation increase in the same variable predicts a 3 percentage point fall in the conscription rate. Moreover, living in departments adjacent to the border lowered the probability of being drafted by around 1.5 percentage points, and this effect is statistically significant throughout. Finally, we find that living in a maritime department lowers the probability of being drafted. Footnote 47 In the Online Appendix, we provide the results of robustness checks akin to those for Table 1. None affect the overall pattern of these results.

### The Lacuée Plan: An Event Study

This section complements the results of our formal econometric exercise with an event study. Conscripts evading their military obligations generate a policy externality. Draft dodgers make draft evasion more appealing to nearby conscripts by congesting the law enforcement system, thus lowering the probability of punishment.Footnote 48 Recall that one simple solution to this problem, from the point of view of the rational ruler, is to draft less in regions where it is the largest. By reducing the conscription rate in departments with a high draft dodging rate, the ruler can mechanically reduce the overall number of draft dodgers in those regions. This fall in the number of draft dodgers leads to less congestion in the law enforcement system, thus increasing its effectiveness and reducing the national draft evasion rate.