

Table 1

GEOGRAPHY AND DRAFT EVASION

***p < 0.01, **p< 0.05, *p < 0.1

Notes: This table displays the results of regressing draft dodging rates on geographical characteristics as well as other controls. We report robust standard errors in parentheses and Conley standard errors correcting for spatial autocorrelation in brackets. Conley standard errors are computed using the Stata code provided by Hsiang (Reference Hsiang2010), assuming a correlation range of 100 kilometers and a linearly declining spatial weighing kernel. Different thresholds are used in Online Appendix I.

Sources: Draft-dodging rates are form the Archives Nationales AF/IV/1124, n. 1 and n. 9. Ruggedness is from Nunn and Puga (Reference Nunn and Puga2012). Township density is from Prudhomme (Reference Prudhomme1804). Distance from Paris was calculated using longitude and latitude data from Wikipedia. Data on “Border” status are from Nussli (Reference Nussli2012). Military relays are from Arbellot, Lepetit, and Bertrand (Reference Arbellot, Lepetit and Bertrand1985). Replacement rate is from the Archives Nationales, AF/IV/1124, pp. 198–215. Maritime is calculated from Poirson (Reference Poirson1808). Tax revenues per capita are from Peuchet (Reference Peuchet1805). Urbanization rates are calculated using data from Bairoch, Batou, and Chevre (Reference Bairoch, Batou and Chevre1988). Wheat suitability is from the FAO, GAEZ v3.0. Literacy data is from the Ministère de l’Instruction Publique (1880). Height and agricultural sector data are both from the Archives Nationales, series F/9, boxes 150 to 259. Year created was calculated with information from Wikipedia. Elevation data are from the U.S. Geological Survey. Information on military divisions is from the Almanach Imperial pur l’An MDCCCVI.

Table 1 reports the results of six OLS specifications on the effect of geographical characteristics on draft dodging rates across French departments. The coefficients of our main explanatory variable (“Log of ruggedness”) are large, positive, statistically significant across all specifications, and stable when we use comparable samples.Footnote 31 A one standard deviation increase in our measure of terrain ruggedness predicts an increase in the draft dodging rate of 2.9 to 6.3 percentage points. An increase in the log of ruggedness from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the distribution predicts a 4 to 8.8 percentage point increase in the draft dodging rate. This effect is large and economically significant, as the average draft dodging rate over our entire period (1806 to 1810) was 14.9 percent.

Other geographic characteristics do not appear to have as strong an effect. In the case of distance from Paris, the coefficient is positive across specifications but only marginally significant. Proximity to the border also positively affects the draft dodging rate throughout, consistent with the idea that border departments offer avenues for conscripts to evade their military obligations. Being a bordering department increases the draft dodging rate by 2.2 to 4.7 percentage points on average. However, this effect is not statistically significant at conventional levels when we employ Conley standard errors to correct for spatial autocorrelation.