

Key to our analysis is the claim that geographical characteristics systematically influence the ruler’s calculus via their effect on the cost of enforcing conscription and preventing draft dodging.Footnote 23 Our main geographic variable of interest is terrain ruggedness as defined by Riley, DeGloria, and Elliot (Reference Riley, DeGloria and Elliot1999). We also generated other geographic variables measuring the distance from Paris, whether a department is adjacent to the border, the year a department was created/annexed, wheat suitability, proximity to the sea, township density, and elevation.

Terrain ruggedness measures “topographic heterogeneity in wildlife habitats providing concealment for preys and lookout posts” (Nunn and Puga Reference Nunn and Puga2012, p. 21). Terrain ruggedness is measured by first dividing a territory into (926x929 ms) squares. Ruggedness is then calculated by taking the square root of the sum of the squared difference in elevation between the center of our original square and the elevation of each of the eight neighboring squares. Footnote 24 Akin to Nunn and Puga’s (2012) argument that ruggedness affected the ability of European colonists to capture slaves in West Africa, we take ruggedness to proxy the exogenous constraint that geographic conditions forced on the French government’s efforts to eradicate draft evasion. Footnote 25

Figure 2 shows the variation in draft dodging rates (top) and the log of ruggedness (bottom) across France’s departments between 1806 and 1810. The black and red borders are for departments—the country’s main administrative units—and military divisions, respectively.

Figure 2

DRAFT DODGING RATE FROM 1806 TO 1810 BY DEPARTMENT AND THE LOG OF RUGGEDNESS

Notes: Terrain Ruggedness Index is in hundreds of meters for grid points 30 arc-seconds (926 meters on a meridian) apart (Nunn and Puga Reference Nunn and Puga2012). The draft dodging rate in the map on the top is in percentage points.

Sources: Nunn and Puga (Reference Nunn and Puga2012) (bottom) and Archives Nationales, AF/IV/1124, n. 1 and n. 9, (top).

A military division was an administrative unit encompassing an average of five departments. Military divisions were created in 1793 to contribute to the administration of the draft (de Halle Reference de Halle1803). From year XI (1802/03) onward, police control was vested in the généraux de division (Forrest Reference Forrest1989, p. 221). Those generals were “charged with supervising military service, gave the impetus to the sedentary troops, to the depots, to the garrison regiments,” and were “natural chiefs of the forces of the interior” (Capefigue Reference Capefigue1842, pp. 37–38). Napoléon saw military divisions “as an important check, and sometimes counterbalance, to the civil authority of the prefects” (Woolf Reference Woolf2002, pp. 81–82).

To bolster our case about the relationship between geography and conscription, we also consider alternative variables that potentially influenced draft dodging and may bias our results if omitted. First, we create a measure of national identity following Johnson (Reference Johnson2015), who draws on data from Hyslop (Reference Hyslop1934).Footnote 26 Second, we measure the local popularity of revolutionary ideology using data from Tackett (Reference Tackett1986) on the percentage of French clergy who swore an oath to the Constitution in 1790 (Online Appendix G.3). Third, we use Le Bris’ (Reference Le Bris2019) data on local legal systems across France to account for institutional differences between the north and the south of France before the revolution (Online Appendix G.4). Until the revolution, France did not have a national legal system. Rather, some regions (mostly in the north) were governed by customary law, while others (mostly in the south) had written legal codes. Finally, we account for the effect of the allocation of soldiers to different theaters of war on draft dodging (Online Appendix G.1). Fighting on different fronts may have entailed substantially different risks for soldiers, influencing the conscript’s decision to dodge the draft.