

Napoléon’s first innovation was to centralize the administration of the country’s conscription system. Traditionally, this task had been within the purview of local officials. However, influenced by their constituencies’ sensibilities, they had proven unreliable agents of the state. As early as 1799, Napoléon had to grapple with local authorities’ insubordination in matters of conscription. When he tried to draft 33,000 new men, only one-third of them actually joined their units. Moreover, many of the ones who did were unfit for service. Overall, mayors were complicit in the locals’ fraudulent attempts to avoid military service: “Especially in southern France, mayors issued false certificates of marriage or physical disability to men called up” (Elting Reference Elting1997, p. 322). Still, by 1806, France’s Chief of Police was writing to Napoléon to inform him that the mayors of several localities near Toulouse were refusing to enforce the draft (Fouché 1964, p. 823). In at least one instance, the mayor of a town in the department of Ariège was accused of burning the identification documents of the local youth (Fouché 1922, p. 231). Fouché himself later recommended that “energetic, impartial commissioner[s]” be sent by the central government to oversee the administration of conscription in rural departments (Fouché 1964, p. 252). Eventually, the regime reorganized the entire system by entrusting its administration to prefects and sub-prefects, who were selected by and worked directly for Paris. Starting in 1806, prefects and sub-prefects were to oversee recruitment and the physical examination of all potential draftees (Woloch Reference Woloch1986, p. 106). The government also regrouped towns and villages into larger administrative districts called cantons to administer the draft. This change was made with the explicit goal of “[weakening] personal favoritism” in the conscription process and increasing its efficiency (Woolf Reference Woolf2002, pp. 158, 161).

Punishment for draft dodgers became more severe and its enforcement stricter (Forrest Reference Forrest1989, p. 105). Their families were turned into targets of government action as well. For instance, “the seizure of hostages from uncooperative families or the billeting of troops on them until they produced their boy” became one of the government’s “most effective” tools to deter draft evasion (Best Reference Best1998, p. 91). The regime even introduced a bounty of 12 francs to be paid out to anyone who captured a draft dodger (Elting Reference Elting1997, p. 322). In some departments, especially those where draft evasion had become endemic, prefects went beyond threatening the families of draft dodgers and instituted a kind of community responsibility system. Villagers of means, including those unrelated to the draft dodgers, were forced to pay steep fees until the young men had joined their units (Woloch Reference Woloch1986, p. 120). Entire villages lost their right to bear arms so long as draft dodgers took refuge in them.