

If the principles of military organizations were becoming universal, the place of the army in society was also changing. Napoléon understood that the potential of the new military organization was not limited to the pursuit of foreign policy. Armies could be employed to ensure compliance with the regime’s goals domestically as well (Best Reference Best1998, p. 205). No single policy contributed more to the process of centralizing state power and to the increasing involvement of the armed forces in domestic policy than Napoléon’s fight against draft evasion:

Enforcing conscription and strengthening its machinery contributed to the build-up of the State’s power…. [T]hrough the draft, more than any other policy, the central state increasingly became a reality the governed were unable to ignore (Grab Reference Grab2003, p. 52).

The appeal of the new system was so strong that just a few years after the Bourbon Monarchy had been restored, Louis XVIII, who had dismantled the Grande Armée upon ascending to the throne (Nafziger 1988, p. 26). The King quickly made Napoléon’s reforms his own, re-established the national army, and re-introduced mandatory military service and promotion by merit (Best Reference Best1998, pp. 217–18). This legacy was not limited to France. Napoléon’s military innovations and reforms were adopted by his former enemies and allies alike. Austria, Prussia, Spain, and even Britain had to recognize their superiority and made Napoléon’s model of the national army their own in their march toward the nation-state (Delbrück Reference Delbrück1985, pp. 450–51).

## CONCLUSIONS

Political economists and economic historians have recently started paying attention to the relationship between military technology and practices on the one hand and institutional change and long-run economic performance on the other. Most such work has focused, in the European context, on the military revolution and political transformation in the Early Modern Era. In this paper, we explore a new and just as consequential episode in European history and the development of modern political institutions: the Napoleonic regime in France. Under Napoléon’s leadership, France perfected a new way of war that relied on a national army. At its helm, Napoléon would (briefly) achieve his vision of French military hegemony over the European continent. However, to realize this vision, he had to overcome one fundamental obstacle: draft evasion. The new military system relied on the forcible conscription of young men for its recruitment. These young men were not always willing to comply and often opted to escape their military obligations instead.

Napoléon’s response to the problem of draft evasion was twofold. In the short run, the regime opted for the discriminatory enforcement of conscription across its regions. Using an original dataset based on archival evidence on draft dodging and conscription over this period, we show that a region’s geographical characteristics (a major determinant of conscription enforcement costs) predict its conscription rates as well as its draft dodging rates. We also provide qualitative evidence from historical sources that members of the Napoleonic regime were aware of the varying propensity of local populations to evade their military obligations. The sources confirm that this information influenced the decision-making process behind the administration of conscription in France.