

Mustafa has not really understood Westphalia’s administrative hierarchy. Confusing the canton mayors--a specific Westphalian rank created at the end of 1808--with the sub-prefects, he asserts that each district was governed by a certain number of sub-prefects (up to eight in certain cases). Like in France, every district was administered by one sub-prefect. The great number of communes administered by non-professional mayors, who often came from the peasantry and accepted relatively easily administrative tasks, shows the broad and interested involvement of the people in public local administration, rather than over-government.

Mustafa’s description of the demesne policy, beginning with a wrong definition of what a domain was, confuses the uninformed reader. In the 1970s, scholars claimed that by depriving the Westphalian government of a substantial part of its crownland, Napoleon favored maintaining feudalism in these parts of the kingdom. However, he had declared that Westphalia should be a model of modernity for the other German states of the Rhenish Confederation, among other things, by abolishing serfdom and privileges. The owners of these domains, composed of the manors whose lord was the prince, were the Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke of Braunschweig, and the King of Prussia. For all reductions of these estates’ revenues by Westphalian anti-seignorial legislation, the Westphalian government had to compensate the recipients. Repeatedly, Mustafa describes these estates as private or aristocratic property confiscated by Napoleon (p. 46)! According to Mustafa, the aristocrats who feared confiscations of their lands, sent delegations to the emperor in 1807, since Napoleon’s administrators were about to survey all these aristocratic properties (p. 29). Napoleonic administrators did indeed describe all the provinces before organizing the new kingdom, but they surveyed the domanial land of the former princes, never confiscating aristocratic and commoners’ properties, considered as private property by the Civil Code. Private property was normally confiscated only in cases of civil servants and military officers who passed to the enemy (or betrayed the Westphalian state). Such confiscations were relatively rare. What the aristocratic delegates sent to Napoleon in 1807 feared was the complete

H-France Review Volume 19 (2019) Page 4 abolition of the peasants’ seignorial obligations, as this had been done in France in 1794. The princely estates were run by farmers who were mostly agrarian pre-capitalist entrepreneurs and who saw their contracts confirmed; they continued to exploit these estates on behalf of the new French remote owners and were not expelled, as the author contends (p. 29). However, they had to pay the ground tax levied on the ground’s revenue.

To show how the new system puzzled many Germans, Mustafa quotes a German author who published a detailed survey of Westphalian territories and who “got a bit confused over the difference between a department and a district” (p. 43). The cited author did not write on the new territorial division at all, but simply presented the statistics of the provinces integrated into the new kingdom.[5] These are only a few examples showing that the meticulous reader will have some difficulty finding confirmation of what the author claims in the works cited in the endnotes. Moreover, Mustafa rounds up figures provided by primary sources very roughly to make it look like Westphalia’s balance sheet worse than it actually was. For example, Mustafa says that even the last Westphalian Minister of Finance, Malchus, conceded “that Westphalia’s tax burden was at least 50% higher than that of the predecessor states, even without counting the forced bonds, special war taxes and French contributions” (p. 101). An analysis of the former minister’s post Napoleonic justifications reveals that Malchus acknowledged an increase of less than 44 percent and finally only around 30 percent, once the taxes imposed on the former privileged aristocrats were deducted and the old pre-Westphalian taxes suppressed in 1811 were taken into account.[6] This increase did not affect all social classes equally.