

The first chapter is devoted to an account of the occupation of provinces later welded together into the Kingdom of Westphalia and to descriptions of life during this period of the war between France and the Fourth Coalition (from October 1806 until July 1807). Chapter two, entitled “A Kingdom on Paper,” deals with the kingdom’s organization, giving a brief description of its institutions and administrative divisions, the rational character of which the author attempts to refute. Taking up the idea of a state designed on paper and modeled on foreign country’s administration without any consideration to local resources, disseminated by the older historiography, he concludes that Westphalia was simply over-governed, its administrative staff being too replete given the size of the country and the number of its inhabitants. Mustafa analyses the motivations of those who served the new state, concluding that most were mainly driven by the desire to keep their jobs. He underlines the abundant contemporary literature about the new state and its legislation, showing the new state’s need to legitimize itself. As many historians before him, he tackles Napoleon’s domanial policy as one reason for Westphalia’s financial difficulties. Napoleon required the new state to cede a substantial part of all crownland laying in Westphalia to give it as fiefs to his officers. Chapter three describes Napoleon’s brother Jerome as the least ambitious of all his siblings, who rightly received his lasting reputation as a womanizer living an extravagant lifestyle at his court. But, as Mustapha believes, it was less the court’s expensive splendor and Jerome’s lack of interest in governing that discredited his regime than the burden of Napoleon’s excessive demands of troops and money that prevented the Westphalian state from winning popular support and loyalty.

The following thematic chapters are devoted to economic life and taxation, the army and military conscription, and, finally, the new legislation and the police. The author repeats several commonplaces created by the older literature. Heavy taxes rested upon the people, economic life was gloomy because of the continental blockade and this was, he claims, a continent-wide problem. Only a few people understood the new laws, and there were not enough judges who could read French and hence be able to understand the Civil Code. Of course, families hated conscription and compulsory military service, as they did elsewhere. Westphalia’s army was thus weakened by significant rates of desertion. In chapter seven, Mustafa describes the conspiracies that sought to overthrow the kingdom in 1809, just before and during Napoleon’s war against Austria, and he contends that they showed the new polity’s fragility. Chapters eight, nine, and ten deal with reforms in religious policy, the emergence of a new Westphalian identity, and attitudes towards the new regime. The final sequence is devoted to the alleged collapse of Westphalia and the restoration of the old order. All that remained of Westphalia was paper.