

In contrast to his declared purpose, Mustafa categorizes people. For instance, he stresses rightly the aristocrats’ hostility to the regime but does not apply his categorization to approach their writings critically. But above all, and without the slightest discussion, Mustafa uses national categories the relevance of which for the early nineteenth century has been largely questioned by recent scholarship.[10] What did it mean for the popular classes to be a German at that time? Beyond these weaknesses Mustafa’s work reveals some methodological limitations characteristic of many other histories of Napoleon’s satellites. Many historians specializing in these polities study exclusively the archival records of these short-lived administrations, leaving aside the huge mass of archival files left by the previous bureaucracies. When Prussia imposed her administration on the Polish provinces occupied after the last partitions (1795), the Poles perceived the new bureaucratic rules as petty. Their reactions resembled those of the Hessians, whose disdain for the Westphalian bureaucracy is described at the beginning of this review: “Most Poles reacted badly to a civil service that overwhelmed them with an avalanche of rules and regulations. Many of these created an impression of absurd pettiness.”[11] But it was this kind of administration that Napoleon’s men found in many parts of Westphalia. Bureaucratic tasks imposed on villagers were nothing new. And if Sam A. Mustafa had studied seriously these pre-Westphalian files, he would have found lists of Prussian deserters and draft dodgers whose properties were confiscated. Even if this is not always an easy task, measuring the rejection of Prussian and Westphalian military service in a comparative perspective would have allowed him to conclude that the Prussian military system was so much hated that in 1813 and 1814 Prussia’s occupational authorities felt obliged to justify the lacking will to enroll in the Landwehr by the fear of corporal punishments. The same criticism applies to the author’s impression of a strange hybridization of the German language with French words during the Westphalian period. The German language had much more French words than today, and they were largely imported in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and not under Napoleon’s rule. Some acquaintance with pre-Napoleonic German texts and familiarity with language history would have allowed the author to avoid such hasty conclusions.

It matters little that the author does not mention some works published in 2015 and 2016.[12] He had decided to avoid seriously engaging with most of the recent scholarly literature, instead using largely memoirs written in the nineteenth century as evidence to depict public opinion in Westphalia. Above all, he has systematically selected only those facts in both the old and new scholarly literature that support his theory of Westphalia’s complete failure. It is easy to complicate and even to refute many of Mustafa’s geographically and socially unnuanced assertions about the impact of the continental blockade, the effects of quartering troops, and many other aspects with information taken from the same scholarly literature he cites in his own bibliography. For example, in Willy Kohl’s scholarly work, courageously published in the unfavorable context of Nazi Germany, he would have found that in 1817 peasants confessed “guilelessly” to a Prussian minister making a tour throughout the reoccupied province of Magdeburg that “they would like to have such a constitution back” (the Westphalian one).[13]