

There is no doubt that the author argues that the old nineteenth-century story written by German historians is finally what matches best a scholarly (and evidence-based) reconstruction of Westphalia’s history. According to the author, recent German and French scholarship has not only overlooked the miseries under Napoleon’s rule, but also exaggerated the modernization of society and of the so-called model state. It is debatable whether historians have sanitized the unpleasant aspects of Napoleonic domination for political reasons. They simply opened their research to new fields that had been previously neglected. One might recall that the German historian Helmut Berding has insisted that the alleged failure of Napoleon’s reform policy occurred because the military and financial pressures exerted by the emperor compromised all efforts to win the people’s support.[2] Berding did not question the existence of what Mustafa calls a “plunder state” disseminated by the old nationalist historiography (pp. 73-74). However, more recent research has offered more nuanced views of this issue.[3] Challenging recent views on Westphalia’s life would require exploring large amounts of primary sources and analyzing

H-France Review Volume 19 (2019) Page 3 them according to scholarly standards of the twenty-first century. It would involve a serious discussion of recent research, especially given that the author’s project was ambitious enough to deal with Westphalia in its entirety. Does Mustafa match these requirements?

Those who are a bit familiar with the satellite kingdom’s history will be astonished by the incredible number of factual errors in Mustafa’s book. Kassel, the capital, was not Westphalia’s largest city, in contrast to Mustafa’s repeated assertions. Despite growing from 18,450 people in 1807 to 22,803 in 1812, mainly due to the prosperity induced by its function as capital of a much larger state than the former Hessian electorate and not only because of immigration from France, Kassel remained only the third most populous city in the kingdom after Braunschweig (with a population of 31,714 in 1807) and Magdeburg (about 30,000).[4] It is quite clear that the French garrison of Magdeburg was never “as large as the city’s population” (p. 209), as the author claims, and the number of soldiers stationed there rarely exceeded 7000-8000. Historians used to recognize the famous French jurist’s Siméon sincere aim to deliver the peasants from feudal obligations. He kept the portfolios of the Ministries of the Interior and Justice up to the end of 1808 and then left the Ministry of the Interior to Wolffradt. However, according to Mustafa, Wolffradt was the Minister of Justice and Simeon that of Interior (p. 42, p. 131) throughout the whole reign of Jerome. According to a statement ascribed to Napoleon, Westphalians were not citizens but only subjects. Therefore, the word citizen was systematically avoided in official texts, as the author asserts repeatedly. However, these claims can be easily refuted by reading the text of the Westphalian Constitution, which uses both terms interchangeably.