

The numerous scans of archival files uploaded by the Hessian Archives allow us to verify Mustafa’s high estimates for desertion.[7] He contends that the different police organs caught between 150 and 200 deserters per month or between 1800 and 2400 a year. The cited source file contains sixteen monthly accounts of gratifications paid to those who had caught draft dodgers or deserters for the districts of the Werra department. When counting the deserters and not mixing up them with the draft dodgers, as Mustafa clearly does, there were 29 deserters in the whole Werra department caught in 1811. If we assume that the evidence is incomplete, which is not certain at all, because gratifications could be paid irregularly, an extrapolation of the average numbers would lead to an estimate of 520 to 590 deserters caught in the whole kingdom in 1811, or 1,7% of the army’s size. This would figure with the data published by the regime’s press, which Mustafa attempts to question. But desertion varied regionally. The two lists available for the Fulda department, both of which are not accounts of gratifications, contain more arrested deserters: 28 in April 1811 and 14 in June. But since deserters were likely to desert when their units stood near to their homes--three quarters of the caught deserters came from the Fulda department that garrisoned half the Westphalian troops--these desertion rates are hardly generalizable. That only two lists are available might be due to incomplete preservation, or it might reflect periodical men-hunting practices known in other satellite states. Draft dodging like desertion were forms of resistance to conscription in Napoleonic France and elsewhere. But normally, historians relate the numbers of draft dodgers to the number of young men in the age groups liable to military service. Compared to other Napoleonic armies, there was relatively little desertion and draft-dodging in Westphalia, which is not astonishing given the highly militarized societies in which people had lived before. The troops standing in the predecessor states amounted to at least 42,000 soldiers, a number the Westphalian army never reached, and the country was able to supply the French troops standing in the kingdom. The Westphalian army’s losses have been exaggerated.

Neither the predicted “broadly-based rebellion” in the case of a war against Russia nor the collapse of Westphalia expected by Prussian strategists happened (p. 238). Westphalia was simply occupied by the regular forces of the Sixth Coalition victorious at Leipzig. Even before, deprived of the main part of its troops and engaged at the Saxon theater of operation alongside Napoleon’s Grande Armée, the kingdom was unable to prevent the enemy’s systematic incursions aimed at disorganizing its administrations. After these short incursions, Westphalian authority was immediately restored, and the alleged collapse of Westphalia expresses nothing more than the wishful and teleological thinking of nationalist historians. During the nearly four weeks between the “dissolution” of Westphalia on October 1 st, 1813 by the Russians (p. 286), who briefly occupied Kassel, and the week after the Battle of Leipzig, 16 th to 19 th of October 1813, and even beyond, the Westphalian administration continued to work as normally as possible in a context of military threat. The idea of widespread popular reprisals against Westphalian officials after the withdrawal of Napoleonic troops is illustrated by some cases that are largely exaggerated by the older historiography, and it is not based on carefully studied evidence. In the former duchy of Braunschweig, these incidents were mostly no more than charivaris, and they affected a little bit more than 6 percent of the villages and towns.[8] Mustafa is obliged to acknowledge that most Westphalian mayors remained in place. In North-western Westphalia, officials and inhabitants hesitated to side openly Napoleon’s enemies as long the scope of his defeat at Leipzig was not clear.[9]