

Sect.  6.  Advance  of  prices  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  in  1811  and 

1812  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  331 

Sect.  7.   Prices  of  commodities  from  the  summer  of  1 81 1  to  the  summer 

of  1813       -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  339 

Sect.  8.   Fall  of  the  prices  of  corn,  and  other  European  produce,  in 

1813  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  341 

Sect.  9.    Rise  of  prices  of  exportable  commodities  in  1813  -         -  344 

Sect.  10.  State  of  the  circulation  from  1809  to  1813,  both  years  in- 
cluded        .....--.    348 

Sect.  11.   Summary  of  the  preceding  survey        -  -  -         -  373 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ihe  high  range  of  prices  which  prevailed  in  the 
closing  years  of  the  past,  and  in  the  earUer  part  of 
the  present  century,  contrasted  with  the  compara- 
tively low  range,  observable  in  the  period  which 
has  elapsed  from  1819  to  the  present  time,  forms  a 
very  striking  feature  in  the  history  of  the  agricul- 
ture and  commerce  of  this  country.  The  contrast 
thus  presented  involves  fluctuations  in  the  value 
of  property  so  great  as  naturally  to  have  excited, 
both  from  a  sense  of  interest  and  from  a  feeling  of 
rational  curiosity,  an  anxious  desire  to  obtain  a 
satisfactory  solution  of  phenomena  so  remarkable. 
Accordingly,  publications  without  number  or  end 
have  appeared,  professing  to  explain  the  extra- 
ordinary variations  of  prices  which  have  marked 
that  eventful  period.  The  explanations  hitherto 
offered,  whatever  may  have  been  the  nature  of  the 
proofs  and  illustrations  brought  forward  in  sup- 
port of  them,  resolve  themselves  mostly,  if  not 
wholly,  into  the  assignment  of  one  or  other  of  two 
general  causes;  namely,  the  war  and  the  currency. 
The  effect  of  war  in  raising  the  prices  of  ar- 
ticles directly  taxed,  has  been  generally  admitted. 
But  as  the  amount  of  taxes  levied  for  defraying 
the  expenses  of  the  war  continued  (with  the  ex- 
ception of  the  property  tax,  which  avowedly  did 
not  act  upon  prices)  undiminished  down  to  the 
summer  of  18^2  ;  and  as  the  fall  of  prices  of  ar^ 
tides  divested  of  duty,  that  of  provisions  especially, 

B 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

had  then  been  as  great,  and  to  as  low  a  point  of 
depression  as  has,  with  trifling  exceptions,  been 
since  witnessed  ;  and  moreover,  as  the  very  great 
reduction  of  duties  of  customs  and  excise,  v/hich 
has  taken  place  since  182^2,  has  not  been  attended 
with  any  corresponding  fall  of  the  prices  of  pro- 
visions, or  of  other  articles  divested  of  duty,  the 
previous  elevation  of  prices  cannot  be  ascribed  to 
the  war,  merely  on  tlie  ground  of  its  attendant 
taxation.*  It  is,  accordingly,  to  the  war,  not  as 
having  caused  the  taxes,  but  chiefly  as  having,  by 
the  enormous  amount  of  tlie  government  ex- 
penditiu'e  defrayed  by  loans,  caused  a  great  and 
increasing  demand  for  all  the  leading  articles  of 
consumption,  that  the  remarkable  elevation  of 
prices  has  been  ascribed  by  a  theory  which  num- 
bers among  its  supporters  no  mean  authorities. 