

But  the  theory  of  war-demand,  as  having  raised 
prices,  and  of  the  peace  as  having,  by  the  con- 
sequent cessation  of  that  demand,  been  necessarily 
followed  by  a  fall  of  prices,  is  now  rarely  advanced. 
The  preponderant,  and  almost  exclusive  theory,  is 
that  which  refers  all  the  phenomena  of  high  prices 
from  1792  till  1819,  and  of  the  comparative  low 
prices  since  1819,  to  alterations  in  tlie  system  of 
our  currency,  holding  all  other  circumstances  that 
can  have  had  any  influence  to  be  so  subordinate  as 
not  to  be  worth  mentioning. 

These  opinions,  however  ingeniously  and  plau- 
sibly advanced  and  maintained,  admit,  as  I  conceive, 
of  being  shown,  by  a  careful  examination  of  facts, 
to  be  wholly  erroneous.  The  error,  indeed,  of 
the  theory  of  war- demand,  is  no  longer  one  which 

*  The  impediments  to  importation,  and  the  consequently 
increased  cost  of  foreign  supplies,  are  occasionally  referred  to 
as  accounting  for  some  increase  of  price.  But  this  effect  of  the 
war  is  but  slightly  noticed,  and  laid  little  stress  upon  by  any  of 
the  supporters  of  either  of  the  theories  of  war-demand  or  of  the 
currency. 


INTRODUCTION.  3  ' 

can  be  attended  with  any  practical  evil.  The 
association  of  war  with  high  jjrices,  and  supposed 
consequent  prosperity,  is  not  likely  to  exercise  any 
influence  on  the  foreign  policy  of  our  government. 
But  there  is  constant  danger  from  the  prevalent 
tlieory  of  the  currency. 

Repeated  attempts  have,  even  down  to  recent 
periods,  been  made  to  induce  thelegislature  to  revise, 
with  a  view  to  alter  and  debase,  the  present  standard 
of  value  ;  and  such  is  the  pertinacity  with  which  the 
opinions  infavour  of  debasement,  or  of  a  return  to 
inconvertible  paper  are  urged,  and  the  weight  of 
influence  by  which  they  are  supported,  th.at  there 
is  ground  for  apprehension  lest,  under  the  pressure 
of  any  temporary  inconvenience,  the  legislature 
might  be  led  to  listen  to  some  one  or  other  of  the 
multifarious  schemes  for  the  degradation  of  the 
currency  w^liich  are  always  afloat. 

The  claims  for  revision,  and  the  plans  for  alter- 
ation, all  proceed  on  tlie  assumption  that  the  greater 
part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  the  rise,  and  of  the  high 
range  of  prices  observable  during  the  interval  in 
which  cash  payments  were  suspended,  was  distinctly 
caused  by  the  restriction,  and  that  the  resumption 
of  cash  payments  has  been  the  main,  if  not  the  ex- 
clusive, cause  of  the  subsequent  fliU  of  prices. 

The  persons  maintaining  this  doctrine  hold, 
as  a  settled  article  of  their  creed,  that  Mr.  Ricardo, 
and  the  other  promoters  of  tlie  Act  of  1819  for  the 
resumption  of  cash  payments,  commonly  called 
Peel's  bill,  w^ere  manifestly  in  error  when  they 
contended  that  the  utmost  effect  of  that  measure 
upon  prices  would  not  exceed  4  or  5  per  cent., 
that  beinsT  the  difference  which  then  existed  be- 
tween  paper  and  gold  ;  for,  that  in  fact,  the  con- 
sequences of  the  passing  of  that  bill  have  been  felt 
in  a  general  fall  of  prices  to  the  extent  of  30  and 
40  per  cent.,  and,  according  to  some,  even  to  the 
extent  of  .50  per  cent. 