

1.  The  Variety  of  the  Seasons. 

2.  The  War. 

3.  The  Currency. 

There  are,  indeed,  two  other  circumstances  of 
a  general  character,  which  may  be  supposed  to 
have  influenced  prices,  viz.,  the  increase  of  popu- 
lation, and  the  improvements  in  agriculture  and  ma- 
nufactures. But  as  these  circumstances  have  been 
uniform  and  progressive  in  their  operation,  although 
in  opposite  directions,  they  do  not  form  any  promi- 
nent part  of  the  grounds  on  which  the  great 
Jluctuations  of  prices  can  be  accounted  for. 

In  as  far  as  the  mere  increase  of  population  might 
be  supposed  to  account  for  any  part  of  the  range  of 
high  prices  of  provisions,  by  the  necessity  of 
resorting  for  production  to  inferior  soils,  it  must 
be  admitted  (the  ratio  of  increase  of  population 
having  been  progressive)  as  a  counteraction  of  any 
tendency  to  fall.  And  as  the  improvements  in 
agriculture  and  manufactures,  all  tending  greatly 
to  reduce  the  cost  of  production,  were  in  progress 
during  the  whole  period,  although  not  so  rapidly 
in  the  earlier  part  of  it,  they  must  have  operated 
as  a  corrective  against  so  great  an  advance  in  price 

B    3 


0  INTRODUCTION. 

of  those  articles  to  which  they  applied,  as  might 
from  the  operation  of  other  causes  have  been  ex- 
pected. This  cause  need  therefore  only  be  inci- 
dentally referred  to,  as  accounting  for  the  further 
fall  of  the  particular  commodities  to  which  it  is 
applicable,  below  the  level  to  which  they  might 
otherwise  have  subsided. 

Tiie  historical  sketch  which  will  be  given  in  the 
course  of  this  work,  of  the  circumstances  which 
may  admit  of  being  connected  in  the  relation  of 
cause  and  effect  with  prices,  will  afibrd  the  means 
of  judging  of  the  degree  in  which  each,  or  any  one 
or  more,  of  the  three  general  causes  above  stated 
may  be  supposed  to  have  operated.  But  the  con- 
clusions to  be  drawn  from  a  view  of  the  facts  as 
they  occurred  in  connection  v/ith  prices,  during 
the  period  immediately  under  consideration,  will 
derive  additional  force  in  as  far  as  they  may  be 
found  to  be  consistent  with  what  might  be  inferred 
d  prion  from  a  reference  to  the  mode  and  degree 
of  influence  of  those  general  causes,  and  from  ex- 
perience of  what  has  been  their  operation  durhig 
intervals  of  some  length  anterior  to  1793. 

The  course  which  it  seems  most  expedient  to 
adopt  with  this  view  is,  in  the  first  place,  to  con- 
sider the  mode  of  operation  of  each  of  these  causes, 
and  the  relative  degree  of  importance  to  be  at- 
tached to  it  on  general  grounds,  illustrated  by  a 
reference  to  any  observable  influence  exercised  by 
it  in  some  of  the  most  prominent  fluctuations  of 
prices,  antecedent  to  the  period  more  immediately 
under  examination,  and  then  to  jiroceed,  with  the 
inferences  thus  derived,  to  investigate  the  degree 
of  influence  that  may  be  legitimately  ascribed, 
separately  or  collectively,  to  these  causes  in  the 
great  variations  of  prices  that  have  occurred  since 
1792. 