

*  The  exception  here  alluded  to,  is,  that  of  my  evidence 
before  the  Agricultural  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons 
in  182L 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  9 

and  speculative  writers,  that  although  there  were 
two  instances  of  scarcities  during  the  war,  viz. 
1794,  1795,  and  1799,  1800,  and  one  subsequently 
in  I8I6,  there  was  nothing  otherwise  of  deficiency 
from  the  season  of  more  than  usual  occurrence,  or 
such  as  to  justify  a  higher  than  usual  range  of 
prices  between  1793  and  181 9-* 

Even  when  incidentally  admitting  the  effect  of 
the  more  prominent  scarcities,  little  if  any  notice 
is  taken  of  the  mode  and  degree  in  which  deficient 
crops  promoted,  during  their  prevalence,  the  pros- 
perity of  the  farmers  and  landlords,  or  of  the  in- 
evitable effect  of  the  transition  from  a  long  course 
of  comparative  dearth  to  abundance,  in  causing 
agricultural  distress. 

With  a  view  to  show  that  there  is  nothing  un- 
warranted by  experience,  in  the  supposition  of  the 
more  frequent  recurrence  of  unfavourable  seasons 
in  intervals  of  twenty  years  or  upwards,  than  in 
intervals  of  equal  length  immediately  preceding 
or  succeeding  ;  or  in  the  assignment  of  a  succes- 
sion of  years  of  plenty,  as  a  cause  of  suffering  to 
farmers  and  landlords  ;  I  propose  to  adduce  in- 
stances derived  from  antecedent  periods  in  the 
history  of  our  agriculture.  In  order,  however,  to 
judge  of  the  degree  in  which  the  variations  of  the 
seasons,  such  as  they  will  be  shown  to  have  been, 
are  calculated  to  affect  the  prices  of  produce  and 
the  condition  of  the  agricultural  interests,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  premise  some  general  observations  on 
the  effects  of  quantity  on  price. 

*  The  partizans  of  war-demand,  limit  their  expliination  of 
high  prices  to  1814,  while  those  of  the  currency  extend  theirs 
to  1819. 


10  EFFECT    OF    THK    SEASONS. 


CHAP.   II. 

EFFECTS    OF    QUANTITY    ON    PRICE. 

It  is  not  uncommon  to  meet  with  persons,  who, 
in  reasoning  upon  prices  of  corn  and  other  com- 
modities, take  for  granted  that  the  variations 
in  price  must  be  in  exact  or  near  proportion  to 
the  variations  in  the  quantity  which  may,  at  dif- 
ferent times,  be  actually  in  the  market  or  in  the 
country  for  sale ;  and  who,  if  the  variations  in 
price  do  not  correspond  with  the  variations  in 
quantity  in  a  near  proportion,  infer  that  there  must 
be  something  in  the  currency,  or  some  unusual 
cause  in  operation,  to  account  for  what  appears  to 
them  so  anomalous  an  effect.  Thus,  the  late  Mr. 
Mushet,  in  a  treatise  on  tlie  currency,  the  object 
of  which  is  to  account  for  all  tlie  phenoniena  of 
prices  by  the  state  of  the  circulation,  maintained, 
that  such  a  fall  of  price  as  was  in  question  could 
not  be  the  effect  of  abundance  if  the  currency 
remained  unaltered,  nor  be  productive  of  agricul- 
tural distress. 