


VI  CONTENTS. 

PART  II. 

ON    THE    EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Page 
General  view  of  the  subject  -  -  -  -  86 

CHAPTER  II. 

Effects  of  taxation  on  the  fluctuation  of  general  prices         -  87 

CHAPTER  III. 

Effect  of  the  extra  demand  or  consumption  supposed  to 
arise  out  of  a  state  of  war  in  general      -  -  -     90 

Sect.  1.    Extra  demand  or  consumption  arising  out  of  a  state  of  war  in 

general         -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -90 

Sect.  2.    Effect  of  the  extra  demand  or  consumption  attributed  specially 

to  the  last  war  ..._.._   lOQ 

Sect.  3.    On  the  effects  of  the  monopoly  of  trade  enjoyed  by  this  country 

during  the  last  war  -  -  -  -  -  -   105 

Sect.  4.    Effects  of  the  stimulus  or  excitement  supposed  to  have  been 

occasioned  by  the  Government  expenditure  during  the  last  war  -   109 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Effect  of  war,  as  obstructing  supply,  and  increasing  the  cost 
of  production     -  -  -  -  -  -114 

PART  III. 

ON    THE    CURRENCY. 

CHAPTER  I. 

General  view  of  the  subject  -  -  -  -  118 

CHAPTER  II. 

Arguments  of  those  who  ascribe  a  greater  effect  to  the  bank 
restriction  than  that  indicated  by  the  difference  between 
the  market  price  and  the  mint  price  of  gold       -  -   128 

Sect.  1.  On  the  alleged  effect  of  the  Bank  restriction  in  depreciating  the 
value  of  the  precious  metals  •-  -  -  -  -130 

Sect.  2.  Effect  of  the  Bank  restriction  on  the  economised  use  of 
money  -  -  -  -  -  -  --144 

Sect.  3.  Effect  ascribed  to  the  Bank  restriction  of  the  substitution  of 
credit  for  currency,  and  of  tlie  excessive  issues  of  country  paper        -   14G 


CONTENTS.  Vll 

I'ago 
Sect.  4.    On  the  alleged  constant  excess  of  issue  by  the  Bank  of  Eng- 
land, and  tlionce  of  the  whole  of  the  circulating  medium        -  -    153 
Sect.  5.    On  the  regulation  of  the   Bank  issues  during  the  restriction  -   163 
Sect.  C.    On  the  effect  of  the   Bank  restriction  in  raising  the  prices  of 
commodities              -              -             -              -              -              -  -168 

Sect.  7.  On  the  alleged  invariable  connection  of  increase  of  price  with 
the  Bank  restriction,  and  on  the  effect  of  the  near  approach  of  the  ter- 
mination of  the  restriction  producing  a  fall  of  prices  greatly  exceeding 
the  difference  between  paper  and  gold  -  -  -  -   170 


PART  IV. 

HISTORICAL    SKETCH    OF    PRICES,    AND    OF    THE    STATE  OF  THE 
CIRCULATION,    FROM     1792    TO    1837. 

CHAPTER  I. 
Introduction  __---.  174 

CHAPTER  II. 

On  the  state  of  prices,  and  of  the  cix'culation,  from  the  com- 
mencement of  1793  to  the  close  of  1798  -  -  176 

Sect.  1.    On  the  seasons  in  connection  with  the  prices  of  provisions,  from 