

It  will  accordingly  be  seen,  on  reference  to 
former  periods  of  our  history,  that  there  were  very 
different  proportions  of  favourable  or  unfavourable 
seasons,  in  periods  of  considerable  length  ;  and  that 
on  the  transition  from  dearths  of  some  continuance 
to  abundance,  there  have  been  complaints,  as  in 
more  modern  times,  of  farmers  ruined,  and  of  rents 
unpaid. 

*  The  effect  of  abundance  in  depressing  the  price  of  corn, 
although  it  must  be  much  beyond  the  ratio  of  the  excess,  is  not 
calculated  to  be  in  the  same  ratio  as  that  of  deficiency  in  raising 
the  price.  In  the  event  of  a  superabundant  harvest,  a  part 
more  or  less  of  the  excess  may,  according  to  the  opinion  and 
the  capital,  or  credit  of  the  farmer,  be  held  over.  If,  however, 
the  recurrence  of  propitious  seasons  should  be  such  as  to  render 
the  accumulation  manifestly  and  inconveniently  large,  the  sub- 
sequent depression  would  be  the  greater,  in  proportion  to  the 
previous  resistance  to  a  fall,  and  the  only  remedy  would  be  an 
exportation  at  ruinously  low  rates,  and  eventually  a  diminished 
cultivation.  As  a  general  position,  tlierefore,  it  may  safely  be 
laid  down  that  an  excess  of  the  supply  of  corn  is  attended  with 
a  fall  of  price  much  beyond  the  ratio  of  excess ;  and  that  the 
larger  quantity  consequently  M'ill  yield  a  less  sum  of  money 
than  the  smaller  quantity. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  21 


CHAP.  III. 

ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  SEASONS  AND  THE 
STATE  OF  PRICES,  AND  THE  CONDITION  OF  THE 
AGRICULTURAL    INTERESTS    PREVIOUS    TO    1793. 

Section  1.  — Period  ending  in  1692. 

Of  the  character  of  the  seasons,  such  as  it  is  to  be 
inferred  from  the  state  of  prices  down  to  the  latter 
part  of  the  lyth  century,  a  concise,  and,  as  it  ap- 
pears to  me,  a  correct  view,  is  taken  in  the  follow- 
ing extract  from  an  article  in  the  Quarterly  Review, 
No.  57.,  which  contains  a  critique  on  a  former  work 
of  mine,  from  the  pen,  I  have  reason  to  believe,  of 
the  late  Mr.  Malthus  :  — 

"  In  that  very  valuable  table  of  prices  collected  by  Sir  Fre- 
derick Morton  Eden,  in  his  work  on  the  Poor,  periods  of  high 
and  low  prices  are  to  be  found,  of  considerable  duration,  for 
which  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  give  any  other  adequate  solu- 
tion, than  the  comparative  abundance  or  scantiness  of  the  supplies 
of  corn,  arising  from  the  number  of  favourable  or  unfavourable 
seasons  included  in  such  periods. 

"  After  the  great  plague,  which  occurred  about  the  middle  of 
the  reign  of  Edward  III.,  and  gave  occasion  to  the  first  attempt  to 
regulate  wages  by  law,  one  should  naturally  have  expected  that, 
owing  to  the  great  loss  of  people  then  sustained,  corn  would  be- 
come cheaper  rather  than  dearer  ;  instead  of  which  it  appears  to 
have  risen  from  about  5s.  4c?.,  the  average  of  the  first  twenty- 
five  years  of  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  to  lis.  9c?.,  the  average  of 
the  last  twenty-six  years  ;  with  very  little  difference  in  the  quan- 
tity of  silver  contained  in  the  same  nominal  sum.  For  this  great 
rise  of  bullion  prices,  spreading  itself  over  a  period  of  twenty- 
six  years,  it  would  be  scarcely  possible  to  assign  an  adequate 
cause  without  resorting  to  a  succession  of  unfavourable  seasons. 
During  the  reigns  of  Richard  II.  and  Henry  IV.,  a  period  of  thirty- 
four  years,  the  bullion  price  of  corn  seems  to  have  fallen  rather 