

But  the  history  of  our  agriculture  tends  very 
clearly  to  prove  that  in  all  the  signal  instances  of 
scarcity  and  abundance  of  the  crops,  the  variations 
of  price  have  been  in  a  ratio  much  beyond  the 
utmost  computation  of  the  dift'erence  of  quan- 
tity, and  that  on  every  occasion  of  marked  tran- 


12  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

sition,  from  dearth  to  abundance  there  have  been 
complaints  of  agricultural  distress. 

The  fact  that  a  small  deficiency  in  the  produce 
of  corn,  compared  with  the  average  rate  of  con- 
sumption, occasionally  causes  a  rise  in  price  very 
much  beyond  the  ratio  of  the  defect,  is  obvious 
upon  the  slightest  reference  to  the  history  of  prices 
at  periods  when  nothing  in  the  state  of  politics  or 
of  the  currency  could  be  suspected  to  have  had 
any  influence. 

Some  writers  have  attempted  to  deduce  a  strict 
rule  of  proportion  between  a  given  defect  of  the 
harvest,  and  the  probable  rise  of  price. 

The  rule  of  this  kind  that  has  been  most  com- 
monly referred  to,  is  one  by  Gregory  King,  which 
is  introduced  in  the  following  passage  by  D'Ave- 
nant : — 

"  It  is  observed,  that  but  one  tenth  the  defect  in  the  harvest 
may  raise  the  price  three  tenths  ;  and  when  we  have  but  half  our 
crop  of  v.'heat,  which  now  and  then  happens,  the  remainder  is 
spun  out  by  thrift  and  good  management,  and  eked  out  by  the 
use  of  other  grain  :  but  this  will  not  do  for  above  one  year,  and 
would  be  a  small  help  in  the  succession  of  two  or  three  unseason- 
able harvests.  For  the  scarcity  even  of  one  year  is  very  de- 
structive, in  which  many  of  the  poorestsort  perish,  either  for  want 
of  sufficient  food,  or  by  unwholesome  diet. 

"  We  take  it,  that  a  defect  in  the  harvest  may  raise  the  price 
of  corn  in  the  following  proportions  :  — 

Defect.  Above  the  common  rate. 


1  tenth 

2  tenths 

3  tenths 

4  tenths 

5  tenths 


raises  the  price 


3  tenths 

8  tenths 

1-6  tenths 

2-8  tenths 

4!'5   tenths 


So  that  when  corn  rises  to  treble  the  common  rate,  it  may  be 
presumed  that  we  want  above  one  third  of  the  common  produce  ; 
and  if  we  should  want  five  tenths,  or  half  the  common  produce, 
the  price  would  rise  to  near  five  times  the  common  rate." — 
(D'Avcnant,  Vol.  II.  pages  224  and  225.) 

It  is  perhaps  superfluous  to  add,  that  no  such 
strict  rule    can   be    deduced ;    at   the   same  time, 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  13 

there  is  some  ground  for  supposing  that  the  esti- 
mate is  not  very  wide  of  the  truth,  from  observation 
of  the  repeated  occurrence  of  the  fact,  that  the 
price  of  corn  in  this  country  has  risen  from  100  to 
200  per  cent,  and  upwards,  when  the  utmost  com- 
puted deficiency  of  the  crops  has  not  been  more 
than  between  one  sixth  and  one  third  below  an 
average,  and  when  that  deficiency  has  been  relieved 
by  foreign  supplies. 