

c  3 


22  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

lower  than  it  was  in  the  first  half  of  the  reign  of  Edward  III. 
In  the  first  twenty-three  years  it  was  5s.  7d.,  and  in  the  last 
eleven  years  6s.  Id. ;  and  as  in  the  latter  half  of  the  reign  of  Ed- 
ward III.  the  pound  of  silver  was  coined  into  255.,  and  at  the 
end  of  the  reign  of  Henry  IV.  into  30*.,  the  bullion  price  of  this 
period  was  rather  below  what  it  was  in  the  first  half  of  the  reign 
of  Edward  III. ;  and  it  certainly  would  be  very  difficult  to  explain 
the  low  prices  of  these  thirty-four  years,  and  the  high  prices  of 
the  preceding  twenty-six,  without  the  powei'ful  operation  of 
seasons. 

"  In  l^^i,  other  statutes  regulating  the  price  of  labour  were 
passed,  probably  owing  to  the  high  price  of  corn,  which  had  risen 
on  an  average  of  the  ten  preceding  years  to  10s.  8d.,  without  any 
further  alterations  in  the  coin ;  and  for  this  rise  there  seems  to 
be  no  adequate  cause,  but  a  succession  of  comparatively  scanty 
crops,  particularly  as  after  this  period  there  was  a  continuance  of 
low  prices  for  above  sixty  years.  The  average  price  of  wheat 
from  ]44'4  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  in  1509,  re- 
turned to  about  6s.,  while  the  pound  of  silver  being  coined  into 
I/.  175.  6d.  instead  of  1/.  2s.  6d.,  as  at  the  time  of  passing  the 
first  statute  of  labourers  in  1350,  showed  a  very  decided  fall  in 
the  bullion  price  of  wheat.  This  fall,  however,  was  so  consi- 
derable, and  lasted  for  so  very  long  a  period,  that  we  cannot  at- 
tribute it  wholly  to  the  seasons.  Still  less  are  we  disposed  to 
attribute  it  to  the  cause  assigned  by  Adam  Smith — a  gradual  rise 
in  the  value  of  silver,  because,  if  we  refer  to  his  own  criterion  of 
value,  labour,  we  shall  find  that  while  the  bullion  price  of  corn 
had  been  falling,  the  bullion  price  of  labour  had  been  rising,  and 
consequently,  silver  had  been  diminishing,  instead  of  increasing 
in  value.  These  prices  of  corn  and  labour  could  only  have  arisen 
from  a  great  and  continued  abundance  of  corn,  which  was  evinced 
by  the  very  large  quantity  of  it  awarded  to  the  labourer ;  and 
this  abundance  was  occasioned  probably  by  the  combined  ope- 
rations of  favourable  seasons  with  the  introduction  of  a  better 
system  of  agriculture,  before  the  distribution  of  property  and  the 
habits  of  the  labouring  classes  had  been  so  far  improved  as  to 
encourage  a  proportionate  increase  of  their  number. 

"  The  rise  in  the  price  of  corn  during  the  course  of  the  next 
century  may,  no  doubt,  be  easily  accounted  for  by  the  progress  of 
population  and  the  discovery  of  the  American  mines,  without  any 
aid  from  unfavourable  seasons,  although  in  fact  such  seasons 
did  combine  with  the  other  causes  just  mentioned,  in  raising  the 
price  of  wheat  towards  the  end  of  the  century  from  1594  to  1598. 
The  same  cause  unquestionably  operated  for  twenty  years  about 
the  middle  of  the  subsequent  century,  from  1646  to  1665  in- 
clusive, when  the  price  of  the  quarter  of  wheat  was  2/.  IO5. — con- 
siderably higher  than  it  was  either  in  the  earlier  or  later  part  of 
the  century  ;  and  it  is  somewhat  singular,  that  while  during  a 
considerable  part  of  the  civil  wars  between  the  houses  of  York 