


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS,  ^3 

and  Lancaster,  and  subsequently,  corn  was  remarkably  cheap  ; 
during  the  civil  wars  under  Charles  I.,  and  sometime  subsequently, 
it  was  as  remarkably  dear —  a  pretty  strong  presumptive  proof 
that  the  seasons  had  more  to  do  with  the  prices  in  both  cases  than 
the  civil  wars." 

The  following  extracts,  from  the  Sloane  MSS. 
in  the  British  Museum,  No.  4174,  give  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  effect,  on  the  payment  of  rents,  of  a  fall 
of  prices,  which  occurred  between  I6I7  and  1621, 
namely,  from  4f3s,  3d.  the  quarter,  of  8  bushels, 
to  27*.*:  — 

"  Mr.  John  Chamberlain  to  Sir  Dudley  Carleton. 

"12  February,  1620. 
"  We  are  here  in  a  strange  state  to  complain  of  plenty  ;  but 
so  it  is,  that  corn  beareth  so  low  a  price  that  tenants  and  farmers 
are  very  backward  to  pay  their  rents,  and  in  many  places  plead 
disability ;  for  remedy  whereof  the  council  have  written  letters 
into  every  shire,  and  some  say  to  every  market-town,  to  provide 
a  granary  or  storehouse,  with  a  stock  to  buy  corn,  and  keep  it  for 
a  dear  year.  But  though  this  be  well  advised,  and  make  a  fair 
show  in  speculation,  yet  the  difficulties  be  so  many,  that  it  will 
not  be  so  easy  to  put  it  into  practice." 

The  following  was  written  at  the  same  period : 

"  England  was  never  generally  so  poor  since  I  was  born  as  it 
is  at  this  present ;  inasmuch  that  all  complain  they  cannot  re- 
ceive their  rents.  Yet  is  there  plenty  of  all  things  but  money, 
which  is  so  scant,  that  country  people  offer  corn  and  cattle,  or 
whatsoever  they  have  else,  in  lieu  of  rent  —  but  bring  no  money  ; 
and  corn  is  at  so  easy  rates  as  I  never  knew  it  to  be  at,  twenty 
or  twenty-two  pence  a  bushel,  barley  at  nine  pence,  and  yet  no 
quantity  will  be  taken  at  that  price  ;  so  that  for  all  the  common 
opinion  of  the  wealth  of  England,  I  fear,  when  it  comes  to  the 
trial,  it  will  prove  as  some  merchants,  who,  having  carried  on  a 


*  The  quotations  of  prices  of  wheat,  until  after  1792,  will  be 
confined  to  those  of  the  Windsor  market,  as  contained  in  the 
Eton  tables  for  the  Winchester  quarter  of  8  bushels.  As  the 
quality  is  supposed  to  be  superior  to  middling  wheat,  it  has  been 
usual  among  writers  on  corn  to  deduct  one  ninth  for  the  differ- 
ence ;  but  this  I  conceive  is  more  than  is  warranted ;  and  the 
quotations,  therefore,  stand  as  they  are  given  in  the  Parliamentary 
Papers. 

c  4 


24  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

great  show  a  long  time,  when  they  are  called  upon  too  fast  by 
their  creditors,  be  fain  to  play  bankrupt." 

And  further :  — 

"  Sir  Symonds  d'Ewes,  in  his  unpublished  diary,  notices,  in 
1621,  the  excessive  cheapness  and  plenty  of  wheat,  the  conse- 
quence of  which  was  to  reduce  the  price  of  lands  from  twenty 
years'  purchase  to  sixteen  or  seventeen.*  The  best  wheat  was 
then  2s.  Sd.  and  25.  6d.  the  bushel,  ordinary  2s. ;  barley  and  rye, 
Is.  3d. 