

While  the  fact,  indeed,  and  the  reason  of  the  fact 
that,  as  relates  to  commodities  generally,  and  to 
corn  more  especially,  a  deficiency  of  quantity  pro- 
duces a  great  relative  advance  in  price,  has  been 
repeatedly  noticed  and  variously  illustrated  by 
several  writers  ;  the  converse  of  the  proposition, 
viz.  that  an  excess  of  quantity  operates  in  depress- 
ing the  prices  of  commodities  generally,  but  of  corn 
more  especially,  in  a  ratio  much  beyond  the  degree 
of  that  excess,  was  little  noticed  until  the  publica- 
tion of  the  report  of  tlie  Agricultural  Committee 
in  1821,  or,  if  casually  noticed,  was  not  applied 
systematically  in  accounting  for  instances  of  great 
depression  of  prices,  and  of  consequent  distress 
among  those  who  felt  the  effects  of  that  depression. 
In  the  report  of  that  Committee,  the  principle 
which  is  here  alluded  to,  and  upon  which  I  was 
particularly  examined,  is  stated,  and  some  of  the 

c 


18  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

consequences   flowing  from  it  are  pointed  out  in 
the  following  passage  :  — 

''  Tlie  cause  which  produces  this  greater  susceptibihty  in  the 
corn  market,  cannot  be  better  explained  by  your  Committee, 
than  in  the  following  extract  from  the  answer  of  one  of  the  wit- 
nesses who  was  particularly  examined  to  this  point :  —  '  Why 
should  a  different  principle  apply  to  corn  than  to  any  other  ge- 
neral production  ?  Because  a  fall  in  the  price  of  any  other  com- 
modity, not  of  general  necessity,  brings  the  article  within  the 
reach  of  a  greater  number  of  individuals  :  whereas,  in  the  case 
of  corn,  the  average  quantity  is  sufficient  for  the  supply  of  every 
individual ;  all  beyond  that  causes  a  depression  of  the  market 
for  a  great  length  of  time,  and  a  succession  of  two  or  three 
abundant  seasons,  must  evidently  produce  an  enormously  in- 
convenient accumulation.' —  '  Is  there  not  a  greater  consump- 
tion of  corn  when  it  is  cheap  than  when  it  is  dear,  as  to  quantity  ? 
There  may,  and  doubtless  must  be,  a  greater  consumption  ;  but  it 
is  very  evident  that  if  the  population  was  before  adequately  fed, 
the  increased  consumption,  from  abundance,  can  amount  to  little 
more  than  waste ;  and  this  would  be  in  a  very  small  proportion 
to  the  whole  excess  of  a  good  harvest  or  two.' " 

The  report  then  proceeds  to  say  :  — 

"  In  the  substance  of  this  reasoning  your  Committee  entirely 
concur  ;  and  it  appears  to  them  that  it  cannot  be  called  in  ques- 
tion without  denying  either  that  corn  is  an  article  of  general 
necessity  and  universal  consumption  among  the  population  of 
this  country,  or  that  the  demand  is  materially  varied  by  the 
amount  of  the  supply.  This  latter  proposition,  except  within 
very  narrow  limits  altogether  disproportioned  to  fluctuation  in 
production,  is  not  warranted  by  experience.  The  general  truth, 
therefore,  of  the  observation  remains  unaltered  by  any  small 
degree  of  waste  on  the  one  side,  or  of  economy  on  the  other  ; 
neither  of  which  are  sufficient  to  counteract  the  effect  which 
opinion  and  speculation  must  have  upon  price,  when  it  is  felt 
how  little  demand  is  increased  by  redundancy,  or  checked  by 
scantiness  of  supply." 