

"  Mr,  Tocke  has  (he  says  at  page  66.,  referring  to  a  former 
work  of  mine,)  laid  too  much  stress  upon  this  argument:  the 
cheapness  that  would  follow  from  increased  production  would 
come  gradually  upon  the  puhlic  ;  and,  if  the  amount  of  currency 
remained  the  same,  the  fall  in  prices  would  be  relative  to  their 
abundance.  But  that  one,  or  even  two,  good  harvests  should 
cause  a  fall  of  price  generally  from  30  to  45  per  cent.,  is  giving 
more  to  the  bounty  of  nature  than  I  think  will  be  found  consist- 
ent with  the  fact.  But  admitting  the  fact,  docs  it  follow  that 
this  abundance  should  cause  general  distress,  and  reduce  the 
agricultural  community  to  the  verge  of  ruin  ?  Admitting  the  ar- 
gument, that  a  productive  harvest  would  cause  a  fall  of  price 
beyond  the  actual  abundance,  would  the  farmer  have  no  recom- 
pence  whatever  from  such  abundance?  Would  such  abundance 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  11 

render  him  incapable  of  paying  for  two  or  three  years  in  succes- 
sion more  than  two  thirds  or  three  fourths  of  his  rent,  when 
landholders  were  obliged  to  meet  their  tenants  with  a  reduction  to 
that  extent,  or  have  their  farm  thrown  on  their  hands?  1  can- 
not contemplate  such  a  state  of  things  from  bountiful  harvests, 
even  under  the  operation  of  our  present  corn  laws.  Nor  am  I 
aware  that  any  evidence  of  such  being  the  case,  can  be  produced 
in  the  history  of  the  agriculture  of  this  country,  unaccompanied 
with  variations  in  the  amount  of  the  currency." 

I  liave  been  the  more  induced  to  insert  this 
quotation,  because  it  was  chiefly  on  the  authority  of 
Mr.  Mushet's  work  that  Mr.  J.  B.  Say,  the  most 
distinguislied  of  the  French  writers  on  Pohtical 
Economy,  expressed  a  most  exaggerated  opinion 
of  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  of  this  country  ; 
while,  cnriously  enongh,  Mr.  Say  had  occasion  at 
the  same  time  to  notice  variations  of  prices  as  great 
in  France,  which  he  accoimted  for  upon  very  ob- 
vious grounds,  without  inferring  any  alteration  of 
the  value  of  money. 

And  more  recently  an  opinion  to  the  same  effect 
has  been  stated  by  one  of  the  most  distinguished 
of  the  partisans  of  the  doctrine  of  the  paramount 
influence  of  the  currency.  Mr.  E.  S,  Cayley,  M.P., 
in  his  evidence  before  the  Lords'  Committee  on 
agriculture,  in  1836,  said  — 

"  It  is  one  of  the  false  notions  entertained  by  political  econo- 
mists, that  a  bad  harvest  is  an  advantage.  In  all  periods  of 
history  a  good  harvest  was  always  considered  a  blessing,  good 
both  for  man  and  beast,  for  then  there  is  plenty  in  the  land. 
When  there  is  a  deficient  crop,  that  increases  the  price^  but  not 
sufficiently  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of  produce;  but  the  in- 
crease of  produce  by  a  good  crop  in  a  proper  state  of  things, 
more  than  counterbalances  the  fall  of  price." — Report  of  Lords 
Committee  on  Agrieultaral  Distress,  1836.  p.  321. 