

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  bear  in  mind 
the  operation  of  the  principle  of  the  great  increase 
of  price  beyond  the  degree  of  deficiency,  with  a 
view  to  accounting  not  only  for  the  high  range  of 
prices,  but,  likewise,  for  the  extraordinary  pros- 
perity which  attended  the  agricultural  interest  * 
during  the  first  half  of  the  period  that  will  come 
under  consideration,  and  which  cannot,  in  my 
opinion,  be  accounted  for  in  any  other  way. 

*  By  agricultural  interest,  I  mean  exclusively  farmers  and 
landlords,  and  owners  of  tithes,  who  are  alone  benefited  by  an 
advance  of  price  resulting  from  scarcity.  The  condition  of  the 
labouring  classes,  even  of  those  employed  in  husbandry,  is  well 
known  to  be  deteriorated  in  periods  of  dearth,  as  the  wages  of 
labour  do  not  rise  in  full  proportion  to  the  advance  in  the  price 
of  provisions. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  15 

It  is  clearly  through  the  medium  of  prices  raised 
beyond  the  ratio  of  deficiency,  that  farmers  gained 
such  great  profits  pending  tlie  term  of  their  leases, 
and  that  landlords  obtained  such  greatly  advanced 
rents  at  the  granting  of  new  leases. 

If  prices  of  produce  had  risen  only  in  exact  pro- 
portion to  the  deficiency  of  growth  ;  thus,  if  in 
commonly  good  years,  an  acre  of  wheat  produced 
33  bushels,  which  sold  for  6s.  per  bushel,  or  9^  18.v., 
but,  in  a  bad  season,  produced  only  two  thirds  of  a 
crop,  or  22  bushels,  which  sold  for  9s.  the  bushel, 
or  9/.  18^.,  supposing  the  expenses  of  getting  in 
the  crops  to  be  the  same  in  both  cases,  the  farmer 
would  be  neither  gainer  nor  loser  by  the  deficiency 
of  his  crops,  that  deficiency  being  here  assumed  to 
be  general.  The  deficiency  would  be  a  general 
calamity,  and  farmers  and  landlords  would  bear 
their  shares  of  it  in  their  quality  of  consumers. 

But,  upon  the  principle  here  stated,  the  case 
would  be  widely  different.  In  the  event  of  a  defi- 
ciency of  one  third  of  an  average  crop,  a  bushel  of 
wheat  might  rise  to  I8s.  and  upwards.*  Now,  22 
bushels,  at  18.9.  per  bushel,  would  be  worth  19^.  l^s.^ 
whereas,  the  33  bushels  at  6s.,  were  worth  only 
9/.  18^.,  making  a  clear  profit  to  the  grower  of 
100  per  cent.  This,  of  course,  is  an  extreme  case, 
and  cannot,  in  general,  be  of  long  duration  ;  it 
supposes  no  great  surplus  from  former  years,  and 
no  immediate  prospect  of  adequate  relief  from  im- 
portation. While  the  deficiency  exists,  however, 
whether  in  reality  or  only  in  apprehension,  such, 
and  still  greater,  may  be  the  effect. 

For  the  sake  of  illustration  of  the  mode  and  de- 
gree in  which  a  deficiency  in  the  crops,  compared 