

*  Considering  the  institutions  of  this  country  relative  to  the 
maintenance  of  the  poor,  if  there  should  be  a  deficiency  of  the 
crops  amounting  to  one-third,  without  amj  surplus  from  a  former 
year,  and  tcithout  any  chance  of  relief  by  importation,  the  price 
might  rise  five,  six,  or  even  tenfold. 


16  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

with  an  average  produce,  is  calculated  to  aifect  the 
condition  of  the  agricultural  interest,  let  us  suppose 
that  the  average  produce  of  corn  in  this  country 
were  32  millions  of  quarters  *  of  all  kinds,  which 
would  sell  at  40.9.  per  quarter  all  round  as  a  remu- 
nerative price,  making  an  amount  of  64,000,000/. 
to  be  distributed  as  wages,  profit,  and  rent,  includ- 
ing tithe  ;  but  by  the  occurrence  of  a  bad  crop,  de- 
ficient one  eighth,  uncompensated  by  a  surplus 
from  the  former  season,  the  price  advanced  to  60.9., 
there  would  then  be  28  millions  of  quarters  at  60*., 
making  84,000,000/,  being  a  clear  addition  of 
20,000,000/.,  to  be  distributed  among  the  farmers 
and  landlords,  and  receivers  of  tithe  in  kind,  in  the 
first  instance.  Eventually,  increased  wages  would 
form  some  deduction,  if  the  advance  in  price,  from 
the  continuance  of  deficiency,  lasted  for  more  than 
one  season,  or  if,  by  the  recurrence  of  deficiency 
at  short  intervals,  the  advance  were,  on  an  average, 
in  the  same  relative  proportion  If  the  deficiency 
were  one  quarter,  and  the  price  were  to  rise,  as  it 
infallibly  would,  to  at  least  double,  the  gain  among 
those  classes  would  be 

32,000,000  of  quarters  at  405.=:64-,000,000/. 
24,000,000  at  805.^:96,000,000/. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  tliat,  in  such  a  state  of 
things,  the  agricultural  interest  would  enjoy,  not 
only  the  appearance,  but  the  reality  of  prosperity. 
But  it  is  clear,  that  the  increased  income  distri- 
buted among  the  agricultural  interest  must,  with 
the  exception  of  the  increased  expenses  incurred  by 
the  landlords  and  farmers  in  their  quality  of  con- 

*  It  was  computed  by  Dr.  Colquhoun,  that  the  consumption 
of  all  kinds  of  grain  in  this  kingdom  amounted,  in  1812,  to  35 
millions  of  quarters,  exclusive  of  seed.  Mr.  M'Culloch  esti- 
mates that,  in  1834,  the  consumption  might  be  computed  at  44 
millions  exclusive  of  seed,  and  52  millions  including  seed. — See 
article,  Corn  Laws  and  Corn  Trade,  in  his  Commercial  Dictionary. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  IJ 

sumers,  be  at  the  expense  of  the  other  orders  of 
the  community.  The  advocates,  however,  for  the 
agricultural  claims,  which,  if  they  were  admitted 
and  could  be  made  operative  to  their  full  extent, 
would  artificially  perpetuate  the  effects  that  could 
otherwise  arise  only  from  the  sterility  of  the  soil  or 
the  unpropitiousness  of  the  seasons,  seem  to  confine 
their  observation  of  the  consequence  of  the  high 
price  of  provisions  to  the  direct  and  obvious  advan- 
tages resulting  from  the  increased  sum  to  be  distri- 
buted among  the  farmers  and  landlords ;  and  infer 
that  this  increased  sum  is  the  creation  of  so  much 
additional  wealth.  It  was  the  same  confinement  of 
view  to  the  increased  sum  which  an  advance  in  the 
price  of  corn  occasioned  to  be  distributed  in  the 
shape  of  profit  and  rent,  that  led  the  sect  of  econo- 
mists in  France,  who  considered  the  raw  produce 
of  the  earth  as  the  only  source  of  wealth,  to  look 
upon  every  advance  in  the  price  of  that  produce  as 
so  much  increase  of  national  wealth. 