

The  relatively  high  prices  of  that  period  cannot, 
indeed,  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for  in  any  other 
way.  The  bounty  must,  on  the  grounds  which  I 
have  stated,  have  been  wholly  inoperative  to  that 
effect ;  or,  rather,  in  as  far  as  it  was  calculated  to 
have  the  effect  ascribed  to  it  of  forcing  a  surplus 
produce,  it  might,  when  the  exportation  was  pro- 
hibited, have  had  a  temporary  effect  in  a  contrary 
direction,  viz.  of  preventing  the  rise  to  so  great  an 
extent  as  might  otherwise  have  taken  place. 

Of  the  inveterate  tendency  which  exists  to  refer 
every  instance  of  relatively  high  prices  of  corn  to 
the  currency,  however  palpably  attributable  to  other 
causes,  there  cannot  be  a  stronger  instance  than 
that  among  speakers  in  parliament,  and  among 
writers  out  of  it,  whenever  reference  has  been  made 
to  the  prices  of  corn  in  the  closing  years  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  it  seems  to  have  been  taken 
for  granted  that  they  were  exclusively  the  result  of 
the  deteriorated  state  of  the  coin. 

The  assignment  of  this  cause  for  the  great  rise 
of  prices  in  the  closing  years  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  is  at  the  outset  negatived  by  a  very  ob- 
vious and  simple  consideration.  The  silver  coins 
were,  in  I69I,  at,  as  nearly  as  might  be,  their 
greatest  debasement  j  and  it  is  the  rise  from  that 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  33 

period  of  nearly  100  per  cent,  which  is  to  be  ac- 
counted for.  It  would  be  extravagant  to  suppose 
that  the  further  deterioration,  till  the  calling  in  of 
the  bad  coin  in  1695,  could  have  been  such  as  to 
produce  any  sensible  effect  on  prices. 

In  tlie  course  of  the  years  l(i94  and  1695,  mea- 
sures had  been  taken  for  a  new  coinage ;  and  the 
effect  of  these  measures,  while  they  were  in  progress, 
was  to  occasion  great  scarcity  of  circulating  medium, 
by  the  inducement  to  hoard  or  to  export  the  more 
perfect  pieces,  and  to  reject  the  imperfect.  In  1695 
a  proclamation  was  issued,  prohibiting  the  currency 
of  the  clipped  money.  In  the  early  part  of  I696, 
being  the  interval  between  the  crying  down  of  the 
old,  and  the  issuing  of  the  new  coin,  the  scarcity 
of  money  seems  to  have  been  severely  felt,  as 
appears  by  the  following  extracts  from  Evelyn's 
Memoirs. 

'•June  11.  1696.  Want  of  current  money  to  carry  on 
the  smallest  concerns,  even  for  daily  provisions  in  the  markets. 
Guineas  lowered  to  22*.,  and  great  sums  daily  transported  to 
Holland,  where  it  yields  more,  with  other  treasure  sent  to  pay 
the  armies,  and  nothing  considerable  coined  of  the  new,  and 
now  only  current  stamp,  cause  such  a  scarcity,  that  tumults  are 
every  day  feared,  nobody  paying  or  receiving  :  so  imprudent 
was  the  late  parliament  to  condemn  the  old,  though  clipped  and 
corrupted,  till  they  had  provided  supplies.  To  this,  add  the 
fraud  of  the  bankers  and  goldsmiths,  who,  having  gotten  immense 
riches  by  extortion,  keep  up  their  treasure  in  expectation  of  en- 
hancing its  value." 