


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  37 

in  1713,  to  33s.  9d.  Nay,  even  farther  to  prove 
how  independent  of  the  war  the  fluctuation  was, 
the  price  having  continued  at  about  30s.  the  quarter 
till  the  peace  of  Utrecht,  in  I7IS,  immediately 
after  that  event,  rose  (at  Michaelmas,  1713,)  to 
56s.  lid.  or  70  pel'  cent.  During  all  these 
fluctuations,  the  silver  coins  were  in  an  undete- 
riorated  state.  There  had  been  some  variations 
in  the  value  at  which  the  gold  passed,  but  these 
did  not  affect  prices  which  were  estimated  in 
silver. 

A  comparison  with  the  prices  in  France  may 
again  be  resorted  to,  as  showing,  by  a  coinci- 
dence of  the  fluctuations,  that  they  were  produced 
by  causes  common  to  both  countries,  and  not  by 
any  peculiarity  in  the  currency  of  this  country. 
Indeed,  whether  by  reference  to  that  comparison, 
or  by  an  inspection  of  the  difference  between  the 
Lady-day  and  Michaelmas  quotation  of  either  the 
Eton  or  the  Oxford  tables,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  but  that  there  was,  on  the  continent  of 
Europe  as  well  as  in  this  country,  a  considerable 
proportion  of  deflcient  harvests  in  the  seven  years 
ending  in  1715,  as  compared  with  the  preceding 
seven  years. 

And  taking  the  whole  period  from  1692  to 
1715,  embracing  an  interval  of  twenty-three  years, 
it  will  be  seen  that  by  direct  evidence  for  the 
greater  part,  and  by  irresistible  inference  for  the 
rest,  there  are  not  fewer  than  eleven  of  these 
twenty-three  seasons  of  more  or  less  deficient  pro- 
duce. 

It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that  in  the  period 
here  referred  to,  the  bounty  on  exportation  had 
been  in  full  operation,  and  that  previously  to  the 
institution  of  it,  the  growth  of  corn  had,  in  ordi- 
nary seasons,  been  such  as  afforded  some  surplus 
for  exportation.     Upon  the  occurrence,  therefore, 

D  3 


38  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

of  years  of  scarcity,  the  portion  of  land  cultivated 
beyond  that  which  in  ordinary  years  was  sufficient 
to  supply  our  own  ordinary  consumption,  would 
be  available  (especially  when  enforced  by  a  pro- 
hibition of  export)  in  lieu  of  what,  under  opposite 
circumstances,  would  be  the  necessity  for  an  in- 
creased importation.  So  that,  if  from  1693  to 
1715  we  had  been  in  the  habit  of  requiring  an 
annual  foreign  supply  of  corn,  the  prices  would 
have  been  higher  by  at  least  tlie  ordinary  charges 
of  importation,  and  during  the  time  of  war  by  the 
extra  charges  incidental  to  the  difference  in  ordi- 
nary wars.  But  as  it  was,  the  average  prices  of 
seven  consecutive  years  of  that  period  were  up- 
wards of  80  per  cent,  higher  than  those  of  the 
seven  years  immediately  preceding,  and  this  ob- 
viously by  the  mere  effect  of  the  seasons.  If,  then, 
to  the  prices  of  the  seven  years  ending  in  1699, 
were  added  such  extraordinary  charges  as  formed 
the  condition  of  a  foreign  sujDply  during  the  latter 
period  of  last  war,  the  average  of  those  seven  years 
would  be  much  higher  relatively  to  the  interval 
of  seven  years  ending  in  1692,  than  the  average 
from  I8O7  to  181 1,  relatively  to  the  seven  years 
ending  in  1792. 