

A  fall  of  the  price  of  wheat  to  29*.  had  taken 
place  after  the  harvest  of  I687,  when  the  coun- 
try was  in  a  state  of  perfect  political  tranquillity: 
and  it  does  not  appear  that  the  revolution  in 
1688  had  any  effect  in  deranging  the  markets  for 
provisions.  If,  from  such  a  cause,  they  had  been 
particularly  depressed,  the  rebound,  when  the  ex- 
traordinary cause  of  depression  was  removed,  would 
have  been  proportionally  great ;  whereas  the  quo- 
tation at  Lady-day  1689,  of  the  Windsor  market,  was 
23s.  Id.,  and  of  the  Oxford  market  Q,5s.  6d.  And 
at  the  end  of  two  years  after  the  revolution,  viz. 
at  Lady- day  I69I,  wheat  in  the  Windsor  market 
was  only  Q9s. — the  silver  coin  being  then  at  nearly 
its  lowest  point  of  degradation.  There  appears, 
therefore,  no  ground  of  inference  that  any  part  of 

*  Indeed  it  must  be  perfectly  clear,  that  the  prices  in  the 
three  years  following  1688,  low  as  they  were,  would  have  been 
still  lower  but  for  the  bounty  on  exportation. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  29 

the  depression  of  prices  so  remarkable  between 
1685  and  1692,  can  be  refeiTed  to  the  state  of 
poHtics  in  that  interval  :  and  as  to  any  influence 
from  the  state  of  trade,  there  is  no  reason  whatever 
for  ascribing  to  it  a  depressing  effect  on  the  price 
of  provisions,  unless  an  impro^dng  and  flourish- 
ing state  of  it  is  calculated  to  have  that  effect. 
The  Board  of  Trade  represented  in  1697:  "We 
have  made  inquiry  into  the  state  of  trade  in  gene- 
ral, from  the  year  I67O  to  the  present  time  j  and 
from  the  best  calculations  we  can  make,  by  the 
duties  paid  at  the  Custom  House,  we  are  of 
opinion,  that  trade  in  general  did  considerably 
increase  from  the  end  of  the  Dutch  war  in  1673 
to  1689,  when  the  late  war  began." — Chalmers's 
Estimate^  p.  47. 

It  is  indeed  manifestly  impossible  to  discover 
any  cause  for  the  remarkably  low  prices  from  1685 
to  1692  *,  but  that  of  a  succession  of  favourable  sea- 
sons, acting  upon  a  probably  extended  cultivation. 
Ofthe  agricultural  distress,  resulting  from  such  sea- 
sons, a  sufficient  proof  is  furnished  by  the  enact- 
ment of  the  celebrated  measure  of  the  bounty ; 
the  real  object  of  which  was,  although  professing 
to  have  in  view  the  encouragement  of  tillage,  to 
relieve  the  landed  interest  from  the  pressure  of 
distress  arising  from  low  prices. 


*  In  a  publication,  entitled  a  General  Chronological  History 
of  the  Air,  Weather,  &c.,  by  Dr.  Short,  1749,  is  the  following 
quotation  from  a  diary  of  the  Rev.  S.  Say,  of  St.  James's, 
Westminster  :  —  "  In  the  latter  end  of  the  reign  of  King  James, 
and  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  King  William,  the  seasons 
were  kindly  to  the  fruits  ofthe  earth  ;  in  1688,  wheat  was  sold 
in  Norwich  at  2s.  per  bushel,  and  in  1691  for  about  2s,  6d." 