


*  Silver  was  then  the  only  current  coin  by  which  prices  were 
determined.  The  guinea  commonly  exchanging  at  that  time 
for  305.  of  the  worn  and  dipt  silver.  In  1695  the  common  price 
of  silver  bullion  was  6s.  5d.  an  ounce,  being  Is.  5d.  or  nearly 
25  per  cent,  above  the  Mint  price. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  ^7 

of  wheat,  of  better  than  the  average  quality.  That 
there  is  no  material  error  in  this  very  low  quota- 
tion of  the  Windsor  market  is  proved  by  a  similar 
low  quotation  of  the  Oxford  market  in  Mr.  Lloyd's 
tables,  viz.  21*.  lid.,  at  Michaelmas  1688.  It  is 
impossible  to  assign  these  extremely  low  rates  to  any 
other  cause  than  that  of  an  inconvenient  accumu- 
lation arising  from  a  succession  of  favourable  seasons, 
operating  upon  a  state  of  tillage,  extended,  doubtless, 
by  the  comparatively  high  prices  which  liad  pre- 
vailed some  time  before. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith,  who  notices  the  very  low 
price  of  this  period,  seems  inclined  to  consider  it 
as  an  indication  of,  and  resulting  from,  an  increase 
in  the  value  of  silver.  For,  according  to  his  view, 
the  utmost  effect  of  the  discovery  and  working  of 
the  American  mines,  in  reducing  the  value  of  silver, 
had  been  completed  between  1630  and  1640,  or 
about  1636.  But  supposing  that  there  had  been 
better  grounds  than  there  now  appear  to  have  been 
for  the  opinion  entertained  by  Dr.  Smith,  of  a 
tendency  to  a  rise  in  the  value  of  silver,  this  cause 
must  necessarily  have  been  extremely  slow  in  its 
operation,  and  could  most  assuredly  not  account 
for  so  low  a  price  as  that  of  the  four  years  ending 
in  1691,  viz.  QJs.  Jd- ;  or,  allowing  for  the  deterior- 
ation of  the  coin,  22.9.  1^.,  being  the  lowest  at 
which  it  had  ever  been  since  1595;  long  before 
the  American  mines  could  possibly  have  produced 
their  full  effect. 

The  bounty  system*  to  which,  by  its  advocates, 

*  By  1  William  and  Mary,  a  bounty  was  granted,  of  5s.  per 
quarter,  on  the  exportation  of  wheat,  when  the  price  did  not  ex- 
ceed 4:8s.  2s.  6d.  per  quarter  on  barley  and  malt,  when  not  ex- 
ceeding 24*. ;  and  3*.  6^.  per  quarter  on  rye,  when  not  exceeding 
S2s.  A  bounty  of  2s.  6d.  per  quarter  was  subsequently  given 
upon  the  exportation  of  oats  and  oatmeal,  when  the  price  of  the 
former  did  not  exceed  1 5s.  per  quarter.  Importation  continued 
to  be  regulated  by  the  act  of  1670. 


28  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

the  low  prices  of  corn  in  the  first  sixty-five  years 
of  the  last  century  were  ascribed,  cannot  in  any 
way  be  brought  to  explain  the  low  rate  now  under 
consideration.  The  measure  was  not  adopted  till 
1688  ;  and  whatever  might  be  its  ultimate  effect  in 
encouraging  an  extended  tillage,  and  thus  even- 
tually reducing  the  price,  the  first  operation  of  it 
would  be,  as  it  was  intended  that  it  should  be, 
a  forced  exportation,  and  a  consequent  imme- 
diate relief  to  the  growers  and  dealers  from  the 
weight  of  accumulated  stock  with  which  they 
were  oppressed.  Accordingly,  the  markets  did 
recover  in  a  slight  degree,  after  the  passing  of  that 
measure,  although  they  continued  at  a  low  range 
till  1692.*  But  if  neither  the  supposed  increase 
of  the  value  of  silver,  nor  the  operation  of  the 
bounty  can  by  possibility  be  assigned  as  the  causes 
of  that  low  range  of  prices,  as  little  can  any  thing 
be  found  in  the  state  of  politics  or  trade  to  account 
for  it. 