


30  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 


Section  2.  —  1693  to  1714. 

But  if  the  low  prices  immediately  antecedent  to 
1693  are,  chiefly  by  inference  (irresistible  as  the 
grounds  for  such  inference  are)  referable  to  the 
state  of  the  seasons,  there  is  direct  evidence  of  the 
influence  of  that  cause  in  the  remarkably  elevated 
range  of  prices  in  the  following  seven  years,  which 
are  traditionally  known  as  the  barren  years  at  the 
close  of  the  seventeenth  century.* 

Of  these  seasons  there  are  various  notices  to  be 
collected  from  publications  relating  to  that  period. 
Among  them  are  the  following :  — 

"  1692.  Great  rains  in  autumn  ;  an  earthquake  was  felt  in 
England,  and  in  most  parts  of  Europe. 

"  1693.  A  very  wet  summer  ;  this  unseasonable  weather  ex- 
tended to  France,  where  numbers  perished  for  want,  notwith- 
standing they  imported  much  corn  from  Sweden  and  Denmark. 
In  Kent,  turnips  made  a  considerable  share  of  bread  for  the 
people. 

"  1694.     A  very  wet  summer. 

"  1695.  Many  of  the  Scotch  are  driven  into  Ireland  by  the 
excessive  price  of  corn. 

"  1696.     A  very  wet  summer.     A  great  want  of  money  in 


*  In  The  Farmers  Magazine  for  January  1800,  is  a  passage 
in  which  the  editors,  after  noticing  the  importance  of  a  register 
of  the  seasons,  add,  "  Such  a  register  will  not  only  inform  the 
present  generation,  but  must  also  prove  very  interesting  to  pos- 
terity. We  need  hardly  say,  that  if  similar  information  could 
be  procured  concerning  the  causes  which  occasioned  the  scanty 
crops  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  traditionally  called 
the  barren  years,  it  would  be  considered  as  a  particular  obli- 
gation." And  Mr.  M'Culloch,  in  his  very  elaborate  work,  "  A 
Statistical  Account  of  the  British  Empire,"  adverting  to  the 
scarcities  with  which  Scotland  has  occasionally  been  visited, 
observes,  that,  "  Those  from  1693  to  1700,  emphatically  termed 
the  '  seven  ill  years,'  were  particularly  severe.  During  the 
*  seven  ill  years,'  the  distress  was  so  great  that  several  extensive 
parishes  in  Aberdeenshire,  and  other  parts  of  the  country,  were 
nearly  depopulated ;  and  some  farms  remained  unoccupied  for 
several  years  afterwards." — Vol.  i.  p.  424. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  31 

specie ;  but  this  was  soon  remedied  by  the  new  coin  coming 
out.* 

"  1698.  A  veiy  wet  summer.  Great  complaints  are  made 
of  the  dearness  of  provisions  and  decay  of  trade. 

"  These  cold  and  wet  seasons  lasted  more  than  seven  years ; 
the  dismal  effects  of  famine  were  felt  in  most  parts  of  Europe." 
An  Inquiry  into  the  Prices  of  Wheat,  Malt,  and  occasionally  of 
other  Provisio7is,  as  Sold  in  England  from  the  Year  1000  to  the 
Year  1765.  (Folio,  published  for  T.  Longman,  1768.) 