

Nothing  can  indicate  more  strongly  than  this 
description  the  great  stagnation  of  the  circulation, 
and  the  consequent  enhancement  of  the  value  of  the 
circulating  medium  *  ;  and  it  is  probable,  therefore, 
that  prices,  high  as  they  were  from  deficiency  of 
supply  arising  out  of  the  seasons,  would  have  been 

*  Mr.  Huskisson,  in  his  speech  in  June,  1 822,  on  Mr.  Western's 
motion,  quoted  from  Archdeacon  Coxe's  publication  of  the  cor- 
respondence between  king  William  and  the  duke  of  Shrewsbury 
several  particulars  which  fully  confirm  this  statement  of  the 
scarcity  of  money  and  general  stagnation  which  prevailed  in 
1696. 

D 


34f  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

still  higher  in  the  interval  immediately  preceding 
1696,  if  the  contraction  of  the  circulation  had  not 
been  greater  *  with  a  debased,  than  it  subsequently 
was  with  a  more  perfect  coin.  In  I696  the  new 
coin  began  to  appear,  .and,  in  the  course  of  the 
two  following  years,  the  reformation  of  the  cur- 
rency was  completed ;  but  it  was  precisely  in  this 
interval,  viz.  from  I696  to  1699,  both  years  in- 
cluded (the  two  last  being  years  of  peace),  that 
prices  reached  their  greatest  height.  The  com- 
parison of  the  prices  of  wheat  in  the  four  years 
ending  in  l691j  when  the  coin  was  deteriorated  by 
at  least  20  per  cent.,  with  the  price  in  the  four  years 
ending  in  1699,  when  the  coin  was  restored  to  its 
full  standard  value,  will  stand  thus  : 

s.    d. 

4  years  ending  1691        -         -  -  27     7 

4  years  ending  1699    -  -  -  5Q     Q> 

A  further  presumption,  if  any  were  wanting, 
against  the  supposition  of  the  currency  having  had 
any  influence  in  this  high  range  of  prices,  is  derived 
from  the  circumstance  that  a  still  greater  pro- 
portionate rise,  in  the  same  period,  occurred  in 
France. 

With  regard  to  the  hypothesis  of  war  having 
occasioned  these  high  prices,  it  is  to  be  observed, 
that  the  prices  continued  low  during  the  first  two 
years  of  the  war,  viz.  from  1689  to  I692,  and  that 
nearly  the  highest  prices,  viz,  in  1698  and  1699, 
were  after  the  conclusion  of  peace. 

Upon  the  cessation  of  the  long  period  of  dearth, 
in  the  closing  years  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the 
fall  of  prices  was  rapid. 

The  price,  after  harvest,  at  Michaelmas  1700, 
had  fallen  to  336^.  9^.,  and,  after  the  harvest  of  I702, 

*  The  depression  of  the  exchange  immediately  previous  to 
1696,  to  the  extent  of  nearly  25  per  cent.,  was  the  effect  of  the 
large  foreign  expenditure.  But  that  depression  could,  of  course, 
not  have  taken  place  if  the  coin  had  been  perfect. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  35 

to  Q5s.  6d.  This  fall  of  upwards  of  50  per  cent, 
took  place,  notwithstanding  a  renewal  of  the  war 
with  France  in  the  year  before,  and  notwithstand- 
ing tlie  full  operation  of  the  bounty  on  exportation. 
The  fall  being  so  great,  it  might  naturally  be  sup- 
posed that  rents  which  had  probably  been  regulated 
with  some  reference  to  the  previous  long  range  of 
high  prices,  could  not  easily  be  paid,  and  there 
happens  to  be  testimony  that  rents  were  not  paid. 
Evelyn,  in  his  Diary,  January,  1703,  writes  :  "  Corn 
and  provisions  so  cheap,  that  the  farmers  are  unable 
to  pay  their  rents.'* 