

The  scarcity  resulting  from  such  seasons  is  no- 
ticed by  Dr.  Adam  Smith,  in  the  following  terms  : 
"  The  scarcity  which  prevailed  in  England  from 

*  The  state  of  the  weather  in  1697  is  not  noticed  in  this 
publication  ;  but  it  is  noticed  in  the  following  description,  ex- 
tracted from  a  "  Syllabus  of  the  general  State  of  Air,  Health, 
and  Seasons,''  by  Thomas  Short,  M.D. 

"  1697.  From  January  17.  to  February  11.,  a  hard  frost.  A 
cold  north  wind  all  March,  and  to  April  11.  July  16.  and  17., 
frost  and  mildew :  calm  to  August  10.  By  constant  daily 
rains  growing  corn  sprouted  in  the  ear  ;  then  came  good  harvest 
weather. 

"  1698.  January  had  much  snow,  and  deep  drifts.  February 
a  cold  cloudy  month;  14  inches  deep  snow  on  the  26th,  ice 
4  inches  thick.  April  22.,  a  deep  snow.  May  3.,  a  general  deep 
snow ;  and  to  June  18.,  very  rainy.  The  16th  of  June,  in  a  warm 
rich  soil,  was  the  first  wheat-ear  seen  near  London.  The  back- 
wardest  spring  in  forty -seven  years.  The  four  months,  to  the  end 
of  August,  had  scarce  two  days  together  without  rain  (except 
from  July  18th  to  the  26th).  The  wettest  season  known. 
Whole  fields  of  corn  spoilt,  even  in  Kent;  much  more  in  the 
north.  Horses  were  turned  into  the  pease  and  barley.  The 
earliest  wheat  not  cut  till  the  middle  of  September.  In  Kent, 
September  the  29th,  barley  standing  uncut  there ;  much  lay  in 
the  swaith  till  December ;  that  which  was  brought  in  was 
soaked  with  wet,  and  almost  useless.  Much  corn  in  the  north 
ungot  at  Christmas  ;  and,  in  Scotland,  they  were  throng-reaping 
in  January,  and  beating  the  deep  snow  off  it  as  they  reaped  the 
poor  green  empty  crop.  Bread,  made  of  wheat,  was  got ;  would 
not  stick  together,  but  fell  in  pieces,  and  tasted  as  sweet  as  if 
made  of  malt.  The  seed-time  was  so  wet,  that  there  was  hardly 
above  half  a  crop  sown  this  year. 

"  1699.  Now  begins  the  first  of  several  hot  summers.  June 
and  July  were  so  hot,  that  wheat  began  to  be  cut  the  1st  of 
August ;  and  though  there  was  but  half  a  crop  sown,  yet  it  fell 
from  9*.  and  105.  a  bushel  to  a  reasonable  price  ;  and  continued 
so  for  several  years." 


32  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

1693  to  1699,  both  inclusive,  though  no  doubt 
principally  owing  to  the  badness  of  the  seasons, 
and  therefore  extending  through  a  considerable 
part  of  Europe,  must  have  been  somewhat  en- 
hanced by  the  bounty.  In  1699,  accordingly,  the 
further  exportation  of  corn  was  prohibited  for  nine 
months."  As  the  price,  on  the  average,  was  above 
that  up  to  which  the  bounty  was  payable,  it  does 
not  appear  how  that  measure  could  have  enhanced 
the  price,  and  I  quote  the  passage  merely  as  evi- 
dence of  the  notoriety  of  the  fact  of  the  prevalence 
of  scarcity  through  the  greater  part  of  Europe 
during  an  interval  of  about  seven  years. 