

f  It  may  be  a  question  how  far  quotations  of  price  are  admis- 
sible as  evidence  of  the  state  of  the  seasons,  when  the  degree  in 
which  price  may  be  affected  by  the  seasons  is  the  very  object  of 
investigation.  The  answer  is,  that  doubtless  direct  historical 
testimony  would  be  better  authority  ;  but  that,  in  the  present 
case,  the  inference  to  be  drawn  from  any  great  difference  of 
price  within  short  periods  may  be  quite  sufficient  for  practical 
purposes,  when  there  is  no  direct  description. 

From  an  account  in  the  Appendix  of  the  prices  of  the  Windsor 
market,  from  the  Eton  Tables,  any  very  marked  variation  in  the 
produce  or  promise  of  the  season  may  be  clearly  inferred  by  a 
reference  to  the  difference  between  the  quotations  of  the  spring 
and  autumn,  when  nothing  in  the  state  of  the  currency,  or  any 
other  important  circumstance  calculated  to  affect  prices,  is  re- 
corded to  have  occurred.  The  inference  to  this  effect  is 
strengthened  by  the  accordance  of  direct  notices  of  the  state 
of  the  seasons,  whenever  they  are  given,  with  the  indication 
conveyed  by  the  variation  between  the  Lady  day  and  Michael- 
mas prices.  Hence,  in  the  absence  of  any  historical  notice,  it 
may  be  safely  concluded,  when  no  considerable  difference  is  ob- 
servable in  the  quotations  from  six  months  to  six  months  and 
from  year  to  year,  that  the  seasons  have  preserved  a  general 
uniformity  of  character  as  to  productiveness. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith,  when  referring  to  considerable  variations  of 
price,  and  considering  them,  even  for  a  period  often  years,  to  be 
too  sudden  to  be  ascribed  to  any  change  in  the  value  of  silver, 
which  is  always  slow  and  gradual,  adds^  "  The  suddenness  of  the 
effect  can  be  accounted  for  only  by  a  cause  which  can  operate 
suddenly,  —  the  accidental  variation  of  the  seasons." 


26  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

yearsy  of  favourable  seasons  and  very  low  prices, 
with  the  exception  only  of  one  year,  viz.  1684,  in 
which,  judging  by  a  reference  to  the  price,  there 
seems  to  have  been  a  somewhat  deficient  crop. 

The  low  range  of  prices  in  the  six  years  ending 
in  1691,  is  more  especially  remarkable,  the  average 
for  those  years  being  only  29^.  5d. ;  but  if  we  take 
only  the  four  years  ending  in  I69I,  the  average 
price  will  be  found  to  be  still  lower,  viz.  9!Js.  'Jd., 
or  a  fall  of  upwards  of  40  per  cent.,  compared  with 
the  average  of  the  seven  years  ending  in  1679  ; 
this  price  too  being  for  a  quality  better  than 
middling. 

The  state  of  the  currency,  instead  of  account- 
ing for  this  low  price,  adds  to  the  grounds  for 
wonder  at  its  being  so  low.  The  silver,  which 
was  then  the  only  current  coin,  had,  during  some 
years  before  this  time,  been  undergoing  a  progres- 
sive deterioration,  and  had  probably,  at  the  revolu- 
tion in  1688,  reached  nearly  to  its  most  degraded 
state,  inasmuch  as  it  was,  very  soon  after  that  event, 
that  the  attention  of  Government  was  drawn  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  evil,  and  the  necessity  of  a  re- 
medy by  recoinage.  The  deterioration  of  the  coin, 
previous  to  the  re-coinage,  was  estimated,  by  Mr. 
Lownds,  at  25  per  cent.  * ;  but  supposing  the  de- 
gradation, in  1688,  to  have  been  only  to  the  extent 
of  20  per  cent.,  it  would  bring  the  price  in  money 
of  full  weight,  on  the  average  of  the  four  years 
ending  in  1 691,  to  22.9. :  and,  applying  the  same  de- 
duction to  the  lowest  quotation  by  the  Eton  Tables 
of  that  period,  viz.  at  Michaelmas  I688,  21^.  4^., 
the  price  in  silver  coin  of  standard  weight  would 
be  reduced  to  17*^  1^-  for  the  Winchester  quarter 