


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  49 

The  harvest  of  1757  appears  to  have  been  de- 
ficient, although  not  in  the  same  degree.  It  is 
probable,  from  the  subjoined  extract  of  Colhnson's 
letters,  that  the  extreme  heat  of  the  summer  of 
1757  may  have  rendered  the  crops  hght. 

"  December  25  and  27.  1757. 

*'  The  extraordinary  heat  of  our  summer  has  ripened  all  sorts 
of  fruit  to  perfection.  In  two  gardens  I  saw  this  year  pomegra- 
nates against  south  walls,  without  any  art,  ripened  beyond  what 
can  be  imagined  in  so  northern  a  climate  ;  they  look  extremely 
beautiful,  and  are  of  the  size  of  some  brought  from  abroad.  Our 
autumn  has  been  long,  dry,  and  warm,  and  so  continues  ;  for  a 
few  slight  frosts  have  not  stripped  the  garden  of  flowers  at  Christ- 
mas-day. The  winter  season  has  not  closed  before  the  spring 
flowers  begin  ;  for  there  are  plenty  of  polyanthus,  narcissus, 
pansies,  and  sweet  violets,"  &c. 

The  six  succeeding  seasons,  viz.  from  1758  to 

1763,  both  years  inchided,  seem  to  have  been 
favourable :  the  particular  character  of  some  of 
them  is  noticed  in  CoUinson's  letters. 

'<  July  25.  1759. 

"  We  had  the  mildest  winter  ever  known.     Our  spring  was 

early  and  very  agreeable,  and  our  summer  the  finest  and  warmest 

since  1750.     Great  plenty  of  all  sorts  of  grain  and  fruits.     New 

wheat,  of  this  year's  produce,  has  been  the  21st  inst.  at  market." 

"  London,  Sept.  2.  1762. 

"  We  have  had  a  delightful  warm  summer ;  all  the  fruits  of 
the  earth  very  good  and  in  great  plenty." 

The  season  of  1763  is  thus  noticed  by  Collin- 
son  :  — 

"  London,  Sept.  15.  1763. 
"  Almost  every  day  rain  since  the  middle  of  July  ;  the  spring 
and  summer  very  dry  to  that  time.     Very  great  plenty  of  grass, 
and  all  sorts  of  corn,  but  the  weather  unkindly  for  the  harvest." 

Of  the  succeeding  season  I  find  no  direct  notice 
by  Collinson.     As   the  price  rose  at  Michaelmas, 

1764,  to  44.9.  5f/.,  a  high  price  at  that  time,  the 
harvest  of  that  year  may  be  suspected  to  have  been 
unfavourable ;  at  the   same  time,   as  there  was  a 


50  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

large  export,  it  is  possible  that  the  advanced  price 
may  in  some  measure  have  been  occasioned  by  an 
unusual  demand  for  corn  abroad.* 

Mr.  Collinson  gives  the  following  description  of 
the  season  of  I765  :  — 

"  London,  September  17.  1765. 

"  You,  my  dear  friend,  surprise  me  with  telling  me  of  your 
cold  and  wet  summer ;  whereas  our  summer  has  been  as  much 
in  the  extreme  the  other  way.  For  all  May,  June,  and  July  were 
excessively  hot  and  dry  ;  but  six  or  seven  rainy  days  in  three 
months,  so  that  all  our  grass  fields  look  like  the  sun-burnt  coun- 
tries of  Spain  and  Africa.  The  beginning  of  August  we  had  some 
fine  rains,  but  they  did  not  recover  our  usual  verdure ;  since  to 
the  present  writing,  hot  and  dry  weather,  not  a  drop  of  rain  for 
fourteen  days.  Our  hay  is  very  short,  and  oats  and  barley  a  mid- 
dling crop ;  but  of  wheat,  which  we  most  wanted,  good  Provi- 
dence has  favoured  us  with  a  plentiful  crop  and  a  good  harvest, 
which  began  two  weeks  sooner  than  in  common  years," 