

The  great  fall  of  prices  in  1731,  1732,  and  1733, 
following  the  slight  dearth  of  I727  and  1728,  was, 
as  might  be  expected,  productive  of  great  agricul- 
tural distress.  The  following  extract  describes  it  in 
terms  which  might  be  supposed  to  have  emanated 
from  the  late  Mr.  Webb  Hall's  Committee,  or  from 
the  Agricultural  Associations  of  a  more  recent 
period  :  — 

"  The  interest  of  our  British  landholders  has  been  declinins: 
several  years  last  past ;  it  has  been  a  general  observation,  that 
rents  have  been  sinking,  and  tenants  unable  to  make  as  good 
payments  as  formerly,  even  in  counties  where  there  is  the 
greatest  circulation  of  money,  the  maritime  ones,  and  those  near 
the  capital  cities  of  the  kingdom.  As  this  is  too  well  known  to 
be  their  case,  they  deserve  the  attention  and  favour  of  our  legis- 
lature :  it  is  proper  they  should  make  a  tolerable  interest  of  their 
money,  as  well  as  adventurers  in  other  businesses,  which  few  of 
them  do,  who  have  not  enjoyed  their  bargains  twenty  years,  or 
a  longer  time,  for  lands  are  much  dearer  now.  Wheat  this  year 
and  last  never  mounted  in  some  of  the  extreme  parts  of  the  king- 
dom, to  above  three  shillings  and  eight-pence  per  Winchester  ; 
barley  is  now  sold  in  the  West  of  England  for  two  shillings  per 


42  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

Winchester  bushel.  Prices  are  often  higher  fifty  miles  round 
London  than  elsewhere,  which  induces  several  great  men  to 
think  that  countrymen  live  better  than  they  really  do.  Country 
measures  (which  are  frequently  larger  than  the  Winchester  or 
legal  bushels)  contribute  farther  to  such  mistakes.  Before  they 
can  pay  their  rents,  wheat  of  middling  goodness  ought,  I  think, 
to  sell  for  about  four  shillings  and  three-pence  per  Winchester, 
not  in  a  few  places,  but  throughout  the  kingdom  ;  barley  for 
2s.  6d.,  peas,  2s.  3d.,  and  oats  1^.  6d.  per  Winchester.  I  know 
in  former  times  less  prices  were  sufficient ;  but  as  circumstances 
alter,  the  same  thing  is  altered^:  corn  farms  (iron,  timber,  har- 
vest people,  and  servants,  being  much  dearer  than  heretofore) 
will  not  yield  sufficient  profit  to  the  occupiers  of  them,  unless 
they  can  have  such  prices,  particularly  as  cattle,  pigs,  sheep,  but- 
ter, and  cheese,  are  now  one  third  part  cheaper  than  formerly, 
and  what  is  called  a  living  price. 

"  The  flourishing  condition  of  the  landed  interest  supports 
all  trade ;  most  trades  now  (except  those  which  supply  luxury, 
those  of  gold  and  silversmiths,  lacemen,  vintners,  painters, 
dealers  in  silks,  velvets,  and  high  priced  cloths,)  are  in  apparent 
decay ;  which  is  not  only  proved  by  the  general  declarations  of 
tradesmen,  but  by  too  many  instances  of  bankruptcy  amongst 
them.  I  wish  I  could  say  the  present  times  are  not  the  worst. 
Our  exports  are,  perhaps,  as  great  as  formerly ;  whence,  then, 
all  this  complaint  ?  Our  farmers  are  worse  customers  than  for- 
merly ;  necessity  has  compelled  them  to  more  carefulness  and 
frugality  in  laying  out  their  money,  than  they  were  accustomed 
to  do  in  better  times."  (The  Landholder's  Companion,  or 
Ways  and  Means  to  raise  the  Value  of  Land,  by  William  Allen, 
Esq.  of  Fobstone,  in  Pembrokeshire,  1734-.) 