


44j  effect  of  the  seasons. 

In  addition  to  this  testimony  as  to  the  general 
character  attaching  to  the  term  from  1741  to  1751, 
I  have  met  with  casual  descriptions  of  particular 
years  ;  and  the  following  extracts  from  the  letters 
of  Mr.  Peter  Colhnson*,  a  celebrated  botanist,  to 
Linnaeus,  containing  those  descriptions,  may  not 
be  uninteresting,  at  the  same  time  that  they  will 
tend  to  form  something  like  a  standard  of  what 
may  be  considered  as  a  fine  season,  to  which  to 
refer  a  comparison  of  the  seasons  of  more  recent 
occurrence,  as  well  as  of  those  from  1793  to 
1813. 

"  London,  Jan.  18.  1743.  O.  S. 

"  We  have  now  a  wonderful  fine  season,  that  makes  our  spring 
flowers  come  forth.  I  am  sure  you  would  be  deHghted  to  see 
my  windows  filled  with  six  pots  of  flowers,  which  the  gardener 
has  sent  me  to  town  t,  viz.  great  plenty  of  aconites,  white  and 
green  hellebore,  double  hepatica,  crocus,  polyanthus,  periwinkle, 
laui'istinus,  vernal  red  cyclamen,  single  anemonies,  and  snow- 
drops. None  of  these  were  brought  forward  by  any  art,  but 
entirely  owing  to  the  temperature  of  the  season,  though  some 
seasons  I  have  known  things  forwai'der  than  now." 

"  London,  Oct.  26.  174.?,  O.  S. 

"  My  garden  is  in  great  beauty,  for  we  have  had  no  frost ; 
a  long,  dry,  warm  summer,  and  autumn  grapes  very  ripe. 

"  The  vineyards  turn  to  good  profit,  much  wine  being  made 
this  year  in  England." 

"  London,  Oct.  3.  1748,  O.  S. 

"  We  have  had  a  fine  summer.  Great  plenty  of  all  sorts  of 
fruits  and  grain,  and  a  very  delightful  autumn.  It  is  now  as  warm 
as  summer  ;  no  bearing  of  fires.  My  orange  trees  are  yet  abroad. 
My  vineyard  grapes  are  very  ripe  ;  a  considerable  quantity  of 
wine  will  this  year  be  made  in  England.  We  have  not  had  one 
frosty  morning  this  autumn.     Marvel  of  Peru,  double-flowered 


these  ten  years,  the  writer  says  of  them,  that  they  were  neither 
very  wet  nor  very  dry  ;  and  adds,  "  This  was  the  most  plentiful 
and  cheapest  time  for  corn  I  ever  remember." 

*  A  selection  of  the  correspondence  of  Linnaeus  and  other 
Naturalists,  by  Sir  Jas.  Edw.  Smith,  M.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  &c.   1821. 

t  Mr.  Collinson's  country  house  was  at  Mill  Hill,  in  Middle- 
sex. ■* 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  45 

nasturtium,  and  all  other  annuals  are  not  touched.     My  garden 
makes  a  fine  show." 

"  May  8.  174-9. 

"  How  the  wmter  has  been  in  Sweden  I  do  not  know,  but  at 
London  the  like  warmth  and  mildness  were  never  remembered. 
Our  autumn  was  long,  warm,  and  dry,  with  a  few  slight  frosts 
before  Christmas  ;  but  we  have  had  since  fine,  warm,  dry  wea- 
ther, and  no  frosts  or  snow.  Our  gardens  were  in  great  beauty 
in  January  and  February  :  almonds,  apricots,  and  peaches  in 
blossom.  Feb.  23.  I  went  into  the  country.  The  elm  hedges  had 
small  leaves  ;  standard  plums,  almonds,  and  crocuses  in  full  blos- 
som ;  gooseberries  showing  their  fruit.  In  short,  it  would  be 
endless  to  talk  to  you  of  the  wonders  of  this  season.  March  5. 
The  fig  in  my  London  garden  had  small  leaves  when  peas  and 
beans  under  south  walls  were  in  blossom." 