

One  of  the  most  remarkable  circumstances  at- 
tending the  state  of  things  here  described  is,  that 
while  the  price  of  corn  had  fallen  so  considerably, 
as  we  have  seen,  on  a  comparison  with  the  preced- 
ing century,  the  price  of  labour  in  this  country  had 
risen. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith,  referring  to  this  period,  ob- 
serves :  — 

"  The  money  price  of  labour  in  Great  Britain  has  risen 
during  the  present  century.  This,  however,  seems  to  be  the 
effect,  not  so  much  of  any  diminution  in  the  value  of  silver 
in  the  European  market,  as  of  an  increase  in  the  demand  for 
labour  in  Great  Britain,  arising  from  the  great,  and  almost  uni- 
versal, prosperity  of  the  country.  In  France,  a  country  not 
altogether  so  prosperous,  the  money  price  of  labour  has,  since 
the  middle  of  the  last  century,  been  observed  to  sink  gradually 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  55 

with  the  average  money  price  of  corn.  Botli  in  the  last  century 
and  the  present,  the  day  wages  of  common  labour  are  said  to 
have  been  pretty  uniformly  about  the  twentieth  part  of  the  aver- 
age price  of  the  septier  of  wheat,  a  measure  which  contains  a 
little  more  than  four  Winchester  bushels.  In  Great  Britain, 
the  real  recompense  of  labour,  it  has  already  been  shown 
the  real  quantities  of  the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life 
which  are  given  to  the  labourer,  has  increased  considerably  dur- 
ing the  course  of  the  present  century.  The  rise  in  its  money 
price  seems  to  have  been  the  effect,  not  of  any  diminution  of  the 
value  of  silver  in  the  general  market  of  Europe,  but  of  a  rise  in 
the  real  price  of  labour  in  the  particular  market  of  Great  Britain, 
owing  to  the  peculiarly  happy  circumstances  of  the  country."  — 
Wealth  of  Nations,  vol.  i.  chap.  xi. 

According  to  Arthur  Young,  the  average  price 
of  wheat  was,  for  the  Avhole  of  the  17th  century, 
SSs.  '■2d.  per  Winchester  quarter ;  and  for  the  QQ 
years  from  I7OI  to  17 66,  326'.  1^/.,  being  a  fill  of 
16  per  cent ;  w^hile  the  price  of  agricultural  labour, 
which,  on  the  average  of  the  17th  century  had 
been  10\d.  per  day,  was,  for  66  years  ending  in 
1766,  12c?.,  or  a  rise  of  16  per  cent. 

The  fact,  indeed,  of  a  rise  of  money  wages  in 
this  country,  coincidently  with  a  fall  in  the  price 
of  corn  during  the  long  interval  in  question,  rests 
on  unquestionable  authorities. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith,  in  the  passage  quoted,  con- 
siders the  advance  in  the  rate  of  wages  as  the  con- 
sequence of  an  increased  demand  for  labour,  and  the 
decline  in  the  price  of  corn  as  a  consequence  of 
an  increased  value  of  silver.  The  utmost  effect  of 
the  supplies  of  gold  and  silver  since  the  discovery 
of  the  American  mines  had,  in  his  opinion,  (found- 
ed, as  it  should  seem,  chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  on 
the  price  of  corn,)  been  felt  somewhat  before  the 
middle  of  the  17th  century.  The  Marquis  Garnier, 
likewise,  taking  wheat  for  long  periods  as  the 
measure  for  estimating  the  value  of  silver,  came 
to  the  conclusion,  that  the  utmost  depreciation 
of  it  by  the  American  mines  had  been  produced 
about  1689  ;  and   he  and   other   French  writers, 