

This  long  period  of  great  abundance,  and  con- 
sequent cheapness  of  the  prices  of  provisions,  was 
one  which  appears  to  have  been  attended  with  a 
great  improvement  in  the  condition  and  habits  of 
the  great  bulk  of  the  population.  In  the  passage 
already  quoted  from  Adam  Smith,  he  refers  to  '•  the 
peculiarly  happy  circumstances  of  the  country  " 
during  that  period,  and  Mr.  Hallam,  in  his  *'  Consti- 
tutional History,"  describes  the  reign  of  George  II. 
as  "  the  most  prosperous  period  that  England  had 
ever  experienced.'*  The  author  of  the  Corn  Tracts, 
writing  in  1765,  observes,  that  "  bread  made  of 
wheat  is  become  more  generally  the  food  of  the 
labouring  people."  This  resort  to  a  higher  diet  is 
a  most  indisputable  sign  of  the  improvement  of 
their  condition.  The  great  command  which  the 
labouring  classes  possessed  over  the  necessaries  of 
life  during  that  interval,  might,  according  to  the 
received  theory  of  population,  be  expected  to  have 
been  attended  with  an  accelerated  ratio  of  increase 
of  numbers.  But,  according  to  the  best  evidence 
of  the  progress  of  population  in  this  country,  the 
ratio  of  increase  during  the  long  interval   under 

*  There  is  at  the  same  time  a  consideration  which  may  have 
some  weight  in  aid  of  the  influence  of  a  series  of  plentiful  years 
in  reducing  the  cost  of  production,  and  thus  admitting  of  keep- 
ing up  or  extending  the  cultivation  —  I  mean  the  very  low  rate 
of  interest  which  prevailed  through  the  reigns  of  George  I. 
and  II.,  and  which  would  render  the  outlay  of  capital  on 
land  remunerative  with  smaller  returns,  than  when  the  rate  of 
interest  was,  as  it  had  previously  and  has  since  been,  so  much 
higher. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  Gl 

consideration,  was  much  slower  than  it  has  been 
since,  under  circumstances  of  diminished  command 
of  necessaries  by  the  labouring  classes.  Mr.  Mal- 
thus  seems  to  have  been  struck  by  the  apparent 
anomaly,  and  gives  the  following  explanation  of  it 
in  his  work  entitled,  "  Principles  of  Political  Eco- 
nomy, considered  with  a  View  to  their  practical 
Application,"  p.  255. : — 

"  It  is  well  known  that  during  this  period  the  price  of  corn 
fell  considerably,  while  the  wages  of  labour  are  stated  to  have 
risen.  During  the  last  forty  years  of  the  17th  century,  and  the 
first  twenty  of  the  1 8th,  the  average  price  of  corn  was  such,  as, 
compared  with  the  wages  of  labour,  would  enable  the  labourer 
to  purchase  with  a  day's  earnings  two  thirds  of  a  peck  of  wheat. 
From  1720  to  1750  the  price  of  wheat  had  so  fallen,  while  wages 
had  risen,  that  instead  of  two  thirds,  the  labourer  could  purchase 
the  whole  of  a  peck  of  wheat  with  a  day's  labour. 