

That  a  prosperous  state  of  manufactures  and 
trade,  and  a  generally  flourishing  condition  of  the 
country,  accompanied  by  an  increasing  population 
employed  at  full  and  increasing  wages,  would  have 
a  tendency  to  increase  the  consumption,  and  that 
the  effect  of  a  continued  increase  of  consumption, 
under  a  given  state  of  supply,  would  be  to  raise 
prices,  diminishing  the  exportable  surplus  in  the 
first  instance,  and  forcing  eventually  a  resort  to 
fresh  soils  at  an  increased  cost,  or  to  an  impoi'tation 
in  as  far  as  permitted,  may  readily  be  allowed. 

But  an  increase  of  population,  even  in  its  most 
accelerated  progress,  and  allowing  for  the  utmost 
possible  difference  between  a  full  and  restricted  con- 
sumption, cannot  o\:^erate  j^ersaltum.  And  supposing 
even  that  the  assumed  increase  of  consumption  had 
not  been  accompanied  and  in  a  great  degree  compen- 
sated by  a  coincident  improvement  and  extension 
of  cultivation,  it  would  not  account  for  the  enor- 
mous difference  between  an  export  in  I763  and 
1764  of  820,000  quarters  of  wheat,  and  an  import 
in  1767  and  I768  of  830,000  quarters  ;  the  whole 
annual  consumption  of  wheat  at  that  period  not 
being  estimated  at  more  than  about  4,000,000  of 
quarters.  Still  less  would  it  account  for  so  great  and 
sudden  an  increase  of  price,  as  from  33^.  2^d.  at 
Ladyday,  1763,  to  58*.  8d.  at  Michaelmas,  I767. 

There  is,  however,  reason  to  believe  that 
there  was  not  only  no  increase  of  consumption  to 
account  for  that  rise  of  price  and  transition  from 
export  to  import,  but  that  the  rise  of  price  was 
required  to  limit,  and  did  limit,  the  consumption 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  65 

below  its  former  rate,  and  was  further  required  to 
induce  a  foreign  supply  to  make  good  the  de- 
ficiencies of  our  own  growth. 

The  reason  for  supposing  that  the  consumption 
was  diminished  instead  of  having  been  increased, 
compared  with  what  it  had  been  in  tiie  period  im- 
mediately preceding,  is,  that  the  rise  of  wages  did 
not  precede,  but  follow,  very  inadequately,  the  rise 
in  the  price  of  provisions. 

Arthur  Young*  states,  as  the  general  result  of  the 
information  obtained  by  him  in  his  extensive  agricul- 
tural tour  inl  767,  I768,  and  I77O,  that  the  mean  rate 
of  wages  for  the  whole  year  was  Js.  4.^kd.  per  week. 
Taking  an  average  of  the  five  years,  from  I766  to 
1770  inclusive,  the  price  of  the  quarter  of  wheat 
WTis  47s.  8f/.,  or  nearly  48^.,  whicli  would  be  6s. 
the  bushel,  and  Is.  6d.  the  peck.  At  these  prices 
of  labour  and  wheat,  the  earnings  of  the  labourer 
would  be  somewhat  under  five  sixths  of  a  peck. 
Now,  in  I7G3,  and  for  SO  years  before,  his  wages 
had  been  7'^'t  a  week,  and  the  average  price  of 
wheat  in  the  5  years  ending  in  1763  being  33.s\  1^//., 
his  daily  earnings  would  be  equal  to  very  nearly  a 
peck  of  wheat.  And  if  the  price  of  wheat  be  taken 
at  the  average  of  20  years  preceding  1755,  it  would 
appear  that  he  then  earned  somewhat  upwards  of 
a  peck.  It  is  difficult,  therefore,  to  conceive  that 
earning  so  much  less  wheat  in  1767*  he  should  have 
consumed  more  than  in  17^3.  But  if,  from  diminished 
command  of  necessaries,  the  inference  were  not  clear 
against  the  supposition  of  an  increased  consump- 
tion, there  is  sufficient  presumption,  from  the  con- 
trast between  the  contented  state  of  the  population 
in  the  interval  from  I72O  to  1755,  and  the  dis- 
turbed and  insurrectionary  state  of  it  between  I765 