

The  profound  internal  tranquillity  which  this 
country  enjoyed  during  that  interval  (for  the  at- 
tempts in  1715  and  1745  in  favour  of  the  Stuart 
family  were  too  feeble  and  too  short-lived  to  be 
worth  mentioning,  as  affecting  the  general  state  of 
internal  peace  and  security,)  may  be  considered  as 
having  had  some  influence  when  compared  with  the 
17th  century. 

The  civil  wars  which  prevailed  near  the  middle 
of  the  17tli  century  might,  doubtless,  be  supposed 
to  have  interfered  in  some  degree  with  tillage, 
although,  for  the  reasons  already  stated,  it  should 
seem  that  the  high  prices  of  that  interval  were 
more  owing  to  the  seasons  than  to  the  civil  war ; 
and  this  is  the  more  probable,    because  the  same 

*  This  exception  is  readily  accounted  for,  partly  by  the  ef- 
fects of  the  war  in  which  we  were  then  engaged  with  France, 
and  partly,  as  far,  at  least,  as  regards  the  amount  of  tonnage, 
by  the  prohibition  against  the  export  of  corn ;  a  prohibition 
which  was  in  force  during  a  part  of  that  period,  and  which,  of 
course,  while  it  lasted,  would  cause  a  diminution  of  the  tonnage 
usually  employed  in  the  transport  of  grain.  The  shipping  re- 
quired for  the  export  of  corn  in  the  middle  of  last  century  must 
have  formed  no  inconsiderable  proportion  of  the  whole  of  the 
tonnage  employed  in  the  trade  of  the  kingdom. 


58  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

relatively  high  prices  prevailed  in  France  during 
the  middle  of  the  17th  century  as  in  this  country. 
But  admitting  the  disturbed  state  of  the  country  to 
have  contributed  to  the  high  range  of  prices  which 
prevailed  during  the  civil  wars,  these  were  at  an 
end  before  1650.  And  during  the  concluding  50 
years  of  the  17th  century,  there  was  no  such  inter- 
ruption of  internal  peace  as  could  be  supposed  to 
interfere  with  the  operations  of  husbandry,  or  the 
general  inducements  to  cultivation. 

If,  then,  the  fall  of  prices  in  question  cannot  be 
accounted  for  by  our  corn  laws,  nor  by  the  price  of 
labour,  nor  by  the  state  of  the  country  in  respect 
of  population,  of  trade,  of  war  or  peace,  or  internal 
tranquillity,  nor  by  any  supposed  increase^,  of  the 
value  of  silver,  we  have  to  seek  for  some  cause  more 
distinctly  affecting  the  production  of  corn. 

It  is  universally  admitted,  however,  that  no  single 
cause  affects  the  production  of  corn  in  respect  of 
quantity  from  year  to  year,  so  much  as  the  differ- 
ence of  the  seasons  ;  and  the  variation  of  price  from 
this  cause,  is,  as  we  have  had  occasion  to  observe, 
in  a  ratio  much  beyond  the  difference  of  quantity. 
The  only  difficulty  therefore  which  attends  the  sup- 
position of  the  seasons  having  had  the  principal  in- 
fluence in  producing  the  cheapness  of  provisions 
in  the  period  alluded  to  of  last  century,  is  in  the 
length  of  time  to  which  the  operation  of  that  cause 
is  assigned.  It  has  been  assumed,  most  arbitrarily, 
that  the  differences  of  seasons,  in  their  influence 
on  the  production  of  corn,  must  be  equalised  within 
certain  periods,  limited  to  suit  some  particular  con- 
clusion. And  by  such  reasoners,  the  idea  of  any 
important  difference  in  the  produce,  and  the  still 
greater  difference  in  the  price,  in  a  period  of  20, 
or  even  of  10  years,  as  compared  with  an  equal 
period  immediately  preceding  or  following,  is 
treated  superciliously  as  a  perfectly  gratuitous  hy- 
pothesis.    Now,  it  will  be  for  the  reader  to  judge. 