


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  59 

whether  there  is  not,  from  such  historical  evidence 
as  the  nature  of  the  subject  admits  of,  combined 
with  inferences  from  variations  of  price  from  year 
to  year,  the  strongest  possible  ground  of  presump- 
tion, that  the  period  of  50  years  from  1715  to 
1765,  was  characterised  by  a  marked  exemption 
from  seasons  of  scarcity,  compared  with  the  50 
years  preceding.* 

If  the  fact  of  such  comparative  exemption 
be  allowed,  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in  con- 
sidering it  as  sufficient  to  account  for  the  greatest 
part,  if  not  for  the  whole,  of  the  relative  cheap- 
ness of  that  period.  If  in  the  50  years,  instead 
of  only  5  years  of  recorded  scarcity,  there 
had  been  upwards  of  20  years,  it  is  perfectly 
clear  that  the  produce  must  have  been  much  less, 
and  the  price  much  higher.  The  difference  in 
respect  of  the  quantity  of  produce,  is  equivalent 
to  a  difference  in  the  average  fertihty  of  the  soil 
during  the  period.  A  comparative  frequent  recur- 
rence of  bad  seasons  affords  a  less  produce  for  the 
same  labour  and  capital,  and  therefore  resolves 
itself,  during  the  preponderance  of  that  description 
of  seasons,  into  an  increased  cost  of  production. 

*  In  this  view  of  the  effect  of  the  seasons,  more  stress  has  been 
laid  on  the  exemption  from  those  of  marked  scarcity  than  on 
the  prevalence  of  those  of  more  than  ordinary  produce.  Not  but 
that  there  appear  to  be  strong  grounds  for  inferring  the  greater 
than  usual  prevalence  of  plentiful  seasons  in  the  period  here 
referred  to  ;  but^  because  the  grounds  for  such  inference  do  not 
admit  of  being  so  well  made  out.  A  very  deficient  harvest,  by 
the  privations  which  it  entails  on  the  bulk  of  the  community,  in- 
evitably attracts  general  notice,  and  is  in  many,  if  not  in  most, 
instances  the  subject  of  historical  notice  ;  besides  that,  in  in- 
stances of  deficiency  short  of  dearth,  the  suddenness  of  the 
rise  of  price  may  afford  strong  grounds  of  inference  as  to  the 
cause.  Whereas  the  indications  of  a  superabundant  harvest 
are  not  always  immediately  manifest.  The  fact  of  excess  of 
produce  may,  and  commonly  does,  escape  immediate  notice,  and 
is  known  only  in  its  ultimate  effects  upon  price,  which  are  com- 
paratively slow,  however  sure  to  follow. 


60  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

The  comparative  exemption  from  adverse  seasons 
would  consequently  be  equivalent,  during  the  period 
to  which  it  applied,  to  a  diminished  cost  of  pro- 
duction ;  and  would  thus,  with  the  aid  of  the 
bounty,  prevent  the  throwing  of  land  out  of  cul- 
tivation, or  even  might  admit  ofan  extended  tillage, 
notwithstanding  the  fall  and  low  range  of  prices 
observable  in  this  period.* 