

This  great  increase  of  command  over  the  necessaries  of  life 
did  not,  however,  produce  a  proportionate  increase  of  population. 
It  found  the  people  of  this  country  living  under  an  excellent  go- 
vernment, and  enjoying  all  the  advantages  of  civil  and  political 
liberty  in  an  unusual  degree.  The  lower  classes  of  people  had 
been  in  the  habit  of  being  respected,  both  by  the  laws  and 
the  higher  orders  of  their  fellow-citizens,  and  had  learned,  in 
consequence,  to  respect  themselves  :  and  the  result  was,  that, 
instead  of  an  increase  of  population  exclusively,  a  considerable 
portion  of  their  increased  real  wages  was  expended  in  a  marked 
improvement  of  the  quality  of  the  food  consumed,  and  a  decided 
elevation  in  the  standard  of  their  comforts  and  conveniences." 

The  solution  here  given  is  apparently  just.  But 
the  fact  itself  speaks  volumes  against  the  theory 
by  which  the  partisans,  whether  of  depreciation  or 
of  corn  monopoly,  seek  to  connect  a  high  price  of 
provisions  with  a  state  of  public  prosperity ;  and 
it  equally  militates  against  the  theory  of  demand, 
which,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  next  section,  attempts 
to  explain  the  sudden  rise  of  prices  following  this 
long  interval  of  cheapness,  by  the  hypothesis  of  a 
sudden  increase  of  consumption. 


6^  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 


Section  4.—  I765  to  1775. 

The  change  which  dates  from  1765  in  the  prices 
of  provisions  from  cheapness  to  dearth,  and  in  the 
corn  trade  from  a  regular  exportation  to  a  prepon- 
derance of  importation,  has  been  the  subject  of 
general  remark,  and  has  given  rise,  as  usual,  on  oc- 
casions of  great  change,  to  controversy  as  to  the 
causes  of  it.  The  same  change  from  cheapness  to 
dearth  occurred  coincidently  through  the  rest  of 
Europe ;  and  this  dearness,  like  the  preceding  cheap- 
ness, was  referred  to  the  most  contradictory  causes. 
In  France  it  was  ascribed  to  the  recent  permission 
of  export,  at  the  same  time  that,  in  this  country,  it 
was  attributed  to  the  occasional  prohibitions  of  ex- 
port and  suspensions  of  the  restrictions  of  import, 
such  prohibitions  and  suspensions  being  argued  to 
operate  as  a  discouragement  of  tillage  ;  not  to 
mention  the  clamours  which  were  then  universally 
prevalent  against  the  supposed  improper  practices 
of  farmers,  millers,  and  bakers,  in  raising  and  keep- 
ing up  prices. 

The  most  plausible  of  the  reasons  among  the 
numerous  ones  which  have  been  advanced  for  the 
great  rise  was  the  supposition  of  a  fall  in  the  value 
of  silver.  A  considerable  increase  in  the  produce 
of  the  American  mines  is  noticed  by  Humboldt 
and  other  writers,  to  have  taken  place  in  the 
middle  of  last  century,  and  more  especially  about 
the  year  1770**  But  the  influence  of  this  cause, 
if  to  be  traced  at  all,  which  appears  to  be  doubtful, 
must  have  been  very  gradual,  and  scarcely  per- 
ceptible ;  and  it  could  not  come  into  operation  at 
all  so  as  to  affect  prices  in  Europe,  till  after  all  the 
phenomena  of  the  high  prices  now  under  consider- 
ation had  occurred  ;    at  any  rate,   it  would   not 