

*  See  Mr.  Jacob's  valuable  Treatise,  entitled  "  Inquiry  into 
the  Precious  Metals/'  vol.  ii.  p.  l.^^. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  6S 

account  for  so  sudden  a  rise  as  took  place  in  I766, 
and  still  less  would  it  account  for  so  great  and 
sudden  a  transition  from  a  large  export  to  a  large 
import  of  grain,  as  took  place  between  I7 65  and 
1775. 

But  another  mode  of  accounting  for  the  phe- 
nomena in  question  has  of  late  years  become  more 
general.  The  very  able  and  well-informed  writer 
of  an  article  in  the  supplement  to  the  "  Encyclo- 
paedia Britannica"  on  the  Corn  Laws  and  the  Corn 
Trade,  gives  the  following  explanation  of  the 
change : — 

"  After  the  peace  of  Paris  in  1763,  the  national  improvement 
was  prodigiously  accelerated.  The  extension  of  industry  caused 
by  the  acquisition  of  new  branches  of  commerce,  by  the  increase 
of  our  colonial  possessions,  and,  perhaps,  more  than  all  the  rest, 
by  the  introduction  of  improved  machinery  into  the  cotton  ma- 
nufactories, was  followed  by  a  sudden  increase  of  the  population, 
and,  as  importation  was  prohibited,  by  a  corresponding  rise  of 
prices." 

And  the  late  Sir  Edward  West,  the  distinguished 
author  of  an  "Essay  on  the  Application  of  Capital 
to  Land,"  in  a  subsequent  "  Essay  on  the  Price  of 
Corn,"  referring  to  the  rise  of  price  between  I765 
and  1 775,  says  :  — 

"  The  true  cause  of  this  rise  of  price,  in  all  probability,  was 
the  increasing  population,  and  the  increased  cost  of  providing 
the  additional  produce  for  that  increasing  population,  according 
to  the  principle  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  in  my 
former  publication.  This  opinion  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  of  the 
very  great  increase  of  the  population  between  the  years  1760 
and  1780.  On  reference  to  Mr.  Rickman's  Preliminary  Observ- 
ations to  the  Population  Abstract,  it  will  be  found  that  the 
population  increased  at  a  rate  far  more  rapid  during  this  in- 
terval than  at  any  former  period.  At  about  the  same  period, 
too — namely,  between  1766  and  1773,  our  imports  of  corn  began 
to  exceed  our  exports,  and  we  have  since  been  a  regularly  import- 
ing instead  of  an  exporting  country." 

The  opinion  to  this  effect  has  become  very  ge- 
neral, constituting  a  theory  which  refers  the  prin- 
cipal phenomena  of  the  prices  of  corn  to  difference 


64  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEA.^ONS. 

of  demand  or  consumption,  neglecting  or  treating  as 
subordinate  any  variations  of  supply  ;  but  it  is  a 
theory  which  will  be  found  to  be  constructed  on  a 
supposition  of  facts  which  did  not  exist,  and  to  be 
irreconcileable  with  those  which  will  be  shown  to 
have  existed  in  the  clear  relation  of  cause  and 
effect. 