

Dr.  Adam  Smith  has  a  remark  to  the  same  effect 
in  the  following  passage  :  — 

"  In  France,  till  1764-,  the  exportation  of  grain  was  by  law  pro- 
hibited; and  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  suppose,  that  nearly  the 
same  diminution  of  price  which  took  place  in  one  country,  not- 
withstanding this  prohibition,  should  in  another  be  owing  to  the 
extraordinary  encouragement  given  to  exportation."  —  Vol.  i. 
chap.  xi. 

There  is  reason  to  believe,  that  in  France  the 
same  prevalence  of  favourable  seasons,  or  rather, 
the  comparative  exemption  from  years  of  dearth, 
was  experienced,  although  with  some  considerable 
exceptions,  during  the  fifty  years  which  are  marked 
by  such  relative  cheapness. 

On  the  prevalence  of  a  general  similarity  of  sea- 
sons, allowing  for  differences  of  climate  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe  within  a  certain  latitude,  are 
the  following  remarks,  in  the  justness  of  which  I 
concur,  in  a  work  entitled,  "  On  the  Present  State 
of  England,"  by  J.  Lowe.    1823. 

"  The  public,  particularly  the  untravelled  part  of  the  public,  are 

E   3 


54  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

hardly  aware  of  the  similarity  of  temperature  prevailing  through- 
out what  may  be  called  the  corn  country  of  Europe,  we  mean 
Great  Britain,  Ireland,  the  north  of  France,  the  Netherlands, 
Denmark,  the  north-west  of  Germany,  and,  in  some  measure, 
Poland,  and  the  north-east  of  Germany.  All  this  tract  is  situated 
between  the  45th  and  55th  degrees  of  latitude,  and  subject,  in 
a  considerable  degree,  to  the  prevalence  of  similar  winds.  Nei- 
ther the  superabundance  of  rain  which  we  experience  in  one 
summer,  or  its  deficiency  in  another,  are  by  any  means  confined 
to  Great  Britain  and  Ireland;  while  in  winter  both  the  intensity 
and  duration  of  frost  are  always  greater  on  the  continent.  Ex- 
ceptions certainly  exist  in  particular  tracts  ;  but  in  support  of 
our  general  argument,  we  have  merely  to  recall  to  those  of  our 
readers  who  are  of  an  age  to  recollect  the  early  part  of  the  war, 
or  who  have  attended  to  registers  of  temperature,  the  more 
remarkable  seasons  of  the  present  age:  thus,  in  ITOl-,  the  spring 
was  prematurely  warm  on  the  continent,  as  in  England :  there, 
as  with  us,  the  summer  of  1798  was  dry,  and  that  of  1799  wet : 
again,  in  1811  the  harvest  was  deficient  throughout  the  north- 
west of  Europe  generally,  from  one  and  the  same  cause,  blight ; 
while  that  of  1816  was  still  more  generally  deficient,  from  rain 
and  want  of  warmth.  In  regard  to  a  more  remote  period,  we 
mean  the  17th  and  18th  centuries  generally,  if  the  temperature 
has  not  been  so  accurately  noted,  we  find,  from  the  coincidence 
in  prices,  that  it  is  highly  probable  that  there  prevailed  a  great 
similarity  in  the  weather  of  the  continent;  thus,  in  France,  the 
latter  years  of  the  17th  century,  the  seasons  of  1708  and  1709, 
as  well  as  several  of  the  seasons  between  1764'  and  1773,  were 
as  unpropitious,  and  attended  with  as  great  an  advance  of 
price,  as  in  England."     (Page  149) 