


*  Annals  of  Agriculture,  No.  271.  p.  215. 
t  Malthus,  Political  Economy,  p.  279.     Arthur  Young,  Pro- 
gressive Value  of  Money,  p.  90. 

F 


60  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

and  1775,  of  their  being  fully  fed  in  the  former 
interval,  and  under-fed  in  the  latter. 

There  is,  moreover,  a  further  objection  to  the 
theory  which  supposes  a  direct  and  observable  in- 
fluence of  the  alternations  of  prosperous  or  de- 
clining trade,  on  the  prices  of  provisions,  that  the 
supposed  coincidence  is,  as  will  be  seen,  not  borne 
out  by  facts. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith,  in  the  following  passage,  refers, 
in  my  opinion,  to  the  right  cause.  At  the  same 
time  I  would  observe  upon  this  passage,  that  inas- 
much as  the  ten  or  twelve  bad  seasons  account, 
in  his  opinion,  for  the  range  of  high  prices  without 
inferring  a  diminished  value  of  silv^er,  the  ten  years 
of  extraordinary  plenty,  to  which  he  refers,  might 
be  considered  as  accounting  for  the  low  prices 
without  inferring  as  he  has  done  an  increased  value 
of  silver. 

"  The  high  price  of  corn  during  these  ten  or  twelve  years  past, 
indeed,  has  occasioned  a  suspicion  that  the  real  value  of  silver 
still  continues  to  fall  in  the  European  market.  This  high  price 
of  corn,  however,  seems  evidently  to  have  been  the  effect  of  the 
extraordinary  unfavourableness  of  the  seasons,  and  ought  there- 
fore to  be  regarded  not  as  a  permanent,  but  as  a  transitory  and 
occasional  event.  The  seasons  for  these  ten  or  twelve  years 
past  have  been  unfavourable  through  the  greater  part  of  Europe  ; 
and  the  disorders  of  Poland  have  very  much  increased  the  scarcity 
in  all  those  countries,  which  in  dear  years  used  to  be  supplied 
from  that  market.  So  long  a  course  of  bad  seasons,  though  not 
a  very  common  event,  is  by  no  means  a  singular  one ;  and  who- 
ever has  inquired  much  into  the  history  of  the  prices  of  corn  in 
former  times  will  be  at  no  loss  to  recollect  several  other  exam- 
ples of  the  same  kind.  Ten  years  of  extraordinary  scarcity, 
besides,  are  not  more  wonderful  than  ten  years  of  extraordinary 
plenty.  The  low  price  of  corn  from  IT-il  to  1750,  both  inclu- 
sivej  may  very  well  be  set  in  opposition  to  its  high  price  during 
the  last  eight  or  ten  years."     (Vol.  i.  p.  310.   3d  ed.) 

Of  the  prevalence  of  a  series  of  bad  seasons,  or, 
at  least,  of  the  very  frequent  recurrence  of  them  in 
this  country,  and  in  a  still  greater  degree,  perhaps, 
in  the  rest  of  Europe,  in  the  interval  between 
17^4^  and  177«5,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  Gj 

The  price  rose  considerably  after  the  harvest  of 
I7G4,  viz.  to  44,9.  5d.  at  Michaehnas,  and  49^.  9^. 
at  Lady-day  following.  This  rise  might  be  occa- 
sioned by  a  moderate  degree  of  deficiency,  there 
being,  probably,  little  or  no  surplus  in  consequence 
of  tlie  very  large  exportation,  which,  in  17^4, 
amounted  to  no  less  than  396,857  quarters  of  wheat. 
The  season  of  I766,  and  some  of  the  effects  of  the 
deficient  crops  of  the  harvest  of  that  year,  are  thus 
described  by  Collinson  :  — 