

Spring  Season,  1782.  Spring,  1783. 

Bought  sixty  bushels  of  Sold  out  of  the  product 

Dutch  oats  for  seed,  oats  that  had  lain  a 


78  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

£    s.  d.  £    s.  d. 

delivered  at  home,  per  month  in  the  wet,  and 

bushel     -         -  -  0     1     8        so   damaged    in    the 

stack  by  rain  during 
making  and  carrying 
in  bad  order,  that  they 
moulded  and  grew  to- 
gether, per  bushel  0  3  6 
A  friend  of  mine  sold  Bought   again     clover- 

clover  seed  of  a  good  seed  of  the  same  qua- 

quality  at  the   com-  lity  for  his  own  sow- 

mon     market   price,  ing,  at  per  cwt.         -  5   10    0 

which  was  per  cwt.     1    11     6 
1782.    Bought  Worces-  1784.    Hops  inferior  in 

tershire  hops,  of  ex-  quality  to  the  oppo- 

cellent  quality,  at  per  site,  bought   at  per 

cwt.        -         -         -  2     2    0       cwt.        -         -         -  5  12    0 

The  season  of  1783,  although  not  so  unfavour- 
able as  the  preceding,  seems  not  to  have  been  a 
productive  one.  It  was  followed  by  two  severe 
wmters  ;  and  the  spring  and  ;  ^mmer  of  1784  were 
cold  and  ungenial. 

The  effect  of  so  frequent  a  recurrence  of  winters 
of  great  severity  was  felt  in  a  comparative  scarcity 
and  high  price  of  animal  food  ;  and  this  description 
of  dearth  induced  the  Corporation  of  London,  in 
1786,  to  appoint  a  committee  for  the  purpose  of  in- 
quiring into  the  causes  of  the  high  price  of  pro- 
visions. The  first  resolution  of  the  committee  in  their 
report  is  sagely  couched  in  the  following  terms :  — 

"  Resolved,  That  it  appears  to  your  committee,  from  the  three 
different  papers  mentioned  in  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Montague, 
principal  clerk  in  the  Chamberlain's  office,  and  Mr.  Tomlinson, 
receiver  of  the  tolls  in  Smithfield  market,  containing  an  account 
of  the  number  of  cattle  and  sheep  brought  into  the  said  market 
during  the  last  thirty-six  years,  that  from  the  year  1732  to  1778, 
the  same  had  annually  increased  in  a  very  considerable  degree ; 
and  that  there  has  been  a  greater  increase  from  1V78  to  1783  ; 
but  the  decrease  that  has  happened  during  the  years  1784  and 
1785,  we  are  of  opinion,  from  the  evidence  that  has  been  laid 
before  us,  arises  from  the  pernicious  system  of  forestalling  in  the 
vicinity  of  this  metropolis." 

The  committee  likewise  attacked  the  prevailing 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  79 

tendency  to  new  enclosures,  as  one  of  the  con- 
current causes.  I  should  not  have  noticed  tliis 
strange  document,  but  for  the  following  information 
wliich  the  inquiry  brought  forth.  The  magistrates 
of  Sunderland,  in  answer  to  the  inquiries,  write  — 

"  For  the  last  three  years  we  have  had  two  very  dry  summers, 
and  three  very  severe  winters,  wliich  caused  much  destruction 
among  sheep  and  lambs  in  the  spring,  and  occasioned  a  great 
consumption  of  all  kinds  of  fodder  ;  and  even  great  quantities  of 
oats  were  used  after  hay,  straw,  and  turnips  were  eaten  up." 