

In  the  reign  of  George  I.  -  -  -  -     16 

George  II.  -         -  -  -  226 

And  in  the  first  fifteen  years  of  George  III.,  viz.  from 
1760  to  1775  -  -  -  -  -  734 

The  probability,  therefore,  is  that  the  increased 
extent  of  cultivation  had  nearly,  if  not  quite,  kept 
pace  with  the  increase  of  the  population:  besides 
that  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  improve- 
ments in  the  mode  of  cultivation,  although  not  so 
great  as  those  which  have  been  strikingly  observ- 
able of  late  years,  must  have  been  more  or  less  in 
progress  during  the  above-mentioned  period. 

l^he  whole  interval  from  1765  to  1775,  in  which 
there  was  so  frequent  a  recurrence  of  seasons  of 

*  It  is  probable  that  if  in  the  period  of  dearth  from  1765  to 
1775,  the  practice  had  prevailed  M'hich  was  introduced  twenty 
years  later,  of  making  up  for  deficiency  of  wages  by  parish  al* 
lowance,  the  prices  would  have  been  still  higher. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  73 

scarcity  in  this  country,  was  marked  by  dearths  of 
equal,  if  not  greater  severity,  on  tlie  continent  of 
Europe.  Reference  to  the  inclemency  of  some  of 
the  winters,  and  to  the  cold,  wet,  and  stormy  cha- 
racter of  the  summers,  are  to  be  met  with  in  the 
published  correspondence  of  several  French  writers 
of  that  period.  But  it  will  be  sufficient  for  the 
present  purpose  to  refer  to  the  following  passages 
from  the  "  Annual  Register  :  " — 

"  1767.  The  irregularity  and  inclemency  of  the  seasons  for 
some  years  past  in  different  parts  of  Europe  has  occasioned  an 
uncertainty  and  great  deficiency  in  the  crops  of  several  countries, 
by  which  the  poor  have  suffered  great  distresses.  The  Eccle- 
siastical State,  and  some  other  parts  of  Italy,  have  been  severely 
affected  by  this  calamity.  England,  which  usually  supplied  its 
neighbours  with  such  immense  quantities  of  grain,  and  allowed 
a  considerable  bounty  on  the  exportation  of  it,  has  been  a  suf- 
ferer from  the  same  cause,  and  it  has  required  the  utmost  atten- 
tion of  the  legislature  to  guard  against  and  prevent  the  dreadful 
consequences  attending  it. 

"  1768.  The  badness  of  the  late  harvest  in  France  had  oc- 
casioned provisions  of  all  sorts  to  bear  an  immoderate  price  ; 
and  corn,  in  particular,  was  not  only  very  dear,  but,  in  general, 
very  bad,  and  the  bread,  consequently,  disagreeable  and  un- 
wholesome. The  distresses  of  the  people  were  excessive,  and 
their  complaints  and  murmurings  became  universal.  In  such 
situations,  all  the  world  fancy  themselves  ingenious  in  finding 
out  the  causes  of  public  calamities  ;  and  if  any  novelties  have 
been  introduced,  they  always  come  in  for  a  great  share  of  popu- 
lar odium.  It  was  so  upon  this  occasion ;  and,  without  any  re- 
gard to  the  influence  of  seasons,  or  to  the  will  of  Heaven,  the 
miseries  of  the  people  were  attributed  to  the  edicts  which  the 
king  had  passed  some  time  ago,  for  the  free  importation  and 
exportation  of  corn  in  all  the  ports,  and  an  unlimited  circulation 
of  it  through  all  the  interior  parts  of  the  kingdom. 