

"  London,  Septenaber  25.  1166. 
"  We  have  had  a  most  uncommon  rainy  summer,  which  was 
no  way  propitious  to  the  growth  of  wheat ;  but  it  pleased  Provi- 
dence to  send  us  the  finest  hot  and  dry  harvest  ever  known,  yet 
the  warm  constant  rains  drew  up  the  wheat  so  much  to  stalk, 
that  the  ears  are  very  light.  I  hope  there  will  be  sufficient  to 
support  the  nation,  now  we  have  prudently  stopped  the  export- 
ation ;  for  so  great  are  the  wants,  and  the  demand  for  foreign 
markets  was  so  great  and  so  pressing,  that  it  advanced  the  price 
so  considerably  as  to  occasion  insurrections  in  many  parts  of  the 
kingdom,  to  stop  by  force  the  corn  from  being  exported;  but 
now  a  proclamation  is  come  out  to  prevent  it,  I  hope  all  will  be 
quiet  again." 

The  letters  of  Collinson  are  discontinued  after 
the  winter  of  that  year  ;  but  the  following  details, 
extracted  from  the  Annual  Register,  will,  it  is 
presumed,  afford  sufficient  evidence  of  severe  and 
long-continued  dearths  :  — 

In  1766,  the  quartern  loaf  in  London  was,  at 
one  time,  as  high  as  l.v.  (id.  Addresses  were  sent 
from  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  stating  the 
general  distress  of  the  people.  A  proclamation 
was  issued  in  September  to  suspend  the  exportation, 
and  enforce  the  laws  against  forestallers  and  re- 
graters  ;  and  the  speech  from  the  throne  on  the 
meeting  of  parliament  in  November  of  that  year 
began  in  the  following  terms  :  — 

"  The  high  price  of  wheat,  and  the  defective  produce  of  that 
grain  last  harvest,  together  with  the  extraordinary  demands  for 
the  same  fi-om  foreign  parts,  have  principally  determined  me  to 

F   2 


68 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 


call  you  thus  early  together,  that  I  might  have  the  sense  of  par- 
liament as  soon  as  convenientlj^  might  be,  on  a  matter  so  import- 
ant, and  particularly  affecting  the  poorer  sort  of  my  subjects." 

The  harvest  of  I767  appears  to  have  been  defi- 
cient in  a  still  greater  degree.*  The  price  at 
Michaelmas,  I7G7,  rose  to  58^.  8d. ;  and  although 
the  exportation  was  prohibited  for  another  year,  it 
continued  high  till  the  following  harvest,  which, 
with  that  of  I769,  may  be  inferred  to  have  been  of 
ordinary  produce,  inasmuch  as  the  prices  gradually 
gave  way,  and  in  the  latter  year  got  down  to  4<0s. 
But  although  the  privilege  of  export  under  a 
bounty  was  restored,  the  exportation  was  trifling. 

The  five  years  from  1770  to  1774,  both  years  in- 
cluded, were  attended  with  unproductive  harvests. 
The  dearth  arising  from  them  caused  considerable 
distress,  and  consequent  commotions  among  the 
people,  and  uneasiness  on  the  part  of  government. 
In  the  year  1770,  an  act  passed,  empowering  jus- 
tices, at  the  quarter  sessions,  to  order  returns  of  the 
prices  of  grain  ;  and  the  returns  thus  obtained 
formed  the  materials  for  the  average  prices,  thence- 
forward periodically  published.  The  exportation 
was  again  prohibited  in  that  and  the  following  year.t 