

"  1770.  A  scarcity  of  provisions  prevailed  in  France.  The 
distresses  of  the  people  were  this  year  so  excessive,  that  it  is 
said  4000  persons  perished  by  famine  in  Limousin  and  the 
Marche  onl}'  ;  and  in  Normandy,  the  most  fruitful  province  of 
France,  barley  bread  sold  at  above  2f/.  a  pound.  This  misery 
produced  numberless  riots  and  insurrections  in  different  parts, 
in  which  much  mischief  was  done,  and  many  lives  lost. 

"  Berlin,  April  13.  1771.  The  present  severity  and  extreme 
rigour  of  the  weather  is  so  very  remarkable,  that  the  oldest 
people  here  do  not  remember  to  have  seen  or  heard  the  like ; 
for  it  still  continues  to  freeze  every  night  as  in  the  middle  of 


74"  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

'winter,  and  a  great  quantity  of  snow  lies  on  the  ground,  which 
so  distresses  the  poor  inhabitants  of  the  country,  that  the  most 
melancholy  accounts  are  daily  received  of  the  misery  and 
wretchedness  occasioned  by  this  dreadful  calamity. 

'^  Frankfort,  April  7.  1771.  The  want  of  provisions  is  very 
great,  both  here  and  in  the  circle  of  Swabia.  Our  magistrates 
distribute  bread  to  the  poor  gratis,  and  those  of  Nuremberg  do 
the  same.     In  Bavaria,  bread  is  at  an  excessive  high  price. 

"  1773.  The  dearth  which  has  so  long  afflicted  different  parts 
of  Europe  has  this  year  been  grievously  felt  in  several  coun- 
tries. Germany,  Bohemia,  and  Sweden  have  presented  scenes 
of  the  greatest  calamity,  and  multitudes  have  perished  in  that 
miserable  extremity  of  wanting  the  plainest  and  most  common 
necessaries  of  life.  France,  though  in  a  lesser  degree,  has  been 
a  considerable  sharer  in  this  misfortune  ;  and  the  distresses  of 
the  people  have  occasioned  riots  and  disturbances  in  several  of 
the  provinces.  Nor  has  the  taking  off  of  the  bounty  on  export- 
ation in  England,  with  all  the  other  measures  that  have  been 
adopted  to  answer  the  same  purpose,  been  sufficient  to  remedy 
the  evils  proceeding  from  inclement  skies,  and  unusual  seasons. 

"  1775.  The  distresses  of  the  people,  owing  to  the  scarcity 
and  dearness  of  corn  in  France,  threw  that  kingdom  into  an  un- 
common state  of  disturbance  and  commotion  during  a  great  part 
of  the  spring  and  summer.  Bread  in  several  places  could  not 
be  procured  for  money  ;  and  the  beggars  are  said  to  have  refused 
the  latter,  whilst  they  rent  the  air  with  cries  for  the  former ;  so 
that  gold  was  no  longer  a  security  against  want.  This  distress 
was  the  more  irremediable,  as  other  nations  were  not  abun- 
dantly supplied.  The  scarcity  of  corn  in  England  not  only  cut 
off  that  resource,  but  diverted  a  still  greater  by  the  immense 
quantities  which  it  drew  from  the  American  colonies."  (After 
enumerating  instances  of  violence,  the  account  proceeds.)  "In 
the  mean  time  no  means  were  left  untried  by  the  government, 
either  to  quell  these  disturbances,  or  to  alleviate  their  cause. 
Troops  were  stationed  to  protect  the  markets,  and  the  roads 
and  rivers  by  which  they  were  supplied ;  great  companies  of  the 
burghers  were  armed  for  the  same  purpose.  The  king  granted 
a  considerable  bounty  on  the  importation  of  corn.  The  public 
disorders,  notwithstanding  all  these  measures,  increased  to  so 
alarming  a  degree,  as  at  length  to  excite  apprehensions  of  a  ge- 
neral insurrection,  and  to  make  it  appear  necessary  to  call  in  the 
troops  from  the  frontiers  to  the  centre  of  the  kingdom  ;  so  that 
the  Isle  of  France,  with  some  other  of  the  interior  provinces, 
were,  in  a  manner,  surrounded  and  intersected  with  lines  of 
armed  men.  It  at  length  pleased  Providence  that  a  most  plen- 
tiful liarvest  removed  the  distresses  of  the  people,  both  in  France 
and  most  other  parts  of  Europe." 