

*  Such  was  the  severity  of  the  sufferings  of  the  people  from 
the  dearth  of  provisions,  that  serious  disturbances  broke  out,  and 
prevailed  with  greater  or  less  violence  over  the  greater  part  of  the 
kingdom.  Much  mischief  was  done  ;  and  many  lives  were  lost  in 
different  places.  The  military  were  called  out,  and  the  gaols 
filled  with  prisoners,  for  the  trial  of  whom  a  special  commission 
was  issued. 

The  king  in  his  speech  on  the  meeting  of  parliament  in  No- 
vember, ITSTj  referred  to  the  continued  scarcity  in  the  follow- 
ing terms  :  — 

"  Among  the  objects  of  a  domestic  nature,  none  can  demand 
more  speedy,  or  serious  attention,  than  what  regards  the  high 
price  of  corn,  which  neither  the  salutary  laws  passed  in  the 
last  session  of  parliament,  nor  the  produce  of  the  late  harvest, 
have  been  able  so  far  to  reduce  as  to  give  sufficient  relief  to 
the  distresses  of  the  poorer  sort  of  my  people." 

-}•  "  The  lord  mayor  ordered  the  meal-weighers  to  stick  up  in  a 
conspicuous  place,  in  the  corn-market,  in  Mark  Lane,  the  quan- 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  69 

In  1772,  importation  was  allowed  dnty  free,  to 
the  1st  May,  1773.  In  1773,  the  city  of  London 
offered  a  bounty  of  4.s'.  for  20,000  quarters  of 
wheat,  to  be  imported  between  March  and  June. 

These  were  all  indications  of  scarcity,  and  of 
alarm  arising  from  it,  not  to  be  mistaken. 

Mr.  Arbuthnot,  a  contemporary  writer,  remarked, 
in  1773j  "  that  we  had  had  five  successive  bad  crops, 
and  this  last  more  generally  so  than  any  of  the 
former  ;  that  it  had  been  nearly  the  same  all  over 
Europe ;  and,  therefore,  till  there  was  a  plentiful 
year,  corn  could  not  be  cheap."  He  conceived 
that  no  effectual  measure  could  be  taken  to  prevent 
the  recurrence  of  scarcity  till  this  event  happened, 
and  till  wheat  was  nearly  the  same  price  all  over 
Europe. 

It  is  said  by  this  author,  that  by  accounts  laid 
before  parliament  at  this  time,  the  yearly  produce 
of  wheat  alone  was  calculated  to  be  four  millions 
of  quarters,  which  he  believed  to  be  short  of  the 
reality.  * 

It  was  in  consequence  of  this  state  of  things  that 
the  opponents  of  the  corn  law,  as  it  then  existed, 
succeeded  in  carrying  a  fresh  act  in  1773,  by 
which  importation  was  allowed  at  a  duty  of  6^?.  per 
quarter,  when  the  price  of  wheat  was  at,  or  above, 
48.S'.  per  quarter,  and  the  bounty  and  exportation 
together  were  to  cease  when  the  price  was  at,  or 
above,  44*.  The  importation  and  exportation,  and 
bounty  for  other  grain,  in  their  relative  proportions 
to  wheat. 


titles  and  prices  of  wheat  sold,  and  the  names  of  the  buyers." — 
Comber  on  National  Subsistence,  p.  167. 