

*  Dr.  Chalmers,  in  his  very  elaborate  work  •'  On  Political  Eco- 
nomy, in  connection  with  the  Morals,  State,  and  Prospects  of 
Society,"  1832,  has  done  me  the  honour  of  making  some  remarks 
on  this  part  of  my  argument  contained  in  a  former  work  of  mine. 
After  having  given  it  as  his  opinion  that  a  government  expendi- 
ture defrayed  wholly  by  taxes  would  not  have  the  effect  of  raising 
prices,  except  of  the  articles  taxed,  he  proceeds  to  say,  that  "  Mr. 
Tooke  has  not  fully  adverted  to  the  distinction,  in  point  of  effect, 
between  a  war  expenditure,  that  is  defrayed  wholly  by  taxes,  and 
a  war  expenditure  that  is  defrayed  partly  by  loans."  Dr.  Chal- 
mers agrees  with  me  in  considering  that  "  the  money  which  is  in 
the  hands  of  capitalists  is  as  much  spent  as  would  be  the  same 
money  in  the  hands  of  government ;  and  that,  therefore,  when 
transferred  from  the  one  to  the  other,  there  is  no  greater  demand 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  95 

counterbalanced  by  the  diminished  power  of  indi- 
viduals to  purchase.  A  moment's  consideration, 
however,  will  be  sufficient  to  convince  any  one  that 
there  can  be  no  rise  of  general  prices  in  tliis  case  any 
more  than  in  the  former :  the  money  advanced  to 
government  would,  but  for  such  loan,  have  been  laid 
out  equally  in  purchases,  though  probably  not  of  the 
same  commodities,  or  would  have  been  lent  on  pri- 
vate securities  to  such  persons  as  would  have  laid  it 
out  in  purchases.  It  is  precisely  of  the  nature  of 
money  advanced  by  way  of  mortgage  to  individuals; 
the  lender  would  have,  when  he  had  advanced  the 
money,  just  so  much  less  to  lay  out  as  the  borrower 
had  more.  It  may  be  said  that  the  borrower  might 
spend  it  in  the  maintenance  of  unproductive  labour, 
whereas  the  lender  might  otherwise  have  laid  it  out 
reproductively  :  this  might  or  might  not  be  the  case, 
and  the  difference  might  eventually  aifect  the  quan- 
tum of  production  ;  but  we  have  supposed  the 
aggregate  supply  to  be  undiminished  by  war ;  for 
how  far  it  may  be  calculated  to  diminish  supply  is 
a  separate  question.  All  that  is  now  contended 
for  is,  that  there  cannot,  by  the  mere  loan  to  go- 
vernment, be  any  addition  to  the  total  of  demand  for 
commodities,  whatever  might  be  the  difference  in 
the  relative  proportions  of  them.* 

thereby  created  to  bear  on  the  general  market,  and  so  to  raise 
prices.  But,"  he  adds,  "  it  should  be  considered  that  though 
such  a  transference  gives  rise  to  no  greater  demand,  it  gives  rise 
to  a  less  supply;  and  that  this  will  raise  prices  just  as  effectu- 
ally." It  will  be  seen,  however,  that  I  have  not  neglected  this 
consideration,  but  have  referred  to  it  as  a  distinct  branch  of  the 
argument,  viz.  the  effect  of  war  in  diminishing  or  obstructing 
supply. 