

I  shall  therefore  proceed  to  examine  how  far 
war,  independent  of  taxation,  may  have  contri- 
buted to  the  fluctuation  of  prices. 


90  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 


CHAP.  III. 

EFFECT  OF  THE  EXTRA  DEMAND  OR  CONSUMPTION 
SUPPOSED  TO  ARISE  OUT  OF  A  STATE  OF  WAR  IN 
GENERAL. 

Those  persons  who  consider  the  range  of  high 
prices  which  prevailed  from  1793  to  1814,  as  being 
fully  accounted  for  by  the  war,  independently  of 
its  attendant  taxation,  proceed  on  the  assumed 
operation  of  the  following  causes  :  — 

1.  An  extra  demand  or  consumption  arising  out 
of  a  state  of  war  in  general. 

2.  The  extra  demand  or  consumption  peculiarly 
characterising  the  last  war. 

3.  The  monopoly  of  trade  enjoyed  b}'^  this  coun- 
try.    And, 

4.  The  stimulus  or  excitement  to  increased  po- 
pulation, production,  and  consumption,  occasioned 
by  the  profuse  government  expenditure  during  the 
above  period. 


Section   1. — Extra   Demand   or    Conswmption 
arising  out  of  a  state  of  War  in  general. 

The  reasoning  in  support  of  the  opinion,  that 
the  principal  phenomena  of  high  prices  may  be 
ascribed  to  the  effects  of  war  in  general,  through  the 
medium  of  extra  demand,  independently  of  any 
reference  to  circumstances  affecting  the  supply, 
may  be  stated  in  substance  as  follows  :  — 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  91 

That  the  whole  of  the  government  expenditure 
for  naval  and  military  purposes  may  be  regarded  as 
creating  a  new  source  of  demand  for  the  articles 
constituting  that  expenditure,  and  consequently  as 
tending  to  raise  the  price  of  such  articles. 

That  not  only  the  price  of  those  commodities, 
which  come  directly  under  the  description  of  naval 
and  military  stores,  must  experience  an  advance  in 
consequence  of  the  increased  demand,  but  that 
the  price  of  corn  and  other  necessaries  must  like- 
wise be  affected  in  a  considerable  degree  by  the 
additional  consumption  occasioned  by  the  main- 
tenance of  the  men  composing  the  fleets  and 
armies. 

That  not  only  the  demand  for  seamen  and 
soldiers  must  tend  directly  to  raise  the  rate  of 
wages  of  that  description  of  labourers  from  among 
whom  these  men  are  taken,  and  indirectly  the 
rate  of  wages  generally ;  but  that  the  increased 
demand  for  various  kinds  of  manufactured  articles 
requisite  for  the  equipment  of  fleets  and  armies,  is 
calculated  further  to  raise  the  rate  of  wages ;  and 
that  this  increased  demand  for  labour,  and  the 
consequent  advance  of  wages  in  general,  naturally 
occasion  increased  population  and  increased  con- 
sumption by  the  labouring  classes. 

Thus  the  government  expenditure  in  all  its 
ramifications  is  thought  to  extend  the  sphere  and 
increase  the  activity  of  demand  for  necessaries, 
to  operate  directly  or  indirectly  in  promoting 
briskness  of  circulation,  to  vivify  every  branch  of 
industry,  and  consequently  to  stimulate  exertion  to 
an  increase  of  every  kind  of  production. 