

The  corn  laws  were  inoperative,  or  nearly  so, 
between  1792  and  1815  :  but  the  war  which  pre- 
vailed during  that  interval  operated  most  powerfully 
in  aggravation  of  the  influence  of  the  seasons.  The 
very  great  difference  arising  from  the  effects  of  the 
last  war  on  the  prices  of  corn  will  be  exemplified 
in  the  period  of  high  prices,  which  is  about  to  come 
under  examination.  But  before  proceeding  to  the 
consideration  of  that  period,  it  is  desirable  to  obtain 
a  clear  view  of  the  o-eneral  effects  of  war  on  prices, 
and  of  the  specific  effects  which  may  be  ascribed 
to  the  last  war. 


G  3 


86 


PART  II. 

ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  WAR. 


CHAP.  I. 

GENERAL    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT. 

In  estimating  the  manner  and  degree  in  which  war 
and  transition  from  war  to  peace  may  affect  general 
prices,  two  distinct  questions  arise  :  the  one  is,  how 
far  the  taxes  requisite  to  defray  the  extraordinary 
expenses  attending  a  state  of  war  are  calculated  to 
raise  prices ;  and  the  other  is,  whether  the  prices 
of  commodities  in  general  (including  food  and  ne- 
cessaries), independent  of  the  degree  in  which  they 
may  be  affected  directly  or  indirectly  by  taxation, 
are  liable  to  be  influenced  by  war,  and  in  what 
degree,  through  the  medium  of  supply  and  de- 
mand. 


EFFECT    OF   WAR.  87 


CHAP.  II. 


EFFECTS    OF    TAXATION    ON     THE     FLUCTJJATION     OF 
GENERAL    PRICES. 

The  effects  of  taxation  on  prices  are  liable  to  vary 
according  to  the  mode  in  which  the  taxes  are 
imposed. 

An  income  or  property  tax,  equally  levied  upon 
all  classes,  would  not,  in  any  way  that  I  can  con- 
ceive, tend  to  raise  general  prices. 

Taxes  levied  upon  particular  commodities  have, 
in  general,  the  effect  of  raising  the  price  of  those 
commodities  ;  and  manufactured  articles  must  be 
raised  in  price  in  some  proportion  to  whatever  tax 
may  be  imposed  on  the  raw  materials.  But  it 
does  not  seem  to  be  a  necessary  consequence  of 
taxes  upon  one  set  of  commodities,  that  all  other 
commodities,  although  untaxed,  should  be  raised 
in  price,  while  there  are  strong  grounds  of  pre- 
sumption that,  under  some  circumstances,  there 
might  be  an  opposite  tendency. 

The  conditions  through  which  taxes  upon  one 
set  of  commodities  are  calculated  to  have  an  in- 
direct or  circuitous  effect  in  raising  the  price  of 
untaxed  commodities,  are,  that  the  objects  taxed 
should  be  the  ingredients  or  the  instruments  of 
production  ;  and  that  such  taxes  should  not  apply  • 
generally,  and  nearly  equally,  to  all  productions. 

If  the  taxes  be  laid  on  the  ingredients  or  instru- 
ments of  production  of  some  particular  article  and 
not  of  others,  it  is   clear  that  such   article  must 