

The  cessation,  by  the  peace,  of  all  such  extra 
demand,  the  great  customer  war  being  withdrawn, 
(when  by  the  stimulus  of  previous  high  prices 
there  was  a  general  increase  of  production,)  v/ould 
naturally,  it  is  supposed,  account  for  falling  markets 
and   consequent    distress   among    the    producing 


92  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

classes,  and  for  reduced  wages  and  diminished 
consumption  ;  these  leading,  through  a  long  course 
of  suffering,  to  the  only  remedy,  viz.  a  diminished 
production. 

The  fallacy  of  this  doctrine,  which  represents  a 
general  elevation  of  prices,  both  of  commodities 
and  labour,  to  be  a  necessary  consequence  of  a 
state  of  war,  proceeds  (and  cannot  otherwise  than 
so  proceed)  on  the  supposition  that  the  money 
expended  by  the  government  consists  of  funds 
distinct  from  and  over  and  above  any  that  before 
existed  ;  whereas,  it  is  perfectly  demonstrable,  that 
an  expenditure  by  government,  whether  defrayed 
by  immediate  taxes  to  the  whole  amount,  or  by 
loan  on  the  anticipation  of  taxes  to  be  levied,  is 
nothing  but  a  change  in  the  mode  of  laying  out 
the  same  sum  of  money ;  and  that  what  is  ex- 
pended by  government  would  and  must  have  been 
laid  out  by  individuals  upon  objects  of  consump- 
tion, productive  or  unproductive. 

I  am  here  supposing  that,  both  on  the  part  of 
government  and  on  that  of  individuals,  the  habit  of 
hoarding  to  any  extent  is  out  of  the  question.  If 
government  were  in  the  practice  of  collecting  a 
surplus  *revenue  in  coin  in  time  of  peace,  and  of 
accumulating  it  as  treasure  to  be  expended  on  the 
occurrence  of  a  war,  then  indeed  there  would  be  a 
marked  difference  in  general  prices  on  the  tran- 
sition from  peace  to  war ;  but  even  this  addition  to 
the  circulating  medium  would  be  limited  in  its 
effect  on  prices  to  the  time  within  which  the  trea- 
sure was  in  a  course  of  progressive  outlay,  until  its 
natural  distribution  into  other  countries  was  ef- 
fected. A  similar  effect  would  follow,  if  indi- 
viduals were  in  the  habit  of  hoarding,  and  if,  for 
the  purposes  of  war,  they  were  obliged  to  give  up 
their  hoards  to  the  use  of  government.  These  sup- 
positions, however,  are  quite  foreign  to  the  practice 
of  the  times  which  are  under  consideration. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  93 

But  although,  upon  the  breaking  out  of  a  war, 
there  would  not  and  could  not  be  any  increase  in 
the  sum  total  of  demand  (the  quantum  of  the  cir- 
culating medium  remaining  unaltered),  there  would 
be  a  disturbance  of  the  proportion  of  the  prices  of 
commodities,  relativ^ely  to  each  other,  and  relatively 
also  to  the  price  of  labour.  The  articles  which 
might  suddenly  be  the  objects  of  government  de- 
mand would  rise ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  those 
articles  which  would,  but  for  the  war,  have  been 
purchased  by  individuals,  from  the  fund  which  is 
withdrawn  from  them,  would  experience  an  equi- 
valent fldl  ;  in  general,  on  such  occasions,  the  de- 
mand by  government,  being  sudden  and  on  a  large 
scale,  for  commodities  of  which  the  supply  has  not 
had  time  to  accommodate  itself  to  such  extra  de- 
mand, may  produce  a  considerable  rise  in  the  price 
of  such  commodities  ;  while  the  corresponding  ab- 
straction of  demand  being  spread  over  an  infinitely 
greater  surflice,  would  operate  in  a  manner  that 
might  be  hardly  perceptible,  but  would  not  be  the 
less  real  on  the  sum  of  general  prices. 