

G  4- 


88  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

advance  in  price  as  the  condition  of  continued 
supply ;  without  such  advance  tlie  article  would 
not  yield  a  profit  equal  to  that  derived  from  other 
productions,  and  it  would,  after  some  interval,  cease 
to  be  produced  in  equal  quantity,  till  the  diminished 
supply  should  raise  the  price  in  some  proportion 
to  the  tax. 

But  if  taxes  on  the  instruments  of  production, 
as  on  corn,  or  other  necessaries  of  the  labourer,  or 
on  tlie  materials  composing  machinery  and  the 
implements  of  husbandry,  apply  equally,  or  nearly 
equally,  to  all  branches  of  industry,  they  cannot 
have  the  effect  of  raising  the  price  of  the  produce 
to  which  they  are  applied  ;  for,  provided  the  power 
of  reproducing  in  general  be  not  impaired,  there 
will  be  no  inducement  to  withdraw  capital  from  one 
occupation  and  to  transfer  it  to  another.  An  ad- 
vance of  price  is  not,  under  such  circumstances, 
a  condition  of  continued  supply. 

In  this  country  the  taxes  on  the  necessaries  of 
the  labourer,  and  on  the  instruments  of  production, 
do  not  apply^exclusively  to  agriculture  ;  they  apply, 
at  least  in  an  equal,  and  probably  in  more  than  an 
equal,  degree,  to  other  branches  of  industry  ;  and 
therefore,  according  to  the  principles  here  stated, 
they  are  not  calculated  to  have  the  effect  of  raising 
the  prices  of  agricultural  produce,  nor,  in  general, 
of  raising  the  prices  of  other  articles  that  are  not 
the  immediate  objects  of  taxation. 

It  is  not  my  intention,  at  present,  to  enter  into 
a  detailed  statement  of  the  grounds  for  this  opinion, 
which  would  involve  a  discussion  of  the  principles 
of  taxation ;  a  subject  foreign  to  the  purpose  of 
this  inquiry.  It  is  sufficient  to  remark,  in  general 
terms,  that  if  the  level  of  the  prices  of  articles  not 
taxed,  agircultural  produce,  for  instance,  were 
raised  by  the  taxes  laid  on  other  articles,  it  would 
follow,  that  if  the  whole  amount  of  taxation  levied 
during  a  war  were  continued  in  peace,  there  would. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  89 

as  far  as  taxation  is  concerned,  be  no  fall  of  prices 
in  the  transition  from  war  to  peace. 

As,  therefore,  the  whole  amount  of  taxation 
(including  land-tax,  tithe,  and  poor-rate)  down  to 
the  summer  of  1822,  was  as  great  as  during  the 
war,  with  the  exception  of  the  income  tax,  the  in- 
ference is,  tliatin  as  far  as  untaxed  commodities  and 
labour  were  raised  in  price  by  that  cause,  the  same 
cause,  subsisting  down  to  the  summer  of  1822, 
should  have  prevented  prices  from  falling  to  the 
level  to  which  they  would  otherwise  have  declined. 
And  as  the  controversy  has  mainly  turned  upon  the 
contrast  between  prices  during  the  war  and  since 
the  peace,  till  the  close  of  1822,  the  lowest  point 
having  been  reached  before  any  remission  of  tax- 
ation, the  income  tax  excepted,  we  may  fairly 
exclude  the  operation  of  taxes  from  among  the 
causes  of  the  fluctuations  in  the  prices  of  untaxed 
commodities,  such  as  agricultural  produce,  or  of 
commodities  divested  of  the  taxes  to  which  they 
may  be  liable  on  importation  or  consumption. 