

The  summer  of  1790  was  wet,  and  the  prices 
ranged  high,  so  as  to  induce  a  large  importation, 
the  ports  being  open  at  the  low  duty  of  6d.  per 
quarter.  At  the  close  of  the  year  the  ports  were 
shut  to  importation,  but  opened  again  in  the  spring 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  81 

following,  thus  affording  a  presumption  that  even 
with  the  aid  of  a  considerable  foreign  supply,  the 
produce  of  the  preceding  harvest  had  been  below 
the  consumption. 

The  season  of  1791  is  described  in  the  *'  Annals 
of  Agriculture,"  vol.  xxiv.  p.  321.  as  one  of 
great  abundance.  And  the  produce  of  that  harvest, 
following  a  large  foreign  supply,  had  the  effect  of 
reducing  the  price  to  40.s'.  11^.,  and  thus  of  closing 
the  ports,  which  remained  shut  through  the  fol- 
lowing year.  But  the  low  price  was  productive,  as 
usual,  of  complaint  on  the  part  of  the  landed  in- 
terest, and  was  the  occasion  of  a  fresh  corn  bill.  * 

The  year  1792  is  stated  in  the  "  Annals  of  Agri- 
culture" to  have  been  "  remarkable  for  an  ex- 
tremely wet  summer,  by  which  the  crop  of  wheat 
was  much  injured  every  w'here."  This  inferiority 
of  the  harvest,  which  raised  the  price  at  Mi- 
chaelmas to  53s.  id.,  combined  perhaps  w^ith  ap- 
prehensions on  political  grounds,  induced  the 
government  on  the  9th  of  November,  1792,  to 
issue  an  order  in  council,  prohibiting  exportation 
until  the  following  spring ;  and  subsequently  par- 
liament passed  an  act,  33  Geo.  3.  c.  3.,  authorising 
the  king  in  council  to  prohibit  at  any  time  during 
the  session  the  exportation  of  all  kinds  of  grain, 
and  to  permit  the  importation  at  the  low  duty. 

On  a  review  of  the  eighteen  years  from  177<5  to 
1793,  it  appears  that,  although  not  marked  by  any 
extraordinary  inclemency  of  weather,  or  by  a  con- 
siderable degree  of  scarcity,  as  far  at  least  as 
regards  wheat,  excepting  from  1782  to  I78I',  the 
seasons  were  irregular,  and  that  a  large  proportion 

*  By  31  G.S.  c.  30.  from  15.  November,  the  former  laws  were 
repealed,  and  a  new  one  enacted,  by  which  wheat  was  subject  to 
a  duty  of  245.  Sd.  if  the  price  was  under  50s. ;  "2$.  6d.  at  or 
above  50*.  and  under  54^. ;  6d.  at  or  above  54*. ;  and  a  bount}^  of 
5s.  on  exportation  at  a  price  under  44*.  The  duty  and  bounty 
on  other  grain,  in  the  usual  proportion. 

G 


82  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

of  them  were  attended  with  harvests  of  scanty  pro- 
duce ;  not  scanty  merely  with  reference  to  an  in- 
creasing rate  of  consumption,  but  scanty  relatively 
to  the  average  produce  of  a  given  extent  of  cul- 
tivation. 

If  compared  with  an  equal  number  of  years  in  the 
middle  of  the  century,  for  instance,  from  1730  to 
1748,  the  preponderance  of  unfivourable  seasons 
here  described,  between  1775  and  1793,  is  very 
great ;  there  having  been  in  the  former  series  of 
eighteen  years  only  one  year  of  scarcity,  or  even 
of  any  thing  like  deficient  produce,  while  in  the 
latter  series  there  were  several  of  acknowledged 
deficiency,  namely,  1782,  1783,  and  1784^  1789, 
1790,  and  1792,  besides  others,  which,  by  inference 
from  prices,  and  from  the  sudden  transition  from 
export  to  import,  may  be  considered  to  have  been 
defective.  And  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclu- 
sion, that  if  there  had  been  an  equal  exemption,  not 
only  in  this  country  but  throughout  Europe,  from 
adverse  seasons  in  the  latter,  as  in  the  former 
period,  we  shonld  have  witnessed,  notwithstanding 
the  increase  of  population,  a  much  lower  range  of 
prices,  and  have  continued,  under  the  operation  of 
the  bounty,  to  have  been  an  exporting  country. 
The  contrast  in  that  case  would  have  been  still 
greater  than  it  is  between  the  prices  of  corn  im- 
mediately before,  and  those  subsequent  to  1793. 
As  it  was,  the  irregularity  of  the  seasons,  and  the 
more  frequent  recurrence  of  comparatively  deficient 
crops  in  the  last  35  years  of  the  18th  century,  ap- 
pear to  have  compensated  for  the  lower  range  of  the 
first  65  years,  and  to  have  had  the  effect  of  raising 
the  average  price  of  the  entire  century  to  a  level 
with  the  average  price  of  the  whole  of  the  17th 
century.  The  comparison  of  the  average  prices 
of  wheat  in  the  two  centuries  is  thus  given  by  Ar- 
thur Young  :  — 