

"  It  has  sometimes  been  stated  that  a  loan  occasions,  while 
government  is  spending  it,  a  greater  demand  for  labour  than  it 
would  have  afforded  had  it  continued  in  the  possession  of  indi- 
viduals. I  confess,  however,  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  dis- 
cover any  grounds  for  this  opinion.  If  the  government  expend 
the  loan  in  the  purchase  of  military  stores,  they  will  not  by 
doing  so  give  any  greater  stimulus  to  labour  than  the  capital- 
ists, who  have  made  the  loan,  would  have  given  had  they  em- 
ployed it  to  purchase  raw  or  manufactured  goods  ;  and  suppose 
government  employed  it  in  hiring  soldiers  and  sailors,  they  will 
not  thereby  occasion  a  greater  demand  for  labour  than  would 
have  been  occasioned  by  employing  it  to  hire  common  la- 
bour. That  there  is  frequently  a  very  brisk  demand  for  labour 
during  periods  of  war  is  no  doubt  true ;  but  we  shall  cer- 
tainly find  the  cause  of  it  in  something  else  than  the  mere  sub- 
stitution of  government  employment  for  that  afforded  by  in- 
dividuals."— Principles  of  Political  Economy,  2d  edit.  p.  498. 

H    52 


100  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

pendent  of  the  degree  in  whicli  they  were  taxed  ; 
and  what,  perhaps,  is  the  most  decisive  consider- 
ation of  all  against  the  assumption  of  that  prepon- 
derating influence,  is  that  the  period  of  the  greatest 
cheapness  in  the  whole  term  of  105  years,  viz.  the 
period  between  1740  and  1748*,  is  precisely  that 
of  an  uninterrupted  and  very  large  war  expendi- 
ture, defrayed  chiefly  by  loans. t 


Section  2.  —  Effect  of  the  extra  Demand  or  Con- 
sumption attributed  specialli/  to  the  last  JVar. 

So  far  as  to  the  presumption  of  the  eflPect  of  war 
generally,  in  raising  prices  :  but  it  has  been  asked, 
*'  who,  that  contemplated  the  character  of  the 
late  war,  that  referred  to  the  great  military  force 
which  was  employed  in  Europe,  and  to  the  conse- 
quent demand  of  all  the  great  articles  of  consump- 
tion, could  for  a  moment  think  of  comparing  the 
events  of  that  war,  and  the  state  of  things  growing 
out  of  it,  with  the  events  and  effects  of  former 
wars  ?"t  Now,  the  obvious  answer  is,  that  as  to  this 

*  There  is  in  this  instance  a  specific  cause  of  a  reduction  of 
the  price  in  consequence  of  the  war.  As  we  had  at  that  time  a 
large  exportable  surplus  of  corn,  chiefly  destined  for  France, 
with  which  we  were  at  that  time  at  war,  the  increased  freight  and 
insurance  would,  if  the  demand  from  abroad  were  not  so  urgent 
as  to  compel  the  foreign  buyer  to  pay  those  charges,  fall  on  the 
exporter,  and  consequently  form  a  deduction  from  the  price. 

f  The  government  expenditui'e  arising  from  the  war  of  that 
period  must  be  considered  to  have  been  very  large,  relatively  to 
the  ordinary  peace  establishment,  and  relatively  likewise  to  the 
general  level  of  the  prices  of  commodities  and  labour.  To  con- 
temporaries it  appeared  of  extraordinary  magnitude.  Lord 
Bolingbroke  says,  "  Our  parliamentary  aids,  from  the  year  1740 
exclusively,  to  the  year  174-8  inclusively,  amount  to  55,522,159/. 
16s.  3(/. ;  a  sum  that  will  appear  incredible  to  future  generations, 
and  is  so  almost  to  the  present." — Some  Reflections  on  llwpresent 
State  of  the  Nation,  1749,  edit.  1773,  vol.iv.  p.  137. 