


EFFECT    OF   AVAR.  105 


Section  3.  —  On  the  Effects  of  the  Monopoly  of 
Trade  enjoyed  hy  this  Country  dui'ing  the  last 
War. 

It  has  been  contended  that,  admitting  no  influence 
by  war-demand  upon  prices,  except  of  articles  that 
are  used  as  naval  and  military  stores,  there  was  a 
considerable  effect  produced  on  general  prices  by 
the  monopoly  which  the  war,  as  a  consequence  of 
our  ascendency  at  sea,  and  of  our  exclusive  pos- 
session of  the  East  and  West  Indies,  conferred  on 
the  trade  of  this  country.  As  instances  of  the 
extent  of  the  monopoly  of  trade  which  we  thus 
enjoyed,  we  are  referred  to  the  number  of  British 
vessels,  which  were  progressively  increasing  (and 
employed  at  advanced  freights)  with  the  continu- 
ance of  the  war ;  to  the  crowded  state  of  the  river 
and  of  the  docks  ;  to  the  consequently  full  employ- 
ment of  the  various  branches  of  industry  con- 
nected with  the  building,  repairing,  and  outfit  of 
ships  in  the  port  of  London,  and  in  many  of  the 
outports ;  and,  in  short,  to  all  the  signs  of  great 
commercial  activity. 

A  part  of  this  description  is  true.  Never  before 
was  the  shipping  of  this  country  employed  at 
higher  freights  ;  and  scarcely  a  ship  belonging  to 
any  other  nation  could  sail  without  a  licence  from 
the  government  of  this  country.  The  whole  of 
the  exportable  produce  of  the  East  and  West 
Indies,  and  of  a  great  part  of  South  America, 
came  to  our  ports  ;  and  no  part  of  the  continent  of 
Europe  could  obtain  a  supply  of  coffee,  sugar, 
and  other  colonial  articles,  or  of  the  raw  materials 
of  some  of  their  manufactures,  except  from  this 
country.  So  far  we  may  be  said  to  have  enjoyed 
the  monopoly  of  trade ;  but  the  effects  of  this 
species  of  monopoly,  in  its  supposed  extension  of 


106  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

our  shipping   and  foreign   commerce,   have  been 
o'reatlv  mistaken  and  overrated. 

On  a  reference  to  the  parhamentary  returns,  of 
tlie  tonnage  of  British  shipping,  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  rate  of  increase  of  it  during  the  war  was 
less  than  it  had  been  during  the  immediately  pre- 
ceding years  of  peace,  or  than  it  has  been  since 
the  termination  of  the  war. 

From  the  amount,  however,  of  the  tonnage  re- 
gistered during  the  war,  ought  to  be  deducted  the 
ships  which  were  engaged  as  transports,  and  which 
could  not  therefore  be  considered  as  forming  a 
part  of  our  mercantile  marine.  The  sliipping 
engaged  as  transports  amounted  to  no  less,  on  an 
average  of  the  latter  years  of  the  war,  than  about 
700  sail,  registering  nearly  200,000  tons ;  which, 
deducted  from  the  total  amount  of  registered  ton- 
nage, leaves  a  greatly  reduced  quantity  of  shipping 
appUcable  to  the  purposes  of  trade  during  the  war, 
compared  with  the  subsequent  years  of  peace.  It 
is  to  be  observ^ed,  too,  that  this  smaller  amount  of 
shipping  during  the  war  was,  in  consequence  of 
the  detention  of  convoys  —  circuitous  voyages,  to 
elude  the  anti-commercial  decrees  of  the  enemy  — 
occasional  embargoes,  and  other  causes  of  delay 
even  in  our  own  or  friendly  ports  —  incapable  of 
carrying  on  nearly  so  much  trade  then,  as  it  would 
at  present,  more  especially  since  the  introduction 
of  steam  navigation.  The  difference  hence  aris- 
ing, in  the  number  of  voyages  performed  by  the 
same  ship  in  a  given  time,  will  account  in  some 
degree  for  the  different  proportion  of  the  tonnage 
cleared  outwards,  to  the  amount  of  registered 
tonnage  at  the  several  periods.  The  same  cir- 
cumstance, combined  with  the  advanced  cost  of 
building  materials  and  of  stores,  will  account  for  the 
high  freights  which  prevailed  during  the  war. 