

It  may  be  said  that  this  reduced  employment  of 
British    shipping,    for   commercial   purposes,    was 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  107 

compensated  by  a  greater  employment  of  foreign 
sliips  during  the  war.  True ;  but  does  not  this 
circumstance  militate  with  the  received  ideas  of 
the  nature  of  our  boasted  monopoly  of  trade  ? 
With  regard  to  the  crowded  state  of  the  river  and  of 
the  docks  during  the  war,  it  is  sufficient  to  remark  as 
a  matter  of  notoriety,  that  the  resort  of  shipping  to 
the  port  of  London  has  been  much  greater  since  the 
peace.  And  if  the  building  of  ships  in  the  river  has 
declined,  it  is  because,  in  consequence  of  the  greater 
expenses  attending  the  river  yards,  a  large  proportion 
of  that  branch  of  business  is  transferred  to  the  out- 
ports,  and  not  because  the  annual  amount  of  ship- 
building has  diminished  during  the  peace,  on  a 
comparison  with  the  average  of  the  war,  as  must 
be  evident  from  the  statements  of  the  relative 
amount  of  tonnage  at  the  several  periods.  The 
most  rapid  increase  of  ship-building,  however,  is 
that  which  has  been  going  on  in  British  America, 
in  consequence  of  the  great  cheapness  of  the  ma- 
terials in  that  part  of  the  world.* 

But  what  must  be  conclusive  on  this  and  all 
minor  points  referred  to,  in  proof  of  the  supposed 
effects  of  our  monopoly  of  trade  by  the  w^ar,  is 
that  the  aggregate  amount  of  our  foreign  trade, 
which  can  alone  be  in  question  as  affected  by  the 
monopoly,  was  not  nearly  so  great  during  the  war 
as  it  has  been  since  the  peace ;  and  that  the  rate 
of  increase  was  as  great  in  the  peace  preceding 
1793,  as  in  the  succeeding  interval  of  war. 

One  of  the  effects  of  our  monopoly  of  trade  was  an 
increase  in  the  exports  of  foreign  and  colonial  pro- 

*  Ships  built  in  that  quarter  are,  as  may  easily  be  supposed, 
from  the  nature  of  the  timber,  less  durable,  and  of  an  inferior 
description  in  every  other  respect  to  those  built  in  this  country. 
The  regulation  of  the  timber  duties,  acting  as  a  premium  for 
dry  rot,  and  yielding  in  impolicy  and  injustice  to  our  corn  laws 
only,  is  calculated  greatly  to  increase  the  proportion  of  that  in- 
ferior, and  in  every  way  objectionable,  class  of  shipping. 


lOS  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

diice,the  amountof  which  must  previously  have  swel- 
led the  imports  in  a  corresponding  degree.  In  the 
interval,  however,  between  1807  and  1814,  there 
was  no  corresponding  export  of  the  colonial  pro- 
duce compulsorily  brought  hither  ;  as  it  was  only  in 
1814  that  an  adequate  vent  could  be  found,  on  the 
opening  of  the  ports  of  the  Continent  by  the  peace, 
for  the  accumulation  of  sugar,  coffee,  &;c.  that  had 
taken  place  in  the  preceding  five  years.  The 
value  of  the  colonial  produce  so  accumulated  could 
be  little  short  of  fifteen  milhons  sterling. 