

But,    as   consumption   is   the    measure    of   the 
extent  of  demand t,  and  as    consumption   has  of 


*  The  insignificance  of  the  extra  consumption  or  waste  of 
provisions  by  soldiers  is  expressly  admitted  by  one  of  the  ablest 
advocates  for  the  doctrine  of  the  great  influence  of  a  government 
expenditure  defrayed  by  loans,  on  general  prices.  "  That  part 
of  the  loan  which  is  distributed  in  pay  to  the  troops  is  mostly 
expended  in  provisions  for  their  maintenance.  Probably  a  greater 
quantity  may  be  consumed  by  them  as  soldiers  than  if  they 
continued  in  their  usual  occupation  :  and  this  is  much  dwelt 
upon  by  some  writers  as  the  great  cause  of  extra  consumption 
during  war  ;  but  I  think  more  importance  has  been  attached  to 
this  species  of  waste  than  can  be  justly  ascribed  to  it.'"  —  Ob- 
servations on  the  Effects  produced  by  the  Expenditure  of  Govern- 
ment during  the  Restriction  of  Cash  Payments,  by  William  Blake, 
Esq.  F.K.S.  page  69. 

-j-  This  is  the  sense  in  which  Mr.  Ricardo  uses  the  word  de- 
mand, and  he  expressly  objects  to  admit  the  use  of  the  term  when 
applied  to  a  rise  in  the  price  of  a  commodity  from  an  alteration 
in  the  value  of  money.  "  The  demand  for  a  commodity  cannot 
be  said  to  increase,  if  no  additional  quantity  of  it  be  purchased 
or  consumed  ;  and  yet  under  such  circumstances  its  money  value 
may  rise.  Thus,  if  the  value  of  money  were  to  fall,  the  price  of 
every  commodity  would  rise,  for  each  of  the  competitors  would 
be  willing  to  give  more  money  than  before  on  its  purchase  ;  but 
when  its  price  rose  10  or  20  per  cent.,  if  no  more  were  bought 
than  before,  it  would  not,  I  apprehend,  be  admissible  to  say, 
that  the  variation  in  the  price  of  the  commodity  was  caused  by 
the  increased  demand  for  it."  —  Principles  of  Political  Eco- 
nomy and  Taxation,  3d  edition,  page  46l. 

There  is  another  sense  in  which  the  word  demand  is  fre- 
quently used,  which  is,  in  my  opinion,  inadmissible  in  a  dis- 
cussion of  this  kind  ;  and  that  is,  where  it  is  applied  to  signify 
the  increased  eagerness  or  competition  of  buyers,  and  consequent 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  103 

late  been  considerably  greater,  and  has  increased 
at  a  more  rapid  rate  than  at  any  period  of  the  war, 
it  is  incumbent  on  those  who  ascribe  all  the  pheno- 
mena of  high  prices  of  provisions  to  war-demand, 
to  show  why  the  smaller  consumption  during  the 
war  should  be  the  cause  of  a  rise  of  prices,  while 
the  greatly  increased  consumption  since  the  peace 
should  have  been  attended  by  a  fall  of  prices. 
Considering  the  progressive  increase  of  population, 
with  the  rapid  improvement  of  our  manufactures, 
which  was  going  on  down  to  the  breaking  out  of 
the  war,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that,  but 
for  the  war,  there  would  have  been  a  still  greater 
demand  for  food  and  other  necessaries  than  ac- 
tually occurred ;  and  that  consequently,  supposing 