

*  The  raising  of  the  funds  requisite  for  the  purposes  of  the  war, 
by  loan,  might  be  supposed  to  have  the  effect  of  temporarily 
affecting  the  channels  of  circulation.  The  amount  advanced  to 
government  would  be,  it  may  be  thought,  collected  from  among 
large  sums  of  monied  capital,  seeking  investment,  some  of 
which  might  have  lain  dormant,  w^aiting  to  be  so  called  forth. 
And  if,  w  hen  paid  into  the  Exchequer,  or  into  the  Bank,  it  were 


96  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

In  the  case  of  indirect  taxation,  that  is,  of  taxes 
on  commodities,  whether  for  defraying  the  whole 
expenditure  or  the  mere  interest  of  loans,  the  ar- 
ticles immediately  taxed  must,  as  I  have  already 
admitted,  rise  in  price  in  some  proportion  to  the 
tax :  but  a  rise  in  price  from  this  cause  would  be 
unconnected  with  any  such  increased  demand  af- 
fecting commodities  generally,  as  is  assumed  by 
those  who  consider  that  the  expenditure  of  govern, 
ment  forms  a  fresh  fund,  whether  arising  from 
taxes  or  loans. 

Viewed  therefore  upon  general  grounds,  the 
conclusion  appears  to  be  irresistible,  that  the  extra 
demand  or  consumption  arising  from  government 
expenditure  cannot  have  the  effect  of  raising  the 
aggregate  of  prices  ;  and  this  conclusion  from  ge- 
neral reasoning  is  fully  borne  out  by  a  reference  to 
experience  of  the  effect  of  former  wars  upon 
prices. 

It  is  of  course  to  be  understood  that  articles 
which  are  subject  to  a  tax,  such  as  malt,  or  to  in- 
creased charges  of  importation,  such  as  colonial 
and  foreign  produce,  or  to  extra  demand  for  naval 
and  military  stores,  such  as  saltpetre  and  cordage, 
do  not  come  into  the  comparison  of  general  prices. 


immediately  distributed  in  payments  by  government,  there  might 
be  a  temporary  briskness  of  demand  upon  the  distribution  through 
the  minuter  channels  of  the  circulation  of  sums  which  were  pre- 
viously collected  in  masses.  There  does  not  appear  to  be  much 
ground  for  the  supposition,  that  any  marked  effect  would  be  pro- 
duced in  this  way,  even  admitting  that  it  were  consonant  to  the 
practice,  which  it  is  not.  For,  in  point  of  fact,  the  payments  by 
government  were  made,  not  suddenly,  but  distributed  over  inter- 
vals of  some  length.  And  so  far  from  the  distribution  of  the  sums 
paid  into  the  Bank  by  the  subscribers  to  the  loans  being  imme- 
diate, they  would,  in  some  instances,  have  been  inconveniently 
withheld  from  circulation,  had  it  not  been  that  the  Bank,  with 
a  view  to  avoid  such  inconvenient  contraction,  used  to  make  ad- 
vances to  the  subscribers  for  a  limited  time  for  the  amount  of 
their  subscriptions  after  the  first  payment. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  97 