

But,  grantingtheutmostthat  ever  has  been  claimed 
(upon  very  insufficient  grounds)  for  the  effects  of  the 
monopoly  arising  out  of  the  war,  in  extending  the 
shipping  and  trade  of  this  country,  it  still  remains  to 
connect  the  description  of  monopoly  with  the  high 
prices  ascribed  to  it.  Now  it  so  happens,  that  not 
an  article  which  was  the  subject  of  monopoly  was, 
as  far  as  I  am  aware,  at  a  higher  price  in  this  coun- 
try than  it  would  have  been  under  the  most  free 
competition.  While  that  monopoly  was  most 
strict,  viz.  in  1811  and  1812,  prices  of  sugar, 
coffee,  dye-woods,  spices,  and  some  descriptions  of 
manufacture,  which  were  the  objects  of  our  ex- 
clusive trade,  were  precisely  those  which,  if  a  de- 
duction be  made  for  the  difference  between  paper 
and  gold,  were  more  depressed  than  they  ever 
were  before  or  have  been  since.  And  it  was  only 
in  the  almost  certain  prospect  of  peace ^  and  con- 
sequently of  the  near  termination  of  the  monopoly ■> 
that  the  prices  of  those  commodities  experienced 
any  decided  advance,  viz.  in  1813  and  1814. 

Dr.  Johnson  defines  the  word  "  Monopoly"  as 
"  the  exclusive  privilege  of  selling :"  but,  if  the 
thing  to  be  sold  exists,  and  is  offered  for  sale  in  as 
unlimited  a  quantity  as  it  would  have  been  without 
that  privilege,  what  is  the  use  of  it  to  the  party 
invested  with  it  ?  If,  when  the  French  and  Dutch 
colonies  in  the  East  and  West  Indies  were  ceded 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  109 

to  this  country,  their  produce  had  been  suppressed 
or  destroyed,  and  their  cultivation  prohibited,  then 
indeed  there  would  have  been  something  sub- 
stantial in  our  monopoly,  as  far  at  least  as  related 
to  price ;  and  the  planters,  or  the  proprietors  of 
the  produce  of  our  old  colonies,  would  have  de- 
rived from  that  circumstance  a  decided  benefit. 
Instead  of  which,  by  a  large  outlay  of  British  ca- 
pital, the  French  West  Indian  islands,  and  the 
Dutch  settlements  of  Demerara  and  Surinam  in 
the  West,  and  Java  in  the  East,  were  rendered  more 
productive  than  they  ever  before  had  been.  The 
collective  and  increased  produce  from  all  these 
sources,  when  poured  into  this  country,  while  the 
export  to  the  Continent  was  restricted,  occasioned 
the  real  depression  attending  a  glut ;  the  very  op- 
posite state  to  that  which  is  commonly  supposed 
to  be  the  consequence  of  a  monopoly.  The  very 
high  prices  of  colonial  produce  in  1813  and  1814 
were,  as  I  have  already  shown,  in  great  part  the 
result  of  ill-judged  speculations  on  the  prospect  of 
peace  ;  and  those  prices  were  not  realised  by  the 
exporters  in  the  eventual  returns ;  but  even  sup- 
posing them  to  have  been  realised,  they  were  so 
transitory,  as  not  to  afford  a  compensation  for  the 
long  previous  depression  ;  and  they  cannot  at 
any  rate  be  considered  as  the  result  of  monopoly 
arising  out  of  the  war,  seeing  that  they  were  only  the 
consequence  of  the  opening  of  the  new  markets  by 
a  peace. 