

:j:  Lord  Liverpool's  Speech,  16th  July,  1822. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  101 

particular  effect  of  war  consumption  upon  prices,  it 
is  only  a  question  of  degree,  whatever  the  difference 
of  the  nature  of  the  contest  may  have  been  in  other 
respects ;  and  further,  that,  upon  the  general 
grounds  before  stated,  the  extra  demand  for  such 
objects  by  the  belligerent  powers  must  be  compen- 
sated, and  probably  more  than  compensated,  by 
corresponding  privations  on  the  part  of  their 
subjects. 

With  regard  to  the  alleged  influence  of  war- 
demand  in  raising  the  price  of  provisions,  it  must 
doubtless  be  admitted  as  operating  in  the  imme- 
diate neighbourhood  of  large  armies  in  a  state  of 
active  military  operations ;  for  it  is  scarcely  pos- 
sible that  the  local  supply  can  accommodate  itself, 
except  at  a  great  advance  of  price,  to  so  sudden 
and  casual  a  source  of  extra  demand.  But  apply- 
ing to  this  country  the  supposition  of  extra  demand, 
arising  out  of  a  state  of  war,  it  is  to  be  observed, 
that  the  quantity  of  food  required  for  the  main- 
tenance of  the  soldiers  and  sailors  composing  the 
war  establishment  is  not  all  so  much  beyond  what 
would  otherwise  have  been  consumed.  The  only 
effectual  addition  of  demand  is  for  that  part  which 
is  beyond  w^hat  would  have  been  the  consumption 
of  the  same  individuals  in  their  former  occupa- 
tions *  J  but  from  this  addition,  small  as  it  must 

*  This  additional  consumption  is  hardlj'^  worth  mentioning  ; 
for,  take  it  at  its  utmost  amount,  it  is  a  quantity  quite  insig- 
nificant compared  with  the  difference  between  a  good  and  a  bad 
crop  of  wheat.  —  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  the  extra  con- 
sumption is  four  bushels  of  wheat  per  head  for  each  (an  extra- 
vagant supposition)  of  the  men  composing  the  army  and  navy ; 
suppose  these  to  have  amounted  to  300,000,  there  is  an  extra 
demand  for  150,000  quarters.  While,  between  the  limits  of  a 
bad  harvest  like  1816,  which  has  been  computed  as  low  as 
9,000,000  quarters,  and  an  abundant  one  like  1820,  which 
was  supposed  to  have  yielded  16,000,000,  there  is  a  difference 
of  supply  of  7?000,000  quarters.  And  accordingly  it  is  well 
known,  by  recent  experience,  that  the  most  wasteful  consump- 
tion produces  very  little  impression  on  a  superabundant  crop. 

H    3 


10^  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

be,  compared  with  the  mass  over  which  it  is  dis- 
tributed, is  to  be  deducted  that  proportion  which 
was  suppUed  from  the  places  abroad  where  our 
fleets  and  armies  were  occasionally  stationed.  Sub- 
ject to  these  deductions,  the  mere  extra  quantity 
consumed  by  the  army  and  navy  must,  when  com- 
pared witli  the  total  production,  be  quite  insigni- 
ficant, and  not  calculated  to  have  any  perceptible 
influence  on  the  price  of  the  principal  articles  of 
food.* 