


advance  of  price,  occasioned  by  the  scarcity  of  any  particular 
commodity,  or,  in  other  words,  by  an  under  supply  of  it  relatively 
to  the  average  rate  of  consumption. 

The  object  of  the  present  discussion  is  to  determine  whether 
the  high  prices  during  the  war  were  occasioned  by  an  extra 
consumption  arising  out  of  the  war,  that  is,  by  a  consumption 
beyond  the  average  rate  at  which  it  was  proceeding,  inde- 
pendent of  the  war,  or  by  an  under-supply,  compared  with  that 
average  rate;  it  is,  therefore,  of  the  greatest  practical  importance 
so  to  confine  the  use  of  the  term,  as  to  preserve  the  consideration 
of  the  alternative  of  these  two  causes,  or  of  the  proportion  in 
which  each  operated,  perfectly  distinct.  The  advocates  of  the 
doctrine  of  war-demand  have  not  attended  to  this  distinction;  and 
to  the  neglect  of  it  may  be  traced  a  good  deal  of  the  confusion  and 
looseness  of  reasoning  which  pei'vades  their  arguments  in  sup- 
port of  that  doctrine.  If,  in  their  use  of  the  term,  they  actually 
mean  an  under-supply,  relatively  to  what  had  been,  independent 
of  the  war,  the  average  rate  of  consumption,  there  is  no  difference 
between  us,  as  it  will  be  seen  that  I  admit  the  influence  of  the 
late  war  in  raising  prices,  by  increasing  the  cost  of  production,  and 
by  obstructing  and  diminishing  supply.  But  it  is  evident  from 
the  general  tenor  of  their  reasoning,  however  loosely  expressed, 
that  they  do  not  so  understand  the  term,  and  that  they,  in  fact, 
use  it  synonymously  with  consumption  ;  for  they  constantly 
refer  to  the  war  expenditure  as  having  afforded  the  means  of  an 
extra  consumption.  It  is  in  this  sense,  therefore,  that  I  under- 
stand and  use  the  term,  in  its  application  to  the  question  now 
under  discussion. 

H    4 


104  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

the  scarcity  arising  from  the  seasons,  and  the  ob- 
structions to  importation,  to  have  been  the  same 
in  peace  as  in  war,  we  should  have  had  prices  full 
as  high,  if  not  higher,  less  only  the  difference  be- 
tween paper  and  gold. 

There  are  particular  articles  of  which  the  demand 
for  naval  and  military  purposes  forms  so  large  a 
proportion  to  the  total  supply,  that  no  diminution 
of  consumption  by  individuals  can  keep  pace  with 
the  immediate  increase  of  demand  by  government; 
and,  consequently,  the  breaking  out  of  a  war  tends 
to  raise  the  price  of  such  articles  to  a  great  rela- 
tive height ;  but,  even  of  such  articles,  if  the 
consumption  were  not  on  a  progressive  scale  of 
increase  so  rapid  that  the  supply,  with  all  the  en- 
couragement of  a  relatively  high  price,  could  not 
keep  pace  with  the  demand,  the  tendency  is  (sup- 
posing no  impediment,  natural  or  artificial,  to 
production  or  importation)  to  occasion  such  an 
increase  of  quantity,  as  to  reduce  the  price  to 
nearly  the  same  level  as  that  from  which  it  had  ad- 
vanced. And  accordingly  it  will  be  observed,  by 
reference  to  the  table  of  prices,  that  saltpetre, 
hemp,  iron,  &c.,  after  advancing  very  considerably 
under  the  influence  of  a  greatly  extended  demand 
for  military  and  naval  purposes,  tended  downwards 
again  whenever  that  demand  was  not  progressively 
and  rapidly  increasing.  Any  fluctuation  indepen- 
dent of  variations  in  the  extent  of  government 
demand,  may  be  clearly  traced  to  the  greater  or 
Jess  obstructions  to  supply. 