

As  far,  then,  as  this  difference  goes,  an  allow- 
ance may  be  made  in  deduction,  under  the  cir- 
cumstances supposed,  from  the  excess  of  the 
market  price  above  the  mint  price  of  gold,  as  a 
measure  of  the  depreciation  of  bank  notes  previous 
to  the  passing  of  Peel's  bill.  There  may,  therefore, 
it  is  evident,  be  cases  —  rare  ones  indeed,  and  to 
so  small  an  extent  that  they  may  safely  be  neg- 
lected —  in  which  the  depreciation  of  paper  may 


124  THE    CURRENCY. 

not  be  considered  as  being  exactly  commensurate 
with  the  excess  of  the  market  price  above  the  mint 
price  of  gold.  And  to  this  hmited  extent  is  there 
a  difference  in  estimating  the  depreciation  of  bank 
notes,  according  as  the  standard  is  assumed  to 
have  been  buUion  or  coin.* 

According  to  the  foregoing  explanation  of  the 
term  depreciation,  as  applied  to  coin  or  paper,  it 
is  to  be  distinguished  from  a  diminished  value  of 
the  currency. 

By  alterations  in  the  iialue  of  the  cuiTencij  are  to 
be  understood  variations  of  the  combined  value  of 
bullion  and  coin  and  paper,  or,  in  other  words,  of 
the  standard  as  well  as  of  the  coin  and  paper. 
For  instance,  if,  while  the  market  price  of  gold 
should  be  10  per  cent,  above  the  mint  price,  indi- 
cating a  depreciation  of  the  paper,  or  coin,  or  both, 
to  that  extent,  gold,  or,  in  other  words,  the  stand- 
ard itself,  should,  from  a  great  diminution  of  the 
produce  of  the  mines,  or  from  extended  functions, 
(as  for  military  purposes  or  hoarding,  or  for  a 
circulation  retarded  by  want  of  confidence  and 
credit,  or  for  a  very  general  substitution  of  gold 
for  paper,)  become  more  valuable  by  10  per 
cent.,  then  although  the  currency  would,  according 
to  the  definition,  be  depreciated  to  that  extent,  i.  e. 
be  less  in  price  than  it  ought  legally  to  be,  yet, 

*  But  it  was  not  a  difterence  to  this  limited  extent  that  was 
involved  in  the  controversy  between  the  Bullion  Committee  of 
1810  and  their  opponents,  upon  the  question  whether  coin  or 
bullion  should  be  assumed  as  the  standard  by  which  the  value 
of  bank  notes  was  to  be  measured.  It  was  distinctly  on  the 
ground,  and  on  the  ground  only,  that  coin  and  not  bullion  was 
the  standard  of  the  paper,  and  that  bank  notes  were  applicable 
to  all  purposes  to  which  coin  was  laivftdly  applicable,  that 
Mr.  Vansittart,  in  May,  1811,  brought  forward,  and  prevailed 
on  the  House  of  Commons  to  pass,  his  resolution  of  unhappy 
celebrity,  declaring,  "that  the  promissory  notes  of  the  Bank  of 
England  had  hitherto  been,  and  are  now  held,  in  public  estima- 
tion to  be  equivalent  to  the  legal  coin  of  the  realm,  and  generally 
accepted  as  such,  in  all  pecuniary  transactions  to  which  such 
coin  is  lawfully  applicable." 