

1.  Increased  activity,  industry,  and  intelhgence, 
in  the  mass  of  the  population,  so  that  the  portion 
remaining,  after  the  abstraction  of  labourers  for 
the  purposes  of  war,  may  be  able  and  willing  to 
produce  as  much  as,  or  even  more  than,  was  pre- 
viously produced. 

2.  Increased  disposition  on  the  part  of  indivi- 
duals to  accumulate  capital,  so  as  to  compensate 
for  the  war  expenditure,  without  any  diminution  of 
the  funds  applicable  to  reproduction. 

3.  Improvements  in  agriculture  and  machinery, 
tending  to  increase  reproduction  with  the  same  or 
less  capital  and  labour. 

4.  Greater  security  of  property  relatively  to 
other  countries,  thus  inducing  an  influx  of  capital 
from  abroad. 

All  these  circumstances  concurred  in  this  coun- 
try, during  the  whole  of  the  last  war,  and  the 
consequence  was  an  increase  of  production  and  po- 
pulation in  spite  of  the  opposite  tendency  arising  out 
of  a  state  of  war. 

The  effects,  however,  of  the  preponderating 
tendency  of  circumstances  favourable  to  repro- 
duction, as  far  as  relates  to  agriculture,  were  re- 
pressed, or,  at  least,  prevented  from  receiving  their 
full  development,  by  a  course  of  seasons  which 
were,  as  will  be  seen,  more  than  usually  unpropi- 
tious. 

Although  the  war  cannot  be  said  to  have  oper- 
ated upon  the  supply  of  agricultural  produce  of 
our  own  growtli  and  of  other  native  commodities, 
sufficiently  to  outweigh  the  circumstances  favour- 
able to  reproduction,  it  operated  most  powerfully 
in  increasing  the  cost  of  production,  and  in  ob- 
structing the  supply  of  such  commodities  as  we 
stood  in  need  of  from  abroad.  It  is  therefore  to 
war  chiefly  as  affecting  the  cost  of  production  and 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  117 

diminishing  the  supply,  by  obstructions  to  import- 
ation, at  a  time  when  (as  it  will  appear  hereafter), 
by  a  succession  of  unfavourable  seasons,  our  own 
produce  became  inadequate  to  the  average  con- 
sumption, that  any  considerable  proportion  of  the 
range  of  high  prices  is  to  be  attributed.  It  is,  in 
fact,  only  with  reference  to  the  nature  and  degree 
of  the  impediments  to  commercial  communica- 
tions, tliat  the  last  war,  as  fur  as  relates  to  prices, 
is  to  be  distinguished  from  former  wars  —  coincid- 
ing as  it  did  with  a  succession  of  seasons  which 
made  us  dependent  on  other  countries  for  an  ade- 
quate supply  of  food. 

Gigantic  and  terrific  as  that  contest  was,  of 
which  it  has  been  truly  said,  tliat  '*  compared  with 
that  crisis,  there  was  nothing  similar,  unless  it 
were  that  sera  at  which  the  irruption  of  the  Bar- 
barians subverted  the  Roman  empire,"  the  effect 
of  it  upon  prices  would  have  been  very  different, 
if,  allowing  the  same  scale  of  military  and  naval 
operations,  and  consequently  of  war  expenditure, 
it  had  been  divested  of  its  anti-commercial  charac- 
ter ;  or  if,  possessing  its  anti-commercial  charac- 
ter, it  liad  not  occurred  contemporaneously  with 
years  of  scarcity  in  this  country,  approaching  in 
some  instances  to  famine. 