


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  Ill 

production,  and  consumption  ;  and  that  the  trans- 
ition from  war  to  peace  occasioned  tlie  fall  of 
prices,  not  by  an  increased  supply  and  diminished 
cost  of  production  since  the  peace,  relatively  to  the 
same  or  an  increased  rate  of  consumption,  but 
but  by  a  diminution  of  demand  or  consumption, 
relatively  to  the  same  or  a  diminished  extent  of 
supply. 

Some  distinguished  writers,  too,  have  supposed 
that  the  greater  part  of  the  period  of  the  war  was 
marked  by  an  active  and  flourishing  state  of  our  ma- 
nufactures, and  that  this  was  a  cause  of  an  increased 
demand  for,  and  price  oi",  agricultural  produce. 
Thus,  in  the  article  before  quoted  of  the  Quar- 
terly Review,  No.  57.,  ascribed  to  the  pen  of  an 
eminent  writer,  is  the  following  passage:  —  "  It  is 
undeniable,  that  during  the  greater  part  of  that 
period  (from  1793  to  1814)  the  trade  of  the 
country  was  in  a  state  of  unexampled  prosperity." 
And  Sir  Edward  West,  in  his  very  able  treatise 
on  the  price  of  corn  and  the  wages  of  labour, 
builds  the  greater  part  of  his  theory  on  this  found- 
ation. 

It  may  be  observed,  however,  that  the  principal 
arguments  in  favour  of  this  theory  were  brought 
forward  in  publications  and  speeches  of  some  years 
back,  when  the  transition  from  war  to  peace  was 
comparatively  recent,  and  when  many  otherwise 
well  informed  persons  entertained  the  belief  that 
there  was  a  retarded  rate  of  population,  and  less  con- 
sumed, and  less  produced,  and  less  trade,  after  the 
peace,  than  there  had  been  during  the  war.  The  as- 
sumption to  this  effect  is  essential  to  the  theory  of 
the  stimulus  of  war-demand ;  the  stimulus  being 
"distinctly  inferred  from  the  assumed  increase  of 
population,  production,  and  consumption  during 
the  war,  as  compared  with  the  period  which  had 
elapsed  after  the  peace  ;  and  if  the  facts  tallied  with 
the  theory,  the  conclusion  would  be  inevitable. 


11^  EFFECT    OF    WAR, 

that  the  state  of  war  was  more  favourable  than  the 
state  of  peace  to  the  progress  of  population  and 
wealth.  A  hypothesis  so  utterly  irreconcileable 
with  any  reasoning  upon  the  general  effects  of 
war,  or  with  any  experience  of  the  effects  of 
former  wars,  might  naturally  raise  doubts,  whether 
it  was  possible  that  it  could  be  sustained  by  facts. 
But  whatever  question  there  might  be  when  those 
theories  were  broached,  and  in  some  degree  of 
vogue,  the  statistical  information  since  collected, 
has  proved  incontestibly,  that  there  is  not  the 
shadow  of  a  foundation  in  fact,  for  the  assumptions 
on  which  the  theory  proceeds.  To  enter  into  a 
detailed  proof  to  this  effect  would  be  at  present 
a  work  of  superogation,  and  would  needlessly  swell 
this  branch  of  the  subject  to  a  disproportionate 
extent ;  inasmuch  as  an  easy  reference  may  be 
had  to  indisputable  evidence*  of  the  progress  of 
population,  production,  and  consumption,  by  which 
it  appears  that  these  were  in  a  greatly  accelerated 
ratio  from  1814  to  the  present  time,  as  compared 
with  the  long  interval  of  war. 