

*  As  the  principle  of  limitation  here  alluded  to,  through 
which  alone  a  selgnorage  can  be  compatible  with  the  main- 
tenance of  the  full  nominal  value  of  the  coin  to  which  it  is  ap- 
plied, may  not  be  quite  familiar  to  all  my  readers,  I  subjoin  a 
short  explanation  of  It  from  a  paper  which  I  delivered  In  to 
the  Lords'  Committee  on  the  resumption  of  cash  payments  in 
1819.  (See  Appendix  to  the  Report,  p.  181.) 

"  Selgnorage  Is  synonymous  with  debasement,  unless  con- 
nected with  a  principle  of  limitation. 

"  The  rationale  of  this  principle  may  be  thus  illustrated. 
Suppose  the  circulation  of  the  whole  countVy  to  be  confined  to 
gold,  and  to  consist  of  twenty  millions  of  sovereigns  of  the 
present  weight  and  standard ;  If,  by  some  sudden  process, 
each  piece  were  reduced  by  one  twentieth,  or  five  per  cent., 
but  the  whole  number  of  pieces  strictly  confined  to  the  same 
amount  of  twenty  millions ;  then,  other  circumstances  being  the 
same,  the  relation  of  commodities,  <S:c.,  to  the  numerical  amount 
of  coin  being  undisturbed,  there  would  not,  it  is  evident,  be 
any  disturbance  of  prices ;  and  if  gold  bullion  in  the  market 
was  previously  at  3l.  lis.  lO^d.  per  ounce,  it  would,  other 
things  remaining  the  same,  continue  at  that  price  ;  or,  in  other 
words,  46/.  14s.  6d.  in  gold  coin,  weighing  nineteen-twentleths 
of  a  pound,  would  purchase  in  the  market  a  whole  pound  of 
uncoined  gold  of  the  same  standard. 

"  But  if  the  quantity  of  gold  thus  abstracted  from  each  piece 
were  coined  into  one  million  of  additional  pieces,  and  reissued 
into  circulation,  the  twenty-one  millions  would  then  exchange 
for  no  more  than  the  former  twenty  millions ;  all  commodities 
would  rise  5  per  cent.,  and  among  them  gold  bullion,  which 
would  then  be  at  4/.  \s.  9\d.  ;  or.  In  other  words,  46/.  14.9.  Qd. 
in  coin  would  only  purchase  nineteen-twentleths  of  a  pound  of 
uncoined  gold. 

"  This  is  the  keystone  to  all  reasoning  on  the  subject  of  cur- 
rency, and  the  application  of  It  is  clear  enough  as  to  the  power 
of  a  state,  by  the  monopoly  of  issue,  to  raise  the  nominal,  com- 
pared with  the  intrinsic,  value  of  the  coin  in  a  currency  wholly 
metallic.  The  only  limit  to  the  extent  of  this  power  is  the  in- 
ducement to  counterfeit  on  the  genuine  metal  ;  and  this  limit  I 
am  Inclined  to  think  Is  much  wider  tlian  is  commonly  imagined. 

"  But  there  is  a  difficulty  in  the  application  of  the  limiting 
principle  to  a  selgnorage  on  the  coin,  as  In  the  case  of  our  gold 
coin,  where  it  circulates  along  with  paper ;  for,  as  has  been 
justly  remarked  by  Mr.  Ilicardo,  on  the  supposition  which  he 
makes  of  a  selgnorage  of  5  per  cent,  on  the  gold  coin,  the  cur- 