

It  will  be  readily  admitted,  that  the  immediate 
and  obvious  tendency  of  a  state  of  war  is  to  ab- 
stract a  portion  of  the  capital  and  labour,  which 
would  otherwise  have  been  employed  in  reproduc- 
tion ;  and  if,  from  the  course  of  military  operations, 
or  from  arbitrary  government  exactions,  an  appre- 
hension should  be  superadded  of  insecurity  of 
property,  there  will  be  a  further  cause  for  dimi- 
nished production  ;  so  that  dearth  and  impoverish- 
ment are  likely  to  be  the  consequences  of  a  state 
of  war  in  a  country  thus  situated.  It  is  probable 
that  circumstances  of  this  knid  operated  in  dimi- 
nishing and  deteriorating  the  cultivation  among 
some  of  the  states  of  the  continent  of  Europe,  in 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  115 

different  periods  of  the  war.  In  the  early  part  of 
the  war,  the  extensive  miUtary  operations  were 
calculated  to  diminish  the  produce  of  the  Nether- 
lands, Germany,  and  Italy ;  and,  at  the  same 
time,  the  political  convulsions  attending  the  re- 
volutionary period  might  affect  the  extent  and 
quality  of  the  cultivation  of  the  land  in  France.  In 
the  subsequent  periods  of  the  war  the  course  of 
military  operations  can  hardly  have  failed  to  di- 
minish the  produce  of  Poland,  Prussia,  Saxony, 
and  Russia,  as  likewise  of  Spain,  Portugal,  and 
Italy.  And  while  causes  like  these  were,  perhaps, 
operating  in  a  diminished  reproduction  in  some  of 
the  countries  alluded  to,  there  were  circumstances 
arising  out  of  the  war,  which,  beyond  all  question, 
added  greatly  to  the  cost  of  production  in  this 
country  ;   these  were  — 

1.  The  increased  rate  of  interest  of  money, 
which,  more  especially  as  regarded  all  outlay  as 
fixed  capital,  formed  an  important  element  in  the 
calculation  of  the  price  at  which  reproduction  could 
be  continued,  or  a  new  production  afforded. 

2.  The  increased  rates  of  freight  and  insurance, 
which  applied  to  the  whole  period  of  the  war,  but 
which  in  the  last  six  years  of  it  amounted  (as  will 
be  seen  when  the  period  comes  under  consider- 
ation) to  an  enormous  charge  on  all  importations 
from  the  continent  of  Europe.  And,  although  the 
greatest  charge  under  this  head  applied  to  our 
foreign  trade,  there  was  also  a  great  increase  of 
freight  and  insurance  attaching  to  our  coasting 
trade,  forming  no  inconsiderable  item  in  the  cost 
of  all  commodities,  the  more  bulky  ones  especially, 
such  as  corn,  coals,  building  materials,  &c.  con- 
veyed coast-wise. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  may  be,  coincidently 
with  a  state  of  war  in  any  particular  country,  cir- 
cumstances arising  from  other  causes  calculated  to 

I  2 


116  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

counterbalance,  and  even  to  outweigh,   the  tend- 
ency in  question :  — 