


122  THE    CURRENCY. 

and  the  difference  will  be  marked  by  an  excess  of 
the  market  price  above  the  mint  price  of  the  metals. 

With  regard  to  the  term  depreciation,  as  ap- 
plied to  paper,  if  bank  promissory  notes  be  issued 
in  a  deteriorated  state  of  the  coinage,  and  be 
really  convertible  on  demand  into  the  coin  in 
which  they  purport  to  be  payable,  they  cannot  be 
said  to  be  depreciated :  the  actual  payment  is 
equal  to  the  promise  to  pay  ;  the  fault  is  in  the 
coinage,  not  in  the  paper.  There  may,  therefore, 
be  a  depreciation  of  tlie  currency  in  which  paper 
circulates,  and  an  increase  of  the  market  price 
above  the  mint  price  of  the  metals,  without  any 
depreciation  chargeable  to  the  paper  :  such  was 
the  state  of  the  currency  in  this  country  imme- 
diately previous  to  the  great  reformation  of  the 
gold  coin  in  1773. 

But  if  the  metallic  part  of  the  currency  be 
really  deteriorated,  and  if  the  paper,  which  pur- 
ports to  be  payable  on  demand  in  that  coin,  be 
not  so  in  fact,  and  cannot  command  as  much  gold 
or  other  commodities  in  this  market  and  in  foreign 
markets,  as  the  same  nominal  amount  in  coin 
would  do,  the  paper  is  depreciated,  and  the  mea- 
sure of  its  depreciation  is  the  difference  of  the 
quantity  of  gold  which  the  coin  and  the  paper  can 
respectively  purchase. 

In  a  perfect  state  of  the  coin,  provided  the  ex- 
portation and  melting  of  it  be  allowed,  there  cannot, 
it  is  evident,  be  an  excess  in  the  market  price  above 
the  mint  price  of  the  metal,  as  measured  in  coin.  It 
is  possible,  in  such  a  case,  that  the  coin  may,  even 


rency,  by  an  abundant  issue  of  bank  notes,  might  be  depreciated 
5  per  cent.,  before  it  would  be  the  interest  of  the  holder  to  de- 
mand coin  for  the  purpose  of  melting  it  into  bullion.  A  remedy 
is  suggested  by  him,  viz.  that  the  holders  of  bank  notes  might 
demand  bullion  and  not  coin  in  exchange  for  them,  at  the  mint 
price  of  3/.  175.  lOhdr 


THE    CUIIRENCY.  123 

without  a  seignorage,  be  more  valuable  than  bullion ; 
but  it  is  hardly  conceivable  that  it  should  be  less 
valuable:  if,  therefore,  in  a  perfect  state  of  the  coin, 
there  be  in  general  circulation  bank  notes  which, 
by  law  or  custom,  pass  current  in  all  transactions ; 
and  if,  under  these  circumstances,  the  market 
price  should  be  above  the  mint  price  of  gold — the 
whole  of  the  difference  would  constitute  the  exact 
measure  of  the  depreciation  of  the  paper. 

Till,  however,  the  act]of  of  1819,  the  gold  coin,  al- 
though not  materially  deteriorated,  could  not  by  law 
be  exported  or  melted  ;  if,  therefore,  there  happened 
to  be  an  extra  demand  for  gold,  for  exportation  or 
for  consumption  in  domestic  manufacture,  the  price 
of  bullion  might  rise  above  the  mint  price  by  the 
amount  of  the  risk  of  the  penalty  on  the  export  or 
melting ;  and  this  difference  might,  for  limited 
periods,  exist  in  a  purely  metallic  currency  consist- 
ing, it  is  true  of  undeteriorated  coin,  but  of  coin 
rendered  less  valuable  by  being  divested  by  law  of 
some  of  the  uses  to  which  it  might  otherwise  be 
applied.  This  difference  has  been  variously  esti- 
mated. In  the  treatise  by  Lord  Liverpool  "  on  the 
Coins  of  the  Realm,"  one  per  cent,  is  considered  as 
the  measure  of  the  risk  of  exporting  coin.  In  the 
evidence,  however,  before  the  Bullion  Committee 
of  1810,  it  was  stated,  that  the  difference  between 
the  value  of  gold  bullion  that  might  be  sworn  off 
for  exportation,  and  that  of  the  gold  produced,  or 
supposed  to  be  produced,  from  our  own  coin, 
amounted  to  between  Ss.  and  4.9.  per  ounce. 