

But  the  extraordinary  nature  of  the  contest  should 
be  more  especially  borne  in  mind,  as  a  caution  against 
drawing  any  inference  from  average  prices  during 
last  war.  The  prices  were  regulated  by  the  increase, 
whicli  was  enormous,  of  the  cost  of  production 
arising  from  the  obstructions  to  commercial  inter- 
course, which  were  peculiar  to  the  last  war,  and 
not,  in  all  human  probability,  likely  ever  again  to 
occur.  To  compare,  therefore,  the  average  prices 
of  the  last  war  with  those  of  any  preceding  or 
succeeding  period,  is  perfectly  illusory  for  the 
purposes  for  which  they  have  usuall}'  been  brought 
forward. 

I  3 


PART  III. 

ON  THE  CURRENCY. 


CHAPTER  I. 

GENERAL    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT. 

At  the  time  when  the  paper  system  was  at  its 
height,  when  there  was  the  greatest  cUfFerence  be- 
tween paper  and  gold,  it  was  confidently  main- 
tained by  the  adv^ocates  of  that  system  (and  these 
then  included  not  only  the  government,  but  the 
great  majority  of  persons,  and  more  especially  of 
the  mercantile  class,  who  took  part  in  the  discus- 
sions on  the  subject),  that  it  was  not  the  paper 
that  was  depreciated  by  abundance,  but  the  gold 
that  had  become  scarce,  and  consequently  that  no 
part  of  the  advance  of  the  price  of  commodities 
was  attributable  to  the  Bank  restriction.  That 
doctrine  seems  now  to  be  generally  abandoned, 
and  to  have  been  replaced  by  one  of  an  exactly 
opposite  description.  An  opinion  has  since  arisen 
and  become  almost  universally  prevalent,  that  a 
depreciation  of  the  currency  was  caused  by  the 
Bank  restriction,  not  merely  to  the  degree  indi- 
cated by  the  rise  of  gold  above  the  Mint  price, 
but  to  a  much  greater,  and  almost  indefinite  extent; 
and  that  the  resumption  of  cash  payments  caused 
an  increase  of  the  value  of  the  currency  greatly 
beyond  the  difference  between  paper  and  gold. 


THE    CURRENCY.  119 

So  much  of  the  discussions,  which  have  arisen 
out  of  these  opposing  views,  has  turned  on  the 
word  depreciation  :  it  has  been  used  in  senses  so 
various,  in  some  being  a  matter  of  mere  definition, 
but  in  no  agreed  acceptation  ;  in  others,  involv- 
ing facts,  or,  rather,  disputed  assumptions  of  facts, 
leading  to  the  most  discordant  conchisions,  that  it 
is  impossible  to  advance  a  step,  having  for  its 
object  an  explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  prices 
during  the  period  under  consideration,  without 
feeling  the  necessity  of  attempting  to  clear  the 
ground  of  this  difficulty,  which  presents  itself  i/i 
limine ;  and  the  follow^ing  explanations  are  offered 
accordingly :  — 

Depreciation  of  mone^,  in  its  most  extensive 
sense,  is  to  be  considered  as  signifying  a  dimi- 
nished ^•alue,  from  increased  quantity  of  money 
indicated  by,  and  commensurate  with,  a  general  rise 
in  the  prices  of  commodities  and  labour.  The  term 
has  not  unfrequently  been  used  to  designate  a  rise 
of  prices  of  some  of  the  leading  articles  of  con- 
sumption, without  reference  to  the  cause  of  the 
rise.  But  this  use  of  it  is  evidently  incorrect,  and 
at  any  rate  is  inconveniently  and  unnecessarily 
ambiguous. 