

If,  then,  an  increased  rate  of  production  and  con- 
sumption be  going  on  at  the  end  of  two  and  twenty 
years  of  peace,  such  an  effect  must  be  referred  to  some 
other  cause  than  the  previous  war  expenditure  ; 
and  some  cause  must  be  found  for  the  fall  of  prices, 
other  than  a  supposed  diminution  of  demand  from 
the  cessation  of  that  expenditure.  What  the  cause 
or  causes  of  the  great  variation  of  prices,  beyond 
the  difference  between  paper  and  gold,  may  have 
been,  is  what  will  be  matter  of  further  examin- 
ation. In  the  mean  time  we  may  safely  dismiss 
a  hypothesis,  which  proceeds  on  the  assumption 

*  See  Tables  of  Revenue,  Population,  &c.  from  the  statistical 
department  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  compiled  under  the  super- 
intendence of  Mr.  Porter  ;  Statistical  Account  of  the  British  Em- 
pire, by  J.  R,  M'Culloch,  Esq. ;  Progress  of  the  Nation  from  the 
l)eginning  of  the  19th  century  to  the  present  time,  1836,  by  G. 
R.  Porter,  Esq. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  113 

of  facts  which  never  had  any  existence,  which 
overlooks  the  most  important  of  the  facts  that  did 
occur,  and  is  utterly  irreconcil cable  with  any  ra- 
tional or  consistent  explanation  of  the  actual  phe- 
nomena. 

The  only  reason,  indeed,  for  having  entered 
into  this  examination,  brief  as  it  is,  of  the  doc- 
trine of  the  stimulus  of  war  demand  is,  that  the 
arguments  in  support  of  it  have  been  advanced  by 
very  distinguished  authorities  ;  and  that  although 
the  grounds  on  which  that  doctrine  has  been 
founded  fail  in  every  part^  there  is  still  a  vague 
but  strong  impression  in  favour  of  it,  by  persons 
who,  seeing  the  extravagance  of  the  ultra  cur- 
rency doctrine,  are  not  aware  of  any  alternative 
but  that  of  the  hypothesis  of  increased  consump- 
tion, to  account  for  the  high  prices  which  prevailed 
during  the  w^ar. 


114  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 


CHAP.  VII. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR,    AS    OBSTRUCTING     SUPPLY,    AND 
INCREASING    THE    COST    OF    PRODUCTION. 

Enough  has  been  said  to  prove  that  war  cannot 
operate  in  raising  general  prices  through  the  me- 
dium of  increased  demand  ;  and  that  there  is  no 
sufficient  ground  for  ascribing  any  effect  in  raising 
general  prices  to  the  monopoly  of  trade,  or  to  the 
increased  excitement  and  activity  which  charac- 
terized the  last  war. 

The  remaining  question  is,  what  effects  are  to 
be  ascribed  to  war  as  regards  supply  ?  And  the 
answer  may  be,  in  general  terms,  that  it  is  the 
tendency  of  war  to  diminish  supply. 

The  mode  in  which  war  may  be  calculated  to 
operate  to  this  effect  is,  1st,  by  a  diminution  of  re- 
production, and  2dly,  by  increased  cost  of  pro- 
duction, and  by  impediments  to  commercial  com- 
munication. 