


Section  4. — Effects  of  the  Stimulus  or  Excite- 
ment supposed  to  have  been  occasioned  hy  the 
Government  Expenditure  during  the  last  War. 

The  advocates  of  the  theory  which  accounts  for 
the  high  prices  observable  during  the  late  war,  by 


110  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

the  excitement  supposed  to  arise  from  the  profuse 
government  expenditure,  assume  implictly  that 
the  operation  of  that  cause  was  distincitly  marked 
by  an  unusually  rapid  increase  of  population*,  of 

*  "  These  peculiarities  (that  is,  of  the  late  war)  were  the  un- 
iisually  rapid  increase  of  the pojmlation,"  &c. —  Quarterly  Review, 
No.  57.  p.  222. 

"  It  may  still  most  safely  be  said,  that  in  no  twenty-two  years 
of  our  history,  of  tvhich  tve  have  authentic  accounts,  has  there  ever 
been  so  rapid  an  increase  of  production  and  consumption,  both  in 
respect  of  quantity  and  value,  as  in  the  twenty -two  years  ending 
with  1814."  —  Ibid.  p.  229. 

"  The  population  increased  with  extraordinary  rapidity,  which 
necessarily  implies  such  a  rise  in  the  money  price  of  labour,  as, 
combined  with  more  general  employment,  and  other  advantages 
in  the  purchase  of  clothing  and  foreign  commodities,  would  enable 
the  labouring  classes  to  bring  up  larger  families  than  before." — 
Ibid.  p.  233. 

"  Examine  the  evidence  of  Alderman  Rothwell,  Mr.  Rous,  and 
various  other  witnesses,  who  all  agree  that  during  the  tvar  there 
were  both  greater  production  and  greater  consumption.''^ —  Ob- 
servations on  the  Effects  of  the  Expenditure  of  Government, 
p.  67. 

"  There  cannot  be  a  doubt  that  during  the  war  more  produce 
was  raised,  and  more  ivorh  doner  —  Ibid.  p.  72. 

"  It  is  to  be  observed,  too,  that  though  in  the  first  instance  the 
demand  might  be  for  the  materials  of  war,  it  tvould  gradually  ex- 
tend to  almost  every  commodity  ordinarily  consumed  by  man."  — 
Ibid.  p.  76. 

"  The  low  prices  ( 1822)  are  not  confined  to  corn  alone:  it  is 
well  known  that  manufactures  are  less  in  quantity,  and  less  in 
price  also."  —  Ibid.  p.  93. 

"  The  exciiement  was  not  confined  to  manufactures.  It  ex- 
tended to  the  producers  of  the  raw  materials  in  every  branch  of 
employment :  the  mines  of  copper,  lead,  tin,  iron,  coals,  were  all 
in  activity."  —  Ibid.  p.  89. 

"  It  appears  to  me,  that  in  whatever  degree  minor  circum- 
stances may  have  co-operated,  the  great  and  mighty  source  of  the 
distresses  felt  by  all  classes  of  producers  has  been  the  transition 
that  took  place  at  the  termination  of  the  war  ;  not  the  transition 
from  war  to  peace,  in  the  usual  acceptation  of  those  terms  ;  not 
the  transition  that  arises  iiom  the  diversion  of  capital  from  one 
employment  to  another  employment ;  not  the  transition  from  the 
waste  occasioned  by  the  extra  consumption  of  troops,  either  at 
home  or  engaged  in  actual  warfare ;  but  the  transition  from  an 
immense,  unremitting,  protracted,  effectual  demand  for  almost 
every  article  of  consumption  to  a  comparative  cessation  of  that 
demand."  —  Ibid.  p.  88. 