


THE    CURRENCY.  125 

the  standard  itself  being  increased  in  value  in  the 
same  degree,  there  would  be  no  alteration  in  the 
value  of  the  currenci).  On  the  other  hand,  if  while 
paper  and  coin  were  depreciated  by  excess  or 
debasement  10  per  cent,  compared  w^ith  iheir 
standard,  and  the  standard  itself  g^o/^/  were,  whether 
from  increased  produce  or  diminished  functions, 
reduced  in  value  likewise  10  per  cent.,  I  shoidd 
say  that  the  alteration  in  the  value  of  the  cur- 
rency generally  was  to  the  extent  of  20  per  cent. 
But  if  the  metal  of  which  the  standard  is  com- 
posed were  assumed  to  be  of  uniform  value,  the 
variations  of  the  value  of  the  currency  would  then, 
and  then  only,  be  measured  by  the  degree  of  con- 
formity of  the  paper  or  coin  to  its  standard. 

Of  variations  in  the  value  of  the  standard  itself 
there  is  no  infallible  criterion.  Variations,  therefore, 
in  the  value  of  the  standard,  if  they  occur,  can  only 
be  inferred  from  variations  of  considerable  extentand 
duration,  in  the  bullion  prices  of  commodities  and 
labour,  in  cases  in  which  these  variations  do  not,  ac- 
cording to  the  widest  induction  of  facts,  admit  of 
being  accounted  for,  by  circumstances  which  may 
have  influenced  the  prices  of  the  commodities  and 
labour  in  question,  independently  of  the  supposi- 
tion of  any  alteration  in  the  quantity  or  rate  of 
circulation  of  the  currency.* 

*  These  definitions  correspond  with  the  sense  in  which  Mr. 
Ricardo  has  used  the  terms  "  depreciation  of  the  currency,"  and 
"  value  of  the  currency  ; "  and  he  fully  and  accurately  defined  and 
illustrated  his  meaning,  in  his  speech  of  the  12th  June,  1822,  on 
a  motion  of  Mr.  Western.  The  following  is  an  extract  from  a 
printed  copy  of  that  speech  :  — 

"  Now  the  whole  difficulty,  in  reference  to  this  part  of  his 
opinions,  was  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  '  depreciation : '  it 
was  quite  evident  that  his  opponents  and  himself  attached  a  dif- 
ferent sense  to  that  word.  Suppose  the  only  currency  in  the 
country  was  a  metallic  one,  and  that,  by  clipping,  it  had  lost  10 
percent,  of  its  weight ;  suppose,  for  instance,  that  the  sovereign 
only  retained  nine  tenths  of  the  metal  which  by  law  it  should 
contain,  and  that,  in  consequence,  gold  bullion,  in  such  a  medium , 


126  THE    CURRENCY. 

These  definitions  and  the  deductions  from  them 
will,  probably,  by  those  whose  opinions  I  am  about 


should  rise  above  its  mint  price,  would  not  the  money  of  the 
country  be  depreciated  ?  He  was  quite  sure  that  his  opponents 
would  admit  the  truth  of  such  an  inference.  It  was  quite  possible 
that,  notwithstanding  this  depreciation,  some  of  those  general 
causes  which  operate  on  the  value  of  gold  bullion,  such  as  war, 
or  the  mines  from  which  gold  is  annually  supplied  becoming  less 
productive,  that  gold  might  be  so  enhanced  in  value  as  to  make 
the  clipped  sovereign  comparatively  of  greater  value  in  the  mar- 
ket than  it  was  before  the  reduction  in  its  weight.  Would  it  not 
then  be  true  that  we  should  possess  a  depreciated  currency, 
although  it  should  be  increased  in  value  ?  The  great  mistake 
committed  on  this  subject  was,  in  confounding  the  words  '  de- 
preciation,' and  '  diminution  in  value.'  With  reference  to  the 
currency,  he  had  said,  and  he  now  repeated  it,  that  the  price  of 
gold  was  the  index  of  the  depreciation  of  the  currency,  not  the  in- 
dex of  the  value  of  the  currency,  and  there  he  had  been  misun- 
derstood. If,  for  instance,  the  standard  of  the  currency  remained 
at  the  same  fixed  value,  and  the  coin  was  depreciated  by  clip- 
ping, or  if  the  paper  money  were  depreciated  by  the  increase  of 
its  quantity  5  per  cent.,  that  fall,  and  no  more,  would  constitute 
the  alteration  in  the  price  of  commodities,  as''afFected  by  the  de- 
preciation of  the  currency.  If  the  metal  gold  (the  standard) 
continued  of  the  same  precise  value,  and  it  was  required  to  re- 
store the  currency,  depreciated  5  per  cent.,  to  par,  it  would  be 
necessary  only  to  raise  its  value  5  per  cent.,  and  no  greater 
than  that  proportionate  fall  could  take  place  in  the  price  of  com- 
modities. In  these  cases  he  had  supposed  gold  always  to  remain 
at  the  same  fixed  value  ;  but  had  he  ever  said  that  there  were  not 
many  causes  which  might  operate  on  the  value  of  gold  as  well  as 
on  the  value  of  all  other  commodities  ?  No,  he  had  not,  but  just 
the  contrary.  No  country  that  used  the  precious  metals  as  a 
standard  was  exempted  from  variations  in  the  prices  of  commo- 
dities, occasioned  by  a  variation  in  the  value  of  their  standard. 
To  such  variations  we  had  been  subject  before  1797,  and  must 
be  subject  to  again,  now  that  we  have  reverted  to  a  metallic 
standard." 