


K 


130 


THE    CURRENCY. 


Section  1.  —  On  the  alleged  Effect  of  the  Bank 
Hesttiction  in  dep7'eciating  the  Value  of  the 
Precious  Metals. 

The  only  ground  that  is  at  all  intelligible  for 
the  opinion  that  the  value  of  gold  was  depreci- 
ated during  and  by  the  restriction,  and  increased 
in  value  subsequently  to  and  by  the  operation  of 
Peel's  bill,  is  that  by  which  it  is  to  be  inferred, 

"  That  the  banishment  of  the  metals,  gold  principally,  from  the 
circulation  of  this  country  during  the  restriction,  and  the  recall 
of  them  for  the  resumption,  affected  in  a  considerable  degree 
the  value  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  commercial  world,  diminish- 
ing their  value  during  the  former,  and  increasing  it  in  the  latter 
period." 

Of  this  theory  it  is  to  be  observed,  in  the  first 
place,  that  the  cause  assigned  is  wholly  inadequate 
to  have  produced  any  considerable  effect  on  bullion 
prices,  supposing  it  to  have  been  uncompensated 
by  circumstances  of  an  opposite  character;  and  in 
the  next  place,  that,  in  point  of  fact,  circumstances 
did  occur  of  a  description  calculated,  at  least,  to 
balance,  if  not  to  outweigh,  the  alleged  effect ;  and 
lastly,  that  the  periods  of  the  highest  prices  on  the 
Continent  do  not  accord  with  those  of  the  greatest 
disengagement  of  the  metals  from  this  country,  or 
the  periods  of  the  lowest  prices  abroad,  with  the 
greatest  influx  of  bullion  into  this  country. 

The  amount  of  gold  coin  circulating  in  this 
country  previously  to  1797»  has  been  variously  es- 
timated. Mr.  Rose,  in  his  speech  on  the  bullion 
question,  in  1811,  entered  into  an  elaborate  state- 
ment, with  a  view  to  prove  that  the  amount  of 
gold  coin  in  circulation,  previous  to  the  Bank  re- 
striction, was  at  least  forty  millions.* 

*  Mr.  Rose,  in  the  speech  here  referred  to,  rested  his  com- 
putation upon  the  returns  of  the  Mint  from  the  great  recoinage 
in  1773  to  1798,  making  an  aggregate  of  the  amount  of  gold 


THE    CURRENCY.  131 

The  first  Lord  Liverpool,  in  his  "  Treatise  on  the 
Coins  of  the  Reahn,"  stated  it  at  thirty  millions.  In 
the  Lords*  Bulhon  Report,  1819,  page  11.,  the 
amount  is  assumed  at  twenty-five  millions.  Mr. 
Whitmore  (Bullion  Report,  1810,  ])age  120.),  and 
Mr.  Harman  (Commons'  Report,  1819,  page  10.), 
computed  that  it  did  not  exceed  twenty  millions  in 
the  three  years  preceding  the  Bank  restriction. 

Upon  this  last  estimate,  the  writer  of  an  able  ar- 
ticle in  the  Supplement  to  the  "  Encyclopedia  Bri- 
tannica,"  under  the  title  of"  Money,"  remarks,  that 
though  it  is  probably  rather  below  the  mark,  there 
are  good  grounds  for  concluding,  that  it  is  the  most 
accurate  of  any  that  have  hitherto  been  framed, 
and  that  it  has  come  as  near  the  truth  as  is  perhaps 
possible  in  such  matters.  Allowing,  therefore,  that 
this  last  sum  is  a  little,  or  only  a  little,  underrated, 
and  that,  consequently,  the  estimate  in  the  Lords* 
Report  is  decidedly  beyond  the  mark,  a  medium 
between  these  will  leave  about  twenty-two  millions 
and  a  half,  as  the  utmost  probable  amount  of  gold 
coin  in  circulation  previous  to  1797* 