


138  THE    CURRENCY. 

out  of  France  about  tlie  same  period.  If  then, 
there  was  no  distinctly  perceptible  increase  of 
the  bullion  prices  of  commodities  between  1790 
and  1791s  notwithstanding  the  addition  of  about 
forty  millions  from  France  to  the  rest  of  Europe, 
the  effect  of  less  than  half  tliat  amount  disengaged 
from  the  circulation  of  this  country  cannot  but 
have  been  most  insignificant.  It  must  there- 
fore be  evident  fi'om  these  considerations  that 
the  utmost  effect  of  the  disengagement  and  re- 
absorption  of  gold  and  silver,  by  the  circulation  of 
this  country,  must  have  been  hardly  perceptible  on 
prices,  supposing  other  things  to  have  remained  the 
same. 

But  other  things  were  ?20^the  same.  For  while, 
as  a  consequence  of  the  Bank  restriction,  about 
twelve  or  fifteen  millions  of  our  coin  may  be  sup- 
posed to  have  gone  abroad,  there  was,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  wars  on  the  Continent,  which  were, 
with  few  intervals,  coincident  with  the  period  re- 
ferred to,  a  great  and  unusual  demand  for  the  pre- 
cious metals.  The  mihtary  chests  and  the  treasuries 
of  the  great  belligerent  powers,  whose  operations 
were  on  so  vast  a  scale,  necessarily  absorbed  a  very 
large  amount  of  specie.  And  it  may  be  a  question 
wliether  a  still  larger  amount  was  not  absorbed  by 
the  very  extensive  practice  of  hoarding  which  pre- 
vailed among  the  inliabitants  of  those  states  of  the 
Continent  which  were  either  the  seat  of  war,  or 
which  had  issued  paper  to  excess.  There  were 
likewise  some  periods  of  the  war,  particularly  the 
hiterval  between  1808  and  1813,  when,  by  the 
violent  anti-commercial  decrees  and  regulations  of 
the  French  government,  there  was  great  difficulty 
and  danger  attending  the  transmission  of  bills  of 
exchange,  and  when,  in  fact,  commercial  oper- 
ations, depending  on  credit,  were  nearly  suspended. 
Such  obstructions  to  circulation  were  equivalent 
to  a  diminution  of  the  quantity  of  money. 


THE    CURRENCY.  139 

So  striking  were  these  circumstances,  both  sepa- 
rately and  collectively  considered,  that  they  were,  by 
the  great  majority  of  those  who  at  that  time  took  a 
part  in  the  discussions  on  this  subject,  appealed  to  as 
very  much  outweighing  the  effect  of  the  quantity  of 
gold  rendered  available  for  the  purposes  of  the  Con- 
tinent, by  the  substitution  of  paper  in  this  country. 
It  was,  as  has  before  been  stated,  the  general 
answer  to  all  charges  against  the  conduct  of  the 
Bank,  in  suffering  the  depreciation  of  its  notes, 
tliat  gold  liad  become  scarce,  and  not  paper  over- 
abundant :  and  it  must  be  admitted,  that  there 
was  ground  for  so  much  of  the  answer  as  went  on 
a  pr'nnd  facie  presum})tion  that  gold  had  become 
somewhat  scarce  relatively  to  a  former  period ; 
or,  that  supposing  the  precious  metals  to  have 
been  otherwise  of  a  aiven  value,  the  obvious  eflfect 
of  the  war,  and  of  the  peculiar  circumstances  attend- 
ing it,  was  to  enhance  their  value.  Accordingly, 
the  Bullion  Report  of  lS10(p.  ^2.),  nearly  at  its 
outset  states  as  follows  : — "  It  will  be  found  by  the 
evidence,  that  the  high  price  of  gold  is  ascribed 
by  most  of  the  witnesses  entirely  to  an  alledged 
scarcity  of  the  article,  arising  out  of  an  unusual 
demand  for  it  upon  the  Continent  of  Europe. 
This  unusual  demand  for  gold  upon  the  Contin- 
ent is  described  by  some  of  them  as  being  chiefly 
for  the  use  of  the  French  armies,  though  increased 
also  by  that  state  of  alarm  and  failure  of  confi- 
dence which  leads  to  the  practice  of  hoarding." 