

In  this  view  of  the  utter  inadequateness  of  the 
quantity  of  gold  disengaged  from,  and  eventually 
restored  into,  the  circulation  of  this  country, 
to  have  produced  any  sensible  impression  on  the 
value  of  bulHon,  I  have  the  concurrence  of  very 
eminent  authorities.  Mr.  Malthus,  in  a  pub- 
lication entitled  "  On  the  Measure  of  Value,'* 
■18'23,  when  referring  to  the  fall  in  the  price  of 
labour,  as  indicating  a  greater  difference  than  that 
between  paper  and  gold,  adds, 

"  This  difference,  of  course,  includes  the  effects  which  have 
been  attributed  to  the  purchases  of  the  Bank,  with  a  view 
to  a  return  to  cash  payments,  the  amount  of  which  separately 
it  is  scarcely  possible  to  calculate  ;  but  I  am  inclined  to  agree 
with  Mr.  Tooke  in  thinking  that  it  is  not  above  one  or  two  per 
cent." 

Mr.  Senior,  in  a  very  luminous  exposition  of 
an  ingenious  theory,  the  object  of  which  is  to 
account  for  some  remarkable  differences  in  the 
quantity  of  silver  awarded  as  the  price  of  labour 
in  different  countries,  has  the  following  passage :  — 

K  4 


136  THE    CURRENCY. 

"  It  is  a  lamentable  proof  of  the  public  ignorance  on  these  sub- 
jects, that  the  general  fall  of  prices,  or,  in  other  words,  the  in- 
creasing difficulty  of  obtaining  the  precious  metals,  of  which  every 
one  is  sensible  should,  by  almost  every  one,  be  attributed  to  some 
causes  of  almost  ridiculous  inadequacy.  It  has  been  attributed 
to  our  return  to  a  metallic  currency,  as  if  the  subtraction  of 
twenty  millions  of  sovereigns,  or  less  than  four  hundred  thousand 
pounds  troy  of  gold,  from  the  ten  millions  of  pounds  troy  of  gold 
bullion  coin,  and  plate,  supposed  to  be  in  use  throughout  the 
world,  that  is,  the  removal  of  one  twenty-fifth  part,  could  sen- 
sibly affect  the  value  of  gold.  It  has  been  attributed  even  to 
the  substitution  of  gold  and  silver  for  the  three  or  four  millions  of 
one-pound  notes  lately  called  in,  as  if  the  value  of  the  two  thou- 
sand millions  sterling  of  gold  and  silver  bullion,  coin  and  plate, 
could  be  materially  afi'ected  by  the  subtraction  of  less  than  one 
five-hundredth  part  of  it."  —  On  the  Cost  of  obtaining  Money. 
1830.  P.  21. 

The  arguments  and  authorities  already  adduced, 
sliow  how  insignificant  this  supposed  influence 
must  have  been  ;  but  an  important  fact  may  here 
be  referred  to,  as  afibrding,  by  analogy,  a  strong 
confirmation  of  that  conclusion.  The  fact  alluded 
to,  as  bearing  upon  the  question  of  the  currency, 
was  first  noticed,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  by  the  late 
Lord  King,  in  a  publication  which,  at  the  time 
when  it  appeared,  deservedly  attracted  great  at- 
tention. 