


THE    CURRENCY.  133 

payments  in  specie,  there  was  a  near  prospect  of  the 
complete  restoration  of  the  value  and  security  of 
paper,  large  sums  of  guineas  were  poured  into  the 
hands  of  the  London  bankers,  by  their  correspond- 
ents in  the  country,  and  by  their  customers  in 
town.  Those  sums  have  been  variously  estimated  : 
but,  upon  the  whole,  it  is  probable  that  an  allow- 
ance of  from  four  to  five  millions  would  be  rather 
within  than  beyond  the  mark. 

The  following  quotation  from  the  evidence  of 
Mr.  Stuckey,  an  eminent  banker  in  Somersetshire, 
given  before  the  Lords*  Committee  of  1819,  will  serve 
as  an  instance  of  the  extent  of  the  practice  of 
hoarding :  — 

"  In  1817,  we  had  a  circulation  of  guineas,  wliich  we  found 
very  inconvenient.  It  cost  us  near  100/.  to  transmit  gold  and  sil- 
ver to  London  in  the  first  six  months  of  the  year  1817.  People 
were  then  in  the  habit  of  coming  to  our  bank  with  guineas,  re- 
questing we  would  give  our  notes  for  them.  I  suppose  they  had 
been  hoarded.  I  brought  up  1000  guineas  in  May,  1817,  and 
taking  them  to  our  London  banker,  they  requested  as  a  favour 
I  would  not  leave  them  ;  they  had  lately  sent  in  so  many  to  the 
Bank  of  England,  that  they  did  not  like  to  trouble  them  any  more. 
Besides,  the  Bank  only  took  those  which  were  quite  full  weight. 
The  result  was,  that  I  took  them  to  a  dealer  in  coin,  and  sold 
them  at  31.  17s.  6d.  per  ounce." 

Among  other  inducements  to  bring  out  hoards  in 
1816,  one  was,  that  light  guineas,  which  had  been 
previously  of  more  value  than  those  of  full  weight, 
from  being  legally  saleable,  were,  in  consequence 
of  the  fall  in  the  market  price  of  gold,  becoming  of 
less  than  the  current  value. 

Mr.  liuskisson  expressed  his  opinion  of  the  ex- 
tent of  the  practice  of  hoarding,  in  the  following- 
passage  of  his  pamphlet  on  the  currency  question, 
in  islo:  — 

"  A  great  quantity  of  gold,  which  is  now  hoarded,  would  also 
make  its  appearance,  if  guineas  were  restored  to  their  use 
and  value  as  currency.  In  this  respect,  the  country  is  in  the 
same  situation  as  it  was  in  King  William's  time,  when  our  me- 
tallic currency  was  so  much  depreciated.  Before  the  determin- 
ation to  restore  that  currency    to  its  standard,  pieces  of  full 

k3 


134i  THE    CURRENCY. 

weight  were  as  scarce  as  guineas  are  now;  but  when  tliat 
determination  was  taken  and  carried  into  effect,  a  great  quantity 
of  good  money  which  had  been  hoarded,  was  brought  back  into 
circulation." 

The  treasure  in  the  coffers  of  the  Bank  during 
the  twelve  years  immediately  following  the  re- 
striction, was  larger,  too,  than  it  had  been  on  the 
average  of  the  five  years  preceding  that  measure.* 