


128  THE  CURRENCY. 


CHAP.   II. 

ARGUMENTS  OF  THOSE  WHO  ASCRIBE  A  GREATER 
EFFECT  TO  THE  BANK  RESTRICTION  THAN  THAT 
INDICATED  BY  THE  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  THE 
MARKET    PRICE    AND    THE    MINT    PRICE    OF    GOLD. 

The  arguments  in  support  of  the  opinion  that  the 
value  of  the  currency  was  depreciated  by  the  Bank 
restriction,  and  enhanced  by  the  resumption  of  cash 
payments,  in  a  much  greater  degree  than  that 
indicated,  at  any  time,  by  the  difference  between 
paper  and  gold,  proceed  upon  the  following 
grounds : — 

1.  That  the  banishment  of  the  metals,  gold  prin- 
cipally, from  the  circulation  of  this  country  during 
the  restriction,  and  the  recall  of  them  for  the  re- 
sumption, affected  in  a  considerable  degree  the 
value  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  commercial  world, 
diminishing  their  value  during  the  former,  and  in- 
creasing it  in  the  latter  period. 

2.  That  the  compulsory  paper  system  established 
by  the  Bank  restriction,  had  the  effect  of  "  height- 
ening "  all  those  expedients  to  which  a  prosperous 
state  of  society  naturally  gives  birth,  for  economis- 
ing the  circulating  medium,  bringing  the  whole  of 
it  into  activity,  and  multiplying  it  virtually  by  the 
substitution  of  credit  for  currency. 

3.  That  the  restriction  was  the  cause  of  exces- 
sive issues  from  the  Bank,  a  fact  which  is  (as- 
sumed to  be)  hardly  open  to  dispute,  and  that, 
if  so,  it  must  be  charged  with  producing  that  ex- 
cessive issue  of  country  paper  also  which  was  an 
invariable  concomitant  of  Bank  of  England  paper. 


THE    CURRENCY.  129 

4.  That  "  the  increase  of  prices  was  progressive 
from  the  year  1797  to  1814,  subject  only  to  such 
fluctuations  as  arise  out  of  the  nature  of  the  re- 
spective commodities  ;"  and  "  that  it  was  not  ac- 
companied by  a  growing*  difference  in  the  value 
of  Bank  paper  and  gold."  "  That  the  constant  and 
invariable  connexion  of  increase  of  price  with  the 
Bank  restriction,  is  a  forcible  proof  of  such  a  re- 
lation as  that  of  cause  and  effect  subsisting  be- 
tween the  two  phenomena  ;  "  and  "  that  the  near 
approach  of  the  termination  of  that  restj'iction  has 
produced  a  fall  of  prices,  greatly  exceeding  the 
difference  between  paper  and  gold  ;  thus  still  fur- 
ther corroborating  that  connexion,  and  proving,  al- 
most demonstratively,  that  the  prices  from  1797  to 
1814  were,  to  a  certain  degree,  artificial ;  and  that 
the  comparison  of  paper  with  gold,  during  that  pe- 
riod, did  not  afford  a  test  of  the  real  amount  of  the 
fall  in  the  value  of  the  currency." 

This  summary  of  the  arguments  in  support  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  indefinite  depreciation  of  the  cur- 
rency caused  by  the  Bank  restriction,  is  extracted 
from  the  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  xviii.,  and  was  re- 
ferred to  in  a  former  ])ublication  of  mine,  entitled 
"  Thoughts  and  Details  on  High  and  Low  Prices," 
as  the  ablest  and  m.ost  compendious  exposition  which 
had  then  appeared  of  that  doctrine.  And  among  the 
numberless  publications  and  speeches  in  which  the 
doctrine  in  question  has  been  since  asserted  and 
maintained,  there  are  none  in  which  the  supposed 
grounds  for  it,  untenable  as  I  consider  them  to  be, 
are  more  fully  and  intelligibly  stated.  These  argu- 
ments, therefore,  as  thus  set  forth,  it  is  now  proposed 
to  examine  under  their  several  heads. 