

"  On  the  supposition  of  the  whole  quantity  of  gold  and  silver 
remaining  the  same,  they  must,  in  a  certain  degree,  be  rendered 
chea})  by  every  increase  of  paper  currency.  But  as  these  me- 
tals are  in  universal  request,  and  circulate  more  generally  than 
any  other  articles  of  commerce,  the  effect  thus  produced  cannot 
be  partial,  but  must  extend  to  all  other  countries  ;  and  it  will, 
therefore,  follow  that  the  actual  reduction  in  the  value  of  gold 
and  silver  which  is  produced  by  tlie  paper  circulation  of  any 
particular  country,  is  in  the  proportion  of  the  amount  of  such 
circulation  to  the  whole  quantity  of  the  precious  metals,  appli- 
cable to  the  purposes  of  coinage  and  commerce  throughout  the 
world.  It  is  probable  that  this  ])roportion  can  never  be  very 
great  ;  and  experience  seems  to  fhow  that  no  considerable  de- 
preciation is  ever  produced  in  this  manner.  Previous  to  the 
revolution  in  France,  the  currency  of  that  extensive  country 
was  carried  on  almost  entirely  in  silver ;  and  the  rapid  emission 
of  assignats,  which  was  the  consequence  of  that  event,  must 
liave  very  suddenly  withdrawn  a  considerable  quantity  of  that 
metal  from  circuliition.       Yet  this  violent  operation  does  n">t 


THE    CURRENCY.  187 

appear  to  liave  produced  any  perceptible  effect  on  prices,  or  even 
on  the  value  of  silver  in  Europe."  —  Thoughts  on  the  Bank  Re- 
stncliou,  180  k 

The  circumstance  alluded  to  by  Lord  King, 
namely,  thc3  total  absence  of  any  observable  effect 
on  bullion  prices,  by  the  large  amount  of  gold  and 
silver  displaced  from  circulation  in  France  as  coin 
by  the  assignats,  in  the  early  part  of  the  revo- 
lution, appears  to  be  quite  decisive  against  the 
hypothesis  of  a  considerable  influence  on  the  value 
of  the  metals,  by  the  quantity  disengaged  from  the 
circulation  of  tins  country.  The  amount  of  coin 
circulating  in  France,  immediately  previous  to  the 
revolution,  has,  by  some  authorities,  been  computed 
at  nearly  a  hundred  millions  sterling  ;  but  according 
to  Peuchet,  whose  estimate  appears  to  be  formed 
upon  the  best  grounds,  the  amount  was  about 
seventy-four  milUons.  Nearly  the  whole  of  this  was 
banished  from  circulation,  when  the  system  of  terror 
was  at  its  height  between  I79O  and  1791^.  It  is 
probable,  that  some  portion  of  the  coin  displaced 
by  the  assignats,  was  retained  in  a  dormant  state  in 
France ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  a  con- 
siderable proportion  must  have  been  brought  away, 
as  being  the  most  portable  and  valuable  descrip- 
tion of  property,  by  the  numerous  emigrants  from 
thence  to  the  other  parts  of  Europe,  and  chiefly 
to  this  country ;  besides  that,  the  export  of  coin 
was  a  necessary  effect  of  the  great  fall  of  the  ex- 
changes of  France  on  other  countries.  Supposing 
that  only  about  one  half  of  the  coin  was  exported 
from  thence,  it  would  amount  to  no  less  than  about 
thirty-six  m.iliions  of  gold  and  silver,  suddenly 
added  to  the  circulation  of  tiie  rest  of  the  world, 
and  in  the  first  instance  to  that  of  the  rest  of  Eu- 
rope. To  this  vast  amount  of  gold  and  silver, 
in  the  shape  of  coin,  must  be  added  a  great 
quantity  of  plate  belonging  both  to  the  cluirches 
and  to  individuals,  which  must  have  found  its  way 