

And,  although  guineas  rarely  appeared  in  circula- 
tion, yet  there  were  cases  of  payment,  for  which 
they  were  reserved  :  Mr.  Rose,  in  his  speech  on  the 
bullion  question,  in  1811,  supposed  although  as  a 
high  estimate,  that  three  millions  might  then  be 
still  in  circulation. 

From  these  considerations  it  should  seem,  that 
a  sum  of  from  twelve  to  fifteen  millions  is  an  ample 
allowance  for  the  quantity  of  gold  which  went  to 
increase  the  mass  of  the  precious  metals  in  the 
rest  of  the  world,  and  which,  so  far  as  it  went, 
must  have  tended,  ccptcris  paribus,  to  diminish 
their  value  in  the  rest  of  the  world. 

In  estimating  what  effect,  other  things  being  the 
same,  the  addition  of  twelve  or  fifteen  millions  to 
the  circulation  of  the  rest  of  the  commercial  world 
might  have  on  general  prices,  or,  in  other  words,  on 
the  value  of  the  precious  metals,  as  compared  with 
corn  and  other  commodities,  it  would  be  requisite 
to  have  some  idea  of  the  total  amount  of  gold  and 
silver  existing  in  the  world  for  the  general  pur- 
poses of  use  and  ornament,  viz.  as  coin,  bullion, 
plate,  and  jewellery.  By  some  authorities  the  total 
amount  has  been  computed  as  high  as  two  thousand 

*  There  cannot  be  a  stronger  ground  of  presumption  that 
the  Bank  had  in  view  the  eventual  resumption  of  cash  payments, 
than  that  which  is  afforded  by  the  large  amount  of  treasure 
in  its  coffers,  on  an  average  of  the  twelve  years  immediately 
following  the  suspension  ;  for  if  it  had  not  been  for  that  view, 
there  could  have  been  no  possible  motive  on  the  part  of  tlie  Di- 
rectors to  forego  the  obtaining  for  their  proprietors  the  interest 
which  would  be  made,  or  saved,  by  selling,  and,  at  any  rate,  by 
not  buying  bullion. 


THE    CURRENCY.  135 

millions.  But  Mr.  Jacob,  in  his  valuable  work 
"  On  the  Production  and  Consumption  of  the 
Precious  Metals,"  computes,  vol.  ii.  p.  347.,  the 
existing  amount  of  coined  and  uncoined  gold 
and  silver  in  Europe  and  America,  and  Asia, 
about  twelve  hundred  millions.  And,  as  in  his 
computations,  he  appears  to  be  disposed  in  no 
case  to  overrate  the  production,  wliile  on  every 
occasion  he  gives  the  utmost  weight  to  the  causes 
of  increased  consumption,  that  amount  may  safely 
be  assumed  as  the  lowest  upon  which  the  quantity 
disengaged,  and  resumed  in  consequence  of  the 
restriction  and  resumption  of  casli  payments  can 
have  operated.  Tliere  is  little  hazard,  therefore, 
in  assuming,  that  the  addition  or  abstraction  of 
from  twelve  to  fifteen  millions,  other  tilings  re- 
maining the  same,  would  make  Uttle  more  than 
1  per  cent.,  and  certainly  not  2  per  cent.,  difference 
in  their  value. 