

coined  of  43,355,119/.  And,  as  he  considered  that  there  hav- 
ing been  in  that  interval  no  temptation  to  send  coin  out  of  the 
kingdom,  or  to  melt  it,  the  price  of  gold  never  having  exceeded 
the  Mint  price  in  that  whole  period  (except  in  a  i'ew  months 
l^d.  an  ounce,  in  1783),  and  was  generally  below  it,  the  coin 
in  circulation  might  be  fairly  estimated  at  40,000,0000/.,  after 
making  a  large  allowance  for  wear.  Sec.  But  he  evidently  under- 
rated the  inducements  to  export  and  to  melting  of  the  coin,  for 
although  the  market  price  of  standard  gold  was  not,  and,  as  the 
paper  was  convertible  and  the  coin  perfect,  could  not  be  for  any 
length  of  time,  much  above  the  Mint  price,  the  exchanges  were, 
for  considerable  intervals  during  the  American  war,  so  much 
below  par,  and  the  price  o'ifoi'eiffn  gold  so  much  above  the  Mint 
price,  as  to  induce  a  considerable  exportation  and  melting 
of  gold,  notwithstanding  the  penalties  attached  to  it.  And 
so  far  from  supposing  that  a  sum  of  about  3^  millions  would 
cover  both  the  exportation  and  the  wear.  Sec.  in  the  long  in- 
terval of  twenty-five  years,  it  must  obviously  be  much  more 
probable, that  not  much  short  of  one  half  of  the  amount  that  had 
been  coined  must  have  disappeared  by  exportation,  melting,  wear, 
and  loss. 

K    2 


132  THE    CURRENCY. 

That  this  estimate  is  not  very  wide  of  the  truth, 
may  be  concluded  from  a  reference  to  the  amount 
of  sovereigns  issued  by  the  Bank  from  May,  1821, 
to  the  end  of  June,  1824.  This  comprises  the  in- 
terval from  the  first  issue  till  tlie  time  when  the  cir- 
culation may  be  considered  to  have  had  as  large 
an  amount  of  gold,  less  the  amount  of  country 
small  notes,  as  it  had  before  1797-  The  amount 
issued  witliin  the  above  interval  was, 

In  sovereigns  and  half-sovereigns,  16,671,030/. 

To  this  add  country  small  notes, 

a  large  estimate         _         .         .  5,500,000 


22,171,030/. 


There  were  considerable  additional  issues  of  sove- 
reigns after  June,  1821  ;  but,  as  the  exchanges 
then  became  adverse,  those  further  issues  were 
probably  exported,  or  replaced  only  those  which 
had  been  exported. 

Assuming  the  amount  to  have  been,  on  the 
grounds  stated,  at  the  utmost  22^:  millions,  there 
is  to  be  deducted  the  quantity  that  was  hoarded 
in  this  country ;  an  amount  that  must  have 
been  probably  much  larger  than  has  commonly 
been  supposed.  There  was  scarcely  an  individual 
of  a  class  above  that  which  is  limited  to  the  means 
of  bare  subsistence,  who  had  not  a  hoard,  greater 
or  less,  of  guineas  that  were  put  by  as  a  provision 
against  the  various  contingencies  whicli  were  con- 
sidered as  endangering  the  value  of  pa])er,  either 
in  degree,  as  by  depreciation,  or  totally,  as  by 
foreign  invasion  or  domestic  convulsion.  And  in 
proof  of  the  existence  of  the  practice  of  hoarding 
to  a  considerable  extent,  it  may  be  sufficient  to  refer 
to  the  fact,  that  between  the  summer  of  1815  and 
that  of  1817,  when  peace  had  been  fully  established, 
and  a  new  gold  coinage  was  about  being  issued, 
and  when,  by  the  notices  from  the  Bank  of  partial 