

*  The  following  notices,  extracted  from  contemporary  ac- 
counts, of  considerable  derangement  of  credit,  in  consequence 
of  a  previous  undue  extension  of  it  among  the  principal  com- 
mercial cities  of  the  Continent  of  Europe,  in  the  course  of  last 
century,  may  be  considered  as  not  altogether  uninteresting  or 
irrelevant  to  the  subject  under  discussion  : — 

"  Letter  from  the  Bankers  at  Hamburgh  to  the  Bankers  at 
Amsterdam." 

"  Hamburgh,  Aug.  4.  1763." 
"  Gentlemen, 
"  This  morning  at  eleven,  when  wc  were  met  to  consider  of 

L  3 


150  THE    CURRENCY. 

The  Bank  of  England,  in  the  regulation  of  its 
issues  of  notes,  which,  during  the  restriction, 
constituted  tlie  basis  of  the  currency,  and  into 
which,  with  the  small  and  diminishing  proportion 


the  methods  to  be  taken  to  assist  the  houses  at  this  place  that 
are  tottering,  we  received  a  fatal  express,  with  the  terrible 
news,  that  you,  the  gentlemen  of  Amsterdam,  would  leave  the 
Neufvilles  to  sink,  by  which  we  were  all  thunderstruck  ;  never 
dreaming  that  so  many  men  in  their  senses  in  your  city  could 
take  such  a  step  — a  step  which  will  infallibly  plunge  all  Europe 
in  an  abyss  of  distress,  if  not  remedied  by  you  whilst  it  is  still 
time.  We  therefore  send  this  circular  and  general  letter  to  you 
by  an  express,  to  exhort  and  conjure  you,  as  soon  as  you  re- 
ceive this,  to  undertake  still  to  support  the  Neufvilles,  by  fur- 
nishing what  money  they  want,  and  giving  them  two  or  three 
persons  of  unquestionable  probity  and  skill,  for  curators,  that 
their  affairs  and  their  engagements  may  be  concluded  and  ter- 
minated, without  causing  a  general  ruin,  which  will  otherwise 
infallibly  happen.  If  you  do  not,  gentlemen,  we  hereby  declare  to 
you,  that  our  resolution  is  taken,  that  is  to  say,  that  although  we 
represent,  a  very  respectable  body  of  rich  and  respectable  men, 
we  have  unanimously  resolved  to  suspend  our  own  payments  as 
long  as  we  shall  judge  it  proper  and  necessary  ;  and  that  we 
will  not  acquit  them,  or  the  counterprotests  that  shall  come 
from  you,  or  any  whatever. 

"This  is  the  resolution  which  we  have  unanimously  taken;  and 
from  which  we  will  not  depart,  happen  what  will.  The  fate  of 
the  general  commerce  of  all  Europe  is  at  present  absolutely  in 
your  hands  ;  determine,  gentlemen,  whether  you  should  crush 
it  totall3^  or  support  it.  You  are  all  too  intelligent  not  to  per- 
ceive, that  by  letting  the  whole  machine  fall  to  pieces,  you  will 
suffer  heavy  losses  in  all  parts,  which  you  may  prevent  to  your- 
selves, and  a  thousand  others,  by  assisting  the  Neufvilles  to  pay 
and  wind  up  their  affairs.  Let  us  have  your  final  resolution 
speedily,  by  express  ;  for  till  that  time  all  will  remain  in  sus- 
pense here,  and  none  of  us  will  pay  one  penny  of  the  bills  we 
have  accepted  till  we  know  what  you  will  do.  Meanwhile,  we 
have  the  honour  to  be,  c'v.'C. 