

Of  the  amount  of  the  country  bank  paper,  it  is 
impossible  to  give  any  accurate  account.  No  ma- 
terials whatever  exist  for  the  computation  of  it  pre- 
vious to  1804,  when  first  a  separation  was  made 
of  the  stamps  for  bankers'  notes  from  those  for 
bills  of  exchange  and  notes  after  date.  In  1804,  dis- 
tinct stamps  were  issued  for  bankers'  notes,  which 
were  not  to  be  re-issued  after  three  years  from  their 
date.  Upon  the  stamps  so  issued,  computations 
have  been  made,  but  they  are  the  most  vague  and 
unsatisfactory  imaginable,  of  the  amount  actually 
in  circulation.  These  wall  occasionally  be  referred 
to  hereafter.  In  the  mieanwhile  it  may  be  re- 
marked of  this  portion  of  the  circulating  medium, 
that,  supposing  it  to  bear  for  local  purposes  a  cer- 
tain due  proportion  to  the  basis  of  the  currency, 
the  deviations  from  this,  its  due  level,  have  been, 
not  only  during,  but  before  and  since  the  restriction, 
very  considerable,  expanding  under  circumstances, 
and  in  a  state  of  opinion,  favouring  a  rise  of  prices, 
and  collapsing  under  the  opposite  circumstances ; 
and  these  expansions  and  contractions  have,  in  the 
majority  of  instances,  not  been  preceded  by  any 
corresponding  variations  of  the  Bank  issues,  al- 
though eventually  tliey  have  come  under  the  limit- 
ation and  control  of  the  Bank  regulation. 


THE    CURRENCY.  149 

The  same,  and  perhaps  in  a  still  greater  degree, 
maybe  said  of  those  other  component  parts  of  the 
circulating  medium,  bills  of  exchange,  and  book 
credits,  to  wliich  alhision  is  made  in  the  passages 
quoted  from  the  review.  The  expansion  and  con- 
traction of  these  and  of  country  bank  notes,  are,  as 
will  be  abundantly  exemplified,  tlie  consequences, 
and  not  the  causes,  of  a  rise  and  fall  of  prices. 

Credit,  in  its  ordinary  and  legitimate  application, 
forms  one  of  the  more  important  means  of  sparing 
the  use  of  the  currency,  as  well  as  of  effecting 
the  best  and  cheapest  distribution  of  capital  and 
revenue  among  the  several  orders  of  the  commu- 
nity. But  it  is  also  a  medium,  which  admits,  during 
short  intervals,  of  expansion,  under  the  influence  of 
the  spirit  of  adventure,  to  an  ahnost  indefinite  ex- 
tent. Some  striking  instances  of  this  expansiveness 
of  the  medium  of  credit  will  be  exhibited  in  the  fol- 
lowing historical  sketch.  But  it  will  be  seen,  that 
the  susceptibility  of  expansion,  and  the  consequent 
liability  to  coliapse,  have  not  been  confined  to  the 
inconvertible  state  of  ourcurrency.  And  a  reference, 
not  only  to  the  state  of  the  currency  in  this  coun- 
try anterior  to  the  Bank  restriction,  but  to  the  cur- 
rencies of  the  continental  states  of  Europe,  in 
which  the  basis  of  the  currency  has  been  purely 
metallic,  will  serve  to  show  that  a  great  abuse  of 
credit  has  not  been  peculiar  to  an  inconvertible 
currency.* 