

'•  Pierre  Corstens,  Albert  Schulte,  Hetling  and 
Ooni,  Venne  C.  Tanni  and  Moller,  Matthiessen 
and  Sillem,  Cornells  Jacob  Berenberg,  Wurmb 
and  Cvidorff,  Vierre  Bouvefils,  P.  Henry 
Trunaner,  J  .F.  Liscke,  Daniel  L.  Strenglin  and 
Co.,  Henry  Kornig."  —  Gentlemcms  Magazine, 
1763. 


THE    CURRENCY.  151 

of  coin,  all  pecuniary  engagements  were,  in  the  last 
resort,  resolvable,  controled  and  limited  the  other 
constituent  elements  of  the  circulating  medium, 
exactly  in  the  same  way  as  a  purely  metallic  basis 
controls  and  limits  the  convertible  paper  and  tlie 
credit  part  of  the  circulation. 

In    the  metallic  currency  of  commercial  com- 
munities,  there   are  expansions  and   contractions 


And  they  seem  to  have  stopped  accordingly,  as  such  appears 
to  be  the  alUision  in  the  following  extract  from  the  Annual  Re- 
gister for  1763:  — 

"Aug.  29.  1763." 

"  There  has  been  lately  at  Amsterdam,  Hambiu'gh,  and  some 
other  of  the  principal  towns  of  Germany,  a  surprising  number  of 
bankruptcies.  They  began  at  Amsterdam  about  the  29.  July, 
by  the  bankruptcy  of  two  brothers  named  Neufville,  who  failed 
for  above  330,000  guineas,  and  a  Jew,  who,  a  few  days  before, 
failed  for  between  30,000  and  40,000/.  This  was  followed  by  a 
stoppage  of  payment  by  no  less  than  eighteen  houses  in  that 
city  ;  and  soon  after  by  a  much  greater  number  at  Hamburgh 
and  other  places,  which  put  a  stop  to  private  credit,  that  no  bu- 
siness was  for  some  time  transacted,  but  for  ready  money.  But 
the  Lombard  houses  at  Amsterdam  and  Hamburgh,  having  sup- 
plied with  large  quantities  of  cash,  such  as  could  give  real  or 
personal  security,  enabled  many,  who  must  otherwise  have 
stopped,  to  stand  the  run. 

Another  recorded  instance  of  great  derangement  of  credit 
occurred  ten  years  later  :  — 

"  The  great  commercial  failures,  which  threw  such  a  damp 
last  year  upon  all  business  in  this  country,  arrived  at  their  ut- 
most extent  about  the  beginning  of  the  present  in  Holland,  and 
were  of  so  alarming  a  nature,  and  so  extensive  in  their  influence, 
as  to  threaten  a  mortal  blow  to  all  public  and  private  credit 
throughout  Europe.  These  failures  were  the  effect  of  an  arti- 
ficial credit,  and  of  great  speculative  dealings  in  trade,  as  well 
as  in  the  public  funds  of  different  countries,  and  though 
attended  with  an  immense  loss  to  individuals,  of  not  less,  perhaps, 
than  ten  millions  sterling,  took  nothing  out  of  the  general  stock, 
neither  money  nor  goods  being  thereby  lessened.  They  would, 
however,  by  lessening  the  value  of  those  commodities,  have 
been  as  pernicious  in  their  effects  as  if  the  loss  had  bean  real, 
and  nothing  but  the  most  judicious  and  timely  remedies  could 
prevent  this  fatal  consequence."  —  Amuial  Register  for  1773, 
vol.  xvi.  p.  ix. 