


14<4i  THE    CURRENCY. 


Section  2.  — Effect  of  the  Bcmk  ReHtriction  on  the 
economised  line  of  Money. 

The  expedients  for  economising  the  use  of  the 
currency,  althougli  they  date  from  a  period  long 
anterior  to  the  Bank  restriction,  and  certainly  had 
their  origin  in  causes  wholly  distinct  from  it,  did 
experience  a  considerable  improvement  about  that 
time.  But  the  economising  practices  which  were 
then  in  progress,  have  not  only  subsisted  in  full 
force  since  the  resumption  of  cash  payments,  but 
have  experienced  further  improvements.  Allowing, 
however,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  the  Bank 
restriction  was  the  cause  of  greater  economy  in  the 
use  of  the  currency,  and  that  this  greater  economy 
was  one  of  the  causes  of  a  diminution  of  the  value  of 
the  currency,  beyond  the  degree  indicated  by  the 
difference  between  paper  and  gold,  how  happens  it 
that,  although  all  the  refined  machinery  of  the  bank- 
ing system  subsists  unimpaired,  and  is  perhaps 
undergoing  further  improvements,  it  has  no  longer 
the  depreciating  eflect  ascribed  to  it?  *  Really,  in 
order  to  have  been  good  for  any  thing  in  the  argu- 
ment which  it  was  brought  forward  to  support,  this 

*  It  was  on  the  ground  of  the  economised  use  of  the  cur- 
rency that  the  Bullion  Committee  of  1810  endeavoured  to  ac- 
count, consistently  with  their  view,  for  the  striking  and  rather 
puzzling  fact  of  the  very  small  numerical  inciease  of  Bank  notes 
to  which  they  ascribed  such  depreciating  effects.  Their  infer- 
ence, from  the  improvements  referred  to,  might  have  been  jus- 
tified if  it  had  been  found  that  the  price  of  gold  had  not  lailen 
until  the  amount  of  Bank  notes  had  been  reduced,  as  compared 
with  that  which  had  been  pronounced  to  lu.ve  been  rendered 
excessive  by  those  improvements.  Whereas,  while  the  economy 
in  the  use  of  the  currency  was  undergoing  j^rogiessive  improve- 
ment, an  increased  amount  of  Bank  notes  was  found  to  be  re- 
quisite for  the  transactions  of  the  country,  consistently  with  a 
fall  of  the  market  j)rice  of  bullion  to  its  Mint  price,  and  with  a 
much  greater  fall  in  the  prices  of  commodities. 


THE    CURRENCY.  145 

economy  of  the  currency  should  have  been  proved, 
not  only  to  have  arisen  from,  but  to  have  terminated 
with,  the  restriction  :  and  it  is  proved  to  have  done 
neither.  On  the  contrary,  while  the  prevailing 
complaint  is  of  a  tendency  the  \ery  reverse  of  di- 
minution in  the  value  of  the  currency,  it  is  noto- 
rious that  circumstances  are  in  progress  calculated 
still  further  to  economise  the  use  of  it.  Not  only 
are  improvements  daily  taking  place  among  the 
bankers,  in  their  ])ayments  on  the  largest  scale ; 
not  only  is  the  practice  of  lodging  money  with  a 
banker  becoming  more  general,  as  including  a  large 
proportion  of  the  smallest  classes  of  tradesmen  ; 
but  there  is  less  detention  in  the  very  minutest 
channels  of  circulation,  inasmuch  as,  by  the  insti- 
tution of  savings'  banks,  the  most  inconsiderable 
sums,  which  must,  but  for  this  mode  of  investment, 
have  been  dormant  as  petty  hoards  in  tiie  hands  of 
mechanics  and  menial  servants,  have  become,  and 
are  becoming  daily,  more  available  to  swell  the 
amount  of  currency  applicable  to  general  purposes. 