

So  large  is  the  aggregate  saving  of  the  use  of 
Bank  notes  and  coin,  from  the  foregoing  causes, 
which  have  acquired  their  principal  activitysince  the 
termination  of  the  Bank  restriction,  and  whicli  have 
not  yet  apparently  reached  their  utmostdevelopment; 
that,  notwithstanding  the  extended  functions  of 
money  consequent  on  an  increased  population,  and 
on  an  enlarged  scale  of  pecuniary  transactions,  it 
is  perfectly  conceivable  that  a  smaller  numerical 
amount  of  coin  and  bank  notes  is  now  requisite  to 
circulate  commodities  at  the  same  prices  than  be- 
fore that  period. 

We  may  therefore  safely  dismiss  the  economised 
use  of  the  currency  from  the  list  of  causes  concur- 
ring to  produce  the  diminution  and  subsequent 
increase  of  the  value  oftlie  precious  metals,  result- 
ing from  the  restriction  and  resumption  of  cash 
payments  by  the  Bank. 


146  THE    CURRENCY. 


Section  3.  —  Effect  ascribed  to  the  Bank  Restric- 
tion of  the  Substitution  of  Credit  for  Currenci/, 
and  of  the  excessive  Issues  of  Country  Paper. 

The  next  effect  ascribed  to  the  Bank  restriction  is 
*'  the  miiltipUcation  of  the  circulating  medium 
virtually  by  the  substitution  of  credit  for  currency." 

The  manner  in  which  the  Bank  restriction  is 
supposed  to  have  produced  these  effects,  is  thus 
stated  in  the  review  already  quoted :  — 

"  In  such  a  system,  country  banks  find  a  less  stock  necessary 
to  answer  demands  than  they  would  keep  if  liable  to  pay  in 
specie.  In  the  former  case,  one  in  twenty  is  deemed  sufficient ; 
in  the  latter,  one-fifth,  or  perhaps  one-fourth,  would  be  the  safe 
proportion.  The  moral  certainty  that  a  banker  feels,  that  he 
shall  not  be  called  upon  to  discount  his  own  notes,  is  a  strong  temp- 
tation to  issue  them  to  the  utmost  practicable  extent.  He  sets  all 
the  canvass  his  vessel  will  carry,  more  than  in  common  prudence 
he  would  do  if  there  were  any  apprehensions  of  a  coming  gale. 
But  the  Bank  restriction  was  a  kind  of  security  against  all  sud- 
den and  unexpected  movements,  a  sort  of  monsoon,  which,  after 
passing  one  session  of  parliament,  he  was  sure  would  continue 
to  the  next  ;  and  wdiile  that  lasted,  nothing  was  likely  to  hap- 
pen that  could  disturb  its  course." 

"  All  the  merchants  examined  agree  in  stating,  that  country 
paper  increased  with  the  increase  of  Bank  paper.  If,  there- 
fore, the  Bank  restriction  was  the  cause  of  excessive  issues 
from  the  Bank  —  a  fact  which  is  at  this  time  hardly  open  to 
dispute  —  it  must  be  charged  with  producing  that  excessive  issue 
of  country  paper  also,  which  was  an  invariable  concomitant  of 
the  other." 

"  It  has  already  been  observed,  that  the  power  of  procuring 
money,  if  wanted,  is  tantamount  to  the  actual  possession.  To 
use  a  scholastic  phrase,  monej^  in  posse  is  equivalent  for  all 
purposes  of  trade  to  money  in  esse :  it  gives  an  equal  spirit  of 
enterprise  to  the  buyer  ;  and,  when  that  power  is  become  noto- 
rious, equal  confidence  to  the  seller.  Now,  it  cannot  be  doubted 
that  this  hypothetical  wealth  was  greatly  augmented  by  the  sys- 
tem of  the  Bank  restriction.  If  the  Bank  was  always  ready  to 
discount  bills  upon  real  mercantile  transactions  ;  if  country 
banks,  in  imitation  of  this  example,  did  the  same  ;  not  only 
were  transactions  entered  into  which,  without  such  facility,  ne- 
ver could  have  taken  place,  but  numerous  contracts  were  effected 
for  which  actual  payment  was  not  required  at  the  time,  and 
was,  in  fact,  never  made  ;  other  transactions  in  the  mean  time 