

This  cause,  therefore,  namely,  the  quantity  of 
bullion  disengaged  from  circulation  as  coin  by  the 
suspension  of  cash  payments  in  this  country,  and 
added  to  the  general  mass  in  the  rest  of  the  world, 


those  which  can  be  imputetl  to  alterations  in  the  system  of  our 
currency.  But  in  the  opinions  which  prevail  among  the  sup- 
porters of  the  ultra  doctrine  of  depreciation,  there  is  an  extraor- 
dinary confusion  of  ideas  in  blending  as  the  effects  of  the  Bank 
restriction,  and  of  the  resumption  of  cash  payments,  variations 
(greatly  exaggerated,  if  existing  at  all)  in  the  value  of  the 
metals,  arising  from  causes  avowedly  distinct,  by  the  very  assign- 
ment of  such  causes,  from  the  possibility  of  having  been  pro- 
duced by  the  operation  of  the  measures  affecting  exclusively 
the  footing  of  the  currency  of  this  country. 

*  The  influence  here  alluded  to  of  our  currency  on  the  cur- 
rencies abroad  does  not  refer  to  the  occasion;il  fluctuations  arising 
from  speculations  and  operations  on  credit,  and  from  the  neces- 
sary reactions  which  communicate  themselves  to  those  countries 
abroad  with  which  we  are  in  commercial  connection.  The 
argument  in  the  text  is  coniined  to  a  supposed  influence,  which 
applies  to  the  whole  period  of  the  restriction  in  raising  prices, 
and  of  cash  payments  in  reducing  them. 


THE    CURRENCY.  143 

may  be  considered  as  wholly  inadmissible  in  ac- 
counting for  any  part  of  the  great  elevation  of 
prices  observable  at  different  periods  during  the 
restriction. 

But  if  the  addition  to  the  general  mass  of  the 
precious  metals,  by  the  substitution  of  paper  for 
coin  in  this  country,  pending  the  Bank  restric- 
tion, cannot,  on  the  grounds  which  I  have  stated, 
be  fairly  inferred  to  have  produced,  under  any  cir- 
cumstances, a  sensible  effect  on  the  value  of  those 
metals  ;  and  if  there  were  circumstances  such  as 
those  already  mentioned,  which  were  calculated,  at 
least  to  compensate,  if  not  to  outweigh  that  effect : 
then  it  follows,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  that  the  re- 
absorption,  by  the  resumption  of  cash  payments,  of 
a  similar  amount  of  bullion  to  that  which  had  be- 
fore been  spared,  cannot  have  been  attended  with 
a  greater  effect  in  an  opposite  direction.  This 
must  be  understood  mutatis  mutandis,  viz.  tlie  dis- 
engagement of  the  sums  employed  for  military 
purposes,  and  the  return  of  security  to  commercial 
intercourse,  renewing  the  facilities  of  circulation 
on  the  Continent,  and  diminishing  the  inducement 
to  hoarding. 

Having  thus  offered  arguments,  which  to  m}'- 
mind  are  conclusive,  against  the  presumption  of 
any  sensible  effect  from  the  alterations  in  the  system 
of  our  currency,  under  the  circumstances  in  which 
they  took  place,  on  the  value  of  the  ])recious  metals 
in  Europe,  I  shall  proceed  to  examine  what  influ- 
ence may  be  ascribed  to  the  second  class  of  circinn- 
stances,  wdiich,  as  a  consequence  of  the  Bank 
restriction,  are  stated  to  have  affected  the  value  of 
the  currency  in  this  country,  in  a  much  greater  de- 
gree than  that  indicated  by  the  difference  between 
paper  and  gold. 