


THE    CURRENCY.  147 

having  taken  place  which  either  directly  or  indirectly  had  the 
effect  of  balancing  these  ;  thus  perforniiiig,  without  regular  book 
entries,  the  very  office  of  a  bank  :  the  seller  building  as  securely 
upon  the  credit  of  the  buyer  (a  credit  never  actually  put  to  the 
test),  as  upon  his  tangible  property." 

On  this  statement,  which  conveys  the  fullest  view 
that  I  liave  met  with  of  the  specific  manner  in 
which  the  excessive  issues  of  the  Bank  of  Eng- 
land, asserted  to  have  been  caused  by  the  restric- 
tion, are  supposed  to  have  swelled  to  a  propor- 
tionate excess  the  whole  of  the  circulating  medium, 
the  following  observations  occur  :  — 

1.  It  is  possible  that  the  country  bankers  might  ha- 
bitually keep  a  somewhat  smaller  stock,  or  reserve, 
during  the  restriction  than  in  a  convertible  state  of 
the  paper,  and  there  might,  to  this  extent,  be  some 
increased  economy  in  the  use  of  the  currency, 
although  hardly  amounting  to  a  set  off  against  the 
progressive  improvements  which  have  since  taken 
place.  This  effect,  therefore,  if  it  existed  at  all, 
must  have  been  the  most  trifling  imaginable. 

2.  A  most  erroneous  impression  is  conveyed  by 
the  description  in  the  foregoing  extract,  and  is  en- 
tertained very  generally  to  this  day,  that  during 
the  restriction  there  was  a  sort  of  exemption  from 
the  penalties  of  overtrading  ;  that  bankers  might 
issue  ad  libitum,  and  merchants  trade  to  the  utmost 
extent  of  their  credit,  without  experiencing  the 
usual  penalties  of  loss  and  failure.  The  bank  re- 
striction is  supposed  to  have  operated  as  "a  kind  of 
security  to  the  banker  against  all  sudden  and 
unexpected  movements  ;  a  sort  of  monsoon, 
which,  after  passing  one  session  of  parliament, 
he  was  sure  would  continue  to  the  next,  and  while 
that  lasted,  nothing  was  likely  to  happen  that 
could  disturb  his  coiu'se."  But  it  did  so  hap])en, 
that  his  course  was  disturbed  by  exactly  the  same 
process  as  we  have  seen  exemplified  in  more  recent 
instances.     The  reaction  from  undue  specuhition 


148  THE    CURRENCY. 

seems  to  liave  been  as  iDevitable  during  the  re- 
striction as  before  and  since  ;  witness  the  extensive 
failures  in  1810  to  1812,  and  again,  in  1814  to 
1816,  which  will  be  more  distinctly  noticed  here- 
after. Of  the  latter  it  may  be,  as  it  has  been  said, 
although  without  the  slighest  foundation,  that  they 
were  the  consequence  of  preparations  for  cash  pay- 
ments ;  but  neither  this  nor  any  other  reason  con- 
sistent with  the  currency  theory,  can  be  brought  to 
account  for  the  former. 

3.  The  country  bank  paper  is  supposed  to  have 
increased  with  every  increase  of  Bank  of  England 
paper,  and  an  excessive  issue  of  the  one,  to  have 
been  an  invariable  concomitant  of  the  other. 