

L   4 


15^  THE    CURRENCY. 

of  the  circulation,  without  any  corresponding 
movements  of  the  metallic  basis.  But  if  from 
accidental  circumstances  there  should  coincidently 
with  the  tendency  to  speculation,  through  the 
means  of  credit,  happen  to  be  an  enlargement 
of  the  metallic  basis,  an  increased  facility  would 
arise,  to  the  extension  of  the  circulation,  and 
to  the  spirit  of  speculation  ;  and  the  converse 
would  be  the  consequence  of  a  contraction  of  the 
basis  coinciding  with  a  reaction  from  speculation 
and  its  attendant  discredit. 

So  likewise  in  the  regulation  of  the  Bank  issues,  if 
an  undue  enlargement  of  them  happened  to  coincide 
with  a  tendency  to  an  extension  of  the  other  con- 
stituent parts  of  the  circulation,  there  would  be  a 
proportionate  excess  in  the  whole  of  the  circu- 
lating medium.  And  the  converse  under  the  op- 
posite circumstances. 

If,  therefore,  the  allegation  of  constant  excess  of 
issues  by  the  Bank  of  England  be  substantiated, 
there  can  be  no  hesitation  in  admitting  a  corre- 
sponding excess  in  the  whole  of  the  circulation. 
It  is  proposed  accordingly,  to  examine  the  grounds 
for  that  allegation  upon  which  the  question  of  de- 
preciation beyond  the  difference  between  the  paper 
and  gold  mainly  turns.  * 


*  In  the  comparisons  Instituted  for  the  purpose  of  judging  of 
the  relative  quantities  of  money  at  different  periods,  it  has  been 
made  a  question  whether  the  deposits  in  the  hands  of  the  Bank 
should  not  be  added  to  the  amount  of  the  circulation.  The  Bank 
is  doubtless  as  much  liable  to  the  payment  of  all  the  deposits,  in 
gold  if  so  required,  as  if  the  depositors  were  holders  of  bank 
notes.  And  it  may  be  said,  and  truly  said,  that  as  the  London 
bankers  now  are  in  the  habit  of  lodging  with  the  Bank  certain 
portions  of  their  reserves,  instead  of  holding  them,  as  they  for- 
merly did,  in  their  own  drawers  in  bank  notes,  so  much  of  the 
amount  under  the  head  of  deposits  in  the  Bank  returns,  should 
be  considered  as  forming  a  part  of  the  circulation.  In  fact, 
some  part  of  the  private  deposits  at  the  Bank,  besides  those  of 
the  London  bankers,  may  come  under  the  same  description  ; 
because  the  common  drawing  accounts,  if  they  had  been  kept 


THE    CURRENCY.  153 


Section  4.  —  On  the  alleged  constant  Excess  of 
Issue  by  the  Bank  of  England,  and  thence  of  the 
whole  of  the  Circulating  Medium. 

The  charge  of  excess  or  over-issues  of  paper 
from  the  Bank  of  England  cannot  but  be  admitted, 
if  by  tliat  charge  be  meant  only  that  during  the 
restriction  the  issues  were,  for  the  most  part,  larger 
than  could  under  the  unusual  circumstances  ope- 
rating on  the  exchanges,  have  been  maintained 
under  a  convertible  state  of  the  currency.  The 
issues  were  in  that  sense  excessive,  inasmuch  as 
the  amount  exceeded  that  which  was  compatible 
with  the  maintenance  of  the  value  of  the  paper 
on  a  level  with  that  of  its  standard.  And  as  al- 
ready noticed  of  the  term  depreciation,  the  mea- 
sure o^  excess,  in  this  case,  would  be  the  degree  in 
which  the  value  of  the  paper  fell  short  of  the 
value  of  the  specific  quantity  of  gold  in  which  it 