


THE    CURRENCY.  141 

the  seat  of  war,  the  tendency  among  its  inhabitants 
to  hoard  what  gold  and  silver  they  could  collect 
beyond  their  immediate  necessities  for  expenditure, 
would  probably  more  tlian  compensate  for  the 
quantity  liberated  by  paper  issues  from  circulation 
as  coin.  The  same  remark  applies  to  Prussia  and 
the  minor  German  States. 

The  United  States  of  America  never  till  recently 
possessed  any  large  stock  of  the  precious  metals  in 
circulation  as  coin.  And  it  was  not  till  1812,  after 
all  the  phenomena  of  high  bullion  prices  had  oc- 
curred, that  there  was  any  general  suspension  of 
payment  by  their  banks. 

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  no  part  of  the  high 
bullion  prices  during  the  war  and  the  restriction 
can  be  accounted  for  by  any  increased  quantity 
of  the  precious  metals  disengaged  from  the  circu- 
lation of  the  countries  just  mentioned.  If,  how- 
ever, there  had  been  such  increase,  it  might  indeed 
have  been  an  accessory  circumstance  in  producing 
the  depreciation  of  the  metals  which  is  alleged. 
But  if  a  depreciation  from  this  cause  did  occur,  it 
has  not  and  ouglit  not  to  have  any  connexion  with 
tlie  question,  how  far  the  Bank  restriction  caused 
a  diminution  of  the  value  of  gold,  or  a  rise  of 
bullion  prices  beyond  the  difference  between 
paper  and  gold  in  this  country.  As  far  as  regards 
the  disengagment,  if  such  there  had  been,  of  the 
precious  metals  from  other  countries,  coincidently 
with  our  Bank  restriction,  there  v/ould  equally,  to 
whatever  extent  that  cause  might  be  supposed  to 
operate,  have  been  a  rise  of  bullion  prices  if  the 
paper  of  this  country  had  continued  to  be  con- 
vertible. * 

*  The  same  observation  applies  to  the  effects  of  the  varying 
produce  of  the  mines  of  gold  and  silver.  If  the  increased  pro- 
duce of  the  mines,  anterior  to  1819,  was  an  element  in  the  high 
range  of  prices,  and  if  a  diminished  produce  subsequently  had 
been  one  of  the  causes  of  the  lov/er  range,  these  causes  of  varia- 
tion of  bullion  prices  must  be  viewed  as  totally  distinct  from 


Its  THE    CURRENCY. 

Whenever  a  reference  has  been  made  to  tlie 
rise  of  bulhon  prices  in  other  countries,  prior 
to  1819,  and  to  the  subsequent  fall,  the  only 
answer  given  has  been  that  the  alterations  in  our 
currency  deranged  the  currencies  of  other  coun- 
tries. I3ut  we  have  never  been  told  in  what  way 
our  alterations  produced  that  effect,  with  the  single 
exception  of  the  supposed  influence  of  the  quan- 
tity of  gold  disengaged  from  this  country  on  the 
value  of  that  metal  in  the  rest  of  the  world.* 

Independently  of  the  argument  derived  from  the 
insufficiency  of  the  cause  assigned  to  have  produced 
the  alleged  effect,  it  will  be  seen  in  the  historical 
sketch  which  Vv^ill  be  found  in  the  further  part  of 
this  work,  that  the  great  variations  of  bullion 
prices  abroad  do  not  correspond,  in  point  of  either 
time  or  magnitude,  with  the  variations  in  the  quan- 
tity of  metals  disengaged  from  use,  and  resumed  as 
coin  in  this  country. 