

This  would  equally  be  the  case  if  the  currency 
were  purely  metallic  ;  and  for  short  periods,  there- 
fore, considerable  variations  of  prices  might  take 
place  consistently  with  a  uniform  amount  of  money, 
as,  on  the  other  hand,  an  undisturbed  sate  of  prices 
might  prevail  consistently  with  marked  variations 
of  the  quantity  of  money. 

But  although  for  short  intervals  the  variations  of 
the  Bank  of  England  issues  afford  no  certain  criterion 
of  the  amount  of  the  circulating  medium,  or  of  its 
being  in  excess  or  defect,  yet  for  longer  periods  the 
regulation  by  the  Bank  of  England  of  its  issues  during 
the  restriction  can  be  shown  distinctly  to  have  ope- 
rated in  limiting  the  other  component  parts  of  the  cir- 
culation along  with  its  own,  in  such  a  manner  as  that 
the  whole  quantity  of  money,  or  of  the  circulating 
medium,  should  seem  not  to  have  exceeded  the 
amount  which,  but  for  the  circumstances  operating 
upon  the  exchanges,  might  have  existed  in  a  con- 
vertible state  of  the  currencv. 

The  grounds  of  presumption  on  which  this  opi- 
nion is  founded,  are  derived  from  observation  of  a 


THE    CURRENCY.  157 

circumstance  to  which  it  is  of  importance  tliat  tlie 
attention  of  the  reader  should  be  specially  directed, 
as  being  one  which  essentially  bears  upon  the  ques- 
tion of  alleged  excess  of  Bank  issues  during  the 
restriction.  The  circumstance  here  alluded  to,  the 
proofs  of  which  will  be  brought  forward  hereafter, 
is  that,  while  the  amount  of  the  Bank  issues  was 
from  1797  to  I8I7  undergoing,  with  trifling  excep- 
tions, a  progressive  increase,  the  exchanges  upon 
every  pause  from  the  pressure  of  exfraordinary 
foreign  payments  tended  to  a  recovery  *,  and  when 

*  The  authority  of  the  opinions  of  Mr.  Henry  Thornton  and 
Mr.  F.  Horner  may  be  adduced,  in  proof  of  the  importance  of 
the  inference  to  be  derived  from  the  fact  of  a  constant  ten- 
dency of  the  exchanges  to  a  recovery,  upon  every  occasion  of 
the  restoration  of  the  balance  of  foreign  payments  in  our  favour. 
Mr.  Tliornton,  in  his  work  on  Paper  Credit^  lias  the  following 
passage,  in  a  note  at  page  236.:  — 

"  In  general  it  may  perhaps  be  assumed,  that  an  excessive 
issue  of  paper  has  not  been  the  leading  cause  of  a  fall  in  the 
exchange,  (/'  it  aftenvards  turns  out  that  the  exchange  is  able  to 
recover  itself  without  any  material  reduction  of  the  cpiantity  of 
paper!'  And  at  page  24-2.,  when  referring  to  the  difficulty  of 
determining  the  effect  of  variation  in  the  amount  of  Bank  of 
England  notes  on  prices,  he  proceeds  to  observe,  "  The  per- 
plexities of  this  subject,  being  such  as  I  have  now  described,  it 
naturally  occurs  to  us  to  reason  from  the  eff"ect  to  the  cause, 
and  to  infer  a  too  great  issue  of  paper,  when  we  perceive  that 
there  is  an  excess  of  the  market  price  above  the  mint  price  of 
gold.  But  this  inference  is  one  which  should  be  very  cautiously 
made,  for  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  excess  may  arise 
from  other  causes  besides  that  of  a  loo  great  emission  of  paper. 
A  suspension  of  the  foreign  demand  for  British  manufactures, 
or  an  increase  of  the  British  demand  for  foreign  articles,  circum- 
stances which  may  arise  when  there  is  no  increase  of  bank  paper, 
are  the  much  more  frequent,  as  well  as  the  more  obvious,  causes 
of  a  fall  in  our  exchange,  and  therefore  also  of  a  high  price  of 
bullion." 