

He  considered  "  the  amount  of  the  bank  notes 
in  circulation  as  being  controlled  by  the  occasions 
of  the  public  for  internal  purposes  ;  "  and,  page 
157.,  that  "  from  the  manner  in  v*'hich  the  issue 
of  bank  notes  is  controlled,  the  public  will  never 
call  for  more  than  is  absolutely  necessary  for  their 
wants." 

The  part,  however,  of  the  evidence  which  at- 
tracted most  notice,  and  created  no  little  surprise, 
was  the  following  :  — 

*'  Is  it  vour  opinion  that  the  same  security  would  exist  against 
any  excess  in  the  issues  of  the  Bank,  if  the  rate  of  the  discount 
were  reduced  from  5  to  4  per  cent.?"  Answer  by  Mr.  Whit- 
more: "The  security  of  an  excess  would  be,  1  conceive,  pre- 
cisely the  same."  Mr.  Pearse :  "  I  concur  in  that  answer." 
"If  it  were  reduced  to  3  per  cent.?"  Mr.  Whitmore  :  "  I  con- 
ceive there  would  be  no  diiference,  if  our  practice  remained  the 
same  as  now,  of  not  forcing  a  note  into  circulation."  Mr.  Pearse : 
"  I  concur  in  that  answer," 

If  the  governor  and  deputy-governor  had  added 
the  proviso,  that  the  market  rate  of  interest  should 
be,  in  the  cases  supposed,  viz.  of  discounting  at 
four  or  three  per  cent.,  as  near  to  the  I]ank  rate^r 
hills  of  the  prescribed  description,  as  it  then  was 


THE    CURRENCY.  l6l 

to  5  per  cent.,  they  would  have  escaped  the  severe 
criticisms  to  which  their  answers,  so  unguardedly 
given,  were  exposed. 

The  truth  is,  that  if  the  market  rate  of  interest 
for  such  bills  as  came  within  the  prescribed  rules  of 
the  Bank  had  fluctuated  more  than  it  did,  and  had 
likewise  on  an  average  very  materially  exceeded 
the  fixed  rate  of  discount,  and  more  especially  if  it 
had  risen  progressively  during  the  whole  period 
of  the  restriction,  not  only  would  the  fluctu- 
ations in  the  amount  of  bank  notes  have  been 
greater,  but  there  would  also  have  been  such  a  con- 
stant tendency  to  excess  through  this  channel  of 
issue,  as  would  not  have  admitted  of  compensation 
by  diminished  issues  through  other  channels,  and 
the  total  increase  of  the  circulation  would  have 
been  greater  than  it  has  proved  to  be.  But  it  so 
happened  that  the  market  rate  of  interest  for  such 
hills  as  came  within  the  Bank  rules  did  not  con- 
stantly nor  materially  exceed  5  per  cent.  ;  nor  did 
it  rise  progressively  through  the  greater  part  of  the 
interval  of  the  restriction.  The  rate  of  interest  for 
such  bills  was  at  its  highest  long  before  the  termi- 
nation of  the  war,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the  cir- 
cumstance, that  in  the  three  last  years  of  it  the 
applications  for  discount  at  the  Bank  fell  oflT,  com- 
pared with  what  they  had  been  for  seme  years 
before. 