


with  private  bankers,  would  have  added  to  their  reserves, 
and  wouUl,  consequently,  have  increased,  in  some  degree,  the 
bankers'  deposits  in  the  Bank  of  England.  These  are  reasons 
for  supposing  that  the  same  amount  of  bank  notes  issued  is  now 
much  more  effective  than  an  equal  amount  formerly  was,  before 
J;he  practice  became  so  extended,  that  is,  prior  to  1825.  And 
in  comparing  the  quantity  of  money  emanating  from  the  Bank 
of  England,  it  might  depend  upon  the  object  for  instituting  tbe 
comparison,  whether  or  not  to  blend  the  amount  of  the  private 
deposits  with  the  Bank  circulation.  But,  generally  speaking,  as 
it  is  the  Bank  issues  coming  under  the  head  of  circulation, 
which  enter  more  immediately  into  the  money  market,  and  thus 
influence,  directly,  the  rate  of  interest,  and,  eventually  and  in- 
directly, the  prices  of  commodities ;  and  as  it  is  the  amount  of 
the  Bank  circulation,  and  not  of  its  liabilities,  which  has  been 
the  standard  chosen  by  the  advocates  of  the  ultra  doctrine  of 
depreciation,  for  the  measure  of  the  expansion  and  contraction 
of  the  currency,  it  will  be  chiefly  to  the  circulation  that  in  the 
following  examination  of  the  supposed  influence  of  the  Bank 
restriction,  reference  will  be  made. 


154  THE    CURRENCY. 

purported  to  be  payable.  The  charge  o^  excessive 
issue  being  so  confined,  would  be  independent  of 
any  question  whether  tlie  difference  arose  from 
an  increase  of  the  circulation,  relatively  to  its 
functions,  the  value  of  gold  being  unaltered,  or 
from  an  increased  demand  for  gold,  the  quantity 
of  money,  or  in  other  words,  of  the  circulating 
medium  being  unaltered  in  its  relation  to  the  or- 
dinary amount  of  revenue  and  trade,  of  commo- 
dities and  labour,  to  be  circulated. 

But  this  is  not  the  common  acceptation  of  the 
term,  nor  evidently  so  intended  in  the  argument 
under  consideration.  The  restriction  is  supposed 
to  have  been  the  cause  of  a  constant  increase  of 
the  Bank  issues,  and  thence  of  the  quantity  of 
money,  not  only  beyond  that  amount,  which  under 
the  pressure  of  extraordinary  foreign  payments, 
could  have  been  maintained  consistently  with  the 
preservation  of  the  par  of  the  exchanges,  and  of 
the  price  of  gold  ;  but  much  beyond  that  which 
could  have  been  maintained  in  an  undisturbed 
state  of  politics  and  trade,  and  in  the  ordinary  state 
of  the  bahmce  of  payments,  without  raising  the 
price  of  gold,  and,  in  a  still  greater  degree,  the 
prices  of  commodities  and  labour.  The  question 
is  one  of  fact,  determinable,  however,  only  by  pre- 
sumptive evidence:  —  IVJiether,  in  the  altered  pro- 
portions between  money  and  the  objects  exchanged 
bi)  it^  the  variations  of  prices^  consequent  on  those 
altered  proportio7is,  originated  in,  and  ivere  depend- 
a7it  upon,  alterations  in  the  quantity  of  money  on 
tlie  one  hand,  or  in  the  cost  of  production,  and  the 
accidents  ajfccting  supply,  on  the  other. 