

Of  the  circumstances  affecting  the  cost  of  pro- 
duction and  the  supply  of  the  objects  exchanged 
by  money  during  the  restriction,  a  historical  sketch 
will  hereafter  be  given.  In  the  mean  time,  it  is 
desirable  to  premise  some  general  observations 
on  the  nature  of  the  presumptive  evidence  to  be 


THE    CURRENCY.  155 

offered  as  to  the  relative  quantity  of  money  in  cir- 
culation, and  of  the  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  it 
as  to  its  influence  on  prices. 

We  have  had  occasion  to  observe,  that  although 
the  amount  of  Bank  of  England  notes  con- 
trolled and  limited,  in  the  long  run,  the  other 
parts  of  the  circulating  medium,  there  might  be, 
as  indeed  tliere  have  been,  intervals  of  great  diverg- 
ence, which  might  equally  occur  for  limited  pe- 
riods in  a  convertible  state  of  the  paper. 

It  may  here  be  the  place  to  remark,  that,  whether 
in  a  convertible  or  inconvertible  state  of  the  paper, 
there  are,  and  must  be,  a  variety  of  circumstances  in 
constant  operation  to  affect  the  numerical  amount 
of  the  Bank  circulation,  without  justifying  the  in- 
ference of  any  corresponding  alteration  in  the 
quantity  of  the  circulating  medium,  or  of  its  being 
in  excess  or  defect,  with  reference  to  tlie  revenue 
and  commodities  to  be  circulated  by  it.  There  is 
a  constantly  varying  proportion  of  Bank  of  Eng- 
land notes,  applicable  to  country  payments  com- 
pared with  London  payments ;  this  was  probably 
more  the  case  during  than  subsequent  to  the  re- 
striction. And  in  cases  of  discredit  of  the  country 
banks,  sometimes  only  local,  sometimes  general,  a 
sudden  increase  of  Bank  of  England  issues  has 
taken  place,  in  order  merely  to  fill  the  temporary 
chasm  of  the  country  circulation.  The  amount 
too  of  London  payments  is  liable  to  vary  very 
considerably  in    short  intervals.  *     Sometimes  the 

*  Till  within  the  last  few  years,  there  was,  in  the  interval 
during  which  the  books  of  the  Bank  were  shut,  preparatory 
to  the  payment  of"  dividends,  a  very  considerable  reduction  of 
the  amount  of  Bank  notes  in  circulation,  and  a  corresponding 
increase  immediately  after  the  payment  of  the  dividends.  This 
cause  of  a  periodical  variation  in  the  amount  of  tiie  circulation, 
which  was  occasionally  found  to  be  inconvenient,  has  since  been 
remedied  by  the  practice  adopted  by  the  Bank  of  making  ad- 
vances, by  way  of  loan,  en  stock  and  other  approved  securities, 
for  the  few  weeks  immediately  preceding  the  payment  of  the 
dividends. 


156  THE    CURRENCY. 

prompts  for  periodical  sales  coincide  with  the  fall- 
ing due  of  large  acceptances  in  particular  branches 
of  trade.  The  payments  passing  between  the  re- 
ceivers of  the  taxes  and  the  exchequer,  and  be- 
tween the  exchequer  and  the  Bank,  influence  the 
amount  of  notes  issued  by  the  Bank  although  they 
may  not  pass  at  all  into  the  hands  of  the  public. 
The  same  sum,  circulating  in  times  of  confidence 
and  speculation  with  rapidity  from  hand  to  hand, 
will  perform  a  great  many  more  exchanges,  and 
act  upon  prices  with  much  greater  effect  than  a 
larger  sum  in  periods  of  dulness  and  absence 
of  grounds  for  specuhition  :  or  at  times  when 
alarm  and  want  of  confidence  induce  the  bankers 
and  possessors  generally  of  monied  capitals  to 
increase  their  reserves,  and  to  withhold  their  usual 
advances. 