

The  fact  of  a  rate  of  interest  in  some  degree 
steady  at  about  5  per  cent,  on  this  description  of 
securities  is  perfectly  compatible  with  a  consi- 
derably higher  rate  for  other  securities.  It  is 
well  known  that,  within  these  few  years  past, 
such  bills  have  occasionally  been  eagerly  sought  by 
bankers  and  other  capitalists  at  a  rate  as  low  as 
2  per  cent,  per  annum,  while,  on  mortgages  or 
other  securities  not  immediately  or  readily  con- 
vertible, advances  were  rarely  to  be  had  under  4, 
and  frequently  not  under  5,  per  cent.    On  the  other 

M 


lO'^  THE    CURRliNCY. 

hand,  during  the  war,  while  bills  of  undoubted  so- 
lidity, and  at  short  dates,  were  generally  discount- 
able at  about  .5  per  cent.,  it  was  difficult  to  raise 
money  on  longer  dated  bills  without  a  commission, 
or  on  mortgages  or  other  securities  imperfectly  or 
distantly  convertible,  on  any  terms  but  such  as,  by 
annuities,  premiums,  or  other  evasions  of  the  usury 
laws,  were  equivalent  to  from  6  to  10  per  cent,  per 
annum. 

It  was,  therefore,  the  coincidence,  through  the 
greater  part  of  the  interval  of  the  restriction,  be- 
tween the  market  rate  and  the  Bank  rate  of  in- 
terest, that  prevented  the  tendency  through  this 
medium  to  progressive  increase  and  irremediable 
excess  of  issues,  which  might  have  been  appre- 
hended if  the  Bank  rate  had  been  for  any  length 
of  time  much  below  the  market  rate. 

The  principal  causes  of  the  fluctuations  in  the 
amount  of  discounts  at  the  Bank  down  to  1816, 
besides  those  which  are  incidental  to  the  growth 
and  varying  exigencies  of  trade,  the  greater  or  less 
inducement  to  speculation  and  occasional  derange- 
ments of  commercial  credit,  may  be  traced  to  the 
financial  operations  of  Government. 

When  considerable  public  loans  were  negoti- 
ated, or  when  Exchequer  Bills,  to  a  larger  amount 
than  usual,  were  issued  on  the  money  market,  the 
immediate  effect  was  to  create  a  temporary  absorp- 
tion of  floating  capital,  and,  consequently,  to  oc- 
casion a  temj)orary  rise  in  the  rate  of  interest. 
This  would  naturally  be  followed  by  increased  ap- 
plications for  discount  at  the  Bank.  But  in  the 
intervals  between  loans,  or  when  Excliequer  Bills 
were  in  less  amount  than  usual,  either  by  Govern- 
ment not  issuing  so  many,  or  by  the  Bank  taking 
a  portion  of  them  off*  the  market,  that  is,  making- 
advances  upon  them,  there  would  be  diminished 
applications  for  discount. 


THE    CURRENCY.  \6S 


Section  5.  —  On   the   Regulation   of  the  Bank 
Issues  durmg  the  Restriction, 

With  reference  to  the  foregoing  explanation  it  is 
to  be  observed,  that  the  regulation  of  the  Bank 
issues,  when  the  pressure  on  the  exchanges  for 
foreign  payments  was  unusually  great,  became  in- 
evitably exposed  to  the  alternative  of  very  extensive 
and  sudden  variations  of  the  exchanges  or  of  the 
rate  of  interest.* 