

The  explanation  of  the  difficulty  seems  to  be  this. 
The  rule  by  which  the  Bank  directors  professed  to 
be,  and  were  in  the  main,  guided,  viz.  the  demand 
for  discount  of  good  mercantile  bills,  not  exceeding 
sixty-one  days'  date,  at  the  rate  of  five  per  cent, 
per  annum,  did,  with  the  necessary  policy  of  go- 
vernment in  periodically  reducing  the  floating 
debt  within  certain  limits  by  funding,  operate  as  a 
principle  of  limitation  upon  the  total  issues  of  the 
Bank.  And  the  reason  of  the  rule  having  so  ope- 
rated, is  to  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  the  market 
rate  of  interest  for  hills  of  the  description  ichich 
were  alone  discountable  at  the  Bank,  did  not  materi- 
ally, or  for  any  length  of  time  together,  exceed  the 
rate  of  five  per  cent,  per  annum. 

But  the  Bank  directors  seem  to  have  been  una- 
ware of  the  precise  mode  of  operation  by  which 
their  rule  had  the  effect  of  a  principle  of  limitation 
against  great  or  permanent  excess  in  their  circula- 
tion ;  and  the  explanation  by  them  in  their  evidence 
before  the  bullion  committee  of  1810  was  so  un- 
guardedly given  as  to  expose  them  to  the  reductio 
ah  absurdum. 

In  the  bullion  report  of  1810  it  is  stated,  *'that 
the  Bank  directors,  as  well  as  some  of  the  merchants 
who  were  examined,  showed  a  great  anxiety  to  state 
to  the  committee  a  doctrine,  of  the  truth  of  which 
they  professed  themselves  to  be  most  thoroughly 
convinced, — that  there  can  be  no  possible  excess  in 
the  issue  of  Bank  of  England  paper  so  long  as  the 
advances  in  which  it  is  issued  are  made  upon  the 
principles  which  at  present  guide  the  conduct  of 
the  directors  ;  that  is,  so  long  as  the  discount  of 
mercantile  bills  is  confined  to  paper  of  undoubted 
solidity,  arising  out  of  real  commercial  transactions, 
and  payable  at  short  and  fixed  periods."     And  the 


160  THE    CURRENCY. 

following  are  extracts  of  the  evidence  to  that  effect. 
Mr.  Whitmore,  governor  of  the  Bank  :  — 

Mill.  p.  91.  "The  Bank  never  forces  a  note  in  circulation: 
and  there  will  not  remain  a  note  in  circulation  more  than  the 
immediate  wants  of  the  public  require,  for  no  banker,  I  presume, 
will  keep  a  larger  stock  of  bank  notes  by  him  than  his  immediate 
payments  require,  as  he  can  at  all  times  procure  them." 

Min.  p.  127.  "  The  bank  notes  would  revert  to  us  if  there 
was  a  redundancy  in  circulation,  as  no  one  would  pay  interest 
for  a  bank  note  that  he  did  not  want  to  make  use  of." 

Mr.  Pearse,  the  governor,  stated  distinctly  his 
concurrence  in  the  opinion  upon  this  particular 
point,  Min.,  p.  126.  He  referred  to  the  manner 
in  which  bank  notes  are  issued,  resulting  from  the 
applications  made  for  discounts  to  supply  the  ne- 
cessary want  of  bank  notes,  by  which  their  issue  in 
amount  is  so  controlled  that  it  can  never  amount 
to  an  excess. 