


vSection  6.  —  On  the  Effect  of  the  Ba7ik  Restric- 
tion in  raising  the  Prices  of  Commodities. 

It  may  be  asked,  whether,  if  it  be  admitted  that 
there  was  no  excess  during  the  restriction  of  the 
amount  of  circulation  beyond  what  might  have 
been  maintained,  but  for  the  pressure  of  foreign 
payments,  the  restriction  can  be  charged  with  any 
part  of  the  nominal  rise  of  prices,  which  prevailed 
during  the  suspension  of  casli  payments  ?  Tlie 
answer  would  necessarily  be  in  the  negative,  as 
far  as  relates  to  depreciation  attributable  to  an 
increase  in  the  quantity  of  money.  But  the  re- 
striction admitted  of  a  greater  depression  of  the 
exchanges,  than  could  have  occurred  in  a  con- 
vertible state  of  the  paper.  And  as  the  depres- 
sion of  the  exchanges  constituted  an  element  of 
increased  cost  of  all  imported  commodities,  and 
thus,  directly  or  indirectly,  affected  the  price  of 
a  considerable  proportion  of  native  productions, 
the  restriction  may  be  considered  to  have  been 
the  condition  without  which  so  much  of  the  rise 
of  prices  as  was  attributable  to  increased  cost  by 
adverse  exchanges  could  not  have  occurred.  Be- 
sides that,  it  is  the  general  tendency  of  a  fall  of  the 
exchange  to  raise  the  prices  of  exportable  com- 
modities. 

It  is  in  this  sense  only,  if,  even  in  this  sense,  the 
word  can  be  correctly  so  applied,  that  the  Bank 
restriction  can  be  said  to  have  been  the  cause  of  so 
much  of  the  advance  of  prices,  as  may  be  measured 


THE    CURRENCY.  l69 

by  the  de])ression  of  the  exchanges  below  the  point 
to  which,  previous  to  the  restriction,  they  had,  un- 
der the  pressure  of  extra  foreign  payments  in  former 
wars,  occasionally  fallen.*  But  the  variations  of 
the  exchanges,  taking  them  in  the  aggregate,  and 
allowing  for  partial  discrepancies  of  occasional 
quotations  arising  from  impediments  to  exchange 
operations,  and  from  hazards  attending  the  trans- 
mission of  bullion,  allowing  also  for  the  difference 
arising  from  the  varying  proportions  between  silver 
and  gold,  will  be  found  to  correspond  in  the  main 
with  the  variations  in  the  price  of  gold.  There 
would,  therefore,  be  little  difference  in  the  result, 
whether  the  price  of  gold  or  the  exchanges  were 
taken  as  the  measure  of  the  utmost  advance  of 
prices  during  the  restriction,  beyond  the  rate  at 
which,  c(Eteris  paribus^  they  could  have  been  main- 
tained in  a  convertible  state  of  the  currency.  The 
same  reasoning  will  apply  as  to  the  measure  of  the 
utmost  fall  of  prices  that  can  be  ascribed  to  a  re- 
turn to  the  convertibility  of  the  paper.  But  the 
price  of  gold  is  the  simplest  and  clearest  expression 
of  the  result  of  the  quotations  of  all  the  different 
exchanges.  On  this  ground,  therefore,  as  well  as 
because  the  price  of  gold  is,  by  the  definition  of 
the  standard,  the  measure  of  the  depreciation  spe- 
cifically predicated  of  bank  notes,  the  explana- 
tion about  to  be  given  of  the  causes  of  the  great 
variations  of  prices,  in  the  period  which  is  to  come 
under  examination,  is  to  be  considered  as  subject 
always  to  an  allowance  (as  a  maximum,  however,) 
of  the  difference  between  j)aper  and  gold.  But  an 
admission  to  this  extent,  which  is  beyond  what,  in 
point  of  fact,  is  likely  to  be  found  necessary,  is 
utterly    insufficient,    according    to    the    currency 