


Years. 

Wheat. 

Barley. 

Oats. 

1  Jan.    1795, 

55s.  qd. 

34*.    2f/. 

21*.  \\d. 

1  July,   do. 

775.  '2d. 

41.9.  lOf/. 

Tin.    8d. 

Government  had,  early  in  1795,  and  indeed, 
for  some  time  before,  taken  the  alarm  at  the  indi- 
cations of  impending  dearth,  and  adopted  some 
extraordinary  measures  of  precaution.  All  neu- 
tral ships  bound  with  corn  to  France  were  seized 
and  brought  into  this  country,  and  their  cargoes 
paid  for,  with  an  ample  profit  to  the  proprietors. 
This  measure  was  adopted  with  a  double  view, 
of  relief  to  ourselves  and  distress  to  the  enemy, 
there  being  still  greater  scarcity  in  France  than  in 
this  country.  At  the  same  time  government  em- 
ployed agents  to  buy   corn   at   the  ports   in   the 

N   o 


182  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Baltic.  This  was  done  because  it  was  apprehended 
that  our  own  merchants  would  be  deterred  from 
purchasing  so  freely  as  was  desirable,  by  the  great 
advance  of  prices,  which  had  taken  place  in  the 
North  of  Europe,  in  consequence  of  large  purchases 
for  account  of  the  French  government. 

Of  the  })olicy  of  this  measure,  as  interfering  with 
the  ordinary  course  and  true  principles  of  trade,  Mr. 
Pitt  spoke  doubtingly ;  but  rested  the  justification  of 
it  upon  the  extraordinary  and  alarming  character  of 
the  emergency.  Sir  Francis  Baring  also  offered  a 
hesitating  opinion  in  justification  of  the  measure. 
Notwithstanding  all  these  precautionary  measures 
for  obtaining  a  foreign  supply,  and  the  induce- 
ments held  out  by  an  unprecedentedly  high  price 
in  this  country,  such  was  the  scarcity  in  the  north 
of  Europe  and  in  America*,  and  such  the  com- 
petition of  the  government  of  France  with  ours, 
that  the  importation  in  the  whole  of  the  year  1795, 
after  deducting  small  casual  exports,  did  not  quite 
reach  three  hundred  thousand  quarters  of  wheat. 

The  spring  of  1795  was  very  cold  and  backward, 
the  summer  wet  and  stormy,  and  the  harvest  con- 
sequently unusually  late.  Under  these  threatening 
circumstances  the  prices  experienced  a  continued 
advance,  the  average  for  England  and  Wales  having 
reached  1086-.  4c?.  in  August  of  that  year.  The  wea- 
ther, however,  having  cleared  up  towards  the  latter 
part  of  August,  and  having  proved  fine  throughout 
September,  so  as  to  admit  of  securing  the  wliole  of 
the  crop  in  good  order,  the  markets  experienced 
a  decline,  the  average  price  in  October  having 
got  down  to  jGs.  Od-  But  tlie  original  de- 
ficiency  then   manifested   itself,    and   prices   rose 

*  In  the  United  States  of  America  the  crops  of  wheat,  in 
1795,  were  as  deficient  as  they  were  in  Europe.  The  deficiency 
was  mainly  ascribed  to  the  ravages  of  an  insect  called  the  Hes- 
sian Fly.  And  the  price  of  flour  reached  the  enormous  rate  of 
fifteen  dollars  the  barrel. 