

It  is  the  purpose,  therefore,  of  the  following 
historical  sketch  to  lay  before  the  reader  the  most 
prominent  of  the  facts,  which  are  calculated  to 
elucidate  the  causes  of  the  great  variations  of  prices 
from  the  close  of  1792  to  the  present  time ;  and 
as  the  result  of  the  view,  which  it  is  thus  proposed 
to  take,  I  expect  to  be  able  to  show  — 

1-  That  there  were  circumstances  during  the 
period  under  consideration,  affecting  the  cost  of 
production,  and  the  casual  supply  relatively  to 
the  rate  of  consumption  of  the  principal  articles, 
the  fluctuations  of  which  are  in  question,  sufficient 
to  account  for  the  variations  of  prices,  independ- 
ently of  any  supposed  influence  of  the  currency, 
beyond  the  degree  indicated  by  the  difference 
between  paper  and  gold. 

2.  That  the  theory  which  supposes  the  disen- 
gagement and  reabsorption  of  gold  by  this  country, 
arising  from  the  restriction  and  the  resumption  of 
cash  payments,  to  have  sensibly  affected  bullion 
prices  is  (independently  of  the  inadequateness  of  the 


172  THE    CURRENCY. 

supposed  cause  as  has  already  been  shown)  not 
borne  out  by  a  reference  to  the  periods  in  which, 
or  to  the  circumstances  under  which,  the  great 
alterations  of  price  took  place. 

3.  That  the  alterations  in  the  amount  of  the 
circulation  did  not  occur  in  such  order  of  time 
with  reference  to  the  variations  of  prices,  as  to 
justify  the  assignment  of  such  a  relation  as  that  of 
cause  and  effect ;  for  that  in  point  of  fact  in  the 
majority  of  instances  the  alleged  effects  preceded 
the  supposed  causes. 

4.  That  the  increase  of  the  Bank  circulation 
during  the  restriction,  although  excessive,  as  being 
beyond  what  could,  under  the  pressure  of  foreign 
payments,  be  maintained  consistently  with  the  pre- 
servation of  the  par  of  the  exchanges,  and  of  the 
price  of  gold,  was  not  greater  than  it  is  probable 
would,  in  an  midisturbed  state  of  politics  and  trade, 
have  been  required  to  carry  on  the  greatly  ex- 
tended pecuniary  transactions  of  the  country  at 
bullion  prices  on  their  ordinary  level  with  those 
of  other  countries.  The  proof,  or  at  least  the 
strongest  possible  presumption  to  this  effect  being, 
that  upon  every  cessation  of  the  pressure  of  foreign 
payments  the  exchanges  tended  to  a  recovery,  and 
were,  when  those  payments  finally  ceased,  restored 
to  par,  not  only  without  any  reduction  of  Bank 
paper,  but  coincidently  with  an  increase  of  it. 

5.  That  the  growth  and  contraction  of  country 
bank  notes  greatly  beyond,  and  within,  the  extent 
to  which  they  served  for  ordinary  local  purposes, 
were  governed  during  the  restriction  by  the  same 
general  causes  as  operated  before  and  since. 
They  expanded  under  circumstances  favouring 
speculation,  and  a  rise  of  prices,  and  became  con- 
tracted under  the  opposite  circumstances. 