

The  first  division  will,  however,  most  con- 
veniently embrace  six  years,  viz.  from  the  com- 
mencement of  1793  to  the  close  of  1798  ;  and  the 
period  ending  1822  will  comprise  only  four  years, 
for  reasons  which  will  be  obvious  when  those 
epochs  come  under  consideration. 


176       PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION,    1793 1798. 


CHAP.  II. 

ON  THE  STATE  OF  PRICES,  AND  OF  THE  CIRCULA- 
TION, FROM  THE  COMMENCEMENT  OF  1793  TO 
THE    CLOSE    OF    1798. 

The  commencement  of  1793  is  among  the  most 
memorable  in  the  annals  of  this  country,  and  of 
Europe,  and  indeed  of  the  civihsed  world.  It  was 
in  February  of  that  year  that  the  war  with  France, 
which,  with  the  intermission  of  a  few  months, 
lasted  for  upwards  of  twenty  years,  was  declared.* 

There  had  been  immediately  preceding  that 
event  a  great  revulsion  and  derangement  of  com- 
mercial credit,  not  only  in  this  country,  but  in 
the  principal  trading  cities  of  the  Continent  of 
Europe. 

By  some  persons  it  was  supposed,  that  the  de- 
claration of  war  had  materially  contributed  to 
produce  the  derangement  of  credit.  Thus  Sir 
Francis  Baring,  in  a  pamphlet  published  in  1797» 
observed : — 

"  A  circumstance  which  very  materially  contributed  to  pro- 
duce the  distress  of  1793  was  the  sudden  unexpected  declara- 
tion of  war.  That  dreadful  calamity  is  usually  preceded  by 
some  indication  which  enables  the  commercial  community  to 
make  preparation.  On  this  occasion  the  short  notice  rendered 
the  least  degree  of  general  preparation  impossible,  and  which 
may  be  ascertained  by  the  prices  of  stocks  in  the  preceding 
month  of  October  and  various  collateral  authorities." 

Notwithstanding  this  deservedly  high  authority 
for  the  supposition,  that  the  breaking  out  of  the 

*  The  preparations  for  war  on  both  sides  were  made  in 
January,  but  the  actual  declaration  of  war  was  made  by  France 
against  this  country  on  the  1st  of  February,  1793. 


PRICES   AND    CIRCULATION,  1793 — 1798.      177 

war  had  contributed  in  a  considerable  degree  to 
the  memorable  derangement  of  commercial  credit, 
which  occurred  about  that  time  ;  I  am  disposed, 
both  from  my  own  recollection,  and  from  all  that 
I  have  been  able  to  collect  by  research,  to  doubt 
whether  the  war  had  much  influence  in  the  origin 
of  the  discredit,  although  it  can  hardly  have  failed 
of  operating  in  aggravation  of  the  main  causes. 
These  seem  to  have  been  pre-existing  in  a  great 
and  undue  extension  of  the  system  of  credit  and 
paper  circulation,  not  only  in  the  internal  trade  and 
banking  of  this  country,  but  in  the  commercial 
transactions  of  the  principal  cities  of  the  Continent 
of  Europe,  and  in  the  United  States  of  America. 