

*  During  the  American  war,  the  exchange  on  Hamburg 
was  occasionally,  and  for  some  length  of  time,  at  about  31*.  6d. 
And  it  is  only,  therefore,  for  the  fall  below  this  rate  that  the 
Bank  restriction  is  accountable. 


170  THE    CURRENCY. 

theory,  to  account  for  the  great  rise  of  prices  dur- 
ing the  restriction,  and  for  the  gi-eat  fall  subse- 
quently ;  the  rise  being,  by  that  theory,  ascribed  to 
an  excessive  enlargement  of  the  issues,  which  the 
Bank  was,  by  the  restriction,  enabled  and  induced 
to  make  and  maintain  ;  and  the  fall  being  attributed 
to  the  contraction  which,  by  the  same  theory,  is 
considered  to  have  been  necessarily  effected  as  a 
preparation  and  means  for  the  restoration  of  cash 
payments. 


Section  7«  —  On  the  alleged  invariable  Connection 
of'  Increase  of  Price  ivith  the  Bank  Bestrictiony 
and  on  the  Effect  of  the  near  Approach  of  the 
Termination  of  the  Restriction  producmg  a  Fall 
of  Prices  greatly  exceeding  theDiff'erence  between 
Paper  and  Gold. 

Proceeding  on  the  assumption  of  the  constant 
excess  of  the  issues  of  the  Bank  of  England,  and 
of  the  country  banks,  the  concluding  allegations, 
among  the  arguments  wliich  have  been  stated  in 
support  of  the  doctrine  of  ultra  depreciation,  are, 
*'  That  the  constant  and  invariable  connection  of 
increase  of  price  with   the  Bank   restriction  is  a 
forcible  proof  of  such  a  relation,  as  that  of  cause 
and  effect  subsisting  between  the  two  pheenomena  ; 
and  that  the  near  approach  of  the  termination  of 
that  restriction  had  produced  a  fall  of  prices,  greatly 
exceeding  the  difference  between  paper  and  gold  ; 
thus    still  further  corroborating  that   connection, 
and  proving,  almost  demonstratively,  that  the  prices 
from  1797  to  1814  were,  to  a  certain  degree,  arti- 
ficial, and  that  the  comparison  of  paper  with  gold 
did  not  afford  a  test  of  the  real  amount  of  the  fall 
in   the  value  of  our  currency.'*     Here  it  is  evi- 
dently meant  to  imply,  that  the  near  approach  of 


THE    CURUKNCY.  171 

the  termination  of  the  restriction,  and,  still  more, 
the  actual  passing  of  Peel's  bill,  had  been  the  ori- 
ginating and  the  cJiief,  if  not  only^  cause  of  the  fall 
of  prices.  And  of  course,  if  the  mere  removal 
of  the  restriction  was  the  chief  cause  of  the  fall, 
the  restriction  must  be  supposed  to  have  been  the 
chief,  if  not  the  only,  cause  of  the  previous  rise. 

It  appears  to  me  that  a  total  absence  of  know- 
ledge of  many  facts  bearing  upon  the  question,  a 
great  misapprehension  of  others,  and  a  general 
confusion  of  the  order  of  time,  in  which  the 
principal  circumstances  in  connection  with  prices, 
and  with  the  state  of  the  circulation,  are  supposed 
to  have  taken  place,  can  alone  account  for  the 
prevalence  of  opinions  so  erroneous  as  those  in- 
volved in  the  above  propositions  ;  opinions  which, 
destitute  as  they  are  of  any  real  foundation,  are 
almost  universally  prevalent. 