

the  restriction,  than  in  the  periods  anterior  and 
subsequent  to  it,  had  been  still  more  striking  than 
it  is,  it  would  not  be  a  compensation  for  the  mani- 
fold evils  and  dangers  attending  an  inconvertible 
paper  currency. 

The  observation  of  the  comparative  uniformity 
of  the  amount  of  the  Bank  circulation,  and  of  its 
not  having  exceeded,  during  the  suspension  of 
cash  payments,  the  quantity  which  was  found 
consistent  eventually  with  the  I'estoration  of  its 
standard  value,  is  not  here  introduced  for  the  pur- 
pose of  vindicating  the  policy  which  imposed  and 
continued  the  restriction,  but  it  may  fairly  be 
adduced  as  an  answer  to  the  charge  of  constant 
excess*  of  issue,  by  which,  in  the  arguments 
quoted,  the  whole  period  of  the  restriction  is  as- 

*  But  charges  still  wider  of  the  truth  have  been  urged 
against  that  measure.  The  most  exaggerated  statements  have 
been  made  in  general  terms,  of  the  violent  changes  occasioned  by 
it  in  the  quantity  of  the  paper  circulation.  The  following  speci- 
men of  such  charges  is  taken  from  a  publication  on  "  Corn  and 
Currency,"  by  Sir  James  Graham,  which  attracted  considerable 
notice  in  its  day  :  — 

"  Mr.  Pitt,  when  he  introduced  his  bold  measure  of  the  Bank 
restriction,  which  rendered  the  paper  of  the  Bank  of  England 
no  longer  convertible  into  cash  on  demand,  and  imposed  no 
h'mit  on  its  issues  beyond  the  will  of  the  Government,  or  the 
caprice  of  the  Directors,  declared,  with  prophetic  warning, 
(Hansard's  Parliamentary  Debates,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  71.)  *  That,  if 
the  country  be  once  surcharged  with  paper,  it  would  have  as 
ruinous  effects  as  would  be  produced  by  lessening  the  quantity 
of  the  paper  circulation ;  a  sudden  diminution  '^of  the  paper 
currency  would  prove  the  most  violent  shock  which  the  trade 
and  credit  of  this  country  could  receive.' 

"  Notwithstanding  this  sound  prediction  from  the  author  of 
the  measure,  his  successors,  who  profess  to  tread  in  his  steps, 
and  to  venerate  his  name,  have  despised  the  warning,  have 
rejected  the  admonition,  and  applied  the  power  precisely  in  the 
two  modes  which  Mr.  Pitt  thought  most  dangerous.  '  The 
country  has  been  surcharged  with  paper  ;'— there  has  been  a 
'  sudden  diminution  of  the  currency,'  not  once,  but  repeatedly; 
and  exactly  as  Mr.  Pitt  foretold,  each  violent  change,  in  either 
direction,  has  shaken  to  their  foundations  '  the  trade  and  credit 
of  the  country.' ''  P.  '28. 

M    4 


168  THE    CURRENCY. 

serted  to  have  been  characterised,  the  term  excess 
not  being  confined  to  mean  an  amount  beyond  what 
could,  under  the  extraordinary  circumstances,  be 
maintained,  consistently  with  the  par  value^  but  such 
an  increase  and  excess  as  would,  under  ordinary 
circumstances,  have  entailed  depreciation. 