

The  commercial  failures  both  here  and  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe,  and  in  America,  began  in 
the  autumn  of  1792,  while  the  price  of  the  funds 
was  still  comparatively  high,  the  3  per  cent.  Con- 
sols being  at  90  in  September,  and  at  88  in 
November  of  that  year,  and  while,  therefore,  it 
could  not  be  supposed,  that  the  alarm  of  impend- 
ing hostilities  could  have  had  much  effect.  Nor 
did  it  appear  from  the  character  of  the  mercantile 
failures  which  occurred,  and  which  proved  in  most 
instances  to  have  been  insolvencies  of  some  stand- 
ing, how  war,  or  the  apprehension  of  war,  could 
have  produced  tlieir  embarrassment.  At  the  same 
time  it  must  be  admitted,  that  the  breaking  out  of 
the  war,  although  apparently  not  an  originating 
cause,  must  necessarily  have  added  to  whatever 
were  the  pre-existing  causes  of  derangement,  not 
only  by  the  increased  rate  of  interest  occasioned 
by  the  loan  for  the  purposes  of  the  war,  but  by  the 
inevitable  disturbance  of  some  of  the  channels  of 
demand.* 

*  It  is  probable,  that,  although  the  failures  and  the  attendant 
commercial  discredit  began  in  1792,  before  any  great  fall  in  the 
funds  of  this  country  had  occurred,  the  further  failures  and  con- 
sequent discredit,  particularly  of  the  country  bankers,  were  ex~ 

N 


lyS  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATIONT, 

There  is  a  very  prevalent  impression,  that  the 
orighi  of  speculations  and  Ingh  prices  is  to  be 
dated  from  the  commencement  of  the  war  in  1793. 
The  fact,  however,  is,  that  there  was  a  very  gene- 
ral fall  of  prices,  from  the  close  of  1792  to  the  com- 
mencement of  1791'-  On  looking  over  the  Table 
of  prices,  it  will  be  seen  that  there  were  very 
few  commodities  which  were  not  lower  at  the 
close  of  1792,  and  at  different  periods  in  1793  and 
1791,  than  they  had  been  at  the  commencement 
of  1792.  And  the  real  fliU  was  still  greater  than 
the  apparent  one  ;  because  the  cost  of  production 
of  all  imported  commodities  was  greater  by  the 
difference  of  freights  and  insurance,  after  the 
breaking  out  of  the  war. 

This  fall  of  prices  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
a  direct  or  obvious  consequence  of  the  war :  it 
was  rather  the  effect  of  a  recoil  from  extensive  spe- 
culations, which  had  their  origin  two  or  three  years 
before,  connected  with  the  extensive  circulation  of 
mercantile  paper  already  alluded  to.  One  of  the  chief 
causes  of  those  speculations  seems  to  have  arisen 
on  the  ground  of  apprehended  scarcity  of  colo- 
nial produce  in  consequence  of  the  revolution  in 
St.  Domingo,  which  at  that  time  constituted  the 
largest  source  of  supply  of  sugar  and  coffee  to 
the  Continent  of  Europe.  Other  grounds  were 
afforded  by  the  unsettled  aspect  of  politics.  As 
usual,  in  times  of  confidence  and  tendency  to  spe- 
culation, many  articles,  for  the  rise  of  which  there 
was  no  sufficient  ground  of  actual  or  apprehended 
scarcity,    participated   in    the   advance.     But  the 