

6.  That  a  contraction  of  the  currency  was  not 
a  necessary  consequence  of,  or,  in  point  of  fact, 
produced  by.  Peel's  bill,  or  by  any  anterior  prepar- 


THE    CURRENCY.  173 

ation  on  the  part  of  the  Bank  for  cash  payments  ; 
for  that,  according  to  the  rules  by  which  the  Bank 
regulated  its  issues,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe 
that,  without  any  reference  whatever  to  that  bill, 
or  to  any  anterior  preparation,  the  circulation  of 
Bank  of  England  notes  and  coin  together,  con- 
stituting the  basis  of  the  currency,  would  have 
been  neither  more  nor  less  than  it  actually  proved 
to  be. 


17  J' 


PART  IV. 

HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  PRICES,  AND  OF  THE 
STATE  OF  THE  CIRCUL/iTION,  FROM  1792  TO 
1 8S7. 


CHAPTER  I. 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  whole  qLiestion  of  the  degree  in  which  the 
causes  that  liave  been  severally  assigned  as  account- 
ing for  the  great  variations  of  price  in  the  period 
which  is  to  come  under  consideration,  viz.  from 
the  commencement  of  179^^  to  the  present  time, 
mainly  rests  upon  the  sequence  observable  between 
prices,  and  the  circumstances  connected  with  them 
in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.  It  is  absolutely 
essential  in  this  view  to  trace  the  events  in  strict 
connection  with  prices.  In  a  former  work  of 
mine  on  prices,  a  cursory  glance  only  was  taken 
of  the  state  of  things  in  relation  to  prices  at  par- 
ticular periods,  without,  as  I  have  since  perceived, 
a  sufficiently  distinct  arrangement  of  the  whole 
series  of  them  in  chronological  order.  It  is  my 
present  purpose,  accordingly,  to  give  them  in  that 
order.  But  with  that  view  it  is  necessary  to  make 
a  division  into  points,  upon  which  the  attention 
may  rest,  or,  in  other  words,  into  epochs,  through 
which  the  several  sets  of  prices  and  circumstances 
may  be  traced  distinctly.  In  determining  the 
question  how  that  object  may  best  be  accomplished, 


HISTORICAL    SKKTCH.  17.^ 

the  most  convenient  mode  that  has  suggested 
itself  to  me  is  that  of  a  division  into  epochs  of 
about  five  years  each.  Shorter  intervals,  annual 
periods,  for  instance,  would,  properly  speaking,  be 
of  the  nature  of  annals,  and  would  weary  and 
distract  the  attention  by  the  inevitable  minuteness 
of  the  details,  besides  that  an  interval  so  short 
would  not  admit  of  continuous  observation  of  the 
whole,  or  even  of  the  greater  part  of  the  phases, 
within  which  the  changes  and  alternations  between 
periods  of  confidence  and  discredit,  of  the  spirit  of 
enterprise  and  despondency,  have  revolved.  On 
the  other  hand,  intervals  often  years  would  be  too 
long  for  the  purpose,  as  they  would  embrace  too 
many  particulars  to  admit  easily  of  such  arrange- 
ment and  classification  as  are  essential  to  the 
formation  of  any  clear  conclusions.  Not  only, 
therefore,  as  a  medium  between  these  extremes, 
but  because,  in  point  of  fact,  it  so  happens  that 
intervals  of  about  five  years  do  afford  resting- 
places,  at  each  of  which  an  examination  may  con- 
veniently take  place  of  the  rise  and  progress,  and 
in  many  instances  of  the  termination,  of  a  series  of 
events,  all  tending  to  throw  light  on  each  other, 
and  to  bring  out  a  legitimate  conclusion,  it  is 
heie  proposed  to  adopt  a  division  of  the  time 
which  is  to  pass  in  review  into  intervals  of  about 
five  years. 