


tended  and  aggravated  by  the  great  fall  of  the  funds  which  im- 
mediately followed  the  declaration  of  war.  And  there  is  reason 
to  believe,  that  some  of  the  failures  of  the  Continental  houses 
were  aggravated,  if  not  caused,  by  previous  speculations  in  the 
French  assignats  which  subsequently  experienced  the  extreme 
of  depreciation. 


1793—1798.  179 

rise  proved  to  have  been  greater  than  the  occasion 
justified,  and  prices  fell.  It  may  be  observed, 
however,  that  as,  during  the  previous  rise,  there 
had  been  no  manifestation  of  extravagance  of  ad- 
vance in  any  one  article,  so,  in  the  fall,  the  number 
of  articles  to  which  it  applied  was  extensive ;  but 
to  none  did  it  apply  in  a  very  marked  degree.  The 
lowest  point  of  depression  of  the  prices  of  such 
articles  as  had  risen  most  between  1790  and  1792, 
seems  to  have  been  reached  in  1794. 

It  was  not  till  the  latter  part  of  1794  and  the 
commencement  of  1795  that  circumstances  arose, 
which  were  calculated  to  create  a  great  disturb- 
ance of  prices,  both  of  corn  and  of  other  leading- 
articles  of  consumption.  In  proceeding  to  notice 
in  some  detail  and  consecutively  the  great  varia- 
tions in  prices,  which  henceforth  occurred,  those 
of  corn,  as  bearing  most,  according  to  general  opi- 
nion, on  the  doctrine  of  depreciation,  will  be  more 
particularly  referred  to  and  dwelt  upon.  Those  of 
other  commodities  will  be  noticed  only  when  un- 
der the  influence  of  extraordinary  circumstances, 
and  more  especially  hi  connection  with,  and  illus- 
trative of,  the  influence  of  the  circulating  medium, 
the  state  of  which  will  be  the  subject  of  consider- 
ation at  the  end  of  each  interval. 

The  general  character  of  the  seasons,  as  to  pro- 
ductiveness, will  be  noticed  with  more  or  less  of 
detail,  according  as  they  may  appear  to  have  been 
attended  with  less  or  more  of  influence  on  prices. 


Section  1. — On  the  Seasons  in  Connection  with 
the  Prices  of  Provisions,  from  1793  to  the  Close 
of  1798. 

Of  the  season  of  1793  it  is  said  by  Arthur  Young, 
in  the  Annals  of  Agriculture,  vol.  xxv.,   that  the 

N  2 


180  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

"  Summer  was  a  very  dry  one,  in  which,  though  the  wheat 
was  moderate,  the  spring  crops  generally  proved  deficient." 

Moderate  only,  however,  as  the  crop  of  wheat  is 
described  to  have  been,  the  price  gave  way  after 
harvest.  The  quotation  of  the  Windsor  market, 
which  at  Lady-day,  1793,  had  been  5is.  Id.,  fell 
at  Michaelmas  following  to  45^.  And  the  ports, 
which  had  been  open  by  proclamation  in  the 
spring,  were  shut  again  at  the  low  duty  in  June 
of  that  year.* 

On  the  seasons  of  1794  and  1795,  the  results  of 
which  form  so  prominent  a  feature  in  the  history 
of  the  Corn  Trade,  it  is  necessary  to  dwell  some- 
what more  in  detail.  Arthur  Young,  writing  in 
1795,  says  of  the  former, 