


*  "  Engagement  by  such  members  as  may  choose  to  sign  the 
same  :  — 

"  To  reduce  tlie  consumption  of  wheat  in  the  famihes  sub- 
scribing such  engagement  by  at  least  one  third  of  the  usual 
quantity  consumed  in  ordinary  times,  and  to  recommend  the 
same  in  their  neighbourhoods.  Agreement  to  be  in  force  till 
fourteen  days  after  the  commencement  of  next  session  of  Par- 
liament, unless  the  average  price  of  wheat  should,  in  the  mean 
time,  be  reduced  to  8*.  per  bushel."  —  ParliamentarT/ History, 
Dec.  11.  1795. 

f  It  was  as  one  of  the  means  of  diminishing  the  consumption 
of  wheat  on  the  occasion  of  this  scarcity,  that  the  notable  hair- 
powder  tax  was  imposed —  a  measure  which  hastened  the  dis- 
continuance of  that  strange  fashion. 


186  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

necessaries  of  life.  The  distress  *,  accordingly,  of 
the  working  and  poorer  classes  was  very  severe, 
and  tlie  privations  of  the  classes  immediately  above 
them,  and  generally  of  all  classes  depending  on 
limited  money  incomes,  were  great.  The  whole 
period,  indeed,  of  this  memorable  dearth,  was  one 
of  much  suffering  to  the  bulk  of  the  community. 
But  it  was  a  time  of  great  prosperity  to  the  landed 
interests,  that  is,  to  the  landlords  who  were  raising, 
or  had  the  prospect  of  soon  raising,  their  rents  ;  and 
to  the  farmers,  who  were  realising  enormous  gains 
pending  the  currency  of  their  leases.  The  follow- 
ing extract  from  an  article  by  Arthur  Young,  in  the 
Annals  of  Agriculture,  for  1796,  will  serve  as  a 
practical  illustration  of  the  principle  which  I  have 
had  occasion  to  notice  ;  viz.,  of  the  effect  of  a  defi- 
ciency in  raising  the  price  greatly  beyond  the  ratio 
of  the  defect,  and  of  the  consequent  larger  sum 
distributed  among  the  growers  than  could  be  de- 
rived from  medium  or  abundant  crops. 

"  The  average  price  of  wheat  for  the  twelve  months,  from 
May  1795  to  ApriJ  1796,  has  been,  on  an  average,  in  England 
and  Wales,  10*.  7c?.  per  bushel,  and  that  of  barley  4^.  9d.  Now 
the  price  for  twelve  years,  ending  1791',  was  for  wheat  5s.  lOd., 
and  for  barley  3*.  3d.  For  the  year  above  described,  therefore, 
the  price  has  exceeded  that  average  4*.  9d.  per  bushel  for  wheat, 
and  Is.  6d.  for  barley.  Let  us  suppose  the  annual  consumption 
of  wheat  to  be  8,701,875  quarters,  and  that  of  barley  10,545,000 
quarters ;  and,  further,  that  the  deficiency  of  the  crop  on  the 
average,  of  the  two  years,  so  far  as  they  affect  the  period  in 
question,  has  amounted,  in  wheat,  to  one  fifth  ;  and  that  the 
barley  has,  on  an  average  of  the  two  crops,  been  a  medium  :  in 
this  case  there  would  have  been  consumed  — 
Of  wheat  6,961,500  qrs.  the  extra  price  on  which 