

The  season  of  1798  proved  to  be  moderately 
productive.  The  summer  was  dry  and  warm,  the 
harvest  forward,  and  the  crops  secured  in  good 
order.  The  spring  crops  had  suffered  from  the 
heat  and  drought.  The  wheat  crop  was  the  best, 
although  not  considered  to  be  large  ;  but  coming 
early  to  market,  the  average  price  which  in  August 
had  been  5ls.  3d.,  fell  in  November  of  that  year 
to  a  fraction  below  48s. 

The  following  statement  of  the  average  prices 
will  show  the  subsidence  of  the  prices  of  corn  at 
the  close  of  1798,  to  nearly  the  level  of  what  they 
had  been  at  the  close  of  1792 — 


Years. 

Wheat. 

Barley. 

Oats. 

1792. 

Dec.  47*.  Qd. 

29.5.  10^. 

18.S.  6d. 

1798. 

Nov.  47^.10^. 

29s.  Od. 

I9s.  lOd. 

So  that  after  six  years  of  war,  involving  a  greatly 
increasing  expenditure,  defrayed  by  loans,  much 
larger  towards  the  later  than  at  the  earlier  period, 
we  see  the  prices  of  corn,  after  having  been  ele- 
vated by  scarcity,  obviously  arising  from  the  sea- 
sons, falling,  upon  the  return  of  only  moderate 
abundance,  to  the  level  whence  they  had  risen. 


Section  2. —  On  the  Prices  of  Coynmodi ties  from 
1793  to  1798. 

While  the  prices  of  provisions  had  been  under- 
going such  great  variations  from  the  vicissitudes  of 
the  seasons,  the  prices  of  other  articles  experienced 
also  an  extraordinary  fluctuation. 

There  had  been,  as  has  been  noticed,  a  general 


1793—1798.  189 

fall  of  prices  at  the  commencement  of  the  war,  and 
they  continued  at  a  comparatively  low  range 
through  the  greater  part  of  1794.  In  1795,  se- 
veral circumstances  combined  to  occasion  a  range 
of  high  prices,  besides  those  of  provisions.  Two 
successive  bad  seasons  on  the  Continent  of  Europe 
as  well  as  in  this  country  had  rendered  all  Euro- 
pean agricultural  produce  scarce  and  dear,  such  as 
linseed  and  rapeseed,  olive  oil,  and  tallow.  Silk  in 
Italy  and  the  vintages  in  France  had  suffered  from 
the  inclemency  of  the  season.  There  was  an  ex- 
traordinary competition  between  our  government 
and  that  of  France  in  the  purchase  of  naval  stores 
in  the  north  of  Europe,  thus  greatly  raising  the 
prices  of  hemp,  flax,  iron,  and  timber.  The  prospect 
of  a  war  with  Spain,  which  broke  out  in  the  year 
following,  affected  several  descriptions  of  Spanish 
produce.  Colonial  produce,  of  which  a  scarcity 
consequent  on  the  failure  of  the  supplies  from  St. 
Domingo  was  now  generally  felt  throughout  Eu- 
rope, experienced  a  fresh  rise.  All  these  classes  of 
commodities  continued  to  rise  through  1795  and 
part  of  1796.  Those  which  were  affected  by  the 
seasons  in  Europe,  fell  in  the  latter  part  of  1796, 
and  in  1797>  although  from  the  increased  cost  of  pro- 
duction, and  in  the  case  of  naval  and  military  stores 
from  the  increasing  demand,  not  to  their  former 
level. 