


1793—1798.  183 

again  considerably  before  the  close  of  the  year ; 
On  the  meeting  of  parliament,  29th  October,  1795, 
the  khig  in  his  speech  alluded  to  the  dearth  in  the 
following  terms :  — 

"  I  have  observed  for  some  time  past  with  the  greatest  anxiety, 
the  very  high  price  of  grain  ;  and  that  anxiety  is  increased  by 
the  apprehension  that  the  produce  of  the  wheat  harvest,  in  the 
present  year,  may  not  have  been  such  as  effectually  to  relieve 
my  people  from  the  difficulties  with  which  ihey  have  had  to  con- 
tend." 

And  concluded  with  an  assurance  of  his  Majesty's 
hearty  concurrence  in  whatever  regidations  the 
wisdom  of  Parliament  might  adopt. 

Animated  discussions  took  place  on  the  nature 
and  causes,  and  extent  of  the  dearth,  and  on  the 
remedies  to  be  applied  for  the  alleviation  of  its 
effects.  On  the  3d  November,  the  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer  moved,  that  a  select  committee 
be  appointed,  for  mquiring  into  the  circumstances 
of  the  present  scarcity,  and  the  best  means  of  re- 
medying it.  As  usual  on  such  occasions,  there 
was  a  disposition  to  account  for  the  high  price  of 
provisions  by  the  assignment  of  any  but  the  simple, 
sufficient,  and  true  cause,  casual  deficiency  of  sup- 
ply from  the  visitation  of  two  very  unproductive 
crops.  Monopoly  *,  forestalling  t,  andregrating  were 

*  The  following  extract  from  among  the  speeches  in  the 
House  of  Commons  may  serve  as  a  specimen  to  this  effect:  — 

Debate  3d  November,  1795,  Mr.  Lechmere  said,  "  We  had 
perhaps  had  as  plentiful  a  harvest  as  the  great  Author  of  all  bless- 
ings ever  gave  us."  "  One  of  the  great  causes  of  the  present 
distress  he  took  to  be  the  monopoly  of  farms." 

t  The  charge  of  Lord  Kenyon,  at  the  Assizes  for  Salop, 
in  1795,  will  afford  a  specimen  of  the  prejudices  which  exten- 
sively prevailed  at  that  period  as  to  the  influence  of  unfair  prac- 
tices in  raising  the  prices  of  provisions  :  — 

"  Here,  gentlemen,  since  I  have  been  in  this  place,  a  report 
has  been  handed  to  me  (without  foundation  I  sincerely  hope), 
that  a  set  of  private  individuals  are  plundering  at  the  expense 
of  public  happiness,  by  endeavouring,  in  this  county,  in  this 
most  abundant  county,  to  purchase  the  grain  now  growing  upon 

N    4 


184<  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

among  the  causes  assigned.  The  war,  howevei', 
was  very  generally  considered  as  having  had  great 
influence  in  the  rise  of  prices.* 

With  regard  to  the  extent  of  the  deficiency. 
Lord  Sheffield,  in  the  House  of  Commons,  Decem- 
ber, 1795,  stated  it  to  be  from  y  to  ^  without  any 
old  stock,  and  without  any  prospect  of  adequate 
supply  from  abroad.  Various  remedies  were  pro- 
posed ;  that  which  was  mainly  relied  upon  and 
finally  adopted,  was  an  act,  granting  a  bounty 
of  from  l6s.  to  QOs.  the  quarter,  according  to  the 
quality,  on  wheat,  and  ()s.  the  cvvt.  on  flour  from 
the  south  of  Europe,  till  the  quantity  should 
amount  to  four  hundred  thousand  quarters  ;  and 