


the  soil.  For  the  sake  of  common  Immanity  I  trust  it  is  untrue. 
Gentlemen,  you  ought  to  be  tlie  champions  against  this  hydra- 
headed  monster.  'Tis  your  duty  as  justices  to  see  justice  done 
to  the  country.  In  your  respective  districts,  as  watchmen,  be  on 
your  guard.  1  am  convinced,  from  my  knowledge  of  you,  that  I 
have  no  need  to  point  out  your  duty  in  this  case  ;  and  though  the 
act  of  Edw.  VI.  be  repealed  (whether  wisely  or  unwisely  I 
take  not  upon  me  to  say),  yet  it  still  exists  an  offence  at  com- 
mon law,  coeval  with  the  constitution  ;  and  be  assured,  gentle- 
men, whoever  is  convicted  before  me  (and  I  believe  I  may  answer 
for  the  rest  of  my  brethren),  when  the  sword  of  justice  is  drawn,  it 
shall  not  be  sheathed  until  the  full  vengeance  of  the  law  is  in- 
flicted on  them  ;  neither  purse  nor  person  shall  prevent  it."  — 
Annals  of  Agriculture  for  1795,  vol.  xxv.  p.  111. 

*  Mr.  Fox  said,  "  The  war  certainly  has  had  a  most  decided 
effect,  so  far  as  it  has  tended  to  increase  the  consumption,  to 
diminish  the  production,  and  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  ob- 
taining supplies,  which  might  have  been  drawn  from  other 
quarters." — Parliamentary  Debates,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  239. 

It  was  with  reference  to  this  opinion  that  Mr.  Burke  observed, 
"  As  to  the  operation  of  the  war  in  causing  the  scarcity  of 
provisions,  I  understand  that  Mr.  Pitt  has  given  a  particular 
answer  to  it ;  but  I  do  not  think  it  worth  powder  and  shot." 
(  Thoughts  and  Details  on  Scarcity,  p.  33.)  As  the  seasons  of 
1791<  and  1795  form  so  important  a  feature  in  the  general 
impression  of  the  high  prices  ascribed  to  the  war  and  the 
restriction,  and  as  those  seasons  were  in  every  way  remarkable, 
an  extract,  descriptive  of  them,  from  the  publication  by  Mr. 
Burke  here  quoted,  will  be  found  inserted  in  the  Appendix. 


1793—1798.  185 

from  America,  till  it  should  amount  to  five  hundred 
thousand  quarters  ;  and  12.y.  to  15,s.  from  any  other 
part  of  Europe,  till  it  should  amount  to  five  hun- 
dred thousand  quarters ;  and  8.9.  to  10*.  after  it 
exceeded  that  quantity,  to  continue  till  the  30th 
September,  179t). 

Among  the  minor  measures  was  a  sort  of  self- 
denying  ordinance*,  by  which  the  members  of  both 
houses  of  parliament  bound  themselves  to  reduce 
the  consumption  of  bread  in  their  households  by 
one  third,  and  to  recommend,  among  those  whom 
they  could  influence,  a  similar  reduction. t 

The  prices  of  all  other  provisions  having  risen  in 
a  greater  or  less  proportion  to  wheat,  and  there 
being  a  very  general  apprehension  of  a  continuance 
of  the  scarcity,  it  had  become  manifestly  impossible 
for  the  working  classes  to  subsist  on  their  ordinary 
wages.  It  was  partly  from  a  conviction  to  this 
effect,  and  partly  in  consequence  of  the  tendency 
to  disturbance  and  riots  among  the  agricultural 
labourers,  that  the  allowance  system  was  at  this 
time  introduced.  There  was  at  the  same  time  a 
general  acquiescence  on  the  part  of  employers  in 
the  necessity  of  some  advance  of  wages,  which, 
however,  when  conceded,  bore  still  a  very  inade- 
quate  proportion    to    the   increased   price    of  the 