

7s.  6d.  -  95.  6d. 

11 5.   -   135. 

13d. 

22^. 

61.  .    81. 

48/.    -  50/. 

3d.  -  5d. 

Uhd.-  I6d. 

1793—1798.  191 

I  have  been  the  more  disposed  to  dwell  upon 
this  remarkable  feature  of  the  state  of  prices  in 
tlie  interval  under  consideration;  because  I  am 
quite  satisfied  that,  among  those  who  recollect  or 
have  heard  of  those  enormous  prices  of  colonial 
produce,  there  is  a  vague  impression  that,  as  they 
occurred  two  years  after  the  Bank  restriction,  and 
in  the  height  of  the  war,  they  were  the  conse- 
quence of  one  or  the  other. 

That  these  high  prices  were  not  tlie  conse- 
quence of  any  enlargement,  but  were  in  spite  of 
a  great  contraction  of  the  basis  of  the  currency, 
will  be  seen  presently;  and  it  is  quite  clear  that 
they  were  not  caused  by  a  demand  arising  out  of 
the  expenditure  of  our  government,  seeing  that 
the  demand  was  chiefly  from  abroad,  and  they 
were  not  connected  with  war  on  the  Continent, 
seeing  that  tlie  powers  of  the  Continent  were  at 
peace  from  the  spring  of  1797  till  1799.  The 
negative  of  the  influence  of  war  applies,  however, 
only  to  the  supposition  of  any  extra  consumption 
or  demand  thence  arising  to  account  for  the  high 
prices.  That  the  effect  of  the  war  was  to  obstruct 
supplies  and  to  increase  the  cost  of  production,  if  it 
were  only  by  the  difference  of  freight  and  in- 
surance, has  been  already  stated,  and  is  in  this,  and 
all  other  instances,  to  be  considered  as  being  im- 
plied. But  this  is  not  the  sense  to  which  the  sup- 
posed influence  of  war  on  prices  divested  of  tax- 
ation is  commonly  confined. 

Thus,  we  have  seen  that  at  the  close  of  1798 
(and  this  is  the  reason  for  having  extended  the 
epoch  to  six  instead  of  five  years),  while  corn 
and  provisions  generally,  and  some  other  arti- 
cles of  European  produce,  had,  as  a  consequence 
of  two  remarkably  unproductive  seasons,  risen 
upwards  of  100  per  cent,  in  1795  and  1796, 
and  had  subsided  at  the  termination  of  the  in- 
terval  to  the  level  from  whence  they  had  risen. 


192  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

another  and  a  most  important  class  of  com- 
modities reached,  by  the  end  of  1798,  to  an  enor- 
mous and  unprecedented  height,  and  were  then 
much  higher  than  during  any  subsequent  period  of 
the  war. 


Section  3. — Bank  Circulation^  1793  to  1798. 

In  the  preceding  sketch  of  prices  they  have  been 
considered  without  reference  to  the  state  of  the 
circulation. 

To  what  extent,  if  at  all,  the  great  fluctuations 
were  influenced  by  the  currency,  will  appear  in  a 
clearer  point  of  view  by  taking  a  survey  of  the  state 
of  the  circulation  during  the  whole  of  the  interval 
which  has  been  under  consideration,  than  if  de- 
tached references  had  been  made  to  it  in  the  pro- 
gress of  the  examination  of  the  circumstances 
which  immediately  affected  the  prices  through  the 
medium  of  supply  and  demand  ;  and  this  mode  of 
examining,  at  the  close  of  each  interval  or  epoch, 
the  regulation  of  the  Bank  issues,  and  the  general 
state  of  the  circulation,  during  such  interval,  will 
be  adopted  in  the  succeeding  epochs. 