

There  was  another  circumstance  which  had, 
probably,  more  than  any  other  single  cause,  con- 
tributed to  the  growth  of  the  country  circulation. 
It  is  well  known  that  rising  prices  of  corn  and 
farming  stock,  and  the  consequently  improved 
state  and  credit  of  the  farmers,  have  been  among 
the  principal  occasions  of  an  increased  issue  and 
circulation  by  the  country  banks :  and  this  was  a 
state  of  things  which  prevailed  between  I787  and 
1791.  During  that  interval,  after  a  low  range  of 
prices  preceding  the  harvest  of  1787>  there  was, 
without  any  extraordinary  scarcity,  such  a  degree 
of  comparative  deficiency  of  produce  as  raised  and 
maintained  a  relatively  high  range  of  prices  till  the 
harvest  of  1791,  the  abundance  of  which  occasioned 
a  temporary  considerable  fall  of  prices.  It  might 
be  thought  by  those  who  consider  every  increase 
of  the  circulation  as  a  cause,  of  a  rise  of  prices,  that 
those  of  agricultural  produce  from  I787  to  1792 

*  Being  one  half  of  its  liabilities,  which  were  17,524,250/. 


1793—1798.  195 

had  been  raised  by  tliat  increased  circulation.  But 
as  a  proof  that  the  rise  was.  not  the  effect  of  any 
increase  of  currency,  pecuHar  to  this  country,  it 
is  requisite  to  advert  to  the  fact,  that  the  ad- 
vance of  prices  had  been  greater  on  the  conti- 
nent of  Europe,  and  especially  in  France,  than 
here ;  and  that  in  order  to  prevent  the  effect  of 
that  higher  state  of  prices  abroad  from  drawing 
supplies  from  this  country,  our  own  crops  of  I788 
and  1789  having  been  considered  rather  deficient, 
the  exportation  from  this  country  was  prohibited 
by  proclamation  ;  and  if  the  prices  of  corn  had  been 
raised  by  the  amount  of  the  circulation  between 
1788  and  1790,  the  still  increased  amount  ought 
to  have  prevented  the  fall  which  occurred  at  the 
close  of  1791  and  the  beginning  of  1792. 

It  is  not  improbable,  indeed,  that  the  fall  of  prices 
of  agricultural  produce,  which  occurred  in  the  early 
part  of  1792,  as  a  consequence  of  the  abundant 
harvest  of  1791  >  had  the  eflect  of  impairing  the 
securities  of  the  country  banks,  through  that  me- 
dium of  issue,  and  may  thus,  concurrently  with 
the  recoil  from  overtrading  in  other  branches,  have 
occasioned  the  extensive  failures  and  discredit  that 
marked  the  close  of  1792  and  1793.  Of  that  ca- 
lamitous time,  some  contemporary  accounts  will  be 
found  in  the  Appendix. 

This  somewhat  detailed  explanation  of  the  cir- 
cumstances connected  with  the  country  circulation, 
which  experienced  so  great  a  derangement,  has  ap- 
peared to  me  to  be  desirable,  as  affording  means 
for  the  better  judging  of  the  position  of  the  Bank 
of  England  in  1793,  and  of  the  influence  of  the 
regulation  of  its  issues  in  the  eventful  period  now 
under  consideration. 