

"  At  a  select  meeting  of  gentlemen  interested 
in  and  acquainted  with  the  principles  of  internal 
circulation,  held  at  the  London  Tavern,  on  Satur- 
day, the  2d  April,  1796,  Sir  Stephen  Lushington, 
Bart.,  in  the  chair  :  —  Resolved, 

1.  That  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  meeting  that 
there  has  existed,  for  a  considerable  time  past,  and 
does  exist  at  present,  an  alarming  scarcity  of  money 
in  the  city  of  London. 

2.  That  this  scarcity  proceeds  chiefly,  if  not  en- 
tirely, from  an  increase  of  the  commerce  of  the 

*  The  notice  was  to  the  following  effect :  — 

"31.  Dec.  1795. 
"  That  in  future,  whenever  bills  sent  in  for  discount  shall  in 
any  day  amount  to  a  larger  sum  than  it  shall  be  resolved  to  dis- 
count on  that  day,  a  pro  rata  proportion  of  such  bills  in  each 
parcel  as  are  not  otherwise  objectionable,  will  be  returned  to  the 
person  sending  in  the  same,  without  regard  to  the  respectability 
of  the  party  sending  in  the  bills,  or  the  solidity  of  the  bills  them- 
selves.'' 


1793—1798.  201 

country,  and  from  the  great  diminution  of  mer- 
cantile discounts  which  the  Bank  of  England  has 
thought  proper  to  introduce  in  the  conduct  of  that 
establishment  during  the  last  three  months." 

After  some  other  resolutions  to  the  same  effect, 
a  committee  was  appointed,  consisting  of  the  Chair- 
man, Walter  Boyd,  Esq.,  Sir  James  Sanderson, 
Bart.,  Mr.  Alderman  Anderson,  Mr.  Alderman 
Lushington,  Joini  Inglis,  Esq.,  J.  J.  Angerstein, 
Esq.,  for  the  purpose  of  digesting  the  outlines  of  a 
plan  for  augmenting  the  circulating  medium  of  the 
country. 

A  plan  was  afterwards  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Boyd, 
for  a  board  to  be  constituted  by  act  of  Parliament, 
for  the  support  of  credit.  They  were  to  issue  pro- 
missory notes,  payable  six  months  after  date,  bear- 
ing interest  at  the  rate  of  l^d.  per  100/.,  or  1/.  18*. 
per  cent,  per  annum,  upon  receiving  the  value  in 
gold  and  silver,  Bank  of  England  notes,  or  in  bills 
of  Exchange  not  having  more  than  three  months 
to  run. 

The  details  of  the  plan  were  given  in  a  report 
drawn  up  by  Mr.  Boyd.  These  were  laid  before  the 
chancellor  of  the  exchequer,  with  w^hom  the  com- 
mittee had  an  interview.  They  there  learned  that 
it  had  been  proposed  by  the  Bank  directors,  as  the 
best  remedy  for  the  scarcity  of  money,  that  the 
floating  debt  should  be  funded.  The  minister  said, 
that  he  would  first  try  what  this  would  do  towards 
removing  the  scarcity  of  money,  and  if  it  should 
answer  the  purpose,  the  estabHshment  of  aboard  for 
the  support  of  credit  would  be  unnecessary. 

Mr.  Boyd,  in  his  pamphlet  from  which  these  ex- 
tracts are  made,  adds  :  — 