

*  The  policy,  on  the  part  of  the  Bank,  of  this  extreme  con- 
traction was  questioned  by  Mr.  Henry  Thornton,  in  his  evidence 
before  the  committees  in  1797,  as  also  in  his  publication  on  paper 
credit  in  1802.  The  rationale  of  the  objections  that  have  been 
urged  against  that  degree  of  reduction  of  the  circulation  is,  that 
having  carried  it  to  a  degree  that  was  effectual  in  restoring  the 
exchanges,  and  thus  securing  the  return  from  abroad  of  the  gold 
that  had  been  exported,  the  expedient  course,  on  the  part  of 
the  Bank,  when  the  demand  for  gold  became  confined  to  the 
interior,  and  evidently  arose  from  the  discredit  of  the  country 
circulation,  was  to  enlarge  its  issues,  instead  of  further  contract- 
ing them,  as  the  Bank  did  ;  for,  by  such  further  contraction,  the 
difficulties  and  discredit  of  the  country  banks  were  aggravated, 
and  the  demands  upon  them,  and  by  them  upon  the  Bank,  for 
gold  became  more  urgent.  And  the  success  of  an  opposite 
course  in  a  memorable  instance  of  more  recent  date  has  given 
considerable  force  to  the  reasoning  upon  which  that  objection 
proceeds.  But  the  doctrine  is  to  be  received  with  great  caution, 
as  it  may  easily  be  perverted  into  a  justification  of  a  very  lax 
and  improvident  management. 

The  directors,  in  1797,  pursued  a  clear  and  steady  course  in 
the  reduction  of  the  amount  of  their  paper,  in  order  to  coun- 
teract the  drain  on  their  treasure;  and  tliere  is  reason  to  believe, 
that  if,  instead  of  applying  to  the  government  with  a  statement 
of  their  apprehensions,  which  led  to  an  interference  by  the 
order  of  council  of  the  26th  of  February,  they  had,  as  the  di- 
rectors in  1783  did,  gone  on  with  the  intention  of  paying  to 
their  last  guinea  (when  at  worst  they  could  but  have  stopped), 
they  would  have  surmounted  the  run.      The  reason  for  this 


1793—1798.  '205 

The  effect  of  this  extreme  contraction  was  felt 
chiefly,  as  may  be  supposed,  in  the  money  market. 
Exchequer  bills,  bearing  3\(L  per  day,  were  sold 
at  Si.  and  31.  10s.  per  cent,  discount,  and  it  was 
said,  that  in  some  instances  sales  were  made  at  5l. 
])er  cent,  discount.  Navy  and  victualling  bills 
were  also  at  an  enormous  discount,  and  the  3  per 
cent,  consols  fell  below  50.  Mercantile  bills,  ex- 
cepting such  as  came  within  Bank  time  and  regu- 
lations, were  hardly  negotiable  at  all,  or  were  sub- 
ject to  heavy  commissions,  by  way  of  evading  the 
operation  of  the  usury  law. 

But  while  in  the  rate  of  interest,  and  in  the 
price  of  public  securities,  the  effect  was  naturally 
very  great,  it  was  hardly  perceptible  in  the  markets 
for  goods.  The  price  of  corn  *  had  previously 
been  falling  from  restored  abundance,  while  from 
the  opposite  cause,  scarcity,  actual  or  apprehended, 
colonial  produce  continued  to  rise,  notwithstand- 
ing not  only  the  pressure  on  the  money  market, 