


210  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION. 


Section  4.  —  Summarif  of  the  'preceding  Survey. 

From  the  preceding  view  of  the  state  of  the 
circulation  and  of  prices,  from  1793  to  1798,  it 
appears, 

1.  'Ihat  it  was  tlie  extraordinary  adverse  ba- 
lance of  foreign  payments,  and  not  an  increased 
circulation  or  quantity  of  money,  that  caused  the 
depression  of  the  exchanges,  and  the  efflux  of  bul- 
lion in  1795  and  1796,  inasmuch  as  the  exchanges 
rose  and  bullion  flowed  rapidly  back  coincidently 
with  an  increase  of  the  Bank  circulation,  when  the 
foreign  payments  ceased. 

2.  That  the  Bank  directors  of  that  time  acted 
upon  the  principle,  and  found  it  efficacious,  of  con- 
trolling the  exchanges  by  a  contraction  of  their 
issues. 

3.  That  in  consequence  of  the  two  very  defi- 
cient harvests  of  179^-  and  1795,  a  great  rise  of 
the  prices  of  provisions  took  place  in  1795  and 
I79G,  coincidently  with  a  remarkable  contraction 
of  the  Bank  circulation  ;  and  that  there  was,  coin- 
cidently with  an  enlargement  of  the  circulation, 
a  rapid  fall  of  the  prices  of  provisions,  and  a  com- 
plete subsidence  of  them  at  the  close  of  1798,  to 
the  level  of  what  they  had  been  at  the  commence- 
ment of  1793. 

4.  That  while,  from  1796  to  the  close  of 
1798,  the  prices  of  provisions  and  of  European 
produce  generally  were  falling,  the  prices  of  all 
transatlantic  produce  were  rapidly  rising,  coinci- 
dently with  a  great  rise  of  the  exchanges,  and 
reached  a  greater  height  than  they  ever  after- 
wards attained,  until  the  commencement  of  1814. 

.5.  That  the  great  fall  of  the  prices  of  corn, 
and  of  European  produce  generally,  from  1796  to 


1793—1798.  ^11 

the  close  of  1798,  took  place  coincidently  with  a 
progressively  increasing  government  expenditure, 
defrayed  chiefly  by  loans. 

6.  That  there  is  as  little  ground,  therefore,  for 
the  hypothesis  of  the  influence  of  war  demand 
(except  in  the  case  of  articles  constituting  naval 
and  military  stores),  as  there  is  for  that  of  the 
circulation,  in  accounting  for  the  very  extraordi- 
nary, and  thus  far  unprecedented,  fluctuations  of 
prices  which  characterised  the  interval  that  has 
passed  under  review. 


p  9, 


212  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 


CHAP.   III. 

ON     THE    STATE    OF    PRICES,  AND    OF    THE    CIRCULA- 
TION,   FROM    1799    TO    1803. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  period  now  com- 
mg  under  consideration,  while  the  prices  of  coffee, 
sugar,  cotton,  and  generally  of  all  transatlantic 
produce  were,  in  consequence  of  a  continued  spe- 
culative demand  for  export,  immoderately  high  ; 
and  while  various  other  articles  were  in  consequence 
of  increased  cost  of  production,  arising  out  of  the 
circumstances  of  the  war,  at  a  greater  or  less  ad- 
vance upon  what  had  been  their  ordinary  level 
before  the  war,  the  prices  of  provisions  were  mo- 
derate ;  or  rather  if  the  increased  cost  of  production 
of  a  foreign  supply,  of  which  it  was  supposed  that 
we  then  stood  habitually  in  need,  be  taken  into 
account,  might  be  considered  extremely  low. 