

opinion  is,  that  the  circulation  was  ah-eady  so  contracted  that 
the  reduced  number  of  notes  then  out-standing  were  become  so 
much  wanted  for  immediate  payments,  as  to  be  less  and  less 
likely  to  be  returned  to  the  Bank  for  gold ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  tide  of  the  metals  was  setting  in  so  strongly  from 
abroad  as  almost  to  insure  a  sufficient  supply  to  meet  the  inter- 
nal demand.  A  strong  corroborative  ground  for  such  a  suppo- 
sition is,  that  before  the  order  in  council  for  the  restriction  had 
reached  Dublin,  the  run  on  the  Bank  of  Ireland  had  altogether 
ceased,  and  the  directors  of  that  establishment  expressed  great 
reluctance  at  being  prevented  from  continuing  to  pay  in  specie, 
which  they  considered  themselves  well  able  to  do.  And  it  is  a 
fair  presumption  that  as  a  demand  for  gold,  under  the  alarm  of 
invasion  in  Ireland,  had  been  one  of  the  predisposing  causes  of 
the  run  in  this  country,  the  same  general  circumstances  which 
restored  confidence  in  the  circulation  there  would  quickly  operate 
in  arresting  the  progress  of  discredit  here. 

*  So  buoyant  were  the  corn  markets,  notwithstanding  the 
contracted  state  of  the  currency,  that,  in  consequence  of  bad 
weather  at  the  harvest  of  1797,  the  price  rose  in  September  of 
that  year  10*.  the  quarter,  and  afterwards  fell  again  slowly  when 
the  sufficiency  of  the  supply  was  ascertained. 


206  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

but  notwithstanding  also  the  great  advance  of  the 
exchanges.* 

On  the  day  following  the  order  in  council,  the 
Bank  increased  its  issues,  and  on  the  28th  of  Feb- 
ruary t  the  amount  stood  at  one  million  higher 
than  it  had  done  on  the  25th.  The  average  for 
the  whole  year  was  somewhat  higher  than  it  had 
been  in  1796,  although  lower  than  in  1795.  But 
in  the  amount  of  the  Bank  circulation  in  1797 
are  included  notes  under  5/.,  amounting  to 
somewhat  under  a  million,  which  must  be  con- 
sidered as  wholly  in  the  place  of  so  much  gold, 
which  would  otherwise  have  circulated.  Indeed 
the  increase  of  Bank  notes  was  in  a  small  propor- 
tion only  to  the  increase  of  bullion,  which  was 
between  three  and  four  millions. 

The  exchanges,  which  had  given  way  a  little 
on   the  post  day  following  the  order  in  council, 

*  It  is  not  possible  to  adduce  an  instance  more  striking  than 
that  which  is  here  adverted  to,  of  the  inefficacy  of  a  contraction 
of  the  circulation  in  counteracting  the  tendency  to  an  advance 
of  prices  under  the  influence  of  actual  scarcity,  or  of  the  force 
of  opinion  of  prospective  scarcity,  relatively  to  the  estimated 
rate  of  consumption.  For  in  the  present  instance,  instead  of  a 
rise  of  prices  of  exportable  commodities  having  been  caused  by 
an  exchange  adverse  to  this  country,  and  therefore  holding  out 
a  compensation  to  the  foreign  buyer  for  a  higher  price,  the 
prices  of  such  commodities  advanced  50  to  100  per  cent.,  while 
the  exchanges  likewise  advanced  10  to  20  per  cent. 