

But  low  as  the  amount  of  the  circulation  had 
been,  on  the  average  of  the  last  nine  months  of 
1795,  and  the  early  part  of  1796,  it  was  still  fur- 
ther reduced  in  the  last  six  months  of  1796,  as  will 
be  seen  by  the  following  return  of  the  quarterly 
averages :  — 

January  to  March     -  -  10,824,150^. 

April  to  June       -  -  10,770,200/. 

July  to  September  -  9,720,440/. 

October  to  December  -  9,645,710/. 

It  might  have  been  imagined  that  the  contrac- 
tion had  thus  been  pushed  far  enough,  inasmuch  as 
the  exchanges  had  improved,  and  were  evidently 
improving,  so  as  almost  to  ensure  a  return  of  the 
bullion  that  had  been  exported.  But  a  fresh  cause 
of  drain  supervened.  This  cause  is  thus  explained 
in  the  report  of  the  Lords'  Committee  of  Secrecy 
in  1797:  — 

"  The  alarm  of  invasion  which,  when  an  immediate  attack 
was  first  appi'ehended  in  Ireland,  had  occasioned  some  extraor- 
dinary demand  for  cash  on  the  Bank  of  England,  in  the  months 
of  December  and  January  last,  began  in  February  to  produce 
similar  effects  in  the  North  of  England.  Your  Committee  find, 
that,  in  consequence  of  this  apprehension,  the  farmers  suddenly 
brought  the  produce  of  their  lands  to  sale,  and  carried  the  notes 
of  the  country  banks,  which  they  had  collected  by  these  and  other 
means,  into  those  banks  for  payment ;  that  this  unusual  and  sudden 
demand  for  cash  reduced  the  several  banks  at  Newcastle  to  the 
necessity  of  suspending  their  payments  in  specie,  and  of  availing 
themselves  of  all  the  means  in  their  power  of  procuring  a  speedy 
supply  of  cash  from  the  metropolis  ;  that  the  effects  of  this  de- 
mand on  the  Newcastle  Banks,  and  of  their  suspension  of  pay- 
ments in  cash,  soon  spread  over  various  parts  of  the  country, 
from  whence  similar  applications  were  consequently  made  to 


20i  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

the  metropolis  for  cash  ;  that  the  alarm  thus  diffused,  not  only 
occasioned  an  increased  demand  for  cash  in  the  country,  but 
probably  a  disposition  in  many  to  hoard  what  was  thus  obtained  : 
that  this  call  on  the  metropolis,  through  whatever  channels, 
directly  affected  the  Bank  of  England  as  the  great  repository  of 
cash,  and  was  in  the  course  of  still  further  operation  upon  it  when 
stopped  by  the  minute  of  council  of  the  26th  February." 

The  landing  of  some  troops  from  a  French  fii- 
gate  which  had  accidentally  got  into  the  port  of 
Fishgard,  in  Wales,  tended  to  increase  the  prevail- 
ing alarm. 

The  contraction  of  the  circulation,  immediately 
previous  to  the  issuing  of  the  order  in  council,  had 
been  carried  to  an  extreme  degree,  the  issues 
on  the  25th  February  liaving  been  reduced  to 
8,640,250/.  * 