

If  this  very  statement  was  not  descriptive  of 
real  scarcity,  it  is  difficult  to  say  to  what  degree  of 
deficiency  the  term  could  with  propriety  be  applied. 
So  formidable  were  the  appearances  at  that  time  of 
increasing  deartli,  that,  in  pursuance  of  the  recom- 
mendation of  the  committee,  recourse  w^as  again 
had  to  a  bounty,  and  an  act  was  accordingly  passed, 

'^  Lord  Ilawkesbury  conch;dcd  by  moving  "  That  leave  be 
given  to  bring  in  a  bill  to  prohibit  an}^  person  or  persons  from 
selling  or  offering  for  sale  any  bread  which  has  not  been  baked 
for  a  certain  number  of  hours."  Leave  was  given.  The  blank 
for  specifying  the  number  of  hours  was  filled  up  with  "  twenty- 
four."  The  bill  went  through  all  its  stages  on  the  following 
day.  Various  other  regulations  were  afterwards  proposed,  and 
some  of  them  adopted. 

P  4 


216  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

guaranteeing  to  the  importer  the  difference  between 
the  average  price  of  English  wheat  in  the  second 
week  after  importation  and  90.9.  on  wheat  from 
the  south  of  Europe,  Africa,  and  America  ;  85*. 
from  the  Baltic  and  Germany  ;  and  90s.  from  Arch- 
angel, if  imported  before  the  1st  of  October,  1800. 
Notwithstanding  the  reasonable  probability  from 
the  encouragement  thus  held  out  of  a  large  forth- 
coming importation,  such  was  the  scantiness  of 
the  supply  in  the  markets,  and  such  the  apprehen- 
sion excited  by  the  unfavourable  appearance  of  the 
growing  crops  in  the  spring  of  1800*,  that  the 
prices  of  provisions  continued  to  advance  until 
June,  1800,  when  they  had  reached  the  following 
quotations  :  — 

Wlieat,  Gazette  average,   134.y.  5d. 
Barley  -  -  69s.  Id. 

Oats  -  -  51*.  Id. 

In  Smithfield  market. 

Beef  sold  for  4,s-.  6d.  to  6s.  4r/.  per  stone. 

Mutton  and  Pork    5s.  4d.  to  6s.  8d. 

In  Newgate  and  Leadenhall  markets. 

Beef  -  -  9d.tols.2d.iper\h. 

Mutton  -  -  8(7.  to  lOd. 

Veal         -  -  -  9^.  to  1*. 

Pork  in  St.  James's  market,  9^.  to  lOd. 

Hay,  -  -  -  64.9.  to  122.9.  per  Id. 

Straw  -  -  54<s.  to  63s. 

The  summer  of  1800  was  hot  and  dry,  and  as 
the  harvest  approached,  the  crops  assumed  a  more 
promising  appearance.  The  weather,  till  the  third 
week  of  August,  was  favourable  for  securing  the 

*  The  autumn  of  1799  had  again  been  unfavourable  for  sow- 
ing wheat ;  the  winter  had  been  somewhat  hke  the  preceding, 
marked  by  early  severity  of  frost,  with  alternations  of  rapid 
thaws;  and  the  spring  of  1800  was  exceedingly  wet. 


1799—1803.  217 

corn  in  the  more  forward  districts,  and  some  quan- 
tity was  well  got  in. 

At  the  same  tune  a  considerable  importation  was 
in  progress.  There  was,  in  consequence  a  sudden 
and  great  fall  in  all  the  principal  markets,  and  the 
averages  in  August,  1800,  declined  to 