

Wheat  -  -  61*.  8^. 

Barley  -  -  35*. 

Oats  -  -  27*.  4c?. 

Beef,  in  Smithfield  -  3.9.  8^?.  to  5s.  per  st. 

Mutton  -  -  4.9.  4fd.  to  5s.  4<d. 

Hay         -  -  -  70.9. 

Straw         -  -  -  59,s. 

To  this  dry,  harsh,  and  ungenial  spring  suc- 
ceeded a  cold  and  almost  uninterruptedly  wet  sum- 
mer and  autumn.  The  consequence  was,  great 
injury  to  all,  and  destruction  to  some,  of  the  crops  ; 
and  henceforth  the  prices  of  grain  rose  without 
intermission.  At  the  close  of  the  year  the  averages 
of  corn  were. 

Wheat         -  -         94.9.  <2d. 

Barley       -  -         45*.  5d.* 

Oats  -  -         SSs.Sd. 

Although  parliament  had  met  in  September  1799, 
there  do  not  appear  to  have  been  any  discussions 
in  it  on  the  high  price  of  provisions  till  the  18th 
of  February,  1800,  when  the  House  of  Commons 
resolved  itself  into  a  committee  on  the  report  re- 
specting the  assize  of  bread,  and  the  deficiency  of 
the  last  crop  of  grain.  Lord  Hawkesbury  then  took 
occasion  to  make  some  statements  which  it  may  be 
worth  while  to  record. 

"  As  to  the  quantity  of  wheat  consumed,"  he  said,  "  a  quar- 
ter of  wheat  in  the  year  for  each  nian  was  the  general  calcula- 


*  The  crops  of  barley  and  oats  had  not  suffered  in  the  same 
degree  as  wheat,  and  the  prices,  it  may  be  observed,  are  below 
their  ordinary  relative  rate. 


1799—1803.  Q15 

tion.  This  allowance  would  require  between  eight  and  nine 
millions  of  quarters  to  supply  this  country  for  a  year.  The 
produce  of  the  country  varied  in  different  years ;  but  the  aver- 
age computation  between  very  high  and  very  low  seasons  might 
come  nearest  tlie  truth.  This  average  did  not  feed  the  country  ; 
for  tlie  average  importation  for  several  years  back  might  be 
estimated  at  one  twentieth  of  the  consumption.  The  deficiency 
of  the  late  crop  might  be  estimated  at  one  third  of  the  usual 
crop,  which  must  be  added  to  the  one  twentieth  usually  imported, 
in  order  to  estimate  what  importation  would  be  necessary  this 
season.  It  must,  liowever,  be  considered  that  there  was  in  the 
country  a  stock  in  hand  from  the  preceding  harvest  sufficient  to 
supply  one  month.  But  if  we  also  take  the  foreign  supply  in 
the  country  at  the  same  period,  there  was  certainly  much  more 
than  would  be  consumed  in  a  month.  Considering  all  these 
circumstances,  the  probable  amount  of  importation  necessary 
this  season  would  be  about  600,000  quarters  of  wheat,  whereas, 
in  1796,  the  importation  was  more  than  800,000  quarters.  The 
millers  and  others  skilled  in  the  subject  had  recommended  some 
regulations  as  to  the  use  of  new  bread,  and  had  computed  that 
by  such  regulations  there  might  be  a  saving  of  one  fortnight  of 
the  whole  consumption.  It  had  also  been  stated  that  millers, 
when  the  price  of  grain  was  high,  and,  consequently,  when  bread 
was  dear,  extracted  from  the  grain  a  greater  quantity  of  flour 
than  they  did  at  other  times.  This  would  afford  a  second 
saving.  A  third  would  arise  from  the  use  of  substitutes  for 
bread.  As  the  price  of  grain,  even  in  those  countries  from 
which  we  could  receive  a  supply,  was  high,  it  was  to  be  feared 
that  the  high  price  of  grain  in  this  country  was  inevitable  ;  but 
from  a  review  of  all  the  circumstances,  it  might  be  collected 
that  there  was  no  real  danger  of  scarcity."  * 