


1799—1803.  221 

Tierney's,  on  the  state  of  tlie  nation,  he  observed 
shortly,  — 

'  "  As  to  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank,  that  stoppage  has  taken 
place  for  some  time,  and  the  difference  between  the  paper  cir- 
culating medium  of  that  time  and  the  present,  is  very  incon- 
siderable."— Parliamentary  History,  vol.  xxxv. 

On  the  24th  of  November,  Mr.  Ryder  pre- 
sented the  first  report  from  the  Commons'  com- 
mittee on  the  high  price  of  provisions,  from  which 
the  following  are  extracts  :  — 

"  There  appears  upon  the  whole  of  this  Information,  reason 
to  believe,  that  the  general  deficiency  of  the  crop  of  wheat  in 
England  and  Whales  does  not  amount  to  quite  so  much  as  one 
fourth." 

*'  The  accounts  of  the  stock  on  hand,  furnished  by  these 
returns,  are  necessarily  more  uncertain  ;  they  are  in  some  de- 
gree various ;  but  they  do  not  on  the  whole  furnish  any  ground 
for  doubting  the  prevailing  opinion,  confirmed  by  the  general 
information  of  the  members  who  have  attended  your  committee, 
that  the  stock  of  British  corn  at  the  harvest  was  reduced  far 
below  its  usual  amount,  and  was  in  most  places  nearly,  in  many 
absolutely,  exhausted," 

"  In  addition  to  what  has  been  stated  respecting  the  produce 
of  the  crop  and  the  stock  in  hand,  it  is  to  be  observed,  with  a 
view  to  the  state  of  the  markets,  in  the  time  which  has  elapsed 
since  the  harvest,  that  the  farmers,  during  that  period,  have 
had  a  double  demand  for  the  new  crop  for  consumption  and 
for  seed." 

"  It  appears  to  your  committee,  that  these  circumstances 
might  be  expected  to  have  produced  a  very  high  price  at  this 
season,  even  if  the  late  harvest  had  been  abundant ;  that  the 
degree  in  which  it  has  been  deficient  must  naturally  have  added 
to  such  prices,  whether  with  or  without  the  concurrence  of  any 
other  causes,  the  existence  and  effects  of  which  your  com- 
mittee propose  to  investigate." 

The  committee  then  state  their  expectation, 
that  the  deficiency  will  be  remedied  by  the  double 
operation  of  importation  and  economy.  With  re- 
spect to  importation  the  committee  state  that, 

"  Within  twelve  months  from  the  26th  of  September,  1799, 
to  the  27th  of  September,  1800,  there  have  been  imported  into 
Great  Britain  no  less  than  1,261,932  quarters  of  wheat  and 
flour,  67,988  of  barley,  479,320  of  oats,  and  300,6931b.  of  rice. 
This  happened  under  the  unfavourable  circumstances  of  a  harvest 


222  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

abroad  uncommonly  deficient  in  quality,  and  not  abundant  in 
quantity,  and  of  tbe  late  period  of  the  season,  when  the  bounty 
was  granted  by  parliament."  * 

The  committee  proceed  to  offer  various  sugges- 
tions ;  the  encouragement  of  the  fisheries,  the 
stoppage  of  the  distilleries,  a  bounty  on  import- 
ation, a  recommendation  from  the  highest  autho- 
rity, pointing  out  the  advantages  which  would  be 
derived  from  the  general  practice  of  economy  and 
frugality  in  articles  of  food.  And  with  reference 
to  this  last  suggestion,  the  committee  observes  :  — 