

Of  corn,  the  Gazette  averages  for  England  and 
Wales  were,  in  January,  1799,  — 

For  Wheat  -  49*.  6d. 

Barley  -  29*.  4d. 

Oats  -  19.?.  lOd. 

And  the  following  were  the  prices  of  meat :  — 
Beef,  in  Smithfield,       -       36-.  to  3s.  4d.  per  st. 
Mutton  -  -       3s.  to  4*.  Qd 

Pork     -  -  -       2.9.  8d.  to  36-.  8^. 

Hay,  aver.  St.  James's  mar.  45*.  6d.  per  Id. 
Straw,      -      ditto,       -       31.9. 

Prices,  as  low  as  they  had  been  on  an  average 
of  several  years  before  1793.  And  the  ex- 
changes were  at  so  high  a  rate  as  indicated  a 
greater  value  of  the  currency  relatively  to  the 
currencies  of  other   countries,   than   had   existed 


1799—1803.  213 

with  a  trifling  exception  dining  tlie  preceding  part 
of  the  century.  But  a  great  cliange  was  about 
to  take  place ;  the  prices  of  provisions,  and  of 
other  P^uropean  produce,  rising  to  an  enormous 
height,  while  transatlantic  produce  experienced  a 
very  great  fill,  at  the  same  time  that  the  exchanges 
underwent  extraordinary  fluctuations. 


Section  1. — Rise  of  the  Prices  of  Provisions  and 
other  Articles  of  European  Produce  from  the 
Spring  of  1799  to  the  Spring  o/^1801. 

The  winter  of  1798-99  was  extremely  rigor- 
ous, and  had  set  in  very  early.  The  autumn 
of  1798  had  been  very  unfavourable  for  wheat 
sowing  (which,  partly  perhaps  from  this  cause,  was 
said  to  be  to  a  smaller  extent  than  usual),  and  the 
subsequent  weather  was  throughout  adverse  to 
vegetation.*  Severe  frosts  setting  in  early,  and 
alternating  with  rapid  thaws,  and  heavy  falls  of 
snow  occurring  into  an  advanced  period  of  the 
spring,  gave  a  general  character  of  untowardness 
to  the  season  of  1799,  which  the  subsequent  pro- 
gress of  it  more  than  realised. 

Under  this  unpromising  aspect  of  the  season, 
the  prices  of  grain  advanced,  slowly  however  at 
first,  the  averages  for  March  having  risen  in  a  very 

*  The  severity  of  the  frosts  and  the  suddenness  of  the  thaws 
during  this  month  have,  in  many  respects,  been  unfavourable  to 
the  young  wheats,  especially  those  which  were  sown  early. 
These  causes  have  likewise  prevented  the  operations  of  the 
plough  in  preparing  turnip  and  other  grounds  for  wheat,  rye, 
Sec,  as  well  as  for  the  making  of  summer  fallows.  In  the  more 
western  parts  of  the  island  our  reporters  also  observe  that  less 
wheat  than  usual  has  been  sown  on  account  of  the  frosts,  and 
some  other  impediments.  —  Monthly  Agricultural  Report  for 
January,  1799. 

p  3 


214  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

trifling  degree.     But  the  spring  proving  to  be  ex- 
cessively cold  and  ungenial,  and  the  appearance  of 
the  growing  crops  very  unpromising  a  rapid  rise 
took  place  in  May,  when  the  averages  for  grain 
were, 