

Under  these  circumstances  of  actual  and  appre- 

*  On  the  policy  of  this  measure  it  is,  perhaps,  scarcely  neces- 
sary to  remark,  as  it  is  not  probable  (although  our  subsequent 
policy  in  legislation  about  corn,  in  the  opposite  direction,  is 
hardly  less  absurd,  and  certainly  more  injurious,  as  it  is  more 
permanent),  that  any  such  gross  error  in  legislation  will  be 
repeated.  It  ought,  indeed,  to  have  been  quite  evident,  that 
the  enormously  high  prices  then  prevailing,  and  the  further  rise 
anticipated,  would  have  the  effect  of  inducing  preparations,  on 
the  part  of  the  merchants,  to  bring  forward  all  tlie  corn  that 
could  be  collected,  and  to  hasten  the  importation  as  much  as 
possible.  The  very  extravagance  of  the  measure,  however, 
proves  the  magnitude  of  the  apprehensions,  which  were  then 
entertained  of  the  further  progress  of  the  dearth. 


224<  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

h ended  deficiency,  the  prices  of  provisions  con- 
tinued to  advance.  The  averages  of  grain  in 
December,  1800,  have  already  been  given.  They 
advanced  progressively  till  March,  1801,  when 
they  were  — 

For  Wheat         -  156*.  2d 

Barley  -  906-.  qd. 

Oats  -  47*.  2rf. 

And  the  following  were  the  prices  of  meat :  — 

Beef,  in  Smithfield,  5.9.  to  6.9.  6f/. 

Mutton,            -  -           6.9.  6g?.  to  8.9. 

Veal,             -  -          6.9.  to  8*.  6r/. 

Pork,             -  -          6.9.  M.  to  7^. 
In  retail, 

Beef  -  -  lOd  to  \^\d. 

Mutton  -         -  llr/.  to  12f/. 

Veal  -  -  12d  to  14d 

A  rise  in  the  price  of  dairy  produce  would  na- 
turally follow  from  the  same  general  causes. 

And  not  only  had  there  been  this  enormous  rise 
in  the  prices  of  provisions,  between  the  close  of 
1798  and  the  spring  of  1801,  but  many  other  articles 
of  European  raw  produce  had  experienced  a  simul- 
taneous advance,  partly  as  the  consequence  of  the 
same  inclemency  of  the  seasons  as  had  prevailed 
in  this  country,  and  partly  from  the  extraordinary 
obstructions  to  importation  from  political  causes. 
Thus  wool  and  tallow  rose  from  the  twofold  cause 
of  the  seasons  in  diminishing  both  the  home  and 
foreign  produce,  and  flax,  hemp,  timber,  foreign 
iron,  linseed,  in  short,  all  articles  for  our  supply 
of  which  we  depended  wholly,  or  in  part,  on  im- 
portation from  the  Baltic,  experienced  a  very  con- 
siderable rise,  not  only  in  consequence  of  the 
embargo  in  Russia,  in  the  autumn  of  1800,  but 
also  in  consequence  of  the  threatened  hostility  of 


1799—1803.  225 

Denmark,  whicli  was  likely  to  close  against  us  the 
passage  of  the  Sound.  In  addition  to  this  exten- 
sive dearth  of  raw  produce  was  the  dearness  of 
many  articles  of  general  consumption,  occasioned 
by  the  progress  of  taxation,  such  as  the  heavy  duties 
of  excise  on  salt,  soap,  candles,  and  leather,  which 
may  be  considered  as  necessaries,  and  on  malt 
and  beer,  sugar,  tea,  and  tobacco  and  spirits,  which 
are  secondary  necessaries,  or,  perhaps,  more  cor- 
rectly speaking,  necessaries  to  all  the  classes  above 
the  very  poorest.  Fuel  of  every  description  had 
risen  considerably  from  the  same  general  causes. 