

96a-.  9.d.  for  Wheat. 
,54^.  Sd.  -  Barley. 
35^.9^.    -    Oats. 

The  promising  appearances  of  restored  abundance 
were,  however,  soon  changed  into  the  sad  reality 
of  renewed  and  aggravated  dearth. 

A  portion,  not  exceeding,  according  to  the  re- 
ports, one  half  of  the  crops,  was  secured  in  good 
order  before  the  19th  of  August,  when  heavy  and 
almost  incessant  rains  set  in,  accompanied  by  a 
high  temperature  and  a  close  atmosphere,  in  con- 
sequence of  which  a  great  deal  of  the  wheat  was 
sprouted,  and  otherwise  injured.  The  portion  that 
had  been  secured  in  the  southern  division  of  the 
kingdom,  before  the  rains  set  in,  and  therefore  good 
as  to  mere  condition,  and  greatly  superior  to  that 
of  1799,  proved  to  be  coarse  and  shrivelled  and 
light,  and  consequently  greatly  deficient  in  yield. 
Tiiis  description  applied  to  the  quality  of  the  grain 
generally.  But  the  rains,  which  came  on  in  August, 
caught  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  wheat  still 
in  the  fields,  even  in  the  home  and  some  of  the 
southern  districts,  and  injured  the  whole  of  the 
crops  in  tlie  northern  parts  of  the  island.  Accord- 
ingly, bad  as  the  crops  were  in  England,  they  were 
still  worse  in  Scotland,  and  considerable  purchases 
were  in  consequence  made  in  Mark  Lane  for  ship- 
ment thither.  Under  these  circumstances,  notwith- 
standing an  importation  of  foreign  corn  to  a  very 
large  amount,  that  of  wheat  alone  being  1,242,507 
quarters,  prices  rose  as  rapidly  as  they  had  just 
before  fallen. 


218  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

The  rise,  in  the  present  instance,  had  been  acceler- 
ated by  the  circumstance  of  the  Russian  government 
having,  in  tlie  autumn  of  1800,  laid  an  embargo 
on  British  shipping.  This  act  was  considered,  as 
it  proved  to  be,  equivalent  to  a  declaration  of  war; 
and  as  the  Danish  government  was  known  to  be 
unfriendly  to  ours,  apprehensions  were  naturally  en- 
tertained, as  they  were  eventually  realised,  that  in 
the  ensuing  season  the  Baltic  might  be  closed 
against  us.  The  Prussian  government,  moreover, 
had  a  few  months  before,  viz.  in  July,  imposed  a 
duty  of  lOs.  per  quarter  on  the  exportation  of 
wheat.  It  can  hardly  therefore  be  a  matter  of 
wonder  that  a  renewed  range  of  high  prices  should 
be  the  consequence,  and  accordingly  the  averages 
in  December  1800  were. 

For  Wheat  ..        133.9. 

Barley  -  76*.  7d. 

Oats  -  41*.  8f/. 

The  sufferings  of  the  bulk  of  the  community, 
under  this  severe  visitation  of  dearth,  were  very 
great.  The  expression  of  them  broke  out  in  tu- 
multuous meetings  and  riotous  proceedings  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  kingdom,  in  the  autumn  of 
1800,  and  the  peace  of  the  metropolis  was  with 
difficulty  preserved. 