

"  In  order  to  give  the  greatest  weight  and  solemnity  to  such 
a  recommendation,  your  committee  submit  to  the  House,  whe- 
ther it  may  not  be  proper  to  desire  the  concurrence  of  the  other 
House  of  parliament,  in  a  humble  address  to  his  Majesty,  re- 
questing that  his  Majesty  would  be  graciously  pleased  to  issue 
a  proclamation  for  this  purpose." 

A  royal  proclamation  was  issued  accordingly,  and 
circulated  by  the  magistrates  and  the  clergy  through- 
out the  kingdom.  An  act  was  passed,  granting  a 
bounty  which  guaranteed  the  difference  between* 
the  average  price  of  foreign  wheat  in  the  third 
week  after  importation,  and  100^.  to  the  importer 


*  In  a  sixth  report,  presented  in  December,  1800,  are  the 
following  computations  of  the  estimated  consumption,  and  of 
the  resources  to  meet  the  supposed  deficiency :  — 

The  usual  consumption  of  wheat  cannot  be  supposed  to  ex- 
ceed 7,000,000  quarters  per  annum. 

Amount  of  resources  to  meet  the  deficiency  : — 
Importation  of  wheat  since  the  beginning  of 

October  above  -  -  .  -    170,000  qrs. 

Importation  of  flour  from  the  United  States, 

equal  to  -  -  -  -   580,000 

Importation  of  wheat  from  Canada        -  -     30,000 

Rice,  equivalent  to  -  -  -   630,000 

Stoppage  of  starch  manufactory  -         -     40,000 

Stoppage  of  distilleries  -  -  .  360,000 

Use  of  coarse  meal  ...  -   400,000 

Retrenchment  ...  -  300,000 

2,510,000 


1799—1803.  ■         223 

of  all  wheat  weighing  53  lb.  per  bushel,  if  im- 
ported within  the  time  limited  by  the  Act.* 

These  proceedings,  while  on  the  one  hand  they 
had  the  effect  of  giving  the  assurance,  that  mea- 
sures were  in  progress  calculated  to  diminish  the 
consumption  and  to  increase  the  supply,  and  thus 
eventually  to  reduce  prices ;  yet,  on  the  other 
hand,  they  naturally  conveyed  a  strong  impression 
of  alarm.  An  official  letter  from  the  Duke  of 
Portland,  then  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home 
Department,  to  tlie  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the  county 
of  Oxford,  strongly  dwelling  on  the  deficiency  of 
grain,  and  recommending  economy  in  the  use  of 
it,  was  animadverted  upon  at  the  time,  as  being 
calculated  to  increase  the  general  feeling  of  alarm. 

There  was,  doubtless,  sufficient  cause  for  ap- 
prehension; because  although  there  were  reason- 
able grounds  for  supposing,  that  the  measures  in 
progress  would  be  effectual  in  ultimately  re- 
ducing prices,  yet  various  contingencies  of  the 
season,  and  of  obstructions  arising  out  of  the  war, 
might  frustrate  the  expectations  of  relief;  and 
althouo'h  the  occurrence  in  immediate  succession 
of  a  third  year  of  deficient  produce  was  not  within 
moderate  probability,  it  was  not  to  be  considered 
as  out  of  calculation,  there  having  been  instances 
of  such  a  succession  of  unproductive  seasons. 