


220  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

show  that  the  war  has  not  any  general  effect  to  raise  the  price 
of  grain,  consider  only  the  price  of  grain  at  different  periods 
of  the  present  war,  though  the  argument  would  be  strengthened 
by  a  review  of  former  wars.  Three  or  four  years  have  been 
years  of  comparatively  high  price.  In  1794<  and  1795,  the  price 
was  high ;  but  in  the  interval  of  nearly  three  years  that  suc- 
ceeded, that  is,  from  about  Michaelmas  1796  to  Midsummer 
1799,  the  price  sunk  perhaps  too  low  for  the  fair  profit  of  the 
farmer.  The  general  price  then  in  England  was  from  4-8*.  to 
49*.  a  quarter.  From  Michaelmas  1798  to  Lady-day  1799,  it 
was  not  above  48*.  How  then,  if  the  war  was  the  cause  of 
the  dearness,  did  it  happen  that  the  effect,  which  on  the  hypo- 
thesis should  have  been  increasing,  was  suspended  during  an 
interval  of  nearly  three  years  ;  and  when  likewise  some  of  the 
taxes  to  which  the  effect  is  chiefly  ascribed  had  been  imposed  ? 
Previous  to  the  last-mentioned  period  (one  of  great  cheapness) 
the  triple  assessment  had  existed  a  twelvemonth,  and  must  have 
produced  its  full  effect.  This  plain  fact  is  alone  worth  a  thou- 
sand instances  deduced  by  circuitous  reasonings.  I  shall  not 
enter  into  a  comparative  statement  of  the  prices  in  former  wars, 
nor  insist  on  the  ingenious  arguments  that  have  been  adduced 
to  show,  that  war  is  favourable  to  lowness  of  price.  It  is 
deserving  of  remark,  however,  that  this  country,  which,  from 
the  period  of  the  revolution,  for  a  great  part  of  the  present  cen- 
tury, had  been  used  to  export  great  quantities  of  grain,  ceased 
to  export  and  began  to  import  in  the  middle  of  that  peace  which 
succeeded  the  most  successful  war  in  which  this  country  was 
ever  engaged.  Thus  it  is  clear,  from  a  deduction  of  facts,  that 
war  of  itself  has  no  evident  and  necessary  connection  with  the 
dearness  of  provisions." 

He  added, 

"  As  to  the  extent  of  the  deficiency  of  the  late  harvest  (1800), 
it  would  be  no  less  rash  than  unnecessary  to  give  any  opinion. 
For  the  practical  remedies  proposed,  a  knowledge  of  the  precise 
deficit  is  not  required.  This,  however,  we  know,  that  notwith- 
standing the  clamour  about,  monopoly,  previous  to  the  harvest, 
it  is  now  universally  admitted,  that  the  old  stock  was  very  nearly 
exhausted.  An  early  harvest,  therefore,  found  us  with  less 
stock  than  usual ;  of  course,  that  stock,  unless  aided  by  im- 
portation from  abroad  and  economy  of  our  own  resources, 
must  be  appUcable  to  the  consumption  of  a  shorter  period  than 
usual." 

Of  the  assignment  of  the  Bank  circulation  as 
a  cause  of  the  high  price,  Mr.  Pitt  seems  to  have 
taken  no  notice  in  that  day's  debate  ;  but  in  a 
debate   a   few    days  after,    on    a    motion    of  Mr. 