

"  IstNovember,  1799. — The  embarrassments  of  the  merchants 
at  Hamburgh  have  increased  to  an  alarming  degree  ;  and  during 
the  whole  month  of  October  every  mail  that  has  arrived  has  added 
several  names  to  the  unfortunate  list  of  houses  which  have  stopped 
payment  in  that  city,  where  there  are  scarcely  any  persons  in  the 
mercantile  line^  whatever  may  be  their  wealth  and  connexions, 
who  have  not  experienced  considerable  difficulties,  while  the  ef- 
fects there  of  have  extended  to  Bremen, Frankfort,  Amsterdam,  and 
many  other  of  the  principal  trading  towns  on  the  Continent.  The 
general  and  extensive  connexion  which  has  of  late  subsisted  be- 
tween the  greater  part  of  our  merchants  and  those  of  Hamburgh, 
naturally  excited  apprehensi-ons  of  the  most  serious  consequences 
in  this  countiy,  which  have  been  in  part  too  justly  verified  by 
the  failure  of  several  commercial  houses,  in  addition  to  those 
alluded  to  in  our  last  report.  The  loss  of  the  Lutine  frigate, 
which  had  on  board  600,000  dollars,  destined  for  Hamburgh, 
has  been  a  very  unfortunate  circumstance,  both  in  itself,  and, 
with  respect  to  the  object  in  view,  as  it  must  occasion  a  great 
disappointment,  and  delay  the  intended  relief  considerably." 

The  losses  connected  with  the  Hamburg  failures, 
and  the  great  fall  of  prices  of  West  India  produce, 


1799—1803.  235 

seem  to  have  been  felt  with  peculiar  severity  in 
Liverpool.  Mention  is  made  in  the  Annual  Re- 
gister of 

"  An  act  passed  in  the  parliament  which  met  in  the  autumn 
of  1799,  granting  a  loan  of  500,000/.  in  exchequer  bills  to  the 
West  India  merchants  in  Liverpool,  in  order  to  avert  the  evils 
which  hung  over  their  heads  from  very  heavy  failures  in  Ham- 
burgh. Security  was  given  for  this  loan,  in  property  in  their 
warehouses  amounting  to  upwards  of  two  millions." 

The  subjoined  statement  will  show  the  extent 
of  the  depression  of  transatlantic  produce,  which 
took  place  between  the  spring  of  1799  and  the 
spring  of  1801,  being  the  interval  during  wliich 
all  European  produce  had  been  rising,  and  had 
reached  an  unprecedented  height :  — 

Coffee,  Jam.  Sup.,  per  cwt. 
Sugar,  Muscov.  Jam.,  do.     • 

,  East  India,  white,  do. 

Saltpetre,  do. 
Cochineal  per  lb. 
Cotton,  Bowed  Georgia   - 
Indigo,  East  India,  superior 
Spices,  Cinnamon 

5  Pepper 

Tobacco,  Virginia 
Logwood,  per  ton 
Rum,  per  gallon 

Tlie  prices  of  most  of  our  manufactured  articles 
likewise  experienced  a  considerable  fall  in  the  in- 
terval from  1799  to  1801.  The  following  is  from 
a  Monthly  Commercial  Report,  dated  1st  April, 
1801:  — 

"  The  trade  of  Birmingham  is  in  a  very  distressed  situation. 
A  large  proportion  of  the  workmen  are  entirely  out  of  employ  ; 
and  those  who  still  have  work  have  the  utmost  difficulty  to 
gain  a  subsistence,  from  the  exorbitant  price  of  all  kinds  of 
provisions.  The  ribbon  trade  of  Coventry  is  in  a  most  deplor- 
able state ;  and  the  woollen  trade  of  Yorkshire,  if  possible,  still 
worse."  * 