


1799—1803.  QS3 

clined  rapidly  in  1799  and  1800,  while  com  was 
rapidly  rising ;  and  all  transatlantic  produce  was, 
at  the  date  of  that  letter,  in  a  state  of  great  depres- 
sion. 


Section  4.  — Great  Fall  of  the  Prices  of  Trans- 
atlantic Produce  from  the  Spring  o/'1799  to  the 
Spring  of  ISOl. 

In  the  examination  of  prices,  in  the  interval  end- 
ing in  1798,  we  have  seen  that  colonial  produce 
had  begun  to  rise  in  1796,  in  consequence  of  a 
demand  from  Germany,  and  that  the  demand  which 
had  become  extremely  speculative,  continuing  on 
an  increasing  scale,  the  prices  had  reached  an  un- 
precedented height  at  the  close  of  1798.  In  a 
few  instances,  the  rise  was  continued  through  the 
first  three  months  of  1799.  As  usual,  in  such 
cases,  the  consumption  of  the  commodities,  which 
liad  been  the  objects  of  speculation,  was  reduced 
by  the  advanced  cost,  and  consequently  proved  to 
be  much  less  than  had  been  anticipated,  while  the 
supplies  were  much  larger. 

The  prices  thenceforward  began  to  fall ;  and,  as  the 
circulation  by  bills  of  exchange  and  other  forms  of 
credit  had  expanded  with  and  promoted  the  rise  of 
prices,  so  it  was  contracted  by,  and  in  its  turn  acce- 
lerated the  fall  of  prices  until  the  final  adjustment  to 
the  metallic  standard.  This  process  was  attended 
with  very  disastrous  results  in  the  great  commercial 
towns  of  Germany  and  Holland.  The  number 
of  houses  that  failed  at  Hamburg,  between  August 
and  November,  1799,  was  eighty-two,  and  the 
amount  of  their  engagements  upwards  of  twenty- 
nine  million  five  hundred  thousand  banco  marks,  or 
about  two  million  five  hundred  thousand  pounds. 
The  rate  of  discount  at  Hamburg  rose  during  that 
interval  to  1.5  per  cent,  per  annum. 


234  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Tlie  fall  of  prices  and  the  commercial  failures 
in  Germany  entailed  a  corresponding  fall  of  prices 
in  this  country,  and  discredit  and  failures  to  a  con- 
siderable extent,  not  only  among  the  houses  im- 
mediately embarked  in  the  trade  with  that  part  of 
the  Continent,  but  also  of  some  eminent  houses  in 
the  West  India  trade.  The  following  extracts,  from 
printed  commercial  reports  of  that  period,  convey  a 
description  of  the  circumstances  attending  the  fall 
of  prices  of  colonial  produce  :  — 

"1st  October,   1799 The   trade  of  this   country  with  the 

principal  part  of  Europe  having  of  late  been  confined  almost 
wholly  to  one  channel,  the  unusual  flow  of  business  it  produced 
to  those  places  through  which  it  was  carried  on,  led  many 
persons  to  extend  their  concerns  in  a  degree  to  which  their 
capital  was  inadequate,  and  encouraged  a  spirit  of  adventure 
and  speculation,  particularly  in  the  chief  articles  of  sugar  and 
other  West  India  produce,  which  at  length  has  been  carried  too 
far  ;  the  consequence  of  which  has  been  the  failure  of  some 
considerable  houses  at  Hamburgh  and  other  places,  which  has 
affected  their  connections  in  this  country,  so  far  as  to  cause 
the  stoppage  of  several  houses  which  had  hitherto  maintained 
no  small  degree  of  commercial  reputation." 