

The  following  extracts  from  a  pamphlet,  pub- 
lished by  Mr.  Boyd,  in  the  form  of  a  letter  to 
Mr.  Pitt,  in  the  autumn  of  1800,  which  attracted 
considerable  attention  at  the  time,  may  serve  as 
specimens  of  ingenious  arguments,  brought  forward 
to  disprove  the  most  palpable  facts,  and  to  substi- 
tute for  til  em  a  perfectly  unfounded  hypothesis. 

Nearly  at  the  outset  (page  3.)  the  writer  states 
his  suspicion  "that  the  increase  of  prices  of  almost 
all  articles  of  necessity,  convenience,  and  luxury, 
and,  indeed,  of  almost  every  species  of  exchangeable 
value,  which  had  been  gradually*  taking  place  dur- 
ing the  last  two  years,  and  which  had  recently  arrived 
at  so  great  a  height,  proceeded  chiefly  from  the  addi- 
tion to  the  circulating  medium,  which  he  conceived 
to  have  been  made  by  the  issue  of  bank  notes,  un- 
controlled by  the  obligation  of  paying  them  on  de- 
mand," He  then  proceeds,  in  terms  which  have 
been  almost  verbally  repeated,  in  recent  times,  by 
persons  who  apply  the  doctrine  of  depreciation  to 
the  state  of  prices  throughout  the  whole  period  of 
the  suspension  of  cash  payments:  — 


of  about  200  per  cent,  in  1800,  compared  with  1773,  and  this 
was  before  any  material  difference  between  paper  and  gold  had 
become  observable. 

*  A  rise  of  100  to  200  per  cent,,  in  two  years,  can  hardly 
be  called  gradual. 

Q   3 


230  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

"  Can  you,  sir,  or  any  man,  assign  any  cause  sufficiently  ge- 
neral in  its  effects  and  powerful  in  its  operation,  to  account  for 
a  change  so  general  in  the  prices  of  all,  or  very  nearly  all, 
articles  of  necessity,  convenience,  and  luxury,  as  well  as  of 
every  species  of  property  or  exchangeable  value,  within  so  short 
a  space  of  time,  except  the  one  to  which  I  attribute  it?  I  by 
no  means  pretend  that  the  high  price  of  grain  (which  the  ge- 
neral voice  seems  to  attribute  to  the  effect  of  an  unfavourable 
season)  is  solely  occasioned  by  the  general  cause  of  excess  of 
paper  circulation,  not  founded  as  all  paper  circulation  ought  to 
be,  in  the  precious  metals.  I  only  contend,  that  if  there  be 
(as  is  alleged)  a  real  scarcity  of  grain,  the  effects  of  this  scarcity 
must  be  very  much  increased  by  the  general  cause  which  I  con- 
ceive to  have  produced  the  general  rise  of  the  price  of  every 
thing.  Your  mind  must  look  down  with  scorn  upon  the  stale 
and  inadequate  causes  of  the  high  price  of  provisions  which  have 
been  assigned  for  it  by  some  men,  more  distinguished  by  their 
station  than  their  acquirements.  You  well  know  that  partial 
causes  never  can  produce  general  effects.  You  cannot  fail  to 
have  sought  for  a  great  and  general  cause  for  the  solution  of  the 
phenomenon  which  excites  the  general  wonder.  That  pheno- 
menon, I  again  assert,  in  all  probability,  arises  from  an  increase  of 
the  representative  signs  of  money  totally  disproportioned  to  the 
time  in  which  it  has  been  effected,  and  to  any  progress  Avhich 
the  industry  of  the  country  can  possibly  have  made  within  that 
time  ;  and  such  an  increase  never  could  have  existed  but  for  the 
rash  attempt  to  extend  the  empire  of  credit  beyond  those  limits 
which  the  eternal  laws  of  nature  had  marked  out  for  it. 