

A  great  rise  has  taken  place  in  every  species  of  exchangeable 
value  during  the  short  period  of  two  years.  The  public  mind 
is  on  the  rack  to  discover  the  cause  of  this  rise,  of  which  the 
most  alarming  effects  are  manifested  in  the  article  of  bread. 
One  says  that  there  is  a  real  scarcity  of  grain,  owing  to  an  un- 
commonly bad  season  last  year,  and  a  scanty  crop  this  year. 
How  this  knowledge  was  acquired,  I  am  utterly  ignorant ;  but 
as  it  comes  from  a  noble  duke,  (alluding  to  a  letter  addressed  by 
the  Duke  of  Portland  to  the  lord  lieutenant  of  the  county  of 
Oxford,)  high  in  the  administration  of  the  internal  affairs  of  this 
country,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  it  was  not  promulgated  on 
slight  or  doubtful  grounds.  This,  however,  I  must  be  permitted 
to  say,  that  if  there  did  exist  sufficient  reason  to  believe  the 
scarcity  to  be  real,  the  influence  of  that  cause  cannot  have  lost 
any  of  its  force  by  the  extraordinary  publicity  given  to  it. 

Another  says,  there  is  no  scarcity;  but  a  set  of  forestallers 
and  regraters  have  monopolised  the  grain  of  the  country,  and 
sell  it  out  at  such  prices  as  they  think  proper  to  fix  from  time 
to  time." 

The  writer  very  justly  ridicules  and  reprobates 


1799—1803.  231 

tliis  absurd  and  unjust  clamour,  but  at  greater 
length  than  the  topic  is  worth,  and  then  con- 
tinues :  — 

"  The  opinion  of  a  third  person  is,  that  tlie  scarcity  and  high 
price  of  bread  corn  proceed  from  a  great  addition  made  to  the 
popuhition  of  the  country.  How  such  a  cause  should  so  sud- 
denly produce  an  effect  of  such  magnitude  does,  I  own,  exceed 
m}'  comprehension.  At  what  period  the  seeds  of  this  extra- 
ordinary increase  were  sown  I  cannot  even  guess ;  but  it  is 
necessary  to  suppose  that  there  must  have  been  some  one  or 
two  years  of  uncommon  fecundity,  in  order  to  account  for  the 
extraordinary  addition  to  our  population  which,  in  this  parti- 
cular year,  has  so  greatly  enhanced  the  price  of  corn.  The  pro- 
gress of  population,  like  the  growth  of  an  individual,  is  so  gradual 
and  imperceptible  as  to  escape  the  notice  of  the  most  vigilant  ob- 
server, otherwise  than  in  its  eff'ects ;  and,  as  in  the  growth  of  an 
individual  it  can  never  happen  to  any  parent  to  be  surprised  with 
a  child  of  two  years  old  starting  into  the  dimensions  of  one  of 
twelve,  so,  in  my  humble  opinion,  it  is  not  probable  that  it 
should  happen  to  any  country  to  find  its  population,  in  one  or 
two  years,  made  such  an  extraordinary  shoot  as  only  could 
have  been  expected  in  half  a  century;  and  yet  such  a  shoot  it 
must  have  made,  if  an  increased  population  be  admitted  as  the 
cause  of  the  very  high  price  of  provisions  in  this  particular  j'ear. 