

R   2 


244  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

But  admitting  that  there  liad  been  the  increase 
of  issues,  by  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  utmost 

effect.  On  the  2d  of  January,  1801,  the  course  of  Hamburgh  is 
printed  29^.  8^/.,  and  on  the  SOth  of  January  it  is  printed  31^.  8d. 
—  a  difference  of  very  near  7  per  cent. ;  and  yet  we  do  not 
perceive  the  slightest  effect  it  has  produced  in  lowering  the 
price  of  provisions  or  other  commodities  grown  and  consumed  in 
Great  Britain,  and  affords  a  most  unequivocal  correct  answer  to 
the  whole  of  his  argument  with  regard  to  the  foreign  exchanges." 

Mr.  Henry  Thornton,  in  his  work  on  Paper  Credit,  makes  the 
following  remarks,  suggested  by  Mr.  Boyd's  publication  : — 

After  observing  that  the  two  millions  of  notes  under  51.  issued 
by  the  Bank  of  England  should  be  considered  as  mere  sub- 
stitutes for  the  guineas  which  they  displaced,  and  should  there- 
fore be  deducted  from  the  total  amount  of  the  Bank  issues,  in 
any  reasoning  upon  the  effect  produced  by  these  on  the  cir- 
culating medium,  he  proceeds  to  say,  "  I  have  to  consider  how 
far,  allowing  for  that  difference  of  two  millions  of  which  men- 
tion has  been  made,  the  circulating  quantity  of  Bank  of  Eng- 
land paper  has  lately  corresponded  with  that  of  antecedent 
periods.  The  average  amount  of  Bank  of  England  notes  in 
circulation  during  three  j'cars  ending  in  1795,  appears  to  have 
been  11,975,573.  The  amount  in  circulation  on  the  20th  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1797,  the  day  antecedent  to  the  suspension  of  the  cash 
payments  of  the  Bank,  has  been  already  stated  to  have  been 
about  8,600,000,  this  being  that  very  low  sum  to  which  they 
vv^ere  then  reduced.  By  a  statement  of  their  amount  on  the  6th 
of  December,  1800,  laid  before  the  House  of  Commons,  they  ap- 
pear to  have  been  then  15,450,970.  This  last  mentioned  sum  in- 
cludes *  the  two  millions  of  one  and  two-pound  notes.  If  these  two 
millions  are  deducted,  the  amount,  on  the  6th  of  December,  1800, 
will  exceed  the  average  amount  in  three  years  antecedent  to  the 
suspension  of  the  cash  payments  of  the  Bank,  by  1,4'75,397/. 
It  remains,  however,  to  be  observed,  that  the  notes  of  the  Bank 
of  England  were  stated  to  the  House  of  Commons  by  the  gover- 
nor of  that  company  in  the  spring  of  1 801,  to  have  been  then 
reduced  to  a  sum  less  by  about  a  million  and  a  half  than  their 
amount  on  the  6th  of  December,  ]  800.  The  total  quantity,  there- 
fore, of  the  Bank  of  England  notes  in  circulation  in  one  part  of 
the  spring  of  1801,  if  the  two  millions  be  deducted,  almost  exactly 
agrees  with  their  average  amount  during  the  three  years  ending 
December,  1795." 