


varices  of  money  :  but  tlie  inhabitants  of  this  metropolis  are  not 
aware  of  the  total  change  in  the  situation  of  the  country  banks, 
in  consequence  of  the  war.  Those  who  are  established  in  sea- 
ports and  great  manufacturing  towns  may  still  be  considered  as 
having  commercial  deposits  with  which  they  must,  in  preference, 
accommodate  their  commercial  friends  ;  but  the  general  mass 
of  banks  through  the  country  look  to  the  farmers  for  deposits 
and  support,  as  the  only  persons  who  have  money  to  employ. 
It  is  very  rare  that  a  farmer  wants  to  borrow  ;  but  the  instances 
are  not  rare  when  he  is  able  to  accommodate  even  his  landlord 
with  a  loan." 

In  truth,  such  were  the  enormous  gains  of  the  farmers  at  this 
time,  that,  while  their  credit  must  have  been  so  high  as  would 
have  enabled  them  to  borrow  to  any  amount  they  might  desire, 
it  is  not  conceivable  that  they  could  have  had  sufficient  motive 
for  borrowing  on  an  extensive  scale.  It  is  much  more  probable, 
and  Sir  F.  Baring  mentions  it  as  a  fact,  that  they  were  rather 
lenders  than  borrowers. 


1799—1803.  247 

was  in  progress  to  accommodate  itself  to  the  in- 
creased and  increasing  foreign  payments,  which 
were  going  forward  nnder  the  two  important  heads 
of  government  expenditure  abroad,  and  of  imports  * 
of  grain. 

The  question  here  occurs,  what  would  have  been 
the  effects  on  commercial  credit  and  prices,  and  on 
the  rate  of  interest,  if  the  issues  of  the  Bank  had 
been  so  limited  at  the  close  of  1799,  and  through 
1800,  as  to  have  preserved  the  value  of  the  paper  on 
a  level  with  gold  ? 

All  hypothetical  reasoning,  as  to  what  might 
have  been,  instead  of  what  ivas,  admits  of  wide 
difference  of  conclusion,  and  is  at  best  unsatis- 
factory. According  to  the  best  of  my  concep- 
tion of  the  state  of  things,  under  the  supposed 
forcible  contraction  by  the  Bank  of  its  issues,  it 
would  have  been  this.  There  would  have  been  a 
greatly  increased  pressure  on  the  money  market, 
severe  as  it  already  was.  The  public  funds 
would  have  been  lower,  and  the  financial  opera- 
tions of  government  would  have  been  on  terms 
more  disadvantageous  to  the  public.  The  com- 
mercial discredit  and  failures  which  occurred  at 
the  close  of  1799,  and  the  commencement  of 
1800,  in  consequence  of  the  revulsion  of  credit  at 
Hamburgh  and  other  continental  towns,  would 
probably  have  been  aggravated,  and  the  fall  of 
prices  of  colonial  produce,  and  of  all  other  com- 
modities that  were  in  full  supply,  or  were  held  on 
credit,  or  depended  for  purchase  on  the  usual 
credit,  would,  great  as  it  was,  have  been  more 
rapid.  But  the  prices  of  corn,  and  of  other  pro- 
visions, and  of  articles  generally,  the  supply  of 
which  was  below  the  ordinary  rate  of  consumption, 
would  in  all  probability  have  been  full  as  high. 
The  prices  of  provisions  were  determined  by  the 