

*  The  computed  value  of  grain  imported,  in  ISOO,  was 
8,755,995/.,  in  1801,  10,149,098/. 

R    4 


248  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

highest  sum  which  the  wages  of  the  lowest  classes, 
aided  by  contributions  from  parishes  and  indi- 
viduals, would  afford  for  food,  and  the  rate  of 
wages  would  not  be  affected,  or  in  the  most  trifling 
degree  only,  by  the  casual  expansion  or  contraction 
of  the  Bank  issues,  and  certainly  not  within  so 
short  a  period  as  a  twelvemonth.  There  appears, 
moreover,  in  the  rise  of  prices  of  provisions  follow- 
ing the  harvest  of  1799  to  have  been  little  of 
either  buying  or  holding  on  credit,  for  there  is,  as 
we  have  seen,  according  to  the  best  evidence  of 
which  the  subject  is  susceptible,  the  strongest  proof 
or  reason  for  supposing  that  the  stock  of  corn  was 
exhausted,  and  that  the  dearth,  great  as  it  was, 
would  have  been  more  severely  felt,  had  it  not 
been  for  the  earliness  of  the  harvest  of  1800. 

The  renewed  rise  of  the  prices  of  provisions 
after  the  harvest  of  1800,  took  place  without 
any  increase  of  the  amount  of  Bank  notes  of 
5l.  and  upwards,  which  for  the  last  six  months 
of  that  year  was  rather  less  than  in  the  first 
six  months.  And  the  avei'age  amount  for  the 
whole  of  the  year  1801  was  13,454,370,  being,  as 
nearly  as  might  be,  the  same  as  in  1800.  Now 
this  amount  upon  the  grounds  already  stated,  with 
the  addition  of  about  2,700,000/.  of  notes  under 
dl.f  and  with  the  utmost  probable  extension  of  the 
country  paper,  and  with  the  progressively  dimi- 
nishing number  of  guineas,  did  not  probably  make 
up  an  aggregate  nearly  equal  to  that  which  con- 
stituted the  currency  in  the  three  years  ending  in 
1795.  There  is  accordingly  the  strongest  possible 
reason  to  believe,  that  the  quantity  of  money  was 
not  increased,  and  could  not,  therefore,  be  the 
cause  of  the  rise  in  the  price  of  provisions  between 
the  summer  of  1799  and  that  of  1801,  indepen- 
dently of  the  incongruity  which  attaches  to  the 
supposition  of  its  having  caused  the  rise  of  one 
class  of  commodities,  at  the  same  tune  that  another 


1799—1803.  2i9 

great  class  of  commodities  was  falling  in  nearly 
an  equal  proportion  to  the  rise  of  the  former, 
while  it  has  been  in  evidence,  that  there  was  a 
great  scarcity  of  the  commodities  which  did  rise. 
Tlie  argument,  therefore,  is  sufficiently  made  out, 
that  it  was  a  case  of  dearth  and  not  of  depreci- 
ation. 

If  any  doubt,  however,  should  still  remain  on 
that  score,  a  fact  decisive  against  the  suppostion, 
that  an  increase  of  the  quantity  of  money,  or  of 
the  circulating  medium,  as  indicated  by  the  Bank 
issues,  had  been  the  cause  of  the  rise  is,  that  co- 
incidently  with  an  increase  of  the  circulation  of 
tlie  Bank  of  England  notes,  prices  subsided  upon 
the  cessation  of  the  scarcity  to  the  level  from  which 
they  had  advanced.  For  if  it  was  the  amount  of 
Bank  notes  that  raised  prices  in  1800  and  1801, 
how  happened  it  that  an  increased  amount  in  1802 
did  not  sustain  the  prices,  and  much  more  prevent 
a  fall  of  above  50  per  cent.  ?  And  if  the  exchanges 
had  been  depressed,  and  the  price  of  bullion  raised 
by  the  amount  of  the  circulation,  how  happened  it 
that  they  tended  upon  the  abatement  of  foreign 
payments  to  their  par  level  coincidently  with  an 
increased  issue,  as  will  appear  by  the  following 
statement.    The  average  circulation  of — 