

*  By  a  return  to  Parliament  from  the  Bank,  dated  6th  Feb- 
ruary 1801,  the  amount  of  notes  under  51.  in  circulation 

From  25  November  to  25  December  1800,  was     2,148,700 
And  from  25  December  to  25  January  1801        -  2,519,400 


1799—1803.  245 

extent  of  Mr.  Boyd's  exaggerated  view  of  it,  and 
allowing  also  for  an  increase  of  the  country  circu- 
lation, it  can  hardly  be  considered  as  compensating 
for  the  chasm  which  must  have  been  caused  in  the 
metallic  circulation  by  the  clandestine  export  of 
guineas,  which  the  low  exchange  must  have  forced 
abroad. 

The  amount  of  gold  in  circulation,  before  the 
restriction,  was  by  a  moderate  computation,  twenty- 
two  millions  five  hundred  thousand  pounds  (by 
some  it  was  estimated  at  forty  millions).  Sup- 
posing, therefore,  eight  millions  to  have  remained 
in  circulation  in  1800  (an  outside  supposition), 
there  would  be  fourteen  millions  and  a  half,  at 
least,  to  be  replaced  by  Bank  of  England  and 
country  bank  notes.  Now  the  increase  of  the 
Bank  of  England  issues,  including  the  small  notes 
in  1800,  as  compared  with  the  three  years  ending 
in  1795,  was  somewhat  under  three  millions  five 
hundred  thousand  pounds,  and  it  would  be  a  most 
extravagant  estimate,  which  would  assume  an  in- 
crease in  that  interval  of  country  bank  notes  to 
the  extent  of  eleven  millions,  which  would  be 
requisite  to  make  up  the  difference.  Indeed,  the 
increase  to  that  extent,  if  it  took  place  at  all,  must 
have  been  effected  in  a  wonderfully  short  space  of 
time,  because,  as  has  been  seen,  there  had  been  a 
great  reduction  of  the  country  circulation  in  1796, 
and  from  that  time  till  after  the  commencement  of 
1799  there  was  not  much  facility  or  inducement 
for  its  increase.  The  subsequent  rise  of  prices,  no 
doubt,  favoured  the  extension  of  the  country  bank 
issues  *,  but  it  is  utterly  improbable,  or  rather  abso- 
lutely absurd,  to  suppose  that  it  can  have  been  toany- 

*  With  reference  to  the  country  bank  circulation  at  this  pe- 
riod, the  following  further  extract  from  Sir  Francis  Baring's 
answer  to  Mr.  Boyd  may  not  be  without  interest.  "  An  alarm 
has  been  raised  against  country  banks,  which  have  been  accused 
of  enabling  the  farmers  to  hoard  their  corn  by  making  them  ad- 

R    3 


2i6  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

thing  like  the  above  amount.  The  fair  conclusion, 
therefore  is,  that  the  quantity  of  money,  during 
the  range  of  high  prices  in  1799  and  1800,  although 
greater  than  could  be  maintained,  under  the  pres- 
sure of  demand  for  foreign  payments,  was  not  only 
not  increased,  but  was  probably  less  than  it  had 
been  in  the  three  years  ending  in  1795,  without 
taking  into  account  the  great  increase  of  trans- 
actions, and  consequently  of  the  functions  of 
money  that  must  have  taken  place  since  that  time. 
But,  whether  less  or  greater,  it  was  the  duty  of  the 
Directors  of  the  Bank  to  preserve  the  value  of 
their  paper  on  a  level  with  gold,  and  this  they 
could  not  have  done  without  contracting  their 
issues,  or,  at  least,  without  limiting  the  amount  in 
1800  to  what  it  had  been  in  1799.  It  is  very 
possible,  that  the  simple  limitation  to  that  amount 
might  have  effected  a  restoration  of  the  exchanges 
and  the  price  of  gold,  because,  notwithstanding 
the  enlargement  of  between  a  million  and  a  million 
and  a  half  of  notes  of  5l.  and  upwards  in  1800, 
the  exchanges  w^ere  not  materially  lower  than  they 
had  been  a,t  the  close  of  1799 ;  whence  it  should 
seem  that  an  increase  of  our  commercial  exports 