


1804—1808.  261 

Scotland,  wheat  an  average  crop,  but  of  inferior 
quality ;  in  England,  a  very  short  crop,  and  the 
quality  very  inferior."  It  happens,  whimsically  too, 
that  Mr.  JopHn  (in  order  to  prove  his  theory,  tliat 
the  variations  in  the  price  of  corn  are  owing  more 
to  variations  of  demand  than  of  supply),  in  the 
text  of  the  pamphlet,  from  the  appendix  to  which 
the  above  quotation  is  made,  has  the  following 
passage  :  —  "In  the  years  1804  and  1805,  wheat 
rose  from  50*.  to  100*.  without  any  scarcity  at  all." 
The  assertion  of  abundance  is  repeated  in  a  publi- 
cation entitled,  "  A  Letter  to  Lord  Archibald 
Hamilton,  1823,  page  15,"  in  which  the  writer, 
in  contradiction  of  a  statement  of  mine,  expressly 
says,  "  1804  was  not  a  year  in  which  the  harvest 
was  deficient,  it  was  rather  a  year  of  plenty." 

It  has  been  requisite  to  notice  these  unfoimded 
assertions,  although  made  so  long  ago,  because  the 
state  of  the  corn  trade,  at  this  most  important 
period,  has  not,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  been  since  dis- 
tinctly adverted  to,  or  attempted  to  be  explained 
consistently  with  either  of  the  two  theories.  And 
such  assertions,  so  confidently  made  as  those  here 
referred  to,  have  served  to  confirm  the  impression, 
so  universally  prevalent,  that  there  was  nothing  in 
the  seasons,  excepting  the  notorious  scarcities  of 
1795-6  and  1800-1,  to  justify  the  high  prices 
during  the  remainder  of  the  war  and  the  restric- 
tion. 

The  fact  of  the  deficiency  of  the  harvest  of  1804 
is  attested  by  evidence  which  leaves  no  room  for 
doubt. 

The  forty-third  volume  of  the  Annals  of  Agri- 
culture, edited  by  Arthur  Young,  is  nearly  filled 
with  answers  from  persons  in  different  parts  of  the 
country,  to  whom  circulars  had  been  addressed  by 
order  of  the  Board  of  Agriculture,  containing  in- 
quiries as  to  the  nature  and  causes  of  the  failure  of 
the  wheat  crop  of  1801,  and  as  to  the  extent  of  the 

s  .3 


26^  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

deficiency.  The  cause  of  failure  seems  to  have  been 
an  extensive  prevalence  of  blight  and  mildew  ;  and 
nearly  all  the  answers  concur  in  stating  a  deficiency 
or  from  one  fourth  to  one  third  in  England  and 
Wales ;  while  in  Scotland,  to  which  the  cause  of 
injury  had  extended  only  partially,  there  was  an 
average  produce.  The  Farmer's  Magazine,  vols. 
V.  and  vi.,  contains  statements  in  great  detail  relative 
to  that  harvest,  and  the  effect  of  it  on  prices.  The 
following  is  an  extract  from  that  work  of  a  corn- 
factor's  circular :  — 

"  London,  Oct.  30.  1804. 
^'  From  the  general  bad  quality  of  the  new  wheat  presented 
-at  Mark  Lane,  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  the  injury  from  blight 
appears  to  have  been  more  extensive  than  was  supposed  when  I 
wrote  you  last.  The  best  samples  are  inferior  to  last  year's  ; 
and  the  great  bulk  of  what  has  been  yet  produced  will  not  yield 
more  than  two  thirds  of  the  fine  flour  which  the  average  of  last 
year  produced.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  price  of  wheat  has 
very  considerably  advanced,  notwithstanding  the  considerable 
isupply  of  foreign  wheat  which  has  been  quickly  brought  to 
^market." 