

Mr.  Peter  Giles,  cornfactor,  said,  "  I  think  wheat  and  oats 
advanced  in  July  from  8^.  to  IO5.  'per  quarter;  but  not  wholly 
occasioned  by  the  agitation  of  the  bill."  "  What  other  causes  ? 
— ^  The  appearance  of  the  crops  on  the  ground  not  being  very 
favourable.     When  did  you  apprehend  that  the  last  crop  might 


t  The  following  is  an  extract  from  a  Meteorological  Journal 
for  July,  1801:  —  "A  considerable  quantity  of  rain  fell  on  the 
7th  ;  on  the  8th  some  heavy  showers,  with  thunder  and  light- 
ning. The  mercury  in  the  barometer  rose  rapidly  till  the  next 
morning,  when  it  fell,  preparatory  to  that  heavy  rain,  which,  on 
account  of  its  long  continuance,  was  remarked  l)y  every  body." 

3    4 


SGi  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

The  acknowledged  failure  of  the  crop  was  quite 
a  sufficient  cause  of  the  rise  of  price,  without  the 
aid  of  the  corn  bill,  which,  in  point  of  fact,  be- 
came wholly  inoperative.  *  But,  if  the  corn  bill 
had  been  operative,  so  much  of  the  rise  as  might 
be  clearly  attributable  to  that  cause  would  obviously 
be  distinct  from  the  supposed  agency  of  war- 
demand,  or  of  the  currency. 

be  defective?  —  The  report  of  the  blight  and  mildew  com- 
menced the  first  week  in  August.  When  did  that  apprehension 
affect  the  price  of  grain  ?  —  It  began  the  first  week  in  August, 
and  continued  to  advance  till  the  last  week.  Do  you  attribute 
the  second  rise  entirely  to  the  apprehension  of  a  defective  crop  ? 
Entirely." 

Mr.  Samuel  Scott  (now  Sir  Samuel  Scott,  Bart.),  a  member 
of  the  house,  being  examined,  chiefly  upon  some  of  the  details 
of  the  bill,  was  asked,  "  Do  you  consider  any  material  rise  in 
price  to  have  taken  place  in  the  market  previous  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  blight  ?  " —  Answered,  "  No  material  advance  had 
taken  place  previous  to  the  first  rumour  of  an  injury  to  the  crop." 

*  On  the  continent  of  Europe  the  prices  of  corn  rose  con- 
siderably between  1802  and  1805.  It  appears  that  the  seasons 
of  1802  and  1803,  which  were  of  fair  average  produce  in  this 
country,  had  been  unfavourable  in  the  south  of  Europe.  So 
great  was  the  scarcity  in  Spain  during  those  two  years,  that 
the  price  of  wheat  rose  in  the  spring  of  1804  to  nearly  six  times 
what  it  had  been  in  1800. 

"  The  medium  price  of  the  load  of  four  funegas  of  wheat  at 
the  market  of  Medina  di  Rio  Seco  in  Leon,  which  was  in  May, 
1800,  at  115  reals  vellon,  rose  as  follows: — 

May,  1801,  172    reals  vellon. 

1802,  263     — 

1803,  247^    — 

1804,  620"    — 

{Appendix  to  Bullion  Report.,  1810,  page  185.) 

The  Monthly  Magazine,  in  its  commercial  report  for  July, 
1805,  has  the  following  passage  :  — 