

The  orders  in  council  issued  by  ourgovernment,  in 
retaliation  of  the  French  decrees,  formed  the  grounds 
for  the  non-intercourse  act  of  America,  the  year 
following.  And  the  bombardment  of  Copenhagen 
in  the  autinrm  of  1807,  was  followed  on  the  part 
of  Denmark  by  a  closing  of  the  passage  of  the 
Sound,  and  on  the  part  of  Russia  by  an  embargo 
on  British  shipping.  While  the  Prussian  ports  of 
the  Baltic  had,  under  the  dictation  of  France,  been 
for  some  time  before  shut  against  the  commerce  of 
this  country.  Under  these  circumstances,  the 
farmers  were  naturally  induced,  as  by  their  increased 
capital   from  their  great  gains  of  late  years  they 


268  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

were  enabled,  to  hold  larger  stocks.  There  is,  there- 
fore, every  reason  to  suppose  that  if  political  ap- 
pearances had  been  less  threatening,  and  the  crops 
less  scanty,  the  subsidence  in  I8O7,  to  the  level 
from  whence  the  rise  in  1804  took  place,  would 
have  been  complete. 

But  in  1808,  and  at  the  very  commencement  of 
it,  the  grain  markets  began  to  recover.  The  scan- 
tiness of  the  preceding  crop  w^as  beginning  to  be 
felt,  and  at  the  same  time  the  apprehensions  which 
had  been  entertained  of  the  exclusion  of  the 
British  flag  from  trade  in  the  Baltic  were  realised. 
Thus  we  were  threatened  with  an  almost  total 
cutting  oft'  of  a  foreign  supply,  if  we  should  have 
occasion  for  it,  as  it  was  thought  inevitable  that 
we  should ;  it  being  considered  as  a  settled  point 
that  this  country  did  not  produce  corn  enough  for 
its  own  consumption. 

The  winter  of  I8O7-8  set  in  very  early,  which 
of  course  increased  the  consumption  of  all  kinds  of 
grain,  more  especially  as  hay  was  scarce  and  dear.. 
The  appearances  that  a  serious  scarcity  of  food 
was  likely  to  be  felt  before  the  coming  harvest,^ 
induced  parliament,  on  a  report  of  a  committee  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  to  prohibit  the  distillation 
from  grain.*  The  same  prospect  had  a  natural 
effect  on  the  corn  market,  and  prices  advanced 
accordingly  in  the  spring  of  1808. 

The  crops  of  1808  proved  more  deficient  than 
those  of  the  preceding  year.  The  memorably  hot 
days  in  the  early  part  of  July  t  were  considered 

*  One  of  the  motives  which  induced  the  legislature  to  pro- 
hibit the  distillation  from  grain  was,  doubtless,  to  afford  some 
relief  to  the  West  India  planters,  by  the  substitution  of  sugar 
in  the  distilleries  ;  but  the  immediate  occasion  and  the  professed 
object  of  the  measure  were  distinctly  stated  to  be  the  actual 
and  apprended  deficiency  of  grain  and  of  potatoes. 

-f-  The  temperature  on  the  13th  and  14th  of  July,  1808,  was 
higher  than  it  has  ever  since  been,  and  I  am  not  aware  that 
there  is  any  authentic  record  of  any  former  instance  of  so  high 