

These  considerations  render  the  real  fall  of  the 
price  still  greater  than  the  apparent  one,  and  this, 
notwithstanding  the  continuance  of  the  war  on  an 
enlarged  scale  of  expenditure,  and  notwithstanding 
an  amount  of  inconvertible  Bank  of  England  notes 
greater  in  the  first  six  months  of  1804  than  it  had 
been  in  the  first  six  months  of  1801,  when  the 
price  was  200  per  cent,  higher. 

It  might  naturally  be  expected  that  a  fall  so 
tremendous  of  the  markets  for  grain  and  for  agri- 
cultural produce  in  general,  by  the  transition  from 
scarcity  to  abundance,  would  be  severely  felt  by 
the  agricultural  interests,  always  excepting  the  la- 
bourer.    Accordingly  there  were  meetings  held  in 

*  The  extra  charge  of  freight  and  insurance  cannot  be  taken 
at  less  than  from  5s.  to  10s.  per  quarter  on  wheat  from  abroad, 
in  the  interval  from  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  till  1806,  when, 
in  consequence  of  the  introduction  of  the  continental  system,  the 
risks,  and  consequent  charges  attending  commercial  intercourse 
with  the  Continent,  were  greatly  increased. 


1801—1808,  %51[ 

Essex  and  otlier  counties  for  the  purpose  of  peti- 
tioning parliament  for  additional  protection  as  a 
remedy  for  the  prevailing  agricultural  distress. 
The  committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  to 
whom  the  petitions  were  referred,  not  having  any 
theory  of  "  preparations  for  cash  payments,"  or  of 
"  transition  from  war  to  peace,"  by  which  to  ac- 
count for  the  recent  fall  of  prices,  or  for  their 
former  elevation,  give  the  following  very  rational 
explanation  of  the  causes  of  the  rise  and  fall  be- 
tween 1791  and  1804:  — 

"  It  appears  to  your  Committee,  that  the  price  of  corn,  from 
1791  to  the  harvest  of  1803,  has  been  very  irregular;  but,  upon 
an  average,  increased  in  a  great  degree  by  the  years  of  scarcity, 
has,  in  general,  yielded  a  fair  profit  to  the  grower.  The  casual 
high  prices,  however,  have  had  the  effect  of  stimulating  industry, 
and  bringing  into  cultivation  large  tracts  of  waste  land*,  which, 
combined  with  the  two  last  productive  seasons,  and  other  causes, 
have  occasioned  such  a  depression  in  the  value  of  grain,  as,  it  is 
feared,  will  greatly  tend  to  the  discouragement  of  agriculture, 
unless  maintained  by  the  support  of  parliament. 

A  bill  was  in  consequence  brought  in  by  Mr 
Western,  and  an  act  passed  by  which  a  duty  was 
imposed  of  24<5.  Sd.  per  quarter,  when  the  price 
should  be  under  QSs. ;  and  Q,s.  6d.  per  quarter,  when 
at  or  above  that  rate  and  under  66s.  j  and  6d.,  when 
above  66s.  It  would  be  foreign  to  the  purpose  of 
this  work  to  enter  into  a  consideration  of  the  jus- 
tice or  policy  of  this  measure,  which  proved  to  be 