

"  In  the  late  general  rise  of  the  price  of  grain  in  Germany, 
the  bushel  of  wheat,  that  had  been  usually  sold  in  Saxony  for 
a  dollar  and  a  half,  rose  to  ten  dollars.  In  Lausitz,  the  price 
rose  as  high  as  fifteen  dollars  a  bushel.  \\\  Brunswick,  rye  had 
advanced  to  between  two  and  three  dollars  a  bushel.  Owing 
to  the  scarcity  and  dearness  of  provisions,  the  last  great  fair  at 
Vienna  was  ill  attended.  Goods  either  went  at  very  low  prices, 
or  remained  unsold." 


1 80  i— 1808.  265 

There  has  been  the  more  reason  for  dwelling 
uj3on  the  fact  of  the  great  rise  of  the  price  of  corn 
following  the  harvest  of  1804,  and  upon  the  causes 
of  that  rise,  not  only  because  it  negatives  the  theo- 
ries of  the  currency  and  war-demand,  as  applicable 
to  this  period,  but  because  this  renewed  dearth, 
so  quickly  following  that  from  which  there  had 
been  just  before  a  transition  to  plenty,  is  important 
in  other  points  of  view.  It  was  calculated  to  main- 
tain an  elevation  of  the  average  price  thrown  over 
a  series  of  years,  and  it  was  the  specific  occasion 
of  renewed  demands  by  the  working  classes  for 
advanced  wages  ;  claims  which  were  rendered  the 
more  effectual  by  the  resource  which  the  increasing 
employment  in  the  army  and  navy  held  out  to  the 
workmen  who  engaged  in  the  numerous  strikes  of 
that  time.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  the  price  of 
artisan  labour  especially  experienced  a  considerable 
advance. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  following  harvests,  com- 
bined with  the  state  of  politics,  were  not  of  a 
character  calculated  to  restore  abundance,  nor  con- 
sequently to  allow  of  a  subsidence  of  the  prices  of 
corn  to  the  level  from  which  they  had  been  dis- 
turbed by  the  failure  of  the  crops  of  1804.* 


Section  2. —  Seasons  of  1805  to  1808,  hotli 
included. 

The  winter  of  1804-5  was  mild;  but  the  spring 
was  ungenial ;  the  summer  cold  and  unsettled ; 
the    harvest   backward ;    and    the    appearance    of 

*  The  harvest  to  which,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  it  bears  the 
nearest  resemblance,  is  that  of  1828,  the  effect  of  which  was  to 
raise  the  average  price  of  wheat  from  50*.  in  January  to  76*.  in 
November,  and  this,  be  it  observed,  when  we  found  in  the  south 
of  Europe,  and  in  Spain  especially,  a  source  of  very  considerable 
supply,  instead  of  competition,  as  in  1804—5,  for  sharing  with 
us  in  supplies  from  the  north  of  Europe.  If  in  18^8  our  exter- 
nal relations  had  been  as  they  were  in  1801,  the  average  price 
of  wheat  would  inevitably  have  reached  upwards  of  lOOs. 


q66  prices  and  circulation, 

the  crops  at  the  approach  of  harvest  unfavour- 
able ;  the  consequence  was,  that  the  average  price 
of  wheat,  after  an  intermediate  fall,  reached  {)8s.  4<d. 
in  August.  But  the  weather  then  taking  up,  and 
continuing  propitious  for  securing  the  crops,  and 
these  turning  out  better  than  had  been  expected, 
although  far  from  being  considered  generally 
abundant,  the  price  of  wheat  fell  more  than  20a\ 
per  quarter  before  the  close  of  the  year,  and  con- 
tinued to  decline  till  the  spring  following,  when 
the  Gazette  average  was  74.?.  5d.,  or  a  fall  of  about 
246-.,  since  the  preceding  harvest. 