

The  winter  of  1805-6  was  attended  with  more 
frost  and  snow  than  the  preceding  season,  but 
was  not  a  very  rigorous  one.  The  spring,  like  the 
preceding  one,  was  backward ;  and  the  appear- 
ance of  the  crops  was  unpromising.  This  circum- 
stance, combined  with  political  events,  namely, 
the  hostile  proceedings  of  Prussia*  against  this 
country,  under  the  dictation  of  France,  which 
threatened  in  their  consequences  to  cut  off  our  sup- 
plies of  corn  from  the  Baltic,  and  which  had  the  im- 
mediate effect  of  raising  greatly  the  rates  of  freight 
and  insurance,  occasioned  a  rally  in  the  average 
price  of  wheat  to  84.9.  in  June  ;  but  thenceforward, 
notwithstanding  that  the  weather  was  variable,  and 
rather  wet  during  the  harvest,  and  notwithstanding 
the  apprehension  of  increased  political  obstructions, 
in  consequence  of  the  overthrow  and  final  subju- 
gation of  Prussia  by  the  battle  of  Jena,  followed 
by  the  Berlin  decree,  in  the  autumn  of  1806,  prices 
declined  slowly,  but  progressively,  to  73.9.  5d. 
before  the  next  harvest.  The  quality  of  the  wheat 
was  considered  to  be  inferior  to  that  of  the  preceding 
year,  and  the  quantity  a  bare  average,  which  was  not 
then  computed^o  be  sufficient  for  the  consumption. 

*  The  Prussian  government  issued  a  proclamation,  dated  in 
March,  1S06,  ])r()hihiting  the  enti'ance  of  British  ships  into  any 
of  its  ports  or  rivers. 


1804—1808.  267 

The  winter  of  180G-7  presented  nothing  re- 
markable of  mildness  or  severity.  The  spring  of 
1807  was  rather  forward,  and  the  summer  fine  and 
dry,  to  nearly  the  completion  of  the  harvest  in  the 
southern  division  of  the  kingdom.  In  England 
and  Wales,  the  wheat  crop,  although  thin  on  the 
ground,  was  considered  an  average  in  point  of 
yield.  But  in  Scotland,  where  the  weather  was 
extremely  unfavourable  for  the  operations  of  the 
harvest,  the  wheat  crop  proved  to  be  very  deficient. 
Thus,  in  the  Farmer's  Magazine, — 

1807.  "The  crops  generally  of  little  bulk.  Wheat, 
in  some  districts,  equal  to  an  average,  but  in  others 
suffered  from  bad  weather." 

The  spring  crops  were  throughout  scanty,  and 
the  potato  crops  in  Ireland  had  failed  to  a  consi- 
derable extent.  Still,  as  the  wheat  in  England 
had  been  got  in  mostly  in  good  order  before  the 
bad  weather  set  in,  and  was  brought  early  to  market, 
prices  declined  to  66s.  in  November,  being  a  fall 
of  upwards  of  30s.  per  quarter  since  August  1305. 
This  fall,  be  it  observed,  took  place  notwithstanding 
the  increasing  gloom  of  the  political  horizon,  w^hich 
led  to  the  apprehension,  well  founded  as  the  events 
proved,  of  great,  and  at  one  time  nearly  insiumount- 
able,  impediments  to  importation. 