

This  was  the  period,  too,  when  our  communication 
with  the  Continent  had  become  very  much  ob- 
structed, so  as  to  preclude  the  expectation  of  any 
considerable  relief  from  foreign  supply.  In  point 
of  fact,  there  was  an  excess  of  export  of  about 
15,000  quarters  of  wheat,  occasioned  by  the  wants 
of  Spain  and  Portugal.  The  high  price,  therefore, 
(wheat  having  advanced  by  July  to  an  average  of 
Sis.  Id.  per  quarter,  and  by  January  following  to 
90s.  4fd.)  was  a  necessary  condition  for  eking  out 
a  reduced  supply  of  our  own  growth,  when  the 
obstructions  to  importation  had  become  great,  and 
were  thought  in  that  year  to  be  insurmountable. 
Nothing,  indeed,  can  better  prove  the  magnitude 
of  those  obstructions,  than  the  circumstance  that 
an  average  price  of  upwards  of  80*-.  when  the  ex- 
change and  the  price  of  gold  were  nearly  at  par, 
was  insufficient  to  bring  forward  any  foreign  supply 
worth  mentioning.  But  such  was  the  spirit  of 
caution  then  prevailing  in  the  corn  trade  which  had 
been  suffering  from  a  slow  but  long-continued  fall 
of  prices,  that  the  advance,  although  under  cir- 
cumstances so  favourable  to  it,  was  very  gradual. 
Tiius  it  was  not  till  May,  1808,  that  the  average 
got  up  to  72s.  6d.  for  wheat.  But  thenceforward 
a  backwardness  of  the  crops,  and  unfavourable  ap- 


it  was  as  high  as  881°  ;  on  the  13th,  91°  ;  and,  on  the  l^th,  it 
was  at  the  astonishing  height  of  93°,  at  which  it  continued 
nearly  an  hour.  At  the  timber  yard  near  Westminster  Bridge, 
Ave  were  informed,  it  was  at  the  same  height.  In  a  shop  in 
Holborn,  on  the  13th,  we  saw  the  thermometer  at  89°,  at  a 
time  that  the  shop  appeared  to  the  feehngs  very  cool  in  com- 
parison of  the  external  air. 

"  Mr.  Capel  Lofft  of  Troston,  writes,  that  on  the  12th  and 
13th,  his  thermometer  stood  both  days  at  91°,  and  his  observ- 
ations were  confirmed  by  those  of  a  neighbour;  and  at  Bury  St. 
Edmunds,  the  thermometer  was  93°  on  the  12th,  and  at  95° 
on  the  13th.  Mr.  Lofft  observes,  that  '  twenty-seven  years' 
observation,  very  little  interrupted,  has  never  given  me  an  equal 
result  in  two  days,  or  even  in  a  single  day.' " 


1«C)1<  — 1808.  ^i71 

pearances  of  them,  and  very  stormy  weather  during 
a  great  part  of  the  liarvest,  which  was  considered 
to  be  deficient,  occasioned  a  more  decided  rise, 
viz.,  to  9^*.,  at  the  close  of  the  year. 

Under  tliese  circumstances,  instead  of  having  re- 
course to  the  Bank  restriction  and  to  war  consump- 
tion, for  the  purpose  of  accounting  for  the  rise  in 
price,  it  should  be  rather  a  matter  of  wonder  that  it 
did  notgo  much  higher;  and  it  is  a  tribute  to  the  pru- 
denceof  thetrade  at  that  time,  that  there  was  somuch 
less  speculation  in  it  than,  as  will  be  seen,  prevailed 
contemporaneously  in  other  branches  of  trade,  in 
consequence  of  an  actual  or  apprehended  cessation 
of  all  foreign  supply.  It  is  at  the  same  time  worthy 
of  remark,  that  while  in  the  interval  under  consi- 
deration, viz.  from  the  commencement  of  1801  to 
the  end  of  1808,  so  great  a  rise  had  taken  place  in 
the  prices  of  corn  there  was  a  considerable  fall  in 
the  prices  of  meat  to  the  close  of  1808,  and  first 
quarter  of  1809. 