

There  was,  coincidently  with  the  great  advance 
in  imported  commodities,  a  new  and  very  exten- 
sive field  opened  for  our  exports. 

The  transfer  of  the  seat  of  government  from  Por- 
tugal to  the  Brazils,  and  the  virtual  emancipation  of 
the  colonies  of  Spain  from  the  control  of  the  mother 
country,  opened  the  trade  of  a  great  part  of  South 
America  in  1808*  ;  and  as  by  the  course  of  the  war 
we  possessed  the  entire  dominion  of  the  seas,  it  was, 
in  fact,  to  this  country,  exclusively  of  the  rest  of 
Europe,  that  this  opening  was  presented.  So  vast 
and  comparatively  untried  a  field  was  not  held  out 
in  vain  to  the  merchants  and  manufacturers  of  this 
country  ;  and,  accordingly,  the  spirit  of  speculation 
was  on  the  alert  to  export  every  article,  not  only 
that  might  probably,  but  that  could  possibly,  come 
into  demand. 

Mr.  M'Cullocli,  in  illustrating  the  effects  of 
ignorance  and  miscalculation  in  the  overstocking 
of  such  new  markets  as  are  occasionally  opened,  and 
in  filling  them  with  articles  totally  unsuited  to  the 
wants  and  habits  of  the  people,  gives  the  follow- 
ing graphic  description  of  the  shipments  to  South 
America  in  1808  :  — 

"  The   exportations  consequent  on  the  first  opening  of  the 
trade  to  Buenos  Ayres,  Brazil,   and  the  Cai'accas  were  most 


*  There  had  been  in  1806,  a  considerable  excitement  in  the 
export  trade,  in  consequence  of  the  expedition  of  Sir  Home 
Popham  to  Buenos  Ayres.  But  both  the  expedition  and  the 
commercial  speculations  founded  upon  it  ended  disastrously. 


1804—1808.  277 

extraordinary.  Speculation  was  then  carried  beyond  the 
boundaries  within  which  even  gambling  is  usually  confined,  and 
was  pushed  to  an  extent  and  into  channels  that  could  hardly 
have  been  deemed  practicable.  We  are  informed  by  Mr. 
Mawe,  an  intelligent  traveller,  resident  at  Rio  Janeiro,  at  the 
period  in  question,  that  more  Manchester  goods  were  sent 
out  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks,  than  had  been  consumed  in 
the  twenty  years  preceding;  and  the  quantity  of  English  goods  of 
all  sorts  poured  into  the  city  was  so  very  great,  that  warehouses 
could  not  be  provided  sufficient  to  contain  them  ;  and  that  the 
most  valuable  merchandise  was  actually  exposed  for  weeks  on 
the  beach  to  the  weather,  and  to  every  sort  of  depredation. 
Elegant  services  of  cut-glass  and  china  were  offered  to  persons 
whose  most  splendid  drinking-vessels  consisted  of  a  horn,  or  the 
shell  of  a  cocoa  nut ;  tools  were  sent  out,  having  a  hammer  on 
the  one  side  and  a  hatchet  on  the  other,  as  if  the  inhabitants  had 
had  nothing  more  to  do  than  to  break  the  first  stone  that  they 
met  with,  and  then  cut  the  gold  and  diamonds  from  it ;  and 
some  speculators  actually  went  so  far  as  to  send  out  skates  to 
Rio  Janeiro." — Pri?iciples  of  Political  Economy,  2d  ed.  p.  329. 