


1804—1808.  26'9 

to  have  clone  great  injury  to  the  wlieat,  and  they 
were  followed  by  a  great  deal  of  wet  and  stormy 
weather,  from  that  tmie  till  the  getting  in  of  the 
harvest.  Some  of  the  other  crops  suffered,  although 
not  in  the  same  degree  with  wheat,  and  the  aggre- 
gate produce  was  estimated  to  be  below  an  average. 

a  temperature  in  this  climate.  Of  the  season  of  1808,  the 
following  extracts  from  the  Farmer's  Magazine  convey  the 
general  character :  — 

"  The  first  four  months  of  the  year  were  singularly  stormy 
and  cold,  displaying  all  the  horrors  of  winter,  even  till  the  last 
day  of  April.  The  month  of  May  was  ushered  in  with  the 
most  promising  appearances ;  and  vegetation,  from  that  time, 
proceeded  with  a  rapidity  rarely  witnessed  in  this  country.  The 
last  two  weeks  of  June,  and  the  first  three  weeks  of  July,  fur- 
nished warmer  weather  than  had  been  remembered  by  the  oldest 
man  living  *  ;  and  this  unprecedented  warmness  was  followed  by 
dreadful  thunder  storms  in  every  quarter  of  the  island,  accom- 
panied with  heavy  rains,  more  resembling  those  of  the  torrid 
zone  than  what  are  usually  experienced  in  the  temperate  climate 
of  Great  Britain.  The  loss  and  damage  sustained  by  such  heavy 
rains,  can  only  be  correctly  ascertained  at  an  after  period.  It 
is  enough,  in  this  place,  to  say,  that,  in  consequence  of  them, 
the  wheats  have  been  mildewed  considerably  ;  a  great  part  of 
the  hay  crop  absolutely  rotted ;  whilst  field  labour  hath  been 
thrown  out  of  shape,  and  placed  in  a  condition  not  to  be  reme- 
died at  this  advanced  period  of  the  season."  —  September,  1808. 
vol.  ix.  p.  375. 

"  The  failure  of  the  wheat  crop,  noticed  in  our  last,  proves 
greater  than  at  first  imagined,  and  appears  to  have  taken  place 
in  almost  every  district,  though  in  different  degrees,  according 
to  the  nature  of  the  soil,  the  stage  of  growth  at  which  plants 
had  arrived  when  adverse  weather  set  in,  and  the  situation  of 
fields  occupied  with  that  grain." — December,  1808. 


*  Extract  from  a  Meteorological  Journal,  two  miles  north-ivest 
of  London  :  — 

"  July  1.  1808.  —  The  leading  feature  of  this  month  has  been 
the  extreme  heat  of  the  12th,  13th,  and  14th  days.  We  have 
paid  much  attention  to  the  state  of  the  atmosphere,  as  the  reports 
in  this  work  will  show,  since  January,  1802;  and  remember 
nothing  approaching  to  the  heat  of  the  days  referred  to. 

"  We  have  used  the  same  thermometer  through  the  whole 
period,  nor  has  the  plan  been  changed ;  it  hangs  on  the  outside 
of  a  window  frame  looking  n.  e.     In  this  situation  on  the  12th, 


270  inXICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 