

This  description  of  the  exports  in  1808  is  the 
more  especially  to  be  borne  in  mind,  as,  in  con- 
jtmction  with  the  speculations  in  imports,  and 
with  the  general  excitement  wliich  is  about  to  be 
noticed,  it  affords  reasonable  grounds  for  anticipa- 
tion of  the  great  reaction,  and  the  ruinous  results 
which  are  to  be  recorded,  as  having  occurred  in 
the  two  following  years. 


Section  .5.  —  General  Excitement  and  Specula- 
tions in  Shares  in  1807  d'^^d  1808. 

The  encouragement  thus  offered  for  speculative 
exports  cohiciding  with  the  inducements  held  out 
by  actual,  and  still  more  by  prospective  scarcity, 
to  speculation  in  so  many  articles  of  general  con- 
sumption, combined,  in  1807  and  1808,  to  produce 
an  almost  universal  excitement,  leading,  as  usual  on 
such  occasions,  to  hazardous  adventure,  and  ex- 
tending itself  to   nev/  projects  of  various  kinds, 

T  3 


278  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

such  as  canals,  bridges,  fire  offices,  breweries,  dis- 
tilleries, and  many  other  descriptions  of  joint-stock 
companies. 

The  speculations  in  shares  had  already  pro- 
ceeded to  a  considerable  extent  in  I8O7.*  In  many 
of  the  instances  these  speculations  as  well  as  those 
in  goods  reached  the  utmost  height  in  the  beginning 
of  1808,  and  the  greater  part  before  the  close  of 
that  year. 

*  This  will  appear  by  the  following  extract  from  one  of  the 
contemporary  periodical  publications  :  — 

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Monthly  Magazine. 
"  Sir, 
"  Several  of  your  correspondents  have  noticed  the  prevailing 
disposition  for  the  establishment  of  joint-stock  companies  for 
almost  every  branch  of  trade,  but  none  of  them  have  attempted 
to  show  the  progress  we  had  made  towards  reviving  the  infatu- 
ation of  the  celebrated  year  1720.  These  stock-jobbing  specu- 
lations have  received  a  check,  which  will  probably  prevent 
their  increase  for  the  present ;  but  in  order  to  convey  to  future 
readers  of  your  Magazine  some  idea  of  our  commercial  inge- 
nuity and  enterprising  spirit,  you  probably  will  find  room  for 
the  enclosed  list.  All  the  projects  it  comprehends  have  been 
laid  before  the  public  in  the  course  of  the  last  year,  and  the 
greater  part  of  them  will  cease  to  be  publicly  known  before 
the  end  of  the  present  year.     Yours,  &c. 

"  January  12.  1808.  G. 

"  List  of  Public  Companies  proposed  to  be  established  by  Sub- 
scription in  the  Year  1807. 

"  1.  Hope  Fire  and  Life  Insurance  Company;  capital 
2,000,000/. 

"  2.  County  Fire  Office,  Southampton  Street  ;  capital 
350,000/. 

"  3.  Eagle  Fire  and  Life  Insurance  Company ;  capital 
2,000,000/.,  in  shares  of  50/.  each. 

"  4.  Rainbow  Fire  and  Life  Office,  Commercial  Road. 