

*  The  price  of  silver  in  1808,  although  a  little  above  the 
Mint  price,  was  loiver  than  it  had  been  during  the  greater  part 
of  last  century^  and  loiver  than  it  ivas  ^>^  1 792. 


1804^—1808.  283 

a  range  of  prices,  and  during  which  such  large  finan- 
cial operations  were  taking  place,  and  such  great 
political  changes  occurred,  are  curious  facts  in  the 
history  of  our  currency. 

How  happened  it  that  the  Bank,  having  such 
powerful  motives  of  interest,  with  a  view  to  its 
dividends,  to  extend  its  issues,  being  no  longer 
under  the  check  of  convertibility,  the  directors 
having  avowed,  moreover,  that  in  the  regulation 
of  the  amount,  they  disregarded  the  exchanges, 
^vhich  they  held  to  be  uninfluenced  by  the  quan- 
tity of  Bank  paper,  and  that  their  only  guide  was, 
the  demand  for  discount  of  good  bills  at  5  per 
cent.?  —  How  happened  it,  that  wdth  such  motives 
to  excess,  and  under  the  guidance  of  opinions  so 
unsound,  there  was  so  trifling  an  increase,  com- 
pared with  the  amount  before  the  restriction,  and 
so  small  a  variation  in  the  yearly  average  of  the 
issues  ? 

The  bullion  committee  of  1810,  from  whose  re- 
port the  foregoing  amounts  of  the  annual  circula- 
tion are  extracted,  do  not  advert  to  this  remarkable 
fact,  and  much  less  do  they  attempt  to  explain  it. 
They  notice  only  the  marked  increase,  which  took 
place  in  1809  and  1810  (and  which  I  shall  have 
occasion  to  remark  upon  hereafter),  observing, 
however,  as  an  important  principle,  that  the  mere 
numerical  return  of  the  amount  of  Bank  notes  in 
circulation  cannot  be  considered  as  at  all  decid- 
ing the  question,  whether  such  paper  is  or  is  not 
excessive. 

This  is  very  true,  and  accounts  for  some  of  the 
phaenomen-a  observed  in  former  periods,  as  also 
in  subsequent  ones,  of  great  alterations  in  the 
amount  of  Bank  notes,  consistently  with  a  state  of 
the  exchanges  at  variance  with  the  indications. 
But  it  does  not  explain  how,  under  the  varying 
but  progressive  increase  of  our  trade,  and  under  the 
very  extraordinary  circumstances  of  the  political 
and  financial  state  of  the  countiy,  so  equable  and 


284  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

SO  moderate  an  amount  of  the  Bank  circulation 
could  be  preserved ;  and  how,  above  all,  it  could 
be  consistent  with  so  enormous  an  advance  of 
prices.  In  order,  however,  to  account  in  some 
degree  for  the  comparative  smallness  of  the  amount, 
the  committee  add, 

"  But,  above  all,  the  same  amount  of  currency  will  be  more 
or  less  adequate,  in  proportion  to  the  skill  which  the  great 
money  dealers  possess  in  managing  and  economising  the  use  of 
the  circulating  medium." 

