


1809—1813.  293 

creasing  obstacles  to  our  receiving  further  supplies. 
The  corn  trade,  however,  as  was  before  observed, 
had  not  participated  to  the  full  extent  of  that 
speculation  ;  for,  high  as  the  price  was,  it  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  high  enough,  although  the 
ports  were  open,  to  induce  adequate  efforts  to  over- 
come the  impediments  which  then  existed  to  a 
foreign  supply.* 

In  the  examination  of  the  causes  of  the  great 
variations  of  prices  observable  in  the  epoch  now 
coming  under  review,  those  of  corn  and  other 
agricultural  produce  are  first  to  be  considered. 
And,  for  reasons  which  will  be  obvious,  the  exam- 
ination will  be  found  to  be  more  conveniently 
conducted  by  a  subdivision  of  the  epoch  into  two 
periods,  viz.,  from  the  commencement  of  1809  to 
the  summer  of  1811,  and  thence  to  the  commence- 
ment of  1814. 


Section  1.  —  Prices:  of  Agricultural  Produce,  from 
the  Commencement  of  1809  to  the  Smmner  of 
1811. 

The  strong  impression  which  had  prevailed  of 
the  insufficiency  of  the  crop  of  1808  to  meet  the 
consumption  till  another  harvest,  without  the  aid 
of  a  foreign  supply,  which  was  not  fortJicoming, 
preserved  a  high  range  of  the  price  of  wheat  through 
the  early  part  of  1809,  and  the  averages  reached  9-5.^. 
in  March  of  that  year.  But  it  then  became  apparent 
that  the  stock  on  hand  was  not  so  much  reduced 
as  had  been  apprehended,  and  that  it  was  likely  to 
suffice  for  the  consumption,  restricted  as  that  was 

*  The  whole  importation  of  wheat  from  abroad  in  1808  had 
been  81,466  qrs.,  while  our  exports  to  the  Peninsula  were  77,567. 

u  3 


g94i  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

by  the  high  price,  and  by  the  prohibition  of  dis- 
tillation from  grain.  As,  therefore,  the  harvest 
approached,  and  appearances  became  favourable  of 
the  growing  crops,  the  markets  gradually  gave 
way,  the  average  price  of  wheat  having,  in  the 
course  of  July,  got  down  to  86s.  6d. :  and  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that,  if  the  crop  of  1809  had 
turned  out  to  be  productive,  and  well  got  in,  a 
great  fall  of  prices  would  have  been  the  conse- 
quence. But  the  harvest  weather  proved  very 
adverse.  Heavy  rains  set  in  in  July,  and  from 
thenceforward,  till  the  middle  of  October,  the  sea- 
son was  exceedingly  wet.*  Scarcely  any  part  of 
the  crops  was  secured  in  good  order ;  and  a  very 
large  portion  of  the  wheat  suffered  from  mildew, 
and  from  sprouting. 

The  injury  from  these  causes  was  more  extensive 
than  in  any  seasons  here  recorded,  excepting  only 
1799  and  I8I6.  All  the  crops,  including  hay,  were 
very  much  damaged ;  and  the  wheat  and  barley 
proved  to  be  deficient  in  quantity,  as  well  as  inferior 
in  quality  and  condition.  Prices  rose  in  conse- 
quence ;  and  the  average  for  December  1809  were, 