


Section  8. —  General  Remarks  on  the  State  of 
Prices,  and  of  the  Circulation  at  the  Close  of 
1808. 

It  is  of  importance  to  remark,  that  this  was  the 
state  of  things  after  an  interval  of  twelve  years 
from  the  Bank  restriction,  during  which  interval 
there  was  only  one  period  of  a  few  months  in  1801 
and  1802,  in   which   tlie  price  of  gold  was  above 


288  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

4/.  per  ounce,  or  the  price  of  silver  higher  than  it 
had  been  during  the  greater  part  of  last  century. 
And  yet  at  different  times  in  this  interval  of  twelve 
years,  nearly  every  article  of  consumption  experi- 
enced a  rise  of  price  fully  equal  to,  if  not  surpassing, 
any  that  it  subsequently  attained,  with  the  exception 
of  a  few  articles  of  colonial  produce,  which  were  ex- 
travagantly raised,  by  ill-judged  speculations,  on  the 
peace  in  1814.  The  price  of  labour,  too,  had,  by  the 
close  of  1808,  attained  nearly  its  maximum  height, 
more  especially  artizan  labour. 

It  has  been  shown  in  the  case  of  corn  more  espe- 
cially, and  of  many  other  articles,  and  it  might  be 
equally  shown  of  the  rest  of  those  that  had  risen,  that 
in  every  individual  instance  scarcity,  real  or  appre- 
hended, was  the  occasion  of  the  advance.  It  may  be 
true,  that  in  all,  or  in  the  greater  part,  the  rise  proved 
tobebeyond  the  occasion  And  itis  probable,  thatthe 
rise  could  not  have  proceeded  to  the  height  which 
it  attained  in  some  of  the  articles,  had  it  not  been 
for  an  extension  of  the  country  bank  issues,  and 
an  extension  generally  of  the  circulating  medium, 
by  bills  of  exchange,  and  other  forms  of  credit. 
But  such  has  been  the  case,  under  circumstances 
favourable  to  speculation,  both  before  the  restric- 
tion and  since  the  resumption  of  cash  payments ; 
and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  restriction  did  not 
exempt  over  trading  in  the  present  instance  from 
its  ordinary  results. 

The  question,  however,  is  not,  whether  the  rise 
was  beyond  the  occasion,  but  whether  it  was  the 
scarcity,  real  or  apprehended,  of  the  commodities, 
or  the  abundance  of  money,  that  was  the  cause  of 
the  advance  of  prices ;  and  it  may  be  put  to  any 
one,  who  has  been  at  the  trouble  of  examining  the 
facts  referred  to  in  the  view  which  has  been  taken 
of  the  period  from  the  restriction  to  the  close  of 
1808,  whether  there  is  the  slightest  ground  to 
ascribe  the  rise  to  an  abundance  of  money,    and 


1804—1808.  289 

not  to  the  scarcity,  real  or  apprehended,  of  the 
commodities.  So  palpable,  indeed,  so  clear  is  the 
negative  of  any  thing  like  depreciation,  as  contra- 
distinguishing abundance  of  money  from  scarcity 
of  commodities,  that  a  reference  is  seldom  made 
by  the  supporters  of  the  doctrine  of  depreciation, 
as  arising  out  of  the  Bank  restriction,  to  the  period 
anterior  to  1809.  And  yet,  the  mass  of  high 
prices  of  commodities,  arising  from  the  circum- 
stances described,  have  constantly  been  included  in 
the  general  impression  which  the  public  entertain  of 
great  depreciation,  caused  by  excess  of  money,  as 
characterising  the  whole  period  of  the  Bank  restric- 
tion. 