

It  may  be  right,  however,  here  to  add,  that  it 
was  only  down  to  the  autumn,  and  not  quite  to 
the  close,  of  1808,  that  the  position  of  the  Bank, 
and  the  quotations  of  the  foreign  exchanges,  w^ere 
in  a  satisfactory  and  sound  state.  In  the  last 
three  months  of  1808,  although  no  increase  worth 
mentioning  had  taken  place  in  the  circulation  of 
the  Bank,  the  exchanges  fell  rapidly,  and  there 
was  a  considerable  reduction  of  its  stock  of  bul- 
lion. But  this  alteration  may  be  considered  as 
more  properly  belonging  to  the  next  epoch  ;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  impulse  given  to  the  great 
advance  of  prices  in  1808,  and  the  anterior  period, 
had  not,  in  some  instances,  operated  to  its  full  ex- 
tent till  the  beginning  of  1809-  The  alteration  of 
the  exchanges,  and  of  the  position  of  the  Bank,  in 
the  last  quarter  of  1808,  therefore,  will  be  con- 
sidered as  belonging  to  the  next  epoch  ;  while  the 
completion  of  the  rise  of  prices,  originating  in,  and 
anterior  to,  1808,  may  be  included  in  the  interval 
which  has  just  been  reviewed. 


iT 


290  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Section  9.  —  Summary  of  the  preceding  Survey. 

As  the  results  of  the  survey  of  the  period,  which 
has  passed  under  review,  it  appears  — 

1.  That,  during  the  first  year  after  the  renewal 
of  the  war  with  France,  the  prices  of  corn  were 
falhng,  and  w^ere,  in  the  early  part  of  1804,  as  low 
as  they  had  been,  on  an  average,  in  ten  years 
before  the  war  or  the  Bank  restriction. 

2.  That  the  harvest  of  ISOi  proved  greatly  defi- 
cient, and  was  the  cause  of  a  great  rise  of  the  prices 
of  provisions,  and  the  occasion  of  a  fresh  rise  of 
wages. 

3.  That  the  harvests  of  1807  and  1808,  although 
not  of  so  marked  a  degree  of  deficiency,  were  con- 
sidered to  have  yielded  only  scanty  crops,  which, 
seeing  the  increasing^  and,  in  the  last  of  tliose  years, 
the  insurmountable^  difficulty  of  obtaining  a  foreign 
supply,  rendered  a  high  price  the  necessary  con- 
dition, with  the  aid  of  the ^  prohibition  of  distilla- 
tion from  grain,  of  limiting  the  consumption  to 
the  reduced  sources  of  supply. 

4.  That  the  progress  of  the  power  of  France  on 
the  Continent  of  Europe  in  1807  and  1808,  and  the 
consequent  enforcement  of  the  Berlin  and  Milan 
decrees,  coincidently  with  the  non-intercourse  acts 
of  the  United  States  of  America,  rendered  our 
actual  importations  of  the  most  important  raw  ma- 
terials for  our  manufactures  deficient  in  an  extra- 
ordinary degree,  and  threatened  to  cut  off  all 
future  supply  ;  thus  justifying  a  great  rise  of  prices, 
on  the  ground,  not  only  of  actual,  but  of  prospective, 
scarcity. 