

-f-  Barley  and  oats  did  not  participate  in  the  advance  ;  the 
averages  at  the  close  of  June,  1810,  being  4-9s.  9d.  and  30*.  6d. 
The  prohibition  of  the  distillation  from  grain  might  contribute 
to  keep  down  the  price  of  barley. 

U   "4 


296  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

amounted  to  about  1,500,000  quarters  of  wheat 
and  flour,  and  about  600,000  quarters  of  other 
gram  and  meal. 

Of  the  deficiency  of  the  wheat  crop  of  1809) 
and  of  the  degree  in  which  we  were  dependent  on  a 
foreign  supply  for  keeping  down  the  prices  between 
that  and  the  harvest  of  1810,  the  following  extracts 
from  the  Farmer's  Magazine  will  furnish  some  in- 
teresting details :  — 

"  Grain  markets,  taking  all  circumstances  into  consideration, 
have  seldom  been  worse  than  for  several  months  past.  Three 
causes  may  be  assigned  for  the  uncommon  dulness  of  the  markets 
from  one  end  of  the  island  to  the  other.  First,  the  bad  wea- 
ther before  and  during  harvest  last  year,  whereby  a  large 
proportion  of  grain,  wheat  especially,  was  in  some  degree  ren- 
dered useless  as  an  article  to  be  manufactured  into  bread. 
Secondly,  the  very  large,  and,  for  the  time,  uncommon  import- 
ation of  wheat  and  oats  from  France  and  Holland,  and  the 
partial  arrivals  of  wheat  from  America,  —  all  tended  to  make 
a  considerable  part  of  British  grain  absolutely  unsaleable,  — 
that  imported  being  in  fact  generally  of  superior  value,  har- 
vested in  a  better  climate,  and  free  of  the  diseases  and  acci- 
dents which  almost  ruined  the  last  crop  in  this  country.  Thirdly, 
the  prohibition  against  the  use  of  grain  in  the  distilleries  ; 
whereby  seven  or  eight  hundred  thousand  quarters  were  de- 
prived of  a  market,  at  a  time  when  a  considerable  part  of 
British  grain  was  fit  for  no  other  purpose  than  distillation." — 
Farm.  Mag.  vol.  xi.  p.  100.  March,  1810. 

"  Letter  from  London,  Mark-lane,  5th  March,  1810. 

"  The  character  of  the  cropof  1809  was  represented,  by  the  most 
intelligent  agriculturists  in  every  part  of  Great  Britain,  as  being 
unproductive,  especially  in  the  article  of  bread  corn.  The  de- 
ficient qualities  and  diminished  quantities,  and  consequent  high 
prices,  of  wheat  which  appeared  at  this  market  after  harvest, 
attracted  the  attention  of  the  foreign  merchants,  and  they  soon 
devised  means  of  obtaining  supplies  from  the  enemy's  coasts. 
Their  activity  has  already  had  the  effect  to  introduce  into  this 
port,  since  the  date  of  our  last,  in  the  end  of  November,  no 
less  than  220,348  quarters  of  wheat,  chiefly  from  the  ports  of 
France,  Holland,  and  Flanders  ;  a  quantity  within  8785  quarters 
of  the  whole  arrivals  of  British  w/ieat  at  this  market  in  the  year 
1809,  and  equal  to  more  than  a  half  of  both  the  English  and 
foreign  wheats  entered  inwards  during  the  above  period. 