

The  amount  of  discounts,  too,  bore  a  nearer  and 
more  uniform  proportion  to  the  advances  to  govern- 
ment during  this  period  than  before  or  subse- 
quently. 

*  And  during  this  reduced  and  low  state  of  the  advances  to 
government,  the  average  price  of  wheat  in  August,  1805,  rose 
to  1005.  per  quarter. 


286  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Section  7.  —  Advances  by  the  Bank  to    Govern- 
ment. 

With  reference  to  the  advances  by  the  Bank  to 
government  on  land  and  malt,  Exchequer  bills 
and  other  securities,  the  bullion  committee  of 
1810  remark,  — 

"  That  the  yearly  advances  have,  upon  an  average,  since 
the  suspension,  been  considerably  lower  in  amount  than  the 
average  amount  of  advances  prior  to  that  event ;  and  the 
amount  of  those  advances  in  the  two  last  years,  though  greater 
in  amount  than  those  of  some  years  immediately  preceding,  is 
less  than  it  was  for  any  of  the  six  years  preceding  the  restric- 
tion of  cash  payments." 

This,  of  itself,  is  an  important  admission,  and  if 
the  attention  of  the  committee  had  been  suffi- 
ciently directed  to  the  inference  from  the  fact,  it 
might  have  led  them  to  hesitate  more  than  they 
did,  in  making  the  charge  of  depreciation  hy  exces- 
sive issue. 

But  there  is  one  point  of  view  in  which  the  mo- 
deration of  the  advances  of  the  Bank  to  govern- 
ment may  be  exhibited  in  a  still  more  striking 
manner. 

From  the  documents  laid  before  parliament,  in 
consequence  of  the  attention  called  to  the  subject 
by  the  repeated  motions  in  parliament  of  Mr. 
Grenfell,  to  whose  persevering  exertions  the  public 
are  indebted  for  a  considerable  abatement,  which 
about  that  time  was  made  in  the  charge  of  the  Bank, 
for  the  management  of  the  public  debt ;  it  appears 
that  the  average  of  the  government  deposits  in  the 
hands  of  the  Bank,  in  I8O6,  was  12,197,303/.,  and 
that  the  amount  fluctuated  for  some  years  after  be- 
tween eleven  and  twelve  millions.  Now,  the  average 
of  the  advances  by  the  Bank  to  government,  was 
in  those  3^ears  somewhat  under  fourteen  million  five 
hundred  thousand  pounds.  So  that  the  real  cash 
advance^  or  the  medium  for  the  issue  of  Sank  notes 


1804—1808.  287 

through  the  government^  as  also  the  real  amount 
available  to  the  government  beyond  its  own  cash 
balance  in  the  hands  of  the  Bank,  did  not,  in  the 
interval  now  under  consideration ,  much  exceed 
three  millions  ! 

This   comparative    smallness   of  the    advances 
to  government  negatives  the  supposition  so  com- 
monly entertained  and  reasoned  upon,  as  a  point 
beyond   doubt,   that  the    Bank  was  rendered   by 
the    restriction,  a  mere    engine    in    the   hands  of 
government  for  facilitating  its  financial  operations, 
and  that  the  war  could  not    have   been    carried 
on  without  the  restriction.      In  fact,    the  whole 
charge    of  an    undue    proportion    of   the    issues 
of  the   Bank  in  advances  to  government,  will  be 
found  to  have  been  confined  to  the  two  last  years 
of  the  war,  and  the  Jive  years  following  the  peace. 
But  the  comparative   smallness  of  the    advances 
to  government,  during  the  period  now  under  con- 
sideration, is  material  in  another  point  of  view;  for 
it  will  be  seen  hereafter,  that  the  partisans  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  paramount  influence  of  the    cur- 
rency upon  prices,  lay  great  stress  upon  the  cliannel 
through  which  the  Bank  notes  are  issued,  imput- 
ing a  great  superiority  of  effect  to  the  same  amount 
if   issued  or  withdrawn  through  the  medium   of 
advances  to  government. 