

Wheat         -         -         102*.  6d.f 
Barley         -         -  50*.  6d. 

Oats  -         -  30*.  3d. 

Previously  to  any  decided  indication  of  mischief 
to  the  crops  of  1809?  the  government  seems  to 

*  It  may  be  sufficient  to  bring  it  to  the  recollection  of  some 
readers,  if  they  be  reminded,  that  it  was  the  season  in  which 
the  ill-fated  expedition  to  Walcheren  took  place;  for  it  must 
be  still  remembered  how  much  the  calamitous  sickness  which 
attended  it  was  aggravated  by  the  rains  which  prevailed, 
almost  incessantly,  from  its  embarkation  to  its  return. 

-j-  The  very  indifferent  quality  and  condition  of  the  wheat  of 
the  crop  of  1809  kept  down  the  average  price  :  the  best  samples 
in  Mark-lane  were,  in  December  1809,  worth  1255.  The  price 
of  oats  was  comparatively  low  because  the  quality  had  been 
more  injured  than  the  quantity ;  besides  that  there  had  been 
an  importation  in  1808  of  about  500,000  quarters. 


1809—1813.  295 

have  been  alive  to  the  deficiency  of  the  growth  of 
the  preceding  year,  which  had  left  very  little  stock 
on  hand,  and  to  have  adopted  measures  for  facili- 
tating importation.  It  appears  to  have  suited  the 
views  of  the  French  government,  at  the  same  time, 
to  promote  an  exportation  of  corn,  which  happened 
then  (as  one  of  the  exceptions  to  the  observation 
of  a  general  similarity  of  seasons)  to  be  unusually 
abundant  and  cheap  in  France  and  the  Netherlands. 
Licenses  were  accordingly  obtained  from  both  go- 
vernments ;  and,  as  a  consequence  of  these  mea- 
sures, about  400,000  quarters  of  wheat,  besides 
other  grain,  were  imported  before  the  close  of  1809. 

Tiie  spring  of  1810  was  singularly  cold  and  un- 
genial :  a  series  of  dry  east  winds  prevailed  for  many 
weeks  together.  The  hay  crops  w^ere  remark- 
ably deficient.  *  The  wheats,  at  the  same  time, 
were  generally  thin  on  the  ground.  This  un- 
favourable appearance  of  the  coming  crops,  and 
their  general  backwardness,  combined  with  the 
known  deficiency  of  the  existing  stock,  raised  the 
averages  in  June  for  wheat  to  113.^.  5d.f ;  and 
the  weatlier  having  become  wet  and  stormy  in 
July,  and  the  first  fortnight  of  August,  prices  ex- 
perienced some  further  advance,  viz.,  to  an  average 
of  116.V.  for  wheat. 

These  high  prices,  and  the  speculation  on  the  pro- 
spect of  a  further  advance,  had  stimulated  extraor- 
dinary efforts  to  obtain  a  foreign  supply;  so  that, 
notwithstanding  the  enormous  expenses  of  freight, 
insurance,  and  licenses,  amounting  collectively  to 
from  30s.  to  50s.  per  quarter  on  wheat,  and  in 
proportion  for  other  grain,  the  importation  in  1810 

*  The  price  of  hay  rose,  in  the  winter  following,  to  11/,  per 
load. 