

5.  That,  while  all  importable  commodities  were 
thus  naturally  the  subject  of  a  great  speculative 
rise,  the  opening  of  the  trade  with  the  Brazils 
and  Spanish  America  afforded  great  inducements 
to  speculations  in  exportable  commodities. 

6.  That  the  state  of  excitement,  usually  attendant 


1804—1808.  291 

upon  apparently  successful  speculations,  commu- 
nicated itself  to  various  other  objects  of  enter- 
prise, and  occasioned  the  projection  of  numerous 
joint-stock  companies,  and  other  manifestations  of 
the  spirit  of  adventure. 

7.  That  the  great  rise  of  the  prices  of  corn, 
and  of  other  leading  articles  of  consumption,  some 
of  them  to  a  height  beyond  any  which  they  ever 
afterwards  attained,  and  the  great  attendant  spirit 
of  speculation  and  general  excitement  in  1807  and 
1809,  took  place  under  a  remarkahly  restricted  and 
equahle  state  of  the  Bank  circulation^  and  in  a  state 
of  the  currency  which,  judging  by  the  exchanges, 
and  the  price  of  bullion,  and  the  position  of  the 
Bank,  as  to  its  treasure,  compared  with  its  liabil- 
ities, was  such  as  it  might  have  been  in  a  convertible 
state  of  the  paper. 

8.  That  this  was  the  state  of  things,  as  regarded 
the  position  of  the  Bank,  and  the  value  of  the  cur- 
rency, after  sixteen  2/ears  of  the  war  and  twelve  years 
of  the  Bank  restriction. 


u  € 


292  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 


CHAP.  V. 

STATE    OF    PRICES    AND  OF  THE    CIRCULATION,    FROM 
1809    TO    1813. 

The  epoch  which  we  are  now  entering  upon,  viz., 
from  the  close  of  1808  to  the  commencement  of 
1814,  embraces  the  precise  interval  which  has 
commonly  been  fixed  upon  in  proof,  as  it  is  alleged, 
of  depreciation  of  the  currency  by  the  Bank  re- 
striction, greatly  beyond  the  degree  indicated  by 
the  difference  between  paper  and  gold.  And 
what,  in  a  historical  point  of  view,  as  relates  to 
the  commerce  of  this  country,  is  of  much  more 
importance,  the  interval  between  the  commence- 
ment of  1809  and  the  close  of  1813,  besides  the 
astounding  changes  which  were  wrought  in  the 
political  condition  of  the  principal  states  of  Europe, 
embraces  events  which  caused  greater  revolutions 
in  the  principal  channels  of  our  foreign  trade,  and 
more  signal  vicissitudes  in  the  fortunes  of  indi- 
viduals, than  can  be  found  in  any  other  equal  por- 
tion of  our  commercial  history. 

We  have  seen  that,  towards  the  conclusion  of 
the  last  epoch,  the  course  of  political  events  had 
been  such  as  tended  to  the  exclusion  of  this  coun- 
try from  commercial  intercourse  with  the  Conti- 
nent of  Europe,  and  with  the  United  States  of 
America.  The  consequence  had  been  a  great  fall- 
ing off  of  the  importation  of  all  European  and 
American  produce,  and  an  enormous  advance  of 
prices,  upon  the  speculation  of  continued  and  in- 