

It  is  here  perfectly  clear,  that  Mr.  Horner  either 
denied  the  scarcity  as  the  cause  of  the  high  price, 
or  that  he  confounded  dearth  with  depreciation. 
Now  dearth  means  dearness,  arising  from  scarcity 
of  the  commodity,  while  depreciation  supposes  no 
scarcity  of  the  commodity,  but  simply  an  increase 
of  money  raising  prices. 

Mr.  George  Rose  replied, 

"  The  honourable  gentleman  complains  of  the  large  import- 
ation of  corn  lately  as  a  great  evil,  and  threatens  inquiry 
respecting  it.  My  defence  will  be  short,  but,  I  hope,  satis- 
factory, —  had  the  importation  not  been  permitted,  the  distress 
for  bread  would  have  been  extreme.  With  the  aid  of  two  mil- 
lions of  quarters  of  foreign  corn,  the  quartern  loaf  was  at  fifteen 
pence,  and,  without  such  aid,  it  would  probably  have  been  at 
half-a-crown.  The  consequences  which  must  arise,  from  paying 
foreigners  for  so  large  a  quantity  of  corn  as  would  probably  be 
imported,  were  too  obvious  not  to  have  been  foreseen ;  but  in 
such  a  dilemma  there  was  no  hesitation  between  submitting  to 
the  inconvenience  of  the  nature  apprehended,  and  to  the  want 
of  bread  to  the  necessitous  part  of  our  population." 


300  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

The  retort  v;as  complete,  but  produced  no  im- 
pression. The  attention  of  the  house  and  of  the 
pubUc  was  absorbed  in  the  question  of  principle; 
and  the  utter  untenableness  in  argument  of  the 
principles  for  which  Mr.  Rose  and  his  colleagues  in 
the  ministry,  with  the  Bank  directors,  contended, 
cast  into  the  shade,  as  irrelevant  and  inconclusive, 
all  mere  matter  of  fact.  The  truth  is,  that  if  it  had 
not  been  for  the  very  large  importations  of  corn 
between  the  harvests  of  1809  and  1810,  the  scarcity 
would  have  been  most  severely  felt ;  and  when  Mr. 
Horner  asked,  what  could  be  the  reason  that  pro- 
duced a  necessity  for  about  two  millions  of  quarters 
of  corn  in  one  year,  which  was  not  a  year  of  famine, 
the  simple  answer  was,  that,  hut  for  that  importation^ 
it  ivould  have  been  a  year  of  famine. 


Section  2. — Fall  of  Prices  of  Commodities,  and 
Commercial  Distress,  from  1809  to  1811. 

But  while  the  price  of  corn  had  undergone  this 
fluctuation  of  a  rise  of  nearly  30^.  the  quarter, 
and  again  a  fall  to  the  same  extent,  between  the 
summer  of  1809  and  that  of  1811,  and  while 
some  descriptions  of  agricultural  produce,  such  as 
hay,  for  instance,  and  other  provender,  were  still 
scarce  and  dear,  all  other  productions,  whe- 
ther raw  materials  or  manufactured  articles,  ex- 
perienced a  very  great  fall  of  price,  between  the 
commencement  of  1809,  and  different  periods 
in  1810  and  1811. 

The  great  advance,  and  the  enormously  high 
range,  of  prices  in  this  country,  in  1808,  while 
on  the  Continent  they  were  low,  (by  the  operation 
of  the  same  causes  as  made  them  high  here),  in- 
duced the  merchants  on  both  sides  to  make  great 
efforts    to  overcome    or    elude    the    obstacles    to 