


1809—1813.  307 

distress,  described  in  the  report  of  the  select  committee,  ren- 
dered it  advisable  that  parliament  should,  if  possible,  adopt  some 
measure  by  which  that  evil  might  at  least  be  diminished.  It  ap- 
peared distinctly  by  the  report,  that  the  distress,  originating  with 
the  merchant,  and  disabling  him  from  paying  the  manufac- 
turer, was  felt  most  severely  by  the  manufacturer  and  those 
employed  by  him.  All  the  principal  manufacturers  had  been 
compelled  to  contract,  and  some  wholly  to  suspend,  their  works. 
It  appeared  by  the  report  that  there  was  scarcely  a  cotton  ma- 
nufacturer in  the  kingdom  who  had  not  diminished,  by  one  half, 
the  number  of  persons  employed  in  his  mills;  and  that  many  of 
the  smaller  manufacturers  had  discharged  their  people  altogether. 
It  appeared,  also,  that  those  who  were  retained  by  the  first 
description  of  manufacturers  were  retained  at  a  reduced  rate 
of  wages.  The  consequences  must  necessarily  be,  as  they  were 
represented  to  be  in  the  report  of  the  select  committee,  that 
the  most  calamitous  distress  prevailed  throughout  many  of  the 
manufacturing  districts.  The  report  also  stated  that  the  mer- 
chants who  traded  with  the  western  world,  not  being  able  to 
find  an  adequate  market  for  their  produce,  this  circumstance 
aggravated  the  distress  of  the  manufacturers ;  and  the  whole 
operating  upon  the  other  branches  of  trade,  although  not  im- 
mediately connected  with  those  to  which  he  had  referred,  pro- 
duced a  general  want  of  confidence,  and  suspension  of  credit, 
which  required  the  prompt  and  effectual  application  of  some 
adequate  remedy," 

The  commercial  distress  of  that  period  was  not 
confined  to  the  United  Kingdom.  It  prevailed  on 
the  Continent  of  Europe,  as  may  be  observed  by 
the  foregoing  extracts  :  and  that  the  same  descrip- 
tion of  distress  appUed  to  the  commerce  of  the 
United  States  will  appear  from  the  following  ex- 
tract of  a  letter  from  New  York,  dated  11th  of 
February,  1811,  communicated  to  me  by  a  friend, 
largely  interested  at  that  time,  as  well  as  at  the 
present,  in  the  trade  with  that  country. 

"  Such  times  for  money  were  never  known,  and  all  confidence 
among  merchants  is  totally,  and,  indeed,  very  justly,  destroyed. 
Since  the  middle  of  December  we  have  had  between  sixty  and 
seventy  failures  in  this  city,  and  many  more  are  expected  to  fail 
in  the  course  of  this  and  the  following  month." 

I  am  indebted  to  the  same  friend  for  the  follow- 
ing extract  of  a  letter  from  his  Liverpool  house, 
to  a  mercantile  correspondent. 

x  2 


308  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

"  Liverpool,  Nov.  22.  1810. 
"  The  effects  of  a  vast  import  of  colonial  and  American  pro- 
duce, far  above  the  scale  of  our  consumption  at  the  most  pros- 
perous periods  of  our  commerce,  and  attaining  a  magnitude 
hitherto  unknown  to  us,  have,  in  the  present  cramped  state  of 
our  intercourse  with  the  Continent,  developed  themselves  in 
numerous  bankruptcies,  widely  spreading  in  their  influence,  and 
unprecedented  in  extent  of  embarrassment.  It  is  but  fair,  how- 
ever, to  ascribe  a  portion  of  these  evils  to  the  consequences  of 
a  sanguine  indulgence  of  enterprise,  in  extensive  shipments  of 
our  manufactures  to  South  America,  which  so  confidently  fol- 
lowed the  expedition  to  La  Plata,  and  the  removal  of  the  go- 
vernment of  Portugal  to  Brazil  :  they  are  further  aided  by  the 
speculations  which  prevailed  during  the  various  stages  of  the 
American  non-intercourse,  and  which,  unfortunately,  were  not 
confined  to  the  duration  of  the  circumstances  which  excited 
them.  In  the  struggle  to  support  themselves,  the  sjieculators 
have  had  recourse  to  new  and  extensive  engagements,  in  the 
face  of  probabilities  and  facts  too  incontrovertible  to  have  been 
slighted,  until  the  united  action  of  the  accumulating  imports, 
and  the  want  of  an  adequate  vent,  have  overwhelmed  them. 
The  event  only  can  enable  us  fully  to  appreciate  the  effects  of 
this  imprudence,  which,  more  than  any  preceding  defalcations, 
have  involved  the  mercantile  character  of  our  country,  and  de- 
stroyed confidence  in  a  degree  that  will  require  a  long  period 
of  prosperous  circumstances  to  retrieve." 