

Great  as  was  the  fall  of  prices,  and  severe  as 
was  the  commercial  distress,  which  prevailed  in  the 
early  part  of  1811,  these  circumstances,  calculated 
as  they  were  to  modify  the  practical  application  of 
the  principles,  for  the  most  part  correctly  laid  down, 
by  the  Bullion  report  of  1810,  were  not  at  all  ad- 
verted to  in  that  report,  nor  were  suffered  to  oc- 
cupy any  prominent  part  in  the  discussions  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  to  which  that  report  gave  oc- 
casion, in  May,  1811.  Indeed,  the  Buhion  Com- 
mittee, in  their  report,  and  their  supporters  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  seem  equally  to  have  pro- 
ceeded on  the  assumption  that  all  commodities  had 
risen  ;  and  the  inference  held  out  was  that  they 
had  risen  in  consequence  of  the  increase  of  bank- 
notes, and  in  common  with  the  rise  in  the  price 
of  gold.     No   evidence  whatever  had  been  taken 


1809—1813.  309 

by  the  Bullion  Committee  respecting  the  prices  of 
commodities  ;  and  the  only  allusion  to  these  is  in 
the  passage  wherein  it  is  said,  "  the  prices  of  all 
commodities  have  risen,  and  gold  appears  to  have 
risen  in  price  only  in  common  with  them.  If  this 
common  effect  is  to  be  'ascribed  to  one  and  the 
same  cause,  that  cause  can  only  be  found  in  the 
state  of  the  currency  of  tiiis  country."  This  ob- 
servation was  made  at  a  time  w^lien  all  commodities, 
provisions  alone  excepted,  which  were  scarce,  from 
the  season,  were  falling  rapidly  in  price^  and  had 
been  falling  when  gold  was  rising.  But  at  the 
time  when  the  discussions  in  parliament  took  place, 
namely,  in  May  1811,  even  corn  had  fallen  con- 
siderably in  price,  as  we  have  seen  ;  and  nearly  all 
other  commodities  were  at  a  ruinously  low  rate, 
compared  with  the  cost  of  production,  which  had 
been  so  greatly  increased  by  the  extravagantly 
high  freights  and  premiums  of  insurance  to  which 
the  importations  were  then  subject.* 

*  The  following  are  specimens  of  the  charges  of  importation, 
to  which  commodities  that  we  stood  most  in  need  of  were  sub- 
ject, between  1809  and  1812,  compared  with  the  charges  of  im- 
portation in  1837,  and  the  reader  will  thence  judge  whether  the 
high  prices  of  those  articles  are  attributable  to  war,  as  increasing 
the  demand,  or  to  war,  as  obstructing  the  supply. 

The  freight  and  premium  of  insurance  t  from  the  Baltic  to 
London,  on  the  average  of  the  seasons,  were  as  follows  :  — 

1809-12.  1837. 

^     s.  d.  £    s.  d. 

On  Hemp         -            -         per  ton     30     0  0  2  10  0 

Tallow         -           -             —         20     0  0  1    10  0 

Wheat         -            -     per  quarter     2  10  0  0     4  6 