

"  1st  December,  1810. 
"  A  numerical  evidence  of  the  present  state  of  trade  may  be 
deduced  from  the  number  of  bankruptcies  in  the  London  Ga- 
zette, inserted  in  this  magazine:  — 


1809—1813.  305 

They  amounted  this  month,  in  1810,  to  273 
The  same  month,  —  1809,  —  130 


Ditto      - 

.      _  1808,  —  100 

Ditto      - 

.       _  1807,  —     97 

Ditto 

,      _  1806,  —    65 

Ditto      - 

.      _  1805,  —    87 

Ditto 

.      _  1804-,  —    60 

Besides  stoppages  and  compositions,  eijual  in  number  to  half  the 
traders  in  the  kingdom  !  These  faiku-es  throughout  tlie  kingdom 
have  wonderfully  affected  the  manufacture  of  every  description 
of  goods ;  and  a  general  want  of  confidence  exists  between  the 
manufacturer  and  the  export  merchant.  The  speculators  at 
Liverpool  have  completly  overstocked  the  different  markets  of 
South  America,  where,  at  present,  English  manufactured  articles 
can  be  purchased  at  a  loss  of  twenty  per  cent,  to  the  exporter, 
with  the  exception  of  a  few  articles,  on  which  little  or  no  credit 
could  be  obtained  here." 

1st  January,  1811. 

"  In  our  last  Report  we  stated  the  vast  increase  of  bankrupt- 
cies within  the  last  month,  compared  with  similar  months  for 
seven  years  back ;  and  we  regret  to  say  that  they  still  continue 
to  increase  in  number,  and  that  confidence  in  the  mercantile 
world  seems  nearly  at  an  end. 

"  Discount,  unless  bills,  &c.,  of  a  few  of  the  first  houses  in  the 
city,  can  only  be  done  through  the  medium  of  bill-brokers,  at  an 
extra  commission,  exclusive  of  the  regular  interest. 

"  In  Lancashire  the  cotton  manufacturers  appear,  by  the  late 
Gazettes,  as  well  as  by  private  information,  to  be  greatly  dis- 
tressed, and  business  quite  at  a  stand.  In  Manchester,  and 
other  places,  houses  stop  not  only  every  day,  but  every  hour. 
Cotton  wool  is  in  no  demand  at  any  price,  and  no  export  of  the 
manufactured  goods,  except  a  few  fine  sorts  to  Rio,  &c.  The 
trade  of  Birmingham,  Sheffield,  &c.  quite  at  a  stand,  and  no 
orders  for  execution  there,  except  a  few  for  our  home-consump- 
tion. At  London,  Liverpool,  and  Bristol,  the  king's  stores  are 
full  of  all  kinds  of  colonial  produce,  as  coffee,  sugar,  rum,  Szc, 
for  security  of  their  duties,  and  the  proprietors  in  the  greatest 
possible  distress,  not  being  able  to  force  sales  of  these  articles." 

To  prove  that  these  are  not  exaggerated  descrip- 
tions of  the  commercial  distress  which  prevailed  in 
this  country  at  that  period,  I  need  only  refer  to 
the  parliamentary  debates  in  the  spring  of  1811, 
from  wliich  I  have  made  as  many  extracts  as  my 
limits  will  permit. 

X 


306  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 