


298  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

A  great  turn,  however,  took  place  in  prices  after 
the  middle  of  August,  1810.  The  weather,  thence- 
forward, cleared  up,  and  continued  uninterruptedly 
propitious  to  the  progress  of  the  harvest  till  its 
completion,  insomuch  that  the  whole  of  the  crops 
was  secured  in  good  order.  The  wheats,  although 
considered  to  be  deficient  in  quantity*,  were,  by 
their  good  condition,  all  available  for  early  use ; 
and  from  this  circumstance,  combined  with  the  very 
large  foreign  supply,  the  markets  declined  thence- 
forth, the  prices  by  the  end  of  the  year  being 
upwards  of  20^.  lower  than  in  August  preceding. 
The  averages  at  the  close  of  1810  being  for 

Wheat  -  -         94.S-.  'Jd. 

Barley  -  -         41. v.  7^. 

Oats  -  -         26.V.  Sd. 

The  corn-dealers,  w^ho  had  speculated  on  the 
bad  weather  at  the  commencement  of  tlie  harvest, 
were  severe  sufferers,  and  many  were  ruined  ;  thus 
swelling  the  list  of  bankruptcies,  the  great  extent  of 
which  will  be  noticed  more  particularly  hereafter. 

The  prices  slowly,  but  progressively,  declined 
till  the  summer  following  ;  the  averages  for  June, 
1811,  being,  for 

Wheat  -  -  86^.  l\d. 
Barley  -  -  38.y.  (jd. 
Oats  -         .         9^8.    5d. 

It  is  not  a  little  remarkable,  that  in  the  discus- 
sions in  the  House  of  Commons,  in  May,  1811,  on 
the  bullion  report,  hardly  any  reference  was  made 
to  deficiency  of  the  crops,  arising  from  the  sea- 
sons, as  accounting  for  the  high  price  of  corn, 
and  the  large  importations  in  1809  and  1810.  It 
should  seem  that  the  disputants  on  both  sides, 
with   the  exception  of  Mr.  George  Rose,  had  no 

*  Farmer's  Magazine,  1810.  "  Wheat,  in  almost  every  case, 
excellent  in  grain,  but  in  many  districts  thin,  and  by  no  means 
an  average." 


1809—1813.  299 

notion  of  deficiency  of  crops,  as  justifying  or  ex- 
plaining high  prices,  except  in  the  peculiar  in- 
stances of  1794  and  1795,  and  1799  and  1800. 

Mr.  Horner  must  have  been  under  an  inexplicable 
misconception  of  the  facts  of  tlie  case,  if  the  report 
of  his  speech,  when  bringing  forward  his  resolutions 
on  the  6th  May,  1811,  be  correct.  According  to 
that  report,  page  812.  vol.  xix.  Parliamentary 
Debates,  he  is  stated  to  have  said,  — 

"  It  is  allowed,  that  the  principal  article  of  import  in  the  last 
year  was  grain,  and  that  import  was  enormous.  Now  it  ap- 
pears to  me,  that  the  House  should  most  seriously  consider 
what  could  be  the  reason  that  produced  a  necessity  for  about 
2,000,000  of  quarters  in  one  year,  which  was  not  a  year  of 
famine.  When  we  consider  the  great  part  of  our  population 
which  is  employed  in  manufactures,  and  the  great  and  increas- 
ing portion  of  that  population  which  is  on  the  list  of  paupers, 
no  man  can  look  to  the  possibility  of  another  year  of  dearth, 
without  feeling  the  most  painful  and  serious  alarm.  I  look 
upon  this  increase  of  the  price  of  corn  as  a  very  strong  argu- 
ment in  support  of  the  opinions  which  I  have  taken  the  liberty 
to  state  to  the  committee." 