


304  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

"  Monthly  Commercial  Report,  1st  August,  1810. 

"  The  failures  of  several  houses  of  the  very  first  respectability, 
both  at  London  and  in  different  provincial  towns  of  Great  Bri- 
tain, have,  within  the  last  month,  been  unprecedented  in  number 
and  importance.  A  West  India  broker,  who  has  long  been  con- 
sidered the  first  in  his  line,  was,  we  are  told,  the  prime  cause  of 
the  stoppage  of  a  banking- house,  whose  credit  was  previously  un- 
impeached.  The  several  banks  in  the  country,  connected  with 
the  London  house,  of  course  shared  its  fate  ;  and  ft-om  them  the 
evil  spread  to  merchants,  manufacturers,  traders,  and,  in  short,  to 
the  very  servants  and  dependents  of  these,  numbers  of  whom  are 
thrown  out  of  employment,  and  their  families  deprived  of  bread. 
Speculations  in  Spanish  wool,  an  article  which  has  fallen  about 
fifty  per  cent.,  are  considered  as  the  origin  of  those  unlooked-for 
disasters.  Five  Manchester  houses  have  stopped  payment  in  the 
city,  and,  we  are  sorry  to  add,  have  involved  numerous  industri- 
ous persons,  both  in  town  and  country,  in  their  ruin.  The  de- 
mands upon  the  five  houses  are  said  to  amount  to  two  millions  ; 
but  it  is  supposed  that  their  real  property  will  ultimately  cover 
all  deficiencies.  Speculative  exports  to  South  America  are  the 
rock  upon  which  these  houses  have  split.  In  consequence  of 
these  unexpected  events,  public  credit  is  at  the  present  moment 
as  low  as  ever  it  has  been  in  the  memory  of  man  :  the  fluctuation 
of  prices  in  the  money-market  is  unpi-ecedented,  and  the  depres- 
sion so  considerable,  that  omnium  is  fallen  to  two  and  a  half  per 
cent,  discount.  We  understand  that  some  respectable  merchants 
have  waited  upon  the  Bank  directors,  in  order  to  solicit  their  aid 
towards  the  alleviation  of  the  burdens  with  which  our  internal 
commerce  is  at  present  borne  down.  The  result  of  this  applica- 
tion is  not  as  yet  publicly  known  ;  we  trust  it  will  prove  favour- 
able. The  renewal  of  our  intercourse  with  the  United  States 
of  America  has,  in  some  sort,  benefited  the  manufacturing  in- 
terest ;  but  this  felicitous  effect  is  almost  swallowed  up  in  the 
vortex  of  those  calamities,  which  it  has  been  our  painful  duty 
to  record. 

"  Holland.  —  All  trade  between  Great  Britain  and  this  de- 
voted country  is  completely  put  a  stop  to  by  the  rigorous  exe- 
cution of  the  French  emperor's  anti-commercial  decrees.  It  is 
even  reported  that  the  captains  and  part  of  the  crews  of  two 
vessels  were  shot  for  violating  the  prohibition. 

"  Prussia.  —  Money  is  so  extremely  scarce  in  the  Prussian 
ports,  that  the  merchants  can  with  difficulty  collect  sufficient  to 
defray  the  import  duties;  and  interest  is  represented  to  be  at 
the  extravagant  rate  of  two  and  a  half  per  cent,  per  month." 