

Extracts  from  the  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House 
of  Commons  on  the  State  of  Commercial  Credit,  7th  March, 
1811. 

"  Your  committee  found  that  memorials  had  been  presented 
to  his  Majesty's  treasury,  towards  the  latter  end  of  the  last  and 
the  beginning  of  the  present  year,  stating  the  great  embarrass- 
ments and  distress  which  were  felt  amongst  the  manufacturers 
in  the  cotton  trade  in  Glasgow  and  Paisley,  and  their  vicinity, 
and  praying  for  public  assistance  ;  that  the  same  were  confirmed 
by  the  representation  of  a  meeting  held  in  the  city  of  London 
on  the  12th  of  February,  which  sent  a  deputation  to  wait  upon 
the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  with  a  copy  of  the  resolutions 
adopted  at  that  meeting.  These  resolutions  your  committee 
have  inserted  in  the  appendix  to  this  report. 

"  Your  committee  found,  by  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses 
they  examined,  that  those  statements  and  representations  were 
founded  on  fact. 

"  It  appeared  to  your  committee  that  the  principal  part  of  the 
distress  which  was  complained  of  had  arisen  out  of  great  and 
extensive  speculations,  which  commenced  upon  the  opening  of 
the  South  American  markets  in  the  Brazils,  and  elsewhere,  to  the 
adventures  of  British  merchants. 

"  Your  committee  also  found  that  great  distress  was  felt  in  a 
quarter  which  was  much  connected  with  this  trade,  namely, 
amongst  the  importers  of  produce  from  the  foreign  West  India 
islands,  and  from  South  America. 

"  That  great  part  of  the  returns  for  the  manufactures  which 
were  exported  to  those  parts  of  the  world  came  home  in  sugars 
and  coffee,  which,  not  being  entitled  to  sale  in  the  home  market, 
there  were  no  immediate  means  of  realizing  their  value. 

"  These  representations  of  the  distress  experienced  in  the 
trade  of  the  cotton  manufacturer  and  exporter,  and  from  the 
want  of  market  for  foreign  colonial  produce,  were  also  con- 
firmed by  respectable  merchants  and  traders  in  London  ;  who 
also  stated  that  the  embarrassments  were  felt  in  other  branches 
of  trade,  not  connected  with  foreign  commerce  or  colonial 
produce." 

Extract  from  the  Speech  of  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  in 
the  Debate  on  the  Commercial  Credit  Bill. 

"  The  consideration  of  this  important  subject,  he  observed, 
divided  itself  into  three  heads  :  —  first,  the  nature  and  extent  of 
the  evils  which  the  manufactures  and  commerce  of  the  country 
were  enduring  ;  —  secondly,  what  were  the  causes  of  those  evils  ; 
— and,  thirdly,  the  measures  by  which  the  evils  might,  with  the 
greatest  probability,  be  removed.  With  respect  to  the  first  of 
these  considerations,  he  apprehended  there  could  be  no  differ- 
ence of  opinion  whatever ;  but  that  the  nature  and  extent  of  the 