

Timber       -            -         per  load     10     0  0  1     0  0 

The  charges  of  importation  in  those  two  years  on  all  other 
commodities  from  the  Baltic  were  in  the  same  proportion. 


-j-  In  1809  there  were  instances  when  30/.  per  ton  was  paid 
for  i\\e  freight  cdone  of  hemp  ;  and  the  insurance  varied  from  20 
to  40  per  cent. ;  making  these  two  items  of  charge  amount  to 
between  40/.  and  50/.  per  ton  on  hemp,  and  in  a  similar  pro- 
portion on  other  articles  of  importation  from  the  Baltic.     But  1 

X  3 


310  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Tlie  strange  misconception  under  which  Mr. Horner 
laboured,  as  to  the  facts  of  the  case  in  regard  to  corn, 

The  expenses  attending  the  importation  of  silk,  which  was 
brought  by  a  circuitous  route  *  from  Italy?  through  the  north  of 
Europe,  were  enormous.  Some  came  likewise  through  France  ; 
and  the  charges  of  conveyance  from  Italy  to  Havre  and  duty  of 
transit,  amounted  to  nearly  100/.  per  bale  of  2401b.,  net  weight, 
exclusive  of  freight  and  insurance  from  Havre  hither.  The 
whole  expense  of  freight  and  insurance  from  Italy  does  not  at 
present  amount  to  more  than  61.  per  bale. 

But,  while  the  cost  of  articles  imported  from  the  Continent 
of  Europe  was  thus  enhanced  by  the  difficulty  of  communication, 
the  same  cause  raised  the  price  of  colonial  produce,  and  of  some 
kinds  of  British  manufactures,  to  a  still  greater  proportionate 
height  on  the  Continent,  inasmuch  as  the  vigilance  and  severity 
of  the  decrees  of  the  enemy  were  exercised  more  directly  against 
imports  from,  than  against  exports  to,  this  country.  One  or 
two  instances  may  serve  to  show  the  degree  in  which  these  ob- 
structions were  calculated  to  raise  the  prices  of  such  commodi- 
ties abroad. 

The  charges  of  freight  and  French  license,  on  a  vessel  of  little 
more  than  100  tons  burden,  have  been  known  to  amount  to 
50,000/.  for  the  voyage  merely  from  Calais  to  London  and  back  : 
this  made  the  proportion  of  freight  on  indigo  amount  to  4*.  6d. 
per  pound :  the  freight  at  present  is  about  Id.  per  pound  ! 

A  ship,  of  which  the  whole  cost  and  outfit  did  not  amount 
to  ^OOO/,  earned  a  gross  freight  of  80,000/.  on  a  voyage  from 
Bourdeaux  to  London  and  back. 

Among  the  means  devised  by  the  ingenuity  and  enterprise  of 
adventurers  to  elude  or  overcome  the  obstacles  presented  by 
the  decrees  of  the  enemy,  one  in  particular,  which  was  resorted 
to  on  an  extensive  scale,  deserves  mention,  as  illustrating,  in  a 
striking  manner,  the  degree  in  which  those  obstacles  were  cal- 
culated to  increase  the  cost  to  the  consumer.  Several  vessels 
laden  with  sugar,  coffee,  tobacco,  cotton-twist,  and  other  valuable 
commodities,  were  despatched  -f-  from  hence  at  very  high  rates 