


have  rather  taken  the  medium  rate  which  prevailed  through  the 
season.  There  was  no  very  material  reduction  in  those  charges 
till  181. '5. 

*  On  one  occasion,  two  parcels  of  silk  were  despatched  from 
Bergamo  to  this  country  at  the  same  time,  one  hy  the  xoay  of 
Smyrna  and  the  other  hy  the  loay  of  Archangel :  the  former  was 
a  twelvemonth  and  the  latter  two  years,  on  its  passage. 

t  The  refined  sugar  was  packed  here  in  small  boxes,  made  at 
a  considerable  additional   expense,  for  the  express  purpose,  to 


1809—1813.  311 

has  already  been  noticed;  and  Mr.  Henry  Thornton, 
following  on  the  same  side,  seems  to  have  been 
under  an  equally  erroneous  impression  as  to  facts 
relating  to  commodities  generally ;  for,  in  the  debate 
of  the  6th  May,  1811,  he  is  reported  to  have  said, 

"It  was  material  to  observe,  that  there  had,  since  the  be- 
ginning of  the  war,  been  a  continual  fall  in  the  value  of  money ; 
he  meant  of  money  commonly  so  called,  whether  consisting  of 
cash  or  paper.  This  had  by  some  been  estimated  at  60  or  70  per 
cent.,  and  certainly  was  not  less  than  40  or  50  per  cent. ;  which 
was,  on  the  average,  2  or  3  per  cent,  per  annum  :  it  followed 
from  hence,  that  if,  for  example,  a  man  borrowed  of  the  Bank 
1000/.  in  1800,  and  paid  it  back  in  1810,  having  detained  it,  by 
means  of  successive  loans,  through  that  period,  he  paid  back 
that  which  had  become  worth  less  by  20  or  SO  per  cent,  than  it 
was  worth  when  he  first  received  it.  He  would  have  paid  an 
interest  of  50/.  per  annum  for  the  use  of  this  money ;  but,  if 
from  this  interest  were  deducted  the  20/.  or  30/.  per  annum 

of  freight  and  insurance  to  Salonica,  where  the  goods  were 
landed,  and  thence  conveyed  on  horses  and  mules  through  Servia 
and  Hungary  to  Vienna,  for  the  purpose  of  being  distributed 
over  Germany,  and,  possibly,  into  France.  Thus  it  might  happen, 
that  the  inhabitants  of  that  part  of  the  Continent  of  Europe 
most  contiguous  to  this  country  could  not  receive  their  supplies 
from  hence,  without  an  expense  of  conveyance  equivalent  to 
what  it  would  be  if  they  were  removed  to  a  distance  of  a  sea- 
voyage  twice  round  the  globe,  but  not  subject  to  fiscal  and  po- 
litical obstructions.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  articles 
subject  to  such  expenses  should  be  sold  at  enormously  high 
prices,  viz.,  5s.  and  6s.  per  lb.  for  sugar,  7*.  per  lb.  for  coffee, 
18*.  for  indigo,  and  7.?.  and  8s.  for  cotton ;  for  these  prices  were 
the  condition  requisite  to  overcome  the  obstacles  to  supply. 

With  just  as  much  reason  might  the  high  prices  on  tlie  Con- 
tinent, of  articles  subject  to  such  obstructions,  be  resorted  to 
in  proof  of  the  effects  of  war-demand,  or  of  the  state  of  their 
currency,  as  the  high  prices  in  this  country,  of  timber,  hemp, 
flax,  silk,  &c.,  and  of  the  manufactured  articles  into  the  compo- 
sition of  which  these  raw  materials  entered,  be  considered  to 
prove  the  extra-demand  and  consumption  arising  out  of  the  war, 
or  to  indicate  the  depreciation  of  paper  beyond  the  difference 
between  the  market  price  and  the  mint  price  of  gold. 