

In  August,  1812,  the  average  prices  were,  for 
England  and  Wales,  per  Gazette  average — 


s. 

d. 

Wheat, 

155 

0 

Barley, 

79 

10 

Oats, 

56 

2 

In  Mark  Lane,  the  finest  Danzig  Wheat  fetched 
180*.,  and  Oats,  in  one  or  two  instances,  were  sold 
at  the  enormous  price  of  84*. 

Y  2 


324  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

The  corn  markets  have  on  no  occasion  since  at- 
tained the  same  elevation. 

Meat  in  Smithfield  reached  the  following  quo 
tations  :  — 


s. 

d. 

s.      d. 

Beef, 

5 

2 

to 

6     2 

Mutton, 

5 

2 

6     4 

Veal, 

5 

6 

— 

7     6 

Pork, 

5 

4 

6  10 

The  weather  during  the  harvest  of  1812  was 
unsettled,  but  not  so  decidedly  wet  as  materially  to 
injure  the  crops.  There  were  conflicting  opinions 
as  to  the  yield.  The  following  are  extracts  from 
some  of  the  reports  of  the  time  ;  making  all  due 
allowance,  the  crops  of  grain  generally,  and  of 
potatoes  in  that  year,  appear  to  have  been  under  an 
average. 

Farmer's  Magazine,  August,  1812. 

"  There  has  seldom,  or  perhaps  never,  been  a  period  when 
the  new  crop  was  a  subject  of  greater  and  more  general  interest 
than  the  present ;  and  it  was  our  particular  wish  to  obtain  the 
best  and  fullest  information  of  its  appearance.  We  feel  very 
grateful  to  our  correspondents  who  have  enabled  us  to  present 
reports  of  it,  and  of  the  condition  of  the  industrious  poor  for 
the  last  quarter  ;  and  their  communications  will  certainly  be  per- 
used with  that  attention  which  their  peculiar  importance  must 
command. 

"  Though  appearances  are  different,  as  might  be  expected, 
from  the  diversity  of  soil  and  culture,  the  general  character  of 
the  ensuing  crop,  as  far  as  an  opinion  can  be  formed  of  it  at 
this  period  of  the  season,  must  be  represented,  we  fear,  as  rather 
unfavourable.  The  impression,  after  a  very  careful  examina- 
tion of  the  reports,  is,  that  unless  we  have  two  months  at  least 
of  singularly  warm,  clear,  and  dry  weather,  the  grain  crops 
will  not  reach  an  average  ;  that  common  oats,  particularly  in 
many  situations,  and"  peas  and  beans  generally,  must  be  very 
late  indeed.  From  recent  and  afflicting  experience  of  partial 
failure  in  the  crops  of  wheat,  it  is  not  a  matter  of  surprise  if 
a  few  of  the  intelligent  writers  are  a  little  alarmed  at  the  in- 
dications of  disease  which  that  crop  already  exhibits  in  some 
districts,  and  which  there  was  but  too  much  reason  to  expect 
from  the  late  cold,  humid,  and  ungenial  state  of  the  atmosphere." 

Agricultural  Report,     Monthly  Magazine, 
"  Wheat  harvest  has  been  protracted  and  extremely  tedious 


1809—1813.  S<25 

in  the  distant  counties  ;  the  farmers  being  obliged  to  wait  an 
unusual  length  of  time  for  the  grain  to  ripen,  which,  in  the  in- 
terval, has  taken  considerable  damage  from  wet.  This  unfa- 
vourable circumstance  will  add  to  the  stock  of  unsound  and  light 
corn.  The  last  year's  stock  is  literally  exhausted  in  all  quarters, 
and  markets  in  consequence  have  continued  to  rise  for  several 
weeks.  The  early  speculators,  who  hurried  their  wheat  to 
market,  to  the  great  deterioration  of  its  quality,  have  failed 
generally  in  their  object,  as  the  subsequent  rise  in  prices  has 
proved.  The  favourable  opinion  of  the  potato  crop  has  not  been 
realised  ;  they  yield  but  indifferently  ;  probably  in  the  propor- 
tion of  a  defect  of  one  fourth  of  the  variable  quantity  of  last 
year.  In  the  mean  time,  certain  ill  informed  newspapers  teem 
with  the  usual  deplorable  nonsense  about  monopoly,  forestalling, 
and  hoarding  farmers  and  dealers  !" — 3Iiddlesex,  October  27. 1812. 