

*  Mr.  Vansittart  had  said,  "  I  wish  the  house  to  pledge  itself 
to  the  belief  that  bank-notes  still  are,  as  they  have  always  been, 
equivalent  to  legal  coin,  for  the  internal  purposes  of  the  country, 
the  only  purposes  to  which  they  ever  have  been  applicable." 


1809—1813.  317 

was  passed,   in  April,  1811,  granting  a  sum,  not 
exceeding  six  millions   of  Exchequer  bills,  to  be 
advanced  by  commissioners  to  the  distressed  mer- 
chants and  manufacturers,  by  way  of  loan  on  ade- 
quate security.     This  measure,  in  consequence  of 
which,  however,   not  more  than  two  millions  were 
eventually  advanced,   was  then,   as  it  probably  is 
still,  supposed  to  have  arrested  the   tendency  to 
depression,  and  to   have  contributed  to  the  subse- 
quent revival  of  trade.     In  that  opinion  I  did  not 
and  do  not  participate.   If  the  causes  of  abundance 
of  commodities  at  home,  and  our  exclusion  from 
foreign  ports,  had  continued,  there  would  have  been 
no  ground  for  a  rise  of  prices :  and,  if  prices  had 
not  risen,  the  parties  who  borrowed  the  Exchequer 
bills  would  have  been  injured  instead  of  benefited 
by  the    facility  of  holding  their  goods  so   much 
longer ;  as   they  would  thereby  have  incurred  loss 
of  interest,   warehouse-rent,   and  other  expenses, 
and  must  at  last  have  submitted  to  the  same,  if  not 
to  lower,  prices  than  they  might  originally  have 
obtained.     But  whether  the  measure  was   or  was 
not  calculated  to  do  the  good  intended,   there  is 
reason  to  believe  that  it  did  not  come  into  opera- 
tion at  all  till  circumstances  had  occurred  favour- 
able  to  a   reviv-al  of  the  activity  of  trade,   and, 
consequently,  to   a  removal  of  the  causes  of  the 
then  existing  distress. 

Those  circumstances  were,  the  complete  expul- 
sion of  the  French  from  Portugal,  and  the  progress 
of  the  British  army  in  Spain,  which  opened  nearly 
the  whole  Peninsula  to  a  commercial  intercourse 
with  this  country.  The  glut  of  our  exports  to  South 
America  and  the  West  Indies  had  been  carried  off 
by  low  prices,  and  a  brisk  demand  iiad  succeeded. 
The  intention  of  Russia  to  resist  the  French  was 
becoming  manifest ;  and  an  anticipation  was  confi- 
dently entertained  of  a  relaxation  of  the  prohibi- 
tions against  imports  into  the  Russian  ports. 


318  PRICES    AND  CIRCULATION, 

Tlie  progress  of  improvement  is  described  in  the 
following  extracts  from  the  periodical  work  which 
I  have  before  quoted  :  — 

Monthly  Commercial  Report,  1st  June,  1811. 

"  The  expulsion  of  the  French  out  of  Portugal  has  once  more 
opened  a  trade  with  that  country,  and,  in  consequence  of  it, 
vast  quantities  of  goods  of  the  manufacture  of  Great  Britain 
are  now  shipping  for  Lisbon  and  Oporto  ;  among  which  the  ma- 
nufactures of  Manchester,  &c.,  will  not  be  the  least  in  quan- 
tity. Linens,  calicos,  and  woollen  cloths  are  in  great  demand 
in  Portugal. 