


contain  not  more  than  about2cwt.  each,  so  as  to  admit  of  being 
slung  one  on  each  side  of  a  horse  or  mule  for  conveyance  over- 
land. 

X  4 


312  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

which  he  had  gained  by  the  fall  in  the  value  of  the  money,  he 
would  find  that  he  had  borrowed  at  2  or  3  per  cent.,  and  not  at 
5  per  cent,  as  he  appeared  to  do.  By  investing  his  money  either 
in  land  or  in  successive  commercial  undertakings,  in  the  year 
1800,  and  then  finally  selling  his  land  or  his  commodities  in  the 
year  1810,  he  would  find  the  produce  amount  to  200^.  or  300/. 
above  the  1000/.  which  he  had  borrowed  ;  which  200/.  or  300/., 
being  deducted  from  the  500/.  interest  which  he  had  paid,  would 
make  the  neat  sum  paid  by  him  to  be  only  200/.  or  300/."  * 

It  is  clear  that  the  meaning  of  the  speaker  is 
that  the  rise  of  prices  here  supposed  was  caused 
by  the  Bank  restriction  ;  and  the  date  assigned  to 
the  first  operation  of  this  cause  is  the  year  1800, 
being  that  in  which  there  first  occurred  any  dif- 
ference between  paper  and  gokl.  Viewing  it  in 
this  hght,  the  hypothetical  case  here  put  involves 
a  total  misconception  of  the  state  of  facts ;  for 
there  were  very  few  commodities  in  which,  if 
1000/.  had  been  laid  out  in  1800,  a  loss  would 
not  have  been  sustained  of  20  and  30  per  cent, 
and  upwards,  in  addition  to  the  interest  upon 
finally  selling  the  commodities  in  1810.  The 
money,  indeed,  if  laid  out  in  land,  or  in  houses, 
or  in  shipping,  in  1800,  would  have  produced  a 
profit  upon  selling  in  1810  and  1811.  But  this 
exception  is  easily  accounted  for.  The  frequent 
recurrence  of  deficient  harvests,  when,  by  the  ob- 
stacles to  importation,  the  rise  of  the  prices  of 
agricultural  produce  was  in  a  greatly  increased  ratio 
to  the  deficiency,  had  given  a  character  of  per- 
manence to  the  range  of  high  prices,  which  enabled 
the  landlords  to  obtain  increased  rents  upon  every 
termination   of  a  lease.     In  several  instances  the 

*  I  have  been  induced  to  notice  and  comment  upon  this 
opinion  of  Mr.  Henry  Thornton,  not  only  because  of  his  de- 
servedly high  authority  on  the  subject  of  the  currency,  but  be- 
cause the  particular  opinion  here  quoted  was  referred  to  by 
Lord  Ashburton,  in  his  evidence  before  the  Agricultural  Com- 
mittee of  the  House  of  Commons  in  1836,  as  confirmatory  of 
his  belief  that  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  at  that  time  was 
greatly  beyond  the  difference  between  paper  and  gold. 


1809—1813.  313 

rents  were  raised  to  treble  of  what  they  had  been 
in  1792,  and  speculations  in  purchases  of  land 
were  almost  certain  to  render  a  profit.  In  the  case 
of  houses,  the  increasing  taxes  upon  building-ma- 
terials, and  the  great  rise  in  the  price  of  timber,  in 
consequence,  not  only  of  the  heavy  duty,  but  of  the 
high  freight  and  charges  on  importation,  when 
combined  with  an  increasing  population,  operated 
as  a  premium  on  all  existing  buildings,  and  neces- 
sarily caused  a  great  rise  in  that  description  of  pro- 
perty. And  as  to  shipping,  there  was  not  only 
the  increased  and  increasing  cost  of  the  materials, 
which  raised  the  building  price,  but  the  employ- 
ment was  extended  by  the  demands  for  the  transport 
service,  which  required  tonnage  on  a  greatly  en- 
larged scale  for  the  war  in  the  Peninsula.  These 
descriptions  of  property  were  doubtless  higher  in  1 8 1 0 
than  in  1800  ;  and  the  price  of  labour  having  been 
slowly  but  progressively  advanced,  in  consequence 
of  the  frequent  recurrence  of  periods  of  dearth, 
the  increased  wages  had  acquired  the  character  of 
permanence.  But  with  these  exceptions,  which,  so 
explained,  afford  no  ground  for  ascribing  their 
comparatively  high  price  to  depreciation  of  money, 
nearly  all  other  objects  of  exchange  were  lower  in 
price  in  1810  and  1811  than  in  1800  ;  in  few  in- 
stances less  than  20  per  cent.,  and,  in  some  instances, 
upwards  of  50  per  cent.,  as  ^neasured  in  paper, 
ivhile  gold  had  risen  ^Z5  per  cent.  It  may  be  matter 
of  surprise  that  Mr.  Henry  Thornton,  who,  in  his 
excellent  work  on  paper  credit,  in  1 802,  had  so  well 
exposed  the  hasty  conclusions  of  Mr.  Boyd,  as  to 
the  influence  of  the  bank  issues  in  causing  the 
high  prices  of  corn  in  1799  and  1800,  should,  in 
1811,  have  laboured  under  such  a  misconception  of 
the  actual  state  of  markets  as  to  be  led  into  an 
error,  so  similar  to  that  which  he  had  some  time 
before  animadverted  upon.  The  fact  is,  that  Mr. 
Thornton,    who    was    profoLuidly   and    acciu'ately 