


314  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

acquainted  with  the  principles  and  details  of  bank- 
ing, had  not  necessarily,  from  his  occupation  as  a 
banker,  any  knowledge  of  markets  ;  and  nothing 
can  more  strongly  prove  how  little  aware  he  was 
of  the  actual  state  of  them,  and  of  the  fluctuations 
to  which  they  had  been  subject,  or  of  the  causes 
of  those  fluctuations,  than  the  passage  here  quoted 
from  his  speech.  His  exposition,  at  the  same 
time,  of  the  general  principles  of  currency  was  full 
and  clear,  and,  indeed,  the  best  that  had  then  been 
given  ;  and  his  exposure  of  the  inconsistencies 
and  fallacies  involved  in  the  maxims  avowed  by 
the  Bank  directors,  and  supported  by  the  govern- 
ment, was  unanswered  and  unanswerable. 

Mr.  Vansittart,  in  his  speech  on  the  same  occa- 
sion, presents  a  curious  and  somewhat  amusing 
contrast.  While  his  arguments  in  support  of  the 
views  of  the  government,  and  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
Bank  directors,  and  of  the  proposition  embodied 
in  his  unfortunate  resolution,  form  a  model  of  in- 
geniously perplexed,  and  elaborately  unintelligible, 
general  reasoning,  his  statements  of  facts  indicate 
extensive  and  accurate  information  as  to  the  nature 
and  extent  of  the  disturbing  causes  which  were 
operating  upon  the  exchanges  and  upon  prices, 
and  which  accounted  for  them  independently  of 
any  supposed  influence  upon  them  by  the  state  of 
the  circulation. 

"  The  general  scale  of  prices,  he  observed,  had  been  pro- 
gressively but  slowly  advancing  for  many  years  previous  to  the 
Bank  restriction,  and  does  not  appear  to  have  been  affected  by 
that  event.  But  the  scarcity  in  1800  and  1801  produced  a 
great  and  permanent  eifect,  particularly  on  the  price  of  labour ; 
and  it  has  been  so  far  from  being  remarkable  in  the  two  last 
years,  that  though  the  price  of  provisions  has  been  high,  from 
causes  sufficiently  notorious,  that  of  most  articles  of  merchandize 
is  considerably  reduced.  The  last  period  of  three  or  four  years 
is,  indeed,  remarkable  for  great  and  sudden  fluctuations  of  the 
prices  of  merchandize,  corresponding  with  the  extraordinary 
and  violent  changes  which  have  taken  place  in  commercial  policy  ; 
but  the  present  state  of  prices  is  so  far  from  justifying  the  opi- 


1 809— 1813.  315 

nion  of  a  currency  depreciated  from  its  excess,  that  it  would 
rather  lead  to  a  contrary  inference,  if  it  were  not  easy  to  be 
accounted  for  by  obvious  causes." 

In  a  subsequent  speech,  on  tlie  13th  May,  1811, 
Mr.  Vansittart  pointed  out  how,  in  some  instances, 
taxation  perpetuated  prices  which,  in  their  origin, 
and  temporarily,  had  been  those  of  dearth. 

"  But  the  principal  reason,"  he  said,  "  which  produced  that 
remarkable  increase  of  prices,  which  has  subsisted  from  that 
time  without  any  extraordinary  variation,  was  the  great  addi- 
tional mass  of  taxes  imposed,  while  the  effects  of  the  scarcity 
were  passing  away,  and  prices  returning  to  their  former  level. 
It  may  serve  by  way  of  illustration  to  mention  a  particular  instance. 
The  price  of  beer  had,  among  other  articles,  been  considerably 
advanced  during  the  scarcity.  In  the  spring  of  1802,  the  price 
of  malt  having  fallen  that  of  beer  was  reduced ;  but  a  tax  was 
soon  after  imposed  by  parliament  to  the  exact  amount  of  the 
reduction.  The  price  was,  accordingly, raised  again,  and  remained 
the  same  to  the  consumer  as  during  the  scarcity." 