

"  South  America.  —  In  our  last  we  stated  the  trade  of  this 
country  to  be  rather  brisk,  and  have  the  pleasure  now  to  say 
that  every  mail  from  the  Brazils  confirms  it." 

1st  July,   1811. 

"  Since  our  last  report,  the  manufactories  have  revived  in  a 
great  degree,  chiefly  owing  to  large  orders  for  all  kinds  of  woollen, 
linen,  and  cotton  goods  having  arrived  here  for  the  markets  of 
Portugal  and  of  South  America.  The  goods  of  Birmingham  and 
Sheffield  are  also  in  great  demand  at  these  markets.  Credit  and 
confidence,  we  are  happy  to  say,  revive,  and  the  towns  of  Man- 
chester, Nottingham,  &c.  feel  vast  benefit  from  the  happy  change 
that  has  taken  place. 

"  The  West  Lidia  Islands  are  now  in  want  of  all  kinds  of  Bri- 
tish manufactured  goods,  as  the  stock  in  hand  in  these  islands 
has  been  purchased  up  with  avidity  for  the  Spanish  settlements. 
Irish  linen,  sheeting,  &c.,  render  a  full  profit  of  twenty  per  cent, 
more  than  the  usual  profit  attached  to  such  speculations." 

This  improvement,  however,  as  it  so  immedi- 
ately succeeded  to  a  period  of  great  distress,  was 
not  yet  marked  by  such  eagerness  of  speculative 
shipment  as  had  distinguished  1808  and  1809- 

While  our  export  trade  was  slowly  recovering, 
there  appeared,  towards  the  autumn  of  that  year,  a 
more  marked  tendency  to  a  general  advance  in  the 
prices  of  agricultural  produce,  and  of  imported  raw 
materials. 


1809—1813.  319 


Section  4.  —  Rise  of  the  Prices  of  Agricultural 
Produce,  and  high  Range  of  them,  Jjetween  the 
Harvest  0/I8II  and  the  Harvest  of\S\S. 

The  scanty  crops  of  corn  of  1810  had  been 
eked  out  by  the  aid  of  the  large  foreign  supply,  at 
rather  decHnmg  prices,  till  the  approach  of  the 
harvest  of  1811,  when,  in  consequence  of  the 
bareness  of  the  stock  on  hand,  and  the  unfavour- 
able appearance  of  the  crops,  combined  with  un- 
settled weather,  prices  began  to  rise  in  August, 
and  thenceforward  advanced  steadily  and  consi- 
derably till  the  eve  of  the  following  harvest,  when, 
as  will  be  seen,  they  attained  their  greatest  height. 

As  it  was  the  deficiency  of  the  crops  of  the 
harvest  of  1811  whicli,  with  little  stock  remain- 
ing from  the  preceding  year,  and  without  the  means 
of  obtaining  a  foreign  supply,  occasioned  the  high 
prices  of  1812,  and  as  those  high  prices  form  the 
standard  a  decline  from  which  has  been  ascribed 
to  the  operation  of  Peel's  bill,  it  is  necessary  to 
notice  in  some  detail  the  circumstances  connected 
with  it.  The  more  especially  because  the  fact 
itself  of  any  deficiency  at  all,  as  resulting  from  that 
year's  crops,  appears  not  to  have  been  contemplated, 
or,  at  any  rate,  has  not  been  admitted,  or  even  ad- 
verted to,  by  the  supporters  of  the  several  theories 
of  depreciation  or  of  war-demand.  The  further 
presumptive  proofs  of  the  negative  of  those  theories 
will  be  pointed  out  hereafter.  In  the  mean  time, 
the  following  extracts  from  contemporaneous  publi- 
cations must  be  considered  as  forming  a  mass  of 
the  best  evidence,  of  which  the  nature  of  the  sub- 
ject is  susceptible,  of  the  deficiency  of  the  crops 
of  corn  in  this  country.  A  deficiency  quite  suffi- 
cient, when  considered  with  its  attendant  circum- 
stances, to  account  for  the  high  prices  which  have 
been  so  gratuitously  ascribed  to  the  currency  or  to 