

Lord  Castlereagh,  who  equally  failed  in  render- 
ing his  general  principles  intelligible,  observed, 
however,  justly  enough,  "  that,  if  the  Bullion  Com- 
mittee could  have  traced  any  advance  of  price  in 
the  leading  articles  of  consumption,  which  could 
be  fairly  shown  to  connect  itself  with  the  alleged 
excess  of  notes,  they  would  have  annexed  to  their 
report  tables  of  the  prices  current  during  the  period 
which  has  elapsed  since  the  restriction  bill  took 
place.  So  far  from  prices  having  advanced  in  the 
two  or  three  last  years,  since  exchanges  became 
unfavourable,  and  bank-notes  are  assumed  to  be 
depreciated,  he  believed  the  fact  to  be  the  reverse." 

And  in  the  House  of  Lords,  in  the  course  of 
the  debates  on  that  most  anomalous  measure,  lord 
Stanhope's  gold  coin  bill,  lord  Bathurst,  in  his 
reply  to  lord  King,  asked,  "  Was  there  a  general 
advance  in  the  price  of  commodities  ?  Let  the 
noble  lord  compare  the  current  prices  at  present 
with  those  in  1808,  and  he  would  find  that  a  large 
proportion  of  commodities,  and  those  by  no  means 


316  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

inconsiderable  commodities,  had  fallen  in  price. 
He  would  find  that  iron  and  wool,  unfortunately 
for  the  noble  lord  adduced  as  instances  of  a  rise 
in  price,  tallow,  cotton,  and  a  great  number  of 
other  commodities,  had  experienced  a  great  fall. 
When  there  was  a  depreciation  in  the  currency, 
there  would  be  a  general  advance  in  the  price  of 
commodities  ;  but,  if  there  was  a  general  advance, 
it  did  not  follow  that  there  was  depreciation.'* 

In  neither  of  the  two  houses,  however,  did  the 
principal  speakers  on  the  side  of  the  Bullion  Commit- 
tee seem  to  think  it  incumbent  upon  them  to  explain 
this  anomaly  of  prices  according  to  their  doctrine. 
They  were  intent  only  on  exposing  the  outrageous 
absurdity  and  inconsistency  of  the  proposition  in- 
volved in  Mr.  Vansittart's  third  resolution.*  In 
that  object  they  so  far  succeeded,  that,  although 
the  resolution  was  carried  by  a  large  majority  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  the  public  has  assented 
to  the  general  principles  for  which  the  Committee 
and  its  supporters  contended. 


Section   3.  —  Revival   of   Credit^    and   improved 
Prospects  of  Trade,  in  the  Summer  o/'1811. 

The  suffering  state  of  commerce,  which  has 
been  described  as  the  consequence  of  the  great 
fall  of  prices  in  1809  and  1810,  and  of  the  dis- 
astrous result  of  the  speculative  exports,  did  not 
continue,  however,  in  the  same  degree  of  intensity 
beyond  the  spring  of  1811,  when  it  seems  to  have 
reached  its  height. 

At  that  time,  as  we  have  seen,  it  attracted  the 
notice   and    interference    of  Parliament.     An    act 