

"  From  all  these  circumstances  a  rise  of  corn  markets  was  the 
necessary  consequence,  though  at  this  time  it  would  be  rather 
rash  to  speculate  or  prognosticate  upon  their  state  at  a  more 
advanced  period  of  the  season,  when  prices  may  be  supposed  to 
have  gained  their  proper  level.  The  present  rate  of  markets 
will  be  seen  from  the  accounts  which  follow.  Hitherto  there 
has  been  little  or  no  importation  from  ibreign  countries,  and  it 
is  understood  that  the  crops  upon  the  Continent  are  scantier 
this  season  than  usual." 

And  the  following  copy  of  a  petition  from  Li- 
verpool will  place  beyond  a  doubt  the  fact  of  the 
general  impression  of  the  great  deficiency  of  the 
crop  of  1811. 

"  At  a  public  meeting  of  the  inhabitants  of  Liverpool,  held 
on  the  4th  of  November,  1811,  John  Bourne,  Esq.  Mayor,  in 
the  chair,  it  was  unanimously  resolved,  upon  the  motion  of  John 
Gladstone,  Esq.,  seconded  by  Thomas  llodie,  Esq.,  that  a  pe- 
tition should  be  presented  to  the  Prince  Regent,  praying  that 
he  would  suspend  the  further  distillation  of  spirits  from  grain 
until  the  meeting  of  Parliament. 

"  The  Humble  Petition,  <i-c.  &c. 
"  Showeth, 

"  That  your  petitioners  being  deeply  interested  in  the  welfare 
of  this  populous  town,  and  this  great  manufacturing  county, 
cannot  but  view  with  great  anxiety  the  progressive  and  alarming 
advance  in  the  prices  of  corn,  in  connection  with  the  fact  now 
ascertained,  that  the  produce  of  the  late  harvest  is  very  deficient, 
and  that  the  weather  for  gathering  it  in,  in  the  northern  parts 
of  Great  Britain,  and  for  preparing  the  wheat  lands  generally 
for  the  next  crops,  has  been  extremely  unfavourable. 

"  That  your  petitioners  are  well  informed  the  potato  crop  in 
Ireland  has  so  materially  failed,  that  this  important  necessary 
of  life  now  sells  in  the  Dublin  market  at  the  excessive  price  of 
6*.  per  cwt.,  from  which  circumstance  your  petitioners  appre- 
hend that  the  usual  supplies  of  corn  from  Ireland,  upon  which 
the  numerous  population  of  this  town  and  the  county  of  Lan- 
caster are  known  in  a  great  degree  to  depend  for  subsistence, 
are  likely  to  be  much  curtailed. 

"  That,  in  times  like  the  present,  when  no  dependence  can 
be  placed  on  receiving  supplies  of  foreign  corn,  it  becomes  of 
the  first  importance  to  husband  to  the  utmost  the  crops  of  this 
country. 

*'  That  the  average  weekly  prices  of  corn  in  England  and 
Wales,  according  to  the  returns  received  in  the  week  ending  the 

Y 


322 


PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 


26th  of  October,  as  published  in  the  London  Gazette  of  the  2d 
of  November,  are  as  follows  :  — 


s.     d. 

