


320  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

war-demand.  The  following  is  an  account  of  it, 
from  one  of  the  circular  monthly  reports  of  that 
period  (Oct.  1811). 

"  The  state  of  the  wheat  crops  seems  now  to  be  ascertained 
with  probable  accuracy  throughout  the  island,  as  somewhat  below 
an  average  quantity,  and  far  inferior  to  that  of  last  year  in  point 
of  quality.  Reckoning  both  quantity  and  quality,  persons  of 
the  most  general  information  decide  upon  a  deficiency  of  a  full 
third.  There  will  be  a  considerable  quantity  of  black  wheat,  and 
in  many  parts  of  the  north  the  barley  is  strongly  smutted." 

This  estimate  was  fully  confirmed ;  for,  in  another 
monthly  report,  in  December,  1811,  it  is  said, 

"  The  former  statements  respecting  the  defects  of  the  crops 
of  wheat,  both  in  quantity  and  quality,  are  fully  and  unfortu- 
nately confirmed.  The  autumnal  price  of  wheat,  is  indeed,  at  an 
enormous  height,  although  the  farmers  have  been  universally 
liberal  in  supplying  the  markets,  considering  the  season ;  and,  as 
there  are  various  impediments  to  foreign  supplies  in  times  like 
the  present,  the  real  state  of  things  cannot  be  too  widely  pro- 
mulgated, with  a  view  to  timely  economy  in  expenditure." 

A  corroboration  of  the  general  estimate  of  the 
defective  state  of  the  crops  of  that  year  will  be 
found  in  the  following  extract  from  the  Farmer's 
Magazine,  more  minutely  descriptive  of  the  de- 
ficiency :  — 

"  December,  1811.  —  The  wheat  crop  is  less  or  more  a  de- 
fective one  in  every  district,  but  more  so  in  some  districts  than 
in  others.  According  to  our  accounts  it  can  rarely  be  estimated 
above  five  eighths  of  an  average  crop,  though,  what  is  surprising, 
the  quality  of  the  grain  is  generally  good,  a  circumstance  which 
seldom  happens  when  the  crop  is  a  failing  one.  Indeed,  as  the 
failure  this  season  was  not,  in  many  instances,  occasioned  by 
mildew  (at  least  in  Scotland),  the  grain  that  was  in  the  ear 
arrived  at  complete  maturity,  without  being  stinted  of  nourish- 
ment. The  deficiency  evidently  proceeded  from  wetness  in 
May  —  from  cold  frosty  nights  in  June  —  from  boisterous  winds 
when  the  plant  was  under  the  blossom  process  —  and  from  want 
of  sun  and  heat  when  the  grain  was  formed  in  the  ear  of  the 
plant.  Wheat  is  a  grain  always  comparatively  unproductive  in 
a  cold  season  such,  as  the  last  one,  and  the  same  remark  is  ap- 
plicable to  barley,  the  crop  of  which,  generally  speaking,  is 
below  an  average.  Oats,  and  peas,  and  beans,  may,  however,  be 
considered  as  fair  crops,   though,  according  to  our  accounts. 


1809—1813.  321 

many  of  these   grains,  upon  thin  soils,  suffered  so  much  from 
the  wetness  in  May  and  June  as  not  to  prosper  afterwards. 