

The  wages  of  agicultural  labourers  and  artisans 
had  been  doubled,  or  nearly  so.  Salaries  from 
the  lowest  clerks  up  to  the  highest  functionaries, 
as  well  as  professional  fees,  had  been  considerably 
raised  on  the  plea  of  the  greatly  increased  expenses 
of  living ;  the  expense  of  living  having  been 
increased,  not  only  by  the  increased  price  of  neces- 

on  the  contrary,  is,  that  the  produce  of  the  permanent  taxes 
fell  off  in  each  of  tlie  years  1811  and  1812.  And  it  is  well 
known  that  this  circumstance,  indicating  an  approach  to  the 
limits  of  the  power  of  further  taxation,  induced  the  resort  in 
1813  to  an  appropriation  of  the  nominal  sinking  fund  for  the 
interest  on  tiie  further  loans. 


330  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

saries,  but  by  a  higher  scale  of  general  expenditure, 
or  style  of  living,  incidental  to  the  progress  of  wealth 
and  civilisation  Thus,  upon  the  recurrence  of  the 
seasons  of  dearth  between  1808  and  1812,  there  was 
more  of  an  adjustment,  although  still  inadequate,  of 
the  pecuniary  means  of  a  large  part  of  the  different 
classes,  which  prevented  so  great  a  degree  of 
the  pressure  of  distress  as  had  been  observable  in 
the  previous  scarcity. 

But  while  the  wages  of  agricultural  labourers 
and  of  artisans  had  been  raised  in  a  considerable, 
although  still  inadequate  proportion  to  the  in- 
creased price  of  necessaries,  this  was  not  the  case, 
or  only  partially  so,  as  regarded  the  wages  of  the 
working  people  in  manufactories.  Considerable 
numbers  of  these  had  no  advance  of  wages  ;  or  if 
they  had,  the  advance  was  more  than  compensated 
by  reduced  hours  of  work.  In  the  branches  of 
trade  which  were  affected  by  the  state  of  stagnation 
and  discredit  in  1810  and  1811,  and  in  those  which 
depended  upon  a  demand  for  export,  many  work- 
men were  thrown  wholly  out  of  employ.  The  dis- 
tress accordingly  among  these  classes  was  very 
severe,  and  was  the  cause  of  considerable  disturb- 
ances in  the  manufacturing  districts.* 

*  The  Prince  Regent,  in  a  message  to  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, in  June  1812,  referred  to  the  violent  and  dangerous  pro- 
ceedings carried  on  in  several  counties  of  England.  In  further 
proof  of  the  distressed  state  of  the  working  classes  at  that 
time,  it  may  be  observed,  that  the  poor  rates,  vi'hich  in  1803, 
a  period  of  low  prices  and  agricultural  distress,  had  amounted 
to  5,348,201/.,  rose  in  1812  and  1813  to  8,640,84-2/.  And  it 
was  stated  in  the  House  of  Commons  (Parliamentary  Debates, 
vol.  xxi.  p.  1004.),  that  a  committee,  appointed  at  Liverpool, 
to  examine  into  the  condition  of  the  poor,  reported  that,  there 
had  been  in  one  month,  namel}^,  January,  1812,  an  increase  of 
numbers  from  8000  to  15,350. 