

Y    4 


328  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

being  an  equal  dearth  on  the  Continent  of  Eu- 
rope, and  especially  in  France,  the  wonder  is 
rather,  not  that  prices  were  so  high,  but  that  they 
were  not  higher.  Of  this,  at  least,  I  feel  per- 
suaded, that  were  a  succession  of  five  such  seasons 
to  occur  again,  .subject  to  an  equal  difficultly  and 
expense  of  obtaining  a  foreign  supply,  or  to  a 
duty  on  importation  equivalent  to  the  difference  of 
freight  and  insurance  at  that  time  compared  with 
the  present,  and  if,  moreover,  an  alarm  were  su- 
peradded, by  the  prospect  of  not  getting  any  aid 
at  all  by  importation,  we  should  witness,  a  range  of 
prices,  at  least,  as  high  as  then  prevailed. 


Section  5.  ■ —  On    JVages   and    Salar^ies   as  con- 
nected with  the  Prices  of  Necessaries. 

It  may  be,  as  indeed  it  has  been,  observed  as  a 
ground  for  questioning,  whether  there  was  a  scar- 
city in  these  seasons  justifying  the  high  prices, 
that  although  the  prices  of  corn  were  as  high  as 
they  had  been  in  1795,  and  1796,  and  in  1800,  and 
1801,  there  was  nothing  like  the  same  importance 
attached  to  them.  No  committees  of  parliament 
to  inquire  into  the  causes  of  the  deficiency  and 
to   suggest  remedies.  *     The   answer  is   that  the 

*  In  the  Letter  to  Lord  Archibald  Hamilton  before  referred 
to,  the  writer,  after  adverting  to  the  years  1795  and  1800,  and 
admitting  them  to  have  been  years  of  real  scarcity,  goes  on 
to  say,  page  29.,  "  shortly  afterwards  ensued  years  not  of 
scarcity  but  abundance;  years  of  increasing  revenue,  and 
increasing  prosperity  among  the  poor ;  whilst  the}'  paid  year 
after  year  prices  for  wheat  of  87*.  9</.,  95*.  Id.,  106*.  2(/.,  94-*. 
Qd.,  125*.  5d.,  and  lOS*.  9d.,  which  last  five  prices  quoted  are 
the  average  prices  of  five  successive  years,  ending  with  1813. 
No  committees  sat  in  these  years  to  consider  of  the  high  price 
of  corn,  and  of  distress  arising  therefrom."  It  is  hardly  possible 
to  imagine  a  more  egregious  misapprehension  of  facts,  than  is 
contained  in  the  above  passage.  Upon  the  perversion  of  years- 
of  scarcity  into  years  of  abundance  I  have  already  remarked. 
With  regard  to  the  assertion  of  an  increasing  revenue,  the  fact, 


1809—1813.  329 

high  prices  of  17'95,  and  179^,  and  of  1800,  and 
1801,  came  abruptly,  combining  dearth  from 
failure  of  produce  with  the  effects  of  heavy  tax- 
ation, which  fell  directly  or  indirectly  on  consum- 
able commodities,  wiiile  wages  and  salaries  had 
been  adjusted  to  the  scale  of  prices  resulting  from 
a  state  of  peace  and  plenty.  It  has  already  been 
observed,  in  treating  of  those  earlier  periods  of 
dearth,  that  they  presented  the  alternative  of  the 
actual  starvation  of  considerable  numbers  of  the 
working  population,  or  of  a  rise  of  wages,  whether 
permanent,  or  temporary  and  variable.  A  great 
rise  of  wages,  but  still  far  short  of  the  rise  in  the 
price  of  necessaries  did  take  place,  partly  perma- 
nent, and  partly  temporary  and  variable,  including 
under  the  latter  description  parish  allowances  and 
individual  contributions.  And  not  only  did  a  rise 
of  wages  take  place  on  the  occasion  of  those  me- 
morable scarcities,  but  there  was  a  further  rise 
when,  after  a  short  intermediate  subsidence  of  the 
price  of  provisions,  between  1801  and  1808,  a 
recurrence  of  defective  crops  and  increasing  tax- 
ation, and  consequent  high  prices  of  food  and 
other  necessaries,  gave  occasion  to  further  claims 
for  advance  of  wages  :  in  most  occupations  these 
had  reached  their  maximum  before  1812. 