

"  La  recolte  fut  mauvaise,  la  cherte  devint  excessive  ;  le 
septier  de  ble  fut  vendu  dans  plusieurs  provinces  jusqu'a  100 
francs  (1505.  the  quarter),  et  la  misere  fut  tres  grande.  Les 
sacrifices  faits  par  le  gouvernement  Imperial  pour  ies  subsistences 
peuvent  etre  evalues  a  80  millions  (upwards  of  three  millions 
sterling).  Les  mers  a  cette  epoque  n'etoient  pas  libres ;  il 
fallut  done  etablir  par  terre  le  transport  des  grains  depuis 
Hambourg  jusqu'a  Paris  ;  quand  momentanement  on  put  profiter 
des  rivieres,  il  y  eut  des  frais  de  chargement  considerables." 

Here  most  assuredly  there  is  nothing  of  paper 
circulation  or  of  war-demand  defrayed  by  loans,  to 
account  for  the  rise  of  prices :  credit  was  nearly 
annihilated  in  France  in  those  times  ;  and  it  is 
well  known,  that  the  expenses  of  the  war  were  not 
defrayed  by  loans.  As  little  can  the  scarcity  in 
France  be  accounted  for  by  extra  consumption 
occasioned  by  the  war.  The  armies  of  France,  at 
that  time,  were  far  beyond  lier  own  territories.  The 
greater  part  were  in  tlie  North  of  Europe,  among 
the  cheapest  of  the  corn-growing  comitries ;  and, 
most  assuredly,  in  the  supphes  sent  from  France  for 
the  troops,  there  would  hardly  be  included  any  large 
proportion  of  mere  articles  of  food  ;  nor  at  any  rate 
of  the  more  cumbersome  ones,  such  as  corn. 

In  1809>  when  the  war  in  Germany  was  carried 
on  upon  a  very  large  scale,  the  prices  of  provisions 
were  comparatively  low  both  in  Germany  and  in 
France.  This  low  price  on  the  Continent  in  1809 
negatives  not  only  the  hypothesis  of  extra  war  con- 
sumption, but  it  negatives  also  the  opinion  of  tlie 
influence  on  continental  prices  of  the  addition  to 
the  stock  of  the  precious  metals  abroad,  by  the 
disengagment  of  them  from  this  country ;  for, 
in  1809,  all  the  bullion  that  could  be  spared 
from  hence  was  sent  for  the  purpose  of  defraying 
our  then  immense  foreign  expenditure.  And 
with  reference  to  this  supposed  operation  of 
the  Bank  restriction  in  depreciating  the  precious 
metals,  how  would  it  account  for  the  circumstance 


1809—1813.  335 

that  France  exported  corn  in  1809,  and  imported 
largely^  and  at  an  enormous  expense  to  tlie  govern- 
ment, in  1811  and  1812.  The  export  of  wheat 
from  France,  in  1809  and  1810,  was  637,273  quar- 
ters ;  while  the  imports,  in  1811  and  1812,  and  the 
early  part  of  1813,  amounted  to  1,337,219  quar- 
ters. 

The  fact  of  tlie  scarcity  and  high  prices  of  corn 
in  France  in  1811  and  1812  is  important  in  a 
twofold  point  of  view. 

1st.  It  favours  the  presumption  of  a  cause  com- 
mon to  the  two  countries,  of  which  none  more 
probable  than  the  influence  of  the  seasons ;  inas- 
much as  these,  in  the  majority  of  instances,  are 
known  to  have  some  similarity  of  character,  at  the 
same  time  that  there  is  direct  evidence  of  dearth 
from  those  two  seasons  in  the  present  instance. 