

There  was  still  no  prospect  of  a  foreign  supply, 
for,  high  as  the  price  here  was,  it  was  insufficient 
to  cover  the  great  expenses  of  importation,  added 
to  a  relatively  high  price  at  the  shipping  ports. 

The  deficiency  of  our  own  crops  in  1811  and  1812 
does  not  appear  to  have  been  so  great  as  it  had  been 
in  1794  and  1795  ;  or,  again  in  1799  and  1800.  It 
is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  prices  of  1811  and  1812 
would  not  have  been  so  high  if  there  had  not  been 
a  virtual  exclusion  of  foreign  supply,  which  ren- 
dered it  necessary  to  eke  out  our  own  produce  by 
economy ;  and  this  could  only  be  effected  through 
the  medium  of  a  relatively  high  range  of  prices. 

It  must  be  obvious  that,  the  effect  of  a  succession 
of  crops,  such  as  have  been  described,  more  or  less 
deficient,  in  raising  prices  so  much  beyond  the 
degree  of  defect,  must  have  been  to  aflbrd  a  great 
amount  of  gain  to  be  distributed  among  the  agri- 
cultural classes.  Independently  of  the  encourage- 
ment arising  from  these  profits,  continued  through 
so  great  a  length  of  time,  there  w^as  now^  a  con- 
fidence, which  had  not  before  existed,  in  the  pro- 
spect of  the  continuance  of  them.  The  average 
produce  of  five  seasons  was  supposed  to  represent 
what  would  be  the  utmost  that  any  five  succeeding 
seasons  were  likely  to  yield ;  and  as  there  was  not, 

Y  3 


326  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

till  the  close  of  1812,  any  appearance  of  a  relax- 
ation of  the  continental  system  of  exclusion  di- 
rected against  the  trade  of  this  country,  a  con- 
tinued absence  of  foreign  competition  was  fully 
anticipated. 

Under  these  circumstances,  rents,  upon  the 
expiration  of  leases,  were  advanced  in  full  propor- 
tion to  the  high  range  of  the  prices  of  produce ; 
and,  in  several  instances,  they  were  raised  threefold 
or  upwards  of  what  they  had  been  in  1792.  Every 
purchase  of  land  previous  to  1811,  whether  made 
with  or  without  judgment,  turned  out  favourably 
according  to  the  then  market  rates,  and  it  was  sup- 
posed, in  consequence,  that  money  could  in  no  way 
be  so  profitably  employed  as  in  buying  land.  Spe- 
culations, therefore,  in  land,  or,  as  it  is  termed, 
land-jobbing,  became  general,  and  credit  came  in 
aid  of  capital  for  that  purpose.  A  striking,  but 
not,  I  believe,  a  singular  instance  of  that  descrip- 
tion of  speculation,  was  exhibited  in  the  case  of  a 
petition  presented  to  parliament  some  years  after, 
representing  that  the  petitioner  had,  in  the  years 
1811  and  1812.  laid  out  150,000/.  partly  his  own 
and  partly  borrowed,  in  the  purchase  of  land,  which 
had  since  fallen  so  much  in  value,  that  he  was 
ruined  by  the  loss  ;  praying,  therefore,  to  be  re- 
lieved, by  what  it  has  been  the  fashion  to  term  an 
equitable  adjustment  of  contracts,  but  which  means, 
in  reality,  an  indemnification  for  bad  speculations. 