

2dly.  It  accounts  for  our  prices  having  risen 
higher  than  with  a  similar  dehciency  of  our  own 
produce  they  would  have  done,  by  the  circum- 
stance, that  the  purchases  of  corn  in  Germany  by 
the  French  government,  combined  with  the  enor- 
mous charges  of  freight  and  insurance,  to  this 
country,  prevented  our  getting  a  foreign  supply, 
of  which  we  stood  in  need  in  those  years. 

It  is  not,  however,  the  price  of  corn  only  in 
France  at  the  period  here  referred  to,  that  affords 
the  strongest  presumption,  if  not  an  irresistible 
proof,  in  the  negative  of  the  theories  of  currency 
and  war-demand.  A  rise  of  prices  of  other  com- 
modities and  of  labour  took  place  in  France,  and 
generally  in  other  countries,  from  a  period  anterior 
to  the  Bank  restriction  till  1811  and  1812,  nearly 
corresponding  with  that  which  occurred  in  this 
country. 

The  corresponding  rise  of  prices,  and  the  rate 
of  living  abroad,  was  referred  to  by  Mr.  Rose  in 
the  course  of  the  discussions,  in  1811,  on  the  Bul- 
lion Report. 


336  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

"  Let  it  not  (he  said)  be  imagined  that  a  rise  in  the  articles 
of  life  has  been  confined  to  this  kingdom  alone.  A  most  at- 
tentive inquiry  has  satisfied  me,  that  the  expense  of  living  has 
gone  on  in  a  ratio  of  increase  throughout  various  parts  of  the 
Continent,  as  well  when  the  precious  metals  have  been  the  sole 
circulation,  as  when  paper  has  been  abundant ;  and  all  this  with- 
out any  connection  with  the  price  of  gold.  In  France,  where 
no  paper  circulates  except  in  tlie  capital,  and  there  onl^'  a  very 
limited  amount,  we  have  the  following  evidence  to  that  effect. 
In  a  report  to  the  Agricultural  Society  at  Paris,  in  1805,  M. 
Silvestre  observes,  that  '  in  most  of  the  departments  the  price 
of  labour  is  increased  since  17S9,  by  one  third  at  least,  and  in 
some  by  one  half;  in  a  faw  it  is  doubled  :  and  this  rise  is  more 
general  with  respect  to  workmen  than  to  servants  at  yearly 
wages.  The  society  has  ascertained  that  all  the  instruments  of 
cultivation  are  raised  in  price  in  a  proportion  nearly  similar ; 
that  building  materials  have  also  risen  from  a  third  to  a  fourth  ; 
beasts  of  burden  about  one  half;  and  all  other  articles  requisite 
for  the  maintenance  of  a  farmer's  family  in  the  same  proportion.' 
In  a  speech  of  Mons.  Daru  to  the  legislative  body  in  1810,  he 
observed  that  the  revenue  which  was  appointed  for  Louis  the 
XVIth,  in  1791,  and  continued  to  Napoleon,  was  no  doubt 
considerable,  but  if  attention  be  paid  to  the  difference  between 
the  real  value  of  money  at  that  time  and  at  present,  it  will  not 
be  thought  an  extravagant  assertion,  that  the  same  income 
does  not  now  represent  more  than  two  thirds  of  what  it  did 
then." 