

Never  was  there  a  greater  delusion  than  that  which  prevails 
under  the  influence  of  the  currency  theory,  representing  this 
period  as  one  of  great  and  increasing  prosperity.  It  was  indeed 
a  period  of  agricultural  prosperity,  but  of  great  privation  and 
suffering   to   tlie  bulk  of  the  community. 


1809—1813.  331 


Section  6. —  Advance  of  Prices  on  the  Continent 
of  Europe  in  1811  and  1812. 

It  may  be  objected  by  persons  who  may  still 
profess  to  be  sceptical,  as  to  the  fact  of  scarcity,  in 
explaining  the  advance  of  prices  of  provisions"  and 
of  labour  in  the  period  referred  to,  that  these 
prices  were  purely  artificial ;  and  were  the  result, 
according  to  the  theory;  of  one  set  of  reasoners,  ofthe 
alteration  ofthe  system  of  our  currency,  and  accord- 
ing to  another,  ofthe  influence  of  war-demand,  aris- 
ing out  of  our  large  expenditure  defrayed  by  loans. 
Upon  either  hypothesis  the  rise  of  prices  and  of 
wages  is  supposed  to  be  from  a  cause  operating 
locally,  either  by  an  increase  of  paper  money,  or 
by  the  large  loans  raised,  in  this  country. 

It  so  happens,  however,  that  a  similar  rise  of  the 
prices  of  provisions  and  of  other  necessaries,  and 
of  labour,  took  place  in  1811  and  1812  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe  generally  as  well  as  in  this 
country,  during  the  })eriod  referred  to,  witli  only 
an  allowance  for  the  difference  of  the  ordinary 
level  of  their  prices,  compared  with  ours. 

It  has  before  been  observed,  that  some  similarity 
of  seasons,  in  point  of  marked  preponderance  of 
drought  or  wetness,  and  of  inclemency  or  propitious- 
ness,  and  consequent  prodiictiv-eness  or  otherwise, 
has  been  found  to  apply  generally  to  parts  of  tiie 
Continent  of  Europe,  but  more  especially  to  the 
principal  parts  of  France  and  Germany.  This 
observation,  however,  is  subject  to  considerable 
exceptions  ;  for  instance,  the  seasons  of  1808  and 
1809  appear  to  have  been  more  productive  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe,  and  in  France  especially, 
than  in  this  country  ;  the  prices  there  were  con- 
sequently low,  and  induced  the  large  exports  to 
this  country,  notwithstanding  the  enormous  ex- 
penses of  freight,  insurance,  and  licences  in  1809 


332  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

and  1810.  But  1810,  1811,  and  1812,  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe,  participated  of  the  character 
of  the  seasons  in  this  country,  and  the  rise  of 
prices  there  was  fully  in  the  same  proportion  as 
took  place  here  in  those  years.  That  the  scarcity 
in  France,  consequent  upon  the  unproductiveness 
of  those  seasons,  was  great  and  real,  admits  of 
being  proved  by  irrefragable  evidence.  The  fact 
is  alluded  to  by  all  the  writers  of  authority  on  the 
subject  of  the  corn  trade  and  of  the  corn  laws  of 
that  country,  and  is  described  as  entailing  a  state 
bordering  on  famine.  Mons.  J.  B.  Say,  the  justly 
celebrated  writer  on  political  economy  *,  so  cha- 
racterises those  seasons,  and  gives  the  following 
quotations,  as  those  of  the  important  market  of 
Roye  in  Picardy,  for  the  measure  equal  to  fifty-two 
litres  two  centimes :  — 