


1809-181.3.  34^5 

the  United  States,  occurred  at  the  close  of  1811, 
and  in  the  early  part  of  1812.  All  these  articles  ex- 
perienced a  moderate  degree  of  improvement  to- 
wards the  close  of  1812,  with  the  exception  of  such 
descriptions  as  were  exclusively  or  chiefly  calculated 
for  export  to  the  United  States,  and  these  of  course 
were  much  depressed  by  the  war  which  then  broke 
out.  By  the  retreat  of  the  French  from  Moscow, 
not  only  the  ports  of  Russia  were  secured  from 
the  danger  of  being  again  shut  against  us,  but  daily 
tidings  were  received  of  other  ports  in  the  north  of 
Europe  being  opened  to  a  trade  with  this  country  ; 
and  sanguine  expectations  were  beginning  to  be 
entertained  that  the  ports  of  France  itself  would 
at  no  remote  period  be  open  to  us.  The  new  mar- 
kets— for  such  they  might  then  be  called — which 
were  thus  presented,  and  the  prospect  of  more, 
gave  rise  to  a  speculative  demand  for  all  the  articles 
really  wanted,  and  for  many  others  which  it  was 
anticipated  would  probably  be  wanted,  by  the 
countries  with  which  we  had  then  suddenly  come 
into  communication.  Colonial  produce,  as  it  had 
been  most  depressed  by  our  previous  exclusion 
from  those  markets,  experienced  the  greatest  and 
most  rapid  advance,  but  many  other  articles  of  ex- 
port participated  in  the  demand,  which  prevailed 
thenceforward  till  the  close  of  1813,  and  the  early 
part  of  1814,  with  greater  or  less  intensity  accord- 
ing as  the  events  of  the  war  seemed  to  hasten  or 
retard  a  general  peace.  The  conclusion  of  the  war 
was  then  hailed  as  holding  out  the  prospect  of  an 
unlimited  demand  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Continent,  for  the  articles  from  the  use  of 
which  they  had  been  so  long  debarred. 

The  earliest  shipments  of  such  exportable  com- 
modities as  had  been  bought  at  the  low  prices 
answered  of  course,  and  the  profits  thence  arising 
naturally  encouraged  the  subsequent  speculation. 
This  speculation,  and  the  consequent  over-trading, 


346  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

proceeded  to  a  most  extravagant  length  till  the 
spring  of  1814.  It  began,  as  has  already  been 
noticed,  with  the  great  reverses  of  the  French  in 
1812,  and  went  on,  with  fluctuations,  according 
to  the  vicissitudes  of  the  subsequent  military  oper- 
ations, till  the  peace  of  Paris,  which  was  the  con- 
summation of  the  views  of  the  speculators ;  the 
ports  of  France,  as  well  as  those  of  all  the  rest  of 
Europe,  being  then  opened  to  a  direct  commercial 
intercourse  with  this  country. 

It  had  been  usual,  in  former  periods,  to  con- 
sider that  colonial  produce  should  rise  in  war  and 
fall  in  peace,  in  consequence  of  the  difference  of 
the  charges  of  importation  ;  but  the  period  in  ques- 
tion was  supposed  to  form  an  exception  to  this 
general  rule  :  it  was  calculated  that  the  inhabitants 
of  the  Continent,  having  been  so  long  debarred 
by  the  anti-commercial  decrees  of  their  govern- 
ments from  the  enjoyment  of  sugar  and  coffee,  and 
of  various  other  descriptions  of  commodities  would, 
now  that  commercial  intercourse  with  this  country 
was  restored,  require  a  supply,  at  almost  any  price,  of 
most  of  the  articles  that  had  been  accumulated  here 
during  the  absence  of  foreign  demand.  Proceeding 
on  this  supposition,  a  great  number  of  adventurers, 
departing  from  their  ordinary  pursuits,  entered 
into  speculations  in  exports  with  the  greatest  avidity. 
Many  retail  tradesmen  who  failed  in  1814  and  1815 
were,  upon  a  disclosure  of  their  accounts,  found  to 
have  been  concerned  in  shipments  of  sugar  and  coffee 
to  the  Continent.  The  contagion  spread  to  the 
outports  (of  these,  Leith  and  Hull  were  most  pro- 
minent) ;  and  it  was  said  that  a  large  proportion 
of  the  shopkeepers  residing  in  them,  who  failed  at 
that  time,  owed  their  ruin  to  having  been  tempted 
into  speculations  of  the  kind  which  I  have  de- 
scribed. In  short,  the  spirit  of  overtrading  in 
that  extensive  class  of  commodities  reached  to 
the   most  extravagant  height,   as  may  be  judged 