

Exchange  on 
Hamburgh. 

29  Feb.  1808,      ~  -       ^14,093,690         345.  6d. 

•28  Feb.  1809,      -  -  14,241,360         31 5.  Od. 


350  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

was  the  gold  that  by  an  extraordinary  and  sudden 
demand  for  it,  for  purposes  of  foreign  payments, 
had  become  of  increased  value,  and  not  that  the 
paper  (being  stationary  in  amount),  had  become 
of  diminished  value.  And  if  the  Bank  had  thence- 
forth continued  to  keep  down  the  amount  of  its 
issues,  although  the  probability  is,  that  under 
the  increasing  pressure  of  the  great  additional 
expenditure  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to 
notice,  the  exchanges  might  still  have  fallen,  the 
grounds  of  presumption  that  the  depression  of 
the  exchanges,  and  the  high  price  of  gold,  were 
not  caused  by  the  increase  of  Bank  notes,  would 
have  been  irresistible.  The  inference  too  would 
have  been  inevitable,  that  it  was  the  gold  that  had 
diverged  from  the  paper,  and  not  the  paper  from 
the  gold.  Not  but  that  the  amount  of  the  paper 
might,  consistently  with  the  rule  which  ought  to 
govern  the  Bank  issues,  be  considered  to  have  been 
excessive,  inasmuch  as  it  was  the  duty  of  the  di- 
rectors to  have  contracted  their  issues,  in  order  to 
have  preserved  the  value  of  their  paper  on  a  level 
with  that  of  gold ;  but  the  question  immediately 
under  consideration  is,  whether  there  is  presump- 
tive evidence  of  an  increase  of  money  having  been 
the  moving  cause  of  the  fall  of  the  exchanges  and 
the  rise  of  the  price  of  gold.  It  is  possible — so  in- 
creased, apparently,  were  the  functions  of  Bank  of 
England  notes — that  if  the  amount  had  been  merely 
kept  down  in  1809,  at  what  it  had  been  in  1808, 
the  further  depression  of  the  exchanges  might  at 
least  have  been  stopped,  and  they  might  even  have 
rallied.  But,  notwithstanding  the  rapid  fall  of  the 
exchanges  at  the  close  of  1808,  the  Bank  issues, 
instead  of  being  reduced  or  simply  limited  to  what 
they  had  been,  were  for  some  time  thenceforward 
increased  in  amount. 

As  it  was  at  this  period  that  the  great  divergence 
between  paper  and  gold  occurred,  and  gave  rise  to 


1809—1813.  351 

the  bullion  controversy  which  has  in  vmions  forms 
ever  since  subsisted,  it  may  be  worth  while,  previ- 
ously to  examining  the  connection  between  the 
Bank  circulation,  as  it  actually  existed,  with  the 
state  of  the  exchanges,  and  of  the  price  of  gold 
and  of  commodities,  to  consider  hypothetically 
what  might  have  been  the  effect  in  a  commercial 
and  financial  point  of  view,  if  such  a  regulation  of 
the  amount  of  Bank  paper  had  been  adopted,  as 
might  have  been  effectual  in  preserving  the  value 
of  it  on  a  level  with  that  of  gold. 