

*  For   an  exposure  of  the  incorrectness  of  the  details,  and 
the  absurdity  of  the  principle  upon  which  that  table  has  been 


1809—1813.  339 

considered  as  an  authority,  it  served  to  favour  the 
argument  against  the  imputed  effect  of  the  restric- 
tion. But  it  was  likewise  referred  to  by  some  of 
those  who  were  most  strenuous  in  contending  for 
the  depreciating  effect  of  the  restriction.  Although 
how  it  could  strengthen  their  argument,  it  is  not 
easy  to  see.  For  surely  the  restriction  act  ought 
in  fairness  to  be  absolved  from  so  much  of  the  rise 
of  prices  as  could  be  referred  to  a  law  which  was 
supposed  to  be  in  steady  and  progressive  operation 
independently  of  that  measure. 

The  evidence  which  has  thus  been  adduced  of 
the  prevalence  of  scarcity  of  corn,  not  only  in  this 
country  but  on  the  Continent  of  Europe,  cannot, 
if  fairly  followed  out,  fail  of  establishing  the  suf- 
ficiency of  that  cause,  combined  as  it  was  with 
extraordinary,  and  as  it  proved,  insurmountable 
impediments  to  importation  into  this  country,  to 
account  for  the  great  rise  and  high  range  of  prices 
which  prevailed  till  the  harvest  of  1813.  The 
effects  of  that  harvest,  both  in  this  country  and 
abroad,  will  be  noticed  presently ;  in  the  mean 
time  a  brief  view  may  be  taken  of  the  coincident 
state  of  prices  of  other  articles. 


Section   7.  —  Prices   of   Commodities  from    the 
Summer  oflSW  to  the  Summer  oflSlS. 

During  the  same  interval  as  that  in  which  we 
have  had  occasion  to  observe  upon  the  rise  of  the 
prices  of  provisions,  viz.  from  the  summer  of  1811 
to  that  of  1813,  there  occurred  a  renewed  scarcity. 


constructed,  see  Arthur  Young  "  On  the  progressive  Value  of 
Money,"  and  the  3d  volume  of  the  Edinburgh  Revieiv,  in  an 
article  headed  "  Wheatley  on  the  Currency." 

Z    2 


340 


PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 


partly  actual  and  partly  apprehended,  of  many  lead- 
ing articles  of  importation. 

In  consequence  of  the  discouragement  arising 
from  the  low  prices  in  this  country  in  1810  and 
the  beginning  of  1811,  there  was  little  inducement 
to  import  in  the  face  of  enormous  charges;  freights 
and  insurances  from  the  Continent  of  Europe  con- 
tinuing so  high  that,  without  an  advance  of  prices 
here,  little  or  nothing  would,  in  some  instances, 
have  been  left  for  prime  cost.  The  stocks,  there- 
fore, of  wool,  silk,  cotton  *,  hemp,  flax,  tallow, 
timber,  &c.  became  scanty  towards  the  end  of 
1811  ;  and  there  were  grounds  at  the  same  time 
for  apprehending  a  further  scarcity.  The  prepa- 
rations by  the  French  for  the  invasion  of  Russia 
gave  reason  to  fear  that,  however  disastrous  to  the 
former  it  might  eventually  prove,  the  intermediate 
consequence  would  be  a  cutting  off  of  the  supplies 
of  naval  stores  and  of  other  produce  from  thence  ; 
and  as  the  French  armies  spread  over  Prussia,  all 
shipments  from  that  country  became  more  difficult 
and  hazardous.  Our  differences  with  America  were 
then  rapidly  tending  to  an  open  rupture,  and  the 
produce  of  that  country  naturally  participated  in 
the  causes  of  advance. 