

It  appears,  then,  that  the  occurrence  of  a  single 
good  harvest,  and  the  removal  of  some  part  of  the 
political  obstructions  to  a  foreign  supply,  had  the 
effect  of  producing  a  great  fall  in  the  prices  of  corn, 
and  of  other  articles  of  European  produce  ;  or,  in 
other  words,  that  immediately  upon  the  cessation 
of  what  one  might  have  thought  had  been  obvi- 
ously enough  the  cause  of  advance,  prices  tended 
to  a  subsidence  to  the  level  from  which  they  had 
risen.  And  if  abundant  proof  had  not  already 
been  adduced  of  the  absence  of  the  causes  com- 
monly assigned,  viz.  of  the  Bank  restriction  or  war- 
demand,  it  would  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  the 
Bank  issues,  and  the  war-demand  continuing  on  as 
large  a  scale  as  ever,  or  rather  on  a  greatly  increased 
scale,  prices  of  corn,  and  of  all  the  other  articles 
that  had  risen  with  corn,  were  falling  rapidly  in 
1813.  But  were  it  possible  that  the  conclusion  to 
that  effect  could  be  made  stronger,  it  would  be  so 
by  reference  to  the  circumstance  of  an  equal  fall  of 
prices  of  corn  in  France,  consequent  upon  the 
harvest  of  1813,   and  this  while  the  war  w^as  still 

z  4 


344-  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

carried  on  on  a  gigantic  scale,  and  nearer  to  her 
own  frontiers.  In  truth,  the  prices  continued  to 
fall  there  while  the  war  was  waged  within  her  own 
territory.  The  fall  in  the  price  of  wheat  in  France, 
between  1812  and  1814,  was  from  34  fr.  33  cents, 
the  hectolitre,  to  17  fr.  7^  cents.  ;  being  nearly 
50  per  cent.,  or  the  same  as  occurred  coinci- 
dently  in  this  country.  Now,  according  to  the 
theory  that  the  gold  disengaged  from  this  country 
diminished  the  value  of  the  precious  metals  on  the 
Continent,  and  was  the  sole  or  the  main  cause  ot 
the  rise  of  prices  there  during  the  restriction,  how 
is  this  fall  of  the  price  between  1812  and  1814  in 
France,  and  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  generally, 
to  be  accounted  for  consistently  with  such  hypo- 
thesis ;  this  fall  of  prices  having  occurred  when 
the  stock  of  gold  spared  from  this  country,  and 
added  to  the  circulation  of  the  commercial  world, 
was  precisely  at  its  maximum  ?  This  instance, 
however,  is  only  one  among  many,  that  not  only 
was  the  amount  of  the  metals  disengaged  from  this 
country,  totally  inadequate  to  produce  any  per- 
ceptible effect  on  prices,  but  that  the  facts  are  in 
the  order  of  time  of  their  occurrence,  at  variance 
with  the  hypothesis. 


Section    9.  —  Rise  of  Prices  of  e.vporiahle   Cofu- 
modities  in  1813. 

As  a  still  further  illustration  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  anti-commercial  character  of  the  war  and 
of  the  Continental  system  had  operated  on  prices,  it 
maybe  observed,  that  while  cOrn  and  other  European 
raw  produce  were  falling,  all  articles  of  export,  viz. 
West  India,  and  generally  all  transatlantic,  pro- 
duce began  to  rise  coincidently  with  the  first  tend- 
ency of  the  former  to  fall.  The  lowest  point  of 
depression  of  West  India  produce,  and  of  other 
commodities,  including  manufactures,  calculated 
for  the  markets  of  the  Continent  of  Europe,   and 