

A   A 


854  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

of  our  manufactures.  The  vast  accumulation  of 
colonial  produce  and  of  manufactured  exportable 
commodities  which  took  place  in  this  country  in 
1810  and  1811,  and  which  contributed  greatly  to 
the  distress  prevailing  at  that  period,  is  referred  to 
in  proof  of  the  insurmountable  impediments  then 
existing  to  exportation.* 

This  argument  is  correct  as  far  as  it  goest,  but 
it  takes  in  only  one  of  the  points  of  view  in  which 
the  influence  of  a  different  regulation  of  the  Bank 
issues  is  to  be  considered.  It  may  be  admitted, 
that  a  contraction  of  the  circulation  would  not,  or 
at  least  might  not;  have  been  effectual  in  inducing 
any  additional  exports  of  commodities.  But  it 
would,  if  timely  applied,  have  had  a  very  great 
effect  in  reducing  the  amount  of  the  imports,  and 
in  reducing  also  the  amount  of  the  sums  to  be 
transmitted  abroad  by  a  saving  of  the  difference  of 
exchange.  If,  seeing  the  enormous  speculations 
which  were  on  foot  between  the  close  of  1807  and 
the  summer  of  1808,  and  becoming  aware  of  the 
political  circumstances  which  inevitably  led  to  a 
very  large  government  expenditure  abroad;  feeling, 
indeed,  the  effect  of  those  circumstances  by  the 
demand  for  bullion  J,  of  which  the  stock  in  the  Bank 
was  rapidly  decreasing  ;  and  seeing,  moreover,  the 
strong  tendency  which,    early  in   the   autumn  of 

*  In  the  letters  of  H.  T.  B.,  already  referred  to,  the  writer 
says,  "  If  60,000  tons  of  coftee,  held  here  unsaleable  at  6d.  the 
pound,  while  coffee  was  45.  or  5s.  the  pound  on  the  Continent, 
is  not  evidence  that  the  impediment  was  more  than  all  the 
subtlety  of  mercantile  men  could  overcome,  it  is  in  vain  to  look 
for  proof  of  such  a  fact." 

t  It  applies,  perhaps,  more  distinctly  to  1810  and  1811,  than 
to  1808  and  1809;  as  it  was  not  till  the  actual  burning  and 
confiscation  in  the  Prussian  ports,  in  1810,  of  goods  shipped  to 
a  vast  amount  from  this  country,  that  the  system  of  exclusion 
became  so  effectual. 

J  Not,  indeed,  on  the  part  of  the  public,  as  the  paper  was  not 
convertible,  but  on  the  part  of  Government,  which  was  the  same 
in  effect,  as  regards  the  present  argument. 


1809—1813.  355 

1808  was  manifested  to  a  fall  of  the  exchanges,  the 
Bank  had  contracted  its  issues,  it  is  fairly  to  be  pre- 
sumed that  a  contraction  so  timed  wo[i\d,  altliough 
carried  only  to  a  moderate  extent,  have  had  a 
considerable  influence  upon  the  amount  of  the 
imports  in  the  following  season.  If  the  merchants 
had  become  apprized,  by  a  notice  similar  to  that 
which  the  Bank  had  given  in  December,  1795,  of 
a  limitation  somewhat  below  the  usual  or  the  ex- 
pected amount  of  accommodation  by  discount, 
and  by  a  generally  diminished  facility  in  the  money 
market,  which  would  have  followed  from  such  a 
limitation  by  the  Bank,  in  the  autumn  of  1808, 
that  they  were  not  to  rely,  in  entering  into  further 
engagements,  upon  the  accustomed  facilities,  there 
is  every  reason  to  believe  that  their  orders  would 
have  been  under  lower  limits  of  price  ;  or,  if  they 
sought  consignments,  they  would  not,  indeed,  they 
could  not,  have  oflTered  such  large  advances  upon 
them.  The  consequence  of  such  lower  limits,  or, 
of  lower  offers  of  advance,  or,  in  other  words,  of 
greater  prudence  in  mercantile  engagements  for 
importation,  would  have  been  most  important  in  its 
influence  on  the  exchanges.  The  whole  of  the  im- 
ports in  1809  and  1810*  would  have  been  less,  and 
the  cost  of  the  smaller  quantity  would  have  been 
less,  not  only  in  the  ratio  of  the  lesser  quantity,  but 
also  of  the  lower  price.  But  if  the  whole  quantity 
imported  had  been  less,  there  would  have  been  a 
considerable  reduction  of  the  sums  to  be  paid  to 
foreigners  for  freight,  not  only  by  the  diminished 
quantity,  but  by  a  lower  rate,  in  consequence  of 
the  less  demand  for  foreign  shiproom.     From  the 