

The  whole  increase,  it  is  to  be  observed,  of  notes 
of  5L  and  upwards,  in  the  first  quarter  of  1809, 
was  very  trifling,  and  left  the  amount  to  be  still 
very  much  below  the  lowest  point  to  which  the 
circulation  has  been  at  any  subsequent  time  re- 
duced ;  while  the  increase  of  notes  under  5l.  can 
hardly  have  been  adequate  to  replace  the  progressive 
disappearance  of  guineas,  which  must  have  been 
hastened  by  the  great  and  sudden  fall  of  the 
exchange.  For  that  fall  of  the  exchange,  the 
immense  amount  of  our  foreign  payments  fully 
accounts  ;  and  there  were  coincident  with  the  de- 
mand for  bullion  for  that  purpose,  circumstances 
in  operation,  which  conferred  a  still  further  value 
on  the  precious  metals  on  the  Continent  of  Europe. 

In  consequence  of  the  cessation  of  all  commercial 
credit  and  confidence,  and  of  security  of  property 
throughout  the  extended  seat  of  war,  there  was 
necessarily  a  great  absorption  of  the  metals,  not 
only  for  the  purposes  of  interchange,  which  would 
n   ordinary  times  have  been  performed  by  bills  of 


1809  — IS13.  361 

exchange,  or  simple  credit,  but  for  the  purposes 
also  of  hoarding,  which  in  times  of  such  insecurity 
must  have  been  practised  to  a  very  great  extent. 
From  these  causes  alone,  gold  and  silver  must  have 
acquired  a  greatly  increased  value.  But  if  to  these 
causes  be  superadded  the  absorption  of  specie  in 
the  military  chests  of  the  great  contending  powers, 
both  in  the  North  of  Europe  and  in  the  South,  the 
w^onder  should  rather  be,  that,  without  a  greater 
diminution  of  our  circulating  medium  than  had 
then  taken  place,  there  was  not  a  still  stronger 
manifestation  of  the  increased  value  of  the  metals, 
or  rather  of  foreign  currencies  as  measured  in  ours. 
In  truth,  the  circumstances  here  adverted  to  may 
be  considered  as  having  operated  in  a  great  con- 
traction, and  consequently  in  an  increased  value,  of 
the  currencies  of  the  Continental  States  of  Europe. 

These  causes  of  increased  value  of  the  metals  were 
in  operation  on  an  extending  scale  till  nearly  the 
termination  of  the  war.  And  the  effect  of  them 
would  have  been  still  more  marked  in  the  depression 
of  our  exchanges,  if  it  had  not  been  that  there  was, 
from  1809  to  1811,  coincidently  with  that  con- 
traction of  the  Continental  currencies,  a  great 
diminution  of  the  credit  part  of  the  circulation  in 
this  country,  as  a  consequence  of  the  great  fall  of 
prices.  For,  although  the  small  mcrease  of  the 
amount  of  the  Bank  circulation,  in  the  early  part 
of  1809,  might  seem  to  afford  a  presumption  of 
an  increase  of  the  quantity  of  money  ;  that  pre- 
sumption is  countervailed  by  the  consideration, 
that,  notwithstanding  a  further  increase  of  Bank 
notes,  tlie  prices  of  nearli/  all  commodities  fell  co- 
incidently with  such  increase. 