

The  greater  part  of  the  commodities  which  had 
been  the  subject  of  speculation  on  the  extraordinary 
political  events  of  1 807  and  1 808,  and  the  consequent 
short  importations,  had  reached  their  greatest  height 
before  the  closeof  1808 :  but  afterthe  spring  of  1809, 


362  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

the  fall  was  general.*  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  fall  of  prices,  and  the  great  revulsion  of  credit, 
attested  by  the  numerous  failures  between  1809  and 
1812,  had  the  effect  of  contracting  the  country 
bank  and  credit  circulation,  and  thus  virtually  re- 
ducing the  quantity  of  money  in  a  greater  degree 
than  could  be  compensated  by  the  contemporaneous 
increase  of  the  Bank  of  England  issues.  As  the 
rise  of  prices  in  1807  and  1808  had  been  accom- 
panied by  an  increase  of  the  country  bank  and 
credit  circulation,  so  the  great  fall  of  prices  in 
1809  and  1810  was  attended  with  a  great  reduc- 
tion of  it :  the  increase  and  diminution  being  in 
each  case  obvdously  the  effect,  and  not  the  cause, 
of  the  alteration  in  prices. 

The  extensive  failures  of  commercial  and  bank- 
ing establishments  in  1810  have  already  been 
adverted  to  ;  the  commissions  in  that  single  year 
were  no  fewer  than  2314,  of  which  26  were  against 
bankers.  And  a  strong  presumption  that  the  in- 
creased issues  of  the  Bank  of  England  in  1810, 
amounting  to  about  2,500,000/.  in  notes  of  5l.  and 
upwards,  and  2,000,000/.  in  notes  under  5/.,  did 
not  fully  supply  the  vacuum  of  the  circulation  so 
created,  is  afforded  by  the  circumstance,  that  the 
foreign  expenditure  being  on  an  increasing  scale, 
the  exchanges  rose,  that  on  Hambiu'g  from  28*.  4rf. 
to  S\s.  9d.,  and  the  price  of  gold  fell  from  4/.  11.9. 
to  4/.  4.9.  6d.  The  rise  of  the  exchange  would 
probably  have  been  greater,  if  returns  could  have 
been  received  for  the  large  exports  which  were 
made  to  the  Baltic,  and  particularly  to  the  Prussian 
ports,  in  the  summer  of  that  year.  The  whole  of 
the    goods    so    shipped,    however,    were    seized, 


*  Wheat  participated,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  general  fall  of 
prices,  viz.  from  95s.  in  March,  to  86^.  6d.  in  July  following  ; 
and  it  was  not  till  the  bad  harvest  of  1809  that  the  prices  of 
corn  rose  again. 


1809—1818.  363 

burnt,  or  confiscated,  in  pursuance  of  the  decrees 
of  the  French  government. 

The  enlargement  of  the  Bank  circulation  in 
1810  had  been  entirely  the  consequence  of  an 
increase  of  discounts.  And  we  may  here  notice 
one  of  many  misconceptions  which  prevail  with 
reference  to  the  influence  ascribed  to  the  regulation 
of  the  Bank  issues  during  the  restriction.  It  has 
been  supposed  that  the  rule,  as  explained  by  the 
directors,  must  have  operated  not  only  in  a  con- 
stant tendency  to  excess,  but  that  the  readiness  of  a 
resort  to  the  Bank  for  discounts  aiforded  a  con- 
stant facility,  and  consequentinotive,  for  speculations. 
But  the  fact  is,  that  the  variations  in  the  amount 
of  the  private  securities  held  by  the  Bank, 
were  indicative  only  of  variations  in  the  market 
rate  of  interest,  as  compared  with  the  Bank  rate. 
And  so  far  from  the  truth  is  the  supposition,  so 
commonly  entertained,  that  an  increase  of  the 
Bank  issues,  through  the  medium  of  discounts, 
afforded  not  only  a  flicility,  but  an  inducement, 
to  the  speculations  which  occurred  during  the 
restiiction ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  while  the 
most  memorable  of  the  speculations  took  place 
without  any  such  increase,  the  most  striking  in- 
stances of  enlargement  of  the  amount  of  discounts 
followed  a  recoil  from  the  great  speculations,  and 
was  coincident  with  the  greatest  depression  of 
markets,  and  with  consequent  commercial  distress. 
Thus,  in  1808  *,  when  the  utmost  extravagance 
of  speculation  prevailed,    the  amount  of  private 