

*  With  reference  to  the  state  of  cornmercial  distress  and 
discredit  which  prevailed  in  1810,  it  may  here  be  observed,  that 
Httle  notice  has  ever  been  taken  of  it  by  the  supporters  of  the 
currency  doctrine,  and  still  less  has  any  plausible  reason  been 
given  for  it,  consistently  with  that  doctrine.  The  discredit  and 
distress  were  clearly  the  consequence  of  the  great  fall  of  prices. 
Now  if,  as  according  to  that  theory  is  supposed,  the  rise  of  prices 
had  been  caused  by  an  increase  of  Bank  of  England  paper,  how 
happened  it,  that,  with  a  further  increased  issue,  they  should  have 
fallen  ?  and  if  that  increased  issue  had  not  been  enough,  why 
should  there  not  have  been  a  still  further  issue,  for  the  express 
purpose  of  supporting  prices,  and  thus  preventing  the  loss  and 
discredit  attending  the  fall  ?  It  may  be  said,  that  the  increased 
issue  by  the  Bank  in  1809  and  1810  was  not  more  than  suffi- 
cient to  compensate  for  the  failures  of  the  country  banks. 
True:  but  why  did  not  the  Bank,  as  by  that  theory  it  is  supposed 
that  it  could,  make  so  much  greater  an  issue  as  to  prevent  those 
failures? 

A  A    3 


358  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

have  been  required,  in  consequence  of  the  great 
saving  which  an  exchange  at  or  near  par  would 
have  made,  not  only  on  the  enormous  sums  which 
the  government  had  to  transmit  for  payments 
abroad,  but  also  on  all  the  contracts  for  naval  and 
military  stores,  the  cost  of  which  was  increased  by 
the  depression  of  the  exchanges. 

Upon  the  whole,  if  the  grounds  for  computation 
of  the  saving  in  the  government  expenditure  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  higher  interest  that  might 
have  been  payable  by  government  on  the  other, 
were  carefully  gone  over,  there  would,  perhaps,  be 
found  reason  to  conclude  that  the  one  would  have 
gone  a  great  way  to  balance  the  other.  At  any 
rate,  it  may  be  of  use  to  suggest  this  point  of  view 
for  consideration,  so  as  to  make  it  at  least  a  question 
whether,  on  the  one  hand,  there  is  sufficient  ground 
for  the  opinion  so  generally  and  so  implicitly  re- 
ceived, that  the  manner  in  which  the  Bank  did 
regulate  its  issues,  afforded  a  facility  uncompen- 
sated by  disadvantages  at  least  equivalent,  arising 
out  of  the  same  system  ;  and  whether,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  public  did  not,  in  the  lower  rate  of  in- 
terest on  the  loans,  receive  a  compensation  for  the 
larger  sums  raised.  So  much,  however,  may  with 
confidence  be  asserted,  that,  according  to  any  legi- 
timate conclusion  from  fiicts  that  are  generally  ac- 
cessible, the  mercantile  classes  were  great  sufferers, 
and  the  government  were  not  gainers,  by  the  devi- 
ation on  the  part  of  the  Bank,  at  the  close  of  1808 
and  throughout  1809,  from  the  course  which  it  would 
have  been  compelled  to  pursue,  if  it  had  then  been 
under  the  obligation  of  paying  in  cash.  Or,  in  other 
words,  the  mercantile  interests  certainly,  and  the 
public  finances  probably,  would  have  been  gainers, 
if  the  Bank  directors,  disregarding  the  applications 
for  increased  discounts  or  advances,  had  steadily  ad- 
hered to  their  duty  of  preserving  their  paper  in  a 
sound  state  ;  that  is,  of  maintaining  the  equivalence 
of  their  promise  of  payment  to  an  actual  payment. 