

*  It  is  not  here  meant  to  contend  that  it  was  not  in  the  power 
of  the  Bank,  by  a  refusal  of  applications  for  discount,  in  1808, 
to  have  forcibly  reduced  the  circulation,  and  thus  to  have  re- 
pressed much  of  the  spirit  of  speculation,  especially  of  that 
which  extended  to  prospective  engagements.  The  observation 
in  the  text  simply  applies  to  the  fact,  that  no  material  increase 
of  discount  at  the  Bank  had  preceded  or  accompanied  the  great 
rise  of  prices,  and  the  general  spirit  of  speculation  which  pre- 
vailed in  1807  and  1808,  so  as  to  admit  of  the  assignment  of 


364  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

securities  held  by  the  Bank  ranged  at  between  13 
and  14milhons, — being  no  perceptible  increase  upon 
what  it  had  been  during  the  three  or  four  years 
preceding.  But  the  fall  of  prices  thenceforward, 
was  followed  by  a  progressive  increase  of  issues. 


such  Increase  as  an  exciting  cause  ;  this  being  the  sense  in 
which  the  charge  is  commonly  made.  And  the  great  enlarge- 
ment of  the  issues  through  that  medium  in  1810  has  not  un- 
frequently  been  referred  to  as  being  the  supposed  cause  of 
raising  prices,— the  hypothesis  involving  an  error  of  fact  as  to 
the  time  in  which  the  rise  and  fall  of  prices  took  place. 

There  is  one  point  of  view  in  which  there  might  be  a  question 
whether,  if  the  Bankhad,  in  1808,  forcibly  limited  its  issues  through 
the  medium  of  discounts,  and  not  only  not  have  enlarged,  but  con- 
tracted, them  in  1809  and  1810,  the  ultimate  effect  might  not 
have  been  a  higher  range  of  the  prices  of  corn  and  of  other 
European  produce  in  1811  and  1812,  than  actually  prevailed. 
The  immediate  effect  of  such  violent  contraction  would  have 
been  a  more  rapid  fall  of  prices  in  1809,  and  there  would  thus 
have  been  both  diminished  inducement  and  diminished  means 
for  endeavouring  to  overcome  the  great  obstacles  which  then 
existed  to  obtaining  supplies  from  the  Continent  of  Europe. 
Now,  it  was  the  magnitude  of  the  importations  in  1809  and 
1810,  which  contributed  to  mitigate  the  scarcities  in  1811  and 
1812,  of  corn  and  other  European  produce.  On  the  supposi- 
tion, therefore,  that  the  circulation  had  been  forcibly  contracted 
at  the  close  of  1808,  and  through  1809  and  1810,  prices,  low  as 
they  were  vi-ith  reference  to  the  cost  of  production,  would  have 
been  still  lower  in  1810  ;  but  they  would,  from  increased  scarcity, 
have  been  higher  in  1811  and  1812.  Lord  Castlereagh  seems 
to  have  had  a  glimpse  of  this  view,  when  he  said,  in  the  course 
of  the  debates  in  1811,  "  But  the  effect  of  a  full  circulation 
upon  prices  at  home,  I  conceive  to  be  the  reverse  of  what  is 
supposed.  I  admit  that  the  first  effect  of  a  reduction  of  the 
circulating  medium  would  be  to  lower  prices,  —  the  value  of 
the  circulating  medium  itself  being  enhanced  in  proportion  to 
its  scarcity :  but  it  would  soon  operate  in  a  corresponding  de- 
gree to  check  reproduction  ;  and  although  the  produce  on  hand 
would  sell  cheaper,  less  being  produced,  the  prices  must  speedily 
rise  again,  the  demand  continuing  the  same  from  the  scarcity 
of  the  article."  This  reasoning  is  admissible  only  under  the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  those  extraordinary  times ;  and  if  he 
had  used  the  term  importation,  instead  of  reproduction,  the 
expression  would  more  clearly  have  designated  the  supposed 
consequences. 