


Section  11. — Summary  of  the  preceding  Survey. 

As  the  result  of  the  view  thus  presented  of  the 
great  variation  of  prices,  in  connection  with  the 
state  of  the  circulation,  during  the  interval  here 
under  consideration,  it  appears  — 

1.  That  there  were  four  deficient  harvests  in 
succession  ;  viz.  1809,  1810,  1811,  and  1812.  The 
scarcity  arising  from  the  deficiency  of  the  two  first, 
was  relieved  by  a  large  importation,  chiefly  from 
France,  and  from  ports  under  the  dominion  of 
France ;  but  in  the  two  last  years,  there  being  a 
severe  dearth  also  in  France,  and  the  charges  of 
importation  being  nearly  50s,  per  quarter,  the  de- 
ficiency of  our  own  crops  was  unrelieved  by  any 
foreign  supplies  worth  mentioning. 

2.  That  immediately  after  the  harvest  of  1813, 
of  which  the  crops  were  abundant,  and  after  the 
opening  of  the  ports  of  the  Continent,  while  tlie 
charges  of  importation,  although  still  high,  were 
greatly  reduced,  the  prices  of  corn  fell  rapidly, 
and  before  the  end  of  that  year  were  more  than 
50  per  cent,  lower  than  they  had  been  in  1812. 

3.  That  the  great  fall  in  the  prices  of  corn,  and 
of  all  European  produce,  in  the  last  six  months  of 
1813,  was  preceded  by  an  enlargement  of  the  Bank 


37-1'  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

circulation,  and  was  coincident  witli  a  great  rise  in 
the  price  of  gold  :  on  the  other  hand,  a  rise  of  the 
prices  of  corn  and  other  European  produce  in 
1811  and  1812,  had  been  immediately  preceded  by 
some  reduction  of  the  amount  of  Bank  notes  :  thus 
affording  a  conclusive  negative  of  the  imputed  in- 
fluence of  the  amount  of  the  circulation,  in  having 
produced  the  great  rise  and  subsequent  fall  of  those 
descriptions  of  produce. 

4.  That  in  the  great  fluctuation  of  prices  observ- 
able in  this  interval,  while  corn  and  other  European 
produce,  of  which,  from  the  seasons,  combined 
with  obstructions  to  importation,  there  was  a  great 
scarcity,  rose  very  considerably,  all  other  descrip- 
tions of  produce  and  manufactures  (except  in  as 
far  as  these  were  raised  in  value  by  the  high  price 
of  the  raw  materials)  experienced  a  great  fall  of 
prices,  and  were,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases, 
lower  in  1811  and  181'2,  than  they  have  been  on 
an  average  since  1819  :  on  the  other  hand,  when 
corn  and  other  European  produce  began  to  fall, 
all  other  produce,  which  had  previously  been  low, 
began  to  rise  ;  and  the  further  progress  of  the  fall 
of  the  former,  and  of  the  rise  of  the  latter,  pro- 
ceeded almost  simultaneously,  and  with  nearly 
equal  rapidity  in  opposite  directions  :  thus  proving 
that  they  were  under  the  influence  of  opposite 
causes ;  whereas  it  is  the  character  of  depreciation 
arising  from  increased  quantity  of  money,  to  raise 
all  prices,  although  some  more  and  some  less,  ac- 
cording to  the  nature  of  the  articles. 