

B    B    2 


372  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

have  been  made  by  the  Bank,  to  counteract  the 
increasing  pressure  of  foreign  payments,  and  the 
increasing  depreciation  of  its  paper  compared  with 
its  standard,  by  a  reduction  of  its  circulation. 
Such  a  measure  would  have  involved  a  departure, 
by  the  Bank,  from  the  system  which  the  directors 
avowed  and  defended  ;  and  it  was,  therefore,  not  to 
be  expected.  But  it  would  have  been  in  every 
point  of  view  beneficial.  It  would  have  repressed, 
in  some  degree,  the  extravagance  of  speculation, 
on  the  prospect  of  a  peace,  in  exportable  commo- 
dities, and  thus  have  prevented  some  of  the  great 
losses  of  the  two  following  years.  It  would,  in- 
deed, at  the  same  time,  have  accelerated  the  fall 
of  agricultural  produce,  which  was  already  in  pro- 
gress ;  but  an  accelerated  fall,  instead  of  being 
injurious,  would,  in  1813,  have  been  beneficial  to 
the  agricultural  interests.  If,  instead  of  tlie  linger- 
ing fall  between  the  harvest  of  1813  and  the 
close  of  1815,  the  price  of  wheat  had  fallen,  as,  but 
for  the  resistance  of  the  farmers  (aided  by  the 
facility  with  which,  being  in  good  credit,  they 
could  obtain  advances),  it  ought,  by  at  least  10.9. 
per  quarter  more  than  it  did  in  the  autumn  of 
1813,  the  ports  would  have  been  shut,  under  the 
corn  law  of  1804,  and  a  great  part,  of  the  im- 
portation of  1813,  and  the  whole  of  that  of  1814, 
would  have  been  kept  out,  and  the  markets  would 
not  have  been  so  much  depressed  as  they  were  in 
1815.  The  foreign  payments  would  have  been 
diminished  by  that  amount,  and  by  a  reduced 
scale  of  importation  of  other  European  produce  ; 
but  in  a  much  more  important  degree  would  they 
have  been  diminished  by  the  less  unfavourable  ex- 
changes which  would  have  been  the  consequence 
of  a  forcible  contraction  of  the  circulation. 

But  although  the  circulation  was  not  contracted 
in  1813,  as  it  ought  to  have  been,  there  was  very 
little  extension  of  it — indeed,  hardly  any  worth  men- 
tioning; the  whole  increase  of  that  year,  or  of  the 


1809—1813.  873 

last  six  months  of  it,  being  only  from  two  to  three 
hundred  thousand  pounds,  in  notes  of  5/.,  and 
upwards,  beyond  what  it  had  been  in  1812  :  and  the 
entire  amount,  namely,  sixteen  millions,  was  con- 
siderably below  that  which  was  soon  after  found 
to  be  compatible  with  a  rise  of  the  exchanges  and 
a  fall  of  the  price  of  gold  to  par :  thus  affording 
the  strongest  possible  presumption,  that  the  quan- 
tity of  money  was  not  greater  in  1813,  than  might, 
but  for  the  great  and  increasing  pressure  of  the 
enormous  foreign  expenditure,  have  been  main- 
tained in  a  convertible  state  of  the  ciu'rency. 