

5.  That  the  great  fall  in  the  prices  of  corn  and 
other  European  produce,  in  1813,  occurred  wliile 
the  expenditure  of  government  in  the  prosecution 
of  the  war,  defrayed  by  loans,  was  proceeding  on 
a  scale  of  greater  magnitude  than  in  any  former 
period  of  the  war,  or,  indeed,  than  in  any  former 
period  of  our  history  :  thus  negativing  the  theory 
of  war-demand  in  accounting  for  the  previous  rise 
of  prices ;  because,  if  war-demand  raised  the  prices. 


1809—1813.  375 

why  did  it,  when  on  an  increased  scale  of  expend- 
iture, suffer  tlicm  to  fail  ? 

6.  That  the  rise  of  prices  on  the  Continent  of 
Europe,  and  in  France  esjiecially,  between  1809 
and  1812,  had  been  as  great,  relatively  to  their  usual 
rate,  as  in  this  country ;  and  the  rise  was  more 
general,  inasmuch  as  while  sugar  and  coffee,  and 
all  articles  of  transatlantic  produce,  were  in  this 
country  extremely  low,  they  were  on  the  Continent 
extravagantly  high.  Thus,  coffee  and  sugar  in 
bond,  which  would  not  fetch  6d.  the  pound  in  this 
country,  were  worth  from  5s.  to  6s.  the  pound  in 
France  ;  and  all  other  transatlantic  produce  was 
high  there  in  the  same  proportion. 

7.  That  a  fall  in  the  prices  of  corn  and  other 
European  produce,  took  place  in  France,  and  on 
the  Continent  of  Europe,  in  1813,  fully  equal  to, 
or  rather  exceeding,  the  fall  in  this  country.  And 
as  that  fall  was  coincident  with  the  lowest  state,  in 
point  of  quantity,  of  the  precious  metals  in  this 
country,  and  consequently  with  the  largest  addi- 
tion that  was  at  any  time  made  from  hence  to  the 
stock  of  bullion  on  the  Continent,  a  fresh  proof  is 
afforded  of  the  absence  of  the  influence  ascribed 
to  the  disengagement  from,  and  the  reabsorption 
by,  this  country,  of  the  quantity  of  gold  requisite 
to  sustain  a  convertible  state  of  the  paper. 

8.  That  the  unusually  large  government  expend- 
iture abroad,  and  the  extraordinary  siniis  paid  for 
freights  to  foreigners,  during  the  greater  part  of  the 
interval  under  consideration,  while  the  Continent 
was  almost  hermetically  sealed  against  exports  from 
this  country,  (so  that  a  vast  amount  of  transatlantic 
produce  and  manufactured  goods,  which  would, 
in  an  ordinary  state  of  commercial  intercourse,  have 
served  to  discharge  the  greater  part  or  the  whole 
of  those  payments,  were  locked  up  and  unavailable,) 
account  for  the  great  pressure  upon,  and  the  low  state 
of,  the  exchanges,  Vv'ithout  the  supposition  that  an 
excess  of  paper  (except  by  mere  comparison  with 


376  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION. 

its  standard),  was  the  originating  and  determining 
cause  of  that  depression. 

9.  That,  according  to  all  the  means  accessible  for 
forming  a  computation  of  the  amount  of  the  cir- 
culating medium,  there  was  no  such  increase  of  it, 
taking  into  consideration  the  greatly  extended  pe- 
cuniary transactions  of  the  country  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  tendency  to  an  economised  use  of 
the  currency  on  the  other,  as  would  not  have  been 
compatible  with  a  maintenance  of  the  value  of  the 
paper  on  a  level  with  that  of  gold,  had  it  not  been 
for  the  enormous  foreign  expenditure,  which,  under 
the  extraordinary  impediments  that  existed  to  the 
export  of  commodities  to  the  Continent  of  Europe, 
operated  as  a  violently  depressing  cause  upon  the 
exchanges,  and  conferred  a  great  temporary  increase 
of  value  on  gold. 