---
source_url: "https://docslib.org/doc/2175792/alexander-grab-conscription-and-desertion-in-france-and-italy-under"
final_url: "https://docslib.org/doc/2175792/alexander-grab-conscription-and-desertion-in-france-and-italy-under"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "28aaed4ec6f334bb3e40a9f34afa4bd27aa5c259f822cdc1b4576275d56f739e"
title: "Alexander Grab: Conscription and Desertion in France and Italy Under - DocsLib"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

Alexander Grab: Conscription and Desertion in France and Italy Under - DocsLib

# Alexander Grab: Conscription and Desertion in France and Italy Under

Total Page：16

File Type：pdf, Size：1020Kb

Load more

19

Alexander Grab: Conscription and Desertion in France and Italy under Napoleon Schriftenreihe Bibliothek des Deutschen Historischen Instituts in Rom Band 127 (2013) Herausgegeben vom Deutschen Historischen Institut Rom Copyright Das Digitalisat wird Ihnen von perspectivia.net, der Online-Publikationsplattform der Max Weber Stiftung – Deutsche Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland, zur Verfügung gestellt. Bitte beachten Sie, dass das Digitalisat der Creative- Commons-Lizenz Namensnennung-Keine kommerzielle Nutzung-Keine Bearbeitung (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) unterliegt. Erlaubt ist aber das Lesen, das Ausdrucken des Textes, das Herunterladen, das Speichern der Daten auf einem eigenen Datenträger soweit die vorgenannten Handlungen ausschließlich zu privaten und nicht-kommerziellen Zwecken erfolgen. Den Text der Lizenz erreichen Sie hier: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/legalcode ALEX A NDER GR A B Conscription and Desertion in France and Italy under Napoleon It is by now a commonplace that Napoleon depended on the human and fiscal resources of Europe in his drive for imperial expansion and domination. The French emperor would have been unable to expand and maintain his empire without the money and troops that occupied Europe supplied him. A key to his ability to tap into the human resources of his European satellites was an annual and effective conscription system. In September 1798 the French gov- ernment introduced a yearly conscription program and quickly extended it to the Belgian départements and the Cisalpine Republic.1 Prior to the Revolution, armies largely consisted of volunteers and mercenaries. While some form of draft had existed in parts of pre-Revolutionary Europe – France had an ob- ligatory militia system to supplement the regular army – Napoleon increased it to unprecedented levels and extended it to states that previously had not experienced it. Consequently, in the first decade of the nineteenth century the Emperor and his satellite rulers introduced an annual draft throughout much of the continent: the Italian Republic (1802), the Grand Duchy of Berg and the Kingdom of Westphalia (1807), the Kingdom of Naples (1807), Holland and the Hanseatic cities (1811) and the Illyrian Provinces (1811).2 Satellite and allied rulers adopted parts or all of the French conscription model because of its ef- ficiency. It helped them to improve their capacity to draft soldiers and provide their quotas to France. Moreover, possessing a large and powerful army signi- fied an increase in political and military strength as well as a rise in prestige. Napoleon’s Grande Armée was a European army, consisting of soldiers from many nations. By establishing the French conscription system in his annexed lands (pays réunis) and forcing it on his satellite states (pays conquis), Napoleon 1 On the conscription law in France, see A. Forrest, Conscripts and Deserters. The Army and French Society during the Revolution and Empire, New York-Oxford 1989, pp. 34f., and id., Soldiers of the French Revolution, Durham-London 1990, pp. 83f. On conscription in Bel- gium, R. Darquenne, La conscription dans le départment de Jemappes (1798–1813), Mons 1970; on the Cisalpine Republic, A. Pingaud, Bonaparte Président de la République Italienne, 2 vols., Paris 1914, vol. 2: pp. 186–196; C. Zaghi, L’Italia di Napoleone dalla Cisalpina al Regno, Torino 1986, pp. 541–544. 2 For a useful summary of conscription in Napoleonic Europe, S. Woolf, Napoleon’s Integra- tion of Europe, London-New York 1991, pp. 156–165. Conscription and Desertion in France and Italy under Napoleon 103 aimed at guaranteeing a constant supply of troops to his Grande Armée and at alleviating the military demands on the French people, thereby diminishing their opposition to conscription. Moreover, it saved Napoleon considerable amounts of money because those troops were subsidized by conquered lands. Except for Code Napoléon, building a military force through yearly con- scription constituted the most significant Napoleonic reform program in oc- cupied Europe. It greatly affected various policies and the population’s daily life. Annual conscription played a crucial role in laying the foundations of the modern European nation-state. Not surprisingly, it survived the Napoleonic period in a number of European countries. In France itself, the Bourbons en- acted an annual draft in 1818.3 Fiscally, forming a national army and paying for the French troops stationed on one’s territory constituted a major expenditure and required the authorities to find new methods to increase their revenues. Military spending constituted the largest item in every state’s budget, well over half of the expenses.4 It caused deficits and prevented governments from devoting more resources to civilian projects. It forced the authorities to create an efficient financial apparatus and improve tax collection. Local authorities in the départements and the cities needed to allocate part of their financial resources to pay for the recruiting process. Most importantly, governments introduced new taxes and increased the burden on the population, creating much resentment. Politically, conscrip- tion contributed considerably to the growing centralization of state power, one of the most important legacies of Napoleon. To enforce the draft and suppress resistance to it, the authorities needed to strengthen their coercive machinery. They expanded state bureaucracy and concentrated more power in their hands to enable them to implement conscription effectively. State and local officials spent an enormous amount of time to assure that their draft quota was fulfilled. The state augmented the police force and established the gendarmerie to search for deserters and draft dodgers. Consequently, state officials and police reached remote mountainous areas they had never arrived at before. The judicial sys- tem was consolidated with the formation of new laws, decrees and courts that aimed at enforcing conscription and fighting against law violations. Forcing young men to leave their families, farms and communities for many years, conscription had a social and psychological impact on the population. It disrupted their daily routine, undermined their traditional way of life and threatened the family economy. In the words of Stuart Woolf, „(c)onscription 3 I. Woloch, The New Regime Transformations of the French Civic Order, 1789–1820, New York-London 1994, p. 425. 4 F. Bundy, The Administration of the Illyrian Provinces of the French Empire, 1809–1813, New York-London 1987, pp. 410–412; A. Grab, The Politics of Finance in Napoleonic Italy (1802–1814), in: Journal of Modern Studies 3 (1998), pp. 127–143. 104 Alexander Grab … touched the most sensitive nerve of individuals, families and communities. It was an intrusion in private and social life, it could destroy the equilibrium of the family economy, it threatened delicate balances of interest within small communities based on trust by the arbitrary choice of who should depart“.5 Society’s resistance to conscription led to increased repression by the state, which further intervened into daily life. Finally, introducing the French model of conscription also affected cultural and ideological aspects. In the words of Michael Broers, „from the outset of the Revolution within France, conscription was … L’école de la nation, ‚the school of the Nation’, the means by which local and regional loyalties, habits and dialects were broken down in the course of serving the state.“ Indeed, the authorities viewed military service as an important way to mold peasants, the majority of the Napoleonic army, into French citizens. This was true about other European states as well. Napoleon regarded military service as an essen- tial tool to strengthen unity and loyalty to his reign and integrate Europe under the French model. In conclusion, directly and indirectly, annual conscription played a major role in influencing and transforming European state and soci- ety. It helped to undermine the traditional organization of European society and contributed to its transformation more than any other Napoleonic policy. Conscription aroused widespread opposition throughout the Napoleonic empire. The absence of an annual draft in the pre-revolutionary period and the lack of national consciousness made such a policy completely incomprehensi- ble, alien and unacceptable for most recruits and their families. Hence, thou- sands of draftees throughout Europe dodged the draft and deserted. Indeed, annual conscription was Napoleon’s most contested policy, causing a major struggle between state and civil society. It required the government to invest more resources and energy in enforcing that policy than any other program. Isser Woloch is correct to say: „With Napoleon, conscription became the bat- tleground, the ultimate contest of wills between individuals and local commu- nities on the one hand and a distant impersonal state on the other.“6 This article examines the intense conflict between state and society over con- scription in Napoleonic France and Italy. It explores the conscription law, its implementation, the methods employed by draftees to evade military service, the government’s policies designed to suppress resistance, and how successful the authorities were in enforcing conscription. As indicated earlier, revolutionary France was the first European country to establish a national conscripted army. The war against a broad European coali- tion required revolutionary France to enlist as many French citizens