

There is enough evidence to implicate malaria as a major component of Walcheren fever, but a more thorough review of all sources, including the primary medical accounts, suggests that other diseases were present. There are frequent references to dysentery in both military and medical memoirs. English authorities on the fever, including the physicians John Bunnell Davis15 and Thomas Wright16 and the surgeon George Pearson Dawson,17 all stress that the intermittent fever often terminated in dysentery and diarrhoea. The postmortem findings, mostly recounted by Davis, were predominantly of generalised oedema, hepatosplenomegaly, and ulcerated and inflamed intestines. The valuable first hand account of Walcheren by assistant surgeon George Hargrove implies the presence of further infectious diseases.8 He describes both a type of fever and the presence of signs, including petechiae, which are compatible with typhoid and typhus. Notably, Hargrove says that these syndromes mainly affected the troops living in crowded and dirty conditions.

Another “statistical” account of the fever states that the remittent fever often transformed to a continued or “typhoid” form with symptoms of severe headache, coated tongue, anorexia, and delirium.12 French sources also support the presence of multiple infections. The clinician Jean-Baptiste Tresal concluded that whereas strangers to the islands were primarily affected by malaria, the inhabitants contracted other diseases.18 That some soldiers had immunity to disease, presumably malaria, is implied in a report by three British army doctors, who noted that men who had been recruited from “dry mountainous districts” were more likely to fall victim than those from “flat and fenny countries.”19

Taken as a whole, the available sources suggest that Walcheren fever was not a newly discovered killer disease but a lethal combination of old diseases—malaria, typhus, typhoid, and dysentery—acting together in a group of men already debilitated by previous campaigning20 and a life of poverty and drunkenness in the lower reaches of society. The reduced mortality in officers compared with the troops (only 3% compared with over 10%) was probably as much due to their better general health as to the more attentive care they undoubtedly received.

## Aftermath

Walcheren is little remembered now. Unsurprisingly, British military historians have given more attention to Wellington's Peninsular and Waterloo campaigns. However, in early 1810 there was public consternation at the debacle and a parliamentary inquiry was held.21 Remarkably, the army medical department had not been informed of the expedition's destination before its departure. Some of the medical men emerged with credit, but the most senior men in the medical department were in the firing line as much as the government and military officers. The medical arrangements were complacent. There were too few doctors, inadequate hospital provision, not enough transport for the sick, and a shortage of vital drugs and supplies. Peruvian bark, one of the few drugs with real efficacy, had to be commandeered from a passing American vessel. The physician general, Sir Lucas Pepys, seemed as much a caricature as his military peers. When asked why he had not attended the sick in Walcheren, he arrogantly replied that he had no personal experience of military medicine. The surgeon general, Thomas Keate, was quick to point out that he was not the appropriate person to visit Walcheren as the matter was “entirely medical.” The old army medical board had proved itself incompetent, divided, and overly preoccupied with private practice. Its demise and replacement by an improved “new medical board” was predictable after the disaster of Walcheren, but an earlier inquiry had already suggested it be scrapped.22–24