

## What was Walcheren fever?

The nomenclature of disease in the early 19th century now seems obscure, and the retrospective identification of diseases can be difficult. Fevers were commonly divided into four basic types: typhus, intermittent, simple continued, and remittent. Typhus is the disease we know today. Intermittent fever was malaria, and simple continued and remittent fevers were probably a mixture of infectious diseases including malaria, typhoid, relapsing fever, and dysentery. The cause of these diseases was unknown. Some believed that contagion had a role, but most army doctors held the longstanding view that “miasmata,” vapours arising from putrid organic matter, were the cause of common fevers. This was easy to believe in the low lying swamps of Walcheren. Treatment was designed to remove these impurities from the blood. The typical “antiphlogistic” regimen included drugs such as laxatives and emetics combined with other treatments such as venesection, blistering, and dousing with cold water. Alcohol and tobacco were regarded as panaceas.

There are three general sources of information that allow an intelligent guess about the nature of Walcheren fever: accounts by the soldiers affected by the epidemic, descriptions of disease by the regimental medical officers, and more specialised medical accounts by senior doctors, which include details of the pathology of disease.12 William Keep gives a typical soldier's view of an attack of Walcheren fever:

This disease comes on with a cold shivering, so great that the patient feels no benefit from the clothes piled upon him in bed, but continues to shiver still, as if enclosed in ice, the teeth chattering and cheeks blanched. This lasts some time, and is followed by the opposite extremes of heat, so that the pulse rises to 100 in a small space. The face is then flushed and eyes dilated, but with little thirst. It subsides, and then is succeeded by another paroxysm, and so on until the patient's strength is quite reduced, and he sinks into the arms of death.4

Splenomegaly was a common physical sign. Rifleman John Harris's spleen was so enlarged that he carried an “extra paunch” for many years.13 Another key characteristic of the disease was its propensity to relapse. William Dyott was well when he returned from Walcheren to England, but he then had an attack of fever lasting 14 days. Of 130 members of a light infantry company of the Scots Guards which left England, only 40 marched back into London, and all except two subsequently developed fever.9

These soldiers' accounts are of a relapsing fever associated with splenomegaly occurring in swamps infested by mosquitoes. Some historians have understandably attributed Walcheren fever to malaria alone. However, there are problems with this hypothesis. The high mortality in such a short period is not compatible with the types of malaria known to have affected the Netherlands at this time.14 Only virulent falciparum malaria could have caused such decimation, and this was restricted to the tropics.