

The contemporary descriptions of Walcheren seem to describe two different countries. When the troops first landed they saw a “flat fen turned into a garden.” William Keep of the 77th Regiment wrote home, “The more I see of this country the better I am pleased with it.... Here we frequently spread our table under the shade of luxuriant fruit trees, and enjoy all the pleasures of rustic life.”4 Another officer thought the capital, Middelburg, one of the most delightful towns he had ever seen.5 However, a British expedition to the region in 1747 had been largely destroyed by an illness well described by the respected military surgeon John Pringle.6 John Webbe, an inspector of hospitals, perceived this darker side of Walcheren in a letter of September 1809:

The bottom of every canal that has direct communication with the sea is thickly covered with an ooze which, when the tide is out, emits a most offensive effluvia. Each ditch is filled with water which is loaded with animal and vegetable substances in a state of putrefaction, and the whole island is so flat and near the sea that a large proportion of it is little better than a swamp, and there is scarcely a place where water of tolerably good quality can be procured. The effect of all these causes of disease is strongly marked in the inhabitants, the greater part of whom are pale and listless.7

Particularly annoying to the troops were the unexpected swarms of mosquitoes, which bit them until their faces swelled. The medical officers were not overly concerned by these insects, however, one commenting, “the buzzing noise they make is more alarming than the harm they inflict.”8

The progress of “Walcheren fever” or “Flushing sickness” was relentless. In early August there were fewer than 700 men sick, but by 3 September over 8000 were in hospital. In late October the 9000 troops sick on Walcheren easily outnumbered those fit for duty.9 Hospitals were set up in houses, churches, and warehouses, and conditions were appalling. Men were “packed together in hovels, such as would be thought unfit for dogs, exposed to the noxious night airs, and in some cases with only damp straw to lie on.”10 When General William Dyott, second in command of the force, inspected the barracks at Flushing he found 12 ill soldiers in one room with only a couple of blankets between them.11 The sick died almost by the minute, and all burials were ordered to be by night without candles or torches. Even those fortunate enough to be evacuated to England were left lying on the beaches in their own filth. The hospitals at home were overwhelmed by the sudden influx of patients, and some were little improvement on the facilities in Walcheren.

By the time the expedition ended in February 1810 the fever had caused the death of 60 officers and 3900 soldiers. Over 40% of the force had been struck down by disease, and six months later around 11 000 men were still registered sick. This compared with only 100 killed in the sporadic fighting of what had become an irrelevant military adventure.3 Many of those who survived the disease were left permanently debilitated. It was common knowledge in the subsequent campaigning of the Peninsular war that the Walcheren regiments were always the first to fall ill.