When Grey went to London in January 1798 Lady Holland found him unusually ‘placid in his temper and pleasing in his manner’, but noted that ‘he says he is dissatisfied with his political conduct, and regrets having continued so long in Parliament after seceding’. In his correspondence with Wyvill he advocated the revival of the old association movement, but he failed to organize a Middlesex meeting and the collapse of Wyvill’s schemes in Yorkshire convinced him of the futility of further exertion on the subject. Rumours persisted that Moira and a ‘third party’ were working for a change of government and, according to Lady Holland, Grey made at least a show of accepting the Prince of Wales’s offer of reconciliation and agreed to put Lord Lansdowne in touch with Moira, ‘but declined all further interference’. Thomas Tyrwhitt\* thought he was favourably inclined to the Prince’s notion that opposition should move an address expressing their loyalty to the King in the event of an invasion, but Lady Holland wrote that the idea was ‘totally rejected by the whole party’. Wycombe remarked that if the French did come, they would find Grey ‘fuming like a virgin of 30 consumed by an hopeless passion’. He attended O’Connor’s trial in May 1798. Incensed by events in Ireland, he voted for Cavendish’s censure motion, 22 June, and nurtured hopes that Whig attacks in the Commons might lead to changes in the Irish government. These soon evaporated, but he pledged himself to bring the problems of Ireland, in which he had taken a keen interest since his marriage, to public notice.15
By December 1798 Grey felt himself to be in an ‘awkward situation’, as Lady Holland recorded:
> He now regrets the secession, yet ... it is owing ... most especially to him ... he is tired of inactivity, and wishes to attend, yet he feels a difficulty in doing so after all he has declared upon its inutility; besides that, to the world it will always have the appearance of being a most deceitful line of conduct, to have gotten Mr Fox pledged to absence, and then become a leader. Unless I knew him to be of an honest, open, warm-hearted character, I should myself suspect a little fraud, but I fully acquit him.
Lord Minto, for one, suspected that Grey was ‘disposed to dispute the lead with Tierney’. In truth, Fox had expressed no concern on learning in October of his ‘intention to attend occasionally’, and Grey himself, who voted against the income tax, 14 Dec. 1798, explained to Bigge:
> retaining my seat ... I feel that a further attendance is required of me, and shall therefore think it necessary to be present at the most material measures of the present session, though I shall not take any active part, unless my constituents’ shall ... express ... a wish that I should do so.
He admitted that the ‘wrong step’ of secession had created problems:
> A
*> total
*> secession, without resigning my seat, I must acknowledge to be wrong, and so long as it is out of my power (on account of private reasons which have not escaped you) to resign my seat, and still less to take any active part while Fox abstains from doing so, there is no mode of conduct I can adopt, which in my own opinion would be perfectly right.
His activities in the House in 1799 were largely confined to protests against the Irish union. He announced his intention of raising the question of crown influence on the Irish Members and coupling with it the general question of reform, 31 Jan.; and on 7 Feb. he followed his qualified endorsement of Sheridan’s critical motion with a major attack on the measure, which Abbot judged ‘the only good speech on the opposite side’.16
Early in 1800 Grey was again considering parliamentary reform as an antidote to the anticipated effects of the Union. He voted against the address on the collapse of peace negotiations, 3 Feb., and for inquiry into the failure of the Dutch expedition, 10 Feb. Although he was initially inclined to support Tierney’s attack on war for the restoration of the Bourbons, 28 Feb., he apparently did not attend; but he reinforced Tierney’s opposition to the income tax, 17 Apr., and made an unsuccessful wrecking motion of his own. He remained ‘a little uncomfortable’ about taking an active part in the absence of Fox, whom he could not persuade to come up. He denounced the Union, 21 Apr., when his motion to suspend proceedings until the sentiments of the Irish people had been ascertained was crushed by 236 votes to 30. On 25 Apr. he moved an instruction to consider how ‘more effectually to provide for and secure the independence of Parliament’ against the increasing influence of the crown, which he maintained would be boosted by the Union. Although he still believed reform to be essential, he declined to press it, being ‘aware that there is no very general sentiment in the public in favour of such a project’, but stated that had the time been ripe he would have proposed to disfranchise 40 rotten boroughs and reduce the number of Irish Members to 85. He secured 34 votes against 176. That evening he again lamented to Lady Holland his ‘precipitation and bad judgement in urging the measure of secession’, and when she hinted that in order to allay suspicion of his conduct he ought to get Fox to make a ‘public declaration’ of his retirement, he replied, truthfully, that Fox had ‘oftentimes urged him to attend’, and added that it was unthinkable that he should ask his leader to close his public life on his account. He moved a series of detailed amendments to the Union bill, all of which were negatived, 5 May 1800.17
In the autumn Grey, recently much in Tierney’s company, was reported to be eager for action at the meeting of Parliament. Though certain that secession was no longer defensible, he was unable to see his way clearly beyond that and resolved to ‘trust to accident’ to determine his conduct. He refused to follow Sheridan’s example and fall in with Pitt’s desire for unanimity on the address, 11 Nov. 1800, and moved an amendment to omit that part which imputed the failure of peace overtures to France. Sheridan’s hostile retort was generally condemned.18 According to Tierney, on 17 Nov. 1800 Grey reached an understanding with Fox, who gave his ‘perfect, unqualified and distinct’ consent to his taking the lead in the Commons. The opposition was revamped and plans were made for regular party meetings to maintain cohesion. By 18 Nov., when he spoke for Jones’s motion on the evacuation of Egypt, Grey had temporarily settled his differences with Sheridan; after making peace between him and Tierney a few days later, he hoped that matters would proceed ‘smoothly’. In the debate on the food shortage, 26 Nov., he applauded the ‘liberal and enlightened principles’ of commerce enunciated by Pitt, but disputed his contention that Jacobins were exploiting the sufferings of the poor and fell into heated argument with Wilberforce, who deplored his ‘unnatural union’ with radicals. He attacked the conduct of the war and called for the removal of ministers, 27 Nov. Canning thought that on both occasions his elevation had gone to his head, but admitted that his speech for peace negotiations, 1 Dec., was ‘very good’. Grey kept in touch with Fox, who offered advice and occasional minor criticism, voted for Jones’s censure motion, 4 Dec., opposed the suspension of habeas corpus, 12 and 18 Dec., and unsuccessfully brought up Lemaitre’s petition, 15 Dec. 1800.19
Soon afterwards he was in correspondence with Wyvill, who was trying to mount a Yorkshire meeting to petition for peace or the removal of ministers. Grey still held that ‘all parliamentary opposition must be unavailing if it does not meet with popular support’ and favoured concentration on the second point, but gave an assurance of his loyalty to the reform cause. Though unable to coax Fox out of retirement, he consulted him on plans for the new session. He overcame extreme nervousness to acquit himself well when moving an amendment to the address, 2 Feb. 1801, which called for inquiry into the state of the nation, with particular reference to foreign affairs. It was defeated by 245 votes to 63. On 9 Feb. he gave a week’s notice of a direct censure motion. He later postponed it on account of the confusion arising from Pitt’s resignation, but got Fox to promise to attend when it came on. This precipitated a violent quarrel with Tierney, whose annoyance at his ‘going down to St. Anne’s to get sense’, reported and embellished by Sheridan, led Grey to accuse him of enticing him back into action in order to exclude Fox and thereby advance himself. He was contemptuous of the Addington ministry and spoke in support of inquiry into the Ferrol expedition, 19 Feb. 1801.20
During the King’s illness Grey, according to Lady Holland, was sounded by Moira about serving in a ministry excluding both Pitt and Fox, but, like the Duke of Bedford, he said that he ‘would never take office unless Fox was the efficient man in the cabinet’. The continued political uncertainty made him ‘restless and impatient’ and, ‘vexed’ by the lack of support for his attack on the Irish martial law bill, 12 Mar., he told his wife that he was ‘more anxious than ever to quit politics’. When he finally made his motion on the state of the nation, 25 Mar., he directed the brunt of his attack against Pitt’s administration, but refused to allow his successors any honeymoon period. The motion was defeated by 291 votes to 105. He led the opposition to the government’s repressive legislation in April and used the debate on the Portuguese subsidy, 18 May, to make another retrospective attack on Pitt. He could not persuade Fox to attend for the indemnity bill, which he forcefully condemned, 5 June. On the Irish martial law bill, 10 June, he bridled at Addington’s charge that he wished to sabotage the chances of peace and declared himself to be ‘the decided enemy of his government’.21
Two events of June 1801 materially shaped Grey’s future and profoundly influenced his attitude to politics. His father, whose health was precarious, accepted a peerage, thereby ending his prospects of a long career in the Commons. While many people wondered at his acquiescence, it seems that only filial affection prevented him from protesting. It certainly annoyed him, less perhaps on account of its implications for himself than because his father had accepted ‘what he thinks a favour’ from a ministry which he himself despised. Fox told Wyvill that Addington had taken advantage of Sir Charles Grey’s vanity and that Grey’s removal from the Commons would be ‘a severe blow’; but he tried to convince Grey himself that the Whigs’ chances of taking office were so negligible as to make it ‘of less importance than it would have been in former days’. At about the same time, Grey’s uncle let him and his wife take over Howick as their residence. This met his anxious wish to find a permanent base for himself and his growing family, to which he was devotedly attached. The remoteness of Howick from London inevitably fostered his increasing inclination to opt for tranquillity and idleness.22
