Grey, ‘too much convinced of the impolicy of the last secession to think of playing any such game again’, wanted a Whig muster on the peace preliminaries, but would not commit himself to appearing before Christmas. Like Fox, he considered the peace terms, however unsatisfactory, to be preferable to continued war, but he had to chide Fox for the indiscreetly pro-French sentiments of his *Shakespeare* tavern speech. Although Tierney’s hints of interesting possibilities arising from Addington’s overtures did not at first tempt him to go to London, he made an unexpected visit late in October. He announced his intention of voting for the peace, 30 Oct., and welcomed the Northern Convention, 13 Nov., but stood by his past criticisms of the British attitude towards the Northern powers. He returned to Howick soon afterwards. When in London he was asked by St. Vincent on behalf of Addington to consider entering the cabinet with Moira and Bedford. While he did not reject the proposal out of hand, it came to nothing, as far as he was concerned, when ministers refused to change the Irish government. He later explained to Tierney, who was disappointed with his decision:
> it is not personal power or patronage that I want ... [but] a real security for myself and a certain indication to the public that the government is to be conducted on different principles from those which have prevailed of late years. ... To this I have no reason to think that Addington is disposed ... Nor, if disposed, do I believe that he would be allowed by the Court to assent to such an arrangement ... the Court is very ready to buy us. But are they willing to acquiesce in a moderate and liberal system of government?
Lady Holland unfairly charged him with disloyalty to Fox, but Grey, who was upset by hostile press comment on the episode, was entitled to think that Fox had withdrawn from serious involvement in politics and given him a free hand. Whitbread assured him that his conduct had been irreproachable, and Fox, though embarrassed by Wyvill’s request for confirmation of stories that Grey had refused office because Addington would not concede reform, gave a diplomatic answer and told Grey that he approved of his behaviour. Yet Grey, who reacted too sensitively, as his friends thought, to a drunken outburst from Sheridan, was perplexed by Fox’s sudden request, 9 Feb. 1802, for an assurance that all negotiation between himself and Addington was at an end. Tierney saw this as an attempt by Fox to reassert his authority, but Fox himself explained to Grey that far from suspecting him of deception, he merely wished ‘to be quite sure, and authorized too to *say* I was quite sure, with respect to your mode of considering the business’.23
Grey was now determined to avoid as far as possible ‘all political connexions of any kind’ and did not return to London until late March 1802. He merely gave a silent vote for Tierney’s amendment on the civil list, 29 Mar., and was the only leading member of opposition to divide against inquiry into the Prince’s financial claims, 31 Mar. He questioned Addington on the chances of a resumption of cash payments, 2 Apr., and replied trenchantly to Pitt’s ‘panegyric on his own administration’, 5 Apr., when he also attacked Addington’s budget and mocked his subserviency to the Court. Left by Fox to decide the line to be taken on Belgrave’s amendment to Nicholls’s motion applauding Pitt’s fall, 7 May, he opted for direct opposition, and in the debate he laid responsibility for the serious defects of the peace settlement on the desperate state to which Pitt had reduced the country. He abstained from voting on Windham’s motion against the treaty, 14 May, conceding that ministers had been right to make peace, but refusing to accept their contention that its ‘beneficial effects’ were attributable to the successful prosecution of the war.24
Grey professed to care little whether he was returned at the general election and was anxious to ‘avoid giving any expectation of an active attendance’. He was re-elected, but at the end of October 1802 claimed that his wife’s fifth pregnancy made it impossible for him to go to London before next March, despite his increasing awareness that a renewal of war was likely. Fox urged him to consider taking office with Addington, without himself, if the minister sought reinforcements against the warmongers, or at least to be active in maintaining Foxite cohesion on the principle of preserving peace. Grey, who had rebuked Tierney for his persistent abuse of Fox, refused to be drawn, pleaded the excuse of his wife’s condition and stated his determination ‘never again to take anything like a lead in politics’. That apart, he was prepared to work for ‘the preservation of peace on honourable terms’, though he could not dissemble his belief that Buonaparte was now the aggressor. He felt that, in any case, the balance of domestic politics was unfavourable to a lasting peace and that Pitt would engineer his return to power as a war minister. While he agreed with Fox that opposition’s best course was to ‘encourage ministers as much as possible in a pacific disposition’, he thought they must avoid ‘any appearance of indifference to the powers, still more of anything like approbation of the measures of the French government’, and insisted that if war broke out it must be wholeheartedly supported. He considered opposition bound to cooperate with Addington in the unlikely event of his seeking a junction, but repeated his disclaimer on active personal involvement. Fox’s subsequent resort to flattery made no impression on him and it is clear that their difference of opinion on the question of war and peace, though not fundamentally great, was marked enough to reinforce Grey’s unwillingness to commit himself to further heavy involvement in politics.25
Early in 1803, after the birth of his first son, he told Fox that he would attend when summoned, though preferably ‘as late as possible’. He still considered Buonaparte’s language to be deliberately provocative and now questioned the utility of rallying behind ministers in support of peace, as they seemed determined to denigrate the Foxites as advocates of base appeasement. He privately wondered how far Fox’s eagerness for action stemmed from ‘thorough deliberation and sound judgement’, but at the same time he was disgusted by the warlike language of Sheridan and Tierney. On 12 Mar. 1803 Fox, appalled by the King’s message hinting at imminent war, pressed him to attend. Grey, too, was shaken by this development and now blamed the British government for the almost certain rupture of peace. He agreed to go up but, failing to grasp Fox’s distinction between support of peace and of the ministry, expressed strong reservations about backing Addington, as well as insisting that he could not assume ‘any lead or direction’. He claimed the same right as Fox to relax his attendance in the event of war, but promised assistance if Fox was prepared to be active, in which case he was willing to secure the co-operation of other political groups to try to replace the present ministry with one more competent to wage war effectively. After reaching London, 25 Mar. 1803, he began to complain peevishly at the continued confusion of affairs. He spent Easter with Whitbread at Southill, whence he was recalled by Fox with the news that an approach from Addington might be in the offing. He believed there would be ‘none that we can accept’ and when his father urged him to co-operate with government if at all possible, he replied that he ‘would not negotiate on any ground but that of having a majority in the cabinet, Fox being one’. He also thought Fox too sanguine about the effects of exertion by opposition, although his own hopes for the preservation of peace and belief in the pacific disposition of France strengthened during April.26
In the House, 22 Apr. 1803, he argued that electoral corruption at Ilchester required a more drastic remedy than the prosecution of individuals. He opposed the Nottingham election bill, 29 Apr., but felt he ‘spoke like Addington, or perhaps worse’. He was unable, or unwilling to make the effort, to make sense of the political scene and claimed that ‘my disposition to withdraw myself from it entirely increases every hour’. His attempt to prevent the adjournment, 6 May, was unsuccessful, but he thought he had managed to make ministers ‘see the perilous path they are treading’. He took the same course on 13 May, when his ‘desire to bring things to some decisive point which may enable me to leave London’ gave him an additional ‘powerful inducement’ to press for information. Perusal of the papers concerning the collapse of negotiations convinced him that ‘it would have been very easy for men of any ability, and desirous of peace, to have preserved it’. He suspected Pitt of scheming for his own return to power, but considered the Foxites morally bound to protest against the war, even though they would thereby play into his hands. He consoled himself with the reflection that while Pitt’s conduct ensured Addington’s survival and confirmed the war, it thus proved ‘how unnecessary it is for me to stay’. On the address in answer to the King’s message, 23 May, he moved an amendment ‘merely to say that we would support the war’ and ‘holding out the desire of peace’, as he ‘could not consent to the original address’. He reckoned that he had coped ‘*tant bien que mal*’. Thomas Creevey\* said he was ‘courageous, dignified and calm’, Sheridan that he spoke with ‘great perspicuity and force’ and both of them that the attention with which his speech was received was a tribute to its quality. There are indications that had he seen a genuine willingness on the part of Addington, Pitt and the Grenvilles to keep the door open for peace he would have waived his amendment, and in the resumed debate, 24 May, he offered to do so if the offending words were dropped from the address. They were not, and the amendment was rejected by 398 votes to 67. Grey, who professed to have no interest in the future development of domestic politics, left for Howick on 1 June 1803.27
