He gave a silent vote against the address, 21 Jan. 1794, but vociferously condemned the employment of foreign troops, 10 Feb., when he castigated the French regime as a ‘furious and rigid tyranny’, but deplored the encroachment of prerogative on popular liberties. His censure motion was defeated by 184 to 35 and his call for an indemnity bill, 14 Mar., by 170 to 41. Fox now reckoned him ‘the person most improved’ in debating talent on the opposition side. He played a full part in the campaigns on behalf of Muir, Palmer and Lafayette and in the attack on the foreign enlistment bill, but confessed to the House, 11 Apr., an inclination to give up politics, ‘where the only effect of his exertion was personal odium and disapprobation’. Afraid of ‘the high-prerogative doctrines of the government on one side, and the violence of those on the other whose conduct I do not commend, but whose temper I cannot much wonder at’, he stated to John Cartwright in March 1794 his preference for a householder franchise over universal suffrage. Although he recognized the futility of raising reform in the House, he reiterated his belief in the need for it when denouncing the suspension of habeas corpus and the report of the secret committee, 16 May. In a major attack on the third reading of the suspension bill the following day, he argued that only an appeal to the public could improve the chances of securing reform. His stubborn resistance at least prevented Pitt, with whom he had several bitter exchanges, from rushing the measure through in one day. He supported Fox’s anti-war resolutions, 30 May, and on 10 July exhorted ministers to ‘acknowledge the Republic upon terms reciprocal, fair and honourable to both countries’.7
Grey attended Hardy’s trial ‘in order’, as he wryly told his fiancee, ‘to learn how to conduct myself when it comes to my turn’. Thomas Pelham\* believed that he and Whitbread were ‘determined to bring forward parliamentary reform in direct opposition to Fox’s advice’, but he did not raise it in the House in 1795. He voted for Wilberforce’s peace amendment, 30 Dec. 1794, opposed the renewal of habeas corpus suspension, 5, 15 and 23 Jan. 1795, and on 26 Jan. moved a resolution that the existence of the present French government ought not to preclude peace overtures. Pitt’s amendment was carried by 269 votes to 86. His renewed attempt to establish whether the government was prepared to wage *bellum ad internecinum* to overthrow the Republic, 6 Feb., was defeated by 190 votes to 60 and got little verbal support. One witness told Farington that he ‘spoke unequally, sometimes with force, but when heated lost himself’, though Fox thought it an ‘excellent’ effort.8 He presented peace petitions from Scotland, 19 and 21 Mar., and voted for Wilberforce’s peace motion, 27 May. He objected to any move to defray the Prince of Wales’s debts, 27 Apr., tried unsuccessfully to reduce his marriage grant by £25,000, 14 May, and took the same hard line in subsequent debates on the issue. He spoke at length against Foster Barham’s motion criticizing the conduct of his father and Sir John Jervis\* in Martinique, 2 June 1795.
Grey tried to organize a Northumberland county meeting to petition for peace and had hopes of a general movement to agitate the question on a non-party basis. The scheme collapsed, and he was sunk in gloom in early November, but he was roused to fury by the subsequent repressive legislation, which he contested bitterly in the House. Charles Abbot\* described him as ‘angry, declamatory, and verbose; implacable in his enmity to Pitt, and unconciliatory’ towards the House; another hostile observer thought that ‘personality to the minister and not the good of his country swayed him’. In accordance with his pledge to stir up opinion against the measures, he promoted a Northumberland protest and addressed the Westminster meeting, 16 Nov. 1795. He was involved in the formation of an association to direct a national campaign for their repeal at the turn of the year, when he wrote that the people ‘must declare open war against the government’, although he seriously doubted the prudence of the venture. Its failure confirmed his conviction of the ‘almost incurable apathy’ of the people.9
His inability to stimulate any significant popular response on the subject of peace intensified his frustration. His peace motion planned for 9 Dec. 1795, when he hoped to recruit support from disaffected ministerialists, was undercut by the message on the state of affairs in France, which hinted at British willingness to negotiate. In the debate on it, he supported Sheridan’s amendment asserting that the internal state of France ought never to be a bar to negotiations. Persistent questioning of Pitt drew no satisfactory answer and Grey, concluding that ‘the hopes inspired by the King’s message were without foundation’, decided to raise the question of peace again himself, though he did ‘not expect to gain an additional vote in the House of Commons or any active support out of it’. His motion of 15 Feb. 1796 was defeated by 189 votes to 50. He had told his friend Thomas Bigge that he intended to expose ‘some of the enormities’ of the administration and on 10 Mar. he moved for inquiry into the finances, urging the country gentlemen to ‘free themselves from the influence of that lodestone’ which was ‘imperceptibly drawing them into the gulf of ruin’. The motion was crushed by 207 votes to 45 and he complained to Sir John Swinburne that he was at a loss to know what more could be done ‘to animate a people stupidly blind to their own destruction’.10 He attacked the budget, 18 Apr., and on 6 May moved a string of resolutions accusing ministers of ‘misapplication of the public money’, which he intended to form the basis of impeachment proceedings. They were defeated by 209 votes to 38. He opposed the legacy duty and the succession tax, spoke frequently against the barrack system and voted for Fox’s motion criticizing the conduct of the war, 10 May 1796.
Despite his political frustration and rumours of trouble in Northumberland, where his line was unpopular, Grey was determined to stand again at the general election, but was not prepared to spend money. In the event, there was no opposition. Un-enthusiastic about Tierney’s scheme to launch a petitioning campaign and relieved when it was shelved, he told Bigge that he might not bother to attend the new Parliament, yet he took his place and resumed his criticism of Pitt’s financial policy, 7 Dec. 1796, though he apparently performed below his best. His attempt to defer the committee of supply, 8 Dec., in order to attack Pitt for making the imperial loan without the consent of Parliament, was defeated by 164 votes to 58. He continued to denounce the transaction and on 30 Dec. blamed government for the failure of peace overtures and moved unsuccessfully for a call of the House on 10 Jan. 1797.11
Convinced that ‘we are come to that melancholy point of political degradation, in which we can no longer bear either our corruption or the remedies’, Grey advocated a Foxite secession before Christmas, but was overruled. In February 1797 he asked Bigge to consider the possibilities of procuring petitions for the dismissal of ministers, which he subsequently encouraged. Although the suspension of cash payments necessitated his continued attendance in Parliament, he looked ‘with a longing eye to that period when I may be enabled to quit it with honour’. He sat on the secret committee of inquiry into the Bank stoppage, but was said to have ‘laid in his disclaim on any general obligation to secrecy’ and supported the motions of Fox and Sheridan on the issue, 28 Feb. and 1 Mar., when he called for parliamentary reform as well as retrenchment. He repeated his allegations of Pitt’s financial mismanagement, 26 Apr., and on 16 May moved a series of resolutions, which were decisively rejected, incriminating him for his handling of the Bank question. He supported Whitbread’s motions on Ireland, 3 Mar., and the delay in implementing increases in seamen’s pay, 10 May.12
On 17 May 1797 Fox gave notice that on the 26th either he or Grey would move for parliamentary reform. An anonymous memorandum of 22 May in the Prince of Wales’s papers states that Fox, like Bedford and Grey, ‘who were of those who encouraged him to that step’, subsequently came to regret it; but the writer was confident that the issue would be handled temperately, without prejudice to the planned formation of a new administration on the initiative of the ‘armed neutrality’ and other ministerial malcontents. Grey, whom Lord Moira was keen to include in a revamped cabinet, later told Bigge that even though Fox had not told him of his offer to stand aside in order to facilitate the formation of a new ministry, he had given ‘a decisive and peremptory refusal’ to an invitation, 25 May, to participate himself. He moved the reform motion the following day with a speech which, Abbot conceded, was ‘moderate and discreet’. He rejected universal suffrage and ‘any speculation of natural and imprescriptible rights’ but his proposals, based on a scheme concocted by the Friends of the People some years earlier, were quite far-reaching. He concluded with a personal statement of his intention of seceding: in future, his parliamentary activities would be confined to voting on measures which affected the interests of his constituents’. A respectable minority of 91 supported his motion. According to Pitt, the mutiny punishment bill was read a second time, 2 June 1797, ‘with no other opposition than the single negative of Mr Grey’, but the reports of the debate did not record an intervention by him.13
In October 1797 Grey, who could not share Wyvill’s optimism about rousing public opinion to support reform, told Whitbread that he hoped Fox would not attend ‘till the country gives him some decisive assurance of support’. For himself, he would ‘not budge unless obliged to do so by a call of the House’. Pleased to find Fox of like mind, he maintained his argument that only a genuine movement of opinion against the existing system could warrant a resumption of active opposition, when countering Tierney’s view that the onus was on the politicians to give a lead. When Northumberland ministerialists considered exploiting local dissatisfaction with his secession, his first instinct was to offer his resignation to any meeting that was called, but on his father’s advice he decided to sit tight. Although he thought Tierney’s enthusiasm for encouraging the agitation against the triple assessment was misguided, he tried, without success, to organize a county meeting on the issue. At the end of the year he was hurt by Fox’s failure to respond to his appeal for advice on his personal position and unsettled by rumours that Fox was inclined to become active again.14
