His view of public affairs remained infinitely gloomy and Fox’s ambiguous response to his message, imparted through Whitbread, to the effect that ‘nothing can be done without Fox, and every proposition must be made to Fox’, confirmed his view that Fox was too much the creature of ‘impulses’. When Fox raised the notion of a junction with the ‘new’ opposition, Grey agreed that, remote as the prospect of forming one might be, it would be wise to avoid the creation of fresh obstacles to it. He was quite against any co-operation with the ministry, whose defence measures had been ‘botched’ and who were responsible for the ‘melancholy chapter’ of events in Ireland. In October he confided to Whitbread his wish that Fox ‘would seriously turn his mind to what he ought to do in Parliament’. In his own view, the main object should be to remove Addington; and ‘if a strong union could be formed against the Court, it would be a great thing’. Yet he advanced the excuse that he could not go to London because it was impossible either to leave his family exposed to the threat of an invasion or to take them with him. He made a further attempt to get Fox to come to a rational decision on policy, only for Fox in turn to exhort him to make the final decision and attend at the start of the session. Grey, though clear that ‘we ought to state very freely our opinions of the measures of administration, and in doing this to smooth the way as much as possible for co-operation with those whose sentiments concur with ours’, insisted that he could not. Neither Fox nor Whitbread could see the logic of this, but they did not press him heavily. Events at the opening of the session, when he thought Fox was allowing Sheridan to steal a march on him, convinced Grey that he could be of no use in London and he contemplated absence for the whole session, adding his wife’s latest confinement and his financial problems to the list of excuses. Fox consulted him on the propriety of moving for Catholic relief. He gave only a ‘conditional’ and on balance unfavourable opinion, but when Fox, disappointed by Irish Whig aversion to the move, wrote in despair of the likely disintegration of the party, Grey offered to attend if provision could be made for a relative to look after his wife and advised him not to give up the question too hastily. He even volunteered to handle it himself, but on reflection decided that it ought not to be forced at present.28
He was nonplussed to learn of the Grenvilles’ approach to Fox for the formation of a coalition to turn out Addington and substitute a broad-bottomed administration. He could not believe that they favoured ‘peace on reasonable terms’, thought that the object of such a junction could be achieved only by ‘a long siege’, to which he was unwilling to commit himself, and suspected that the ultimate beneficiary would be Pitt. He endorsed Fox’s decision to express merely ‘a general inclination to support’ on particular issues. Consideration of the problem was suspended by the King’s illness. Fox urged Grey to come up and to ‘make up your mind to be what you must be, if things take a turn which I think not improbable. I will give you every assistance, but you must be at the head.’ Grey replied that that could not be, but he obeyed the summons and arrived in London on 23 Feb. 1804. A conference with Fox confirmed his forebodings of ‘disgusting intrigues and some arrangement at last, in which I shall refuse to have any share’. While he was mainly preoccupied with trying to contrive his departure as early as was decently possible, he was seriously concerned about ministers’ refusal to disclose the full truth about the King’s health and on 27 Feb. he demanded information. The same day he criticized the volunteer consolidation bill and called for a general inquiry into defence arrangements. Neither effort satisfied him. On 2 Mar., after a party meeting, he again pressed for an explicit statement on the King’s executive competence and, failing to get it, threatened a motion on the subject. He supported inquiry into the Irish insurrection, 7 Mar., and thought the division showed ‘what might be done if there was a cordial union of all those who disapprove of the administration’. Though at first personally disposed to make a major issue of the King’s condition, he saw the difficulties and risks involved and welcomed the opposition decision, 10 Mar., to do nothing. He was nevertheless ‘much satisfied’ with his personal protest in the House the previous day, as it freed him from ‘the disgrace of a silent acquiescence’. After unsuccessfully proposing an amendment to the volunteer consolidation bill, 12 Mar., he left London.29
As a result, he was only an interested spectator of the combined attack on Addington. His wife’s convalescence from the birth of their sixth child was his excuse for resisting Fox’s urgent requests for his presence in London, but he told Whitbread that
> my total despair of any political good, deprives me of all energy. A constitutional languor contributes to the same effect. I feel quite unequal to any great exertion, and dread being placed in a situation that may require it.
He was additionally pained by his father’s steady support for the tottering ministry in the Lords. He reluctantly left Howick on 28 Apr., believing that if Addington did not survive, it would all end in the restoration of Pitt. When Fox, barred from office by the King, gave his followers the option of joining Pitt without him, Grey was the prime mover in putting an ‘absolute veto’ on it. Though prepared to acknowledge in public that opposition had no cause to complain of Pitt’s conduct, he was privately contemptuous of its ‘meanness’. Determined to leave London by the end of May, he only stayed on for form’s sake, attending the ‘detestable House’ to attack the volunteer consolidation bill, 23 May. George III’s relapse forced him to change his plans and he drafted the Prince’s letter to Lord Eldon requesting an official statement on the King’s condition. He participated in the opposition to the additional force bill in June, and indeed believed that only apathy among the opposition rank and file had allowed the measure, and the ministry, to survive. He supported Whitbread’s censure of the lord advocate, 22 June, and went north the next day.30
His political correspondence with Fox was not resumed until November 1804. He was determined to have nothing to do with any offer arising from the negotiations between Pitt and the Prince and was against junction with Pitt on any terms. Unlike Fox, he saw no advantage in moving the Catholic question. He saw the Spanish war as a better bet and wanted opposition to ‘occupy with all their forces the advantageous ground of which they are in possession’, but he tried to escape personal involvement. This time Fox would not be denied and Grey went to London, under protest, early in 1805 to take charge of the attack on the Spanish war. According to Robert Adair\*, he was ‘clear and sometimes eloquent’ in moving an amendment of censure, 11 Feb. He was active in all the major onslaughts on government in February and March and played a full part in the hounding of Melville, which rekindled some of his old enthusiasm. He felt initially that ‘if we are seconded by the public, as at present there is every reason to hope we shall be’, the ministry was doomed; but events in the House taught him to expect nothing more from a demonstration of public opinion than moral backing for those who were ‘active in the prosecution of public delinquency’. He was one of the committee appointed to draw up articles of impeachment, 26 June. After failing to secure information on the rumoured renewal of continental co-operation he moved, 20 June 1805, to postpone the prorogation. While he saw concerted military action and joint negotiation as the best means of defeating France, he wanted to know if the current plans afforded a realistic hope of success and argued that ‘a separate peace, on moderate terms, would be preferable to a mere defensive war’. The motion went down by 261 votes to 110 and Grey left London soon afterwards.31
Before doing so he gave Fox a ‘letter of attorney’ to dispose of him as he saw fit, subject to unspecified limitations, if Pitt decided to barter with opposition. When Fox asked him to state his terms, he named the war department and the Exchequer as the only offices to which he had insuperable objections, though he told Whitbread, ‘I wish to God he would allow of a more general objection, and leave me entirely out’. Like Fox, he did not expect Pitt to make an acceptable offer and thought the only reasonable response would be to propose the construction of a fresh administration, of which Pitt would not be the leader; but it was some time before he came round to Fox’s view that he would not make even a token gesture. The military disasters at the end of 1805 proved to him that it was ‘nonsense to talk any more of continental confederacies’. He went to London early in 1806, feeling that only the influence of the crown could sustain Pitt in power against a concerted attack, though he did not discount the possibility of opposition disunity. According to Moira, the general disposition of opposition after Pitt’s death was to behave with ‘dignity and moderation’, but Fox ‘hinted his apprehensions from the violence of Mr Grey’s temper’. He seems to have controlled it.32
Grey became first lord of the Admiralty in the ‘Talents’. His first few weeks in office were vexatious and personally distressing: he was genuinely hurt by Whitbread’s disappointed reproaches over his exclusion, though he was partly at fault in the misunderstanding which led to it; he had to try to placate the disgruntled Duke of Northumberland, one of his main electoral props; and he found the whole scramble for spoils unedifying. When Whitbread urged him to insist on an earldom for Lord Grey, he declined to be ‘pressing for myself’, but the promotion took place in April 1806 and Grey assumed the courtesy title of Viscount Howick. His onerous departmental duties, which he handled creditably, prevented him from taking a prominent part in general debate. He spoke against the demand for inquiry into St. Vincent’s naval administration, 14 May, defended the West India auditors bill, giving George Rose a good dressing down, 16 June, and on Mildmay’s motion for a vote of thanks to the volunteers, 11 July, vindicated the government’s defence plans and carried the previous question against Sheridan’s resolution. Creevey described it as ‘one of his best speeches, full of honour, courage and good faith’. He was responsible for drawing up proposals for a general increase in naval pay.33
Howick’s dismay at the collapse of Fox’s health was increased by his fear that it presaged further labour and responsibility for himself. His awareness of a wish among the Foxites and, reportedly, on the part of Fox himself, to see Holland take over the foreign seals encouraged him to demur when Lord Grenville exhorted him to prepare himself for the task. He hoped and waited in vain for explicit instructions from Fox. After feverish discussions following Fox’s death, when several permutations were considered and rejected, Howick reluctantly took the foreign secretaryship and the leadership in the Commons, perceiving that he was bound to do so both to prevent Grenville seeking reinforcements from opposition and to fulfil his own moral obligations to the Foxites. He still spoke of holding the seals only as locum for Holland, whom he tried at the last minute to persuade Grenville to appoint. Holland thought he had behaved ‘in the handsomest, openest and fairest manner possible’ but wondered, as did Fitzpatrick, whether he would be so keen to surrender the office when the time came. Lord Sidmouth considered that he had ‘shown no personal solicitude for change of situation or increase of power’.34
