

So far, then, Sir, as the general charge against the present Government goes, of having reduced the navy, I have given a short, and I trust, a satisfactory answer, resting on documents beyond the possibility of contradiction. In no one respect have we reduced anything that contributes to the efficiency of the navy.

I am, however, fully aware, that not only for our vindication, but still more for the purpose of putting the Committee and the country in full possession of the state of our navy and naval establishments, it is necessary for me to go into the subject in much greater detail; and I think, it will be for the convenience of hon. Gentlemen, that I should do so under the different heads of expenditure, as they stand in the estimates.

First, then, with regard to the strength of the navy.

It will be in the recollection of hon. Gentlemen, that late in the last Session of Parliament, the Duke of Wellington called the attention of the House of Lords to the reduced state of the navy. He said, that he considered our naval establishments "to be in too weak a condition to answer the purpose for which they were intended." "The circumstance of which 1216 I complain," said the noble Duke,* "I do not at all attribute to neglect upon the part of the Admiralty, neither do I include, in my censure, the noble Earl who is at the head of the Admiralty; but those whom I do blame, are the individuals who have thought proper to reduce the establishments of the country to such a degree that protection cannot possibly be given in all places where it is required."

The noble Duke, with that fairness which always distinguishes him, did justice to the present Board of Admiralty. He did not impute blame to us. Not so those partisans of hon. Gentlemen opposite, who, in after-dinner speeches, pamphlets, letters, and newspaper articles, throughout the autumn, imputed to us, that we had reduced the navy; and, on the supposition that we had done so, held up our conduct to the censure of the country, as contrasted with that of the Tories. Let us see, Sir, how the facts stand. The strength of the navy mainly depends on the number of men voted. From the year 1818 to 1824, the number of men voted averaged about 15,000. In 1824 they were increased, and to 1831, averaged, including the coast blockade, from 20,000 to 21,000 men. The right hon. Member for Pembroke put down the coast blockade. But the highest vote for seamen, since the peace, except our own, was not under a Tory, but under the Whig Government of Lord Grey, namely, that taken in 1831, by the right hon. Member for Pembroke. He subsequently reduced the number to about what they had stood at, since 1834, exclusive of the coast blockade, namely, 18,000, and so they stood till the year 1834.

In 1834, for a most useful purpose, that of introducing a greater number of boys into the navy, he reduced 500 men, and added 1,000 boys, which, upon the usual calculation of two boys to one man, left the force where it was. Then came the government of the right hon. Member for Tamworth; and they, as I have said, reduced the number of men. I confess, I was at a loss to understand what the right hon. Baronet meant just now, when he denied this;† they not only reduced the men, but they boasted of it. What said my noble Friend, the Member *Debate, Aug. 14, 1838. Hansard, 3rd Series, vol. xliv. p. 1200. † Sir Robert Peel had done so across the table. 1217 for Dorsetshire, (Lord Ashley) who moved the naval estimates in 1835, and whom I regret not to see in his place, he said, that the House had been accustomed to economy under the preceding Governments, and they would find that they had not lost in that respect by the return of the Conservatives to power; for "with respect to the first great head, namely, the effective service, he had to inform the House that there was a reduction of 2,000 men, on full wages—in 1835 as compared with 1834—but, in consequence of the success which had attended similar experiments in former years, 1,000 boys were to be added; as, however, 1,000 boys were equal only to 500 men, there would be a net reduction of 1,500 men."*