

§ And it is not a little curious, that in that country, the mother of steam navigation, this steam-vessel should be the only one belonging to the Government.

§ I come now to the great bugbear of my hon. Friend, the Member for Birmingham, the Russian navy; and certainly if I had believed the newspapers in the autumn, I should have thought, that the hon. Gentleman had inoculated half the country with his fears and hatred of Russia. Most exaggerated accounts had been put forth on the subject of the Russian navy; and the Admiralty are accused of being the only persons in the country ignorant and careless on the subject. I cannot expect, that anything that falls from me as an individual should excite the attention of this House; but I may call to the recollection of hon. Gentlemen, that in moving the navy estimates in 1836 I stated the force of the Russian navy, and stated it as one of the grounds on which I asked for an increase of our naval force, and what was the reception I met with? Why, I was taunted by the right hon. Member for Tamworth, for ha- 1222 ving made statements calculated to excite alarm at home, and apprehension of hostilities abroad. In spite of this circumstance we have been accused of ignorance on the subject; when it is notorious, that I made this statement in the House in 1836, and a statement to the same effect was made by the right hon. Member for Pembroke in the year 1835; by myself one year, and by him two years before the publication of Commander Craufurd's pamphlet. Sir, there is no difficulty in ascertaining the truth, if Gentlemen would only take the trouble of inquiring before they begin to write upon the subject.

§ The Russians have twenty-eight sail of the line in the Baltic fit for service, of which eighteen are seventy-four gun ships; and ten in the Black Sea, of which two are in bad condition; and Russian ships are remarkably subject to decay, so that a ship reported perfectly good one year, is sometimes condemned as unseaworthy the next.

§ This, then, being the condition of the Russian fleet in the Baltic, and which is, from the nature of the Russian naval service always kept ready for sea; I will admit to the hon. Member for Birmingham, that if, without provocation, without warning, in the middle of profound peace, regardless of the fearful vengeance which this country might exact, Russia chose to make a sudden attack on this country, she might do us considerable mischief; so I will admit, that if France, in time of profound peace, suddenly landed a large force on our shores, it might take some time to collect a force to oppose them; and so, Sir, your life and that of every one of us, is at the mercy of the first man we meet in the street, if, without provocation and without warning he chooses to attempt it. But are these dangers, which even the most prudent man thinks it necessary to guard against? If so, I ask if this country was ever in time of peace prepared against such dangers? If so, I ask if the three guard-ships, half-manned, in each port, about which we have heard so much, were an adequate defence against twenty-eight Russian ships of the line? If we are really to be protected against such an attack, we should have twenty or twenty-five sail of the line in the North Sea every summer. But surely hon. Gentlemen will perceive that this involves a question, which cannot be decided by a department, or even by a Government, it must be de- 1223 cided by Parliament and the country, for it is no less than whether we shall, in time of peace, maintain a war establishment.