

§ Sir, it may be some consolation to my hon. Friend, the Member for Birmingham, to know that there is no great increase in the Russian fleet from what it was many years ago. The hon. Gentleman has referred this evening to what it was forty years back. I will state what its numbers have been at several periods. In 1787, the Russians had forty-five sail of the line, and several building; in 1801, sixty-one sail of the line; and in 1807, forty-three—precisely the same number as they have at present: I speak of those afloat, exclusive of ships building. Their ships are increased above what they were three, or four years ago, but they have not yet reached their establishment, which is forty-five sail of the line in the two seas.

§ It will be a further consolation to my hon. Friend, to be assured, that we have for years lived unarmed through dangers as great as that to which we are now ex. posed. The number of our ships in commission, is higher in proportion to the Russians than it has been for some time.

§ In 1817 we had fifteen sail of the line in commission, and Russia had thirty,—our ships being just one half of hers; in 1823, we had twelve, and the Russians thirty-seven,—our ships being in the proportion of one-third to hers; In 1832, we had eleven, and Russia thirty-six—being also in the proportion of nearly one-third; and now we have twenty, and Russia forty-three,—having raised our ships to nearly 1225 half the number of those of Russia. So far, therefore, we are in a better situation as respects that country, than in any year since 1817. In fact, England has now a larger naval force than she has ever yet maintained during peace. Including the ordinary, which, for this purpose, the men being available for sea service, I have a right to reckon, but excluding those employed in the home packets, the vote for seamen for 1838 was 24,700 men; and the highest vote under a Tory Government, including the coast blockade, namely, in 1828, was 21,000. The increase, therefore, above their highest vote is little short of 4,000 men. I repeat, therefore, that this country has at this moment the largest naval force, the greatest number of seamen, and the greatest number of ships in commission, that she has ever had since the peace.

§ I am aware, Sir, that several objections have been taken to the composition of our force, to which I will now advert.

§ It is said, in the first place, that we have only seventy-four gun ships, and that we ought to have more of our larger ships at sea. When Gentlemen are determined to object, there is no saying to what length their objections may not be carried; but if there is any one point on which I thought that we were beyond reproach, not that I take any credit for it to the present board of Admiralty, it was that of wearing out our small two-deckers in time of peace; and reserving our more powerful ships for the exigencies of war. This was the course recommended by the late comptroller of the navy, acted upon by former boards, followed up by us; and, I must say, that I am perfectly convinced that the course is a right one.