

§ The numbers voted make it still clearer.

§ The numbers voted were:—

| Men. | Boys. |
| --- | --- |
| In 1834 | 17,500 | 1,000 |
| 1835 | 15,500 | 2,000 |

§ The next year we added 5,000 men and boys.

§ This was the conduct of the Tories. What said the right hon. Member for Pembroke, at the time, who, if I may use the expression, then represented Whig opinions upon naval matters. He expressed his disapprobation of the reduction. He said, that "he must express his regret, that at this juncture any reduction whatever had taken place." He said, referring to the force of other nations, "that he put it to the good sense of Gentlemen present whether it was proper, if foreign powers were in that state to incur the risk of reducing the amount of the naval force of the country to the amount proposed."* The reduction then was made by the Tories, and it was disapproved at the time by the Whigs.

§ I confess I should have been glad to hear on what ground that reduction was made. When we made the increase in the subsequent year, no insignificant Member of the right hon. Baronet's Government, the Duke of Wellington, took the earliest opportunity of expressing his approbation of the increase. I should be glad to know what change had taken place in the affairs of Europe, that could make this difference. My memory may deceive me, but as far as I can recollect, no change had taken place in the aspect *Hansard, 3rd Series, vol. xxvi. 996. † Hansard, vol. xxvi., p. 990. 1218 of political affairs, which could have made a reduction right in 1835, when, in the opinion of the Duke of Wellington, an increase was so necessary in 1836. But, Sir, there is no longer any doubt upon this point. We have had within these few days the advantage of hearing the statement of the noble Earl, who was First Lord of the Admiralty, in the Government of the right hon. Baronet, and what was his account of it? "Great," said he, "was the pressure for economy upon the Government; small was the chance, that the House of Commons would listen to a large vote for the navy; and, therefore, he would be perfectly frank, and at once say, that the number of men was a great deal too small, and short as had been his professional connexion with the service he felt it deeply before he quitted office."*

§ Now, Sir, after this account of the grounds of the reduced vote taken iu 1835 by Sir Robert Peel's Government. I beg of hon. Gentlemen to call to mind the expressions, that have been so lavishly applied to us: "Base truckling to the hon. Member for Kilkenny; disgraceful parsimony; and a sacrifice of the best interests of the navy, to a shameful courting of low popularity," were the mild terms in which our conduct was spoken of by the Tory press. I appeal to every candid man on this side of the House, or even on your own, whether these terms are more applicable to us who increased, or to you who reduced, the navy, and for such reasons as are stated by yourselves, with a frankness, which, I confess, almost disarms me.