

§ The next point to which I will allude, illustrates the different manner in which he deals with things abroad and at home. He attacks me as Secretary to the Admiralty for saying, that we had at a particular time twenty sail of the line "at sea." He is candid enough, however, to confute himself in this point; for though he gives some reasons why he does not consider them as effective ships, a few pages afterwards, he gives the list of the twenty sail of the line at sea. But how does he deal with the French navy? They have, he says, twenty-two sail of the line "actually at sea." It will hardly be believed, that to make up the twenty-two he includes all the ships the French have afloat including those in ordinary. The number actually at sea is ten. There is no excuse for these inaccuracies. He professes to quote an able and elaborate report of Baron Tupinier, which contains the real state of the French navy, and the French annual estimates contain the fullest information. The French carry publicity to a fault. They carry it, as Sir John Barrow has mentioned in his late life of Lord Anson, to their own detriment. There is no disguise about the state of their navy. They have twenty-two ships afloat, and twenty-seven building, making forty-nine, I mean ships of the line; and I beg the Committee to understand, that unless I particularly specify it, I always mean ships of the line, for the task would be endless if I went into the details of smaller vessels. Their active force for 1838 was eight sail of the line, but, including reliefs, they had ten at sea.

§ The next subject I shall refer to, is the American navy, the ships of which are, as naval officers know, of a very formidable description; but it is an error to suppose that their navy has been much increased of late years. On the contrary, there have been great complaints in America that there was nothing doing in their dockyards. The American naval force is precisely what it was last year and a year or two back. They have seven ships of the line, and four building; eight frigates, and six building. [Sir James Graham intimated across the Table, that Sir John Barrow's letter stated twenty-six ships of the line.] There is a mistake in the statement in the table in Sir John Barrow's book; he has included in the ships build- 1221 ing, those for which frames are collected, or are contracted for. There can be no mistake about the matter; for the paper I am quoting is an extract from the report to Congress of the state of the navy. To satisfy the right hon. Baronet, I will give the statement in detail.

§ The Americans have two ships of the line in commission, three ready for sea, two in want of repair, four on the stocks, four of which the frames are collected, and eleven, the frames for which are contracted for, to be delivered by the year 1841; and it would be absurd to reckon as ships building, those for which the timber may as yet be growing in an American forest.

§ To show the want of vessels in the American navy, I will read an extract from the Secretary of the Navy's report. The act of congress approved 22nd December, authorized the President of the United States to employ the public vessels in cruising along the Atlantic coast during the winter season, for the purpose of affording relief to merchantmen in distress. Under this law, the sloop of war Erie, the brigs Pioneer and Consort, the schooner Active, and steamship Fulton were occasionally employed with beneficial results: owing to the want of proper vessels at the disposal of this department, after supplying the necessities of foreign stations, the steam-ship Fulton is the only one now available for this service.