

§ Now, Sir, I recommend Gentlemen who advocate such a course, first to sit down and calculate the cost. It is not a question of two or three sail of the line, it is not a question of three or four thousand men, or of four or five hundred thousand pounds; it is a question of millions in every year since the peace up to the present time, and hereafter.

§ It is possible that all our greatest statesmen may have been wrong, and that a war establishment may be right; but this is a point which it yet remains for those Gentlemen to prove. I hold in my hand a curious paper on this subject, which, with the permission of the committee, I will read to them, as bearing directly upon my argument. The Duke of Choiseul on quitting office presented an elaborate and confidential paper to his sovereign, in which he entreats him most earnestly, to adopt a system subversive of the maritime greatness of Great Britain; such is avowed in the paper to have been the object to which the policy of France had long been directed. The aim and end, according to the writer, were just and reasonable, but the means adopted, namely the equipment of large fleets, and the resort to frequent hostilities were defective and injurious. The secret scheme recommended in the paper, and which it is contended therein, would to demonstration waste and destroy, not merely the navy of Great Britain, but the resources and spirit from which her greatness was derived, was according to this remarkable paper to keep her in a constant state of feverish apprehension, to compel her to exhaust her strength on peace establishments, and yet never afford her an opportunity by actual war, of dispelling the bugbears which excited these alarms. The Duke de Choiseul, no unimportant or uninformed Minister of the power which was then our great rival, may be wrong; Lord Grenville may have been wrong; and almost every person who has taken a part in public affairs since 1815, may have been wrong; and it may be right to maintain a war establishment during peace. I will not now stop to argue this question further; if Parliament and the country decide upon a war establishment, we will do our best to administer the war, as we have to administer the peace establishment of the navy.

§ If, however, war establishments are not to be maintained, then the amount of the force must depend upon the nearer or 1224 more distant prospect of hostilities, and the state of our relations with foreign powers, of which, after all, the Ministers of the day must, on their responsibility, be the judges. On these grounds the present Administration proposed its vote of men in 1836, and the circumstances remaining the same, they will propose to the committee to vote the same number of men for the present year. On these grounds, too, I should have been willing to give full credit to the hon. Member for Tamworth, in his reduction of men, supposing that he believed the prospect of peace to have been increased by his accession to power, if it had not been for the frank confession of the noble Earl elsewhere, to which I have before alluded. The present Government did not think it for the honour or the interest of this country, that the naval force should be so low as it was when they came into office, and they, therefore, proposed, in their first estimates, an increase of 5,000 men.