

§ I should have been glad, Sir, if the various publications to which I have alluded had confined themselves to even such violent and unjust attacks as these; but I grieve to see, that many of them are written in a tone and temper which make me blush to think, that they were written by Englishmen.

§ It used to be almost a reproach to an Englishmen, that he unduly despised everything that was foreign, unduly esteemed everything that was English. This was a pardonable, because it was a patriotic, pride. No such feeling appears in these publications; there, everything abroad is exalted, everything at home depreciated; I might not have complained if they had stopped here; but even beyond *Times Newspaper, Feb. 23. 1219 this, the writers have made the grossest misstatements, and, in some cases, when evidently from the references in their own publications they had the means of correct information before them, they have yet stated what was untrue. I cannot characterise such a course, however unwilling I am to use a harsh word, but as little less than wilful misrepresentation.

§ Neither can I be surprised, that when these statements have been made public, apprehensions should have been very generally entertained in this country; or as I am told, that opinions derogatory to the honour and power of Great Britain, should have been expressed by individuals abroad. In one, however, of these fears I have never participated. I mean the fear that any foreign power should have been encouraged by such statements to assume a more hostile attitude, or to use more hostile language towards this country: and for this simple reason, because I am perfectly assured, that with those means of information which, in this free country, are open to everybody, there is no foreign power which has the least curiosity on the subject, which is not in possession of more accurate information than what is contained in these pamphlets—information unknown and neglected only by those who seek to depreciate their own country.

§ The pamphlets refer to the state of foreign navies and to our own. I will now advert to those of foreign powers, and first to that of the French. The statements as to the French navy are contained in a letter addressed to the Duke of Wellington, and signed (I do not know whether it was written) by "A Flag Officer," and which excited very great attention at the time of its first publication.

§ The French navy is a powerful and formidable navy, but the exaggerations in the flag officer's letter on the subject are perfectly absurd. He says they have "fifty-seven sail in commission, or ready for it. The name of each ship is given—the number of guns she carries, and the whole statement has an appearance of accuracy which might well deceive those who had no means of better information. Now, of the ships so described; as "in commission, or ready for it," nine have been broken up, condemned, burnt, or lost; three are hulks, one is a school ship, and twenty-two are building, so that 1220 out of the fifty-seven, he is wrong by no less than thirty-five.