

We have been charged with creating discontent in the dockyards by our reductions. The yearly earnings of a shipwright in 1335 were 52l. in 1838 they were 62l. 8s. Lastly, we have been accused of having reduced the provision for stores. The sum taken for this purpose in 1835, was 383,000l.; in 1838, it was 593,000l. And these are the measures which have been called reductions!

It is true that reductions have been made: but they were made by others. The number of men was reduced, but it was by the Government of the right hon. Member for Tamworth in 1835. We have been blamed for the reduction of the Marine Artillery; that corps was reduced in 1832. It is true, that the amount of work in our dockyards has been reduced; but it was reduced first by the government of the Duke of Wellington, and next by the right hon. Member for Pembroke. It is true, that the votes for stores have been reduced; but it was first by the right hon. Member for Pembroke, and still further by the government of the right hon. Member for Tamworth.

I will not stop now to give an opinion upon these reductions. All that I have at present to say, is, that they were not made by us. For many of those made by the right hon. Member for Pembroke, he received great credit at the time, and most justly. The violence of party has now involved them all in one undiscriminating censure, and with signal injustice, has laid that censure upon us. We have increased and not reduced the navy. We have increased the number of men, nearly thirty per cent. We have nearly doubled the number of ships of the line in commission. We have increased the work in the dockyards about thirty per cent.; and the provisions for stores between fifty and sixty per cent. Blame us, then, if you will; say, if you please, with the hon. Member for Kilkenny, that the increase we have made, is too great, or say that it is too small; but do not commit what is in you an absurdity, and towards us an injustice, of designating as a reduction, what is in fact, so considerable an in- 1215 crease. For what we have done ourselves, I am ready to answer—ready to submit to that censure, which from some quarter or another, is sure to be inflicted, whatever we may do; but, as it would be unworthy in us to seek credit, so it is unjust that we should incur censure, for the acts of others. The documents, Sir, to which I have referred, in proof of my assertions, are public documents. I have had recourse to no source of information not open to the public, and which has not been in the hands of everybody who hears me. I have referred only to the several Parliamentary estimates, which were, or ought to have been, in the hands of those who made the charges against us, at the time when they made them. I complain of no censure or blame for what we have done, but I do complain, not only on our own part, but still more on the part of the country, which has been misled and deceived; that those who profess to instruct and guide the public mind, have, in their eagerness to injure those to whom they are politically opposed, laid out of sight altogether, both dates and facts; and that the statements which have been made, are as wide as is possible from the truth.