

§ The old system, and which we have now again heard so much commended, was to keep three half-manned guard-ships in each port. I believe a worse system for the discipline and habits both of officers and men never was invented. This system was discontinued by the right hon. Member for Pembroke in 1832. He *See the Flag Officer's Letter. 1230 substituted three inefficient flag-ships; I mean ships which could not go to sea. He established what were called demonstration ships; and the whole of his active force consisted of sea-going ships. So it was when hon. Gentlemen opposite came into power, and if they disapproved of this plan so much, and thought the old system of guard-ships so advantageous, they might have commissioned guard-ships in the spring of 1835. They did no such thing; they did commission frigates; and though for the first of the periods no blame can attach to them, it is singular enough, that the year 1835 is the only year for a long time in which neither on the 1st of January, nor on the 1st of July, was there any sea-going ship of the line in any of our harbours. This was so much felt by the present board, that one of their first acts was to restore efficient flag-ships in our ports. The orders for this purpose were given in June, 1835; and from the time that these ships were completed, there has been an efficient three-decker in each of our ports.

§ One great argument used in favour of the guard-ships has been the celerity with which troops were conveyed to Lisbon in 1826; and hearing this point so urged, any body ignorant on the subject might suppose, that troops had not been sent out to Canada last year in the same manner, in greater numbers, and in circumstances of greater difficulty, both from this country and the Mediterranean.

§ The system upon which we have acted, has been to have within reach every summer what we consider to be a sufficient number of efficient ships of the line. We consider, as in this situation, any ships at Lisbon, on the north coast of Spain, or cruising as an experimental squadron. With the more rapid and certain means of communication now afforded by steam vessels, I see no difficulty in collecting ships from this distance in a very short time. It was always considered advisable to send even the guard-ships occasionally to sea for the practice both of officers and men. Even they were not always at home.

§ Taking, then, the ships so employed in addition to those in our ports, there was within reach, in the month of July, 1835, when I do not consider ourselves responsible for the arrangement, one single ship of the line; in July, 1836, the first year of our arrangements, there were fourteen; 1231 in July, 1837, there were eleven; in the month of April, last year, there were nine. Four were dispatched to America with troops; they returned as soon as they had performed that duty; and in the month of August there were again nine ships of the line within reach. So far, then, from our coasts having been left defenceless, I maintain, that we were in a better condition with nine efficient ships within reach, than with nine guard-ships in our ports. My noble Friend (Lord Ingestrie) has moved for returns, shewing the number of the complements of the ships stationed on the coasts of this country on the 1st of December for several years. I find, that the number in December, 1835, was 2539; and in December, 1836, the number was 5467, more than double that of the preceding year.