

§ The condition of the British seamen has recently been improved; and it is now superior in every respect to that of the merchant seamen, except in that of pay. Even the pay in the Queen's service is very little lower than that of seamen in 1233 merchant ships for long voyages. Hon. Gentlemen do not seem to take into account the number of petty officers in Queen's ships, who are raised exactly as seamen for the Queen's or merchant service, but who receive higher rates of pay. Our attention, too, has been particularly directed to improving the condition of this most meritorious class of officers; and I had great pleasure in stating the other night, in answer to a question from the hon. Member for Boston, that by a recent order they have been put into classes, and their pay increased. The pay of those in all ships of the line has been made equal to that in first-rates. The second class comprises all those in other rated ships; and the third, those in sloops and small vessels. The increase in the amount of pay varies from two and three to six and seven shillings per month.

§ The question of the pay of seamen is one not very easy to deal with, for it involves that of the amount of pay in the merchant service. It appears, however, from Captain Marryatt's statement, to which I have already referred, that the amount of Queen's pay in this country approaches much more nearly to that of the merchant service, than the State pay does to the merchants pay in America. Captain Marryatt states that the seamen in the American merchant service receive 3l. 10s. per month; in the service of the Government, 2l. per month; and that in England the merchant seamen's wages vary from 2l. 2s. to 2l. 10s. per month, whilst our seamen receive 1l. 14s. Taking then the amount for the year, the American merchant seaman receives 42l. per annum; the seaman in an American ship of war receives 24l. per annum, or 26l., if it is reckoned as in this country, by the lunar month; the difference in one case being 18l. in the other 16l. per annum. The English merchant seaman receives 25l. 4s. or 30l. per annum, according as we take the lower or the higher rate of pay; the seaman in the Queen's service receives 22l. 2s. per annum; the difference in one case being 3l. 2s., in the other 7l. 18s. per annum, and the greatest difference does not amount to half the lowest difference in the American pay.

§ Speaking then, generally, I do not conceive that, in ordinary circumstances, and maintaining about the same permanent number of men in the Queen's service, there will be any difficulty in manning 1234 our fleet. The question is, however, altered, when we come to make an increase to the number of men. In discussing this question, Gentlemen seem to me to treat it as if the supply and demand of seamen were regulated by different principles from that of other description of persons. It must be evident to hon. Gentlemen that there never can be for any length of time either in this or in any other country, a greater number of seamen, than those for whom, either in the service of the State, or of individuals, there is permanent employment. If, then, there is a demand for men, beyond the usual number, for the Queen's service, they must be drawn from the merchant service; and the immediate effect is to raise the pay in the merchant service. All the distress and stagnation of commerce in the last two years, produced no effect in reducing the wages of merchant seamen; but so small a draft upon them as 5,000 men in 1836, (and, indeed, in that year we did not actually draw more than 3,000), raised the merchant wages considerably, and complaints were made to the Admiralty that several vessels were lying in the Thames unable to go to sea for want of men.