

§ I come now to the demonstration ships. They were established by the right hon. Member for Pembroke, and we have persevered in the same system. I admit that they are not now in the same state of readiness as that which he recommended; and I will state the reason for this to the Committee. It was found on examining some of them in 1836, that the tanks, and other things which they had on board, tended very much to produce decay; and not only the rigging, but the masts of others had become so rotten that it was necessary to take them out and to put new ones in. For this reason the system was changed, and the stores, masts, &c., are now kept in store-houses, preserved from the risk of decay, but perfectly ready to be at once put into the ships. Certainly some, but a very trifling delay might be caused by this; but it is evident, that the ships from which it was necessary to take out the old masts and rigging could not be so soon ready as under the present system.

§ Much has been said about the time which has been required to get these demonstration ships ready for sea. It is quite impossible in time of peace to get work so rapidly done, as when every body feels, that there is a real necessity for exertion. Besides, in fitting a ship for a long station many alterations and improvements are made, which would not be necessary in order to send the ship to sea in case of need. The Ganges took a long time in fitting at Portsmouth, but the master shipwright of that yard told my hon. Friend near me (Sir C. Adam) on the 1232 deck of the Ganges, that there was not more of really necessary shipwright's work required for her than could be done in forty-eight hours if she was wanted for an emergency. As to their requiring caulking, or being taken into dock to have their copper examined, it is equally necessary for guard-ships, or indeed for any ships lying in harbour. It is always done at intervals. If a ship happens to be commissioned just after one of these periods, she needs nothing; if just before, there is of course this additional work to be done.

§ The next and most important point is the manning of the navy.

§ I do not apprehend that there is more difficulty now in manning the navy than usually has been the case during peace. I do not refer, of course, to the years immediately subsequent to the last war, when so many seamen were suddenly thrown out of employment. In the year 1812 we had a vote for near 150,000 men; in the year 1818 for 14,000. With every allowance for a number of foreigners employed during the war, and for the seamen who might be absorbed in the commercial service, there must have been for some time nearly 100,000 men who could not find employment. The manning is now exceedingly slow, from the selection which officers think it necessary to make. Much depends upon accident; still more upon the character of the officer commanding the ship. There is no place where it has generally been so difficult to man ships as Sheerness; and yet not very long ago, a 74-gun ship was manned there in little more than a fortnight, and with one of the best crews which any ship has lately carried to sea. If, as I believe it does, the selection tends to promote order and discipline on board ship, and to diminish the necessity for corporal punishment, I do not see why, in time of peace, such haste should be made as to risk those advantages. It appears from a statement which was published in the Times newspaper, from a forthcoming work by Captain Marryatt, that exactly the same complaint is made in America; and that their ships of war lie for months in port before they can get manned.