

§"About 80 of our second class boys have been discharged to-day into the flagship. Nothing can exceed the trouble which has been taken with the boys by the officers of the ordinary, in the exercise 1239 of the great guns, in reefing and furling sails; and I assure you some of the second class boys now gone into the flag-ship are as expert at the gun exercise as the seamen are, and our first class boys sometimes beat the men."

§ Such, Sir, then, is the state of our navy, and of our naval resources; and I do not hesitate to say that, whether as regards the active force employed—the force for the defence of our own shores—the number of seamen in the country, or those available for immediate demands—this country never was, in time of peace, in so powerful a condition as she is at this moment.

§ I turn now to the next great branch of the estimates—the maintenance of the ships of our fleet. It is perfectly true, that the number of our ships of the line has been diminishing since the peace; they, like everything else, have been coming to what was considered to be the peace establishment; but they have not yet reached what was considered the minimum limit. The present Board of Admiralty, however, thinking that limit somewhat too low, knowing also that some of the ships were very old, and thinking that we were deficient in some particular classes of ships, have already commenced the increase. The maintenance of our ships evidently depends upon the amount of work in our dockyards.

§ Orders for the reduction of the number of men in our dockyards, were given by the Duke of Wellington's Government, in January 1830, although they were not carried into effect till May 1831, by the right hon. Member for Pembroke; and I, perhaps, can hardly give a better proof of the advantage derived from the abolition of the Navy Board, than the fact that orders issued to them by the Admiralty in January 1830, were only very partially executed in May 1831.

§ I am, however, sorry that the right hon. Baronet did not carry out the intentions of the Board of Admiralty in 1830, in directing this reduction of men; which were, that when reduced in numbers, they should work six days in the week: 7,000 men, or rather upwards, working for five days in the week (and a more absurd system than that of working five days only, never was practised,) are about equal to 6,000 working for six days—and therefore no reduction in the amount of work would thus have been made.

1240

§ The right hon. Baronet, however, allowed the 6,000 men to work five days only, and he put them on day pay, which further reduced the amount of labour performed. It is not very easy to estimate the reduction made, but it must have been much more considerable than I should think he could have contemplated. The annual consumption of ship-building timber, on the average of seven years, ending in 1830, was 21,600 loads. The annual consumption on the average of four years, ending in 1836, the year before we made the increase, was only 9,600, the difference being no less than 12,000 loads. With every allowance for waste and error under the old system, such a diminution in the consumption of timber cannot but indicate a great reduction of work performed.