

§ In 1790, there were borne in April 17,000 men; they were doubled by the month of June, when the numbers borne were 34,000. In September, the same year, the number was 52,000.

§ In the armament of 1792 and 1793, the number borne in November, 1792, was 12,000; it was nearly doubled by January 1793, when the number was 23,000; in two months more, in March, the number was 39,000; in May, 50,000; in July, 60,000; and, before the end of the year, the number had been raised to nearly six times its amount, in the month of November, 1792, viz, to 70,000 men.

§ I have now, on this part of the subject, only to refer to the existing means for immediately sending additional men to our ships; and to the question of putting down the Coast-blockade, which was considered as a great and valuable resource for this object. Great exaggerations have been made use of on this subject on all sides. The right hon. Member for Pembroke put down the Coast-blockade in conformity with the report of several committees of this House; and it must be remembered, also, that this is not exclusively a naval question. The protection of the revenue is intimately concerned in it. He has been much blamed for destroying a great resource for manning our navy. But the resource has been overstated; for the right hon. Gentleman 1238 mentioned in this House, that the number of able seamen in the coast-blockade, at the time when it was put down, amounted to only 800. The right hon. Baronet established the system of the coast-guard, with the view of affording an inducement to men to enter the navy, and as a reward for the best seamen. I do not think that it has quite answered the expectations which he entertained of it in this respect. I am inclined to think that perhaps a system may be devised, which, without interfering with the protection of the revenue, may again render it of more advantage towards manning the navy. This, however, will be inquired into before a commission, of which a Lord of the Admiralty will be a member, which is about to sit, and to investigate the whole subject of the coastguard service, and which would have commenced its labours ere now, but for the severe illness of the Assistant-Secretary of the Treasury.

§ But, Sir, whatever resource has been taken away by putting down the coast-blockade, we have more than supplied by commissioning the ordinary. Formerly, the persons employed in taking care of our ships in ordinary, were not liable, and many of them not capable, of going to sea. They are now all of them men raised for general service, liable to be sent to sea, and in practice occasionally drafted into sea-going ships.

§ The number available for this purpose in January last, was 1,449, men and boys. When the complements of the guard-ships of the ordinary are completed, there will be about 2,200; and the number actually drawn from the ordinaries, or lent to sea-going ships in the course of last year, was 589; as large a number as ever were drafted from the coast-blockade in the same time. To show what description of boys were employed in the ordinaries, and trained up in the service, the Committee will, I am sure, hear with pleasure part of a letter from one of the officers of the ordinary, which has been received within this day or two. A number of second class boys had been ordered from the ordinaries into the flag-ships to be sent to foreign stations:—