

§ The last objection is, that the ships are only half manned. It is perfectly true, that in time of peace the ships have only peace complements on board. An hon. and gallant Friend of mine has to-night expressed an opinion, that there should be no such thing as reduced complements in time of peace. Without meaning to defend ourselves for doing wrong, because others have done wrong before us, I have yet a right to say this, that all those distinguished officers who have at any time, during peace, sat at the board of Admiralty, have invariably been of opinion, that in peace a reduced complement was right. I do not feel myself competent to give a strong opinion on naval matters, especially in the presence of so many who are better able to form a proper judgment on such matters than myself; but I must say, that it seems to me to stand to reason, that if in time of war such a complement of men is put into a ship as are able to fight all her guns in a protracted action—to go through all the hard service that is incident to a time of war—and even to furnish prize-crews, a smaller complement may be sufficient when none of' these contingencies are likely to arise. With regard to what the amount of such complements should be, I feel myself still more unable to express an opinion. The peace complement of 1834, which has been complained of, and which, after all, was not framed by us, was very considerably larger than the peace complement which, from the year 1816 to 1826, was established in the navy, and which officers of long experience in naval affairs supposed, up to the latter of those years, to be sufficient. In 1826, the complements were increased. They have subsequently been changed from time to time,—supernumeraries were given to some ships, and taken away from others; but the changes have been made upon no rule whatever. In 1834, the complements were reviewed, and a small reduction made.

§ I readily admit, that in some classes of ships, especially in those technically called Razées, and in the new classes of ships, the complements fixed in 1834 were too small. The Admiralty were some time ago disposed to increase them; but those who have been connected with the ma- 1228 nagement of public affairs will know what strong objections there are to dealing with particular cases; and, as the Admiralty had, under their consideration, a scheme for the new armament of the navy, which necessarily entailed a revision of the complements, they thought it better to postpone doing anything till the whole could be done on a system.

§ Experiments have been carried on for some time on board the Gunnery ship, in Portsmouth Harbour, which were brought to a conclusion in the course of last year. A scheme of armament for all classes of ships was then framed, and was taken into consideration by the board as soon as they met after the recess. It is too technical a subject for me to enter upon in this House; but I may state, upon the opinion of most able and competent officers, that the new armament is of a most powerful and formidable description. As soon as the armament was fixed, the complements were revised. The arrangement of the war complements is nearly made; but, as it is not pressing, and requires an Order in Council, it is not yet quite completed. The peace complement, however, has been completed, giving a considerable increase, especially in those ships where the deficiency was most complained of.