

§ A paper was put into my hands, showing the ratio of reduction of former peace complements as compared with the war complement of 1814; and, as it afforded a fair test of comparison, I had that of the new peace complement added to it. The peace complement of 1816 was twenty-four per cent. below the war complement of 1814; that of 1826, seven per cent.; that of 1834, eight per cent.; and the peace establishment, as just fixed, will only be four and a half per cent. below it. And I do believe, that what the hon. Member for Bristol said ought to be done,—what my gallant Friend, Captain Berkeley, was so anxious to see,—a proper and adequate peace complement, has been established, and one which will give satisfaction to the best officers in the service.

§ Since Parliament has met, I must admit, that we have heard little or nothing of these charges of a general reduction of our navy. It is not the first time, that accusations against the Government, which have been rife enough during the autumn recess, have vanished, as at the touch of Ithuriel's spear, on the meeting of Par- 1229 liament. Since then the charges have dwindled down into an imputation of having neglected the defence of our own shores; and having so far departed from the course pursued by former Governments, that now an American privateer might run unopposed up the Channel, and burn the town of Brighton.* It is somewhat strange, that hon. Gentlemen opposite had not found this out in the year 1835, when the shores of this country were in a much more defenceless position. This, too, I stated in the year 1836, as another of the grounds upon which I then asked the House for an increase of force. It is true, that hon. Gentlemen opposite were not in office in the summer of 1835, but it is notorious, that the estimates by which the amount of force is determined, are settled soon after Parliament meets in each year; and, indeed, the arrangements for the year are made early in the spring, especially when there is a probability, that a Government is going out. A Government coming in afterwards can only deal with the force which it finds. [Cheers from Sir Robert Peel.] If the right hon. Gentleman supposes, that I mean to imply any censure on the appointment of the officers then made, I assure him he is quite mistaken. I only mean, that after completing the frigates which had just been commissioned, we had no disposable force left. [Sir R. Peel: You might have moved a supplementary estimate.] We might have moved a supplementary estimate, says the right hon. Gentleman. I admit, that such a course was possible, but I never heard of its having been adopted; and if the right hon. Gentleman means to reproach me for not having done se, I ask him, how it happened, that they did not come down to amend their own estimate, and ask for an increase to the number of men which they admit to have been too small, and that they were fully aware of it, even in the short time which elapsed after their vote before they quitted office?