

§ It is therefore very desirable that any increase of the number of men in the Navy should be made slowly and gradually; and I believe that the best mode of doing this is by entering boys and training them up in the service; as by this means they acquire an attachment to the service in which they have been bred up from their youth, and make the very best seamen in the navy.

§ I will now advert to the resources which we should have at command in this country, in case of need, as compared with foreign countries. With regard to Russia, it is obvious that it is the necessary condition of the maintenance of her navy, that they should keep up in peace whatever they consider requisite for their war establishment. They have no mercantile marine to draw upon, and if they did not maintain their numbers even in peace, they would be without resource for war. The Americans, if Captain Marryatt's statement is to be depended upon, rely entirely on this country for their supply of seamen, and not only much of their State navy, but a large portion of their merchant vessels, are manned by men from this country. The French, like other nations, depend upon their mercantile re- 1235 sources; and their mode of raising men is, as is well known, by the means of what is termed "The Inscription." The book to which I have before referred, Baron Tupinier's Report on the French Navy, contains an account of the Inscription. According to him, there appeared, on the inspection of 1835, to be 90,000 registered seamen in France. Of these, 37,000 were either masters, landsmen or apprentices; of the remainder, 18,000 were either below or above age,—leaving actually available 35,000 men; of these, however, 18,000 were already in the King's service, so that the whole number they could rely upon for an increase of their naval force, was only 17,000. Baron Tupinier certainly questions the accuracy of this, which is however the official account of the inspection of the Inscription in 1835, as given by himself. It is clear, however, that the whole number registered in France is 90,000; and deducting the 18,000 already in their navy, there remains 72,000, of all classes and ages, available as a resource for an increase of their navy.

§ By the last returns under the Act for the registry of merchant seamen, there were in this country 200,000 registered seamen of all classes, including apprentices. The actual number registered is 202,000; but allowing for deaths or double entries, which, however, cannot go to any great extent, I take it at 200,000.

§ This number, moreover, does not include all the fishermen, or many other branches of our maritime population. There is no official account of their numbers; but upon the best calculation that can be made, and upon very good data, I cannot calculate the number of seafaring men beyond the 200,000 registered seamen, at less than 150,000. It has been said that there has been a reduction of seamen of late years in England, and especially since the general introduction of steam navigation; so far from this being the case, there has beeen a considerable increase. The returns which I am now about to quote, are not accurate accounts of the actual number of seamen, and I beg the Committee to understand that I use them for the purpose of comparison only. They are prepared in the Custom-house, upon the same data in different years; and I am assured by the very intelligent officer at the head of the office for the registry of merchant seamen, 1236 that as comparative statements in different years, and as such only I use them, they may safely be relied upon. By these returns it appears that the number of registered seamen was—