

§ Another charge is, that our ships are half armed.

§ This charge may apply to the flagships at the ports, all of which have not their lower-deck guns in. The Howe at Sheerness has: guns for the others are lying ready at the Ordnance wharf; and I have only to appeal to any naval officer to confirm me in the statement, that no three-decker takes all her guns in at Portsmouth till she gets to Spithead. The Britannia could not he where she is if she had her lower deck guns in.

§ The next description of ships to which the charge might apply is the ships of the line conveying troops to America. It is perfectly true, that for the convenience of 1226 the troops embarked, these ships did take out their lower-deck guns. It was the practice during the war. In 1811, Sir Joseph Yorke, then a lord of the Admiralty, conveyed troops to Lisbon in no less than six ships of the line which had taken out their lower-deck guns.

§ The third description of ships to which the objection may apply, and to which I believe it was mainly directed, are the flag ships on foreign stations. The public has been led to suppose, that the present board of Admiralty has sent out ships much less powerful than those usually employed on foreign stations. When the present Government came into office the flag-ships on foreign stations were fourth or fifth rates, that is, frigates of the larger class. It was, however, represented to us, that it would be a great convenience and great benefit to the service if ships of the line without their lower deck guns were substituted on these stations, as by this means greater accommodation would be afforded to the admiral's retinue, and to the numerous supernumaries who are constantly borne in flag-ships abroad. For this reason the Admiralty assented to the proposal, and with the further knowledge, that if any occasion should arise for it, these ships might, by taking in their lower-deck guns, and completing their complements, which there is no difficulty in doing abroad, become at once effectual ships of the line. The best proof of this is, that out of three ships of this description on foreign stations, two have actually taken in their lower-deck guns. The moment it was thought necessary to act on the coast of America the lower-deck guns of the Cornwallis were taken in at Halifax, and her complement filled up. The same thing has since been done with the Wellesley in India.

§ It is a matter of small importance, and curious only as shewing how totally destitute of truth the charges against the Admiralty have been, that one accusation on this subject, contained in a newspaper sent up to me, as they frequently are when there is any attack upon the Admiralty in them, was, that great hardship had been inflicted upon the flag officers by this course; and still greater injustice, for by a special exception in favour of Lord Minto's brother, he had been allowed to have his lower deck guns mounted. Now, true it is, that Admiral Elliott's ship is a solitary exception, but it is an exception 1227 the other way: for the Melville is the only ship which has not her lower-deck guns.