

§ Sir, in the course of the observations which I have addressed to the committee, I have necessarily had to speak of former Administrations, and I hope I have done so, in a manner not calculated to give offence to anybody. Such, at any rate, was my intention. With regard to Administrations previous to 1830, I think their system of stores was bad, and that enough was not done for the improvement of the dock-yards. The Administration of the right hon. Member for Pembroke, was the one of great and beneficial reforms in the naval department. The abolition of the subordinate boards was a great improvement. The credit of that measure is indeed due to Lord Grey, who would have executed it in 1806, if he had remained longer at the Admiralty; but I must do the right hon. Baronet full justice for the manner in which he carried it into execution; and the selection which he made of the officers for the heads of the different departments, than whom abler or better public servants could not have been chosen. He extended the system of the Excellent. He made great improvements in the condition of the seamen and in the system of stores for the navy. In one point I do differ from him, and that is, that the establishments of the dock-yards, or perhaps I should say the amount of work in them, was fixed too low.

§ With regard to the short-lived Administration of the right hon. Member for Tamworth, I had no disposition to blame even the reduction of men which it made: and I expressed no such opinion in moving for the increase of men in 1836, or at any subsequent period; but when we for six months have been suffering under the charge of having made this reduction, it is too much for human patience to bear: and after all, I have only shown how much more the accusations made by the parti- 1250 sans of that Administration apply to them, than to the present Government.

§ With regard to our own administration of naval affairs, I am not vain enough to suppose, that we have not committed many faults. I am still more sensibly aware how much remains to be done; but of all the accusations to be brought against us, the last which I expected was, that we should be accused of having been deterred by false economy from proposing to this House what we thought necessary for the efficiency of the naval service.

§ In 1836, in our first estimates, we increased the force of the navy; in 1837 we increased the establishment of our dockyards. In 1838, as in the previous years, we increased the vote for stores; circumstances existed which prevented the increase in that year being as much as it would naturally have been, and the increase under this head has therefore fallen principally on this year, enhanced, I am sorry to say, by an increased price of some of the main articles.

§ But, Sir, in alluding to the acts of the present Board of Admiralty, I must refer, though only very shortly, to a few other points, for the purpose of shewing, that throughout the service, our administration of naval affairs has been productive of improvement.