

§ The armament of the ships in the navy has been revised and very much improved.

§ The complements have been revised and increased.

§ The war steamers have been more than 1252 doubled in number, and those which have been added are generally of larger size.

§ The steam vessels employed as packets abroad, and the home-packets also have been improved.

§ The greatest attention has been paid to the subject of steam-navigation, and the whole superintendence of every thing connected with it, placed under a most able officer, Sir Edward Parry.

§ We have added about a third to the work in the dockyards.

§ We have made arrangements for building in India.

§ We have increased the stores of every description in our yards, and of the most efficient materials. A further supply of materials is amply provided for in this year's estimates.

§ We have carried on, and are carrying on, large works at Woolwich, which will render it, in about two years, a most complete establishment for the purposes of steam-vessels and steam machinery.

§ Deptford has been restored as a store-yard, and Huddart's valuable rope machinery will be erected there.

§ Large works are undertaken at Portsmouth; and also at Plymouth, including the construction of a basin.

§ The whole of these works are placed under the super intendance of a most intelligent and zealous officer of engineers, Captain Brandreth; and I anticipate the greatest advantage from his exertions in improving the mode of conducting them.

§ Sir, I am sensible that I have trespassed too long upon the attention and patience of the committee; but in the situation in which the Board of Admiralty has been placed by the attacks upon it for the last six months, I felt, that I could not do otherwise. I could not but show to the country what we have done, as the best answer to the charges against us. I must say, though perhaps I ought not to say so, that looking back upon the enumeration of our measures, which I have just laid before the Committee, I do not think, that we have any reason to be ashamed of what we have done. Our measures of improvement of the navy have neither been few nor unimportant. We have done much—we have laid the foundation of more.

§ I am not sorry, that the question has been agitated as it has been. We may have incurred some obloquy: but I am not afraid of the judgement of the country, 1253 when it is put in possession of the truth. Although we may have suffered, I am sure that the country has gained. It has been seen, that the real opinion of the country is not in favour of that pressure for excessive economy, which may perhaps have been too lightly yielded to, when it touches so vital a point as the efficiency of the British navy: and we have the satisfaction of feeling, that in the improvement and increase of our naval establishment, which we have been carrying on for the last three years, we have only been anticipating the wishes of the country.

§ Sir, it only remains for me to thank hon. Gentlemen, which I do most sincerely, for the kind attention with which they have listened to me, and to place in your hands the vote for men for the service of the ensuing year.