

§ One of the most important articles of store are the lower masts of ships, and which take some time to make. En the autumn of 1835, we had reason to think, that the lower masts in store were not in good condition. A survey was ordered in November 1835, and on the completion of that survey no less than 161 lower masts were found defective. Nearly one half of the lower masts for ships of the line were condemned. We have been somewhat impeded in raising the amount of the masts in store by the reduced state of the establishment; but we have now a store in fact, which we then had, only on paper.

§ The next article is top-masts.

§ Top-masts are soon made, perish rapidly when made, are easily preserved in spars; it is not, therefore, the practice to keep a large quantity in a converted state. Taking then together, the top-masts and the spars for top-masts, we have of the largest size fit for ships of the line, and assuming as the basis of calculation the consumption of last year with our increased force, a quantity equal to twenty years consumption.

§ What I have said of lower masts, is equally applicable to rigging and sails; great quantities of those in store were found defective on commissioning the ships in 1836, one-third of the fitted rigging for ships of the line was condemned as unserviceable.

§ Cables and cordage are above the establishment. With regard to yarn, an alteration was made in 1833 in the mode of making it, with the view of improving its durability. I do not think, that the improved quality has at all made up for the diminished production. Now what have we done as to rope-making? We gave the rope-makers the sixth day per week in 1836, we have since doubled the number a persons employed in rope-making in our yards, besides adding very powerful machinery at Chatham for this purpose.

§ The quantity of yarn produced in 1836, was double that produced in 1835. In 1837 we doubled again the production of 1836; and in 1838, we have produced six times as much as was made in 1835.

§ The result is, that there are now the main articles of store complete, requisite 1244 for sending to sea more than thirty sail of the line, besides frigates; those for five or six more are nearly ready. These ships are in addition to those already in commission; so that we have in fact stores for between fifty and sixty sail of the line.

§ I am perfectly aware, that this statement differs from that made by a noble Earl, who even took the trouble of visiting two of our dock-yards for the purpose of acquiring full information on the subject of our stores. I can only say, that any statements he may have made as to the inadequacy of our stores, are completely contradicted, not only by the ordinary official returns from the yards, but also by more particular communications which we have since had with the super-intendants of the yards. I will take two of the principal statements insisted on by the noble Lord.—He said, that there was no lower mast in store for the Revenge at Portsmouth. I will read an extract from a letter of Rear-Admiral Bouverie, the superintendant of the yard, to whom reference has been made:— There were masts in store fit and ready to put on board the Revenge, on the 31st of January last, if it had been requisite to have masted her before those destined for her were completed. Her own masts would have been completed long ere this, if it had not been considered expedient to season the fishes and cheeks as long as was convenient, before fixing them in their places on the exterior of the masts. The truth therefore was, that though the masts destined for her were not quite completed, there were others ready for her in the yard.