

§ With regard to the statement as affecting another yard, Plymouth, the noble Lord said that there were no topsails in store: of small sails of various sorts there were plenty, but of topsails (the important sails, without which a ship cannot go to sea), there were none. Such, Sir, did not appear to be the case, by the ordinary return of stores; but to prevent the possibility of a mistake, I wrote to the superintendant, Admiral Warren, to ascertain what topsails there were in the yard on the day when the noble Lord was there. I have received his answer; and on the 31st of January last, when the noble Lord said there was not a single topsail in the yard, there were in fact for ships of the line 66; for frigates of the large classes, 70. The noble Earl further stated that there were no complete suits of sails for line-of 1245 battle ships at Plymouth. There were in fact complete suits for foreign service; for first-rates, three sets; for second-rates, one; for third-rates, three,—making together seven complete sets for ships of the line, and six for large frigates. Complete suits for foreign service contain more sails than are needed, in order to send ships to sea, or than they carried for Channel service even during the war.

§ Part of the sails for Plymouth yard are made at Deptford, and a number, to com-plete other sets, arrived at Plymouth from thence on the 2nd of February; but I confine myself to what there was in store, on the day of the noble Earl's visit.

§ I am indeed aware that the noble Earl says our returns are false—that is a grave and serious charge to make against, the individuals to whom it is applied. I appeal to those who have formerly been connected with the Admiralty, and who are personally acquainted with the individuals, the storekeepers of the different yards, if they are men likely to make false returns. I ask if, with the certainty of detection staring them in the face, they would dare to do so. I ask the Committee, if the hon. and gallant Officers, the superintendents of the yards who transmit the returns, Admiral Bouverie and Admiral Warren, men of as high family and rank as the noble Earl himself, are men likely to make false returns. I ask, if the Storekeeper-general of the Navy, than whom a more honourable man does not exist, is a man likely to make a false return. I am sure that if the noble Earl had considered for a moment, he would have retracted the charge as soon as it was made. I ask then the Committee, whether such information as a hasty visit to the yards could afford, or the returns made by such men as I have described, are most to be relied upon.

§ I do wish, however, to call the particular attention of the Committee to these statements. A noble Lord, a most honourable man, incapable I am sure of stating what he does not believe to be true, a captain in the navy, and therefore conversant with the subject, goes down to the dockyards for the very purpose of obtaining a knowledge of the state of the stores; communicates with the superintendent; is accompanied at Plymouth round the yard by the master-attendant (an old shipmate of the noble Earl's) with orders to shew him every thing he might wish to see, and 1246 yet with these, the best possible means of obtaining the most accurate information—what is the result? The public, I freely admit, has a right to rely on such testimony. Without such means of official information as we possess, it could not have had better evidence, and yet I have shewn you, on evidence which cannot be disputed, that a statement so erroneous could hardly have been made.