

§ Hon. Gentlemen may recollect, that a committee of this House reported against making any general promotion. My noble Friend at the head of the Admiralty felt very soon after his accession to office, how hardly this pressed upon old and meritorious officers; he therefore proposed to the Government a flag promotion. The Government acceded to the proposal, and in January 1837, a large promotion took place. On the coronation of her Majesty a second promotion took place, and the officers of the navy have had the advantage of two general promotions in an unusually short space of time.

§ With regard to the marines, we carried through a large measure of improvement. Every inefficient officer, on survey, was removed from the corps and placed in retirement, a larger number of retirements were created for the heads of the corps, and the operation of the whole measure was such, that in a twelvemonth a larger proportion of the officers of marines received promotion than, I will venture to say, of any other corps in more than twice the time.

1251

§ With regard to pursers, and for this measure my hon. and gallant Friend, the Member for Devonport, deserves the credit of having called our attention to it; the emoluments of pursers in large ships which exceeded those of the captains have been reduced, those of pursers in small vessels increased, and a shilling a-day added to the half-pay of all.

§ The pay of assistant-surgeons has been increased in small ships; and further measures for the improvement of the situation of some other classes of our officers in the navy were in contemplation, when our course was arrested by a vote of this House, which rendered it necessary to appoint a commission to inquire into the promotion and retirement of naval and military officers.

§ As that commission has not made any report, I will say no more on that head: I only beg, that it may be understood, that we are preparing to take steps for the benefit of other officers in the navy.

§ The warrant-officers have been classed, and their situation improved.

§ The engineers have been classed, and their pay increased.

§ The petty officers have been classed, and their pay increased.

§ After what the right hon. Member for Pembroke has done, there remained but little to do for the seamen; they have, nevertheless, been provided by us with a schoolmaster, end a seamen's library in each ship.

§ We have increased the strength of our fleet, we have increased the number of small vessels, and nearly doubled that of ships of the line in commission. The service of tarrying troops to America was performed with the greatest efficiency; and I can assure the committee, that we have received satisfactory accounts of the effect which was produced there, not only in our own colonies, but in the United States, by the appearance on their coasts, in a very short time, of no less than seven ships of the line.

§ The flag-ships in the ports have been made effective ships.

§ The ordinaries have been put into commission.