

§ With regard to all these stores, I state on the authority of the Storekeeper-general of the Navy, who was himself a member of the Navy Board, and has been for ten or twelve years in a most responsible situation in Somerset House, and has better means of forming an opinion than any other individual, that never in his memory were the stores of the navy in so efficient a state.

§ With regard to unconverted stores. The establishment for timber was fixed by the Navy Board in 1826 at two years consumption; we have now timber in store for five years. The store of hemp is above the establishment; that of canvass, including what is due from contractors, is higher than for some years past.

§ We have taken a considerable increase in the vote for stores this year.

§ As to timber, there were reasons connected with the state of the contract which prevented our doing so last year; the increased consumption requires an increased supply. We have also entered into engagements for the supply of Italian oak; and for a quantity of larch, which, being a lighter wood, is particularly useful in building steam-vessels.

§ There will be an increased consumption of hemp; and the price has risen from 30l. to 45l. per ton.

§ The same is true of canvass.

§ There is an increased sum for steam machinery; and further sums are taken for increasing the supply of anchors and boats.

§ I will now call the attention of the Committee to the subject of repairs and new works in our yards; and, under this head, I must say that I do not think enough has been done since the peace, especially when we consider the large works and large outlay which the French have made for similar purposes. A plan for improving Woolwich yard was proposed some years ago, and I am sorry to say was then postponed. We have been carrying it on gradually: first, by 1247 erecting a new river wall; last year we provided for the entrances of the docks; this year we shall commence the construction of the docks; and we shall have completed, so as to be in operation before the end of the year, a large establishment for the construction and repair of boilers and steam machinery.

§ Chatham dockyard had been very much neglected, and a great portion of the sheds and houses have been almost rebuilt within these few years.

§ At Portsmouth attempts have been made to patch up the sea wall, which have failed; and we are now about to undertake repairing the slips, which are unsafe, and the wall along the harbour, in a solid and effectual manner. In the course of doing this, two new slips will be constructed. It will take about two or three years to complete this work.

§ At Plymouth in the same manner a building slip, which is not safe, is to be made good; and the sea walls repaired in a substantial manner; and this latter work is to be so executed as to form the commencement of works necessary for the construction of a basin; the want of which at Plymouth has been long felt and complained of.

§ Two roofs will be constructed at Pembroke.