

§ We have also made arrangements for recurring to a system which was very beneficial for the navy, I mean building teak ships in India. We have taken a small increase in the vote for wages this year; but we think it desirable to have another year's experience of the effect of a system of work we have introduced into the yards, before we can decide what measures it may ultimately be necessary to adopt.

§ The next head of expenditure is for the stores of the navy. Upon this subject hon. Gentlemen will remember how con- 1242 stant and how loud the attacks upon us have been. I confess I was not much alarmed, for I remembered how similar attacks had been made upon the right hon. Member for Pembroke, and equally without foundation. If hon. Gentlemen opposite, by whom those attacks were made, thought, that the system of the right hon. Baronet was so wrong, how comes it, I would ask, that they did not alter it when they came into office. They did no such thing, they reduced the lowest amount ever taken by the right hon. Member for Pembroke for providing stores, by no less a sum than 82,000l., and the lowest vote ever taken for stores, was that taken by the Government of the right hon. Member for Tamworth.

§ Whether we look to the total strength of our navy; to the defence of the coasts of this country, or to the provision for naval stores, the most inadequate means were those provided in the estimates of 1835.

§ I will deal first with converted stores, because they depend, in great measure, as the ships do, upon the number of workmen in the yards. Nothing, Sir, could be so absurd as the old system of stores: great part of them, invariably rotted in the yards before they could be used. We have heard a great deal said of the advantages of appropriated stores. The system was to appropriate all the stores for a ship, put them away in a separate place, to be ready for the ship when commissioned. In the first inspection of the dock-yards by the right hon. Member for Pembroke, he found such appropriated stores, carefully put away, labelled with the ship's name, not to be touched till she was commissioned, and the only objection to their being used was, that the ship had been broken up for years. No wonder, that under such a system, so faithfully carried out, stores rotted in our yards; and if the right hon. Member for Pembroke had done nothing else, he would have done the greatest service in putting an end to such a system. If I were to find fault with the right hon. Baronet, I should say, that he had not probed the system deep enough, for we found a considerable quantity of stores in this state.

§ Sir, in the statements I am about to make, I beg most distinctly to say, that I impute blame to nobody: but I do wish to call the attention of the Committee to them, as they shew the great difficulties 1243 we have had to contend with, and the exertions we have made to put our stores into a proper state, beyond the increase which we have made to our force at sea.