

§ There is another point for which considerable provision is made in these estimates, and that is, for introducing machinery of different kinds into our yards. I think too little has been hitherto done for this purpose. This probably arose from a desire not to discharge the men; but it is impossible to go through any of the great private establishments in this country, and not to feel ashamed of the state of our dockyards in this respect.

§ There will in many cases be a great saving made by these means. In one instance, which is included in the present estimates, the introduction of so simple a thing as fan-bellows, the cost of which is not more than 1,200l. I believe the saving will be near 1,000l. per annum; by the increased labour of the smiths who are now employed in blowing the bellows.

§ We have already erected rope machinery at Chatham; we have completed the millwright machinery at Plymouth; and we have purchased the most powerful machinery, (a splendid proof of the genius of Captain Huddart, an officer of the East India Company's service,) for making 1248 rope, and a sum is taken in the present estimates for erecting it at Deptford.

§ Sir, I have now gone through the different main branches of expenditure on which the strength of our navy depends, and I trust I have shewn that we have not neglected our duty. I have shewn in what state we found our establishments, the exertions we have made, and the state to which we have brought them, a state of efficiency, I do not hesitate to say, unparalleled in time of peace.

§ After having trespassed so long on the attention of the Committee, I will only say, upon the other heads of estimate, that there is a considerable increase in the victualling estimate, over which we have no control, as it arises entirely from the increased price of provisions; but I must advert shortly to a new item which appears in the scientific vote, for the re-establishment, though on a different footing, of the Royal Naval College. The old Naval College was put down a short time ago, because the Admiralty did not think that any useful end was gained by it, beyond what might be attained by education at private establishments, and enforced by an examination previous to the entry of first class volunteers. There had been great complaints of the College, and soon after Lord Minto came to the Admiralty, there were forty vacancies and only one candidate for admission. As a better means of affording education to young gentlemen in the navy, when we suppressed the College, we introduced a schoolmaster of a superior description, with increased pay, who is now termed, "Naval Instructor." We were somewhat disappointed at first in the expectations we had been led to form of the number of candidates who would come forward. There are now, however, twelve in sea-going ships, and three preparing themselves on board the Excellent; in all fifteen, and I have no doubt that we shall soon have instructors in all our ships.

§ The system of the revived Naval College is, that a certain number of mates shall, after passing through the system of gunnery in the Excellent, be received at the College, and receive there scientific instruction of various kinds; the prize of a lieutenant's commission being held out to the officer who passes the best, at half-yearly examinations. The whole establishment is to be under the direction of Captain Hastings, who has shewn himself fully 1249 competent for the duty, by the manner in which he has conducted the system on board the Excellent. We trust, that by this means, and by giving the education at a time of life, when the officers are more able to appreciate its value, we shall extend among the officers of the navy a higher degree of scientific attainment, which the improved system of gunnery, and the introduction of steam navigation has rendered indispensable, and without which an officer now can hardly hope to rise in his profession.