

## MOBILIZATION

Numbers are the most common element of victory, and in the decisive campaign of 1813 in Germany, the numerical strength of the Austrian army provided the margin of victory over the forces of Imperial France. While differences in the skill of commanders and the fighting style of soldiers can often tip the balance, European armies have historically tended toward a general symmetry of military skill and organization. The Napoleonic Wars were some of the most powerful demonstrations of this trend. Not four years after their humiliating surrender at Ulm in 1805, an Austrian army, reformed along French lines in its tactics and organization, inflicted Napoleon's first clear defeat in a major battle, and after another four years, would contribute mightily to Napoleon's expulsion from Germany and final defeat. Whereas Hernan Cortes's small band of well-armed and aggressive Spaniards meant the margin of victory over the powerful Aztec alliance, rough numerical parity was crucial for even attempting European warfare in the early modern period. Given the superiority of the defensive form of war in that era, achieving decisive military victory without a considerable margin of numerical superiority could not be guaranteed. More specifically, the importance of numbers becomes especially significant where diplomacy and strategy coalesce in coalition struggles; the presence of a large and powerful army adds weight to a power's diplomatic declarations, demonstrating its commitment to the war, and contributing materially to the war effort. As such, the mobilization of armies was a matter of utmost importance. The organization and institutions of the army and the state determine what forces are available to campaign, and the margin of superiority or inferiority influences what military and political objectives are practicable. While the Russians ultimately contributed more men to the struggle in the decisive theatre, the timing and strength of the Austrian mobilization played a determining role in the shape of the Fall Campaign of 1813.

The 1813 campaign in Germany witnessed war on a scale even grander than the previous Napoleonic campaigns, culminating in what was then the greatest battle in world history.

Together, the Allies mobilized as many as one million men, and the decisive battle at Leipzig crammed more than 500,000 men into an area no larger than Denton, Texas. As one of the preeminent powers in the Coalition, Austria's methods for managing and raising its armies were crucial to the shape of the campaign and represent a remarkable achievement. The most important factors in Austria's 1813 mobilization were the skillfully managed army reduction of 1810, the organization of regiments with depot and reserve battalions that could be expanded in wartime, and the incorporation of the Landwehr militia into the army.

Austria raised 127,000 men for service in the Army of Bohemia. In addition, Vienna mobilized significant forces to fight along the Danube in Germany and take the offensive in Italy, amounting to 39,000 and 37,000 men, respectively. The Austrian army in Bohemia would become core of the main army of the Coalition when joined by Russian and Prussian contingents, Its commander, Schwarzenberg, was entrusted with the strategic direction of the two other Allied armies, and its chief of staff would draft the Coalition's main war plan. Mobilizing such large armies represented a special challenge for Austria, as Napoleon had imposed a limit on the size of the Austrian army in the Treaty of Schönbrunn, which ended the War of the Fifth Coalition in 1809. Under its terms, Austria's standing forces were not to exceed 150,000 men -slim indeed for a Great Power that had fielded more than 500,000 regulars and militia during the war with Napoleon in 1809.