

While contingency and genius decided the first struggle with France, Napoleon's rise to absolute power in France magnified and solidified his advantages over the Austrians. To contest French domination of Europe, the Austrian army needed reform. Rothenberg analyzed this process through the career of Archduke Charles, concentrating on two main periods: the first, between 1801 and 1805, encompassed largely administrative streamlining, while the second, from 1806 to 1809, emphasized tactical and operational matters. Although Charles retired following the War of the Fifth Coalition, the Austrian army continued to adapt and evolve.

Finally, in 1813 and 1814, it emerged triumphant in the War of the Sixth Coalition.

The most important sources for this thesis were the papers of Metternich, Schwarzenberg, and Radetzky. These men directed the Austrian war effort at the highest levels, and their writings provide valuable insight into how they approached war and statecraft. Metternich's memoirs, like most, are self-serving, and have little valuable insight into military events, but provide one of the few windows through which modern readers can peer at conversations behind closed doors, as Metternich's negotiations with Napoleon often took place in private. Moreover, his interpretation of events provide insight into his thinking. Schwarzenberg's letters to his wife discuss military strategy in considerable detail, describing the movements of the army, the objectives of operations, and a commander's view of the war's political framework. While his letters primarily concern strategy, his tactical instructions to the army have been reproduced in print, facilitating analysis on that front as well. Radetzky's memoranda provide the perspective of a remarkably talented staff officer on numerous issues, including military organization, finance, and operational planning. The war plan that directed the Allied armies to victory in the Fall Campaign began with his pen, and his memoranda written throughout the campaigns in Germany and France illustrate the Austrian army's approach to war. When appropriate, I have also drawn from regimental histories to complete the picture with a ground-level perspective and demonstrate important changes at the tactical level.

As this thesis concentrates on the evolving art of war, I have studied the works of the most important contemporary military theorists to provide an analytical framework. Archduke Charles commanded the Austrians in several key campaigns and dedicated enormous efforts to reforming the army. His writings on war reflect the institutional background of the Austrian army stemming from the eighteenth century and became highly influential after the wars.

Jomini's experience as a staff officer in the French army served as the basis for his theoretical writings, which became the military orthodoxy for much of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Clausewitz was in many ways the most profound of his generation of military writers and theorists, examining every level of war with remarkable clarity of analysis. His perspective on the military changes that transformed warfare during his lifetime are invaluable as a foil for the key Austrian strategists discussed here.