

The French Wars encompassed much of the globe from 1792-1815, especially when one includes related conflicts such as the War of 1812 in North America and the Spanish colonial wars of independence. The experience of war varied widely, even within a given theater.

Europe saw both the immense battles of conventional armies in central Europe and vicious wars to the knife in Calabria and Spain. Republican France relied on a remade social contract to mobilize the people, offering a political voice to a nation of citizens. Under Napoleon's Enlightened Absolutism, equality before the law underlay the Empire's relationship with the people. Yet mass dissatisfaction with absolutism and French anti-clericalism ignited a vicious people's uprising, one so successful as to give us the term guerrilla warfare. Fiery anti-French patriotism drove hundreds of thousands of Prussians to answer the state's call to arms in 1813.

As different as the wars in Spain and Germany were, they represent the same phenomenon: the active involvement of the common people in war en masse.

Even while the wars still raged, soldiers and historians debated the nature of the revolutionary transformation of warfare they were witnessing. Antoine-Henri, Baron de Jomini, a Swiss-born French staff officer for most of the Napoleonic Wars, defected to Russian service in 1813 during the War of the Sixth Coalition. After the wars, he wrote extensively about military history and theory, becoming one of the most influential thinkers on warfare in Europe. As a French officer, his writing primarily concerned Napoleon's operations, and concentrated on the practical problems of strategy, such as the use of interior lines, corps of observation, and bases of operation. He attempted to synthesize the eighteenth century and Revolutionary arts of war into a coherent system, despite the dramatic social, political, and military changes of the Revolutionary Era. His attempt was not particularly satisfactory, understandable in light of his "prejudices […] in favor of the good old times when the French and English Guards courteously invited each other to fire first, as at Fontenoy, preferring them to the frightful epoch when priests, women, and children throughout Spain plotted the murder of isolated soldiers." 2 Most early historians of the Wars of Liberation were serving officers like Jomini, and often Prussian. This was not an accident, as the Prussian reform movement intentionally established a relatively intellectual institutional culture in the Prussian army dedicated to studying and refining the conduct of war. 3 The Kriegsakademie and general staff occupied a central place in the development of professional military history during the nineteenth century.

From 1821 to 1825, Johann Christian August Wagner composed a detailed account of the campaigns of 1813, but his purpose was primarily descriptive, rather than analytical, and concentrated on the Prussian army, befitting a Prussian officer. Carl von Clausewitz's historical writings served his interest in theoretical development, and his 'strategic critique' of the 1814 invasion of France is no exception, examining the strategic and operational decisions made by the major military leaders. 4 Following the unification of Germany in 1871, the Great German General Staff continued the historical tradition of its Prussian forebears by examining the Napoleonic Wars. They produced an extensive nine-volume history, later abridged by Rudolf Friedrich. Unlike Wagner's earlier writings, the German General Staff history engaged in extensive analytical work, for instance criticizing the Allied campaign plan that emerged from Reichenbach in 1813 as a relic of obsolete strategic thought. Similarly, Rudolf von Caemmerer, a contributor to the nine-volume history, conducted critical analysis of many key decisions during the Wars of Liberation in his 1907 work Die Befreiungskriege 1813-1815: Ein strategischer Überblick. In general, Austrian official histories of the French Wars emphasize the monarchy's stronger performances. While the five-volume Befreiungskriege 1813 und 1814 was intended to discuss the invasion of France with the same admirable level of documentation and detail as the German campaign, the outbreak of the First World War understandably adjusted the general staff's priorities away from historical research. As such, the series ended with the Coalition's decisive victory at the Battle of Leipzig without exploring the checkered course of the invasion of France. Several Austrian officers studied the Napoleonic Wars through the lens of the Archduke Charles, Austria's great hero of the period. Oskar Criste and Moriz von Angeli produced extensive, well documented treatments of the Archduke. Francis Loraine Petre similarly used the Archduke Charles as his focal point when he produced his history of the War of the Fifth Coalition. Gunther Rothenberg would carry this torch in the twentieth century, and John H. Gill would author a magisterial history of the 1809 war. This angle produced fruitful insights concerning the earlier French Wars, but with Charles's non-participation in the Wars of Liberation, these extraordinary campaigns regretfully do not benefit from the same treatment. F. N. Maude was an officer in the British army and book review editor of the Journal of the Royal United Service Institution. Following Prussia's remarkable victories in the Wars of German Unification, many officers across Europe took a keen interest in German military institutions, and Maude was no exception. Maude's drive to understand the German army was intensified by Britain's lackluster performance in the Boer Wars. 5 His book on the Leipzig campaign stemmed from his reforming zeal, and features several polemical asides discussing military issues relevant in his own time. He emphasizes the role of nationalism among the Allied armies, which ensured that even Napoleon's more inspired strategic movements, like his concentration for the October 16 Battle of Leipzig, met far more resilient enemies than he had faced before.