

However, during the previous twenty years of continual warfare and the violent century that preceded it, the Habsburg Monarchy had developed crucial institutions that allowed it to draw upon a font of manpower to rival any adversary. Facing threats from all corners, a powerful military force was a matter of life or death for the Habsburgs. For example, in 1740, the princes of the Holy Roman Empire bitterly contested the election of Maria Theresa's husband to the imperial throne, Frederick the Great claimed the province of Silesia, and the ensuing War of the Austrian Succession endangered the very existence of the Monarchy. A powerful army was a necessity to safeguard the state from external threats, but raising such a force required not only control over manpower, but money as well. These sinews of war could not be secured without increased centralized control over the population and society. Designed to secure these sinews of war, the reforms of Maria Theresa and Joseph II represented a significant increase in government power. foot_7 Not only did the provincial estates, representative institutions of medieval heritage, essentially relinquish their power to the central state during the reign of Maria Theresa, but the first comprehensive census as carried out by the state was the work of the army in 1770. This census not only counted people, but also numbered houses and tracked draft animals suitable for military service; knowing the number of men and horses available and their location was critical to the new system of cantonal conscription. foot_8 By establishing more effective knowledge of their dominions and the resources at their disposal, the Habsburgs would more effectively marshal the latent strength of their realm for war.

The military institutions of the Austrian empire bear extended comment. The regular army was based on territorial recruitment, each line regiment having a military district from which it could conscript the necessary manpower. As such, the military establishment adapted as territories changed hands during the wars with France. The empire as a whole had two main subdivisions: the 'Hereditary Lands' and the 'Lands of the Crown of St. Stephen.' The latter primarily encompassed the Kingdom of Hungary, which incorporated many non-Hungarian territories such as Croatia and Transylvania. Hungary was constitutionally separate from the rest of the empire-a situation that manifested in many peculiarities. The Hungarian nobility insisted on exemption from and control over taxation, recruitment, and supply in Hungarian lands. As a result of Hungarian constitutionalism, the lands' financial and military burden typically lagged behind that of the Austrians, as inflation and population growth outpaced requirements. As such, Hungarian lands yielded less than one-third their proportional share in July 1813, raising onethird fewer men than Bohemia, a region with three-eighths the population. 10 Regiments recruited in Hungary were also structured differently than the 'German' regiments raised elsewhere in the monarchy. As of 1809, each of the forty-six 'German' regiments in the standing army consisted of two field battalions, one garrison battalion, two depot companies, and two companies of grenadiers. Each field battalion contained six companies of 180 men while the garrison battalion had four companies in peace and six in war. The fifteen 'Hungarian' regiments mustered 200 men per company. Conscription was not implemented in Hungary, which continued to raise men through the old system through recruiting parties and bounties. 11 The seventeen Grenzer regiments constituted one of Austria's unique military institutions, wherein communities along the Military Border with the Ottoman Empire received land grants in exchange for universal liability to military service. foot_9 Furthermore, each German infantry regiment had two reserve battalions, led by officers detached from the regiment and composed of men whose conscription 10 Wilhelm Wlaschütz, Österreichs entscheidendes Machtaufgebot 1813, Volume II of Befreiungskriege 1813 und 1814 (Vienna: Siedel und Sohn, 1813), 117.