

Unitary Frederician armies depended on a linear deployment to fight effectively and struggled to respond to ruptures in the line or flanking movements. By contrast, the armies of the Napoleonic Wars marched to battle in multiple independent corps, each a small army unto itself. The army fought in great depth, engaging a small portion of its strength at a given moment while retaining its bulk in reserve, able to quickly respond to flank attacks or breakthroughs. French armies developed particular skill in employing corps and tactical reserves. While they enjoyed numerical superiority early in the French Wars, this system exploited their strengths and minimized their weaknesses. However, in the later wars, the Allies' adoption of similar techniques frustrated Napoleon's search for decisive victory. This process of adaptation was incomplete in 1809, as Archduke Charles remained wedded to outdated tactical thinking throughout his career. However, throughout the War of the Sixth Coalition, Austrian armies demonstrated their growing fluency in the modern tactics, even if they never equaled the French at their best.

Lastly, Allied strategy in the 1814 invasion of France presents a marked contrast with the Fall Campaign of 1813. While that year saw Napoleon at the head of his European empire, in 1814, his back was to the wall. Victory for the Allies was deeply uncertain in 1813, but in 1814, Metternich worried about the effects of a victory too extensive. As such, profoundly different political conditions shaped the strategy of the 1814 campaign than that of 1813. However, like the 1813 campaign, Austrian strategy in 1814 has traditionally been framed as a return to outdated concepts of strategy, or else linked with Charles's theory of the 'key to the country.' Yet, like the 1813 campaign, close analysis of Austrian strategists' writings illuminates their intentions and demonstrate strategic competence, if not brilliance.

Austria successfully adapted after the 1809 defeat to raise a powerful army in 1813, despite the handicaps imposed by the Peace of Schönbrunn. This army provided Vienna with the premier role in shaping Allied strategy. The Austrians used this preeminence to craft a war plan fundamentally based on modern strategic principles, rather than outdated eighteenth century ideas. The Reichenbach Plan brought Napoleon to battle on advantageous terms. During the decisive battle at Leipzig, the Austrians employed modern tactics to ensure their strategic advantage was not wasted. Finally, the 1814 campaign demonstrates the necessity of sound political guidance for military operations to produce the desired results.

These events shaped the following century in Europe and across the world. The French dream of durable European hegemony died on the fields of Leipzig, ensuring the balance of power system would survive the Napoleonic crisis and define the politics of the nineteenth century. Napoleon's conscious imitation of the Roman Empire acquires an unintended resonance in this light. Like the Romans, Napoleon ruled the peoples of Europe as colonial dependencies, extracting resources to benefit the metropole and maintain the armed forces that carried out this exploitation. 6 Roman historian Walter Schiednel argues the Western world needed to "escape from Rome" (and powerful empires cast in the same mold) in order to create the prosperous and advanced modern state. 7 Napoleon's empire-building represented the last opportunity to return Europe to a unipolar system. The enterprise was built on French military victories and a new art of war. It collapsed because Napoleon's enemies adapted to the new methods of warfare. The Austrians certainly did not win the war alone, but their military changes after 1809 deserve recognition in the story of Napoleon's downfall. 6 See Broers, Europe Under Napoleon, "Economic Imperialism and the Continental System: From Blockade to Market Design" and Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics, 1763 -1848, 392-394. 7 Walter Schneidel, Escape from Rome: The Failure of Empire and the Road to Prosperity (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2019), 19.