

11 Gunther Rothenberg, Napoleon's Great Adversaries: The Archduke Charles and the Austrian Army,1792-1814 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1982), 109 had been deferred. The reservists drilled for four weeks their first year of service, and three weeks in subsequent years, and although they were technically furloughed soldiers, they were treated as civilians in daily life. 13 The Monarchy's thirty-five cavalry regiments were organized into regiments of two to four divisions, each division comprising two squadrons. 14 ditionally, the Austrians organized a popular force, the Landwehr, beginning in 1808.

Participation in the militia was universal and compulsory for all men in the Hereditary Lands subject to military service not already in the regular army or the reserve battalions. The institution of the Landwehr represented a shift in the character of the Habsburg state, however incremental. Clausewitz, one of the most insightful observers of this transformative period in the history of warfare and the world, identified the participation of the people in affairs of war and statecraft as the defining change provided by the era of the French Revolution. In France most of all, this took the form of vast citizen armies while in the Vendée, Calabria, Spain, and Tyrol, guerrilla uprisings saw the people making war on their own account. 15 As the leaders of a multinational empire, the premier statesmen of the Habsburg Monarchy were suspicious of attempts to fan national feeling, fearing it could deepen divisions between the many diverse peoples under their rule. Arming the people could undermine the classic monopoly of violence enjoyed by the modern state and exacerbate revolutionary unrest. However, even these fears bowed to military necessity, and 170 battalions of Landwehr were established. 16 strian defeat in 1809 and the ensuing Treaty of Schönbrunn resulted in severe military reductions. Not only were standing forces limited to 150,000 men by the treaty, but the damage 13 Ibid.,118.

14 Ibid., 26. 15 Clausewitz, On War, 592. 16 Rothenberg, Napoleon's Great Adversaries, 119. to state finances during the latest of a long series of lost wars was catastrophic. Hieronymus von Colloredo and Heinrich von Bellegarde, who served as presidents of the Imperial War Council to 1811 and 1814, respectively, oversaw the army budget as it fell from more than 250,000,000 florins in 1809 to a low of 47,000,000 in 1811. This was partially mitigated by deflation as paper money was redeemed for state bonds at a five to one rate. The loss of Polish, German, and Balkan territories removed the recruiting grounds for fourteen infantry regiments; between German, Hungarian, and Grenzer regiments, the total fell to fifty-three. 17 Moreover, the Landwehr and its Hungarian counterpart, the insurrectio, were disbanded. Meeting the stipulations of the treaty without crippling the army represented a significant challenge. In general, the Austrians did everything they could to ensure the brunt of the reduction was borne by comparatively 'unskilled' enlisted men, rather than the trained and experienced officers crucial to battlefield leadership. In the field battalions of the German and Hungarian regiments, the number of fusiliers under arms was cut by two-thirds and one-half, respectively, to a total of sixty and one hundred men per company; the furloughed men remained on the regimental lists, but returned to civilian life. 18 They retained the most crucial personnel from the depot divisions as cadres, and with Landwehr obligations still codified in law, if not in practice, each regiment would have a fourth battalion comprised of these militiamen. Moreover, the cap on standing forces meant that the empire would have many men eligible for conscription who could not be taken in; these men were incorporated into the reserve battalions, receiving their annual training while remaining in circulation in the civilian economy. 19 The reduction had a target of 178,000 men; to comply with treaty obligations, the Austrians put just over 30,000 men on leave while 17 Rothenberg, Napoleon's Great Adversaries, 174. 18 Ibid., 175. 19 Ibid.