

As the concrete events of the War of the Sixth Coalition are well established, I felt confident in relying on Leggiere's work for the overarching narrative of events. Similarly, Gill's history of the 1809 war was indispensable for the relevant sections. For events relating specifically to the Austrian army or the 1813 Army of Bohemia, I utilized the Austrian General Staff's well-documented histories. Dr. Llewellyn Cook's thesis on Schwarzenberg was a useful guide to the field marshal's role in the Fall Campaign. Wolfram Siemann's recent biography of Metternich provides invaluable insight into the fraught politics of this "world war."

For clarity, I refer to the French, Austrian, and Russian monarchs as emperor, Kaiser, and tsar respectively. I refer to troops from France and its subordinate states as Imperials and those of the Sixth Coalition as Allies. I occasionally use the word 'corps' to refer to substantial independent bodies of troops, such as a 'left wing corps' that was officially designated an Armee-Abteilung, rather than using it solely to denote units organized explicitly into army corps; this was common practice during the time period. Modernity is a theme running through this thesis; I use the term to denote the period after the French Revolution, contemporary to Napoleon et al., rather than the modern day (2020). I refer to persons who gained new noble titles during their lifetime somewhat anachronistically for the sake of clarity, using their most well-known title even when discussing events that preceded it. Because the chapters are thematic, many events recur throughout; maps have been collected and numbered in the appendix for reference.

My first chapter encompasses the mobilization of the Austrian army for the decisive campaign of the Napoleonic Wars. While the harsh peace of 1809 had imposed limitations on the size of the army and hindered state finance, the Austrians succeeded in expanding their forces, raising enough men to assume a dominant position within the Coalition. They accomplished this expansion by combining the machinery of the absolutist state with new principles of military organization, relying on numerous reservists and militia to bolster the much-reduced standing army.

Second, I analyze Allied strategy in the Fall Campaign. Traditional German as well as some current historiography label the Austrian Reichenbach plan a return to the staid positional warfare of the eighteenth century. However, a careful analysis of the evidence, from Radetzky's planning to Schwarzenberg's writings on its execution, illustrates the Austrians' familiarity with the conditions of modern war. Radetzky devised a plan to achieve the destruction of the enemy's main army and assisted Schwarzenberg in actualizing it. The plan culminated as intended with the titanic struggle at Leipzig and a crushing victory for the combined Allied armies.

My third chapter discusses the evolution of Austrian tactics during the later Napoleonic Wars. The Revolutionary Era witnessed a dramatic transformation in the conduct of battle.