

Petre, likewise a British officer, continued to feed the service's interest in Continental military developments. He penned a series of detailed operational accounts of the Napoleonic Wars. His narrative of 1813 represents a synthesis of the major German works on the campaign as well as French sources. Following Maximilian Yorck von Wartenburg's study of Napoleon's generalship, Petre argues that Napoleon's strategic insight in prioritizing annihilation over position decayed in his later career, beginning in 1809 and producing disastrous consequences in 1813. His was the best Anglophone work on the War of the Sixth Coalition campaign for a century.

Michael V. Leggiere has published extensive histories of the War of the Sixth Coalition, incorporating the contents of archives from every major power. He argues an ardent nationalism bloomed in Prussia, allowing it to play an outsized part in the campaigns of 1813. Moreover, the reformed Prussian army had adopted many of France's key military advantages, the most important being the operational art of war. His work concentrates on the Prussians, especially the Army of Silesia and the Army of North Germany in 1813.

The Austrian army in the Napoleonic Wars received scant attention for much of the twentieth century, especially in English. Gunther Rothenberg was one of the first Anglophone scholars to study the Habsburg army in depth, beginning with the Military Border. He emphasized the persistence and adaptability of the army during the long struggle with France while noting the limitations of a fundamentally dynastic army in an age of national wars.

Rothenberg structured his book as a dual study of the Archduke Charles and the Austrian army.

Unfortunately, Charles's retirement following the 1809 War of the Fifth Coalition resulted in a lack of emphasis on the truly decisive campaigns of the Napoleonic Wars, much like the previous Charles-centric studies of the wars. While Rothenberg discusses the 1809-1814 period, it is very brief. Alan Sked has published books on Joseph Radetzky von Radetz and the Habsburg monarchy in the twentieth century, but the Napoleonic Wars are not the main focus, and the documentation is uneven.

Austria waged war against Revolutionary France nearly twice as long as the other Eastern Powers; for much of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, Austria was France's chief opponent. While Great Britain spent more time officially at war with France, Britain lacked an army that could challenge France on the Continent. A profound asymmetry dominated the course of the Anglo-French war, as neither power could strike the other's vitals. By contrast, Austria was an even more landbound power than France, and relatively closely matched in population. While France and Austria both had their own qualitative advantages -in light troops and cavalry respectively, among many other factors-the first great confrontation (1792-1797) resulted in a prolonged stalemate, punctuated with French offensive victories and the occasional passive success by the Austrians. Bonaparte's unique talent decided the outcome of the war with his Italian campaign (1796-1797), smashing one Austrian army after another from the Piedmont to the Julian Alps and leading his army into the heart of Austria.