

Throughout the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, Austria reformed its military institutions, allowing the monarchy to access a vast pool of manpower. This organizational evolution reflected change in the nature of the Austrian state and its relationship to its subjects.

The demands of war drove the modernization of the Habsburg bureaucracy, allowing it to raise large forces under adverse conditions. Because Austria had mobilized a large and powerful army 47 Robert Thomas Wilson, Private Diary of Travels, Personal Services, and Public Events: During the Mission Employed with the European Armies in the Campaigns of 1812, 1813, 1814, (London: John Murray, 1861), 318. and husbanded that strength for the right time, Vienna's Allies had to defer to Austrian political objectives. Metternich archly summarized his monarch's importance in the Coalition, stating to Schwarzenberg, "the power that places 300,000 men in the field is the first power, the others are auxiliaries." 48 As a result, Metternich defined the Allies' war aims, Schwarzenberg led the main army, and Radetzky drafted the Allied war plan. With such a powerful army having been raised, developing a sound plan of operations was crucial to ensure its efforts would not be misapplied, as had happened all too often for Austria in this period of dramatic military change. Thankfully for the Austrians, Radetzky's planning was based in sound strategy, seeking decisive superiority over the French to destroy their main force. 48 Oscar Regele, Feldmarschall Radetzky, Leben, Leistung, Erbe (Vienna-Munich, Verlag Herold, 1957) Throughout the Napoleonic Wars, an undercurrent of tension ensued between the tested way of war of the eighteenth century and the new paradigm of the French Revolution. After the wars concluded, military thinkers attempted to mend this tremendous rupture in military history, arguing that Napoleon and the French Republic before him simply practiced the same art of war better than their enemies. Theodore Ayrault Dodge believed in the timeless principles of war as revealed by the 'Great Captains,' and Paddy Griffith expounded the view that armies of the French Revolution merely perfected the 'best practices' of a way of war that remained operative through the American Civil War.

Yorck von Wartenburg was a Prussian colonel and military historian. His book, Napoleon as a General, examines Napoleon's campaigns in an attempt to distill the essence of his art of war. From the pages emerges an unstated tension between Napoleon's belief in universal military principles and the transformation in warfare that occurred during the Revolutionary Wars. Wartenburg presents the campaign of 1796 in Italy as the birth of the modern system of strategy, while also positing crucial commonalities between Napoleon and Frederick the Great. Admitting that Frederick was the greatest practitioner of the eighteenthcentury strategic system that had become obsolete, Wartenburg nonetheless concludes that the essence of his generalship, the resolute pursuit of decision, anticipated the Wars of Napoleon. 49 the final stage of his intellectual evolution, Clausewitz concluded that the Napoleonic Wars were fundamentally different from most of their predecessors. In his formulation, war possessed a dual nature. A vast gulf separated the diplomatic type of war, in which princes fought battles and took fortresses to strengthen their hands for negotiation, compared to the remorseless struggle to destroy the forces of the enemy and render him politically and militarily helpless. 50 Whereas the political and social conditions in Europe of the Old Regime made the latter form of war difficult to realize, the development of new relationships between state and citizen as well as extensive changes in the applied art of war made the latter form a greater possibility than ever before. Clausewitz describes the latter form of war as more unified and interconnected. In a war to leave the enemy utterly helpless, all hinges on the great decision by arms, and all efforts not devoted to this overriding necessity are at best necessary evils.