

retaining the ability to recall them. In total, 259,000 men remained on the army's rolls following the reduction. 20 mobilization was one challenge, but planning for the renewed expansion of the army was another. Radetzky was one of Austria's foremost military minds during the nineteenth century. During the Napoleonic Wars, he served with distinction as a line officer and on the staffs of general officers. In 1809, he served as chief of staff for the main army after Archduke Charles departed and active operations ceased. His memoranda provide a wealth of information on military topics during the Napoleonic Wars. Writing in the aftermath of the 1809 Peace of Schönbrunn, he emphasized to the Kaiser that it was imperative to organize the reduction of the army so as to facilitate rapid expansion in the eventuality of war. 21 In specific terms, he stressed that branches of the army and personnel requiring longer instruction to become effective be retained as much as possible. The imperial administration would have to keep a close eye on personnel placed on leave, requiring them to notify the bureaucracy of changes in residence and occupation, and forbidding them from emigrating. In this way, a regiment cut to a much-reduced peace footing would have a ready source of manpower. Rather than retiring now-superfluous officers outright, they would be retained as supernumeraries on half pay. Like the men, they too would notify their regiments of any change in residence so they could be recalled in time of war. 22 detzky was not the only officer forced to compensate for coerced army reductions.

The experience of the Prussian military state and its methods of mobilization serve as an 20 Wlaschütz, Österreichs entscheidendes Machtaufgebot 1813, 4, 5.

21 Joseph Radetzky, Denkschriften; militąrisch-politischen Inhalts aus dem handschriftlichen Nachlass des k. k. österreichischen Feldmarschalls Grafen Radetzky (Vienna: 1858), 8. interesting point of comparison. Prussian military history and practice has been of great interest to Western observers since the Wars of German Unification, and even earlier during the Seven Years War. Many elements of it have become well known, such as Clausewitz's philosophy, the tradition of Auftragstaktik, and its general staff system. Its battery of reforms following the defeat of Jena are widely celebrated by military historians, as was its mobilization scheme.

Limited to a paltry 42,000 men by the 1808 Treaty of Paris, the Prussians sought to circumvent this cap by furloughing five men from each infantry company every month and taking in as many new recruits. When Prussia declared war on France in 1813, these "Krumper" recruits formed Reserve Regiments attached to the Line Regiments of the regular army. Many writers have exaggerated the effectiveness of this system; while its usefulness cannot be denied, in numerical dimensions it was underwhelming. In total, roughly 36,000 men were trained this way, nearly doubling the strength of the Prussian army in Spring 1813. 23 However, this represented only a fraction of Prussia's manpower needs for the Wars of Liberation; their main utility for the decisive Fall Campaign was in their capacity as cadre for new recruits in reserve units, rather than in composing whole battalions of trained reservists. The bulk of Prussian forces in 1813 consisted of their own Landwehr, raised according to a new law of universal service. Each district formed its own committee, which nominated officers from the leading classes of the population at large. However, many of the most warlike among this population were siphoned off by the numerous self-equipped volunteer units, and the Krumper men were consumed in forming reserve regiments. 24 Considering Prussia's straits after 1807 were even more dire than Austria's after 1809, these troops gave good account of themselves in the Fall Campaign, but the highly extemporized mobilization produced imperfect results.