

The Allied monarchs bestowed supreme command on Schwarzenberg and travelled with his headquarters after Austria formally joined the coalition against Napoleon. Fielding troops hailing from all three Great Powers, this was the main army and the center of gravity for the whole Coalition; its victory or destruction could decide the war. The Army of North Germany and the Army of Silesia under Jean Bernadotte and Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher respectively, had roughly 100,000 men each at the beginning of the campaign while the Army of Bohemia had approximately 250,000. The three Allied armies formed a wide arc around Napoleon's position in Saxony and Lusatia: Bernadotte to the north in the vicinity of Berlin, Blücher to the east near Breslau, and Schwarzenberg in the south behind the mountainous Bohemian frontier.

Napoleon's main force of 200,000 was stationed in Saxony and Upper Lusatia; secondary armies of 100,000 each stood in Silesia under Ney and in Lower Lustia and northern Germany under Nicolas Oudinot and Louis-Nicolas Davout, respectively. Napoleon planned to unite his main force with Ney to seek a battle in Silesia, where he believed he would find the Coalition's main army of 200,000 Russians and Prussians. At the same time, Oudinot and Davout would advance 76 Clausewitz, On War, 191. on Berlin, and thereafter to the Oder and Vistula river lines, where tens of thousands of French languished in isolated garrisons behind enemy lines (Map A.7). 77 Both the Trachenberg and Reichenbach Plans anticipated Napoleon's first blow would fall on the army in Bohemia, as a crushing victory there would decide the war. However, upon learning that more than 100,000 Allied troops had left Silesia to form the Coalition's main army in Bohemia, Napoleon decided to take advantage of the relative weakness of Blücher's smaller army. After the armistice expired on 17 August, Napoleon advanced to Görlitz in Lusatia to assemble an army of 180,000 and crush Blücher before the Austrians could unite with their new allies in Bohemia. 78 For his part, Napoleon severely underestimated the speed at which the Allied army could form in Bohemia; believing the two constituent parts-the Russo-Prussian army coming from Silesia and the Austrian army-incapable of affecting a junction in the vicinity of Prague before 25 August. Yet, on the 16 th , Schwarzenberg reported that the Russians and Prussians had already united with his main body. Schwarzenberg also referenced the stipulations of the Reichenbach Plan, hoping that if Napoleon attacked the Army of North Germany, Bernadotte would withdraw rather than be crushed by the emperor's superior force. In the meantime, he would launch an offensive against Napoleon's base. 79 e Army of Bohemia crossed the Bohemian frontier in several columns on 22 August, fighting a few minor combats. On the left bank of the Elbe, only Laurent de Gouvion St. Cyr's XIV Corps guarded Napoleon's crucial logistical base at Dresden, although Schwarzenberg knew Napoleon was in supporting distance and could reach the Saxon capital in a matter of days.