

At the end of August, the Kaiser furthermore ordered that a second Landwehr battalion of 500 men be raised for each regiment to fulfill occupation duties left vacant by the first Landwehr battalions fighting in the field formations. 35 cording to Radetzky's plan of mobilization, the cadre third battalions would be brought up to field strength and deployed forward. 36 In their place, the reserve battalions would serve as depots in their home military districts to take in new conscripts, using supernumeraries and pensioned officers to provide experienced leadership for the new soldiers. In this way, a regiment of German infantry cut to roughly 720 men by Schönbrunn's stipulations could expand to several thousand men in six battalions without requiring large numbers of new officers. As a rule, increasing the number of battalions in a regiment was more efficient than increasing the number of regiments. Not only did this reduce the need to form new regimental headquarters, but at least in French experience, it also ensured that the parent regiment gave the new battalion a quality cadre, rather than offloading deadwood. 37 The supernumeraries retained after the army reduction meant that few new officers were needed during the partial mobilization until the end of April. 38 Thus, the decision to retain as many regiments as the monarchy's territory allowed was furthermore crucial in facilitating the army's mobilization.

The Austrians knew that they would not be able to contain the struggle with France to the plains of Saxony and the wooded mountains of Bohemia. In addition to the large contingent devoted to the main army, the Austrians would need to maintain a strong force on the Middle 35 Criste, Österreichs Beitritt, 100. 36 Radetzky, Dekschriften, 100. 37 John R. Elting, Swords around a Throne: Napoleon's Grande Armee, Kindle edition, "Chapter X: Poor Bloody Infantry." 38 Wlaschütz, Österreichs entscheidendes Machtaufgebot 1813, 187. Wlaschütz, Österreichs entscheidendes Machtaufgebot 1813, 187. Danube. This force would serve a variety of ends. It would both protect Vienna from a sudden thrust and make a strong impression on Bavaria, a key French satellite in Germany. Following repeated defeats at the hands of the French, Austria had ceded considerable territory to Bavaria, making them a significant threat. Additionally, the army on the Danube would protect the strategic flank of the Bohemian army and hopefully draw off reinforcements from Napoleon's main army in Germany. It also had the function of preventing a juncture between adjacent enemy forces; Radetzky expected to face roughly 30,000 Italians south of the Alps, 25,000 Bavarians in the vicinity of Munich, and 40,000 men under Marshal Pierre Augereau in Franconia. He estimated that fifteen regiments, ten grenadier battalions, and thirty-six cavalry squadrons with suitable artillery support would be necessary to secure the Austrian capital and the rear of the main army in Bohemia; in total, 40,000 additional men would have to be raised. This army would be deployed behind the River Enns, north of Steyr in Upper Austria. 39 e Austrians furthermore decided to raise yet another major army for action against Napoleon and his empire. Vienna had long maintained significant interests in Italy, and with Frenchmen in ever-shorter supply, the Napoleonic kingdoms of Italy and Naples were crucial sources of manpower for the emperor's armies. As such, additional tens of thousands of men would need to be mobilized for action in another theater. Here, the system of depots divisions, reserves, and popular militia demonstrated their importance once again. Radetzky anticipated an initial offensive by Eugene Beauharnais, Napoleon's stepson and Viceroy of the Kingdom of Italy, through Villach in the Julian Alps into Styria. He planned to defend against this thrust while also detaching a small corps to advance into Dalmatia, where the local Grenzer regiments had been transferred to French service when the province was ceded in 1809. There, the Austrians would retake possession of these regiments and augment their force for a counteroffensive. This augmentation would provide the manpower necessary to carry them into more lands ceded in 1809, where they planned to reincorporate regiments disbanded by loss of their military districts. Each of the six Grenzer regiments would assemble at least one battalion at Karlstadt, and reserve battalions would be assembled without delay. In the meantime, Radetzky recommended the mobilization of the Landwehr and the organization of the militia to augment local defensive efforts. 40 He again the importance of the third battalions is emphasized in his war plan memorandum, assigning them to garrisons in Josephstadt, Königgrätz, and Theresienstadt; whatever manpower they lacked for this purpose would be made up from the Landwehr. 41 By completing the cadre third battalions and cavalry divisions, the Austrians incorporated another 53,000 infantry and 7,000 cavalry into their armies for the decisive campaign of 1813. 42 In total, the Austrians raised 298,000 men in fully mobilized formations by August 1813, of which 245,000 were field troops. 43 roughout the summer of 1813, the combatants' arms stood silent during the armistice.