

Occupying territory and fortresses has no inherent value before the battle is fought; the destruction of the enemy force allows one to occupy them at leisure, and they cannot be held if one's own force is destroyed. However, in more limited conflicts, in which aims are more modest and emotion less excited, strategic positions can hold great value. They can be used as bargaining chips to trade for one's objectives if the enemy is willing to negotiate. 51 Most wars throughout history were of the diplomatic type, but the social and military changes of the French Revolution refocused war on the destruction of the enemy.

Frederick and Napoleon represented dichotomous faces of war in Clausewitz's theory.

Frederick took refuge in the inherent strength of the strategic defense to outlast the vast superiority of his enemies, contenting himself with frustrating his enemies' designs.

Exemplifying most wars of the eighteenth century, his were fought for territory and the revenue it brings. His was a war of position, holding strategically important territories and trading them for favorable peace settlements. In 1762, after seven years of campaigning, he occupied part of Saxony while the Austrians occupied the County of Glatz in Silesia. Both still had strong armies in the field. Thus, in the Peace of Hubertusburg, Frederick was able to 'trade' occupied Saxony for Glatz and fulfill his limited objective. 52 By contrast, Napoleon exemplified the superior efficacy of the successful offensive, leveraging his destruction of the enemy's forces to have his way with the vanquished. Typically, this meant forcing the state to subordinate its foreign policy to France, rather than outright conquest and annexation, but such an objective was not practical against a great power if its army could not be annihilated in battle. He did not make war without maps, as he accused Joachim Murat of attempting, but positions and territory held no inherent value in this new way of war. Clausewitz does not argue against the existence of universal principles for war, or that either form of war is necessarily superior, but that each form needs to be judged by its own standards and whether or not it fits the situation. 53 ausewitz observed that the most important act of judgement a strategist must make is to determine the kind of war he is undertaking; this formed the basis for all further decisions. 54 In 1813, Austrian objectives were ultimately limited ones, aimed at establishing a durable peace based upon a just balance of power in Continental Europe, rather than seeking to topple 52 Christopher Duffy, Frederick the Great: A Military Life (London: Routledge, 1985), 241-242. 53 See also Hans Delbruck, History of the Art of War within the Framework of Political History, trans. Walter J. Renfoe (Westport: Greenwood Press, 1985), 4: 421-423. 54 Clausewitz, On War, 88-89.

Napoleon and prostrate France. More immediately, the Austrians sought to regain territories lost in previous wars with France. Viewed in this context, a strategy of exhaustion is in theory a valid approach. In such a strategy, reducing the enemy's probability of success or increasing the cost of waging war can take the place of the destruction of their forces. 55 However, if the enemy attempts to employ a strategy of annihilation, it typically demands a like response, since wasting resources on other projects risks destruction if the enemy succeeds in bringing about a general engagement. 56 chduke Charles was one of the most successful generals in Austrian history and an influential reformer of the army, but he remained wedded to the strategy of exhaustion which had served well in the limited wars of the eighteenth century. His thought was inundated with the geometric concepts of strategic lines and geographic points, rather than battle and destruction, which resulted in often disappointing results against the French. As Clausewitz observed, states, and so Metternich remained wary of his new allies. Austria’s defeat in the War of the Fifth Coalition led to the harsh peace of Schönbrunn on 14 October 1809, which forced Vienna to surrender its independent foreign policy, pay a considerable indemnity, and cede wide swaths of territory with millions of subjects. Furthermore, the treaty imposed a limitation of 150,000 on Austrian standing forces for ten years. Napoleon wed the Archduchess Marie Louise in 1810, the daughter of Emperor Francis I, thus facilitating greater Austrian integration into the French imperium. On 20 March 1811, Marie Louise bore him a son, Napoléon François Joseph Charles Bonaparte, Prince Imperial, and King of Rome. One year later on 24 March, a treaty of alliance bound Austria to France. As a result, the Austrians contributed an auxiliary corps commanded by Schwarzenberg to Napoleon’s invasion of Russia later that year. Schwarzenberg would earn his field marshal’s baton during the campaign at Napoleon’s recommendation. The dramatic miscarriage of Napoleon’s Russian campaign appeared to offer a window of opportunity to curtail French hegemony. Metternich and Schwarzenberg engineered Austria’s withdrawal from the French alliance. Corresponding with Metternich as well as the Russians, Schwarzenberg arranged a series of maneuvers that left his corps in a dangerous position near the Austrian frontier with Napoleon’s Grand Duchy of Warsaw. Prince Alexei Scherbatov, the Russian commander opposing Schwarzenberg, purposefully transferred his line of advance, redirecting it from Schwarzenberg’s southern flank to his northern flank. This change split the Austrian corps from the rest of the Imperial armies and pushed it against Austrian Galicia. By allowing himself to be “cut off” from the remains of the Grande Armée, Schwarzenberg found himself “forced” to sign a convention with the Russians on 30 January that neutralized his corps. Napoleon consented to Austrian neutrality to save the corps, intending it for future use as he believed that Austria would remain his ally after the Russian debacle. 59 Unlike the Austrian Kaiser who married off his daughter to gain a reprieve from Napoleon’s heavy hand, King Frederick William III of Prussia maintained the precarious position he found himself in after the 1807 Peace of Tilsit dramatically reduced the foundations of Prussian power. Like the Austrians, the Prussians also provided an auxiliary corps for Napoleon’s use during the invasion of Russia. Despite the destruction of Imperial forces in Russia, Frederick William hesitated to challenge Napoleon. However, the army forced his hand after General Ludwig Yorck von Wartenburg declared his corps’s neutrality after signing the 30 December Convention of Tauroggen with the Russians. Moreover, on 7 February 1813, the East Prussian provincial estates called for a war of national liberation against the French. 60 In March, the Prussians made common cause with the Russians to form the Sixth Coalition. London soon committed tons of war materiel and much needed financial support before officially joining the alliance in June through the signing of formal subsidy treaties. Steeled by the searing experience of the 1812 campaign, Tsar Alexander envisaged the war in 1813 as a crusade to overthrow a godless tyrant, avenge Moscow, and establish a new order in Europe. Despite the tsar’s designs, Austria’s leading statesmen were more pragmatic. The Russo-Prussian alliance focused on driving Napoleon from central Europe. Expansion of Russia in Poland and Prussia in Germany would be their reward but this held little appeal for Austria. In particular, Metternich wished to preserve a powerful France to counterbalance Russia. He recognized that geography intensified Austria’s need for international balance. Whereas France and Russia enjoyed single and secure frontiers against the other great powers — 59 Henry Kissinger, A World Restored: Metternich, Castlereagh, and the Problems of Peace, 1812–1822 (New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1964), 45-46. 60 Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany, 1: 81.