

Austrian mobilization for the Fall Campaign of 1813 was a complex process, proceeding in fits and starts as military and diplomatic fortunes of all the combatants swung back and forth.

Yet, in the broadest sense, it began even before Napoleon's misfortune in Russia. While officially remaining neutral in the war between France and Russia, Austria was bound by treaty of alliance to provide one corps for Napoleon's Grande Armée. Dubbed the Auxiliary Corps, it fought on the extreme southern wing of the invasion, participating in several engagements with the Russians. Crucially, this corps was considered outside the treaty-imposed limitations on the Austrian army; Vienna was allowed to exceed the 150,000-man treaty limitation only by providing the Auxiliary Corps. Its organization was the subject of discussion between Napoleon and Metternich. Napoleon observed that rather than organizing the corps around five or six regiments, which with four battalions each would have sufficed for the required contribution, the corps had the cadres of twenty regiments. Metternich replied that the Austrian army was mostly cadres at that point, but this organization allowed the Austrians to quickly bring the thirty-two field battalions of twenty regiments up to full strength. 25 the winter and spring of 1813, it became clear Austria would need a major army.

Following the destruction of Napoleon's Grande Armée in Russia, he faced yet another European coalition, consisting of Russia, Great Britain, and a resurgent Prussia. In this strategic context, amassing a strong army would give Austria crucial leverage. After defeat in 1809 forced Vienna to subordinate its foreign policy to Napoleon, the newfound parity between the French emperor and his enemies in 1813 opened a window of opportunity for Austria to play peace broker, with restored political independence their asking price. However, this role would require substantial forces to lend weight to their words in diplomacy. If nothing else, the vast armies clashing north of the Bohemian mountains in Spring 1813 made it prudent to ensure the territorial integrity of the empire by expanding the army.

Austria rebuilt its army one corps at a time. First, a corps of observation was formed in Galicia in March 1812 during Napoleon's buildup for the invasion of Russia. This became the Auxiliary Corps. It consisted of 24,000 infantry, 6,000 cavalry, and 96 guns. As the Auxiliary Corps prepared to depart for Russia, the Austrians replaced it by forming a Reserve Corps in Galicia in April 1812. This corps had a strength of 24,000 infantry and 4,000 cavalry. The Reserve Corps received as reinforcements nine battalions and fourteen squadrons from Bukowina in the southeast, which mobilized an additional four battalions and six squadrons to compensate for the transfer. Thus, by the end of 1812, the Austrian army was roughly 200,000 strong, of which about 75,000 were part of mobile field formations, the Auxiliary and Reserve Corps being the strongest. This would be insufficient for the role of armed mediator Austria wished to play in 1813. To strengthen Vienna's hand, the army first brought the formations in the Auxiliary and Reserve Corps to full wartime strength. Next, the Austrians established another corps of observation in Bohemia in February 1813 with a complement of 27,000 infantry and 5,000 cavalry. As the corps of observation formed around the first two battalions of its infantry and first two divisions of its cavalry regiments, the third battalions and third and fourth divisions were brought from cadre status to peace footing. 26 adetzky was the chief strategic planner for much of the 1813 campaign, and his collected writings from this time offer considerable insight into the process of mustering a powerful army. He took it as a given that Napoleon would not accept moderate peace terms, and centered his initial planning around countering a thrust by the French into Bohemia with at least 100,000 men. Radetzky believed that a minimum of 120,000 men should be disposed along the Bohemian frontier in eighty battalions and ninety-eight squadrons; he provided a breakdown of available formations as of 9 May 1813. The two largest units in the vicinity were Schwarzenberg's Auxiliary Corps that had invaded Russia alongside Napoleon's Grande Armée and the still-forming corps of observation in Bohemia that had been ordered after the French retreated into Germany. They were joined by the Reserve Corps from Galicia and fourteen newly raised battalions and four new squadrons from Moravia; all told, seventy-six battalions and eighty-six squadrons. However, Radetzky believed this was not enough, reaching only 87,000 and well short of the desired minimum. 27 Allowing for detachments and the sick list, effective strength for the army in Bohemia was roughly 77,000 men. 28 To reach the 120,000 men he considered necessary for the defense of the Austrian monarchy, he similarly drew up redeployments of standing formations on 9 May 1813, scraping together as many regular army battalions and squadrons as possible, including an infantry division and cavalry brigade from the former Auxiliary Corps, newly equipped Moravian troops originally assigned to Galicia, a division due to arrive in Galicia on 21 May, and the cavalry regiments of Moriz Liechtenstein and the Schwarzenberg Uhlans. Together, these reinforcements for the army in Bohemia amounted to 33,000 men, bringing its strength to 120,000, at least nominally. 29 adetzky believed time was of the essence, as Austria's preparations for war could not be long concealed. 30 Ultimately, the field forces of the standing army proved insufficient to meet Austria's security needs. As a result, the army needed to fully mobilize. 31 Beyond the third battalions still at cadre strength, Radetzky continued to recommend the mobilization of the regiments' reserve battalions, and in one instance the covert mobilization of the Landwehr under the guise of a large-scale training exercise. 32 At first, Austria's most prominent statesmen, Metternich and Schwarzenberg included, refused to sanction full mobilization, citing the difficulties in materiel shortages and the possibility of a diplomatic solution. Before long, however, the necessity of mobilization could no longer be denied, and reservists were called up on 22 June. At the beginning of July, more than 50,000 Landwehr were called to arms. 33 The Austrians integrated the Landwehr more closely into the army structure than they had in 1809, when the militia fought in newly formed independent battalions rather than as part of existing regiments. Every German regiment established two Landwehr battalions, one active and one inactive. The battalion commander in the Landwehr was completely subordinate to the colonel of the regiment. While most Landwehr officers were retirees from the regular army, many subaltern positions in the Landwehr and line infantry alike were filled by men of the leading classes directly from civilian life. 34 The Kaiser ordered further mobilization of the Landwehr on 12 July, stating that all first Landwehr battalions and third battalions not essential in the interior should be deployed forward to join their regiments. The order also instructed the army to raise 30 Ibid., 89. 31 Ibid., 86. 32 Ibid., 109. 33 Rudolf Friedrich, Gesichte des Herbstfeldzuges 1813 (Berlin: E.S. Mittler und Sohn, 1906), 1: 55. 34 Wlaschütz, Österreichs entscheidendes Machtaufgebot 1813, 84-45 as many Landwehr battalions in the German and Galician provinces as the population allowed.