

Austria's defeat in the War of the Fifth Coalition led to the harsh peace of Schönbrunn on 14 October 1809, which forced Vienna to surrender its independent foreign policy, pay a considerable indemnity, and cede wide swaths of territory with millions of subjects. Austrian corps from the rest of the Imperial armies and pushed it against Austrian Galicia. By allowing himself to be "cut off" from the remains of the Grande Armée, Schwarzenberg found himself "forced" to sign a convention with the Russians on 30 January that neutralized his corps.

Napoleon consented to Austrian neutrality to save the corps, intending it for future use as he believed that Austria would remain his ally after the Russian debacle. 59 like the Austrian Kaiser who married off his daughter to gain a reprieve from Napoleon's heavy hand, King Frederick William III of Prussia maintained the precarious position he found himself in after the 1807 Peace of Tilsit dramatically reduced the foundations of Prussian power. Like the Austrians, the Prussians also provided an auxiliary corps for Napoleon's use during the invasion of Russia. Despite the destruction of Imperial forces in Russia, Frederick William hesitated to challenge Napoleon. However, the army forced his hand after General Ludwig Yorck von Wartenburg declared his corps's neutrality after signing the 30 December Convention of Tauroggen with the Russians. Moreover, on 7 February 1813, the East Prussian provincial estates called for a war of national liberation against the French. foot_25 In March, the Prussians made common cause with the Russians to form the Sixth Coalition. London soon committed tons of war materiel and much needed financial support before officially joining the alliance in June through the signing of formal subsidy treaties.

Steeled by the searing experience of the 1812 campaign, Tsar Alexander envisaged the war in 1813 as a crusade to overthrow a godless tyrant, avenge Moscow, and establish a new order in Europe. Despite the tsar's designs, Austria's leading statesmen were more pragmatic.

The Russo-Prussian alliance focused on driving Napoleon from central Europe. Expansion of Russia in Poland and Prussia in Germany would be their reward but this held little appeal for Austria. In particular, Metternich wished to preserve a powerful France to counterbalance Russia. He recognized that geography intensified Austria's need for international balance.

Whereas France and Russia enjoyed single and secure frontiers against the other great powers -the well-fortified Rhine in the West and the Nieman in the East -Austria was vulnerable from three directions, as was Prussia. For such powers, balance and repose amongst states were crucial. 61 While the prodigious expansion of French power since the Revolution had threatened Austria, so too would Russian expansion in Eastern Europe. 62 poleon himself occupied a distinct and paradoxical place in Metternich's thinking.

Metternich had no doubt that Napoleon's European conquests had nearly destroyed the equilibrium of international politics. Yet Napoleon had succeeded in restoring domestic order to France after a decade of tumultuous social revolution. Viewing domestic turmoil in France during the Revolution as the ultimate cause of French expansionism, Metternich sought to maintain Napoleon as the guarantor of French domestic stability while limiting his ability to disrupt the international order. Ultimately, however, this was a policy of contradiction in Henry Kissinger's judgement, as the very determination that made Napoleon the stable lawgiver in France made him the implacable warlord abroad. 63 Yet Metternich professed to believe that Napoleon's domestic situation was precarious enough to make peace a true possibility, as the faction of revolutionaries led by Charles Maurice de Talleyrand and Joseph Fouché allegedly felt their positions in France threatened by Napoleon's foreign engagements, and the army was not confident in bringing the war to a successful conclusion. 64 en after the disastrous Russian campaign, Napoleon's dramatic victories in the spring of 1813 gave little indication that deposing him was a real possibility. The total destruction of 61 Prague, and even then Napoleon displayed contempt for the proceedings, his envoy, Armand-Augustin-Louis de Caulaincourt, arriving only on 28 July. 67 Schwarzenberg confided to his wife on 22 July, noting this display of bad faith. In his opinion, every day Caulaincourt did not 65 Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany, 2: 74. 66 Munro Price, Napoleon: The End of Glory, (London: Oxford University Press, 2014), 63. 67 Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany, 2: 57. appear diminished the hopes for peace, and he suspected Napoleon was intentionally protracting the armistice. He also noted the Duke of Wellington's smashing victory at Vitoria on 21 June, especially as British newspapers claimed Joseph Bonaparte and the remnants of his army had been cut off from France. Schwarzenberg expressed hope that he himself could strike such a blow in Germany and so right the world. 68 cing one of the most renowned generals who ever lived, the development of a sound plan of operations was of paramount importance for the Allied armies. However, strategists of all nations intensely disagreed regarding the employment of the combined armies of the Coalition. The two most important blueprints that emerged from the various headquarters were the Trachenberg and Reichenbach Plans. The first, the product of agreement among the Prussians, Swedes, and Russians, envisioned three field armies. The Army of North Germany would have Berlin for its base, and consist of 70,000 Prussians, Swedes, and Russians. The Army of Silesia would remain in position around Breslau with 50,000 Prussians and Russians.