

The Bohemian Army would assemble north of Prague with more than 200,000 Austrians, Prussians, and Russians. The Trachenberg plan stipulated that the Allied armies would take the offensive and advance concentrically on the main body of the enemy, intending to achieve a rapid decision. 69 contrast, the Reichenbach plan, developed by Schwarzenberg's chief of staff, Radetzky, called for a more complex approach. This plan envisioned the Allied armies retreating from any superior forces led by Napoleon while attacking detached corps and secondary armies.

Radetzky expected Napoleon's forces to match or outnumber those of the Coalition upon the cessation of the armistice, thus precluding a decisive battle until the balance could be righted. 70 his 7 July Operations Draft, he estimated French strength at 450,000 men and that of the Allies at 405,000. Moreover, Napoleon's position in Saxony gave him the advantage of interior lines, facilitating concentration of superior forces against a single Allied army. Expecting Napoleon to target the Bohemian Army with all his might at the resumption of hostilities, Radetzky recommended a careful defensive against the French emperor's main force, combined with bold offensives by the other Allied armies. Likewise, should Napoleon take the offensive against the Army of North Germany or the Silesian Army, the armies not attacked would themselves take the offensive to relieve the pressure. Should Napoleon remain on the defensive, Radetzky called for the Allied armies to concentrate for a decisive blow. 71 While the language of this plan emphasized avoiding superior forces, Radetzky also recognized the impact of the French emperor's personal presence on the battlefield in a 14 September memorandum, noting the delight he inspired even in his war-weary generals and the zeal that drove his soldiers into enemy ranks with charged bayonets. Denying Napoleon the chance to employ his talent as a general was crucial. 72 ggiere along with numerous historians, such as Maximilian von Hoen of the Austrian General Staff, characterize the differences between these plans according to the classic strategic dichotomy of annihilation and exhaustion and follows Rudolf Friedrich in his description of the Reichenbach Plan as a return to the indecisive attritional warfare of the eighteenth century. 70 Ibid., 2: 55-56. 71 Radetzky, "Operationsentwurf," in F. J. H. Hellwald and Karl Schönhals, Der k.k. österreichische Feldmarschall Graf Radetzky: eine biographische Skizze nach den eigenen Dictaten und der Correspondenz des Feldmarschalls von einem österreichischen Veteranen (Stuttgart: J.G. Cotta, 1858), 160-161.

Whereas the Trachenberg Plan sought to seize the initiative and destroy Napoleon's main force in a decisive blow, Radetzky's plan entailed the protracted attrition of Imperial forces. Physical exhaustion from constant countermarches and privation in ruined country would inflict as much damage as constant actions and minor battles until the Coalition had assumed such a superiority in strength that it could seek a decision against Napoleon's main force. Radetzky emphasized that the transitory advantages gained by the auxiliary armies would be far outweighed by the clash of main forces, and for this reason recommended the greatest possible force be mustered in Bohemia, proposing 150,000 Austrians. 73 Thus, the goal remained the destruction of Napoleon's main army in battle. As Radetzky stated forthright in his June memorandum, "The purpose of every operation is the annihilation of the enemy." 74 e central question in the choice of strategy regards time. When planning a campaign or a major maneuver, the commander must ascertain whether the passage of time will benefit him or his enemy more. As Vegetius, for centuries the greatest authority on warfare, remarked, the chief strategic issue was for the general to decide whether it was in his interest to pursue the decision by arms or to stall and temporize. 75 Typically, the defender with inferior strength seeks to delay the decision, as the strength of the attacker diminishes throughout the offensive until it reaches Clausewitz's Culminating Point of Victory. At that point, the attacker has lost the superior strength that justifies offensive action. In a purely defensive war, not just delaying a decision, but preventing a decision altogether is often a useful strategy for the weaker side. However, at times strategic defenders have been so much weaker that the future held no promise 73 Ibid., 101-103, 107. 74 Ibid., 116. 75 Publius Flavius Vegetius Renatus was an official in the Western Roman Empire during the fifth century. His book, Epitoma rei militaris, was widely read in the Middle Ages and early modern period. of an improved situation; Frederick the Great began the Seven Years War with a bold offensive into Saxony and thereafter into Bohemia for this reason. 76 In the case of the Fall Campaign of 1813, the division between offense and defense was very fluid, both strategically and operationally. While the Allies sought to curtail Napoleon's power in central Europe, Napoleon fought to maintain an empire he had carved from his prostrated enemies. Both sought a decision in the German theater of war. For his part, Napoleon sought to fight a decisive battle at the outset of the campaign; insofar as the Allies attempted to delay a decision and prepare for more favorable conditions, their strategy can be considered defensive.