

[W]hile his judgement is otherwise sound, he has in the main a completely false idea of strategy. He takes the means for the purpose, and the purpose for the means. In war everything should be done to bring about the destruction of the enemy's forces; but destruction does not exist as a separate task in his range of concepts; he accepts it only insofar as it is also a means of driving the enemy from this or that position. To him success is solely the occupation of certain positions and areas; but these cannot ever be anything but a means for achieving victory-that is, for destroying the physical and moral strength of the enemy. We can recognize how far the archduke pursues this false course from the fact that in his victorious battles his opponents never suffer a significant loss of prisoners and guns ... but we can recognize it even more clearly in the failure of the archduke's accounts to mention enemy casualties in any battle at all. 57 such, the Austrian development of a strategy of annihilation shows a new recognition of the 55 Ibid., 91-93. 56 Ibid., 98. 57 Clausewitz, Die Feldzuge von 1799 in Italien und der Schweiz, in Hinterlassene Werke des Generals Carl von Clausewitz über Krieg und Kriegführung (Berlin: F. Dümmler, 1832-1837) 5: 152-153. In Peter Paret, Clausewitz and the State: The Man, His Theories, and His Times (Princeton: Princeton University Press), 334-335. As explained above, Clausewitz would later modify his views as to the necessity of destroying the enemy's forces, but his characterization of Charles's strategic views is not unjustified. 'annihilation principle.' "Destruction of the enemy forces is always the superior, more effective means," concludes Clausewitz, "with which others cannot compete." foot_23 Facing Napoleon in 1813, Radetzky recognized his enemy would certainly attempt a strategy of annihilation and prepared the Austrian war plan with the destruction of the enemy army as the foundational principle.

The benefit of hindsight is a two-edged sword for historians. While knowing end effects aids in tracing their causes, it can blind the careless to the way historical actors perceived events.

To Metternich or Francis or Schwarzenberg, the Napoleonic Wars did not steadily and inevitably progress toward a single known conclusion, but rather each day offered a myriad of possibilities, of which only a few were realized and became the history we know today. Today we know that the War of the Sixth Coalition resulted in the utter downfall of Napoleon and the destruction of his European empire, but such an eventuality seemed neither likely nor necessarily desirable to the Austrian statesmen of 1813 and 1814. In Plato's dialogue, Laws, Clinias remarks that all states are perpetually at war with one another, regardless of the declarations of the heralds, and that what men call peace is merely an empty word. While history has certainly seen no shortage of outright warfare, the implication is that whether or not states are directly bearing arms against each other, they are always engaged in a zero-sum competition for power. Erstwhile allies are no exception. The foundation of the international system of the eighteenth century that endured throughout the French Wars was that of the balance of power. Rather than bonds of fellowship, ideology, or moral purpose shared between states, self-interest governed international relations and alliances. While Austria joined the Sixth Coalition against Napoleon, this did not suspend the eternal political struggle between states, and so Metternich remained wary of his new allies.