

While the Austrians attempted to mediate peace, they also collaborated with the Allies to ensure they would enter the war at the moment of greatest possible advantage. After it became clear Napoleon would not accept peace on grounds acceptable to Vienna and the Allies, the Austrians delayed the renewed onset of the war by extending the armistice so they could continue their mobilization and planning. Metternich had written to Schwarzenberg, asking if an extension would be more useful to Austria than to France, and how long of an extension would be 40 Ibid., 138. 41 Ibid., 120. necessary. Schwarzenberg responded that twenty days would allow Austria to mobilize tens of thousands of additional men for the army. 44 this stage, the peace proposals heard at Dresden on 5 July were not very serious; Napoleon did not attend the diplomatic conference in person, and did not accept its stipulations that would have neutralized his empire in central Europe. 45 The interests of the burgeoning Coalition, with Austria waiting in the wings, were fundamentally contrary to Napoleon's.

However, as a ploy to extend the armistice and facilitate further mobilization, the conference was a success, as the end date was postponed from 20 July to 10 August, with an additional six day window at the end before true resumption of hostilities. Indeed, the end of July and the beginning of August saw a net of 60,000 men transition from partially ready units to mobile formations. 46 At the beginning of the campaign in Saxony, Austria entered the lists with nearly 130,000 men in the Bohemian Army alone.

Austria's military mobilization was one of the key factors in shaping the War of the Sixth Coalition and Napoleon's downfall. Contemporaries remarked on the great importance of Austria's rearmament. General Robert Thomas Wilson, a British military attaché at the Russian court, provides an eyewitness account of many of the highest diplomatic dealings of the war.

During the Allied advance in the spring of 1813, he spoke with the Prussian king, who was disappointed by Austria's neutrality to that point, believing it unworthy of the empire's military reputation. While the king's professed commitment to the common cause impressed Wilson, he 44 Metternich, Memoirs, 194. Theodor Franz Baillet de Latour, who served as a distinguished officer in line commands and on the Quartermaster-General staff, reports in his memoirs that by mid-July, Austrian war preparations were still not complete; particularly, the provisioning of men in the Landwehr with uniforms was proceeding slowly. Theodor Franz von Baillet de Latour, Erinnerungen an den k. k. Feldzeugmeister und Kriegsminister Theodor Grafen Baillet von Latour, (Gratz: 1849), 114. expressed concern that Prussia as a whole lacked the same steadiness, and that Russia lacked the power to meet the occasion. He emphasized the importance of Austria, preaching, "It is Austria -Austria! -which holds the balance, and it is to Austria that we should direct all our thoughts, whilst we afford sufficient succor to Prussia to keep her vessel afloat." 47 e manpower resources of the Austrian monarchy gave Vienna considerable sway in directing a war that it was slow to join. Whereas Russia and Prussia would have seen Napoleon dethroned, believing him to be an existential threat to peace in Europe, Metternich saw Napoleon as a useful guarantor of French internal stability. After he replaced the warlike Stadion as Chancellor in 1809, Metternich had pursued a policy of détente with Napoleon, even arranging a marriage between the French emperor and the Kaiser's favorite daughter, Marie-Louise; her child was heir to the French imperial throne. As such, the Austrians strove to retain the Bonapartist throne, despite their allies' second thoughts. Their case was aided by Napoleon's resurgence. Despite the catastrophic failure of the Russian campaign, Napoleon quickly rebuilt his army. In May 1813, he struck back, defeating the combined armies of the Russians and Prussians at Lützen and again at Bautzen; they were fortunate when on 4 June Napoleon proposed an armistice, ostensibly to facilitate a peace congress in neutral Prague.