

125 Lee Eysturlid, The Formative Influences and Campaigns of Archduke Charles (Westport: Greenwood, 2000), 26. 126 Charles, Archduke of Austria, Ausgewählte Militärische Schriften, ed. Freiherr von Waldtstätten (Berlin: Richard Wilhelmi 1882), 28.

Similar to Clausewitz's explanation of deployment in depth, the intention behind Charles's oblique order was to keep the bulk of one's forces out of combat, but without the same clarity of purpose. 127 In On War, Clausewitz argues that the best way to destroy the enemy army is to retain the greatest possible reserve and employ it after the battle proper in an aggressive pursuit.

The chaos, destruction, and mental and physical exhaustion of combat naturally throws even well-disciplined units into disorder. As a matter of function, troops previously engaged in combat need time to restore order, collect stragglers, and distribute fresh ammunition before they can effectively pursue the enemy while reserve units can undertake the pursuit immediately. 128 ther than using forces successively to apply consistent pressure, Charles believed that the wing making the attack would attempt to restore order and resume the attack after the necessary pause. 129 The fact that doing so likewise gives the enemy time to restore order was not considered, nor that an enemy with strong reserves could exploit this pause for a devastating counterattack. Lee Eysturlid directly compared Charles's doctrine with that of the Seven Years War. 130 Under new battlefield conditions, this doctrine could no longer be useful.

It should be clear from this discussion that Charles's tactical thinking remained dominated by the 'battle of lines' and that it had no defined place for the use of operationally independent forces in concert on the battlefield. Nevertheless, he organized the Austrian army along modern lines for the opening maneuvers of 1809, activating corps on 2 February 1809.

Charles divided the Austrian army into nine army corps and two reserve corps. The army corps 127 Charles, Militärische Schriften, 30. 128 Clausewitz, Clausewitz, On War, 206, 241, 264 129 Charles, Militärische Schriften, 31. 130 Eysturlid, The Formative Influences, Ideas, and Campaigns of Archduke Carl of Austria, 43. Furthermore, Charles quotes Field Marshal Maximilian von Browne, who claimed the tactics of the ancient Romans applied in his own day. he had codified his thinking in his Principles of War quite clearly. Dispensing with the cordon warfare en vogue with many Austrian commanders, he stated plainly that the best method for defending a river line was to remain concentrated behind it and attack the enemy once a portion of his troops had crossed. 133 Certainly Johann Beaulieu would not have been so easily dislocated from his defense behind the Mincio in northern Italy in 1796 if he had adhered to this principle. 134 By keeping his army concentrated and allowing Napoleon to cross a portion of his army over the Stadler arm of the Danube, Charles attained great numerical superiority against an enemy with a single line of retreat, and one intermittently compromised by a fragile bridge. 135 vertheless, despite a near-ideal situation on the first day of battle, the results fell short of expectations. The principle cause of this disappointment was in the outdated and staid Austrian tactics. The commanders of each column spent too much time performing set-piece deployments from their marching columns into battle lines, while Charles's disposition for the day had made the movements of the columns dependent on those of their neighbors. 136 The Austrian General Staff history of the 1809 campaign concludes that Austrian commanders, under the spell of linear tactics, rarely succeeded in shock combat with large bodies of troops. However willing to strike 133 Archduke Charles, Militärische Schriften, 24, 34. 134 Napoleon pierced Beaulieu's extended defensive chain with relative ease in the 30 May Battle of Borghetto during the Venetian Phase of his First Italian Campaign. See David Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon, 86. 135 Moriz von Angeli, Erzherzog Carl von Österreich als Feldherr und Heeresorganisitor (Vienna: W. Braumüller, 1896-7), 5: 306. 136 Muir, Tactics, 144-45. the Austrian commanders were, they fell victim to an unsuitable tactical form. 137 Delay followed delay, and thanks to the excellent combat leadership of Napoleon, Jean Lannes, and Masséna, the French survived the first day of battle, repulsing the uncoordinated Austrian attacks (Map A.2).