

Schwarzenberg described the Bohemian Army's movements in a 23 August letter to his wife. 77 Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany, 2: 107. 78 Ibid., 138. 79 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 16 August 1813, Schwarzenberg, Briefe, No. 243, 328. This letter illustrates Schwarzenberg's strategic mindset, which consistently encompassed the combined efforts of the Allied armies in Silesia and North Germany as well as his own. He pays particular attention to Blücher's maneuvers, reporting that the Prussian general drove back the French in Silesia with a series of fierce advance-guard engagements. Turning to his own army's maneuvers, he noted that only St. Cyr's corps remained on the western bank of the Elbe, but he believed Napoleon would shift his army to face him. By advancing down the Elbe, the Allied commander in chief knew he would draw Napoleon into a battle. Schwarzenberg prepared for a confrontation with the emperor and his main force, noting the importance of minimizing detachments and remaining concentrated for the main battle. As such, he could spare no force to cover his base of communications at Prague. This willingness to ignore an Imperial occupation of his base, rather than jeopardize the campaign over a raid on his communications, represents an abandonment of the positional fixations that plagued earlier Austrian commanders. However, if Napoleon were to descend into Bohemia with his main army, Schwarzenberg planned to combine with Blücher and meet Napoleon in battle, crushing the French with overwhelming force. 80 The ensuing campaign miscarried, but not because the strategic thought of the Austrian headquarters was unsound.

Upon learning that the Army of Bohemia had debouched over the Bohemian frontier to attack St. Cyr at Dresden, Napoleon rushed from Lusatia to defend his base with 100,000 men and sent Dominique Vandamme's I Corps to cut off the Allies from Bohemia if they retreated.

In the meantime, Jacques Macdonald continued to pursue Blücher deeper into Silesia with the 100,000 men of the newly-formed Army of the Bober while Oudinot drove on Berlin with an eponymous army of 70,000, supported by the 30,000 men of Davout's XIII Corps at Hamburg. At Dresden, Napoleon arrived late to the defensive fighting on 26 August; on the 27th, he counterattacked. With rain-choked streams dividing the Allied wings from their center, and Johann von Klenau's left wing arriving too late to participate in the battle, Napoleon enveloped their left and right flanks to inflict a punishing defeat. Murat with the French right captured 13,000 prisoners, and the Allies lost 38,000 men to Napoleon's 10,000 in total (Map A.8). 81 Although the Battle of Dresden was ultimately a considerable defeat for the Allies, Schwarzenberg considered the campaign a qualified success, as it had achieved its chief object. 83 Leggiere, Blücher: Scourge of Napoleon, (Norman: Oklahoma University Press, 2014), 276-278. 84 Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany, 2: 312-316. completing his isolation, resulting in the destruction of the corps and the capture of the French commander and eighty-two guns (Map A.9). 85 Even Napoleon could not be everywhere at once.