

Overall, the strategy of the Allied armies in the Fall Campaign of 1813 suited Austria's situation. This reflects well on the military reforms of Maria Theresa, Joseph II, and Archduke Charles, which ensured that Austria remained a strong and secure state in a vicious anarchic world, as well as the diplomacy of Metternich, which carefully husbanded this strength for the opportune time. As such, Austria possessed the diplomatic clout and military strength to compose the main war plan and appoint the nominal commander in chief. The Reichenbach Plan balanced the possibility of a negotiated peace and a bloody decision by arms. Given Napoleon's dazzling military skill and the parity of forces, the plan made a virtue of necessity. The Allied armies as a rule exposed themselves to as little unnecessary risk as possible in the 'wearing out' phase through September, during which Napoleon may have acquiesced. Owing to the extreme wastage of his forces, his military fortunes in Germany grew bleak as the balance of strength increasingly favored the Allies. The Allies brought Napoleon to battle with the advantage in numbers firmly on their side, but that was in itself no guarantee of victory. To win the battle and ensure their advantage was not wasted, sound modern tactics and battlefield organization of the kind pioneered since the Revolutionary Wars were imperative. they brought Napoleon to battle at Leipzig, but the battle still needed to be won. While Austrian senior officers continued to give uninspired performances, improvements in the Austrian army's battlefield organization, formations, and tactical doctrines ensured the strategic advantage gained in the Fall Campaign would not be wasted as in previous campaigns against Napoleon.

Tactics in the broadest sense encompass more than the specific decisions of commanders ('left, right, or down the middle') in combat. Methods of organization commonly have great tactical significance on the battlefield; the Napoleonic system of multiple army corps including every arm of the service revolutionized the way battles were fought. At the highest level, 'grand tactics' encroach upon strategy; this connection, solidly established in the Napoleonic Wars, is now understood to be the operational art studied in modern armies. As such, the discussion of tactics involves several closely related topics with direct significance to armies in battle.

Battles and campaigns in which a smaller force defeated a more powerful enemy attract great attention from historians and enthusiasts alike. Historians believe that such battles can reveal principles of war that can supersede the obvious advantage of superior numbers; they are especially important for those seeking to draw practical lessons from military history. As Clausewitz observed, it would be a peculiar theory of war that left off just where the need was greatest. Marathon, Gaugamela, and Cannae have been canonized as masterpieces in no small part on account of the numerical inferiority of the victors. In the black powder era of firearms, Charles XII and Frederick the Great famously gained several battles against long numerical odds in the linear warfare of the eighteenth century. The former's Russian enemies suffered terrible defeats at Narva in 1700 and Holowcyzn in 1708 despite the balance of forces being 3-1 in their favor in each case. Frederick the Great won battles against 2-1 odds at Soor, Rossbach, and Leuthen. Although Napoleon could match any of his predecessors in terms of military skill, he never triumphed against odds of 2-1 or greater in a major battle; the closest is the Battle of Dresden, where the 180,000 Allied soldiers represented an advantage of 3-2 against Napoleon's 120,000. He largely succeeded in attaining superiority or at least avoided marked inferiority in his battles; when he failed to do so, as at Aspern-Essling, Leipzig, Laon, Arcis-Sur-Aube, and Waterloo, he lost. The reason for this discrepancy lies in the tactical transformation of European armies during the French Wars.