

Reinforced during the night, Napoleon nearly succeeded in breaking Charles's army on the second day of battle. Lannes's II Corps drove back the Austrian center until Charles's corps of grenadiers began to press its flank. Charles succeeded in repulsing Lannes's breakthrough attempt, but this defensive success required the use of his only reserve. 138 Given the disparity of forces involved, this demonstrates the poor economy of force with which Charles conducted the battle. Repeated ruptures of the pontoon bridge over the Danube prevented Louis-Nicolas Davout's III Corps from joining the battle before it was lost. Had Davout's corps arrived in strength, French victory would have been all but certain. After Napoleon ordered the retreat across the single unstable bridge to Lobau island, Charles did not pursue with his exhausted troops, but simply cannonaded the French as they withdrew. 139 One can hardly imagine Napoleon or nearly any of the French marshals (save Bernadotte) contenting themselves with merely holding the field against a weaker enemy withdrawing over a precarious string of pontoons.

Charles issued new tactical instructions in the aftermath of the battle. On 5 June, he recommended the mass of half divisions as the main infantry formation, covered by a light skirmish chain. 140 Artillery would occupy the wide intervals between battalions. For cavalry, he 137 Krieg 1809, prepared by the staff of the k.k. Kriegsarchiv as part of the series Kriege unter der Regierung des Kaisers Franz, (Vienna: Seidel und Sohn, 1907-10), 1: 111. 138 Gill, Thunder on the Danube, 2: "Chapter 3, Aspern: Crisis in the Centre." 139 Gill, Thunder on the Danube, 2: "Chapter 3, Aspern: 22 May: The Most Frightful Day." 140 In Napoleonic contexts, 'column' usually refers to a column of divisions, each division comprising two companies or platoons. However, it can also refer to columns of companies. French battalions commonly fought on a front of one company when the flank companies of grenadiers and voltigeurs were detached. The Austrian emphasized control and formation discipline, instructing squadrons not to gallop everywhere, and so arrive dispersed and breathless, but rather to move from slower to faster paces during the charge. Maintaining cavalry bodies in support of the charge was crucial. Charles furthermore instructed column commanders to show greater aggression, noting that in previous battles, they retreated to maintain lateral connections when a neighboring column was pushed back. Instead, he directed column commanders to attack the enemy's flanks when they pushed back an adjacent column, and so win space for that column to rejoin combat with a counterattack. 141 arles's 7 June instructions focused on the use of artillery in greater detail. He recommended commanders retain a large body of guns in reserve to ensure fire superiority at the decisive moment of the battle. He also denounced the practice of prolonged and indecisive cannonades. Artillery was not to be used in close range engagements in broken terrain, where enemy infantry could harass the gunners with skirmishing fire. Instead, the guns were to be sited on open ground, covered by a chain of skirmishers, and supported by nearby battalion masses.