

inhibiting it from defending its remaining territory. The destruction of enemy forces may manifest as the invasion and simple devastation of his provinces. Clausewitz considered the Duke of Wellington's campaigns in Portugal, where French forces withered in territory stripped of provisions, an excellent example of the destruction of enemy forces. 93 Forcing the enemy to march and countermarch in depleted territory affects his destruction in the same way. Marches are a force of active destruction upon an army, comparable to an engagement. 94 Not for nothing did Vegetius remark that a great general could destroy his enemy more by famine and want of provisions than by the sword.

Continuous wastage is the core of an effective defensive strategy. In 1812, the prolonged advance into the Russian interior led to incredible wastage among Napoleon's armies while the Russians carefully husbanded their strength. After the balance of force tipped in their favor, the Russians began their counteroffensive against the weakened remnants of the French army.

Clausewitz calls this moment, the shift to the offensive against a weakened enemy, 'drawing the flashing sword of vengeance,' the most brilliant moment of the defense. In pursuit operations, he recommends the use of a parallel route, destroying the enemy by forcing them to overexert their fleeing troops to prevent being cut off from their line of retreat. 95 While Napoleon fought several sanguinary engagements during the campaign of 1812, the great bulk of his losses resulted from privation, exhaustion, desertion, straggling, and exposure to the extremes of heat and cold. 96 chwarzenberg and the other Allied commanders, unwilling to fight Napoleon in a general engagement with the state of force parity in the Fall of 1813, employed a similar method.

Rather than striking Napoleon's forces with shot and steel, the combined Allied campaign inflicted terrible losses on the Imperials through privation and physical exhaustion. After the failure at Dresden, the Allied armies steadfastly denied Napoleon the rapid and bloody decision he chased with desperation throughout the Fall Campaign, as time was not on his side. The longer the campaign lasted, the more Napoleon's troops would suffer, as the exterior line of the Allies facilitated threats to his armies' communications. Facing serious dangers from all corners, advances against any one of the three Allied armies would leave French communications exposed. The Allied plan of avoiding battle and targeting French communications and secondary armies negated the advantages of Napoleon's interior lines. Unable to land his intended blows on Blücher or Schwarzenberg, Napoleon repeatedly had to march and countermarch to keep his communications secure against the other Allied armies, while being unable to threaten their strategic flanks in turn. 97 On 20 September, Schwarzenberg explained the dire straits of Napoleon's forces: its goals were the same, and it soon produced results. In less than one month of campaigning since the end of the armistice, Napoleon lost 200,000 men to all causes along with 300 guns. 99 For comparison, after the shattering defeat at Jena, the Prussian army lost roughly 165,000 men in a wave of shocking capitulations during Napoleon’s ruthless pursuit. 100 Napoleon’s losses in the first month of the Fall Campaign represented a smaller proportion of his forces than Prussian losses in 1806, but every day that passed without a decisive battle weakened his position. While the Allies also suffered considerable losses due to privation and desertion, three advantages worked to limit the damage. First, they enjoyed superior numbers from the beginning. Second, the three Allied armies drew their supplies from a greater overall area than the Imperials, having Brandenburg, Silesia, and Bohemia to support the fighting men, while the Imperials spent most of the Fall Campaign in Saxony, thus exhausting local supplies more quickly. Finally, the continued flow of British subsidies and materiel aid gave the Allies a further advantage in the replacement of inevitable wastage. 101