

The linear armies of the eighteenth century shared many fundamental similarities with the armies of antiquity and the middle ages, despite their universal use of firearms. Like the hoplite phalanx, the physical integrity of the Frederician line of battle represented life or death. Once broken, it unraveled, and could not be repaired in a timely manner, no matter the number of troops available. The charge of the Bayreuth Dragoons during the 1745 Battle of Hohenfriedburg demonstrates this most powerfully. A single gap in the Austrian battle line allowed a mere ten squadrons of Prussian cavalry to roll up both main lines of Austrian infantry.

The 1757 battles at Rossbach and Leuthen similarly reveal the critical vulnerability of a linear army to flank attacks. At Kesselsdorf in 1745 and later at Rossbach, the Prussians won major victories while the bulk of their infantry remained unengaged. Breaking through the enemy line at one point, the left and right wing, respectively, sufficed to drive their Austro-Saxon and French-Imperial enemies from the field regardless of the balance of forces. 115 In eighteenth century battles, "a wing overrun and driven out of line decides the fate of the flank that has held fast," in Clausewitz's formulation. 116 Thus, while victories comparable to the famous battles of Antiquity had become rare as a symmetry of military skill came to define European warfare, an aggressive commander with an efficient, well-disciplined army could still triumph against long odds by attaining a local success and ruthlessly exploiting it. In Napoleon's time, such expedients had become almost irrelevant. As Clausewitz keenly observed, European armies had developed great skill in the employment of reserves, which facilitated their use almost anywhere on the battlefield under almost any conditions. 117 deed, in many battles, the main task of the commander was to decide the time and place for the commitment of reserves. Thus, methods of battle came to be defined by the use of reserves. In his tactical writings, Ferdinand Foch delineated two kinds of battle: the 'parallel battle,' in which the reserve is used 'as a magazine' to prolong the battle and outlast the enemy, and the 'maneuver battle,' where the reserve is earmarked for use 'as a club' to smash the enemy after their own reserves had been consumed. Napoleon naturally served as the exemplar of the 'maneuver battle' tactician. 118 have reserves at their disposal, commanders instituted measures to ensure the utmost economy of force, maximizing their ability to control the battle and minimizing unnecessary exhaustion of strength. To a great degree, the attritional phase of the battle was the work of skirmish lines and artillery. Beyond the range of the enemy artillery, the bulk of the force stood formed in mobile columns to quickly intervene wherever needed. Commanders sought to commit their reserves while their enemy was still in the temporary disarray that afflicts even successful units after an engagement. The French émigré in Russian service, Langeron, aptly 117 Ibid., 251. See also Hans Delbrück, History of the Art of War, 4: 408-409. 118 Ferdinand Foch, Principles of War, trans. Hilaire Belloc (London: Chapman and Hall, 1921), 800. described the tempo of Napoleonic battle when he recalled the fighting around Leipzig on 18 October: I believed the position was assured, and went forward of the village to establish a chain of outposts. At this moment Ney [...] launched against me so unexpected an attack, and so impetuous and well directed, that I was unable to withstand it. Five columns, advancing at the charge and with fixed bayonets, rushed at the village and at my troops who were still scattered and whom I was trying to re-form. They were overthrown and forced to retire in a hurry. I was swept along by the fugitives, but I really cannot blame their sudden retreat because it was impossible to hold out, and I must confess that they moved as fast as I could manage ... Fortunately, I still had considerable reserves, and after letting the regiments which had been expelled from Schönefeld pass through the gaps between them, I soon did to the enemy what he had done to me, because my columns were in good order and his troops were by this time scattered. 119 gether with the organization of the army into combined arms corps and divisions, the central importance of reserves gave subordinate commanders more control over their engagements. Whereas their chief role in linear armies was to relay orders and provide an example of courage, Napoleonic era officers could choose the time and place to commit their reserves. This allowed them to make more complex plans and react more forcefully than their more circumscribed counterparts from the age of linear warfare. 120 In the infantry, even the basic tactical unit, the battalion, gained significant independence in battle, able to subdivide and maneuver according to the commander's professional judgement and initiative.