

Similarly, the cavalry needed to be ready to charge in defense of the horse artillery, which fought at closer ranges, thanks to its greater mobility. The whole battery should share a single fire mission, and individual guns detached only in extremely rare circumstances. During enemy attacks, the artillery was to refrain from answering the enemy's counter-battery fire and focus instead on the closed bodies of their troops; suppressing the enemy's guns took paramount importance when supporting a friendly attack. Concentrated battery fire was crucial for 'battalion mass' was essentially a column of companies in this manner. The 'division mass' closely resembled the French column of divisions but was rarely used. As such, 'column' and 'mass' were largely synonymous during the Napoleonic Wars when referring to battalion formations. The battalion column should not be confused with the much larger aforementioned Abteilungen, often called Collonen in German and 'columns' in English. See Gunther Rothenberg, Napoleon's Great Adversaries,110-111. assaulting an enemy position, as was keeping troops ready to immediately exploit the effect of fire. 142 e Austrians trained continuously throughout the weeks following their first victory over Napoleon, to the satisfaction of their commander. Charles's recommendations in these documents are generally sensible as far as they go; the fact that he felt the need to issue them shows an unfortunately well-justified lack of confidence in his subordinate commanders.

However, like his Principles of War, these instructions suffered from deficiencies in key areas.

Most prominently, Charles had nothing to say on the operational use of combined arms units or how these independent formations should shape the battle, signaling his intention to fight with a still semi-unitary army. Furthermore, the instructions suffer from a lack of clarity regarding the nature of modern battle. Charles did not describe the tactical use of mobile column formations or the use of reserves across the battlefield, nor does he emphasize economy of force except regarding artillery. Thus, the central element of Napoleonic battles, the keeping of strong reserves to deliver powerful blows against an exhausted enemy, did not receive its due importance.

The final great clash between Napoleon and the Archduke Charles came one month later (Map A.3). Fought over ground largely adjacent to the battlefield of Aspern-Essling, the Battle of Wagram on 5-6 July 1809 saw Napoleon first feint a crossing toward the same location as in May, and then take advantage of the interior lines of Lobau Island to cross further east during a fierce storm. Napoleon had prepared this crossing with much greater care than in May, building several bridges over the Stadler arm and driving a line of piles into the riverbed to protect the bridges and disrupt the flow of the river. Napoleon's crossing from the eastern face of the island allowed him to nearly separate Klenau's VI Corps near Aspern from the main body of the Austrians behind the Russbach (Map A.4). Consequently, Charles had to commit his reserve cavalry and grenadiers prematurely to maintain the connection with the right wing of the army (Map A.5). Not only was Charles now forced to fight on an exterior line, but for most of the battle he lacked a general reserve. Outnumbered by 40,000 men, Charles was bitterly disappointed by Archduke John's failure to cover the thirty-five kilometers between Pressburg and Wagram to participate in the battle. 143 Moreover, because Napoleon had marshaled considerably superior numbers, he retained substantial reserve forces through both days of the battle (Map A.6). 144 The late nineteenth-century historian, Moriz von Angeli, argues that the poor marching performance of the Austrian corps compared to that of the French ensured the failure of the army to execute Charles's planned double envelopment. Regardless, the plentiful reserves available to Napoleon reduced the possibility that even threats to his flanks could have broken his army. 145 vertheless, the performance of the Austrians on 5 and 6 July reflects progress made in refining the army tactically throughout the French Wars. While the army lacked a general reserve throughout the battle, the individual army corps proved remarkably resilient in the face of the French onslaught. The main Austrian position behind the Russbach extended roughly six kilometers; even without a general reserve, the advance guard and three army corps occupying this line held it in great depth. The ratio of men to space (approximately 81,000 men for 6100 143 Many historians have blamed John for failing to arrive. The battle was decided by the exhaustion of IV Corps's reserves on the left wing, where John's corps should have arrived. While his force of 13,000 men was likely too small to decide the battle, a struggle against Napoleon's 170,000 men should not have been attempted without every available soldier. See Oskar Criste, Erzherzog Carl von Oesterreich: Ein Lebensbild, (Vienna: Braumüller, 1912), 3: 246. 144 Angeli, Carl, 5: 472-3. 145 Ibid., 5: 520. meters) was only slightly less than the Duke of Wellington's exceptionally deep deployment at Waterloo (68,000 men on a 4100 meter front). 146 As a result of the great depth of the main position, the Austrians did not break under the French assault, being able to continually feed in fresh troops to maintain the combat. Despite their numerical inferiority, the Austrians resisted Napoleon for two days before the last reserves of the left wing were consumed and the Russbach line had to be abandoned. The Austrians retreated unbroken and in good order. They brought with them thousands of French prisoners and more enemy cannon than the French took from them, and Klenau checked Masséna's pursuit in a sharp combat at Hollabrünn on 9 July 1809.