

Despite the victory at Kulm, Schwarzenberg found much that warranted complaint, as he decried to his wife those he called the weaklings, sycophants, babblers, critics, and general vermin that collected at Allied headquarters. More concretely, Alexander's habit of circumventing Schwarzenberg in the command of the Bohemian Army's Russian troops undermined his authority. While perhaps venting his frustrations in the aftermath of a defeat, one can sympathize with his remark that the very word 'coalition' had become terrible to his ears. 86 ter the electric opening to the Fall Campaign, operational maneuver dominated the succeeding weeks. Napoleon thrust toward Blücher, who retreated east across the Neiße and burned the bridges behind him. In response, the emperor mounted an attack toward Bernadotte (Map A.10). 88 Schwarzenberg rejoiced in the success at Dennewitz, reporting the capture of 10,000 prisoners and 60 guns and claiming the Army of Berlin had practically dissolved in its retreat. 89 tably, Schwarzenberg did not measure success in terms of territory or strategic points, as Archduke Charles did, but by damage inflicted on the Imperial armies. 90 Similarly, Radetzky judged the opening of the Fall Campaign a success, despite the blow Napoleon landed at Dresden. Writing on 4 September, he noted with approval the virtual destruction of Vandamme's corps at the Battle of Kulm, as well as the heavy losses among Macdonald's Army of the Bober. While French losses at the 23 August Battle of Großbeeren did not match the extent of the other Allied victories, the lost battle degraded imperial combat strength and morale, 88 Leggiere, Napoleon and Berlin, 193-209. 89 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 13 September 1813, Schwarzenberg, Briefe, No. 249, 336. 90 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 15 September 1813, Ibid., No. 250, 337. as Oudinot conducted his headlong retreat from the gates of Berlin to Wittenberg on the Elbe. 91 oking ahead to the climax of the campaign, Schwarzenberg would frame the victory at Leipzig in these terms. While Archduke Charles almost never mentioned the capture of guns or prisoners, Schwarzenberg proudly listed to his wife the three French corps commanders, 200 cannon, 800 wagons, and tens of thousands of prisoners taken from the vanquished French as trophies of the victory; the French had suffered a monumental defeat. 92 roughout the Fall Campaign, the Austrians pursued the destruction of Napoleon's fighting strength. Napoleon attempted to realize this same objective through a rapid advance that led to a battle of annihilation, typically before his target could receive reinforcements. In the Ulm campaign of 1805, he immediately cut off and enveloped the unfortunate Karl Mack von Leiberich's army in Swabia before Mikhail Kutuzov's Russians could join him in strength; again in 1806, Napoleon ruthlessly destroyed the Prussian army before the Russians could come to their aid. In each case, Napoleon achieved decisive results within a month of opening the campaign. The destruction of the enemy forces can proceed in various ways and at different rates. In the case of Napoleon's campaigns of 1805 and 1806, he achieved this destruction through direct physical force, typically in one or two general engagements. However, this is not the only means of prosecuting a strategy of annihilation; the enemy must simply be put in a state where he cannot continue the fight. Destruction of the enemy army may occur through prolonged wastage of his forces, with a view toward easing the final decision. Often, the destruction takes place by degrees, as the conquest of enemy territory weakens the enemy army, 91 Radetzky, Denkschriften, 164. 92 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 20 October 1813, Schwarzenberg, Briefe, No. 258, 348. Schwarzenberg stated that Bertrand, Lauriston, and Reynier were captured. However, Bertrand was in fact still commanding IV Corps, and retreated across the Rhine with the rest of the French army. The latter two did fall into Allied hands as did the king of Saxony.