

My pursuing vanguard made several hundred prisoners, who were almost dying of hunger. The road is covered with dead horses; the lack of food of all kinds is extraordinary, and it is to be hoped that this type of war will soon put the enemy army in a considerable degree of hardship. Heaven is favorable to us. This rain is destroying the troops as they march, so I hope it will give us a significant advantage. If Napoleon marches against Blücher, he will not accept a battle, but will retire on his magazines, and the French army will again, without achieving any purpose, become fatigued and starve in plundered Lusatia. But if Napoleon marches against the crown prince, Blücher can attack his rear. 98 though the plan proceeded more slowly and less directly than Napoleon's campaigns, 97 Leggiere, "Prometheus Chained," 338-339. 98 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 20 September 1813, Schwarzenberg, Briefe, No. 252, 339. its goals were the same, and it soon produced results. In less than one month of campaigning since the end of the armistice, Napoleon lost 200,000 men to all causes along with 300 guns. 99 r comparison, after the shattering defeat at Jena, the Prussian army lost roughly 165,000 men in a wave of shocking capitulations during Napoleon's ruthless pursuit. 100 Napoleon's losses in the first month of the Fall Campaign represented a smaller proportion of his forces than Prussian losses in 1806, but every day that passed without a decisive battle weakened his position. While the Allies also suffered considerable losses due to privation and desertion, three advantages worked to limit the damage. First, they enjoyed superior numbers from the beginning. Second, the three Allied armies drew their supplies from a greater overall area than the Imperials, having With Blücher's 'retreat' west to Halle, the Allied armies were finally in supporting distance for a battle on an unprecedented scale. By 13 October, Schwarzenberg had issued dispositions in explicit terms detailing his intention to envelop Napoleon's army at Leipzig, cut off its retreat with his main force, and annihilate it (Map A.13). 111 Napoleon decided to concentrate all his available forces at Leipzig. 112 The time had come for "the decision of infinite consequence," in Schwarzenberg's words. 113 Hemmed in on all sides, with his reserves of men and ammunition exhausted against vastly superior forces, Napoleon abandoned Leipzig after four days of battle, leading to the collapse of his European empire.

Ultimately, Schwarzenberg and Radetzky's war plan, with Blücher's modifications and energetic execution, brought Napoleon to battle on favorable terms and decisively defeated the French 'God of War.' The Austrian battle plan was distinctly imperfect, and the 1813 campaign was waged by Allied powers, reliant on consensus across multiple nations, rather than the dictation of any single power. However, Schwarzenberg and Radetzky deserve credit for making the key act of judgement in the campaign, to seek a decision against Napoleon and his main army at Leipzig. This final phase of the campaign protects the Austrians from charges that they had learned nothing from Napoleon's strategy.