

The ideal was to physically engage the enemy with the fewest possible troops while retaining the greatest possible reserve. Troops still fresh at the end of a battle could execute a mass attack to decide the battle, cover a retreat, or spearhead an aggressive pursuit. The balance of reserves between combatants was frequently the decisive factor in victory and defeat. 121 iven the greater flexibility and relative abundance of reserve forces on the Napoleonic battlefield, it should come as no surprise that the balance of numerical strength assumed greater importance than during the days of Frederick the Great and Charles XII. While an enveloping attack still offered a force multiplier that could produce disproportionate results, it did so primarily by threatening to cut the enemy's line of retreat. This danger usually compelled a commander to commit forces to protect his escape route, thus reducing his available reserves.

Clausewitz's comment that "every day, numbers become more decisive" reflects one of the fundamental transformations in warfare he witnessed at the height of the French Wars. 122 The following examines four battles during the 1809-1813 period in which the Austrians and their allies enjoyed numerical superiority over the French and one in which they did not. Strategic events shaped each battle before the opening shots, but the way each battle unfolded reveals the ways in which the Austrians either adapted or failed to adapt to the new tactical methods.

The War of the Fifth Coalition in 1809 is commonly considered the debut of a modernized Austrian army under the Archduke Charles. Even more than the 21-22 May Battle of Aspern-Essling, which marked Napoleon's first defeat in a major battle, the 5-6 July Battle of Wagram is heralded as the start of a new phase in the Napoleonic Wars, if not in warfare itself. 123 t only did Napoleon fail to destroy his enemy on the field, but the numerically inferior Austrians managed to retire with thousands of French prisoners in tow; they even captured more standards and cannon than the French took from them. This was a first for armies under the French emperor's direct command, and a troublesome portent for the future. The retreating Austrians retained significant fighting spirit, inflicting a check on André Masséna's pursuing IV 122 Ibid., 282.

123 See Robert M. Epstein, Napoleon's Last Victory and the Emergence of Modern War (Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1994).

Corps in a sharp combat at Hollabrunn on 9 July. Although the following 9-10 July combat and Armistice of Znaim marked the conclusion of a victorious campaign, it would be Napoleon's last.

Despite the Austrian army's creditable performances on the Marchfeld at Wagram, it continued to lag behind the French in several critical areas. Archduke Charles defined the Habsburg army in 1809 more than any other individual; having won his laurels fighting the French Republic starting in 1793. By 1806, he had attained far reaching control over the administration of the army as well as leadership in the field. In this capacity, Charles instituted and facilitated useful if conservative reforms of the army's tactics, organization, and strategic doctrine. 124 Nevertheless, Charles received his military education in the school of the eighteenth century and remained wedded to antiquated ideas. His Principles of War, published in 1806 for the instruction of senior officers in strategy and operations, bore the stamp of Henry Lloyd, the famous Welsh theorist and commentator on the Seven Years War, among other eighteenth century military thinkers. 125 Broadly, the Austrians continued to conceptualize the army on the battlefield in essentially linear terms. The army would consist of two lines of battle and a small reserve that served to cover a potential retreat rather than contribute to victory. Rather than trusting the flexibility of modern infantry and the availability of reserves, Charles remained concerned by the possibility of an entire line unraveling under the weight of a flank attack. 126 reover, this document held the oblique order of battle as an ideal. The most intriguing aspect of his preference for the oblique order is the rationalization for this antiquated deployment. 124 See Gunther E. Rothenberg, Napoleon's Great Adversaries.