

However, the final confrontation of the campaign, the combat of Znaim on 10-11 July, lacked even these meagre consolations for the defeat at Wagram. Despite defending a river with superior numbers, the Austrians sustained sharp losses to Marmont's XI Corps, thus allowing Masséna's IV Corps to arrive and support the attack. The prospect of further French reinforcements convinced Charles to accept an armistice; the campaign was over, as was Charles's career as a field commander. 147 e defeat in the War of the Fifth Coalition had serious repercussions for the Austrian army. Territorial losses, indemnity payments, and treaty limitations on the size of the army inhibited large scale changes to structure and doctrine after 1809. However, Napoleon's catastrophic defeat in Russia provided an opportunity for the Austrians to renegotiate their subordination to his international system; fielding an army to assert Austrian interests became Vienna's first priority. While preparation for such an eventuality had been underway since 1810, fielding a powerful army in Bohemia represented an immense challenge. Schwarzenberg commanded the army and Radetzky served as his chief of staff. In a similar position to the French army during the opening phase of the Revolutionary Wars, many of the soldiers mustered for the Army of Bohemia received very limited training. The army reduction of 1810 was structured to retain soldiers in the branches that required the longest training, such as artillery and engineers, as much as possible. 148 As such, the cuts had fallen hardest on the infantry. All armies strove to field as many men as possible and replace monumental losses. All thus faced the problem of incorporating new recruits, and the later Napoleonic Wars witnessed several such incidents of convergent evolution.

Like the French in the Revolutionary Wars, Schwarzenberg and Radetzky made a virtue of necessity. Schwarzenberg issued tactical instructions that outlined his thinking to the senior officers of the army. While formations remained the purview of the commander in action, Schwarzenberg recommended the battalion column or mass as the chief infantry formation.

More compact than the line, battalion masses maneuvered more easily than linear formations, even if composed of imperfectly trained troops. Schwarzenberg's instructions specify that all units not assigned to a specific position be kept in closed columns for greater mobility while awaiting orders. When committed, they were to reach their position by the shortest route. As these formations were vulnerable to artillery, Schwarzenberg emphasized they be protected by terrain whenever possible. 149 hwarzenberg recommended that subordinates arrange their battalions in a checkerboard formation of masses with deployment intervals. The gaps between masses would be covered by 148 Radetzky, 9.

149 Karl-Phillipp zu Schwarzenberg, "Instruction über die taktische Verhaltungen," in Beiträge zur Geschichte des österreichischen Heerwesens (Vienna: Siedel und Sohn, 1872), 1: 265-66.