

Although Schwarzenberg suffered a serious defeat at Dresden, the campaign had only just begun; Napoleon won one battle, but before the week was out, his armies would lose three. (Map A.9). Notably, accounts of the latter movement 'read' almost exactly like the celebrated mobility of French armies. Screened by a chain of skirmishers and arrayed in deep order to provide ample reserves, Colloredo led his division in several columns over the rough terrain of the Bohemian foothills. 155 Vandamme deployed one brigade to protect his flank, but after it had to withdraw, an Austrian cavalry charge cut into the exposed position, capturing 1400 prisoners.

However, Colloredo hesitated in his attack, and Kleist's corps thus suffered serious losses as the French struggled to escape; only two battalions from Frederick Bianchi's Austrian division briefly participated, taking prisoners as the enemy retreated. foot_46 Thus, although an over-cautious commander limited the fruits of the victory, the Austrians demonstrated the military skills that would contribute to the decisive victory in the next great clash with Napoleon.

As noted, the 1813 campaign in Germany climaxed in the 16-19 October Battle of Leipzig. Blücher and Bernadotte crossed the Elbe, then retreated west to evade Napoleon's counteroffensive at Bad Düben while Schwarzenberg and Bennigsen approached Napoleon's new position at Leipzig from the south (Maps A.10-A.13). Blücher and Bernadotte then turned south to ensure that a decisive clash would take place. More than 500,000 men fought in the battle that would determine the fate of Europe. By all reliable measures, it was the greatest battle fought in the history of the world to that point. Napoleon anchored his front on the line of villages of Liebertwolkwitz on his left, Wachau in the center, and Markkleeberg on his right. In his first echelon, he posted V, II, and VIII Corps. He positioned the Guard Artillery in his grand battery on the Gallows Hill between Wachau and Liebertwolkwitz. He kept XI and IX Corps in reserve, along with I, II, IV, and V Cavalry Corps and the Imperial Guard, which consisted of two Young Guard corps, one corps of Old Guard, and the Guard Cavalry Corps. This was an extraordinarily deep deployment, massing more than 120,000 men on a front of 6400 meters. 157 the southern sector, the Allies advanced north against the French positions in seven columns on the 16 th . The five on the right, led by Klenau, Andrei Gortschakov, Pyotr Pahlen, Eugene of Württemberg, and Kleist, attacked the Liebertwolkwitz, Wachau, and Markkleeberg line of villages from east to west. West of the Pleiße River, Maximilian von Merveldt's column attempted to outflank the French line, attacking across the stream toward the village of Connewitz; further west, beyond the Elster River, Gyulay's column threatened the French line of retreat, which ran through the defile of Lindenau. The Russian Foot and Horse Guard stood in reserve, alongside the Prussian Guards and the Austrian grenadiers and cuirassiers (Map A.14).