

After the Allied armies breached the 'Natural Frontiers,' negotiations continued as the Allies summoned Caulaincourt to a peace congress at Châtillon, which met from 5-10 February, and briefly on 17 February. Metternich had succeeded in extracting concessions from British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh regarding the French frontier. While Britain would not consent to Antwerp remaining in French hands, much of the Rhineland among other territories could stay French. 187 Metternich's memoirs blame Napoleon's unwillingness to make peace for the failure of the congress. Metternich also claimed that he did not fear the Châtillon Congress would result in an "untimely settlement" with Napoleon making peace before he was overthrown, as Metternich claimed was his objective. foot_57 185 Ibid., Ibid., 158, 160. 186 Ibid., 168. 187 Ibid., [189] [190] . These other territories would include Nice on the Mediterranean, Savoy on the Western side of the Alps, and parts of the Netherlands; Castelreagh proposed the Meuse as the French border with a restored Dutch state.

As was often the case, Metternich was economical with the truth. That this offer was sincere can be seen from the fact that the Austrians (Stadion and Metternich) were furious that the tsar undermined it by not granting his representative the authority to sign an immediate peace should Napoleon accept the Frankfurt Proposals. In response, Metternich threatened to sign a separate peace and withdraw Austria from the coalition. 189 On his own initiative after the 18 February Battle of Montereau, Schwarzenberg proposed an armistice; the specific terms were to be negotiated from 24 February at Lusigny. As the shifting course of military events had interfered with diplomacy before, a standstill would simplify negotiations. These failed because Napoleon refused to compromise regarding the demarcation line for the ceasefire, demanding the evacuation of Allied armies beyond the French frontier. The talks were suspended on 5 March. 190 Nevertheless, the repeated efforts of the Austrians to negotiate with Napoleon in his weakened state show that until the last moment, they sought a limited political objective in the war with France. 191 As such, their strategy in the final campaign of the War of the Sixth Coalition must be judged through this lens.

Leading the Imperial far right wing during the Russian campaign of 1812, Schwarzenberg had personally witnessed the incredible devastation the war unleashed on both Russia and the French army. In a moment of political cynicism, he remarked in a letter to his wife that it was probably for the best that "both colossi" suffer, hoping that a more balanced international situation would result, rather than wishing to see one power permanently 189 Price, The End of Glory, 198. 190 Ibid., [199] [200] [201] In fact, even during the Hundred Days of 1815, Metternich with the tsar's approval offered to restore Napoleon's son to the French throne if he would return to exile. As uch, his later statements about believing the Bourbons alone could guarantee peace in France ring hollow. Metternich's memoirs obscure this point and Siemann's biography omits it. See Price, The End of Glory, 255-256, cf. Metternich, Memoirs, 1: 258. crippled. 192 Schwarzenberg personally believed France needed to be restored to the frontiers of 1789 and desired a regency for the King of Rome under Marie Louise. 193 He did not trust Napoleon's sincerity in peace negotiations. Writing on 1 December 1813, he mused that Napoleon's appointment of Caulaincourt was a feint, designed to present the appearance of peaceful intentions for public consumption: "I do not believe that at this moment he really thinks of peace after his great military misfortunes." 194 Nevertheless, Schwarzenberg's letters repeatedly emphasize a desire for moderation in the war, avoiding a march on Paris and the further chaos it would bring, as well as hope that the peace congress at Châtillon would be productive. 195 Coupled with his attempt to secure an armistice, his words and actions during the campaign indicate his willingness to reach a negotiated peace with Napoleon.