

The nature of the French Revolution, Napoleon, and the relationship between the two are divisive questions even today, but were even more vitally important during the War of the Sixth Coalition, when Napoleon's existence as a ruling monarch was on trial before the Great Powers of Europe. Napoleon portrayed himself during the Consulate as a peace maker. He ended the insurgency in the Vendée through a combination of force, negotiation, and compromise. Furthermore, he ended the War of the Second Coalition in the only general peace of the era, however short it was. Metternich believed that France's expansionism during the Revolution stemmed from domestic instability, and that Napoleon showed his value as a guarantor of civil peace in France. A strong France could serve as a useful counterweight to an overweening Russia. As a power in the middle of Europe, Austria sought equilibrium and strove to prevent the hegemony of any one state. 176 ushing Napoleon and leaving him helpless as a political and military actor was thus not necessarily desirable. While a general engagement with Napoleon's remaining forces could serve Austria's purposes, the limitation of objectives meant that other means of securing peace were theoretically available. After defeating Napoleon at Leipzig, the Allied armies chased Napoleon out of Germany (Maps A.17, A.18). From the historic city of Frankfurt, one day's march from the Rhine border, the Allied monarchs dispatched Auguste Saint-Aignan, the French emissary to Gotha and Weimar, with their peace terms on 9 November 1813. They demanded 176 Kissinger, A World Restored, 32, 59. independence for Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, and Italy, but would allow Napoleon to retain the throne of France and the Natural Frontiers, bought with so much blood during the Revolutionary Wars. In a letter to Caulaincourt, Metternich expressed no confidence the terms would be accepted, but that it was necessary to offer peace. 177 In December, he published a manifesto to France, expressing the Allies' respect and their offer to allow France greater territory than it had ever controlled under its kings; as he put it, "flattering the vanity instead of embittering the feelings of the nation." 178 The chief object of the Coalition was lasting peace, which would be all the harder to secure if Allied high-handedness stoked a peoples' war in France. As Robert Wilson, the British attaché at the headquarters of the Allied Main Army, keenly observed in a letter to his brother in December 1813, when events and the decisions of individuals determine its course. The Napoleonic wars did not have to end with France humbled, Napoleon in exile, and the Bourbon dynasty restored to their ancient throne. The restoration of 1814 occurred despite the efforts of influential figures like Metternich and Schwarzenberg, who continued to seek a more moderate peace. The nature of the French Revolution, Napoleon, and the relationship between the two are divisive questions even today, but were even more vitally important during the War of the Sixth Coalition, when Napoleon’s existence as a ruling monarch was on trial before the Great Powers of Europe. Napoleon portrayed himself during the Consulate as a peace maker. He ended the insurgency in the Vendée through a combination of force, negotiation, and compromise. Furthermore, he ended the War of the Second Coalition in the only general peace of the era, however short it was. Metternich believed that France’s expansionism during the Revolution stemmed from domestic instability, and that Napoleon showed his value as a guarantor of civil peace in France. A strong France could serve as a useful counterweight to an overweening Russia. As a power in the middle of Europe, Austria sought equilibrium and strove to prevent the hegemony of any one state. 176 Crushing Napoleon and leaving him helpless as a political and military actor was thus not necessarily desirable. While a general engagement with Napoleon’s remaining forces could serve Austria’s purposes, the limitation of objectives meant that other means of securing peace were theoretically available. After defeating Napoleon at Leipzig, the Allied armies chased Napoleon out of Germany (Maps A.17, A.18). From the historic city of Frankfurt, one day’s march from the Rhine border, the Allied monarchs dispatched Auguste Saint-Aignan, the French emissary to Gotha and Weimar, with their peace terms on 9 November 1813. They demanded 176 Kissinger, A World Restored, 32, 59.