

overlapping fields of fire from the first-and second-line battalions. Furthermore, space to maneuver allowed second line battalions to quickly aid any disorganized and vulnerable first line battalions from an enemy attack. While linear formations brought every musket into action, they required well-trained soldiers to maintain order while moving, or else time to deploy from column formation. Schwarzenberg considered the line's bayonet attack "highly uncertain" compared to that of the mass, which he preferred. 150 Hastily trained men in column formations moved more easily across battlefield terrain but could employ relatively little firepower. To compensate for this loss of firepower, the Austrians increasingly relied on light troops and artillery.

Schwarzenberg's instructions paid little attention to combat in line, which Charles considered ideal for attack and defense alike, only stating that when necessary, its deployment from column be carried out as quickly as possible. Instead, infantry firepower was to come from the skirmishers, whose fire would precede a bayonet charge in battalion mass. While the Austrians never extended the same trust to their skirmishers as did the French at their height, they increasingly delegated responsibility for fire action away from their close order infantry, with massed artillery becoming dominant. 151 It is interesting to note that as the quality of French infantry declined, Napoleon also came to rely on his heavy guns to carry the burden of the firefight. Schwarzenberg emphasized the importance of concentration and aggression for artillery commanders, recommending they engage the Imperials at the closest possible distance. foot_42 150 Ibid., 267. 151 Rothenberg, Napoleon's Great Adversaries, 184. See also Gunther Rothenberg, The Art of Warfare in the Age of Napoleon, (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978), 173.

In 1813, nearly 130,000 Austrians mustered in Bohemia for the war with Napoleon.

Joined by Prussian and Russian contingents to swell its numbers beyond 250,000 soldiers, Schwarzenberg's force became the main army of the coalition, hosting the three Allied monarchs. Rather than corps, the Austrian divisions were initially grouped into 'wings' of The experience at Dresden demonstrates the limitations of even the more flexible tactical system of the Napoleonic Wars, as terrain difficulties played a key role in its outcome. Due to Schwarzenberg's faulty disposition, his left wing was separated from the main body of the Allied army by the Weißeritz stream, crossable at only one location (Map A.8). Moreover, Klenau's column, which Schwarzenberg intended to support the isolated left wing, did not arrive in time.

Napoleon deployed one cavalry and one army corps under Joachim Murat against the Austrian left, which consisted of the divisions of Nikolaus von Weißenwolf and Alois von Liechtenstein commanded by Ignácz Gyulay, and Joseph de Mesko von Felsö-Kubiny's light division of Klenau's wing. On the far left, Mesko's division suffered the worst, with whole regiments forced to surrender to Murat's cavalry. The inability of the Austrian infantry to fire their muskets in the rain exacerbated the problem, opposed as they were by a strong cavalry force. After Klenau's main body finally arrived, it could do nothing but cover the retreat of Weißenwolf's and Liechtenstein's battered divisions. 154 e Battle of Dresden was the closest Napoleon came to a victory over a markedly stronger enemy, although the odds were not quite 2:1 against him. Rather than fundamental flaws in the Austrian army's tactical doctrine, the chief causes of the defeat included the poor deployment of Schwarzenberg's army on the terrain, Klenau's tardiness in supporting the left wing, and the heavy rains that swept Germany at the end of August 1813. At Dresden and later at the October 1813 Battle of Leipzig, misplaced faith in Friedrich von Langenau's knowledge and experience as a Saxon officer would contribute to Schwarzenberg's questionable use of terrain. Regardless, Napoleon's success proved fleeting as the other Allied armies defeated his secondary armies.