

To secure what we have, I still pronounce my belief that peace is necessary. Without the loss of 100,000 men, I believe we might have had the peace which is required for the attainment of the objects of Europe. If it is proclaimed that we are to make a crusade against France, and not sheathe our swords until we have planted our standards in Paris and struck off Buonaparte's head, then I should not talk of peace on the Rhine but very cheerfully make war all my life. If, however, the balance of power is the desideratum, then I must make my grenadier ardour [sic] subservient to the statesman's consideration and respect his "ne plus ultra." 179 vertheless, a few days later, he remarked in his personal diary with wry wit that even though the Allied sovereigns had foresworn an invasion of France, "the appetite grows with the eating." 180 In war, the intrusions of chance and chaos, of apprehension and terror, of the shame of defeat and the exultation of victory, often serve to overwhelm these attempts at rational calculation.

177 Siemann, Metternich, 375-376. 178 Metternich, Memoirs, 1: 214.

179 Robert Wilson, Private Diary of Travels, Personal Services, and Public Events: During the Mission Employed with the European Armies in the Campaigns of 1812 , 1813 , 1814 , (London, 1861), 244. 180 ), 244. 180 Ibid., 272.

There is some controversy in classifying the campaign of 1814 as one of limited objectives for the Allies, turning largely on the sincerity of the peace offers extended to Napoleon during the course of the war. Siemann argues that Metternich pursued Napoleon's overthrow from an early stage, and that his proposals for peace, at the Prague Congress, at 181 Ibid., 339-340. 182 Ibid., 385. 183 Price, The End of Glory, 187. 184 Ibid., 189.

Frankfurt, and at Châtillon, were only tactical measures to alienate French public opinion from Napoleon's war effort. This was the tack taken by Metternich's own memoirs, Siemann's most important source. 181 Siemann also produces contemporary statements to corroborate his stance, such as a letter to Wilhelmine von Sagan, Metternich's mistress, stating, "For years I have told myself: 'I shall kill Napoleon' and I shall establish peace in the world . . . and if Napoleon lives, if he rules-he will be smaller, as if he had never ruled!" 182 Nevertheless, there are many reasons to doubt the truth of Metternich's statements. As Munro Price's detailed narrative of the events of 1814 show, Metternich in his actions displayed greater concern towards constraining Russian power than in actually crushing Napoleon. He certainly did not share the tsar's indifferently concealed intention to enthrone Bernadotte in France, writing to Schwarzenberg that he would not sacrifice a single Austrian soldier to this end. 183 When the Frankfurt proposals were made, there was not yet any sign the Bourbons, the main alternative to Bernadotte and Napoleon, had the public support the Allies viewed as a necessity for a French government. 184 reover, Metternich undertook considerable risks in making his peace offers. At Frankfurt, the offer included a statement to the effect that Britain was willing to compromise on the matter of maritime rights, when in fact the British diplomats had offered no such concessions. While the 181 Ibid., 339-340. 182 Ibid., 385. 183 Price, The End of Glory, 187. 184 Ibid., 189. so-called Frankfurt Proposals of the three Continental powers would present the British with a fait accompli if Napoleon accepted, Metternich risked alienating a key ally if the proposal went nowhere. Metternich furthermore made sure to impress on Saint-Aignan how welcome the appointment of the pro-peace Caulaincourt as foreign minister would be at Allied headquarters. 185 In the end, complications in the Allied camp undermined the peace proposals; the British repudiated the maritime concessions while the tsar withdrew his support following the Austrian violation of Swiss neutrality. 186 If the purpose had been purely tactical, these developments would only serve to weaken the ruse, and had Napoleon seized the opportunity instead of delaying his response, withdrawing the offer would have inflamed with apparent duplicity the popular passions in France the Allies strove to defuse.