

In the north, Blücher advanced against the French with two corps commanded by Yorck and Langeron; the fighting reaching a fever pitch in the engagement around Möckern.

## The Battle of Leipzig provides fascinating examples of ongoing trends in European

warfare during the Revolutionary Era. While it is tempting to portray the various sectors as separate battles, the use of reserves shifted between the different sectors testifies to the essential unity of the battle. However frantic the fighting became from moment to moment, neither army shattered its opponent on the 16 th , but by nightfall, Napoleon had lost his European empire. The chief explanation for this result is the consumption of his reserves during the day's fighting, 157 The scaled maps available are not in universal agreement. Map A.14 in the Appendix shows the distance from Markkleeberg to Liebertwolkwitz to be approximately 4000 yards, while Vincent J. Esposito gives 4 miles as the distance. I have converted figures to meters in the text to facilitate comparison. Esposito's 4 miles or 6400 meters is thus a conservative figure in terms the force to space ratio of Napoleon's deployment. See Vincent J. Esposito, Atlas to Accompany Napoleon as a General by Count Yorck von Wartenburg, (West Point: U.S. Military Academy, 1955), Map 109. compared to the reinforcements the Allies could expect the following days. Napoleon appeared to be on the cusp of a decisive victory after II, V, and XI Corps ejected the Allies from Wachau and Liebertwolkwitz, exposing them to the massed fire of his grand battery on the Gallows Hill, the attack of the Young Guard, and the charges of Murat's cavalry in I, IV, and V Cavalry Corps, but he lacked the reserves to clinch the battle. XI, V, and II Young Guard Corps attacked toward the University Wood on the Allied right while II, VIII, and I Young Guard Corps attacked between Wachau and Markkleeberg. One column of the massed reserve cavalry supported the latter attack, while a second under Murat attempted to break the Allied center around Güldengossa. 158 The Allied reserves repulsed Napoleon's decisive attack across the battlefield; the Russian cuirassiers defeated Murat's cavalry column, the Russian 1 st Grenadier Division moved to support Kleist, and the 2 nd shifted to relieve the Allied columns near the University Wood. The Austrian reserve cavalry defeated the right column of Napoleon's cavalry, then attacked the squares of the Young Guard. 159 Not only did Blücher famously grapple with the better part of two army corps with strong cavalry support in the north, but Gyulay's threat to the French line of retreat forced Napoleon to commit Henri Bertrand's IV corps far from the main field of battle to support the Leipzig garrison troops under attack at Lindenau. The disposition of the Army of Bohemia on the 16 th has been widely criticized, principally for its failure to adequately account for the difficult terrain that would hinder Allied efforts on their left wing. The marshy ground between the Pleiße and the Elster Rivers obstructed Merveldt's attempts to advance his artillery, seriously weakening his attack. Nevertheless, the Allied columns fought well enough on the 16 th , as demonstrated by the even rate of attrition throughout the day. As a point of comparison, during the 18 June 1815 Battle of Waterloo, the Duke of Wellington's reserves dwindled to critical levels after a few hours, especially following the fall of La Haye Sainte, while Napoleon still retained the Imperial Guard and VI Corps as his reserve. 160 By contrast, at Leipzig, Napoleon was forced to commit his reserves first, and exhausted them by the end of the day. For the first time in their many wars with Napoleon, the Austrians conducted the battle with an economy of force on par with that of the French. structure by attacking in multiple waves. The 48 th 's second battalion led the attack, pushing back the French, but the success against the strong position was incomplete until the attack received the support of two Russian battalions. However, after Napoleon's main attack, Auenhayn fell into the hands of French II Corps. Victory in this engagement came when the next wave, consisting of the 48 th 's first battalion and Grenadier Battalion Call, outflanked the French position and expelled them with a bayonet charge. During the fighting, the grenadier battalion stormed the Maierhof and retrieved a Russian flag previously captured by the French. 163 rsuing the enemy up the hill opposite Auenhayn, the regiment was threatened by cavalry on the flanks. Forming the men in 'clumps,' the regiment was able to make a fighting withdrawal and hold Auenhayn until nightfall. 164 Klenau's corps on the other end of the line, the 15 th Infantry Regiment similarly demonstrated proficiency in fighting in multiple waves. The regiment's first battalion was ordered to hold the Seifersheim village and repulsed several French attacks until overpowered by multiple enemy columns, which broke into the position. However, a quick counterattack by the second battalion and three companies from the third expelled the French, leading the way for the rest of the division to retake its position in front of the village. 165 As a testament to the ability of the Allies to keep pace with the French tactically, Napoleon had to commit his last reserves to repulse Allied attacks on the 16 th . The Old Guard rarely directly fought in most of Napoleon's battles, but he needed to commit its 2 nd Division along with III Corps's 11 th Division to the engagement at Dölitz. Bianchi's and Weißenwolf's divisions of the Austrian reserve drove Augereau's IX Corps from Markkleeberg and Merveldt's column crossed the Pleiße to take Dölitz. The Imperial reinforcements counterattacked and retook Dölitz, capturing Merveldt in the process. 166 Regardless, even after committing his last reserves, Napoleon had lost the battle. The Allies maintained their superiority in fresh reserves despite Napoleon's attempts to shift the balance.