

## WAR AND POLITICS

The German campaign of 1813 was the greatest in European history until the First World War, climaxing in the largest pitched battle in world history. As the last of Napoleon's columns trudged west over the Rhine, no one could harbor any realistic doubts as to the outcome of the war. Nevertheless, Napoleon's intransigence during the last months of his empire cost thousands of lives, and the victorious Allies needed to fight hard in the 1814 invasion of France to finally secure peace. The invasion of France and the dramatic cut and thrust of desperate battles overwhelmed attempts at rational diplomacy, ending with a French defeat without precedent.

Clausewitz is known for his reserved, cerebral analysis, but even he could not conceal his awe at the epic conclusion of two decades of war. "Proud Paris had for the first time to bow her head, and the terrible Bonaparte lay bound and chained." 174 ke the 1813 Fall Campaign, the 1814 invasion of France illustrates the complexity of adapting to a new way of war with complex and contradictory political objectives in a coalition struggle. Metternich, Schwarzenberg, and Radetzky had to balance both shared and national political objectives in an exceptionally volatile strategic environment. The state of French public opinion and enthusiasm for war, Napoleon's personal desperation, the sudden vulnerability of one of the Great Powers to utter prostration, and the constant intrusions of chance and chaos on the battlefield all conspired to nullify the influence of plans over reality. Still, examining Austrian planners' designs and their attempts to actualize them illustrate the crucial issues surrounding the monumental struggle that ended the French Wars. While the military strategy they developed was theoretically sound, they misjudged their adversary's willingness to make peace and so strategized under false premises. This is not an exhaustive account of the campaign of 1814, but its general contours are sketched near the end. Although Clausewitz's incomplete treatise, On War, is by far his most famous work, his two letters to a fellow staff officer discussing strategy are useful windows into the nature of strategy and operational planning in the Napoleonic period. Discussing a pair of strategic problems circulated for discussion among general staff officers, these letters emphasize the influence of political purposes on war plans. The strategic problems centered on a hypothetical war of Prussia against Saxony and Austria, and officers were canvassed for responses.

Clausewitz considered the problems in question very poor, as they left the political situation wholly undefined. In his thinking, this was a matter of vital importance.

We still cannot ignore those conditions that have brought about the war and that determine its political purpose. The political purpose and the means available to achieve it give rise to the military objective. This ultimate goal of the entire belligerent act, or of the particular campaign if the two are identical, is therefore the first and most important issue that the strategist must address, for the main lines of the strategic plan run toward this, goal, or at least are guided by it. It is one thing to intend to crush my opponent if I have the means to do so, to make him defenseless and force him to accept my peace terms. It is obviously something different to be content with gaining some advantage by conquering a strip of land, occupying a fortress, etc., which I can retain or use in negotiations when the fighting stops. 175 e war against France was a coalition struggle involving every great power in Europe, and as such its political contours were exceptionally complex. Not only did Austria have a formidable enemy in Napoleon and the French, but the Russian tsar was himself an opponent after a fashion. Metternich's commitment to shaping a European balance of power favorable to the Habsburg monarchy was the guiding star of Austrian planning in 1813 and 1814. Despite the powerful influence of long-term trends and abstract forces on history, there are still many times when events and the decisions of individuals determine its course. The Napoleonic wars did not have to end with France humbled, Napoleon in exile, and the Bourbon dynasty restored to their ancient throne. The restoration of 1814 occurred despite the efforts of influential figures like Metternich and Schwarzenberg, who continued to seek a more moderate peace.