

He would not get another chance. While the 17 th passed in relative quiet compared to the furious battle of the 16 th , the tactical balance became truly overwhelming as fresh Allied forces arrived. Bennigsen's Army of Poland, Bernadotte's Army of the North, and Colloredo's column reinforced the Allied armies by over 100,000 men while Napoleon received the reinforcement of Reynier's lone VII Corps. The 18 th saw fierce concentric attacks all along the front of Napoleon's position (Map A.15). Philip of Hesse-Homburg led the Austrian divisions of Bianchi and Ignaz von Hardegg against Dölitz and Dösen, respectively, eventually forcing Napoleon to commit one division of the Young Guard to restore the situation. The fighting swung too and fro as Colloredo, who assumed command after Hesse-Homburg fell wounded, fed successive grenadier battalions from Weißenwolf's division into Dölitz, capturing the village by 2:00.

The action around Dölitz further illustrates the essential modernity of Austrian infantry tactics in 1813. The 2 nd Infantry Regiment, fighting in Bianchi's division, attacked in two waves. The second battalion led the attack, gaining a foothold in the village, but was unable to capture it, prompting the colonel to call for the support of the first battalion. Its commander was shot dead reconnoitering his angle of attack, but a captain of the Quartermaster-General Staff, accompanying the attack as a volunteer, quickly took charge and completed the regiment's assault. Some of the imperials driven out of the village retreated onto the flood plains west of the village, where they proceeded to fire into the regiment's flank. In response, the first battalion dispatched two companies to repulse the French. The first company formed a skirmish line and drove the French to the edge of the plains, but was suddenly attacked in the flank by Polish lancers, approximately two squadrons. Despite being surprised and in a disadvantageous formation, the company succeeded in regrouping and driving off the enemy cavalry. Meanwhile, the second company faced a battery of Polish guns. The Austrians pushed forward a small vanguard in open order to harass the gunners, who could not effectively target such a dispersed band with their cannons. When a company of Polish infantry charged to protect the battery, the twelve men of the vanguard stopped their attack with well-aimed fire; the main body of the company then charged with fixed bayonets and captured the battery. 167 the right of Dölitz, the French occupied a wood, which the first and second battalions of 18 th Infantry Regiment assaulted in columns. The first battalion advanced in two wings. The attack of the right wing drew enemy reinforcements to the wood, and the subsequent bayonet charge of the left wing swept the enemy from their position. Still more infantry and artillery moved to reinforce the French, driving the Austrians out again. Finally, the colonel of the regiment personally led the second battalion and carried the wood for the rest of the day. 168 As with the case of 2 nd Infantry Regiment, the judicious use of small units, led by intrepid officers and NCOs, allowed the Austrian infantry to hit their opponents with a succession of blows, a necessity against an opponent with ample reserves and experience using them. A French counterattack forced the Austrians out of Dölitz after a stubborn defense, but fresh Austrian troops won back the village by 5 p.m.