

Elsewhere, Dösen fell after a lengthy struggle, and a general advance by Colloredo's column captured Lößnig. The subsequent attacks on Connewitz ended only with the intervention of the 2 nd Brigade of the 2 nd Division of the Old Guard, but the Austrians could not be dislodged from Dölitz and Dösen. Nightfall ended the engagement. 169 The Austrian corps engaged retained considerable reserves throughout the battle on 18 October. The 22 nd Infantry Regiment, fighting in Klenau's corps on the Bohemian Army's right wing, spent most of 18 October as a corps reserve after a brief assault on the Kolmberg hill after capturing the position. The rest of the corps pushed on to Zuckelhausen, which was captured with the support of a Prussian brigade. 170 By the end of the day, Napoleon's defensive had consumed all but his very last reserves; the Allies retained roughly 100,000 fresh troops to his 10-12,000. Even a general as bold and confident in his skills and his army as Napoleon recognized he could no longer stand against such overwhelming numbers, and he thus decided to retreat.

The storming of Leipzig itself represents a shortcoming in Austrian adaptation of Napoleonic warfare (Map A.16). The enemy's retreat being assured, a direct attack against his powerful rearguard was a misapplication of force. Instead, the pursuit of the enemy army as a whole typically ensures greater results at a lesser cost. Moreover, the dispositions for 19 October demonstrate a fixation on geographic points and positions rather than the Napoleonic 169 Maximillian Ritter von Hoen, Feldzug von Liepzig, 602-605. 170 Gustav Hubka von Czernczitz, Geschichte des k.k. Infanterie-regiments Graf von Lacy nr. 22 von seiner errichtung bis zur gegenwart: Im auftrage des regiments-kommandos bearbeitet, (Zara: published by the regiment, 1902), 221.

focus on the main enemy army. 171 The decision to storm Leipzig was a tactical action with great strategic importance. The predominant question is if a more immediate pursuit would have damaged Napoleon's army to such a degree that it could not resist an invasion of France as tenaciously as it did in 1814. This is a complicated question to assess. The most effective pursuits, such as those following Jena and Napoleon's retreat from Russia, force the enemy into greater exertions by using parallel marches to threaten a strategic envelopment. This threat is best combined with a second column directly following the enemy to collect stragglers and abandoned guns and wagons. 172 Karl Philipp von Wrede's Austro-Bavarian army already threatened Napoleon's line of retreat over the Rhine (Map A.17), and the direct assault on Leipzig led to the premature destruction of the bridge over the Elster and the resultant crop of prisoners and trophies. While the brilliant results of the attack on the 19 th were not assured, neither was Napoleon's rapid victory over Wrede at Hanau on 30-31 October. The threat to his line of retreat and the Allied armies following him forced Napoleon to retreat in great haste, covering the nearly 300 kilometers between Leipzig and Hanau in just eleven days. During this phase of the retreat, Napoleon lost thousands of men as prisoners while still more deserted the army or formed bands of marauders; he exacerbated the problem by having garrisoned much of his precious remaining strength in German fortresses, left stranded by his retreat. 173 It is difficult to determine whether a more immediate pursuit would have forced Napoleon to accelerate his retreat and further exacerbate the attrition of his forces. The question also remains if the Allied armies could have blocked Napoleon's line of retreat had they not given his columns a head start by attacking his rearguard in Leipzig. In war, all action is directed toward probabilities, and 171 Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany, 732-3. 172 Clausewitz, On War, 268-269. 173 Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon, 938-939, CHAPTER V focus on the main enemy army. 171 The decision to storm Leipzig was a tactical action with great strategic importance. The predominant question is if a more immediate pursuit would have damaged Napoleon’s army to such a degree that it could not resist an invasion of France as tenaciously as it did in 1814. This is a complicated question to assess. The most effective pursuits, such as those following Jena and Napoleon’s retreat from Russia, force the enemy into greater exertions by using parallel marches to threaten a strategic envelopment. This threat is best combined with a second column directly following the enemy to collect stragglers and abandoned guns and wagons. 172 Karl Philipp von Wrede’s Austro-Bavarian army already threatened Napoleon’s line of retreat over the Rhine (Map A.17), and the direct assault on Leipzig led to the premature destruction of the bridge over the Elster and the resultant crop of prisoners and trophies. While the brilliant results of the attack on the 19 th were not assured, neither was Napoleon’s rapid victory over Wrede at Hanau on 30-31 October. The threat to his line of retreat and the Allied armies following him forced Napoleon to retreat in great haste, covering the nearly 300 kilometers between Leipzig and Hanau in just eleven days. During this phase of the retreat, Napoleon lost thousands of men as prisoners while still more deserted the army or formed bands of marauders; he exacerbated the problem by having garrisoned much of his precious remaining strength in German fortresses, left stranded by his retreat. 173 It is difficult to determine whether a more immediate pursuit would have forced Napoleon to accelerate his retreat and further exacerbate the attrition of his forces. The question also remains if the Allied armies could have blocked Napoleon’s line of retreat had they not given his columns a head start by attacking his rearguard in Leipzig. In war, all action is directed toward probabilities, and