

By contrast, new weapons technology played a relatively small role in the Napoleonic Wars. The weapons systems involved represented only incremental improvements over those of the previous century. The Gribeauval artillery system lightened the army's firepower, and Britain's more powerful 'cylinder' gunpowder helped economize ammunition, but on their own, these developments could hardly change warfare. The Napoleonic Wars did see new weapons, such as Congreve rockets and shrapnel shells, but societal and institutional changes in warfare easily dwarfed their impact. In this Military Revolution, adapting to military conditions required more than casting new guns or redesigning firearms. Wide swaths of society had to change to feed the war machine. Moreover, the way states wielded their war machines required a new understanding of war. Clausewitz observed that the military changes of his lifetime had made war a far more interconnected enterprise. All threads converged on the decisive battle. War no longer turned on negotiation or distinct 'bargaining chips,' and the political objectives of the day could be attained only through battle. Tactics and strategy became an intermeshed whole through the operational art while the increasing tactical importance of numerical superiority made wide-reaching mobilization more paramount than ever. 235 tionalism as understood in the Napoleonic Wars was antithetical to the structure of the Austrian monarchy. While French elites believed in their culture's unity, superiority, and exportability, the Habsburgs ruled many distinct peoples. 236 Nationalism usually receives credit for France's mass armies, but the Austrians fielded armies of similar magnitude through most of the French Wars. These armies persisted through defeat after defeat, interrupted by fleeting passive successes like Aspern. Finally, though, the Austrian army had its revenge on the French.

Many factors contributed to the Allied victories of 1813 and 1814. The 'Spanish ulcer' constantly drained French manpower, and the Russian catastrophe transformed the strategic landscape. Prussia married zeal to far sighted reforms to revitalize the state and the army after a unique disaster at Jena. However, the importance of Austrian manpower and strategy in destroying Napoleon's empire should not be underrated. The Allies faced grim prospects in 1813 without Austrian assistance, even more so for their lack of a war plan as sound as Radetzky's. Prussia and Russia would have been hard pressed to face Napoleon's renewed army in the Fall Campaign without 300,000 Austrians in various theaters. The Reichenbach Plan 235 Clausewitz, On War, 195. 236 See Broers, Europe Under Napoleon, "Internal Conquest." secured strong footing for a decisive battle against Napoleon, and the Austrians conducted their battles according to modern principles, which ensured the Allied numerical superiority deprived Napoleon of almost any hope of victory.

If the Austrians failed to realize their medium-term objective, their long-term goal of European repose from two decades of relentless chaos and bloodshed was ultimately a success.