

In war, the total defeat of the enemy typically calls for the destruction of their forces and occupation of their territory, which prevents them from mustering new forces. When the total defeat of the enemy is not the aim of the war, there are two main strategic alternatives to the destruction of their forces. One is by raising the cost of the struggle; when the resources expended exceed the value of the enemy's political objective, the objective should be given up.

Most insurgencies follow this pattern. The other is by making success so improbable for the enemy that they accept peace terms rather than stake their future on an unlikely gamble.

Because chance and probability exert so much influence in war, it is only natural that manipulating probability can undergird an effective limited-aim strategy of exhaustion.

However, such a strategy requires the real strength to win a confrontation should the enemy 'call 192 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 27 December 1812, Schwzenberg, Briefe, No. 226, 296. 193 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 3 February 1814 , ibid., No. 272, 372. 194 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 1 December 1813, ibid., No. 263, 355. lines of communication and force a retreat across the Rhine. 200 hwarzenberg and Radetzky were of like mind regarding the invasion route. Writing to his wife from Freiberg in the Black Forrest on 12 December, Schwarzenberg outlined several reasons a passage through Switzerland would work to the Allies' advantage. First, he believed that Swiss neutrality was ultimately impossible, and that one side or the other would have to occupy it as a base for further operations. If the Allies did not secure Switzerland, the French would, and from it launch attacks on Allied communications. Second, he believed Switzerland was eager to throw off the French yoke, and that the few pro-French elements in the cantons would yield to the situation. Third, he explained that from Switzerland and the crossings on the Upper Rhine, the Allied armies could threaten France quite sensitively, with an easy path into the French interior lying before them. Fourth, a crossing over the Upper Rhine would threaten communications with the French armies in Italy, and so turn them out of that theatre. He concluded with an affirmation that the time for decisive action had come; with France weakened after the catastrophic campaign of Leipzig, the tide had to be taken at the flood. 201 ring the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the 'key to the country' was one of the most widespread concepts in strategic thought. Despite its widespread use, Clausewitz complained that very few writers endowed it with concrete meaning and applied it in a useful manner. He considered two main definitions possible. On the one hand, it could refer to a point that must be taken to safely threaten the interior of the enemy's country. However, many writers used it in a quite different and much less credible sense, believing the possession of a geographic point could somehow dominate the whole of an enemy's country. 202 Radetzky used the phrase in his memoranda to describe Switzerland's position with regards to the invasion of France, stating that to put Allied forces to good use during the winter months, "we shall have no other operations than to conquer Holland and Switzerland, and to advance against France from Switzerland, which is the key to our enemies' country." 203 It is clear from Radetzky's planning that he did not attribute any mystical powers to Switzerland as the key to controlling all of the French interior. Early in a 21 November memoranda, he notes, "An empire like the French has too many resources in its confines, in its inhabitants, and in its places of arms, to hope that we will completely prevent it from reorganizing its armies. We can therefore only talk of causing the enemy the greatest possible damage in general to benefit our operations." This is a sober, realistic assessment of the situation. Radetzy's interpretation contrasts with the views of Archduke Charles, whose strategic theory accorded primary importance to geographic points as such, believing the loss or seizure of fortresses, spheres of influence, and lines of communication determined the fate of warring nations, rather than the strength, maneuver, and destruction of the armies in the field. To him, "the possession of strategic points is the most decisive factor in war." 204 In his works on the art of war, the archduke devoted considerable attention to delineating the nature of various 'decisive points,' invariably geographic. 205 While Radetzky's planning for the invasion of France certainly took fortresses, geographic positions, and lines of communication into account, his analysis of them revolved around the conditions they gave for a confrontation with Napoleon, rather than any supposed inherent value. For example, when he discusses a potential position on the left bank of the Saône, it is because an 203 Radetzky, Denkschriften, 279.