

, the treaty imposed a limitation of 150,000 on Austrian standing forces for ten years. Napoleon wed the Archduchess Marie Louise in 1810, the daughter of Emperor Francis I, thus facilitating greater Austrian integration into the French imperium. On 20 March 1811, Marie Louise bore him a son, Napoléon François Joseph Charles Bonaparte, Prince Imperial, and King of Rome. One year later on 24 March, a treaty of alliance bound Austria to France. As a result, the Austrians contributed an auxiliary corps commanded by Schwarzenberg to Napoleon's invasion of Russia later that year. Schwarzenberg would earn his field marshal's baton during the campaign at Napoleon's recommendation. The dramatic miscarriage of Napoleon's Russian campaign appeared to offer a window of opportunity to curtail French hegemony. Metternich and Schwarzenberg engineered Austria's withdrawal from the French alliance. Corresponding with Metternich as well as the Russians, Schwarzenberg arranged a series of maneuvers that left his corps in a dangerous position near the Austrian frontier with Napoleon's Grand Duchy of Warsaw. Prince Alexei Scherbatov, the Russian commander opposing Schwarzenberg, purposefully transferred his line of advance, redirecting it from Schwarzenberg's southern flank to his northern flank. This change split the

his army in Russia failed to disarm him, and a new army sprung up, as if from the dragon's teeth sown into the earth by Cadmus in the Argonautica. After defeating the Prussians and Russians at Lützen on 2 May, he chased them to the Elbe, where Michel Ney crossed at Torgau to turn their position at Dresden from the north with 85,000 men, almost half of Napoleon's 200,000 Imperials. After his quarry slipped away, Napoleon pursued them to Bautzen across the Spree in Lusatia, where Ney's army enveloped the Allied right, forcing them to retreat again. Following these victories, Napoleon approached the Allies with an offer of an armistice, to which they agreed; armies of the French Empire would remain in Lower Silesia and the Allies in Upper Silesia, separated by a neutral zone.65 Metternich's peace proposal during the summer armistice was relatively mild considering the disasters that had recently befallen France and the power the Austrians could lend the hostile coalition if their demands were not met. Not only would Napoleon remain on the French throne, but he also would retain parts of his Italian empire. The minimum terms Metternich brought to Napoleon stipulated the partition of the Duchy of Warsaw, the return of Austria's old Illyrian territories with 'a good frontier in Italy,' surrender of French territories beyond the Rhine, and the end of the Confederation of the Rhine. 66 Buoyed by his victory at the battle of Bautzen, Napoleon angrily rebuked Metternich's offer when they met at Dresden. Only by dropping his initial demands did Metternich persuade Napoleon to participate in a 5 July peace conference at

Pursuant to the Reichenbach Plan, the North German and Silesian Armies engaged secondary Imperial armies almost simultaneously. The first battle was fought on 23 August in Brandenburg, just eighteen kilometers south of Berlin. Advancing north from Luckau in Lower Lusatia toward Berlin, Oudinot's Army of Berlin found its movement channeled into three lanes by broken terrain, hindering mutual support between XII Corps and III Cavalry Corps on the left, VII Corps in the center, and IV Corps on the right. Friedrich Wilhelm von Bülow's Prussian III Corps attacked and defeated the Saxons of VII Corps at Großbeeren, support from III CavalryCorps arriving too late to prevent a retreat. The Prussians lost only 1,000 men to the 3,000 Saxon and French casualties. Though by no means a mortal blow, the loss prompted a dismayed Oudinot to flee seventy-five kilometers southwest to the safety of Wittenberg on the Elbe.82 On 26 August, as Napoleon arrived at Dresden in person, Blücher landed a particularly hard blow against Macdonald at the rain-swollen Katzbach in Silesia. Napoleon had instructed Macdonald to drive east to Jauer in Silesia and there establish a defensive position to contain81 Leggiere, "Prometheus Chained," 336. 82 Michael V. Leggiere, Napoleon and Berlin: The Franco-Prussian War in North Germany, 1813, (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2002), 160-172. Blücher. Blücher's main force, consisting of Yorck and Fabian Gottlieb von der Osten-Sacken's corps facing west, occupied a plateau in the angle formed by the rivers Wütende Neiße to their front and left and the Katzbach on their right. As elements of French III Corps, XI Corps, and II Cavalry Corps crossed the streams and formed up on the plateau, the Allies attacked. The first wave of the French advanced into this encounter battle from the west toward the front of the position while the second wave, comprising the bulk of French III Corps, came from the north on Blücher's right. The Allies repulsed both, and the steep ravines cut by the Neiße and Katzbach, the defiles through them, and the narrow bridges over the streams threw the French retreat into chaos. 83 While Louis Alexandre Andrault de Langeron's Russian corps south of the Neiße was hard pressed and forced back by superior numbers, the enemy's withdrawal left Jacques Puthod's 17 th Division isolated. Unable to cross the Bober and rejoin Macdonald's army, the division made a last stand at Plagwitz, where Langeron's corps crushed it. 84 As Napoleon's main army was locked in battle with Schwarzenberg's south of Dresden, he could not support Macdonald or Oudinot in their battles with Blücher and Bernadotte. Even after his victory at Dresden, Napoleon gained no permanent advantage as illness forced him to end his part in leading the pursuit. In the meantime, Vandamme's I Corps continued to pursue the Bohemian Army, with the French VI and XIV Corps following. Vandamme crossed the Erz Mountains and attacked the Russian corps of Alexander Ostermann-Tolstoy at Kulm. While the Erz constrained Vandamme's lines of retreat, the Prussian II Corps reached Nollendorf north of Kulm, thus cutting off Vandamme from VI and XIV Corps. The Russians to his front received reinforcement from the Russian Guard. An Austrian corps enveloped Vandamme's left,