

Three chief corridors provided invasion routes into the French interior (Map A.18) Alexander. 213 detzky's 21 November memorandum on the war plan for 1814 illuminates many 212 Ibid., 288. 213 Leggiere, The Fall of Napoleon, 35-38. aspects of the invasion of France. An outspoken advocate of an immediate strategic penetration into the French interior, Radetzky believed that the invasion could not be conducted soon enough. Every week the Allies delayed would allow Napoleon to muster ever more troops; the hesitation of the Allies would give heart to the beleaguered veterans of the 1813 Fall Campaign as well. As such, delays meant that when the time finally came for an invasion, the Allies would have squandered the great numerical and moral superiority they had gained after the victorious campaign in 1813. Thus, the Allies needed to press into the heart of France with all speed, denying Napoleon's state the control over the country and population needed to mobilize new armies. If the army failed to act, Radetzky calculated the numerical balance would shift from four to one (400,000 against 100,000) to two-to-one (600,000 against 300,000) in the Allies' favor, undermining their present superiority. By contrast, even the loss of 50,000 men in a winter campaign would be offset by a replacement of 100,000 new recruits in the spring, while war on Napoleon's own territory would hinder his attempts to replace his losses. 214 ter defeat in the 18 February Battle of Montereau, Schwarzenberg refused battle to Napoleon in the vicinity of Troyes and retreated east behind the Aube River (Map A.25). He took this occasion to explain to his wife the overall purpose of the invasion in a 26 February letter. The Allied armies crossed into France to quickly hinder Napoleon's preparations for a renewed war, and thus wrest from him an advantageous peace. The intention was not to fight a decisive battle against Napoleon. The situation was exacerbated by numerous factors giving advantage to the French. Napoleon was fighting with his back to the abyss and found extraordinary vigor in his desperation. The French army was marching through its home territory, with its capital at its back and the general cooperation of the people in matters of supply and sustenance. Moreover, the French peasants were armed, and numerous victorious combats had buoyed French spirits. If defeated in battle, a retreat over the Rhine had the chance of leading to the dissolution of the Allied army. 215 detzky addressed the reservations of the camp opposed to a winter campaign in France, which was concerned by the typical lack of provisions available in winter war. He countered with the pointed observation that however lacking provisions would be at the beginning of winter, three months after the harvest, the situation would be far worse if the Allies waited for spring, eight months after the last harvest, by which time accumulated stores would be depleted. 216 For similar reasons, Schwarzenberg was keen to carry the war into enemy lands as well; campaigning in the winter, he sought to sustain his army, 200,000 strong, at the expense of the enemy as much as possible. After the punishing effects of privation on Imperial armies and the devastation of the German states during the Fall Campaign, one can hardly blame Schwarzenberg and his staff for being acutely sensitive to matters of provision. 217 the outset of the invasion in January, Schwarzenberg wrote a letter revealing some of the chief strategic concerns in the early phase of the campaign. Writing from Altkirch on 4 January, he described the coordinated movements of columns in eastern France and the strategic objectives in question. Schwarzenberg planned to blockade the fortresses of Belfort and Besançon while he pushed through Vesoul to the plateau of Langres, where he would find better means of sustenance for the vast army under his command. Bubna, leading a detachment of roughly 12,000 men, had liberated Geneva, providing the Main Army's left with further support.