

His column would push on to Lyon, where, according to Radetzky's planning, Schwarzenberg hoped it would disrupt the mustering of conscripts. Furthermore, the Allies were sensitive to public opinion in France, and sought to avoid agitating the passions of the people against the invading armies. Because the Allies believed the area of Lyon was dissatisfied with Napoleonic rule, they hoped good discipline by the Allied troops would reassure the French people that their quarrel was with Napoleon only. Moreover, the large class of Lyonnaise merchants cultivated and maintained extensive contacts across France, accelerating the spread of news from the seat of war to the other provinces. 218 In this letter, Schwarzenberg pointedly does not discuss a plan to seek battle against Napoleon's main army, nor to make a thrust against Paris. Instead, the Main Army campaigned in search of a better strategic position, without undertaking extreme efforts to immediately seek decisive results. The most Schwarzenberg hinted at in this respect was that his army would move according to circumstances.

Other important letters demonstrate his commitment to seeking an advantageous peace at the first opportunity. Writing from Langres on 21 January, Schwarzenberg expressed his opposition to an advance on Paris. By his account, the Kaiser, Stadion, Metternich, and Castlereagh agreed that such a maneuver would be distinctly unmilitary. After repulsing Marmont's weak force from Bar-sur-Aube and reaching his chosen position, Schwarzenberg confided that in his view, the time had come to make peace. 219 e 1814 invasion of France illustrates the great value in keeping one's forces concentrated on a single line of operations to the greatest extent practicable. The Allies attacked France of all its conquests. 223 e Campaign of 1814 in France illustrates some of the central issues in the development of strategic thinking. Clausewitz underwent significant intellectual evolution during his years of study and writing. The epic fury of the Napoleonic Wars, in which whole nations could be brought to their knees in lightning campaigns, seemed to signal the perfection of warmaking in 222 Clausewitz, On War, 635, 163. 223 Leggiere, "Prometheus Chained," 346-366.

Europe. Attempting to oppose this new system of strategy with the old wars of maneuver and position in the style of the eighteenth century appeared a contest so unequal the outcome could not be in doubt. For Clausewitz in his early thinking, it was a matter of some speculation whether limited war would ever return to the European battlefield after the social and strategic transformations unleashed by the French Wars. And yet, in studying military history, it appeared to Clausewitz that the vast majority of conflicts fell well short of the standard of intensity set by the Wars of the French Republic and Empire, in which Great Powers could be destroyed and whole peoples could rise up in arms. If military theory was to be useful, it needed to describe wars of all kinds, be they colossal struggles like the Napoleonic Wars or diplomatic duels like the War of Bavarian Succession. The political aims would always provide the guiding intelligence in war, but the final stage of the War of the Sixth Coalition demonstrates the power of other forces, such as emotion and chance, to disrupt this influence and take war to places not intended by strategists. 224 e experience of Austrian strategists in 1814 illustrate the challenges of formulating a limited war strategy in an environment as uncertain and chaotic as Napoleonic Europe.