

Strategies of annihilation have the virtue of conceptual simplicity. Convincing an enemy to accept that an unpleasant deal is in their best interests is more complex than crushing them with overwhelming force. However sound their war plans to convince Napoleon to make peace may have been on paper, Austrian strategists ultimately failed to deliver the results sought by the statesmen. Metternich and Schwarzenberg had misjudged their adversary. Charged with securing a lasting peace with a strong and stable France, Napoleon's personal intransigence and willful self-deception fatally sabotaged Austrian strategy; in the end, neither the Natural Frontiers nor the Bonapartist throne could be retained, regency or not. This is not necessarily a condemnation of their strategy, but an unfortunate reality of war. A properly managed war effort is based on a rational calculation of political priorities and the probability of success, and it would be a poor strategist whose plans would assume his enemy would fail such a basic test.

Yet, when the guiding hand of policy succumbs to vanity and delusion, the results on the battlefield, not just for the loser, but the victor as well, are dire indeed. Napoleon's refusal to recognize his untenable position led to the collapse of French power and thousands of useless deaths. Nevertheless, the defeat of Napoleon after two decades of sharp and cruel war ushered in an era of relative peace almost unique in European history. Schroeder calculated that the ratio of battlefield deaths to the European population fell seven times from the eighteenth to the nineteenth century, the result of a new international system governed by consensus and conscious restraint established during the struggle against Napoleon between 1813 and 1815. 225 ace is a precious thing, and this achievement should not be forgotten. While wars of limited scope and aims continued -the Crimean War and the Wars of German and Italian Unification being the most prominent-no pan-European total war with the potential of destroying the international order erupted until the First World War. The era of peace that began in 1814 with the Austrians leading Europe to Paris ended only in 1914 when the same monarchy, fearing strategic collapse and domestic implosion, committed the Austrian empire to its final disastrous war.

## CONCLUSIONS

Napoleon stands at the convergence of several historical threads. Studying his rise and fall shines light on the connected fields of political, military, intellectual, social, cultural and European history, both as a whole and each nation individually. In many ways, the age of Napoleon and its end was the demarcation that defined the modern political landscape. The 'Napoleonic Legend' was the last of its kind; never since has any period been so dominated by individual personalities. In military history specifically, he represents the last great 'warlord' in the vein of Alexander, Edward III, and Frederick II, conquerors who controlled the machinery of the state, directed diplomacy, and led their armies in person. Clausewitz called them 'kings who were their own condottieri,' combining the absolute authority of a monarch with the skill and temperament of a professional soldier. 226 Unlike Alexander, Napoleon's career of conquest failed, ending with the destruction of his armies and the eclipse of France's ambitions of European hegemony. His empire ultimately succumbed to men of lesser ability, like Schwarzenberg, by virtue of the superior resources at their command.