

The Austrian army never matched the French at their best, and many aspects of the revolution remained incomplete even to the end of the monarchy. In the political sphere, the traditional Hungarian insistence on consensual government ensured that the Kaiser could not exploit his territory to its fullest potential in men and money. 229 The Austrian army remained saddled with many mediocre senior officers, especially at the corps level. Meritocracy never took root to the degree it had in France, where privates could rise to the marshalate and unsuccessful generals lost their heads. As Gill has observed, several Austrian corps commanders received laurels for uninspired performances at Wagram in 1809 while Franz Seraph, Prince of Orsini-Rosenberg was censured when he did all that could be done defending the left wing of the army against Davout's onslaught. 230 The habitual slowness and sloppiness of the Austrian war In hindsight, a regency for Napoleon II represented the best outcome for Austria. 232 poleon could not be trusted, but Russian domination of Continental Europe was also unacceptable. While Metternich worried that a French regency under Marie-Louise would embroil Austria too closely in French domestic affairs, few if any superior options were available. The scheme to enthrone Bernadotte in France would benefit only Russia. The Bourbons had become no more popular after their twenty-two-year absence and had already demonstrated they could not ensure domestic stability in France. This would be the precursor to renewed war. Napoleon had proven that with his loyal army, he could guarantee peace and order within France, but he could not resist expansion across Europe. Napoleon II represented the best chance for a strong, stable, and peaceful France. Ultimately, the Austrian goal of maintaining Napoleon's rule (properly restricted to France's Natural Frontiers) asked too much of the emperor's national responsibility and diplomatic sense. He refused to see the writing on the wall until it was too late. Napoleon needed to be disarmed and expelled from Europe to ensure peace. This could not happen without an overwhelming victory in France itself. The Allies should not have paused at the Rhine and divided Blücher from Schwarzenberg, but instead should have pursued Napoleon to Paris. This was the surest course to a durable European peace.

Living in a highly materialist, technological society, we tend to see technology at the root of most important historical developments, especially wars. Many times, technology has played a decisive rule in victory and defeat. Gunpowder weapons provided both the means to centralize state control and a powerful incentive to do so. In Brandenburg, the nucleus of the future Prussian monarchy, the Elector's powerful gunpowder artillery in 1414 demolished the castles of quarrelsome nobility like the Quitzow family. 233 In the sixteenth century, European states developed mature weapons systems based on gunpowder, such as the musket, cannon, and bastioned fortress. In the Habsburg Monarchy, the crisis of Maria Theresa's succession in 1740-1748 drove the central state to take more power from the nobility. War had become impossibly expensive, and the state needed money and manpower to remain competitive. 234 The new technologies gave Europeans crucial advantages in fighting not only each other, and so drove competition and reform among European states, but also proved a crucial advantage over peoples across the world, who widely adopted them in turn. Military Revolution theorists herald these connected phenomena as the beginning of the modern era.