

Previous conquerors like Alexander had faced vastly superior enemies and defeated them through radical innovations in tactics and technology. Yet Napoleon's enemies had either already developed the key underpinnings of his way of war or adopted the new methods during the French Wars. Michael Broers framed Napoleon as an enlightened despot, and his wielding of that despotic authority was foundational to his military success. Through a campaign of internal conquest and legal reform, he solidified central control of France and mustered vast resources. 227 In many ways, though, France had needed to catch up to the rest of Europe, as the humiliation of the Seven Years War laid bare. The French Revolution wiped away the Old Regime and laid the foundation for Napoleon's new order. Rather than a radical break with the pattern of European politics, the French Revolution and Napoleon was its culmination.

Napoleon's absolute centralization, however, outlived its usefulness as the scope of statecraft and warfare expanded beyond the ability of one man to personally direct. Not only was Napoleon a monarch and a general, he was also effectively his own prime minister and his own chief of operations in those respective roles. All power was unified in his person. While Napoleon often exploited this unity of command to his advantage throughout his career as emperor, the clear subordination of professional soldiers to professional political leadership was the way of the future. This was the system in Britain and Austria during the Napoleonic Wars.

For the latter power, the cooperation of Metternich, Radetzky, and Schwarzenberg was indispensable for Allied victory, articulating clear war aims, developing sound plans, and executing the latter to serve the former.

Napoleon's success depended on a 'well-ordered police state,' which represented the ideal of European monarchies, and he pushed the system to its limits. To achieve this, he combined modern statecraft with new theories and methods of warfare that emerged in the late eighteenth century. These threads of political and military change intertwined most closely at the foundation of war-making, the raising of armies. Rather than the long-service professionals of the eighteenth century, the French came to rely on mass conscription. This was possible because of the greater coercive power in the hands of the state compared to the still quasi-feudal absolutism of the later Bourbon kings. The manpower available and the cheapness of life had a profound impact on the tactics, operations, and strategy of French armies. French tactics emphasized economy of force, flexibility, and mobility, turning the clash of solid battle lines into fluid battles of reserves, echeloned in depth. They organized armies into combined arms formations like divisions and corps that could maneuver and fight independently; these bridged the divide between strategy and tactics, opening new realms of 'combinations' for talented generals. Lastly, they abandoned the siege-heavy positional strategy of the absolutist eighteenth century, in which captured fortresses and territories were exchanged like tokens at the peace table. Instead, the French pursued the destruction of the enemy army in battle, leaving the enemy disarmed and helpless, forced to subordinate their foreign policy to France. Through these military changes, the French subjugated most of Continental Europe between 1792 and 1809. 228 When combined with the rationalized Enlightenment state, these changes represented a second 'Military Revolution.' However, France's European enemies had state foundations that could adapt to and adopt these key changes. While the Prussian reform movement is widely known among modern with the French after their mass levies of 1793, the Austrians therefore adapted and made a virtue of necessity. They too came to rely on skirmishers and artillery to engage the enemy, while keeping most of the army in reserve in deep column formations, increasing the flexibility of the army. Strategically, the oft-criticized Reichenbach Plan in fact represented a considerable break from the essence of eighteenth-century strategy, prioritizing damage and destruction inflicted on the enemy army over any bargaining chips for peace negotiations. After extensive attrition in hard marches and lost battles, the French accepted battle on disadvantageous terms on 16 October 1813, leading to the destruction of Napoleon's European empire. While Austria's Enlightened Absolutism preceded the French Wars, the French challenge pushed the Austrian army to realize the institutional potential established before the war. This process of adaptation continued after the defeat of 1809, culminating in a decisive defeat for Napoleon. However, the Austrians did not achieve all of their political objectives in the War of the Sixth Coalition. While they succeeded in their main short-term goal in the restoration of the monarchy's independent foreign policy and the regaining of much lost territory, they could not compel Napoleon to agree to a compromise peace. Rather than become strong partners for the Habsburgs, their position secured by a loyal army, the House of Bonaparte effectively went into exile, and France suffered considerable internal turmoil for much of the nineteenth century. Why did Austria fail to realize its medium-term objective of securing a Bonapartist France as a partner to balance Prussia and Russia?