

The year 1814 began an age of fundamental peace in Europe. While periodic conflicts occasionally erupted, Europe would not be embroiled in another existential war among all the Great Powers for another century. The Austrian army played a crucial role in this victory. It was to be their last, however. While the state and the army had adapted to the greatest threat to face the monarchy since the Thirty Years War, the inferno of the Great War would prove its undoing.

After surviving the gravest dangers the pre-industrial world could manifest, a realm cobbled from a feudal patchwork by war and marriage finally collapsed under the strain of an industrial total war.

most important aspects of the Wars of Napoleon is that the period witnessed radical changes in the art of war despite only incremental changes in technology. As a highly materialistic society consumed with constant technological change, we expect new tools and new weapons to be the chief drivers of military change. Accusing historical commanders of attempting to 'fight the last war' is a cliché in popular military literature, especially in eras defined by radical changes in the art of war. As such, the Austrians of the Napoleonic Wars have the dubious distinction of standing alongside the French of 1940 as military relics. While the Austrians did not push the envelope of military innovation like the Revolutionary French did, historians go too far when they accuse the Austrians of waging an eighteenth-century war against a modern army. This chapter is not a comprehensive account of the 1813 Fall Campaign in the War of the Sixth Coalition, but it demonstrates the basic modernity of Austria's strategic approach. Through great exertions, Austria raised a mighty army in 1813, but without a strategically sound war plan, all could have come to naught against a battle-emperor of Napoleon's caliber. The strength of Austrian forces and the timing of their joining the Coalition gave Austria the diplomatic clout to construct the Allied war plan. This plan would lay the foundation of Allied victory at Leipzig and the destruction of the French empire. While a substantial body of literature discusses the Fall Campaign of 1813, it lacks the sheer scope of Waterloo's Anglophone historiography. A WorldCat search for "Waterloo, Battle of, Belgium, 1815" returned more than 3600 books, while the equivalent search for Leipzig returned a comparatively paltry 384. The relative dearth of published accounts of the Fall Campaign of 1813 is disappointing. More than any other, the Leipzig campaign determined the fate of Europe in the Napoleonic Wars. At the beginning of the Fall Campaign, Napoleon appeared as invincible as ever. Following the Russian catastrophe in 1812, he rebounded with force in the Spring of 1813, driving the resurgent Prussian and Russian armies 200 miles back from the Elbe to the Oder River in less than three weeks. While French rule in Iberia gradually receded, and the Russians occupied the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, the core of Napoleon's empire in France, Germany, and Italy remained secure. Drawing on these immense resources, he rebuilt his army, which in the Fall of 1813 had swelled to perhaps 700,000 men.