

204 Geoffrey Wawro, "The Austro-Prussian War: Politics, Strategy and War in the Habsburg Monarchy, 1859-1866", Ph.D. diss., (Yale University, 1992), 1: 147. 205 Eysturlid, The Formative Influences, Theories, and Campaigns of Archduke Carl of Austria, 53-56.

enemy defeated there would need to retreat through constrained defiles in the mountainous terrain west of the river, magnifying the effect of a victory. 206 Radetzky's thinking regarding geographic positions thus demonstrates good sense and the proper regard for military priorities.

Austrian headquarters selected the plateau of Langres as the geographical objective of their invasion of France. This plateau is the French watershed; rivers on its north face flow into the Atlantic, while those to its south flow into the Mediterranean. The undue attention of this fact led Blücher to famously remark that the only real strategic significance of the watershed was the opportunity to piss into both oceans. 207 Blücher's sense of humor notwithstanding, Radetzky outlined more concrete arguments for Langres as a geographic objective in his 18 January memoranda. Austrian headquarters did not rely on the possession of Langres to defeat Napoleon through the operation of 'occult sciences,' to use Clausewitz's phrase, but rather to improve their position for peace negotiations by occupying a good position for battle. The availability of useful roads shaped the development of the Allied war plan for 1814 in several crucial ways. In his memoranda, Radetzky emphasized the quality of French roads west of Switzerland and the Upper Rhine. Langres in particular was the node of several wide roads in good condition, connecting the French cities of Dijon, Besançon, and Chaumont. 208 According to Radetzky, these roads would facilitate the concentration of the army at Langres (Map A.19); the left wing would consist of 25,000 men at Dijon, a center column of 90,000 men in the vicinity of Langres and Chaumont, and a right wing formed by Blücher's army of 60,000 men marching up the Moselle valley through Nancy. While he could not determine with certainty the time to link with the right wing, Radetzky calculated that 115,000 men could be gathered at Langres in four or five days. One does not concentrate an army of 175,000 men without the willingness to fight a decisive battle. While the war plan was developed without the express purpose of seeking a decisive battle, it did not discount the possibility and prepared for it.

Moreover, Radetzky noted several other advantageous features of the military geography of Franche Comté and Burgundy. The position promised a good source of provisions.

Occupying an area from Langres to Chaumont to Neufchâteau, the center column would have food for four weeks. In addition to facilitating the concentration of the army, the road network secured Allied control over the mountain passes for debouching into France and facilitated both forward and rearward movement. 209 Writing to his wife, Schwarzenberg relayed his relief that the garrison of Fort de Joux sought terms for capitulation, as capture of the fortress would secure his line of retreat along the Pontarlier road to Switzerland. 210 The route through Switzerland and into Franche Comté and Burgundy bypassed many of the fortresses in France's triple line of defenses along the eastern frontier, although the Allies still needed to detail a blockade corps to observe and reduce the fortresses the Main Army bypassed. By targeting Langres, the Main Army would also bypass the Moselle and Meuse river lines. Radetzky argued that the topography of the Langres position would be advantageous, as the relatively gentle sloping of the mountains in that region of France afford numerous strong, if small positions. Further expressing their preparedness to fight a battle under advantageous circumstances, Radetzky proposed that should Napoleon advance against the Main Army's position along the mountain ridges in the vicinity of Langres, they should not wait to receive his attack, but advance themselves down into the plains to meet him and take the offensive. 211 At the end of the memorandum, Radetzky concedes that the question of seeking or avoiding a decisive battle was not a purely military question, but to a great extent a political one, illustrating his profound understanding of the influence of politics on the contours of military operations. 212 e geography of the French frontiers caused considerable debate at Allied headquarters.