

Eugene marches from Italy to support Napoleon on the Danube. Archduke John moves to reinforce Charles Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History Eugene marches from Italy to support Napoleon on the Danube. Archduke John moves to reinforce Charles. Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars, https://www.westpoint.edu/academics/academic- departments/history/napoleonic-wars 123

The Battle of Aspern-Essling A Map 21 May 1809 3 Map A.3: The Battle of Aspern-Essling, 21 May 1809.

Despite Charles's dramatic numerical superiority, he failed to destroy the French bridgehead owing to the cumbersome nature of Austrian tactics at this juncture Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History 6 July 1809 The Battle of Wagram Despite Charles's dramatic numerical superiority, he failed to destroy the French bridgehead owing to the cumbersome nature of Austrian tactics at this juncture. Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars, https://www.westpoint.edu/academics/academic-departments/history/napoleonic-wars Map A.5: The Battle of Wagram, 6 July 1809.

Battle Both armies are pressing the enemy's left, but unlike Charles, Napoleon has extensive forces still in reserve Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars of Wagram Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History 6 July 1809 Both armies are pressing the enemy's left, but unlike Charles, Napoleon has extensive forces still in reserve. Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars, https://www.westpoint.edu/academics/academic- departments/history/napoleonic-wars Map A.6: Battle of Wagram, 6 July 1809.

Archduke John's army is unable to join Charles's. The Austrian right is giving way. Charles decides to retreat Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars 26 August 1813. 29-30 August The Battle of Kulm Macdonald's 'infernal column' breaks the Austrian line, but suffers heavy losses. Archduke John's army is unable to join Charles's. The Austrian right is giving way. Charles decides to retreat. Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars, https://www.westpoint.edu/academics/academic-departments/history/napoleonic-wars Map A.7: Fall Campaign, 26 August 1813. Oudinot's Berlin offensive is beaten back on 23 August at Großbeeren. Blücher defeats Macdonald at the Katzbach on 26 August. The Army of Bohemia's drive against Dresden is repulsed with Napoleon's arrival. Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars, https://www.westpoint.edu/academics/academic-departments/history/napoleonic-wars Map A.9: The Battle of Kulm, 29-30 August.

s corps is isolated in the Bohemian mountains and attacked by a Russian corps from the front, an Austrian on the left, and a Prussian in the rear. The corps is effectively destroyed. Map from Esposito Dominique Vandamme 6 September 1813 Atlas, courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History 10 Map A Fall Campaign Dominique Vandamme's corps is isolated in the Bohemian mountains and attacked by a Russian corps from the front, an Austrian on the left, and a Prussian in the rear. The corps is effectively destroyed. Map from Esposito, Atlas, courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History. Map A.10: Fall Campaign, 6 September 1813.