

generally comprised two infantry divisions and an advance guard of cavalry and light infantry while the reserve corps consisted of grenadier battalions and heavy cavalry. Most of the artillery was distributed into brigade batteries, with each corps keeping a reserve. Without codified doctrine or experience handling such formations, the results disappointed all involved. The combination of all arms within the corps of the Austrian army gave them the theoretical capability to march and fight independently, but exploiting this capability required initiative that most senior officers in the Austrian army lacked. Charles's Principles of War offered little guidance for the subordinate commander, and no maneuvers were conducted in the two months between the division of the army into corps and the commencement of operations in April. 131 Charles invaded Bavaria on 9 April 1809. From 19 to 23 April, he engaged the French in a series of running battles south of Ratisbon on the Danube and north of Landshut on the Isar. The Austrians fought battles at Teugen-Hausen, Abensberg, Landshut, Eckmühl, and Ratisbon, suffering defeat in each engagement. The southern wing of the army, consisting of V and VI Corps, and II Reserve Corps, had to retreat separately after the French separated it from Charles' main body and drove it south. Charles retreated through Ratisbon and then east along the northern bank of the Danube, reuniting with the southern wing at Krems, approximately seventy kilometers west of Vienna. The French raced down the southern bank, entering Vienna on 13 May, exactly one month after Napoleon left Paris for the campaign (Map A.1). 132 However, Charles waited with his army north of the Danube across from Vienna. Following these reverses, he abolished the army corps organization, favoring instead the previous system of Abteilungen, typically rendered as 'columns' or 'wings' in English. Unable to rely on the initiative of his subordinates, Charles resorted to issuing lengthy dispositions for the army. The army's next test came on the banks of the Danube during the 21-22 May Battle of Aspern-Essling. Charles displayed sound strategy in choosing the time and place of the battle;

variable structure. After the expiration of the armistice of Pläswitz, Napoleon marched from Bautzen and Görlitz to attack Blücher's Army of Silesia near Breslau. In accordance with the Allied plan of operations, Schwarzenberg's Army of Bohemia advanced north on the western bank of the Elbe and over the Bohemian mountains to attack Napoleon's communications at Dresden while Blücher avoided battle (Map A.7). Schwarzenberg commanded the main body while Klenau commanded a detached wing on the left. Napoleon hastened back from Löwenberg in Silesia to meet the Allies, dispatching Vandamme's I Corps from Stolpen toward Pirna to preemptively pursue the Army of Bohemia. On 26 August, Napoleon's reinforcements saved St. Cyr's XIV Corps from being overwhelmed by Schwarzenberg, and on the 27 August, he counterattacked on both wings. 153