

along a multitude of separate vectors, with armies operating across the Lower, Middle, and Upper Rhine, an army in Italy pressing Viceroy Eugene, and the Duke of Wellington's Anglo-Portuguese-Spanish army invading Languedoc and Gascony. As in the Wars of the French Revolution, the interior lines of France allowed Napoleon to shift troops from less active theaters to counter the Allied thrust that posed the greatest apparent threat. After Bernadotte's army failed to act aggressively against French forces on the Lower Rhine, Schwarzenberg complained bitterly that he found new forces from Namur opposing his advance into Langres, blaming "the miserable behavior of that villainous Bernadotte" and the Duke of Wellington for their inability to pin the French in their sectors. As such, French regulars had been withdrawn from southern France to join with new conscripts and National Guardsmen in a position to harass Schwarzenberg's left flank. 220 Despite France's natural advantages of interior lines and the dithering dandies in the Allied camp, Austrian headquarters bore considerable responsibility for the problems of the invasion. 221 They made the decision to spend weeks maneuvering into Switzerland to cross the Upper Rhine, giving Napoleon time to regroup. While Blücher was able to join the lead elements of the Main Army in the first phase of the campaign, they likewise decided to direct him to advance on Paris along the Marne while the Main Army approached via the Seine after the victory of La Rothière (1 February 1814, see Maps A.20 and A.21). Clausewitz was especially critical of this decision, and believed it provided Napoleon a potentially war-winning opportunity. With Blücher separated from the Main Army, Napoleon was able to mass sufficient forces to inflict a major defeat on him during the Six Days Campaign (10-15 February, see Maps A.22 and A.23). Had Napoleon executed an aggressive operational pursuit, Blücher would have had no choice but to retreat over the Rhine according to Clausewitz. Clausewitz furthermore posited that Schwarzenberg, unwilling to risk Austria's main field army on potentially disadvantageous terms and being so well known for caution and even irresolution, would have followed suit in falling back over the Rhine. 222 However, when Schwarzenberg resumed his advance on Paris, Napoleon's turn toward him granted Blücher room to breathe and subsequently resume the advance (see Map A.24). Pressing on toward Paris, Blücher joined his battered army with the one Prussian corps and one Russian corps detached from Bernadotte's Army of North Germany north of the Aisne. Napoleon left a covering force west of Schwarzenberg, which the Austrian field marshal defeated in two battles. Blücher then defeated Napoleon at Laon on 8-10 March (see Maps A.25-A.27). Napoleon then turned south, crossing the Aube to attack Schwarzenberg. Yet the emperor suffered another defeat against overwhelming forces at Arcis-sur-Aube on 20-21 March (see Map A.28). Unable to outfight the Allied masses, Napoleon shifted his position east to St. Dizier, attempting to outmaneuver them and threaten their communications. Undeterred, the Allied armies advanced west, routed the covering force, and took Paris (see Map A.29) on 30 March; the senate declared Napoleon deposed and his marshals mutinied, forcing him to abdicate. The Allies exiled Napoleon to Elba, restored the Bourbon monarchy, and sheared