

and Berlin; Schwarzenberg and Blücher moved into action. Schwarzenberg dispatched Peter Wittgenstein toward Dresden, threatening Napoleon's base of operations while Klenau advanced on Marienberg to threaten his communications. As soon as Napoleon redeployed his forces to counter Schwarzenberg's thrust and envelop the Allied left, they cleaved to the agreed principle and avoided a general engagement while Blücher ended his retreat and started driving west against the shattered remnants of Macdonald's Army of the Bober. 87 In the meantime, the Allied strategy was beginning to tell against Napoleon. The emperor sought to wrest back the initiative by planning an advance on Berlin, which he would 85 The announcement of the victory is reproduced in full in Maximilian Ehnl, Schlacht bei Kulm, (Vienna: Siedler und Sohn, 1913), 221-222 86 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 6 September 1813, Schwarzenberg, Briefe, No. 247, 334. 87 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 9 September 1813, Ibid., No. 248, 335. See also Maximilian von Hoen, Der Feldzug von Leipzig, (Vienna: Siedler und Sohn, 1913), 9-13. lead himself with 30,000 reinforcements. However, continued pressure on the Army of the Bober forced Napoleon to suspend the offensive. Unaware, the Army of Berlin's new commander, Ney, marched on the Prussian capital and Bernadotte's army. On 6 September, the armies clashed at Dennewitz. The battle opened with Bogislav on Tauentzien's Prussian IV Corps exchanging fire with Henri Bertrand's and grew as Bülow on the Allied side and Oudinot and Reynier's corps on the French joined the fighting. The battle developed on a northeastsouthwest axis, with Bertrand on the French right and Reynier on the left. At the height of the battle, Ney committed Oudinot's corps to his right, depriving Reynier of support. Reynier crumbled under the Prussian onslaught, effectively deciding the battle. Ney's advance on Berlin had been repulsed while the Reichenbach Plan ensured Napoleon remained preoccupied with the other Allied armies, first driving Blücher back in Silesia then rushing to Dresden as Schwarzenberg threatened his base again

Brandenburg, Silesia, and Bohemia to support the fighting men, while the Imperials spent most of the Fall Campaign in Saxony, thus exhausting local supplies more quickly. Finally, the continued flow of British subsidies and materiel aid gave the Allies a further advantage in the replacement of inevitable wastage.101 Privation was not the Allies' only weapon, however. At Reichenbach, Radetzky had planned to seek a general engagement after the Allied armies achieved a sufficiently favorable balance of forces. Already on 5 September, before Ney's drubbing at Dennewitz, Radetzky believed the Allies had gained the strength to crush Napoleon in battle under the right circumstances. In a memorandum, Radetzky considered Napoleon's options following the first round of battles. If he struck toward the Army of Bohemia, the army would await him behind defenses while Blücher fell on the Imperial left flank. If Napoleon challenged Blücher, the99 Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany, 2: 10.100David Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon (New York: Macmillian, 1966), 502 101 See John Sherwig, Guineas and Gunpowder: British Foreign Aid in the Wars withFrance, 1792-1815, (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1969), 307-310. It should be noted that at least in Austria's case, most of the materiel aid in muskets, wool, and hides for boots arrived after the decisive battle at Leipzig. frontier on 17 September resulted in a minor victory for the Allies. Austrian I and II Corps with Prussian II Corps attacked and enveloped French I and XIV Corps as they debouched from the Erz mountains near Kulm, capturing 2,000-3,000 prisoners and a few flags and cannon as trophies.104 A further Imperial attempt to break through the defiles of the Erz failed.105 Through the last weeks of September and the first weeks of October, the noose slowly tightened around Leipzig. Bennigsen's army did not arrive in position until 26 September, but once there, it occupied a fortified position at Kulm amidst the mountainous Bohemian frontier to observe Dresden.106 The same day, Blücher began his march to unite with Bernadotte and cross the Elbe, shifting his position from Bautzen in Silesia to the village of Elster across the river from Wartenburg. Bertrand's IV Corps defended the crossing site, retreating after a fierce combat with Yorck's I Corps on 3 October. The Russian contingent of Blücher's army followed Yorck's Prussians across the river, establishing 64,000 Allies on the western bank of the Elbe by nightfall. Bernadotte's army crossed the Elbe 40 kilometers upstream at Roßlau on 4-5 October.107 Schwarzenberg described the movement toward the decisive battle in his 4 October letter.His army marched north on Leipzig with Wittgenstein's 45,000 Russians, who passed through Zwickau while the Austrian wing of 70,000 passed through Marienberg to the east with the Russian reserves following behind. Moritz von Liechtenstein's column protected the left flank of the army against any Imperial advance from the vicinity of Erfurt; there, he defeated a thrust104 Schwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 18 September 1813, Schwarzenberg, Briefe, No. 251, 338. chwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 19 September 1813, Ibid., No. 252, 339. 1 chwarzenberg to Maria Anna, 26 September 1813 Ibid., No. 253, 342. by Augereau. Colloredo and Bennigsen observed Dresden. 108 After Blücher and Bernadotte crossed the Elbe, Napoleon evacuated the east bank, and concentrated his forces against the joined armies (Maps A.11 and A.12). 109 He left four corps commanded by Murat to slow Schwarzenberg's advance while he struck north from Bad Düben toward Dessau on the Elbe, cutting Blücher and Bernadotte off from Berlin. Nevertheless, they refused battle, retreating west while Schwarzenberg slowly drove back Murat. 110