

Napoleon planned to join with Michel Ney for a second drive against Berlin. However, Schwarzenberg's demonstrations against Dresden draw the emperor south Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars 2 October 1813 The Leipzig Campaign Napoleon planned to join with Michel Ney for a second drive against Berlin. However, Schwarzenberg's demonstrations against Dresden draw the emperor south. Ney is routed at Dennewitz on 6 September. Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars, https://www.westpoint.edu/academics/academic-departments/history/napoleonic-wars Map A.11: The Leipzig Campaign, 2 October 1813.

Bernadotte and Blücher link up and march on the Elbe. Schwarzenberg approaches the Bohemian frontier Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History 9 October 1813 The Leipzig Campaign Bennigsen's Army of Poland arrives and the movement to the decisive battle begins. Bernadotte and Blücher link up and march on the Elbe. Schwarzenberg approaches the Bohemian frontier. Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars, https://www.westpoint.edu/academics/academic-departments/history/napoleonic-wars Map A.12: The Leipzig Campaign, 9 October 1813.

Blücher Bernadotte Cross The Elbe Napoleon thrusts north to cut them off from the Elbe, leaving behind a body under Murat to observe Schwarzenberg. Schwarzenberg debouches into Saxony and advances cautiously against Murat Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars Leipzig Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History 16 October 1813 Bernadotte and Blücher cross the Elbe. Napoleon thrusts north to cut them off from the Elbe, leaving behind a body under Murat to observe Schwarzenberg. Schwarzenberg debouches into Saxony and advances cautiously against Murat. Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars, https://www.westpoint.edu/academics/academic-departments/history/napoleonic-wars Map A.14: The Battle of Leipzig, 16 October 1813.

Napoleon concentrates his forces in the south against Schwarzenberg. The Allies attack in six columns against Lindenau, Connewitz, Markleeberg, Wachau, and Liebrtwolkwitz from West to East. Napoleon holds the line Markleeberg-Wachau-Liebertwolkwitz with three army corps, siting his grand battery on Gallows Hill between Wachau and Liebertwolkwitz. Blücher attacks Marmont between the Elster and Parthe rivers. Map from Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany 18 October 1813 2 628 Leipzig courtesy of the author. Map A.15. Battle of Napoleon concentrates his forces in the south against Schwarzenberg. The Allies attack in six columns against Lindenau, Connewitz, Markleeberg, Wachau, and Liebrtwolkwitz from West to East. Napoleon holds the line Markleeberg-Wachau-Liebertwolkwitz with three army corps, siting his grand battery on Gallows Hill between Wachau and Liebertwolkwitz. Blücher attacks Marmont between the Elster and Parthe rivers. Map from Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany, 2: 628, courtesy of the author. Map A.15: Battle of Leipzig, 18 October 1813.