

reinforcing the Allies with 100,000 men. The Allies mount another series of concentric attacks on the French position. While no breakthrough materializes, the French lose ground, the Saxons defect, and French reserves are exhausted. Map from Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany Bennigsen Bernadotte Colloredo Have Joined 2 700 courtesy of the author Bernadotte, Bennigsen, and Colloredo have joined, reinforcing the Allies with 100,000 men. The Allies mount another series of concentric attacks on the French position. While no breakthrough materializes, the French lose ground, the Saxons defect, and French reserves are exhausted. Map from Leggiere, Napoleon and the Struggle for Germany, 2: 700, courtesy of the author.

A Map Napoleon leaves covering forces at the Upper, Middle, and Lower Rhine 18 Map A.18: Napoleon leaves covering forces at the Upper, Middle, and Lower Rhine.

Schwarzenberg marches up the Rhine to cross at Basel in Switzerland on 20 Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars December 1813. 26 January 1814 Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History , while Blücher crosses the Middle Rhine on 1 January 1813 and Wintzingerode and Bülow cross the Lower Rhine Schwarzenberg marches up the Rhine to cross at Basel in Switzerland on 20 December 1813, while Blücher crosses the Middle Rhine on 1 January 1813 and Wintzingerode and Bülow cross the Lower Rhine. Map courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History, Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars, https://www.westpoint.edu/academics/academic-departments/history/napoleonic-wars Map A.19: 26 January 1814.

Schwarzenberg debouches from the plateau of Langres and moves to link up with Blücher. Map from Esposito Atlas, courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History. Map A 20 1 February 1814 Schwarzenberg debouches from the plateau of Langres and moves to link up with Blücher. Map from Esposito, Atlas, courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History. Map A.20: 1 February 1814.

reinforced by corps from the Main Army, defeats Napoleon on 1 February northeast of the Bar-Sur-Aube defile. Schwarzenberg's main body provides a fallback position Blücher 14 February Map from Esposito, Atlas, courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History Map A.23. Napoleon defeats Blücher again at Vauchamps Blücher, reinforced by corps from the Main Army, defeats Napoleon on 1 February northeast of the Bar-Sur-Aube defile. Schwarzenberg's main body provides a fallback position. Map from Esposito, Atlas, courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History. Map A.23: Napoleon defeats Blücher again at Vauchamps, 14 February.

Schwarzenberg advances down the Seine towards Paris. Map from Esposito Atlas, courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History Schwarzenberg advances down the Seine towards Paris. Map from Esposito, Atlas, courtesy of United States Military Academy Department of History.

Napoleon marches east after the defeat at Arcis, defeating a Russian corps on 26 March A Map 29 Map A.29: Napoleon marches east after the defeat at Arcis, defeating a Russian corps on 26 March.