

Blücher inflicted the most serious defeat at the Katzbach while Bülow repulsed Oudinot's attempt to capture Berlin. Even the army defeated at Dresden was far from beaten and took advantage of Napoleon's mistakes. Although Napoleon halted the pursuit, Vandamme's I Corps continued to attack Ostermann-Tolstoy's Russians through 29 August. The isolation of Vandamme's corps provided an excellent opportunity for the Allies. While the Russians defended their position obstinately, a Prussian column under Kleist cut across Vandamme's line of retreat on 30 August while Colloredo's Austrians advanced to envelop his right wing

One of the most striking examples of this economy of force is the mass use of skirmishers. In Revolutionary France, the use of whole battalions of line infantry in open order was considered a noteworthy innovation. In the same crucible of battle, Austrian infantry tactics developed along similar lines. During the engagement on 16 October around Dölitz, four companies of the 24 th Infantry Regiment dispersed into a chain of skirmishers with two companies remaining as formed reserves around the Schloß. 161 Similarly, the 44 th Infantry Regiment engaged the Poles near Connewitz in a sharp firefight at 10 p.m., with the first battalion's skirmish line receiving waves of reinforcement from the second battalion. 162 Light companies, third-rankers, and battalions in open order formed much of the frontline firefight, thus keeping more of the army out of the reach of fire and ready to use as a fresh reserve. The 48 th Infantry Regiment, fighting in Bianchi's division of the Austrian reserve, demonstrated proficiency in modern tactics during the 2 p.m. engagement at the Auenhayn sheep farm, southeast of Markkleeberg on the French right. Charged with storming the Maierhof, strongly held by the French and flanked with multiple batteries of artillery, the Austrians took the 160 Clausewitz, On Waterloo, http://clausewitz.com/readings/1815/five40-49.htm#Ch40 161 Hoen, Feldzug von Leipzig, 5: 457. 162 Franz von Banko, Geschichte des k.k. Infanterie-Regimentes Nr 44 Feldmarschall Erzherzog Albrechts, von seiner Errichtung 1744 bis 1875 (Vienna: Hof-und Staatsdruderei, 1875), 202.

. The Lower Rhine route, which passes through the Low Countries, was most famously used in the German Schlieffen Plan during the First World War. The Middle Rhine in the vicinity of Mainz was the route assigned to Blücher's army for the invasion of 1814; the Prussians had used it in 1793 and would use it again during the campaign of 1870. Julius Caesar began his campaigns in Gaul after powerful Germanic tribes began streaming across the Upper Rhine and carving out conquests from Rome's allies; the invaders' key ally, the Sequani tribe, had Vesontio as their largest city, known in modern times as Besançon. Each invasion route had its partisans at Allied headquarters. August von Gneisenau, simultaneously Chief of the Prussian General Staff and chief of staff of the Army of Silesia, argued for an immediate resumption of the offensive by crossing the Middle Rhine, the Moselle, and the Meuse and marching on Paris with the Bohemian and Silesian Armies. Moreover, the Russian tsar opposed attempts to cross the Upper Rhine and invade France through Switzerland, seeking to bring the Alpine cantons into his orbit through respect for their strict neutrality. When the Main Army did violate Swiss neutrality with its Rhine crossing, this end-run around the tsar seriously strained trust between Metternich and