

The  lists  of  European  and  other  commodities  suitable  to  the  markets  at  the  llritish 
Presidencies  are  made  up  from  actual  transactions.  Those  ol  liomhay  w .1)  appear  more  ex- 
tensive than  at  the  other  settlements.  The  Author’s  connexions  were  cliielly  ihi  re;  and  the 


r R E F A C E. 


calamitous  fire,  which  a tew  years  since  destroyed  the  warehouses  of  the  merchants, 
made  the  orders  from  that  settlement  more  numerous.  By  a reference  to  t^lu'se  lists  it  will 
be  seen  that  there  is  scarcely  an  article  manutactured  in  Great  Britain,  or  any  other  part 
of  Europe,  but  what  is  carried  in  considerable  quantities  to  India  in  the  investments  of  the 
Commanders  and  Officers  in  the  Company’s  service. 

The  directions  for  chusing  the  various  productions  of  India  and  China  arc  given  from 
the  best  authorities;  and  the  quantities  imported  and  sold,  will  enable  the  merchant  to  ascer- 
tain, with  a groat  degree  of  accuracy,  the  demand  for  each  article,  and  the  price  it  has  gene- 
rally borne  at  the  Company’s  sales. 

The  trade  from  port  to  port  in  India,  carried  on  by  Native  or  European  merchants 
resident  there,  commonly  called  the  Country  Trade,  is  fully  shewn  by  numerous  tabh-s:  and 
from  the  lists  of  the  articles  which  compose  the  imports  and  exports,  it  will  be  seen  that 
the  productions  of  the  western  hemisphere  bear  but  a very  small  proportion  in  this  trade. 

The  commerce  carried  on  by  Foreigners  with  the  British  Settlements  is  extremely 
beneficial  to  the  latter,  the  greater  part  ot  the  imports  consisting  of  treasure,  and  the  exports 
of  the  manufactures  of  England.  The  articles  imported,  are  principally  wines,  sj)irits, 
naval  stores,  and  metals,  interfering  in  a very  small  degree  with  the  trade  carried  on  by  the 
East  India  Company,  or  the  Commanders  and  Officers  in  their  service. 

In  stating  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  commerce  carried  on  with  hidia  and  China  by 
the  various  nations  of  Europe,  the  best  authorities  have  been  consulted,  and  the  Author 
has  entered  into  a detail  of  their  commercial  transactions,  particularly  those  of  the  English, 
to  a much  greater  extent  than  has  hitherto  been  done.  It  was  intended  to  close  the 
account  of  the  English  East  India  Company  with  a detail  of  the  particular  branches  of 
their  service  at  home,  the  benefits  resulting  to  individuals  belonging  to  their  numerous 
establishments,  and  the  internal  arrangement  of  the  various  depart menfs;  hut  as  delays 
have  already  occurred  in  the  publication  of  this  work,  and  it  seems  particularly  called 
for  at  the  present  juncture,  it  has  been  Judged  best  to  give  the  public  that  part  of  it  which 
is  now  ready,  and  to  reserve  what  reraaips  for  a future  opportunity. 