

grateful  to  my  feelings  will  it  ever  be  to  acknowledge  the  many  instances  of  fiivoiir 

a 


DEDICATION. 


and  protection  I have  privately  had  the  honour  of  receiving  from  you.  In  presenting, 
therefore,  to  your  Lordship’s  candour  the  performance  to  which  many  years  of  my  life 
have  been  dedicated,  I entreat  that  it  may  be  accepted  by  your  Lordship  as  an  evidence 
of  my  gratitude  and  regard. 

I have  the  honour  to  be,  with  the  utmost  respect, 

My  Lord, 

Your  Lordship’s  most  faithful  and  devoted  Servant, 
WILLIAM  MILDURN. 


]34<,  Leadenhall  Street, 
March  25,  1813. 


PREFACE. 


THE  commercial  concerns  of  the  extensive  countries  within  the  liinit.s  of  the  East 
India  Company’s  charter  are  so  little  known  in  Great  Jiritain,  that  any  at  tempi  to  eluci- 
date them,  must  be  always  acceptable,  but  more  particularly  so  at  the  present  time,  when 
the  public  attention  is  directed  to  the  consideration  of  East  India  alfairs. 

The  materials  of  which  this  work  is  composed,  have  been  collected  during  a period 
of  twenty-five  years  actively  employed  in  the  sea  service  of  the  Gompany,  and  in  com- 
mercial pursuits  in  Enj^land  immediately  connected  with  it.  Duriiii;'  tlu'  above  period, 
the  Author  performed  seven  voyages  to  and  from  the  East  Indies  and  China,  and  had 
the  benefit  of  repeatedly  visiting  the  principal  places  referred  to  in  the  work.  These 
opportunities  were  wtH  calculated  to  (jualify  him  for  the  task  lu‘  has  umhMlaken;  and  with 
what  success  he  has  performed  it,  is  now  submitted  to  the  judgim*nt  of  the  piddie.  It 
has  been  his  aim  through  the  whole  to  render  every  thing  in  the  numerous  subjects 
it  comprehends,  as  plain  and  intelligible  as  possible. 

The  geographical  and  historical  matter  has  been  drawn  from  the  best  and  latest 
writers,  and  the  Author  has  endeavoured  to  be  accurate  without  lu  iug  too  ditfuse. 

The  statements  of  the  relative  value  of  the  coins,  weights,  and  measures  wer(‘  made 
from  personal  observations  at  the  dilferent  places  the  Author  has  \isited,  from  the 
authorities  of  such  as  have  trealcdoii  these  subjects  before  him,  and  from  the  kind  assist- 
ance of  vaiiuiib  friends  eoiiveisaiit  therein,  lie  has  to  regret,  however,  that  tlnw  are  less 
perfect  than  he  could  wish,  from  the  want  of  a fixed  standard  even  at  the  priueipal  setih'- 
ments.  Here  it  may  be  necessary  to  remark  that  Indian  accounts  are  ke|U  in  lacs  of  one 
hundred  thousand  each  ; thus,  ^’1, ‘234, 567  would  be  stated  in  rupees  12,3 1,567 twelve 
lacs,  thirty-four  thousand,  five  hundred  and  sixty-seven  njjiecs. 

The  statements  of  duties,  and  the  various  regulations  in  the  shipping  and  coniim  rcial 
departments  of  the  principal  .setth'ments,  have  been  brought  down  to  the  latest  period; 
and  as  observations  upon  the  provisions  and  refreshments  procuralile  at  the  various  plact  s, 
must  he  admitted  to  be  essentially  necessary  to  those  connected  with  the  eomint  rce  of  llie 
East  Indies,  particular  care  has  also  been  taken  to  give  a correct  detail  of  them. 