

It  will  t asily  he  seen  that  a work  of  this  nature  required  great  labour  and  attention, 
diligent  research,  and  persevering  enquiry,  to  render  it  worthy  of  public  attention  ; and 
the  Author,  as  he  has  already  stated,  has  had  the  advantage  of  many  years’  expe- 
rience. Having  thus  briefly  acquainted  the  reader  with  the  nature  of  it,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  add,  that  it  was  begun,  and  has  been  carried  on,  under  circumstances  very 
adverse  to  such  ait  undertaking;  and  should  it  experience  the  public  patronage,  the 
Author  will  think  himself  happy  in  having  contributed  to  the  commercial  interests  of  the 
empire.  A work  so  arduous  and  complicated  can  hardly  be  thought  to  be  without  errors; 
the  Author,  therefore,  upon  this  point  claims  the  indulgent  candour  of  his  reader. 


INTRODUCTION 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


BETWEEN 


JilNGLAN®  AN®  THE  EAST  JNDIES. 


THE  advantages  which  Great  Britain  has  derived  Irom  iG  commerce  with  the  East  Iiniies  for  ^lp^^  ards 
of  two  centuries,  hy  the  immense  wealth  it  has  introduced  into  the  country,  the  large  pecuniary  suppllc.^  it 
has  afforded  the  Government,  and  the  assistance  it  has  given  to  her  naval  power,  to  which  her  exaltation 
among  the  nations  may  be  attributed,  are  so  tftily  benelicial,  that  it  will  not  he  thought  an  unimportant 
object  in  the  commencement  of  this  work  to  endeavour  to  trace  its  rise  and  progi  es.s,  and  to  place  in  a dear 
light  the  present  situation  of  so  essential  a branch  of  the  national  trade. 

Some  historians  allege  that  the  East  Indies  were  not  unknown  to  Britons  in  very  ancic'nt  times. 

William  of  Malmesbury  relates  that  in  the  year  883,  Siglielmus,  Bishop  of  Sherborne*  in  Dorsetshire, 
being  sent  by  King  Alfred  to  Rome  with  presents  to  the  Pope,  proceeded  from  thence  to  the  East  Indies, 
to  visit  the  tomb  of  St.  Thomas  at  Meliapour,  by  whose  means  the  English  nation  had  an  early  view  of 
the  riches  of  those  countries,  in  the  spices  and  jewels  which  the  Bishop  brought  back  with  him. 

With  respect  to  the  importation  of  the  manufactures  and  productions  of  the  East  into  Europe  ante  - 
cedent to  the  discovery  of  the  passage  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  wc  find  that  in  the  thirteenth 
century  the  Mahometan  Moors  made  a conquest  of  tlic  greater  part  of  the  Peninsula  of  India,  as  well  as 
of  the  most  valuable  of  the  Spice  Islands ; and  having  engrossed  the  commerce  of  tliose  countries,  they 
transmitted,  during  that  and  the  two  following  centuries,  the  rich  merchandise  of  Asia  for  the  European 
markets,  chiefly  from  Aden  in  Arabia,  by  the  Red  Sea  to  Suez,  from  whence  it  was  conveyed  upon  camels 
to  the  Nile,  and  there  shipped  for  Grand  Cairo  anci  Alexandria;  and  sometimes  it  was  carried  from  the 
Persian  Gulf  to  the  Euphrates,  and  afterwards  conveyed  by  caravans  to  Aleppo.  From  those  places  it 
was  dispersed  by  the  Venetian  and  other  European  merchants  over  the  western  world.  England  was  sup- 
plied with  Indian  commodities  by  an  annual  ship  from  Venice,  of  great  burthen  and  immense  value,  which 
they  sold  at  their  own  prices.  In  this  condition  the  commerce  remained  for  a considei’able  time,  without 
any  attempt  of  the  English  to  participate  in  so  beneficial  a trade. 