

They  were  also  empowered  to  make  hye-laws,  to  inflic  t punishments,  either  corpoial  or  pecuniary, 
provided  sucli  punishments  accorded  with  the  laws  of  Mnglitnd. 

To  export  goods  free  of  duty  for  f'onr  years;  and  uftei  wards  the  duly  of  all  exports  which  should  mis- 
carry, to  be  deducted  from  future  goods  when  shipped. 

For  the  customs  ol  imported  goods  they  were  allowed  six  months’  credit  for  half,  and  twelve  months 
for  the  payment  of  the  remainder,  with  a free  exportation  for  thiiteeii  months. 

They  were  also  permitted  to  export  to  the  amount  of  in  foreign  coin  or  bullion,  provided 

that  et’btXlO  were  recoined  in  her  Majesty's  mint. 

All  other  her  Majesty’s  subjects  were  by  this  charter  excluded,  under  severe  penalties,  from  this 
traffic,  w ithoui  the  assent  and  lea\  e of  the  Company. 

The  charter  w^as  not  to  extend  to  any  place  in  the  actual  possession  of  any  of  her  Majesty’s  allies. 

The  Company  were  obliged  to  return,  six  months  after  the  completion  of  a voyage,  the  same  (juan- 
tity  of  silver,  gold,  or  foreign  coin  as  they  had  exported,  the  first  voyage  excepted. 

This  proviso  was  likewise  added,  that  “ if  within  the  space  limited  by  the  charter,  this  monopoly 
should  appear  in  any  respect  detrimental  to  the  public,  it  should  then,  upon  two  years’  warning  under  the 
privy  .seal,  become  null  and  void.  13ut  if  experience  proved  this  n(‘W  corporation  w'as  for  the  wTal  and 
benefit  of  the  nation,  in  this  case  her  Majesty  passed  her  royal  word,  not  only  to  r(*ncvv  their  charter, 
but  to  add  such  other  clauses  and  graces  as  should  a[)pear  most  conducive  to  the  interest  of  the  commerce, 
the  undertakers,  and  the  kingdom  in  general,  the  true  end  of  all  public  enterprises.” 

In  consequence  of  this  charter,  the  merchants  began  to  raise  a joint  stock  l*or  the  execution  of  the 
design,  which  became  so  popular,  that  in  a short  time  were  paid  into  the  treasurer’s  hands. 


VI 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Tlie  Company  purchased  the  Susan  for  I’KiOO,  and  tlic  owners  agi*eed  to  give  £800  for  her  after 
her  return  from  the  first  voyage.  The  Malice  Scourge,  afterwards  named  the  Dragon,  of  600  tons, 
with  all  her  stores,  was  bought  of  the  Earl  of  Ciiinberland  for  £3700;  and  they  came  to  a resolution 
not  to  employ  any  gentlemen  in  any  place  of  charge.'’  The  allowances  granted  to  the  commanders 
were  to  be,  .PI 00  wages,  and  £200  on  credit  for  an  adventure;  and  as  an  incit(‘meiit  to  activity  and 
zeal  in  the  service,  if,  on  their  return,  the  profit  yielded  2 for  1,  they  were  to  be  allowed  P500;  if  3 for  I, 
PlOOO;  if  4 for  1,  PI 500;  and  if  5 for  I,  P2000.  Thirty-six  factors,  or  supracargoes,  were  nomi- 
nated. Three  principal,  or  factors  of  the  first  class,  were  each  to  be  allowed  cf’lOO  for  equipment,  and 
£200  as  an  adventure;  four  factors  of  tlic  second  class,  £50  for  equipment,  and  PlOO  for  an  adventure; 
four  of  the  third  class  were  to  have  P30  for  equipment,  and  £50  for  an  adventure;  and  four  of  the  fourth 
class  were  to  be  allowed  £20  each  for  equipment,  and  .PtOfor  an  adventure.  They  were  to  give  security 
for  their  fidelity,  and  that  they  would  abstain  from  all  private  trade;  the  principal  factors  to  the  extent  of 
P500  each,  and  the  others  in  proportion. 