


BETWEEN  ENGT.AND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


vli 

at  once  furnished  a supply  for  the  existing  demands,  and  enabled  the  original  advonUu  ers  to  send  out  again 
the  same  ships  upon  a second  voyage. 

1604.  The  East  India  Company  sent  out  their  second  voyage  under  tlie  command  of  Sir  Henry 
Middleton  with  four  ships,  the  same  as  pertbrined  the  former  voyage,  'fliey  were  lo  proceed,  in  the 
first  instance,  to  the  factories  wdiich  had  already  been  established,  but  with  permission  to  opim  a trade 
with  the  Spice  Islands.  The  sum  suhscrihed  tor  the  second  \oyagc,  I’fiO,  1.^0,  was  expended  as  follows: 
— For  repairs  of  the  ships,  for  stores,  and  provisions  /MS,110;  bullion  F11,I6();  goods  FJ,1  \^2.  This  Heel 
sailed  the  25th  of  March,  1604,  and  arrived  at  Bantam  on  the  22d  of  D(‘C(‘mhcr,  where  two  sliijis  were  laden 
with  pepper;  the  other  two  WTre  sent  to  Banda  and  Andjoyna  for  nutmegs,  mare,  and  eloxes.  Captain 
Middleton  arrived  in  England  in  May,  1606,  with  the  Joss  of  one  of  his  ships.  The  profits  upon  this  and 
the  former  voyage  amounted  to  95  per  cent,  upon  the  capital  originally  siihserihnl,  cli  ar  of  all  charges. 

The  success  ot'tliese  two  voyages  induced  pr  ivate  nierehants  wlio  were  not  partners  in  the  Compan)'s 
stock,  to  endeavour  to  obtain  a participation  in  the  trade.  King  »James  1.  in  this  year  granteil  a licence 
to  Sir  Edward  Michelborne  and  others,  to  trade  to  ‘‘ Catliay,  China,  Japan,  Coiea,  and  Cainhay.i,  &e. 
and  the  isles  thereto  belonging,  and  to  trade  vvitii  tlie  said  countries  and  people,  not  as  yet  frerpienled  and 
traded  unto  by  any  of  our  subjects  or  people,  xvithout  inteiniplion,  any  restraint,  grant,  or  charter  to 
the  contrary  notwithstanding.’’  This  licence  was  a direct  violation  of  the  exclu.sive  privileges  granted 
by  Queen  P^ilizabeth  to  the  Company;  and  Is  memorable  for  its  being  the  first  appeal ance  of  pi ix ate 
traders,  who  were  termed  interlopers,  endeavouring  to  participate  in  the  Company  s commerce.  Michelborne, 
on  his  arrival  in  India,  instead  of  exploring  new  places  of  trade,  as  was  the  proicssed  object  of*  his  voyage, 
committed  various  depredations  upon  the  Chinese  junks  trading  among  the  eastern  islands;  and  having 
obtained  a considerable  booty,  he  returneil  to  England  with  the  plunder.  This  not  only  brought  disgrace 
upon  the  English  name,  but  in  some  degree  involved  the  Comjiany’s  alfaii  s at  Bantam  in  eonl*usioii. 

1606.  Notwithstanding  these  unpromising  appearances,  there  were  still  found  among  the  adventurers 
some  public  spirited  persons  who  were  unwilling  lo  abuiuion  the  trade,  provided  they  could  be  assured 
of  meeting  with  due  support  and  protection  from  the  State.  Being  satisfied  on  this  lu  ad,  a new 
subscription  was  entered  into,  which  produced  a capital  of  i?5.1,.^y)0.  Willi  part  of  ibis  sum  lh(‘  new 
subscribers  purchased  of  the  original  adventurers  tlieir  outstanding  reinuius,  and  the  lemainder  was 
employed  in  fitting  out  the  third  voyage,  consisting  of  three  ships,  the  Dragon,  Captain  Keeling;  Hector, 
Captain  Hawkins;  and  (’onsent,  Cajitain  JMiddlctoii.  The  ex|»ence  of  repairs  and  c([uipping  this  fleet 
amounted  to  i?28,620;  the  cargo  was  estimated  at,  bullion,  i'i  7,1)00,  and  gooils  J.72S0,  forming  a total 
of  ^24,880. 