

1586.  Captain  Cavendish  commenced  his  voyage  round  the  globe,  sailed  from  Plymoiitb,  the  2 1 si  of 
July,  arrived  at  the  Cape  de  Verd  Islands  in  September,  1586,  and  entered  the  Straits  of  Magellan  the 
7th  of  January,  1587.  He  coasted  along  to  the  northward,  then  proceeiled  to  the  T^adrones,  where  hi- 
arrived  on  the  3d  of  January,  1588,  and  by  the  6th  of  March  passed  the  Straits  of  Sunda,  and  arrived  at 
Plymouth  on  the  9th  of  September,  1588,  by  the  way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  This  was  the  second 
voyage  round  the  world  pciformed  by  the  Englisli. 

1587.  England  at  this  period  was  at  war  with  Spain  and  Portugal.  Sir  Eraru  is  Drake  eaplured, 
near  the  Azores,  a Portuguese  carrack  from  the  East  Indies,  and  brought  her  to  bbigland.  The  papia  s 
of  this  ship  afforded  so  much  information  as  to  the  value  of  the  trade,  and  the  mode  of  conduit  ing  it,  thul 
Camden  considers  them  to  have  furnished  the  first  idea  of  establishing  a trade  thither  fiom  England. 

1588«  The  Spaniards  complained  of  the  English  having  infringed  their  right  by  fn-quenting  tin* 
Indian  seas,  alluding  to  Sir  Francis  Drake  sailing  round  the  globe.  Queen  Klizahelh  replii-d,  “It  is 
as  lawiul  for  my  subjects  to  do  this  as  the  Spaniards,  since  the  sea  and  air  arc  common  to  all  men.*' 

1591.  The  voyages  undertaken  by  Sir  Francis  Drake  and  ("aptuin  Cavendish,  thoiigli  more  foi 
the  purpose  of  annoying  and  distressing  the  enemy,  and  profiting  by  the  booty,  than  witli  a view  to  com- 
mercial objects,  afforded  such  an  insight  into  the  trade  of  India,  as,  combined  with  tlic  information  pro- 
cured  from  others,  who  had  visited  that  country  by  circuitous  routes,  induced  some  merchants  of  London  to 
set  on  foot  a voyage  thither,  direct  by  the  way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  In  defiance  of  the  claims  of  the 
Portuguese  to  the  exclusive  right  to  the  navigation  by  that  route.  This  voyage  w^as  undertaken  with  three 
ships,  the  Penelope,  the  Merchant  Royal,  and  the  Edward  Bonaventuri*,  under  the  command  of  Mr. 
George  Raymond  and  Mr.  James  Lancaster;  and  although  its  principal  object  was  to  establish  a commer- 
cial intercourse  between  the  two  countries,  the  advantages  of  privateering  were  still  kept  in  view.  In 
their  passage  to  the  Cape  they  were  successful  in  capturing  several  Portuguese  ships;  hut  this  occasioned 
KO  much  delay,  that  they  had  to  encounter  the  diHiciilties  of  weathering  the  Cape  in  the  most  inclement 
season;  in  addition  to  which,  their  crews  were  so  sickly,  that  they  were  obliged  to  send  hack  the  Merchant 
Royal.  The  other  two  ships  pursued  their  voyage,  hut  soon  after  parted  company  in  a gale  of  wind;  and 
the  Penelope  with  Captain  Raymond  was  never  more  heard  of.  Captain  Lancaster  reached  the  Indies, 
and  took  in  pepper  at  Sumatra;  hut,  owing  to  the  sickly  state  of  his  crew,  could  not  reacli  the  Moluccas. 
On  his  return  home,  being  in  want  of  provisions,  he  made  for  the  West  Indies,  wliere,  whilst  himself 
and  the  chief  of  the  crew  were  on  shore  upon  an  uninhabited  island,  in  search  of  means  for  supplying 
their  wants,  the  remainder  ran  away  with  the  ship.  Here  he  continued  some  time,  fill  at  length  he  was 
relieved,  and  brought  home;  but  in  tlie  interim  most  of  his  crew  had  perlslied. 