

♦A 


ii 


HISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


The  Portuguese  had  the  credit  and  good  fortune  of  making  the  important  discovery  of  a passage  by 
sea  to  the  East  Indies.  It  was  soon  followed  by  their  acquisition,  partly  by  treaty,  but  chiefly  by  conquest, 
of  numerous  settlements  on  the  coasts  of  the  peninsula  of  India  and  the  Eastern  Islands,  which  enabled 
them  to  supply  the  European  markets  with  all  kinds  of  East  India  goods,  which  they  enjoyed  for  nearly 
a century,  without  any  other  Euro[)can  nation  endeavouring  to  partici[mte  with  them  in  this  lucrative 
branch  of  commcj  ce,  on  the  ground  of  their  original  discovery,  by  which  it  was  held  that  all  other  nations 
were  excluded  from  a communication  with  India  by  the  same  route. 

1497.  King  Henry  VI  I.  fitted  outjbvo  vessels  under  the  command  of  John  Cabot,  a skilful  and  en- 
terprising navigator,  with  a view  of  discovering  a north-western  passage  to  India.  He  proceeded  as  far  as 
67^  30  North  latitude;  but  in  consequence  of  the  mutinous  disposition  of  his  crew,  he  was  obliged  to  stand 
to  the  southward,  and  in  the  course  of  his  passage  home,  he  fell  in  with  Newfoundland,  and  the  Continent 
of  North  America. 

1549.  Sebastian,  the  son  of  John  Cabot,  inheriting  the  idea  of  his  father,  that  there  was  a shorter 
passage  to  India  than  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  persuaded  a number  of  merchants  in  London  to 
raise  a capital  of  .P60(X),  in  shares  of  i?25  each,  for  the  purpose  of  prosecuting  the  discovery  of  a passage 
to  the  North-west.  They  obtained  the  King’s  Charter,  and  in  155fl  fitted  out  a licet  of  three  ships  under 
Sir  Hugh  Willoughby,  who  sailed  on  the  10th  of  May.  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby  with  his  crew  were  all  lost. 
Captain  Cliancellor,  the  second  in  command,  arrived  at  a port  in  Russia,  travelled  to  the  Court  of  the 
Czar,  or  Emperor,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  the  present  Russia  Company. 

157G.  Previous  to  this  period,  very  considerable  privileges  were  granted  by  the  Grand  Signior  for  the 
establishment  of  a Turkey  trade,  in  consequence  of  a treaty  between  England  and  the  Porte.  The  Turkey 
or  Levant  merchants  were  at  this  time  looked  upon  as  the  true  East  India  traders,  by  means  of  their  fac- 
tories at  Alexandria,  Alep|)o,  Damascus,  and  the  different  ports  of  Egypt  and  the  Turkish  dominions. 
A new  channel  of  trade  Iiad  also  been  set  on  foot  through  Russia  to  Persia  for  raw  silk,  and  Queen  Eliza- 
beth had  sent  letters  to  the  Sophy  of  Persia,  requesting  permission  for  her  subjects  to  trade  in  his  dominions. 
The  Sophy  granted  them  an  imniunity  from  tolls  or  customs  on  their  merchandise,  and  full  protection  to 
their  persons  and  goods. 