

Mr.  Thorne,  a London  merchant,  who  had  long  resided  at  Seville,  and  there  acijuired  some  know- 
ledge of  the  East  India  trade,  represented  to  King  Henry  VIII.  the  advantages  this  kingdom  might 
derive  from  the  eastern  commerce.  His  proposal  was  to  open  a passage  by  the  north-west  to  Tartary  and 
China;  and  some  merchants  of  London,  in  expectation  of  reaping  the  benefit  of  this  discovery,  fitted  out 
fwo  ships  under  Captain  Frobisher,  which  were  unsuccessful  in  several  attempts;  and  the  idea  of  finding  a 
passage  in  that  direction  was  rejected,  as  being  hazardous  and  impracticable. 

1577.  Sir  Francis  Drake  fitti?d  out  an  armament  at  his  own  cxpence,  consisting  of  the  Pelican  under 
his  own  command,  and  four  other  ships,  with  which  he  sailed  through  the  Strait  of  Magellan  into  the  South 
Seas,  wliere  he  did  the  Spaniards  incredible  miscliief,  and  acquired  an  immense  booty.  On  the  news  of 
this  reaching  Spain,  a strong  force  was  sent  to  intercept  him  in  his  return ; to  avoid  which,  being  by  losses 
reduced  to  a single  ship,  he  determined  to  proceed  home  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  In  the  course  of  his 
passage  he  touched  at  Ternate,  one  of  tlie  Molucca  Islands,  whose  King  was  then  at  war  with  the  King  of 
Tidore,  at  the  latter  of  which  places  the  Portuguese  liad  formed  a settlement.  Sir  Francis  having  afforded 
the  King  of  Ternate  some  assistance  against  his  enemies,  a treaty  of  amity  and  commerce  was  entered  into 
between  them,  in  which  the  King  agreed  to  9U{)ply  tlie  English  nation  with  all  the  cloves  produced  in  his 
country;  he  also,  according  to  the  Eastern  custom,  formally  ratified  the  contract  by  the  delivery  of  a present. 
At  Ternate  Sir  Francis  took  on  board  a large  quantity  of  cloves,  and  in  February,  1580,  departed  for 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES 


111 


England,  where  he  arrived  on  the  3d  of  November  following.  In  lliis  voyage  Sir  Francis  not  only  esta- 
blished his  reputation  as  the  first  person  who  had  |)erformed  a complete  voyage  round  llu*  world,  but  he 
had  the  honour  of  being  the  first  who  opened  a direct  commercial  intercourse  between  England  and  Iiulia. 

1583.  Three  English  merchants,  Fitcli,  Newberry,  and  Leedes,  travidled  overland  to  India,  pro- 
vided with  letters  to  the  King  of  Cambay,  the  Emperor  of  China,  &c.  They  proceeded  to  Tripoli,  from 
thence  to  Bagdad,  and  down  the  Tigris  and  Persian  Gulf  to  Orinus,  where  tluy  cmbai  ked  for  (ioa;  they 
then  proceeded  to  Agra,  where  Leedes  entered  into  the  service  of  the  Great  Mogul;  Newberry  died  in 
India;  and  Fitch  proceeded  to  Ceylon,  Bengal,  Pegu,  Siam,  Malacca,  and  many  otlier  parts  of  the  East 
Indies,  in  all  of  which  places  they  found  the  Portuguese  settled,  who  threw  ewery  ol)stacle  in  llie  way  of 
their  progress.  They  >vere  in  general  received  kindly  by  the  natives  of  the  various  coiintrii*s  they  visited. 