

At  this  juncture  an  attempt  was  made  on  the  part  of  Spain  to  negotiate  a peace  with  England. 
Commissioners  liad  arrived  for  that  purpose,  and  it  was  foreseen  that  one  of  the  main  points  that  Spain 
would  insist  upon,  would  he  to  exclude  England  from  the  trade  to  India,  and  it  was  apprehended  that  this 
would  be  conceded  to  them  ; it  was  therefore  judged  advisable  to  bring  matters  to  a test  before  the  voyage 
was  so  far  entered  upon,  as  to  recede  without  loss  and  disappointment.  A petition  was  accordingly 
presented  to  the  Lords  of  the  Council,  “ soliciting  their  Lordships’  warrant,  that  the  voyage  might  be  pro- 
cceded  upon  without  any  hindrance,  nothwithstanding  the  treaty,  and  that  by  reason  thereof,  they  should 
not  be  staid  when  the  shipping  was  prepared."  In  reply  to  this  petition,  they  were  informed  that 
their  Lordships  declined  granting  such  warranty  as  deeming  it  more  beneficial  for  the  general  state  of 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


T 


merclmtulise  to  entertain  a peace,  than  tliat  the  same  should  he  hindered  hy  tlu'  standinir  with  the  Spanish 
Commissioners  for  the  maintenance  of*  this  trade,  and  tlierehy  forego  tin;  opportunity  of  concluding  the 
peace.’’  Upon  this  inteliigeiice,  the  adventurcTs,  “ fearing  lest,  after  they  were  drawn  into  a chaige,  they 
should  be  required  to  desist  from  the  voyage,  w^ere  didermined  to  give  up  tlie  concern.”  Foitinmtely, 
howTver,  for  the  best  interests  of  the  country,  the  Commissioners  did  not  agri'e,  and  the  negotiation  for 
peace  was  entirely  broken  off. 

1600.  Availing  themselves  of  the  breaking  off  the  Spanish  treaty,  the  merchants  made  applU 
cation  to  the  Queen  for  a charter,  empo^vering  them  to  undertake  a trade  to  the  Mast  Indies.  On  the  ‘31st 
of  December,  1600,  their  request  was  granted,  and  an  East  India  Company  (‘reeled  under  the  title  of 
“ The  Governor  and  Company  of  ]\lerchants  of  London  trading  to  the  Mast  Indies.*’  A chart(T  was  granted, 
and  they  were  formed  into  a body  corporate,  with  a common  seal,  which  they  were  |H‘nnitlcd  to  alter 
at  pleasure. 

The  management  of  their  concerns  was  placed  under  a Governor  and  twenty-four  conimillee-men,  to 
he  annually  chosen  in  July  in  each  year,  who  wore  to  have  the  direction  of  voyages,  provision  of  sliipping, 
and  sale  of  merchandise. 

The  members  of  the  Company,  their  sons  of  the  age  of  twenty-one  years,  and  their  a|)[)rentiees, 
factors,  and  servants,  w’ore  authorized  to  carry  on  trade  to  the  Mast  Indies  (that  is,  to  all  countries  beyond 
tlie  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  Straits  of  ]Mag(dlan)  for  fifteen  yc'ars  from  Christmas,  1600,  on  the  following 
terms,  viz,  Freely  to  trafiic  and  use  the  trade  of  merchandise  hy  s(\a,  in  and  hy  such  ways  and  passages 
already  discovered,  or  hereafter  to  be  found  out  or  discovered,  as  they  should  esteem  and  take  to  he  littc'st, 
into  and  from  the  Mast  Indies,  into  tlie  countries  and  ports  of  Asia  and  Africa;  and  into  and  from  all  the 
islands,  ports,  havens,  cities,  creeks,  rivers,  and  places  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  Anu'rica,  or  any  of  them 
beyond  the  (.'ape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  w luae  any  trade  or  tralbc  rnuy  be  used  to  and 
from  every  of  them,  in  such  order,  manner,  form,  liberty,  aJid  condition  as  they  themselves  should  from 
time  to  time  ague  upon.” 