

1607.  The  fourth  voyage  commenced  with  two  ships,  the  Ascension  and  (Jnion,  under  the  command 
of  Captain  Sharj)ry.  A subscription  of  i?33,000  was  entered  into.  The  cxpence  of  repairs  and  equipment 
amounted  to  d(?  14,600;  the  cargo  consisted  of  15,000  in  bullion,  and  i?3, 400  in  goods.  This  voyage 
was  unfortunate.  The  Ascension  arrived  at  Aden  the  8th  of  April,  1609,  and  obtained  the  grant  of  a free 
trade,  but  was  afterwards  lost  off  Diu.  The  Union  proceeded  to  Priaman  on  Sumatra,  and  obtained  a 
cargo  of  pepper,  and  nn  her  voyage  home  was  lost  on  the  coast  of  France. 

1608.  Upon  the  arrival  of  the  Consent  from  the  Moluccas,  belonging  to  the  third  voyage,  with  a 
cargo  of  spices,  which  the  Commander,  by  dint  of  bravery  and  exertion,  had  obtained,  in  spite  of  every 
effort  of  the  Dutch  to  prevent  it,  the  adventurers  agreed  to  raise  an  additional  subscription  of  25  per  cent, 
on  their  capital,  to  send  out  another  ship,  the  Expedition,  Captain  David  Middleton,  for  the  firth  voyage, 
the  equipment  of  which  cost  £6000,  The  cargo  consisted  of  £6000  in  bullion,  and  700  in  goods. 
This  ship  was  destined  to  Bantam  and  Banda ; but  the  Dutch  being  in  possession  of  the  latter  place,  they 
were  refused  permission  to  trade;  on  which  they  proceeded  to  Pulo  Way,  where  he  procured  a valuable 
cargo,  consisting  of  nutmegs,  mace,  pepper,  and  other  commodities.  Captain  Middleton's  conduct  was 
equally  conspicuous  in  this  as  in  the  former  voyage ; and  upon  the  final  adjustment  of  the  whole  concern, 
there  was  divided  a profit  of  211  per  cent. 

1609.  Although  the  fifteen  years'  exclusive  trade  granted  to  the  East  India  Company  by  Queen 
Elizabeth,  was  not  to  expire  till  1615,  the  inconvenience  which  the  Company  experienced  from  the  inter- 
ference of  private  traders,  induced  them  to  make  application  to  King  James  for  a renewal  of  their  privi- 
leges. After  reciting  the  charter  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  the  King,  by  letters  patent,  dated  the  31st  of 
May,  1609,  confirmed  the  right  to  the  Company,  to  be  a body  politic  and  corporate  for  ever,  with  per- 
petual succession,  and  to  make  bye-laws;  and  this  right  was  defined  to  be,  to  possess  lands,  and  to 
alienate  the  same;  but  instead  of  limiting  their  exclusive  privileges  to  fifteen  years,  the  whole  entire  and 
only  trade  and  traffic  to  the  East  Indies  for  ever,"  was  granted  to  the  Company;  and,  by  a prohibitory 
clause,  all  persons  were  enjoined  not  to  trade  within  the  Company's  limits,  except  by  licences  obtained 
from  them  under  their  common  seal;  and  to  prevent  any  apprehensions  which  the  Company  might  enter- 
tain of  licences  granted  to  private  traders  being  obtained  from  the  Crown,  it  was  expressly  stated,  that  the 
same  should  not  be  given  without  the  consent  of  the  Company,  explaining  that,  notwithstanding  these 
privileges,  if  the  trade  should  not  be  found  profitable  to  the  realm,  such  exclusive  privileges  were  to  cease 
and  determine  after  three  years'  warning. 