

A fleet  of  five  ships,  the  Dragon  of  ()00  tons,  the  Hector  of  300,  the  Ascension  of  2(i0,  the  Susan 
of  240,  and  a tender,  under  the  command  of  Captain  James  l4ancaster,  was  equipped  and 
manned,  the  cargoes  of  which  were  composed  of  bullion,  P28,742;  and  goods,  consisting  of  iron,  tin 
wrought  and  iinwrought,  lead,  80  pieces  of  broad-cloths  of  all  colours,  80  pieces  of  Devonshire  kersies, 
100  pieces  of  Norwich  stuffs,  with  smaller  articles  intended  as  }>resents,  amounting  to  P6860.  They 
were  furnished  with  letters  and  presents  from  the  Queen  to  the  Kings  of  Achecn  and  Bantam.  The  fleet 
sailed  from  England  the  13th  of  February,  1601,  and  arrived  at  Acheen  the  5th  of  June,  1602,  where  they 
w’ere  received  with  every  mark  of  distinction ; they  formed  a treaty,  and  left  factors,  but  did  not  obtain 
a sufficiency  of  pepper  to  load  their  ships.  From  thence  they  sailed  to  Bantam,  and  w-ere  graciously 
received.  So  successful  in  every  respect  w^as  this  fleet,  that  it  excited  the  jealousy  of  the  Portuguese,  who 
soon  began  to  do  the  English  all  the  mischief  in  their  power.  Having  settled  factors  at  Bantam,  Lancaster 
set  sail  for  England,  and  arrived,  after  a prosperous  voyage,  in  the  Downs  on  the  lltli  of  September, 
1603.  On  their  passage  home,  tlicy  took  possession  of  the  Island  of  St.  Helena. 

During  the  absence  of  these  ships,  it  had  been  proposed  to  follow  up  the  efforts  of  the  first  adventurers 
by  setting  forth,  in  the  subsequent  season,  a second  voyage  upon  a new  subscription ; hut  though  the  mea- 
sure w'as  strongly  recommended  by  the  T.ord  High  Admiral,  the  I^ord  Treasurer,  the  Lords  of  the  Council, 
and  even  by  her  Majesty,  who  went  so  far  as  to  Intimate,  that  by  not  following  up  the  business  with 
spirit,  in  the  manner  of  the  Dutch,  it  seemed  as  if  but  little  regard  was  entertained  for  her  Majesty's 
honour,  or  the  honour  of  the  country;”  yet  so  averse  were  people  at  that  time  to  hazard  their  property  in 
untried  speculations,, that  no  sufficient  number  of  persons  could  be  found  who  were  disposed  to  engage  fur- 
ther in  this  trade,  till  it  should  be  known  how  far  the  original  adventure  was  likely  to  succeed. 

Captain  Lancaster’s  return  took  place  at  a most  unfortunate  period.  The  plague  was  then  raging  in 
London,  from  whence  most  of  the  principal  inhabitants  had  withdrawn  themselves,  in  order  to  escape  from 
its  direful  effects.  A large  sum  of  money,  not  less  than  •f'35,000,  was  unavoidably  required  to  defray  the 
current  expcnces,  such  as  seamen's  wages,  the  King's  duties,  and  other  incidental  charges.  There  was  no 
prospect  of  obtaining  the  money  by  a present  sale  of  the  Company's  commodities,  nor  were  they  enabled 
to  borrow  it,  even  upon  the  credit  of  men  of  the  first  responsibility.  It  was  also  no  less  necessary  that 
measures  should  be  taken  for  raising  a fund  for  fitting  out  a second  voyage  in  the  subsequent  season,  to 
which  no  new  adventurers  shewed  an  inclination.  Under  these  discouraging  circumstances,  the  original 
adventurers,  as  a measure  of  necessity  rather  than  choice,  resolved  that  each  subscriber  of  £250  to  the 
first  capital,  should  be  required  to  advance  a further  sum  of  .£'200  in  addition  thereto,  in  consideration  of 
which,  he  should  be  allowed  to  receive  pepper  and  spices^  at  given  rates  of  valuation,  to  the  amount  of 
£500,  to  be  disposed  of  at  liis  own  discretion.  In  this  way  a further  sum  of  J?60,450  was  raised,  which 