

*A2 


iv 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


159^.  Some  private  ships  of  war  captured  a large  Portuguese  carrack,  called  the  Madre  de  Dios,  of 
1600  tons  burthen,  and  brought  her  into  Dartmouth ; she  was  the  largest  ship  ever  seen  in  England.  The 
cargo  eonsi.^ted  of  spices,  calicoes,  silks,  gold,  pearls,  drugs.  China-ware,  &c.  valued,  at  a moderate  com- 
putation, at  .XM  50,000.  The  possession  of  such  imtiiense  foreign  riches  greatly  encouraged  the  English  to 
go  directly  to  the  East  Indies  on  a mercantile  account. 

1596.  Sir  Robert  Dudley  and  others  fitted  out  three  ships,  with  the  intention  of  trading  to  China. 
Wood,  the  commander,  hud  letters  from  Queen  Elizabeth  to  the  Emperor  of  China.  This  expedition  was 
very  unfortunate;  not  one  of  the  company  ever  returned  to  give  an  account  of  the  rest. 

1599.  In  this  year  Queen  Elizabeth  sent  Sir  John  Mildenhall  overland,  by  the  way  of  Constanti- 
nojde,  to  the  Court  of  the  Great  Mogul,  to  apply  for  certain  privileges  for  the  English  Company,  for 
whom  she  was  then  preparing  a charter,  in  which  he  was  long  opposed  by  the  arts  of  the  Portuguese  at 
that  Coui  t,  who  prepossessed  the  Mogul  against  the  English,  so  that  it  was  a considerable  time  before  he 
could  get  the  better  of  them. 

The  unsuccessful  termination  of  Captain  Raymond's  expedition  gave  a*  damp  to  all  future  exer- 
tions upon  individual  account.  The  Dutch  had  by  this  time  commenced  u trade  to  India  upon  an 
extensive  scale,  with  a [)rospect  of  success.  At  this  juncture  England,  not  being  able  to  get  supplied  with 
Eastern  commodities  from  Lisbon,  on  account  of  the  war,  could  only  obtain  them  through  the  medium  of 
the  Dutch,  or  her  own  Turkey  Company,  by  way  of  the  Levant.  The  Dutcli,  taking  advantage  of 
this  eircumstaiice,  raised  the  pepper  upon  us,  from  about  three  shillings  to  tin'  extravagant  rate  of  six 
and  eight  sliillings  p(»r  pound.  Aggrieved  by  this  imposition,  the  merchants  of  London  conceived  an  idea 
of  putting  in  for  a share  of  this  trade.  A meeting  was  accordingly  called  on  the  22d  of  September,  1599, 
at  Founders'  Hall,  at  which  the  Lord  Mayor  and  most  of  the  Aldermen  and  principal  merchants  of  the 
City,  to  the  number  of  101,  attended,  and  agreed  to  form  an  association,  for  the  piu’posc  of  establisiilng  a 
commercial  intercourse  w'ith  India  direct.  The  sum  raised  for  that  purpose  was  .^.S0,133  6s.  8d. 

At  a subsecjiient  meeting  persons  were  appointed  to  conduct  the  concern;  and  it  was  agreed  that  a 
petition  should  he  [iresented  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council,  setting  forth,  “ that,  stimulated  by  the 
success  which  has  attended  tlie  voyage  to  the  East  Indies  by  the  Dutch,  and  finding  the  Dutch  are  projecting 
another  voyage,  for  which  (hey  have  bought  ships  in  England;  the  merchants,  having  the  same  regard 
to  the  welfare  of  this  kingdom  that  the  Dutch  liavc  to  their  commonwealth,  have  resolved  upon  making 
a voyage  of  adventure,  and  for  this  purpose  entreat  Her  Majesty  will  grant  them  letters  patent  of  incor- 
poration, succession,  &c  ; for  that  the  trade,  being  so  far  remote  from  hence,  cannot  he  managed  but  by  a 
joint  and  united  stock."  On  the  ith  of  October,  at  a meeting  of  the  subscribers,  they  were  informed  by 
the  committee,  that  the  f.ords  of  the  Privy  Council  were  pleased  to  favour  the  enterprise,  and  had  pro- 
mised to  further  the  business  witli  her  Majesty.  On  tlie  16th  they  reported  that  her  Majesty  had  ex- 
pressed her  gracious  approbation  of  the  voyage,  as  also  that  the  Lords  of  the  Council  desired  some  of  the 
principal  adventurers  would  attend  them  to  receive  orders  for  their  further  proceedings. 