

The  profits  from  this  voyage  were  218  per  cent,  on  the  sum  of  j£^15,364  originally  subscribed. 

The  value  of  the  exports  made  by  the  Company  in  the  years  1601  to  1610  was,  in  goods  and  stores, 
•P5],673,  in  bullion  ^'’119,022,  forming  a total  of  j^l 70,695,  by  which  it  appears  that  the  buUion  bore  a 
proportion  to  the  goods  of  2 to  1.  The  value  of  the  imports  cannot  be  ascertained,  as  the  Company 
occasionally  made  their  dividends  in  goods,  after  the  manner  of  the  Dutch;  but  it  may  be  estimated  to 
amount  to  near  i?l, 000,000  per  annum.  The  amount  of  the  duties  paid  during  the  same  period  was 
JP97,950,  on  an  average  i?9,795  per  annum. 

1611.  The  eighth  voyage  was  a distinct  concern,  in  the  Clove,  the  Hector,  and  Thomas,  under 
the  command  of  Captain  Saris.  They  sailed  from  England  in  April,  1611.  On  their  arrival  at  Mocha, 
they  were  about  to  enter  upon  a trade,  when  the  arrival  of  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  on  his  return  from 
Surat,  put  an  end  to  all  further  proceedings.  Sir  Henry,  on  behalf  of  the  sixth  voyage,  and  Captain 
Saris  for  the  eighth  voyage,  finding  that  if  they  acted  separately,  there  would  be  a clashing  of  interest  that 
might  affect  the  good  of  the  whole,  agreed  to  take  their  measures  in  concert,  allowing  to  the  sixth 
voyage  two-thirds,  and  to  the  eighth  one-third  of  all  their  trading  concerns.  On  this  plan  they  stopped 
the  Moorish  ships  from  entering  Mocha,  and  bartered  with  them  for  their  commodities  in  exchange  for 
European  goods.  Having  finished  their  business  in  this  way,  they  sailed  for  Bantam;  hei-e  two  of  the 
ships  took  in  pepper  and  spices,  and  Captain  Saris,  in  the  Clove,  proceeded  to  open  a trade  with  Japan. 
In  his  way  he  touched  at  the  Moluccas,  and  could  have  obtained  cloves  of  the  natives,  but  the  Dutch 
would  not  suffer  him  to  trade;  they  insisted  that  the  islands  were  theirs  by  right  of  conquest,  and  that 
the  natives  were  under  perpetual  contract  to  supply  them  exclusively  with  the  whole  of  their  productions. 
At  Japan  Captain  Saris  met  with  a friendly  reception,  and  obtained  permission  to  trade.  He  afterwards 
returned  to  Bantam,  and  took  in  a lading  for  Europe.  The  capital  raised  for  the  eighth  voyage  was 
.1^55,947,  and  it  yielded  a profit  of  211  per  cent 

1612.  The  ninth  voyage  was  a single  ship  that  sailed  for  Bantam,  and  from  thence  to  the  Coast  of 
Coromandel.  The  capital  riused  for  the  voyage  was  dP19,164,  and  the  profit  160  per  cent. 

The  tenth  voyage  was  made  with  two  ships,  the  Dragon  and  Hoseander,  under  the  charge  of 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xi 

Captain  Thomas  Best,  a brave  and  discreet  commander.  The  object  of  this  voyage  was  to  quiet  the 
mind  of  the  Mogul,  in  respect  to  the  proceedings  of  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  in  laying  tlie  ibips  of  his 
subjects  under  contribution  in  the  Red  Sea.  Captain  Best  by  great  address  arcomplished  his  purpose. 
He  entered  into  a treaty  of  amity  and  commerce  with  the  Mogul,  and  procured  a phirmaund,  allowing 
the  English  nation  permission  to  trade,  on  paying  3^  per  cent,  customs,  the  privilege  of  keeping  an 
ambassador  at  Agra,  &c.  The  Portuguese  were  nevertheless  determined,  if  possible,  to  prevent  the 
English  from  trading  in  the  Mogul's  dominions.  For  this  purpose  they  collected  the  whole  of  their  naval 
force,  4 galleons  and  26  frigates,  and  attacked  the  English  ships.  The  Portuguese,  having  the  advantage 
of  numbers,  maintained  an  obstinate  light;  but  by  the  gallantry  of  Captain  Best  and  his  associates,  aflcr 
four  several  encounters,  the  Portuguese  were  entirely  defeated  with  great  loss,  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  Moors,  who  had  considered  them  to  be  invincible.  From  Surat  Captain  Best  proceeded  to  Aclieen, 
where  he  procured  a confirmation  of  the  privileges  granted  to  Captain  Lancaster  in  the  first  voyage.  He 
afterwards  went  to  various  places  on  Sumatra,  and  finally  to  Bantam,  from  whence  he  returned  home 
with  pepper,  &c.  The  capital  engaged  on  this  voyage  was  i?46,092,  which  yielded  a profit  of  148  per  cent. 