

♦B  2 


xii 


RISK  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCf: 


the  thiril  voyage,  who  advanced  the  amount  upon  a valuation);  taking  it,  therefore,  upon  a medium  of 
seven  years,  it  reduces  it  to  something  less  than  20  per  cent,  per  annuin.  It  must  also  be  noticed  that 
this  was  not  merely  the  simple  [irofit  of  the  voyage  out  and  home,  but  included  the  accumulated  profits  of 
all  the  various  barters  and  sales  in  their  transit  from  port  to  port  in  India,  which  were  by  no  means  incon* 
sideruble.  It  is  further  to  be  recollected  that  the  Company,  by  building  their  own  ships,  and  fitting 
them  out  within  themselv(\s,  derived  tlie  advantag(‘s  which  now  attach  to  the  various  professions  employed 
111  and  about  shipping;  taking,  therefore,  all  these  circumstances  into  coiislderatioii,  it  may  be  fairly 
doubted  whether  the  profits  upon  an  insignificant  sum  under  X’dDjOOO,  were  more  than  what  they  will  be 
found  to  be  upon  a capital  of  rb,000,0()(). 

The  importance  of  this  trade  was  daily  becoming  more  apparent,  and  it  was  of  course  necessary  to 
adopt  measures  for  conducting  it  upon  a more  extended  scale.  Experience  had  laid  open  the  error  of 
carrying  on  the  trade  upon  a separate  account.  The  Dutch  were  early  sensible  of  this  evil,  and  by 
joining  in  one  common  stock,  became  united  in  one  common  interest;  while  the  natives  of  India, 
unus(‘d  to  any  other  than  national  distinctions  among  the  dilfereni  descriptions  of  Murojiean  traders,  saw 
with  astonislmu'nt  the  represiaitatives  of  various  societies  of  the  same  nation  pursuing  their  several 
commercial  speculations  with  all  the  zeal  and  avidity  of  professed  rivals,  and  suhjcTt  to  all  the  jarrings 
and  contentions  which  ever  result  from  opposing  interests.  They  belield  them  with  secre  t satisfaction 
underselling  and  overbuying  each  other  in  the  same  niarkel;  and  being  alive  to  their  own  interest,  they 
did  not  fail  to  avail  theiuselvx's  of  the  opportiuiity  that  was  thus  afforded  them,  of  depreciating  the  value 
of  British,  and  enhancing  tlie  rates  of  their  own  Indian  commodities. 

Inconveniences  also  vviTO  no  less  felt  at  homo  in  the  disposal  of  tlie  homeward  cargoes.  They  were 
either  sold  at  public  sale,  or  divided  among  the  adventurers  in  kind,  as  was  l)(*st  suited  to  tin*  interests  of 
the  leading  persons  in  the  sepaiate  concerns;  and  it  often  happened  that  private  accommodation  was 
studied  at  the  expe  nee  of  the  gimeral  good. 

It  nas  impossii)le  under  such  circumstances  that  the  Mnglish  iinfion,  divided  amongst  themselves, 
could  maintain  llic‘ir  ground  against  the  Portuguese  and  Dutih,  both  of  wh«>m  were  endeavouring  by 
every  means  in  tlieir  power  to  compel  them  to  abuiulon  this  brancli  of  trade.  It  was  therefore  resolved  to 
rcliiujuish  all  lnrth(‘r  concerns  on  separate  voyages,  and  to  open  a subscription  for  continuing  the  trade 
upon  a joint  stock  account.  The  duration  of  the  stock  was  piirp()s(‘ly  limited  to  i'our  years,  in  order 
that  the  adventurers  might  have  an  opportunity  of  n'gulating  their  liiture  conduct  by  eireumstances  as 
they  should  arise.  The  amount  of  the  subscription  was  X^I1S,()91,  wliich  it  was  agreed  should  be 
advaiued  in  ccjual  proportions  in  each  of  the  four  years. 