

1(510.  The  Company,  having  raised  a capital  of  .i\S0,l(i3  for  a sixth  voyage,  dlspatehed  tlu*  'frade^ 
Increase,  the  Pepper  (.’orn,  and  Darling,  under  the  eommand  of  Sii  Henry  Middh  ton.  The  olijcci  of 
this  voyage  w'as  to  open  a new  source  of  trade.  It  was  eoneeivi'd  that  laigi‘  <juanti!ies  nf  Jhilish  (oinmo- 
ditles,  particularly  w'oollcns  and  metals,  might  be  disposed  <if  in  llic  Bed  Sea;  and  that  eali(w»es  and  oIIk  i’ 
Indian  articles  might  be  procurable  from  the  Mogul's  subjects  who  traded  (hitla  i*;  which  hi  ing  laiiiid  to 
Bantam,  the  Moliiceas,  &c.  might  be  disposed  of  in  barter  for  spices  and  drugs.  Upon  binding  at  Afoelia, 
their  goods  were  seized,  and  Sir  Henry  and  several  of  his  associates  committed  to  juisoii,  where  they  wx*i(‘ 
detained  several  months.  They  at  length  made  their  escape;  and  having  an  ived  on  board  their  ships,  ?sir 
Henry  obtained  restitution  of  liis  los.se.s  by  threatening  to  use  foreiv  Having  remained  in  the  Bed  Sea 
(luring  the  monsoon,  lie  pursued  his  voyage  to  Surat,  where  his  landing  w^ns  oj)pos('d  l)y  the  I'oi tiigiiesc, 
and  effected  only  by  force.  Owing,  however,  to  the  intrigues  of  the  Pgrluguc'se,  they  were  not  pe  rmitted 
to  trade.  Sir  Henry  thereupon  returned  to  the  lied  Sea,  where  he  seized  several  of  the  Mogul's  ships,  and 
obliged  them  to  compound  for  their  release,  by  a sum  equivalent  to  the  loss  he  Iiad  siistaiiMMi  by  the 
iVu.stration  of  bis  voyage.  He  then  proceeded  to  Ticoo  on  Sumatra,  wliere,  and  at  Bantam,  lie  loaded 
home  tw'o  of  Ins  ships  w ith  pepper;  but  w'as  obliged  himself  to  remain  beiiind,  to  irpair  the  damage  whieli 
his  ship,  the  Trader’s  Increase,  had  sustained  by  running  on  a rock.  In  careening  the  ship  in  Bantam 

H 


X 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


roads,  she  overset,  at  which  Sir  Henry  was  so  much  affected,  that  he  soon  after  died  of  g/Aef,  The  concern 
on  its  termination,  nevertheless,  divided  their  capital  with  £121  13s.  4d.  per  cent,  profit 

The  seventh  voyage  was  undertaken  with  a single  ship,  the  Globe,  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Ilippon,  having  on  board  two  merchants,  who  had  quitted  the  service  of  the  Dutch,  and  entered  into  that 
of  the  English  East  India  Company.  The  object  of  this  voyage  was  to  open  a trade  on  the  Coast  of 
Coromandel  for  calicoes,  partly  for  sale  in  the  Eastern  islands,  where  they  were  in  great  demand,  and  also 
for  trial  at  home.  They  sailed  from  the  Downs  on  the  5th  of  February,  1610,  and  proceeded  to  the 
Coromandel  Coast ; but  were  prevented  trading  at  Pulicat  by  the  Dutch,  who  were  settled  there,  and  had 
the  grant  of  an  exclusive  trade.  At  Pettapole  they  traded,  and  left  factors.  At  Mausulipatam  they 
also  traded,  paying  4 per  cent,  customs;  the  Governor  wanted  to  exact  12.  From  thence  they  proceeded 
to  Bantam,  and  settled  a trade  with  the  King,  paying  3 per  cent,  customs.  From  thence  they  went 
to  Patany,  where  they  were  favourably  received,  and  allowed  a free  trade.  They  likewise  settled  a 
factory  at  Siam,  and  returned  to  Mausulipatam  the  16th  of  December,  1613.  In  1614  the  King  of 
Narsinga  invited  them  to  settle  a factory;  but  he  dying  before  they  left  the  place,  the  Governor,  who 
had  obtained  goods  of  them,  refused  payment  of  his  debt:  on  this  they  seized  his  son,  and  carried  him 
on  board  their  ship;  he  then  paid  their  demand,  and  obtained  his  song's  release.  They  then  went  back  to 
Bantam,  where  they  took  in  a cargo,  and  returned  to  England. 