

In  the  outset  of  this  concern  the  Company  were  highly  successful,  although  they  hud  to  contend 
with  the  violence  of  the  Portuguese,  and  the  treachery  of  the  Dutch;  the  latter  of  whom,  although 
they  had  acted  very  cordially  uitli  the  English  in  resisting  the  attempts  that  were  made  by  the  rortugucse, 
to  excliule  both  nations  from  any  trading  intercourse  with  that  country,  yet  having  obtained  a secure 
footing  themselves,  they  were  now  ecjnally  earnest  in  excluding  tlie  English. 

16 bl.  The  first  voyage  on  the  joint  stock  consisted  of  four  ships,  under  the  command  of 
Captain  Nicholas  Downton.  On  their  arrival  at  Surat,  they  contended  for  a reduction  of  customs  and 
other  privileges.  The  Mogul,  being  at  war  with  the  Portuguese,  sought  the  assistance  of  the  English; 
but  as  peace  subsisUd  at  that  time  between  England  and  Spain,  to  the  latter  of  whom  the  Portu- 
giK'se  were  then  subject,  it  was  declined.  U'lie  Governor  of  Surat,  displeased  at  this  refusal  of  the 
iMigli^h  to  assist  the  Mogul,  used  his  utmost  endeavours  to  prevent  their  being  allowed  to  trade;  and  the 
Portuguese,  with  the  most  unprincipled  ingratitude,  availed  themselves  of  the  circumstance,  insinuating 
that  the  English  meant  to  lend  thek  assistance  to  them  against  the  Mogul.  The  Mogul,  being  at  length 


liETWEEN  Ex\(;LAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES  xiil 

tnidcceivcd,  sent  his  jdiirniauiul,  allowing  the  English  to  trade;  and  tin-  prese  nts  for  the  Mogul  were  there- 
upon Ibrwardeil  to  Agi\i.  Upon  the  a|)j)earaiu‘(‘  of  a voiy  considi  rahle  Poiliigufso  Hod,  llio  (lovernnient 
were  terrilied,  and  sued  for  j)eaLe,  whieli  was  haughtily  retiised  them.  The  Eoituguese  Ihi'n  attacked 
the  haiglish  ships,  hut  met  with  a severe  re])uhs(‘,  in  which  many  of  tludr  ships  were  burnt,  'bhis  alhorded 
great  encouragement  to  the  Mogul's  people.  Some  attempts  weie  mad(*  by  llu*  desiiits  to  reconcile  mailers, 
whicli  proved  ineileetual,  Iruni  the  impel  i«)Us  demands  made  by  the  Eoiliiguese,  who  procured  a supply  of 
fire-sliips,  and  endea\onred  to  destroy  the  English  ships,  but  without  cHcct.  'I'he  \ iceroy  then  made 
proposals  tor  peace  wit !i  the  Mogul,  who  in  his  turn  jiroNed  haughty,  u[)on  w hith  they  idired  to  Cloa. 
1 he  English  having  transact' <1  their  bu'^liu'ss',  d(‘[iaited  lor  Ihintam,  where  oiu'  of  the  ships  procured  a 
cargo  ol  mace  and  silk,  and  jiroceechal  to  Mausulipatam,  ami  the  othe  rs  rcliuiud  to  I’lngland.  CJreat 
complaints  were  made  ag  nnst  the  conduct  «)f  the  Dutch  botjiat  Ihmiam  and  AbuMssar  t«>  the  English  lactois* 

An  attempt  was  made  to  open  a trade  with  IVTsia,  where  tlu'  iMiglish  liutors  wcie  well  leceivetl. 