

1615.  The  Company  made  an  application  to  the  King,  to  grant  his  royal  authoi ity  that  an  ainhas- 
sador  should  proceed  in  his  name  to  the  Great  Mogul.  The  King,  in  compliance  then with,  granted  his  coin- 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


xvr 

mission  to  Sir  Thomas  Roe  ‘‘  to  be  Ambassador  to  the  Great  Mogul,  or  King  of  India  ^ the  Company 
agreeing  to  defray  the  expences,  in  consideration  that,  under  their  exclusive  privileges,  they  were  to 
acquire  such  benefits  as  might  result  from  this  mission. 

Sir  Thomas  Roe  sailed  from  England  in  March,  1615,  on  board  the  Lion,  Captain  Newport,  one  of 
four  ships  fitted  out  on  the  joint  stock  account,  and  arrived  at  Surat,  from  whence  he  proceeded  to  the 
Mogul’s  Court  at  Agimere,  which  he  reached  in  December,  1615,  and  on  the  10th  of  January,  1616,  was 
presented  to  the  Great  Mogul,  when  he  delivered  the  King’s  letter,  and  the  presents,  of  wdiich  the  Mogul 
expressed  his  satisfaction,  and  gave  the  ambassador  a gracious  reception.  On  the  24th  of  January  Sir 
Thomas  had  a second  audience  of  the  Mogul,  when  he  stated  the  injuries  the  English  had  sustained 
from  the  arbitrary  conduct  of  the  Governors  of  Surat,  and  proposed  the  renewing  the  articles  of  the  phir- 
maund  or  treaty  between  the  Mogul  and  the  English  nation,  which  was  complied  with.  The  following  is 
the  substance  of  this  treaty: 

After  the  usual  preamble,  it  was  stipulated  tliat  the  English  subjects  should  have  liberty  of  trade, 
and  be  allowed  to  settle  factories  in  any  ports  of  the  Mogul  empire. 

That  they  should  be  furnished  with  all  kinds  of  provisions  and  carriages  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea- 
ports, according  to  the  ordinary  rates  of  charge. 

That  the  merchants  should  be  protected  against  any  exactions  in  all  sales,  not  exceeding  16  rials  of  8. 

That  all  presents  sent  to  the  Mogul,  should  be  protected  from  being  opened  at  the  sea-ports,  and  be 
forwarded  to  the  English  ambassador  at  Court,  to  be  delivered  agreeably  to  his  instructions. 

Tliat  the  goods  of  the  English  merchants  should  be  rated  within  six  days  after  being  landed  at  any 
port;  and  after  payment  of  the  stipulated  duty,  might  be  forwarded  free  to  any  other  English  factory. 

That  the  goods  purchased  by  the  English,  in  any  part  of  the  Mogul’s  dominions,  should  have  a free 
transit  to  the  ports  at  which  they  were  to  be  shipped. 

That  the  property  of  the  Company’s  servants  who  might  die  in  the  Mogul’s  dominions,  should  be 
delivered  to  the  Company’s  officers,  or  their  successors. 

That  the  provisions  necessary  for  the  shipping  should  be  exempted  from  duty. 

By  a separate  article  it  was  agreed,  that  the  rate  of  customs  on  English  imports  should  be  fixed  at 
Sj  per  cent,  and  2 per  cent,  on  rials  of  eight;  and  that  mutual  assistance  should  be  given  against  the  ene- 
mies of  either  of  the  contracting  parties. 