

The  eleventh  voyage  was  a single  ship,  sent  out  to  bring  home  the  remains  of  the  adventurers 
who  had  subscribed  to  the  third  and  fifth  voyage.  The  sum  subscribed  was  10,G69,  and  the  voyage 
being  made  direct  out  and  home  in  20  months,  the  profit  was  320  per  cent. 

The  twelfth  and  last  voyage  consisted  of  a single  ship  only,  the  Expedition,  Captain  Newport, 
whicfai  took  out  Sir  Robert  Shirley,  as  the  .King's  ambassador  to  Persia.  Sir  Robert  was  to  Jinve  been 
landed  at  Guadeli  to  proceed  to  Ispahan  by  land;  but  a discovery  being  made  that  the  natives  had 
an  intention  of  plundering  and  destroying  him  and  his  suite,  they  proceeded  to  Diu.  Here  the  Portuguese 
opposed  them;  they  accused  Sir  Robert  of  being  a pii’ate,  and  treated  his  pass  from  the  King  of  Spain 
as  a forgery.  The  Governor  of  Diu  was  inclined  to  admit  of  their  ti*ading,  but  was  prevented  by  the 
influence  of  the  Portuguese;  a conditional  agreement  was,  however,  made  to  admit  the  English  in 
another  year,  on  which  they  proceeded  to  Ticoo  and  Bantam,  and  loaded  home  with  pepj>er.  The 
capital  for  this  voyage  was  J?71 42.  The  outward  cargo  consisted  of  1,250  in  money,  and  i?650  in 
goods.  The  profit  amounted  to  J^133  18s.  4d.  per  cent. 

It  is  observable  that  h7thf>rto  but  little  progress  had  been  made  in  extending  this  trade,  which  scarcely 
merited  the  name  of  a national  concein.  Thu  whole  of  the  capitals  raised  for  the  twelve  voyages,  in  the 
aggregate,  amounted  to  no  more  than  X‘464,284,  or  upon  an  average  i?38,690  for  each  voyage,  which 
sum  of  d&464,284  appears  to  have  been  invested  in  the  following  manner: 

In  merchandise,  &c  d(?62,411^or,  on  an  average  i?5,201  per  voyage. 

Bullion  138,127  11,510  ditto. 

Shipping,  stores,  provisions,  &Ct  1 ,9 1 9 ditto. 

which  gave  a profit,  one  voyage  with  another,  of  138  per  cent. 

That  no  erroneous  idea  may  prevail  with  regard  to  the  supposed  magnitude  of  these  profits,  compared 
with  the  state  of  things  at  the  present  day,  it  will  be  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  voyages  above 
referred  to,  were  seldom  made  in  less  than  thirty  months,  and  often  were  extended  to  three  and  four  years, 
from  the  time  of  the  ships  leaving  England  till  their  return;  that,  upon  their  arrival,  their  cargoes  were 
disposed  of  at  long  credits,  from  eighteen  to  twenty-four  months,  and  that,  iVom  irregularity  in  the  factors, 
as  well  in  keeping,  as  in  the  transmission  of  their  accounts,  it  was  frequently  six,  seven,  and  eight  years 
before  the  concerns  of  a voyage  were  finally  adjusted;  (the  first  and  second  voyage  accounts,  which  com- 
menced in  1600,  were  not  brought  to  a close  till  1609,  and  then  it  was  by  making  over  their  remains  to 