

^For  provisions  and  other  extraordinary  charges  30,0(K) 

1616.  The  stock  for  the  next  voyage  was  estimated  at  i?52,087  in  money,  and  X^16,506  In  goods; 
and  tlie  fleet  consisted  of  seven  vessels,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Pring.  They  sailed  from  the 
Downs  in  March,  and  arrived  at  Surat  in  October,  1616,  after  taking  a valuable  Portuguese  frigate;  tliey 
then  sailed  to  Bantam.  At  Jacatra  they  agreed  to  give  700  rials  per  annum  for  the  liberty  of  trade,  and 
1 500  rials  for  a piece  of  ground  for  a factory.  The  Dutch,  who  liad  so  loudly  complained  of  the  oppo- 
sition they  met  with  from  tlic  Portuguese,  seeing  the  rapid  advances  the  English  were  making  in  the 
East  India  trade,  sought  every  opportunity  in  their  turn  to  harass  and  distress  them.  The  most 
serious  differences  had  for  some  time  subsisted  between  the  two  Companies,  which  at  length  broke  out 
into  open  hostilities.  King  James  I.,  with  a view  of  affording  protection  to  the  English  Company,  as 
well  from  the  insults  of  the  Dutch,  as  from  the  injurious  effects  from  some  interlopers  who  had  crept  into 
the  trade,  granted  a commission  to  Sir  Thomas  Dale  to  proceed  with  a fleet  propeily  armed  to  India;  he 
also  was  empowered  to  seize  the  ships  of  illicit  traders.  ^Phis  force,  on  its  arrival  at  Bantam,  was  joined 
by  the  Company’s  shipping  then  in  India,  making  13  sail,  witli  wliUh  they  engaged,  and  beat  oft'  the 
Dutch  fleet.  The  Dutch  had  previously  seized  the  English  factors  at  Jacatra,  and  burnt  the  factory,  and 
even  went  so  far  as  to  attack  the  King’s  palace.  The  King  on  this  sent  to  Bantam  for  the  a.ssistance  ol' 
the  English,  which  being  rendered  him,  the  Dutch  proposed  to  surrender  their  fort  at  Jacatra.  The 
English  attacked  four  Dutch  ships  off  Sumatra,  which  again  retreated  ; but  in  a subsequent  engagement 
five  of  the  English  ships  were  taken. 

The  profits  of  the  four  voyages  on  joint  stock  did  not  amount  to  more  than  87|  per  cent,  on  the 
original  subscription,  notwithstanding  the  cargo  of  one  of  the  ships  cost  only  40,000  rials  of  eight,  and 
produced  at  the  sales  in  England  i?80,000  sterling. 


1617.  The  period  of  four  years,  to  which  the  concerns  of  the  first  joint  stock  was  limited,  being 
expired,  a fresh  subscription  was  opened;  and  so  eager  were  persons  of  all  ranks  to  enrol  themselves 
therein,  that  at  the  period  of  its  close,  the  sums  that  were  underwritten,  amounted  to  no  less  than  0^1,620,040. 
The  following  list  has  been  preserved  of  tlie  various  descriptions  of  the  subscribers: 


15  Dukes  and  Earls. 

82  Knights,  including  2 Judges,  all  the  King’s 
Council,  and  5 privy  counsellors. 