

Ibl  1.  'Die  dissensions  that  pre\ ailed  between  tlie  laiglish  and  Dutch  Company's  siixants  in  India  were 
now  become  so  seiious  and  alarming,  as  to  forma  sidiject  of  di^enssion  b(‘tw'een  tln^  ri'spcatis e (ioMiimuiits 
in  Europe.  (^Jnlmi^si{)nel•s  were  appointed  on  both  siilcs  to  adjust  tiu'se  ditfen-nees,  and  to  li\  upon  soni(‘ 
satisfactory  plan  for  tin*  regulation  of  the  trade' to  India  in  liitme.  In  the  conferencis  wliicli  lo(»k  jilace 
on  this  occasion,  a pi oposil ion  was  made' on  tin*  part  of  the  Dutch,  that  an  union  shouhl  hi*  estahlished 
between  tin'  two  Companies,  and  tin*  tiade  caJiic'd  on  .is  a joint  eoiieiin.  In  sup[Mul  of  Ihi^  luoposilicnij 
they  urged  that  such  a iiK'asure  would  he  piodiietivc'  of* the  following  signal  advantages: 

That  with  a stock  of  Cl )()(),  tlu'  concern  would  he  .d)Ie  to  maki'  a ye.uly  lefurn  in  spice,  alone, 
to  the  amount  of  5 or  i’tiOt ),()()(). 

It  wa)nld  keep  up  the  prices,  as  care  waiidd  he  taken  to  Ining  no  more*  than  sbendd  la*  barely  siiilicii  nt 
lor  the  European  demand. 

It  would  he  the  means  of  elfeeling  a reduction  In  the  customs  pav.dili'  in  India. 

It  w'onld  lead  to  the  abolition  of  the  juuetice  of  giving  ju’esents  to  the  native  Ihincis. 

It  waudd  lend  to  iiure.ise  the  number  of  shijijung,  by  the  opening  ol‘.i  tiaih'  to  China. 

It  would  keep  tiu'  factors  and  maiiiu'rs  in  better  subordination,  and 

It  would  operate  to  the  ('xcliision  of  all  other  nations  from  tlu’  tiade  of  India,  as  abo  cnabh*  llieni 
the  betlir  to  make  war  against  iht'  eomnion  eimmy. 

Upon  the  English  (Vmipany  taking  this  |)roposition  Into  eoiisuhi atlon.  It  was  u inaiked  that  the 
Moluccas,  the  especial  place  which  the  Diitrb  were  so  earnestly  stiiving  for,  would  not  yield  sullieieiit 
advantage  to  countervail  tlie  excessive  charge  of  their  maintinanci'. 

That  the  pro.spcct  which  tin*  Company^  had  of  trade  on  the  Malaliar  Coast  bid  fiir  to  bi*  productix* 
of  more  solid  advantages  than  could  be  expected  to  arise  from  the  trailc'  in  spices  siiiijily;  and  that  if  an 
union  were  to  be  formed,  tlie  Dutch  must  be  allowed  a participation  therein. 

Tliat  the  object  of  the  Dutch  was  meri  ly  to  obtain  the  assistance  of  tlu'  l aigli  di  in  di  iving  the  Spa- 
niards from  the  Moluccas. 

That  they  deemed  war  to  be  a matter  of  .state,  and  contrary  to  the  mercantile  course  pursued,  and 
intended  to  he  pursued  by  tin'  1 aiglish ; and, 

That  for  two  nations  to  join  in  monopolizing  a trade  to  tlie  exclusion  of  others,  was,  in  their  view  of 
things,  neither  just  nor  praetieahle. 

Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  they  were  of  opinion  the  proposition  could  not  be  acceded  to,  on  w hich 
the  conferences  were  hrok(*n  off. 