


*C  2 


XX' 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


And  of  all  the  before-mentioned  monies  and  goods  sent  into  the  Indies,  tliere  hath  been  employed 
the  value  of  i^375,288  for  the  lading  of  36  ships,  which  are  retunied  licnce  with  sundry  sorts  of  wares, 
all  of  which  wares  have  produced  here  in  England  by  the  sales, 

“ Whereby  it  doth  plainly  appear,  that  if  i?557,6()4'  of  our  money  and  goods  sent  out,  were  returned 
with  no  more  success  than  the  i?375,2H8  which  is  already  received,  it  would  produce  in  all  d6’5,000,000 
sterling,  which  is  a fur  greater  proportion  of  the  kingdom's  stock,  than  can  be  procured  by  any  other 
foreign  trade  whatsoever  known  unto  us.  For,  although  it  is  very  true  that  the  said  cF5,000,000  be  pro- 
cured by  the  money  and  goods  afore- written  alone,  without  a further  great  charge  also  disbursed  for  ship- 
ping, victuals,  ammunition,  wages  for  captains,  olSccrs,  factors  and  mariners,'  besides  His  Majesty’s 
customs  and  imports,  with  many  other  charges,  yet  all  these  disbursements  made  within  this  realm  from 
one  to  tlie  other,  do  not  diminish  the  kingdom’s  stock,  although  tliey  directly  abate  the  merchant’s  gain.” 

The  equipment  of  this  season  consisted  of  four  ships,  the  cargoes  of  which  were  estimated  at  of*12,900 
in  bullion,  and  i?6,2o3  in  goods.  Of  tliese  ships  only  one  returned  to  England,  and  her  cargo,  which 
consisted  of  pepper,  cloves,  &c.  produced  at  the  sales  0^91,461*. 

1622.  Tlie  Portuguese,  from  the  first  appearance  of  the  Dutch  and  the  English  in  India,  had 
determined  to  keep  them  out  of  the  trade  by  force,  under  the  pretence  tlmt  the  exclusive  right  was 
vested  in  them,  as  the  original  discoverers  of  the  passage  by  tlic  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  The  English  and 
Dutch  determined  to  resist  force  by  forc«',  and  a warfare  existed  in  India,  though  the  English  were  at 
peace  with  Spain.  In  the  commission  from  the  King,  granted  to  Sir  Henry  Middleton  in  1604,  there 
was  a clause  inserted,  in  wliicli  it  was  stated,  that  as  the  King  was  at  peace  with  all  the  Christian  powxTs 
in  Europe,  the  Englisli  shipping  were  forbid  to  attack  tlie  subjects  or  ships  of  the  King  of  Spain,  unless 
in  their  own  defence,  being  previously  provoked  thereto.  The  English  commamh'rs  had  on  all  occasions 
studiously  adhered  to  their  instructions,  and  acted  only  upon  the  defensive  in  the  various  engagements 
that  had  taken  place  with  the  Portuguese.  Among  their  other  acquisitions  in  India,  the  Portuguese 
possessed  the  island  and  castle  of  Ormus,  which  commanded  the  trade  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  in  which  they 
committed  various  depredations  upon  the  hhiglish  and  others  trading  there.  The  King  of  Persia  was 
desirous  of  dispossessing  them ; and  calling  to  his  assistance  the  English,  with  whom  he  was  then  in  alli- 
ance, it  was  proposed  to  make  a joint  attack  upon  tlie  island;  and  the  King  agreed  that,  if  it  proved 
successful,  he  would  place  it  in  the  Company’s  hands,  and  give  tlicm  one-half  of  the  customs.  In 
conseciucncc  of  this  agreement,  an  expedition  was  prepared,  and  sent  against  it.  The  attack  was  chiefly 
conducted  by  the  English,  and  the  city  and  castle  taken  on  the  22d  of  April,  1622.  The  English 
received  a proportion  of  the  plunder,  and  a grant  of  the  moiety  of  the  customs  at  the  Port  of  Gombroon, 
wliicb  was  regularly  paid  till  about  1680,  when  the  Company,  not  having  it  in  Uieir  power  to  keep  the 
Gulf  clear  of  pirates,  the  King  of  Persia  withheld  their  proportion  of  the  duties. 