

The  voyage  of  this  .season  coiisisteil  of  two  ships,  the  Dragon  and  E\peilition,  for  the  Malabar  Coast 
Tliey  were  defeated  in  theii  views  of  ti:nle  at  Dahul,  Haticaloe,  ami  Calient,  iVom  want  of  sincerity  in  the 
Sumorin.  They  then  jirmaadt d to  Sinnatia.  I’he  Diagon  was  allei wauls  attacked  hy  six  Dutch  ships  otl 
Ticoo,  and  after  an  obstinate  d(‘fi*nce,  taken,  and  her  ciew  treated  with  the  grealist  barbarity. 

1019.  A furtlM  i*  voyage  wjis  made  in  the  London,  llait,  Hoelnuk,  ami  hiOgli',  under  the  command 
of  Captain  Shillinge:  they  sailed  in  Eehruai\,  ltil9.  In  iheii  passage  out,  they  tiiok  possession  of  Sal- 
danha  Bay.  On  their  arrival  in  Malabar,  the  llait  and  Jvigle  weio  iruj)atrheil  for  Jasques;  but  on  their 
attempting  to  enter  that  port,  they  found  it  blockaihd  !»  a hugi*  Eortugiiese  lleet  ■ they  were  therefore 
obliged  to  return  to  Surat,  where  they  were  joined  by  the  other  ship^,  ami  again  salh»l  for  Jasques,  wliere 
they  fell  in  wdth  the  Portuguese  Heel,  when  an  cMigageinent  look  jdaci',  which  lasted  nine  hours,  but  with 
little  loss.  Tlic  Portuguese  gave  w ay,  and  allowed  tlieJinglish  ships  U)  enter  tin'  port;  hut  ha^illg  re- 
ceived assistance  from  Oriuu.s,  a second  engagement  took  place:  tlie  eonlliD  was  obstinate,  but  terminated 
ill  favour  of  the  English,  who  lost  their  commander,  (’aplain  Shillingc'.  The  ships  soon  alter  returned 
to  Surat,  where  the  Mogul  Governor  occasioning  some  ubstruetlon  to  tlu  ir  trade,  they  prevented  a ship 
of  his  from  obtaining  a loading,  which  brought  about  a remoNul  of  their  dilliculties. 

A treaty  of  friendship  and  trade  was  this  year  concluded  with  Persia  upon  terms  very  advaiiiageous  to 
the  English,  who  were  permitted  to  build  a fort  at  Jasques. 

In  this  year  the  Dutch  took  four  of  the  Company's  ships  on  tlie  Coast  of  Sumatra. 

The  perpetual  contentions,  and  tlic  fruitless  issue  of  several  conferences,  which  took  place  in  Europe 
in  1613  and  1615,  respecting  the  ailairs  of  the  Englisli  and  Dutch  East  India  Companies,  rendered  fur- 
thcr  negotiation  absolutely  necessary.  A treaty  was  concluded  by  commissioners,  appointed  by  the  India 
Companies  of  both  nations.  On  the  7th  of  July,  1619,  an  agreement  was  signed,  which,  after  specifying 
an  amnesty  and  oblivion  of  all  excesses  committed  by  either  part  in  the  East  Indies,  and  a mutual  restor- 
ation of  ships  and  property,  declared  the  trade  of  the  two  nations  in  the  East  to  be  free,  to  the  extent  of 
the  respective  funds  which  might  be  employed  and  specified;  that  the  exertions  of  both  Companies  should 

♦C 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


xvJii 

lie  directed  to  reduce  the  duties  and  exactions  of  the  native  officers  at  the  different  ports;  that  the  pepper 
trade  at  Java  should  be  equally  divided;  that  the  English  should  have  a free  trade  at  Pulicat,  on  paying 
half  the  cxpeiices  of  the  garrison;  that  the  English  at  the  Moluccas  and  Bandas  should  enjoy  one-third  of 
the  import  and  export  trade,  and  the  Dutch  two-thirds,  and  tliat  commissioners  should  be  appointed  to 
regulate  the  trade,  the  charges  of  the  garrisons  to  be  paid  in  the  same  proportion;  that  each  Company 
should  furnisli  ten  ships  of  war  for  common  defence,  but  tliat  those  ships  were  not  to  be  employed  to  bnng 
cargoes  to  ICurope,  but  oidy  in  the  carrying  trade  from  one  part  of  the  East  Indies  to  another;  and  that 
the  whole  proceedings  should  be  under  tlie  r<‘gulation  of  a Council  of  Defence  in  the  Indies,  composed  of 
four  riienibers  from  each  Comjiany.  I'his  treaty  was  to  be  binding  for  twenty  years.  On  its  ratification 
by  King  James,  His  Majesty  promised  not  to  grant  another  charter  to  any  other  person  whatsoever,  during 
the  term  of  llie  above  agreement. 