

The  equipment  of  this  season  consisted  of  five  ships;  the  stock  was  estimated  at  £GlfiOO  in  money, 
and  •£’6,430  in  goods.  The  homeward  ships  were  also  five,  and  the  amount  of  tlieir  sales  was  d£’389,500. 

1623.  The  e(iui[)ment  of  this  season  consisted  of  seven  ships;  the  stock  was  estimated  at  o£’68,720 
in  Spanisli  silver,  and  i?  17,345  in  goods.  The  homeward  ships  were  five;  their  cargoes  consisted  of 
pepper,  cloves,  mace,  and  nutmegs,  which  produced  at  the  sales  .P  18.5, 593,  exclusive  of  Persian  raw 
silk,  which  amounted  to  P97,000,  making  in  the  whole  P582,593.  The  outward-bound  ships  were 
detained  in  consequence  of  a claim  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  as  Lord  High  Admiral,  for  a share  of 
prize-money  at  Ormus;  and  the  Company  paid  him  P10,000  before  they  were  permitted  to  depart,  and 
a similar  sum  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  King’s  use. 

In  February,  1622-3,  the  Englisli  factory  at  Ainboyna  was  massacred  by  the  Dutch.  By  this  act  of 
cruelty,  and  those  previously  practised  at  Lantore  and  the  other  islands,  the  Dutch  engrossed  to  them- 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xxi 


selves  tlic*  whole  of  tlie  spice  trade,  of  which  they  rcmaineil  the  solo  possessors  till  tlic  islands  were 
captured  by  the  English  during  the  war,  which  coinineiiced  in  171)3. 

1G23.  On  the  Sth  of  Marcli  a warm  debate  took  place  in  railiainent,  in  wliich  tlic  East  India 
trade  was  pronounced  to  be  injurious  to  the  national  interests,  on  the  pica  of  its  ilraining  the  nation  of 
treasure,  of  which  it  was  said  they  exported  to  the  amount  of  ^80,000  per  annum.  Upon  this  occasion 
they  were  ably  defended  by  two  of  the  City  members  and  many  others.  The  following  paper  was  also 
printed  and  sent  in  cireulatioii  among  the  members,  wliieh,  ibr  its  brevity  and  j)ersplcuity,  merits  attention: 

‘‘The  principal  objections  that  will  be  made  in  Pailiament  against  the  East  India  Company  are 
supposed  to  be  these : 

I.  Tlie  exj)ortIng  the  treasure  of  the  kingdom,  to  tlie  impoverishment  of  tlie  State. 

II.  The  destruction  of  timber  by  building  of  great  ships. 

III.  The  decay  of  mariners  by  tlieir  eniployimait. 

“ To  the  first  they  answer,  that  they  curry  out  no  silver  hut  such  as  tiny  contract  for  abroad  to  be 
delivered  here,  being  restrained  by  an  express  danse  in  tin*  patent  lioin  exporting  lMigli‘'h  coin,  'fhey 
buy  rials  of  eight  at  dear  rates,  which,  if  they  did  not  do,  the  merchants  would  seek  out  as  good  a market, 
and  know  where  to  find  it. 

“ If  the  State  should  think  fit  to  dissolve  tlie  Comjiany,  the  I lollanilers  are  ready,  with  much  carefulness, 
to  take  up  the  whole  trade  as  a business  that  would  increase  their  strength  and  wealth,  and  with  no  less 
proportion  of  money  than  the  English  now  do;  but  our  nation  will  lo^e  thi‘ honour  and  trade,  and  the 
silver  will  be  bought  up  as  now,  and  sent  o\er  by  tlie  Duldi. 