

At  Patany  about  10,000  rials  of  Surat  and  Coromandel  cloths  might  be  sold;  but  it  furnished  few 
articles  of  export,  and  trade  was  on  the  decline. 

At  Siam,  if  the  country  were  in  a state  of  peace,  Coromandel  cloths  might  be  sold  to  tlnr  amount  of 
40,000  rials  per  annum;  and  in  return,  it  would  yield  gold,  silver,  and  dccr-skins  for  the  Japan  market. 

At  Japan  English  cloth,  lead,  deer-skins,  silks,  and  other  goods  would  find  a considerable  market 
and  in  return,  it  would  furnish  silver,  copper,  and  iron;  but  the  English  cargoes  liitherto  sent  had  been 
ill  assorted,  and  the  trade  was  on  the  decline. 

At  Succadana  diamonds,  bezoar  stones,  and  gold  might  be  obtained,  had  not  this  trade  been  ruined 
by  the  ignorance  of  the  first  factors. 

At  Banjarmaf>sln  diamonds,  gold,  and  bezoar  .stones  could  be  procured ; but  the  character  of  the 
natives  w’as  so  treucherous,  that  it  would  he  expedient  to  withdraw  the  factory. 

At  Macassar  the  h(‘st  rice  in  Imlia  could  be*  bought,  and  about  40,000  rials  per  annum  of  India  cloths 
sold;  hut  this  place  was  resorted  to  by  the  Portuguese,  though  abandoned  by  the  Dutch, 

At  Banda  about  50,000  rials  annually  of  Coromandel  cloths  could  be  sold,  and  in  return,  about  100 
Ions  of  nutmegs  and  mace  could  be  purchased,  and  a still  greater  quantity,  could  peace  be  established  between 
the  P’uropeans  trading  to  it. 

In  this  year  the  English  obtained  possession  of  the  islands  of  Pulo  Roon  and  Rosengyn,  and  fortified 
them;  the  Dutch  attacked  the  former,  but  were  repulsed  with  loss.  They,  however,  captured  two  of  the 
(’ompany’s  ships,  the  Defence  and  Swan, 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xvii 


I61S.  King  James  granted  letters  patent  for  the  estiihllshment  of  a trade  to  India  from  Scotland,  to 
Sir  James  Cunningham,  a|)poIntlng  him,  Ids  heirs,  and  assigns,  to  he  governors,  lulers,  and  directors  of 
the  Scottish  East  India  Company,  and  nnthorizing  him  “ to  trade  to  and  from  the  East  Indies,  and  the 
countries  or  parts  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  heyond  the  Cape  of  Bona  Spia'antia  to  tin*  Straits  of 
Magellan,  and  to  the  Levant  Sea,  and  territories  under  the  (i()\ eminent  of  tlie  Great  Turk,  and  to  and 
from  tlic  countries  of  Greenland,  and  all  other  eouiitries  and  islands  in  the  noilh,  noilh-west,  and  north- 
east seas,  and  other  parts  of  America  and  Muscovy.’’ — TTpon  which  the  Biissia  Company  and  the  English 
East  India  (’ompany  represented  to  Ills  M.aji'sty,  that  it  would  he  highly  prejudicial  to  their  traile.  Tlie 
King  thereupon  informed  the  Company,  that,  ns  he  considered  them  to  he  a strength  to  the  kingdom,  and 
an  honour  to  liimself,  he  would  withdraw  the  patent,  on  their  n eompensiiig  Sir  James  Cunningham  foi 
the  charges  and  cxpcnccs  he  had  uicnrred  in  his  proceedings;  ami  lu'  at  the  sjunp  time  eonditiom'd  that  the 
East  India  Company  should  join  with  the  Unssia  Company  in  the  ^nppoit  of  their  trade,  tlie  concerns  of 
which  had  long  been  in  an  enfeehh'd  slate.  'The  ('ompany  theieupon,  at  Ills  Majesty^  entreaty,  and  under 
a promise  that  he  would  grant  no  oth(‘r  patents  lliat  should  he  injurious  to  their  interests,  as  also  induced 
thereto  by  his  having  been  graciously  pleased  to  withdraw  the  Scottish  pnttnt,  agreed  to  a<lvanee 
per  annum  for  tlie  remaining  time  of  their  duration,  which,  with  a similar  sum  to  lie  advanced  by  the 
Russia  Company,  it  was  hoped  would  gi\ e life  and  vigour  to  that  trad(‘,  which  lor  the  ln>t  sixty  year^ 
liad  yielded  no  iienefit  to  the  adveiilureis.  'flie  trade  was  carricul  on  by  both  (’oinjianies  jointly  for  tno 
seasons,  but  without  success;  upounliich,  on  the  ^^IKh  of  l)('f i inhei*,  l<)l!h  t lie  c )nnexIon  was  dissolved. 
The  East  India  Company’s  IcfSs  on  this  occasion  was  estimated  at 