

13  Countesses  and  Ladies. 

26  Doctors  of  Divinity  and  Physic. 

18  widows  and  virgins. 


.313  merchants. 

214  tradesmen. 

212  without  title. 

25  merchants,  strangers. 

36  whose  occupations  were  unknown, 
making  in  all  954. 


xvi 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OV  THE  COMMERCE 


Tills  joint  stock,  like  the  former  one,  was  limited  to  four  years  duration,  or,  more  correctly  speaking, 
to  send  out  sliippin^  for  four  succeeding  years,  and  then  lo  wait  their  arrival,  in  order  to  bring  the  con- 
cern to  a close.  The  Directors  fixed  on  Surat  and  Bantam  as  the  principal  scuts  of  their  trade,  and 
placed  under  their  controul  such  out-stations  as  had  been  established. 

At  its  commencement  the  jiroposition  was  again  renewed  for  the  English  and  Dutch  to  Join  in  con- 
cert, seeing  that  an  East  India  ('ompany  was  forming  in  France,  and  iinotlnT  in  Denmark;  but  it  was 
again  rejected.  This  so  exas|)erated  the  Dutch  Company,  that  they  gave  instructions  to  their  servants 
abroad  to  take  measures  for  engrossing  the  whole  of  the  pepper  trade  at  Bantam  and  Batavia,  at  both  of 
whicli  places  the  English  carried  on  a trade  with  the  natives.  They  aKo  declared  that,  as  a means  of 
forcing  the  F.nglisli  into  the  desired  union,  they  were  ddermiiied  to  undersell  them  at  home,  though 
to  tlieir  own  loss.  These  threats,  however,  had  no  ollua*  effeet  upon  the  Company,  tlian  to  render  them 
more  cautious  and  wary  in  count(‘racting  their  proceedings. 

The  following  survey  of  the  Company’s  estahlishinents  in  India,  and  the  nature  of  the  trade  carried  on, 
was  transmitted  in  this  year: 

Surat  was  the  most  commodious  station  in  nil  India;  at  which,  though  Englisli  goods  were  not  in 
great  request,  all  the  eastern  parts  of  India  could  be  supplied  with  cloths;  but  those  articles  could  only 
be  procured  by  exchange  of  China  goods,  spices,  and  money. 

At  the  factories  of  Acheen  and  Ticoo  large  quantities  of  rand)ay  and  MaiMdipatam  goods  iniglit  be 
disposed  of;  and  in  return,  gold,  cainpbirc,  pepper,  and  benjamin  could  be  obtained. 

Bantam  was  the  greatest  place  of  tnuh*  in  the  Indian  seas,  where  Cambay  and  Mausidipatam  goods, 
to  the  amount  of  00, ()()()  rials,  were  annually  imported,  and  in  return,  from  00  to  1.50,000  sacks  of  pepper 
could  be  exported;  the  price  of  pejiper,  however,  bad  been  raised  treble  within  the  last  few  year.Sy  from 
the  competition  between  the  English,  Dutch,  and  Chinese. 

Jacatra  yiehh'd  arrack,  rice,  and  fish;  but  a seltlcment  there  would  be  difficult,  from  the  cxorbilant 
sum  demanded  by  the  King  for  ground  lo  build  a factory  iq)OTi. 

Jamliee  lia<l  been  recently  settled  as  a factory,  at  which  there  was  an  increasing  demand  for  Cambay 
and  Coromandel  cloths,  and  in  return,  would  afford  J0,(K)0  sacks  of  pepper. 