

This  petition  was  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the  (’ouneil  of  State,  who,  by  an  order  dated  the 
3d  of  November,  1056,  referred  it  to  a select  committee,  wlio  were  directed  to  take  the  subject  into  their 
consideration,  and  to  report  their  opinion  to  the  Council,  “ in  what  manner  the  East  India  trade  might  be 
best  managed  for  the  public  good  and  its  own  encouragement.” 

The  committee  reported,  on  the  18th  of  December,  that  they  had  candully  considered  the  petition 
of  the  East  India  Company;  and,  that  they  might  have  the  fullest  information  on  tills  important  subject, 
had  directed  notices  to  he  fixed  on  the  Exchange,  appointing  a day  for  all  persons  concerned  in  the  East 
India  trade  to  attend  tlierri.  In  consequence  of  wdiioh,  several  mereliants  attended,  and  a full  hearing  was 
given  to  the  arguments  of  both  parties;  and  the  Committee  reported  to  the  Council  of  State,  that  thougli 
it  was  their  private  opinion  the  trade  ought  to  be  conducted  on  an  united  joint  stock,  yet  they  considered 
the  business  of  so  much  importance,  that  they  w^ould  not  come  to  any  positive  delermination  on  the 
subject,  but  referred  the  whole  case  to  the  Council  of  State  for  their  decision. 

The  Council  of  State,  on  receiving  this  report,  appointed  the  28th  of  January,  1057,  for  the 
Governor  and  Committee  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  the  principal  ineichant  adventurers,  to  attend 
them;  when,  after  a full  hearing  of  the  claims  of  both  parties,  the  Council  gave  it  as  their  advice  to  the 
Protet^r,  “ that  the  trade  of  East  Indya  be  mannaged  by  a united  joynt  stock,  exclusive  of  all  others.” 
On  the  10th  of  February  the  Protector  signified  his  approbation  of  their  advice,  and  a committee  was 
appointed  to  consider  of  the  charter  to  be  granted  to  the  East  India  Company. 

In  consequence  of  this  determhiatiun  of  the  Protector,  an  union  took  place  between  the  Coinj)any 
and  the  merchant  adventurers;  and  the  sum  of  -P786,(XK)  was  subscribed,  to  form  a new  joint  stock,  and 
the  forts,  privileges,  and  immunities  in  India  and  Persia  were  made  over  to  the  new  joint  stock  on  pay* 
ment  of  i?20,000.  The  rights  thus  transferred  were  Fort  St.  George,  and  tlie  several  factories  on  the 
Coromandel  Coast  and  in  Bengal;  the  factories  at  Surat  and  Gombroon  in  Persia,  with  their  dependencies; 
and  the  factory  at  Bantam,  with  its  dependencies  of  Jambee  and  Macassar. 


niSE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


16(K).  Notwithstanding  the  recent  restoration  of  the  Company's  privileges,  they  still  continued  to 
'•uffer  hy  interlopersS.  A case  at  this  time  occurred,  which  produced  the  most  serious  differences  between 
both  Houses  of  Parliament  Thomas  Skinner  had  fitted  out  a ship  in  1657,  which  arrived  in  India  in 
1658.  ITie  Company,  by  virtue  of  the  powers  they  possessed  under  their  new  chat  ter,  seized  Skinner 
and  his  effects.  Skinner  complained  to  the  K^ing,  who  referred  his  case  to  the  Privy  Council,  from  ivhence 
it  was  carried  to  the  House  of  Peers.  The  Peers,  on  hearing  the  complaint,  directed  the  Company  to 
put  in  their  answer.  The  Company  urged  their  exclusive  privileges,  and  at  tl^c  same  time  demurred 
against  the  jurisdieiion  of  the  Lords,  as  the  case  had  not  come  before  them  regularly  hy  an  appeal  from 
an  inferior  Court.  The  Lords  overruled  the  plea,  and  iti  1666  appointed  the  case  to  be  heard  at  their 
bar.  The  Company  obtained  a postponement  till  1667,  when  they  again  demurred,  and  complained  to 
the  Commons  of  the  illegality  of  the  Lonls'  proceedings.  The  Lords  on  tliis  were  inflamed,  and  passed 
a decree  in  favour  of  Skinner,  with  i?5(K)0  damages.  This  exasperated  the  Commons,  who  passed  some 
severe  resolutions  against  the  Lords,  and  sent  Skinner  to  the  Tower.  The  Lords  upon  this  voted  the 
Company's  petition  to  the  Commons  to  be  false  and  scandalous.  The  Commons,  in  return,  resolved  that 
whoever  should  execute  the  sentence  of  the  Lords,  in  favour  of  Skinner,  should  be  deemed  a betrayer  of 
the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  Commons  of  England,  and  an  infringer  of  the  privileges  of  their  House. 
These  violent  contentions  obliged  the  King  to  jirorogue  tlie  Parliament  seven  times.  In  1670  the  quarrel 
was  again  revived,  when  the  King  called  both  Houses  to  Whitehall,  and  prevailed  upon  tliem  to  erase  all 
the  offensive  votes  from  their  journals.  This  put  an  end  to  the  business,  but  occasioned  many  discussions 
in  respect  to  the  Jurisdictions  of  the  Houses  of  Parliament. 