

The  above  treaty  set  the  aftairs  of  the  Company  again  on  foot,  and  gave  life  and  spirit  to 
c'ommercc,  but  encouraged  an  opposition  to  the  Company,  from  a general  impression  of  extending  the 
trade  of  the  realm.  This  opposition  arose  from  some  who  had  been  parties  to  the  Assada  trade  in  1649. 
These  adventurers  petitioned  the  Council  of  State  on  the  21  st  of  September,  1654,  that  the  trade  might 
be  carried  on  by  a Company;  but  with  liberty  for  the  members  of  such  Company,  individually,  to  employ 
their  own  stock,  servants,  and  shipping,  in  such  way  as  they  might  conceive  most  to  their  own  advantage. 
The  East  India  Company  answered  this  petition,  and  among  other  reasons,  stated  that  the  only  method 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xxjx 

of  carrying  on  tlic  trade,  for  the  benefit  and  honour  of  the  country,  would  be  by  a joint  stock  v*’  and  tlicy 
pnayed  a renewal  of  their  cliarter,  and  that  private  persons  should  be  prohibited  sending  shipping  to 
India.  These  petitions,  from  the  unsettled  state  of  public  alfairs,  were  not  attended  to. 

The  objections  which,  from  the  commencement  of  the  Company's  establishment,  had  been  occasionally 
urged  against  their  being  vested  with  the  exclusive  trade  to  India,  were,  however,  pressed  upon  the 
Protector  with  so  much  force  and  effect,  that,  by  way  of  experiment,  he  declan  d the  navigation  and 
commerce  to  India  open  and  free  for  three  years.  All  ranks  eagerly  embarked  in  the  trade.  Tin* 
consequence  of  this  permission  is  thus  truly  stated  by  an  intelligent  author: — ‘‘When  the  East  India 
trade  was  laid  open,  they  aflTorded  India  commodities  so  clienp,  that  they  supplied  mon*  parts  of 
Europe,  and  even  Amsterdam  itseli  therewith,  than  ever  they  did  after,  whereby  tliey  very  mucli  Mink 
the  East  India  Company’s  actions;”  and  “ there  was  also  a great  lowering  of  Englisli  commodities  in 
India.”  In  this  year  the  (’ompany  made  u|i  the  actual  state  of  their  allhirs,  by  which  it  appeared  that 
their  assets  amounted  to  .P185,5S9  7s.  and  their  debts  to  1 19s.  4d.  leaving  a balance  in  their 

favour  of  7s.  8d. 

1656.  Tlie  (’ompany  presented  another  petition  to  the  Government,  staling  that  they  had  been  at 
great  expenees  in  purchasing  privileges,  and  erecting  factories  in  \arioiis  parts  of  India;  that  the  time  of 
the  United  Stock  being  expired,  and  many  ships  having  been  sent  by  individuals  under  licences,  the 
interference  of  wdiich  had  the  effect  of  raising  the  price  of  India  produce  1‘roni  M)  to  50  per  cent,  and  to 
lower  the  price  of  English  manufactures  in  an  equal  proportion,  they  prayed  that  the  Protector  would 
renew  tlieir  charter,  and  that  it  might  he  confirmed  by  Act  of  Parliament,  with  such  additional  privileges 
as  had  been  found  necessary  to  carry  on  the  trade. 