

♦1) 


MW  EISE  AND  PBOGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 

In  this  year  the  Company  were  first  oflered  a ship  upon  freight,  at  £25  per  ton;  and  as  k aj^eared 
by  a calcidatioD,  that  their  own  shipping  stood  them  at  the  rate  of  ^31  per  ton,  she  was  chartered, 
and  performed  a voyage  to  and  from  India  in  the  space  of  eleven  months,  being  the  shortest  that 
at  that  period  had  ever  been  known.  As  tins  proved  an  advantageous  concern  to  the  owners,  others 
were  ledhy  degrees  to  follow  tl\eir  example;  so  that  the  Company's  trade  for  a time  was  carried  on  partly 
by  their  own,  and  partly  by  hired  shipping.  The  country  at  length  being  furnished  with  such  a stock  of 
shipping,  that  the  Company  could  rely  upon  being  supplied  with  tonnage  sufficient  for  their  annual  wantst 
by  the  hire  of  ships  upon  freight,  they  relinquished  the  practice  of  building  their  own  ships,  and  sold 
their  dockyards;  since  which  time,  with  but  few  exceptions,  the  Company's  capital  has  ceased  to  be  invested 
in  shipping. 

The  second  joint  stock,  originally  established  in  1617,  having  been  from  time  to  time  protracted 
tin  1631,  before  it  had  been  able  to  afford  a reimbursement  of  the  original  sum  subscribed,  it  was  agreed 
to  make  over  its  remains  to  the  tliird  Joint  stock,  at  a valuation  of  12[  per  cent 

The  subscription  for  the  third  Joint  stock  amounted  only  to  n(?430,700,  of  which  nearly  one  half 
was  to  be  paid  to  the  former  Joint  stock,  as  the  valuation  of  their  remains  in  India  and  in  England.  With 
this  sum  but  little  could  be  accomplished;  indeed  the  state  of  public  affairs  was  not  sufficiently  encouraging 
for  the  activity  of  enterprise.  The  Company  were  persecuted  by  their  enemies  abroad,  and  were  without 
support  or  protection  at  home.  No  retlrcss  was  likewise  to  be  obtained  from  the  Dutch,  whose  power  and 
insolence  in  India  had  arrived  to  an  unexampled  degiw  of  magnitude.  The  Company,  however,  upon  the 
whole  suffered  less  from  enemies  abroad,  than  their  opponents  at  home.  The  King  had  been  prevailed 
upon  to  issue  a new  grant  to  Sir  William  Courieen  and  others,  authorizing  them  to  trade  in  such 
parts  of  India  as  had  not  hitherto  been  resorted  to  by  the  East  India  Company.  Instead  of 
confining  themselves  within  the  limits  of  this  grant,  they  openly,  and  in  defiance  of  tlie  Company's 
authority,  visited  and  traded  in  every  part  of  India.  The  Company  remonstrated,  but  obtained  no 
redress.  They  were  nevertheless  unwilling  to  abandon  the  trade,  in  hopes  that  affairs  might  take  a more 
favourable  turn.  In  this  way  they  persevered  for  several  years,  struggling  against  difficulties  of  various 
kinds.  Having  at  length  realized  sufficient  to  discharge  their  debts,  they  in  this  year  (1640)  brought 
their  affairs  to  a close,  and  divided  their  capital,  with  a profit,  in  eleven  years,  of  only  36  per  cent. 