

The  ships,  however,  proceeded  to  India  in  April,  IfilO.  Two  of  them,  the  Roebuck  and  Samaritan, 
with  only  stores  and  provisions  on  board,  n‘<*eived  from  the  King  a commission  that  was  not  to  be 
opened  till  they  were  in  the  latitude  of  Ihc  Cunuiy  Islands.  They  proceeded  to  the  lied  Sea,  and  committed 
several  acts  of  piracy  on  the  ships  lu'longing  to  the  IMogul  merchants ; in  conse(pience  of  which,  the 
Company’s  servants  at  Surat  were  seized  and  imprisoned,  and  their  property  confiscated,  to  make  good 
the  losses  sustained  by  the  owners  of  the  Mogul  vcs.sels.  On  the  receijd  of  this  intelligence  in  England, 
the  Company  presented  a memorial  to  the  King,  stating  the  sulferings  of  their  servants,  and  their  great 
losses,  which  would  terminate  in  the  ruin  of  the  East  India  trade,  unless  Ilis  IMaJesty  should  interfere  in 
their  behalf,  and  be  pleased  to  take  the  illegality  of  the  licences,  and  their  consequences  to  the  trade,  into 
his  consideration.  The  subject  was  referred  to  the  Privy  Council  on  the  Cth  of  January,  1G37.  The  Com- 
pany also  gave  directions  that  the  parties  concerned  in  this  piratical  aet  should  be  prosecuted.  This  w^as 
interrupted  on  the  !i^2d  of  February  by  a message  from  the  King,  desiring  ‘‘  that  Sir  William  Courteeh 
might  not  be  troubled  on  the  subject  of  his  ships.”  The  other  ships  belonging  to  this  association  proceeded 
to  Chinn,  where  their  conduct  was  somewhat  similar  to  that  in  tlie  Red  Sea. 

1637.  The  Company's  application  for  redre.ss  was  of  little  avail;  for  on  the  1st  of  June,  1637,  the 
King  by  a fresh  grant  confirmed  the  privileges  granted  to  the  new  ('ompany,  and  allowed  them  to  trade 
for  five  years  to  all  places  in  India,  where  the  old  Company  had  not  settled  any  factories  or  trade  before 
the  12th  of  December,  1635;  and  with  permission  to  export  during  the  said  term  jP40,0(K)  in  gold  and  silver 
bullion  to  India,  and  to  re-export  India  goods,  free  of  customs. 

1630.  The  Company  again  presented  a petition  to  the  King,  in  whicli  they  enumerated  their  griev- 
ances nearly  in  the  same  terms  as  before;  and  concluded  by  stating  the  absolute  necessity  they  should  be 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xx\ 


under  of  abandoning  the  trade,  unless  the  protection  they  prayed  for,  was  afforded  them.  Tfiis  petition 
was  referred  to  a committee  of  the  Privy  Council,  who  made  a report  thereon  to  tlie  King  on  the  of 
November,  1639.  On  the  10th  of  December  the  King  declared  that  he  would  i*L*voke  all  patents  formerly 
granted,  for  plantations  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  grant  no  more  of  the  same  kind ; allowing 
only  to  Courteen’s  association  reasonable  time  to  withdraw  their  settlements,  and  to  bring  home  their 
goods  and  shipping;  and  that  a new  subscription  should  be  entcaed  into,  for  carrying  on  the  trade  on  an 
extensive  joint  stock ; and  when  such  subscription  should  be  completed,  His  Majesty  would  renew  the  Com- 
pany’s charter,  and  grant  such  additional  privileges  as  might  bt‘  found  necessary  and  expedient  “ for 
carrying  on  so  great  and  important  a trade.’' 