

In  the  early  |)eriod  of  the  Company's  concerns,  the  trade  with  India,  as  has  been  already  stated, 
was  carried  on  by  a circuitous  route.  The  ships,  on  their  departure  from  England,  visited  the  northern 
parts  of  India,  where  they  disposed  of  part  of  their  cargoes,  and  ivith  the  proceeds  purchased  piece- 
goods  for  the  supply  of  the  ports  to  the  southward:  here  they  disposed  of  the  remainder  of  their 
British  goods,  and  such  of  the  piece-goods  as  were  suitable  for  those  markets,  and  invested  the  produce 
in  pepper,  spices,  and  other  articles  for  their  returning  cargoes,  wdncli  thereby  consisted  of  an  assortment 
of  goods  from  all  pails.  The  fluctuating  state  of  Asiatic  politics,  (the  Indian  Princes  being  mostly 
engaged  in  a state  of  warfare),  combined  with  the  opposition  which  the  Company  experienced  from 
their  inveterate  enemies,  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch,  obliged  them  to  he  continually  sliitling  their  factories 
from  place  to  place,  according  to  the  state  of  existing  circumstances.  This  moile  of  traffic,  which 
was  both  tedious  and  expensive,  was  now  given  up,  and  the  Company  resolved  to  confine  themselves  to 
the  ti'ade  with  India  direct  out  and  home.  The  trade  from  port  to  port  in  India,  or,  as  it  is  more 
familiarly  termed,  the  country  trade,  was  accordingly  leflt  to  the  Company's  servants  in  India,  and  to  per* 
sons  licensed  to  reside  there  as  free  merchants. 

Tlic  national  ships  at  this  period,  thougli  numerous,  were  still,  compared  with  the  present  day, 
but  of  small  dimensions^  and  in  general  incapable  of  defence  against  tlie  pirates  of  Algiers,  or,  as  they  were 
tefmed,  the  Turkish  rovers.**  To  entourage  the  building  of  ships  of  above  550  tons,  and  with  three 
decks,  the  Company  gave  the  public  assurances  that  they  would  give  them  employment  in  their  airvice  in 
preference  to  all  others,  at  20s.  per  ton  more  tiiau  the  ordinary  rates  of  freight.  The  first  ship  of  this 
description  tendered  to  the  Com|)aiiy,  was  the  Loyal  Merchant,  built  by  Captain  Millett  in  1660.  This 
ship  underwent  a royal  Inspection,  and  his  Majesty,  Charles  II.  was  so  pleased  with  her  construction,  that, 
as  an  enoouragement  for  building  ships  of  a similar  description,  he  caused  an  Act  to  be  passed  (14  Charles  11. 
chap.  %)  by  which  it  was  conditioned,  that  for  seven  years  to  come,  whoever  slmuld  build  Alps  with  three 
decks,  or  with  two  decks  and  a half,  and  a forecastle,  with  a space  of  five  feet  between  each  deck,  and 
mounted  at  least  with  90  cannon,  should  for  tite  first  two  voyages  receive  one  tenth  part  of  all  the  Customs 
that  were  payable  on  their  export  and  import  lading. 