

“ Concerning  the  part  ol  the  Indian  wares  which  by  trade  Irnth  been  exported  again  into  foreign 
countries,  we,  by  estimate,  are  of  opinion,  that  one  half  of  the  raw  silk  is  used  here,  which  by  the  manu- 
facture thereof,  doth  employ  a great  multitude  of  poor  people;  the  other  half  we  consider  is  carried  beyond 
the  seas,  as  also  three-quarters  of  all  the  Indian  wares  which  have  been  brouglit  into  this  kingdom,  to 
the  great  increase  of  trade,  importation  of  treasure,  and  employment  of  shipping.’’’ 


1631.  King  Charles  I.  issued  a proclamation  “ for  restraining  the  excess  of  tlie  private,  or  clandes- 
tine trade,  carried  on  to  and  from  the  East  Indies  by  the  olfieers  and  sailors  in  the  Company'’H  own  ships.” 
This  proclamation  stated  the  goods  which  the  Company  were  permitted  to  ex|)ort  to,  and  import  from, 
India  into  England,  which  were  as  follow,  viz. 

Exports. — “ rcrpetiianoes,  and  drapery,  broad  clotlis,  &c.  pewter,  saffron,  woollen  stockings,  silk 
stockings  and  garters,  ribbons,  roses  edged  witli  gold  lace,  heaver  hats  with  gold  and  silver  bands,  felt 
hats,  strong  waters,  knives,  Spanish  leather  shoes,  iron,  and  looking-glasses. 

Imports. — “ Long  pepper,  white  pep[)er,  white  powdered  sugar,  priNcrved  nutmegs,  and  ginger,  pre- 
served myrabolans,  bezoar  stones,  drugs  of  all  sorts,  agate  heads,  blood-stones,  rnusk,  aloes,  ambergris 
rich  carpets  of  Persia  and  Cambay,  quilts  of  satin  taffuty,  painted  calicoes,  beiijamin,  damasks,  satins  and 
taffaties  of  China,  (luilts  of  Chinn  embroidered  with  gold,  (juilts  of  Patany  embroidered  with  silk,  galls, 
worm-seeds,  sugar-candy,  China  dishes,  and  porcelain  of  all  sorts.” 

In  this  year  the  Rump  Parliament  granted  the  East  India  Company  a charter  for  five  yeors  to  frade 
on  the  Continent  of  Africa. 


1634'.  A phirmaund  was  obtained  from  the  IMogul  on  tlie  2d  of  February,  1631*,  for  liberty  of  trade 
in  the  province  of  Pengul,  witliout  any  other  restriction  than  that  the  English  ships  were  to  resort  only^ 
to  th^port  of  Pipley. 

1635.  In  this  yeoi*  King  Charles  granted  a charter  to  Sir  William  Courtcen  and  otliers,  authorizing 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


isir 

them  to  send  six  sliips  under  the  command  of  Captain  Wedden,  to  India,  to  trade  during  five  years,  the 
proainhle  to  which  states,  ‘‘  that  the  East  India  Company  had  neglected  to  establish  fortified  factories,  or 
seats  of  trade,  to  wliich  the  King’s  subjects  could  resort  with  safety ; that  th(*y  had  cunsiilU  d their  own 
interests  only,  without  any  regard  to  the  King’s  revenue;  and,  in  general,  tliat  they  had  broken  the  con- 
ditions on  which  their  charter  and  exclusive  privileges  had  been  granted  them.” — I’lie  Company  remon- 
strated against  this  manliest  infringement  of  their  charter,  and  received  in  answer,  from  the  King,  “ that 
the  ships  were  about  to  lie  employed  upon  a secret  design,  which  for  the  present  he  did  not  think  fit  to 
reveal;  but  that  the  Company  might  rest  under  an  assurance  that  nothing  was  intended  to  their  disad- 
vantage.” The  Company,  however,  finding  the  ships  were  taking  in  goods  fitted  for  the  Indian 
market,  and  that  many  persons  who  had  been  formerly  in  their  service,  were  engaged  to  proceed  in  the  said 
ships,  they  resolved  to  petition  Ills  Maje.sty.  The  petition  stated,  “ that  they  had  then  in  India  fourteen 
returnable  ships  (besides  three  then  going  out),  many  of  which  wen^  forced  to  be  rotting,  by  reason  of  the 
great  scarcity  of  merchandise,  which  formerly  the  liulies  did  afibrd,  occasioned  by  a famine  and  pestilence. 
Albeit  the  Company  have  at  present  a large  stock  in  India  and  Persia  to  buy  commodities.  They  also  prayed, 
that  if  leave  was  given  to  Sir  William  Courteen’s  ships  to  go  to  the  Indies  by  way  of  trade,  they  might  lie 
debarred  from  bringing  to  Europe  any  spires,  indigo,  calicoes,  silk  or  other  commodities,  in  which  the 
(’ompany  traded  lor  relading  their  ships,  for  it  was  Inipossibh*  they  could  subsist  together;  but  if  tliey 
should  be  sufiered  to  buy  tlic  same  commodities  with  the  Company  there,  and  vend  them  in  Europe,  the  one 
would  undoubtedly  undo  the  other,  or  both  together;  and  \\hen'as  Ills  Majesty  laid  his  express  commands 
on  the  petitioners  to  use  their  best  assistance  Ibr  the  continuance  ol‘  tlie  trade,  which  accordingly  they 
bad  endeavoured,  as  well  by  their  councils  as  labour,  and  advertising  their  estates,  they  also  further  prayed, 
that  if  the  trade  should  hap|)en  to  be  deserted,  HE  Majesty  would  not  impute  the  same  to  neglect  on  their  part, 
and  that,  according  to  their  charter,  they  might  have  three  years  to  recall  home  their  ships  and  eflects.” 