

1640.  In  consequence  of  the  protection  and  cncouragcanent  thus  held  out,  a Court  of  the  gcnerali(\ 
of  proprietors  was  summoned,  wlien  it  was  proposed  to  raiee  a subscription  for  a new,  or  fourth  joint 
stock,  on  the  following  conditions: 

I.  That  the  subscription  should  be  paid  in  lour  years. 

IL  That  the  subscription  should  be  open  to  all  persons,  foreigners  as  well  as  IbiglUli,  till  the  Ist  of 
May,  1640,  and  the  instalments  paid  (quarterly. 

III.  That  in  case  of  default  in  payment  of  the  instalments,  1 { per  cent,  per  month  should  be  levied 
as  a fine,  till  such  payment  should  be  made. 

IV.  That  no  Englishman  should  subscribe  less  than  and  no  foreigner  less  than  X^IOOO. 

V.  That  if  any  Englishman  should  buy  any  share  alter  the  books  were  closed,  he  shouhl  pay  £20^ 
and  a foreigner  jt*40,  as  a fine  for  his  freedom  to  the  new  Coin[)any. 

VI.  That  to  prevent  inconvenience  and  confusion,  the  old  Company,  or  adventyrei>*  in  the  third 
joint  stock,  should  have  sufficient  time  allowed  for  bringing  home  their  properly,  and  shoidd  send  no  more 
stock  to  India  on  that  account  after  tlie  month  of  May,  1610. 

Among  the  ex[iedients  to  which  King  Charles  in  his  necessity  was  obliged  to  have  recourse,  was 
his  compelling  tlie  East  India  Company  to  .sell  to  tlie  Crown  the  whole  of  the  pepper  in  their  warchouse.i, 
amounting  to  607,522  lbs.  at  2s.  Id.  peril),  payable  by  instalments.  This  pej)per  was  sold  for  ready  money, 
at  Is.  8d.  per  lb.  and  it  was  several  years  before  the  Company  could  get  the  accounts  settled. 

The  Company,  on  the  15th  of  November,  16U1,  obtained  a giant  uf  the  town  and  port  of  Madra.s- 
patnam,  where  they  built  a fort,  which  they  naiiUHl  St.  George.  As  an  encouragement  to  the  English  to 
settle  there,  they  were  allowed  to  trade,  duty  free;  of  the  customs  paid  by  other  (radiTs,  one  half  was  to 
be  allowed  to  the  Company,  and  the  other  half  to  the  King.  On  olitaining  this  grant,  tlie  factory  removed 
from  Armagon  to  Fort  St.  George,  which  has  .since  been  the  pi  incipal  settlement  on  tlie  coast. 

The  Company’s  trade  having  much  extended,  tliey  found  tln  ir  yard  at  Deptford  inadequate  to  their 
occasions.  Some  coj))’hold  ground  was  therefore  purchased  at  Bluckwall,  viliieli  at  this  time  was  a mar.di, 
without  inhabitants,  and  another  yard  was  established  upon  a more  ext(‘nsive  scale,  where  they  built 
a still  larger  ship  of  1200  tons,  (the  Royal  James),  and  several  others  of  the  burthen  of  900,  800,  and  700 
tons  each.  In  these  two  yards  the  Company  performed  every  function  connected  with  the  outfit  of  ship- 
ping within  themselves;  they  built  their  own  sliijis  and  boats,  made  their  own  masts,  yards,  sails,  anchors, 
cables,  and  cordage  for  rigging;  they  imported  their  own  flour,  baked  their  own  bread,  killed  and  .salted 
their  own  provisions;  imported  staves  from  the  Baltic,  made  their  own  cask.s,  and  even  were  under  the 
necessity  of  importing  from  tlia  Continent  saltpetre  to  make  their  own  gunpowder,  King  Charles  1.  having 
taken  the  monopoly  of  this  commodity  into  his  own  hands,  but  was  unable  to  supply  the  Company  with 
Uie  quantity  they  required  of  . it.  All  these  occu|)ations,  from  the  improved  state  of  the  country,  have 
shice  become  separate  trades,  which  have  been  successfully  carried  on  by  individuals,  whereby  many 
families  by  industry  have  risen  to  a state  of  affluence  and  honourable  independence. 