

1642.  At  a meeting  of  the  adventurers  in  the  third  joint  stock,  on  the  6th  of  October^  1641, 
it  was  resolved,  that  a necessity  exists  of  something  being  done  to  support  and  uphold  the  East  India 
trade,  as,  if  this  year  Is  passed  over,  the  trade  may  pass  off  so  as  never  to  be  again  revived."  A subscrijv* 
tion  was  therefore  opened  for  a single  voyage,  and  £67^500  was  subscribed.  This  adventure  was  to  pay 
the  tliird  Joint  stock  one  per  cent,  for  management  at  home,  and  6 per  cent,  ou  the  invoice  cost  of  their 
goods,  for  service  of  factories,  warehouses,  and  small  shipping  in  India. 

The  adventurers  in  the  fourth  Joint  stock  consisted  of  such  of  the  members  of  the  fisrmer  stock 
as  chose  to  subscribe  their  remains  in  that  concern,  on  a valuation  of  25  per  cent,  wiffi  a few  new  sub^ 
scribers;  but  to  so  deplorable  an  ebb  was  this  trade  reduced,  that  the  total  amount  of  the  subscriptions^ 
lacludmg  an  addition  that  was  made  thereto  in  1643,  was  only  about  j£^lQ/S,000;  with  this  sum  little  could 
be  eftcied,  and  indeed  little  was  attempted,  owing  to  the  confusion  of  the  times.  The  nation  was  now 
involved  in  a civil  war,  and  the  baneful  spirit  of  party  had  extended  itself  to  all  ranks  and  descriptions  of 
men:  it  pervaded  even  the  ordinaiy  operations  of  commerce.  The  stock  of  the  Company,  trifling  as  it 
was,  experienced  a great  diminution  by  the  conduct  of  Captain  Macknel,  one  of  their  commanders,  who 
carried  hie  ship,  the  John,  with  a cargo  valued  at  ^20,000,  into  Bristol,  where  he  surrendered  her  up  to 
the  King's  use.  The  capital  was  also  further  lessened  by  the  wreck  of  another  ship,  valued  at  £36,000. 
This  reduced  them  to  the  necessity  of  borrowing  money  upon  their  bonds  at  home,  and  availing  themselves 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES, 


UfU 


of  their  credit  abroad,  in  the  manner  tliat  had  been  practised  hy  the  former  Company^  by  which  upon  tlic 
whole  they  obtained  but  little  profit. 

164(i.  The  urgency  of  State  atiliirs  pi^veiited  the  Government  from  attending  to  the  East  India  con- 
oerns.  The  application  for  a charter  had  been  put  oft'  from  time  to  time  for  many  years,  ainfthe  only 
encouragement  the  Company  could  obtain,  was  the  forbidding  all  persons  trading  to  India,  ii|)on  the  for* 
feiture  of  ships  and  goods,  and  empowering  them  to  fine  and  imprison  those  who  sliould  lie  guilty  of  dis^ 
obedience  to  their  orders. 

The  following  is  a state  of  the  affairs  of  the  fourth  joint  stock  on  the  4th  of  September,  Id  Id. 

The  debts  owing  by  the  Company  in  England,  amounted  to  l'122,0tX). 

Their  cftects  consisted  of,  quick  stock  at  Surat,  i.'83,d00;  quick  stock  at  Bantam,  i?G0,731;  in  shipping 
and  stores  jL^31,1S0;  and  customs  at  Gombroon,  estimated  at  X'5,000;  forming  a total  of  XM80,.511. 