

The  Engb’sh  having  been  expelled  from  their  fort  and  factory  at  Bantam,  the  King  granted  a commission, 
dated  August  1,  1683,  authorizing  the  Adniii'alty  to  grant  commissions  to  such  as  the  Company  should 
recommend,  for  enabling  them  to  recover  the  said  fort  and  factory  from  the  Dutch,  to  whom  the  King  of 
Bantam  had  made  it  over. 

1686.  The  interlopers  in  India  having  become  very  numerous,  and  created  great  disturbances  there, 
and,  by  setting  themselves  up  as  the  true  East  India  Company,  incited  the  Mogul's  people  to  make  war  on 
the  Company  in  Bengal,  to  their  great  detriment,  and  the  hazard  of  being  deprived  of  their  privileges  of 
trade  granted  them  by  the  country  powers ; a ship  of  war  was  dispatched  to  India,  with  the  King's  pro- 
clamation, enjoining  all  his  subjects  in  India  to  repair  to  the  Company’s  forts  and  factories,  and  to  submit 
to  their  jurisdiction,  with  orders  to  seize  all  interlopers;  and  for  enlarging  and  corroborating  the  Company’s 
authorities,  the  King  granted  them  & new  charter,  being  the  sixth,  dated  April  12,  1686,  whereby  he 
ratified  all  the  preceding  charters  for  ever  in  their  fullest  extent,  notwithstanding  any  nonuser,  misuser,  or 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


:KXXvii 


Abuser.  And,  further,  grante<l  to  the  Company,  and  their  respective  Presidents,  Agents,  Chiefs,  and  Coiuu  ils 
in  India,  or  to  any  three  of  them  (whereof  such  President,  Agent,  or  Chief  to  l)e  one),  power  to  administer 
to  all  persons  employed  by  the  Company,  the  oath  taken  by  the  freemen  of  the  Company,  and  such  other 
lawful  oaths  as  the  Court  of  Directors  should  preserilie.  And  also  a power  to  exercise  martial  law  at 
St.  Helena,  and  the  Company's  fort  at  Priaman  on  tiu!  West  Coast  of  Sumatra,  as  well  as  in  all  their  other 
limits.  And  the  King  having  been  given  to  understand,  tliut  many  of  the  native  Princes  and  Govi  rnors  of 
India,  &c.  taking  advantage  of  the  divisions,  distractions,  or  rehellions  amongst  the  EiigUdj,  occasioned 
by  the  late  licentious  trading  of  interlopers,  had  violated  many  of  the  Company's. privileges,  sur- 
prised their  servants,  ships,  and  goods,  besieged  their  factories,  invad(‘d  their  liberties,  and  by  many  other 
ways,  without  just  can'se,  abused  their  Chiefs  and  Factors,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  English  nation,  for  all 
which  the  C^)mpany  intended  to  demand  satisfaction  in  a peaceable  way;  ami  if  not  obtained  that  way,  to 
use  force  of  arms,  wherein  they  would  hav<‘  oceasi»>n  to  use  tlu  ir  sliips  in  a \\arlike  manner;  wherefore  the 
King  granted  full  power,  to  tlie  Company  to  appoint  ^Vdmirals,  Captains,  &:<*.  fn)m  time  to  time,  who  might 
raise  and  muster  seamen  and  soldiers  on  boaril  their  ships,  asshoidd  hedirt'cled  hy  tlie  Company,  or  by  their 
Captain-Cieneral  in  India,  to  whom  authority  w as  granl('d  fors(‘izing  all  I'liglisli  interloptTs,  and  compelling 
them  to  submit,  and  fur  taking  tlieir  ships  and  goods.  Also  to  make  war  on  sneli  Indian  Princes  as  might 
hurt  the  C'ompaiiy;  witli  power,  in  time  of  open  hostility  with  any  Indian  nation,  to  exercise  on  the  other 
side  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  inarllal  law%  as  wvll  on  hoard  their  ships  as  on  land  ; reserving,  however, 
liberty  to  the  King  at  pleasure  to  revoke  this  grant  of  martial  hnv  in  their  ships. 