

2 


xxxn 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


1682.  In  August  the  English  were  expelled  from  Bantam,  in  consequence  of  a quarrel  between  the 
old  King  of  Bantam  and  his  son.  The  English  took  part  with  the  father,  and  the  Dutch  with  the  son, 
and  sent  their  forces  to  his  assistance  from  Batavia,  whereby  the  old  King  was  vanquished,  and  shut  up  in 
prison.  The  young  King  gave  the  Dutch  possession  of  the  castle  which  commanded  both  the  town  and 
fort,  whereuiwn  they  drove  out  the  English  Company's  fa<‘tors,  and  have  ever  since  possessed  the  place. 

1683.  For  the  more  eflTectually  preventing  and  punishing  interlopers  residing  at,  or  trading  to  the  East 
Indies  without  licence,  the  King  granted  the  Company  their  fifth  charter,  dated  August  O’,  1683,  empow- 
ering the  (>ompany,  their  factors,  &c.  to  seize  all  ships  and  goods  brought  from,  or  carried  to  any  place 
within  the  limits  of  the  Company’s  exclusive  trade,  granting  to  the  Company  one  moiety  of  the  forfeiture, 
and  reserving  the  other  moiety  to  the  Crown. 

Also,  that  the  Governor  and  Company  should  have  the  rule  and  government  of  all  forts,  factories,  and 
plantations,  already  or  thert‘after  to  he  settled  by  ihc  Company  within  tlie  limits  aforesaid,  with  the  power 
of  making  and  declaring  peace  and  war  with  the  heathen  nations,  and  the  appointment  of  Governors,  &c. 
which  Governors,  &c.  might  muster  forces,  and  execute  martial  law  in  India;  the  King,  nevertheless, 
reserving  the  sovereign  riglit  over  tlu;  said  forts,  &c.  and  power  of  making  peace  and  war,  uhen  he  should 
think  fit  to  interpose  his  royal  authority. 

Also  a power  to  erect  Courts  of  Judicature  in  any  of  their  settlements,  and  to  appoint  Judges  thereof, 
who  should  determine  according  to  er[!ilty  and  good  conscience,  and  the  laws  and  customs  ol  merchants. 

And,  lastly,  the  King  granted  that  the  Company  should  enjoy  all  privileges  in  the  City  of  London, 
in  us  large  a manner  as  could  be  enjoyed  by  any  Company  of  merchants  erected  by  charter. 

An  alarming  and  dangerous  mutiny  broke  out  among  the  military  at  Bombay.  Captain  Keigwin,  who 
commanded  the  garrison,  seized  tlie  members  of  Government  on  the  27th  of  December,  1683,  annulled  the 
Company’s  authority  by  proclamation,  and  declared  the  island  under  the  King's  protection,  The  President 
at  Surat  used  every  means  to  persuade  thorn  to  return  to  their  duty,  but  in  vain ; and  it  was  not  till 
November,  1681-,  the  island  was  again  subjected  to  the  Company’s  authority. 

The  inhabitants  of  St.  Helena  were  also  in  a state  of  insurrection ; many  of  them  having  refused  to 
pay  taxes,  or  acknowledge  the  Company’s  authority,  it  was  found  necessary  to  put  in  execution  the  jxiwers' 
with  which  they  were  invested  by  their  new  charter.  Some  of  the  most  refractory  were  tli(Teupoii  tried  and 
executed.  This  occasioned  a great  ferment.  The  relatives  of  the  parties  complained  to  Parliament,  who 
voted  the  Company’s  proceedings  to  be  arbitrary  and  illegal,  which  was  the  means  of  rendering  them  very 
unpopular;  but  in  other  re.spects  their  concerns  were  in  a tlourishing  state,  their  stock  having  in  this  year 
increased  from  31>0  to  500  per  cent. 