

That  they  may  seize  all  Englishmen  and  other  persons  in  the  East  Indies  sailing  in  any  Indian  or 
English  vessel,  or  inhabiting  those  parts  without  the  Company’s  licence,  or  that  shall  disobey  their  order?, 
and  send  them  home  to  England. 

That  the  King's  subjects,  employed  by  tlie  Com|mny  in  tlie  limits  aforesaid,  shall  sufl'er  such  punish- 
ment for  offences  there  committed  as  the  Company’s  President  and  Council  shall  think  fit,  and  the  quality 
of  the  offences  requires;  and  in  case  of  appeal,  the  offender  shall  be  sent  home  fur  punishment.  And  for 
the  better  discovery  of  offenders,  ail  persons  may  be  examined  upon  oath  before  the  Company’s  President 
and  Council,  touching  the  same. 

The  Company  ore  restricted  from  trading  in  the  dominions  of  any  Christian  Prince  or  State,  in  aniify 
with  the  Crown  of  England,  who  shall  oveiily  declare  it  to  be  against  his  will  or  good  liking. 

With  proviso,  that  if  the  continuance  of  tliis  charter  shall  not  be  profitable  to  the  Crown  and  the 
realm,  the  King  may  resume  it  on  three  years’  notice. 

The  marriage  of  King  Charles  II.  with  the  Infanta  of  Portugal  took  place  soon  affer  the  renewal  of 
the  Company’s  charter.  By  the  11th  article  of  the  treaty  of  marriage,  the  Crown  of  Portugal  ceded  and 


xxxii 


niSE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


granted  tp  the  Crown  of  England  fhl'^i^island  and  barbour  of  Bombay,  in  full  sovereignty,  which  was 
taken  possession  of  in  the  name  of  the  King,  and  retained  by  the  Crown  till  1668;  when  it  being  found  that 
the  expences  in  maintaining  it  greatly  exceeded  the  revenues,  it  was  granted  to  the  Company  in  pcii)etuity 
by  letters  patent,  dated  the  27th  of  March,  1668. 

The  island  of  Roon,  otherwise  Pulo  Roon,  was  an  early  possession  of  the  Company.  The  Dutch 
East  India  Company  having  captured  it,  the  arbitraton  appointed,  in  1654,  for  settling  the  disputes 
between  the  two  Companies,  decreed  that  it  should  be  restored  to  the  English;  but  the  Dutch  having 
failed  to  do  so,  the  King,  by  a grant  dated  the  lltli  of  January,  1660,  gave  licence  to  the  Company  to 
take  possession  of  the  said  island,  and  to  regain  it  from  the  Dutch  Company,  and  to  plant,  husband, 
manage,  retain,  and  keep  the  same.  The  island  was  accordingly  repossessed  by  the  Company,  who 
held  it  only  a short  time  before  the  Dutch,  in  1664,  again  seized  it;  and  by  the  treaty  of  Breda  in 
1667,  it  was  ceded  to  the  Dutch  in  full  sovereignty  and  riglit. 

1664.  The  seven  years  for  which  the  Company  were  associated,  being  now  expired,  public  notice 
was  given  that  within  a prescribed  space  of  time,  such  of  tlie  subscribers  as  were  inclined,  might  withdraw 
their  shares;  but  they  all  preferred  letting  them  remain  upon  a new  establishment.  The  price  of  India  stock 
having  been  reduced  so  low  as  70  per  cent,  a statement  of  the  ('orflpany’s  aflairs  was  made  up,  by 
which  it  appears  that  they  had 