

1678.  Permission  was  tliis  year  obtained  for  settling  a factory  at  Toiifpiin;  l)iit  in  consequence  of 
the  exactions  of  the  Mandarins,  and  the  little  traiie  carried  on  there,  it  was  sof)n  ab:uHl()m*d.  Nine  ships 
were  sent  out  this  season,  three  of  whieli  were  destined  to  Bantam,  tliiee  to  Coast  and  Bay,  and  thr(e 
to  Surat;  their  chartered  tonnage  amounted  to  tons. 

1679.  Ten  ships  w^ere  sent  out  this  season,  three  of  which  w'cre  destined  to  Bantam,  four  to  Coast 
and  Bay,  and  three  to  Surat ; their  chartered  tonnage  amounted  to  .5400  tuns. 

A factory  was  established  at  Amoy  in  ('hina  about  this  period. 

1680.  Ten  ships  were  sent  out  this  season,  five  of  which  were  destined  to  Madras,  three  to  8urat, 
and  two  to  Bantam ; their  chartered  tonnage  was  407,5  tons,  and  the  bullion  nml  meichamlise  expoi ted 
on  them  were  1^316,213,  From  this  period  the  exports  by  the  b'ast  India  Company  ar(‘  regularly  staled. 

1681.  The  silk-weavers  of  London  this  year  unsuceessfidly  petitioned  the  House  of  Commons 
against  the  wear  of  East  India  silks,  Bengals,  &o.  It  was  stated  hy  oiu'  of  the  nnanhers  of  the  House, 
“ that  we  consumed  i?.30(),000  yearly  in  lliose  blast  India  manufactured  goods,  including  printed  and 
painted  calicoes  for  cloths,  bed-han^ngs,  &c. 

The  Turkey  Company  made  a formal  complaint  to  tlie  Council  of  tla  ('nmprsny's  interference  in  the 
article  of  raw  silk,  and  tlierchy  lessening  the  demand  for  woollens.  'TIh'  'rm  key  Compjmy  were  heard 
in  support  of  their  complaint  before  the  I.ords  of  the  Privy  Council,  to  which  llu*  East  India  (!ompaiiy 
made  an  able  and  satisfactory  defence.  The  substance  of  the  3'urkey  Coinjiany's  allegations  and  tlie  East 
India  Company's  answers  was  printed,  and  exhibited  an  interesting  view  of  the  trade  of  both  Companies. 

While  the  above  proceedings  were  pending  before  the  Privy  Council,  the  Company  represented  to 
their  Lordships  the  necessity  of  their  being  aflorded  jiroh  etioii  against  illicit  traders.  They  stated  they 
were  at  an  expence  of  £\00ft00  per  annniu  for  forts,  ganison.s,  &:c.  and  that  it  would  he  impossible  to 
carry  on  a profitable  trade  if  interlopers  were  permitted.  A slilp,  commanded  by  ('n])taiii  Sands,  being 
now  about  to  proceed  with  a cargo  of  .C,50,00()  value,  the  King,  at  the  request  of  the  Company,  lai<l  an 
embargo  upon  her;  and  after  a long  and  interesting  trial,  a decision  was  made  in  favour  of  the  Company; 
so  that  the  ship  and  cargo  w^rcsold  off,  to  the  proprietors'  great  loss.  Notwithstaiuling  which,  the  inter- 
lopers continued  their  voyages  to  India,  being  encouraged  by  the  opinion  of  several  (>minent  lawyers,  who 
freely  declared  that  the  King  could  not  legally  o!>struct  them  by  any  charter  whatever  grunted  to  the 
Company,  unless  their  exclusive  powers  had  the  sanction  of  on  Act  of  Pailiamcnt 