

2d.  The  loss  of  so  many  stout  ships  and  mariners  would  he  a great  detriment  to  the  nation. 

‘‘  3d.  AVere  wc  forced  to  buy  all  our  pepper,  calicoes,  &e.  from  the  Dutch,  they  would  make  us  pay 
as  dear  for  them  as  we  do  for  tlndr  nutmegs,  mace,  cloves,  and  cinnamon;  and  if  wc  did  not  use  calicoes, 
wc  should  fall  into  the  use  of  foreign  linens." 

About  this  time  the  wear  of  muslins  was  first  introduced  into  England  instead  of  cambrics,  lawns, 
and  other  linens  from  b'landers  and  Gerniany,  f4)r  which  immense  sums  were  anmiully  paid. 

Tlie  Levant  Company  began  to  comjdain  of  the  l^ast  India  Coinpimy,  on  account  ot  the  great 
quantities  of  raw  silk  they  inijiortcd,  whicli  had  ibrmerly  been  brouglU  sole!)  iVom  I'urkey. 

1G72.  The  English  Company  obtained  a confirmation  of  the  pri\ilcges  granted  them  in  1G43  at 
Madraspatnam,  as  also  a grant  of  the  remaining  moiety  of  the  customs,  on  paving  the  Nabob  the  annual 
sum  of  1,200  pagodas.  The  phirmaimd  was  dated  the  .'list  of  .Taniiaiy,  1071-2. 

The  Dutcli  took  St.  Helena;  but  it  was  soon  after  retaken  by  Captain  Ahiialeii. 


1674.  The  Company  having,  under  the  authority  of  tlieir charter  ol'  ItiOl,  erected  foils,  and  made 
plantations  at  St.  Helena,  previous  to  its  cap! lire  by  the  Dutch,  and  it  Ix  ing  rdakeri  liy  tin*  King's  shijis  and 
forces,  the  King,  by  grant  dated  December  16,  1674,  regranted  and  confirmed  the  same  to  the  .said 
Governor  and  Company  in  perpetuity,  to  he  held  in  socage  tenuie,  as  of  the  Manor  of  East  Creenwieh, 
with  the  same  powers  and  privileges  for  the  safety  ond  protection  thereoi*,  and  for  the  government  ol*  the 
inhabitants,  and  with  the  like  declarations  in  favour  of  the  Company  and  the  inlmhitants,  as  were  coin 
tuined  ill  the  grant  of  Bombay;  and,  with  this  fiirtlnu'  privilege',  that  the  (’ompany  >v('re  permitted  to 
export  to  the  .said  island  all  kinds  of  clothing,  provisions  or  victuals,  ammunition,  ordnance,  and  im- 
plements,  without  payment  of  custom,  subsidy,  or  olher  duly,  and  also  to  tran.sport  thither  such 
numbers  of  men,  willing  to  go,  as  the  Company  should  think  fit. 

At  this  time  the  manufactured  commodities  of  India  annually  im|M)i  tpd  into  lOurope,  and  more 
particularly  into  England,  were  become  so  considerable,  as  to  occasion  loud  complaints  against  the 
East  India  Company,  as  les.seners  of  the  consumption  of  English  maiiufuclures;  whereby  it  wa.s  observed 
that  the  annual  exportation  of  bullion  to  India,  which  Ibrmerly  did  not  oll(*n  exceed  jCMOjOGO,  was 
greatly  increased.  These  complaints  continued  without  intermission,  or  rather  inen^ased,  until  the 
legislature  found  it  necessary  to  enact  a total  and  absolute  prohibition  of  the  wear  of  all  such  in  Eng- 
land,  muslins  only  excepted. 