


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  axi 

In  the*  three  yeftis^  1659)  Hiid  the  totAl  smouiit  o^Chc  Ooinp(iny*s  6xpoi*tsw&s  1,583 
aiul  consisted  of  bullion,  £227fi20j  and  goods,  i?S3,763. 

lG(il.  The  Company  petitioned  the  Kingfioc  a renewal  of  their  exclusive  privileges,  when  a new 
charter  was  groriited,  dated  the  3d  ol  April,  1661;  the  preamble  of  wiiich  recites,  that  divers  disorders 
and  inconvenionces  had  been  committed  by  the  King's  subjects  and  by  foreigners,  to  the  great  prejudice 
of  tlw  Company,  and  inten  uption  of  their  trade;  wliereuj)on  the  Company  had  besought  the  King  to  con. 
finn  their  charters,  granted  them  by  Queen  Elizabeth  and  King  James.  The  King  accordingly  grants^ 
ratifies,  and  confirms  unto  the  Governor  and  Company,  that  tliey  shaU  be  a body  corporate  and  politic 
by  their  former  name,  witli  perpetual  succession  for  ever.  And  tlie  charter  tlien  pioceeils,  like  that  from 
King  James,  to  the  nomination  of  the  first  Governor,  Deputy  Governor,  and  24  Committee-men,  with 
instructions  for  tlieir  annual  election;  and  grants  to  the  Company  tlic  following  powers  in  addition  to 
those  given  them  by  tlieir  last  charter,  viz. 

That  the  Commissioners  of  Customs  shall  permit  no  entry  of  India  goods,  but  such  as  shall  be 
allowed  by  the  Governor  and  Company,  under  their  seal,  or  unde  r the  hand  of  the  Company's  officers, 
to  be  by  them  appointed  to  sit  at  the  Custom-house  for  that  purpose. 

That  every  member  shall  have  a vote  in  the  general  Court,  at  all  elections  and  byeJaws,  for  each 
1*500  stock  wliich  he  shall  possess;  and  that  persons  may  unite  smaller  sums  to  make  up  that  amount, 
and  vote  jointly  for  the  same. 

That  all  plantations,  forts,  &c.  where  the  Company's  factories  are,  or  shall  be  established,  shall  be 
under  their  own  command  and  controul,  with  the  appointment  of  Governors,  and  officers  to  govern  the 
same;  and  that  such  Governor  and  his  Council  may  exercise  civil  and  criminal  jurisdiction  in  the  said 
factories,  &c.  according  to  the  laws  of  England;,  and  if  the  offence  shall  be  committed  in  a place  where 
it  cannot  be  tried,  the  offender  may  be  sent  to  such  oilier  plantation  or  fort  where  there  is  a Governor  in 
Council  to  try  him,,  that  justice  may  be  done. 

That  the  Company  may  export  warlike  stores,  make  peace  and  war  with  Princes  and  people  In  tlie 
limits  of  tlieir  trade  (not  b<^ing  Christians),  and  recom|jense  themselves  for  wrongs  and  damages  sus- 
tained at  their  settlements. 

That  they  may  fortify  St.  Helena  and  any  other  places  within  the  limits  of  their  trade,  and  supply 
their  forts  and  setticineiils  with  clothing,  victuals,  umniunition,  and  implements  free  from  custom  oi 
<hity,  and  transport  thitlier  such  men  os  shall  be  willing  to  go;  may  govern  them  in  a legal  and  reasonable 
manner,  and  inflict  punishments  for  misdemeanors,  or  ini^^osc  fines  for  breae^  of  orders. 