


otliers,  trustees  for  the  English  Company,  of  the  fifth  part.  By  this  deed  the  London  Company  agreed 
to  tninsfi'r  the  charters  by  which  they  held  the  inlands  of  Bombay  and  St.  Helena,  to  the  English  Com- 
|)aiiy,  ill  consideration  of  credit  in  the  united  trade,  and  tiie  sum  of  i?l.‘]0,00()  paid  to  them 

ill  money,  and  also  their  rights  to  all  their  several  forts  and  factories,  within  the  limits  ot  then'  charter,  in 
the  Piast  Indies,  of  whicli  the  following  is  an  enumeration,  vu. 

Tlie  factories  dc'pending  on  the  Piesidciiey  of  Bomhay,  Surat,  Baroach,  Amcdabad,  and  Agra. 

On  tlie  Atalabar  Coast,  the  forts  anil  factories  of  Carwar,  Tellichcrry,  Anjengo,  and  Calicut. 

Ill  Persia,  the  factories  of  Gombroon,  Sihiraz,  and  Tspuhan,  with  the  yearly  rent  of  10t)0  tomunds, 
or  (is.  Sd.  paid  by  the  Sojilii  of  Persia  at  Gombroon. 

On  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  Gingee  and  Orixa,  the  faetoiles  depending  on  the  Presidency  of  P'ort 
St.  George,  or  St.  George,  and  the  (.'ity  of  ^Madras,  P'ort  St.  l^avid,  Cuddalore,  Poi  to  Novo,  Pettipole, 
Maiisullpalam,  Madapollain,  and  Vizagapatani,  and  connected  with  them,  the  settlements  on  the  island  of 
Sumatra;  or,  York  Fort,  Bcneoolcn,  Iiulrapore,  Priaman,  Sillehar,  and  the  stations  dependent  on 
Bencoolen;  and  al^o  the  factory  of  Tonqnin. 

The  factories  dependent  on  the  Presidency  of  Fort  William;  or  Fort  William,  Chutamiltce,  Balasorc, 
Cossimbuzar,  Dacca,  lliigliley,  l\ialda,  Biijainahl,  and  Patna,  with  all  their  claims  or  title  to  Bantam,  or 
any  other  settlements  they  might  have  had  in  the  Southern  Seas;  and  all  the  stores  and  ammlinition  be- 
longing to  the  said  forts  and  factories  respectively,  and  comprehending  all  the  rents  and  customs  arising 
from  those  settlements,  and  all  the  grants  or  pliirmaunds  by  w liicli  the  same  w'cre  sold  to  them.  This 
transfer  also  included  their  warcliouscs  in  London,  and  their  house  in  Leadcnliall  Street. 

The  English  Company,  on  the  other  hand,  declared  to  the  London  Company  that  the  following  scl- 
tliMTicnts  constituted  their  dead  .stock,  for  which  tlicy  were  to  be  allowed  i7(),000  in  the  united  stock ; 
vis.  the  factories  at  Surat,  iii  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  at  Mausulipatum,  Mudapollam,  on  the  island  of  Borneo, 
and  on  the  island  of  I'ulo  ('oiulore,  with  the  stores  and  ammunition  belonging  to  each,  and  all  of  them;  and 
it  was  in  explanation  mutually  covenanted  that  both  Companies  should  enjoy  the  respective  profits,  unci 
pay  the  respective  charges  of  all  their  settlements,  to  the  date  of  this  deed,  July  22,  1702. 

1703.  The  bullion  exported  from  England  to  the  East  Indies  in  six  years,  from  1698  to  1703,  both 
years  inclusive,  was  in  silver  J^3,171,40,5,  and  in  gold  ori28,229,  total  J.'3,299,()3t;  being  on  an  average 
J^549,939  per  annum.  It  appears,  by  an  account  made  up  by  the  In.spcetor  General  of  the  Customs,  that 
the  East  India  goods  re-exported  from  England  in  the  four  years,  1698  to  170^^,  amounted  to  rif’2,538,934, 
being  on  an  average  .X’.’iOijiS?  per  annum. 