


xl 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Thus  tlio  nation  had  two  East  India  Companies  constituted  upon  parliamentary  authority.  No  sooner 
was  the  new  Company  erected,  than  numerous  and  obvious  difliculties  and  objections  were  started  against 
their  trading  during  tlic  three  years  remaining  to  the  old  Company,  who  were  in  possession  of  the  forts, 
and  of  the  privileges  granted  in  India  l)y  the  Moguls,  &:c.  The  English  Company,  therefore,  in  the  course 
of  a short  period  made  advances  to  the  London  Company  for  a coalition,  or  union  of  stock  and  trade, 
which  were  rejected.  On  the  19th  of  January,  1699-1700,  the  London  Company  obtained  an  Act  of  Par- 
liament, continuing  thein  a corporation.  On  the  8th  of  March  the  King  recommended  an  union  of  the  two 
Companies,  as  it  was  his  opinion  that  it  would  be  most  for  the  interest  of  the  Indian  trade.” 

During  these  unsettled  times  the  Company’s  stock  tluctuatcd  from  300  to  37  per  cent. 

The  wear  of  India  wrought  silks,  stuffs,  and  calicoes  was  become  so  universal  in  England  at  this 
tirne,  and  the  complaints  thereof  so  loud,  that  k was  now  thought  proper  to  remedy  so  great  an  evil. 
The  grievance  was  greatly  heightened  by  the  double  importations  by  two  I'ast  India  Companies,  which 
raised  a great  clamour  in  various  parts  of  the  country.  A statute  was  therefore  passed,  enacting  that 
from  Michaelmas,  1701,  all  wrought  silks,  llengals,  and  stuffs  mixed  with  silk  or  herbn,  of  the  manufacture 
of  Persia,  China,  or  the  East  Indies;  and  also  all  calicoes,  printed,  painted,  dyed,  or  stained  there,  should 
be  locked  up  in  wareliouses  a[)pointed  by  the  Commissioners  of  the  Customs,  till  re-exported ; so  as  none 
of  the  said  goods  should  be  worn  or  used,  in  either  apparel  or  furniture,  in  England,  on  forfeiture  thereof, 
and  also  of  .£’200  penalty  on  the  pc'rson  having,  or  selling  any  of  tliem. 

The  English  Company  established  a factory  at  Jlorneo,  and  a ship  was  dispatched  to  China. 

1700.  In  consequence  of  the  recommendation  ofthe  King  to  form  an  union  of  the  two  Companies, 
a Court  of  proprietors  of  the  London  Company  was  called  on  the  23d  of  December,  1700,  at  which  it  was 
resolved,  “ that  this  Company,  as  ili(»y  have  always  been,  so  are  they  still  ready  to.  embrace  eveiy  oppor- 
tunity by  which  they  may  manifest  their  duty  to  His  IMajesty,  and  zeal  for  the  public  good,  and  that  they 
are  desirous  to  contribute  their  utmost  endeavours  for  the  preservation  of  the  East  India  trade  to  this  king- 
dom, and  are  willing  to  agree  with  the  new  Company  upon  reasonable  terms.” 

The  Court  were  informed,  that  “ His  IVfaJesty  was  glad  to  find  that  the  l^ondon  Company  were  dis- 
posed to  unite  with  tlie  lOnglisb  Company  on  reasonable  terms,  and  that  he  would  willingly  know  from 
themselves  what  those  terms  were.” 