

The  first  auction  in  laiglaiul  was  by  Governor  Yale,  of  Madru.s,  of  the  goods  he  brought  home. 

1704.  The  Council  of  Pulo  Condore  obtained  a grant  of  the  island  from  the  King  of  Cochin-China. 
In  the  following  year,  on  the  2d  of  March,  an  insurrection  took  place  among  the  Malay  soldiers,  who  set 
fire  to  the  Company's  w^arcliouses,  and  massacred  the  (^hief  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  English  on  the 
island.  The  Malays  were  supposed  to  liave  been  instigated  by  the  Cocliin-Cliinese,  that  they  might  get 
possession  of  the  Company’s  treasure,  estimated  at  22, (KK)  tales. 

1707.  By  an  Act,  6 Anne,  chap,  2,  for  bettor  securing  the  duty  on  East  India  goods,  the  security 
thereafter  to  be  given,  pursuant  to  the  Act  of  the  9th  of  King  William,  that  the  East  India  Company 
should  cause  all  the  inerchandi.se  in  any  ship  from  India  to  he  brought  to  some  port  in  England,  without 
previously  breaking  bulk,  was  directed  to  be  after  the  rate  of  .^2, 500  for  every  100  tons  of  each  ship  sent 
to  the  ladies  (necessary  provisions,  stores,  and  merchandise,  for  the  people  and  garrison  of  St.  Helena,  for 
their  own  proper  consumption,  only  excepted);  and  except  also  where  the  breaking  of  bulk,  or  landing  of 
goods  should  hap|)en  by  the  danger  of  the  seas,  enemies,  restraint  of  Princes,  &c.  under  penalty  of  forfeit* 
ing  such  goods  or  their  value,  &c. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xliii 

Tlio  English  srttlement  at  Ilanjar  Massin  was  suddenly  attacked  by  the  natives  on  the  37lh  of 
Juno,  1707;  and  tliougli  they  were  at  first  beaten  olF,  the  lo.ss  of  the  English  in  killed  «ns  so  great,  that 
it  was  with  diliiculty  the  survreors  escaj>ed  on  board  the  sinps.  The  loss  of  tieasiire  belonging  to  the 
Company  on  shore  was  estimated  at  .5(),()<K)  dollars.  The  natives  were  supposed  to  have  been  instigated  to 
this  measure  by  the  (Jhinese,  who  were  jealous  of  their  interference  in  trade. 

not).  The  Earl  of  Godolphin  having  been  constituted  arbiter  of  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the 
two  Companies,  and  empowered  to  examine  and  ascertain  the  reciprocal  credits  and  debts  of  each,  mmle 
his  award,  the  substance  of  which  is  as  follows: 

That  all  debts  or  iiiouey  due  to  the  Old  or  London  C\)mpany,  in  India,  China,  rcisia.  Si.  Helena, 
&c.;  and  also  all  debts  due  to  the  3‘higlisli  (’oinpany  in  India,  China,  &c.  and  the  separati'  goods,  wares, 
and  merchandise  ol  both  Companies  laden  on  ships  in  India,  and  which  might  not  an’i\(‘  in  the  Ui>cr 
lhanies  before  the  1st  of  September,  1708,  should  become  the  stock  or  property  of  the  United  Company 

ihat  the  London  Company  should  transfer  to  the  Queen,  by  indenture  under  their  common  ^eal,  all 
their  foreign  debts,  or  debts  due  to  them  in  India  before  the  Hist  of  October,  1708,  To  the  intent  ihut 
the  Queen  might  regrant  the  same,  within  ten  days  alter  that  date,  to  the  United  C ompany.  Tliat  after 
such  regrant  or  transfer  by  (he  Queen,  the  United  Company  should  be  liable  to  jiay  the  separate  debts 
both  of  the  London  and  Knglish  Companies  in  India.  That  tlit‘  estate  and  elfeets  of  the  London  ('om- 
pany would  not  be  sidfieient  to  pay  their  foreign  debts,  or  debts  in  India,  to  whieli  debts  the  United 
Company  would  b(‘come  liulde  from  the  date  of  this  award;  and  therefore  tlicieed  that  the  London 
Company  should  pay  to  the  United  Cuinpany  the  sum  of  Is.  lid. 