

That  the  estate  and  effects  of  the  Lnglish  (-ompany  in  India  would  exeeeil  their  separate  debts,  and 
therefore  decreed  that  the  United  (’ompany  should  pay  I’bO, ()():>  Is.  2d.  to  the  Diiceturs  of  the  Knglish 
Company,  for  the  use  of  their  respective  iu(‘ml)ers. 

That  the  London  Company  were  indebted  to  a large  amount  in  Ihigland,  and  tluM  efore  empowered 
them  to  call  on  their  proprietors  to  raise  T20(),0(M),  in  two  instalnu  iits,  before  the  Isi  of  I'ebriiary,  171)1), 
and  such  further  sum  betore  the  1st  of  INIureli,  1701),  as  uould  be  suHicient  to  dear  olf  all  their  home 
ilebts;  and  then,  taking  into  view  the  sum  which  had  l)een  luhaueed  hy  the  London  (’ompany  at  the 
union,  to  equalize  the  stock  of  the  two  Comjmnics  (or  what  was  termed  the  70  [n'r  e(>nl.  additional  stock), 
decided,  that  when  the  London  Company  should  have  raised  the  lirst  Cl 00,000,  the  UiiitiTl  Company 
should  repay  to  them  one-third  of  the  said  money,  or  additional  stock,  advanced  by  them  at  the  union, 
for  carrying  on  the  united  trade;  and  when  they  should  have  raised  the  second  id00,0t)(),  another  third 
part  of  the  said  additional  stock  should  in  like  manner  he  repaid;  and  uhtm  the\  should  have  raised  a sum 
sufficient  to  defray  all  their  debts  in  Great  Britain,  the  remainder  of  the  said  additional  stock  should  bo 
repaid,  with  the  exception  of  1^70, 000,  wliich  was  to  be  reserved  as  a secuiity  tu*  juaiHlty,  that  the 
London  Company  should  surrender  all  their  charters  to  the  Queen  on  or  before  the  2oth  of  March,  170!), 
which  sum,  on  their  failing  to  make  such  surrender,  was  to  be  forfeited  to  tin*  United  C’ompany;  but  in 
the  event  of  such  surrender  being  made,  the  said  sum  of  .X^70,0()0  Avas  to  be  vested  iu  trustees,  to  pay 
any  remaining  debts  of  the  London  Company;  and  should  any  surplus  remain,  to  lx*  distributed  anioii'; 
the  members  of  the  London  Company. 

And,  lastly,  it  was  decided,  that  the  Ixuidoii  Company  should  transfer,  before  the  l!)tli  of  Maidi, 
1700,  to  their  respective  members  all  such  stock,  in  the  pro|)ortion  of  their  respective  shares,  as  the  said 
London  Company  might  have  in  the  stock  of  the  United  Company;  and  that  the  members  liaving  light 
to  it,  should  be  adinitled  to  all  the  privilcge.s  of  members  of  the  United  CVnn|Kiny. 

This  award,  proceeding  on  the  authority  of  the  Act  of  rurliumeiit,  avus  to  be  confirmed  in  all  its 
parts  by  a decree  of  the  High  ('ourt  of  Chancery. 

♦ V 2 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


i:li¥ 


By  an  account  subjoined  to  the  award,  it  appears  that  the  debts  of  the  London  Company  amounted  to 
i^l,249,807  7s.  6d.  and  their  assets  to  only  «f’850,011  18s.  5d.  being  a deficiency  of  1*399,795  9.s,  Id. 