

A General  Court  was  accordingly  summoned,  at  which  it  was  resolved,  ‘‘  that  what  terms  may  be 
judged  reasonable,  they  do  humbly  conceive  must  arise  from  a treaty,  and  that  tliey  have  appointed  seven 
persons  of  this  Company  to  treat  with  the  like  number  of  the  English  Company,  in  order  to  an  union.” 
Various  conferences  were  held  with  the  Governor  and  Committee  of  the  English  Company;  and  in  January, 
1702,  the  general  terms  of  union  were  agreed  on  by  both  Companies,  and  approved  by  their  respective 
General  Courts  on  the  27tb  of  April,  1702. 

1702.  An  indenture,  tripartite  between  the  Queen  and  the  two  East  India  Companies,  dated  the 
^2d  of  July,  1702,  })asscd  under  the  great  seal  of  England,  which  is  described  as  the  “ Charter  of  Union.” 
jly  this  deed  it  was  settled  that  tlie  London  Company  should  purchase  as  much  of  the  stock  of  the  English 
Company,  at  par,  as  would  vest  in  each  an  equal  proportion  of  tlie  £^2,000,000,  for  the  advance  of  which 
to  Government  the  charter  had  been  originally  granted  to  the  Englisli  Company.  The  interests  of  the 
London  and  English  Companies  and  private  tradi^rs  were  as  follow: 

The  I.ondon  Company’s  subscription  1^315,000 

The  English  Company':)  subscription  663,000 

Separate  traders'  subscription  23,000 

.. — ^-^<^300,000 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  nil 


IBy  this  agreement  the  interests  of  the  two  Companies  were  fixed,  as  foUnw: 


Purchase  of  stock  by  ihc  London  Company,  .C<i73,(K)0,  in  addition  to  their 

former  stock,  making  their  share  together  i?9R8,.500' 

Englisli  C'ompony’s  988, 500 

Separate  traders’  proportion  2J,(.)0() 

1%000,000 


It  was  decided  that  in  future  the  trade  to  Imlla  should  he  curried  on  for  seven  years  liy  the  chailer  of 
the  English  Company.  Estimatt's  were  made  of  the  dead  stock  of  both  Coinj)anics,  that  is,  forts,  facto- 
ries, buildings,  &c.  as  distinguished  from  money,  ships,  or  merchandise.  'I'lu*  dt  ail  itoek  of  the  London 
Company  was  valued  at  P^k30,000,  and  that  of  the  English  Company  at  the  hhiglish  Companv, 

therefore,  were  to  pay  XM30,0()()  to  the  London  Company,  so  as  to  make  up  their  moiety  of  the  whol<^ 
dead  stock,  estimated  at  ClOOjOOO,  ami  intended  to  liecome  an  additional  stoek  on  lh(‘  joint  account. 

The  London  Company  W’ere  to  fetain  the  use  of  their  dead  stock  at  home,  that  is,  tluir  ofiees  and 
Warehouses,  during  seven  years,  and  after  lliat  period  they  were  to  go  to  the  Uiillul  CV)ju|)any.  During 
this  period,  also,  each  Company  were  to  hold  their  distinct  ('ouits,  and  miglit  r.uM*  innney,  either  for  their 
respective  shares  of  the  united  trade,  for  th(‘ir  separate  afliiirs,  or  for  paying  their  ^(‘para!(  de  bts,  hut  all 
debts  contracted  for  the  joint  trade,  wore  to  be  jiaid  out  of  the  Ignited  Company's  •‘lock.  Eacli  (/ompany 
were  fortliwitli  to  iiring  home  their  s(‘parate  estates,  and  make  dividends  to  their  re>p(‘etlvc  propi  ietor.s, 
aller  which,  neither  Company  were  to  send  out  ships,  bullion,  or  goods  on  tlieir  se  p irate  accfiunt. 