

II.  a(?'rk4,(H)()  sliull  be  added  to  the  present  ca[)itul  stock  of  tlie  Company  by  a fresh  subscription. 

HI,  None  shall  subscribe  above  -X^10,0(X). 

IV.  In  general  ('ourts  .£^1,0()0  stock  to  give  one  vote,  and  none  to  have  above  ten  votes. 

V.  Such  as  shall  become  proprietors  liy  purchase,  shall  pay  £5  for  their  freedom;  who  (as  also  the 
new  subscribers)  shall  take  the  oaths  appointed  by  law,  ami  also  tlie  freeman's  oath. 

VI.  The  Governor,  or  in  his  absence,  the  Deputy  (Governor,  to  Iiav^  a casting  vote  in  all  Courts;  each 
of  them  to  liave  iPkjOOO  stock  in  tlieir  own  right;  and  each  Director  and  Committee-man  to  have  i?1000. 

VII.  No  permission  shall  be  granted  for  ships  to  India  on  a private  account,  under  the  penalty  of 
forfeiting  the  charters. 

VIII.  No  pri\  ate  contract  .shall  be  made  for  the  sale  of  goods,  saltpetre  for  thp  King's  use  onlyexcepted ; 
hut  all  to  be  openly  and  publicly  sold ; and  no  one  lot  ( jewels  excepted)  to  exceed  £500  value. 

IX.  The  Company  shall  aimiially  export  goods  to  India,  of  the  growth  and  product  of  England,  to 
the  value  of  at  lea.st  -t*  100,000. 

X.  Company  shall  annually  supply  the  Crown  with  500  tons  of  saltpetre,  at  £38  10s.  per  Ion 
in  time  of  peace,  and  £<^5  in  time  of  war. 

XI.  All  dividends  of  the  Company’s  profits  shall  for  the  future  be  made  in  money  only. 

XII.  A book  shall  be  kept  by  the  Company,  wherein  the  value  of  their  stock  simll  be  entered,  and 
utt(\sted  upon  oath,  and  lay  open  to  the  view  of  all  persons  concerned;  and  the  like  as  to  mortgages,  alien- 
ations, transfers,  and  assignments. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


ixxix 


XIIL  The  joint  stock  of  the  Company  shall  continue  for  a term  of  twenty-one  years;  and  for  thr 

•pace  of  one  year  before  its  expiration,  books  shalHie  open  for  new  subscriptions  to  a new  joint  stock. 

And  by  the  second  instrument  of  regulations,  the  following  alterations  were  made  : 

I.  The  Company  may  liccMise  their  own  commanders  and  mariners  (hut  none  other)  to  trade  on 
their  own  private  account,  In  such  commodities  and  to  such  value  as  a Gimeral  Court  shall  diicct. 

II.  'J\)  the  intent  that  tlie  (\)mpany\s  annual  exports  of  English  goods  to  India,  to  the  value  of 
100,000,  may  he  proved,  a true  account  tliereof  in  writing,  signed  hy  the  Governor  or  Deputy,  shall  he 

annually  laid  before  the  King  and  Council,  attested  on  the  oaths  of  the  proper  oliicers;  and  no  part  of 
such  goods  shall  be  relandcd,  or  carried  any  where  out  of  the  Company's  limits. 

III.  Neither  the  Governor,  Deputy,  nor  Committee  sliall  lend  out  the  Company's  money  without 
the  authority  of  a General  Court. 