

IV.  If  this  and  the  two  last  charters  sliall  not  a[ipear  to  he  j)rofit:il)h’  to  the  Crown  and  realm,  then, 
after  tliree  years'  warning,  all  tlie  said  three  charters  shall  be  d(*terminc(l  and  void,  and  the  said  (ioNcriiors 
and  Company  shall  no  longer  continue  a corporation. 

V.  Lastly,  the  Company  shall,  by  a writing  under  their  common  seal,  de  clare  their  acceptance  of, 
and  submission  to,  the  said  two  charteis;  or,  in  tlicir  delUnlt,  no  longj  i*  act  as  a corpuiation. 

1G95.  The  Parliaincnt  of  Scotland,  on  the  2(itli  of  June,  WOj,  pas.scil  an  Act,  enaliling  the  King  (us 
King  of  Scotland)  to  constitute  a Scottish  Company,  with  powers  to  trade*  to  Africa  and  the  East  Indies, 
and  authorized  it  besides,  not  only  to  trade  to  the  countiies  within  the  East  India  (’ompany's  limits, 
but  extended  its  range  to  America  and  the  West  Indies.  It  was,  however,  in  the  course  ol*  a few  years 
repealed,  in  consequence  of  the  rejirescntations  and  remonstrances  from  the  East  India  Company,  and  the 
other  European  nations  interested  in  that  commerce. 

The  Company’s  settlements  and  trade  having  been  exjmsed  to  great  dangers  by  the  continual  depreda- 
tions of  the  English  pirates  in  the  Indian  seas,  a reward  of  -L\50()  was  offered  by  the  King,  and  u like  sum  liy 
the  Company,  for  the  apprehension  of  Captain  Avery,  the  princijial  of  tliern,  who,  after  enriching  himself  by 
plunder,  had  gone  to  the  Bahamas,  wlicre  his  ship  was  sold,  and  the  crew  dispersed;  several  of  them  were, 
however,  seized  and  executed. 

1697.  This  year  the  silk-weavers  of  London  were  extremely  outrageous  and  tumultuous,  on  pretence 
of  the  great  quantities  of  silks,  calicoes,  and  other  Indian  manufactures  imported  hy  the  East  India 
Company,  and  worn  by  all  sorts  of  persons.  They  even  carried  their  violence  so  far,  as  to  attempt  seizing 
the  treasure  at  the  East  India  House,  and  had  almost  succeeded  in  it;  hut  were  in  the  end  reduced  to  ord(*r. 

During  the  war  with  France,  which  was  brought  to  a close  by  the  treaty  of  Kyswdck,  the  Company 
lost  several  valuable  ships  taken  by  the  privateers  of  that  nation. 

1698.  From  the  encouragement  given  to  private  traders  by  licences  to  trade  with  India,  an  opinion 
began  to  prevail  that  a second  East  India  Company  might  be  formed.  The  private  merchants  tlierefore 
made  application  to  obtain  from  Parliament  an  Act  for  creating  another  Company,  whereupon  tin*  Court 
of  Directors  made  an  offer  to  advance  i7(}0,000  at  4 per  cent,  interest,  for  the  public  service,  provided 
their  charter  should  be  confirmed  by  Act  of  Parliament.  The  private  merchants  offered  lo  raise  .£%()( H),()<H) 
at  8 per  cent,  interest,  provided  they  might  liave  the  exclusive  tr&de  to  India  vested  in  them.  J'his  Inst 
offer  was  considered  the  most  advantageous  to  the  public,  and  a bill  was  intiodiiced  into  the  House  of 
Commons  for  accepting  the  offer;  and  they  were  incorporated  by  the  name  of  the  English  Company  tru  Mng 
to  the  East  Indies,  the  old,  or  London  Company  to  be  permitted  to  ti  ade  till  the  S^9th  of  September,  1701. 