


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


III  the  meantime  he  referred  it  to  a Committee  of  the  Privy  Council,  and  the  Company  consented 
to  abide  by  such  regulations  as  the  Council  sliould  prescribe.  The  Council  resolved  that  their  capital 
stock  should  be  made  up  .£^1,500,000  at  least,  and  not  to  exceed  two  millions,  of  which  the  present  Com- 
pany's stock  of  .£?74*0,000  was  to  constitute  a |)art,  and  that  they  and  the  new  subscribers  should  be  incor- 
porated for  twenty-one  years.  To  this  the  Company  olijected,  on  the  ground  that  their  quick  stock  and 
revenue  were  really  worth  more  than  1,500,000,  and  that  the  current  price  of  their  stock  at  market  was 
150  per  cent. ; that  all  their  forts,  towns,  and  territories  were  their  own  for  ever  by  their  charters,  and  had 
cost  them,  first  and  last,  upwards  of  «i?l,(XK),000.  The  King  thereupon  informed  tlie  Commons  that,  upon 
consultation,  lie  found  he  could  not  dissolve  the  Company  without  giving  them  three  years'  notice,  during 
which  time  they  could  not  be  hindered  from  trading,  nor  could  a new  Company  trade  till  the  three  years 
were  expired:  he  tlierefore  recommended  to  them  to  prepare  a bill  for  settling  the  business.  The  House 
accordingly  took  the  subject  under  consideration;  hut  owing  to  a diversity  of  opinion,  nothing  was 
determined  upon,  except  an  address  to  the  King,  to  dissolve  the  Company  at  the  end  of  three  years. 

1G91*.  The  Company,  having  made  default  in  the  payment  of  a duty  of  5 per  cent,  imposed  on  their 
capital  stock,  by  an  Act  of  the  4tli  and  5tli  of  William  and  Mary,  chap.  15,  a doubt  arose  whether,  in 
strictness  of  law,  their  charters  were  not  become  void,  under  a proviso  contained  in  the  Act  To  prevent 
the  disorders  and  inconveniences  which  would  have  befallen  the  Company,  and  other  persons  concerned 
and  employed  in  their  coininerce,  as  well  at  home  as  abroad,  if  the  Crown  were  to  have  taken  advantage 
of  the  forfeiture,  the  King  granted  to  the  Company  a new  charter  of  this  date,  for  restoring  them  to  their 
former  cajiacities  and  privileges;  subject  to  a special  proviso,  that  if  they  should  not  accept  of,  and  in  all 
things  conform  to,  such  orders  and  constitutions  as  the  King,  with  the  advice  of  his  Privy  Council,  sliould 
express  and  direct  by  any  instrument  under  the  great  seal,  the  King  should  be  at  liberty  to  resume  the 
charter.  And  by  two  separate  Instruments  under  the  great  seal,  dated  November  II,  1693,  and  28th  of 
September,  1691,  the  King  prescribed  various  rules  and  orders  fur  the  Company's  observance,  viz. 

By  the  instrument  of  1693,  it  is  ordered  that, 

I.  All  subscribers  shall  bo  members  of  tlie  Company. 