

173G.  About  this  period  Thomas  Kouli  Khan,  the  Persian  usurper,  who  had  assumed  the  title  of 
Nadir  Shah,  ravaged  the  empire  of  Hindostan.  Maliomed  Shall,  tlic  Mogul,  accommodated  matters  by 
ceding  to  him  all  the  provinces  to  the  westward  of  the  Indus,  On  his  return  to  Persia  in  173!),  he  is  said 
to  have  carried  off,  in  treasure  and  effects,  nCl25,()00,()()0  sterling.  During  these  troubles  the  Nizam  ul 
Mulck  established  himself  in  the  Souhahship  of  the  Decan.  Bengal  also  became  indi^peiuh'iit  under  Ana- 
verdy  Cawn  in  1738,  and  about  the  same  time  the  llohillas  formed  themselves  into  a state  on  the  east  side 
of  the  Ganges.  The  Mogul  empire,  thus  weakened,  was  soon  ullcr  entirely  suhveitcd. 

1740.  About  this  period  an  attempt  was  made  to  rc\ive  the  trade  with  Persia  by  the  way  of  llnssia; 
and  it  being  doubted  whether  the  Act  of  Navigation  permitted  the  importation  of  silk  from  Persia  through 
liussia,  a new  Act  was  ohl Mined,  by  which  the  merchants  were  enabled  to  carry  on  this  trade  as  they  had 
done  before  the  Act  of  Navigation.  In  consequence  of  which,  considerable  quantities  of  woollen  goods 
Were  exported  to  Persia,  by  the  way  of  Russia,  in  return  for  Persian  raw  silk.  This  continued  till  1717, 
when  the  carrying  of  good.s  through  Russia  to  Persia  was  prohibited  by  a decree  of  tlie  Russian  Legislature. 
The  navigation  of  the  Caspian  Sea  wms  also  refused  to  the  British  flag;  and  the  ships  wliich  Iiad  been  built 
by  the  Russian  Company  for  this  service,  were  sold  at  a great  loss;  and  dining  tb(‘  eh  il  wars  in  Persia,  the 
effects  of  the  British  merchants  were  plundered,  to  the  amount  of  above  XU00,O0O. 

1744.  The  East  India  Company,  in  consideration  of  an  enlargement  for  fourteen  years  longer  of 
their  present  exclusive  trade  and  privileges,  agreed  to  advance  X' 1,000,000  for  the  public  service  of  1741, 
at  3 per  cent,  interest,  which  W'as  accordingly  confirmed  by  an  Act  of  Parliament;  the  Company  being 
for  this  end  enabled  to  borrow  money  on  their  common  seal,  by  creating  a inilllon  of  new  bonds  at  three 
per  cent,  interest;  so  that  the  debt  due  by  the  public  to  the  Company  was  X' I ,‘200,000,  viz. 

Lent  in  1G98,  in  consideration  of  the  charter  of  incorporation  000,000 

III  1707  there  w'as  advanced  on  an  interest  of  5 per  1,^00,000 

In  1744,  in  consideration  of  an  extension  of  cxcludvc  privileges  «%'«  1 , 000,000 

This  debt  was  declared  to  be  redeemable  upon  one  year’s  notice,  nl’trr  T.ady-day,  171.7,  by  payment* 
of  not  less  than  i?500,000  at  any  one  time;  but,  notwithstanding  such  re«lcmptlon,  the  Company  w'as  to 
continue  to  enjoy  its  exclusive  commerce  for  the  term  granted  by  former  law  s;  and  in  conshleration  of  tin* 
loan  to  the  public,  it  was  to  have  an  addition  of  fourteen  years  to  its  present  exclusive  term,  which  would 
therefore  extend  to  1780,  three  years’  notice  to  be  given  by  Parliament  after  Lady-day,  17S0;  and  at  the 
expiration  of  the  said  three  years,  and  repayment  of  the  above  i?!, "200, 000,  and  all  arrears  of  interest, 
then  its  title  to  an  exclusive  trade  should  cease  and  determine:  yet,  alter  tlie  said  determination,  the 
Company  should  continue  to  have  a common  right  wdth  other  subjects  in  and  to  the  trade  to  fndia. 