


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


x\\\[ 

1719.  The  Company’s  servants,  h iving  ;ihaiulone<l  York  Fort,  on  lla*  West  (^)a^l  Sumatra,  liegaii 
erceting  Fort  Martborougli,  two  or  three  miles  distance;  but  wen*  prevented  proceeding  bv  the  native^, 
n' ho  drove  them  out.  In  the  ensuing  year  they  returned,  and  without  opp«)siiion  eompleted  the  foit. 

1721.  The  use  of  printed  Indian  calicoes,  both  in  apparel  and  household  furniture,  was  at  this  time 

become  so  universal,  as  to  be  a great  detriment  and  obstruclion  to  the  woollen  and  silk  manuraelures  of  the 
kingdom.  This  had  occasioned  several  riots  and  tumults  <»f  the  weavers  iu  London,  It  was  theuforo 

found  necessary  to  redress  the  grievance, wherein  so  many  were  inferc'^ted.  An  Act  of  I’arliament  was  in  eon- 
sequence  passed,  to  preserve  and  encourage  the  woollen  aiiil  silk  luamifaetures,  See.  which  ahsolutely  prohi- 
bited the  ww.‘ar  thereof,  under  the  penally  of  F,j  for  each  cdVcucc  on  l!ie  w'eaier,  and  of  on  the  sellei. 

The  Ostenders  still  persisting  in  trading  to  the  Ea'^l  Indies,  Fin  llanient  passed  an  Act  lor  fuillier  pre- 
venting Ilis  Majesty’s  subjects  from  trading  under  forc'igii  4*ommissions,  and  prohihiling  the  imp«)itation  of 
tea  from  any  part  of  Europe,  ovct  and  above  all  toimer  rc'^lraints  laid  on  Ibltish  suhjeets  I'lom  reMuling 
or  trading  to  the  East  Indies  under  foreign  commissions;  with  smulry  other  new  adililional  restraints 
and  penalties.  (7  (ieo.  I.  chap.  20.)  And  by  the  Dute!»  placaids  it  was  lu.ule  death  lor  any  of  tlieir 
subjects  to  be  copeerned  lh(*reiii. 

1722.  The  interference  of  the  Oslcnd  Coinpanv,  and  various  otlu  r iliilit  ultles,  nt  ihks  time  obliged 
the  Company  to  reduce  their  half  yearly  dividend  fiom  5 to  t per  cent. 

1726.  King  George  1.  granted  the  Company  a luwv  charter  of  confirmation,  witli  ample  powers  to 
erect  corporations  at  Bengal,  Madras,  and  Bombay,  and  to  establish  Courts  of  Judicature  there.  The 
powers  conferred  hy  this  charter  were  enlarged  aiul  more  accurately  defined  hy  suhsei|uent  iharters. 

In  this  year  the  East  India  House  in  Leadenhull  Street  was  built. 

1727.  By  an  Act  of  the  IJth  of  (ieorgo  1.  chap.  H,  the  South  Sea  Company,  vvith  the  licence  ami 
consent  of  the  East  India  Company,  w'ere  allowed  to  take  in  negro(*s  at  Mailaga**rar,  giving  sec  nrily  not 
to  break  bulk,  or  to  proceed  to  any  other  places  within  the  Company’s  limits,  under  hu h ilnre  4)f  Ihcii 
ships  and  cargoes,  and  of  double  the  value.  This  Act  w'as  to  eoutiiuu*  tor  six  ycai’>i  only;  and  the  South  Sim 
Company  were  thereby  limitc’d  to  four  ships  anmially^,  and  to  carry  to  Aladagascar  n<»1hing  hut  llu' 
necessary  provisions,  ixc.  solely  for  the  purchase  of  negroes. 