

1760.  A fleet  of  seventeen  East  Indiamen  arrived  under  the  protection  of  Admii  al  Pocockc  on  the 
20th  of  September.  This  was  the  richest  convoy  that  ever  arrived  together  from  Indi.i. 

Karical  was  taken  from  the  French  by  Major  Monsoii  on  the  5th  of  A pi  11. 

Count  D’Estaing  attacked  and  captured  the  British  .settlements  of  Natal,  'rapjianooly,  and  Bencoolen, 
on  the  West  Coast  of  Sumatra,  committing  all  the  ravages  in  his  pow  er.  The  English,  however,  restored 
them  in  the  following  year  to  their  former  state. 

1761.  Pondicherry,  the  capital  of  the  French  possessions  in  India,  was  taken  by  the  English  under 
Colonel  Coote,  on  the  16th  of  January,  after  a tedious  siege  of  eight  months.  Malic,  wdth  its  subor- 
dinates, surrendered  to  the  British  troops  under  Major  Hector  Munro,  on  the  10th  of  February,  1761. 

Jafficr  Ally  Cawn,  who  had  been  placed  on  tlie  throne  of  Bengal  in  17.57,  was  deposed,  and  his  son- 
in-law,  Cossim  Ally  Cawn,  promoted  to  that  dignity,  who  granted  the  English  a considerable  extent  of 
country,  and  confirmed  all  the  privileges  given  by  his  predecessors. 

1762.  Government  granted  the  East  India  Company  i?20,000,  in  lieu  of  affording  them  a regiment 
for  the  protection  of  their  settlements  in  India. 

War  having  been  declared  against  Spain,  an  expedition  was  fitted  out  from  India  against  Manilla, 
the  principal  settlement  belonging  to  the  Spaniards  in  the  Philippine  Islands.  The  fleet  sailed  from 
Madras  on  the  1st  of  August,  and  arrived  in  Manilla  Bay  on  the  23d  of  September.  The  place  was  taken 
by  storm  on  the  6th  of  October,  and  a capitulation  agreed  upon,  by  whieli  the  tow  n and  port  of  Cavite, 
with  the  islands  and  forts  dependent  on  Manilla,  were  to  be  given  up  to  his  Britannic  Majesty,  and  they 
were  to  pay  4,000,000  dolloi's  for  the  preservation  of  the  town  and  their  effects,  for  whit:h  tdlU  were  aftei- 

♦G2 


lii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


wards  given.  The  Spaniards,  however,  evaded  the  ransom,  and  acted  on  the  most  dishonourable  terms, 
and  to  this  period  the  ransom  has  never  been  paid. 

1763.  The  conduct  of  Cossim  Ally  Cawn,  tlic  new  Soubah,  Iiaving  been  ungrateful  to  the  English, 
a war  took  place  between  them,  which  was  carried  on  with  uninterrupted  success  on  the  part  of  the  latter, 
who  defeated  the  Nabob  in  several  actions,  and  became  entirely  masters  of  the  province  of  Bengal. 

A treaty  of  peace  was  concluded  between  England  and  France.  Tliis  treaty  put  a conclusion  to  the 
war  carriecl  on  by  the  two  powers  in  the  East  Indies,  first  as  auxiliaries  to  the  native  Pnnees,  and 
afterwards  as  declared  enemies,  for  the  space  of  eight  years,  during  which  period  the  British  troops 
acquired  immortal  honour,  and  great  advantages  for  the  East  India  Company. 