

1746.  The  English  having  refused  the  neutrality  offered  by  the  French,  the  latter  came  to  the  reso- 
lution of  giving  a vigorous  exertion  to  tlieir  force  In  India;  and  to  distress  the  English  as  much  as  possible, 
they  besieged  Madras,  the  principal  settlement  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  which  surrendered  to  them  on 
the  10th  of  September,  1746;  from  which  period  the  Government  was  transferred  to  Fort  St.  David,  and 
continued  there  till  Madras  was  restored. 


•G 


1 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


1718.  The  English  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  upon  the  French  settlement  of  Pondicherry. 

A general  peace  was  concluded  in  Europe,  and  definitively  signed  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  on  the  7th  of 
October,  whereby  it  was  agreed  that  all  the  conquests  that  had  been  made  since  the  commencement  of  the 
war  in  the  East  Indies,  should  be  restored.  Madras  was  in  consequence  delivered  up  by  the  French. 

1750.  The  interest  on  the  debt  of  .P4, 200,000  due  from  Government,  was  reduced  to  3 per  cent,  and 
the  Company  were  empowered  to  grant  annuities  towards  the  discharge  of  their  bond  debt,  for  which  the 
funds  appointed  for  the  payment  of  the  interest  to  the  Company,  were  made  a collateral  security. 

The  late  war  in  India  brought  together  a greater  number  of  troops  than  either  the  English  or  French 
had  assembled  before;  and  the  two  powers,  when  no  longer  authorized  to  fight  against  each  other,  took 
the  resolution  of  employing  their  arms  in  the  contests  bctw'een  the  native  Princes.  From  1749  to  1754 
they  opposed  each  other  only  as  auxiliaries.  A truce  was  then  agreed  upon  between  both  nations;  after 
which  they  recommenced  hostilities,  when  war  w'as  declared  between  Great  Britain  and  France  in  1756, 
and  continued  till  the  general  peace  was  concluded  in  1763.  I'liis  w.ir  was  gloriously  conducted  by  the 
English  forces  in  India.  The  particulars  are  detailed  under  the  head  of  the  French  East  India  Company. 

17.55,  The  C-ompany,  In  consequence  of  the  expenrps  Incurred  in  Indin  on  account  of  the  war,  wxre 
under  the  necessity  of  reducing  their  dividends  from  8 to  6 per  cenfc 

The  Doddington  outward-bound  Ea^^t  Indiaiiian  was  lost  on  the  17th  of  July,  1755,  off  the  East  Coast 
of  Africa,  and  the  greater  part  of  her  crew  and  passengers  perished. 

1756.  An  expedition  was  fitted  out  from  Bombay,  under  Commodore  James,  against  the  pirate 
Angria\s  possessions  on  the  Malabar  Coast.  He  sailed  from  Bombay  on  the  22d  of  March,  17.55,  cap- 
tured Severndroog  on  the  2d  of  April,  Bancoote  on  the  8th,  and  after  reconnoitring  Gheriah,  Angria\s 
capital,  returned  to  Bombay  the  31st  of  December.  They  agaiti  sailed  on  the  27th  of  January,  1756,  and 
on  the  J3th  of  Feluuary  Gheriah  surrendered  to  the  English  and  l^lahratta  forces,  and  was  delivered 
up  to  the  hitter.  Angria's  fleet  ivus  destroyed,  and  considerable  booty  was  found  in  the  place. 