

'I’lio  English  and  Dutch  at  length  succeeded  in  convincing  the  Emperor  of  the  injustice  ol  saniti»)i!ing 
the  Ostend  East  India  traders;  whereupon  he  suspended  their  chaiter. 

1730.  The  Company’s  term  for  the  redemption  of  their  tapital,  ami  of  tlu‘ir  exclusive  trade,  luing 
near  its  expiration,  that  is,  on  three  years’ notice  from  Lady  Day,  1733,  a powerful  and  strenuous  oppo- 
sition to  its  renewal  was  now  raised  by  certain  merchants  and  gentlemen,  wlu),  fbresc'eing  that  the  (’oin- 
pany  would  apply  to  the  legislature  for  a prolongation  of  tlieir  exclusive  pi ivih  ges,  dtleimimd  to  he 
beforehand  with  them;  and,  therefore,  in  I’ehniary,  1731),  they  |aeM*nled  to  the  House  of  Commons 
their  petition  and  proposals,  wherein  they  offered  to  advance  .X*3,2()(),()00,  to  redeem  the  fund  ot  the 
Company,  by  five  several  payments,  the  last  to  be  at  I.ady  Day,  1733,  to  be  allowed  mi  inten  t of 
4 per  cent,  till  that  term,  and  only  2 per  cent,  after  it;  provided, 

I.  That  they  might  be  incorporated,  and  in  all  respects  vested  with  all  the  exclusive  privileges  ami 
trade  of  that  Company;  yet  so  as  not  to  trade  in  one  joint  stock,  or  in  their  eorjiorate  capacity,  hut  fl.  it 
the  trade  should  be  free  and  open  to  all  His  Majesty’s  subjects,  who  should  jiay  oiu*  per  cent,  of  tae 
value  of  their  exports  to  India,  in  consideration  of  their  taking  out  a licence  trom  the  p^()po^clI  corporatisn. 

II.  That  this  trade  be  sohdy  carried  on  from  the  Fort  of  London. 

III.  That  the  proposed  (’ompany’s  term  be  31  ye.ars,  and  be  redeemed  on  tliree  years  notice. 

IV.  That,  moreover,  for  enabling  the  proposed  corporation  to  defray  tlie  cxpciiccs  ot  forts  and 


xlvill 


RISE  AND  PnOGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


icttlements  in  India,  as  well  as  the  preservation  and  enlargement  of  the  trade,  they  were  to  be  empowered 
lo  levy  a duty  of  5 per  eeiit.  on  the  gross  value  of  all  the  merehandise  which  should  be  imported  from  India. 

The  House  of  Commons  rejected  the  pe  tition,  and  passed  a l)ill,  entitled  An  Act  for  reducing  the 
Annuity  or  fund  of  the  United  J'lust  India  ('oinpuny,  and  for  ascertaining  their  right  of  trade  to  the  East 
Indies,  and  the  continuance  of  tlieir  corporation  for  that  purjmse,’’  upon  the  terms  therein  mentioned; 
whereby,  after  a full  recital  of  former  statutes  and  charters,  the  Company  agreed,  and  it  was  enacted,  tliat 
their  yearly  fiiiul  should  be  reduced  from  Ij  to  4 per  cent,  from  IMichaelmas,  1730;  in  consideration 
whereof,  and  of  riC^2(K),0(K)  to  be  paid  by  them  for  the  public  service  of  the  year  1730,  all  their  exclusive 
privileges  of  trade  to  the  East  Indies  wti’c  continued  and  prolonged  from  Lady  Day,  1736,  to  Lady  Day, 
176(),  .an<l  three  years'  notice  then  lo  be  given,  being  in  all,  including  the  said  three  years’  notice  to  Lady 
Day,  1769,  ,3.3  years;  wdion,  on  payment  of  their  entire  capital  of  ^^3,200,000,  their  exclusive  privileges 
of  trade  w ere  to  cease  .and  determine.  Yet,  nevertheless,  the  Company  w ere  to  continue  as  a corjMn  ation  for 
ever,  to  enjoy  the  East  India  trade  in  common  with  all  other  subjects.  The  Company,  Jiioreovei  , at  any 
time,  on  one  year's  notice  after  Lady  Day,  17,36,  might  be  paid  off  their  whole  caj)ital  by  any  payments, 
not  less  than  L^5()0,000  at  a time,  ami  so  on  from  time  to  time,  on  such  yearly  notices  hy  rarliament. 
"1  he  Company  were  likewise  hereby  debarred  from  possessing  in  Great  Ilritain  lands,  Umcments,  &c. 
exceeding  1*10,000  yearly  rent. 