

In  this  year  Surajah  Dow  lab,  Nabob  of  Bengal,  captured  Calcutta  from  the  English;  but  on  the  arrival 
of  reiiiforcements  from  Madras,  they  .succeeded  in  regaining  possession  of  it;  and  large  tracts  of  land  were 
granted  them  by  Jaffier  Ally  Cawii,  whom  they  made  Nabob  of  Bengal, 

1757.  The  French  captured  the  British  factories  at  Ingeram  and  Bandermanlanka,  and  invested 
Vizngapatani  with  a very  large  army,  which  soon  surrendered  by  capitulation.  This  capture  gave  the 
French  the  entire  possession  of  the  coast  from  G an  jam  to  Mausulipatam. 

Three  homeward-bound  East  luuiamen,  the  Houghton,  Suffolk,  and  Godolphin,  were  attacked  by  two 
French  ships,  one  of  sixty-four  guns,  the  other  a frigate  of  thirty-six  guns,  off  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 
The  French  ships  attacked  them  with  an  assurance  of  victory  over  trading  vessels  heavily  laden ; but  the 
Indiamen  formed  into  a line,  and  sustained  a furious  engagement  for  upw  ards  of  three  hours,  in  which  the 
French  made  repeated  attempts  to  board,  but  were  always  repulsed,  and  at  last  sheered  off  with  the  lo.ss 
of  146  men  killed  and  wounded.  The  East  India  Company  on  the  27tli  of  September  ordered  a gra- 
tuity of  to  each  ship’s  company,  as  a reward  for  their  courage  and  fidelity. 

1758.  The  French,  under  the  command  of  General  Lally,  captured  Cuddalore  on  the  3d  of  May, 
and  on  the  26th,  Fort  St.  David  surrendered  by  capitulation;  the  fortifications  of  which  were  destroyed 
by  the  French,  and  have  not  since  been  rebuilt. 

The  French  commenced  the  siege  of  Madras  on  the  12th  of  December,  1758,  which  they  were  com- 
pelled to  raise  on  the  17th  of  February,  1759. 

The  Parliament  in  the  supplies  for  the  service  of  the  year,  granted  the  Company  i^,000  towards 
enabling  them  to  defray  the  expence  of  a military  force  in  their  settlements,  in  lieu  of  His  Majesty’s  troops. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


li 


1759.  The  English  factory  at  Surat,  having  been  grievously  insulted  and  oppressed  by  the  native 
Governors,  a force  was  detached  to  take  possession  of  the  castle,  \>  liich  was  obtained  on  the  4tli  of  March, 
and  the  English  established  in  a most  valuable  and  useful  settlement. 

The  English  factory  at  Gombroon  was  taken,  plumlered,  and  burnt  by  the  rrench  on  the  15(h  of 
October,  under  ITEstaing,  who  was  at  the  time  on  his  parole,  having  been  taken  prisoner  at  the  siege 
of  Madras,  and  liad  not  been  exchanged. 

Maiisulipatam  was  taken  from  the  rn  nch  by  storm  on  the  7lh  of  April,  with  but  little  loss. 

The  Dutch,  availing  themselves  of  the  situation  of  llie  English,  made  preparations  for  invading 
the  British  possessions  in  Bengal,  and  embarked  upwards  of  1500  men  on  board  seven  vessels,  vi:.  the 
Vlessingen,  Bleiswyk,  Welgeleegen,  and  Princess  of  Orange,  of  .‘10  guns  ( m b ; hilizabclb  Dorothea,  ami 
Waereld,  of  26  guns  each  ; and  ^Nlossell,  of  16  guns,  'fhe  EngliNhhad  only  ilurr  Eii>t  IiulIanK  ii  to  o])po.se 
to  this  formidable  force  : the  Calcutta,  Captain  Wilson  ; tlie  Duke  of  Dorset,  Captain  Forrester;  and  the 
Hardwickc,  Captain  Sampson.  On  their  approaching  each  otlu'r  in  the  river,  the  Dutch  drew  up  in  line 
of  battle  to  receive  the  English,  who  followed  tlieir  example,  and  the  Duke  nl‘ Dorset  began  the  engage- 
ment; but  tlie  wind  dying  away,  she  could  not  be  properly  seconded  for  some  time,  lIoue\er,  when  the 
other  two  ships  came  up,  they  malTilained  so  smart  a fire  upon  the  Duteli,  that  lv\«)  of  their  smaller  ships 
were  obliged  to  cut  their  cables,  and  run,  and  the  other  was  driven  ashore.  Alter  a severe  action  of  two 
hours,  the  Dutch  Commodore  struck,  and  the  others  followed  his  example,  exc(’j)(  his  seeoiul,  who  got  off 
by  fighting  bis  way,  and  fi  ll  down  the  river  to  Culpee,  where  he  was  intercepted  hy  theOxl'ordund  Boyal 
George,  who  had  arrived  two  days  before,  'flu*  Dutch  Commodore  had  '16  men  killed,  and  many 
wounded:  he  sull’ered  most,  as  did  the  Duke  of  Dorset  on  the  Fnglisli  side,  who  w'as  mon*  immediately 
engaged  with  him.  This  ship  was  almost  torn  to  pieces,  and  had  above  ninety  sliols  in  her  hull ; yet  she 
liad  not  a man  killed:  nor  did  the  other  ships  lose  u single  man,  though  the  Dutch  had  above  a hundred 
killed  and  wounded.  'I1ic  rest  were  made  prisoners,  and  carried  up  to  Calenlta.  'fins  brave  action,  liy 
which  the  province  of  Bengal  may  lie  said  to  have  been  saved,  receivcil  the  warme  st  thanks  from  the  Court 
of  Directora  on  the  return  of  the  ships  to  England. 