

1710.  No  redress  having  been  obtained  for  the  Invasion  of  the  privileges  of  the  English  East  India 
(’onipany,  a proclamation  w as  issued  by  the  King,  .strictly  prohibiting  Ilis  Majesty’s  subjects  from  trading 
to  the  East  Indies  under  foreign  commissions,  contrary  to  the  privileges  of  the  English  East  India  C orii- 
pany,  and  also  from  .serving  on  board  foreign  ships. 

Ry  an  Act,  5 Geo.  I.  chap.  11,  no  goods  from  the  Fiast  Indies  can  be  landed  in  Ireland,  on  penalt\ 
of  forfeiture  of  goods  and  vessel. 

About  this  period  there  was  a eonsi(hTal)Ie  scarcity  of  silver  coin  in  England,  occasioned,  as  it  w'as 
stated,  by  the  vast  exportation  of  silver  bullion  to  the  East  Indies,  wliereby  silver  had  become  scarcer,  and 
gold  more  plentiful,  by  tlie  profit  of  bringing  gold  from  India  and  China.  It  was  asserted  that  the  East 
India  Company  had  exported  in  one  year  near  .3,00(M)()0  ounces  of  silver  to  India,  which  was  more 
than  was  imported  from  all  parts. 

1718.  The  trade  from  Ost<’nd  to  India,  under  the  Emperor’s  flag,  being  still  carried  on,  notwith- 
standing the  remonsl^ances  of  the  English  and  Dutch,  an  Act  was  passed  for  the  better  securing  the 
lawdul  trade  of  llis  Majesty’s  subjects  to  the  East  Indies,  and  for  the  more  effectually  preventing  all 
flis  Majesty’s  subjects  from  trading  thither  under  foreign  commissions,  whereby  it  was  enacted  that 
“ whereas  it  is  of  great  importance  to  the  w^elfare  of  the  kingdom,  that  the  trade  to  and  from  the  East 
Indies  he  regulated  according  to  Acts  of  Parliament,  and  the  roy.al  charters;  and  that,  particularly  by  an 
Act  of  the  flth  of  King  William  III.  the  Ihist  Indies  should  not  be  visited  nor  frequented  by  any  Rritish 
subjects,  other  than  such  as  might  lawfully  trade  thither,  under  the  penalties  therein  set  forth;  and  that 
the  goods  laden  from  India  should,  without  breaking  bulk,  be  brought  to  some  port  in  Great  Rritain  to 
be  laden.  Notw  ithstumling  wiiich  restrictions,  and  the  proclamation  of  the  year  1715,  several  British 
subjects,  not  entitled  under  the  said  law  s,  have  presumed  lo  trade  to  India,  in  foreign  and  other  ships,  to 
the  diminution  of  Ilis  Majesty’s  customs,  an<l  the  trade  of  this  kingdom;  wherefore  the  contraveners  are 
hereby  declared  liable  to  all  the  penalties  of  the  laws  in  being.  And,  moreover,  the  East  India  Company 
are  liereby  authorized  to  seize  on  the  persons  of  all  such  British  subjects  as  bliall  be  found  within  their  limits, 
and  to  s(*nd  them  prisoners  to  England;  and  that  all  or  any  British  subjects,  acting  under  a commission 
from  any  foreign  potentate,  shall  forfeit  £500  fop  every  sucli  offcmce.”~Thi8  Act  was  further  continued, 
by  the  5lh  of  Geo.  III.  chap.  29,  for  seven  years,  from  the  1st  of  May,  1732. 