

The  Company  found  it  necessary,  in  con.sccpieuee  of  the  embarrassed  state  of  their  affairs,  to  reduce 
their  dividend  from  12^  per  coat,  ut  which  rate  it  had  been  paid  from  Midsummer,  J771,  to  Mid.sumnu‘r, 
1779  inclusive,  to  G per  cent,  jier  annum. 

The  Mahraltas  made  some  attempts  to  get  possession  of  the  pio\  inces  of  Corah  and  Allahabad, 
bordering  on  the  terrltoi  ics  of  the  Nabob  of  Oude,  but  were  opposed  by  the  Eiiglisli,  who  in  the  ensuing 
year  defeated  and  cUove  them  across  the  Ganges,  when  they  invaded  the  country  of  tlie  lloliillas. 
On  this  occasion  the  English  acted  as  allies  of  the  Nabob  of  Oude,  to  wlioiu  the  llohilla  Chiefs  had  promised 
to  pay  40  lacs  of  rupees  for  the  protection  aflbrdcMl  them;  but  payment  was  afterwards  refu.sed;  the 
consequence  of  which  was,  that  the  llohilla  country  was  Invaded  in  1774,  and  conquered,  as  well  as  several 
otlier  large  tracts  of  territory,  by  wliich  the  boundaries  of  Oude  were  advanced  in  all  directions. 


Iri 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


1773.  In  this  year  a material  alteration  took  place  in  the  system  under  which  the  Company’s  shipping 
concerns  were  conducted.  Previous  to  this,  by  long  established  practice,  the  ships  were  chartered  at  499 
tons,  with  a complement  of  ninety-nine  men  and  a boy;  as  by  the  charter  of  1G98,  the  Company  were 
required  to  employ  a Chaplain  on  board  every  ship  of  500  tons  burthen,  'rhis  occasioned  them  to  charter 
the  ships  at  499  tons.  Different  rates  of  freight  were  allowed  to  the  various  parts  of  India  and  China, 
and  also  distinct  freights  for  fine ‘and  gruff  goods,  in  proportion  as  the  commodities  were  more  or  less 
favourable  for  stowage.  Of  these  499  tons,  a deduction  was  made,  in  the  first  instance,  of  3 per  cent, 
or  15  tons,  for  which  no  freight  was  paid,  it  being  an  allowance  to  the  commanders  and  officers,  for  private 
trade.  A further  16  per  cent,  or  60  tons,  was  also  stipulated  to  be  carried  in  iron  kiutledge  or  ballast, 
for  which  the  Company  agreed  to  pay  the  owners  at  the  rate  of  one-third  of  the  freight  payable  on  gruff 
goods;  so  that,  in  fact,  the  cliartered  tonnage  of  a ship  was  actually  completed  with  404  tons  of  goods, 
nor  were  the  Company  obliged  to  lade  any  greater  quantity,  unless  it  suited  their  convenience;  if  any 
further  quantity  was  laden  under  80  tons,  freight  was  reckoned  ot  two-thirds^  of  the  rate  payable  on  gruff 
goods  (one-third  having  been  previously  allowed  the  owners  for  the  kintledge),  and  on  all  exceedings 
beyond  80  tons,  they  paid  only  half  freight.  This  perhaps  may  be  more  clearly  illustrated  by  an  example. 