

The  Company  were  involved  in  war  with  llyder  Ally,  who  usurped  the  government  of  the  kingdom 
of  Mysore  in  17().‘3,  and  in  a short  time  extended  Ids  dominions  so  as  to  I)ec()me  formidable  to  his  neigh- 
bours. The  war  continued  with  various  success  during  the  years  17(i7,  17()H,  and  part  of  1709,  when 
llyder  with  a strong  detachment  having  advanced  within  a few  miles  of  Madras,  the  Presidency  made 
overtures  of  peace,  which  were  readily  acceded  to.  Negotiations  were  opened,  and  a treaty  comluded,  hv 
which  each  party  agreed  to  cede  the  conquests  made  by  him.  The  prisoners  on  both  sides  were  to  be 
released,  u league  ollensive  and  defensive  to  take  place  between  the  contracting  parties,  and  a free 
trade  carried  on  between  tlicii’  subjects. 

1708.  By  a treaty,  dated  the  23d  of  February,  1708,  between  the  Company,  the  Nizam,  and  the 
Nabob  of  the  Carnatic,  in  which  tlie  Northern  Circars  were  confirmed  to  tlie  Company,  the  annual  payment 
to  the  Nizam  for  the  four  Circars,  of  which  the  Company  were  then  in  possession,  was  reduced  to  2,()(),0(’0 
rupees  for  six  years,  and  1,00,000  more,  if  during  that  period  they  should  obtain  possession  of  the  Guntoor 
Circar;  and  after  the  .six  years,  .5,00,000  rupees  for  tlie  four  Circars,  with  two  more  when  Guntoor 
should  come  into  their  possession. 

1769.  The  time  being  near  at  harnl  when  the  anmtal  payment  of  i?400,000  to  the  Government  by 
"the  Company,  and  also  the  parlianuMitary  restriction  of  the  dividends  would  expire,  the  Company  con- 
ceiving that  the  large  sum  thus  exacted  from  tliem,  would  thenceforth  be  considered  by  the  Administration 
as  part  of  the  regular  revenue,  were  desirous  of  rcceiviiig  some  compensation  for  what  they  deemed  so 
great  a sacrifice.  They  therefore  requested  a prolongation  of  their  charter  for  five  years,  which  was 
refused.  Afler  holding  several  Genei'al  Courts,  and  much  correspondence  between  Administration  and  the 
Company,  the  following  agreement  was  confirmed  by  Parliament. 

The  East  India  Company  became  bound  to  pay  to  the  public  J^400,000  annually,  for  five  years  to 
come.'  They  were  ])crinitted  lo  increase  their  dividends,  at  a rate  not  exceeding  one  per  cent,  each  year, 
till  they  .should  be  raised  to  12}  per  cent,  which  they  must  never  exceed.  Should  the  Company,  instead 
of  increasing,  be  obliged  to  reduce  their  dividends,  a prufiortional  deduction  was  to  be  made  from  the 
sum  payable  to  Government,  which  was  to  be  entirely  given  up,  should  the  Company  be  obliged  to 
reduce  their  dividends  to  6 per  cent.  During  the  five,  years  the  Company  were  obliged  to  exp6rt  British 
goods  equal  in  value  to  the  average  amount  of  those  they  exported  in  the  last  five  years;  and  if  any 
cash  should  remain  in  their  treasury,  after  the  jiayment  of  certain  specified  debts,  they  were  bound  to 
lend  it  to  the  public  at  an  interest  of  2 per  cent.  (9  Geo.  III.  chap.  24.) 