

each  of  their  ships;  and  they  were  bound  to  export  goods  of  the  growth,  produce,  and  manufacture  ol 
Great  Britain,  to  the  amount  of  oL7(>l,(i71‘,  between  the  29th  of  Sejitember,  1773,  and  the  29th  ot 
September,  1775,  exclusive  of  military  and  naval  stores,  and  of  all  ex])ortution  by  tlie  Company  s servants, 
or  by  private  traders  licensed  by  the  ('oinpany.  (13  (ieo.  III.  eliap.  91.) 

By  this  Act  there  were  1219  proprietors  of  India  stock  disfranchised,  and  the  whole  govei’iunent  ol 
the  Company's  affairs  thrown  into  the  liands  of  dH7  jiroprietors. 

The  civil  and  military  government  in  India,  an<l  the  management  of  the  territorial  acquisitions  in 
Bengal,  Baliar,  and  Orixa,  were  vested  in  a Governor  General  and  lour  ('ouncillors,  to  reside  at  hurt 
William  in  Bengal,  to  whom  the  JVesidencies  of  Madras,  Bombay,  and  Bencoolen  were  made  subordinate. 
A Supreme  Court  of  Judicature  was  also  established  at  Fort  William,  consisting  ol  a Chief  Justice  and 
three  other  Judges,  all  appointed  by  the  Crown.  This  Court  superseded  the  IMayor's  Court  at  Calcutta. 

♦II 


Iviil 


KISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


TIic  sajarics  of  the  Governor  General,  Councillors,  and  Jud;;(vs  were  directed  to  be  paid  out  of  the 
territorial  revenues;  and  neither  they  nor  any  other  civil  or  military  servant  of  the  Crown,  or  of  the 
C’onipany  in  India,  were  allowed  upon  any  account  to  accept  any  j)r(*.sents,  or  to  engage  in  any  kind  of 
trade;  but  counsellors  at  law,  physicians,  surgeons,  and  chaplains  were  allowed  to  receive  their  professional 
fees.  (13  Geo.  HI.  chap.  (33.) 

The  annual  election  of  twenty-four  new  Directors  having  made  the  administration  of  the  Company's 
aftuirs  too  fluctuating  and  unstalde,  it  was  enacted  that  (hey  should  in  future  remain  four  years  in  office, 
and  six  of  tlicm  go  out  every  year.  The  election  to  !>e  made  hy  proprietors  of  not  less  than  .TIOOO 
stock,  who  only  were  to  have  the  privilege  of  voting  in  future,  which  they  must  have  held,  without 
collusion  or  fraud,  twelve  months,  or  acquired  hy  succession,  the  custom  of  London,  or  settlement.  No 
person  who  should  have  been  employed  in  any  civil  or  military  capacity  in  India,  could  be  elected  a 
Director  till  lie  hud  resided  two  years  in  England. 

At  the  period  of  pas.sing  the  above  regulation,  the  number  of  proprietors  of  East  India  stock,  holding 
.f  500  or  more,  appears  by  the  Company’s  books  to  have  been  as  follows; 

rroprietors  of  iPlOOO  stock  or  more, 

English \S7 holding -t'l, 018, 398  19  11 

I’oreigners  890,940  17  0 

l,tK)9,339  16  11 

Proprietors  of  £500  stock,  and  more,  not  exceeding  oTlOfJO, 