


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  W 

The  Company  sent  out  Commissioners  to  superintend  their  Governments  in  India,  and  to  rectify  the 
abuses  which  had  arisen  from  mismanagement.  They  sailed  in  the  Aurora  frigate,  and  were  unfortunately 
never  more  heard  of. 

1770.  The  penalty  of  30  per  cent,  payable  to  the  Company  on  goods  imported  from  the  East 
Indies  under  foreign  commissions,  not  being  found  sufficient  to  clieck  such  illicit  trade,  it  was  now  raised 
to  100  per  cent,  on  the  value  of  all  goods  so  imported.  By  the  same  Act  tlie  civil  and  military  servants 
of  the  Company  were  made  amenable  to  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  in  England,  for  acts  of  oppression 
committed  in  India.  (10  Geo.  III.  chap.  47.) 

The  situation  of  the  Company's  allUirs  being  such  as  to  admit  a further  augmcMitation  of  their 
dividend,  it  was  declared,  for  the  ensuing  payment,  at  the  rate  of  12  per  cent.  j)er  annum. 

1779.  In  order  to  prevent  the  great  consumption  of  timber,  fit  for  the  constnution  of  large  ships 
of  war,  the  Company  were  prohibited  from  building,  or  allow  Ing  to  be  built  for  their  service,  any  new 
ships,  till  the  shipping  in  their  employ  should  be  re«luced  undca*  4.j,000  tons,  or  employing  any  ships 
built  after  the  18th  of  May,  1779;  but  they  were  at  liberty  to  build  any  vessel  wliatevei*  in  India  or  the 
colonies,  or  to  charier  any  vessel  built  in  India  or  the  colonies. 

The  Company's  affairs  in  India  standing  more  in  ne(‘d  of  rc‘gulation  than  when  the  supervisors,  who 
unfortunately  perished  on  their  passage,  were  sent  out,  the  CouiL  of  Dii  eel ors  resolved  to  send  others, 
and  appointed  five  gentlemen  for  the  important  trust;  hut  before  tliey  could  proceed  on  (heir  mission, 
they  were  prohibited  by  an  Act  of  Parliament  of  13  Geo.  HI.  chap,  t),  which  nslrained  the  Company,  for 
a limited  time,  from  appointing  Commissioners  for  su]>cnutending  and  regulaliiig  their  affairs  at  their 
Presidencies  in  India. 

JVfr.  Warren  Hastings,  belonging  to  the  Madras  Civil  Service,  was  this  year  appointed  Governor 
General  of  India.  The  confused  and  embarrassed  state  of  the  Comj)anCs  alfairs,  in  the  midst  of  the  most 
flattering  external  appearance  of  prosperity,  notwithstanding  the  great  accessions  of  territory,  will  be  best 
sliewn  by  an  extract  from  that  (Gentleman’s  lleview  of  tlie  state  of  Bengal: — ‘‘  The  treasury  was  empty; 
the  Company  wiis  involved  in  debt;  its  revenue  was  declining;  every  n gion  of  Ilindostaii  groaned  under 
different  degrees  of  oppression,  desolation,  and  insecurity." — The  plans  di  vised  by  biin,tbongb  unfortunately 
not  executed,  are  deserving  attention,  as  they  shew  the  be.d  pv>liey  of  that  system  of  aggrandizement 
which  had  been  hitherto  pursued. — “ Had  I been  alh»wed  the  nu-ans  which  I re(|ulretl,  I should  have  sought 
no  accession  of  territory  ; 1 should  have  rejected  the  ofler  of  any  which  would  have  enlarged  our  line  of 
defence,  without  a more  than  approj)riatc  augmcntalion  of  defensive  strength  and  revenue;  I should  have 
encouraged,  but  not  solicited,  new  ulliaiiees,  and  sliould  liave  lendeied  that  of  our  (iovernment  an  olject 
of  solicitation,  by  the  example  of  those  which  already  existed.  Towards  thc'-e  I ^Iiould  have  observed,  as 
my  religion,  every  principle  of  good  faith." — Numerous  obstacles,  lu)we\er,  interfered  with  the  execution 
of  this  sclietne.  Mr.  Hastings's  conduct  aflerwards  became  the  subjict  of  pailiamentary  investigation; 
and  a reference  to  the  result  of  it  is  necessary,  for  the  means  of  forming  an  opinion  respecting  him. 