

The  Com[)any  gave  a large  bounty  for  raising  6000  seamen  for  the  public  service,  and  made  an 
addition  to  the  navy  of  three  ships  of  71  guns,  which  were  called  the  Bombay  Castle,  Carnatic,  and  Ganges. 

"J'lie  House  of  Commons  jietitioned  His  Majesty  to  direct  the  Attorney  (ieneral  to  prosecute 
George  Stratton,  Henry  Brooke,  Charh's  Floycr,  and  George  IVIackay,  J^'squires,  for  confining  Lord 
l*igot,  the  Governor  of  Madras,  ^'hey  were  tried,  found  guilty,  and  fined  iMOOO  each. 

A\'ar  was  declared  against  Great  Britain  by  Spain  in  June,  1779. 

A leagiK*  of  confederacy  was  foj-med  against  the  English  in  India;  the  principal  parties  were  tlie 
Nizam,  the  Mahrattas,  Hydcr  Ally,  the  Rajah  of  Bcrar,  and  several  (’hiefs  on  the  western  sidef)f  India. 
^I'hc  [)rej)arations  were  in  a great  state  of  forwardness;  and  the  Company's  (iovernments  considering  the 
war  as  fraught  with  great  danger,  used  every  exertion  to  put  the  settlements  and  troops  in  the  best  state 
to  meet  the  approaching  storm. 

1780.  Lord  North  proposed  in  the  House  of  Commons,  that  notice  should  be  given  to  the  East 
India  Company  of  tlie  intention  of  Parliament  to  pay  off  the  d(*ht  of  i?l, 200,000,  together  with  the 
interest  upon  it,  due  by  the  public  to  the  Company  on  the  5th  of  Aj)ril,  1783,  agreeably  to  the  power  of 
redemption  in  the  Act  of  Parliament,  and  the  stipulation  <)f  three  years'*  notici',  after  which  the  Company's 
exclusive  privileges  would  expire.  He  stated  he  had  expected  the  (’ompany  would  have  made  some  offer 
of  terms  for  the  renewal  of  their  charter;  but  though  the  time  was  so  near  whiui  it  would  be  necessary 
for  Government  to  give  notice  of  repayment,  no  proposal  bad  hitherto  been  uliered  on  the  part  of  the 
Company,  wjiich  came  near  to  the  expectation  or  right  of  the  public,  who  were  cuititled  either  to  the 
whole  of  the  territorial  acciuisitions  and  revenues,  or,  if  the  (’ompany  were  permitted  to  retain  the 
monopoly  of  the  trade,  to  a participation  of  the  profits.  The  final  settlement  of  the  business  of  the 
charter  was  postponed  for  the  present  by  the  Act  of  20th  Geo.  III.  chap,  56,  by  which  the  Company 
were  to  retain  the  entire  revenue  of  India,  though  their  debt  to  the  public  of  i:*!, 400, 000  was  paid  oflT, 
and  tlieir  bond  debt  reduced  to  500, OCX),  till  the  8th  of  April,  1781,  and  till  then  to  make  dividends 
not  exceeding  8 per  cent,  per  annum. 

The  (Company  experienced  a very  severe  loss  in  their  .shipping  this  year:  the  Royal  George,  Mount 
Stuart,  Godfrey,  Hillsborough,  and  Gatton  were  taken  on  the  Dth  of  August,  1780,  by  the  combined 
fleets  of  France  and  Spain. 