

Lord  IMacartney,  as  ambassador  to  China,  sailed  from  Fhigland  on  the  20lh  ot‘ Se|»leml>er,  1702,  and 
arrived  in  the  River  of  Tckin  on  the  5tli  of  August,  J703.  The  obje  ct  of*  his  mission  was  to  remove  (he 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  English  cormiiercc.  He  was  received  with  eve  ry  m.uk  of  attention,  hut  eliel 
not  succeeil  in  fulfilling  the  purposes  for  which  he  was  sent. 

The  Nabob  of  Arcot  entered  into  a treaty  with  the  Company,  dateel  July  12,  1702,  by  which  the 
Company  agreed  to  maintain  a military  force  in  his  dominions,  ujion  his  paying  them  star  pagoda^ 

annually  towards  the  expence.  I'he  Nabob  furtlier  agreed  to  pay  ti,21,ltt5  star  pagotJas,  towarefs  licjiiiilating 
sundry  debts  due  by  him,  which  was  afterwards  guaranteed  by  tlic  British  ]\‘ii  liameiit. 

1703.  The  French  Government  on  the  1st  of  February  declared  war  against  (ireat  Ilrilfiin.  On  the 
receipt  of  this  intelligence  in  India,  expeditions  were  fitted  out  against  tlie  French  settlements  in  Jlengal 
and  in  the  Peninsula,  which  were  all  taken  possession  of  by  the  EngHsIi. 

The  Company,  by  virtue  of  an  Act  of  the  23d  of  Geo.  HI.  chap.  22,  and  upon  (he  ‘^eemity  of  the 
debt  due  to  them  by  the  public,  had  sold  annuities  at  3 per  cent,  to  the  amount  of  J’2,!f02,  HO  5s.  ot 

* I 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Izvi 

capital,  which  were  known  by  the  name  of  India  Annuities.  With  the  consent  of  the  Company  and  of 
the  holders,  these  annuities,  and  also  tlie  annuities  on  the  capital  sum  of  d£*l,207,559  15s.  retained  by  the 
Company  in  their  own  hands,  amounting  in  all  to  i<^126,t)00  a year,  were  transferred  from  the  Company’s 
management  to  that  of  the  Bunk  of  England,  and  ingrafted  upon  the  fund  called  the  3 per  cent.  Annuities. 
By  this  ingraftment  the  Jebt  of  i?4,2(.)0,000  due  by  the  public  to  the  Company,  was  considered  as  paid 
off,  excepting  that  the  part  of  it  remaining  in  the  Company’s  hands,  w^as  to  be  repaid  to  them  at  par, 
before  the  legislature  could  divest  them  of  their  exclusive  trade. 

The  Company  were  also  authorized  to  increase  their  present  stock  of  five  millions,  by  opening  a sub- 
scription for  another  million,  the  projirietors  having  a preference  of  subscribing  to  the  extent  of  50  per  cent, 
on  their  present  stock,  unless  the  capital  so  subscribed  should  have  exceeded  the  proposed  million,  in  which 
case  there  was  to  be  a proportional  reduction  on  every  subscription.  And  they  were  to  employ  the  money 
so  received,  in  reducing  their  bond  debts  in  Great  Britain,  to  tlie  sum  of  i?l,500,000,  which  they  were 
not  afterwards  to  exceed,  unless  with  the  consent  of  the  Board  of  Controul. 