

In  November  war  was  declared  against  the  Dutch.  On  the  receipt  of  the  intelligence  in  India, 
Negapatam,  their  prim  ipal  settlement  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  with  all  jJaces  subordinate  thereto, 
were  taken  possession  of  by  the  British  forces. 

Ilyder  Ally,  who,  since  the  conclusion  of  the  peace  in  1769,  had  paid  every  possible  attention  to  his 
army  and  finances,  invaded  tlie  Carnatic;  and  while  Tippoo,  his  son,  was  laying  waste  the  Northern  Circars, 
Hydcr  lay  siege  to  Arcot,  which  he  obtained  possession  of,  after  defeating  the  English  army  under 
Colonel  Baillie.  For  some  time  he  carried  every  thing  before  him.  By  the  happy  exertions  of  Sir 
Eyre  Coote,  however,  to  whom  the  management  of  affairs  was  committed,  the  progress  of  this  formidable 
adversary  was  stopped,  and  he  soon  became  weary  of  a war  which  was  attended  with  incredible  cxpence 
to  himself,  without  any  reasonable  prospect  of  success.  By  the  year  1782,  tlierefore,  Hyder  Ally  was 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  Ixi 

finccrely  desirous  of  poace,  but  died  before  it  could  be  brought  to  a concUbion ; and  Ills  rival,  Sir 
Coote,  did  not  survive  him  above  five  months. 

1781.  The  Company  made  up  their  account  of  the  profits  of  their  trade  and  t'  li  lloiial  levenues  to 
tlie  1st  of  March,  1781;  whereby  there  appeared  a balance,  after  paying  i'lO(),nO()  to  the  public, 
according  to  agieement,  of  17s.  lOd.  This  sum  they  weit*  aib  ruards  anlhoilzetl  to  pay  in 

dividends  to  the  proprietors  of  the  stock;  but  they  preferred  employing  it  in  trade;  and  they  laoe  kept  a 
distinct  account  of  it,  under  the  title  of  the  Separate  FilTid,  which  they  havi!  annually  credite<l  with  inteii‘st. 

After  many  debates  in  Parliament  and  the  India  House,  the  affairs  of  the  Company  at  home  and 
abroad  were  settled  by  two  Acts  of  Pailiamcnt,  in  the  following  manina*: 

That  the  Company  should  pay  the  sum  of  i?4()0,0tltb  by  four  crjual  instnlim  nt^,  as  a fidl  compen- 
sation for  all  claims  the  public  might  have  upon  them,  fiom  the  time  that  their  Ixmd  clcht  was  redneed 
to  X^l,500,000,  to  the  1st  of  March,  1781.  The  Company's  exclusive  traile,  and  the  possession  of  their 
territorial  ac(juisitions,  were  thereupon  contiiuieil  till  the  1st  of  Mareh,  171)1,  and  llu  realb'*  till  Ibnlia- 
nieiit  should  give  tliree  years'  notiee  of  an  intention  to  discontinue  them,  and  |)ay  oil*  Ihe  caj)ital  or 
debt  of  oP4,2()0,()()0  due  to  the  Company,  with  all  arrears  of  interest,  &:c.;  and  after  a t(’rmination 
of  their  exclusive  privileges,  they  were  to  have  a right  to  remain  a corporation,  and  to  trade  with  their 
joint  stock  in  common  with  other  British  subjects. 