

Peace  was  concluded  betw'een  Great  Britain  and  France,  by  the  13th  article  of  which  it  wa.s  agree 
that  the  settlements  which  had  been  taken  from  the  French  during  the  war,  should  be  restored  to  them 
with  some  privileges  of  trade,  and  liberty  to  Jig  a ditch  round  Chandernagorc.  Tliev  w^re  alsalo  b 
allowed  some  districts  round  Pondicherry  and  Karical. 

The  Company  lost  the  under-mentioned .slnjis  in  this  year: 

Blandford,  Captain  Pigou,  taken  off  Gati^am,  January  lly  1783. 

llinchinbrooke.  Captain  Maxwell,  lost  in  Bengal  River,  Apeft  10,  178S.  . 

Duke  of  Athol,  Captain  Rattray,  burnt  in  Madras  Roads,  A^jl8,  1783/  ; 

Fairforcl,  Captain  Haldane,  burnt  at  Bombay,  June  15,  1783f  ' 

Duke  of  Kingston,  Captain  Nutt,  burnt  off  Ceylon,  August  20,  1783. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixili 


It  appears  by  accounts  made  up  at  the  India  House,  that  in  six  years,  177S  to  17S.),  being  a period 
of  war,  the  Comj)any\s  losses,  by  capture  or  otherwise,  were  170,  being  /’t  <Js.  I Id.  per  cent,  on 

their  imports  and  exports,  which  amounted  together  in  tliat  period  to  i?l  1,01  J,,>0(i. 

1784*.  A treaty  of  peace  was  concluded  with  the  Dutch,  May  20,  wlieiiin  wcie  the  fulh)wing 
stipulations: 

Article  4*.  The  States  General  ceded  Negapatatn  with  its  dependencies  to  (iieat  Jhit.iin,  but  llu* 
King  promised  to  listen  afterwards  to  any  reasonable  proposal  fur  a restoration  of  it,  by  aji  exelumge  Ibi 
Bome  other  territory. 

5.  Great  Britain  restored  to  the  Dutch  Trincomalee  and  all  otlica-  towns,  fnll^,  he.  taken  from 
tliem  during  the  war,  either  by  the  King’s  forces  or  the  I’.ast  India  Compmiv^. 

0.  The  Dutch  promised  not  to  obstruct  the  navigation  of  British  siihjeels  in  the  I'astein  Seas 

A treaty  of  perpetual  peace  and  friendship  was  signed  at  Mangalore,  on  the  lltli  of  March,  bet n ecu 
tlic  Company  and  Tippoo  Sultan,  the  principal  stipulations  ol*  which  were  : 

Article  2,  Tippoo  engaged  to  evacuate  the  Carnatic,  and  to  liberate  all  pii^o!tei>. 

3,  4,  !}.  The  Company  restored  Onore,  Carwar,  Sudasbaglnir,  &c.  and  some  other  f(»rts  and  distiiits. 

8,  9.  Tippoo  renewed  and  confirmed  all  the  commercial  privileges  granted  by  his  fatlier  to  llic 
Company,  and  agreed  to  restore  to  them  the  factory  and  privileges  they  fori neil\  po^^sessed  at  Calicut, 
and  also  Mount  Dilly  with  its  district,  as  it  formerly  helongcd  to  the  si'tlhanent  of  'J\'Ilicherrv. 

Mr.  Pitt  brought  in  a hill  for  the  better  regulation  ol‘  the  Company's  alliiijs,  which  was  rejf’cted  on 
the  second  reading;  upon  which  Ills  Majesty  judged  it  expetlient  to  dissolve  the  Pailiainent. 

On  the  new  Parliament  meeting,  a bill  was  passed,  21  Geo.  III.  eba|>.  25,  by  wbicli  the  superin- 
tendence and  controul  overall  the  territorial  possessions  in  India  were  vested  in  a Board  of  Commissioners, 
with  powers  nearly  similar  to  those  contained  in  the  Act  of  33  Geo.  111.  chap.  .52.  This  Act  also  made 
provision  for  the  establishment  of  a special  tribunal,  consisting  of  a number  of  Members  of  both  Houses 
of  Parliament.  Persons  returning  from  the  ICasl  Indies,  were  reipiiicd  to  give  an  inventory  of  ibeir 
property;  but  tbi.s  was  rejiealed  by  an  Ac.t  of  29  Geo.  III.  eliap.  ,57. 