

By  the  first  article,  “ a safe,  free,  and  inde])endent  trade,  such  as  was  carried  on  by  the  French 
Company,'''  was  secured  to  the  subjects  of  France*,  whether  they  should  exercise  it  individually,  or 
as  a (.'ompany.'" 

A treaty  was  concluded  with  the  Nabob  of  Oude,  by  which  the  British  subsidiary  force  was  Increased, 
but  for  which  the  Nabob  was  to  pay  annually  50,00,000  sicca  rupees. 

1788.  Doubts  Inning  arisen  whether  the  Company  were  liable  to  bear  the  expence  of  troops  sent  tev 
India,  without  being  rcrpiested  by  them,  the  Board  of  Controul  were  declared,  by  an  Act  passed  the  28tli 
of  Geo.  III.  chap.  S,  to  bo  fully  empowered  to  order  the  expcnce,  raising,  transporting,  and  maintaining 
any  munher  of  His  1\1  a jesty's  forces,  not  exceed ing  8,04.5  men,  including  oflier  iN;  or  of  tlio  European 
forces  of  the  East  India  Company,  not  exceeding  12,000  men,  inelinling  olHcers,  to  be  defrayed  out  of  the 
territorial  revenues  of  India.  The  Commissioners  were  prohibited  from  augmenting  the  salary  of  any 
person  in  Indm,  or  giving  any  gratuity,  unless  such  augmentation  or  gratuity  were  proposed  by  the 
Directors,  and  also  submitted,  together  with  the  reasons  for  it,  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament.  The 
Directors  were  re(piircd  to  lay  before  Pailiamcnt  an  annual  account  of  the  revenues  and  disbursements  at 
each  of  their  Presidencies  in  India,  together  with  a statement  of  the  debts  due  by  them  at  each  of  them. 

The  Company  jircsented  a petition  to  Parliament,  when  in  they  set  foi  th  that,  in  consequence  of  the 
arrears  of  the  war,  of  the  claim  of  Government  on  them  for  0^,500, 000,  of  the  debt  incurred  in  China,  and 
of  the  advances  necc.ssary  for  the  China  trade,  they  stood  in  need  of  a large  sum  of  money,  which  they 
prayed  that  they  might  lie  authorized  to  borrow,  when  they  were,  by  an  Act  of  the  28th  Geo.  III.  chap.  29, 
empowered  to  liorrow  .X*l,20(),000  upon  bonds  under  their  common  seal. 

The  Company  purchased  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  imported  into  Great  Britain,  since  the 
passing  of  the  Commutation  Act,  17,tW)9,877  lbs.  of  tea,  which  cost  them  X^2,048,797  18s.  2d. 

1789.  The  Company  entered  into  a contract  with  the  Spanish  Philippine  Company  to  supply  them 
with  the  manufactures  and  produce  of  India  to  a considerable  amount,  to  be  delivered  at  Manilla,  and  to 
be  paid  for  in  dollars. 

Lord  Cornwallis  issued  orders  for  abolishing  the  slave  trade  in  the  Company’s  dominions.  The 
Directors  gave  public  notice  that,  in  order  to  give  every  encouragement  to  the  British  manufactures,  they 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES 


IXT 

had  resolved  to  make  an  nngmentation  of  above  2,500  tons  in  tlu*ir  exports  this  seuson.  They  also  granted 
permission  to  the  commanders  and  ofheers  to  fill  all  unoccupied  toiiiiage,  freight  liee;  and  thev  allowed 
their  servants,  and  inerchants  residing  in  India,  to  fill  up  such  tonnage  homewanl-boimd,  ns  might  be  unoc- 
cupied by  the  (\>mpany,  at  a reasonable  freight. 