

The  i'oinpany  were  again  involved  in  war  with  Tippoo  Sultan,  in  coiiserpuMice  ot‘  his  invading  the 
territory  of  their  ally,  the  llajah  of  Travancore.  This  period  was  very  favourable  to  the  hinnhling  ot' 
Tippoo  Sultan,  the  Company  being  at  peace  with  nil  the  ])owers  in  India;  and  treaties  of  alliance'  existed 
with  the  two  most  powerful  States,  the  Nizam  and  the  Mahrattas,  who  bf>t1i  joineil  the  English  in  assist- 
ing  to  crush  the  rising  power  of  Mysore. 

1701.  The  House  of  Commons  gave  the  Company  notice  that  on  the  31st  of  March,  170L  the 
capital  or  debt  of  «^4,20(),000  owing  to  them  by  the  piddle,  together  with  all  interest  due  upon  it,  shouhl 
be  paid  ofl*,  that  Parliament  might  beat  liberty,  agreeably  to  the  terms  of  the  charter,  uhich  reipiire •three 
year.-i’  notice,  to  lay  the  trade  to  India  open. 

The  Company,  by  an  Act  of  the  31st  of  Geo.  HI.  chap.  42,  were  reipiircd  to  put  up  at  their  sales, 
every  half  year,  5,000  bags  of  saltpetre  m<»re  than  the  quantity  of  that  article  sold  hy  them  on  the  ave- 
rage of  their  four  last  sales,  at  the  price  of  31s.  per  cw3.  in  lime  of  peaee,  and  40s.  in  tinu*  of  war,  ami 
also  to  di'liver  annually  500  tons  of  saltpetre  into  the  King's  stores,  at  tlie  average  of  their  upset  price  for 
the  year;  and  on  failure  of  either  of  the  se  requisitions,  the  King  in  Council  might  authorize  the  importatioji 
of  the  necessary  quantity  from  any  country. 

1702.  The  Englisli  and  the  allies  were  very  successful  in  their  exertions  against  'I'ippoo  Sultan;  most 
of  bis  principal  forts  were  taken,  and  his  fortified  camp  at  Seringapatam  stormed  by  the  EiUglisb  army, 
under  Lord  Cornwallis,  on  the  Gth  of  February,  and  on  the  Sth  of  Manli  a treaty  was  eoneliuled, 
whereby  Tippoo  confirmed  to  llie  Company  all  the  privileges  and  immunities  of  trade  grantisl  to  tliem  by 
llyder  in  1770;  he  also  ceded  to  the  Company  and  their  allies  a considerable  portion  of  his  dominitms,  and 
consented  to  pay  a large  sum  of  money.  For  tlie  due  performance  of  this  tr(*aty.  In*  gave*  his  two  sons  as 
hostages.  By  this  treaty,  also,  the  (’’ompany  received  an  increase  of  territory,  yii  lding  an  annual  reve- 
nue of  13,10,765  pagodas;  and  the  acquisitions  of  the  Nizam  and  tlu'  Mahrattas  W(  re  each  in  a similai 
pro[)ortion  to  those  of  the  English. 

The  IVincess  Royal,  Captain  Horncastle,  was  taken  in  the  Straits  of  Siiiida  b\  the  French,  on  the 
20th  of  September,  1703;  and  the  Winterton,  C.aptain  Dundas,  was  h)st  off  Ma(l.lga^(^l^,  humeward- 
bound,  the  20tli  of  August,  1702,  having  a cargo  on  board,  the  prime  cost  of  uhieh  amounted  to  .t  'Oti, 500- 