

At  a Court  of  East  India  proprietors  it  appealed  that  the  loan  of*  i’ I , I( )(),()()()  advanced  hv  (Gom'iin 
ment  to  the  C'ompany,  was  reduced  lo  the  sum  of  X’l'if ),()()();  and  that  the  alfairs  of'  the  (’om[)an\  were 
in  general  in  a prosperous  condition. 

Lord  Pigot  w'as  deprived  of  the  (lov(‘rninent  of  Fort  St.  George  by  a inajoiify  of  the  Connell,  and 
imprisoned  at  the  Mount  at  St.  'riionie,  where,  after  a confinement  of  some  months,  he  died. 

17?7.  The  (Company,  having  now' paid  up  the  whole  of  the  money  advanced  to  them  by  Govern- 
ment ill  1773,  together  with  the  interest  on  it,  were  ooiiseqiiently  at  lihirty,  agreeably  to  the  Act  of 
Parliament,  to  raise  their  dividends  from  G to  7 [ler  cent.;  and  they  accordingly  declared  their  half 
yearly  dividend  to  be  3\  per  cent,  TJie  restriction  laid  ujion  the  (Company  not  to  accept  hills  drjjwn  from 
India  beyond  .X\M0,0()0  in  one  year,  was  liow^ever  continued. 

It  appears  by  the  aecounts  made  n|)  at  the  East  India  House,  tliat  in  the  ten  yenrs,  I ThS  to  177? 
inclusive,  the  Company''s  losses  by  ea[)lure  or  otherwise  were  .^’57 being  V2  IL.  .id.  per  cent,  on 
their  imports  and  exjiorts,  which  amounted  together  in  that  period  to  I’2^,‘lf)!h^s()7 

1778.  War  broke  out  again  with  the  Malirattas.  The  (\niit  of  Poonab  lefuslng  to  comply  with 
some  of  the  stipulations  of  the  Poorunder  Treaty,  the  Bombay  army  landed  on  the  coiitiiu  nt  to  proieed  to 
Poonah;  they  were  soon  after  surrounded  by  the  Malirattas,  and  all  means  of  letreat  cut  off.  A l iipilii- 
lation  look  place  at  Worgaum,  when  the  English  agreed  to  give  up  the  Island  of  SalM  lte,  and  the  othei 
countries  conquered  by  them,  upon  which  they  were  conducted  to  the  s(‘a-coast,  and  emharked  for  Bomljav. 

War  was  declared  between  England  and  France.  (Jn  the  receipt  of  this  Intelligence  in  India,  an 
expedition  was  fitted  out  against  Pondicherry,  which  surrendered  to  the  Britisli  foices  on  tlw  l/itli  t»l' 
October,  1778. 

The  Company  obtained  from  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore  the  territory  of  Nagore,  )ielding  a roe  inc  of 
2,50,(X)0  rupees  yearly,  in  lieu  of  a grant  of  land  round  Devicotta,  which  the  Rajah  volnntaiily  olliicd  to 
the  Company,  on  being  restored  to  his  dominions  by  the  Madras  Goveriinioiit 

1779.  The  Company  having  now  discharged  their  debt  of  i?l,400,000  due  to  the  public,  and  ic- 
duced  their  bond  debt  under  X^l,500,000,  the  public  became  entitled  to  a partii  ijiation  of  the  teriitniial 

♦ II 


H 


IIISE  AND  PHOGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


acquisitions  and  revenues  obtaini^d  in  India.  They  were,  however,  continued  entli’e  to  tlie  Company  by 
Parliament  till  the  5th  of  April,  17S0;  they  being  restneted  from  making  aaiy  dividends  above  8 per 
rent,  during  that  time.  The  Company  were,  moreover,  directed  to  present  a state  of  their  aflaii’s  every 
half  year  to  the  Lords  of  the  Treiisury;  and  they  were  prohibited  from  accepting  Mils  from  India  for 
above  i^’SOOjOOO,  exclusive  of  certificates  to  the  comniauders  and  ofiiccTs  of  their  ships,  without  the 
consent  of  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury. 