


Ixii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


British  subjects  belli"  in  any  way  whatever  concerned  with  fon'igners  in  Indian  were  innJc  so  strict,  tliat 
even  fending  money,  directly  or  indirectly,  was  declared  iinlawrul, 

1782.  The  Company  lost  the  under-mentioned  ships  in  the  course  of  this  year: 

Fortitude,  Captain  Gregorle,  taken  by  the  French  tlie  23d  of  June,  1/82. 

Earl  of  Dartmouth,  Captain  Thompson,  lo**!  oil  Car  Nicobar  the  21th  of  Jane,  1782. 

Major,  Ca|dain  Arthur,  burnt  at  Culpee,  in  Bengal  River,  the  2 lib  ol  June,  1782. 

Grosvenor,  Captain  Coxon,  lost  off  the  Kas^t  Coast  ot  Afiica  the  lib  ot  August,  1782, 

Rrilliant,  Captain  Mears,  lost  at  Johanna  tlie  28tb  of  August,  1782. 

Earl  of  Hertford,  Captain  Clarke,  lost  in  ^ladras  Roads  the  13ib  ot  October,  1 /S2. 

The  Company  being  in  arrears  to  Government  for  customs,  an  Act  was  passed,  22d  Geo.  III.  cliaj).  .51, 
postponing  the  period  of  their  payment,  and  allowing  the  Company  in  the  hiterim  to  diviile  8 per  cent. 

The  Americans  established  their  independence  the  30th  of  Novemlicr,  1784/. 

By  an  account  made  up  at  the  India  House,  it  appears  that  the  dami|^*^ftstalnc‘il  by  the  (.'ompnny 
and  chargeable  to  the  owners  of  their  ships,  amounted,  in  the  years  1771  to  1782  inclusive,  to 
being  on  an  average  i^l33  5s.  lid.  on  each  ship, 

A treaty  of  peace  WMs  concluded  with  the  Mahrattas,  dated  May  17,  1782,  which  stipulated  lhal 
the  Company  .should  restore  the  countries,  forts,  &c.  lately  taken  from  the  Mahrattas,  with  the  exceptioi 
of  the  Islands  of  Salsetto,  Elcplmnta,  Caranjah,  and  Hog  Island. 

The  possession  of  Buroach,  witli  a twritory  of  3,00, (K)0  rupees,  had  hocn  ceded  to  the  Compixiiy  1)^ 
a former  treaty;  but  llicy  now  relinquished  tlieir  claim  to  the  territory,  yet  retainetl  the  city. 

The  Feshw%a  engaged  to  suffer  no  o*fr  European  nation  to  be  established  in  his  territories,  or  thos( 
depending  upon  him;  the  settlements  of  tlie  Portuguese  were,  however,  understood  to  remain  on  tlieii 
foriiUT  footing. 

1 783.  The  Acl  of  last  year,  postponing  the  payment  of  the  arrears  due  from  the  Company  t( 
Government,  xva.s  repealed, and  an  Act  passed,  the  23d  Geo.  III.  chap.  30,  allow ing  the  Company  to  borrov 
/’5()0,0(K)  upon  lionds;  and  in  this  year,  cliap.  78,  the  payment  of  duties  was  fui  ther  postponed,  and  Govern 
nient  advanced  the  Company  i’SOfhOOO  in  Exchequer  Bills. 

'fhe  higli  duties  upon  the  importation  of  muslins,  calicoes,  and  nankeens  operated  a.s  a premium  fo 
smuggling.  It  was  found  expedient  to  lower  the  duties,  by  .substituting,  instead  of  the  former  rates,  , 
duty  of  18  per  cent,  on  tlie  sales  by  the  Company,  of  w hich  10  per  cent,  should  be  allowed  as  a draw 
back  upon  exportation.  23  Geo.  III.  rliap.  74*. 