

55.  The  Court  of  Directors  may,  with  the  approbation  of  Board  of  (Commissioners,  suspend  the 
powers  of  the  Governor-General  to  act  of  his  own  autliority,  fur  so  long  as  t4icy  shall  see  fit,  and  to  le- 
vive  them  when  they  see  fit. 

5(>.  (’ivil  servants  under  Council  to  he  promoted  according  to  llii‘ir  rank. 

57.  Vacancies  in  tlie  civil  service  to  he  filled  up  fibm  the  servants  of  the  Presidency  w here  the  vacancy 
hapi)cns.  No  person  shall  be  appointed  to  any  situation,  the  salary  and  emoluments  of  which  exceed  i’5(^0 
per  annum,  unless  such  person  shall  liave  been  a resident  in  India  for  three  years,  as  a covenanted  servant. 


prior  to  the  vacancy. 

To  the  like  of  oP  1,500  Six  years. 

J,000  Nine  years. 

4,000  welve  years. 


58.  No  person  may  bold  tw^o  offices,  the  salaries  of  w hicli  shall  exceed  the  prescribed  sums  above  named. 

59.  Directors  may  not  send  out  a larger  number  of  writers  or  cadets  tlian  are  competent  to  supply 
the  vacancies  in  their  establishments. 

00.  No  [lerson  slmll  be  appointed  a writer  or  cadet,  whose  age  shall  be  under  fifteen,  or  more  than 
twenty-tw^o  years.  A certificate  must  be  produced  of  the  age,  under  tlie  hands  of  the  parisli  registrar.  Where 
such  cannot  he  obtained,  the  affidavit  of  the  party  may  be  received  as  a substitute.  An  exception  as  to 
cadets,  in  favour  of  persons  wdio  have  borne  a cominksion  in  the  King’s  service,  the  Militia,  or  Feuciblc5| 
or  from  the  Company  of  Cadets  at  Woolw  ich. 

IIevenuks.— 61.  Officers  employed  In  collecting  revenues,  to  be  sw’orn  not  to  receive  any  money, 
gift,  or  present. 

62.  Beceiving  presents  declared  to  be  a misdemeanour,  and  the  party  to  forfeit  the  value. 

63.  Court  may  restore  present  to  the  party  from  whom  it  was  obtained,  and  order  the  whole  or  any 
part  of  the  fines  to  be  paid  to  the  prosecutor. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  \xxl 

G4^.  Counsellors,  pliysicians,  surgeons,  and  chaplains  may  take  fees,  but  in  the  war  of  their  pro- 
fesslon  only. 

G5.  Govcrnor-Gcneral,  Governors,  Commanders  In  Cliief,  or  servants  of  tlic  Company,  dhoheying  or 
neglecting  to  execute  the  orders  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  or  wilfully  breaking  their  trust;  are  guilty  of  a 
nusdemeanour, 

GO.  The  like  as  to  any  corrupt  bargain  for  giving  up  or  obtaining  any  office  or  employment  in  the 
King  or  Company’s  service. 

G7.  His  xMiijesty’.s  subjects  amenable  to  Courts  of  Just  ire  in  India  and  in  Great  Britain,  for  ollenecs 
in  the  ten  itorics  of  native  Trinces,  or  ngniiisl  any  of  their  people. 

G8.  No  action  or  suit  at  law  may  be  stayed  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  or  any  of  their  servants,  witli- 
out  the  approliation  of  the  Board  of  (’ommissioiiers. 