

‘Mh  I'his  Act  sliall  not  preclude  the  Directors  from  recalling  their  ollicers  oi  servants;  any  (io\ernor- 
General,  Governor,  or  Commander  in  Chief  appointed  by  His  Majt'.siy,  in  delanit  of  an  appoiiitinent  by 
the  Court  of  Directors,  excepted. 

37.  Departure  from  India  of  any  Governor-General,  Governor,  ]\Icml)er  of  C’ouneil,  or  Commander  in 
Chief,  with  an  intent  of  leturniiig  to  Europe,  shall  be  deemed  a resignathm  of  bis  ollice.  A resignution  while 
at  the  I’resideiiey  not  to  be  valid,  except  made  in  writing,  lor  the  piii|)ose  of  being  recorded.  Salaiies  to  cease 
from  the  day  of  their  departure.  Any  person  (putting  the  Presideney  to  wliieh  he  shall  belong,  other  than 
in  the  known  service  of  the  Company,  salary  to  cease  lioni  the  time  of  leaving  the  settlement. 

3S.  C’oimcil  to  consider  business  proj)Osed  by  Governor.  A jjroposition  from  Ji  ( 'ouiisellor  the  Go- 
vernor may  udjouin  to  a futnie  lime,  not  exceeding  forty-eight  hours;  but  it  shall  not  he  twice  adjouined, 
without  the  coiistail  of  the  Counsellor  who  pr()pos(*d  it. 

39.  7VII  resolutions  sliall  be  reconh  d and  issiu*d  by  the  Seeietaiies,  as  the  act  of  the  (Jovei  lUH-tieiK  ial 
in  Council,  or  Gov(Tiior  In  ( oimcil,  as  the  c.iso  may  he. 

4-0.  Governor-GeiKTal  in  (’ouneil  at  Fort  William  to  superintend,  coutroul,  and  direct  all  the  Com- 
pany‘’s  Governments  in  India. 

41.  Governmenls  must  oiicy  all  orders  from  G()vcrnor-(i(‘neral  in  Coiineil,  exi’cpt  wlnm  they  may 
have  received  positive  (jrders  from  the  (’ourt  of  Directors,  or  the  Secret  ('ommiltee,  by  the  authority  of 
the  Commissioners,  re|Migiiant  to  the  01  dels  ol’ tin*  Governor-General,  and  not  known  to  th(‘  (TO\eiiior- 
General  at  the  lime  of  issuing  his  iintruelions:  in  such  eas(*,  eo|)i(‘S  of  such  01  del  s must  he  transmitted  by 
them  to  the  Governor-General  in  (’ouneil,  who  sh.ill  lh('ieiipoii  give  such  fiiilher  iiisli nelioiis  as  he  shall 
see  necessary. 

42.  Governor-Crcneral  of  Fort  William,  without  ordeis  fiom  the  Court  of  Diieetois  or  Seeiet  ('omniit- 
tce,  except  wlien  hostilities  have  been  eomnieneed,  or  pieparations  aetiiall)  made  for  tlie  eominencriin  nl  of 
hostilities,  against  the  British  nation,  or  any  of  their  allies,  may  not  chrLiiv  war  against  any  of  the  nativi? 
powers;  and  in  all  cases  vvlu'n^  hostilities  are  lesolved  upon,  eoiiimuiiiealion  iiiiist  he  iiiad(‘  with  all  expe- 
dition to  the  Secret  Committei’. 

43.  Governor  ol'Fort  St.  George  or  Bombay  may  not  d(‘clare  w ar,  or  eonelnde  jie.'iee,  except  in  v(‘ry 
extraordinary  eases,  without  orders  fiom  the  Governor-Cieiieral  in  Council,  the  f'ouit  of  Directors,  or  the 
Secret  Committee,  on  penalty  of  dismission. 