

17.  Hoard  may  not  direct  the  increase  of  salaries,  allowances,  or  emoluments  to  any  of  the  Ciunpany's 
servants  in  India,  unless  such  increase  be  proposed  by  the  (rourt  of  Diieelors  In  a dispatch,  and  notice  of 
such  intention,  with  their  reasons  for  the  same,  shall  liavc  been  laid  befon*  both  1 louses  of  i’arliainerit, 
thirty  days  before  such  dispatch  shall  be  sent. 

18.  Nor  grant  any  gratuity  for  services  performed,  unless  projmsed,  in  like  m.nnncr,  I)y  tlie  (Vunt  of 
Directors.  Such  gratuities,  when  made,  to  be  added  to  the  next  lists  of  cslablidimcnls  to  bi*  laid  b(*forc 
Parliament. 

19.  Board  may  transmit  .secret  orders  to  the  Secret  Committee  of  the  Dlj  irtors  n ho  shall  transmit 
the  same  to  India,  where  they  shall  be  obeyed,  in  like  manner  ns  if  they  had  bei  n sent  by  the  Court. 

♦ I 2 


1*"*'  RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 

20.  Court  of  Directors  to  appoint  three  of  their  members  a Secret  Committee,  who  shall  take  an  oath 
of  scci’ocy. 

ai.  Secret  Committee  dispatclies  to  Iw  prepared  by  the  Secretary,  the  examiner  of  Indian  correspon- 
dence, and  none  else,  without  tlie  a|)prubatiun  and  consent  of  the  Commissioners.  Such  jiersons  must  be 
sworn  to  secrecy. 

22.  rresidciu  ies  in  India  may  address  their  dispatches  to  the  Secret  Committee  of  the  Directors,  who 
.shall  deliver  the  same,  or  copies,  to  the  Board. 

23.  Resolutions  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  touching  the  civil  or  military  Governments,  or  the  reve- 
nues, after  being  approved  by  the  Commissioners,  shall  not  be  revokable  by  the  Proprietors. 

Governments  in  India. — 24.  The  civil  and  military  government  of  Fort  William,  and  the  ordering, 
management,  and  government  of  the  territorial  acquisitions  and  revenues  of  the  kingdoms  or  provinces  of 
Bengal,  Bahar,  and  Orixa,  vested  in  a Governor-General  and  three  Coiinsellor.s. 

The  civil  and  military  government  of  Fort  St.  George,  and  the  acquisitions  on  the  Coast  of  Coro- 
mandel, in  a Governor  and  three  Counsellors. 

The  civil  and  military  government  of  Bombay,  and  the  acquisitions  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  in  a 
Governor  and  three  Counsellors.  The  Governments  of  Fort  St.  George  and  Bombay  shall  be  subject  to 
the  superintendence  and  controul  of  the  (iovernor-General  in  Council. 

25.  Vacancies  of  Governor,  Counsellors,  or  Commanders  in  Chief  of  all  the  forces  in  India,  or  of  any 
provincial  Commander  in  Chief,  to  be  filled  by  the  Directors.  The  members  of  Council  to  be  taken  from 
the  senior  merchants,  who  have  resided  twelve  years  in  India. 

26.  If  tlie  Directors  neglect  for  two  months  to  till  up  such  vacancie.s,  His  Majesty  may  supply  them. 