

82.  None  but  the  Company,  or  such  ns  shall  obtain  their  special  licence,  may  ship  any  militaiy  oi 
naval  stores,  nor  import  any  India  calicoes,  or  other  description  of  piece-goods. 


Ixxii 


RISE  AND  TROGRESS  OF  THE  COI^fMERCE 


83.  The  Court  of  Directors  sliall  annually,  in  the  month  of  February,  lay  before  the  Commissioners 
for  India  an  account  of  the  naval  stores  exported  by  them  in  the  preceding  year;  and  the  like,  as  far  as 
can  be  done,  of  what  is  intended  to  be  exported  in  the  ensuing  season.  If  any  representations  are  made 
by  the  manufacturers  that  such  exports  are  insutficient  for  the  Indian  demand,  the  Boaid  may  examine 
such  representations,  and  at  their  discretion  allow  individuals  to  (‘xport  the  same  on  the  Company's  ships, 
at  the  rate  of  freight  payable  for  other  private  goods,  a!id  direct  tonnage  to  be  provided  for  the  same. 

84.  If  the  Company  do  not,  by  the  31st  of  August  in  each  )ear,  purchase  1,5()0  tons  of  copper  for 
exportation,  the  proprietors  or  holdcTs  of  British  copper  may  export  to  that  extent,  or  so  much  as  the 
Company's  exports  may  fall  short  thereof  (freight  to  be  paitl  the  same  as  on  other  [)rivate  goods),  and 
may  make  their  returns  in  the  commodities  ni'  India,  in  like  manner  as  is  allowed  to  other  exporters  of 
British  produce.  Notice  of  such  intention  to  export,  must  be  given  by  the  20th  of  October  in  (‘ach  year. 
The  tonnage  for  such  copper  not  to  be  deemed  any  part  of  the  allowance  made  for  |)rivate  trade. 

8.5.  If  the  Company  do  not  import  a suflicient  quantity  of  piece-goods,  the  Board  of  Coniniissioiicrs 
may  admit  individuals  to  import  them  in  the  Company's  ships. 

86.  Not  to  vary  any  nf  the  legal  provisions  as  to  prohihited  goods. 

87.  Company  required  to  provide  3,000  tons,  at  least,  of  shipping,  in  their  export  and  import  trade. 
This  to  he  regulated,  more  or  less,  as  the  Board  of  (Commissioners  may  direct. 

88.  Directors  may  petition  His  Ma  jesty  if  they  think  the  quantity  of  tonnage  directed  to  be  provided 
for  individiuds  is  too  large,  who  .shall  finally  determine  thereon. 

89.  Rates  of  freight,  in  time  of  peace,  to  be  £t)  per  ton  outward,  and  i^J.5  per  ton  homeward.  In 
war,  or  preparation  fur  war,  additional  rates  to  be  paid  in  proportion  to  the  additional  rates  of  freight 
paid  by  tbc  Company. 

90.  Intention  of  raising  the  rates  of  freight  to  be  first  communicated  to  the  Board  of  Commissioners 
for  their  approbation. 

91.  Every  three  years  the  Directors  to  determine  whether  any  abab’ment  can  be  made  in  the  rates  of 

freight  of  private  trade,  and  to  communicate  the  result  to  the  Commissioners.  ' 