

44.  Fort  St.  Cn'orge  and  Bombay,  and  all  other  settlements  in  India,  to  send  copies  of  their  proeerd- 
ings  in  Council  to  Governor-tfeiieial  in  Cuiiiieil  at  h'oit  William. 

4.J.  Governor-General  in  Council  may  issue  his  warrant  to  apprehend  any  jiersoii  siispeel(d  of  (viriy- 
ing  on  any  correspondenee  dangerous  to  the  peace  and  saf(‘ty  of  the  British  jiossessioiis  in  India,  wiih  any 
of  the  native  or  European  powers,  and  commit  him  or  lh(*m  to  sale  custody.  A copy  ot'  tin*  diaigr  (<)  he 
delivered  the  party  within  five  days,  who  shall  be  allowed  to  make  a (l(*l’enee  in  wnliiig.  l!,  a/tci  the 
hearing  of  witnesses  on  both  •sides,  there  shall  appear  reasonable  grounds  lor  the  ehaiLo,  ^:Kh  pri  son  may 
be  ke|)t  in  safe  custody,  and  brought  to  trial  in  India,  or  else  be  sent  for  trial  to  England  by  the  lirst 
convenient  opportunity. 


Ixx 


msK  AND  rnoGiiEss  or  the  coMiwEncE 


4(>,  1’he  like  powrs  ;'ivon  to  the  Governors  of  Fort  St.  Georp^o  and  Hombay. 

4 7.  Governor-(ji(‘nonil  in  (Council  at  llenp^ai,  and  Governor  of  Fort  St.  George*  and  Bombay,  Jn  case 
of  a elini'i  ence  of  opinion  between  tbeinseiv  cs  and  tlicir  Council,  may  act  independent  of  the  Council.  All 
acts  so  done  by  him  itiusi  be  recorded,  signed  by  the  Council,  and  be  obeyed,  in  like  manner  as  if  con- 
curred in  by  the  Council. 

48.  In  such  cases,  the  Governor-General  or  Governor  shall  be  alone  held  responsible  for  the  same. 

1 9.  This  not  to  (*mpo\ver  the  (iovernor  to  perform  any  act  whieli  could  not  have  been  made  and  exe- 
cuted with  the  conciirreiicc  of  the  Councils. 

'riiis  power  not  to  he  exercised  by  any  Governor  who  shall  succeed  to  the  Government  by  deatli 
or  rcNigiiation,  unless  such  person  sliall  have  been  provisionally  appointed  to  succeed,  or  uidess  and  until 
such  pel  son  shall  have  been  continued  by  the  Couit  in  such  otlice. 

.51.  Tills  power  not  to  be  exerted  in  rases  which  come  under  the  consideration  of  the  Governor- 
(ieneral  or  Go\ernor  In  Council,  in  tiudr  judicial  capacity. 

52.  The  powers  of  the  Governments  of  J^'ort  St.  George  and  Bombay,  and  all  other  settlements,  vested 
in  the  Governor-General,  during  bis  stay  at  such  IVrsidency. 

5d.  Wiien  Governor-General  shall  see  it  necessary  to  be  absent  from  bis  Government  at  Btnigal,  be 
may  nominate  a member  of  the  C'ouncil  to  act  as  Vice  IVcsideiit,  or  Deputy  Governor,  in  bis  absence. 

5 k Governor-General,  wliiJe  absent,  may  issue  orders  to  the  respective  Governments,  or  to  any  of 
the  oflicers  and  servants  of  these  Gov<*i*nments,  without  communicating  such  orders  to  such  Governmcnl, 
which  they  are  hound  to  obey,  as  if  coming  li  oiu  the  (iovernor  in  Council  at  Fort  William. 