

27.  Directors  may  appoint  persons  provisionally  to  supply  vacancies,  when  they  shall  happen,  and 
may  revoke  the  same;  but  no  person  .so  appointed  shall  receive  the  salary  or  emolument  of  the  office,  until 
in  actual  possession. 

28.  This  Act  not  to  vacate  any  appointments  already  made. 

29.  Vacancies  in  the  GovernnuMit,  when  no  provisional  successor  is  on  the  spot,  shall  be  filled  by  the 
senior  member  of  Council,  until  some  other  person  is  ap))ointcd  thereto.  If  the  Council  Ix'come  reduced 
to  one  member,  beside  such  acting  Governor,  be  may  call  to  the  Council  such  one  of  the  senior  merchants 
as  he  shall  tliink  fit.  Acting  Governor  to  receive  the  emoluments  of  Governor,  on  foregoing  his  allow- 
ances as  Counsellor,  for  the  period  he  .so  acts. 

30.  No  Coimnander  in  (’liief  to  succeed  to  the  temporary  Government,  unless  provisionally  appointed 
to  supply  the  same ; but  the  vacancy  must  be  filled  by  the  member  of  Council  next  in  rank  to  the  Com- 
mander in  Chief. 

31.  Vacancies  in  (Council,  when  no  provisional  successor  i.s  on  the  spot,  shall  be  filled  from  among  the 
senior  merchants. 

32.  When  the  office  of  Commander  in  Chief  of  all  the  forces  in  India  is  not  held  by  the  Governor 
General,  such  (\)mmanderin  Chief,  if  specially  authorized  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  may  be  a member 
of  the  Council  of  Fort  William.  And  when  the  offices  of  Governor  and  Commander  in  Chief  of  Fort 
St.  George  and  Bombay,  respectively,  are  vested  in  difierent  persons,  such  Commander  in  Chief  may  be 
a member  of  Council  at  such  Presidencies,  if  authorized  by  the  Court,  and  shall  rank  as  second  in  Council, 
but  sliall  not  be  entitled  to  any  emolument  as  a member  of  Council,  unless  the  same  be  specially  granted 
by  the  Court  of  Directors. 

33.  Commander  in  Chief  of  the  forces  in  India,  if  not  in  the  person  of  the  Governor-General,  when 
resident  at  Fort  St.  George  or  Bombay,  shall  be  a member  of  Council  at  such  Presidency,  during  which 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixix 

tinKj  the  provincial  Comnmiuler  in  Cliief,  if  a nieniber  of  the  Council,  may  continue  to  sit  and  deliberate, 
but  shall  have  no  voice  at  the  Council  Board. 

If  any  member  of  Council,  by  inlirinity  or  otherwise,  be  remlered  incaj)able  of  acting,  or  be  ab- 
sent from  the  Presidency,  the  Governor-General,  or  Governor,  may  call  to  Council  any  provisional  suc- 
cessor, or  if  there  be  none  such,  a senior  merchant;  but  he  shall  be  entitled  to  no  salary  or  emolument 
nor  shall  it  occasion  him  to  be  deprived  of  any  ollice  or  emphnnunt  he  la  fore  enjoyed. 

J.j.  ilis  Majesty,  by  his  sign  manual,  countersigned  by  the  Pie.sident  of  the  Boanl,  ina)  remove  any 
oflicer  or  servant  of  the  Company  in  India. 