

1.  Hoard  of  Coinniissioners.  I.  Exclusive  trade. 

2.  Governments  in  India.  Individuals  allowed  to  participate  in  the  liade. 

3.  Revenues.  (>.  Appllealion  of  the  Eonipany''.  prulils  in  J airope. 

ERKAMni.K.— Comi)any\  prMleges  extended  for  twenty  years  fiom  the  M of  M<iieli,  r;OI.  May  hr 
then  discontinued,  on  giving  three  years'  notice. 

Hoaru  ok  CoMMrsmoNERs. — 2.  Ills  IMnjesty  may  appoint  (Nmimlssioners  for  the  atlhirs  of  India. 

3.  Three  Commissioners  may  form  a Hoard  for  executing  the  powers  vcstcil  In  Ihein. 

4.  In  case  of  an  oijuality,  Ere.sident  to  have  the  casting  vote. 

!j.  Board  may  aj)point  ofllcers.  (Commissioners  and  oIHcjts  to  have  sneli  salarus  as  His  IVl.ijeslv  shall 
direct.  Salaries  and  contingent  exjiences  to  he  paid  liy  the  Company,  not  exceeding  .X’ Hi, OHO  per  annum. 

f)  and  7.  Commissioners  and  oflieers  to  take  an  o.ath  for  the  due  exernlion  of  their  ti  ust. 

5.  Commissioners  and  (’hief  Secretary  not  therehy  discpialitied  to  sit  in  J\iiHaMien(. 

0.  Hoard  to  superintend  all  roneerns  relative  to  the  civil  or  military  goveiaimenl.  or  revenues  of  liiiljii. 

10.  Commissioners  and  their  oOict'rs  to  have  access  to  the  Ct)m])any\  hooks,  and  to  he  liuiiislied  »itli 
copies  or  extracts  of  such  as  may  he  re<iMired. 

11.  ('opies  of  all  minutes  and  proceedings  of  the  General  Coin  ts  of  IVoprielors  or  Dinx  lors,  and  of 
all  dispatches  receivi'd  from  India,  relating  to  the  civil,  military,  or  revenue  concerns  of  the  Company,  to 
he  sent  to  the  Hoard. 

12.  No  order  relating  to  the  civil  or  military  government,  or  revenues  of  the  (Company,  shall  ho  sent 
to  Indio,  till  first  approved  by  the  Hoard.  The  Hoard  may  disapprove,  alter,  or  vary  the  sid)slance  of  the 
Court's  instructions,  giving  their  reasons  for  tlie  .same,  wliieh  aineiuh  d iiislrnetions  the  Directors  shall 
transmit  to  India  without  delay. 

13.  Directors  may  remonstrate  upon  the  Hoard's  varying  the  sul)>lanec  of  their  orders,  n Inch  the 
Board  shall  consider,  and  give  such  further  oiders  thereon  as  Out  think  fit. 

14.  Hoard  not  to  nominate  any  of  the  (Company's  servants. 

15.  It  the  Court  of  Directors  neglect  to  frame  orders  on  any  subject  rehitiiig  to  the  ei\il  or  military 
government,  or  the  revenues  ol  the  C'onipaiiy,  wdtliin  fourteen  days  afler  they  are  rerjulred,  (lommissioners 
may  frame  such  instructions  as  they  thiuk  fit,  wliich  the  Court  of  Directors  are  reipiireil  to  transmit  to  liiilia. 

IG.  If  the  Directors  think  the  Hoard  interfere  with  points  not  eonneeted  with  the  civil  or  inilitaiy 
government,  or  revenues  of  India,  they  may  petition  His  Majesty,  who  shall  decide  hetwei  ii  them. 