

GO.  Sentences  of  Courts  in  India  or  in  England  may  not  he  remitted,  or  oificia  s disnli^sed  by  such 
sentences  n'stored. 

70.  Persons  in  civil  or  military  service,  under  the  rank  of  Council,  or  (^ommander  in  Chu‘l',  who 
.shall  be  absent  from  their  station  five  years,  are  not  capable  of  serving  again  in  India;  unless,  in  case  of  a 
civil  servant,  it  is  proved,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  their  absence  has  arisen  Iroin  sick- 
ness or  infirmity,  or  unless  such  person  shall  hu\e  the  sanction  of  the  Court  of  l^roprietors  for  sucli  purjiose, 
for  returning  w ith  his  rank,  taken  by  a ballot,  in  wJiich  three  jiarts  in  four  shall  concur ; or  in  the  case  of 
a military  officer,  it  lie  proved,  to  the  satisfiiction  of  the  Court  ol‘  Directors  and  the  Board  of  Cominissioncrs, 
that  the  absence  has  been  occasioned  by  sickness,  iiifirinily,  or  some  inevitable  accident. 

Exclusive  Thade.— 71.  Exclusive  trade  to  the  Company  continued,  subject  to  limitations,  conditions, 
and  i cgulations;  as  also 

72.  All  profits,  &c.  granted  by  former  acts  or  charters,  and  not  by  this  act  repealed,  ratified,  and  con- 
firmed in  as  full  and  am[)lc  a manner  as  if  re-enacted  in  tliis  act,  subject  to  all  sucb  restrictions  and  regula- 
tions contained  in  such  acts  or  charters. 

73.  At  any  time  after  the  Ht  of  3Iarcli,  1811,  upon  three  years’  notice,  and  payment  of  what  may  lie 
due  from  the  public  to  the  Company,  at  the  expiration  of  such  three  years,  the  exclusive  tiadc  .shall  cease. 

74.  But  the  Company  may  afterwards  carry  on  a free  trade  to  India,  in  tlicir  corpoiate  capacity,  in 
common  with  others  His  Majesty’s  subjects. 

7.5.  Notice  from  the  Speaker  of  the  1 louse  of  Commons  to  ])C  deemed  a due  notice. 

7G.  In  case  of  any  cession  of  territory  from  the  Chinese  Government,  and  the  establishment  of  a new 
.settlement  thereon.  His  Majesty's  subjects  may,  under  certain  restrictions,  export  British  or  Irish  inanu* 
factures  in  the  Company’s  ships,  at  a moderate  rate  of  freight. 

77.  Salvo  in  favour  of  the  ships  employed  in  the  Southern  Whale  Fishery,  subject  to  the  restrictions 
and  regulations  contained  in  the  2Gth  Geo.  III.  chap.  50,  and  the  28th  Geo.  III.  chap.  20. 

78  to  80.  And  for  ships  ti’ading  from  the  N.  W.  coast  of  America,  on  what  conditions  licences  may 
be  given  them. 

Individuals  allowed  to  participate  in  the  trade  to  and  from  the  Last  Inoies.— 81.  Any  of  JJis 
Majesty’s  subjects  resident  in  Great  Britain,  or  any  part  ot  Ills  Majesty  s Luropeun  dominions,  may 
export  to  India;  and  any  of  the  Company’s  civil  .servants,  or  persons  resident  in  India  under  lliem  licence 
and  protection,  may  import  from  India,  goods  ujjon  the  Company’s  ships,  subject  to  the  following  irstiitU 
ions  and  regulations. 