

92.  Persons  intending  to  ship  goods,  must  give  notice  to  the  Secretary  before  the  31st  of  August  in 
each  year,  of  the  nature  and  quantity  of  the  goods,  and  when  tliey  will  be  ready;  and  before  the  15th  of 
Se])tenihcr  deposit  the  freight.  In  case  of  failure  in  shipping  the  goods,  tlic  fri'iglit  to  he  forfeited. 

93.  The  like  notice  and  conditions  to  be  observed  in  India,  in  regard  to  goods  intended  to  be  shipped 
for  this  country. 

94.  Vacant  tonnage,  not  engaged  by  individuals,  may  be  occupied  by  the  Company.  If  the  goods 
to  be  shipped  exceed  the  ipiantity  of  tonnage  provided,  a distribution  must  be. made  to  each  in  proportion. 

95.  Civil  servants,  and  free  merchants  in  India,  may  act  as  consignees,  in  the  disposal  of  exports 
from  this  country,  and  providing  articles  in  return. 

90.  If  there  are  not  a sullicient  number  of  persons  in  India  to  act  as  above.  Court  may,  with  the 
approbation  of  the  Commissioners,  license  an  additional  number  of  free  merchants  to  reside  in  India. 

97.  Agents  for  private  traders  to  he  amenable  to  the  Company's  authority. 

98.  No  person  sliall  reside  more  than  ten  miles  from  one  of  the  principal  settlements,  without  leave 
of  the  Governor. 

99.  The  duty  of  7 per  cent,  payable  on  goods  of  individuals  repealed,  and  3 per  cent,  laid  in  lieu 
thereof,  as  an  eipii valent  for  all  charges  of  management. 

1(X).  This  not  to  cxt(‘nd  to  goods  from  Cliina,  or  to  the  private  trade  of  the  commanders  and  officers. 
— By  a resolution  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  this  has  been  since  extended  to  the  goods  of  the  commanders 
and  officers  in  private  trade. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  ANT)  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxiii 


101.  Arrangements  to  be  made  for  speedy  side  of  the  goods  of  individuul><. 

102.  Such  goods  to  be  warehoused,  and  sold  at  the  Company’s  sales,  on  account  of  the  pi opiic  tois 
Goods  bought  in,  to  be  speedily  delivered,  on  payment  of  the  charges  only. 

103.  Goods  to  be  registered  previous  to  shipping,  both  here  and  in  India,  on  penalty  of  foilVituic. 

104*.  Goods  of  individuals,  in  all  respects,  to  be  on  the  same  footing  as  Company's  goods,  as  to 

j)ayment  of  duties. 

105.  Company  exonerated  from  embezzlement  of  goods  of  individuals  while  in  their  warehouses  m 
India  or  England, 

lOb.  The  security  given  by  Company’s  servants  against  embezzlements,  to  be  extended  to  the  goods 
of  individuals.  Persons  through  whose  negligence  any  loss  arises,  shall  be  answeiuble  for  the  same  at  law 

Application  of  the  surplus  Revenues. — 107.  The  revenues  of  India,  after  defraying  the  charges  of 
collection,  shall  be  disposed  of  in  the  following  order.  Eirst,  in  defraying  the  charges  of  the  inilitar\  and 
marine  establishments,  maintenance  of  forts  and  garrisons,  and  provision  of  naval  and  warlike  stores. 
Secondly,  in  paying  the  interest  of  the  Indian  debts.  Thirdly,  in  defraying  the  expences  of  the  ci\il  aiul 
commercial  establishments.  Eourthly,  a sum  of  not  less  thanacion-  of  lupces,  to  be  tievoted  to  the 
provision  of  investments  and  lemlttauies  to  Cliiiia.  Eit'thly,  as  often  as  any  part  of  the  ilehts  in  India 
shall  be  redeemed  or  transferred  to  Great  Rritain,  the  advances  to  the  Commercial  Hoards  to  hi*  iiiereaseil 
in  the  extent  to  which  the  interest  is  reduced.  And,  lastly,  (he  surplus  shall  he  ap|died  to  (lie  liipiidafion 
of  the  debts  In  India,  or  to  such  other  uses  as  the  Court  of  Directors,  with  (he  approbation  of  the  Board 
of  Commissioners,  shall  direct. 