

108.  The  Governments  in  India  may  grant  bills  upon  the  Directois,  for  transferring  the  debts  in 
India  to  England,  till  they  arc  reduced  to  two  millions  sterling. 

109.  If  the  Indian  creditors  shall  decline  to  receive  bills  of  exchange  to  the  amount  oi'  X’5(H),00(}, 
the  deficiency  may  be  made  up  by  loans,  which  shall  be  applied  to  the  Hciuidation  and  discharge  of  (he 
Indian  debts,  and  to  no  other  purpose. 

110.  Bills  not  to  be  granted  for  a larger  sum  than  i?500,000,  unless  by  the  authority  of  the 
Court  of  Directors, 

Application  op  the  Profits  op  the  Company  in  Europe. — 111.  After  payment  of  (he  bills  of 
exchange,  current  debts,  interest,  and  other  outgoings  and  charges,  (the  bond  debt  excepted),  the 
remainder  to  be  disposed  of:  first,  in  payment  of  a dividend  of  10  per  cent,  per  annum;  the  first  half 
year’s  payment  to  be  made  at  Mid.summer,  179.3.  Secondly,  .P500,000  per  annum  to  be  set  apart  for  pay- 
ment of  bills  drawn  in  liquidation  of  the  Indian  debts,  until  the  same  shall  he  redncc’d  to  two  millions 
sterling.  Thirdly,  in  payment  of  aP500,(X)0  annually  into  Ills  Majesty's  Excherjiier,  the  ilefieiency  of 
one  year  to  be  made  good  in  the  next.  The  first  half  year’s  payment  to  b(*  due  the  1st  of  duly,  1783. 

Until  die  debts  are  reduced  to  two  millions,  the  ultimate  surplus  may  be  appropriated  for  the  lurtliei 
reduction  of  debts  in  India,  or  in  jiayment  of  debts  in  England  (bond  debt  of  P1,.50(MMM)  excepted),  or  to 
the  purchase  of  exports,  the  produce  of  which  to  be  appropriated  to  the  discharge  of  Indian  dehls. 

When  debts  in  India  are  reduced  to  two  millions,  and  bond  debts  to  d’l, .'>()(), 000,  (he  surplus,  aflei 
payment  of  outgoings,  a dividend  of  10  per  cent,  and  dt^5()0,(X)0  a year  to  the  Kxclieijuer,  to  he  apjilic  d 
as  follows:  one-sixth  to  be  retained  by  the  (’ompany  for  their  own  use,  to  augmi  nt  d'vidi  mis,  ami  the 
residue  to  be  vested  in  the  Bank,  in  the  names  of  the  Commissioners  appointed  to  apjily  sums  tewaids  (Ik* 
discharge  of  the  national  debt,  until  the  sums  so  paid,  with  the  growing  interest,  shall  amoimt  to  twebe 
millions  sterling,  after  which,  such  supply  shall,  from  tune  to  time,  be  paid  into  the  Exelierpier  fm  Ills 
Majesty’s  use. 

♦ K 


Ixxiv 


RISE  AND  niOGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


11:^.  If  the  debts  are  again  increased  beyond  two  millions  in  India,  and  <£1, 500,000  bond  debt  in 
England,  the  like  appropriations,  as  mentioned  before,  shall  again  take  place,  until  the  debts  are  reduced 
to  those  sums. 

113.  Hank  to  keep  an  account  with  the  Commissioners,  under  the  head  of  Guarantee  Fund. 

114?.  When  the  stock  in  the  name  of  the  Commissioners  shall  amount  to  twelve  millions,  the  divi- 
dends shall  be  liable  to  make  good  what  tlie  Company’s  dividends  may  fall  short  of  10  per  cent,  w hile 
they  continue  to  trade  under  a joint  stock. 