

In  the  years  1792-3-4  there  were  conveyed  to  India  in  the  Company’s  ships  10,400  troops  of  their 
own  and  the  King’s;  the  mortality  amongst  them  was  only  194  men,  and  some  of  them,  it  appears,  were 
lust  by  accident.  This  forms  a contrast  to  the  losses  which  have  been  incurred  in  Government  trans- 
ports in  voyages  of  much  shorter  duration,  and  places  in  a striking  point  of  view  the  safety  and  strength 
of  the  Company’s  shipping. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxvii 


Tlie  trial  of  Warren  Hastings,  Esq.  formerly  Governor  General  of  India,  whieh  had  lasted  nearly  eight 
years,  was  now  brought  to  a conclusion.  He  was  honourably  ac(|uitti‘d;  and  tlu^  East  India  ronipuny, 
unanimous  in  their  approbation  of  his  conduct,  paid  his  law  cxj)enccs,  which  amounted  to  and 

settled  an  annuity  of  i,^5()()0  per  annum  upon  him.  4'his  (rial,  which  engaged  the  attiMUion  ot  the  nation, 
was,  to  use  the  words  of  Mr.  Hastings,  “less  my  trifd  than  that  of  the  I'ast  Inilia  (‘ompany  and  the 
British  nation,  whose  justice  and  honour  were  e(|ually  involved  in  it.  It  became  unavt)iilahle,  fiuni  the 
reiterated  allegations,  which  for  years  preceding  had  been  made  and  credited,  of  abuses  ami  oppressions 
exercised  by  the  Governments  of  India.  It  was  institutial  for  the  ixpre**s  purpose  of  rectifying  those 
abuses  in  one  event  of  it,  or  of  proving  that  they  ne\er  had  existence.  INIy  uccpiittal  has  proved  they  did 
not  exist.  It  has  retrieved  the  honour  of  Great  Britain.  It  has  confirmed  the  right  of  the  Company  and 
of  the  nation,  to  those  advantages  which  were  at  all  times  admitted  to  Iiavc  been  obtained  by  my  im'usuri  s; 
and  it  has  demonstrated,  beyond  all  argument,  the  purity  of  that  great  assembly,  which  w ould  resolve  to 
hazard  such  a sacrifice  of  the  national  wealth  and  strengtii,  in  which  they  themselves  had  so  near  a concern, 
to  the  superior  calls  of  national  justice."’ 

In  the  month  of  August,  in  consequence  of  the  senreity  of  grain  that  at  that  time  [u  evailed  in  hhigland, 
and  the  probability  of  its  continuance,  the  Court  of  Directors  took  up  .^>000  tons  of  sliipping  to  [iniceed 
to  India  for  rice;  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  the  Court,  from  a motive  of  further  relieving  the  couiilry 
from  the  dreadful  effects  of  fomine,  the  apprehensions  of  it  not  lia\ing  then  subsided,  engaged  .^jOOO  tons 
more  shipping  to  proceed  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  for  wheat,  which  it  was  uiulciNlood  was  in  great 
abundance  there.  The  Court  also  sent  orders  to  India,  authorizing  the  (iovernments  there  to  pci  mil 
country  ships  to  load  home  rice,  allowing  tliem  to  take  cargoes  from  England  in  return.  From  an  account 
made  up  on  the  return  of  the  ships  sent  to  India  and  the  Cape  of  (iood  Hope,  it  appears  that  tlic  (\>ni- 
pany  lost  by  this  praiseworthy  measure,  on  rice  importetl  from  India,  J.^ir>(),S{)();  and  on  wln  at  Impoiied 
from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  forming  a total  loss  of  c£’17H,l;^Gl). 