

12S.  After  this  period,  all  charges  respecting  the  King’s  troops  serving  in  India,  to  he  paid  by  the 
( ompany. 

129.  3'he  several  Acts  passed  for  securing  to  the  Company  the  exclusive  trade  to  India,  reduced  to 
4)nc  Act.  Ships,  &c.  of  unlicensed  persons  trading  to  the  East  Indies,  to  be  forfeited,  and  double  the 
value;  one-fourth  to  the  person  v>ho  shall  .seize  or  inform,  the  other  to  tlie  Company,  W’ho  shall  bear  the 
charges  of  the  prosecution. 

130.  Persons  found  wdthiii  tlie  Company’s  limits,  to  be  deemed  unlawfid  traders. 

131.  Such  persons  shall  be  subject  also  to  fine  and  imprisonment. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxr 

132.  May  be  arrested,  and  sent  to  England  for  trial. 

13:^.  t’oinpany's  (iovernors  and  Ag(‘nts  empowered  to  arrest  oftt‘n(iers,  and  seize  tlieir  vessels. 

13  k IV^rsons  resigning,  or  dismissed  the  service,  remaining  in  India  aller  the  time  allowed  them  to 
depai  t,  .shall  he  deemed  unlawful  traders. 

13.>.  All  goods  shipped  for  the  East  Indies,  except  licensed  by  the  Tompany,  or  under  the  provision»» 
of  this  Act;  and  all  goods  taken  out  of  any  ship  on  her  \(>y;ige  home,  to  he  forfeiletl  with  dmdde  value 
The  Master  to  forfeit  i?1000  and  all  his  wages,  and  Ix'  rendered  incapable  of  serving  the  (\)m|):inY  ai;ain 

l.'Ki.  No  British  subject  shall  trade  to  India,  under  a ecuninission  from  any  foreign  State,  <m  penalty 
of  •f^OO;  one  half  to  the  informer,  who  shall  ^iie  h)r  the  same,  the  i)ther  to  the  ('(»m|)any. 

137.  No  Governor,  Member  of  (.V)uncil,  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Coin  t,  or  person  emj)loved  in  cob 
lecting  the  revenues,  or  in  the  admiiii‘'tralion  ot‘ justiee,  shall  be  allowed  to  tiade,  on  penally  of  treble 
the  value;  half  to  the  (.hnupany,  and  ludi'  to  the  informer  suing  for  the  same. 

1.38.  No  British  subject  to  Ix'  roncerneil  In  sending  goods  to  Europe  by  w\'\y  of  Suez,  or  In  any  othei 
channel  than  allowed  by  this  Act.  IVnalty  double  the  value. 

139.  'riie  abov'c  not  to  be  considered  as  extending  to  sidling  goods  to  the  subjects  of  fuieigii  States, 
or  acting  as  agents  for  foreigners. 

140.  Directions  how  ollieers  are  to  be  prosecuted. 

141.  Directions  how  actions  are  to  he  laid.  Limitation  of  actions,  process. 

112.  Attorney  General  may  exhihit  eorn|)!aints  .against  illicit  traders.  ClaiMh'sline  traders  to  pay  (he 
King's  duties,  and  a reparation  to  the  C’omjianv  of  [xt  cent,  of  the  value.  If  hill  dismisseil  in  favoiii 
of  defendant,  the  ('ompany  to  jiay  costs,  if  a decree  is  obtained,  <h*fendant  must  pay  costs, 

113.  Upon  information  of  illicit  trading,  if  the  Gompany  shall  elect  to  piel’er  the  complaint,  there 
shall  be  paid  to  the  informer  one-third  of  the  shigle  value  of  the  concern;  if  it  is  agreed  to  prosecute  for 
the  penalties,  informer  may  sue  ; nor  shall  the  action  be  discontinued  wilbout  Gompanv's  consent. 