

In  Dccemher,  17JK>,  the  (’onipany  adopted  a new  system  for  tliclr  shipping  concerns,  and  determined 
in  future  to  (*mploy  no  ship  but  such  ns  the  owners  should  build  for  their  service,  and  should  expressly 
engage  to  continue  then'iii  for  six  voyages.  At  the  same  time  all  the  old  ships  then  in  the  service  were 
considered  holli  by  the  ConipaJiy  and  the  owners  as  permanently  engaged  therein  for  the  performance 
of  six  voyages,  at  a fixed  rale  of  fr(*iglit  in  each  season,  with  an  additional  allowance  for  the  actual 
expellees  incurred  by  war,  or  preparation  for  war,  to  be  then  srfth'd  nnrl  agreed  upon  between  the  Couit  of 
Directors  and  the  old  owners  acting  in  a body;  and  from  this  time  the  ships,  as  tliey  came  in  turn  for  voy- 
ages, were  employed  without  any  lender  being  made  iluring  their  existence;  and  to  provide  for  the  future 
want  of  shipiiing  hy  public  advertisement  and  open  eompdition,  an  Act  afterwards  passed,  by  whicli  it  was 
ordained,  that  IVom  and  after  passing  the  said  Act,  (.‘i9  Geo.  III.  chap.  89),  the  C’ompany  should  employ 
ill  their  regular  service  no  ships  but  such  as  should  be  contracted  for  to  serve  the  said  Company,  as  they 
.should  have  occasion  to  employ  them,  and  that  from  time  to  time,  whenever  the  said  Company  should 
have  occasion  to  cause  any  ship  or  ships  to  b(?  built  for  their  service,  the  Court  of  Directors  should  give 
notice  thereof  hv  public  advertisement,  and  therein  state  the  burthen  of  tlie  ship  or  ships  wanted,  &c.  and 
recc‘ive  proposals  fur  building  and  fri'ighting  ships;  and  the  proposals  ollering  the  lowest  freight,  to  be 
accepted,  without  favour  or  partiality.” 

This  alteration  in  the  sliljiping  system  led  the  Company  to  a consideration  as  to  the  situations  in 
which  the  (’omniandcrs  and  ofiicers  would  be  placed  wdieii  their  resjiective  ships  should  be  w'orn  out.  'flic 
perpetuity  of  bottoms,  though  very  properly  never  acknowledged  by  the  C’oiiipany,  yet  got  into  practice 
by  the  favour  and  indiilgenee  of  the  (’ourt  of  Directors,  though  contrary  to  their  original  principle.  With 
the  continuance  of  liottoms  came  on  the  continuance  of  commands;  and  the  sale  of  those  commands  was 
universally  known,  and  continued  to  be  the  invariable  practice  of  the  service,  though  in  direct  contradiction 
to  the  regulations  of  the  Company. 

The  high  freight  paid  by  the  Company,  w^as  in  a great  degree  occasioned  by  this  sale  of  commands,  or, 
as  it  is  usually  termed,  the  good-w  ill,  which  in  some  instances  has  risen  to  i^l0,000,  hut  on  an  average  may 
he  computed  at  nCS,()()0  for  a new  ship,  'fhis  practice  origiimled  with  the  acting  owner,  who  is  styled  the 
ship’s  husband,  and  who  sold  it  to  the  Captain  to  whom  he  gave  the  command,  wdicn  the  .ship  was  first 
taken  into  the  service.  After  this  sale,  the  command  became  the  transferrable  property  of  the  Captain; 
and  when  he  left  the  ship,  he  was  considered  to  have  an  undoubted  right  to  sell  the  command  to  the  highest 
bidder;  or,  if  lie  died,  the  same  right  was  to  go  to  his  heirs. 