

1790.  The  (’ompany  gave  public  notice  that  tliey  w'ould  thenceforth  allow  interest,  at  the  rale  ol 
1}  per  cent,  upon  all  tlieir  outstanding  bombs,  though  bearing  an  obligation  to  pay  only^  \ jier  cent.,  (‘N<ept 
those  wliich  were  ordered  to  be  paid  olf. 

In  tlie  month  of  November  the  British  forces  captured  Foul  Point  on  Madagascar,  heloiiging  to  (he 
French;  likewise  several  other  small  places  they  held  on  the  east  side  of  that  island. 

It  appears,  liy  accounts  made  up  at  the  East  Indi.x  House,  that  in  nine  }t*ars,  1 7S.>  to  1 7tM  inchi^ivj*, 
the  Company's  losses,  by  capture  or  otherwise,  were  being  17s.  7il.  per  cent,  on  the  aim^unt  ol 

their  imports  and  exports,  which  during  that  period  w^as  ol\‘i3,<?l(),.5.jG;  and  that  the  sea  damage*  ol  those 
cargoes  w'as  .X’ 1(30,.' 191,  or  14s.  I3d.  per  cent,  on  tlie  invoice  amount. 

The  shipping  concerns  of  the  Company,  which  w^ere  lell  to  the  entire  management  of  the  Coni  I ol 
Directors  at  the  time  when  the  legislature  as.siinied  a enntroul  over  the  other  points  connec  ted  w it  h tlie 
welfare  and  support  of  the  British  possessions,  having  occasioned  continual  dissensions  ami  eoiiti-t^ 
amongst  themselves,  it  was  in  this  year  resolved,  after  much  discussion  and  delibcralioii,  to  new  iiuuh  l dial 
important  and  essential  branch  of  their  affairs. 

Previous  to  this  period  the  Company  employed  ships  built  specially  for  their  sc  i vice,  and  used  in 
none  other  so  long  as  they  were  considered  fit  for  their  use,  wdiicli  was  lour  voyages;  and  u In  n u oi  ii 
out,  other  ships  were  built  iii  their  room,  and  the  new  shi|is  replaced  the  old  in  <*veiy  uqurt. 
They  were  officered  hymen  devoted  wholly  to  that  service,  and  regulated  liy  oM  customs  and  standing 
rules.  There  was  no  written  engagement  on  the  jiart  of  the  owners,  that  they  wuuM  conliniu*  their  ships 
in  the  Company’s  service,  nor  on  tSe  part  of  the  Company  that  they  should  be  employe il , however,  the 


Ixxvili 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COiniERCE 


custom  was  so  well  established,  that  the  parties  mutually  relied  upon  it,  each  considering  the  other  bound, 
by  ties  of  honour,  and  by  their  mutual  interest,  to  observe  their  implied  customary  engagements.  In  point 
of  form,  when  it  came  to  a ship’s  turn  to  be  employed,  a regular  tender  on  the  part  of  the  owners  was 
sent  in,  in  writing,  olforing  the  ship  in  (jiiestiou  for  the  Company’s  service  for  one  voyage,  and  proposing 
a particular  person  as  Captain;  and  upon  this  tender  a charter-party  was  entered  into  for  one  voyage',  uitli- 
out  reference  to  any  previous  or  subsequent  service  of  the  same  ship;  hut  although  the  ships  were  tendered 
from  voyage  to  voyage,  and  a f’aptain  proposed  for  each  voyage,  yet.  the  owners  were  not  at  liberty,  with- 
out the  consent  of  the  Company,  to  displace  any  person  having  been  regularly  put  into  the  command  of  a 
ship  according  to  the  usage  of  the  service. 