

1 15.  This  stock  to  be  a guarantee  fund,  for  securing  to  tlie  Company  their  capital,  at  the  value  oi 
200  per  cent.,  in  case  their  own  funds  shall  prove  insuilicient,  at  the  expiration  of  the  Utiu  Ibr  determining 
of  their  exclusive  trade,  after  payment  of  their  debts,  and  as  a guarantee  fur  the  like,  wdiile  they  trade  on 
a joint  stock.  After  making  good  such  deficiency,  the  surplus,  if  any,  shall  belong  to  the  jiublie. 

110.  Hank  to  lay  lielbre  Parliament  annually  an  account  of  the  money  so  paid  in  by  the  Company. 

1 17.  'riie  securities  givi*ii  by  cashiers  of  the  Hank  to  be  extended  to  this  Act. 

118.  Hank  to  be  allowed  out  of  the  dividends  such  sums  for  their  services  ns  tlie  Lords  of  the 
Treasury  shall  think  fit. 

119.  If  the  Company  fail  of  making  siuli  pfiynu'nts  to  the  Hank,  it  may  be  sued  lor  in  the  Courts, 
and  recovered  with  damages. 

120.  Hank  to  give  the  Comjiany  a e(‘rtilicato  of  the  monies  so  paid  in. 

J2I.  If  it  is  inconvvui^'^ft  0)  the  Company  to  make  the  payments  at  the  time  required,  the  Lords  of 
the  Treasury  are  allowed  to  postpone  the  periods  of  such  paynumts. 

122.  If  by  extraordinary  cxpences  for  w\ar,  or  preparations  for  war,  the  Company’s  funds  shall  fall 
short  of  allow'ing  the  payment  of  .C5()0,000  annually  into  the  Exeheipior,  the  deficiency  shall  not  be  made 
good,  so  as  to  impede  the  accumulation  of  the  Guarantee  Fund. 

123.  31iis  Act  not  to  affect  the  rights  of  the  public  or  the  Company  in  the  territorial  acquisitions 
and  revenues,  beyond  tlie  further  term  granted. 

121.  Conijiany’s  separate  fund,  amounting  to  J^’lt57,89fi  7s.  Id,  over  and  above  1?9,75()  capital  stock; 
also  part  of  the  said  fund,  may  he  appropriated  in  an  increased  dividend  of  10s.  per  cent. 

125.  No  grant  of  new  sjilaries,  increase  ol*  salaries,  or  pensions  above  1^200  piT  aiimini,  to  be  made 
but  with  the  approbation  of  the  Hoard  of  Commissioners. 

12ti.  .Annual  produce  of  the  revenues,  amount  sales  of  goods  and  stores,  annual  disbursements, 
amount  of  debts,  amount  of  Interest,  state  of  their  ellects,  and  a list  of  their  establisiiments  in  India;  as 
also  an  annual  account  of  their  commercial  receipts  and  charges  at  home,  a statement  of  the  bond  and 
other  <lebts,  witli  the  amount  of  interest,  with  an  account  of  new  or  increased  salaries  and  pensions,  to  be 
annually  laid  before  Parliament. 

127.  Debt  of  the  Company  to  Ills  Majesty  for  the  hire  of  troops,  and  of  the  public  to  the  Company 
for  th(*  mainti  nance  of  jirisoners  at  the  taking  of  Manilla  in  17(i2,  and  for  customs  on  tea  returned  by 
llie  buvers  in  17S  I-,  miUuuIJy  agreed  to  be  discharged  and  done  away  until  the  S-Uh  of  December,  1792. 