

162.  Prosecutions  in  consequence  of  this  Act,  to  be  commenced  within  three  years  ot  the  otiencei  In 
the  absence  of  the  party  aggrieved,  within  three  years  of  their  return  to  Great  Britain. 

Act  to  commence  from  the  1st  of  February,  1794*. 

1794.  By  an  Act  of  34  Geo.  III.  chap.  41,  the  Company  were  released  from  the  obligation  of 
keeping  their  bond  debt  within  the  amount  of  1,500, 000,  and  permitted  to  issue  bonds  to  the  amount 
of  i?2,000,000;  and  they  w^re  also  empowered  to  increase  their  bonds  to  the  amount  of  jPi,000,000 
more  for  the  general  purposes  of  their  trade,  with  the  consent  of  the  Board  of  Controul. 

The  Company’s  saltpetre  warehouses  in  liatclifTe  Highway  were  burnt  the  26th  of  June,  1794. 

By  the  treaty  of  amity,  commerce,  and  navigation  concluded  between  America  and  Great 
Britain,  on  the  19th  of  November,  1794,  it  was  stipulated  that  American  vessels  should  have  liberty 
to  trade  in  all  articles  not  prohibited  in  the  British  settlements  in  India,  and  to  pay  the  same  duties 
as  British  subjects,  but  should  only  carry  the  articles  exported  by  them  from  India,  to  their  own  ports 
In  America. 

The  Company,  in  a loyal  address  to  the  King,  offered  to  raise  and  clothe  three  regiments,  of  1000 
men  each,  for  His  Majesty’s  service  during  the  war;  but  (Jovernment  preferred  their  giving  a bounty  to 
seamen,  which  was  arrordiiigly  done. 

1795.  Hostilities  having  commenced  with  Holland,  it  was  necessary  to  guard  the  eastern  coast  of 
Great  Britain.  Ills  Majesty’s  Ministers,  thinking  it  needful  to  augment  the  strength  of  the  navy  as 
much  as  possible,  apjdied  to  the  East  India  Company  for  such  ships  of  force  as  they  had  at  home.  In 
consequence  of  which,  14  of  their  largest  ships  were  transferred  to  the  use  of  the  Slate,  and  made  into 
54  gun  ships;  some  of  which  were  afterwards  in  the  memorable  engagement  under  Lord  Duncan,  and 
one  (the  Glatton,  commanded  by  Captain  Trollope),  beat  off  and  defeated  five  ships  of  the  enemy. 

On  the  receipt  of  the  intelligence  in  India,  that  war  was  declared  against  Holland  by  Great  Britain, 
expeditions  were  fitted  out  against  their  settlements  in  India,  and  from  England  against  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  which  was  taken  by  (lie  British  forces  September  16,  1795.  Trincomalee  on  Ceylon 
surrendered  to  the  British  troops  August  26,  1795.  Malacca  and  its  dependencies  were  taken  August 
17,  1795.  Cochin  was  taken  October  20,  1795;  ami  a force  detached  against  the  Dutch  fort  at  Quinton 
and  the  factory  at  Porca,  which  were  delivered  up  without  resistance.  These  captures  left  the  Dutch 
without  a single  settlement  or  fi^tory  upon  the  continent  of  India. 