

should  bo  found  to  have  purchased  their  places;  and  in  another  set  of  bunds  of  thi‘  same  tenor,  in  ea^*  they 
should  be  found  to  have  sold  those  places. 

In  December,  17(35,  it  >vas  stated  by  the  Court  of  Directors  that  these  bonds  “ had  not  answon'd 
the  end  anil  purpose  intended;”  and  in  January,  17<>(),  an  oath  was  prescribed  by  them;  but  in  July  following 
the  Court  declared  it  to  be  their  opinion,  that  this  oath  also  h.ad  proved  inelfeetunl,  and  should  be  dis- 
continued.” It  was  discontinued,  and  from  that  timi*  to  the  present  no  ne>v  eiroit  has  been  made  to  cor- 
rect the  evil  complained  of. 

Ill  Fi'briiary,  179(3,  (lie  Court  of  Directors,  desirous  of  abolishing  this  practice*,  w hich  the  inteii  st  of 
the  Company  and  the  public  l ecpiired,  and  ofalfording  that  relief  to  the  Commanders  w hlrli  they  had  leason 
to  expect  from  the  liberal  senlinienfs  >YliicIi  bad  been  expressed  by  a (ieniaal  Court  of  I’loprielors  on  the 
subject,  aller  much  deliberation,  came  to  tlie  following  resolutions: 

“ That  the  bottom  of  each  ship  be  valued  at  cl4500,  and  that  ench  ('ommaiuh  r lu*  rejiaiil  two-thirds 
of  the  sum  he  sliall  be  found  to  have  paid  for  the  purchase  of  the  butlom.  f)ii  this  piinciple,  the  com* 
mander  who  paid 


£.j/j00  or  upw'ards  received  i?5,0()() 

5,000  4,s3ii 

4,. >00 4,o00 

4, (KM)  i«(; 

3,m 


01'  upwarils 

2. . 5(H) 

2,(H)() 

1.. 5()() 

1,000 


(‘celM'd  aC;3,500 
,3, 1 (JO 

>,.5(10 

-,00(1 


and  the  Commanders  wdio  bad  obtained  tlie  command  graluitonsly,  received  X’J,500. 

“ That  cveuy  Commander  of  a n’gular  ship  in  the  service  of  the  Comjiany,  lx*  suhject  to  (lie  payment 
of  i:-\500  on  the  conclusion  of  each  voyage,  which  sum  shall  not  be  remitted  in  any  case  whatever,  witliout 
the  approbation  of  a General  Court  summoned  for  that  [nirposc.” 

The  amount  of  the  bonds  issued  to  the  Commanders  of  the  regular  ships  In  the  Company's  service, 
in  consecjucnce  of  the  first  resolution,  was  X’37(3,505,  the  interest  of  vvliieb,  at  5 per  cent,  per  uiinum,  is 


Ixxx  RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 

ri8,825;  so  that  it  will  require  thirty-seven  regular  ships  annually  to  defray  the  interest,  without  reducing 
the  principal. 

As  the  Company’s  regulations  now  stand,  it  is  out  of  the  power  of  money  to  obtain  a command  for  a 
person  deficient  in  the  qualifications  requisite  for  such  a situation.  Great  care  is  taken  that  no  person, 
without  competent  merit,  shall  be  promoted.  A man  must  enter  very  young  into  the  service,  begin  with 
the  lowest  station,  and  act  in  that  station  with  diligence  and  propriety;  he  must  go  on  progressively 
through  superior  offices,  acquit  himself  in  them  to  the  satisfaction  of  Ids  Commander,  and,  upon  each 
voyage,  undergo  a professional  examination  before  he  is  admitted  to  be  sworn  in.  All  these  arc  necessary 
trials  of  his  merit  and  nautical  skill;  and  aft<‘r  so  much  experience,  and  such  repeat(*d  proofs  of  liis  capa- 
city, qualifications,  and  merits,  he  is  considered  as  entitled  to  command  a ship ; having,  by  the  labour  of 
from  ten  to  fifteen  yi'ars,  shewn  his  ability  to  discharge  the  duties  of  tlie  station. 