

The  Presidencies  of  Bombay  and  Madras  experienced  heavy  losses  from  fire  in  this  year.  On  the  17tli 
of  February  a dreadful  fire  broke  out  in  the  former  place,  which  destroyed  the  wliole  of  the  bazar,  or 
market-place,  the  barracks,  custom-house,  &c.  and  threatened  the  total  ruin  of  the  settlement.  Tlie  jiri- 
vate  loss  was  stated  at  near  .50,00,000  rupees.  On  the  .30th  of  April  a destructive  lire  broke  out  near  the 
custom-house  at  Madras,  which  destroyed  immense  quantities  of  grain,  and  olhi  r articles. 

In  this  year,  after  much  deliberation,  a final  arrangement  was  made  for  the  rcguliitif)n  <»f  tlic  jirivatc 
trade  between  India  and  Great  Biitain.  It  was  determined  by  the  Company  that,  in  addition  to  the  3,000 
tons  of  shipping  of  the  33d  of  Geo.  TII.  a further  quantity  of  5,000  tons  m’  much  as  might  be 
wanted,  .should  be  assigned,  and  which  should  not  be  diverted  to  political  or  w mi  like  purposes,  but  should 
sail,  laden  with  private  trade  goods  only,  within  the  line  WTatber  season.  ICxcejd  sal![)('tre  and  piece-goods, 
all  articles  might  be  laden  upon  them;  light  and  heavy  goods  were  to  beussoiled  by  the  Company's  olliceis; 
and  as  the  (.'ompany  were  answerable  to  the  owners  for  the  freiglil,  they  were  to  lade  lIk*  ^hips,  If  private 
merchants  declined.  These  ships  wen;  to  be  built  either  in  England  or  in  Iiulia 

1803.  The  Company  were  involved  in  war  with  the  Maliratta  Piinces,  Dowlut  Rao  Sciiidcah,  and 
Ragojee  Rounsla,  Rajah  of  Bcrar;  but  from  the  well-planned  and  vigorous  prosecution  of  it,  the  coimtiics 
of  both  those  Princes  were  overrun,  and  each  of  them  was  compelled  to  conclude  a j)cace;  that  with  the 
Rajah  of  Berar  was  signed  on  the  17th  of  December,  by  which  he  ceded  to  the  English,  in  jicipctual  sove- 
reignty, the  province  of  Cuttack,  including  the  district  and  fort  of  Balasore,  and  also  all  the  tcii  itorics, 
the  revenues  of  which  he  had  previously  collected,  in  conjunction  with  the  Souhahdar  ofllu*  Diraii,  toge- 
ther with  those  shunted  to  the  westward  of  the  River  Wurdah;  and,  lastly,  to  engage  tu*v(T  to  take,  or 
retain  in  his  service,  any  Frenchman,  or  the  subject  of  any  other  European  or  American  power,  without 
the  consent  of  the  British  Government. 


Ixxxvi 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


The  peace  with  Scindcah  was  signed  on  the  30th  of  December.  Ry  this  treaty  It  was  agreed,  on  the 
part  of  Scindcah,  first,  to  cede  to  the  English,  in  perpetual  sovereignty,  all  his  forts,  territories,  and  rights 
in  the  Dooab,  or  couritiy  situated  in  northern  llindostan,  between  the  Rivers  Ganges  and  Jumna;  secondly, 
to  cede  to  the  English,  in  perpetual  sovereignty,  the  fort  and  territory  of  Baroach  in  the  Guzzerat,  and 
the  fort  and  territory  of  Ahmednughiir  in  the  Decan;  and  likewise  all  the  territories  which  belonged  to 
him  before  the  commencement  of  the  war,  which  are  situated  to  tlie  southward  of  the  Adjuntce  Hills, 
including  all  the  districts  between  that  range  of  mountains  and  the  River  Godavery;  thirdly,  to  renounce 
for  ever  all  claims  upon  the  Emperor  Shah  Alum,  and  to  engage  never  again  to  interfere  in  the  affairs 
of  that  monarch.  This  treaty  also  contained  a clause  similar  to  that  with  the  Rajah  of  Berar,  respecting 
the  employment  of  Europeans. 