


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxxlii 


Some  attempts  were  made  to  obtain  from  T'ippoo  a satisfactory  adjustment  of  iljc  dlllerenccs,  and  to 
remove  every  cause  of  dissatisfaction,  if  any  really  existed,  wlilcli  proved  uumkcc  ; upon  wliic  h the 
British  army  from  Madras,  under  the  command  of  (General  Hairis,  entered  the  territorus  of  Mysore  on 
the  5th  of  Mareli,  1799,  and  commenced  operations  by  the  capture  of  several  foils.  Tlu*  nomhay  army, 
under  Tdeutenant  (ieneral  Stuart,  inarched  from  raiianore  on  the  "il st  of  February.  His  aiiuv,  on  the 
6th  of  Alareli,  was  attacked  by  Tippoo  at  Seedaseer,  ^^hen  the  Sultaifs  army  was  defeated,  and  (oinpUtely 
dispers('d.  The  English  army  invested  Seriiigapatam,  and  their  butteries  opeiietl  on  the  IlOth  of  iVi^iiil; 
and  on  the  Itli  of  May  the  place  was  taken  by  assault,  in  which  '^ripj)oo  Sultan  fell;  the  lossofthe  English  in 
the  attack  wa^.  but  trifling.  Thus  ended  a war  which  retlected  gieat  honour  on  those  who  were  ein|)loyed 
in  it,  and  under  whose  direction  it  was  most  ably  conducteil;  which  frustrated  the  hopes  of  the  French, 
and  gave  the  English  peaceable  jiossession  of  immense  ten  it«u  ies  and  revenues.  The  specie  captured 
amounted  to  about  Hi, 00, <)()()  pagodas,  and  the  amount  of  jewels  was  about  9,00,000  more. 

The  Governor  General  placed  the  descendant  of  the  Rajah,  who  had  been  dis[)ossessed  of  his  rights 
l)y  ITyder  Ally,  on  the  Musiuid,  and  di\ided  the  territories  in  the  following  manner: 

To  the  East  India  Company  the  province  of  (hmara,  and  the  districts  of  (\>imhatoie  and  Dc  ram- 
porum,  with  all  the  territory  between  the  Goinjiany's  possessions  in  the  Carnatic  and  those  in  tin*  IMalahar 
province;  the  forts  and  posts  forming  the  heads  of  the  passes  aliove  the  Ghauts  and  the  'fahh*  T.und;  togetlu  r 
with  the  fortress,  city,  and  island  of  Seringapatam,  the  possession  of  whit Ii  secures  llit*  eommunicatioii 
between  the  territories  on  both  coasts.  By  this  partition  the  I'ast  India  Ctunpany  accpiired  an  augment- 
ation of  direct  territorial  revenues  to  the  annual  amount  of  7,77,170  (’anteria  pagodas,  from  whit h a 
tleduetion  of  2,1-0,000  W'as  made  for  tlit‘  maintenance  of  the  families  of’  llyder  Ally  and  of  Tippoo  Sultan. 

The  Nizam  acquired  territories  yielding  revenues  of  ,5,07,0:12  star  pagodas. 

MVi  the  Mahrattas,  notwithstanding  tluy  had  btuin*  no  part  in  the  expence  or  hazard  t>f  the  W’ar, 
were  givtai  territories  wdiich  yielded  a re\enue  of  2,60,957  (’anteria  pagotlas. 

The  country  reserved  for  the  Rajali  of  ISIysore  is  on  the  'ruble  Land,  above  the  Ghauts,  remarkably 
compact,  with  a strong  frontier  on  every  side,  yielding  a revenue  of  10,7^,076  Canteria  pagodiis. 