

In  consequence  of  the  high  price  of  grain  throughout  the  kingdom,  the  East  India  Company,  with 
the  concurrence  and  approbation  of  Ilis  Majesty’s  Ministers,  sent  out  in  August,  1799,  directions  to  their 
Governments  in  India  to  afford  every  encouragement  to  individuals  to  send  rice  and  other  grain  to  England, 
engaging  that  the  ships  so  employed,  should  be  allowc‘d  to  carry  out,  in  return,  cargoes,  as  formerly  allowed 
to  Country  ships;  and  on  the  .SOth  of  September,  in  order  to  encourage  as  large  an  importation  as  possible 
before  the  next  harvest  could  be  got  in,  they  sent  further  directions  to  India,  authorizing  such  ships  as 
brought  iliree-fourths  of  them  tonnage  in  rice,  to  bring  also  such  other  goods  as  are  usually  imported  into 
this  country,  with  an  indemnification  in  case  rice  should  be  under  certain  prices  on  their  arrival  in  England, 
They  also  offered  to  grant  licences  to  any  ships  to  be  sent  from  England  to  India,  for  the  purpose  of 
bringing  home  rice,  on  very  liberal  conditions;  but  under  the  express  stipulation  that  the  ships  should  be 
cleared  out  from  the  Custom  House  before  the  1st  of  December,  18(X),  or  from  any  port  in  the  East 
Indies  before  the  1st  of  September,  1801.  Large  quantities  of  rice  were  in  consequence  imported  from 
India,  chiefly  from  Bengal,  and  between  the  months  of  June,  1799,  and  August,  1800,  twenty  India 
built  ships  returned  to  India  from  the  Port  of  London  with  cargoes,  of  which  the  invoices  amounted  to 
i^()l3,247  12s.  (id.  and  from  the  Island  of  Madeira  to  J?  11 6,505  Os.  fid.  and  their  repairs,  outfit,  and 
supplies  in  England  to  i?202,877  12s.  3d, 

1801.  The  settlement  of  Bencoolcn,  on  the  West  Coast  of  Sumatra,  being  a heavy  expence  to  the 
Company,  the  Court  of  Directors  came  to  the  resolution  of  reducing  the  establisliment  there,  and  other 
subordinate  places,  and  transferring  the  civil  servants  to  Madras;  the  recent  great  addition  of  territory 
to  that  Government  requiring  an  additional  number  of  servants. 

From  the  1st  of  August,  1801,  the  civil  government  of  Malabar  was  transferred  from  Bombay  to 
Madras;  and  the  interior  administration  of  the  City  of  Surat  and  its  dependencies  having  become  vested 
by  treaty  in  the  Company,  the  establishment  of  Chief  and  Council  was  abolished,  and  a Lieutenant 
Governor,  a Judge,  and  Magistrate,  with  some  subordinate  officers,  were  appointed. 

The  preliminaries  of  a treaty  of  peace  with  France  were  signed  the  1st  of  October,  1801,  by  the 
second  article  of  which,  Great  Britain  agreed  to  restore  to  the  French  Republic  and  her  allies  all  the 
possessions  and  colonies  occupied  or  conquered  by  the  English  force  in  the  course  of  the  war,  with  the 
exception  of  Ceylon,  whicli  His  Britannic  Majesty  reserved  to  himself  in  full  and  entire  sovereignty.  By 
the  third  article,  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  was  to  be  open  to  the  commerce  and  navigation  of  the  two  con- 
tracting powers,  who  were  to  enjoy  therein  the  same  advantages. 