

On  the  21st  of  February,  17f)8,  a treaty  was  concluded  with  the  Nabob  of  Oiide,  by  which  the 
subsidiary  force  was  increased  to  10,000  men.  The  sum  stipulated  to  be  paid  by  the  Na!)o])  was  70,00,000 
Oude  rupees,  including  some  stipends  and  pensions  to  be  paid  to  the  Begums,  Princes,  &c.  Tliis  treaty 
continued  in  f6rce  till  1801,  when  it  was  sujKTseded  by  another,  dated  November  10,  I SOI,  under  which 
districts  w'ere  ceded  in  perpetual  sovereignly  to  the  (^ompany,  estimated  at  an  annual  gross  rent  of 
laicknow  rupees  1,3.), 23, 174,  or  1 ,.502,0.52.  I'hls  territorial  cession  was  declared  to  he  in  lieu  of  the 
subsidy,  and  all  expenees  on  account  of  defensive  engagements;  and  no  demand  was  to  he  made  in  future 
upon  the  Nabob  on  any  account  whatsoever. 

The  Company,  in  consideration  of  the  services  rendered  them  l>y  Lord  Hobart  during  the  period  he 
was  Governor  of  JMadras,  granted  him  a pension  of  i.’1.500  per  annum,  payable  out  of  the  territorial 
revenues  in  India  for  the  period  of  the  Company’s  charter,  if  he  should  so  long  live^and  to  commence 
from  the  time  of  his  (jiiltting  the  Government  of  Madras. 

8ince  the  peace  of  Seringapatam,  and  more  especially  ^inec  the  year  1790,  the  destruction  of  the 
Briti.sh  |)ower  in  India  formed  the  favourite  and  unremitting  object  of  Tippoo  Sultan’s  hopes  and  exertions. 
His  haughty  mind  never  could  he  reconciled  to  the  sacrifice  which  he  was  compelled  to  make  for  tlie 
purchase  of  peace  in  1792;  and  Ids  increasing  eagerness  to  recover  the  extensive  portion  of  his  dondiiions 
then  ceded  to  the  allies,  urged  Idm  to  pursue  a systematic  course  of  intrigue  against  the  British  power 
among  all  the  native  States,  and  to  revert  to  his  ancient  and  hereditary  connexion  with  France,  as  the  only 
eflectual  means  of  gratifying  either  his  aml)itioii  or  He  therefore  dispatched  an  embassy  to 

Zemaun  Shah,  the  object  of  wliieh  was  to  encoura^r  that  Prince  in  liis  long-projected  invasion  of 
Hiiulostan.  He  aKo  .sent  ambassadors  to  the  IMduritius,  where,  on  their  arrival,  a proclamation  was 
issued  by  the  Governor,  wideli  stated  that  an  emliassy  had  arrivcal  with  letters  from  Tippoo  Sultan,  pro- 
posing to  conclude  an  ollensive  and  defensive  alliance  with  the  French;  to  subsidize  and  supply  whatever 
troops  the  French  ndglit  furnish  to  the  Sultan;  and  to  commence  against  the  British  power  in  India  a war 
of  aggression,  for  which  tlie  Sultan  declared  himself  fully  prepared,  and  waiting  with  anxiety  the  moment 
when  the  succour  of  France  should  enable  him  to  satisfy  his  ardent  desire  of  ex[)elling  the  British  nation 
from  India. — A French  force  was  .sent  from  the  Mauritius,  which  landed  at  Mangalore,  the  principal 
oflicers  of  which  were  received  with  extraordinary  marks  of  honour  and  distinction.  These  circumstances 
were  considi'rcd  by  the  Supreme  Government  as  violations  of  the  treaties  of  peace  subsisting  between  him 
and  the  ( -ompany,  and  acts  of  direct  hostility  and  aggression  against  the  British  Government  in  India. 
A treaty  was  concluded  with  the  Nizam,  who  at  this  period  had  an  army  of  14,000  men,  commanded  by 
I'rciich  oflicers,  that  had  obtained  a degree  of  discipline  superior  in  every  respect  to  tluit  ot*  any  /lative 
iniantry,  excepting  those  in  the  Company’s  service.  By  this  treaty  an  increase  of  tlie  British  subsidiary 
force  serving  with  His  Highness,  was  increased  by  4,400  men.  This  detachment  reached  Ilydrabad  on  the 
10th  of  October,  and  on  the  22d,  under  the  orders  of  the  Nizam,  and  with  the  co-operation  of  a body 
of  bis  cavalry,  surrounded  the  French  camp,  disarmed  the  sepoys,  and  secured  the  persons  of  all  the 
nlFiccrs.  Tliis  operation  was  happily  effected  without  bloodshed  and  without  contest. 