

1799.  The  empire  of  llintlostan  being  threatened  w ith  Invasion  by  Zemann  Shah,  an  embassy  w'as 
sent  from  Bengal  to  Persia,  wdiicli  was  received  with  honour,  and  .siiecec  ded  In  the  principal  objects  of  its 
inission.  The  King  of  Persia  was  not  only  induced  to  attack  Khoiosaii,  w hich  Iiad  the  effect  of  nith- 
drawing  Zeinaun  Shah  from  his  designs  upon  India,  but  entered  into  treaties  of  political  and  commercial 
alliance  with  tlie  British  (iovernment,  which,  while  they  completely  excluded  the  French  nation  from 
JVrsla,  gave  the  Englisli  every  benefit  wdiieh  they  could  derive  iiom  the  connexion. 

1800.  A perpetual  and  general  defensive  alliance  was  coiieliuled  on  tin*  r2t!i  of  October,  at  TTydrabad, 
between  the  East  India  Company  and  Ills  Iliglmess  the  Ni/ain,  w hereby  Ills  Highness,  in  eommululion 
for  the  subsidy  payable  to  the  Conq»any,  ceded  to  him.  In  ]Kr|)etiiuI  so\ereignt),  all  the  (eiritoiles 
acquired  by  His  Iliglmess  under  tlie  treaty  of  Seringapatam  on  the  IStljof*  March,  1792;  and  also  aJl 
the  territories  acquired  by  His  Iligluics.s  under  the  trc'aly  oi  M\sore  f)n  the  22(1  of  dune,  1 v.  .th  tlut 
exception  of  certain  districts  situated  to  the  northward  ol  the  River  1 oonibuddrali,  whit.li  Ills  IlighiK^^s 
retained  in  exchange  for  the  provineas  of  Adoiil  and  Nundyal;  and  for  all  His  Hlghness'.s  n-niuniiiig 
possessions  and  dependencies  situated  to  the  southward  of  that  river,  and  of  t!i(‘  River  Kiistna  ht  low  its 
junction  with  the  Toombiiddrah,  the  provinces  of  Adoiii  and  Nnndyal,  and  all  the  said  distiicts,  ptjsx  .smns, 
and  dependencies  of  His  Highness,  .situated  to  the  .southward  of  the  Toombiiddrah,  and  of  the  ICiMna 
below  its  junction  with  the  Toombuddrah,  being  ceded  to  the  Company.  The  annual  revenues  of  the 
countries  ceded,  amounted,  accordmg  to  the  valuation  contained  in  the  schedules,  to  62,71,262  rupees, 

♦L2 


Ixxxiv 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


The  Company,  in  consequence  of  the  eminent  services  rendered  by  the  Marquis  Wellesley,  granted 
him  an  annuity  of  dPSOOO,  to  issue  out  of  the  territorial  revenues  in  India,  for  the  term  of  20  years, 
provided  the  Company’s  exclusive  trade  should  so  long  continue,  and  the  territorial  revenue  should  so 
long  remain  in  possession  of  tlie  Company,  to  commence  from  the  1st  of  September,  1798. 

The  Company,  taking  into  consideration  the  iinremitted  exertions  of  Mr.  Henry  Dundas,  who  had 
intimated  his  intention  of  relinquishing  the  situation  of  President  of  the  Board  of  Commissioners  for 
the  Affairs  of  India,  gave  him  an  annuity  of  i^2000  during  the  existence  of  the  Company’s  present  limit- 
ation of  their  exclusive  trade,  to  be  paid  to  him,  his  executors,  or  assigns. 