

The  Island  of  Ceylon,  which,  on  intelligence  of  tike  war  between  England  and  Holland  in  171)5,  was 
surrendered  in  trust  for  the  Prince  of  Orange,  to  whose  cause  the  majority  of*  the  Dutch  Avere  attached, 
remained  an  appendage  to  the  Presidency  of  IMadras  until  1799,  when  it  was  transferred  to  the  Ch'owii  of 
England,  and  formed  into  an  establishment  wholly  unconnect(‘d  with  the  East  India  Company,  and  subject 
only  to  the  controul  of  Ilis  Majesty's  Ministers.  In  1803,  in  consequence  of  the  troops  ol’  the  King  of 
Candy  having  committed  hostilities  against  the  inhahitants  of  the  English  territories,  an  army  was  marched 
into  the  interior,  which  succeeded  in  obtaining  possession  of  the  capital  of  Candy;  but  from  the  un- 
healtliiness  of  the  climate,  they  were  soon  corii|)elled  to  surrender  it  to  the  Candians,  who  pnt  the  garrison 
to  death.  AH  the  other  fortn  sses  in  ('andy  were  likewise  abandoned,  and  it  was  some  time  before  peace 
was  restored  between  the  two  countries. 


1801.  A fleet  of  homeward-bound  ships  from  China,  consisting  of  sixt(‘cn  sail,  under  the  command 
of  Captain  Nathaniel  Dance,  fell  in  with  a Erencli  sejuadnm  under  Admiral  Linols,  consisting  of  one  sldj) 
of  80  guns,  2 heavy  frigates,  a corvette,  and  a brig,  otV  Pulo  Auore,  in  the  China  seas,  on  tlie  1 1th  of 
February.  Captain  Dance  ma<le  such  preparations  for  receiving  them,  that,  on  th(*ir  altaeking  the  ships  on 
(he  following  morning,  they  were  so  severely  handled,  that  Admiral  Linois  hauled  his  wind,  and  made 
sail  to  the  eastward  under  all  sail,  and  the  Company’s  ships  prorei  ded  on  their  \o\  ago. 

The  circumstance  of  so  formidable  a fleet  being  defeated  by  a fleet  of  merchantmen  heavily  laden,  was 
considered  highly  honourable  to  the  British  naval  character.  The  King  conferred  the  honour  of  Knight- 
hood  ujion  Captain  Dance;  and  the  East  India  Company,  with  the  most  liberal  gratitude  for  the  gallantry 
and  good  conduct  evinced  by  the  Commanders,  officers,  and  seamen,  voted  the  follow  ing  sums: 

3’o  C’aptuin  Dance  2,0(K)  guineas,  and  a jiiecc  of  plate  valu(‘d  at  200  guineas. 

To  Captain  3’imins,  whose  ship,  the  Royal  George,  bore  the  brunt  of  the  action,  being  the  leading 
ship,  1 ,0(KI  guineas,  and  a piece  of  plate  value  100  guineas. 

To  each  of  the  other  Commanders  500  guineas,  and  a piece  of  plate  value  50  guinea.s. 

To  the  officers,  petty  ollieers,  and  .seamen  of  the  fleet,  in  Uic  fullowdng  proportions;  ' ' 


Chief  Olficers  guineas  each. 

Second  ditto. 

Tliird  and  fourth  ditto  SO  ditto. 

Eiflh  and  sixth  ditto  « % ^ I'iO  ditto. 

Pursers  and  Surgeons  80  ditto. 


Suigeons  mates  guineas  c^cli, 