

It  is  necessary  to  observe  that  the  above  allowance  of  tonnage  is  not  paid  for  by  the  Company  to  the 
owners  of  the  ship,  nor  can  the  Captain  claim  the  exemption  from  freight  upon  that  tonnage  as  his  riglit; 
but  it  is  considered  as  a boon  to  him  from  his  owners. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxxi 


Trade  from  Port  to  Port. — Ships  destined  for  Bombay  and  China  aro  allowed  to  be  freighted 
l)y  the  Commanders  and  officers  from  Bombay  to  China  on  their  own  account,  upon  paying  a sum  equal  to 
that  whicli  the  Company  are  charged  l)y  the  owners  for  demurrage,  and  sucli  i\niher  sum  ns  muv  be 
stipulated.  Ships  for  Madras  and  China  are  allowed  to  be  freighted  in  like  manner. 

PAbSENOERs. — The  allowance  for  passage  money  outward  and  homeward  is  fixed  by  the  Company, 
and  tiic  C-oniinanders  enter  into  a bond  not  to  take  more  tluin  that  allowances  but,  in  consideration  of 
giving  uj)  their  own  apartments  and  accommodations,  those  sums  in  many^  instances  are  exceeded. 

It  is  impossible  to  form  an  average  estimate  of  the  profits  arising  from  tlie  command  of  an  East 
Indiaman,  so  nmcli  depends  upon  tlie  skill  and  good  management  of  the  Commaiuler  and  the  persons 
employed  by  him,  the  risk  of  the  markets,  his  connexions  and  interest,  wliieh  enable  liini  to  select  Ids 
passengers  from  among  opnlent  persons  returning  to  Europe,  and  many"  other  cireinnstances  depending  on 
chance.  Although  u|)c)ii  a voyage  out  and  home,  tlie  (.Vmmian(ler\s  investment  has  sometimes  produced  a 
small,  and  at  other  times  a large  profit,  inslanceb  Jiave  occurred,  and  those  not  unliequently,  wherein  a 
considerable  loss  has  been  sustained.  Tlie  least  productive  of  the  voy-ages  may  he  generally  estimated  nt 
^2000  per  voy^age;  while  upon  some  others,  such  as  the  eireiiltous  voyages  to  Bomliay  and  China,  of 
which  there  are  not  above  four  in  a season,  the  gain  may  be  from  E8000  to  .PP2, ()()();  tho  major  part  of  tlie 
voyages  may  be  averaged  from  X'dOOO  to  oP5()0().  The  time  occupied  in  ju  rlinming  a voyage,  liom  the 
period  of  the  ship  commencing  the  receipt  of  her  outward  cargo,  to  her  Ix  ing  linally  cleared  of  her  homeward 
one,  varies  according  to  the  ship’s  destinathm,  from  II  to  18  months. 

The  followinf  are  the  rates  of  freiglit  paiil  by  the  Company  from  the  period  the  alteration  took  place 
in  their  shipping  system,  to  the  period  wlien  the  system  of  free  and  open  competition  commcnceil: 


Y.-ars. 

Co.ul  and 

U.iy. 

Bombay 

Chuia 

direct. 

India 

China 

UiMHial  X 
Belli  i*i»!i  r 

\ O.ilS. 

C»'Usl  and 
B.i\. 

1 Bonihny 

t \i 
dir 

per 

uia 

Cl  l. 

Indu  \ 
C\una 

per  Tun. 