

• The  Company  have  freipiently  expressed  tlieir  obligations  to  the  Commanders  and  officers  in  their  sea 
service.  In  one  instance  tliey  observe,  ‘‘  except  for  their  exertions,  their  ability,  and  their  valour,  many  of 
the  great  operations  in  India  would  most  probably  have  been  endangered;  and  they  believe  that,  next  to 
the  bravery  and  perseverance  of  their  land  forces,  the  Company  are  indebted  to  the  distinguished  exertions 
of  those  gentlemen  for  their  present  prosperity.” 

The  junior  officers  derive  very  little  advantage  from  the  privilege  granted  them  to  trade;  and  a 
young  man  entered  into  the  service,  will,  notwithstanding  the  greatest  economy,  expend  upwards 
of  X* 1,000  before  he  can,  witli  the  best  interest,  and  most  fortunate  circumstances,  arrive  to  be  a second 
officcT,  which  is  the  first  station  wherein  his  pay  and  allow^ances  afford  him  a maintenance.  From  that 
station  he  occasionally  becomes  a Commander;  but  most  friMjuently  has  to  perform  one  or  more  voyages 
as  chief  officer.  Having  altaiued  the  command,  the  principal  advantages  resulting  from  that  situation  are, 

1st.  Investment  to  India  or  China,  and  from  India  or  China  home. 

2d.  The  trade  from  port  to  port  in  India,  if  a circuitous  voyage. 

3d.  The  passengers  out>vard  and  homeward, 

IwESTMENT  OUTWARD.— The  Commaiuler  of  each  regular  ship  is  allowed  to  carry  out  to  the  extent  of 
56 { tons  in  any  articles,  excepting  tin,  woollens,  warlike  stores,  clocks,  and  toys.  Of  this  tonnage  he 
may  invest  .£^2,(K)()  in  coral,  precious  stones,  &c.  on  paying  duties  to  the  Company.  ^ 

Ccunmandcrs  of  China  ships  may  cany  out  bullion  to  make  up  any  deficiency  between  the  amount  of 
tlieir  investment  and  .T3,()0(),  and  may  further  carry  out  to  the  amount  of  £3,000  in  bullion  for  the  pur- 
chase of  gold.  They  have  also  leave  occasionally  granted  to  cany  out,  as  ballast,  flints  for  sale  in  China, 
exclusive  of  the  regular  privilege;  and  the  Commanders  of  ships  of  every  destination  are  sometimes  per- 
mitted to  exceed  the  amount  of  their  privilege  outward,  upon  application  to  the  Court. 

If  tlu‘re  be  a ejuuntity  of  provisions  and  stores  in  the  victualling  bill,  exceeding  what  the  owners  may 
think  re(|uisitc  for  the  ship’s  use,  it  is  understood  that  the  Commander  has  the  option  of  filling  up,  on  his 
own  account,  the  wliole  amount  of  each  article  left  deficient  by  the  owners. 

IwvESTMKNT  HOMEWARD.— The  CoiTUiianders  of  China  ships  may  import  38  tons  each,  and  the  Com- 
manders of  other  ships  may  each  import  .30  tons  32  feet  on  theii*  own  account.  The  articles  oi?which  the 
tonnage  is  to  consist,  and  the  duties  ])ayuble  thereon,  are  enumerated  In  the  Company’s  Regulations.  There 
is  also  an  indulgence  of  tonnage,  not  exceeding  30  tons,  exclusive  of  the  above,  granted  to  each  ship, 
provided  the  Commander  shall  not  have  refused  to  receive  on  board  any  goods  tendered  by  the  Com- 
pany’s agents  in  India  or  China. 