

On  the  31st  of  July  a new  treaty  was  concluded  with  the  fjfabob  of  Arcot,  vesting  the  civil  and  mili- 
tary government  of  the  Carnatic  in  the  Company,  together  with  the  full  and  exclusive  right  to  the  reve- 
nues thereof  for  ever;  reserving  to  the  Nabob  the  annual  payment  of  one-fil‘tli  part  of  the  net  collections, 
upon  principles  defined  in  the  treaty ; the  Company  engaging  to  apply  the  annual  sum  of  «C248,442  to  the 
liquidation  of  the  Nabob’s  registered  private  debts,  according  to  the  stipulations  of  a former  treaty,  till  it 
should  be  completed.  The  entii  c defence  of  the  Carnatic,  and  the  maintenance  of  internal  tranquillity  aqd 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES 


lxxx\ 


police,  were  undertaken  by  the  Company.  The  liquidation  of  the  Nabolfs  debts  was  accomplished  in  1801, 
at  which  period  measures  were  taken  for  the  payment  of  other  debts  which  were  not  included  in  those 
classes,  as  well  as  what  were  atlcrvvards  incurred;  and  Commissioners  appointed  for  examining  and  making 
up  the  account,  when  the  annual  sum  of  3,4*0,000  pagodas  was  set  apart  for  the  payment  of  it. 

1802.  A treaty  offensive  and  defensive  was  concluded  with  the  Peishwa  on  tlic  31st  of  DccembiT, 
1802,  which  stipulated  that,  in  consideration  of  the  Company  furnisliing  a permanent  snhsidiary  force  of 
not  less  than  0,000  regular  native  infantry,  with  the  proper  equipment  of  warlike  stores  ami  ammunition, 
the  Peishwa  should  assign  and  cede,  in  perpetuity  to  the  Company,  certain  distiicts  in  the  province  of  (luz- 
zerat,  and  territories  south  tlicreof,  yielding  an  annual  revenue  of  2(),(K),000  rupee's. 

In  this  year  a political  connexion  commenced  between  the  Guicovvar  Rajah  in  Guzzerat,  and  on 
the  15th  of  March,  articles  of  convention  were  entered  into  with  him,  in  consequence  of  his  having  soli- 
cited the  assistance  of  English  troops  in  securing  his  right  as  legitimate  heir.  This  comention  provided, 
in  the  first  place,  for  the  reimbursement  of  the  exjience  which  might  attend  his  rc-estahlisliment,  by  the 
assignment  of  certain  districts;  and,  in  tlie  second  place,  for  permanently  subsidizing  a body  of  troops,  the 
whole  expence  of  which  was  computed  at  fi5,000  rupees  per  month,  for  the  payment  of  uhieh  lands  were 
ceded  to  the  Company.  A cession  from  the  former  Rajah  was  recognized  by  tliis  convention.  (Jn  the  fith 
of  June  following,  the  war  having  ended  successfully,  an  engagement  was  entered  into  with  the  Rajah, 
confirming  the  former  convention,  and  making  other  cessions  of  territory;  l)uL  it  was  not  till  the  21st  of 
April,  1805,  that  the  definitiye  treaty  was  concluded,  fixing  the  amount  of  tlie  subsidiary  force;  for  tlie 
cxpence  of  which,  districts,  producing  a revenue  of  «P131,625,  wen*  ci‘dcd  to  the  Company.  Tlie  former 
cessions  were  also  confirmee],  and  districts  were  mortgaged  till  the  advances  made  by  the  Company  on 
account  of  the  Rajah,  should  be  liquidated. 