

jVI idshipmcn  ditto* 

Other  petty  olTicers  ^^.^^15  ditto. 

Boatswains,  gunners,  & carpenters  50  ditto. 
Seamen,  ordinary  seamen,  &c.  6 ditto. 


The  Insurance  Companies  in  India  likewise  behaved  with  great  liberality  to  them. 

. 1805.  The  Company’s  alfairs  being  in  an  embarrassed  state,  arising  from  various  causes,  they  made 
'application  to  Parliament  for  paynumt  of  a large  balance,  amounting  to  oC5,570,336,  stated  to  be  due  to 
them  from  Government,  on  account  of  advances  for  the  public  service  iu  India.  The  account  was  referred 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxxvii 


to  a Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  who  reported  that,  after  dividiuij;  the  charges,  &e.  of  tlie 
capture  of  Ceylon  and  tlie  Eastern  l.slands  C(|ually  between  the  public  and  tlu*  Cn’npany,  deducting  the 
ordinary  expences  of  tlio  troops  employed  in  Egypt  from  the  gross  charges  of  tin*  expedition,  and  taking 
credit  for  the  whole  amount  of  cimrge  against  the  Company  by  Pay  (Jtliee,  many  articles  {){'  whirh  the 
Committee  stated  were  objeetional>le,  there  was  a clear  balance  owing  to  the  Company  of  X’,^,;H)0,lKK).  Of 
lliis  sum  i?l,()(X),000  was  paid  to  tlie  Company  on  account,  and  in  180G  anolber  sum  of  C 1, ()()(), ()(H). 


180G.  Ily  an  Act  of  ParHamcnt  of  the  l.ld  of  ilvo.  III.  ebap.  a Company  was  formed,  bearing 
the  title  of  the  b'ast  India  Dock  Company,  with  powers  to  make  docks  and  other  woiks  tit  Black  wall;  tlie 
preamble  of  whleli  runs  thus:— ‘‘  Whereas  the  ships  in  the  employ  of  the  East  Iinlia  ^^^nlpany  are  ol  a 
larger  size  than  other  vessels  employed  by  merchants  in  trade,  and  many  of  them  nearly  equal  in  linlk  to 
the  .ships  of  the  line  in  the  Royal  Naw ; and  whereas  the  cargoes  and  merchandise  on  hoaid  of  sucli  sliips 
are  of  great  value  and  national  importance;  and  whereas,  by  the  present  sy.stem  of  loading  and  discharging 
the  cargoes  of  such  sliips,  the  navigation  of  the  River  Thames  Is  frequently  imped(‘il,  and  delays,  l(>s.^^•s, 
and  inconveniences  experienced,  and  the  cargoes  of  such  .ships  are  subject  to  |)hmder,  and  thi'  East  India 
Company  and  owners  thereof  injured,  and  the  public  revenue  defrauded  to  a coasidcrable  amount;  and 
whereas,  if  good  alul  sufficient  wet-<loeks  and  basons,  with  neci'ssarv  ac(‘ommi)d.ilioiis  and  requisites  for  the 
recejition  of  East  India  ships  were  made  at  or  near  RIackwall,  the  (*vlls  anil  ml  ililcls  aloresaid  miglit  he 
greatly  remedied  and  prevented,  The  principal  stipulations  of  tlie  Act  are — 


part 


All  ships  with  cargoes  from  the  East  Indies  or  China  must  unloail  witliln  tl»c  dotk^,  except  such 
as  the  Commissioners  of  the  (histoms  may  direct  to  be  imloadcii  at  Lung  lliMch,  loi  lessoning  tlie 