

1808.  The  Company  presented  a petition  to  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  26th  of  April,  which 
shewed  that  the  embarrassments  in  which  their  afiaiis  were  involved,  had  not  originated  in  any  impro- 
vidence or  mismanagement  on  their  parts.  It  states, 

“ That  in  the  course  of  the  last  and  present  war  they  have  incurred  various  expences  for  expeditions 
from  the  continent  of  India  to  the  French,  Dutch,  and  Spanish  possessions  in  the  Indian  seas,  and  to 
Egypt,  under  the  instructions  of  His  Majesty's  Government,  which  expences  were  adwnced  upon  the  re- 
liance that  they  were  to  be  t‘ully  reimbursed  by  the  public,  and  diilbrent  sums  have  at  diflerent  times  been 
issued  in  respect  thereof;  nevertheless  they  claim  that  a large  balance  is  still  due  on  that  account. 

That  they  were  on  the  1st  of  March  last  indebted  for  customs  and  excise  .^^770, 000;  and  upon  an 
estimate  of  their  pecuniary  transactions,  from  the  1st  of  March  last  to  the  1st  of  March,  1799,  their  pay- 
ments, including  the  said  duties,  will  exceed  the  probable  amount  of  their  receipts  within  the  same  period 
by  the  sum  of  jF2,433,185,  not  including  in  the  said  receipts  any  part  of  the  balance  which  may  appear 
due  by  the  public  to  them;  and  that  it  will  be  highly  inconvenient  and  disadvantageous  that  they  should 
raise  the  whole  of  that  sum  by  the  means  now  in  their  power.” 

“ That  they  are  not  conscious  of  having  created  or  aggravated  the  financial  pressure  which  they  now 
feel,  but  that  the  same  has  been  produced  liy  a combination  of  the  following  causes : 

I.  “ The  vast  amount  of  the  debt  accumulated  in  India,  and  the  high  rate  of  interest  it  bears,  the 
effects  of  which  have  been  to  intercept  the  suiqdus  revenue,  and  to  occasion  large  drafts  on  the  home  trea- 
sury for  payment  of  interest  on  the  said  debts,  as  well  as  payments  for  political  charges  appertaining  to 
the  Indian  territory,  out  of  the  home  funds. 

II.  The  very  large  sums  advanced  for  the  expeditions  from  India  before  mentioned,  part  of  which 
was  borrowed  in  India  at  a high  rate  of  interest. 

III.  The  deterioration  occasioned  in  their  affairs  by  a state  of  European  war,  under  these  heads: 

First,  in  freight  and  demurrage,  which  in  fourteen  years  have  created  an  increased  cxj)ence  of 

.£^7,000,600.  Secondly,  in  the  increased  cost  of  the  manufactures  of  this  country  exported  by  them,  to  the 
annual  amount,  on  the  average  of  thirteen  years,  of  «F1, 690,000  sterling;  which  increase  has  not  been 
counterbalanced  by  an  increase  in  the  selling  prices  abroad  of  the  same  goods,  nor  by  diminution  in  the 
cost  of  goods  purchased  abroad  for  importation  into  Europe;  and  thirdly,  in  diminution  of  profits  on  the 
Indian  investments  homeward-bound. 