


them  to  he  unloaded, 


draught  of  water  of  the  ships. 

Owners,  masters,  &c.  of  ships  with  Last  India  produce  on  boanl,  sulleiin^ 
except  as  above,  to  forfeit  for  every  oflViice 

If  sutli  sliips  raiinot  be  luiloudcd  in  the  docks,  (■(•mnlis^iom•rs  ofCnstoius  may  direct  wlicre  tlieysliall 
be  unloaded  in  the  port  of  London. 

Outward-bound  ships  to  India  or  China,  to  load  either  in  the  dock.s,  or  below  I.Irnchoiisc  (>ii‘ck. 
Owners,  masters,  &e.  suflVriiig  goods  to  be  loaded,  except  os  aboxe,  to  forleit  i'dOO  for  every  olfence. 
No  other  than  ships  in  the  India  trade,  or  cratl  attending  them,  are  sulleud  to  go  into  the  docks. 


The  following  are  the  rates  of  charges  for  the  use  of  the  docks: 


Entering  inwards  and  unloading,  and  loading  outwards  (to  be  paid  within  ten  days  atler 

clearing  inwards)  for  ships  not  Country  ships,  per  ton,  according  to  the  register ... 

For  Country  ships,  not  less  than  two-thirds  of  the  crew  being  Lascars,  per  ton,  to  be  paid  as  above 
New  ships,  loading  out  for  the  first  time,  or  ships  not  having,  on  their  last  arrival,  unloaded  in 
the  docks,  to  pay,  before  leaving  the  docks,  per  ton 
Ships,  or  Country  ships,  removing  from  dock.s  after  unloading  inwards,  and  not  loading  there 
outwards,  to  have  returned,  per  ton 

And  to  such  ships  completing  their  number  of  voyages,  or  not  continuing  in  the  trade,  to 
have  returned,  per  ton,  within  one  month  after  such  ship  sJiall  he  removed  from  the  docks 
And  in  addition  to  the  above,  a further  rate  of  2s.  pr  ton  on  all  goods,  &c.  imported  by  the 
East  India  Company,  to  be  paid  the  Dock  Company,  within  tliree  months  after  the  ship 

shall  lie  cleared  (the  tonnage  to  be  computed  according  to  the  mode  of  calculating  tonnage 

of  goods,  &c.  by  the  East  India  Company);  the  amount  paid  for  private  goods  to  be 
deducted  by  the  East  India  Company  from  the  produce  of  such  goods. 


d-’O  It  0 
0 12  0 

0 t 0 

0 2 0 

0 t.  0 


Ixxxviii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


The  Dock  Company  may  charge  after  the  rate  of  2s.  per  ton,  for  wharfage,  carting,  Sec.  of  goods. 
The  East  India  Company  may  increase  the  rate  to  3s.  per  ton. 

Prize  ships  loaded  wdth  East  India  produce,  are  subject  to  the  same  regulations  as  sliips  from  India, 
&c.  and  to  pay  the  same  charge  as  privilege  goods.  Ships  in  the  East  India  trade  are  not  required  to  load 
or  unload  in  the  docks,  &c.  for  more  than  twenty-one  years. 

1807.  Hy  an  Act  of  the  37th  of  (4eo.  III.  chap.  3,  the  Company  were  permitted  to  add  i?2,000,000 
to  their  capital  stock;  a power  of  which  they  did  not  avail  themselves,  preferring  to  borrow  money  upon 
bond,  as  being  more  advantageous  to  their  concerns;  they  therefore  applied  to  Parliament  to  enable  them 
to  issue  bonds  to  that  amount,  wdilch  was  granted  by  an  Act  of  the  47th  of  Geo.  III.  chap.  41. 