

They  therefore  pray  that  the  House  will  be  pleased  to  take  the  matters  aforesaid  into  their  consider- 
ation, and  to  grant  such  relief  in  the  premises  as  tlieir  ease  may  require,  and  to  the  House  shall  seem  meet.'’ 

This  petition  was  referred  to  the  Select  Committee,  who  reported  that  there  was  X'^1,500,019  owing 
to  the  Company,  a considerable  doubtful  balance  being  still  left  open  for  discussion.  In  consequence  ot 
this  repoit,  X?l,500,000  was  paid  under  the  authority  of  Parliament. 

The  long  and  intimate  connexion  with  the  Rajah  (>f  Travancorc  was  this  year  broken  off.  The  war 
with  Tippoo  Sultan,  which  concluded  in  the  year  1792,  had  for  its  first  ostensible  cause  the  attack  by  lliat 
Prince  on  the  lines  of  the  Rajah  of  Travancorc,  wlio  was  in  close  alliance  with  the  Com[)any.  It  w.is 
therefore  considered  as  a matter  of  justice,  that  the  Rajah,  should,  in  like  manner  willi  tlie  jNahol)  of 
Arcot  and  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore,  be  culled  upon  to  coiitribule,  acconling  to  his  ability,  Ins  proportion 
towards  the  expenees  of  the  war.  This  proportion  was  calculated  at  half  the  amount  ol  his  net  revenues. 
The  last  payment  *o  any  amount  was  made  in  1792-3.  A small  sum  was  received  in  the  following  year. 

♦M 


xc 


niSE  AND  rROGllESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


After  tills  period  the  settlement  of  accounts  with  the  Rajah  was  transferred  from  Madras  to  Bombay; 
but  during  the  three  years,  1794-5  to  1796-7,  nothing  was  received.  In  1795  a permanent  treaty  was 
concluded  with  the  Rajah,  in  wdiich  it  was  stipulated  that  a subsidiary  force  should  be  furnished  by  the 
Company  for  his  service,  for  which  a sum  was  to  be  paid  annually  equivalent  to  the  expence  of  the  same. 
No  payment  was  made  under  this  treaty  till  1797-8.  From  1798-9  to  1606  the  amount  of  this  subsidy, 
fixed  at  «£^42,914,  has  been  annually  realized  in  the  way  of  set-off  in  the  accounts  with  the  Rajah  for 
pepper,  furnished  by  him  under  contract.  In  1805  another  treaty  was  entered  into  with  the  Rajah  for 
increasing  the  subsidiary  force,  and  adding  to  the  subsidy  to  the  amount  of  i!45,186  for  the  expence  of  it; 
but  no  payment  was  made  on  account  of  the  additional  subsidy  for  nearly  two  years  subsequent  to  the 
conclusion  of  the  treaty,  notwithstanding  the  remission  of  half  of  it  for  that  period.  In  1808,  through 
the  intrigues  of  the  Dewan  of  that  Rajah,  serious  disturbances  occurred,  and  ended  in  direct  hostility  to 
the  (Company,  which  was  happily  subdued ; and  the  Rajah  has  since  made  a considerable  payment  in 
discharge  of  the  aiTcars  of  subsidy. 

The  Danes  having  been  compelled  to  yield  to  the  French  system  of  excluding  England  from  the 
continental  markets,  an  expedition  was  sent  against  Copenhagen,  w hich  ohtaineil  possession  of  it  and  the 
Danish  fleet.  On  the  receipt  of  this  intelligence  in  India,  a detachment  of  the  Madras  army  took  Tran- 
quebar,  the  principal  settlement  of  Denmark  in  the  East  Indies.  About  the  same  time  Serhampore  in 
Bengal  surrendered  to  the  British  forces. 