

The  total  of  the  Indian  debt  in  181 1-12  was  X^28, 646,989,  from  which  deducting  the  amount  of  assets 
abroad,  a sum  falling  short  of  the  present  revenue  of  the  Company's  Indian  territories  for  one  year,  remains, 
and  which  may  be  liquidated  in  ten  years  under  the  present  system,  from  the  surplus  revenues. 

IX.  The  following  is  a list  of  factories  at  present  established  in  various  parts  of  India,  for  the 
provision  of  the  Company's  luiropean  investments,  at  all  of  which  the  Company  have  an  establishment 
of  European  servants.  Under  the  Presidency  of  Bengal  are  the  subordinate  factories  of 


Benares. 

Midiiapore. 

Patna. 

Soonamookey. 

Baulesib. 

Luckipore. 

Radnagorc, 

Mow. 

Hurrial. 

Chittagong. 

Rungpore. 

Cossiporc. 

Hurripaul. 

Cossimbuzar. 

Santipore. 

Etawah, 

Jungypore.  I 

Comercolly. 

Burron. 

Calpy. 

Keerpore.  j 

Malda.  j 

Dacca. 

Gorruckporc* 

Under  the  Presidency  of  Fort  St.  George,  or  Madras,  are  the  subordinate  factories  of 

Tinncvelly. 

Nagore. 

Maddepollam. 

Vizagapatam, 

Ramnad. 

Cuddalore. 

Mausulipatam. 

Ganjam. 

Salem. 

Pulicat, 

Ingeram. 

Devicotta. 

Under  the  Presidency  of  Bombay  are  the  subordinate  factories  of 


Scindy,  or  Tattah. 

C’ambay. 

Tellicherry. 

Calicut. 

Cutch. 

Brodera. 

Onore. 

Cranganore. 

Amedabad. 

Baroach. 

Barcelore. 

Cochin. 

Surat. 

Carwar. 

Mangalore. 

Anjengo. 

Including  also  all  the  other  places  where  pepper  was  produced  in  the  earlier  periods. 


Under  Bencoolen,  on  Sumatra,  are  the  subordinate  residencies  of 

Moco  Moco.  I Cattown.  Manna. 

Ippoe.  I Saloomah.  Crooe. 


Tappanooly. 

Padang. 


Some  of  these  have  recently  been  withdrawn,  their  maintenance  being  too  expensive.  The  Company 
have  also  an  establishment  at  Piilo  Pinang,  or  Prince  of  Wales’s  Island,  in  the  Straits  of  Malacca;  at 
several  of  the  Eastern  or  Spice  Islands;  at  Bushire,  in  the  Gulf  of  Persia;  and  Canton,  in  China. 

Of  the  factories  under  the  respective  Governments  of  Madras  and  Bengal,  many  include  an  extent  of 
from  50  to  100  miles  of  country ; so  that  under  each  factory  there  is  of  necessity  a number  of  minor 
factories,  situated  in  the  principal  manufacturing  towns,  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  the  produce  of 
those  places,  and  of  forwarding  them  to  the  head  factory  to  which  they  are  attached,  from  whence  they 
are  ultimately  consigned  to  the  respective  Presidencies^  to  which  the  principal  factories  are  subordinatOt 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES 


X.  The  following  is  the  present  Constitution  of  the  East  India  Company : 

The  Company's  stock  forms  a capital  of  six  millions  sterling,  into  which  all  persons,  natives  or 
foreigners,  males  or  females,  bodies  politic  or  corporate  (the  Governor  and  Company  of  the  Hank  of 
England  only  excepted),  are  at  liberty  to  purchase,  without  limitation  of  amount.  Act  1)  and  U)  Wil- 
liam III.  chap.  44.  Charter,  5th  of  September,  1698. 