


General  Courts. — The  proprietors,  in  General  Court  assembled,  are  empowered  to  enact  byc-hiw.s, 
declare  dividends,  and  in  other  respects  are  competent  to  the  complete  investigation,  regulation,  and  eon- 
troul  of  every  branch  of  the  Company’s  concerns;  but  for  the  more  prompt  dispatch  of  business,  the  cxe- 
cutive  detail  is  vested  in  a Court  of  Directors.  Charter,  5th  September,  161)8. 

A General  Court  is  required  to  be  held  once  in  the  months  of  March,  June,  September,  and 
December  in  each  year.  Charter,  5th  September,  1698. 

No  person  can  be  present  at  a General  Court,  unless  possessed  of  X'50(3  stock;  nor  can  any  person 
vote  upon  the  determination  of  any  question,  who  has  not  been  in  possession  of  nL‘l,(KK)  stock  lor  the  pre- 
ceding twelve  months,  unless  such  stock  shall  have  been  obtained  by  bequest  or  marriage. 

Persons  possessed  of  one  thousand  pounds  stock  are  empowered  to  give  a single  vote;  three  thousand 
pounds  are  a qualification  for  two  votes;  six  for  throe  votes;  and  ten  thousand  and  upwards  for  four  votes. 

The  number  of  proprietors  on  the  Company’s  books,  on  the  8th  of  April,  1800,  were  2163:  of  these 


1,683  were  qualified  to  give  single  votes. 
342  two  votes. 


87....... ditto.» three  votes. 

.^l.. ditto lour  votes. 


Upon  any  special  occasion,  nine  proprietors,  duly  qualified  by  the  [wssession  of  .n ,( KM)  stock,  may,  by 
a requisition  in  writing  to  the  Court  of  Directors,  call  a General  Covirt,  which  the  Directors  are  required 
to  summon  within  ten  days,  or,  in  default,  the  proprietors  may  call  such  Court,  by  notice  affixed  upon  the 
Royal  Exchange.  Charter,  5th  September,  1698. 

In  all  such  Courts  the  (juestions  are  decided  by  a majority  of  voices.  In  case  of  an  equality,  the  deter- 
mination must  be  by  the  Treasurer  drawing  a lot.  Charter,  5th  Septembe  r,  l()9H. 

Nine  proprietors  may,  by  a rc(|uisition  in  writing,  demand  a ballot  upon  any  question,  which  shall 
not  be  taken  within  twenty-four  hours  after  the  breaking  up  of  the  General  C’ouit. 

Court  of  Directors.— The  Court  of  Directors  is  composed  of  twenty-lbur  members,  eliosen  from 
among  the  proprietors,  each  of  whom  must  be  possessed  of  1^2, 000  stock;  nor  can  any  Director,  aftei 
being  chosen,  act  longer  than  while  he  continues  to  hold  stock.  Charter,  5tli  of  September,  1698. 

Of  these,  six  are  chosen  on  the  second  Wednesday  in  April  in  each  year,  to  serve  tor  four  years,  in 
the  room  of  six  who  have  completed  such  service.  After  an  interval  of  twelve  inontlis,  those  who  had  gone 
out  by  rotation,  are  eligible  to  be  re-elected  for  the  ensuing  four  years. 

No  person  who  has  been  in  the  Company’s  civil  or  military  service  in  India,  is  eligible  to  be  elected  a 
Director,  until  he  shall  have  been  a resident  in  England  two  years  after  (putting  the  service. 