

Previous  to  the  year  1784,  the  sale  value  of  the  Company's  imports  was  enhanced  by  the  amount  of 
the  custom  duties  to  which  they  were  subject.  These  duties  being  a charge  upon  the  Company,  the  goods 
were  of  course?  sold  at  an  increased  rate  of  cost,  proportioned  to  their  amount. 

By  the  Act  of  the  2Uh  George  III.  commonly  called  the  Commutation  Act,  a revision  of  this 
system  took  place  upon  the  article  of  tea;  and  from  the  passing  of  that  Act,  the  duties  upon  this  commo- 
dity have  been  paid  by  the  purchaser,  at  a certain  rate  per  cent,  upon  the  gross  price  at  the  sales. 

In  1799  a further  modification  took  place.  By  an  Act,  usually  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the 
Warehousing  Act,  entitled,  “ An  Act  for  permitting  certain  goods  imported  from  the  East  Indies  to  be 
warehoused,  and  for  repealing  the  duties  now  payable  thereon,  and  granting  other  duties  in  lieu  tlieieof,” 
the  imports  made  through  the  (’ompuny,  with  a few  exceptions,  are  allowed  to  be  landed  and  housed  on 
payment  of  a small  duty,  atter  which  they  may  be  exported  free  of  further  charge;  but  if  cleared  for  home 
consumption,  the  duties  formerly  paid  thereon,  become  a charge  upon  the  purchaser. 


xcv 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

Under  these  regulations  the  sale  amount  of  the  Company’s  imports  has  been  reduced  in  proportion 
to  the  amount  of  the  duties  formerly  paid  by  tlie  ( ompaiiy,  but  non'  transferred  to  the  purchaser. 

The  amount  of  the  Coni[)any’s  sales  cannot  altogether  he  relied  upon  as  an  accurate  test  lor  ascertain- 
ing how  far  the  trade  may  be  considered  in  an  improving  or  a ilediiiing  state;  many  ot'the  coiumoditics 
are  subject  to  great  tluctuations  in  price:  pc[3per,  for  instance,  has  varied  from  2\?4d.  to  7[d.  per  lb. 
In  1757,  the  period  at  winch  the  first  of  the  Indian  territciries  was  obtained,  pepper  sold  at  I5d.  per  lb.;  it 
is  now  about  half  that  price:  hence,  by  looking  at  the  sale  amount  of  the  commodity,  no  considerable  alter- 
ation may  be  visible;  but  it  is  evident,  in  point  of  fact,  that  in  the  latter  period  double  the  cpiantlty  uill 
be  required  to  give  an  ecpial  sale  amount  with  that  of  the  former. 

Tea  may  also  be  instanced-  In  1757  the  quantity  sold  was  2,t>0 7,805  lbs.  and  the  sale  amount 
.£^7 10,1 16.  In  1810  the  (juaiitity  sold  was  23,51*8,168  Ihs.  and  the  sale  amount  C3,S{)6,02I.  Here 
the  quantity  is  found  to  be  an  increase  nearly  as  9 to  J,  whereas  the  sale  amount  is  only  in  the  itroportiori 
of  5 to  1.  Piece-goods  also:  in  1771  the  quantity  sold  at  the  (.’ojnjiany’s  sales  was  850,665  pieces,  and 
the  sale  amount  £’1,427,031.  In  1810  the  quantity  sold  was  819,193  pieces,  and  tlie  sale  amount 
«(?61 1,974.  Here  the  quantity  of  the  article  is  found  nearly  equal,  whereas  the  sale  ainniiut  is  only  in  the 
proportion  of  1 to  4. 