


TIIK  M.\I)EIHA,S 

Ar«  a group  of  islands  consisting  of  Porto  Sancto,  tho  Dcscrlas,  and  Madeira 

l»()UTO  SVNCTO 

Is  the  northornmost  of  tlio  group.  centre  of  tliei.sland  is  in  lalllude  MV  .>  North,  and  longitude 
IG  25  West;  it  is  very  remarkable,  and  in.ay  !>o  seen  in  clear  wt'al her  near  20  haigiu's;  it  has  two  or 
three  very  high  hummocks,  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  Mndeiia  or  tlu‘  Desertas.  On  the  S.  W.  side 
IS  an  excellent  road,  where  good  water,  provusions,  and  refi(‘shmenfs  ;»t(*  to  In*  ha<l,  and  where  vessels  of 
near  .^00  tons  burthen  have  been  hove  douii  and  repaired.  The  pioperty  of  the  island  is  vested  in  a pjivut(‘ 
family,  and  trom  it  Madeira  is  supplied  with  laige  ipiantities  of  coin,  >>hen  the  crops  aiv  good. 

^rilE  DKSl'HtTAS 

Are  about  12  leagues  S.  S.  W.  from  Porto  Sancto.  The  se  islands  extend  nearly  N.  N.  W.  and  S.  S.  K. 
rather  of  an  even  appearance,  about  5 leagues  in  extent,  and  are  uninliahited. 

MADETKA. 

Thi.s  island  is  about  12  leagues  long  from  East  to  West,  and  ab(»ut  3 leagues  broad  from  North  to 
South;  it  is  very  high  and  mountainous,  except  the  East  emi,  wliith  terminates  in  a low  rugged  point. 

Funchal,  the  capital,  and  the  seat  of  the  Government,  is  on  the  .south  side  about  lw<i  thii  ds  down  tiorn  its 
west  end,  in  latitude  32'’  37  N.  and  longitude  17’  fi  West;  the  town  is  about  a mile  long,  and  half  a mile 
broad,  and  is  said  to  contain  about  2000  houses.  It  has  several  handsome  cliurelies  and  monastei  ies.  'flie 
houses  are  built  of  .stone,  some  (Hf*  them  three  stories  high,  willi  latticed  windows,  and  ljaleoni(‘s  in  the 
front:  most  of  them  have  a mean  appearance.  The  streds  are  narrow,  badly  pave<l,  anri  verydi/ty. 

Funchal  is  strongly  fortified.  On  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  beach  i.s  a fort  called  ^{.  Jago;  that  of 
Lorenzo,  within  200  yards  of  the  western  extremity  of  the  town,  is  ocenpled  as  the  residence  of  the  Gover- 
nor; the  third,  called  the  Peak  Castle,  is  at  the  N.  W.  angle  of  the  town  on  a hill,  about  half  a mile  from 

H 


MADEIRA. 


the  shon'.  The  fourth  fort  stands  upon  the  Loo  Rock,  which  is  about  400  yards  from  the  shore,  with 
which  it  has  no  communication  but  by  boats;  it  commands  the  bay,  and  the  only  cntifuicc  to  it  is  Ly  a 
naii'ow  night  of  steps,  hewn  out  of  the  rock,  and  properly  guarded.  The  town  has  likewise  a strong  wall 
to  the  sea,  connecting  the  forts,  the  whole  of  which  are  in  a good  state  of  repair. 

The  landing  place?  of‘the  island  is  to  the  N.  W.  of  the  Loo  Rock;  and  irom  the  deep  water,  and  I lie 
violence  of  the  surf*,  is  sometimes  dangerous.  Steps  are  cut  out  of  the  rock  to  ascend  to  the  top  of  it,  which 
communicates  with  the  road  to  Funchal.  This  road  is  very  rough  and  narrow',  being  no  more  than  four 
feet  and  a half  wdde,  with  a low  wall  on  either  side.  The  entrance  to  the  town  is  about  three  (|iniiUis  of 
a mile  from  the  landing  place,  and  is  through  a gate,  from  which  a narrow  stn  et  leads  to  a puhlie  w alk 
disposed  in  the  form  of  a garden,  w e ll  shaded  w ith  trees,  w ith  a principal  avenue  in  the  centre,  terminated 
by  the  cathedral,  a large  Gothic  building.  On  one  side  of  the  entrance  stands  the  theatre,  and  on  the  other 
the  hospital.  The  custom-house  is  on  the  sea  side,  surrounded  by  a rampart  mounted  with  cannon,  w hich 
contains  barracks  for  soldiers. 