

The  best  ancliorage  for  large  ships  is  in  30  to  35  fathoms  w'ater,  having  the  citadel  a little  open  to  the 
eastward  of  the  Loo  Rock ; the  distance  from  the  I.oo  Rock  will  tlien  be  about  half  a mile.  Prudence 
requires  that  it  should  be  w ith  a w hole  cable  w hen  there  is  the  least  app(*arance  of  unsettled  w'eatluT,  with  a 
slip  buoy  on  the  eable,  having  the  spliee  so  situated,  that,  should  you  be  oblig(‘d  to  put  to  sea,  which  fre- 
quently happens,  and  not  be  able  to  weigh,  you  may  cut  the  cable  near  the  s|)li(  (\ 

Ships'  boats  may  land  on  the  beach  in  suiunuT  months;  but  when  th(‘re  is  no  landing  of  goods  to  render 
it  necessary,  it  is  hedter  to  he  avoided  at  all  seasojis,  both  for  the  safety  of  the  boats,  which  are  driven  Ijy  a 
violent  surge*  on  a shingly  shore,  and  for  preventing  the  seamen  from  having  the  opportunity  of  fi  cquenting 
the  disorderly  houses  in  tho  neighbourhood  of  the  beach,  and  drinking  the  pernicious  liquors  vended  there- 
abouts. ('aution  is  likewise  nece'ssary  against  the  shore  boats  coming  on  board,  under  pnte'ncc  of  selling 
fruit,  vegetables,  &c.  for  their  chief  object  is  the  sale  of  spirituous  liquors,  ami  often  concealed  goods. 

The  merchants  here,  w ho  arc  principally  English,  arc  extremely  hospitable  and  kind  to  strangers  If 
they  bring  the  smallest  introduction  from  any  friend  in  England.  Madeira  contains  about  110,000  inha- 
bitants, of  which  near  20,000  arc  computed  to  be  inhabitants  of  Funchal;  the  remainder  are  dispersed  in 
the  towns  and  villages,  of  wliich  there  are  six  or  eiglit  on  the  island. 

Madeira  w'as  firsi  visited  l)y  the  Portuguese  in  1119;  hid  it  had  been  previously  visited  by  nn  English- 
man of  the  name  of  Macham,  w ho  w'as  driven  here  in  a storm,  having  w ith  him  a lady,  who  died 
on  the  island,  and  over  whose  grave  he,  w ith  the  assistance  of  his  shipmates,  erected  a wooden  tomb  and 
cross:  this  circumstance  is  admitted  by  most  of  the  Portuguese  historians.  The  Portuguese  nniaiiicd  in 
undisturbed  possession  of  the  island  till  1801,  when  the  English  took  possession  of  it,  to  prevent  a similar 
transaction  on  tlie  part  of  the  French:  it  was,  liow'cvcr,  restored  at  the  peace;  but  on  tin*  emigration 
of  the  I'ortuguese  Government,  when  Portugal  was  invaded  by  the  French,  the  island  again  came  under  the 
English,  being  surrendered  in  trust  to  them  for  tlie  Queen  of  Portugid,  December  2G,  1807. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  AND  MEASURES. 

Coins.— Accounts  are  kept  in  n*as  and  inilreas,  which  are  imaginary  coins ; the  latter  is  1000  reas, 
and  equivalent  to  5s.  (id.  sterling.  The  coins  current  on  the  island  arc, 