

9.  The  Committee  of  Shipping  arrange  the  shipping  concerns,  aftd  provide  tlie  remaining  exports. 

10.  The  Committee  of  Private  Trade  adjust  the  settlement  of  freight  with  the  owners  of  shipping. 

11.  The  Committee  for  preventing  the  growth  of  Private  Trade,  see  that  the  indulgences  granted  to 
the  Commanders  and  oflicers  of  the  Company’s  ships  are  conducted  within  the  prescribed  regulations. 

12.  The  Committee  for  Government  Troop.s  and  Stores  adjust  all  concerns  respecting  the  forces  and 
.ships  of  His  Majesty  serving  in  the  Fast  Indies. 

The  Chairman  and  D(*j)uty  are,  !)y  virtue  of  their  office,  members  of  every  (’ommlttee. 

All  letters  and  papers  on  the  subject  of  the  Company’s  aftairs  are  read  in  Court,  and  referred  to  the 
consideration  of  a Committee,  according  to  the  nature  of  tlielr  contents.  The  reference  upon  ordinary 
concerns  is  for  tlic  C!ommIttee  to  give  such  directions  thereon  as  they  may  think  fit;  but  in  more  important 
matters,  the  Committee  is  required  to  examine  the  facts,  and  report  an  opinion  thereon,  for  the  ultimate 
determination  of  the  Court  of  Directors. 

The  Company’s  oflicers,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  receive  their  appointments  immediately  from  the 
Court,  to  whom  they  are  responsible  for  the  due  and  faithful  discharge  of  the  ti  ust  reposed  in  them.  The 
patronage  is,  nevertheless,  so  arranged,  as  tliat  each  member  of  the  Court  particijiates  therein. 

Tlie  civil  and  military  establishments  abroad  are  kept  up  by  an  annual  appointment  of  Writers  and 
Cadets.  These  vary  in  number  according  to  existing  circumstances.  The  number  (o  be  sent  to  India  is 
tletermined  upon,  and  a distribution  is  made,  with  a due  attention  to  the  pretensions  of  seniority. 

At  home  each  Committee  is  considered  as  possessed  of  the  patronage  of  the  department  that  falls 
more  immediately  under  its  controul,  according  to  the  established  system  of  official  arrangement. 

The  Secretary,  in  point  of  fact,  is  the  immediate  officer  of  the  Court ; yet  as  the  duties  of  Jiis  station 
are  so  intimately  connected  with  points  that  fall  under  the  cognisance  of  the  Coimaittee  of  Corresjioiidcnce, 
his  establishment  has  always  been  considered  as  subject  thereto. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


(iii 

From  the  foregoing  remarks  on  the  rise  and  progress  of  tlie  commerce  between  England  and  the 
East  Indies,  it  is  evident  that  the?  East  India  Company  fiavc  essentially  contiibuted  to  the  present  great- 
ness of  the  country.  They  gave  a very  early  impulse  to  its  manufactures  and  trade.  'rh(‘y  opened  a new 
commerce  not  with  the  East  only,  but,  by  means  of  their  returns  from  thence,  wdth  foreign  Euroj)e.  They 
soon  increased  the  ship-building,  and  improved  the  navigation  of  the  kingdom;  both  ^^hIch  they  have,  in  latter 
times,  carried  to  a degree  of  advancement,  that  has  made  their  fleets  serviceable  in  the  wars  of  the  nation,  ami 
their  Commanders  and  officers  eminently  successful  in  adding  to  the  naval  glory  of  their  country.  Against 
the  jealous  rivalship  of  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch,  they,  through  a long  course  of  hostilities  from  a superior 
force,  maintained  for  the  nation  a share  in  the  India  trade;  they  preserved  it  from  being  totally  lost,  amidst  all 
the  convulsions  of  the  civil  wars;  they  outlived  even  the  more  dangerous  innovations  of  suhsequent  jicriods; 
they  upheld  in  India  the  national  interests  against  the  ambitious  designs  of  h’uropcuii  enemies,  and  the 
despotic  violence  of  native  powers,  and  in  a long  and  arduous  struggle,  maintained,  with  little  exception, 
at  their  own  expence;  they  aeipiired  a territorial  empire  for  the  motlu^r  country,  which  exalted  its  rank  in 
the  scale  of  nations;  they  have  since  expelled  every  European  nation,  except  our  ally  of  Portugal, 
from  the  Indian  Continent  and  Ocean;  and  they  have  given  a better  government  to  an  immensely  extended 
empire  than  the  East  ever  saw  before. 