

The  Directors  chuse  annually  from  among  themselves  a Chairman  and  Deputy  (’hairmun,  who  are  cacli 
allowed  £500  per  annum.  The  Directors  are  allowed  1 300  per  annum  each.  Bye-Laws,  chap.  6,  sect.  1 1. 

The  Directors  are  required  by  Bye-Laws,  chap.  6,  sect.  1,  to  meet  once  in  cveiy  wtek 
they  frequently  meet  oftener,  as  occasion  requires.  Not  less  tliaii  thirteen  can  lorin  a ( ourt.  i icii  1 1 ti 
minations  are  guided  by  a majority.  In  case  of  an  equality,  the  question  must  be  decided  Iiy  the  drawing 
of  a lot  by  the  Treasurer.  Charter,  5th  September,  1698.  Upon  all  questions  of  iin|)ortance,  the  sense 

of  the  Court  is  taken  by  ballot. 


iii  RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 

For  the  more  ready  and  orderly  dispatch  of  the  Company‘‘s  business,  the  members  of  the  Court  arc 
subdivided  into  twelve  classes  of  Committees,  to  each  of  which  is  allotted  some  distinct  branch  of  the 
Company's  affairs ; and  the  name  of  these  Committees  In  a great  degree  indicates  the  nature  of  the  business 
to  which  their  attention  is  more  immediately  devoted. 

In  the  first  class,  which  consists  of  a number  of  the  senior  Directors,  are  comprised  the  several 
Committees  of  Correspondence,  Treasury,  Lawsuits,  and  Military  Fund. 

].  To  the  Committee  of  Correspondence  arc  referred,  generally,  all  matters  connected  with  the  civil 
and  military  Governments  of  India,  and  the  Company's  servants  abroad;  they  also  prepare  and  submit  to 
the  Court  the  dispatches  to  the  various  settlements. 

2.  The  Committee  of  Treasury  regulate  the  financial  affairs. 

3.  The  ('ommittec  of  Lawsuits  conduct  the  legal  concerns. 

4.  The  Committee  of  INIilifary  Fund  manage  and  direct  the  application  of  the  fund  established  by 
Lord  Clive,  for  the  support  of  the  invalids  in  the  Company's  military  s(»rvice. 

The  second  class  is  com[>osed  of  a number  of  the  Dii  ectors  next  in  the  course  of  seniority,  and  forms 
the  respective  Committees  of  AVarehouses,  Accounts,  Buying,  and  House. 

5.  The  (Committee  of  Warehouses  arc  charged  with  the  more  immediate  superintendence  of  the 
Company’s  investments  iti  India;  they  also  regulate- the  disposal  of  them  in  this  country. 

fi.  The  Committee  of  Accounts  prepare  the  statements  of  the  general  state  of  the  home  concerns. 

7.  The  Committee  of  Buying  purchase  the  woollens  and  lead  for  exportation  to  India  and  China. 

8.  Th(j  Committee  of  House  give  directions  in  all  matters  appertaining  to  the  concerns  of  the  Housc- 

Tho  third  class  contains  the  remaining  Directors,  who  constitute  the  Committees  of  Shipping,  Private 

Trade,  preventing  the  growth  of  Private  Trade,  and  Government  Troops  and  Stores. 