

17.  No  vessel  that  shall  have  remained  in  port  anight,  after  being  visited  the  preceding  day,  can  sail 
until  slie  shall  be  again  vi.sitcd. 

18.  All  vessels,  wheie  seeond,  third,  or  more  visits  are  ncces.sary,  must  pay  for  each,  after  the  first, 
half  a moidore,  or  thirteen  shillings  and  twopenee  halfpenny  sterling,  besides  other  contingent  expences.  ' 

19.  Any  vessel  attempting  to  get  under  weigh  before  she  has  been  visited,  a.s  in  all  cases  above  menti- 
oned,  w dl  lie  fiied  at  iiom  the  forts,  and  obliged  to  pay  for  th(*  powder  and  shot 

20.  No  eommander  of  a vessel  ean  leave  any  of  his  cirw  behind  him  in  this  island,  without  giving 
security  in  the  C’onsurs  ofliee  for  tlu'ir  subsistence. 

Any  person  who  shall  transgress  llio  above  Rules,  will  do  so  at  Ids  peril,  and  must  not  expect  from 
his  Consnl  any  protection  against  eonsecpienees  occasioin-d  by  a wilful  breach  of  the  Laws  and  llegulationi 
of  this  island. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS 

Are  most  cxorhitanlly  dear.  Reef  and  mutton  very  indifferent,  from  15f/.  to  I8rf.  per  lb.  Fowls,  very 
had,  a Spanish  dollar  each.  Ducks  laOO  reus  each.  Turkeys  3000  to  4000  reas  each.  Fruit  and  vege- 
tables very  scarce,  inferior,  and  dear.  The  provisions  and  water  are  sent  off  in  the  boats  belonginc 
to  the  island.  ® ® 


CHAFFER  11. 


The  Canary  Islands, 


Tlieir  Numher'-^Lanccrota;  Description^  Trade^  ^c.—Fucrtaventura;  Description^  Trade,  ^c,^G rand  Canaria; 
Description,  Trade,  ^c, — Teneriffe— Santa  Cruz;  Description — Coins-^Weights — Measures — Imports 
from  London,  and  their  Anuiunt— Articles  of  which  they  consisted — Exports — Duties — Port  liegulaUons 
and  Charges— Provisions  and  Refreshments— Orotava;  Description— Palma ; Description,  Trade,  ^c.— 
Gomcro;  Description— Hierro ; Description— Orchilla  Weed— Rose  Wood, 


THE  Canary  Islands  are  seven  in  number;  viz. 

Lancerota,  Fuertaventura,  Grand  Canaria,  Teneriffe,  Palma,  Gomcro,  Hierro,  or  Ferro;  the 
easternmost  of  which  is  about  50  leagues  from  Cape  Non,  on  the  Coast  of  Africa. 

To  which  may  be  added  several  small  isles  to  the  eastward,  which  are  uninhabited. 

LANCEROTA, 

The  easternmost  island  of  tlie  cluster,  is  about  15  miles  long,  and  10  broad.  The  principal  port  is  on 
the  S.E.  side,  and  is  called  Porto  de  Naos;  its  latitude  28°  58'  N.  and  longitude  13^  33'  W.  Here  vessels 
not  drawing  more  than  18  feet  water,  lay  secure  from  all  winds.  As  this  is  the  only  convenient  place  in  tlie 
Islands  for  cleaning  or  repairing  large  vessels,  it  is  much  frequented  for  that  purpose.  At  the  west  end  of 
the  harbour  stands  a square  castle  built  of  stone,  and  mounted  with  some  cannon,  but  of  no  great  strength, 
as  ships  of  war  may  approach  within  musket  shot  of  it.  Thcrre  is  no  town ; but  there  arc  some  magazines 
in  which  corn  Is  deposited  for  exportation.  On  the  west  side  of  the  castle  is  another  port  called  Porto 
Cavallos;  this  Is  also  an  excellent  harbour,  but  the  entrance  to  it  has  only  12  feet  water  at  spring  tides. 
Upon  a small  island,  between  the  two  harbours,  stands  the  aforesaid  castle,  which  defends  them  both. 
This  rock  is  joined  to  the  land  by  a bridge,  under  which  boats  go  from  Porto  de  Naos  to  Porto  Cavallos. 