

Santa  Cruz  is  a large  town,  containing  two  parish  churches,  several  convents  of  Fii, ns  and  Nuns, 
svith  many  neat  private  buildings,  though  not  .so  good  and  large  iis  those  of  the  city  of  Palmas  in  Camniai 
or  of  the  towns  of  Teneriffe.  A mole  is  built  here  at  a considerable  expence,  near  nhich  is  a (..sHc  or 
battery  mounted  with  a few  cannon  to  defend  the  .shipping  in  the  bay,  and  to  prevent  an  enemy 
from  landing.  In  the  middle  of  the  town,  near  the  great  church,  is  a fountain  tilled  by  a rivulet,  nhieh 
plentifully  supplies  the  inhabitants  with  good  water.  Palma  exports  to  'reneiilfe,  sugar,  ahm.nds,' sweet- 
meats, plank,  pitch,  law  silk,  and  orchilla  weed,  and  rcceiv(‘s  in  return  W^cst  liulian  and  I'inropean  goods. 
Santa  Cruz  U tlio  only  town  of  note  on  the  island. 

Tlie  produce  here  is  much  the  same  as  that  of  Canaria.  The  east  side  of  the  Isl.nid  produces  good 
wines  of  a dilferent  taste  and  flavour  from  tho.se  of  Teneritfe.  The  dry  nine  is  snndl-bodied,  and  of  a 
yellow  colour.  The  Malvasia  is  not  so  luscious  or  strong  as  that  of  Tenerifle;  but  when  it  is  about  .1  vears 
old,  has  the  flavour  of  a rleh  and  ripe  pine-apple:  but  these  wines  are  veiy  dillicnlt  of  preservation  when 
exported,  as  they  often  turn  sour.  In  this  and  the  neighbouring  island  pitch  is  e.xti  acted  in  great 
quantities  from  the  pitch-pine. 


TROVrslONS  AND  UHFRESIIMKNTS 

Arc  much  the  same  as  at  Grand  Canaria  and  ToneriHe.  The  nati\es  have  plenty  of  siii^ar,  and  make 
excellent  conserv  es,  which  form  an  article  of  trade  to  the  other  islands,  and  lo  some  parts  of  Hie  Indies. 

GOMERA. 

This  island  is  about  6 leagues  S.  W.  from  Teneriffe,  in  latitude  28^  :j  North,  and  longitude  1 20  Wt‘st. 

The  principal  town,  called  St.  Sebastian’s,  or  La  Villa  de  la  rainni,  is  situate  d close  by  the  sea  shore,  in  the 
bottom  of  a bay,  on  the  S.  E.  side  of  the  island,  where  shipping  lay  landlocked  fi  om  all  winds,  except  S.  E. 
Here  you  may  moor  at  a convenient  distance  from  theshore,  from  7 to  15  fathoms;  but  as  the  land  wind 
fretjuently  blows  hard,  it  is  necessary  for  a ship  to  moor  with  a large  .sco|)c  of  cable,  otherwise*  she  will  he  in 
danger  of  being  blown  out  of  the  bay.  The  sea  here  is  generally  so  smooth,  that  boats  may  land  on  the  bench 
without  danger.  When  boats  cannot  land  on  account  of  the  suif,  they  put  ashore  at  a small  covi*,  on  the  north 
side  of  the  bay,  from  whence  tliere  is  a footpath  along  the  face  of  the  cliff'  to  the  town  ; but  it  is  so  narrow, 
that  two  persons  cannot  walk  abreast.  Near  the  end  of  this  road  is  a gati*,  wdiich  is  always  s!mt  after  sunset, 
or  when  it  turns  dark,  and  then  no  man  can  pass  that  w^ay.  At  the  cove,  ships  of  anv  burthen  may  heave 
down,  clean,  and  repair,  hauling  close  to  the  shore,  whicli  is  a high  and  perpendicular  eJi/f;  on  the  top 
is  a battery,  with  several  pieces  of  cannon  for  the  defence  of  the  port.  The  town  comnu'nces  a short 
distance  from  the  beach,  the  principal  street  of  whicli  runs  straiglit  inland.  It  has  a eluiieh  and  convent, 
with  about  150  private  houses ; most  of  them  are  but  mean  and  small.  It  is  well  supplied  with  good  water 
drawn  from  wells  in  several  parts  of  it.  The  be.st  place  for  a shij)  to  lay,  is  whei  e a fidl  view  may 
be  had  through  the  main  street  of  the  town,  and  at  about  a cable's  length  from  the  beach. 