

A considerable  trade  is  carried  on  between  the  Islands  Teneriffe,  Canaria,  and  Palma,  and  the  Spanish 
West  Indies,  in  which  no  foreigner  is  permitted  to  share;  it  is  principally  confined  to  articles  of  their  own 
produce.  The  ships  are  all  obliged  to  unload  their  homeward  cargoes  at  TcncTiffe,  which  consist  of  the 
commodities  of  ports  from  whence  they  came,  being  chiefly  cocoa,  logwood,  hich  s,  sugar,  and  Mexico 
dollars;  but  cochineal  and  indigo  are  prohibited  from  being  landed  here;  the  silver  is  also  limited  to  50 
dollars  per  ton,  according  to  the  registered  tonnage,  yet  some  of  the  ships  import  far  more  than  that 
allowance. 


DUTIES. 

All  goods  imported  into  the  Canary  Islands,  or  exported  from  them,  used  to  pay  a duty  of  7 per  cent,  on 
the  rated  value;  and  all  American  and  European  goods,  which  are  transported  from  island  to  Island,  pay  alike 
duty,  if  they  have  been  imported  into  the  islands  within  a certain  limited  time,  which  is  about  tw^o  months. 
Some  alterations  have  recently  been  made  by  the  Government  respecting  the  impoil  and  export  duties. 

PORT  REGULATIONS. 

No  person  is  permitted  to  land  on  these  islands  from  any  ship,  until  the  master  of  her  produce.^ 
a bill  of  health  from  the  port  he  was  last  in,  or  until  the  crew  have  heen  properly  examined  whetlier 
they  are  free  from  any  infectious  distemper;  before  this  is  done,  no  boat,  (*xce})t  the  pratl<|ue,  or  health, 
boat  dares  to  come  near  her.  No  boats  are  allowed  to  land  or  to  go  from  the  shore  oiler  sunset. 


OROTAVA. 


11 


Tlie  following  port  cliargcs  were  paid  by  one  of  the  East  India  Company’s  ships  wliich  recently 


anchored  in  the  roads. 

Captain  of  the  port’s  visit Spaijish  Dollars  3! 

In(|uisition 3Jr 

Tlealth  ollice 3] 

Waterage  and  anchorage  dues 1^3 

flc’iicral  licence 4- 


The  firing  a morning  and  evening  giin  in  the  roads  is  prohibited. 

niOVISlONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Reef,  which  is  good,  is  charged  at  about  sixpence  per  11).  Mutton,  pork  and  goats  arc  procurable. 
Vegetables  and  fruits  are  rather  scarce.  Fowls  of  a middling  kind  cost  from  half  to  a whole  dollar  each.  Bread 
is  very  indillen'iit.  Fisli  are  plentiful,  particularly  niackarcl,  and  the  water  is  preferable  to  what  is 
procured  from  the  other  islands;  it  is  charged  a Spanish  dollar  per  hiitt,  the  boat  hire  included. 

The  anchoring  ground  being  in  general  had  in  Santa  Cruz  Roads,  it  is  advisable,  for  ships  that  call 
at  this  place  in  (he  winter  months  merely  for  the  piiqiose  of  obtaining  refreshments,  not  to  come  to 
anclior,  but  to  stand  off,  and  on,  si'iuling  a boat  on  shore,  to  go  through  the  necessary  forms  with  the 
Governor,  and  to  order  the  reijnisite  supplies  to  be  put  on  board.  The  little  additional  trouble,  and 
seeming  inconvenience  of  this  mode,  are  sufficiently  compensated  l)y  the  preservation  of  tlie  cables,  tlie  safety 
of  tlie  ship,  and  the  exeni|)tion  from  anxiety.  Even  in  the  summer  months  it  is  necessaiy  to  buoy  the 
cables,  and  to  moor  with  as  little  cable  as  possible. 