

Santa  Cruz  is  a large  town,  containing  several  churches  and  com  cuts,  an  hosi>ital,  and  the  best  con- 
structed private  building.s  of  any  in  the  Canary  Islands;  it  is,  in  tact,  the  capital  ol  them  all,  though  the  ejiis- 
copal  see,  and  courts  of  Judicature,  are  in  the  city  of  Palmas  on  Canaria;  but  the  (lovernor  (ienerul  of  the 
islands  resides  always  in  Santa  Cruz,  where  there  is  continually  a great  eoneoiirse  of  foreigiu  rs,  it  being 
the  centre  of  the  Canary  trade  with  Europe  and  America.  'I'he  number  of  inhabitants  are  about  7,(HH); 
the  water  they  drink,  is  conveyed  in  open  wooden  troughs  or  spouts  into  the  town  from  a neighb(au  lng  spi  iug. 

The  latitude  of  the  road  of  Santa  Cntz  is  28°  28  N.  and  longitude  10°  26  West  of  Grc<  nwich. 

COINS. 

The  current  coins  in  the  Canary  Islands,  are  the  Mexico  dollar  and  its  divisions,  the  halt,  quarter, 
eighth,  and  sixteenth.  Besides  these,  there  is  a provincial  real  of  plate,  which  is  a small  sdver  piece  of  the 

C3 


TENERIFFE. 


value  of  five  pence  sterling,  and  the  quart,  a copper  coin,  equal  in  value  to  our  hallpcnny,  for  ten  of  tliem, 
make  a real  of  plate.  The  provincial  silver  coin  is  not  current  in  Lancerota  and  Fuertaventura,  and  is 
never  exported,  because  it  passes  in  the  islands  for  more  than  its  intrinsic  value. 

Accounts  are  kept  here  in  imaginary  money,  viz.  in  current  dollars  of  ten  reals  of  vellon  each.  The 
real  of  vellon  is  equal  in  value  to  eight  of  the  above-mentioned  quarts,  so  that  the  current  dollar  is  exactly 
three  shillings  and  four|3ence;  and  six  of  them  are  equal  to  a pound  sterling;  three  sixteenths  of  the  Mexico 
dollar  pass  for  two  reals  of  plate.  Little  or  no  gold  is  to  be  met  with  in  these  islands,  passing  as  coin* 


WEIGHTS 

Are  much  the  same  as  in  England,  1231bs.  of  the  Canary  Islands  being  nearly  1251bs.  avoirdupois. 
They  are  thus  divided; 

l(i  Adarmos 
8 Oncas 
2 Marcos 
25  Libras 
4 Arobas 


I make  < 


1 unca,  or  uunce. 
1 Marco. 

1 Libra. 

1 Arolia. 

1 Quintal. 


MEASURES. 

The  measures  are  the  fanega,  the  almude,  the  liquid  aroba,  aiul  the  var.  The  first  of  these  is  tlie 
measure  used  for  corn,  cocoa,  salt,  &c.  Twelve  almudes  make  a fanega.  The  liquid  aroba  contains  some- 
thing more  than  three  English  gallons,  and  the  quartillo  is  nearly  ecjual  to  our  quart.  The  var  is  a mea- 
sure for  cloth,  &c.  and  is  about  7 per  cent,  less  tlian  the  English  yard. 


IMPORTS. 

Since  the  invasion  of  Old  Spain  by  the  Fn»nch,  and  the  reconciliation  between  the  Englisii  and  Spa- 
niards, the  l.racle  with  these  islands  has  cuiisideiubl^r  luei eased,  at  all  times  n small  traffic  was  carried  on,  as 
will  appear  from  the  following 