

3.  The  Captains  or  Pursers  must  bring  with  them  the  vessel’s  register  and  Mediterranean  Pass, 
and  also  the  manifest  of  her  cargo;  as  without  the.se  documents,  business  cannot  be  transacted  at  the 
Consular  and  other  offices. 

4.  No  vessel  lying  in  the  port,  can  have  any  communication  with  one  that  is  coming  in,  or  that  has 
already  anchored,  until  the  new  comer  shall  have  been  regularly  visited. 

5.  No  vessel  at  anchor  can  change  her  birth  without  licence  from  the  Government, 


ft 


MADEIRA. 


f).  No  boats  aro  pormitted  to  pass  between  vessels  and  the  shore  after  sunset,  except  by  licence 
obtaiiK'd  iVorn  the  Government. 

7.  No  seaman  or  soldier  to  leave  their  ships  without  leave  obtained  in  writing  from  the  Captain  or 
the  commanding  oilicer. 

H.  Any  seamen  or  soldier  found  on  shore  after  sunset  without  a written  leave  of  absence,  is  liable 
to  be  taken  up  by  the  Government,  and  kept  in  custody  until  claimed  and  sent  on  board  ship;  which 
will,  exclusive  of  his  mainUMianee,  occasion  an  expence  of  two  dollars  for  each  individual,  to  be 
deducted  out  ot'his  wa":es. 

o 

0.  All  (.\'i|)lains  or  commaiuling  oflicers  are  requested  to  read  the  above  two  articles  (7  and  8)  to 
the  sailors  and  soltli(*rs  on  board  their  respective  vessels. 

10.  All  Captains  or  Pursers  must  give  notice  at  the  Consufs  or  the  Vice-Consufs  office  twenty-four 
hours  at  least  before  the  time  of  th(‘ir  intended  departure. 

11.  No  vessel  is  t(»  carry  Irom  hence  any  person  or  persons  other  than  those  that  came  in  her,  without 
a regular  jiassport. 

P^.  ^riie  Master  of  any  vessel  d(*terted  in  attempting  to  carry  away,  without  a passport,  any  Portu- 
guese subject,  is  liable  to  a fine  of  a hundred  dollars,  and  imprisonment  for  three  months. 

M.  In  cases  where  the  ('aptain  of  a vessel  .shall  be  judicially  warned  not  to  cany  from  this  island 
any  particular  person,  if  he  shall,  notwithstanding  such  judicial  warning,  still  carry  him,  he  w’ill  thereby 
become  Iia[)le  for  the  delits  which  such  person  .shall  owe  here. 

1 1*.  When  v(‘ssel.s  are  ready  to  (h'part,  the  Captains  must,  through  their  C’onsul,  or  through  their 
C’onsignees,  apjily  to  the  (rovernmeiit  to  have  its  visiter  sent  on  l)oard  at  the  hour  when  they  will  be  ready 
to  proceed  to  sea. 

lA.  After  a vessel  has  been  visited  for  the  purpose  of  proceeding  on  her  voyage,  she  cannot  have  any 
communication  either  w ith  tin*  shore,  or  with  the  ves.sels  in  port.  If  she  has  any  communication  with 
either,  she  cannot  sail  until  visited  a .second  time. 

Hi.  No  vess(‘I  can  enter  or  leave  this  port  after  sunset,  without  special  licence. 