

GRAND  (CANARIA. 

The  N.E.  [)oint  of  this  island  is  about  18  leagues  distant  fjoin  Eucrtaventura ; the  latitude  of  this 
point  is  2H^  13'  N.  and  15’  38  W.  from  Greenwich.  On  the  N.E.  (’Jill  of  tills  isluiul  is  11  {K'ninsuhi,  about 
two  Iragucs  in  circiimfcrcncc’.  'I'Ik.'  isthmus  hy  whicli  it  is  connected  with  the  main  island,  is  about  two 
miles  long,  and  u (inarter  of  a mile  broad  at  its  narrowest  |iart.  On  each  side  of  this  istliimis  is  a hoy, 
which  is  cxiMised  on  the  N.  side  to  the  swell  of  the  sea,  and  therefore  an  unlit  road  for  shipiiing;  but 
small  barks  lie  beie  secure  from  all  winds  and  weather,  and  licre  the  natives  I’ejiair  their  small  ves-els. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  isthmus,  is  a spacious  sandy  buy,  called  Porto  dc  laiz,  having  some  steep 
rocks  at  its  entrance  towards  the  N.  li.  This  is  a good  road  for  shipping  of  any  hurtlien,  with  all  winds 
except  S.E.  to  which  it  is  exposed;  hut  that  wind  seldom  blows  so  hard  as  to  endanger  shipping. 

The  landing  place  is  at  tlie  veiy  bottom  of  the  bay,  where  the  water  is  generally  so  smooth,  that  a 
boat  may  lie  broadside  to  the  sliore  without  danger.  At  this  landing  place  stands  a chapel,  dedicated  to  St. 
Catherine,  and  a castle  mounted  with  a few  guns,  but  of  no  strength.  From  thence  along  shore  to  the 
eastward  is  the  city  of  Palmas,  the  capital  of  the  island,  between  which  and  the  above-mentioned  ca.stlc, 
are  two  forts,  mounted  with  guns,  and  garrisoned  by  invalids.  At  the  other  end  of  the  city  is  another  castle, 
called  St.  Pedro;  none  of  these  are  of  any  strength.  The  city  of  Palmas  is  not  capable  of  opposing  an 
attack;  but  it  is  large,  and  contains  several  fine  buildings,  jiarticularly  the  Cathedral  of  St.  Anne,  with  many 
churches,  convents,  and  nunneries.  The  private  houses  are  in  general  good,  being  all  built  of  stone. 
The  city  is  divided  into  two  parts,  wliicli  have  a communication  with  each  other  by  a bridge  thrown  over 
a small  stream  of  water.  Tiie  iiuiiiber  of  the  iidmbitants  in  Palmas  is  estimated  at  about  (i,0l)0. 

Shipping  that  discharge  their  cargoes  at  Palmas,  generally  in  good  weather  anchor  within  half  a mile 
of  the  town,  for  the  (|uiekcr  dispatch ; hut  that  jdneo  is  not  a good  road. 

This  island  is  the  most  healthy  and  pleasant  of  tlie  whole  group. 

niPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

Grand  Canaria  exports  to  TenerilTe,  provisions  of  all  sorts : coarse  woollen  blankets,  some  raw  and 
wrought  silk,  orchilla  weed,  square  stones  for  pavements,  filtering  stone  vessels,  some  salt,  &c.  The 
returns  received  for  these  commodities  areciiicily  silver,  and  other  produce  of  the  Spanish  West  Indies. 