


OROTAVA. 

This  port  lies  about  8 leagues  to  the  soutlM\estward  of  Point  Nago,  in  latitude  28^25'  North,  and 
longitude  1(P  3;j  West.  1’his  is  a good  port  in  the  summer  season,  or  from  the  beginning  of  May  to  the  end 
of  October;  but  in  tli(‘ winter,  ships  are  often  obliged  to  sliji  their  cables,  uiul  put  to  sea,  for  fear  of  being 
sniprised  with  a north-west  wind,  wliicli  throws  in  a heavy  sea  upon  this  coast;  but  those  winds  rarely  Imp- 
pen,  and  commonly  give  warning  beforehand,  so  tJiat  Shi,  js  have  time  to  get  away. 

No  bout  w ill  go  Irom  hence  to  a ship  in  tlie  offing  until  she  approaches  within  a mile  of  the  shore,  when 
the  |.ratii|ue  l)()at  |)ufs  n |>ilot  on  tiomcl,  nlu.  hrin^rs  her  into  (Ik-  roud,  whieli  is  about  a mile  to  the  west- 
ward  of  the  (own,  wlu-re  .shi|)|)in,r  lay  moored  in  dO  or  .5(1  fallioms  water.  The  j.ilot  who  boards  a shij)  on 
her  arrival,  remains  mdil  she  de,)arts:  they  are  very  careful  to  slip,  and  ,,ut  to  sea,  when  they  appre- 
hend any  daiif'er.  It  is  eonimonly  calm  in  lids  road  ; hut  there  is  almost  always  a long  northerly  swell, 
which  causes  ships  to  roll  very  much,  and  make.s  it  difficult  to  load  a cargo  there.  ’ 

'I'he  landiiig-|.luee  is  near  to  the  mi.ldle  of  the  town,  where  is  a small  creek  or  haven  among  the  rotks 
There  large  laiats  load  wines,  and  carry  them  olf  to  the  .shi|)s  in  the  roud.s  with  great  dispatch. 

Tort  Orotavii  is  u jiluee  of  coiisideiahle  trade,  and  has  inurh  increased  since  the  destruction  of 
(Jarrachiea,  one  of  the  jirineijial  |H)rts,  hy  an  earthquake  in  170t.  It  contains  some  good  private  buildings 
two  elnirches,  two  convents  of  I'riars,  and  two  of  Nuius.  At  each  end  of  the  town  is  a black  sandy  bay! 
along  the  northernmost  is  a low  stone  wall,  built  to  |.reveiit  an  enemy  from  lauding;  at  the  other  bay  is  a 
small  fort  or  castle,  for  the  same  |nn  j.ose;  and  between  them,  at  the  landing-, ilace,  a battery  of  a few 
enimon:  hut  the  surf  that  breaks  continually  on  (he  shore,  is  a belter  .lefence  than  a large  army  Port 
Orotnva  is  jilentifidly  sup, died  with  gooil  water,  which  is  conveyed  to  it  from  a rivulet  at  a great  distance  in 
ojicn  wooden  sj.outs,  or  troughs,  and  is  brought  oil’  to  shipiiing  in  the  country  boats. 


PALMA—GOMERA. 


15 


PALlfA. 

This  island  is  about  17  leaguos  from  the  west  oml  of  Tencriffi'.  It  is  un,  ommonlv  I,!,,],  land  • its 
north  iK.int  is  in  latitude  28^  51  North,  and  longitude  17-  IS  West.  The  ehief  port  is'  tlnil  of  Santa 
Cruz,  on  the  S.  E.  side  of  the  island.  The  mark  by  which  it  is  to  he  found,  is,  when  appro  u hing  to  the 
east  side  of  the  island,  it  will  appear  shajied  like  a saddle.  Steer  so  as  to  full  in  a little  to  « indwaid  of  the 
middle  of  the  saddle,  till  within  a mile  of  the  land;  then  run  along  shore  to  the  sontliwurd,  till  von  peieeive 
the  town  close  by  the  shore,  and  the  shiiipiiigin  the  roads.  The  town  is  in  latitude  2S-  .'IS  'North,  and 
longitude  17-  .58  West.  Theroad  is  within  a masket-shol  of  theshore,  in  1.5  to  2(»  fathoms,  hut  is  expos- 
ed to  easterly  winds;  it  is  considered  more  .secure  than  any  at  Canaria  or  'rcnerilfe,  though  in  the  n inter 
season  there  is  a heavy  surf,  which  prevents  boats  from  going  oil  or  landing  for  smer.d  das"s  together. 