

About  two  leagues  from  Porto  de  Naos,  towards  the  N.  W.  is  the  town  of  Cayas,  or  Rubicon,  the 
chief  habitation  in  the  Island,  and  which  was  formerly  a Bishop's  see.  It  contains  about  200  houses,  a 
church,  and  a convent:  it  has  an  old  castle,  mounted  with  some  guns  for  its  defence.  Most  of  the  dwelling 
houses  here  have  but  a mean  appearance.  There  are  one  or  two  other  small  towns  on  the  island. 

This  island  exports  to  Teneriffe  a great  quantity  of  corn,  orchilla  wTcd,  cattle,  cheese,  coal,  skins, 
salt  fish,  and  fowls.  The  returns  are  generally  European  goods  and  cash.  The  horses  are  much  esteemed, 
being  of  the  Barbary  breed;  the  cattle  are  fat  and  good,  and  fish  are  in  great  plenty,  and  of  various  sorts. 

FUERTAVENTURA 

Is  about  7 miles  distance  from  the  S.  W.  point  of  Lancerota.  This  island  is  about  80  miles  long,  and 
16  broad;  in  the  middle  it  is  narrow  and  low.  There  are  no  ports  for  large  ships  in  the  island,  but 
several  from  whence  the  produce  is  shipped,  which  consists  principally  of  corn. 

C 


10 


GRAND  CANARIA. 


Tilt.*  latitude  of  the  north  point  of  the  island  is  28*^  40'  N.  and  longitude  13^  52  W.  fj'om  Grccnwit  li. 
In  the  channel  between  it  and  Lancerota,  lies  the  island  of  Lobos  (or  seals),  which  is  about  a 
league  in  circumference,  uninhabited,  and  destitute  of  water.  Near  to  this  is  a good  port  for  shipping; 
the  mark  to  find  it  is  the  east  point  of  Lobos  N.  JK.  and  anchor  about  half  way  between  it  and  Fuerta- 
ventura.  Although  this  road  seems  to  be  open  and  exposed,  yet  it  is  very  sale  with  the  trade  wind ; for 
the  water  is  smooth,  and  th(?  ground  every  w'hcre  clean,  being  a fine  sandy  bottom.  Right  ashore  from  tiie 
road,  on  Fuerta\  entura,  is  a well  of  good  water,  easy  to  come  at. 

On  the  east(  rn  side  is  the  poit  of  Cala  de  Fustes,  where  corn  is  shipped  off,  but  is  only  fit  for  small 
barks  : here  they  II(*  secure  from  all  but  S.  K.  winds.  Four  leagues  to  the  southward  of  the  above  is  Point 
de  Negro;  on  the  otlu'r  side  of  which  is  a spacious  bay  called  Las  Play  as.  The  best  anchoiing  place  is  on 
the  north  side,  where  it  is  ch'an  sandy  bottom,  at  a convenient  distance  from  the  shore,  in  14  fathoms. 

The  principal  town  on  the  island  is  situate<l  about  2 leagues  inland  from  the  road  of  Lobos,  before 
mentioned;  here  are  a large  heantiful  ehurch  and  convent,  built  of  hewn  stone;  most  of  the  houses  of  the 
town  are  neat,  and  are  about  100  in  iinmber.  There  are  several  other  small  towms  scattered  up  and  down 
ill  different  parts  of  the  island  ; hut  the  inhabitants  are  not  numerous. 

Tlie  artiele  of  corn  is  (lie  principal  one  exported  from  the  island,  in  return  for  which  the  inhabitants 
receive  Spanish  dollars,  and  a few  articles  ol*  European  and  West  Indian  produce;  besides  which,  they 
have  some  orchilla  weed,  caltle,  and  a small  (juantity  of  wine,  geii(*rally  w eak  and  poor. 