


'rENERlFFK. 


The  wine  of  Canaria  is  good,  but  has  not  siidi  a Iwcly  as  lliat  of  TcncriflV,  and  ilicrcrurc'  not  so  fit  for 
exportation;  yet  a cuiisideralde  quantity  of  it  is  annually  sent  to  tlie  West  Indies. 

PROVISIONS  \Nn  RKFRESIIAIENTS. 

ProvLsion.s  and  refreshments  are  plentiful,  and  consist  of  hulloeks,  sheep,  floats,  ralduts,  fowls,  lurkejs, 
geese,  &e.  and  of  fruits,  the  ju'ach,  apricot,  apple,  pear,  eheriy,  jrluins,  pine-apples,  ;>,e.  aie  in  the  pro|>er 
.season  in  abundance.  Onions  and  other  vegetables  arc  extremely  good  and  reasonable. 

TENKRIFFE. 

This  i.sland  is  ahno.st  triangular,  the  three  sides  being  nearly  equal,  and  each  about  12  leagues  in 
length.  It  is  1.5  leagues  from  (Irand  Canaria.  Nearly  In  the  centre  of  the  island  is  th(>  thmous  peak, 
which  is  19()I  French  toises,  or  two  Engli.sh  miles  and  a quarter  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  may  be 
seen  in  clear  w'cather  upwards  of  .'10  leagues.  About  six  leagues  from  the  N.  E.  point  of  the  island,  called  Punto 
de  Nago,  on  the  S.  K.  side,  is 

SANTA  CRUZ, 

The  most  frequented  port  of  any  in  the  Canary  Islands.  'I'he  best  road  Ibr  shipping  is  between  the  middle 
of  the  town,  and  a fort  or  castle  about  a mile  to  the  northward  of  it.  In  all  tliat  space,  shi|)s  aiichoi'  from  a 
cable's  length  distance  from  the  shore,  in  6,  7,  and  8 fathoms  water,  to  half  a mile  in  2.5  to  30  fathoms. 
The  ground  is  in  .some  places  foul ; and  if  a ship  is  likely  to  remain  long  in  the  roads,  it  is  nceessaiy  to  buoy 
the  cables.  In  the  middle  of  the  town  is  a mole,  built  at  a vast  expence,  for  the  convenience  oflanding; 
it  runs  to  the  northward,  and  the  outermost  part  of  it  turns  tow'ards  the  shore.  Tlie  surt  sometimes  beats 
with  great  violence  on  the  shore  for  .several  days  together;  for  a .shelter  against  which,  tin*  mole  is 
but  ill  contrived.  In  mild  weather  goods  arc  landed  at  a creek  among  the  rocks,  near  the  custom-house, 
at  a short  distance  to  the  southwanl  of  the  mole.  In  going  from  the  mole  into  the  Jown,  there  is  a .square 
fort  on  the  leR  hand,  named  St.  Philip’s,  which  is  the  principal  one  in  the  bay  ; to  the  northward  of  it  along 
shore  are  .some  forts,  or  batteries,  mounted  with  guns ; the  most  considerable  of  which  is  called  Pusso  Alto : 
near  it  is  a steep  rocky  den  or  valley  ninning  a long  way  inland. 

At  the  south  end  of  the  town  are  some  batteries,  and  beyond  them  close  to  the  .slime,  there  is  a fort 
called  St.  Juan.  All  the  sea  shore  from  thence  to  the  southward  is  generally  inaccessible,  being  naturally 
fenced  with  rocks,  on  which  the  surf  breaks  almost  continually.  These  forts  are  mounted  with  cannon, 
and  joined  to  each  other  by  a thick  stone  svall,  which  begins  near  Passo  Alto,  and  continues  with  little  inter- 
ruption to  Fort  St.  Juan.  This  wall  is  only  breast  high  within,  but  higher  without,  facing  the  sea.  The 
entry  to  the  town  from  the  sea,  is  at  the  mole,  where  there  is  an  open  |)ussage  between  the  wall  and  St. 
Philip’s  Castle,  which  commands  and  guards  this  entry.  The  town  is  not  fortified  on  the  land  side,  as  no 
danger  is  apprehended  from  that  quarter,  the  country  near  Santa  Cruz  being  diy,  stony,  and  barren. 