


HIERRO. 


IG 


HIERRO,  OR  FERRO, 

Is  the  westernmost  of  llio  Canaries;  its  north  point  is  in  latitude  27^50'  North,  and  longitude  17"^  50' 
West.  It  is  15  leagues  in  circumference,  and  5 in  breadth.  There  is  no  considerable  towm  on  the  island ; 
the  port  or  anchoring  j)lace  is  an  o|)en  road,  and  but  little  frequented,  ( xcept  by  small  vessels. 

Water  is  extremely  scarce  on  this  island.  It  produces  wine,  which  being  poor,  weak,  and  bad,  is  distilled 
into  brandy  : lliis  with  (jrchilla  weed,  and  a few  small  cattle,  are  the  principal  exports  to  Tenerifte ; for  which 
they  receive  in  return  various  European  and  other  commodities. 


OUCHILLA  WEED 


Grows  upon  the  rocks  on  the  sea  coast  of  the  Canary  Islands,  the  Cape  de  Verds,  and  Madeira;  but 
the  best  sort,  and  the  greatest  quantity,  are  found  on  the  Canary  Islands.  It  is  an  ingredient  used  in  dying, 
and  very  valuable  It  grows  out  of  the  pores  of  stones  or  rocks  to  about  the  length  of  three  inches,  is  of 
a round  form,  and  of  tlio  thickness  of  cominun  sewing  twine.  Its  colour  is  grey,  inclining  to  white ; here 
and  there  on  the  stalk  are  found  white  spots,  or  scabs ; many  stalks  proceed  from  one  root,  at  some  distance 
from  svhich  they  divide  into  branches.  There  is  no  earth  or  mould  to  be  perceived  on  the  rock  or  stone 
svhere  it  grows.  Those  who  do  not  know  this  weed,  or  arc  not  accustomed  to  gather  it,  would  hardly  be 
able  to  find  it ; for  it  is  of  such  a colour,  and  grows  in  such  a direction,  that  it  appears  at  first  sight  to  be 
merely  flic  shade  of  the  rock.  It  produces  a beautiful  purple  dye,  and  is  much  used  for  brightening  and  enli- 
vening  other  colours.  The  best  sort  is  that  of  the  darkest  colour,  and  of  an  exactly  round  form ; and  the 
more  it  abounds  in  scabs,  the  more  valuable.  It  is  found  on  sonic  of  the  islands  of  the  Mediterranean,  and 
it  is  probable  that  it  grows  on  .some  of  those  in  the  Eastern  Seas.  The  prices  of  the  different  sorts  greatly 
vary  in  the  London  market,  riV. 

i 

First  sort  from  the  Cnnaiy  Islands,  from  . i’230  to  £250  per  ton. 

Second  ditto 110  to  130  ditto. 

Cape  de  Verd  Islands 130  to  160  ditto. 

Madeira 80  to  100  ditto. 

The  permanent  duty  on  orchilla  weed  is  10s.  6d.  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty,  3s.  (kl.  per  cwt 

ROSE  WOOD. 


This  wood  grows  on  the  Canary  Islands,  and  in  some  parts  of  the  East  Indies.  It  is  extemallv  of  a 
whitish  colour,  but  internally  of  a deep  yellow  with  a cast  of  red.  These  colours  are  sometimes  varied  In 
the  most  perfect  .specimens,  the  external  jiart  Is  pale,  and  nearest  the  heart  is  darker.  In  these  it  also  apnears 
that  this  wood  is  cut  from  a knotty  tree  with  an  irregidar  grain,  having  several  convolutions  in  the  midst 
of  which  arc  clusters  of  circular  fibres,  incluiling  a fine  fragrant  resin.  Rose  Wood  has  a slightly  bitterish 
somewhat  pungent  balsamic  taste,  and  a fragrant  smell,  especially  when  scraped  or  rubbed  resembling 
roses.  It  should  be  chosen  sound,  heavy,  of  the  deepest  colour,  and  in  the  largest  pieces  that  can  be  pro 
cured,  of  the  most  irregular  knotty  grain,  and  well  filled  with  resinous  fibres.  The  smaU  lieht  coloured 
and  large  shivered  pieces  should  be  rejected.  ’ ° * 