

The  regulations  rospeeting  .salutes  Iiere  are,  to  fonagn  men  ot‘  w ar,  the  same  number  is  ret  in  iied  ; to  an 
Admiral  of  their  own  nation,  an  ecjual  numher;  two  less  to  a Commodon',  and  foin*  less  a C.ijitain  of  llicii* 
own  ships  of  w’ar;  to  foreign  merchant  ships  tour  gun.s  less,  and  to  their  owai  trading  shijis  no  aiisn  i r is  gi\  (*n. 

The  coast  of  Rrazil  W’as  discovered  by  Peter  do  (’abral  in  1.500,  when  on  a v(>yai>e  to  the  Last 
Indies;  he  took  possession  of  it  in  the  name  of  the  King  of  Portugal,  and  sent  one  ol  his  licet  to  Lislion  to 
announce  th(‘  diseoveiy.  Lor  many  years  the  Portuguese  only  us(‘d  it  as  a pi. ice  for  condemned  criminals; 
however,  in  1519,  the  King  appointed  a Gov(‘rnor,  who  .shortly  after  built  M.  Salvador,  and  fortified  it. 
In  15S1,  the  Crown  of  Portugal  devoUing  to  tin*  King  of  Spain,  he  became  posse^s(*d  of  HrazLl.  In  1()21, 
the  Dutch  being  at  w’ar  with  Spain,  attackctl  and  took  S(.  Salvador,  and  ju(jul](‘(l  imme  nse  plimdei ; tiny 
WTre  driven  out  from  thence  in  1(1*20.  In  KiJO,  th.ey  attacked  anil  took  Pei  namhiieo,  and  m.iny  othi  i jil.ues 
on  the  coast,  doing  iniminse  mischief  to  their  enemies:  it  is  stated  that  in  thiiteen  years,  liom  to 

IC.'IT,  they  took  5J5  vesseks,  wlilcli,  with  their  cargoes,  sold  for  seven  millions  and  a hall  Sti  rling.  In  10.51, 
the  Portuguese  succeeded  in  expelling  the  Dutch;  .since  which  period  they  have  rem.iined  in  iindistui  bed 
possession. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MLASURES 

Are  similar  to  those  enumerated  at  Rio  dc  Janeiro,  to  whicli  St.  Salvador  is  subordinate. 

IMPORTS  Axn  Exroirrs. 

Previous  to  the  removal  of  the  scat  of  Government,  the  li.ich*  with  the  mother  eouuiiy  enijiloyeil  a 
great  number  of  ships,  many  of  them  upw^ards  of  1,(XK)  tons  Inii  then.  Lrom  Europe  tin*  imjiorts  are  similar 
to  those  enumerated  at  Rio  de  Janeiro.  The  merchants  here  impoi  t tlieirow  n slaves  fiom  the  coast  ot  Aliii.i, 
w'ho  arc  said  to  cost  on  an  average  upwards  of  .^30  piT  head,  and  are  obtained  in  exchange  tm*  tobacco, 
spirits,  piece-goods,  beads,  &c.  which  are  carried  from  hence. 

The  coasting  trade  is  very  considerable,  and  the  vessels  emjdoyed  are  numerous.  A contraband 
trade  with  the  Spanish  settlements  to  the  southward,  used  to  be  can  led  on  to  .a  gi c.it  i xtcnl , tin  o’  lelm  ns  w cie 
Spanish  dollars,  dried  beef,  hides,  &c.  Cotton  is  one  of  the  most  considerable  ai  tides  ol  c'.jxn  U it  is  i eceiv  ed 
from  the  neighbouring  places,  deposited  in  warehouses  appropjiated  to  the  purpo>e,  whtu  it  is  soiled, 
weighed,  and  made  up  into  bales  for  exportation;  the  other  articles  are  Mig.ir,  lohan  o,  drugs,  &c. 