

ST.  LIT(  lA 

Is  about  5 leagues  long,  and  one  and  a half  broad.  It  is  uninhabited,  hut  iins  a mimher  of  wild  bullocks 
and  goats,  which  the  inhabitants  of  St.  Nicholas  and  St.  Antonio  occasionally  join  in  hunting. 

ST,  VINCENT 

Is  about  4 leagues  to  the  N.  W.  of  the  latter,  and  has  a good  hay  on  its  N.AA^  siile.  This  island  is 
likewise  uninhabited,  but  well  stored  with  wood  and  water,  and  there  are  many  wild  asses  upon  it. 

ST.  ANTONIO, 

The  northernmost  and  westernmost  of  the  group,  is  about  0 leagues  long,  and  4 broad.  Thia  i'  are  two 
remarkable  mountains  upon  it;  one  of  which  is  higher  than  the  other,  and  called  the  sugar-loaf.  On  the 
S.E.  side  is  the  town  of  Santa  Cruz,  situated  on  a bay,  of  which  the  ground  is  viay  indiflerenr.  The 
island  produces  wine,  cotton,  indigo,  orchilla  weed,  &c.  and  has  plenty  of  wood,  provisions,  and  other 
I'efreslments.  The  N.W.  point  of  the  island  is  in  latitude  17°  10  N.  and  longitude  25^3  W. 

1)2 


CHAPTER  IV 


South  America. 


Forts  visited  h\^  East  India  Ships  in  Brazil — S(,  tSalrador;  piscriplion^Coin,s\  Weip^hfsy  and  Measures^ 
Imports  and  Exports— Port  Regulations — Provisions  and  Refreshments — Rio  dt  Janeiro;  Description— 
Coinsy  Weights,  and  Measures — Imports  from  England^  and  (heir  Amount — E\por(s  to  England,  and 
thiir  Amount-State  of  the  Portuguese  Trade  with  the  British  Stttlements  in  the  East  Indies— Import  and 
Export  Duties — Prot  isinns  and  Refreshments — Rio  dt  la  Plata — Maldoiudda ; Description — Provisions  and 
Rifreshmuits — Monte  Video;  Description — Coins^  Weights,  and  Measures — Imports  from  England— 
Exports  to  England— Amount  of  Imports  and  Exports — Trade  of  Spain  with  South  America— Buenos  Ayres; 
Description » 


mW/AL. 

Tlu*  coast  (if  Brazil  contains  st'vcj-al  good  harbours;  but  St.  Salvador  and  Rio  do  .lanciro  arc  the  most 
rapacious  and  convcMucnt  for  large  ships,  and  arc  the  (udy  ports  frc<|U(‘ntcd  hv  outward  bound  Rast  India 
ships,  which  stop  on  this  coast  for  refreshments. 

SAINT  SALVADOR. 

The  entrance  into  the  Bay  of  All  Saints,  or  St.  Salvador,  is  b(‘t ween  a large  island  called  Tnporica  to 
the  westward,  and  a peninsula,  on  which  the  city  of  St.  Salvador  is  built,  to  the  eastward.  The  anchorage  is 
abreast  of  the  city  in  8 to  12  fathoms,  a mile  or  a mile  and  a half  distant.  On  the  extremity  of  the  pe- 
ninsula there  is  a lighthouse  to  guide  ships  in  the  night.  The  bay  is  large  and  eominodioiis,  and  capa- 
ble of  containing  a girat  number  of  .ships,  where  they  ride  secure  from  all  winds. 

The  city  in  on  the  riglit  hand  side  of  the  hay,  in  latitude  12"^  db  South,  and  longitude  38*^  40' West; 
it  was  the  capital  of  the  whole  of  Brazil,  until  the  seat  of  Oovenmunt  w'as  removed  to  Rio  de  Janeiro. 
It  is  divided  into  the  upper  and  lower  town,  the  former  being  built  on  the  Mininiit  of  a steep  hill; 
and  tile  latter,  which  consists  chictly  of  a single  street,  running  parallel  to  the  beach,  is  situated  at  the 
bottom  of  the  hill.  They  are  connected  by  throe  streets,  w Inch  run  shmtw  isc  iij)  tlie  einincnci',  as  it  w^ould 
be  inijiossible  to  go  right  up.  In  the  lower  town  all  the  merchants  and  people  of  business  reside.  The  houses 
are  in  general  large,  but  by  no  means  liaiidsome  or  commodious.  In  tlui  middle  of  the  town  is  situated  the 
great  s(|uure:  its  four  sides  are  oeeupied  by  the  Governors  Talaee,  the  Mint,  and  other  jiublic  buildiin^s. 
The  churches  are  numerous,  and  many  of  tlieiii  large  and  handsome  structures*.  The  streets  are  in 
general  confined  and  narrow  , badly  paved,  and  very  diily. 