

Poilo  Praya,  situated  about  seven  miles  to  the  N.E.  of  llibiera  Grande,  at  the  S.  E.  extremity  of 
the  island,  is  now  the  residimee  of  the  I'ortuguese  Governor,  to  whom  the  whole  of  the  Cape  de  Verd 
Islands  are  subject.  It  contains  a church;  except  which  building  and  the  gaol,  it  does  not  possess  another 
above  the  description  of  a hut;  even  tlu:  habitation  of  the  Governor  is  but  one  of  a better  a])pearance. 
These  huts  are  built  in  wid(‘ly  detached  rows,  and  the  market  is  held  in  the  most  spacious  of  these  divisions. 
The  liarbour  is  defended  by  a battery  of  Hi  guns,  placed  on  a clifi‘  at  the  bottom  of  the  bay;  but  the  car- 
riages are  in  .so  bad  a state,  as  hardly  to  bear  the  shock  of  bring  a salute.  The  best  anchorage  is  with  the 
fort  bearing  N.  W.  about  one  mile  distant. 

Poito  Praya  is  celebrated  for  tlie  engagement  which  took  place  between  Monsieur  Suffiein  and  Com- 
modore Johnson,  on  the  Kith  of  April,  1781,  in  which  the  East  Iii(linmcn  hdiuvcd  with  uncommon  bra- 
very. This  bay  is  occasionally  visited  by  outward  bound  ships,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  refreshments. 


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS 

Are  very  trifling:  the  former  coirsist  of  a few  necessaries;  the  latter  of  some  coarse  cotton  goods,  ma- 
nufactured for  the  slave  market,  and  mules,  ot  which  they  have  an  excellent  breed ; numbers  of  them  are 
annually  sent  to  the  West  Indies. 

Cotton  is  grown  here  sufficient  for  the  cloths  they  manufacture  for  their  trade  to  the  Coiifinent  of 
Africa.  The  following  are  the  kinds  made;  the  Hrst  of 'uhich  is  in  the  greatest  demand,  and  flic  resf  iti 
the  order  of  the  numbers.  'Fheir  prices  on  the  Island  are. 


1 Pano  de  agulha,  all  cotton 2,500  rea.s 

2 Pano  qundroda,  all  cotton 2,000 

Pano  da  ley,  all  cotton 1,000 

4 Pano  de  sio  de  Ian,  cotton  and  worsted  . . 1 to  5,000 

5 Pano  de  retro.s,  cotton  and  .silk 0 to  12,000 

6 Pano  de  V€*stir 3,(K)() 


A duty  is  levied  on  imports  amounting  to  about  10  per  cent. 


PROV  ISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 


The  privilege  of  selling  eaftle  to  shipping,  and  European  goods  to  the  inhabitants,  is  vestc<i  in  a foin 
pany  ; but  ni  all  otl.er  articles  the  native,  are  allowed  to  traffic,  t’altle  must  he  paid  for  in  Spanish  dollars' 

but  the  other  refreshments  arc  procured  better  for  old  clothes,  black  in  particular,  th.an  for  dollars  The 
prices  arc: 


Uullock.s,  weighing  from  3 to  -I  cwt.  each  16  to  20  Spanl.sh  dollars 

Goats,  but  iiidiffi  rent 3 to  t ditto 

Hogs,  small  and  poor 2 to  4 dilto 

Turkeys,  which  are  very  large  and  good  . I dollar  earli. 

Fowls,  very  indiHerent 2 ditt„  ,,tr  dozen 


19 


FOGO—BnAVA— NICHOLAS— ST.  LUCIA— ST.  V1N(M<  NT— ST.  AN'rONK). 