


expected  that  some  alteration  will  take  place.  They  are  as  follow,  ih. 

Pilotage,  at  entrance,  and  departure 7,000  reas 

l\)r  entrance  into,  and  departure  from  the  port 1,000 

Anchorage  per  day  ';^,00() 

Harbour-master  per  day  1,000 

IVesent  to  linguist  on  departure  2,i)0()  reas 

Six  custom-house  guards,  at  3 patacaoscach  per  day,  eating  at 

their  own  cost,  while  on  board A, 7 00 

Guard  de  mor  of  tobacco 3,200 

Ditto  of  Alsandego,  or  custom-house  1,2S0 

making  a first  expence  of  17,480  reas,  and  an  additional  daily  one  of  S,7(>0  reas. 

The  charges  made  for  caulking,  if  people  are  procured  from  the  shore  for  that  purpose,  an? 

Alaster  workman,  per  day Reas  1,200 

First  Assistant  working  high  up  8CK) ; when  low  down  ....  1,100 
Second  ditto  . . . ditto  . . . .000  . . . ditto 1,000 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFHESHMKN  rs. 

All  biishicss  relative  to  a ship  must  be  done  by  application  to  the  Tntendant  of  I lie  port;  and  IIkmi 
there  is  considerable  difficulty  in  obtaining  even  a necessary  supply  of  refreshments.  A list  of  whatever  is 
required,  must  be  given  in  writing  the  day  before,  at  one  o'clock.  On  last  days  they  will  notgraMlany 
supplies.  The  price  paid  for  bullocks,  which  are  intolerably  bad,  are  12,000  reas  ( ndi.  Poultry  more 
reasonable.  There  is  a market  held  in  the  lower  town,  where  liuits  ol  vaiious  Kinds  arc  procun  »1,  i/:. 
plantains,  oranges,  lemons,  guavas,  tamarinds,  &c.  V^egetables,  such  as  yams,  peas,  cabbage.,  and 
cucumbers,  are  in  abundance;  and  the  bay  produces  fish  in  great  variety. 

A charge  of  4-00  reas  is  made  for  Coolies  driving  bullocks,  &c.  and  on  the  departure  ol*  a ship,  the 
under  linguist,  who  attends  the  wharf,  expects  a present. 

RIO  DE  JANEIRO, 

Called  also  St.  Sebastian,  is  at  present  the  capital  of  Brazil,  and  became  the  residence  of  the  royal 
family  of  Portugal,  upon  their  emigration  from  Lisbon,  on  the  French  invasion.  The  entrance  of  the 
harbour,  one  of  the  finest  in  the  world,  is  .situated  about  22  leagues  from  Cape  Frio,  which  is  in  latitude 
23^  1'  S.  and  longitude  41°  AO'  W.  and  may  be  known  by  a remarkable  hill  in  the  form  of  a sugar-loaf,  at 
the  West  pwnt  of  the  bay.  The  entrance  of  the  harbour  is  not  very  wide,  but  the  sea  breeze,  which  blows 
every  day  from  10  to  12  o'clock  till  sunset,  enables  ships  to  go  in  bclbre  the  w ind,  and  it  grows  wider  as 
the  town  is  approached;  so  that  abreast  of  it,  there  is 'room  for  the  largtst  fleet.  'Ihe  entrance  is  defended 
by  the  Castle  or  Fort  of  Santa  Cruz,  which  is  very  strong,  mounting  near  GO  pieces  of  heav  y cannon,  and 
by  a small  fortified  island,  nearly  abreast  of  it,  called  St.  Lucia;  between  these  is  the  channel.  B(*foj’e 
a ship  attempts  to  enter  the  harbour,  it  will  be  necessary  to  send  a boat,  with  an  officer,  to  the  Fort  of 
Santa  Cruz,  from  whence  he  is  conducted  to  the  city,  to  give  information  of  the  slop's  airivaJ,  the 
occasion  of  her  stopping,  &c.  The  ship's  colours  should  also  be  hoisted  early,  unless  the  prat icpie  boat 
be  already  on  board.  A vessel,  even  of  the  Portuguese  nation,  attempting  to  pass  the  fort,  will  be 
hailed,  and  compelled  to  anchor,  until  permission  be  granted  for  passing  into  tlie  harbour.  Lvery  parti- 
cular of  the  ship,  her  condition,  force,  destination,  and  wants,  are  rc(juired  to  be  declared  under  the  sig- 
nature of  the  Captain;  after  which,  every  indulgence  and  assistance  are  readily  promised  to  be  given;  but  the 
ship’s  crew  arc  not  suffered  to  land  at  any  place,  except  at  the  stairs  opposite  the  palace;  and  a military 