

Of  fruits  they  have  oran-cs,  guavas,  cocoa-nuts,  liim.s,  plantains,  piiie-applc^s,  anil  tannii  inils.  Vege- 
tables  are  rather  scarce,  particularly  in  dry  seasons;  iiotwitlistaruiing,  a few  cal)l)a;;cs,  pumpkins,  yams,  and 
sweet  potatoes  arc  always  to  be  procured.  Indian  corn  is  plentiful,  and  the  principal  food  of  the  natives. 

The  water  is  in  general  very  good.  The  cistern  which  supplies  the  sliips,  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill 
on  which  the  fort  is  built,  about  a ciuarter  of  a mile  from  the  beach.  As  tlien^  is  gcncrallv  some  surf  upon 
the  beach,  boats  should  lie  at  their  grapnels,  and  the  casks  of  water  be  hoisted  into  them,  aftci’  being  Idled  at 
the  cistern,  rolled  down,  and  floated  through  tlic  surf.  It  is  recommended  to  send  on  shore  a pump, 
to  place  in  tlie  well,  by  which  ships  will  be  sooner  watered,  than  if  drawn  up  in  tlie  common  way  by 
buckets.  Some  planks  carried  on  shore,  will  be  useful  to  place  under  the  casks  in  rolling  tliem  down, 
where  the  ground  is  stony,  or  uneven,  or  where  it  is  soft  sand,  which  is  oflen  the  case. 

FOGG, 

This  is  the  highest  ot  the  Cape  de  Verd  Islands,  and  has  an  immense  volcano,  uliich  hin  ns  conllnuallv, 
and  may  sometimes  be  seen  upwards  of  30  leagues’  distance.  On  tlie  western  side  is  a small  town,  olf 
which  vessels  may  anchor  in  10  fathoms,  and  where  a few  provisions  may  be  procured,  if  reipiired.  'flic 
latitude  of  the  peak  is  14*^  .50  N.  and  longitude  14^  22'  West. 

BJIAVA. 

This  island  is  about  6 leagues  to  the  westward  of  Fogo.  Its  southern  side  is  in  latitmlc  1 .51  N.  ami 
longitude  25^  42  West.  It  has  but  few  inhabitants,  and  these  are  blacks;  but  the  most  hospitable  and  harm- 
less ])eople  in  the  islands.  Brava  produces  plenty  of  salt,  some  corn,  live  stock,  and  fish. 

ST.  NICHOLAS 

Is  about  10  miles  long,  three  broad,  and  high  and  mountainous.  Its  east  eiul  is  in  lutilude  10^  2.) 
N.  and  longitude  about  24*^  10  West,  There  are  two  good  hays,  one  on  tin*  S.  \V.  and  tiu*  other  on  the 
N.  W.  side  of  the  island.  The  first  is  called  rreguica  Bay,  and  is  about  7 miles  from  the  Last  end.  At 
this  place  there  is  good  landing,  and  plenty  of  water  may  Ik*  had  in  line  weatlier  f rom  a pond  siippliisl  by 
the  mountains;  but  no  other  refreshments.  The  other  hay  is  1 leagues  from  the  S. AV.  end,  and  called 
St. George’s  Bay.  Here  every  article  of  refreshiniait,  ('xcept  good  water,  may  he  pjoeured,  and  at  no  other 
place  on  the  island.  About  four  miles  from  the  bay  i.s  a town,  wliiae  the  B^^hop  nsides.  Ve-ssels  of  dif- 
ferent nations  frequently  touch  here,  to  procure  cattle,  hog>,  poultry,  fruit,  ami  some  medicinal  plants. 