


CHAPTER  III. 


Cape  de  Verd  Islands. 


Their  NumberSal—Bonavista— Maya^St*  Jago;  Description — Porto  Praya;  Naval  Action  ihere--^ Imports 
and  Kxports— Cloths  manufactured-^ Provisions  and  Refreshments^ Fogo— Brava — St,  Nicholas^ 
St,  Lucia—SL  Vincent^St.  Antonio. 


Tlicse  islands,  wiiicli  take  their  name  from  Cape  de  Verd,  the  nearest  point  of  the  coast  of  Africa,  consist 
of  Sal,  or  Salt  Island;  Bonavista,  Mayo,  St.  Jago,  Fogo,  Brava,  St.  Nicholas,  St.  Lucia,  St.  Vincent,  and 
St  Antonio,  besides  several  small  islets. 

SAL. 

This  island  is  about  16  miles  long,  and  6 or  7 broad.  It  is  high,  and  has  a peak  on  it,  which  may  he 
seen  in  clear  weather  at  a considerable  distance.  The  N.  W.  part  of  the  island  is  in  latitude  16^  50'  N.  and 
longitiuh*  22^^  55'  W.  On  the  west  side  are  three  bays,  the  principal  of  which  is  Mordera  Bay,  and  is 
one  of  the  best  in  the  C^ape  de  Verd  Islands.  This  island  is  uninhabited. 

BONAVISTA. 

The  north  end  of  this  island  is  in  latitude  16*^  15  N.  and  longitude  22®  .52'  West,  and  is  very  uneven. 
No  freshwater  is  to  be  had  here.  The  principal  road,  named  English  Road,  is  on  tlie  .N. W.  side  of  the 
island,  where  merchantmen  load  salt.  On  a reef  of  rocks  near  the  S.  E.  point,  the  Hartwell  East  India- 
man  was  lost.  May  24-,  1787;  on  the  19th  April,  1806,  the  Lady  Burgess,  another  of  the  Company’s 
ships,  was  lost  on  a reef  near  the  same  place,  and  several  ships  in  the  fleet  narrowly  escaped  the  same  fate. 

MAYO. 

This  island  is  about  15  leagues  to  the  .southward  of  Bonavista.  Under  its  S.W.  point  is  the 
road  named  English  Road,  where  merchant  vessels  anchor.  This  island  is  remarkable  for  its  salt,  which  is 
collected  by  the  natives  for  sale,  and  is  much  frequented  for  this  article,  more  particularly  by  the  Americans. 
The  anchorage  is  rocky  and  dangerous.  The  town  is  a wretched  place,  and  the  surrounding  country  has 
scarcely  a vestige  of  vegetation  u|Km  its  surface.  It  is  governed  by  a black  man,  subject  to  St.  Jago.  I’he 
inhabitants  apparently  live  in  great  misery.  Live  stock  and  a few  limes  are  to  be  had.  The  water  is  scarce, 
and  very  indifferent.  The  cotton  plant  grows  in  the  interior;  likewise  the  silk  cotton  tree. 

ST.  JAGO. 

This  island  w very  high,  and  the  largest  and  most  considerable’ of  the  group.  Its  priiicijial  road  is  on 
the  S.E.  aide,  called  Porto  Praya,  or  Pray  a Bay,  in  latitude  11°  55'  N.  and  longitude  23°  JO  W.  1 he 

D 


I8  3q 


18 


ST.  JAGO. 


town  of  Ribiera  Grande,  situated  on  the  south  side  of  the  island,  was  formerly  the  residence  of  the  Go- 
vernor, and  of  course  the  chief  place  in  it.  It  contains  a large  church,  and  a convent  of  Franciscans,  in 
which  are  twenty-four  Monks.  A castle  commands  the  town,  which  some  time  back  contained  some  good 
houses,  built  of  a kind  of  Portland  stone;  but  both  castle  and  town  arc  now  in  a state  of  ruin,  and  present 
nothing  but  the  greatest  decay.  Scarcely  is  an  European  to  be  seen  in  either:  a few  miserable  creatures 
alone  inhabit  those  buildings,  in  which  formerly  resided  some  respectable  Portuguese  families. 