


24 


BIO  DE  JANEIRO. 


officer,  or  soldier,  generally  attends  every  person  from  on  board,  and  while  he  remains  on  shore.  Guard 
boats  also  surround  the  ship,  to  prevent  landitig,  except  when,  and  where  permitted.  These  regulations  are 
still  more  rigidly  enforced  with  regard  to  merchant  ships,  than  men  of  wax;  and  all  persons  are  obliged  to 
repair  on  board  their  ships  at  sunset. 

The  City  of  St.  Sebastian  is  situated  on  the  West  side  of  the  river,  about  4 miles  from  the  entrance, 
on  a projecting  point  of  land.  It  is  about  one  mile  and  a half  long,  and  about  three  quarters  broad. 
On  the  promontory  is  a strong  and  regular  fortification,  which  completely  commands  the  town  and 
anchorage;  opposite  tliis  point  is  the  Isla  de  Cobras,  or  Snake  Island;  on  the  highest  part  of  which, 
stands  the  citadel,  about  80  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  island  is  upwards  of  300  yards  long;  it 
slants  at  the  inner  end  to  about  8 feet;  round  every  side  of  it,  and  close  to,  ships  of  the  greatest  draught  of 
water  may  lie  in  perfect  security.  On  this  island,  a commodious  dock -yard  has  been  erected,  with  magazines 
and  naval  storehouses,  and  a wharf  for  heaving  down  and  repairing  ships. 

On  landing,  the  first  object  is  a handsome  square,  surrounded  on  three  of  its  sides  with  buildings,  and 
the  fourth  open  to  the  water;  along  this  side  is  erected  a noble  stone  quay,  with  flights  of  steps  at 
each  extremity,  and  in  the  centre,  which  is  the  common  landing  place;  and  near  it  is  a quadrangular 
obelisk,  which  siqiplies  a stream  of  good  water,  for  the  iwe  of  the  lower  part  of  the  town,  and  of  the 
shi[)ping  in  the  harbour.  One  side  of  the  square  is  entirely  occupied  by  the  palace,  a long  plain  building; 
contiguous  to  which,  and  nearly  adjoining  each  other,  arc  the  opera-house*,  prison,  and  mint:  the  palace, 
the  obelisk,  and  pier  are  all  built  with  hewn  blocks  of  granite;  some  of  the  houses  are  of  hewn  stone, 
and  others  of  brick,  mostly  covenjd  with  slat**,  and  furnished  with  balconies;  the  slrc'cts  are  generally 
straight,  well  paved,  and  have  excellent  foot|)uth.s,  and  most  of  them  are  tenninuted  l)y  a church.  The 
shops  are  numerous,  and  well  stocked  with  European  and  Asiatic  commodities. 

COINS. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  milrea«  and  reas,  1000  reas  making  a milrea.  They  separate  the  milreas  from  the 
rcas  thus — 106,208,  which  is,  166  milreas,  208  reas. 

The  gold  monies  current,  and  the  weight,  are  os  follow.  The  sterling  value  is  estimated  at  the  British 
standard  of  oP.'l  17  10]  per  ounce. 


C'OINS. 

wek; 

IIT 

Stcrline  value. 

(’unont  va 

U.- 

No  ol  Kr.is. 