

Saint  Salvador  is  defended  by  a nnmher  of  forts  and  batteries,  the  principal  of  which  is  Fort  de  Mar. 
It  stands  on  a small  rocky  hank  of  the  inner  bay,  about  thretMjii al  ters  of  a mile  from  the  shore,  and  is 
mounted  wdth  very  heavy  cannon,  it  is  employed  its  a magazine  for  shipping;  and  all  vessels,  excc'jit  men 
of  war,  are  obliged  to  land  tlunr  pow  d(»r  on  an  iving  in  the  bay.  The  Dock-yard  is  defended  by  the  battery 
ofSt.  rhilip;  and  on  the  inhabited  part  of  the  beach  are  several  batteries,  mounted  with  eamion  of  difler- 
cut  sizes.  On  the  land  side,  St  Salvador  is  defended  by  several  extensive  lortifications  in  good  repair. 
The  city  Is  computed  to  contain  100, (K)0  inhabitants;  of  which  :10,000  are  whites,  about  the  same 
number  imdattoes,  and  tlic  remumder  negroes. 


mo  0RANt>K 


1*  A K A 1 H . 


P A H T 
or  THE 

(OAST  OF  BRAZIL 


r A M A U I C A Cj 


V K H N A M II  V ('  () 


/'.  Frtwt'  io  d<* 

Paitth' 

S K K (i  I P 1*  K 

S.in  I'Vuiicihi'^i 

a V * i 

Srrtfi/'/'r  i 

./4Avi  u 

Ku)  Rra 

\ 

\S 

\Pimim 


......... 


R.FafffHi  ^ 

» fiyuro 


n’ 


K ' • J-  I 
/7  Kitpiphu  SrtMto 


4- 


(S' 


■L 


SAINT  SALVADOR. 


tl 


In  the  lower  town,  near  the  beach,  stand  the  custoni-hoii^o  and  whari;;  lik(n>is('  the  roval  dock- 
yard, tlie  arsenal,  the  marine  store-house,  magazines,  &c.  which  arc  lar^c,  well  filled  with  naval  stores,  and 
kept  in  excellent  order.  Adjoining  to  tlie  public  l)iiildings,  a resuhnicc  has  bccMi  erected  lor  the  Inteiidant, 
or  Port  Commander. 

The  dock-yard  admits  but  one  ship  of  the  line  to  be  built  at  a time.  At  a place  called  I'aoapippc*,  a 
short  distance  from  the  city,  are  several  private  yards,  in  vvliich  ships  of  all  dimensions  are  Iniilt,  and  with 
much  greater  dispatch  than  in  the  royal  yard.  The  ships  are  handsome,  and  well  modelled;  and  the 
timber  extremely  well  calculated  for  .ship-building.  The  labour  of  workimm,  and  other  artielesfor  the 
equipment  and  repair  of  ships,  are  cheaper  here  than  at  Uio  de  Janeiro.  Large  i|uaiitities  of  limber, 
prepared  for  building,  used  to  he  sent  to  Portugal  in  the  men  of  war  that  came  out  as  convoy  to  the  lh  azil 
Heeds.  Ry  the  treaty  recently  concluded  with  the  Portuguese  Government,  the  Lnglish  have  the  jirivih'ge 
of  causing  timber,  for  the  purpose  of  building  .ships  of  war,  to  be  purchased  and  cut  down,  together 
with  permission  for  ships  of  war  to  be  built,  equipped,  or  repaired  within  the  ports  and  harhours  in  the 
Portuguese  dominions;  whicli  privileges  are  not  to  be  granted  to  any  other  nation. 

Saint  Salvador  is  miserably  provided  with  accommodations  for  strangeis.  An  inn  is  unknown,  and 
those  who  wish  f(»r  a temporary  residence  on  shore,  are  obliged  to  tak(‘  tin*  whole  or  pait  of  a lious(‘, 
and  furnish  it;  whieh  is  attended  with  much  ineoiixenienee,  and  consicli  rabk*  ex|)enc(*. 