

The  principal  places  of  which  the  English  obtained  a temporary  possession  in  the  River,  were  Buenos 
Ayres,  the  capital  of  the  province,  Monte  Video,  and  Maldonaldo.  Some  of  the  East  India  ships  have 
visited  those  places ; and  as  it  is  not  improbable  that  at  some  future  period  the  ports  maybe  again  open,  a 
(iMcription  of  them  and  the  trade  may  not  be  unaceeptable. 

MALDONALDO. 

This  town  b situated  on  the  north  side  of  the  River,  in  latitude  34'"  58  South,  and  longitude  about  54 
4.'i  W est.  The  harbour  is  safe,  witli  good  depth  of  water  for  ships  of  any  size,  and  is  partly  sheltered  from 


MONTE  VIDEO. 


Sin 


the  sea  by  the  island  Gorelli  at  its  entrance.  The  town  is  pleasantly  situated  at  a short  distance  from  the  sea, 
contains  about  200  houses,  and  1000  inhabitants;  the  houses  are  low  and  mean,  and  have  each  a small 
garden  attached  to  them.  A new  church  has  recently  been  erected  in  the  Spanish  style  of  architecture. 
The  leading  mark  for  entering  the  harbour  is  the  island  Lohos,  so  called  from  the  multitude  of  sea-wolves 
that  infest  it.  The  harbour  is  defended  by  batteries  on  the  beach,  and  by  a strong  fortification  on  the 
island  Gorelli,  which  mounts  twenty  24  pounders. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks  are  in  plenty,  and  good : they  may  be  procured  at  a Spanish  dollar  each.  Of  fruits,  oranges, 
lemons,  nectarines,  peaches,  figs,  &c.  may  be  had  in  abundance. 

MONTE  VIDEO 

Is  in  latitude  34°  53' South,  and  longitude  56°  1 West;  it  is  about  22  leagues  to  the  westward  of 
Maldonaldo,  is  elevated  about  450  feet  above  tlie  sea,  having  a building  on  its  summit  Tlie  harbour, 
where  ships  moor  in  2'J  and  3 fathoms  water,  is  on  tlie  east  side  of  tlie  mount;  and  the  town  of  Monte 
Video,  so  called  from  the  mount,  is  on  the  east  side  of  the  harbour.  The  town  is  built  on  a rocky  peninsula, 
fortified  all  round,  more  particularly  on  the  land  side,  where  a strong  fort  has  been  recently  added,  which  is 
a regular  work,  with  bastions,  and  a ditch : the  only  entrance  is  within  the  town  over  a drawbridge.  There 
are  two  entrances  into  the  town  from  the  country,  one  on  each  side  of  the  citadel  or  fort.  The  only  landing 
place  is  within  the  harbour,  at  a stone  pi(?r.  The  cathedral  is  a large  brick  building,  willi  two  lolly  square 
towers,  and  a cupola,  and  is  placed  in  the  western  face  of  an  open  square,  near  the  citadel.  There  is  a 
second  church  belonging  to  the  Dominicans,  the  only  order  of  Monk.s  in  the  town.  The  streets  are  laid  out  at 
right  angles,  of  about  100  feet  in  each  face,  and  occupied  with  brick  houses,  having  flat  roofs,  and 
parapets  of  4 feet  in  height  surrounding  them ; the  windows  arc  grated  with  iron,  a precaution  necessary 
in  a climate  where  too  much  air  cannot  be  admitted,  and  where  also  a great  number  ot  the  inhabitants  subsist 
by  depredations  on  their  neighbours. 