

rnovisioNS  and  refreshments. 

The  following  articles  are  proc’ured  here : 

Bullocks  12  Spanish  dollars  each.  These  are  small,  and  in  general  very  poor. 

Sheep  and  hogs  are  bud  and  dear,  and  are  seldom  purchased  for  sea  stores. 

Goats — some  excellent  ones  are  to  be  procured,  but  at  very  high  prices. 

Turkeys — ^large  and  good,  at  about  | moidore  each. 

Fowls  and  capons  very  fine  and  large,  may  be  got  in  plenty,  from  2s.  6d.  to  3s.  eacli. 

Muscovy  Ducks,  large  ones,  which  prove  in  a short  time  excellent  stock,  at  about  3s.  each. 

Yams  and  cabbages,  very  fine  and  of  a large  size,  and  fruits,  oranges,  &c.  in  abundance. 

Tlie  spirits  manufactured  here,  are  very  indifferent,  and  should  not  be  purchased  for  ships’  stores  if 
it  can  possibly  be  avoided  Common  wines  are  to  be  got  very  cheap ; and  unless  great  care  is  taken,  the 
seamen  who  go  on  shore  on  duty,  generally  return  intoxicated. 

Water  is  filled  from  the  fujueduct  pipes,  whicli  are  l(‘d  down  to  the  quay.  It  is  advisable  to  hire 
a country  boat,  which  will  hold  about  30  butts.  If  you  water  with  your  own  long  boat,  no  charge  is  made; 
and  on  application  at  the  palace,  one  of  the  cocks  which  supply  the  town,  is  sometimes  granted,  for 
the  sake  of  dispatch. 

Washing  is  very  dear,  and  there  is  much  difficulty  in  getting  your  clothes  back  again. 

RIO  DE  LA  PLATA, 

Or  River  Plate,  has  been  recently  brought  into  notice  by  the  success  of  a small  expedition,  under  the 
command  of  Sir  Home  Popham  and  General  Beresford,  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  which  took  Buenos 
Ayres  from  the  Spaniards  in  180(5.  The  capture  of  this  city,  with  so  small  a force  as  these  commanders  had 
lirought  against  it,  oxeited  much  triumjih  in  the  British  dominions;  and  although  an  act  unauthorized  on  the 
part  of  Government,  yet  it  appeared  inclined  to  take  advantage  of  this  unexpected  conejuest,  to  open  a new 
channel  for  the  manufactures  of  the  country.  Great  expectations  were  held  out  by  Sir  Home  Popham’s 
dispatches;  and  as  his  knowledge  of  commercial  concerns  was  held  in  high  estimation,  the  circular 
lelter  he  addressed  to  the  merchants,  encouraged  speculation  to  an  extent  that,  in  the  end,  caused  the  ruin  of 
hundreds,  and  great  embarrassment  to  the  mercantile  world  in  general.  An  expedition  was  fitted  out 
from  England,  to  retain  the  possession  so  easily  acquired ; but  before  their  arrival,  the  Spaniards  had 
succeeded  in  reconquering  the  settlement,  and  sent  the  garrison  prisoners  into  the  interior.  On  the  arrival 
of  the  expedition,  they  attacked  and  took  Monte  Video  by  storm;  but  failed  in  an  attack  upon  Buenos  Ayres, 
the  result  of  which  was,  a treaty  between  the  English  and  the  ^Spaniards,  dated  July  7,  1807,  by  which 
the  former  agreed  to  evacuate  Monte  Video  in  the  course  of  two  months,  which  was  accordingly  done.  Thus 
terminated  this  disastrous  expedition,  from  which  too  much  had  been  expected  by  the  British  nation. 