

F 


3,,  SALDANHA  BAY. 

Dutch  took  po^c^sionolll;  IrntthecivU  wars  in  England  prevented  measures  being  adopted  to  form  a colony 
at  tlic  Cape,  and  the  prior  rights  of  tlic  crown  were  neglected.  In  Iti-IO,  Van  Ricbcck,  a surgeon  of  one  of 
their  ships,  pointe.l  out  to  the  Directors  of  the  Dutch  Ka.st  India  Company,  the  great  advantages  winch  would 
he  derived  from  establishing  a settlement  at  this  place.  The  Company  adopted  Ins  plan,  and  sent  out  four 
ships  under  his  command,  to  commence  the  settlement  he  hod  advised . With  some  presents  of  brass,  toys, 
beads,  tobacco,  and  hraiuly , he  purchased  of  the  natives  permission  to  build  a fort,  and  form  a settlement  m 
their  country;  and  from  that  time  the  Cape  remained  in  the  undisturbed  possession  of  the  Dutch,  during  the 
space  of  nearly  J. 50  years,  till  it  siuTtMiiU  rcd  hy  capitulation  to  the  llriiish  arms,  under  Cieneral  Mured 
Clarke,  and  Admiral  Sir  (icorge  Keith  Eliihinstono,  on  the  16tli  September,  1795.  It  was,  however,  re- 
stored by  tlie  treaty  of  Amiens,  and  evacuated  by  the  llritisb  on  tlie  i21.st  of  February,  IHOJ.  Again,  on 
the  2d  of  January,  ISOb,  an  expedition  under  Idciit.  General  Sir  David  llaird,  and  Commodore  Sir 
Home  Popham,  arrived  in  Talile  Hay,  where  a landing  was  with  but  veiy  little  difficulty  effected, 
notwithstanding  the  opposition  made  by  the  (‘iiemy,  who,  under  the  command  of  General  Janssens, 
were  afterw^ards  bold  enough  to  risk  a battle  in  the  open  field,  which  took  plac(‘  on  the  8th  following.  Tlic 
actioiMvas  of  very  short  duration;  nothing  could  withstand  the  impetuosity  with  which  the  British  army 
charged  the  enemy,  wlio  soon  tU'd  in  every  direction  into  the  interior,  leaving  the  town  to  its  fate.  On  the  10th, 
the  town  liaving  suiTendercd,  the  troops  took  possession  of  the  castle  and  batteries;  and,  hy  the  prompt  and 
decisive  measures  pursued  hy  TdeutenanL  Giaieral  Sir  David  Baird,  the  Dutch  (ieneral  was  forced  to  agree 
to  a capitulation,  hy  which  tlu*  wliole  colony  was  once  more  put  in  possession  of  the  British  forces. 

The  places  most  freipiented  by  East  India  slii[>piiig,  are  Saldanha  Bay  and  Table  Bay,  on  the  western 
side,  and  False  Bay,  on  the  eastern  side  ol*  the  peninsula. 


SALDANHA  BAY 

Is  an  excellent  harbour,  where  any  number  of  ships  may  lie  sheltered  from  all  wdnds.  The  entrance 
is  in  latitude  3,‘P7'  South,  about  l(i  leagues  N.N.W,  of  Table  Bay,  between  two  small  islands.  A little 
farther  in  is  another,  which  may  be  passed  on  either  side.  On  the  left  side  going  in,  is  Hootje’s  Bay,  where 
the  ships  from  the  Cape,  and  American  w halers  when  in  want  of  repairs,  heave  dow'ii  at  a natural  pier  of  gra- 
nite, and  have  every  facility  in  remedying  their  defects. 