


EXPORTS. 

The  returns  imule  to  Europe  for  the  goods  sold  here,  were  hides,  tallow,  skins,  and  a few  small  articles  ; 
tlic  remainder  was  in  specie. 

The  following  is  an  official  SUilment  of  the  Value  of  ihr  Exports  from,  and  Imports  into,  Great  Britain 
from  the  Rio  de  la  Plata,  from  pajKrs  submitted  to  Parliament. 


Yfuis 

isob 

1507 

1508 
1S()9 


fioin  England. [ 

p ■ .v“  d r 
0 2' 

10  11 

12  2' 
4 h! 


lm|>.  10  Kiigland. 

P sT'd. 
121,685  18  8 
li;3,626  3 11 
253,24.5  15  10 
122,189  11  9 


To£.-iI.  11,276,701 7 111  610,747  10  2 

“VTt,  I"*:’  '*  i«  f"u.-  esee«l,J 

Ihc  exports  I 6(k>,9;j3  1<s.  9(/.  beinjj on  tin  average -C166, 488  Os.  M per  annum. 


ruovisioxs  AND  REFRESHMENTS 


The  market  is  very  excellent;  it  abounds  with  every  speeies  of 
the  river  with  a great  variety  of  fish.  Ik-ef  is  < ery  fine;  bullocks  ar 
a dollar  each.  Vegetables  and  fruits  arc  cheaj),  and  very  abundant. 


# 

meat  and  poultry,  and  is  supplied  from 
e a S|)anish  dollar  each,  and  sheep  lialf 


BUENOS  AYRES. 


51 


BUENOS  AYRES,  ^ 

riie  capital  of  the  Viceroyalty  of  Paraguay,  is  situated  on  the  south  side  of  the  Rio  do  la  Plata;  it  is 
bounded  on  the  cast  side  by  a smaU  river,  over  which  is  a wooden  bridge:  the  northern  and  western  sides 
are  bounded  with  gardens  and  orange  groves,  enclosed  with  strong  hedges  of  the  aloe  and  prickly  pear. 

In  the  centre  of  the  town,  on  the  face  next  the  river,  stands  the  castle,  a srpiare  work,  Hanked  with 
small  bastions;  the  walls  are  about  15  feet  high;  it  has  a ditch  on  the  face  next  the  town  only,  n>er 
which  is  a drawbridge.  In  this  fortress  is  the  residence  of  the  Go\  ernor,  and  it  is  likewise  occupied  w itli  othcT 
spacious  buildings.  The  great  square,  called  by  the  Spaniards,  Ua  Plaza,  separates  the  castle  Iroin  tin* 
town,  the  south  face  of  which  contains  a large  church  with  a lofty  dome  and  parapet.  Thv  stieets  are  at 
right  angles,  and  the  houses  in  this  neighbourhood  are  lofty,  and  sun*ounded  with  parapets  above  4 feet 
high.  At  the  N.  W.  angle  of  the  town,  and  close  to  the  river,  is  another  extensive  opening,  cuIKhI  La 
Plaza  del  Tauros,  in  which  is  erected  El  lletiro,  the  amphitheatre  tor  the  exhibition  of  bull-figlits.  In  the 
neighbourhood,  and  towards  the  river,  are  other  large  buildings  of  ])riek,  s('r\ing  as  the  ehief  depot  for 
the  military  stores  and  ordnance  of  Buenos  Ayres.  Various  roads  and  .stress  lead  into  the  Plaza  del 
Tauros,  but  all  at  right  angles  with  each  other.  To  the  eastward  of  the  great  square,  and  one  street 
above  it,  is  another  open  space,  where  arc  barracks,  and  nearly  opj)()sit(‘  those,  tlie  chureli  and  monastery 
of  St  Domingo,  the  principal  one  in  Buenos  Ayres  except  the  cathedral  A very  extensive  building,  w liicli 
had  been  originally  intended  as  a royal  hospital,  and  called  Uesidciitia,  is  situated  at  the  east  (‘iid  of  llie 
town,  over  wdiich  are  scattered  other  churches  and  squares  ol*  interior  note.  Many  of  the  |>iil)lie  buildings 
are  of  white  stone,  vvhieli  is  found  in  a small  plain  in  the  vicinity  of  the  tow  n Th(‘  length  of  the  city  is 
nearly  two  miles,  and  its  breadth  about  one,  and  it  has  a handsome.'  appearance  from  llu'  river. 