


(;apf  town, 

The  capital  of  the  Colony,  and  the  scut  of  Government,  is  pleasantly  situated  at  the  In'ad  of  'i’.ihh*  Bay, 
in  latitude  33^  58  South,  and  longitude  18^35'  J-’.asl,  on  a sloping  jdain  that  rises  with  an  eas)  a^eenl  to  the 
foot  of  the  Devil’s  Hill,  tin*  Table  IVIonnlain,  and  the  Lion’s  Head,  before  mentioned.  'Fhe  low  n consists  ot 
about  1,100  houses,  built  witliregularity,  and  kept  in  neat  order;  it  isdisposed  into  straight  and  parallel  streets, 
intersecting  each  other  at  right  angles.  Many  ot  the  streets  are  open  and  airy,  wdth  caiuds  ol  watei*  running 
through  them,  walled  in,  and  planted  on  each  side  with  trees;  others  are  narrow  andilipa\ed.  Three  or 
four  s(|uares  give  an  openness  to  tlie  town.  In  one  is  held  the  public  market;  another  is  the  common  K'soit 
of  the  peasantry  wdth  their  waggons;  and  u third,  near  the  shore  ot  the  bay,  and  between  the  town  and  the 
castle,  serves  as  a parade  for  exercising  the  troops.  The  barracks,  originally  intended  h>r  an  liospital,  foi 
corn  magazines,  and  wine  cellars,  is  a large,  w’ell-ilesigned,  regular  building,  wliieh,  with  its  two  wings,  occu- 
pies part  of  one  of  the  sides  of  the  great  square.  'Fhe  Castle,  whudi  is  a regular  pentagon,  is  said  to  have  been 
constructed  by  the  famous  Coeliorn,  on  his  way  to  India;  and  is  mounted  tuw’ards  the  sea  with  \eiy  lieavy 
guns  and  mortars.  There  is  but  one  entrance  into  the  body  of  the  fort,  w hieb  is  on  the  tow  n side.  It  affords 
barracks  for  1,000  men,  lodgings  for  the  officers,  magazines  lor  artillery,  ston‘s,  and  ammunition;  and  most 
of  the  public  offices  of  Government  are  within  its  walls.  Tlu^other  public  buildings  are  the  Stadtlioiiso, 
situated  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  town;  a Lutheran  Churcli,  in  tin*  (‘asternmost  scjuarc;  and  another  fre- 
quented by  Calvinists,  at  the  west  end  of  the  town.  Betw’cen  the  tow  n and  I able  Mountain  me  scntUaed 
over  the  plain,  a number  of  neat  houses,  surrounded  by  plantations  and  gardens:  of  these,  the  large  st  and 
nearest  the  town,  is  that  called  the  Government  Gardens,  wdiieh  is  near  1,000  yanls  long,  and  contains  about 
40  acres  of  rich  land,  divided  into  squares,  well  planted,  and  sheltered  from  the  noon  heat  of  the  climate;  and 
they  are  at  all  times  accessible  to  decent  persons.  In  these  grounds  is  the  Governor’s  n sidenee.  'Flic  [lofiida- 
tion  of  Cape  Town  is  estimated  at  about  6,000  whites,  inclusive  of  the  military,  and  12,000  slaves;  that  of’ 
the  whole  Colony,  exclusive  of  the  town,  is  estimated  at  only  15,000  whites.  3 here  are  few  inns  in  tin 
town;  but  no  stranger  need  be  at  a loss  for  accommodation,  as  most  of  the  lamilies  receive  strangeis  into  tlieii 
houses,  to  board  and  lodge  during  their  stay.  Upon  the  whole,  Cape  Town  may  he  considered  an  excellent 
place  for  an  outward  or  homeward  East  India  ship  to  refresh  at,  in  the  fair  weather  season. 