

In  1 781,  Commodore  Jolinson  surprised  five  Dutch  East  Tridiamen  in  the  hay,  and  took  four  of  them ; the 
other,  called  tlic  Middlehurg,  the  most  valuable  of  the  fleet,  was  burnt  hy  the  Dutch.  In  August,  1797,  a 
Dutch  stpiadron,  consisting  of  nine  men  of  war,  having  troops  on  board,  under  Commodore  Lucas,  sent  from 
Europe  to  retake  the  colony,  surrendered  to  the  British  fleet,  under  the  command  of  Admiral  Sir  George 
Keith  Elphinstone,  and  an  army  commanded  by  General  Craig,  marched  from  Cape  Town. 

PKOVTSIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Before  you  have  any  communication  with  the  inhabitants  in  the  neighbourhood,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
send  a boat  on  shore,  to  obtain  permission  from  the  Resident  to  land  goods,  or  procure  supplies ; and  at  whose 
fiouse  accommodations  may  be  had  during  a ship’s  stay  in  the  harbour. 

Bullocks  are  to  be  procured,  but  they  are  poor  and  dear.  Sheep  are  in  plenty,  and  good.  Poultry  of 
various  kinds  are  to  be  got;  likewise  fruit  and  vegetables.  Wood  is  scarce;  but  the  greatest  disadvantage 
here,  is  the  scarcity  of  good  water;  no  spring  in  tlic  neighbourhood  yielding  sufficient  for  a small  squadron 
in  the  dry  season  : during  the  winter  months,  when  much  rain  falls,  the  brackish  water  about  the  bay  is 
rendered  sweet,  and  fit  for  most  purposes. 


TX\M.V:  BAY— CAPK  TOWN. 


TAULK  BAY 

Is  large,  and  capable  of  containing  any  number  of  ships;  but  it  is  open  to  11h’  wcshi  l\  wiiuU,  \>  liii  h iIhxmv 
in  a heavy  swell.  The  land  contiguous  to  the  bay,  is  remarkable.  The  highest  j)art,  fiom  naIk  iuv  tin 
bay  takes  its  name,  is  situated  directly  over  Cape  Town,  at  the  soutli  side  of  the  hay,  am!  is  called  the  'liable 
Mountain.  It  is  a stupendous  mass  of  naked  rock,  the  iiorlh  front  of  which,  diieclly  facing  (he  town,  is  a 
horizontal  line,  or  very  nearly  so,  of  about  two  miles  in  length.  The  bold  face  that  rises  almost  at  right  angles 
to  meet  this  line,  has  the  appearance  of  the  mined  walls  of  some  gigantic  fortress ; and  tlu  se  walls  rise  above 
the  level  of  Table  Bay  3,582  feet.  The  Devifs  monnlain  on  one  sideg  and  the  Lioifs  lb  ad  on  the  oilier,  niak(‘ 
in  fact,  with  the  Table,  but  one  mountain;  the  height  of  the  former  is  3,135,  and  that  oitlu*  latter  2,1  GO  feet. 
The  Devil’s  Mountain  is  broken  into  irn'giilar  points;  but  the  upper  pai  t ot‘  the  Lion’s  Head  is  a solid  mass  of 
stone,  resembling,  from  some  points  of  view,  the  donieof  St.  Paul’s  placed  upon  a high  conic  shaped  liill.  From 
these  mountains  descend  several  small  rivulets,  which  fall  into  Table  Bay,  and  ^^d^e  Bay.  The  jiroper 
anchorage  is  abreast  of  (’ape  Towm,  with  tlie  'Fable  Mountain  healing  S.  \V.  in  .3  to  7 fathoms,  about  a mih* 
distant  from  the  town. 