


!i4 


ALCOA,  oa  ZWARTKOFS  BAY. 

This  bay  U about  10  leagues  in  extent  from  Cape  Recife,  or  Rocky  Cape,  its  S.  W.  point,  to  Cape 
Padron,  its  N.  E,  extreme.  Cape  Recife  is  in  latitude  34°  2 South,  and  longitude  26°  40"  East.  You 
may  anchor  in  any  part  of  tlie  bey,  and  diuse  your  depth  of  water;  the  common  anchorage  is  off  the  land- 
ing  place,  in  7 fathoms,  about  three  quarters  of  a mile  from  the  shore,  a small  river,  called  Baker's  river, 
beaiing  W.  half  S.  the  outermost  point  of  the  land  S.  by  E.  On  the  North  side  of  the  river,  a blockhouse 
has  been  erected,  surrounded  witli  a palisade,  for  tlie  defence  of  the  landing  place,  and  to  keep  the  Caffres 
in  awe.  The  common  landing  place  is  at  the  blockhouse.  About  200  of  the  Cape  regiment  are  generally 
stationed  here. 


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

Very  little  trade  is  carried  on  here,  it  being  kept  principally  as  a depot  for  provisions;  a few  articles 
may  be  disposed  of  to  the  miliUry,  particuhuly  eatables  and  drinkables,  for  which  you  are  paid  in  paper  cur- 
rency:  and  to  the  farmers  in  tlie  ncighliourhood,  a small  quantity  of  the  commodities  enumerated  at  Plet- 
teraberg  Bay,  may  be  exchanged  for  tlie  articles  you  may  stand  in  need  of. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  readiest  way  of  procuring  supplies  is  by  application  to  the  commanding  officer  of  the  troops  sta- 
tioned here,  who  will  send  round  to  the  farmers.  The  cattle  here  are  large  and  very  fat,  and  may  be  pur- 
chased for  8 or  10  rix  dollars  each,  weighing  5 cwt.  Veal,  at  about  2 stivers  a pound.  Sheep,  6 to  8 schillings 
each.  Poultry  equally  reasonable;  and  from  the  stores,  a .ship  in  distress  might  procure  salt  provisions,  spirits, 
and  grain.  Potatoes,  cabbages,  and  turnips  are  to  be  met  with  in  small  quantities ; and  dried  fruits  in  abun- 
dance. Of  fish,  Roman  snappers,  and  many  others  equally  good,  may  be  caught  near  tlie  isltmds  and  rocks  in 
the  bay.  Firewood  is  to  begot  a few  miles  up  the  country.  There  is  a good  spring  of  fresh  water  about  100 
yiuds  within  Bakers  river;  and  about  three  quarters  of  a mile  to  the  southward  is  a small  run  of  water, 
called  Baker's  Fountain,  from  whence  with  a westerly  wind  any  number  of  casks  may  be  easily  rafted  off.  ' 

About  10  leagues  to  the  eastward  of  Cape  Padron,  and  3 from  the  Main  of  Africa,  lies  the  rock  on 
which  the  Doddington  East  Indiaman  was  lost  in  1755.  She  was  outward-bound,  and  had  made  1 1 degrees 
meridian  distance  from  Cape  Lagullas.  Judging  they  were  near  the  Coast  of  Madagascar,  and  the  passage 
open,  they  bore  away  to  the  northward;  but  on  the  17th  of  July,  about  a quarter  before  one  in  the  morn- 
ing, they  struck,  saw  Uie  breakers,  and  in  less  than  a quarter  of  an  hour  the  ship  went  to  pieces.  Out  of 
270  people,  only  23  were  saved.  Tlicy  remained  six  months  on  tliis  rock,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of 
Bird  Island,  and  built  a sloop  out  of  the  wreck.  The  chief  officer  and  16  people,  being  all  that  remained 