

Of  a curricle  or  cart  20  ditto 

Of  a saddle  horse 7 ditto 

♦.  For  transporting  goods  from  Cape  Town  to  Simon’s  Town,  or  from  Simon's  Town  to  the  Cape. 

On  a horse  waggon 38  rix  dollars 

On  a bullock  waggon 24  ditto 

But  a waggon  being  hired  to  carry  a load  from  Cape  Town  to  Simon’s  Town,  and  the  next  day  a 
load  from  Simon’s  Town  to  the  Cape  in  return. 

On  a horse  waggon 46  rix  dollars 

On  a bullock  waggon 34  ditto 

5.  For  hire  of  waggons,  intending  to  pass  Muysenburg,  without  freight  or  passengers,  and  there  hired 
or  stopped  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  goods  or  passengers  to  Cape  Town  or  Simon’s  Town,  whither  they 
were  bound  for, 

Of  a covered  waggon  or  chariot 15  rix  dollars 

Of  a gig  or  cart 11^  ditto 

Of  a bullock  waggon 15  ditto 


6.  For  transporting  a load  of  hay  to  the  Hout  Bay  « 

Ditto  to  Muysenburg 

Ditto,  from  citlier  place,  one  half  more. 


24  ditto 
20  ditto 


7 For  hire  from  Cape  Town  to  other  districts  not  enumerated  above. 

Of  a covered  waggon  or  chariot 18  rix  dollars 

Of  an  open  waggon 

Of  a gig ditto 

Of  a bullock  waggon 12  ditto 

These  prices  may  be  asked  per  day,  during  tlie  first  three  days;  but  beyond  that  period,  two  rix  dollars 
less  for  each  day.  Of  a saddle  horse,  for  three  days  or  less,  four  rix  dollars  per  day;  but  for  more  days, 
three  rix  dollars  per  day. 

8.  For  a freight,  to  or  from  the  country  districts,  not  at  a further  distance  than  Witteboomen,  twelve 
rix  doHars. 

9.  It  will,  however,  be  allowed  to  the  parties  to  contract  for  loss  prices,  but  the  lessors  may  not  de- 
mand more  than  the  prices  above  stipulated. 


112 


58 


FALSE  BAY~SIMON’S  BAY. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  Cape  is  an  excellent  place  for  refreshments;  all  sorts  of  provisions  being  in  abundance,  and  at 
moderate  prices. 

Beef  is  to  be  got;  the  prime  parts  sixpence  a pound,  the  other  in  proportion. 

Mutton,  threepence  per  pound;  but  taking  beef  and  mutton  together,  one  third  of  the  former,  and 
two  thirds  of  the  latter,  two  pounds  and  a quarter  for  sixpence. 

Ducks  and  fowls  vary  according  to  their  size,  and  the  demand. 

Of  fruits,  the  Colony  produces  many  kinds  in  abundance,  and  reasonable. 

The  vegetables,  such  as  cal)bages,  brocoli,  cauliflowers,  &c.  are  very  excellent;  the  seeds  of  them  arc 
an  acceptable  present  in  all  parts  of  India,  and  are  frequently  carried  from  the  Cape  to  the  British  settle- 
ments, as  an  article  of  trade. 

^J'he  water,  which  is  good,  is  brought  to  the  pier  by  pipes,  where  boats  may  lie  and  fill  their  casks 
with  a hose;  or  il’  it  is  not  convenient  to  use  your  own  boats,  country  boats  may  be  had  to  w'ater  the  ship, 
at  a Spanish  dollar  a butt.  Firewood  is  very  scarce  and  dear.  In  fine  weather,  the  town  is  well  supplied 
with  fish  of  several  kinds. 