

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  best  mode  of  procuring  supplies  is  by  application  to  the  Port-holder,  unless  you  are  acquainted 
with  the  language;  they  would  then  be  obtained  more  reasonably.  lli!ef  and  mutton  may  be  purchased 
from  2d.  to  3d.  per  lb.  A sheep  at  about  six  schillings.  Vegetables  and  fniit  are  scarce.  Fish  are  caught 
in  abundance;  and  good  oysters  and  muscles  are  to  be  procured.  Only  brush-wood  is  to  be  got  near  the 
bay;  but  at  a small  distance  up  one  of  the  rivers,  there  is  plenty  of  large  limber.  Water  is  easily  to  be  had 
from  a spring  near  the  landing  place,  and  can  be  conveyed  into  the  bo.its  by  a hose.  AVheat  is  about  22 
rix  dollars  the  load,  under  three  shillings  sterling  the  bushel. 

PLETTEMBERG  BAY. 

Seal  Cape,  or  Cape  Delgado,  the  S.  W.  point  of  this  bay,  is  in  latitude  31°  0 South,  and  longitude 
23°  48'  East.  It  is  an  Ojicn  roadstead,  but  the  anchoring  ground  is  good  in  17  or  18  fathoms.  The  land- 
ing-place is  on  a sandy  beach,  near  the  Governor’s  house,  which  is  neat  and  spacious.  Here  is  a magazine 
for  timber,  200  feet  long,  and  a strong  and  commodious  building  as  a barrack  for  troops,  where  a small 
detachment  of  the  Cape  Regiment  is  always  stationed. 

COINS. 

The  Cape  paper  money  passes  current  here;  and  Spanish  dollars  vary  from  11  to  12$  schillings  pajier 
currency,  each. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

For  the  use  of  the  military,  tea,  sugar,  and  a few  Eurojiean  commodities  are  brought ; for  trade  here, 
coarse  woollens,  camblets,  cutlery,  tar,  iron,  lead,  coarse  Imlia  chintz,  blue  Balias,  Gurruhs,  Doosooties, 
and  unbleached  linens,  in  return  for  elephants’  teeth,  aloes,  and  timber:  of  the  latter,  large  quantities  are 
sent  to  the  Cape,  and  spars  may  be  procured  of  sufficient  dimensions  for  masts  to  line  of  battle  ships,  from 
a forest,  about  twelve  miles  to  the  N.W.  of  the  landing  place,  which  abounds  with  timber  of  large  dimen- 
sions, fit  for  ship>and  house  building.  Timber  in  planks  might  be  pmchased  here,  12  to  14  inches  wide, 
and  I4nch  thick,  at  about  3d.  per  foot  in  paper  currency. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMICNTS. 

At  a short  distance  up  a small  river,  whose  entrance  is  generally  closed  by  a sandy  bai,  is  a consitlei 
able  farm-house,  where  it  would  be  advisable  to  apply  for  what  is  rwiuired.  Beet  and  muftoii  is  a • 
per  lb.  FowU  15d.  to  18d.  each.  Fruit  and  vegetables  are  rather  scarce;  fish  is  in  abundance,  llie 
watering  is  rather  difficult  here,  as  you  have  to  roll  the  casks  nearly  .3(M)  yards  over  a heavy  sail  , an  o 
raft  them  through  a surf,  which  frequently  breaks  high  upon  the  beach. 


ZWABTKOrS  BAY. 