

circumstances  for  consumption,  upon  sale  price  10  ditto 

4.  Indian  articles  from  England  in  British  ships  . . 7 ditto 

Exportation  Duties  on  Colonial  Produce. 

1.  To  a foreign  Port ' 3 i)er  cent. 

2.  If  shipped  for  a British  port dlft® 

3.  Provisions ^ 

But  sea  stock  (liquors  excepted)  for  passengers,  is  allowed  to  be  shipped,  Duty  free. 

European  Articles. 

1.  Re-exported,  if  for  a foreign  port 5 percent 

If  for  a British  settlement ^ 

Indian  Produce. 

1.  If  exported  by  the  East  India  Company,  or  by 

their  licence  ^ per  cent. 

Prize  goods  sold  for  exportation 5 ditto 

TARIFF  OF  FEES  AND  EXPENCES  TO  BE  CHARGED  AT  THE  CUSTOM-HOUSE. 

Entrance  of  ships  4 rix  dollars 

For  landing  a cargo,  or  shipping  a cargo,  each  ...  10  ditto 

Entrance  of  a.  coasting  vessel  Gratis 

For  landing  her  cargo,  or  shipping  a cargo,  each  . . 2 ditto 

Permit  to  import  or  export  merchandise 1 ditto 

Permit  for  sea  stores,  baggage,  and  other  trifles  ...  4 ditto 

Manifest ^ ditto 

Clearance  of  ships ^ 

Clearance  of  coasting  vessel ^ ‘^‘R® 

Puss  for  a vessel  trading  on  the  coast 2 ditto 

H 


£0 


CAPE  TOWN. 


PORT  REGULATIONS. 

1.  When  your  vessel  is  properly  moored  with  bower  anchors,  or  at  least  with  one,  and  a very  heavy 
stream  anchor  and  good  cable,  and  good  buoys  and  buoy  ropes,  you  arc  to  take  the  exact  place  of  the  ship 
by  bearings  of  two  landmarks,  and  depth  of  water,  and  should  any  accident  occur,  by  which  your  ship  may 
drift  from  her  situation,  or  lose  her  anchors,  you  must  be  cai'eful  in  taking  good  bearings  at  the  time,  and 
depth  of  water,  and  notify  the  same  in  writing  to  the  Port  Office:  and  it  is  particularly  recommended  to 
you  to  keep  your  sliip  as  snug  as  possible,  to  counteract  the  periodical  winds  which  sometimes  blow  with 
great  violence. 

2.  You  are,  within  twenty-four  hours  after  giving  seeurily  at  the  Colonial  Secretary’s  Office,  to  lodge 
the  certificate  of  your  having  done  so  at  tin*  Port  Office,  and  to  leave  there  your  address  or  place  of  abode 
when  on  shore. 

3.  No  boat  can  ship,  tranship,  or  bring  on  shore  any  goods,  wares,  or  mercliandise,  without  a permit 
from  the  Custom  House,  vvliidi  is  to  particularize  the  nature  and  number  of  packages,  &c.  Nor  can  any 
boats  be  permitted  to  land  goods  (except  King’s  stores)  any  where  but  at  the  public  wharf,  without  per- 
mission from  the  Custom  House;  and  when  landed,  they  must  be  taken  away  within  twenty-four  hours,  or 
they  will  be  lialile  to  seizure. 

4.  You  are  not  to  allow  any  desertei’  from  the  Navy  or  Army,  or  any  runaway  slave  to  be  harboured 
on  board  your  ship,  under  the  penalty  of  6(H)  rix  dollars. 