

Chintz,  onlinaiy,  in  pieces  of  12  cubits  by  2,  on  a tolerably  good  cloth;  to  cost  about  35  to  40  rupees 
per  corge,  and  only  tliree  grounds,  red,  black,  and  white,  aU  small  sprigs  and  flower  patterns.  The  white 
ground  may  display  as  great  a variety  of  colour  as  possible,  except  yellow  or  orange,  which  do  not  suit 
at  the  Cape.  The  red  grounds  to  liave  only  white  sprigs,  and  the  black  only  white  sprigs.  No  striped 
pattern,  however  handsome,  suits  the  Dutch  taste,  ^ 

Chintz,  fin*.  The  same  as  the  preceding,  in  regard  to  colours,  length,  and  breadth,  to  cost  70  or  80 
rupees  a corge?  answers  very  well  on  Jondah  Cossaes,  in  whole  pieces;  these  come  to  about  10  or  18 
rupees  a piece. 

Chintz  Hanukerchikps,  upon  twDled  dimity,  pretty  fine,  and  the  small  real  shawl  spot,  imitated  as 
near  as  possible,  with  broad  borders,  and  a long  twisted  knotted  fringe,  of  three  sizes,  8,  8}-,  and  3 
square.  The  same  patterns  on  common  cloth  also  answer  for  the  slaves. 


CAPE  TOWN. 


47 

Muslins,  flowered,  a few  pieces  of  the  Santipore  kind,  that  cost  15  to  IG  rupees ; but  no  fine  muslins, 
muslin  handkerchiefs,  doreas,  or  charconnas,  answer  at  the  Cape;  the  little  of  articles  of  this  description 
used,  they  get  from  England,  of  British  manufacture,  considerably  cheaper  than  they  can  be  brought  from 
#India. 

Shirts,  of  middling  cloth,  for  the  better  sort  of  people,  but  not  to  cost  above  two  rupees  each,  without 
ruffles;  and  coarse  ones  for  the  soldiers,  not  to  cost  above  one  rupee  each;  and  shirts  made  of  coarse  blue 
cloth  for  the  slaves,  as  much  under  a rupee  as  possible,  but  not  to  exceed  it. 

Shawls,  real  India,  are  in  great  request  at  the  Cape,  and  usually  sell  well. 

Rice  is,  in  years  of  ordinary  plenty,  only  an  article  of  luxury  among  the  Dutch,  and  seen  only  at  their 
tables  with  curry;  in  these  times,  the  finer  and  whiter  the  rice  is,  the  better;  the  white  Patna  rice  is  then 
the  article  to  be  taken,  for  which  they  will  give  from  7 to  10  rix  dollars  per  lOOlbs.  Dutch  weight ; but  in 
times  of  scarcity,  when  their  wheat  crops  fail,  rice  becomes  an  article  of  food  from  necessity : lh(*n  the  com- 
mon cargo  rice  is  acceptable,  and  bears  a price  from  6 to  9 rix  dollars  per  lOOlbs.  The  most  convenient 
packages  are  bags  of  llSlbs.  English,  which  will  turn  out  a Dutch  hundred  of  lOTlbs. 

Sugar,  from  none  being  produced  in  the  Colony,  generally  yields  a good  price;  and  in  proportion  to 
its  whiteness,  is  valued  at  2 to  3 schillings  a pound. 

Sugar  Candy,  from  Bengal,  also  answers  in  boxes  of  112  and  5G]hs.  each. 

Soap,  Bengal,  is  now  made  little  inferior  to  Europe,  and  has  the  advantage  of  washing  equally  well 
with  salt  as  with  fresh  water.  The  best  packages  to  put  it  up  in,  are  boxes  of  1 cwt.  and  \ cwt.  which, 
allowing  for  loss  of  weight,  turns  out  at  the  Cape  a full  Dutch  hundred,  and  the  small,  half  a Dutch  hundred. 