


FALSE  BAY 

Is  formed  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  on  the  west  side,  and  Ca|>c  Falso  to  the  eastward;  the  distance 
from  Cape  to  Cape  is  about  5 leagues,  and  its  extent  to  the  northward  about  the  same  distance.  Four 
leagues  to  the  northward  of  the  ('ape  Point,  near  the  N.  W.  corner  of  False  Bay,  and  at  the  foot  of  the 
highest  mountain  on  the  coast,  is  situated 

SIMON’S,  oa  SEAMAN’S  BAY. 

This  is  only  a small  bay,  or  cove;  and  in  the  winter  months,  from  April  to  September,  when  Table  Bay 
is  unsafe,  ships  put  in  here,  and  are  sheltered  from  all  wind.s,  except  the  S.  E. 

The  town  is  small ; the  houses  arc  neat.  Close  to  the  landing-place  is  a range  of  warehouses,  w^ell 
stocked  with  marine  and  other  stores.  At  a short  distance  from  this,  is  a commodious  and  handsome 
house,  where  the  commanding  officer  resides.  A little  higher  up,  on  the  brow  of  a hill  overlooking  the  bay, 
is  a large  building,  which  the  Dutch  used  for  a hospital;  but  it  is  now  converted  into  excellent  barracks 
lor  the  troops  stationed  here.  There  is  a saluting  battery,  near  the  landing  place,  which  is  a wooden  pier, 
where  boats  may  he  at  all  times;  the  water  is  brought  down  to  the  pier  by  pipes,  and  conveyed  into  th6 
casks  by  hoses  with  ease  and  expedition. 

About  half  a mile  from  the  town,  to  the  eastward,  is  a space  called  the  Company’s  garden,  well  stocked 
with  vegetables,  &c.  for  the  use  of  shipping.  About  half  way  between  the  town  and  garden  is  a strong 
batteiy,  which  commands  great  part  of  the  bay;  besides  which,  there  are  a few  small  batteries,  on  a level 
with  the  sea,  and  guns  planted  at  different  places,  to  prevent  an  enemy  landing  on  the  beach. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  generality  of  supplies  are  procured  here  upon  the  same  terms  as  at  Cape  Town.  Ships  occasion- 
ally send  their  long  boats  over  to  a bay  in  Hottentot  Holland,  on  the  eastern  side  of  False  Bay,  where 
poultry  and  many  other  refreshments  are  to  be  got  rather  more  reasonably  than  at  Simon’s  Town.  The 
bay  abounds  with  fish,  many  of  them  excellent,  particularly  the  stone  brassems,  or  Hottentot  fish. 


MOSSEL  BAY—PLETTEMBERG  BAY. 


63 


MOSSEL  BAY. 

The  southern  extremity  of  this  Bay  is  Cape  St.  Blaze,  in  latitude  34°  10'  South,  and  longitude  22°  18" 
East.  The  bay  is  open  to  the  S.  E.  winds,  which  throw  in  a heavy  swell.  The  marks  for  unchorafre  are. 
Seal  Island  N.W.  by  W.  the  com  magazine,  S.  W.  by  S.  and  the  outer  point  South;  you  are  then  in 
fathoms  water,  and  about  three  quarters  of  a mile  from  the  shore.  There  is  a Port-holder  here,  who  lias 
charge  of  the  corn  magazine,  which  is  a strong  building,  150  feet  in  length,  and  will  hold  10,(KK)  bushels 
of  corn.  The  Colony  at  the  Cape  draws  considerable  quantities  of  grain  from  this  place. 