

The  amount  of  the  above  is  but  trifling.  Prize  goods  are  occasionally  to  be  procured ; but  together 
they  form  but  a small  proportion  of  the  value  of  the  imports.  The  merchants  therefore  purchase  Govern- 
ment bills  to  make  their  remitUnces,  at  a heavy  discount,  generally  from  15  to  25  per  cent. 

American  ships  frequently  .stop  at  the  Cape  on  their  outward  voyage  to  China,  to  di.spose  of  a part  of 
their  cargoes  consisting  generally  of  lumber,  for  which  they  receive  biUs  on  India,  or  Spanish  dollars. 

CAPE  WINES. 

There  are  several  kinds  of  wine  made  in  the  Colony.  The  principal  are  Constantin,  red  and  white; 
Maag,  Madeira,  Muscodell,  and  Malmsey. 

Constantin  is  the  produce  of  two  farms,  called  Great  and  Little  Constantin,  situate  about  midway  between 
Table  and  False  Bay.  Great  care  is  taken  in  the  manufacture  of  it : no  fruit  but  such  as  is  fuU  ripe,  or 
stalks,  are  suffered  to  go  into  the  press.  The  genuine  Constantia  is  a very  racy  and  delicate  dessert  wine 
and  has  something  peculiarly  agreeable  in  the  flavour  of  it.  The  produce  of  tiie  two  farms  used  to  be  about 
60  pipes  of  the  red,  and  100  of  the  white.  The  Dutch  Company  reserved  to  themselves  the  exclusive 
sale  of  the  Constantia;  but  there  are  now  other  farms,  that  produce  wine,  which,  in  point  of  goodness 
nearly  equals  it:  this  is  called  Maag,  or  stomach  wine,  and  is  sold  rather  cheaper  than  Constantia.  * 

Cape  Madeira  is  a heavy,  strong,  sweetish  wine,  seldom  sent  to  Europe,  as  it  is  not  much  (isteemed. 
The  inferior  kinds  of  wine  are  very  cheap,  and  produced  in  great  abundance. 

Cape  brandy  bears  a strong  resemblance  to  whiskey,  but  is  much  more  fi^,  and  considered  penddoHa 
to  the  health,  unless  kept  for  some  time.  It  should  not  therefore  be  shipped  as  stores,  without  its  MebelM 
ascertained;  unless  in  cases  of  urgent  necessity.  ^ ^ 


SjOOOlbs.  tamarinds. 
200  bags  sago. 

200  bags  pepper. 
5001bs.  cardamoms. 


CAPE  TOWN. 


41) 


TARIFF  OF  IMPORT  AND  EXPORT  DUTIES  AT  rilE  CAFE. 

Import  Duties  on  European  Manufactures. 

1 . British  goods  in  British  sliips  Duty  IVec 

2.  Foreign  goods  in  British  sliips 6 per  cent. 

3.  British  goods  in  foreign  ships  7 ditto 

4.  Foreign  goods  in  foreign  sliips 15  ditto 

5.  Prize  goods  on  the  vendue  roll 5 ditto 

6.  N.  B.  Goods  transhipped  in  the  harbour,  are  to  pay 

import  duties,  but  they  may  be  afterwards  landed  Duty  free 

Indian  Produce. 

1 . By  British  ships  from  any  part  of  India,  or  the  east- 

ward, on  prime  cost 5 per  cent. 

2.  By  neutrals  from  a foreign  settlement  (supposing 

a permission  to  be  granted) 15  ditto 

3.  Prize  goods,  supposing  them  to  be  sold  under  peculiar 