

5.  Y ou  are  not  to  harbour  or  receive  seamen,  or  seafaring  men,  or  landsmen,  of  any  nation  or  colour, 
without  a certificate  from  the  Coimnwidhig  Officer  of  His  Majesty’s  s^ps  or  vessels  of  war  on  this  station, 
with  regard  to  seamen  and  scjafaring  men,  and  of  the  Captain  of  tbe  Port  witli  regard  to  landsmen  and 
others,  countersigned  by  the  Fiscal:  nor  receive  any  person  on  board  without  a due  certificate,  under  the 
penalty  in  the  bond  signed  by  you  at  the  Secretary’s  Office. 

6.  You  arc  not  to  lefrve  any  passenger  or  otlier  person  behind  you  in  the  Colony,  without  permission 
from  the  Colonial  Secretary’s  Office ; and  all  persons  deserting  or  absenting  themselves  from  your  ship,  are 
to  be  notifiecl  at  the  Port  and  Fiscal’s  Offices,  that  they  may  be  apprehended  as  soon  as  possible. 

7.  You  arc  not  to  attempt  U)  take  away  any  specie  out  of  this  Colony,  without  special  permission;  the 
penalty  for  so  doing  is,  confiscation  of  the  boat  or  craft  that  takes  it  away,  the  propei'ty  confiscated,  with  n 
penalty  of  tliree  times  the  amount,  together  with  twelve  months  imprisonment. 

8.  Your  boats  cannot  be  jiermittcd  to  remain  on  shore  after  gun  fire  at  night,  except  in  cases  when 
the  public  service  requires  your  shtji  to  be  quickly  watered, 

9.  You  must  give  notice  at  the  Custom  House  at  least  tw^  days  previous  to  your  sailing  from  Table 
Bay,  and  three  days’  notice  from  Simon’s  Bay;  and  in  order  to  admit  of  all  possible  means,  and  to 
give  sufficient  time  for  researches  to  be  made  for  deserters  and  runaway  slaves,  you  are  to  cause  your  ship’s 
ensign  to  be  hoisted  at  the  main-top-gallant-mast-head,  forty-eight  hours  previous  to  your  intended  depar- 
ture, in  order  thereby  to  notify  it  to  the  public. 

10.  In  failure  of  complying  with  any  one  of  these  several  instructions  ao  enumerated,  you  will  for 
such  offence  incur  a [)enalty  of  500  rix  dollars,  over  and  above  the  other  pains  and  penalties  as  by  law 
established. 

List  of  Pt'^ces  on  the  Hire  of  Waggon  aitd  Saddle  Harm  at  Copt  Temm, 

1.  For  the  Iiire  from  Cape  Town  to  Simon’s  Town,  and  the  next  day  back. 


Of  a covered  waggon,  or  chariot  46  rix  doBaiv 

Of  a curricle,  or  cart  with  two  wheels 30  ditto 

Of  a saddle  horse  10  ditto 


CAPE  TOWN. 


2.  Any  renter  detaining  a waggon  or  horse  in  Simon’s  Town,  is  to  pay,  in  addition  to  the  above-men- 
tioned prices,  daily 

For  a covered  waggon  or  chariot 10  rix  dollars 

For  a curricle  or  cart 12  ditto 

For  a saddle  horse 3 ditto 

3.  For  hire  from  Cape  Town  to  Simon’s  Town,  or  from  Simon’s  Town  to  the  Cape,  and  not  in  return. 

Of  a covered  waggon  or  chariot 38  rix  dollars 