


56 


DELAGOA  BAY. 


DELAGOA  BAY, 

So  called  ljy  (lie  Eii][>]ish,  is  named  by  the  Portuguese  and  other  nations,  Bay  ot  I.orenzo  Marques, 
from  the  name  of  its  discoverer,  and  also  the  Bay  of  the  Holy  Ghost:  it  is  of  considerable  extent,  being 
about  7 leagues  broad  from  East  to  W(‘st,  and  near  20  leagues  deep  from  North  to  South;  but  the  channel, 
on  account  of  the  shoals  on  both  sides,  is  not  more  than  five  miles  in  breadth.  The  North  Point,  or  Cape 
St.  Mary's,  tlie  N.  E.  point  of  the  island  of  the  same  name,  is  in  latitude  25°  58  South,  and  longitude  33° 
15  East.  This  island  is  separated  from  the  main  land  by  a narrow  rocky  channel. 

There  are  tliree  principal  rivers  in  this  bay,  vk.  Maniea,  Delagoa,  or  English  River,  and  Macha- 
vanna.  Tlie  first  is  the  northernmost,  and  when  this  bay  was  discovered  by  the  Portuguese  in  1545,  was 
the  only  one  navigable  for  large  vessels;  here  they  formed  a settlement,  and  built  a fort,  some  vestiges  of 
which  still  remain,  but  abandoned  it  in  consequence  of  its  entrance  being  choked  with  sand.  The  second 
is  Delagoa,  or  English  River,  which  has  a bar  with  about  15  feet  on  it  at  low  water:  this  is  the  only 
one  at  present  frequented  by  English  vessels.  The  Dutch  settled  a factory  here,  which  they  held  till  1727, 
when  a strong  squadron  of  Ibiglisli  pirates,  who  had  their  rendezvous  on  Madagascar,  after  plundering  the 
Dutch  warehouses,  rased  them  and  the  fort  to  the  ground.  In  1777,  an  establishment  was  made  here,  on 
account  of  tlie  Austrian,  or  Ostend  East  India  Company,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Bolts,  who  built 
warehouses,  and  erected  a battery  of  12  guns  on  the  south  side  of  the  river:  the  Imperialists  remained  but 
Ihree  years  in  possession,  when,  in  consequence  of  a protest  from  the  Portuguese  Government,  the  Cabinet  of 
Vienna  disavowed  the  settlement,  and  a force  was  sent  from  Goa,  who  treated  the  Imperialists  in  a similar 
manner  to  that  in  which  the  Dutch  were  treated  by  the  pirates  in  1727;  then*  ships,  (‘ffects,  and  men,  having 
been  seized  and  carried  off.  The  third,  or  Machavanna  River,  is  the  southernmost;  it  is  about  8 leagues 
from  Delagoa  River,  and  is  not  navigable  for  ships;  but  a boat  that  draws  only  6 feet  water,  can  go  30  leagues 
above  the  entrance,  where  the  trade  is  carried  on,  and  where  the  chi(*f  usually  resides. 

Delagoa  River  is  much  frequented  by  South  Sea  whalers,  as  the  bay  abounds  in  whales,  and  is  very 
commodious  and  safe.  It  is  navigable  by  vessels  drawing  about  12  feet  water,  for  upwards  of  40  miles, 
and  for  large  bouts  near  200.  Ships  commonly  lie  about  2 miles  up  the  river,  where  they  have  good  depth 
of  waU'r,  and  are  perfi’ctly  secure  from  all  winds.  A considerable  trade  was  formerly  caiTiod  on  at  the  rivers 
in  the  bay,  for  elephants’  teeth  and  gold  dust.  Few  English  ships  now  visit  the  bay  for  that  purpose ; but 
the  Portuguese  carry  on  a small  trade  with  the  natives.  There  are  several  chiefs  on  the  south  side  of  the 
river ; but  they  are  all  subject  to  one  who  resides  near  the  village  where  the  slijps  anclior.  The  houses  of 
the  natives  are  neat,  and  circular,  about  15  feet  in  diameter,  having  only  one  entrance,  and  surrounded 
with  palisadoes  about  four  feet  high.  ^L'lie  natives  are  CaflTres,  of  a bright  black  colour,  but  not  numerous, 
probably  in  the  whole  hay.  They  seem  a good-natured  and  harmless  people,  but  sharp  and  cun- 