

alive,  went  to  Madagascar  in  her;  where  the  Carnarvon  outward-bound  East  Indiaman  took  them  onboard, 
nnd  curried  them  to  Madras 


CHAPTER  VI. 


East  Coast  of  Africa. 


Natal;  Description^Proviaions  and  Refreshments — Delagoa  Bay;  Description^Imports  and  Export s-^Prn- 
visiona  and  RefreshTntnta^Inhamhan^Sofala;  Description^Imports  and  Exports^Provisions  and  Re- 
fre8hmtntS""^reat  Cuama  R{v€r^QuilimuHC“^Jifosanthi(fue;  Description — Clause  in  Ike  Treaty  with 
Portugal  relative  to  the  Slave  Trade^Coins,  Weights^  and  Measures— ‘Imports  and  Exports— Trade  with 

BritiJi  India Provisions  and  Refreshments— Articles  procurable — Amber — Ambergris — Cnlvmbo  Root- 

Cowries Elephants'  Teeth— Elephants  Hair— Hippopotamus  Teeth— Tortoise  Shell — Querimba  Islands— 

Macaloe—Mongallou  River— Lindy  River— Quiloa ; Description— Imports  and  Exports— Provisions  and 
Refreshments — Zanzibar;  Description — Momhas— Melinda— Patte— Juba— Brava— Magadoxa— Cape 
Guardafui— Barbara— Zeila. 


NATAL. 

The  River  Infanta,  or  Great  Fish  Rivier,  tlie  extent  of  the  Cape  Colony  to  the  eastward,  is  the 
southernmost  boundary  of  the  coast  of  Natal,  so  called  because  the  Portuguese  discovered  it  on  Christmas 
Day,  1497.  The  only  place  frequented  by  the  Europeans  is 

PORT  NATAL, 

Which  is  situated  in  latitude  29°  56  South,  and  longitude  about  31°  30  East.  The  river  Is  wide  at 
its  entrance,  but  is  only  fit  for  small  vessels.  The  bar  is  very  dangerous,  not  having  more  than  5 feet  at 
low  water,  and  the  sea  rises  but  5 feet  more,  except  in  the  months  of  September  and  October,  when  you 
will  find  about  12  feet  at  high  water.  The  course  on  the  bar  is  to  the  S.  W.  the  swell  being  very  great; 
but  as  it  is  very  narrow,  two  or  three  seas  will  carry  you  over,  and  then  you  deepen  your  water  to  3,  4, 
and  5 fathoms.  When  you  are  about  a mile  within  the  river,  you  perceive  a piece  of  barren  ground  at  the 
dedivity  of  a hill,  over  against  which  you  may  anchor  in  4 fathoms,  ut  a cable's  length  from  the  shore;  the 
safest  way  is  to  moor  with  hawsers  to  the  rocks  on  shore. 

This  place  was  much  frequented  by  the  earlier  voyagers  to  India;  but  at  present  very  little  trade  is 
carried  on,  except  with  the  Portuguese  from  Mosambique,  who  import  coarse  piece-goods,  chiefly  blue 
cloth,  iron,  beads,  tobacco,  and  spirits;  and  receive  in  return,  elephants'  teeth,  cattle,  and  sometime.s  amber- 
gris. The  natives  are  apparently  inoffensive,  but  generally  go  armed  with  lances,  bows  and  arrows; 
their  houses  are  built  of  straw  and  mats,  but  in  a neat  manner. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  b»»llnf^Tfa  here  are  large  and  good,  and  poultry  in  plenty,  in  exchange  for  small  articles,  such  as 
buttons,  iron  hoops,  &c.  The  river  abounds  with  fish,  and  turtle  is  occasionally  to  be  met  with. 