


AMBER — AMBERGRIS— COLUM BO  ROOT. 

Articles  procurable  at  MosamhiquCy  with  directions  how  to  chitse  than. 

AMBER 

Is  sometimes  to  be  met  with  on  the  East  Coast  of  Africa ; it  is  generally  in  irregular  masses  of  a 
yellowish  brown  colour:  it  should  be  chosen  in  fine  hard  pieces,  clean  and  transparent:  the  smell  when 
rubbed,  fragrant  and  pleasant;  it  should  also  attract  straws,  hairs,  and  other  light  substances.  That  which 
is  opaque  and  foul,  should  be  rejected. 

The  permanent  duty  on  amber  is  Is.  per  lb.  and  the  war  duty  4d.  per  lb. 

AMBERGRIS 

Is  a concrete  substance,  of  an  ash  colour,  soft  and  tenacious  like  wax,  marked  with  blackish  and  yellow 
spots:  it  is  generally  in  solid  masses,  irregular,  and  sometimes  round,  being,  when  broken,  rougli  and  uneven, 
and  frequently  containing  pieces  of  shells,  and  other  substances.  It  is  found  on  various  parts  of  the  Hast 
Coast  of  Africa,  and  the  islands  in  the  eastern  seas,  sometimes  in  very  large  masses,  though  generally 
small.  In  1693,  the  Dutch  gave  the  King  of  Tidore  1 1,000  rix  dollars  for  a piece,  which  weighed  \S2\hs. 
measuring  5 feet  8 inches  long,  and  2 feet  2 inches  thick. 

This  article,  being  vciy  valuable,  is  often  adulterated;  great  care  is  thenTore  requisite  in  purchasing  it. 
The  best  is  ash-coloured,  intermingled  with  yellowdsh  or  blackish  veins  and  spots;  it  has  scarcely  any  par- 
ticular taste,  and  very  little  smell,  unless  heated  or  much  handled,  when  it  is  very  fragi  ant  and  agreeable 
to  most  people:  it  melts  without  affording  either  bubble  or  scum,  when  exposed  to  the  (lame  of  a candle 
in  a silver  spoon : it  swims  in  water;  and  if  the  point  of  a knite  heated,  has  asmull  piece  laid  upon  it,  and  it 
melts  entirely  away,  without  leaving  any  dross  or  impuritie.s,  it  is  good.  The  Chinese  try  whether  it  is  genuine, 
by  scraping  some  of  it  very  fine  upon  boiling  hot  tea ; if*  genuine,  it  will  dissolve  and  difiuse  generally, 
which  the  adulterated  will  not.  That  which  is  all  black,  or  entirely  while,  is  good  for  little,  as  is  the 
smooth,  uniform,  and  apparently  pure,  these  being  commonly  factitious. 

This  commodity  is  principally  used  by  the  perfumers,  and  when  good,  will  sometimes  sell  for  30s. 
per  ounce;  but  is  frequently  not  more  than  half  that  price. 

COLUMBO  ROOT 

Is  a steple  export  of  the  Portuguese  from  Mosambique ; and  from  the  ejuantity  produced,  it  is  remark- 
able that  the  place  of  its  growth  should  have  been  so  long  doubtful  in  Europe.  It  is  never  cultivated, 
but  grows  naturally,  and  in  great  abundance  in  the  thick  forests  on  the  coast  about  Mosambique, 
and  inland  about  fifteen  or  twenty  miles.  It  is  in  great  estimation  among  all  the  Africans,  even  far 
removed  from  the  Portuguese  settlements,  for  the  cure  of  dysentery,  and  as  a remedy  for  almost  all 
disorderi. 