

ning, anil  ask  three  times  more  than  tlwy  will  take  for  their  goods.  They  are  great  beggars,  particularly 
on  the  north  side  of  the  river : the  natives  at  a distance  up  the  rivefs  arc  reckoned  more  traiterous  and 
ferocious  than  those  in  the  bay,  and  you  must  be  continually  on  your  guard  when  trading  with  them, 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  Portuguese  send  a shij)  here  1 Vom  Mo.sambique  occasionally,  and  the  Persecs  on  the  Malabar  coast 
'have  sent  small  vessels  at  different  times,  their  imports  consisting  of 


Arrangoe  beads 

Cutlery 

Piece  goods 

Spirits 

Buttons 

Copper 

Pipes 

Tobacco 

Brass  wire 

Iron 

Sugar 

Wearing  apparel 

INHAMBAN—SOFALA 


b1 


Their  returns  are  principally  made  in  elephants’  teeth;  the  rortuguesc  sometimes  take  slaves  to 
Mosambique.  Ambergis  is  occasionally  to  be  met  with,  likewise  gold  <lust  in  small  quantities,  and  hippopo- 
tamus teeth : the  latter  article  may  be  purchased  very  cheap,  but  the  natives  set  a high  price  upon  the  ele- 
phants’ teeth;  these  arc  only  to  be  procured  for  piece-goods,  and  the  kind  most  in  request  amongst  them 
is  coarse  blue  cloth. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS 

Are  to  be  procured  in  plenty,  and  very  reasonably,  after  permission  of  the  chief  is  obtained.  Tliere 
is  a kind  of  master  attendant  here,  called  the  king  of  the  water ; he  informs  the  chief  of  the  arrival  of  any 
ship  l<l^the  bay,  and  you  cannot  purchase  any  bullocks  till  the  chief  comes  down  to  his  house  at  the  landing 
place,  where  you  must  make  him  a present  of  some  old  clothes  and  liquor:  he  gives  you  in  return  a bul- 
lock, after  which  you  may  get  what  you  want  every  day.  The  master  attendant  has  a great  number  of 
cattle ; he  comes  on  board  your  ship,  remains  as  long  as  you  please,  and  will  accompany  any  officer  on  shore 
to  trade:  by  keeping  on  good  terms  with  him,  you  can  get  every  thing  that  is  to  be  procured  here.  The 
bullocks  are  very  good;  for  a piece  of  coarse  Surat  piece-goods,  one  weighing  between  three  and  four  hun- 
dred weight  may  be  got;  fowls  for  an  iron  hoop  each,  or  two  metal  buttons,  vegetables,  and  fruit,  for 
old  clothes,  empty  bottles,  &c.  Turtle  is  sometimes  to  be  met  with.  Fire-wood  and  water  are  in  plenty, 
and  easily  procured.  The  bay  and  rivers  abound  with  a variety  of  excellent  fish,  whicli  are  brouglit  off  by 
the  natives  in  their  boats,  and  cost  a mere  trifle. 

From  Delagoa  Bay  to  Cape  Corientes,  in  latitude  T South,  and  longitude  35^51  East,  tlic 
coast  is  seldom  visited  by  Europeans,  and  but  little  known. 

INHAMBAN  BAY  and  RIVER. 

The  eastern  extremity  of  Inhamban  Bay  is  5 leagues  to  the  northward  of  Cape  Corientes;  about 
three  miles  to  the  westward  of  which,  is  the  entrance  of  the  river,  in  latitude  23P  47  South,  and  longitude 
35^  52  East;  but  on  account  of  the  numerous  shoals  in  the  bay,  it  is  only  frequented  by  small  vessels. 
Inhamban  Town  is  situated  about  eight  miles  from  the  entrance  of  the  river.  The  Portuguese  have  hero 
a Resident,  and  a few  troops  for  his  protection.  Vessels  from  Mosambique  come  here  to  trade  for  slaves, 
elephants'  teeth,  and  gold  dust;  but  the  trade  is  not  very  considerable. 