

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks  and  poultry  may  be  procured  reasonably,  if  purchased  from  the  natives;  but  the  Portu- 
guese make  visiters  pay  much  dearer  for  supplies.  Fruit  and  vegetables  are  plentiful;  and  fish  of 
various  sorts  are  caught  in  the  river. 

GREAT  CUAMA  RIVER 

Is  called  by  the  natives  Zanibezc,  and  is  in  many  places  more  than  a league  broad.  About  20 
leagues  from  its  joining  the  sea,  it  divides  itself  into  two  branches,  the  southernmost  of  which  is  called 
I.uabo;  this  also  divides  itself  into  two  branches;  the  other  principal  arm  is  called  Quilimane.  In  the 
midst  of  the  river  are  several  islands,  some  very  large.  The  entrance  of  Luabo  River  is  in  about 
19^  South  latitude;  that  of  Quilimane  in  18°  10'  South,  and  longitude  37°  30  East. 

QUILIMANE. 

This  town  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  the  river,  about  5 leagues  from  its  entrance.  The  river 
has  a bar,  having  only  2}  fathoms  on  it  at  low  water;  here  the  Mosambique  vessels  discharge  their 
cargoes  into  small  bouts,  to  proceed  to  Sena,  their  principal  settlement  on  the  river,  which  is  more  than 
60  leagues  distant,  in  latitude  17°  37  South.  Large  quantities  of  gold  are  annually  procured  at  Sena, 
but  it  is  not  above  19  carats  fineness;  likewise  elephants'  teeth,  wax,  rhinoceros  horns,  hides,  &c.  The 
Africans  from  the  interior,  come  sometimes  from  the  distance  of  two  or  three  months'  travel  to  Sena, 
to  purchase  European  and  Indian  goods  for  gold.  This  barter  yields  the  Portuguese  veiy  great  profit; 
indeed  this  part  of  the  Coast  of  Africa  may  be  considered  their  Peru;  gold  being  so  common  in  the 
interior,  tliat  many  of  their  household  utensils  are  made  of  it. 


MOSAMBIQUE. 


Mosambique  island,  which  is  situated  in  latitude  15°  1 South,  and  longitiulo  tO^  i()  East,  is  the  principal 
i,ettlement  of  the  Portuguese  on  tlie  East  CoEvSt  of  Africa,  and  to  which  all  the  others  arc  subordinate.  The 
harbour  is  one  of  the  best  on  the  coast,  and  is  formed  by  the  islands  of  St.  Jago  and  St.  George,  which  arc  to 
the  southward  of  its  entrance,  and  that  of  Mosambique,  about  three  miles  to  the  N.  W.  of  the  otht  rs.  Mosam- 
bique  is  small,  not  above  three  miles  in  circumference,  to  the  westward  of  which  is  the  harbour.  Ships 
generally  anchor  w^ithin  St.  George’s  Island,  and  wait  for  a pilot  to  carry  them  to  the  proper  anchorage. 

Mosambique  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese,  under  De  Gama,  in  M98,  and  was  llien  described 
as  a large  ti)wn,  lull  of  merchants,  who  traded  with  the  Moors  of  India,  for  spices,  precious  stones,  and 
other  commodities.”  The  natives  received  De  Gama  in  a friendly  manner,  taking  them  to  he  Turks; 
but  on  discovering  them  to  be  Christians,  laid  a plan  for  their  destruction,  which  was  fortunately  discovered, 
and  De  Gama  removed  from  the  harbour;  but  being  in  want  of  water,  he  took  it  by  force,  and 
previous  to  his  departure  for  India,  lie  cannonaded  and  destroyed  great  part  of  the  town.  In  1510 
the  Portuguese  obtained  permission  to  settle  a factory,  the  object  of  which  was  the  establishment  of  a place 
for  their  outward  and  homeward  tmund  ships  to  stop  at,  to  procure  refreshments.  They  soon  after  expelled 
the  inhabitants;  and,  excepting  an  attempt  made  by  the  Dutch  in  1603  to  take  the  place,  which 
was  unsuccessful,  they  have  remained  in  undisturbed  possession  ever  since.  It  was  at  first  unhealthy,  but 
has  of  late  years  improved  in  that  respect. 