

SOFALA. 

'Phis  town  is  situated  up  a river,  navigable  only  by  small  vessels,  liaving  a bar  at  its  entrance, 
which  has  only  12  or  14  feet  on  it  at  low  water.  The  Fort  of  Sofula  is  on  a point  of  land,  insulated  at 
high  water,  in  latitude  20®  15  South,  and  longitude  34®  45  East;  the  town,  which  principally  consists  of 
huts,  lies  on  the  north  side  of  the  river.  The  anchorage  is  about  four  miles  from  the  fort,  in  5 futhoins, 
having  the  flag-staff  bearing  N.  33®  W.  Ships  ought  not  to  enter  this  place  without  a pilot.  A Portu- 
guese Resident  with  a party  of  men  are  stationed  here ; there  are  also  some  merchants,  who  procure  ele- 
phants' teeth,  slaves,  gold  dust,  &c.  for  a ship  which  annually  comes  from  Mosambique. 

Sofala  was  visited  by  the  Portuguese  soon  after  their  discovery  of  the  passage  round  the  Cape  of  Cood 
Hope.  They  were  kindly  received;  and  in  1507,  notwithstanding  the  opposition  they  ex|)erienced  from 
the  Arab  merchants  frequenting  the  port,  obtained  permission  to  build  a fort,  which  they  have  lield  ever 
since,  although  the  climate  is  represented  as  extremely  unliealthy. 


I 


B8 


GREAT  CUAMA  RIVER— QUILIMANE. 


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  vessel  which  comes  annually  from  Mosambique,  imports  coarse  piece-goods,  and  other  articles 
suitable  to  the  taste  of  the  natives;  and  takes  in  return,  gold,  slaves,  and  elephants'  teeth.  It  is 
stated,  that  from  the  mines  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sofala,  more  than  2,000,000  metigals  of  gold  are 
yearly  extracted,  the  value  of  which  is  estimated  at  1,666,666  sterling.  The  trade  in  slaves  is  abo 
considerable.  The  Arabs  frequent  Sofala,  and  cariy  on  an  extensive  trade  with  this  part  of  the  coast. 

At  Sofala,  and  other  places  where  the  Portuguese  have  Residents,  a guard  is  placed  on  board  any 
vessel  that  may  touch  there,  to  prevent  illicit  trade;  but  by  gaining  the  favour  of  the  Commandant, 
trade  may  be  transacted  at  most  of  these  places.  They  are  all  subordinate  to  Mosambique,  and  all  the 
coasting  vessels  belong  to  that  port. 

Ships  touching  on  different  parts  of  the  East  Coast  of  Africa,  little  frequented,  ought  to  be  careful 
in  landing  with  their  boats,  for  the  natives  of  many  places  are  much  prejudiced  against  Europeans; 
and  not  without  cause.  It  has  bccai  said,  that  both  French  and  English  vessels  have  visited  the  coast, 
and  at  different  places,  after  enticing  the  natives  on  board,  carried  them  away,  and  sold  them  as  slaves. 
It  is  pretty  well  umlerstood  that  a vessel  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  used  to  procure  slaves  in 
this  manner;  and  it  is  said  that  when  she  was  at  an  island  called  Chulawan,  to  the  southward  of  Sofala, 
the  son  of  the  Prince,  or  Chief,  governing  the  country  on  the  banks  of  the  river  opposite  the  island, 
with  several  of  his  subjects,  were  allured  on  board  under  pretence  of  friendship,  and  carried  away. 
This  vessel  returned  to  the  Cape  with  a full  cargo  of  slaves,  and  there  b much  reason  to  believe  that 
the  greater  part  of  them  was  procured  in  this  perfidious  manner. 