


LINDY  niVER-QUILOA— ZANZIBAR. 


f)5 


LINDY  RIVER 

Is  about  6 leagues  from  the  former,  is  largo,  and  easy  of  access,  having  many  villages  around,  the 
principal  of  which  is  Lindy,  on  the  northern  side.  It  is  said  to  be  an  excellent  liarbour,  where  provisions, 
wood,  and  water,  may  be  easily  procured. 


QUILOA. 

This  town  is  situated  on  an  island,  in  latitude  8°  41'  South,  and  longitude  39®  47  East.  The  island 
is  about  6 miles  long  from  North  to  South.  The  harbour  is  between  the  island  and  the  main,  and  is  ca- 
pable of  receiving  ships  of  any  size,  where  they  lie  secure  in  all  weathers.  The  town  is  reprcst'nlcd  as 
large  and  well  built ; the  houses  of  stone,  two  or  three  stories  high,  having  terraced  roofs.  The  streets 
are  very  narrow:  on  one  side  of  the  town  is  the  fort,  where  the  Governor  resides;  it  is  strong,  and  sur- 
rounded by  a ditch.  Quiloa  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese  in  1500,  who  were  kindly  received  by  the 
reigning  Prince;  but  in  consequence  of  the  character  given  of  them  by  the  Arab  merchants  frequenting 
the  port,  the  intercourse  with  them  was  broken  off;  and  they  were  refused  to  trade  in  his  dominions;  they 
therefore  proceeded  to  India,  attacking  all  the  Arab  ships  they  met  with  in  their  way,  in  revenge  for 
the  affront  they  had  received  from  those  of  Quiloa.  In  1505  the  l*ortuguese,  under  D’Almeyda,  attacked 
and  took  the  town,  built  a strong  fort,  and  left  a garrison  of  5(W)  men,  who  were  afterwards  driven 
out  by  the  Arabs;  since  which  period  it  has  remained  in  their  hands. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  trade  of  this  port,  which  is  extensive,  is  carried  on  by  the  Muscat  Arabs;  they  import  piece- 
goods  of  various  kinds,  sugar,  arrack,  spices,  &c.  and  receive  in  return,  slaves  and  elephants'  teeth.  The 
place  is  seldom  visited  by  Europeans,  as  the  inhabitants  are  in  general  considered  hostile  to  thoin. 

ZANZIBAR 

Is  the  largest  island  on  this  part  of  the  coast,  and  on  sailing  along,  it  has  a most  beautiful  appearance; 
its  north  end  is  in  latitude  6°  20'  South,  and  longitude  39®  40'  East.  It  was  first  visited  by  the  Portu- 
guese in  1503,  when  they  took  a number  of  vessels  belonging  to  the  place,  whereupon  in  retaliation  the 
Kiitg  made  an  attempt  upon  the  Portuguese  ships ; but  being  defeated,  peace  was  concluded,  the  King 
agreeing  to  pay  tribute.  In  1500,  the  inhabitants  having  negleclcd  to  pay  tlie  tribute,  the  town  was 
attacked,  plundered,  and  destroyed  by  the  Portuguese,  The  English  first  visited  it  in  1591. 

There  are  two  harbours,  the  outer  and  inner,  both  fit  for  receiving  large  ships.  His  Majesty’s  ships 
Leopard  and  Orestes  were  here  in  1799  for  refreshments;  the  following  are  the  observations  then  made. 