

HIPPOPOTAMUS  TEETH. 

Africa  is  the  only  part  of  the  world  which  produces  the  hippopotamus.  The  teeth  are  long,  crooked, 
and  sharp,  like  the  tusks  of  a boar,  and  are  sometimes  met  with  12  or  14  inches  long,  weighing  8 or  lOlbs:  they 
are  of  a harder  and  whiter  substance  than  those  of  the  elephant,  and  do  not  turn  yellow  so  soon  Dentists 
prefer  them  on  account  of  these  qualities,  for  artificial  teeth.  Tliey  should  be  chosen  large,  straight,  free  from 
cracks  or  flaws;  those  under  two  pounds  each  are  of  little  value.  The  hide  of  this  animal  is  thicker  than  that 
of  the  rhinoceros,  and  makes  excellent  whips,  which  after  a little  use  become  very  pliable. 

TORTOISE-SHELL 

Is  the  shell  of  the  testaceous  animal,  called  a tortoise,  of  which  there  arc  two  kinds,  the  land  and  sea 
tortoise;  the  sea  tortoise  is  again  of  several  kinds,  but  it  is  only  the  hawk’s  hill  which  produces  this 
beautiful  shell,  so  much  admired  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  Its  flesh  is  in  no  estimation ; the  plates  of  the 
shell,  which  are  far  stronger,  thicker,  and  cleaner  than  in  any  other  kind,  constituting  the  sole  value  of  the 
animal. 

The  shell  of  the  tortoise  is  somewhat  of  a Iieart-shaped  form,  or  pointed  at  the  extremity,  and  con- 
sists of  thirteen  divisions  or  plates,  surrounded  by  twenty-five  marginal  pieces ; of  the  former,  there  are 
four  plates  on  each  side,  and  five  on  the  back;  these  last  are  bent  in  the  centre;  of  the  side  jdates,  (he  (no 
middle  ones  are  the  most  valuable,  being  larger  and  thicker  than  the  others;  those  on  the  back,  with  the 
marginal  ones,  are  denominated  Ao^  in  the  trade,  and  are  of  comparatively  little  value. 

Tortoise-shell  should  be  chosen  in  large  thick  plates,  free  from  cracks,  carbuncles,  or  barnacles,  which 
are  frequently  attached  to  them;  the  more  clear,  transparent,  and  variegated,  the  more  esteemed;  the 
crooked,  broken,  and  small  plates  should  be  rejected.  There  is  a peculiar  kind,  said  to  lie  met  with  at  the 
Maidive  Islands,  which  is  superior  to  all  others,  being  very  dark  coloured,  smooth,  and  beautifully  varie- 
gated, and  having  frequently  many  natural  figures  in  it. 


QUERIMBA-MACALOE-MONGALLOU  RIVER. 


0i 


The  freight  on  torto!se.9heU  is  calculated  at  the  rate  of  20  cwt.  to  # ton,  and  tlie  duty  payable  by 
the  purcliaser  iii  as  follows: 


^Vdr  Duty,  Permanent  Duty. 

Unmanufactured 0 10  0 per  lb,  . . . £ 0 2 6 per  lb. 

Manufactured 17  1 8 per  cent.  . . 51  5 0 per  cent. 


The  following  are  tlie  quantities  sold  at  the  East  India  sales  for  five  years,  1804  to  1808  inclusive, 
with  the  amount  of  the  sales,  and  the  average  price  per  lb. 