

‘‘  Got  a pilot  on  board,  and  ran  close  into  the  inner  harbour  at  low  water,  through  a very  narrow 
channel,  scarce  three  quarters  of  a mile  wide,  and  anchored  about  a mile  from  the  town,  Tlie  fort 
saluted  with  three  guns,  as  did  a ship  under  Moorish  colours,  hound  to  Muscat.  The  town  is  composed 
“ of  some  few  good  houses;  the  rest  are  huts  of  straw  mat,  which  are  very  neat.,  The  latitude  of  the 
town  is  6®  6 South,  and  longitude  39®  33  East,  The  inhabitants  made  every  profession  of  serving  us ; 
“ but  they  were  so  slow  and  indolent,  that  we  had  but  little  assistance  from  them  by  boats.  We  completed 
“ the  water  within  a few  tons  with  the  ship's  boats;  by  watching  the  tides,  you  get  plenty  of  water  at 

K 


MOMHAS— MEIJNDA. 


(U> 

Fresli  Water  River,  wjrKli  is  about  lour  miles  to  the  eastward  of*  tlie  ancliornn;e ; yon  roll  your  casks 
“ some  (listanee  from  the  beucli,  and  bah'  out  of  the  stream;  but  at  hi;;h  water  it  is  ratluT  brackish;  it  is 
“ therefore  advisable  to  fill  with  the  fallini^  tide,  and  take  them  off  with  the  flood.  There  are  several 
“ wells  in  and  about  the  town,  but  they  will  not  allow  the  water  to  he  taken  from  some  of  them  from 
“ religious  motives.  They  will  supply  you  with  plenty  of  wood. 

‘‘  Here  you  can  obtain  many  kinds  of  refreshments ; hut  as  the  Governor  made  a monopoly  of  the  sale 
“ of  all  kinds  of  articles,  w'epaid  exorbitantly  dear  for  them:  the  inhuhitants  sell  their  things  much  cheaper* 
“ We  got  very  fine  bullocks,  goats,  poultry,  rice,  cocoa  nut  oil,  &:c.  The  fruits  are  very  delicious,  and 
they  have  all  kinds.  There  is  good  fishing  here,  and  turtle  is  oeeasionally  taken,  'fhe  small  trading 
“ vessels  from  IVIuseat,  and  the  Red  Sea,  aft('r  discharging  their  cargoes,  which  are  chiefly  dates,  always 
“ dismantle,  and  move  into  an  inner  harbour  at  the  back  of*  the  town,  and  wait  the  return  of  the  monsoon. 
“ IMiis  island  is  tributary  to  the  Imauni  of  Muscat,  and  the  (Tovernor  is  appointed  by  him.  They  have  a 
“ grout  trade  with  the  Fieiieh  from  the  Mauritius,  in  slaves  and  coffee,  and  many  of  them  talk  that  lan- 
‘‘  guage  in  conseipieiiee.  I'lie  inhabitants  profess  the  Mahometan  religion.  In  their  modi's  of  traffic  they 
“ are  very  singular;  a guinea  is  of  no  \alue,  but  an  anchor  button,  or  a button  of  any  kind,  is  a gem  in  the 
“ eyes  of  tlu'  lower  class  of  people;  an  instanei'  occurred  on  board  the  Leopard,  where  they  refused  a gui- 
nea  which  v\as  offered  in  change  for  some  fowls,  and  amarine’s  button  put  an  end  to  the  bargain.  They 
always  go  armed,  and  apjiear  very  timid,  exc(‘pt  wlieii  a cousiderahle  number  are  together.’’ 