

Barbora  was  taken  by  the  Portuguese  fleet  in  1517,  and  plundered  and  burnt:  they  expected  to  find 
a considerable  spoil  in  it,  hut  were  disappointed,  the  inhabitants  having  had  sufficient  time  to  convey  them- 
selves and  their  most  valuable  effects  to  the  continent. 

. ZEILA,  OR  ZEYLA. 

This  town  is  situated  at  the  bottom  of  a large  bay,  in  latitude  10°  15'  North,  and  longitude  about 
44®  0 East.  It  was  formerly  of  considerable  importance;  and  previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  Portuguese 
in  these  seas,  it  was  the  place  through  which  the  greatest  part  of  the  merchandise  that  was  carried  into 
the  interior  of  Abyssinia,  commonly  passed. 


ZEILA. 


69 


In  IMG  the  Portuguese  fleet,  having  failed  in  uii  attempt  made  upon  Judda,  in  the  Rod  Sea,  came  to 
this  port,  which  they  found  unprovided  with  tlic  proper  means  of  defence;  it  was  tiu'retbre  easily  taken, 
plundered,  and  burnt,  but  was  soon  rebuilt,  though  not  so  well  as  before,  when  in  the  Portuguese 
again  took  and  utterly  destroyed  it.  Zeila,  notwithstanding,  carries  on  a considerable  trade  with  various 
parts  tf  the  East  Coast  of  Africa,  Mocha,  and  other  ports;  their  imports  consisting  of 


Coarse  piece  goods. 

Cardamums. 

Iron,  in  bars. 

Cutlery. 

Dates. 

Ironmongery. 

Cornelian  beads. 

Glass  ware. 

Lead. 

Spices. 

Sugar  & sugar  candy 


Tin. 


and  various  other  Asiatic  and  European  commodities.  The  returns  are  principally  made  in 

Elephants’  teeth.  I Cum  Arabic.  Olibanum.  i Rhinoceros’  horns. 

Gold  dust.  I Myrrh.  Ostrich  feathers  | Slaves. 


and  a few  other  articles,  the  produce  of  Abyssinia,  and  the  neighbouring  countries. 

Zeila  is  seldom  visited  by  Europeans.  In  1800  one  of  His  Majesty’s  ships  anchored  near  llie  town. 
Having  an  Arab  linguist  from  Mocha  on  board,  a treaty  was  entered  into  with  the  chier  to  supply  the  troops 
going  on  the  Red  Sea  Expedition  (then  in  transports  at  Mocha),  with  sheep,  which  are  lu  re  very  cheap. 
Should  a merchant  ship  touch  here  for  refreshments,  it  will  be  retpiisite  to  guard  against  treachery,  as  the 
disposition  of  the  natives  of  this  place,  and  along  the  coast  from  hence  to  Cape  Guardafui,  is  but  little 
known. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Islands  off  the  East  Coast  of  Africa. 


Mahgascar;  its  Exknl~~Sl.  Augmlm's  Bay—Artichs  of  Tradt—Mode  of  salting  Pmmons^Mwmndava 
Bcmbatook  Buy— New  Mnssalego—Passandam—Port  Dauphin— Manouro—Tamatave— Foul  Point- 
Si.  Mary's  Island— Ant  ongil  Bay— Ravansera,  a Spice;  Directions  how  to  chuse— Comoro  Islands;  their 
Numiwr— Comoro— Mohilla—Mayotta— Johanna— Imports  and  Exports— Anchorage  Fees,  Presents,  ^c. 
Provisions  and  Refrcshmenls—Socotra — Provisions  and  Refreshment*— Aloes,  their  Kinds,  and  Directions 
how  to  chuse  them. 