

MOMRAS. 

This  port  is  formed  hy  an  arm  of  the  sea.  Into  which  fall  several  small  rivers,  and  this  narrow  arm, 
or  iidet,  extends  round  Moinhas  island,  which  is  situated  inside  of  the  two  points  that  form  the  entrance. 
M’he  town  and  fort  arc  on  the  island,  a little  within  the  harbour,  in  latitude  about  4'^  4 South,  and  longitude 
4<)°  2 East.  The  town  is  large,  and  many  of  the  liouses  handsome  and  well  built;  the  streets  are  straight 
and  narrow;  the  fort  is  strong,  and  well  furnished  with  cannon.  The  Portuguese,  under  Vasco  de  Gama, 
arrived  here  April  7,  1197.  In  1507,  Almeida,  on  MS  way  to  India,  sent  his  vessels  to  sound  the  harbour;  they 
were  fired  upon  from  the  shore,  in  revenge  for  which,  he  burnt  the  shipping,  landed  his  troops,  plundered  the 
town,  and  reduced  the  greater  pait  of  it  to  ashes.  It  was  afterwards  rebuilt,  hut  plundered  a second  time 
by  D’Acunlia  in  1529,  and  the  fort  which  was  strong,  they  took  possession  of,  and  retained  till  about 
1(531,  when  the  King  of  the  country  having  a quarrel  with  them,  retook  it  hy  storm,  and  put  all  the 
Christians  in  tlie  country  to  death.  Since  that  period,  few  European  vessels  visit  this  part  of  the  coast, 
more  particularly  Mombas,  where  the  Government  has  in  general  endeavoured  to  allure  and  seize  the  Eu- 
ropean ships  that  touched  here  for  provisions.  In  the  event  of  a ship  being  in  want  of  water  or  other  arti- 
cles, she  ought  to  proceed  to  Zanzibar,  which  is  preferable  to  any  other  port  on  the  coast,  and  there  is  less 
chance  of  treacheiy,  it  being  under  the  government  of  Muscat,  and  more  civilized.  There  is  a great  trade 
carried  on  here,  and  the  place  is  much  f’requented  by  Arab  vessels  from  the  neighbouring  places. 

MELINDA. 

This  town  is  in  latitude  about  South,  and  longitude  4P2  East;  it  is  large,  and  had  formerly  a 
number  of  Portuguese  churches,  and  other  large  buildings,  which  are  now  in  ruins.  The  town  is  repre- 
sented as  being  large,  the  houses  built  of  stone,  many  of  them  handsome,  which,  with  the  numerous 
mosques,  look  well  from  the  sea.  The  place  of  anchorage  is  at  a considerable  distance  from  the  town;  the 
coast  liere  is  very  shallow,  notwithstanding  which,  it  is  a place  of  considerable  traffic.  Vessels  from  the 


PATTE— JUBA— BRAVA. 


67 


Red  Sea,  Persia,  and  the  northern  parts  of  India  frequent  the  place,  the  trade  with  the  Interior  being  very 
brisk.  Vasco  de  Gama  visited  this  place,  Apnl  13,  1498,  where  he  was  kindly  received,  and  furnished 
with  pilots  to  proceed  to  India,  lii  a few  years  afterwards,  in  consequence  of  some  olfenee  taken  by  th(! 
Portuguese,  they  plundered  and  destroyed  the  town;  it  was,  however,  rebuilt,  and  made  tributary  to  them, 
and  they  remained  here  till  expelled  by  the  Arabs,  about  the  year  1698. 