

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Cattle,  and  many  other  articles  of  provision  are  here  plentiful,  and  reasonable ; but  as  the  trade  ii 
carried  on  in  native  vessels,  Europeans  seldom  visit. 

PATTE. 

This  town  is  situated  at  tlie  west  end  of  an  island  of  the  same  name,  in  latitude  2^  2 South,  and  Ion- 
gitude  41®  24f'  East;  it  is  surrounded  with  shoals,  and  in  the  event  of  a ship  stopping  here,  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  wait  for  a pilot  to  take  her  to  the  anchorage,  which  is  six  miles  to  the  southward  of  the  town.  The 
place  was  visited  by  the  Portuguese  about  1.503;  here  they  settled  a factory,  which  enabled  them  to  carry 
on  a considerable  trade  in  India  goods,  taking  in  return,  cowries,  elephants'  teeth,  &c.  About  1092,  the 
Arabs  expelled  them  from  hence,  and  prohibited  commerce  with  all  other  nations;  it  is  therefore  seldom 
visited  by  Europeans. 


JUBA. 

This  town  is  situated  on  an  eminence  near  the  side  of  Rogues  River,  in  latitude  0®  12  South, 
and  longitude  43®  2 East.  It  is  composed  of  a few  huts.  The  river  has  a bur,  and  the  surf  beats 
high  upon  it;  boats  may  pass  over  it  at  high  water  in  the  fair  season,  but  the  perfidy  of  the  natives  should 
exclude  European  ships  touching  at  this  place.  Ilis  Majesty's  .ships  Leopard  and  Orestes  before  men- 
tioned,  anchored  here  in  1798,  expecting  to  procure  a supply  of  water:  two  of  their  boats  upset  in  the 
surf,  and  although  the  natives  at  first  appeared  in  a supplicating  manner,  they  soon  collected  in  num- 
bers, and  assaulting  the  boats'  crews,  killed  several  men,  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  the  remainder 
were  saved. 


BRAVA. 

This  town  is  situated  close  to  the  sea  in  latitude  1®  12'  North,  and  longitude  4i®  10  East.  Near 
it  are  several  small  islands  which  break  off  tlie  sea,  and  there  is  on  one  of  them  a pagoda  or  tower,  resem- 
bling a light-house.  Inside  these  islands  the  small  vessels  lie  sheltered,  and  ships  anchor  outside  in  7 or  8 
fathoms.  In  1.503  tliis  jilace  became  tributary  to  the  Portuguese,  in  consec|uence  of  their  having  captured 
a number  of  tlie  principal  inhabitants  in  sonic  vessels  at  sea,  and  who  agreed  to  pay  annually  .500  nietigals 
of  gold.  In  1508  the  inhabitants  having  failed  in  the  payment  of  the  tribute,  the  Portuguese  attacked, 
and  took  the  place  by  storm,  committed  the  greatest  cruelties  upon  the  inlnahitants,  and  plunilered  and 
burnt  the  city,  which  was  then  described  as  large,  and  a place  of  great  trade;  at  prt*s(*iit,  it  apjiears  well 
built,  but  being  in  posses.sion  of  the  Arabs,  it  is  seldom  visited  by  jMiropeans.  Cattle,  and  goats  arc  plentiful 
here,  and  in  the  neighbourhood. 