


MADAGASCAR. 

This  island,  which  is  one  of  the  largest  in  the  world,  extends  from  Cape  St.  Mary,  its  southern  ex- 
tremity,  in  latitude  25°  40  South,  and  longitude  45°  16' East,  in  a N.  N.  E.  direction  to  Cape  Amber, 
its  northern  extremity,  which  is  in  latitude  12°  2'  South ; it  is  about  100  leagues  from  the  coast  of 
Africa,  and  the  .sea  between,  which  is  denominated  the  Mosambique  Channel,  is  much  frequented  by 
ships  proceeding  to  India,  more  particularly  those  bound  to  Bombay. 

Tlie  western  side  of  the  island  contains  many  bays  and  harbours  but  little  known ; the  only  one 
resorted  to  by  the  outward-bound  h'ast  India  Ships,  is 

ST.  AUGUSTINE’S  B.\Y. 

At  the  entrance  of  this  bay,  about  two  miles  from  the  .southern  shore,  is  Sandy  island,  which  is 
in  latitude  2.3°  .39  South,  and  longitude  44°  0 East.  After  passing  it,  and  standing  to  the  eastward, 
you  sec  a high  land  close  to  the  .sea,  on  the  South  side  of  the  bay,  and  another  high  land  in  the  in- 
terior; the  entrance  of  Dartmouth  River  is  then  open  to  you. 

This  part  of  the  island  is  subject  to  the  King  of  Baba,  who  resides  in  a town  built  with  mud,  about 
12  miles  from  St.  Augustine's  Bay.  On  a ship  anchoring,  some  of  the  King's  people  come  off,  whom  they 
call  pursers,  and  who  in  general  adopt  English  names  and  titles,  such  as  Prince  of  Wales,  Duke  of  Kent,  &e. 
Some  small  presents  are  necessary  for  permission  to  procure  provisions,  See.  and  should  the  King  come 
off,  it  will  be  requisite  to  salute  him  on  his  arrival  and  departure. 

This  i.s  an  excellent  place  fur  refreshments,  more  particularly  provisions.  The  bullocks  beuig  large 
and  fat,  weigh  from  6 to  700 lbs.  each;  they  hare  all  a hump  on  the  shoulders  similar  to  the  Indian  cattle# 
They  are  procured  by  barter  for  English  commodities.  The  foUowing  is  an  account  of  the  expence  incurred 
by  a ship's  stay  here,  by  a gentleman  who  visited  the  bay  some  years  since. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE'S  BAY. 


71 


AKTICEES  OF  TRADE. 


Gunpowder. 

Small  looking-glasses. 
Brass  nails. 

Brass  pots. 


Muskets. 
OomiMon  sfissars. 
Razors. 

Tin  tea-kettles. 


Pewter  tankards. 

Iron  pots  ot*'2ui  p;allons, 
Pow(U‘r  horns. 

Flints. 


Glass  beads  of  five  colours,  vtz,  green,  yellow,  white,  transparent,  and  orange.  Airangoes  about  3 
inches  long,  bored,  and  artificial  coral  beads.  Siber  is  in  great  request  among  them  ; they  make  it  into 
bracelets  for  the  women,  and  it  is  in  general  preferred  to  gold. 

On  our  first  arrival  they  asked  8 Spanish  dollars  for  a bullock,  or  8 measures  of  gunpowder,  each  9 
pounds,  or  one  musket ; but  latterly  they  were  purchased  for  2 measures  each,  anil  one  measure  for  a cow, 
and  sometimes  a powder-horn  for  one ; these  horns  should  be  black  and  w hite,  and  the  musket-stocks 
very  brown  ; a fat  sheep  may  be  had  for  a measure  of  powder,  and  two  goats  for  the  saine. 