


K 2 


68 


MAGADOXA— BARBORA— ZEILA. 


MAGADOXA 

• 

Is  the  principal  town  on  this  part  of  the  coast  of  Africa;  it  is  in  latitude  2®  8'  North,  and  longitude 
46°  30'  East;  it  is  easily  known  by  three  remarkable  mosques  in  the  middle  of  it,  resembling  towers. 
There  is  a reef  of  coral  rocks  fronting  the  town,  having  a sandy  beach  inside  of  it.  Vasco  de  Gama,  on 
his  return  from  India,  saw  this  town,  Feb.  2,  1499,  but  did  not  land.  It  is  described  ‘‘  appearing  very 
‘‘  large  and  handsome,  surrounded  with  walls,  and  in  the  middle  a great  palace,  that  stood  very  high.” 
Magadoxa  is  the  only  place  on  this  coast  that  resisted  the  arms  of  the  Portuguese  with  effect,  as  it  does  not 
appear  they  were  ever  able  to  make  an  impression  upon  it.  Of  all  the  conquests  which  do  so  much  credit  to 
their  valour,  and  so  little  to  their  policy,  Mosambique  is  the  principal  and  almost  only  possession  which 
has  survived  the  wreck  of  their  empire  on  the  East  Coast  of  Africa,  and  from  which  they  have  been  expelled 
by  the  natives,  without  the  aid  of  any  European  power. 

The  inhabitants  are  hostile  to  Europeans.  In  1700,  the  Albemarle  East  Indiaman  anchored  off  the 
town,  and  sent  her  boat  on  shore,  which  was  seized  by  the  inhabitants,  and  they  fired  on  the  long  boat 
whilst  endeavouring  to  open  a communication  for  the  recovery  of  it. 

Between  Magadoxa  and  tlie  north-easternmost  extremity  of  Africa,  Cape  Guardafui,  which  is  in  lati- 
tude 11®  ,50'  North,  and  longitude  ,51°  32'  East,  there  are  no  ports  visited  by  Europeans.  On  the  coast 
between  Cape  Guardafui  and  the  Straits  of  Babclmandel,  are  Barbora  and  Zeila. 

BARBORA. 

This  town  is  situated  on  an  island  at  the  bottom  of  a bay,  in  latitude  about  10®  45'  North,  and  lon- 
gitude 4*6°  15  East.  It  is  a place  of  considerable  trade,  and  has  been  alw^ays  a kind  of  rival  in  commerce  to 
Zeila,  and  a great  fair  is  annually  held  hen*  from  October  till  April,  the  caravans  from  the  interior  coming 
in  during  that  period,  'fhe  first  is  uhvaj^s  the  largest;  it  is  said  to  bring  down  15,000bahars  of  gum  arabic,  each 
320 lbs.  also  all  the  myrrh  that  is  consumed,  about  2,000  bahars;  the  first  produces  about  15  dollars,  and 
the  latter  22  dollars  per  huhar.  Olibunum  is  chiefly  produced  on  the  coast  between  Barbora  and  Cape 
Guardafui;  it  is  exported  from  a small  port  near  Cape  Felix,  in  Arab  vessels,  and  is  usually  sold  at  about  12 
dollars  the  baliar.  A small  proportion  of  these  articles  finds  its  way  to  Bombay,  and  from  thence  to  Eu- 
rope; the  larger  proportion  goes  up  the  Red  Sea  to  Egypt,  and  some  is  consumed  in  Arabia  and  Persia. 
From  the  fair  at  Barbora,  Arabia  draws  considerable  quantities  of  ghee,  a great  number  of  slaves,  horses, 
mules,  and  asses,  the  returns  for  which  arc  made  in  India  piece-goods,  generally  sold  at  a great  profit. 
Thera  are  many  Banians  from  Mocha,  Aden,  and  various  parts  of  India,  who  carry  on  a trade  with  their 
respi‘ctlve  ports.  Many  chiefs  in  the  interior  send  down  caravans  of  their  own  to  purchase,  with  gold, 
elephants'^  teeth,  &e.  the  produce  and  manufactures  of  India. 