

PASSANDAVA 

Is  a large  bay,  of  a square  form,  extending  6 leagues  to  the  southward.  The  town  is  at  the  bottom 
of  the  bay,  in  latitude  13^  45'  South,  and  longitude  48^  23  East. 

Bullocks  and  other  refreshments,  wood  and  water,  may  be  procured  in  great  plenty,  and  on  reasonable 
terms.  The  inhabitants  are  shy  of  strangers,  until  acquainted  with  their  business;  but  they  seem  to  be  an 
inoffensive,  and  fail*  dealing  people.  The  inhabitants  of  Johanna  affirm,  that  their  villages  are  plundered 
and  destroyed,  and  many  of  their  people  cruelly  maimed  or  massacred  by  the  natives  of  Madagascar,  who 
come  over  in  boats  to  plunder  and  prey  upon  them. 

From  Passandava  Bay  to  Cape  Amber,  the  northern  extremity  of  the  island,  there  docs  not  appear 
any  place  of  resort  for  shipping.  The  ports  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  island  are  seldom  visited  by  English 
ships,  except  occasionally  tn  war  time,  when  our  cruisers  arc  in  search  of  French  vessels  from  the  Mauri- 
tius, or  stand  in  need  of  refreshments. 

The  principal  places  on  the  east  side,  are  Fort  Dauphin,  Manouro,  Tamatave,  Foul  Point,  St.  Mary’s 
Island,  and  Antongil  Bay. 

FORT  DAUPHIN 

Is  in  latitude  85®  5'  South,  and  longitude  46®  35'  East.  Tlie  fort  commands  the  road,  being  150  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea;  it  is  a long  square,  encompassed  with  walls  of  lime  and  gravel  well  cemented,  and 
might  easily  be  made  secure  against  the  islanders,  but  the  situation  is  unhealthy.  This  part  of  Madagascar 
b very  populous;  almost  all  the  villages  are  situated  on  eminences,  and  surrounded  with  two  rows  of  strong 
palisadoes,  somewhat  in  the  manner  of  fences,  composed  of  hurdles  and  turf;  within  is  a parapet  of  solid 
earth,  about  4-feet  in  height  Large  pointed  bamboos  placed  at  some  distance  from  each  other,  form  a kind 
of  loop  holes,  which  contribute  towards  the  defence  of  these  villages,  some  of  which  are  besides  surrounded 
with  a deep  ditch,  Thb  country  being  under  the  command  of  several  chiefs,  great  caution  in  your  con- 
duct must  be  observed. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks,  poultry,  and  other  provisions  are  abundant,  and  at  reasonable  prices ; water  is  got  at  the 

landing-place,  by  digging  in  the  sand ; it  is  very  indifferent,  and  will  only  serve  lor  cooking  and  the  stock, 

but  at  a short  distance  inland,  there  are  several  springs  of  veiy  excellent  water. 

$ 


MANOUEO. 

This  village  is  situated  at  the  mouth  of  a river,  in  latitude  about  20®  South;  it  consists  of  a small 
number  of  huts,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  the  French  occupy  a small  piece  of  ground,  enclosed  by 

L 


74 


TAMATAVE— FOUL  POINT— ST.  MARV’S  TSLAXI). 