

Bullocks  are  to  be  procured  here;  they  are  small,  and  not  in  abundance.  Rice,  paddy,  plantain  trees, 
and  fruit  of  various  kinds  are  to  be  got,  and  the  sea  abounds  with  fish. 

The  body  of  Mohilla  is  in  latitude  about  12®  20'  South,  and  longitude  43®  50 . 

MAYOTTA 

Is  the  southernmost  of  these  islands,  and  being  surrounded  with  reefs,  is  less  frequented,  and  tess 
known  than  the  others;  at  its  N.  W.  end  there  is  a saddle  island,  like  that  of  the  N.  W.  point  of  Johanna, 
from  which  circumstance  this  island  lias  occasionally  been  mistaken  for  Johanna.  The  town  and  anchorage 
is  about  five  miles  S.  E.  by  E.  from  that  island,  and  is  remarkable  by  a bluff  head,  with  rocks  overhanging 
the  sea,  which  may  be  mistaken  for  a ship  at  anchor  close  in  shore.  Here  water  and  refreshments  can 
be  procured,  but  it  is  attended  with  danger.  On  the  South  part  of  Mayotta,  is  a sharp  conical  mountain, 
called  Valentine’s  Peak,  which  is  in  latitude  12®  54  South,  and  longitude  45®  14'  East. 

JOHANNA. 

This  island,  which  is  now  much  frequented  by  European  ships  for  refreshments,  on  their  outward- 
bound  voyage,  is  of  a triangular  form,  and  the  bay  and  anchorage  is  between  its  two  North  points,  in  lati- 
tude 12®  7 South,  and  longitude  44®  30  East,  The  best  anchorage  is  about  three  miles  to  the  westward 


JOHANNA. 


77 


of  the  town,  abreast  of  a range  of  cocoa-nut  trees,  called  Brown’s  garden,  near  the  sea,  having  a large  black 
rock  to  the  eastward,  between  them  and  the  town,  with  the  rivulet  where  water  is  procured,  at  their  western 
extremity;  the  bearing,  when  at  anchor,  is  the  rivulet  S.  by  W.  and  the  mosque  East,  rall\er  more  than  a 
quarter  of  a mile  from  the  shore. 

The  town  of  Johanna  is  near  three  quarters  of  a mile  long,  close  to  the  sea  side,  and  contains 
about  two  hundred  houses,  each  of  which  is  enclosed  with  a wall,  or  paling  made  with  a sort  of 
reed;  the  alleys  or  streets  are  intricate;  the  better  kind  of  houses  are  built  of  stone,  with  a court 
yard,  having  a portico  to  shield  them  from  the  sun,  and  one  lofty  room,  where  they  receive  their  guests, 
which  is  ornamented  with  small  pieces  of  looking  glass,  China  ware,  &c.  and  such  furniture  as  they  pro- 
cure occasionally  from  ships  stopping  here.  The  King  resides  about  nine  miles  in  the  interior,  seldom  vi- 
siting  the  sea-side,  unless  on  the  arrival  of  a ship  in  the  roads,  which  he  generally  visits,  and  it  is  customary, 
on  his  arrival  and  departure,  to  salute  him  with  five  guns,  and  some  presents  are  necessary  for  himself  and 
his  attendants,  when  permission  is  obtained  for  procuring  provisions  and  refresliments.  Tlie  island  is  said 
to  contain  about  10,000  inhabitants;  those  on  the  coast  are  Mahometans.  They  carry  on  a considerable 
trade  in  their  trankeys  with  Arabia:  these  are  vessels  from  70  to  100  tons  each,  and  carry  cocoa-nuts, 
cowries,  and  occasionally  a few  slaves.  From  this  trade,  the  natives  of  Johanna  have  learned  the  use  of  money 
in  purchasing  piece-goods,  and  other  Indian  commodities  from  the  Arabs,  which  Ibrmerly  they  were  igno- 
rant of. 