

BEMBATOOK  BAY 

Is  liira;e  und  safe;  the  entrance  is  in  latitude  15®  43'  South,  and  longitude  4G®  28  East,  and  is  about 
3 miles  wide.  On  the  east  side  of  the  entrance  is  the  village  Majuinga.  Bembatook  town  is  on  the  south  side 
of  a point  of  the  same  name,  about  3 leagues  within  the  entrance  of  the  bay  on  the  east  side:  here  ships 
may  lay  land-locked  and  sheltered  from  all  winds,  close  under  the  point  near  the  town.  Captain  Inverarity, 
who  visited  this  bay  during  a trading  voyage,  in  1802,  says— ‘‘ Should  the  Englisli  Government  over  intend 
« to  have  a settlement  on  this  island  of  consequence,  I should  certainly  recommend  Bembatook  as  one  of 
“ the  most  commodious,  healthy,  and  easy  of  access,  it  being  near  the  capital  ol  the  country,  the  King  of 
“ which  is  cordial  to  strangers,  and  supplied  with  as  fine  beef  as  any  in  the  world,  at  the  moderate  price 
of  from  one  to  two  dollars  each  bullock.  The  merchant  would  also  find  this  a most  excellent  situation 
**  for  trade,  the  country  su|)plyiiig  many  commodities,  as  well  as  a sale  for  East  India  goods.  The  French 
purchase  in  this  part  of  the  island,  with  dollars  brought  for  that  purpose,  their  slaves  and  cattle,  which  are 
‘‘  drove  across  to  Fort  Dauphin  by  the  natives  of  the  Ft)rt  Dauphin  district,  the  French  putting  implicit 
“ faith  in  those  men,  who  seldom  betray  tlieir  trust.  At  Bembatook,  beef  may  be  salted,  as  well  as  at 
Fort  Dauphin,  where  tlie  French  salt  provisions  for  their  European  ships,  as  well  as  their  colonial  con-. 
“ sumption.  There  is  no  pork  to  be  had  here,  except  the  wild  hog,  which  is  in  great  plenty.  Rice  may 
‘‘  be  bad  in  any  quantity,  at  two  gamels  a dollar,  the  gamel  weighing  38 lbs.  avoirdupois.  It  is  necessary 
« to  speak  in  time  to  the  natives,  as  the  grain  is  generally  purchased  here  in  paddy,  and  beat  out  as  they 
‘‘  consume  it.'*' 

This  place  is  frequented  by  the  Arabs  from  Muscat  and  the  neighbouring  places^  who  cairy  on  a small 
trade  here,  and  Arabic  is  spoken  by  many  of  the  natives. 

NEW  MASSALEGE 

Is  situated  on  the  right  side  of  a river,  in  latitude  15®  30'  South;  there  is  a bar  at  the  entrance  which 
precludes  large  vessels  from  going  up.  The  town  is  large,  and  there  is  a mud  fort,  with  many  cannon 
mounted.  The  King,  who  resides  here,  appears  the  most  powerful  on  the  island ; his  palace  is  built  in  the 
European  style,  and  has  two  stories,  with  a reserve  of  arms,  and  many  articles  of  furniture  from  Europe, 


PASSANDAVA— FORT  DAUPHIN— MANOURO. 


7S 


such  as  tables,  chairs,  looking  glasses,  &c.  In  the  bay,  facing  the  river,  there  is  good  anchorage;  there  is 
also  a small  island,  which  is  very  commodious  for  refitting  and  repairing  ships,  and  on  which  they  once 
permitted  the  French  to  form  an  establishment.  There  are  several  Arab  families  settled  here,  who  con- 
struct  small  vessels,  and  trade  to  Persia  and  Arabia,  touching  at  the  Comoro  Islands  for  refreshments. 
These  Arabs  are  the  only  inhabitants  who  know  how  to  navigate  the  open  sea,  and  they  serve  as  pilots  to 
the  ships  approaching  to,  or  departing  from  the  coast.  When  the  King  pays  a visit  to  a ship,  he  generally 
brings  a present  of  two  bullocks,  some  poultry,  and  vegetables,  and  expects  in  return  the  usual  acknow- 
ledgments of  muskets,  coarse  linen,  flints,  &c. 