

The  water  is  very  gootl,  and  is  generally  procured  from  the  rivulet,  at  the  extremity  of  Brown's  gar- 
den ; it  is  got  very  exjtcditiously  by  laying  down  a small  anchor  midway  between  the  shore  and  the  ship, 
for  the  boats  to  haul  off  when  loaded:  by  this  means  100  butts  might  be  procured  in  forty-eight  hours. 
Firewood  is  scarce. 

This  place  is  admirably  well  suited  for  jn  ocuring  refreshments,  and  recovering  the  health  of  scorbutic 
people,  provided  they  arc  debarred  an  immoderate  use  of  fruit,  and  arc  not  permitted  to  sleep  on  shore. 


SOCOTRA. 

This  island  is  about  40  leagues  to  the  eastward  of  Cape  Guardafui;  it  extends  nearly  E.  S.  E.  and 
W.N.W.  is  27  leagues  long,  and  7 broad,  and  in  general  compo.sed  of  high  and  mountainous  land 
There  are  two  anchoring  places,  generally  used  according  to  the  prevailing  monsoon;  that  on  the  S W 
side  of  the  island,  is  called  Delisa;  it  is  seldom  visited.  Provisions  may  be  procured,  but  the  water  is  un 
palatable.  The  Bay  of  Tamarida,  on  the  N.  E.  side  of  the  island,  where  the  King  resides,  is  the  most 
eligible  place  for  refreshments;  it  is  in  latitude  12°  39  North,  and  longitude  53°  33  East.  The  anchorage  is 
in  10  to  12  fathoms,  the  body  of  the  town  bearing  South,  about  a mile  off  shore.  The  houses  are  built  of 
Stone  and  lime,  and  the  town,  having  .several  mosques,  makes  aJiandsome  appearance  from  the  ships 

This  island  was  discovered  by  the  Portuguese  in  1503:  in  1508  they  first  landed  here,  when  being 
offended  with  the  reply  to  their  demand,  of  the  island  In-coming  tributary  to  the  King  of  Portugal  they 

attacked  the  fort,  which  wa,  but  an  indlflerent  one,  and  after  much  resistance  from  the  natives,  they  took 
it^  putting  the  garrison  to  the  sword. 

This  island  was  oceasion.-illy  visited  by  our  earlier  voyagers  for  aloes.  The  price  in  1610  was  35  to 
38  dollars  per  quintal  ol  104lbs.  Dragon’s  blood  is  sometimes  to  be  met  with  in  small  quantities. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

B"llock>,  li>k,  .ihI  are  to  b,  procund  here  at  reasooable  price.,  nd  the  iababitut,  m 
« generd  e.yJ  to  .t^-^  The  »ot,  r » rer,  good,  u,d  » got  f™,  a .mall  madjr  mdW,  dKl«t . mar. 
ter  of  a mile  from  the  town.  Firewood  is  scarce,  and  procured  with  difficulty.  ' ^ 


ALOES. 


79 


Aloes  are  a bitter,  gummy,  resinous  juice,  prepared  from  a plant  of  tke  same  name,  which  grows  in 
several  parts  of  the  world,  of  which  there  are  four  sorts,  viz.  Socotrine,  Hepatic,  Horse,  and  Cape. 

ALOES  SOCOTRINE 

This  drug  is  brought  from  Socotra,  wrapped  in  skins;  it  is  of  a bright  suiface,  in  some  degree 
transparent,  of  a yellowisli  red  colour,  with  a purple  cast,  when  in  the  lump,  and  of  a golden  colour  when 
reduced  to  powder:  it  is  hard  and  friable  in  winter,  somewhat  plialile  in  summer,  and  soRens  between  the 
fingers.  Its  bitter  taste  is  accompanied  with  an  aromatic  flavour,  but  nut  sufficient  to  prevent  its  being 
disagreeable:  the  smell  is  not  very  unpleasant,  and  is  something  like  myrrh.  To  try  its  purity,  boil  four 
ounces  in  a quart  of  water,  and  it  will  dissolve  into  a dark  coloured  Hcpior:  if  adulterated,  the  impurities  will 
remain  undissolved.  If  in  the  package  of  this  drug  there  should  be  any  mixture  of  rubbish,  it  will  be 
more  advantageous  to  cleanse  it  in  India,  the  duty  being  paid  by  weight,  and  purity  much  advancing  the 
price.  The  packages  should  not  weigh  more  than  150  to  SOOlbs.  The  purchaser  should  expect  a 
considerable  loss  on  the  skins;  and  the  packages  should  be  greased,  to  prevent  the  aloes  from  sticking. 