


ST.  MARY^S  ISLAND, 

Called  by  (he  natives  Nossi  Ibrahim,  is  about  forty  miles  N.N.E.  from  Foul  Point,  and  extends  from 
17°  5'  South,  to  16°  33  in  a direction  about  N.E.  by  N.  On  the  West  side,  about  2 leagues  from  the 
South  point,  there  b a bay,  with  an  island,  called  Quail''s  island,  at  the  entrance;  on  it  the  French  settled 


ANTONGIL  BAY^OMOllO. 


75 


a factory  in  1740,  and  left  120  men  there,  who  were  three  months  aflerwa^d^  cut  oft  by  tlie  natives;  they» 
however,  repossessed  it  in  1743,  but  abandoned  it  in  17G1,  on  account  of  the  unhcaltJiiness  of  the  place. 

About  the  year  1696,  the  Englisli  pirates  who  infested  the  Indian  Seas,  established  a fortified  station 
here,  and  brought  in  their  prizes;  the  principal  of  whom  were  Kidd  and  Avery.  Kidd  was  taken  and 
hung  in  chains  at  Tilbury,  in  1701.  In  1702,  two  men  of  w'ar  were  sent  out  to  supjuess  them;  but  it 
was  many  years  before  their  depredations  were  eftectually  put  a stop  to. 

ANTONGIL  BAY, 

Called  Manghabees  by  the  natives,  takes  its  name  from  Antonio  Gil,  a Portuguese  captain,  by  whom 
it  was  discovered.  The  entrance  into  it  is  about  10  leagues  to  the  northward  of  St.  Mary’s  island;  it  is 
about  14  leagues  long  from  North  to  South,  and  8 broad  at  its  entrance  between  Cape  Bollones  and  Point 
Baldrick.  At  the  bottom  of  the  bay  are^everal  small  islands,  the  principal  of  which,  called  Marotte,  is 
about  a mile  in  extent,  and  the  same  space  from  the  shore;  it  is  situated  in  latitude  15®  25  South.  The 
common  anchorage  is  tg  the  northward  of  this  island,  at  the  distance  of  a musket  shot,  opposite  to  two 
small  sandy  coves,  in  11  or  12  fathoms.  Wood  and  water  are  procured  here  with  great  convenience,  and 
the  tents  may  be  erected  safer  than  on  the  main,  where  you  must  trade  for  provisions.  The  river 
bears  N.  N.  W.  from  Marotte,  and  is  navigable  by  boats.  The  anchorage  of  the  river  is  called  Port  Choi- 
seul,  and  from  hence  they  derived  part  of  their  supplies  for  the  Mauritius. 

Exclusive  of  the  places  described,  there  are  many  other  bays  and  harbours  on  the  East  Coast  of  Ma- 
dagascar, where  small  vessels  may  anchor  and  procure  refreshments,  although  not  so  convenient  for  large 
ships  as  those  already  specified.  ^ 

Madagascar  produces  few  articles  of  commerce.  The  French  have  occasionally  brought  from  thence 
a kind  of  spice,  called  by  the  natives,  Ravansera,  some  of  which  has  l)eeu  taken  by  our  cruizers,  and  put 
up  to  sale  at  the  East  India  sales.  It  is  thus  described: 

RAVANSERA 

Is  the  produce  of  a large  bushy  tree,  growing  on  various  parts  of  Madagascar,  having  a pyramidical 
head,  like  the  clove  tree,  and  a reddish  odorous  bark;  the  wood  is  hard,  heavy,  and  white,  with  some  red- 
dish fibres,  and  has  no  smell.  The  fruit  is  the  size  of  a large  cherry,  shaped  like  a pear,  with  a rouiidish 
body;  it  consists  of  a nut,  divided  into  six  parts,  in  the  same  manner  as  a walnut  into  four,  covered  with 
a hard  coriaceous  shell,  and  that  with  a green  shell  or  bark  very  closely  adhering  to  it;  both  these  are  aro- 
matic, but  the  nut  has  an  acrid  biting  taste,  which  is  almost  caustic.  The  natives  gather  it  before  it  is 
ripe,  and  use  it  as  a spice,  for  seasoning  their  meat;  it  ha.s  a fine  aromatic  smell  when  fresh,  and  the 
caustic  taste  may  be  abated  by  keeping  it  some  months,  after  which  it  may  be  thrown  into  boiling  w^ater 
for  four  or  five  minutes,  and  then  dried  in  the  .sun.  It  is  in  this  state  in  which  we  see  it. 