

COMORO  ISLANDS 

Are  four  in  number— Comoro  (which  gives  its  name  to  the  group),  Mohilla,  Mayotta,  and  Johanna. 

COMORO 

Is  the  largest  of  these  islands,  being  about  12  leagues  long,  and  5 or  6 broad.  The  anchorage  is  to 
the  N.  W.  of  the  island,  where  the  principal  town  is  situatAl,  in  latitude  about  11®  20  South.  The  town 
is  large,  and  full  of  cocoa-nut  trees,  with  a fine  smooth  sandy  beach  before  it;  it  is  the  only  place  where  a 
boat  can  land;  shoal  water  runs  off  about  a quarter  of  a mile,  and  at  low  water  you  cannot  go  ofl  with  a 
’ L2 


7(}  .MOHILLA—MAYOTTA— JOHANNA. 

boat.  Whenever  you  see  this  town,  send  boate  a-head;  for,  as  the  shore  is  boid  in  all  other  places,  you  would 
have  no  expecUtion  of  foul  ground  off  such  a fine  sandy  beach.  This  island  is  seldom  visited  by  Euro, 
peans,  Johanna  having  the  preference  of  all  the  others. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Very  excellent  bullocks  arc  to  be  procured  here  at  about  six  dollars  each,  likewbe  sheep  and  goats  at 
moderate  prices.  Oranges,  lemons,  and  plantains  are  to  be  had  for  knives.  No  water  can  be  procured. 

A present  is  necessary  to  the  King  or  Chief,  who  resides  at  the  town. 

MOHILLA, 

The  smallest  of  the  islands,  is  about  12  leagues  S.  E.  by  S.  from  Comoro,  and  at  one  time  was  consi- 
dered the  best  for  supplying  refreshments.  There  are  several  small  towns;  one  to  the  southward,  which  is 
reckoned  the  best  anchorage,  is  behind  some  small  islands;  another  to  the  northward : this  last  we  have  the 
most  general  account  of,  having  been  visited  by  one  of  the  Company’s  ships  in  1756.  The  town  is  situated 
on  a bluff  hillock  close  to  the  sea,  where  provisions  and  refreshments  were  procured;  the  bearings  at  anchor 
were,  the  town  S.S.  W.,  the  N.  W.  point  of  the  island  W.S.  W.  and  the  eastern  land  E.  by  S.  The  wa- 
tering-place is  about  200  yards  from  the  beach,  up  an  easy  ascent;  but  the  water  is  in  a kind  of  ravine, 
about  12  feet  deep,  and  being  too  steep  to  roll  casks  up,  they  are  filled  with  the  engine,  where  tliey  are  rolled 
with  great  ease  from  the  beach,  which  is  a soft  sand.  Tlie  run  of  water,  which  is  clear  and  constant  from 
the  mountains,  is  lost  about  ten  yards  below  wliere  the  casks  are  to  be  filled,  among  the  rocks  and  sand, 
and  may  be  observed  to  ooze  out  of  tl)e  beach  at  low  water;  there  is  a reef  of  rocks,  which  runs  from  the 
town  across  the  little  bay,  wliere  the  watering-place  is,  which  prevents  boats  working  the  last  quarter  ebb, 
and  the  first  quarter  flood. 

The  town,  where  the  King  resides,  is  about  4 leagues  S.  E.  by  S,  from  the  above  place ; but  the  coast 
is  very  dangerous,  and  ships  cannot  approach  within  two  miles  of  the  town,  where  there  is  a large  surf, 
which  would  make  it  difficult  and  dangerous  watering  there. 