


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


The  under-mentioned  European  articles  are  always  in  demand,  and  fetch  a handsome  price. 


Small  oval  looking  glasses. 
Ditto,  paper  mounted. 

Beads,  white,  blue,  and  yellow. 
Iron  in  rods  and  square  bars« 
Nails  of  various  sixes. 


Large  coarse  razors. 

Clasp  knives. 

Lascar  knives,  with  sheaths. 
Cloth,  red  and  blue. 

Skirts,  and  other  apparel 


Muskets. 

Pistols. 

Cutlasses. 

Gunpowder. 

Flints. 


But  the  people  of  Johanna  have  no  other  mode  of  payment  than  the  refreshments  received  in  barter, 
a mode  of  liquidation  which  will  be  found  favourable  to  any  of  the  Company’s  ships  who  may  call  here, 
since  the  attachment  of  the  inhabitants  to  the  British,  is  a great  incitement  to  their  dealing  lioncstly.  They 
have  but  few  dollars  among  them,  and  these  they  carefully  reserve  for  the  purchase  of  Surat  goods,  which 
are  occasionally  imported  in  vessels  from  Surat,  the  returns  for  which  are  usually  made  in  cowries,  red 
beetle  nut,  dammer,  wax,  cocoa-nuts,  and  corn. 


ANCHORAGE  FEES,  PRESENTS,  &c. 


The  presents  and  demands  under  the  head  of  Port  Charges  are,  to  the  King  a barrel  of  gunpowder,  a 
few  yards  of  scarlet  cloth,  and  two  or  three  muskets;  and  to  his  attendants,  who  mostly  assume  Englisli 
titles,  areasfollow: 


The  Prince  of  Wales  ...  15  dollars. 
The  Governor,  Duke  Burkit  2 ditto 
The  King’s  Purser  ....  20  ditto 


Governor  Abdallah  ....  5 dollars. 
Keeping  watering-place  in  order  5 ditto 
Watching  casks,  at  night  . . 1 ditto 


Independent  of  the  above,  the  Prince  of  Wales  asks  for,  and  expects  a barrel  of  gunpowder.  They 
have  likewise  faUen  upon  a method  of  soliciting  those  who  visit  the  island,  particularly  all  passefigers,  to 


JOHANNA— SOCOTRA. 


18 

contribute  a dolkir  or  two  towards  improving  the  navigation  which  they  carry  on  with  the  Continent  of 
Africa;  and  by  way  of  persuasive  example,  produce  lists  of  persons  who  Imve  subscribed  for  that  purpose, 
so  that  they  sometimes  collect  30  or  40  dollars  from  a ship;  and  when  the  commanders  leave  the  place, 
they  generally  procure  from  them  a certificate  of  good  usage. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  bullocks  here  are  very  excellent,  but  not  large,  seldom  weighing  more  than  4 cwt.  Goats  and 
poultry  may  also  be  procured;  and  excellent  yams,  and  sweet  potatoes  in  abundance;  the  prices  arc, 


Bullocks 10  dollars  each  Fowls 1 1- dollar  per  dozen. 

Rice,  per  bag  of  140  lbs.  ...  aj  ditto  Ducks 1 ditto 


Calavances 2 ditto  | Goat,  or  2 kids  ....  1 dollar  each. 

Of  fruits,  they  have  pine-apples  of  a most  delicious  flavour,  measuring  10  to  12  inches  in  circumfe- 
rence; oranges,  limes,  plantains,  guavas,  Stc.;  these  are  brought  off  by  the  natives  in  their  canoes,  and 
sold  to  the  ship’s  erew  for  knives,  old  clothes,  bottles,  &c. 