


palisadocs,  wherein  are  two  huts,  one  of  which  serves  as  a lodging,  and  the  other  is  employed  as  a magazine 
fur  rice,  and  other  commodities. 

Vessels  lie  sheltered  here  within  a reef,  extending  from  the  village  to  the  northward. 

In  this  part  of  the  island  numerous  herds  of  cattle,  and  much  poultry  are  reared.  More  rice  is  grown 
than  they  consume,  and  frequently  large  quantities  of  this  important  article  are  sent  to  tlie  Mauritius  and 
Bourbon. 

The  natives  manufacture  beautiful  mats,  and  from  the  fibres  of  a plant,  make  a fine  stuff  of  various 
coloured  stripes,  about  8 yards  long:  some  of  them  are  not  much  inferior  in  beauty  of  colour  to  silk,  but  are 
not  so  soft  and  pliant,  for  tliey  readily  cut  in  wearing;  they  likewise  manufacture  several  articles  from  the 
cotton  produced  on  the  island. 

TAMATAVE 

Is  in  latitude  about  18^  12  South.  The  French  had  a small  settlement  here,  to  procure  cattle,  &c. 
for  the  Islands  of  Mauritius  and  Bourbon,  which  was  taken  in  1811. 

FOUL  POINT. 

The  anchorage  here  is  formed  by  a large  reef,  which  begins  on  the  shore,  about  a mile  to  the  south- 
ward of  the  village,  and  extends  about  three  miles  N.N.E. 

Opposite  the  anchorage,  in  latitude  17^  4r  South,  and  longitude  49^  36'  East,  is  situated  a village 
of  considerable  magnitude,  named  Mahaveti  by  the  inhabitants;  here  the  French  possess  a piece  of 
ground,  surrounded  by  palisadoes,  where  they  have  a principal  house,  intended  as  a habitation  for  the  resi- 
dent of  the  company  established  in  the  Isle  of  France,  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  the  necessary  supply  of 
cattle  and  rice  for  the  use  of  that  colony.  The  King^'s  house  is  situated  at  the  western  extremity  of  the 
tillage,  and  is  composed  of  one  principal  story,  which  is  ascended  by  means  of  a ladder;  the  roof  is  covered 
with  leaves,  and  has  altogether  a very  mean  appearance.  It  is  surrounded  by  several  huts  appropriated 
to  tlie  accommodation  of  his  attendants  and  women. 

According  to  the  relation  of  a French  officer,  the  ships  of  that  nation  trade  witli  the  inhabitants  in  the 
following  manner. 

A male  or  female,  from  30  to  4ft  ...  2 muskets,  2 cartouch  boxes,  10  flints  and 


10 balls;  or  1,500 bolls;  or  1,700 flints. 

A bullock 1 musket,  or  12  to  15  lbs.  of  powder. 

A heifer 2 cartouch  boxes,  or  lOlbs.  ditto 

2 heifers 1 musket. 

1 fat  capon  1 knife,  or  7 balls,  or  a pair  of  scissors. 

1 fowl  8 needles,  or  4 balls,  or  6 flints. 


and  fruits,  vegetables,  and  other  small  articles,  for  buttons,  flints,  needles,  &c. 

Plenty  of  bullocks,  large  and  fat,  are  to  be  procured  here,  with  other  refreslunents.  To  the  southward 
if,  the  village  is  a small  river,  where  vessels  obtain  fresh  water;  but  a boat  cannot  proceed  into  it  at4ow 
water  in  consequence  of  a bar. 