

M 


62 


MASSUAH. 


stone,  with  cupolas  at  top,  but  of  rude  workmanship;  to  the  southward  of  the  town  are  a number  of  large 
tanks  for  water.  Vessels  from  Massuah  and  other  places  occasionally  come  here  to  trade. 

MASSUAH. 

This  Bay  is  in  latitude  15®  31'  North,  and  longitude  39®  37  East,  on  the  North  side  of  the  high  land 
of  Gedam,  having  a town,  called  Arkeeko,  in  the  southern  part  of  it,  where  A’essels  may  anchor  in  10  or  13 
fathoms,  and  be  sheltered  from  most  winds.  Massuah  is  situated  on  a small  island  close  to  the  Abyssinian 
ahore.  The  fortifications  are  trifling;  the  houses  are  surrounded  by  fences  of  reeds;  the  rooms  are 
detached,  and  built  of  the  same;  within  they  are  lined  with  mats.  'Fhe  inhabitants  arc  very  civil,  but  are 
importunate  beggars,  and  occasionally  thieves.  The  chief  resides  clueily  at  Arkeeko,  where  he  has  a good 
house,  although  the  place  is  not  so  pleasant.  Massuali  is  the  principal  seaport  of  Abyssinia;  and  were  the 
trade  to  be  turned  into  any  other  channel,  it  would  sink  into  insignificance.  The  Portuguese,  in  1526, 
reduced  this  place.  There  are  about  30  tanks  for  water,  which  are  filled  in  the  rainy  season,  but  they  are 
not  sufficient  for  the  supply  of  the  place,  and  much  water  is  daily  brought  by  boats  from  Arkeeko. ' The 
landing-place  is  at  a pier  close  to  the  town,  to  w^hich  boats  can  come  with  ease.  Though  this  place  may 
be  considered  as  situated  in  a very  plentiful  country,  yet  all  the  necessaries  of  life  are  dear. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  ani>  MEASURES. 


Venetians  do  not  pass  current.  Dollars,  and  glass  beads,  called  cantarro,  of  all  kinds  and  colovirar, 
perfect  and  broken,  pass  for  small  money,  and  are  called  in  their  language,  boorjookes. 


3 of  which,  or  grains 
10  Kibcers 

4 Duvanis 
23  Duliabs 


> make  •< 


1 Kibcer. 

1 Duvani. 

1 Ilarf',  or  Dahab. 

1 Dollar,  or  Patack. 


The  value  of  the  dollar  is  therefore  2,760  bourjookes,  or  beads;  the  fraction  of  the  patack  is  the  half 
and  quarter. 

The  Massuah  vakia  is  to  the  Mocha,  as  5 to  6. 

The  Cuba  is  a wooden  measure,  containing  62  cubic  inches  of  rain  water.  The  dram  is  called  caffla, 
.10  of  which  make  a vakia. 


IMPORTS. 

The  trade  carried  on  with  Mocha  and  Judda  is  considerable;  the  value  of  goods  imported  into  Mas- 
suah, is  estimated  at  400,000  dollars  per  annum,  exclusive  of  cotton  wool,  which  is  purchased  by  the 
Abyssinians,  and  of  which  three  ships’  cargoes  may  be  disposed  of  in  a year.  No  merchant  here  has  capital 
sufficient  to  enable  him  to  purchase  a cargo,  nor  even  a large  proportion  of  it;  but  experience  has  given 
rise  to  a confidence  in  the  honour  of  the  dealers,  which  justifies  the  captain  of  a ship  in  trusting  his  pro- 
perty into  their  hands.  The  Banians  here  are  comfortable,  some  of  them  men  of  good  property;  Hadje 
Hassan,  or  Currum  Chund,  would  receive  a cargo,  and  consider  themselves  responsible  for  the  whole; 
they  would  dispose  of  it  in  smaller  quantities,  to  people  whom  they  know  worthy  of  credit,  who  would  de- 
part with  it  into  the  interior,  and  in  about  three  mofiths  return  with  the  value  in  gold  and  other  goo;^* 
’The  principal  articles  of  import  are  as  follow: 