


BADOUR. 

Here  the  Dola  resides.  It  is  a miserable  little  place,  one  small  mosque  being  the  only  stone  building; 
the  rest  are  grass  huts.  There  is  no  trade,  exc(‘pt  an  export  of  ghee,  and  some  tortoise-shell.  The  dows 
come  this  way  from  Suakin  and  Massiiah,  for  fear  of  the  Wahabees.  Cattle  are  in  great  plenty;  sheep 
and  poultry  are  also  in  abundance;  the  prices  demanded  are,  however,  high.  Bullocks  5 to  7 dollars  each. 
Fowls,  8 for  a dollar.  Sheep  more  reasonable,  a good  fat  one  being  procured  for  a dollar.  Money  is  but 
little  known  here,  white  Surat  cloths  being  more  valuable,  as  two  pieces,  each  of  a dollar,  woidd  purchiise 
a bullock,  Water  is  to  he  had,  which,  though  not  very  good,  is  equal  to  that  of  Mocha. 


SUAKIN. 

This  town  is  situated  on  a small  island,  in  latitude  19°  .5  North,  and  longitude  37°  33  East;  the 
port  is  deemed  one  of  the  best  in  the  Red  Sea.  It  was  formerly  very  important,  and  extremely  opulent. 
A Portuguese  writer,  who  visited  it  about  154/),  thus  describes  it: 

‘"Suakin  is  at  present  one  of  tlie  richest  dtic.s  in  the  East,  standing  near  the  coast  of  Abyssinia;  it 
equals,  if  not  exceeds  tlic  most  eminent  places,  in  the  goodness  and  security  of  its  harbour,  facility  in 
“ lading  and  unlading  ships,  traffic  with  remote  countries,  strength  and  advantageous  situation  of  the 
“ town,  &c.  The  harbour  is  slieltered  by  nature  from  all  winds,  and  the  waters  are  so  sniootli  and  still, 
“ that  the  tides  are  scarcely  perceptible.  It  is  capable  of  containing  200  large  shij)s,  besides  a prodigious 
“ number  of  gallics;  the  road  is  from  5 to  10  fathoms  deep,  the  ships  come  up  close  to  the  shore,  quite 
“ round  the  city,  and  may  be  laden,  by  laying  a plank  from  them  to  the  warehouses  of  the  merchants.” 

With  respect  to  commerce,  it  traded  at  that  time  to  the  Peninsula  of  India,  the  Arabian  and  Persian 
Gulls,  and  other  countries.  Since  the  above  period,  this  place  has  fallen  under  the  dominion  of  the 
Turks,  and  has  lost  its  commerce  and  consequence,  and  is  now  only  kept  from  total  ruin,  by  the  caravans 
which  still  come  annmdly  from  the  interior  of  Africa,  in  their  way  to  Mecca.  The  town  is  nearly  in  ruins; 
two  mosque.s  give  it  a handsome  a])pcarance  at  a distance,  and  the  buildings  being  whitewashed,  and  on  an 
elevation,  look  much  better  than  they  really  are.  It  covers  the  whole  of  a small  island,  as  it  did  in  former 
times ; but  instead  of  a number  of  ships,  tliere  are  only  a few  miserable  dows  anchored  alongside  the  houses. 
A trade  is,  however,  carried  on  with  Hodeida,  Mocha,  and  Judda,  for  slaves,  horses,  and  elephants’ teeth. 