

Present  to  linguist 

. 600  ditto 

Custom-house  searchers  for  cutting  the  bales  to  clear  the  customs,  8 bales  for  a cruse. 

To  the  Bashaw'‘s  guard 

on  board,  1 cruse  per  day  till  cleared,  and  20  cruse  as  buxies. 

The  Rates  of  Boat  Hire  are  as  follow. 

Robins  of  Pepper,  each 

. . . 14  duanees. 

Chests  of  Benjamin,  each  . . . 

14  duanees. 

Bales  of  Cardamums  • . 

. . . 14  ditto 

Bags  of  rice,  sugar,  &c 

7 ditto 

Chests  of  China  ware  . , 

. . . 14  ^itto 

Lead  and  Tutenague,  in  slabs  . . 

7 ditto 

Chests  of  lac,  &c.  , . . 

. . . 14  ditto 

Boat  hire,  and  writer'‘8  fees  . . 

25  ditto 

The  Rates  of  Cooley  Hire  are  as  follow. 

Bales  of  Pepper  . . , 

, . . d per  cruse. 

Bags  of  rice,  sugar,  &c.  . . . 

20  per  cruse- 

Ditto  Cardamoms  . . . 

. . . 9 ditto 

Stowing  bales  in  godown  . . . 

10  ditto 

Chests  of  China  ware  . . 

. . . 2 ditto 

Chests  of  Benjamin 

9 ditto 

Instructions  respecting  the  Trade  from  India  to  Judda^  by  II,  Elmore, 

As  soon  as  you  anchor  in  the  harbour  of  Judda,  the  Eniibar  and  officers  of  the  Bashaw  will  come  off, 
and  demand  a manifest  of  your  cargo,  that  is,  the  number  of  packages  ; they  do  not  enquire  about  the  con- 
tents— only  say,  so  many  chests  of  China  ware;  so  many  bales  of  Bengal  goods,  &c.  The  only  man  I can 
recommend  to  you  at  Judda  is  Shaik  Ally,  as  an  Arab  writer,  (which  it  is  neccessary  you  should  have)  ; he 
will  also  serve  as  your  broker. 

When  the  Enubar  s boat  leaves  you,  he  will  leave  two  custom-house  officers  on  board,  who  will  re- 
main till  the  cargo  is  all  delivered,  and  the  ship  searched,  to  whom,  during  their  stay,  there  is  a customary 
daily  allowance  for  provisions.  In  addition  to  these  officers,  there  will  be  a boat  moored  a-stem  of  you 
every  night  while  any  cargo  remains  on  board : and  do  not  suffer  your  own  boat  to  leave  the  ship,  except 
when  it  cannot  be  avoided,  as  the  officers  of  Government  are  both  troublesome  and  insolent,  stopping,  and 
searching  your  people,  &c.  but  as  soon  as  the  ship  is  cleared  and  searched,  this  ceremony  is  dispensed  with^ 
and  no  longer  pursued,  and  you  have  a free  communication  with  the  shore. 

Should  it  so  happen  that  you  arrive  at  Judda  before  the  Hodjee,  get  permission  to  go  on  shore  as  soon 
as  possible,  and  in  this  case  the  Government  will  wish  to  hasten  you;  so  that  there  will  be  no  difficulty  hi 


JUDDA. 


91 


procuring  the  indulgence.  But  do  not  leave  the  ship,  until  you  have  agreed  to  he  allowed  to  chuse  yoiu 
own  broker  and  shroff:  and  have  it  in  writing  under  their  signature,  or  else  tluy  will  iniimse  some  crea. 
ture  of  their  own  upon  you,  who  pay  them  for  it.  I have  already  said,  that  Shaik  Ally  will  probably  be 
your  broker,  and  assist  you  in  chusing  a shroff,  if  you  cannot  get  Ifodjee  Hogg  Sayell,  who  is  the  most 
honest  man  in  the  English  service,  at  Judda:  stipulate  with  them  also,  that  all  your  cargo  pay  the  duties, 
charges,  &c.  in  kind,  which  will  amount  to  8 or  9 per  cent,  and  that  it  be  opened  and  examined  at  your 
own  house  only,  and  by  no  means  in  the  public  custom-house. 