

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS 

Are  to  be  procured  here  in  abundance.  Water  is  good  and  tolerably  clear;  it  is  to  be  got  from  welh 
and  tanks  in  skins,  25  for  a dollar.  Fish  are  in  plenty,  and  cheap.  Sheep  from  1|  to  2 dollars  each. 
Fowls  are  scarce,  about  four  for  a dollar.  Bullocks  6 to  7 dollars  each,  and  vegetables  plenty  and  cheap. 


COSSIER— SUEZ. 


S5 


COSSIEH. 

This  town  is  in  latitude  26®  8'  North,  and  longitude  3P 15  East.  It  is  an  open  roadstead,  with  very 
bad  holding  ground;  there  is  always  a heavy  swell  setting  in  here;  and  from  the  smallness  of  the  aiuhorage, 
the  shipping  are  obliged  to  lie  very  close  to  the  shore.  It  has  been  a place  of  great  note,  and  is  still  con- 
siderable for  the  exportation  of  grain  to  Arabia,  which  is  brought  by  caravans  Irom  the  Nile.  I'he 
Fort  of  Cossier  stands  upon  a rising  ground,  and  is  a square  building,  of  about  400  yards  in  circumference. 
It  was  formerly  strong  enough  to  have  withstood  a regular  attack,  the  walls  being  of  stone,  and  raised  to 
a considerable  height;  but  at  present  it  is  in  a defenceless  state;  the  breaches  which  time  has  made  in  it, 
being  repaired  with  mud,  and  not  more  than  three  dismantled  cannon  letl  to  protect  it.  Tin*  town  now  is 
in  a most  miserable  condition  ; of  all  the  numerous  houses  which  once  reared  their  heads  here,  nothing  but 
the  walls  are  standing;  of  mosques,  only  the  remains  of  two  can  be  discerned;  but  if  the  town  displ.nys  so 
unfavourable  an  appearance,  it  falls  infinitely  short  of  the  dreary  aspect  of  the  country  around  it.  4'hough 
the  garrison  is  under  the  command  of  a Turkish  officer,  appointed  by  the  Hc*y  of  Cairo,  the  gov(‘rmnent  of 
the  town  is  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  Arabs. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

Various  kinds  of  Asiatic  commodities  are  imported  and  sciit  into  the  interior,  by  tin*  eara\ans  which 
bring  dowm  the  grain  to  the  coast.  Exce[Jt  giulii,  the  exports  arc  but  trilling,  and  the  whole  commerce  ol* 
the  port  is  carried  on  by  the  Arabs. 

SUEZ. 

This  town,  which  Is  situated  at  the  head  of  the  Red  Sea,  is  in  latitude  1 Nortli,  and  longitude 
32®  28  East,  and  is  about  one  mile  and  a half  in  circuit.  Here  are  three  channels,  running  near  the  East  end 
of  the  town,  that  form  a curve  uniting  into  one  branch,  which  rims  WTstward  to  the  back  (»f  the  town,  re- 
ceiving at  spring  tides,  dows  and  other  small  vessels.  It  is  nearly  two  miles  and  a half  from  the  town  to 
the  bar.  Suez  is  not  fortified;  the  houses  are  built  closely  together,  and  then*  are  only  tw'o  pas- 
sages into  the  city,  of  which  that  nearest  the  sea  isopen,  the  other  shut  by  a gate.  It  w as  formerly  a plaec 
of  considerable  splendour:  each  Bey  of  Egypt  had  a house,  wherein  his  factor  resided.  'Fhe  hiiildiiigs  are 
many  of  them  large,  hut  at  present  little  more  than  a heap  of  ruins,  chielly  ow  ing  to  the  wanton  injnrie.s 
of  the  French,  who  thus  revenged  themselves  on  the  Beys  for  retiring  into  Upper  Egypt,  and  not  permit- 
ting themselves  to  be  subdued. 