

In  December  and  January,  the  pilgrims  assemble  here  to  proceed  to  Judda.  Immediately  on  a ship 
making  her  appearance,  a boat  is  sent  on  hoard  to  enquire  the  purpose  of  her  coming,  and  the  offic(*r 
usually  brings  a small  present  from  the  Governor,  consisting  of  a sheep,  ivc.  As  the  messenger  is  g(‘nerally 
a man  of  some  rank,  it  is  usual  to  salute  him  with  three  guns.  The  most  acceptable  presents  are,  double- 
barrelled  silver  mounted  guns  and  pistols,  China  howls,  repeating  watches,  shawls,  kincohs,  muslins,  &c. 
Any  of  these  things  given  the  Governor,  and  some  trilie  of  the  same  kind  to  the  offic(‘r  of  the  customs, 
will  ensure  you  great  respect,  and  prevent  your  goods  and  baggage  being  tumbled  and  searched. 

COINS. 

The  principal  current  coins  are  burhers,  medines,  sequins,  and  Spanish  dollars.  Hie  huibei  is  a 
copper  coin,  18  of  which  make  a medine.  The  sequin  is  of  two  sorts,  one  called  Fiiiulunelee,  and  passes 
current  for  146  medines;  the  other  zermabob,  which  passes  for  110  incdincs.  The  asper,  though  not 
coined  in  Egypt,  passes  current  here,  3 aspers  making  1 medine. 


TOK~YAMBO. 


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES. 

Four  grains  mako  1 kellat,  10  of  winch  make  a dram,  of  which  all  the  weights  are  compounded. 

1 1 dram  is  1 metigal,  by  which  gold  and  silver  arc  weighed. 

144  ditto  1 rottolo,  equal  to  lib.  4 ounces  avoirdupois. 

400  ditto  1 oke,  by  which  sugar  and  other  heavy  goods  are  weighed. 

The  quintal  varies  from  110  to  150  rottolos,  aceprding  to  the  species  of  goods  to  be  weighedr 

IMPORTS. 

There  arc  six  or  eight  large  ships  belonging  to  tliis  port,  which  trade  to  Judda,  and  make  sometimes 
two  voyages  in  a year,  some  of  them  upwards  of  1,000  tonsbiulhen.  The  principal  article  of  import  is 
colfee,  of  which  0,0(X)  tons  are  said  to  be  brought  annually  into  Egypt;  the  other  articles  of  India  produce 
are  similar  to  those  enumerated  at  Jiiddu. 


EXPORTS, 

Immense'  ipiantities  of  grain  are  sent  from  Suez  and  Cossler  to  Arabia;  upon  a moderate  calculation, 
not  less  than  i?0,000  tons  per  annum:  the  balance  is  paid  in  bullion. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  necessaries  of  life  arc  very  scarce,  and  consequently  dear.  All  kinds  of  animal  food  and  fish  are 
difiicult  to  be  procured.  Bread,  butter,  and  milk,  in  small  quantities.  To  the  westward  of  the  town, 
there  is  a well  of  brackish  water;  but  the  water  to  supply  the  shipping,  and  town  of  Suez,  is  brought  on- 
camels  from  springs  at  a considerable  distance  to  the  eastward  of  the  road,  and  is  very  indilfcrent. 

TOR. 

This  harbour  is  situated  in  latitude  28°  1 9 North,  and  longitude  .33^28  East;  it  is  formed  to  the 
soutlnvard  by  a reef  of  coral  rocks,  and  to  the  northward  by  a low  point  of  land,  on  which  is  placed  a- 
beacon;  it  is  a plain  stone  building,  secured  by  piles,  about  30  feet  high,  with  a mast  placed  in  the  middle, 
and  may  he  seen  very  plainly  at  three  leagues  distance.  The  town  is  situated  at  the  N.  FI  part  of  the  har^ 
bour,  and  is  inhabited  by  Greeks  and  Hedonin  Arabs;  near  the  town  there  are  the  remains  of  a well-con- 
structed foitification.  When  tlw  strong  northerly  winds  are  blowing,  the  cargoes  which  are  brought  from 
Judda,  and  intended  for  Suez,  are  landed  at  this  j)lace,  and  carried  on  camels  to  their  place  of  destination. 