

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Here  is  the  best  water  of  any  place  in  the  Red  Sea,  and  you  bale  it  out  of  three  wells,  that  are  not‘ 
more  than  200  yards  from  the  beach.  You  can  get  no  refreshments  of  any  kind  here ; but  there  is  a mo* 
nftsteiy  on  Mount  Sinai,  about  20  miles  from  Tor,  from  whence  you  may  now  and  then  get  some  fruit' 
and  vegetables,  brought  down  by  a Greek  priest. 

YAMBO 

Is  a considerable  town  in  latitude  24^  10' Noilh,  and  longitude  38^  21' East.  It  is  the  seaport  of 
Medina,  from  wliich  it  is  distant  about  100  miles;  here  the  pilgrims  from  Egypt  land,  it  being  the  port^ 


JUDDA. 


h7 

from  which  the  communication  is  more  immediately  carried  on  with  Ej^ypt.  It  Is  the  general  resort  of  all 
the  Arab  vessels  that  ply  on  this  sea,  and  has  a safe  and  convenient  hurhoiir  for  their  protection  in  bud  wea- 
tlier.  Its  situation  behind  a chain  of  shoals  and  breakers,  secluded  it  from  the  knowledgo  of  hhiropean 
navigators  till  1777,  when  a country  vessel  bound  to  Sueis  was  inv(‘igled  into  the  harbour,  seized,  and  sub- 
jected to  heavy  exactions  previous  to  her  liberation;  the  perfidious  coiuluct  of  the  natives,  therefore,  upon 
this  occasion  ought  to  be  a warning  to  all  ships  to  avoid  so  dangerous  a set  of  men.  'fhe  town  is  at  tin* 
bottom  of  the  bay  or  harbour,  and  is  in  a ruinous  condition;  there  are  the  remains  of  a fort  hen',  and  a 
few  old  guns,  but  the  firing  of  them  would  endanger  the  safety  of  the  fortifications. 

JUDDA. 

This,  town  is  situated  in  latitude  21^  29  North,  and  longitude  30-  lA  East;  it  is  a port  of  consider;d)le 
trade,  arising  from  the  numerous  pilgrims  who  come  from  the  various  Alahoinetnn  counliies  to  ^isit 
Mecca,  wdiich  is  about  21  miles  inland.  Tin*  entrance  to  the  road  is  full  of  shoals;  it  would  llierelore  he 
im{)i'iident  to  attempt  going  in  without  a pilot;  it  signals  are  made  with  two  guns,  the  native  pilots  will 
meet  a ship  well  outside,  and  carry  her  to  the  anchorage,  w hich  is  in  J2  iatlioins,  three  miles  distant  Iroiii 
tlie  shore,  the  town  bearing  about  E.  liy  S. 

The  town  of  Judda  is  .superior  to  that  of  Mocha.  The  houses  are  built  of  large  blocks  of  Afjuln'poi  e; 
and  tlie  streets  are  very  narrow,  wdiieli  is  an  advantage,  as  they  are  c onsequenlly  shaded  the  gi(*ul(‘r  pait  of 
the  day.  The  landing-place  is  in  front  of  the  Vizier’s  palace;  wdiieh  is  j)ieasiintly  situated  close  to 
the  sea;  the  custom-house  likewise  faces  the  sea,  and  is  a handsome  lofty  building.  The  ground  rising  from 
the  sea,  gives  the  town  a good  appearance. 

The  English  formerly  carried  on  a considerable  trade  liere ; l)ut  of  late  yeai’s  it  has  mnch  declineil,  in 
consequence  of  the  numerous  extortions  under  the  head  of  presents,  N:c.  and  the  insolence  and  ill-treatment 
to  which  all  Christians  are  subject  in  Mahometan  countries. 