

At  about  a quarter  of  a mile  from  the  North  end  of  the  town,  on  the  sea  w alls,  is  a battery  of  12  guns 
pointing  due  West;  and  at  the  South  end  a round  castle  with  tw^elve  embrasures,  and  six  guns  mounted: 
the  embrasures  are  placed  at  equal  distances,  to  any  of  which  the  guns  can  be  shifted  occasionally.  At 
equal  distance  round  the  city  are  built  round  towers  on  the  walls,  which  add  much  to  the  beauty  of  the 
whole.  There  are  two  land  gates,  one  at  the  North,  and  the  other  at  the  South  end  of  the  town. 

The  houses  fronting  the  aea,  are  all  very  lofty,  built  with  stone,  and  whitewashed  without  as  well  as 
within.  There  are  four  large  mosques,  and  six  smaller,  the  minarets  of  w hicli  greatly  improve  the  view 
of  the  town  from  the  sea,  especially  the  great  mosque,  which  being  elegantly  built,  and  very  lofty,  serves 
as  a landmark  for  ships  coming  into  the  road.  The  best  anchorage  is  in  6 or  7 fathoms  water,  the  grand 
mosque  bearing  E.  S.E.  and  the  South  fort  S.  by  E.  distant  about  two  miles  from  the  shore. 

Mocha  was  first  visited  by  an  English  fleet,  under  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  in  1610,  having  letters  and 
presents  from  the  King  to  the  Bashaw  and  Aga,  and  was  received  with  all  possible  marks  of  distinction 
and  friendship.  The  civilities  of  the  Turks  were  intended  to  ensnare  the  Admiral,  and  to  allure  him  and 
his  officers  on  shore,  as  well  as  to  entice  their  ships  into  the  harbour;  but,  disappointed  in  the  latter  part  of 
their  scheme,  they  fell  upon  the  Admiral,  killed  eight  of  his  attendants,  w'oimded  himself  and  fourteen 
men,  and  after  stripping  them,  threw  them  chained  into  a dungeon.  They  next  made  an  attempt  upon 
one  of  the  ships,  but  were  repulsed  with  great  loss.  Finding  that  open  force  could  not  reduce  the  sliips  Into 
their  power,  they  threatened  the  Admiral  with  death  and  the  torture,  if  he  did  not  order  them  to  suri-cinlpi': 
but Henry.,  preferring  the  most  excruciating  tortures  and  death,  to  an  ignominious  life,  and  tiic  Joss  ol’ 
honour,  bravely  defied  them,  and  triumphed  over  their  malice  and  cruelty.  After  six  months’  iinpiisoii- 
ment,  he  found  means  with  most  of  his  attendants  to  make  his  escape,  and  arrive  at  the  sliips,  which  had 
kin  in  an  haribour  on  .the  Abyssinian  shore.  He  now  had  an  opportunity  of  shewing  In's  resentment,  which 
he  did  accordingly  in  a message  to  tlie  Aga— that  if  he  did  not  instantly  release  the  remaining  prisoners, 

V and  render  ample  satisfaction  for  the  damages  be  had  received,  he  would  sink  all  the  ships  in  the  road,  and 

O 


MOCHA. 


batter  the  town  about  his  ears.^  This  menace  had  its  effect;  his  men  and  pinnace  were  set  at  liberty,  and 
18,000  rials  of  eight  paid  him  for  damages,  after  which  he  proceeded  with  the  fleet  to  India. 