


LOHEIA. 


95 


LOHEIA 

Is  a considerable  town,  situated  in  latitude  15^  44'  North,  and  longitude  42^  44  East.  It  is  at  the 
bottom  of  a deep  bay,  protected  from  the  sea  by  the  large  island  Camaran,  and  a group  of  smaller  to  the 
N.  W.  Loheia  is  without  walls,  though  not  entirely  defenceless:  several  towers,  guarded  by  soldiers,  stand 
at  equal  distances  round  it,  some  of  which  will  admit  cannon.  Many  of  the  houses  are  built  of  stone,  but 
the  greater  number  are  mud  huts  thatched  with  grass.  The  harbour  is  at  present  so  shallow,  that  even  the 
smallest  vessels  are  obliged  to  anchor  at  a great  distance  from  the  town ; and  at  low  water  laden  boats  can- 
not even  approach  it.  Notwithstanding  this  disadvantage,  a considerable  trade  in  coffee  is  carried  on  here : 
this  coffee  is  not  reckoned  so  good  as  that  wliich  comes  from  Beetlefackie,  and  is  shipped  at  Mocha  and 
Hodeida ; but  it  is  to  be  purchased  more  reasonably,  and  the  carriage  to  Judda  costs  less.  On  this  account 
several  merchants  from  Cairo  reside  here,  and  there  are  about  forty  Banians  employed  in  different  trades. 
The  French  recently  mode  application  at  Loheia  for  permission  to  settle  a factory  on  the  island  of 
Camaran.  Its  situation  is  good  for  watching  all  vessels  going  up  or  down  the  Red  Sea,  but  would  be 
of  little  use  in  a commercial  point  of  view.  This  island  was  visited  by  the  Portuguese  in  1513,  when  they 
captured  many  vessels,  and  wintered  here. 


COINS. 

The  only  money  is  a small  piece  of  base  and  adulterated  silver,  about  the  size  of  a sixpence,  called 
commassee,  and  by  this  all  the  different  denominations  of  foreign  coins  are  ascertained.  There  arc  likewise 

half  commassees,  which  are  the  smallest  coin  current. 

« 

1 Venetian  sequin  passes  for  . 90  Commassees  t 1 Barbary  sequin  passes  for  80  Commassees 

1 Fundunclee 80  ditto  j 1 Dollar,  or  patack  ....  40  ditto 

When  the  Indian  merchants  or  vessels  are  here,  the  fundunclee  is  raised  3 commassees  more;  but 
all  specie  is  scarce,  notwithstanding  the  quantity  brought  hither  in  dollars,  whicli  is  the  coin  in  which  all 
purchases  are  made.  When  it  is  necessary  to  change  dollars,  the  shroff,  or  broker,  only  allows  39  instead 
of  40  commassees,  so  that  there  is  a loss  on  the  exchange  of  per  cent. 

WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES. 

The  weights  are  the  di'am,  ounce,  rottolo,  and  quintal.  Their  proportions  are  as  follow: 

10  drams  r ^ ounce 

16  ounces  Vmakei  ^ rottolo 

100  rottolos  j (^1  quintal 

The  rottolos  are  of  two  sorts,  one  of  140  drams,  which  is  used  in  selling  fine  goods ; the  other  of  160, 
which  is  used  in  weighing  sugar,  lead,  and  other  heavy  articles.  There  is  also  another  weight,  called  the 
faranzula,  equal  to  20  rottolos. 