


jitdda: 


93 


Upon  both  piece-goods  and  gruff  cargo  tliey  charge  you,  und(‘r  the  head  of  Calum  and  Xeral|»hie, 
10  per  cent,  upon  the  amount  of  your  customs,  which  they  call  fees,  for  the  drlierent  wi  il(Ms  and  people 
attached  to  the  custom-house.  By  a small  fee  you  may  prevail  upon  them  to  take  your  ( hiini  ware  at  five 
per  cent,  without  unpacking  or  counting,  which  will  reduce  the  whole  of  your  cu4{)ins  to  ahmi  1 1 or  12 
per  cent.;  and  if  the  time  before  the  Hodjee  is  short,  the  Government  will  readily  agree  to  this ; but  will 
take  ten  cups  from  every  chest  of  China  ware,  exclusive  of  the  customs.  What  this  is  done  for,  I could  not 
find  out,  only  that  it  was  an  old  established  custom.  As  you  generally  sell  your  China  ware  by  the  corge, 
which  is  20  in  all  parts  of  India,  you  are  to  recollect  that  the  corge  is  22  at  Jiidda. 

When  you  sell  your  sugar-candy,  or  any  thing  else  by  weight,  send  for  the  custom-house  steelyards 
(as  it  will  prevent  disputes),  and  have  the  goods  weighed  and  delivered  at  your  own  house.  They  make  arbi- 
trary deductions  from  5 to  20  per  cent,  for  tare  of  the  packages,  therefore  agree  ])reviously  about  the  tare. 
Sugar-candy  is  about  10  per  cent.;  upon  this  account  a small  present  to  the  custom-house  weighinun  (con- 
veyed.privately)  may  be  advantageously  disposed  of,  as  he  generally  fixes  the  tare;  and  as  well  as  his  pre- 
sent, give  him  a few  cruse  and  a bottle  of  arrack  occasionally.  If  the  Bashaw  purchases  your  cargo,  or  any 
part  pf  it,  the  w'cighman  dare  not  shew  you  the  smallest  tavour  in  the  delivery;  on  the  contrary,  you  may 
expect  the  reverse:  but  even  in  this  your  present  \vill  not  be  misapplied,  ns  he*  will  for  arrack  and  a few 
cruse,  do  all  he  dure  to  si^n’c  you. 

In.si.st  upon  your  shroff  having  the  weighing  of  yoiu'  musk:  it  will  save  you  a great  deal.  Musk  sells 
hy  the  rattle  (of  4()0  drams). 

You  pay  1,00(1  to  1,2(X)  cinisc  anchorage,  with  about  3A0  cruse  w lien  you  get  on  the  coast,  which  will 
be  all  the  charges,  beside  the  pilotage,  you  have  to  pay  at  Judda. 

It  may  be  now  necessaiy  to  caution  you  against  disputes,  which  will  unavoidably  arise  (eitlier  about 
your  prices,  payments,  money,  or  goods),  that  they  sliould  be  settled  amicably,  if  possible,  by  your  sliroll, 
or  by  merchants  of  respectability ; but  if  you  are  under  the  necessity  of  referring  the  dispute  to  the  Go- 
vernment, apply  to  wdioever  has  the  most  weight  at  Judda,  either  the  Hashaw  or  the  Xeriffs,  but  not 
without  a present.  If  your  application  is  to  the  Bashaw%  go  yourself  personally;  ninl  if  to  the  Xerifl,  go 
(o  his  house  in  Judda:  if  he  is  absent,  w'rite  to  him  to  Mecca,  through  your  Arab  writer.  But  all  this  is 
only  upon  the  most  urgent  necessity,  for  all  communication  with  the  Ciovermncnt  ought  to  cease  imiuc- 
diiitely  after  paying  your  present,  and  paying  your  cu.stoms. 