

From  the  above  statement,  it  would  be  best,  in  making  your  sales,  to  fix  both  the  price  and  value  of 
your  silver  and  gold  coin  (in  cruse)  with  the  merchant.  In  this  be  very  exact,  and  observe  that  gold  fluc- 
tuates more  than  silver  all  over  India : it  would  be  necessary,  therefore,  before  you  leave  Calcutta,  Madras, 
Bombay,  or  Surat,  to  have  the  price  current  of  all  kinds  of  coins,  from  the  Shroffs,  in  the  current  rupee  of 
the  place ; by  this  means  you  will  know  to  a certainty  w^hat  your  coins  will  produce,  and  the  best  market 
for  the  sale  of  them  : add  to  this,  large  sums  are  paid  at  Judda  in  gold,  and  a small  error  in  calculation 
may  amount  to  a considerable  sum.  And  be  guarded,  upon  the  receipt  of  gold,  not  to  suffer  them  to 
charge  you  2 per  cent,  for  what  they  call  overweight ; or  if  obliged  to  allow  it,  make  your  estimate  of 
their  relative  value  accordingly. 

The  Grand  Signor’s  customs  on  goods  imported  by  the  English  through  his  dominions,  are  5 per 
cent ; however  the  Bashaw  of  Judda,  under  pretence  that  Judda  is  not  named  in  the  phirmaund  for  our 
trade,  has  always  imposed  a great  deal  more : he  takes  4 per  cent,  for  himself;  4 percent,  for  the  Xeriffs, 
and  the  other  inijiositions  may  be  reckoned  at  4 per  cent  more ; making  the  whole  aggregate  amount  equal 
to  at  least  12  per  cent. 

The  trade  w'ith  Judda  is  on  the  decline:  at  one  period  the  English  paid  upwards  of  i'50,000  sterling 
duties  per  annum;  yet  the  abuses  and  extortions  multiplied  daily:  this,  with  the  progress  recently  made 
by  the  Wahabites,  a new  religious  sect  in  Arabia,  has  occasioned  the  almost  entire  abandonment  of  the 
trade  by  Europeans.  The  progress  of  these  reformers  has  been  audacious  and  successful.  Mecca  and 
Medina,  so  long  considered  by  Mahometans  the  tw’o  principal  cities  in  Arabia,  have  been  taken  by  them; 
Mecca,  on  the  27th  of  April,  1803,  when  the  splendid  tombs  and  public  buildings  were  levelled  with  the 
ground;  Medina,  and  the  tomb  of  the  Prophet,  shared  the  same  fate  in  1804.  They  afterwards  attacked 
Judda  with  a considerable  force,  but  w ere  repulsed;  they  however  reduced  the  town  to  such  distress,  that 
the  Xerlff  and  principal  inhabitants  had  recourse  to  negotiation,  and  purchased  a peace  for  130,000  dollars, 
when  the  Wahabites  retired  into  the  interior. 

Yanibo,  X^oheia,  and  Hodeida  have  been  taken  and  plundered  at  different  times  by  them. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 


Slieep  and  a few  bullocks  arc  to  be  procured,  but  at  high  prices.  The  bazar  is  well  supplied  with 
fruit  and  vegetables. 

Europeans  are  only  permitted  to  go  into  the  bazar  to  purchase  the  few  articles  they  require,  and  are 
subject  lo  much  insolence  from  ilie  natives. 