


COFFEE  TRADE. 

Coffee  is  the  only  article  produced  here:  that  which  is  intended  for  India,  Muscat,  or  Europe,  1$ 
first  brought  by  land  to  Mocha;  but  w'hat  is  designed  for  Judda,  is  shipped  at  Hodeida.  There  are  two 
kinds  of  duty  payable  on  coffee,  one  at  Beetlefackie,  called  the  inland  duty,  which  is  paid  on  all  that  is 
consumed  in  the  kingdom  as  ivell  as  wdiat  is  exported ; and  another  duty  on  exportation,  of  which  the 
quantity  is  immense:  it  is  said  that,  one  year  with  another,  there  are  not  less  than  60,000  bahars 
ex|K)rted.  3 he  price  here  varies  from  8.5  to  110  Spanish  dollars  pc?r  bahar.  Tlie  inland  and  foreign  duty, 
catncl-hire  to  Mocha^  and  charges  on  shipping,  amount  to  about  20  Spanish  dollars,  making  the  price  at 
Mocha  from  105  to  130  Spanish  dollais  per  bahar.  . • . . 


MOCHA. 


97 


MOCHA, 

The  principal  port  in  the  Red  Sea  frequented  by  Europeans,  is  in  latitude  13^  20  Nouli,  and  longi- 
tude 43"^  20  East,  about  40  miles  to  the  northward  of  Cape  Babel  man  del. 

Mocha  makes  a striking  appearance  from  the  road,  or  in  sailing  by  it,  and  is  situated  bL‘t\Yr('n  two 
low  ponits  of  land,  which  project  from  the  shore,  so  as  to  form  a bay,  which  shelters  such  ships  as  their 
draught  of  water  will  permit  anchoring  within  a mile  of  the  shore.  Large  ships  lie  much  further  out,  where 
they  are  exposed  as  in  an  open  road.  This  city  is  so  situated,  that  each  of  those  projt  cting  points  of  land 
seem  at  an  equal  distance  from  each  end  of  it:  the  distance  between  these  two  points  is  about  5 miles. 

Mocha  is  built  so  near  the  sea,  that  when  the  wind  blows  strong  from  the  west,  it  washes  against  the 
walls.  It  lies  due  North  and  South,  and  is  near  a mile  and  a half  long,  but  of  uneijiiul  breadth;  at  the 
North  end  it  is  more  than  half  a mile  broad,  and  becomes  gradually  narrower  to  the  South  end,  where  it 
is  not  quite  half  a mile.  It  is  strongly  walled  round  with  hewn  stone,  and  the  walls  are  kept  in  good 
repair:  there  are  loopholes  for  arrows  and  musketry  at  about  5 feet  distance  from  each  other. 

At  the  extremity  of  the  two  points  of  land  which  form  the  bay,  is  a circular  castle,  strongly  built  of 
stone:  on  the  semicircle,  towards  the  sea,  arc  six  24  pounders,  and  on  that  fronting  the  land,  are  six 
12  pounders.  There  is  another  such  castle  nearly  in  the  middle  of  the  sea  walls,  near  wliich  is  the  only 
gate  by  which  goods  or  passengers- can  enter  from  the  sea.  Here  is  a station  for  the  custom-house  officers, 
where  all  goods  that  are  imported  or  exported,  are  examined  and  registered.  From  this  gate  there  runs 
out  a pier  150  yards  due  West,  which  is  built  of  stone,  and  strongly  supported  at  the  end  and  sides  by 
plank  and  piles,  and  is  very  serviceable  for  loading  and  unloading  goods. 