The  freight  of  treasure  from  Judda  to  Surat,  Bombay,  or  Madras,  is  generally  3 per  cent.;  the  pre- 
mium of  insurance,  as  the  Captain  can  agree,  from  one  to  two  and  a half  per  cent.  The  freight  of  grulT 
goods  is  arbitrary,  as  it  must  be  agreed  upon  by  both  parties. 

Should  the  season  be  so  far  advanced,  as  to  make  it  doubtful  whether  your  ship  will  be  able  to  go  to 
Surat,  deliver  her  freight,  and  leave  it  before  the  full  moon  in  March  (or  not.)  It  would  be  better  to  de- 
cline taking  any  Surat  freight,  unless  the  mercliants  will  allow  you  to  send  the  treasure  by  some  other  con- 
veyance from  Bombay,  immediately  upon  your  arrival  tliere;  if  they  agree  to  this,  the  additional  expence 
must  be  paid  by  their  constituent  at  Sural,  and  not  by  you.  If  you  can  prevail  upon  them  to  do  this,  it 
will  considerably  increase  your  freight,  as  they  have  large  consignments  from  thence  in  Guzzerat,  Cossim- 
buzar,  and  Bengal  piece-goods,  &c.  and  consecjuently  have  large  remittances  to  make. 

rrobably,  if  the  pi  ices  of  goods  are  low  at  Judda,  and  you  do  not  sell  at  the  first  offer,  your  Aiab 
writer  w ill  endeavour  to  [lersuade  you  to  send  them  to  Mecca,  in  Jiopes  of  tlieir  being  entrusted  to  his  care^ 
and  himself  with  the  sale  at  the  Ilodjee,  and  have  the  commissions ; they  will  furnish  you  with  very  spe- 
cious and  favourable  accounts  of  the  markets,  as  well  as  bringing  numbers  of  people  to  recommend  them^ 
as  being  well  ac(]uainted  with  the  markets,  and  of  the  highest  integrity.  But  do  not  on  any  account  fall 
into  this  snare  ; for  as  certain  us  you  send  goods  to  Mecca  on  youi*  own  account,  to  be  sold  at  the  Hodjee^ 
you  will  be  n considerable  loser  (if  not  lose  the  whole)  by  the  speculation. 

The  customs  upon  your  China  ware  and  goods  will  be  settled  by  the  Government,  and  (though  it 
may  lie  extravagantly  exorbitant,  complaint  is  useless,  ns  you  can  have  no  redress)  from  the  account  you 
give  them,  and  which  should  be  done  by  the  supercargo  or  purser,  in  the  public  custom-house;  as  it  is  a 
necessary  form,  it  ought  to  be  complied  with. 

Your  musk  and  agala  wood  they  will  weigh  in  tlie  custom-house,  and  pjobably  want  to  open  it  there 
to  satisfy  themselves;  but  you  must  not  allow  it  to  be  done.  If  they  want  to  see  the  contents  of  your 
{lackages,  let  them  come  to  your  house ; for  if  you  oj>en  any  thing  in  the  custom-house,  you  may  rest  as- 
sun  d of  losing  25  per  cent,  and  you  cannot  possibly  help  it,  they  are  such  expert  thieves. 

Wlien  they  deliver  you  the  amount  of  customs  upon  your  graft'  goods^  it  will  be  10  per  cent  abova 
what  the  customs  should  be. 