

The  long  measure  is  the  peek  of  27  inches. 

IMPORT  AND  EXPORT  DUTIES. 

All  Indian  goods  imported  directly  from  India,  pay  5 per  cent. ; but  all  goods  whatever  brought  from 
Judda  by  merchants,  whether  Turks  or  natives,  pay  7 per  cent.  Presents  are  necessary  here,  as  well  aa^ 
in  all  other  places  in  the  Red  Sea. 


HODEIDA-^BEETtEFACKIE. 


IIODEIDA 

Is  in  latitude  15®  10'  Nortli,  and  is  the  seaport  of  Beetlefackie.  The  harbour  is  somewhat  better 
than  that  of  Loheia,  yet  large  vessels  cannot  enter  it.  The  town  is  large,  and  the  mansion  of  the  Dola^ 
or  Governor^  the  mosques,  the  custom-1  lOuse,  and  the  houses  of  the  principal  merchants  are  built  of 
stone;  the  rest  consist  of  huts  built  in  an  ordinary  manner.  Near  the  sea  stands  a small  castle,  which  is 
not  capablti  of  much  defence. 


f OINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES 

Are  the  same  as  at  Beetlefackie.  The  Spanish  dollar  is  the  principal  currency,  which  is  equal  to 
40  cavears,  an  imaginary  coin. 


BEETLEFACKIE 

Is  about  30  miles  distance  from  llodeida,  in  latitude  15®  10'  North.  The  town  stands  on  a plain,  and 
the  houses,  many  of  which  are  of  stone,  are  built  separate.  There  is  a kind  of  castle,  sufficiently  strong  to 
resist  tlie  roving  Arabs.  It  is  in  a favourable  situation  for  trada,  being  only  Haifa  day’s  jourAey  from  the 
hills  on  whieJi  tlie  coffee  grows,  and  but  a few  days’  journey  from  Mocha,  l.oheia,  and  Hodeida : it  is 
therefore  the  pnnelpal  mart  for  it,  and  this  trade  brings  merchants  from  Egypt,  Persia,  Abyssinia,  and 
India.  Here  are  also  a number  of  Banians  from  Guzzerat,  who  are  allowed  the  fi'ce  exercise  of  their  reli- 
gion. This  place  is  seldom  visited  by  Europeans,  as  they  transact  their  business  with  the  Banians  at  Mocha. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 


Accounts  arc  kept  in  J^panish  dollars  and  cavears;  40  cavears  are  equal  to  one  Spanish  dollar:  cavears 
are  an  imaginary  coin,  both  here,  and  at  IVIocha.  All  foreign  coins  puss  current,  and  as  coffee  is  always 
paid  for  in  ready  money,  large  quantities  of  various  kinds  of  foreign  coins  are  to  be  met  with.  The  custom- 
house weights  are  vakius,  ^rattles,  maunds,  and  frazils,  thus  divided  ; 


15  Vukias 
2 Rattles 
10  Maunds 
40  Frazils 


I make  i 


1 Rattle  lbs.  oz.  dwts.  gr. 

1 Maiiiid  weighs ...  2 0 10  23 

I Frazil 20  6 4 0 

1 Bahar 814  to  816  lbs. 


They  reckon  14{  vakias  to  a rattle,  and  2 rattles  to  a maund  in  coffee,  and  to  all  other  goods,  15 
vaklas  to  a rattle;  hut  of  all  sorts  of  merchandise  whatever  (excepting  Jaggery,  date.s,  candles,  and  iron, 
ol  which  16  vakias  make  a rattle),  10  maunds  arc  a fruzi),  and  40  frazils  a bahar.  The  rattle  is  only 
used  in  the  bazar.  1 he  weights  arc  seldom  exact,  though  annually  rectified  by  the  Imaum's  shroff'. 