

The  first  offer  is  invariably  the  best;  and  if  you  can  agree  with  one  person  for  your  whole  cargo,  you 
will  reap  a double  advantage,  for  you  will  get  a larger  price,  and  less  trouble.  The  time  from  your  arrival, 
until  the  time  of  the  Hodjee,  will  be  very  short;  and  after  its  arrival,  your  goods  will  not  sell,  at  least  not 
to  such  a good  account. 

You  are  to  be  guided  by  the  character  of  the  merchants  to  whom  you  give  credit.  In  this  I will  not 
pretend  to  guide  you,  as  the  honest  man  of  one  year  may  turn  out  otherwise  the  year  following;  and  by 
presents  and  lyibeiy  to  Government,  may  purchase  his  protection ; or  may  probably  be  able  so  far  to  in- 
fluence Government  to  prohibit  any  others,  but  himself  and  his  creatures,  from  ])urchasing  your  goods.  As  a 

N« 


JUDDA, 


«nide,  I can  t(*ll  you  what  they  say  of  each  other:  ‘‘  If  he  has  been  at  Mecca  once,  take  care  of  him;  if 
“ he  has  been  there  twice,  do  not  trust  him;  but  if  he  has  been  there  three  times,  have  no  kind  of  dealing 
‘‘  uith  him,  for  he  will  cheat  you.” 

There  is  one  thing  I cannot  omit  in  this  place.  In  the  event  of  your  selling  the  whole  of  your  cargo 
to  one  person,  or  only  one  particular  species  of  goods,  you  ought  to  observe  (as  they  buy  them  at  an  ave- 
rage price)  that  the  proprietors  of  fine  goods  of  that  specie,  should  liave  a proportionate  advance  upon  their 
goods;  and  consequently  the  proprietors  of  coarse  goods  should  have  such  an  advance  taken  from  the 
amount  sale  of  their  goods,  being  of  a worse  quality;  and  only  sold  (probably)  by  the  demand  of  the  other 
(fine)  goods. 

As  soon  as  the  merchants  return  from  Mecca,  which  will  be  about  a month,  l>egin  to  collect  your 
money,  and  send  it  off  to  your  ship  immediately  as  you  receive  it;  and  never,  if  you  can  possibly  help  it, 
keep  any  in  your  bouse;  and  at  the  same  time  call  upon  all  the  niercliants  and  pilgrims,  and  fix  upon  a day 
for  sailing.  The  merchants  will  by  this  means  prepaie  their  treasure,  freight,  and  themselves,  as  passengers; 
from  whom,  and  the  pilgrim  passengers,  the  (’aptain's  principal  emolument  arises,  as  he  has  so  much  a 
head  for  each,  as  well  as  so  much  more  for  his  water  and  provisions;  both  of  which,  by  custom,  are 
allowed  to  him  by  the  owners  of  the  ship. 

A furiher  emolument  of  the  (’aptain  arises  from  insuring  the  freight  treasure  which  he  takes  on  board, 
and  which  the  native  irierchaiits  never  object  to,  although  he  may  be  a passenger  on  board,  and  will  take 
the  Captaiifs  guarantee,  though  not  worth  a sous,  for  lacs  of  dollars,  if  he  has  so  much  on  board. 

