

121,01,984 

Balance  ogainsf  the  Arabian  Gulf  in  five  years  Sicca  Rupees  197,94,683 

Being  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat^w*  Sicca  Rupees  182,19,212 

I\ladrus  and  its  de|Kindencies  »%%%%'»»% vw%%^%»-  15,75,471 

During  tlie  same  period,  ilie  trade  curried  on  between  Bengal  and  the  Gulfs  of  Arabia  and  Persia, 
was  in  favour  of  Bengal,  Sicca  Rupees  108,53,394;  of  that  amount  one  half  may  be  considered  to  arise 
from  the  trade  with  the  Gulf  of  Arabia,  which  will  make  this  trade  in  favour  of  British  India  in  five  years^ 
Sicca  Hupei'S  252,21,360,  which  at  2s.  6d.  sterling  per  Rupee,  is  <£^630,539,10  per  annum. 

Notwithstanding  the  balance  of  the  trade  betw  een  British  India  and  the  Red  Sea  is  against  the  latter, 
us  the  greater  j)art  of  the  imports  are  paid  in  gold  and  silver,  yet  this  drain  is  amply  compensated  by  the 
iinmimse  sums  of  ready  money  paid  for  cofTee,  which,  admitting  that  60,000  bahars  is  the  annual  average 
exportation,  at  100  Spanish  dollars  per  bahar,  amounts  to  six  millions  of  Spanish  dollars,  beside  the  sums 
paid  for  customs,  and  the  other  expcnces  attendant  on  the  shipping  and  transfer  of  it. 

The  trade  carried  on  with  Judda,  Matsua,  Suez,  and  other  ports  in  the  Red  Sea,  is  very  extensive^ 
’riie  principal  article  of  export  is  coffee,  of  which  the  greater  part  is  sent  to  Judda,  in  vessels  either  belong- 
ing to  Mocha  or  Judda,  where,  after  reserving  a sufficient  quantity  for  the  consumption  of  the  country,  the 
remaijulcr  is  sent  to  Suez,  in  ships  which  come  annually  from  thence  laden  with  corn,  a few  other  articles, 
the  produce  of  Egypt,  and  some  European  commodities;  and  return  again  from  Judda  with  cofiee,  dnigs, 
and  other  commodities,  the  produce  of  Abyssinia,  Muscat,  Persia,  and  India.  The  ships  of  Suez  have  an 
(•xclusive  right  to  the  trade,  as  no  ships  from  Mocha,  Muscat,  or  India  are  allowed  to  enter  any  port  in  the 
Red  Sea  beyond  Judda.  Coffee  is  prohibited  to  be  carried  from  Mocha  to  Judda,  excej)t  in  ships  belong- 
ing to  one  or  other  of  the  above  ports. 

U'lie  Anu'ricans  have  of  late  years  sent  a number  of  ships  to  Mocha  for  coffee,  which  has  advanced 
the  price  upwards  of  40  dollars  per  bale. 

Till!  greater  part  of  the  foreign  trade  is  transacted  by  the  Banians.  It  is  much  safer  to  sell  to 
them,  than  either  the  Turks  or  Arabs,  since,  if  a Banian  becomes  a bankrupt,  the  other  Banians  will 
< ontrihule  according  to  their  ability,  and  pay  his  debts,  to  prevent  his  being  imprisoned,  or  tortured] 
which  neither  Turks  nor  Arabs  will  do  for  their  countrymen. 

When  goods  are  discharging  from  the  ship,  the  merchant  to  whom  they  belong,  must  give  the  custom- 
house officer  a copy  of  the  marks,  numbers,  and  contents  of  each  package.  If  the  duty  is  to  be  paid  by 
weight,  they  are  carried  to  the  custom-house;  if  piece-goods,  they  are  carried  to  the  merchants  house, 
where  they  must  lay  in  a yard  unopened,  until  they  arc  inspected  by  the  Governor,  collector,  and 
other  officers  of  the  customs.  Two  or  three  bales  are  then  opened,  and  the  pieces  counted;  if  they  cor- 
respond w'ith  the  account  delivered,  they  only  open  a few,  and  the  merchant  is  permitted  to  put  the  goods 
into  his  wan*house,  and  to  sell  them  when  he  pleases;  but  if  any  bales  exceed,  either  in  number  or 
quality,  the  merchant  (besides  receiving  a severe  reprimand)  pays  double  duty  for  the  excess,  and  all 
the  remaining  bales  are  opened,  which  is  attended  with  much  trouble  and  inconvenience. 