

BALM  OF  GILEAD, 

Or  Balsam  of  Mecca,  is  a resinous  juice  Uiat  distils  from  an  eveegreen  tree,  or  shrub,  growing  between 
Mecca  and  Medina;  it  is  much  used  by  the  Asiatic  ladies  as  a cosmetic.  The  tree  is  scarce;  the  best  sort 
is  said  to  exude  naturally  from  it,  but  the^  inferior  kinds  are  extracted  from  tlie  branches  by  boiling. 
It  is  at  first  turbid  and  white,  of  a strong  pungent  smell,  and  of  a bitter  and  acrid  taste;  upon  being  kept 
some  time,  it  becomes  thin,  limpid,  of  a greenish  hue,  then  of  a golden  yellow,  and  at  length  of  tlie  co- 
lour of  honey. 

This  article,  being  scarce  and  valuable,  is  very  liable  to  adulteration.  The  following  methods  are  ro 
commended  to  discover  imposition. 


104 


BALM  OF  GILEAD— COFFEE. 


Cause  a drop  or  tvro  of  the  liquid  balsam  to  fall  into  a glass  of  clear  water;  if  the  drop  go  to  the  bottom 
without  rising  again  to  the  surface,  or  if  it  continue  in  a drop  like  oil,  it  is  a proof  that  the  balsam  is  adul- 
terated. If,  on  the  contrary,  it  spreads  upon  the  surface  of  the  water,  like  a very  thin  cobweb,  scarcely 
visible  to  the  eye,  and  being  congealed,  may  be  taken  up  with  a pin  or  small  straw,  the  balsam  is  pure  and 
natural.  Or  if  the  pure  balsam  be  dropped  on  woollen,  it  will  wash  out ; but  if  adulterated,  it  will  not. 
The  genuine,  dropped  into  milk,  coagulates  it,  which  the  spurious  will  not.  When  a drop  of  the  pure  bal- 
sam is  let  fall  on  red  hot  iron,  it  gathers  itself  into  a globule;  but  oil  or  spurious  balsam  runs,  and 
sheds  itself  all  round.  The  genuine  balsam  also  feels  viscid  aiid  adhesive  to  the  fingers,  which  the  adul- 
terated does  not.  If  sophisticated  with  wax,  it  is  discovered  by  the  turbid  colour,  never  to  be  clarified;  if 
with  honey,  the  sweet  taste  betrays  it;  if  with  resins,  by  dropping  it  on  live  coals,  it  yields  a blacker 
flame,  and  of  a grosser  substance  than  the  genuine.  Wheu  the  balsam  is  too  thick  to  be  taken  out  of  the 
bottle,  it  need  only  be  placed  near  the  fire,  the  smallest  degree  of  heat  liquifying  it.  Tlie  bottles  must 
not  be  quite  full,  lest  they  should  break,  as  the  Imlsam  is  apt  to  rarify. 

Balsamum  is  the  Latin  name  of  the  tree,  whence  the  balsam  issues;  Opa  Balsamum  is  the  juice  or  bal- 
sam; Carpo  Balsamum  is  the  fruit,  and  Xylo  Balsamum  is  the  wood;  these  are  all  useful 

CAIlPO  BALSAMUM 

Should  be  chosen  fresh,  plump,  ponderous,  of  a hot  biting  taste,  and  smelling  in  some  moderate  de- 
gree like  the  balsam.  Hypericum  is  sometimes  mixed  with  it,  which  may  be  discovered  by  its  excess  in 
size,  its  vacuity,  want  of  virtue,  and  peppery  taste.  The  berries  are  about  the  size  of  a small  pea,  sharp 
at  the  end,  brown,  with  a small  stalk.  Reject  such  as  are  broken,  decayed,  and  wonn-eaten. 