

Fish  of  many  kinds  are  cheap  and  excellent  in  their  quality;  here  are  sea-crabs,  very  large,  from  3 to 
41bs.  each,  which  may  be  bought  for  a halfpenny  each.  New  cheese  and  fresh  butter  are  daily  tiTOUght  to 
market  from  a town  called  Musa,  about  20  miles  inland. 


ACACIA— ACORUS—ASPHALTUM— BALM  OP  GILEAD. 


103 


In  the  summer  they  have  plenty  of  grapes,  peaches,  apricots,  quinces,  mangoes,  plne-apples,  plan- 
tains, and  melons,  all  of  which,  though  brought  from  20  to  50  miles  inland,  are  very  reasonable. 

Good  water  is  scarce;  what  is  drunk  in  the  town,  isbrouglit  from  the  villagt*  of  Musa,  a short  dis- 
tance ott‘,  in  leather  bags  or  bottles,  on  the  backs  of  asses,  and  is  at  all  times  very  indiff  erent ; llie  water 
from  the  wells  in  the  town  is  brackish,  and  disagrees  with  most  visiters  to  this  place. 

List  of  Articles  procurable  at  Mocha^  with  Directions  how  to  chuse  them, 

ACACIA 

Is  the  inspissated  juice  of  a plant  of  the  thorn  kind,  growing  in  Arabia,  and  other  parts:  two  sorts  are 
known,  Acacia  Vera,  and  Acacia  Germanica.  The  former  is  a gummy  substance,  usually  of  a firm  con- 
sistence, but  not  very  dry.  We  meet  with  it  in  round  masses,  enclosed  in  thin  bladders,  from  4 to  8 ounces 
in  .veight:  outwardly  it  is  of  a deep  brown  colour,  inclining  to  black,  and  of  a lighter  brown  within,  in- 
clining to  red,  or  yellow.  Acacia  Germanica  is  a juice  expressed  from  the  unripe  fruit  of  the  sloe  bush, 
and  differs  from  the  pr^eding,  in  being  harder,  heavier,  darker  in  colour,  shaqier  in  taste,  and  particu- 
larly in  this,  that  its  astringency  may  be  procured  by  rectified  spirit,  as  well  as  by  water;  whereas  the  other 
is  not  at  all  dissoluble  by  spirit.  The  following  particulars  should  be  attended  to  in  chiising  Acacia  Vera: 
it  has  little  or  no  manifest  smell;  applied  to  the  tongue,  it  quickly  sollens,  discovering  a rough,  and  not 
very  ungrateful  taste,  followed  by  a sensation  of  sweetness.  If  quite  pure,  it  dissolves  totally  in  water;  if 
otherwise,  the  impurities  remain  undissolved.  This  is  an  article  seldom  imported  by  East  India  ships. 

ACORUS,  OR  CALAMUS  AROMATICUS, 

Is  a reed,  or  knotty  root,  about  the  size  of  a little  finger,  and  several  inches  long,  reddish  externally, 
internally  of  a white  colour,  full  of  joints,  somewhat  flatted  on  the  side,  and  of  a loose  s[>ongy  texture; 
its  smell  is  strong,  the  taste  warm,  bitterish,  and  aromatic.  They  should  be  chosen  tough,  and  cleared 
from  the  fibres,  and  free  from  worms,  to  wliich  it  is  very  subject. 

ASPHALTUM 

Is  a solid  shining  bitumen,  of  a dusky  colour  outside,  and  within  of  a deep  black,  found  in  many 
parts  of  Egypt,  A thin  piece  appears  of  a reddish  colour,  when  placed  between  the  eye  and  the  light. 
It  has  no  smell  when  it  is  cold,  but  acquires  a slight  one  by  friction;  when  exposed  to  heat,  it  liquifies, 
swells  up,  and  burns  with  a tliick  smoke,  the  smell  of  which  is  strong,  acrid,  and  disagreeable.  It  is 
occasion^ly  adulterated  with  pitch ; but  the  fraud  may  be  discovered  by  means  of  spirits  of  wine,  which, 
entirely  dissolve  the  pitch,  and  only  take  a pale  colour  with  Asphaltum. 