

A French  author,  who  wrote  on  coffee,  says  the  Freneh  kne^w  nothing  of  it  till  1645.  It  was  not 
known  at  Paris  before  1669.  Its  use  was  intrcnluced  into  England  some  years  sooner,  in  165!^,  when 
Air.  Daniel  Edwards,  a Turkey  merchant,  brought  home  with  liim  a Greek  servant,  wlio  understood 
tlie  roasting  and  making  of  coffee.  He  opened  a coffee-house  in  George  Yard,  Loinhard  Street,  for  pub- 
licly vending  it  as  a drink,  after  the  manner  practised  in  Turkey.  The  first  mention  of  coffee  in  our 
Statute  Books  is  in  1660,  wrhen  a duty  of  fourpence  was  laid  upon  ever)^  gallon  of  eoffee  made  and  sold, 
to  be  paid  by  the  maker.  In  1663  all  coffee-houses  were  licensed  at  the  general  quarter  sessions  of  each 
county.  Ill  1675,  King  Charles  H.  issued  a proclamation  to  shut  them  up  ns  seminaries  of  sedition,  but 
in  a few  days  it  w’as  set  aside.  In  1688,  it  was  supposed  that  there  ivere  more  coffee-houses  in  London 
than  in  Grand  Caii*o,  and  they  were  likewise  to  be  found  in  every  town  of  note  in  the  kingdom. 

About  1690,  Van  Hoorn,  Governor  of  Batavia,  procured  some  coffee  plants  from  Mocha,  ivhich  he 
caused  to  be  planted  at  Java.  In  1714,  the  Dutch  presented  the  French  King  ivith  a fine  tree,  which  is 
•aid  to  have  been  the  parent  of  all  that  have  been  since  cultivated  in  tlie  French  AVest  India  Islands.  In 
1718,  the  Dutch  began  to  plant  coffee  in  Surinam,  and  in  the  same  year  it  is  stated  to  have  been  intro- 
duced into  the  Island  of  Bourbon  from  Mocha.  In  172!^,  it  was  introduced  into  Cayenne  liy  the  French, 
and  in  1727  to  Martinique;  from  thence  it  most  probably  spread  to  the  neighbouring  islands,  for  in  1732 
an  act  passed  in  Jamaica,  to  encourage  it  in  that  island;  since  which  period  it  has  w'ondeiTully  increased 
in  both  the  East  and  West  Indies,  more  particularly  in  tlie  latter;  and  what  was  about  two  hundred 
years  since  not  known  as  an  article  of  food,  except  to  a few  tribes  in  the  interior  of  Africa,  has  no\v  made 
its  way  thnmgh  half  the  civilized  world. 

Of  the  coffee  produced  in  the  Eastern  parts  of  the  w'orld,  that  of  Alocha  is  esteemed  the  best ; 
secondly,  that  of  the  Island  of  Bourbon ; and  thirdly,  that  of  Java. 

It  is  impossible  to  ascertain,  with  accuracy,  the  quantity  of  coffee  that  is  raised  in  the  East  Indies. 
From  the  information  of  the  Custom  Master  at  Mocha,  it  appears  that,  one  year  wnth  onolher,  pro- 
Tious  to  the  troubles  occasioned  by  the  Wahabites,  there  were  annually  exported  from  Arabia  60,000 
bahars,  each  about  820 lbs.  making  in  the  whole  49,200,0001bs.  In  the  year  1777  there  w en?  exported 
from  the  port  of  Hodeida  alone,  upwards  of  35,000  bahars,  which  are  stated  to  be  more  than  was  ex- 
ported from  all  other  parts  of  Arabia  in  that  year. 