

XYLO  BALSAMUM, 

The  wood  of  the  tree  producing  the  Balm  of  Gilead,  should  be  chosen  in  small  knotty  rods,  the  rind  red, 
the  wood  white,  resinous,  and  having  a scent  somewhat  like  the  balsam. 

Freight  is  charged  on  Balm  of  Gilead  at  the  rate  of  Ificwt.  to  the  ton.  The  permanent  duty  on 
natural  balsams  Is  Is.  6d.  per  lb.  and  on  artificial  balsams  3s.  per  lb.  the  temporary,  or  war  duty  on  the 
former  6d.  and  on  the  latter  Is.  per  lb. 


CIVET. 

This  substance  is  soil,  unctuous  and  odoriferous,  nearly  the  consistence  of  butter,  and  is  produced  by 
an  animal  called  the  Civet  Cat.  They  are  confined  in  cages,  and  when  irritated,  throw  out  the  civet,  which 
is  carefully  scraped  off.  It  is  brought  from  the  Brazils,  Guinea,  and  the  interior  of  Africa.  Lord  Valentia 
brought  home  from  Abyssinia  a horn  full  of  it,  which  is  of  a dark  brown  colour,  unctuous,  somewhat  resem- 
bling Labdanum,  of  a very  powerful  smell,  far  from  fragrant  or  agreeable.  Its  principal  use  is  as  a per- 
fume,  and  when  genuine,  is  worth  from  30s.  to  40s.  per  ounce.  The  best  is  said  to  come  from  the  Brazils, 
of  a lively  whitish  colour,  which  becomes  dark  by  keeping,  if  paper  is  rubbed  with  civet,  and  it  will  bear 
writing  on  afterwards,  it  is  considered  genuine. 


-COFFEE. 

There  is  but  one  species  of  the  coffee  tree,  supposed  to  be  a native  of  Arabia;  it  seldom  rism  men 
than  16  or  18  feet  in  height:  the  main  stem  grows  ujpright,  and  is  covered  with  a light  brown  bark;  the 
branches  are  horizontal,  the  leaves  when  fully  grown,  are  4 or  5 inches  long,  and  2 broad  in  the  middle. 


COFFEE 


10,1 


The  flowers  are  produced  in  bunches  at  the  roots  of  the  leaves;  the  fruit,  which  is  the  only  useful  part,  re 
sembles  a cherry;  it  grows  in  clusters,  and  when  it  comes  to  be  of  a deep  red,  it  is  gathered.  The  fnlit  is 
of  an  orri  form,  smaller  than  a horse  bean,  and  of  a tough,  close,  and  very  hard  texture.  It  is  prominent 
on  one  side,  and  flatted  on  the  other,  having  a large  deep  furrow  running  along  the  Hatted  ^ide.  It  is  mo- 
derately  heavy,  hard  to  break,  of  a greyish  yellow  colour,  and  a somewhat  bitterisli  taste. 

The  liquor,  which  we  call  coffee,  is  said  to  have  been  drunk  in  ^Ethiopia  time  immemorial.  It  was 
introduced  into  Arabia  about  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Not  long  alter  it  reached  Mecca  and 
Afedina,  then  Grand  Cairo,  from  thence  it  continued  its  progress  to  Damascus  and  Aleppo,  and  in  1,554 
became  known  at  Constantinople.  The  first  mention  of  coffee  in  the  west  of  Ihirope  is  by  Rauwolf,  a 
German  traveller,  who  returned  from  Syria  in  1573.  In  1591  it  was  particularly  described  hy  Prosper 
Alpinus.  Its  use  as  a beverage  is  noticed  by  Biddulph  in  100,3,  who  says— “ The  Turks  have  for  theii' 
“ common  drink  coffee,  which  is  a black  drink  made  from  a kind  of  pulse  called  Cmva.  William  Finch, 
w^ho  visited  the  East  Indies  in  1607,  .says— « The  people  in  the  Island  of  Socotra  have  for  their  best  en- 
tertainment  a China  dish  of  Co6o,  a black  bitterish  drink,  made  from  a berry,  like  a bay  berry,  brought 
from  Mecca,  sipped  off  hot,”  It  is  not  certain  at  what  time  coffee  passed  to  the  western  parts  of  Europe; 
but  Pietro  de  la  Valle,  a Venetian  traveller,  in  a letter  from  Constantinople  in  1615,  .slates  his  intention  of 
bringing  with  him  some  coffee,  which  he  believed  was  a thing  imkiiowm  in  his  count ry. 