

The  town  of  Aden  has  at  present  a miserable  appearance  from  the  sea,  b(‘ing  neai  ly  a heap  of  ruins* 
out  of  which  two  minarets  and  a mosque  rear  their  heads.  The  rocky  peninsula  on  wln’ch  tin*  town  is 
situated,  was  formerly  strongly  fortified,  the  .summits  of  the  rocks  being  cove  red  with  the  ruins  of  lines 
and  forts.  Fortified  Island  was  also  covered  with  works  resembling  the  hill  forts  of  India;  and  when  in 
good  condition,  must  have  been  impregnable,  and  a small  expeiice  would  make  it  so  again,  'fhe  residtmee 
of  the  Sultan  is  but  an  indifferent  building,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  houses  are  comjiosed  ot  basket 
w^ork  and  matting.  There  is  a pier  running  out  from  the  middle  of  the  tow'ii,  where  boats  cun 
conveniently  land,  but  it  does  not  extend  to  low  water  mark. 

Aden  was  formerly  the  most  opulent  town  in  Aralria.  The  Portuguese,  under  Allnuiuercine,  made 
an  attempt  upon  it  in  1513,  but  were  repulsed.  In  15Ifi  a Portuguese  force  stopju’d  h(‘n‘  on  its  way  into 
the  Red  Sea,  when  the  Governor  of  the  town  oflered  to  surrender  it  to  them;  hut  they  defiTred  taking 


possession  till  their  return  from  tlic  Red  Sea.  In  the  mean  time  the  Governor,  having  received  remforce- 
ments,  refused  to  deliver  it  to  the  Portuguese,  who  thereupon  returned  to  India.  In  153:2  it  became  tri- 
butary to  them;  it  was  then  described  “very  strong,  standing  by  the  sea  side,  surromnled  by  iiiomnaiiis, 
“ on  the  top  of  which  are  little  castles  or  forts,  encompas.sed  with  ravelins  on  every  side,  excepting  a 
« little  opening  for  a road  into  the  country,  and  to  the  shore,  with  gates,  towxTs,  and  good  walls.  3 o the 
“ northw^ard  there  is  a large  port,  with  good  anchorage  secure  from  all  winds.  In  1.'>3H  it  wa.s  taken  by 
the  Turks,  who  reteined  possession  for  some  time,  hut  were  driven  out  of  the  country  hy  the  Imaum  of 
Sana’s  forces  V who,  desirous  of  atti^acting  vessels  to  his  dominions,  fixed  upon  Modiii,  to  which  he  annexed 


11* 


MACULA  BAY. 


so  many  privileges  and  encouragements,  that  Aden,  notwithstanding  the  superiority  of  its  harbour,  and 
the  difliculty  of  getting  through  the  straits  from  Mocha,  except  during  the  particular  monsoon,  was  in  a 
great  measure  abandoned,  and  the  commerce  transferred  to  the  new  establishment.  One  of  the  causes 
that  contributed  most  to  tlie  removal  of  the  commerce  to  Mocha  was,  that  the  market  for  coffee  being  in 
the  territory  of  the  Imaum  of  Sana,  he  wished  to  have  it  shipped  from  a port  within  the  boundary  of  his 
own  states,  and  for  that  purpose  laid  upon  the  article  so  heavy  a duty  when  it  was  taken  to  Aden,  that  the 
merchants,  to  avoid  this  charge,  adopted  the  practice  of  shi[>ping  it  from  Mocha. 