

Ti'he  town^  of  Muscat  is  walled  round,  and  none  but  Arabs  and  Banians  are  permitted  to  live  within 
ihe  gates ; the  others  reside  without  in  mat  houses.  It  is  strongly  fortified,  and  no  vessels  are  allowed  to 
go  in,  after  dusk,  or  come  out  after  sunset.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Serang  of  the  Imaum  or  Prince  of  Muscat, 
to  iissist  any, vessel  that  comes  to  the  port;  and  they  are  allowed  a certain  sum  for  this,  which  they  are 
never  backward  in  demanding,  whether  they  attend  or  not.  When  a vessel  comes  near,  by  making  the 
usual  signal  for  a pilot,  they  will  come  off,  otherwise  they  will  take  no  notice  of  any  one:  it  is  best  ta 
make  them  attend  till  the  vessel  is  secured,  as  they  have  excellent  boats  for  carrying  out  warp  anchors. 

Muscat  is  the  key  of  Arabia  and  Persia;  all  the  j)orts  from  Rosalgate  to  the  Gulf  are  tributary  to  it; 
it  is  a place  of  very  great  trade,  being  possessed  of  a considerable  number  of  large  ships,  which  trade  to 
the  British  settlements  in  India,  to  Sumatra,  the  Malay  Peninsula,  the  Red  Sea,  and  East  Coast  of  Africa. 
Great  indulgences  are  allowed  by  the  English  to  the  flag  of  Muscat ; being  recognised  as  neutral,  their  ves- 
8IU8  visit  the' enemy's  settlements,  where  they  purchase  prize-goods,  at  hsITtheir  value:  and  thejr*  have  of 
laic  been  ihe  carriers  of  British  India.  Muscat  may  be  considered  the  magazine  for  goods,  and  is  resorted 
to  by  vessels  from  every  port  in  Persia,  the  ports  of  Arabia  within  the  Gulf,  and  from  the  coast  as  far  as 
the  Indus.  It  has  been  the  usual  custom  for  all  English  merchant  ships  in  their  voyage  from  India  to  Bus- 
sorah,  to  stop  at  Muscat,  and  in  like  manner  on  their  return,  and  they  generally  sell  and  purchase  goods  here. 

There  is  aiidther  town,  about  three  miles  to  the  westward,  called  Muttra,  defended'^by  u sAiidl  fort, 
which  is  nearly  as  large  as  Mu'seat,  with  several  villages  in  the*  valley  between.  Ai-Huttra  therb  ba  gook 


MUSCAT, 


US 

place  to  haul  rcsselfl  on  shore;  and  though  they  have  one  at  Muscat,  yet  they  always  send  their  largest 
there  to  be  cleaned.  There  is  a good  road  along  the  shore  from  Muscat  to  MutJ,ra.  ^ 

Independent  of  tlie  commerce  by  sea  to  the  British  settlements  in  India  and  other  places,  the  inhabi- 
tants  of  Muscat  carry  on  a very  large  trade  with  the  numerous  tribes  of  Arabs  in  the  interior,  from  whom 
they  receive  caravans  frequently,  which  bring  various  articles  hereafter  enunu  rated. 

The  Government  of  the  Imaum  is  the  strictest  and  civilest  of  any  either  in  Persia  or  Arabia,  and  a 
stranger  may  walk,  the  streets  any  hour  in  the  night  without  molestation:  goods  are  ])ilcd  up  in  the 
streets,  and  lie  night  and  day  exposed,  without  any  watch  or  guard,  ajul  there  never  happens  an  in- 
stance that  such  goods  are  robbed  or  pilfered  of  the  least  part,  tin*  police  being  so  (*xeellent. 