

MYBRH 

Is  a vegetable  product  of  the  gum  resin  kind,  distilling  by  incision,  and  sonielimos  spontaneously  from 
the  tree  that  produces  it.  Myrrh  is  generally  in  grains,  from  the  size  of  a pea  to  that  of  a horse  bean,  or 
larger;  their  flgure  is  as  irregular  as  their  size,  round,  oblong,  or  contorted.  These  grains  are  of  a resin- 
ous greasy  substance,  not  hard  to  break;  their  colour  is  a reddish  brown,  with  a mixture  of  yellow;  their 
smell  is  strongly  aromatic,  and  their  taste  is  acrid,  warm,  bitter,  though  somewhat  spicy.  When 
broken,  myrrh  is  often  marked  with  small  white  semi-lunar  specks.  It  is  to  be  chosen  in  ch^r  pieces, 
light,  triable,  unctuous,  and  of  the  bitterest  taste,  of  a reddish  brown  colour:  that  which  Is  foul  and  black 
must  be  rejected.  When  pure,  myrrh  will  dissolve  in  boiling  water ; but  as  the  liquor  cools,  a |)ortioii  of 
resinous  matter  subsides.  There  are  sometimes  found  among  myrrh,  hard  shining  pieces,  of  a pale  yellow 
colour,  resembling  Gum  Arabic,  but  without  taste  or  smell;  sometimes  masses  of  lldelliiim  arc  mixed  with 
it,  which  are  darker  coloured,  more  opaque,  softer  tlian  myrrli  internally,  and  which  di/lers  from  it  in 
taste  and  smell.  Sometimes  an  unctuous  gummy  resin,  of  a moderately  strong,  but  somewhat  ungrateful 
smell,  with  a durable  bitterish  taste,  obviously  diflerent  from  Hdtllium  and  myrrh,  is  fouinl  with  this  drug; 
and  sometimes  we  meet  with  hard,  compact  dark  coloured  tears,  less  unctuous  than  inyrrh,  of  an  ofleii- 
sive  smell,  and  a most  ungrateful  bitterness,  so  as,  when  kept  some  time  in  the  mouth,  to  provoke  retching. 
That  which  is  dark  coloured,  and  full  of  impurities,  should  be  rejected. 

The  following  are  the  quantities  of  myrrh  imported  and  sold  at  the  East  India  sales,  in  the  years 
1804  to  1808  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount,  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Years. 

1 March  Sale.  | 

.September  S.ife. 

1 Totut.  j 

\ver.  per^^^f. 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwi. 

Jt* 

1 i’ 

if. 

r/. 

1804 

•mm 

_ 

— 

— 

- 

18a5 

mmm 

_ 

...» 

,r-  T 

1806 

— 

18 

380 

18 

380 

21 

2 

3 

1807 

56 

1,058 

_ 

— 

56 

1,058 

18 

17 

o 

1808 

38 

747 

15 

267 

53 

1,014 

19 

2 

.16  cwt.  of  myrrh  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £5  12«.  per  cwt.  and  the  temporary 
Or  war  duty  £l  17j.  4d.  making  in  the  whole  £7  4d.  per  cwt. 


108 


NAXnON^—RHINOCEROS"  HORNS  and  HIDES-SAGAPENUM-SALEP. 


NATRON, 

Or  native  mineral  Alkali,  is  sometimes  found  in  Egypt,  from  whence  it  has  been  brought  to  India, 
and  from  thence  to  England.  Volney  describes  the  lakes  where  it  is  produced:  their  bed  is  a natural  ca- 
vity, 3 or  4 leagues  long,  and  about  a quarter  of  a league  broad ; the  bottom  is  solid  and  stony ; it  is  dry 
during  nine  months  of  the  year,  but  in  winter,  a water  of  a violet  red  colour  oozes  out  of  the  earth,  which 
fills  the  lake  to  5 or  0 feet  in  depth ; the  return  of  the  heat  of  summer  evaporates  this,  and  leaves  a bed  of 
salt  behind  it,  of  two  feet  in  thickness,  which  is  dug  out  witli  bars  of  iron.  The  mineral  Alkali  differs 
from  the  vegetable;  it  is  less  caustic,  and  so  far  from  attracting  humidity,  that  it  effloresces  in  the  air.  The 
French  are  stated  to  have  imported  into  Marseilles  from  Egypt  5,000  tons  of  this  article  in  a year. 