


110 


TRAGACANTII  GUM. 


TRAGACANTH  GUM,  or,  as  it  is  usually  caUed,  gum  dragon,  is  a gum  exuding  from  a prickly 
plant  of  the  same  name.  This  commodity,  chiefly  produced  in  Turkey  and  Arabia,  is  of  different 
colours  and  qualities,  from  a pale  white  to  a dark  and  opaque.  It  is  usually  in  long,  slender,  worm- 
like pieces,  and  sometimes  it  is  in  roundish  drops,  which  are  rare.  It  is  moderately  heavy,  of  a firm  con- 
sistence, rather  tough  than  hard.  It  is  with  difficulty  pulverized,  unless  it  be  dried,  and  the  pestle  and 
mortar  kc]it  warm.  Its  natural  colour  is  a pale  white,  and  the  cleanest  specimens  are  something  transpa- 
rent. It  has  little  or  no  smell,  and  a taste  rather  disagreeable.  It  melts  in  the  mouth  to  a very  soft  mu- 
cilage, without  sticking  to  the  teeth,  as  Gum  Arabic  does.  The  most  striking  difference  between  this  and 
the  other  gums  is,  that  it  gives  a thicker  consistence  tO  a much  larger  quantity  of  water,  and  is  with  diffi- 
culty dissoluble,  or  rather  dissolves  but  imperfectly.  When  put  into  water,  it  slowly  imbibes  a great  quan- 
tity, swells  in  a large  volume,  and  forms  a soft,  but  not  fluid  mucilage;  by  agitation,  and  an  addition  of 
ivutcr,  a solution  may  be  obtained,  but  the  gummy  mucilage  settles  to  the  bottom  on  standing.  Gum 
Tragacanth  should  be  chosen  in  long  twisted  pieces,  semi-transparent,  white,  very  clear,  and  free  from  all 
other  colours;  the  brown,  and  particularly  the  black,  are  to  be  wholly  rejected.  An  inferior  kind  has  been 
lately  brought  home  from  the  British  settlements,  for  an  account  of  which,  see  Gum  Kuteera. 

t)f  Gum  Tragacanth  16  cwt.  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  pennanent  duty  is  £S  IOj,  per  cwt.  and  thtj 
temporary  or  war  duty  £l  3s,  id.  making  in  the  wliole  £i  l3^.  id.  per  cwt» 


CHAPTER  IX 


Coast  of  Arabia  to  the  Persian  Gulf. 


Ailtn;  Descriptton'-^Trade-^Articles  suitable  to  the  Market — Provisions  and  liefi'cshmcnts-^Macvhi 

Shahar — Kisseen^^Dofar-^Morebat-^Mazeira  Island — Rosalgnte — Zmr — Kuriat — Muscat ; Description 
— Coi'ws,  and  tVeights^Trade  between  British  India  and  the  Guffs  of  Persia  and  Arabia — Balance  in 
Favour  of  British  India^Trade  with  other  Placcs-^Duties-^Provisions  and  Bfrcshments-^Burlca, 


ADEK. 


About  100  miles  to  the  eastward  of  the  straits  of  Babelmandel,  is  (\'ipe  Aden,  in  liitlindc  about 
19^  45  North.  This  Cape  is  high  and  craggy,  and  forms  a peninsula,  witli  a deep  bay  to  the  westward, 
called  Back  Bay,  and  another  to  the  eastward,  in  which  the  town  of  Aden  is  situated,  in  latitude  12^  .51 V 
North,  and  longitude  4.5°  10'  East,  where  ships  lie  sheltered  from  westerly  winds.  The  anchorage  is  in 
7 fathoms,  with  Cape  Aden  bearing  South;  the  mosque  touching  the  N.  W.  point  of  Eortilied  Island 
(a  black  islet  with  a tower  on  its  extremity)  about  | of  a mile  distant  from  the  island. 