

In  ISO*,  Sir  Home  Popham  was  sent  on  a mission  from  Bengal  to  Arabia.  He  visited  Aden,  and 
prefers  it  to  Mocha,  both  in  a commercial  and  political  point  of  view : as  a commercial  port,  it  has  manifest 
advantages  over  Mocha,  it  being  accessible  at  aU  tunes  of  the  year  Its  intercourse  with  the  Coast  of 
Africa  can  be  kept  up  at  all  seasons,  and  consequently  there  would  be  a continued  trade,  if  any  protec- 
tion \vas  given  to  it  by  tlie  English,  to  whom  the  Sultan  is  much  attached,  and  has  offered  to  hold 
his  country  under  them.  There  are  some  merchants  already  settled  at  Aden,  who,  though  they  have 
but  little  trade,  enjoy  a mild  Government,  and  on  that  account  they  do  not  remove  to  Mocha. 
The  exports  and  imports  are  nearly  the  same  as  at  Mocha;  and  Gum  Arabic,  and  other  drugs,  which 
are  brought  from  the  opposite  coast,  owing  to  its  contiguity,  may  be  procured  at  a cheaper  rate.  The 
natives  who  inhabit  the  coast  from  Cape  Guardafui  to  the  straits,  exclude  the  Arabs  from  their  ports,  and 
bring  tlicir  produce  either  to  Aden  or  Mocha  in  their  own  dows;  a great  part  of  the  myrrh  and 
Gum  Arabic  is  brought  to  the  former  place,  where  the  Banians  of  Mocha  liave  each  a partner  established 
to  conduct  tlieir  business.  AVere  a regular  trade  carried  on  at  Aden,  the  consumption  of  goods  would 
probably  Increase  considerably,  as  the  Africans  have  no  limit  to  their  purchases,  excepting  the  amount  of 
their  gold,  elephant's  teeth,  gums,  and  the  produce  of  their  own  country. 

The  articles  suitable  to  the  market  are  as  follow ; and  the  quantity  that  may  be  disposed  of,  about 
the  value  of  three  lacs  of  rupees,  principally  the  produce  of  the  East  Indies  and  China. 


Benjamin. 

Cotton, 

Iron. 

Steel. 

Camphirc. 

Cotton  thread. 

Lead. 

Sugar. 

('ardumums. 

Cutlery.  ^ 

Piece  goods. 

Tobacco. 

Cassia. 

Ginger. 

Popper. 

Turmeric. 

China  ware. 

Glass  ware. 

Rice. 

Tin. 

Cloves. 

Hardware. 

Sandal  w^ood. 

Tutenaguc, 

Cinnamon. 

Ironmongery 

Silks. 

Vermilion. 

The  exports  would  consist  ot  coffee,  elephants'  teeth,  gold,  and  gums  of  various  kinds. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  beef  procured  here  is  but  indifferent;  the  Sultan  reserves  to  himself  the  disposal  of  bullocks 
The  be.st  w^ater  is  to  be  procured  from  Back  Bay,  the  only  cxpence  of  which  is  3 dollars  demanded  by  the 
Dola:  that  from  Aden  is  brackish,  and  brought  in  skins  to  the  landing  place.  Grapes  and  pomegranates 
are  to  be  had  in  plenty,  but  no  vegetables.  Firewood  is  to  be  got,  if  required. 

MACULA  BAY 

fs  about  55  leagues  E.  N.  E.  from  Cape  Aden,  in  latitude  about  W'  6 North,  and  longitude  47®  S3 
East.  The  bay  is  about  * leagues  deep,  and  60  broad.  At  the  bottom  of  it  is  a small  town ; but  refresh- 
ments are  not  to  be  expected,  water,  and  every  article  of  provision,  except  (ish,  being  scarce,  and  the 
inhabitants  are  not  to  be  trusted.  Between  this  place  and  Sbahar  Point  are  several  small  villages  close 
to  Uie  sea  side. 