


SHAHAR—KISSEEN—OOFAEo-MOREBAT-^MAZEIRA  ISLAND— ROSAI.GATr,.  j 1.1. 


SHAHAR 

• 

Is  about  40  miles  to  the  Eastward  of  Macula,  in  latitude  14"^  20  North,  and  lun^itiule  48'*  Jii  East. 
This  town  appears  of  considerable  size,  and  is  situated  close  to  the  sea  side.  The  inliuliUants  arc  inure 
civilized,  and  give  a kind  reception  to  strangers;  and  here  provisions  and  refreshments  mn)*  he  proem  ed. 
The  place  is  known  by  two  hills,  one  to  the  northward,  and  the  other  to  the  southward.  Ships  anchor  in 
9 fathoms,  the  first  hill  bearing  N.  £.  by  N,  the  other  about  West. 

KISSEEN. 

This  bay  is  formed  by  Cape  Kisseen,  in  latitude  15^  19  North,  and  longitude  50'  East,  and  Cape 
Fartash  : the  former  is  known  by  two  peaks  that  make  like  an  ass’s  ears.  In  this  bay  are  three  towns  or 
villages,  the  principal  of  which  is  Kisseen,  in  latitude  15®  25'  North.  To  the  westward,  about  a mile,  on 
the  shore  is  a well,  the  only  place  where  water  can  be  procured. 

DOFAR. 

Tlus  town  is  called  Hamme  Badgeree  by  the  natives ; it  is  about  .50  leagues  from  Ca])c  Fartash,  and 
in  latitude  17^  North,  and  longitude  54®  33  East;  the  anchorage  is  about  two  miles  from  the  shore.  This 
place  was  formerly  of  some  importance.  It  was  destroyed  in  1526  by  the  Portuguese,  upon  what  occasion 
it  does  not  appear.  The  town  is  small;  no  provisions  or  refreshments  can  be  procured;  the  natives  who 
arc  armed  with  matchlocks  and  spears,  are  shy,  but  do  not  appear  unfriendly  to  strangers. 

MOBEBAT. 

Cape  Morebat,  which  forma  the  southern  extreme  of  the  bay,  is  in  latitude  17®  North,  and  longitude 
55®  4'  East.  The  town  b about  two  miles  from  the  point,  and  consists  of  a number  of  huts,  with  several 
mosques;  the  best  anchorage  b abreast  of  the  town,  about  a mile  distance.  If  the  inhabitants  should  be 
shy  in  coming  on  board,  wave  a white  flag,  when  they  will  come  off;  they  are  well  behaved,  but  it  would  be 
^proper  to  rbk  going  far  from  the  beach,  or  sleeping  on  shore  in  the  night.  This  bay  is  preferable  to 
any  on  the  coast,  and  ships  that  lose  their  passage,  generally  wait  here  the  change  of  the  monsoon* 
Water  b to  be  procured  by  sinking  casks  near  the  mosques;  the  water  is  brackish,  but  does  not  injure 
the  health  of  the  men.  Fbh  are  plentiful;  some  sheep,  goats,  and  bullocks  are  to  be  had:  the  latter  is  a 
scarce  article,  but  fodder  more  so.  Thb  place  is  not  recommended,  except  in  cases  of  necessity.  A few 
lean  bullocks,  goats,  or  a few  fowls,  are  all  that  may  reasonably  be  expected.  The  inhabitants  here  arc 
generally  at  war  with  those  of  the  interior,  with  whom  they  have  no  communication. 