

RHINOCEROS'  HORNS 

Are  much  esteemed  among  the  Mahometans,  not  for  any  real  utility,  but  on  account  of  their  being 
considered  a powerful  antidote  against  poison.  They  are  in  general  about  12  to  15  inches  long,  and 
from  3 to  6 inches  in  diameter,  though  sometimes  10  inches  in  diameter,  and  near  24  inches  long;  this  size 
is  seldom  seen.  A good  sized  horn,  sound,  and  not  broken  at  the  point,  is  worth  from  three  to  four  pounds 
sterling.  At  the  base  they  are  commonly  of  a brown  or  olive  colour,  though  they  are  occasionally  met 
with  grey,  and  sometimes  nearly  white:  they  are  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  and  are  nearly 
straight,  having  a very  small  curve,  inclining,  upwards  with  a sharp  point.  The  horns  of  the  Rhinoceros 
liavc  not  that  interior  spungy  substance  which  is  contained  in  the  horns  of  other  animals,  but  are  entirely 
solid : they  are  made  into  drinking  cups  and  snuff  boxes,  which  are  very  beautiful,  and  preferred  to 
tortoise-shell. 


RHINOCEROS  HIDES 

Are  in  great  demand  for  making  targets  or  shields;  when  prepared,  tliey  are  proof  against  the  stroke 
of  a scimitar;  they  are  of  a variegated  colour,  and  when  polished,  are  very  similar  to  tortoise-shell.  At 
Surat  they  make  the  most  elegant  targets  of  these  hides,  and  stud  them  with  silver-headed  nails.  These 
will  fetcli  from  30  to  40  rupees  each,  and  are  much  sought  after,  particularly  in  Arabia. 

SAGAPENUM 

• 

Is  the  concrete  gummy  resinous  juice  of  a plant  not  well  known.  It  is  met  with  in  drops,  and  in 
masses  composed  of  those  drops ; but  the  loose  drops  are  much  finer  than  the  masses.  In  both  forms  it  is 
a compact  substance,  considerably  heavy,  of  a reddish  colour  outwardly,  but  paler  within,  and  dear  like 
horn.  It  grows  soft  on  handling,  so  as  frequently  to  stick  to  the  fingers.  The  larger,  daricer  coloured, 
broken  masses  of  Bdellium  are  sometimes  substituted,  but  they  may  be  easily  distinguished  by  the  weakness 
of  their  smell.  Sagapenum  has  a strong  smell,  somewhat  of  the  leek  kind,  and  a moderately  hot,  biting 
taste.  Of  Sagapenum  18  cwt.  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  16s.  and  the  war  duty 
18tf.  8rf.  per  cwt.  making  in  Uie  whole  £3  10s,  9d.  per  cwt. 

SALEP 

Is  pi'epared  from  the  dried  roots  of  a plant  of  the  Orchis  kind;  it  was  formerly  imported  from  the 
East  Indies,  and  held  in  great  estimation,  being  considered  highly  nourishing.  It  is  generally  in  yellowish 
white  oval  pieces,  bard,  clear,  and  pellucid,  without  smell,  in  taste  somewhat  resembling  TragaoantlK 


SKNNA— SHARKS'  FINS. 


109 


When  properly  prepared,  it  is  a wholesome  nourishment,  Miperior  to  rice,  and  it  has  the  sin^nilar  propiMly 
of  concealing  the  taste  of  salt  water;  hence,  to  prevent  the  calamity  of  famine  at  sea,  it  has  been  proposed 
that  the  powder  of  it  should  constitute  a part  of  every  ship’s  provisions.  If  kept  dry,  it  never  spoils. 