

MAZEIRA  ISLAND. 

The  N.  B.  part  of  thb  bland  is  in  latitude  20®  35'  North,  and  longitude  about  59®  40  East.  On  its 
Mstern  side  is  a small  village,  but  it  is  seldom  virited  by  Europeans,  the  currents  running  strong,  and  the 
coast  being  but  imperfectly  known.  There  is  a passage  between  the  island  and  the  main  for  large  vesse 

R0SAL6ATE. 

This  cape  fa  the  N.  E.  point  of  Arabia;  the  land  is  high  and  uneven  over  it,  but  facing  the  sea  fa  fa 
low  and  levd.  Its  sfanation  wat  not  correeUy  determined  till  1799,  when  by  observations  taken  in  the 
licopard,  it  iqi^iean  Ac  latitade  Is  88®  SO"  North,  and  longitude  ®0“  10'  East. 

Q 


114 


ZOAR—KURIAT— MUSCAT. 


The  town  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  a small  river  or  crook,  about  5 leagues  from  the  Cape,  in  lati- 
tude about  22^  34  East;  it  is  inhabited  by  fisliormeti,  who  bring  off  fish  and  dates  to  ships  passing;  the 
town  is  small,  has  several  trees  near  it,  and  4 or  5 tomb%<{r  white  buildings  on  the  left  of  it. 

ZOAR 

Is  in  latitude  22°  45'  North,  about  five  leagues  from  Rosalgate;  it  is  a considerable  town,  and  a place 
of  some  trade,  but  being  so  near  Muscat,  to  which  it  is  tributary,  it  is  not  visited  by  European  vessels. 
It  was  taken  and  plundered  by  the  Portuguese  under  Albuquerque  in  1508. 

KURIAT. 

To  the  southward  of  Cape  Kuriat,  is  a towm  of  the  same  name;  it  was  formerly  of  Some  note.  It 
was  visited  by  the  Portuguese  in  1508,  under  Albuquerque,  who  being  ill  received  by  the  inhabitants  at 
that  period,  under  the  dominion  of  Ormus,  he  stormed  the  town,  then  plundered,  and  afterwards  burnt  it. 

The  Government  of  Muscat  is  said  to  extend  to  Cape  Rosalgate,  including  the  above  places;  but  it  is 
not  safe  for  Europeans  to  land  at  the  villages  near  the  Cape,  because  the  inhabitants  are  inhospitable  to 
strangers,  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  wandering  Arabs  keep  some  of  these  villages  or  towns  in 
subjection.  The  only  supplies  that  are  likely  to  be  met  with  hereabouts,  are  fish,  dates,  and  sometimes 
water,  which  are  brought  off  by  the  country  boats  to  ships  passing  near  the  coast. 

MUSCAT 

Is  situated  in  latitude  23°  38'  North,  and  longitude  about  59°  16'  East.  The  harbour,  or  cove,  is 
formed  by  high  land  to  the  southward  and  westward,  and  on  the  East  side  by  an  island,  called  Muscat 
Island,  which  is  joined  by  a reef  of  rocks  to  the  peninsula,  on  which  the  town  of  Muscat  is  situated,  the 
entrance  into  the  cove  being  from  the  northward,  and  is  protected  by  a fort  on  each  side;  and  there  is  ano- 
ther fort  close  to  the  town,  that  commands  the  inside  of  the  cove,  where  the  depths  of  water  are  4 and  5 
fatl^pms,  between  the  two  western  forts,  and  where  a large  fleet  may  moor  in  safety. 