

The  trade  carried  on  between  British  India  and  Persia  is  however  very  considerable,  and  is  open  to 
every  one,  the  article  of  woollens  excepted,  which  the  Company  reserve  to  themselves,  notwithstanding  it 
is  attended  with  an  annual  heavy  loss.  It  appears  from  papers  laid  before  the  House  of  Commons,  that 

The  average  amount  of  sales  at  Bussorah  for  10  years  was  .>^..^^^£5047 

The  annual  loss  130 

Besides  which,  the  expence  of  the  fartory,  inrlitding  presents,  was*«.,.^«^4<276 

Annual  loss  arising  from  the  sale  of  woollens,  and  the  establishment  ^^£^5406 

The  demand  for  British  manufactures  is  comparatively  small  ; the  most  valuable  part  is  supplied 
from  Europe  by  caravans  across  the  desert.  The  expence  of  carriage,  including  the  insurance  from  risk, 
and  the  duties  paid  the  wandering  tribes,  &c.  is  very  moderate.  It  is  impossible  that  a cargo  of  European 
goods  to  any  extent  could  be  found  capable  of  being  disposed  of  in  all  or  any  ports  in  the  Gulf.  It  will 
appear  by  the  list  of  imports  in  1805,  that  the  only  European  articles  mentioned  are  lead,  cutlery,  quicksilver, 
iron,  beads,  cochineal,  and  steel;  and  the  amount  was  under  a lac  of  rupees.  A considerable  part  of  the  goods 
imported  into  Bussorah  from  India  is,  no  doubt,  for  Turkey  and  other  parts,  as  well  as  Persia;  but  as  most 
of  those  articles  are  also  imported  into  Bushire  (the  Indian  manufactures,  however,  in  small  quantities,  but 
the  others  in  a much  larger  proportion),  some  of  these  necessary  for  the  supply  of  Persia,  are  of  con- 
siderable value,  and  naturally  entitled  to  a preference  over  woollens  or  other  European  articles ; wliilst, 
on  the  other  liand,  the  greater  part  of  the  products  and  manufactures  of  Persia  is  not  suitable  to  the  Indian 
mai'kets.  They  consist  of  horses,  pearls,  silks,  brocades,  carpets,  manufactures  of  steel,  sword  blades, 
spear  heads,  gun  barrels,  glass,  rose-w’aier,  otto  of  roses,  cotton  cloths,  shawls,  skins,  raw  silks,  some 
indigo,  tobacco,  rhubarb,  drugs  of  different  sorts,  diied  fruits,  iron,  copper,  Caramania  wool,  wines, 
and  some  trifling  articles;  to  which  must  be  added  Persian  and  Turkish  coins,  Venetian  sequins,  German 
crowns,  and  gold  and  silver  in  bars.  India  is  therefore  a constant  drain  upon  Persia  for  its  gold  and  silver, 
as  scai’ce  one  third  of  the  imports  can  be  returned  to  India  in  tlie  produce  of  Persia. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  trade  carried  on  between  Madras  and  Bombay  and  the  Gulf 
Persia  in  five  years,  1802  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports 
consisted  in  1805.  The  trade  between  Bengal  and  the  Gulf  of  Persia  is  blended  with  that  of  the 
Arabian  Gulf. 