

BAHREEN  ISLANDS. 

The  principal  of  these  islands  is  situated  about  30  leagues  W.  N.  W.  from  Bushire,  and  w ithin  5 
leagues  of  the  coast  of  Arabia:  they  are  in  possession  of  the  Persians.  On  the  island  is  a strong  fort 
garrisoned  with  about  300  men;  but  their  supplies,  even  water,  are  brought  from  the  ludghbouring  places. 
At  these  islands  is  the  greatest  and  most  valuable  pearl  fisliery  in  the  w orld,  the  annual  produce  being 
seldom  less  than  60,000  Bussorah  tomands,  and  often  more;  some  years  it  amounts  to  100,000  toiiiands. 

The  pearl  banks  commence  in  about  26^  North  latitude,  and  extend  to  26^  4^)  North,  having  in  that 
space  several  towns  very  little  known. 

The  fishery  generally  commences  in  June,  and  lasts  about  two  months.  It  is  carried  on  by  the  Per- 
sians, and  the  divers  are  Persians. 

The  duty  on  what  is  taken,  is  one  third  to  the  Sovereign,  which  the  collector  receives  every  day,  either 
pearls,  or  their  equivalent  in  money,  as  the  divers,  or  those  who  contract  wdth  them,  can  agree.  It  some- 
times happens  that  a diver,  or  contractor,  makes  his  fortune  in  a season.  The  boats  are  all  numbered,  and 
no  oysters  are  allowed  to  be  opened  in  a boat,  but  must  be  t>rought  on  shore  by  a certain  hour,  w hen  they 
are  opened  in  the  presence  of  an  officer.  The  pearls  which  are  found,  are  then  carried  to  the  collector, 
^ho  receives  the  duty,  and  the  day's  business  is  concluded. 

The  oyster  banks  have  from  15  to  30  feet  water  on  them,  and  some  more.  It  frequently  happens 
that  a man  will  bring  up  300  to  400  oysters  in  a day,  and  not  find  as  many  pearls  as  are  worth  five  shil- 
lings; as  there  ore  more  which  have  not  any,  than  those  that  have,  and  of  these  many  have  only  small 
pearls,  which  are  denominated  seed  pearl. 

The  oyster  shells  are  always  the  property  of  the  divers,  whether  they  fish  for  themselves,  or  contract 
ivith  others.  Some  of  these  shells  ore  from  8 to  10  inches  in  diameter,  nearly  of  a round  form,  and  thick 
in  proportion.  The  oysters  are  seldom  eaten,  as  they  are  generally  rank.  The  sorts  and  sizes  vary  so 
much,  that  the  smallest  are  not  two  inches  in  diameter:  these  are  eaten  by  the  people  on  the  spot.  The 
largest  shells  have  not  always  the  greatest  quantity,  nor  do  they  contain  the  largest  pearls,  ns  neither 
the.  sisw  nor  colour  indicates  their  contents,  it  being  mere  cliance.  The  round  pearls  are  always  found  in 
the  fleshy  part  of  the  oyster,  and  many  of  those  which  have  an  irregular  shape:  some  adhere  to  the  inner 
part  of  the  shell,  which  are  deformed,  and  flat  on  that  side  which  is  attached  to  it. 