

There  are  eight  bastions,  on  each  of  which  are  mounted  8 brass  guns,  12  pounders,  besides  which 
upwards  of  50  brass  cannon,  6 and  9 pounders,  on  ship  carriages,  are  mounted  round  the  walla.  Th^ 
fortifications  on  each  side  the  creek’s  mouth,  are  exclusive  of  the  eight  bastions;  baddes  which,  there  is  a 
battery  of  12  brass  guns  at  the  Bashaw’s  quarters,  which  is  about  100  yards  below  the  ci4k’g  mouth 

The  mosques  and  houses  are  all  buUt  of  burnt  brick;  many  houses  belonging  to  the  merchants 
are  large  and  convenient,  being  only  one  story  high  above  the  ground  floor,  which  consbts  of  a hall 

facing  the  gate;  on  each  side  of  which,  are  magazines  and  warehouses  for  the  reception  of  merchandbe 

The  meydan,  or  great  square,  b very  large,  and  b not  only,  used  for  exerebing  horses,  but  as  thi 
great  com  market,  where  wheat,  and  all  kinds  of  grain  and  pulse  arc  sold,  wholesale.  On  one  side  of 
the  meydan,  b the  Seraglio,  or  Governor’s  palace,  which  is  very  large,  but  not  a handsome  building. 

Bussorah,  previous  to  the  plague,  which  commenced  in  April,  1773,  was  computed  to  contain  300000 
Inhabitants,  and  in  September  following  when  it  ceased,  they  only  amounted  to  about  50,000;  the  remainder 
except  about  20,000,  who  fled  from  the  city,  having  fldlen  victims  to  its  fury.  * 

Bussorah  was  first  visited  by  the  Englbh  in  1640,  who  soon  after  established  a factory,  which  has  been 
kept  up  ever  since,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  convubions  to  which  the  country  has  been  suMect; 
The  factoiy  is  a good  and  convenient  building,  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  creek,  full  three  from 
its  mouth,  where  vessek  ot  80  tons  may  unload  their  cargoes  at  the  gate  of  tiie  factoiy.  At  the  side  of  the 
creek  b a good  garden;  and  about  5 miles  dbtance  from  the  Bagdad  gate,  the  CompanyVt  r^ent  has  a country 
house,  c^  hfargil,  which  has  a good  prospect' up  and  down  the  river,  from  the  banks  of  which  iti 
distant  about  a quarter  of  a mile. 


BUSSORAII. 


From  its  convenient  situation,  Dussorah  is  a place  of  great  trade,  as  mercliaiils  can  here  purchase 
the  produce  of  most  parts  of  India,  Persia,  and  Arabia  at  the  first  hand,  they  being  iiupoiled  directly 
from  the  place  of  their  growth  and  manufacture.  There  are  a number  of  Armenian  and  other  merclianls 
resident  here,  who  carry  on  a considerable  commerce  with  all  the  ports  of  India,  by  cara>ans  to  Aleppo 
and  Bagdad,  and  from  thence  to  Constantinople. 

COINS. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  floose,  danims,  mamoodics,  and  tomands,  thus  divided  : 

10  Floose  ^ r 1 Danim, 

10  Danims  /makc<  1 Mamoody. 

100  Mamoodies  3 (.1  Tomand,  value  about  lo  rupees. 