

The  shells  are  bought  on  the  spot,  and  sent  to  different  parts  of  Persia,  from  whence  they  are  sent 
up  the  Red  Sea,  and  from  thence  to  Grand  Cairo  and  Constantinople.  Many  are  carried  to  India,  and 
from  thence  to  China,  where  they  arc  manufactured  into  a great  variety  of  neat  and  use  ful  articles. 

The  pearls  produced  here  ore  not  so  much  esteemed  in  Europe  as  those  of  Ceylon,  having  a 
yellowish  hue ; but  the  natives  of  India  prefer  them.  They  say  they  always  retain  their  original  colour: 
whereas  the  white  will  in  a few  years  become  darker,  from  the  heat  of  the  weather,  and  that  ol  the  person 
wearing  them. 

CATIF,  OR  EL  KATIF. 

The  town  is  Stinted  in  latitude  about  26®  60'  North,  at  the  weetem  extremity  of  a bay  of  tlie  same 
Qeae.  It  ia  said  to  be  a good  harbour,  and  i place  of  lome  trade,  but  is  seldom  visited  by  Europeans*  ■ 


6nANE-BlTS80RAlT. 


m 


GRANE. 

Thi*  town  and  harixMir  is  situated  on  the  Coast  of  Arabia  in  latitude  gS®  13'  North,  about  18  leagues 
from  the  entrance  of  Bussorah  River.  The  town  is  on  the  south  side  of  a small  river,  and  here  the  Com* 
pany's  cruisers  generally  wait  the  arrival  of  the  overland  dispatches  from  Europe. 

BUSSORAH. 

This  town  is  situated  in  a plain,  about  three  miles  from  the  great  river  of  Arabia,  from  which  a creek 
rans  into  the  city,  navigable  at  high  water  for  vessels  of  50  or  60  tons,  and  is  in  latitude  30®  SO'  North 
and  lonptude  47®  33  East.  It  is  about  100  miles  from  the  Persian  Gulf,  into  which  tliat  river  empties 
Itself,  and  about  90  miles  from  Koma,  the  extreme  point  of  Mesopotamia,  where  the  rivers  Tigris  and 
Euphrates  unite  The  river  is  about  half  a mile  broad  from  Bussorah  creek  to  the  Persian  skore. 

The  city  b walled,  and  surrounded  with  a deep  and  broad  ditch;  it  has  four  gates  and  a sally  port. 
The  walls  are  of  mud,  from  «0  to  26  feet  thick,  with  parapet  walk,  breast  high,  which  have  small  eml 
brasures  for  musketry  or  arrows.  The  walls  not  only  encircle  the  city  on  the  side  of  the  land,  but  like- 
wise on  those  of  the  creek,  the  entrance  of  which  is  at  a considerable  dbtance,  where  the  walls  terminate 
on  both  sides,  each  extremity  being  defended  by  a fortification  and  a gate,  which  are  three  miles  dbtance 
from  the  town.  In  the  intermediate  space  are  many  thousands  of  date  trees,  mixed  with  rice  grounds. 
The  walls  are  about  12  miles  in  circuit;  and  although  not  half  the  enclosed  space  b built  upon,  yet  it  b a 
large  city,  and  was  formerly  very  populous.  The  two  principal  gates  are  large,  and  are  situated  on  thd 
land  side;  one  b called  the  Bagdad,  and  the  other  the  Zobeir  Gate;  neither  of  them  is  defended  by  a 
ditch,  which  b wanting  for  a considerable  dbtance  each  side.  The  foundation  of  the  waUs,  which  ig 
buUt  of  burnt  brick,  reaches  so  high,  as  to  bo  above  the  water  when  tbo  dJtrb  b fuU.  The  water  b let 
into  the  ditch  at  the  flood  tide  from  the  creek,  and  b retained  by  flood  gates. 