

Muscat  was  a place  of  considerable  trade  previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  IMrtuguese  in  IheNC  seas,  and 
was  then  tributary  to  Ormus.  Albuquerque  summoned,  and  obliged  it  to  submit  in  the  year  lo()7;  but  a 
body  of  2,000  Arabs  getting  into  the  town,  immediately  raised  an  insurrection,  in  spite  of  all  the  care  the 
Governor  could  take  to  keep  them  quiet,  upon  which  a bloody  and  obstinate  action  ensued,  ending  in  a 
complete  victory  gained  by  the  Portuguese.  After  the  destruction  of  Urmus,  this  place  hecanie  the  prin- 
cipal mart  of  this  part  of  the  world,  and  thereby  produced  very  great  advantages  to  the  Crown  of  Portugal, 
exclusive  of  the  prodigious  private  fortunes  made  by  individuals,  while  they  remained  in  possession.  During 
that  time,  the  city  was  very  much  improved ; for,  besides  regular  fortifications,  they  erected  a stately 
church,  a noble  college,  and  many  other  public  structures,  as  well  as  very  fine  stone  houses,  in  which  the 
principal  merchants  resided,  and  those  who,  by  the  management  of  public  aflliirs,  had  acquired  fortunes  to 
live  at  their  ease.  In  process  of  time,  however,  they  began  to  treat  the  natives  so  ill,  and  to  lay  tlieir 
commerce  under  so  many  difficulties,  that  at  length,  despairing  of  redress  any  other  way,  they  had  recourse 
to  arms;  and  though  the  Portuguese  behaved  very  gallantly,  yet  in  the  end  they  were  reduced  to  such 
extremities,  as  to  be  glad  to  embark  with  their  best  eflects  on  board  their  ships  in  the  port,  and  retire  to 
their  other  settlements.  This  was  about  the  year  1648;  but  the  war  did  not  end  here : they  made  frequent 
attempts  to  recover  a place  of  such  importance,  sometimes  by  force,  sometimes  by  negotiation,  but  with- 
out effect.  They  for  many  years  disturbed  the  trade  of  the  place;  but  these  hostilities  were  disadvanta- 
geous in  the  end;  for,  by  degrees,  the  Arabs  became  expert  seamen,  excellent  in  the  use  of  fire  arms,  and 
raised  a considerable  maritime  force,  which  afterwards  was  the  di'cad  of  all  the  European  powers  in  India. 

In  1659,  the  English  Resident  at  Surat  projected  a plan  for  obtaining  possession  of  Muscat,  and  it 
so  far  succeeded,  that  a negotiation  was  commenced  with  the  Governor ; but  it  was  not  brought  to  a satis- 
factory conclusion.  In  1694,  the  strength  of  the  Arabs  of  Muscat  in  shipping  and  forces  was  so  increased 
as  to  occasion  an  alarm  that  they  would  obtain  the  command  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  they  having  taken 
several  places;  and  apprehensions  were  entertained  that  they  would  attack  Gombroon,  the  Resident  of  which 
gave  it  as  his  opinion,  “ that  they  will  prove  as  great  a plague  in  India,  as  the  Algerines  were  in  Europe.” 
The  Government  at  home  proposed,  when  peace  was  concluded  in  Europe,  to  equip  armed  ships  to  clear 
the  Indian  Seas,  and  to  root  out  that  nest  of  pirates,  the  Muscat  Arabs.”  In  1707  the  Arabs  adopted 
a more  regular  system  of  naval  warfare,  having  obtained  permission  from  the  King  of  Pegu  to  build  ships 
at  the  ports  in  hb  country;  and  they  spread  their  fleets  over  the  Indian  Seas,  some  of  their  ship.s  cairying 
froin^  to  50  guns;  and  made,  descents  on  scveral'towns  on  the  Malabar  Coast.  They  continued  tor  a 
len^  of  time  to  annoy  the  tirade;  but  of  late  years  they  have  confined  themselves  principally  to  comnieree.^ 
With  the  Persians  they  are  almost  continually  at  war;  but  such  is  the  policy  of  the  Buaum;  or  Prince  ot 
Muscat,  that  he  suffers  the  Persians  to  resort  to  Muscat  with  their  vessels  to  purchase  goods,  for  ready 
money,  without  any  molestation,  either  at  Muscat  its  dependent . territories,*  or  in  tladr  voyages  to  or 
from  Muscat  to  any 
nmels  which  they, 