


BURKA. 


HT 

i*  carried  on  by  the  Arabs,  under  the  flag  of  the  Imaum  of  Afuscat  The  trade  with  the  subjecti  of  Muscat 
on  the  coast,  and  the  independent  Arabs  in  the  interior,  consist  of 


Almonds, 

Gums^  various. 

Rhinoceros’  horns. 

Wax. 

Cattle. 

Hides. 

Ditto  hides. 

Pearl  shelU 

Drugs,  of  sorts. 

Honey. 

Skins. 

Horses^ 

Elephants’  teeth. 

Ostrich  feathers. 

Sheepw 

Raisins, 

taking  in  return  various  East  Indian  commodities,  principally  the  under-mentioned; 

Ginger.  i 

Opium. 

Pepper.  | 

Spices. 

Grain.  | 

Piece  goods. 

Sugar.  1 

Turmeric. 

and  a small  quantity  of  European  cutlery,  glass  ware,  looking  glasses,  broad  cloth,  &c. 


DUTIES. 

Mahometans  pay  per  cent  on  imports  and  exports;  all  other  nations  pay  5 per  cent. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Notwithstanding  the  unpromising  appearance  of  the  country  near  Muscat,  provisions,  fruits,  and  ve- 
getables are  to  be  had  in  plenty,  and  reasonably  cheap.  Bullocks  are  extremely  good,  at  10  to  IS  dollars 
a head;  a good  sheep  2 or  3 dollars;  fowls,  large  and  reasonable.  From  April  to  September  the  market 
is  extremely  well  supplied  with  grapes,  melons,  mangoes,  oranges,  limes,  pomegranates,  and  other  fruits ; 
likewise  greens,  pumpkins,  onions,  and  abundance  of  other  vegetables.  They  are  always  well  supplied 
with  delicious  fresh  fish,  which  is  the  principal  support  of  the  natives;  they  kill  meat  daily  on  shore  for 
sale,  but  that  which  comes  on  board  the  vessels,  must  come  from  Muttra,  in  a clandestine  manner,  as  the 
compradore  (or  steward)  is  dependent  on  the  Company's  broker,  who  is  a Hindoo,  and  very  desirous  of 
saving  the  lives  of  the  bullocks,  but  they  have  not  that  authority  on  shore;  they  manage  so  as  to  bring  the 
cattle  on  bqard  in  the  night  time.  The  beat  mode  of  watering,  is  with  the  ships’  casks,  otherwise  they  will 
bring  off  the  water  in  oily  boats  in  bulk,  which  will  smell  disagreeably  in  a few  days,  although  very  good 
if  it  is  taken  clear  from  the  reservoir,  which  is  near  the  sea,  the  water  being  conducted  to  it  from  a consi- 
derable distance  inland.  The  Muscat  mangoes  ore  preferable  to  any  in  India. 

BURKA. 

Thb  place  is  in  latitude  23®  50'  North,  and  is  strongly  fortified.  Here  the  Imaum  of  Muscat  resides; 
between  it  and  the  entrance  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  are  several  small  villages  seldom  visited  by  any  European 
vessels; 


CHAPTER  X. 


Gulf  of  Persia. 


Ras  el  Khima^Destruclion  of  Pirate  Ves-^elH,  — Bahreen  Tslandn^Pearl  Fishery^Catif^Grane^Bustorahy 

Description — Coins — Weights  and  Measnres^Trade  to  and  from  British  India-^Imports  and  Experts  from 
Bomlniy  and  Madras — Surat  Piece  Goods  suitable  to  the  Bussorak  Market — Bengal  Piece  Goods-^Instruc- 
tions  relative  tothe  Trade  at  Bussorah-^Dutiesand  Port  Charges-^Provisions  and  Refreshment  s^Bandareck-^ 
Korgo^Karak — Bushire ; Description — Coinsy  Weightsy  and  Measures^-^Imports  and  Exports-^Provisions 