

From  Bombay,  Bengal,  Muscat,  and  other  places  arc  imjKirtcd  pu'ce  goods  similar  to  those  enume* 
rated  at  Bussorah,  likewise  the  following  articles: 


Bamboos. 

Cassia  buds. 

Musk.  i 

Shawls, 

Cotton. 

Coffee. 

Nutmegs. 

Silk  goods. 

Cotton  yam. 

China  camphire. 

Pepper. 

Turmeric. 

Cardamums. 

Ginger. 

Red  lead. 

Tuteiiaguc. 

Cloves. 

Indigo. 

Sugar. 

Tobacco. 

pinnamon. 

Iron. 

Sugar  candy. 

Tin. 

China  ware. 

Lead. 

Steel, 

Woollens. 

A part  of  these  importations  b supposed  to  be  for  Turkey  and  Arabia,  as  well  as  this 

part  of  Per^;  of  Indian  manufactures  the  quantities  imported  into  Bushire  are  small  compaied  with  those 
of  Bussorah,  but  of  the  European  commodities  a much  larger  proportion. 

S 


130 


BUSHEAB^KISMI&--OBMUS. 


Very  few  of  the  products  of  Persia  being  suitable  to  the  Indian  market,  the  returns  are  prindpaflly 
made  in  Persian  and  Turkish  coins,  Venetian  sequins,  German  crowns,  and  gold  and  silver  in  bars* 
About  one  fifth  of  the  imports  are  estimated  to  be  returned  in  Persian  commodities,  consisting  of  dniga 
of  various  kinds,  carpets,  rose-wa^r,  otto  of  roses,  Schiraz  wine,  &c. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS 

Are  all  brought  from  the  interior  by  caravans,  and  the  town  is  well  supplied  with  fruits,  vegetables, 
and  meat,  which  are  both  good  and  cheap.  A full  grown  sheep  from  1 J to  2 rupees  each.  Oxen,  which 
weigh  from  4 to  5 cwt.  each  from  6 to  8 rupees.  The  fruits  are  good,  such  as  apples,  pears,  peaches, 
nectarines,  apricots,  plums,  and  grapes.  Bread,  butter,  milk,  and  vegetables  are  excellent,  and  rea-^ 
sonable.  The  water  in  the  town  is  very  bad,  being  brackish,  and  brings  on  disorders:  but  they  have 
some  good  water  which  is  brought  from  the  interior.  There  are  fish  of  various  kinds  in  great  plenty. 

BUSHEAB. 

Next  to  Kismis,  this  is  the  largest  island  in  the  Gulf,  and  is  in  latitude  2GP  50  North ; it  is  about  12 
miles  long,  and  4 or  5 broad.  At  its  east  end  is  good  anchorage : here  the  chief  of  the  island  resides,  who 
is  a kind  of  pirate,  and  not  to  be  trusted.  A few  years  since  a vessel  belonging  to  Bombay  was  wrecked 
on  a reef  which  runs  out  about  3 miles  from  the  west  end  of  the  island,  the  cargo  of  which  was  seized  by 
him,  and  not  long  after,  one  of  the  Company's  packets  ran  upon  the  island  in  the  night,  and  was  lost. 

KISMIS. 

This  island,  which  is  the  largest  in  the  Gulf,  is  situated  near  the  continent.  On  its  east  end,  oppo- 
bite  a small  island,  called  Larek,  is  a considerable  town  well  inhabited.  This  island  produces  large  quan* 
titles  of  wheat  and  other  grain,  and  was  formerly  the  granary  of  Ormus.  In  1642  the  Dutch  made  an 
attempt  to  take  the  island ; but,  losing  a great  many  men,  were  obliged  to  desist,  and  make  their  peace 
with  the  Persians  by  considerable  presents.  The  town  is  in  latitude  about  27®  North. 