


BUSHIRE. 


IW’ 

The  road  is  qttite  open;  and  when  strange  ships  arrive,  they  should  make  sigmds  for  a pilot  to  comeYrom 
the  town,  as  all  ships  bound  to  Bussonah  call  here,  and  take  a pilot,  while  those  tlmt  come  from  Bussoruh 
put^  their  pilots  On  shore  at  Bushire. 

The  castle  of  Bushire  is  about  12  miles  S.  E.  of  the  town;  thej^rtu;,mcse  had  fomeily  a fadory 
here,  having  first  built  a castle,  and  then  a town,  which  they  walled  round  very  strongly,  with  only  one 
small  gate  on  the  land  side,  barely  sufficient  for  a loaded  •mule  to  pass.  The  castle  is  of  great  extent, 
situated  on  an  eminence,  and  although  at  present  much  decayed,  makes  a noble  appearance  from  the  sea; 
it  was  taken  by  the  Persians  from  the  Portuguese  in  1622,  who,  being  hard  pressed,  left  behind  their 
cannon  and  mortars,  which  were  all  brass;  but  being  masters  of  the  sea,  carried  off  their  moveables. 

At  one  period  the  Company  had  abandoned  Ormus,  Gombroon,  and  Bushire ; hut  at  the  rcrpiost  of 
the  Persian  Government,  an  establLshment  was  again  formed  at  the  latter  place,  which  has  continued  ever 
fiince.  No  trade  can  be  carried  on  with  Persia  from  the  sea,  without  a regular  (‘stablishment  of  persons  con- 
stantly residing  at  this  port  and  Bussorah,  to  cultivate  the  protection  of  this  fluctuating  (jovernmemt,  by 
making  presents,  and  at  times  to  a considerable  amount,  whenever  a revolution  may  take  place  in  the 
country. 

The  Company  being  deprived  of  the  means  of  an  establishment  on  the  borders  of  the  Bed  Sea,  from 
the  want  of  protection,  they  retain  the  settlements  of  Bussorah  and  Bushire,  notwithstanding  the  great  loss 
they  have  sustained  for  many  years,  and  which  may  probably  continue  for  many  more,  as  tliey  are  well 
aituated  for  obtaining  information,  as  well  as  for  improving  every  favourable  circumstance  wliich  may  arise. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Many  of  the  European,  and  most  of  the  Asiatic  coins  pass  at  the  same  rates  as  at  Bussorah;  but  the 
price  fluctuates  according  to  the  quantity  of  the  specie  in  the  market. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  floose,  mamoodies,  and  tomands,  100  mamoodies  making  1 tomand. 

Pearls  are  sold  by  the  abas,  a weight  equal  to  about  3|  diamond  grains,  or  2,875  dec.  gold  grains. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  East  India  Company  have  a resident  here,  with  a view  of  extending  the  sale  of  woollens  and 
metab,  of  which  they  are  obliged  by  their  charter  to  take  so  large  a quantity;  all  other  articles  arc  free 
for  individuals  to  trade  in.  The  annual  average  amount  of  woollens  sold  at  this  residency  for  10  years  from 
1780  to  1790,  was  £2608,  on  which  the  loss  was  about  5 'per  cent.  This  with  the  expeners  of  the  factory, 
which  was  during  the  same  period  near  14<X)  a year,  and  advances  made  to  the  Bombay  cruisers  when 
here,  made  an  annual  loss  of  upwards  of  <i&1800  per  annum.  The  articles  sold  were  broad  cloths, 
long  ells  and  shalloons ; in  no  year  did  the  sale  exceed  .£’7,000,  and  in  one  year,  1788,  only  i’OS. 