

GOMBROON. 

This  town,  which  was  formerly  of  such  great  importance,  Is  at  present  reduced  to  a fishing  town,  and 
is  situated  on  the  main,  nearly  opposite  the  island  of  Ormus,  in  latitude  about  27°  10  North,  and  longi- 
tude 55°  45'  East.  The  English  obtained  permission* to  settle  a factory  here  in  1613.  About  1620  the 
Dutch  followed  their  example,  and  upon  the  capture  of  Ormus  in  1 022  by  the  English  and  Persians,  num- 
bers of  merchants  resorted  here,  and  the  commerce  greatly  increased.  It  was  at  that  time  strongly  forti- 
fied ; the  houses  were  large  and  handsome,  but  the  place  was  considered  very  unhealthy.  The  English  re- 
tnained  here  till  1759,  when  the  factory,  then  defenceless  and  totally  neglected,  was  attacked  by  the  French, 
tinder  Count  D'Estaing,  who  had  been  made  prisoner  at  Madras,  and  who  was  at  the  time  on  his  parole, 
The  force  consisted  of  about  400  men,  with  four  ships,  having  all  the  requisites  for  a siege.  They  began 
to  batter  the  factory,  in  which  were  sixteen  Europeans  and  a few  seapoys  as  a guard  to  the  house,  on  the 
morning  of  the  15th  of  October,  and  in  the  afternoon  they  summoned  it  to  surrender,  which  it  did,  and 
the  terms  were  calculated  to  clear  the  Count  D'Estaing  from  the  guilt  of  breaking  his  parole,  which  was 
given  in  the  usual  way,  not  to  serve,  directly  or  indirectly,  against  the  English  during  the  war,  or  until  he 
should  be  regularly  exchanged.  The  factory  was  afterwards  re-established,  but  has  long  since  been  with- 
drawn,  in  consequence  of  the  heavy  expence,  and  the  unbealthiness  of  the  climate.  • 

COINS. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  shahees,  an  imaginary  coin,  and  for  which  all  bargains  are  made;  the  re- 
turns for  goods,  allowing  7 or  8 per  cent  for  the  exchange,  arc  generally  made  in  abassees.  All  coins  pass 
current  here,  Spanish  dollars,  rupees,  Venetians,  French  crowns,  &c. 


make 


Abassees  and  sequins  are  the  common  coins;  of  the  latter  there  are  several  kinds,  of  which  the  Ve- 
netians are  the  best  in  India  by  2 per  cent.  When  a parcel  of  Venetian  ducats  are  mixed  with  others,  the 
whole  go  jby  the  name  of  sequins;  but  when  separate,  one  sort  is  caUed  Venetian,  and  all  the  rest  indii- 
imhtly  by  the  name  of  ^bbers. 

SS 


1 Shahee. 

1 Mamoody. 

1 Abassee. 

1 Surat  Rupee. 

1 Venetian. 

1 Spanish  Dollar. 
1 Tomand. 


10  Coz  or  Pice 
2 Shahees 
2 Mamoodies 
2 Abassees 
28  Shahees 
16  Shaliees 
200  Shahees 


ALM0NDS»AMM0N1ACUM  GUM. 


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES, 

Tlic  larger  weights  are  of  tlifferent  sorts,  and  vary  according  to  the  nature  of  the  commodities  sold. 

The  maund  tabrees  is  6|1bs.  in  the  factory,  but  only  6|lbs.  in  the  bazar;  by  this  weight,  sugar,  copper, 
tutenague,  and  all  kinds  of  drugs  are  sold. 