


KORGO 

Is  a small  low  island,  about  4 leagues  long,  and  a quarter  of  a mile  brood,  situated  near  the  N.E. 
end  of  Karak;  there  is  a channel  between  them  about  a mile  wide,  and  quite  safe.  On  both  ends  of 
Korgo  there  is  water,  but  not  so  good  as  that  on  Karak ; the  best  anchorage  is  at  the  N.  E.  part  of 
the  island,  where  there  are  a few  date  trees,  and  thereabouts  a watering  place,  where  near  40  of  our 
people  were  cut  to  pieces  in  1768,  when  we  assisted  the  Persians  in  the  siege  of  Karak. 

KARAK. 

This  island  is  in  latitude  29^  14'  North,  about  12  leagues  from  Bushire  town.  It  is  about  7 miles 
long,  and  4 broad.  At  the  N.  E.  end  is  a bay,  where  there  is  good  anchorage,  and  near  it  a strong  castle 
built  on  the  extreme  point,  which  commands  the  whole  anchorage  of  the  bay.  This  island  was  uninha- 
bited till  about  1760,  when  a Dutch  gentleman  from  Bussorah  having  surveyed  it,  and  finding  the  bay  per* 
fectly  secure,  and  that  there  was  a good  situation  to  build  a town,  with  a castle  for  its  defence,  and 
that  of  the  ships  at  anchor  in  the  bay,  reported  his  observations  to  the  Government  of  Batavia, 
who  approving  of  the  design,  sent  him  back  with  several  ships  laden  with  every  necessary  for 


BUSHIRE. 


m 

building  the  castle  and  town,  and  a large  quantity-  of  European  and  Indian  goods.  They  completed  their 
work,  and  had  a brisk  sale  for  their  goods,  of  which  tliey  liad  a regular  supply  for  5ix  or  seven  years ; but 
were  dispossessed  by  a Persian  Prince  who  lived  at  Bandareek,  a few  leagues  to  the  northward  of  Karak% 
He  then  made  the  island  his  chi|?f  place  of  residence,  built  a number  of  vessels,  and  commenced  piraic, 
taking  and  plundering  ships  and  vessels  of  (wery  nation,  till  he  became  us  great  a terror  to  those  who  navi- 
gated the  Persian  G idf  ns  the  famous  A ngria  had  heretofore  been  in  India.  In  1708  the  Persians,  with 
the  assistance  of  the  Eiiglisli,  made  an  attempt  to  capture  the  island,  but  it  was  ineffectual.  The 
Persians,  however,  contrived  to  get  ])osscssion  of  it  in  the  following  year  without  any  loss  (Uie  Prince 
having  abandoned  the  island),  becoming  masters  of  an  immense  quantity  of  merchandise,  ammunition, 
many  galliots,  and  some  treasure.  It  still  continues  in  their  possession,  but  has  very  little  trade. 

The  best  pilots  for  Dussorah  are  procured  here.  To  carry  u ship  there  and  back,  they  generally  re- 
ceive 150  to  100  rupees,  ^ith  an  addition  of  50  more  for  the  trankey  that  attends,  and  provisions  for  five 
or  six  people.  It  is  customary  to  give  a bag  or  two  of  rice  to  the  Sheik,  and  one  to  the  pilot's  family. 
During  the  time  the  ship  is  stationary  at  Bussorah,  the  pilot  receives  10  rupees  per  month. 