

at  2s.  Gd.  sterling  per  Rupee,  is  equal  to  XH76,028  IOa*.  per  annum. 


Surat  Piece  Goods  suitable  to  the  Bussorah  Market , by  J.  Stevens. 


Prom  Surat  the  following  piece-goods  are  imported,  in  the  proportions  hereinafter  stated,  vfz*> 


Red  Sheilas  or  Sallocs 
Red  Sahn 

Humsey  Siah  Snrmaic 
Duty  Siah  Surmaie  Pono  der 
Baflla  Siah  Guzzee  S ur m ai e 
Duly  Mauwee,  or  light  blue  Der  Guzzee 
Baftae  Siah  Surmaie 


1 \jr  U«<  ^4.C 


Sheilas  or  Sallocs,  Siah  Surmaie,  the  cloth  to  be  thick  and  close  woven,  half 
of  the  first,  and  half  of  the  second 
Sahn  Siah  Surmaie,  the  cloth  to  be  close 
l^uty  Brodera 


Byram  Nousaree  Surmaie,  the  cloth  to  be  thick  and  close  woven 
By  ram  Broachee  Surmaie  ditto  ditto 

Byram  Randaree  Surmaie  ditto  ditto  . 

Cotton  yarn,  Siah  Surmaie,  each  bale  to  weigh  6 Surat  maunds 
Mulmuls  Siah,  called  Setra  Guzzee,  dyed  at  Surat,  a very  deep  blue 


20  corge 
20  ditto. 

15  ditto, 

16  ditto. 
30  ditto 
25  ditto. 
20  ditto. 
15  ditto. 
10  ditto. 

60  ditto. 
30  ditto. 
50  ditto* 
40  ditto, 
190  ditto. 
96  ditto. 
96  ditto. 
3 bales. 
10  corge 


The  above  red  and  blue  goods  are  the  consumption  of  Bussorah,  and  places  adjacent,  so  that  a consider- 
able quantity  is  likely  to  go  off  well.  It  is  necessary  to  observe,  that  the  sooner  these  goods  arc  provided 
at  Surat,  the  cheaper  they  will  turn  out ; and  by  being  etlrly  at  market,  you  will  have  the  advantage  of 
chusing  or  procuring  the  goods  of  a finer  quality  than  when  the  monsoon  is  far  advanced,  or  at  the  latter 
end  of  it. 


BUSSOflAH. 


125 


Of  fine  Surat  piece  goods,  the  following  will  answer : 

Soosey  Ilundee  Seefed  anil  Cheendar  20  corge. 

Germasoot  Guzzee  Klvan  Mutai'iif^^^^  10  ditto. 

Ditto  Kerinesi  Solbisi  3 ditto. 

Germasoot  Mulherhauiie  ditto. 

Germasoot  Mahomet  Shai  Seefed  2 ditto* 

Cbitaura  Mahomet  Shai  Seefed  1 ditto. 

Of  the  above  goods,  if  well  provided,  a considerable  quantity  may  be  disposed  of;  likewise  of  the  finer 
sorts  of  Guzzerat  goods,  such  as  arc  usually  brought  to  this  port. 

Bengal  Goads  suitable  to  the  Bnssorah  Markit. 

Mulmuls  Annendee,  of  the  first  and  second  sorts,  | of  the  first  sort,  { oftlio  second  sort. 
Mulmuls  Setha  Guzzee,  of  the  first  sort,  which  at  Bussorah  go  under  the  name  of  Mulmuls  Slier- 
Betty  and  Mahomet  Ilyatce;  observe,  that  two-thirds  should  be  of  tlie  ^luhniils  Annendee,  in  the  manner 
above  specified,  and  the  other  third  part  of  Setra  Guzzee,  as  above  mentioned.  And  observe  also,  that  the 
assortment  of  goods  made  up  for  Bussorah,  are  generally,  or  ought  to  be  in  the  tollowing  manner,  i h, 
two-third  parts,  or  thereabouts,  of  your  whole  parcel  of  goods  ouglit  to  be  of  Mulmuls,  anil  Mnlinuls  Setra 
Guzzee,  in  the  manner  and  proportion  as  are  above  specified ; and  the  remaining  third  part  of  the  adven- 
ture ought  to  be  made  up  of  the  goods  hereunder  mentioned.  All  which  goods,  log(‘ther,  or  one  with  ano- 
ther, generally  go  at  a certain  rate,  more  or  less,  according  to  the  demand  and  ijiiantity  at  market.  But 
take  notice,  that  all  goods  be  of  the  usual  lengths  and  breadths ; for  if  they  are  deticlent,  it  will  prejudice 
the  sale. 