

When  landing  your  cargo,  the  freight  goods  (if  you  have  any)  should  be  put  in  different  boats 
than  your  own,  otherwise  it  will  occasion  much  confusion  and  trouble,  as  all  the  freight  is  carried  to  the 
ciistom-liouse;  but  your  own  private  trade,  immediately  upon  landing,  is  carried  to  your  own  house;  for 
which  reas6n,  the  officers  on  board  should  have  a list  of  the  freight  goods,  and  orders  not  to  mix  them  in 
the  boats  with  the  trade,  but  load  them  separately. 

The  purser  (if  you  have  one)  ought  to  attend  at  the  landing-place  with  a list  of  the  freight,  and  the 
marks  and  numbers  of  each  package;  as  it  frequently  happens  that  the  merchants  do  not  know  their  bales. 

After  all  your  goods  arc  landed,  you  inform  the  Shabundar  you  are  ready  for  his  visit:  he  will  come 
with  his  officers,  attendants,  writers,  and  some  of  the  principal  merchants  of  the  place  They  will  take  an 
account  of  your  goods,  open  a bale  or  two  of  each  quality,  and  are  satisfied  with  your  account  of  the  num- 
ber of  bales,  and  quantity  of  pieces  in  each.  This  good  opinion  should  not  be  abused,  as  it  renders  the 
inspection  extremely  easy  to  you.  And  for  the  gruff' goods,  he  takes  the  account  entii*ely  from  yourself. 

After  this  visit,  he  pays  you  another,  to  bc  informed  of  the  prices  for  which  you  have  sold  your  goods; 
and  if  any  remain  unsold,  they  are  valued,  and  the  customs  and  duties  calculated  ujwn  the  whole. 

The  Shabundar  receives  no  duty  upon  grain;  this  is  paid  to  the  IMurbarall:  other  goods  either  pay  to 
the  Shabundar,  or  custom-house. 

Upon  exporting  any  goods,  you  must  have  a permit  from  the  Shabundar,  mentioning  the  quantity 
and  quality  of  them. 

The  hamauls,  or  custom-house  porters,  will  not  allow  your  own  hamauls  to  bring  your  goods 
from  the  water-side  to  your  house  (as  these  people  farm  their  place  from  Government,  and  pay  a large 
sum  annually  for  it),  for  which  you  pay  them  1 mamoody  for  every  bale,  and  5 mamoodies  for  every  100 
maunds  (sophy.)  House  hamauls  have  only  one  half  that  sum  for  their  labour,  and  5 mamoodies  per  100 
maunds  (sophy)  for  the  returning  cargo. 

Boat  hire  is  2 mamoodies  per  bale,  and  10  mamoodies  per  100  maunds  (sophy).  The  best  method  is 
to  hire  trankeys  for  so  much  per  trip ; the  expence  is  something  more,  but  the  safety  of  your  goods,  and 
the  dispatch  they  make,  fully  compensate  for  it. 

Presents  here  are  very  necessary,  particularly  to  the  Islam  (or  Bashaw);  they  are  generally  made  up 
in  goods  to  the  value  of  1,200  or  1,500  cruse;  but  he  afterwards  receives  the  amount  in  money,  and  the 
goods  are  returned : this  makes  it  easy  to  the  merchant,  as  he  might  otherwise  dispute  the  value  of  the  goods. 