

You  should  make  a proportionate  present  to  the  Shabundar  and  his  people,  the  Mirbhar's  people,  your 
broker,  shroff,  linguist,  and  the  Bashaw's  servants. 

After  your  presents  are  all  made,  you  visit  the  Islam,  who  makes  you  some  trifling  present,  as  a coat, 
(or  gown)  such  as  is  worn  in  the  country. 

A house  will  cost  about  30  tomands  for  the  seasont 

A licence  to  trade  5 tomands  per  annum. 

Durwan,  or  door  porter  36  mamoodies  per  month. 

Waterman,  or  Beasty  30  mamoodies  per  month. 

Pi  otchman  20  mamoodies  per  month. 


BANDAREEK-KORGO^-ltAIlAK. 


127 


Owners  of  sWps  from  all  ports  in  India,  allow  the  commanders  house  rent,  palanquin  (or  carriage) 
hire,  oil,  candles,  grain,  fuel,  sircars  (or  compradorcs)  pay,  except  at  the  port  to  which  tlie  sliip  belongs, 
when  no  house  rent  or  palanquin  hire  is  allowed,  but  every  thing  else.  And  this  custom  is  general  in 
India,  except  there  is  a special  agreement  to  the  contrary.  If  they  bring  back  freight,  the  owners  allow 
the  Commander  5 per  cent,  as  a commission  for  collecting  it. 

DUTIES  AND  PORT  CHARGES. 

All  goods  imported  in  English  ships  pay  a duty  and  consulage  to  the  East  India  Company,  which 
amount  to  6 per  cent.  This  duty  is  over  and  above  what  is  paid  to  the  Rashaw  of  Ragdud;  and  as  most  of 
the  goods  from  India  are  brought  in  English  ships,  it  amounts  in  the  year  to  a considerable  sum. 

The  Bashaw  of  Bagdad  receives  two  customs  on  all  goods  which  are  sent  from  Russorah,  vie.  3 per 
cent,  from  Europeans,  and  8 per  cent,  from  all  Turks,  Persians,  and  other  Asiatics;  one  duty  is  paid  at 
Bussorah,  the  other  at  Bagdad.  These  goods  are  rated  at  the  current  prices  whicli  they  may  be  worth 
on  their  arrival  at  each  place,  with  the  exception  of  such  goods  as  are  conveyed  directly  by  the  cara- 
van  from  Bussorah  to  Aleppo,  which  must  pay  two  duties  at  Bussorah,  one  on  their  arrival,  and  ano« 
ther,  called  the  Bagdad  duty,  before  their  departure.  No  caravan  can  depart  for  Aleppo  without  leave 
first  obtained  from  the  Bashaw  of  Bagdad;  so  that  he  receives  6 percent,  from  Europeans,  and  16  per 
cent  from  all  otliers,  and  half  this  duty  only  on  goods  consumed  at  Bussorah. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS, 

Provisions  are  very  good  here,  and  at  reasonable  prices,  particularly  boef^  mutton,  and  butter,  os 
well  as  camefs  flesh,  which  the  Arabs  prefer  to  beef,  especially  when  young. 

The  fruits  procurable  here,  are  apples,  grapes,  peaches,  nectarines,  pomegranates,  dates,  &c. 

BANDAREEK. 

This  port  is  in  latitude  29°  42'  North,  and  previous  to  tlic  troubles  in  Persia,  the  Company  had  a 
factory  here;  it  has  been  long  since  withdrawn.  It  was  formerly  a place  of  some  note;  the  houses  are 
built  of  mats;  the  inhabitants  are  chiefly  Arabs;  and  though  they  may  appear  civil  to  Europeans,  are 
not  to  be  trusted. 