

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  water  of  Karak  is  much  hotter  than  at  Bushire.  Firewood  is  very  scarce ; what  they  have,  is 
brought  from  the  nortliern  coast.  Fish  arc  plentiful,  which  with  dates  is  the  principal  food  of  tlie  inhabit- 
ants ; for  they  have  no  grain  but  what  comes  from  Bushire,  and  very  few  vegetables.  Bullocks,  sheep, 
and  poulljy  aiv  to  be  procured,  but  at  an  exorbitant  price  when  a supply  is  wanted.  Vegetables  are  scarce. 

BUSHIRE 

Is  the  principal  scajiort  iho  Persians  have  in  the  Gulf,  and  is  situated  about  S.  S.  E.  from  the  bar  at 
Bussorah,  70  leagues  distance,  and  about  8 leagues  S.  E.  from  the  island  of  Karak.  The  town  is  in  latitude 
29^’  North,  and  longitude  50°  4-7  East,  and  stands  on  the  North  point  of  alow  peninsula,  of  which  Bushire 
Point,  about  4 leagues  to  the  southward,  forms  the  other  extreme.  It  stands  so  very  low,  that  the 
houses  are  discovered  on  coming  from  (lie  sea,  much  sooner  than  the  land  on  which  the  town  is  built.  The 
situation  on  one  side  is  near  the  entrance,  and  on  the  south  bank  of  the  river  of  that  name,  having  a sandy 
beach  between  the  houses  and  the  river,  in  some  places  about  20,  in  others  from  30  to  40  yards  in  breadth 
at  high  water.  The  tide  rises  in  the  river  5 or  0 feet  perpendicular,  but  not  more  than  two  or  three  in  the 
roads.  Another  side  of  the  town  is  on  the  banks  of  the  sea,  with  a sandy  beach.  The  town  is  surrounded 
with  stone  walls,  except  the  part  wliich  is  within  the  river’s  mouth ; but  they  are  not  kept  in  good  repair, 
There  are  two  gates  on  the  land  side,  one  on  eacli  side,  facing  each  of  which  is  a very  large  brass  cannon, 
the  diameter  of  the  bore  of  which  is  11 1 inches : they  were  brought  from  Ormus  in  1622,  and  though  they 
bear  the  date  of  1502,  appear  as  if  new.  The  town  is  about  3 miles  in  circuit,  and  of  a rectangular  form ; 
the  longest  sides  arc  those  on  each  sea  bank.  There  is  neither  castle  nor  battery  in  or  near  the  totvn  be- 
longing  to  it ; but  there  are  many  war  galliots,  and  a number  of  small  merchantmen  belonging  to  those 
who  trade  to  and  from  IVIiiscat,  Gombroon,  and  other  places  in  the  Gulf,  as  well  in  Arabia  as  Persia  and 
Bussorah.  The  number  of  inhabitants  is  stated  to  be  20,000. 

The  entrance  of  the  yver  is  about  3 miles  broad ; yet  near  the  town  it  is  not  navigable  (even  for  boats 
at  low  water)  a hundred  yards  across.  Vessels  that  draw  more  than  9 feet,  cannot  come  into  the 
river  at  high  water ; those  of  less  draught  may  go  above  the  town.  The  road  where  ships  Ke,  is  directly 
fronting  the  river,  there  being  2 or  3 fathoms  three  miles  from  the  shore.  There  are  many  chantieb 
in  the  entrance  of  the  road,  between  which  there  arc  not  above  8 or  10  feet,^80  that  ships  ^ of  Wf 
great  burthen  anchor  at  least  2 leagues  from  the  shore  in  about  4 fathoms,  with  a soft  muddy*  bottoih. 