

Mulmuls  Santipore,  of  divers  sorts;  but  the  finest  sort  is  most  in  demand. 

Mulmuls  Savagepore,  as  they  call  them  here,  the  old  or  true  .sort.  Of  each  sort  an  equal  quantity. 
Mulmuls  Savagepore  Solosoy.  Cassa  Boorum,  1 or  2 bales  to  every  2.^  or  30  bales. 

Mulmuls  China  Sonergam.  Cassa  Izmere,  sorted  in  like  manner  as  the  foregoing, 

Mulmuls  Sarookpeach.  Dooria  Rizaput,  ditto. 

Mulmuls  Powookpcach.  Dooria  Alley  Cauney,  ditto. 

Cassa  Solosoy.  Munga  Dooria  of  the  Tanzib  sort,  1 or  2 bales. 

Cassa  Ketmery;  1 bale  of  this  is  enough  to  every  Munga  Dooria  of  the  Mulmul  kind,  not  in  diMiiand. 

20  or  30  boles  of  Mulmuls.  Munga  Dooria  of  the  Bafta  kind,  5 or  (i  bales. 

Tenrandems,  sorted  in  like  manner,  as  above.  Bafta  Dacca,  2 or  3 bales. 

The  above  specified  goods  are  the  proper  sorts  to  sell  to  the  merchants,  who  come  to  purchase  them 
from  the  different  parts  of  Turkey,  viz.  Constantinople,  Smyrna,  Aleppo,  Diabekir,  Bagdad,  &c. 

Instructions  relative  to  the  Trade  at  Bussorah^  by  J.  IL  Elmore. 

Immediately  upon  your  arrival  at  Bussorah,  use  dispatch  in  going  up  to  town,  and  procure  boats  for 
your  cargo;  for  which  you  will  apply  to  the  Chief,  who  generally  sends  down  boats,  called  dunnocks;  but 
X would  advise  you  to  have  trankeys,  as  they  are  less  liable  to  be  stopped  in  the  river,  whicli  Irequently 
happens  when  dunnocks  arc  sent. 

You  are  next  to  look  out  for,  and  hire  a good  house,  with  large  godowns,  which  ought  to  be  as  nigh 
the  creek  as  possible,  for  the  convenience  of  landing  and  receiving  your  goods. 

In  chusing  your  broker,  much  caution  and  circumspection  are  necessary,  as  your  wlioli*  transactions 
depend  upon  bis  Being  steady  to  your  interest.  If  possible,  employ  a jierson  wlio  trades  a little  tor  him- 
seBT,  and  is  independent  of  any  one  else;  the  same  caution  is  to  be  used  in  chusing  your  sluofl  (or  banker.) 


Cbitaura  Elvan  Cankneedar  1 corge 

Ditto  yellow  and  white  striped — 1 ditto. 

Ditto  red  ai^l  white  striped  1 ditto. 

Ditto  jiengc  reng  Kalum  Areed  1 ditto. 

Ditto  Am.sluiat  1 ditto. 

Bafta  Bootidar  crood.  with  flowers 


126 


BUSSOHAIL 


These  persons  you  will  find  very  slow  in  transacting  your  affairs,  though  they  will  appear  to  bc  very 
assiduous.  Your  seiwants  should  be  solely  de|>endcat  upon  yourself,  and  you  ought  not  to  employ  any  recom- 
mended by  persons  whom  you  suspect  to  be  desirous  of  prying  into,  or  being  acquainted  with  your  business 
and  concerns.  This  caution  is  to  be  observed,  otherwise  your  transactions  will  be  communicated  to  Uie 
whole  town,  wdiich  doubtless  will  be  much  to  your  prejudice. 

After  you  are  settled  in  your  house,  the  merchants  will  come  and  pay  you  a visit;  tlie  Turks  and 
Armenians  will  bc  very  inrjuisitivc  about  your  affairs.  They  are  particularly  tenacious  of  any  slight;  be 
therefore  very  complaisant  in  your  behaviour,  and  treat  them  (particularly  the  Turks)  with  much  courtesy. 