

On  the  north  side  of  the  island  was  a nest  of  pirates,  who  were  destroyed  by  the  English  in  1809. 

ORMUS. 

This  little  island,  which  is  not  more  than  6 miles  long,  and  about  4 broad,  stands  within  7 miles  of 
the  continent,  in  latitude  27®  12  North,  nearly  opposite  to  Gombroon.  It  was  first  visited  by  the  Portu- 
guese  under  Albuquerque  in  1508,  and  was  then  a place  of  great  importance.  The  King  of  the  island, 
having  heard  of  the  conduct  of  the  Portuguese  in  the  neighbouring  towns,  which  they  had  attacked,  plun- 
dered, and  burnt  without  provocation,  made  eveiy  exertion  to  defend  the  island,  so  that,  when  the  Por- 
tuguese entered  the  harbour,  there  were  30,000  men  on  the  island,  and  in  the  harbour  400  vessels,  sixty  of 
them  of  considerable  bulk,  and  having  2500  men  on  board.  Albuquerque  made  an  attack  upon  the  town, 
in  which  he  foiled,  but  succeeded  in  destroying  all  the  shipping : he  then  returned  to  India,  doing  all  the 
mischief  in  his  power.  In  1514  he  returned  with  a large  force,  and  succeeded  in  obtaining  possession  of 
the  island,  on  which  he  erected  a strong  fort ; and  leaving  a sufficiefnt  garrison,  proceeded  to  Goa,  The 
Portuguese  encouraged  the  commerce  of  the  island,  which  wonderfuHy  flourished;  they  built  elegant 
houses,  and  increased  the  fortifications ; and  during  the  period  it  remained  in  their  possession,  about  120 
years,  it  so  advanced  in  wealth  and  splendour,  that  it  was  considered  the  richest  spot  in  the  world.  The 
Portuguese  having  committed  many  outrages  on  the  En^^sh  shipping  and  property,  the  latter  agreed  to 
join  the  Persians  in  an  atUck  upon  Ormus.  The  attack  was  chiefly  conducted  by  the  EngKsb,  and  the  city 


GOMBROON. 


131 


and  castle  erere  taken  on  th6  22d  of  Aprilf  1622:  the  surrender  was  made  to  the  Englisli,  and  the  Portu- 
guese commander  and  principal  officers  were  sent  prisoners  to  Surat.  On  this  occasion  the  English  received 
a proportion  of  the  plunder  of  Ormus,  which  was  very  considerable,  and  a grant  of  tiie  moiety  of  customs 
at  Gombroon.  The  Portuguese  made  an  attempt  for  its  recovery,  wliich  was  unsuccessful.  After  it  once 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Persians,  the  place  was  quickly  ruined,  and  the  trade  truiisferreil  to  Gombroon. 
A gamson  was  kept  in  the  citadel  for  some  time;  but  by  degrees  that  has  fallen  to  ruin,  and  the  islaml 
is  nearly  deserted : scarce  the  smallest  remains  are  now  left  to  prove  that  this  was  once  a place  of  such  great 
consequence,  and  the  principal  magazine  of  the  Indian  commerce. 

The  only  natural  productions  of  the  island  are  sulpliur,  salt,  and  red  earth,  for  which  articles  vessels 
come  occasionally.  The  black  shining  sand  of  Ormus  is  much  esteemed  in  India. 