

KISMISSES, 

A species  of  raisin,  in  which  a considerable  trade  is  carried  on  between  Persia  and  various  parts  of  India. 

LABDANUM  GUM 

Is  a resinous  juice  which  exudes  from  a small  shrub  in  I’ersia  and  Arabia.  Two  sorts  of  it  arc  distin- 
guished ; the  one  in  cakes,  or  masses  of  an  irregular  siae ; the  other  in  rolls,  twisted  like  the  rolls  of  wax 
tapers.  This  drug  is  said  to  be  collected  in  the  heat  of  summer,  lightly  brushing  the  shmb  that  pro- 
duces it  with  a kind  of  rake,  having  thongs  of  leather  fixed  to  it,  instead  of  teeth;  the  unctuous  juice  ad- 
heres to  the  thongs,  and  is  aflerwards  scraped  off  with  a knife.  The  masses  of  Labdanum  are  dark  co- 
loured, of  the  consistence  of  a soft  plaister,  of  a strong,  but  not  disagreeable  smell,  accompanied  with  a 
warm,  aromatic,  rather  unpleasant  taste.  The  coiled  Labdanum  is  harder  than  the  preceding,  and  con- 
tains a considerable  quantity  of  sandy  matter.  The  masses  have  not  near  such  a quantity  of  impurities ; 
some  small  dust,  &c.  blown  on  this  resin  while  it  remains  on  the  shrub,  cannot  be  avoided. 

LAPIS  LAZULI, 

Or  azure  stone,  is  a compact,  ponderous  fossil,  less  hard  than  flint,  that  takes  a high  polish,  and  ia 
used  occasionally  for  toys,  &c.  Its  most  valuable  purpose  is  in  making  that  beautiful  coloqr  call^  ultrk  ma- 
rine blue.  It  is  found  in  many  ports  of  the  world,  but  the  best  is  that  of  Asia;  it  is  in  lumps,  usually 
about  the  size  of  a man's  fist,  frequently  smaller,  and  sometimes  in  pieces  of  4 or  5 lbs.  weight.  It  is  very 
seldom  covered  with  any  coat  or  crust,  but  resembles  those  stones  which  have  been  washed  off  from  whole 
strata,  and  smoothed  or  rounded  by  accident  afterwards.  Its  surface  is  naiurapy  smooth  and  glossy;  its 
colour  a very  elegant  blue,  beautifully  variegated  with  white  ot  clouded  spots,  and  witl^  gold  coloured  shin- 
ing veins.  For  any  purpose  but  toy-makmg,  it  is  the  most  valuable  thel  l^s  it  h^  of  these  variegations^ 
Itis  to  be  chosen  of  a fine  dose  texture,  heavy,  of  a deep  indigb  blue  colour,  having  as  few  gold  coloured 
veins  as  possible,  and  such  as  calcines  in  a strong  fire  without  emitting  any  smell.  It  is  sometimes  rubbed 
over  with  olive  oil  to  increase  its  colour:  this  may  be  discovered  by’  breaking  the  stone;  if  it  be  paler  within 
than  without,  it  is  a proof  that  the  stone  was  falsified;  if  it  be  of  a good  quality,  its  cobnrvi^  rmalkr 
unchanged  when  it  is  red  hot  m the  fire.  The  ]l*api8  Afynenus,  which  externally  resembles  this  stone^ 
may  be  readily  distinguished  by  its  being  less  hard,  and  foon*  losing  its  blue  colOttrrin#modurata"l^ 

20  cwt.  of  Lapis^  Lazuli  is  allowed  to  the  ton.  The  permanent  duty  on  it  is  Ss.  Ih-  .|in4 
)fmary  or  war  duty  8d.  per  Ib.  making  in  the  whole  Ss.  8d.  per  lb. 