


ELEMI  GUM 

Is  a concrete  resinous  juice  exuding  from  a tree  of  the  olive  kind,  growing  in  the  East  and  West 
Indies.  The  East  India  elemi  is  generally  brought  in  cakes  of  2 or  3 lbs.  each,  of  an  oblong,  roundish 
form,  wrapped  up  in  flag  leagues ; it  is  semi-transparent,  and  of  a pole  yellow  colour,  a little  inclining  to 
green.  Chuse  that  which  is  softish,  of  a pale  whitish  yellow  colour,  and  of  a strong,  not  unpleasant  smell, 
somewhat  like  that  of  fennel,  and  of  a bitterish  taste.  Reject  that  which  is  hard,  dark  coloured,.or  dirty, 

IGcwt.  of  gum  elemi  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £2  2s.  per  cwt.  and  the  tempo* 
rary  or  war  duty  14s.  making  in  the  whole  £2  16s.  per  cwt. 

GALBANUM  GUM 

Is  the  produce  of  an  evergreen  plant,  found  in  Persia,  and  in  some  parts  of  Africa.  When  this  pl»tnl 
is  in  the  third  or  fourth  year  of  its  growth,  it  naturally  exudes  drops  of  galbanum  at  the  joints ; the  na, 
tives  to  increase  the  produce,  wound  the  main  stem  at  this  time,  at  a small  distance  above  the  root ; the 
juice  then  flows  plentifully,  and  is  collected  for  use.  Galbanum  is  a gummy,  resinous,  rather  unctuous  sub* 
stance;  sometimes  in  the  natural  drops  or  tears,  but  more  frequently  in  masses  composed  of  a number  of 
these  blended  together.  The  drops  when  perfect,  approach  near  to  a roundish,  or  oblong  figure;  but  they 
commonly  lose  their  form  in  the  masses;  these  are  pale  coloured,  semi-transparent,  soft,  and  tenacious. 
In  the  best  specimens,  they  appear  composed  of  clear  whitish  tears,  often  intermixed  with  stalks,  and  seeds 
of  the  plant.  When  fresh,  the  masses  and  tears  are  white,  and  with  age,  change  to  yellow  or  brown. 


6ALLS-G0GUL. 

13T 

When  the  teen  can  be  procured,  they  ore  to  be  oreferrMl  tn  >i.»  ... 

■hould  be  fattbh,  moderately  viscous,  and  glossy  on  Uie  sLace;  such  as  are  Z fet'oMT  kT*® 
lour,  end  mixed  with  sticks,  and  other  foreign  substances,  are  to  be  rejected  The  besi  r k T“ 
a Ught  yellow  colour,  of  a strong,  piercing,  and  to  ^st  pT.-. Tr.gJ«W 

tinL^d^rir’d  "‘’l  “ "“ture  between  a gum  nn<l  a resin,  flaming  in 

^ ‘’r  "ther  impuritios,  .he  better 

solvicr  Jn  rtf  “d  ®«e  of  water,  will  best  shew  its  quali.y,  by  AW 

solving  »U  ^e  pare  galbanum.  and  leaving  the  impurities.  When  its  foulness  renders  it  of  littlJvalL  it 

enough  to  be  str^^  by  pressure  through  a hempen  cloth.  If  this  process  be  skilfuUy  managed,  the  gal- 
mmum  to^s  but  Uttle  of  the  essenthd  oD.  some  of  whichi.  ge„erally‘carried  off  in  eva^raZ  ® 

1804  to  “ Tr  veaiv 

to  1808  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount,  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Yean, 

Anarch 

1 ^aie. 