

20  cwt.  of  auripegmentum  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  18d,  per  cwt.  and  the  temi 
porary  or  war  duty  6d.  making  in  the  whole  2s.  per  cwt.  ■ ’ . 

BDELLIUM  GUM  • . 

Is  produced  in  Persia  and  the  East  Indies,  and  is  externally  of  a reddish  brown,  somewhat  like 
myrrh;  internally  it  is  clear,  and  not  unlike  glue;  it  b in, loose  drops,  not  concreted  into  Some 

of  these  drops  are  as  large  as  hazel  nuts,  many  less  than  a pea,  and  some  few  of  considerable  size;  they 
are  seldom  regularly  round,  often  crooked,  and  of  an  irregular  diape.  This  gum  b moderately  heavy  and 
hard;  taken  into  the  mouth,  it  grows  soft  and  tough,  in  the  manner  of  mastic;  its  «fnyll  b not  dbogiae^ 
able;  its  taste  inclines  to  bitter,  but  not  so  much  as  that  of  myrrh;  it  readily  takes  fiia,  and  bums  very 
briskly  with  a white  bright  flame,  though  it  crackles  all  the  time,  and  frequently  throws  «»n*ii  fragments 
of  matter  to  the  surface  of  the  flame.  It  should  be  chosen  somewhat  transparent,  the  more  so  the 
better,  of  a bitter  taste,  and  of  a dusky  reddbh  brown  colour,  moderately  heavy  and  bard, 
soft  and  tough 'in  .the  mouth.  It  entirely  dissolves  in  verjuice  or  vinegar. 

16  cwL  of  Gum  Bdellium  b allowed.to  the  toiu  The  penqai^ent  duty  b JSH  16s.  per  cwt,  and  the 
temporary  or  war  duty  18*.  Sd.  making  in  the  whole  £3  14*.  Bd.  per  cwt. 


BEZOAR— BRIMSTONE-CARAMANIA  WOOL-COLOQUINTIDA. 


139 


BEZOAR. 

■» 

This  medicinal  stone,  to  which  extraordinary  qualities  were  formerly  attributed,  has  latterly  been 
a^uch  more  lightly  esteemed.  It  grows  in  the  stomach  of  an  animal  of  tlie  goat  kind,  inhabiting  the 
mountains  in  various  parts  of  Persia  and  India.  Besides  this,  there  are  German  and  other  bezoars,  which 
are  less  valuable.  The  genuine  Oriental  bezoar  is  commonly  of  an  oval  form,  and  between  the  size  of  a 
hazel  nut  and  a walnut;  if  larger,  it  is  more  valuable;  if  smaller,  of  little  value.  This  stone  is  cxtemnlly 
smooth  and  glossy,  and  composed  of  several  shining  coatx,  like  an  onion,  enclosing  either  a powdery  sub* 
stance,  or  a nucleus,  round  which  they  are  formed.  The  colour  most  valued,  is  a shining  olive,  or  dark 
green;  but  there  are  some  whitish,  some  grey,  and  some  of  a dull  yellow.  Purchasers  should  be  careful 
in  cliusing  this  drug.  The  real  bezoar  lias  little  smell,  and  no  taste.  It  should  be  as  large  as  possible;  the 
very  stiKtll  pieces  should  be  entirely  rejected,  as  they  are  most  commonly  increased  with  factitious  substances 
resembling  them.  Wlien  a red  hot  needle,  on  entering  the  bezoar,  occasions  it  to  fry  and  shrivel,  it  is 
not  genuine;  if  it  only  throws  off  a small  scale  or  crust  without  entering,  it  is  good.  If  on  rubbing  it  over 
paper,  previously  smeared  with  chalk  or  quick  lime,  it  leaves  a yellow  taint  on  the  former,  or  a green  one 
on  the  latter,  it  is  a good  vtonc.  If  the  be  zoar,  after  soaking  five  or  six  hours  in  lukewarm  water,  remains 
unchanged  in  weight,  colour,  or  consistence,  it  is  genuine.  Nor  should  it  appear  affected  by  rectified 
spirit  anymore  than,  by  water.  The  powder,  alter  agitation  with  water  or  spirit,  subsides  uniformly 
and  totally,  leaving  no  greenish  matter  dissolved  in  the  li<juors,  as  those  powders  do  in  which  the  bezoar* 
tincture  has  been  imitated  by  certain  vegetable  matters. 