

The  permanent  duty  on  Bezoar  stones  is  Is.  6d.  per  oz.  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty,  6d.  per  oz. 

BRIMSTONE,  or  SULPHUR, 

Is  a well-known  substance,  hard,  brittle,  and  inflammable,  of  an  opaque  yellow  colour;  it  is  found, 
more  or  less  pure,  generally  in  the  neighbourhood  of  volcanoes;  it  is  an  article  of  trade  from  Persia  to  the 
British  settlements,  but  not  to  any  extent.  It  has  been  corned  to  China;  but  being  contraband,  would 
not  fetch  any  price,  and  was  thrown  into  the  river. 

CARAMANIA  WOOL. 

This  article  waa  formerly  one  of  the  principal  imports  into  England  from  Persia,  and  the  East  India 
Company  were  particularly  anxious  to  obtain  it,  it  being  in  great  demand  in  some  of  the  British  manufac- 
tures. It  b described  ‘‘  as  soft  as  silk,  curiously  curled,  of  a mixed  colour,  black  and  white,  inclining 
to  grey. 

COLOQUINTIDA^ 

Or  bitter  apple,  b a fruit  about  the  size  of  an  orange,  that  grows  on  a climbing  plant  of  the  gourd 
kind,  in  Persia,  Arabia,  and  Egypt;  it  is  light,  and  of  a fungous  texture,  with  a number  of  roundish 
seeds  in  the  cavities,  which  are  unctuous,  and  sweetish  to  tlie  taste;  the  other  part  is  acrid,  nauseous, 
and  extremely  bitter.  Chusc  the  largest  white  apples,  that  are  light,  round,  and  not  cracked  or  broken,  os 
the  seeds  are  the  most  material  part  of  the  fruit. 

It  has  occasionally  been  imported  from  India;  but  the  prices  it  has  fetched,  have  been  veiy  low. 

In  September  sale,  1803, ..123  cwt.  sold  for  £13. 

In  March  sale,  1807, 395  cwt  sold  for  £30. 

8 cwt  of  Coloquintida  b allowed  to  the  ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £&  12#.  per  cwt.  and  tlie 
temporary  or  wer  duty,  £1  17#.  4d.  making  in  the  whole  £7  9#.  4d.  per  cwt. 


130  C.UirET&-.CUMMIN  SEEDS—EARTH,  RED— ELEMI  GU^— GALBAJJUM  GUM. 

CARPETS 

Were  formerly  an  article  of  trade;  but  from  the  improved  state  of  our  own  manufactures,  and  the 
heavy  duty  on  Persian  curjiets,  they  arc  now  seldom  imported.  The  permanent  duty  is  £l  10s.  6<f.  p^r 
square  yard,  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty  10*  34-  making  in  the  whole  £2  1*.  per  square  yard^ 

CUMMIN  SEEDS. 

The  plant  which  produces  these  sced.s,  somewhat  rescmldes  fennel,  and  grows  in  various  parts  of  India, 
Persia,  and  Egypt;  it  is  an  article  of  trade  with  Surat.  The  seed  is  a kind  of  carraway,  of  a bitterish,  warm 
taste,  of  an  aromatic,  but  disagreeable  flavour.  They  are  to  be  chosen  fresh,  and  of  a greenish  colour. 
There  are  several  sorts  of  cummin  seeds  to  be  met  with,  but  they  are  seldom  imported  from  India. 

EARTH,  RED, 

Or  Indian  red,  is  the  name  of  a species  of  earth,  which  is  procured  from  some  of  the  Islands  in  the 
Persian  Gulf,  and  carried  from  thence  to  Surat,  Bengal,  and  other  parts  of  India,  where  it  is  used 
in  painting  houses,  kc.  It  is  much  esteemed  among  painters,  being  an  useful  colour,  but  it  is  difficult  to  be 
procured  genuine  in  England.  The  best  kind  is  of  a fine  purple  colour,  extremely  heavy,  and  of  a very- 
great  hardness,  of  a firm,  compact,  solid  texture,  and  always  full  of  bright  glittering  particles,  of  a rough 
and  dusty  surface,  colouring  the  hands  very  much;  it  adheres  firmly  to  the  tongue,  melts  with  difficulty 
in  the  mouth,  and  is  of  a rough,  austere,  and  very  astringent  taste;  thrown  into  water,  it  makes  a very 
considerable  ebullition,  but  moulders  or  breaks  with  difficulty  in  it.  In  the  fire  it  burns  to  a greater  hard* 
ness,  with  very  little  change  of  colour. 