


1>APIS  TUTLB—MA8TIC-0LIBANUM. 


m 

' • .*  I 

, LAPIS  TVTIM, 

^ OrTvItyf  i»A-da]rqr  or  argillaeeotts  ore^f  asemUmeial,  called  Zinc,  found  in  Persia,  formed  on 
ejiiodrieal  moakb  ifi|to  tubuloua  pieces  of  different  lengths,  like  the  bark  of  a tree,  and  baked,  to  a mode- 
rate liardaess*  On. the  outside  it  is  of  a brown  colour,  and  full  of  small  protuberances,  smooth  and  yel- 
lowish within,  sometimes  with  a whitish,  and  sometimes  with  a blueish  cast.  The  finest  is  that  which  is  6f 
a godd  brown  on  the  outside,  and  of  a yellow  tinge  within,  the  thickest,  brightest,  most  granulated,  'the 
hardest  to  break,  and  that  which  has  the  least  foulness  among  it.  It  is  seldom  imported  from  India.' 

80  ewt  of  Lapis  Tutlse  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £2  28,  and  tlio  temporary 
or  war  duty  lie,  making  in  the  whole  £2  16s.  per  cwt. 

MASTIC 

Is  a concrete  resin,  obtained  from  the  Lentisk  tree  by  transverse  incisions  made  in  the  bark,  about 
the  beginning  of  August.  It  is  in  small  yellowish  white  transparent  drops,  of  a resinous,  and  rather 
astringent  taste,  with  a light,  agreeable  smell,  esiiecially  when  rubbed,  or  heated.  In  chewing,  it  first 
crumbles,  soon  after  sticks  together,  and  becomes  soft  and  white  like  wax.  It  is  to  he  chosen  clear,  of  a 
pale  yellow  colour,  well  scented  and  b/ittle.  Such  as  inclines  to  black,  green,  or  is  dirty,  must  be  rejected. 
When  free  from  impurities,  it  totally  dissolves  in  rectified  spirits.  Mastic  is  seldom  Imported  from  the 
East  Indies.  In  the  September  sale  1606,  785  cwt.  was  put  up,  the  sale  amount  of  which  was  only  £\  14. 
The  wood  of  the  tree  is  sometimes  imported;  it  should  be  chosen  heavy,  compact,  and  firm,  grey  without, 
and  white  within,  of  an  astringent  taste. 

The  permanent,  duty  on  red  mastic  is  6d.  per  lb.  and  the  war  duty  2d.  per  lb. ; onany  other  sort  the 
perteiuusntdaty>is  9d.perlb.  and  the  war  duty  3d.  per  lb. 

OLIBANUM 

Is  a gnmmy  resin,  produced  in  Persia  and  Arabia,  in  drops  or  tears,  and  is  said  to  be  the  frankincense 
of  the  ancients;  it  smells  moderately  strong  and  resinous,  but  not  very  pleasant;  the  taste  is  pungent,  and 
somewhat  bitter;  it  sticks  to  the  teeth  in  chewing,  becomes  white,  and  turns  the  spittle  milky.  The  drops 
are  of  a pale  yellow  colour,  which  by  age  becomes  reddish.  Laid  on  red  hot  iron,  Olibanum  readily 
catches  flame^  and  bums  with  a strong,  Effusive,  not  unpleuant  smell.  If  it  be  run  into  a mass,  mixed 
with  dirt  and  rubbbh,  having  but  few  tears,  it  is  of  little  value. 

The  following  is  ad  account  of  the  quantities  imported  and  sold  at  the  Company's  sales  for  five  years, 
180410  1806  indosive,  together  with  the  sale  amount,  and  the  average  price  per  cwt 