

The  maund  copra  is  71  lbs.  at  the  custom-house;  but  in  the  bazar  from  7|  to  TJlbs.  by  this  weight,  riee, 
almonds,  raisins,  and  other  eatables  are  sold. 

The  maund  shaw  is  likewise  in  use,  being  2 maunds  tabrees,  and  equal  to  13}lbs.  avoiidupois. 

The  weight  for  gold  and  silver,  is  the  miscal;  2i  miscals  are  equal  to  a Surat  tola,  and  200  it 
1 maund  tabrees.  By  this  weight,  all  valuable  commodities  are  weighed. 

The  long  measure  is  the  guz,  93  of  which  are  considered  equal  to  100  English  yards. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  trade  formerly  carried  on  was  very  considerable ; at  present  it  is  trifling,  scarce  one  vessel  in  a 
season  calling  here.  The  articles  imported  and  exported,  are  similar  to  those  enumerated  at  Bushire,  but 
in  very  small  quantities.  , 

Aniclet  procurable  in  the  Gulf  qfij>erina,  teith  Directions  hme  to  chuse  them. 

ALMONDS 

Are  carried  in  large  quantities  from  Persia  to  India;  great  care  is  necessary  in  the  choice  of  these 
kernels,  as  they  are  apt  to  become  rancid  in  keeping,  and  to  be  preyed  on  by  an  insect  which  eats  out  the 
internal  part,  leaving  the  almond  to  all  appearance  perfect.  They  should  be  chosen  large,  of  a bright 
cinnamon  colour  without,  breaking  of  a clean  pure  white  within.  A species  of  bitter  almonds  passes 
current  at  Surat,  and  are  called  baddams,  about  60  of  which  are  equal  to  a pice. 

AMMONIACUM  GUM 

Is  a concrete  gummy  resinous  juice,  brought  from  Persia,  and  various  parts  of  the  East,  either  in  fine 
tears,  or  drops,  or  in  mosses  composed  of  them  of  a miUcy  whiteness;  the  external  part  of  the  mny,, 
monly  inclines  to  yellow  or  brown,  and  the  white  tears  change  to  the  same  colour,  on  being  exposed  for 
some  time  to  the  air.  Thu  gum  has  a strong  smell,  somewhat  resembling  galbanum,  but  not  so  ungrateful ; 
a disagreeable  sweetness  of  taste,  followed  by  a sensation  of  bitterness;  it  softens  in  the  mouth,  and  on  being 
chewed,  becomes  of  a white  colour.  Gum  Ammoniacum  in  masses  should  be  chosen  full  of  drops  or  tears 
without  filth  or  seeds,  dry,  brittle,  growing  soft  by  the  fire,  and  easily  reduced  to  a white  powder,  of  ft 
sharp  taste  and  smell.  The  drops  should  be  round,  white  internally  and  externally,  of  a bitter  taste,  and 
free  from  seeds  or  other  foreign  substances,  and  when  thrown  on  live  coab,  burning  away  in  flame.  Reject 
that  which  u soft,  dark  coloured,  and  foul. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  quantities  imported  and  sold  at  the  East  India  Company’s 
in  the  year  1804  to  1808  inclusive;  w'ith  the  sale  amount  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Years. 

1 March  Sale. 

1 September  Sa^. 

1 Toul. 