

The  only  coin  belonging  to  the  place,  is  of  silver,  called  a cowrie.  The  exchange  varies  from  285  to 
295  cowries  per  100  Bombay,  or  Surat  rupees.  All  Indbn  coins  pass  current  here.  Their  value  fluctu- 
ates according  to  the  quantity  in  the  market. 

The  weights  are  seers  and  maunds,  the  latter  of  two  sorts,  Cutch  and  Pucca. 

2 Pice  ..  Anna 

16  Annas  tmake*!  ^ Cutch  Seer 

40  Seers  J (.1  Cutch  Maund,  avoidupois  37 1 lbs. 

The  Pucca  maund  is  2 Cutch  maunds,  and  20  Cutch  maunds  are  equal  to  1 Surat  candy. 

The  measures  are  the  grab  and  the  guz,  16  grabs  making  1 guz,  about  .34'  English  inches.  Broad 
cloth,  velvets,  silks,  &c.  are  sold  by  this  measure,  though  the  shopkeepers  in  the  bazar  otien  sell  by  hand, 
firoin  the  finger's  end  to  the  elbow,  &c.  This  is  rejected  by  the  merchants. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

A considerable  commerce  is  carried  on  between  this  place  and  the  British  settlements  of  Bombay.  The 
principal  article  of  produce  is  cotton,  which  is  inferior  to  most  of  what  is  grown  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Surat  and  the  Gulf  of  Cambay.  Many  of  the  principal  Bombay  merchants  have  agents  residing  here  to 
transact  their  business.  Some  trade  is  likewise  carried  on  with  the  Persian  Gulf. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

No  animal  food  is  to  be  procured,  but  by  stealth;  and  rice,  &c.  only  in  small  quantities,  which  must 
be  paid  for  as  soon  as  received.  There  is  tolerable  water  to  be  got,  brought  down  by  women  to  the  land- 
ing.place,  at.  the  rate  of  2|  silver  cowries  per  leager. 

The  coast  of  Guszerat,  from  the  h^  of  the  Gulf  of  Cutch  to  the  islands  near  Jigat  Point,  is  but 
little  known. 


150 


BATE— JIGAT— GOOMTEE, 


BATE. 

This  island,  and  that  of  Artura,  are  situated  about  10  miles  N.  E.  from  Jigat  Point,  and  with  tho 
main  form  the  harbour  of  Bate,  which  is  well  sheltered  from  all  winds.  The  entrance  to  it  is  in  latitude 
22°  31'  North,  where  there  is,  directly  to  the  northward  of  Artura,  about  a mile  distant,  the  bar,  having 
on  it  near  high  water,  3|  and  fathoms,  rocky  bottom,  and  outside  of  it,  at  half  a mile  distant,  14  and  l(i^ 
lathoms.  The  island  is  about  five  miles  long  from  N.  E.  to  S.  W.  something  in  the  shape  of  an  S,  with 
the  lower  part  of  it  cut  oiT ; the  fort  is  situated  on  the  west  side  of  the  island,  and  is  a place  of  considerable 
strength.  There  is  no  ditch;  the  gate  is  in  the  north  face;  the  tide  flows  to  within  30  yards  of  the  waUs, 
which  are  about  40  feet  high,  and  appear  well  built  of  stone  and  chunam.  A ship  drawing  17  feet  water^ 
can  get  within  half  a mile  of  it;  but  the  passage  is  narrow  and  dangerous.  The  latitude  of  the  castle  is. 
22®  28  North,  and  longitude  69°  20  East.  The  Rajah  of  Bate,  being  the  most  powerful  in  the  petty 
states  who  fitted  out  vessels  for  piratical  purposes,  and  this  island  being  the  general  rendezvous,  an  expe* 
dition  was  sent  from  Bombay  in  1803  against  it;  they  burnt  about  30  of  the  pirate  vessels,  and  made  an 
attick  on  the  fort,  by  landing  a party  of  men  and  some  guns,  and  by  firing  on  it  from  the  ships;  but 
were  repulsed  with  some  loss.  They  have  several  forts  on  the  main,  particularly  Aramra  and  Pissotra ; 
the  former  about  three  miles  to  the  westward,  and  the  latter  about  five  miles  to  the  S.  E.  of  Bate. 