

TATTA, 

The  capital  of  the  province.  The  town  was  formerly  very  large,  about  3 miles  long  and  1|  broad, 
fcttving  at  its  western  extremity  a large  castle,  containing  the  residence  of  the  Nabob,  and  barracks  for  a 
lai-ge  army;  it  stands  about  2 miles  from  the  river  side,  from  whence  it  has  canals  cut,  to  convey  vessels 
and  merchandise  to  it.  The  river  hereabouts  is  a mile  broad,  having  S and  6 fathoms  water  in  the  channel, 
nnd  is  navigable  by  small  Vessels  an  immense  distance  up  the  country.  The  Portuguese,  under  Baretto  in 
1555,  having  received  some  provocation  from  the  King  of  Scindy,  attacked  the  place,  put  upwards  of  8,000 
persons  to  the  sword,  then  burnt  the  town,  and  with  it  great  riches:  notwithstanding  this,  the  plunder 
was  immense,  all  of  which  was  afterwards  lost  in  a storm.  In  1635  the  English  formed  a factory  here, 
with  a view  to  the  disposal  of  woollens  and  other  goods ; but  it  was  withdrawn  in  about  20  yeaw,  not 
answering  the  purpose  intended.  A considerable  trade  is  earned  on  with  the  6ul6  of  Persia  and  Arabia, 
Qombay  and  Surat,  by  both  of  the  princq)al  branches  of  the  river. 


AtJRUNGABUNDEn. 


UT 


ATTRUNG  ABUNDER,  called  also  Darah,  is  in  latitude  about  23®  50  North,  and  has  a wide  entrance^ 
abreast  of  which  ships  anchor,  but  shoal  water  is  found  on  the  banks  near  its  mouth.  It  is  navigable  for 
boats  of  burthen,  and  a considerable  trade  is  carried  on  with  Tatta,  from  whence  it  is  distant  about  50  miles^ 
by  the  course  of  the  Indus.  Vessels  from  Surat,  Bombay,  and  other  parts  of  India  frccpient  this  place. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 


Accounts  are  kept  in  rupees,  carivals,  and  pice,  12  pice  making  1 carival,  50  carivals  1 rupee.  Cow- 
ries are  current  in  Scindy— 48  cowries  1 picc. 


The  exchange  between  Tatta  and  Aurungabunder  is  2}  percent. 

The  weights  and  measures  are  as  follow: 

8M.\LL  WEIUUTS. 

LONG  MEASURE. 

24  Moons 

1 Ruttee. 

1 1 Garce 

'I  f 2 Inches. 

y make  A , 

) 11  (jllZ. 

6 Ruttees 

[.  make  ) 

1 Massa. 

1 1 6 Garccs 

12  Massas 

) ( 

1 Tolalu 

but  1 Guz  is  34  inches  in  cloth  at  Tuttu. 

CROSS  WEIGHTS. 

(illAIN  MiiASUHi;. 

4 Picc 

) f 

I Amin. 

4 Puttoes 

^ f 1 Twier. 

16  Annas 

f make  i 

1 Pucca  seer. 

4 Twiers 

V make  -J  1 Cossa. 

40  Seers 

J i 

1 Maund. 

60  Cossas 

J V I Carval  of  wlieat. 

which  is  equal  to  74  lbs.  5oz.  7dwts. 

avoirdupois. 

which  is  22  pucca  mauiids,  or  21  Bombay  paruhs. 

Diamonds  and  pearls  are  sold  by  hubbas  and  ruttecs— 8 bubbas  equal  to  1 ruttee,  about  2grs.  troy  ^ 

IMPORTS  ANJ)  EXPORTS. 

Prom  Bombay  and  other  parts  of  tlie  British  dominions  are  imported  the  following  commodities. 


Copper. 