

^attd  d^ar;  Fish  are  in  abundaopa^^';  ~ 


144  CHEWABAD— GUTTER  BAY— 6UADEL. 


CHEWABAD, 

• * » ‘ 

Or  Churbar  Bay,  is  one  of  the  best  on  theicdist,  and  is  in  latitude  about  15'  North;  the  en* 
trance  is  between  the  head-land,  called  Colab,  on  the  west  side,  and  Churbar  low  point  to 'the  eastward, 
liaving  ov^r  it  a wliite  tomb  and  some  trees. , The  to.wn  is*  inside  the  low  point,  where  ships  may  anchor 
in  4 or  5 fathoms.  Here  is  a small  mud  fort,  but  no  cannon;  and  the  town  is  composed  of  straggling 
mat  houses.  There  are  about  100  Banians  settled  in  the  place,  who  have  a small  bazar;  and  many  weavers, 
who  manufacture  coarse  check  piece-goods,  and  some  carpets.  A trade  is  carried  on  here  in  horses,  the 
breed  of  which  is  very  good,  and  camels,  for  which  they  receive  inlretuj’n,  rice,  ghee,  and  other  articles  of 
food.  The  Portuguese  once  had  a small  settlement  in  this  bay,  the  , remains  of  the  town  being  still  visiUe, 
Goats  and  sheep  are  to  be  had  at  a moderate  price;  but  neither  bullocks  nor  fowls  can  be  got;  there 
are  some  small  gardens,  which  prdduce  vegetables  of  various  kinds.  The  water  b better  here  t]|^n  at  any 
other  place  on  the  coast,  and  easily  procured,  being  very  near  the  shore. 


- GUTTER  BAY. 

Noa  Point,  the  eastern  extreme  of  this  bay,  is  in  latitude  26^  3'  North,  and  longitude  about  5 
East.'  At  the  bottom  of  the  bay  is  situated  the  town,  which  is  small,  and  chiefly  inhabited  by  fishermen; 
In  crossing  the  bay  from  Noa  Point,  a small  hill  is  seen  on  tlie  opposite  shore,  near  which  is  in  island,  at 
the  mouth  of  a small  bay,  called  by  the  natives,  Bucker  Bunder,  where  they  go  to  fish.  This  is  sidd  to  be 
one  of  the  places  where  the  pirate  vessels  from  Gnzzerat  lie  in  the  fair  Weather  season,  on  purpose  to  plun- 
der the  dingies,  and  other  small  vessels  which  trade  on  this  coast.  These  pirate  gallivats  come  firom 
Bate,  Nowabunder,  JafTrebat,  and  other  ports  on  the  Guzzerat  Coast.  They  rove  along  the  coasts 
of  Scihdy  and  Persia,  and  about  the  entrance  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  boarding  and  plundering  every  small 
vessel  they  can  master.  Recently  Uiey  have  been  successful  in  getting  possession  of  several  brigs  trading 
from  Bombay  to  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  have  treated  their  commanders  and  crews  with  great  cruelty. 


GTTAnKT., 


Cape  Guadel,  in  latitude  about  4'  North,  and  longitude  63<’  12'  East,  is  a peninsula  of  moderate 
height,  joined  to  the  main  by  a neck  of  land,  about  half  a mile  over.  A wall  fortified  with  towers  ibr- 
merly  extended  across  the  isthmus,  from  one  bay  to  the  other,  to  protect  the  town  from  assaults  by 
the  ruins  of  which,  also  some  wells,  and  a town  built  with  stone,  are  to  be  seen;  but  the  few  inh^itants 
now  live  in  a town  composed  of  mat  houses,  situated  close  under  the  north  side  of  the  Ciqpe.  The  principal 
part  of  them  are  weavers;  they  manufacture  such  cloths  as  serve  their  own  markets,  which  are  dark  chedii, 
and  very  narrow,  and  some  plain  carpets  of  different  colours,  but  not  rough.  They  say  there  are  several  large 
towns  in  the  country,  and  one  situated  between  Posmee  and  Guadel;  but  the  principal  town  of  which  they 
speak  most,  is  Lahore,  from  whence  they  are  supplied  with  curious  matchlocks,  of  inlaid  work,  and  fd- 
mitars,  which  are  for  the  most  part  watered  alter  the  manner  of  the  Damascus  blades.  From  Cape 
Jasques  to  this  place,  the  people  call  themselves  Brodies,  and  from  hence  to  Crotchey,  Ubiej  take  the  iMyne 
of  Blochees.  There  is  some  difference  in  their  language,  and  perhaps  ia  their  refigion,  though  none  is.  to 
be  observed  in  their  dress.or  manners. 