

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

From  Surat,  Bombay,  Muscat,  and  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  are  imported  the  following  articles : 


Beetle  nut 

Cassia  l^gnea. 

Nutmegs. 

Sandal  wood. 

Cardamums. 

Copper. 

Pepper. 

Safiron. 

Cochineal 

Iron,  in  bars. 

Piece  goods. 

Tin. 

Cloves. 

Ironmongery.  ’ 

Rice. 

Tutenague. 

Cloths. 

Lead. 

Sapan  wood. 

Timber. 

China  ware. 

Looking  glasses. 

Sugar. 

Vermilion. 

And  by  the  caravans  from  Cabul  and  Candahar  are  brought,  almonds,  cummin  seeds,  dates,  ghee, 
grain,  hides,  oil,  piece-goods. 

The  exports  consist  of  the  above-enumerated  arBdes,  and  cotton,  which  are  generally  sent  to  Bombay. 

U 


146 


BIVKU  INDUS.  OR  SCINDY— LARIBUNDER-TATl'A. 


DUTIES. 

The  revenue  arising  from  the  ciifjtoms  is  stated  to  amount  to  1,25,000  inipees  per  annum.  This  is  to 
be  understood  to  relate  only  to  the  period  since  the  trade  of  Ijaribunder  has  been  obstructed:  how  the  duties 
are  levied,  is  not  generally  known. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Black  cattle,  sheep,  and  goats  are  to  be  had,  but  not  reasonable.  The  necessaries  of  life  are,  how* 
ever,  plentiful  and  cheap,  and  the  country  abounds  with  wild  geese,  ducks,  teal,  partridges,  snipes,  hares, 
and  deer.  Poultry  is  plentiful.  Little  or  no  regard  is  paid  to  vegetables  here;  excepting  a few  spots  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  town,  which  produce  a small  quantity  of  carrots,  radishes,  and  a few  other 
roots,  there  is  nothing  of  the  kind  for  40  miles  mund.  The  water  is  very  indifferent,  and  in  consequence 
of  the  distance  from  the  harbour,  the  expence  of  shipping  it  is  considerable. 

RIVER  INDUS,  OR  SCINDY. 

The  different  branches  of  this  celebrated  river  occupy  a space  of  near  SO  leagues  of  sea  coast,  but, 
being  seldom  visited  by  Europeans,  is  but  indifferently  known.  About  170  miles  from  tliesea,  by  the  course 
of  the  river,  the  Indus  divides  itself  into  two  branches,  of  which  the  northernmost  is  the  largest.  This  is 
commonly  called  liaribunder.  After  a course  of  about  60  miles,  it  branches  off  into  two  more,  the  smallest 
of  which  is  called  Darraway,  and  the  largest,  taking  the  name  of  Ritchel  River,  runs  in  a more  southerly 
course  to  a small  village  of  that  name  on  the  sea  coast.  The  other  principal  branch,  which,  as  before  stated, 
separates  about  170  miles  from  the  sea,  is  smaller  than  the  other,  and  at  some  distance  from  the  sea,  di- 
vides mto  several  branches,  the  pruicipal  of  which  are  Aurungabunder  and  Warrell. 

LARIBUNDER. 

This  is  commonly  called  Scindy  River,  being  the  principal  branch  of  the  Indus,  having  15  feet  water 
on  the  bar,  and  6 or  7 fathoms  inside;  it  is  situated  in  latitude  about  24*^  30  North,  having  a pagoda  on 
the  western  side  of  its  entrance.  The  town  of  Laribunder  is  about  5 leagues  from  the  sea,  and  vessels  of 
SOO  tons  used  to  proceed  up  to  it;  but  of  late  years  the  navigation  is  much  obstructed  by  shoab.  The 
town  contains  about  100  houses,  chiefly  built  of  bamboos  and  mats,  with  a small  mud  fort,  having  4 or  $ 
guns  mounted  to  protect  it  from  robbers.  About  50  miles  farther  up  the  river  stands 