


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

A few  goats,  aheep,  andfowls  may  be  purchased,  but  are  dear.  The  best 
tn  the  sand;  that  whidi  is  procured  from  the  wdditlidlliillDwib  bebg  rather  Mckiitu 


SOMMEANY— CROTCHEY. 


145 


SOMMEANY 

Is  a smdl  town,  situated  Inside  the  entrance  9!’  a river,  in  latitude  about  25®  30  North,  and  longitude 
67®  25'  East.  It  has  a mud  fort  which  is  in  ruins.  The  liiits^coinjwsing  the  town  are  con-ti  u(  ted  of  poles 
and  mats;  the  townjs  scarcely  discernible  from  the  road;  Uie  best  mark  for  finding  it,  is  a remarkable  gap 
In  the  high  land  at  the  back  of  it,  which  in  clear  weather  cannot  escape  notice.  When  it  bears  N.  N.  E. E, 
the  river’s  mouth  is  N.  E.  by  E.  distant  about  2 miles,  in  4 fatlioms  water. 

Every  article  of  refreshment  is  very  scarce;  even  the  water,  which  is  indlfrerent,  cannot  be  pro- 
cured in  sufficient  quantity,  nor  without  considerable  trouble:  it  is  got  by  iligging  holes  .'i  or  (5  feet  deep, 
and  as  much  in  diameter,  near  the  town,  which  formerly  appears  to  have  been  a swamp : il'  the  water  oozes 
through  the  sand,  which  docs  not  always  hup])en,  it  serves  them  that  day,  and  perhaps  the  next,  but  soon 
becomes  quite  brackish,  owing  to  the  nitrous  quality  of  the  earth. 

The  Coast  of  Scindy  extends  from  Cape  Monze  to  the  Gulf  of  Cutcb,  a distance  of  about  80  leagues; 
it  receives  its  nanie  from  the  River  Scindy  or  Indus,  which  disembogues  itself  into  the  sea,  by  many 
branches  extending  along  tlie  coast.  The  principal  place  of  trade  between  Cape  Monze  and  the  Indus,  is 

CROTCHEY, 

Which  is  known  by  several  small  islands  to  the  northward,  and  by  a w bite  tomb,  or  pagoda,  built  on  a 
promontory,  which  bounds  tlie  west  side  of  the  harbour,  and  atadistanceappe.arslike  an  island;  Iheenliance  into 
the  bay  is  between  the  promontory  and  the  largest  island.  To  anchor  in  the  road  outside,  the  tomb  should 
^ brought  to  bear  N.  W.  by  N.  to  avoid  some  foul  ground.  The  town  of  Crotchey  is  about  (>  miles  from 
the  anchorage,  near  a mile  from  the  side  of  a small  creek,  which  con  admit  only  small  boats,  and  is  in 
latitude  about  24°  46  North.  The  fort  is  about  a mile  round,  constructed  of  mud;  the  streets  ore  very 
narrow  and  dirty,  abounding  with  filth  of  all  kinds,  which  makes  the  place  very  unhealthy;  the  houses  are 
of  the  simplest  structure,  and  merely  calculated  to  shelter  their  tenants  iVom  the  sun;  the  walls  are  of  mud 
and  straw,  mixed  into  a paste,  and  the  roofs  which  are  flat,  are  covered  with  the  same  materials.  Of  tim- 
ber, the  country  is  entirely  destitute ; what  is  required  for  building  houses  and  boats,  is  brought  from  Ma- 
labar and  Bombay.  This  town  formerly  belonged  to  the  Bloachcs ; but  the  Prince  of  Scindy,  finding  it 
more  convenient  than  any  part  of  his  sea  coast,  for  the  caravans  from  the  inland  countries,  made  an  ex- 
change with  some  other  place  for  it.  It  seems  the  caravans  cannot  come  from  tiie  interior  to  Tatta  as  for- 
merly,  on  account  of  the  branches  of  the  Indus  being  so  wide  and  deep,  as  to  render  it  impossible  for  ca- 
mds  to  pass;  but  hairing  no  such  difficulty  in  the  road  to  Crotchey,  the  trade  is  much  increased,  and  con- 
tinues to  flourish.  The  population  of  Crotchey  is  estimated  at  10,000  souls ; the  men  are  chiefly  merchants 
and  mechanics,  who  carry  on  a considerable  trade  to  Muscat,  Surat,  Bombay,  and  the  Malabar  Coast; 
there  is  also  a very  large  inland  traffic  by  camels  to  Candahar  and  CabuL 