

The  Portuguese  plundered  and  burnt  this  town  in  1531,  and  again  in  151fi,  when  it  was  just 
emerging  from  the  former  ruins. 

The  greater  part  of  the  cotton  grown  in  this  neighbourhood,  and  Bownaghur,  is  shqiped  from  hence 
to  Bombay;  and  the  vessels  bring  in  return,  various  articles  of  European,  East  Indian,  and  China  produce, 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  market  is  but  poorly  supplied;  vegetables  are  scarce,  though  there  are  a number  of  Baniajis  who 
fjibsist  on  nothing  else.  Fish  is  not  to  be  had  at  any  rate,  except  a few  mud  w ornis,  called  by  the  natives, 
newtee.  Mutton  is  seldom  killed,  because  uo  one  can  afford  to  purchase  it,  but  on  tlieir  great  feast  days. 
Beef  is  never  killed  for  tlie  same  reasons,  and  to  ol)lige  the  Bramin  and  Hindoo  merchants  who  reside  here. 
They  are  badly  off  for  fresh  water;  all  about  the  town  being  brackish,  as  that,  and  a great  way  inland,  is 
overflowed  every  Iiigh  spring;  they  are  therefore  obliged  to  bring  the  water  for  drinking,  the  distance  of 
four  or  five  miles,  in  skins,  upon  bullocks.  Firewood  is  likewise  very  scaice,  being  all  brought  from  other 
parts  inland,  and  from  the  different  creeks  in  the  Gulf.  Fowls  arc  good,  ond  tolerably  cheap;  these,  with 
lOggs,  butter^  and  milk,  are  all  an  European  can  get  to  subsist  upon> 


X: 


CHAPTER  XII. 


Coast  of  India  from  Cambay  to  Bombay. 


Camhay;  Description-^Coins^Wdghls  and  Mioaurcs^Trade  between  British  India  and  the  Northern  Parts  of 
Guzzerat^Dutiesy  Port  Chargesy  ^c.^^unibaseer^Baroach — Surat;  Dcseriptioyp^CoiHs^Wetghts  and 
Mcasures^Trade  of  Surat  and  adjacent  Villages  with  British  India-^Kxports  to  the  Gulfs  of  Persia 
and  Arahia-^Trade  with  the  Portugucscy  Dutchy  and  Freneh-^Custom-house  Begulations-^Provisions  and 
Refreslnnents^Dumaun ; Description-^^Bassein ; Description. 


CAMBAY, 

The  place  which  gives  its  name  to  the  Gulf,  is  the  seaport  to  Amcdabad,  the  capital  of  the  province, 
and  is  in  latitude  22^  24'  North ; it  is  of  considerable  .size,  and  was  formerly  a place  of  great  trade:  most 
of  the  European  nations  had  factories  here ; that  belonging  to  the  Dutch  was  established  in  1620.  The 
tides  are  very  strong  and  rapid  here;  at  high  water  spring  tides  there  are  5 or  6 fathoms  water,  and  ship^ 
could  anchor  near  the  city;  but  at  low  water  it  is  quite  dry,  except  some  channels,  in  which  there  remain 
3 or  4 feet,  so  that  vessels  in  the  river  must  lie  quite  aground,  tliough  they  do  not  suffer  much  in 
that  situation,  from  the  bottom  being  soft.  The  town  is  stated  to  have  been  twice  as  large  as  Surat,  but 
not  so  populous ; the  streets  are  large,  and  have  all  gates  at  the  end,  which  are  shut  in  the  night  time ; in 
that  pai’t  next  the  sea,  are  to  be  seen  tlie  remains  of  some  fine  houses,  built  by  the  Portuguese  when  they 
resided  here.  The  inhabitants  are  numerous,  composed  of  all  nations,  who  carry  on  a trade  with  many 
parts  of  India,  but  nothing  in  comparison  with  what  it  did  previous  to  the  water  decreasing  in  the  upper 
pail  of  the  Gulf.  Large  quantities  of  piece-goods  manufactured  at  Amedabad,  and  cotton  are  annu^y 
shipped  from  hence  to  Bombay.  Cambay  is  the  only  place  where  cornelian  stones  are  produced. 