

The  market  is  well  supplied  with  vegetables,  which  come  from  the  main.  Fish  and  fowls  aie  very 
plentiful ; the  latter  are  dearer  here  than  at  Dumaun,  but  cheaiier  than  at  any  of  the  English  ports.  Beef 
they  are  obliged  to  procure  in  a clandestine  manner,  and  kill  it  witliin  the  castle,  on  account  of  the  pirn- 
cipal  merchants  being  Hindoos,  whose  friendship  is  of  the  utmost  impoilance  to  tlie  place,  as  the  revenues 
of  the  custom-house  are  the  only  support  of  the  garrbon.  Most  of  the  water  on  the  island  is  biac  is  i » 
that  which  is  for  use,  is  kept  in  large  reservoirs,  and  will  last  the  garrison  and  shipping  fiom  ^a.son  to 
season.  It  is  all  rain  water,  conveyed  to  the  wharf  in  a channel,  and  delivered  by  a eoc  to  l le  oat-*. 


162  NOWABUNDER~RADJAPORE.-^AFFREBAT— SEARBETT  ISLAND,  kc. 


NOWABUNDER. 

About  6 miles  East  of  Diu  Is  a nest  of  Pirates.  These  thieves  are  nearly  on  the  same  tenns  with  the 
Portuguese  as  the  Malwan  pirates  are  with  the  English,  passing  all  boats  under  their  colours ; but 
those  of  other  nations  are  seldom  spared  if  the  pirates  get  the  upper  hand.  They  have  a small  creek  pro^ 
tected  by  a little  fort,  into  which  their  vessels  are  hauled,  many  of  which  are  always  kept  ready  for  sea. 

RADJAPORE. 

This  place  is  in  latitude  about  20o  45'  North,  and  longitude  71®  SO  East.  There  is  a small  fort  upon 
a point  greatly  elevated ; and  they  generally  fire  upon  any  vessel  that  comes  within  the  reach  of  their  shot. 
Round  this  point  is  a small  creek,  where  their  gallivats  lie.  They  are  arrant  thieves  from  this  place,  and 
pay  no  respect  to  any  colours,  taking  all  by  whom  they  can  gain  any  advantage ; but  their  cowardly  dis- 
position is  against  their  profession ; for  the  flash  of  a musket,  or  a red  jacket  or  two  will  intimidate  them. 

JAFFREBAT. 

Next  to  Diu,  this  is  the  principal  place  for  trade  in  Guzzerat.  It  is  in  latitude  20®  52'  North,  and 
longitude  71®  38  East,  and  about  6 miles  to  the  westward  of  Searbett  Island.  It  has  the  best  river  on  this 
coast,  owing  to  its  easy  entrance,  having  no  bar.  It  is  shallow,  but  vessels  will  receive  no  damage  by  lying 
in  the  soft  mud  at  low  water,  as  they  are  well  sheltered  from  all  winds*  This  town  belongs  to  the  Siddee 
of  Radjapore,  who  is  at  war  with  the  Sanganians  and  Arabs,  and  has  several  vessels  at  sea  in  the  fair  weather 
season.  It  is  defended  by  a wall  all  round,  but  it  has  not  any  guns  mounted.  The  Governor  is  said  to  be- 
have civilly  to  the  English,  who  occasionally  visit  this  place. 

SEARBETT  ISLAND. 

The  centre  of  this  island  is  in  latitude  20®  55'  North,  and  longitude  71®  40'  East.  Its  form  is  that 
of  an  irregular  triangle.  It  affords  shelter  to  vessels  against  both  monsoons.  The  village  is  on  the  north 
side  of  the  island,  consisting  of  thirty  or  forty  houses,  built  of  stone,  and  thatched  with  straw.  The  inha- 
bitants arc  about  200  in  number,  including  women  and  children.  The  greater  part  of  the  island  is  laid  out 
in  fields  of  Badjeree  grain,  the  rearing  of  which  is  the  chief  employment  of  the  people.  They  have  several 
wells  of  excellent  water,  which  seem  to  have  been  the  work  of  the  Portuguese,  as  they  are  regularly  built 
of  cut  stone.  The  ruins  of  some  old  walls  of  good  masonry  arc  still  to  be  seen. 