

To  the  southward  of  the  castle  is  a large  o[)en  plain,  called  the  Castle  Gr(‘en,  where  arc  largo  tents 
fixed,  surrounded  by  jialings  of  bamboos ; where  goods  are  kept  ready  for  shipping  off. 

Surat  has  few  fine  buildings;  some  of  the  houses  of  the  principal  merchants  are  large  aiul  w(‘ll  built, 
but  the  generality  are  of  bamboos  and  mud.  There  arc  some  handsome  mosques,  likewise  the  rnstoni- 
house,  and  mint,  and  some  fine  tanks  or  reservoirs  for  water.  The  streets  are  narrow,  iiTegnlar,  and  iin- 
paved,  extremely  dirty  and  offensive,  particularly  in  the  wet  season.  Surat  is  very  populous;  the  inhabit- 
ants are  estimated  at  400,000,  amongst  whom  are  a great  number  of  rich  merchants,  Fersees,  Moors,  and 
Armenians,  who  carry  on  a large  trade  with  Persia,  Arabia,  and  various  parts  ol  India. 

The  burial  places  of  the  Europeans  in  the  suburbs,  are  generally  visited  by  strangers,  some  of  the 
tombs  being  large  and  handsome  buildings,  formed  of  the  best  materials,  and  highly  ornamented,  more 
particularly  those  belonging  to  the  Dutch. 

The  Portuguese  took  and  destroyed  Surat  in  1.512.  Celebrated  as  it  was  then  for  its  trade,  it  became 
more  considerable  by  its  min,  and  >vas  soon  the  general  staple  for  European  and  Eastern  mcrcliandisc. 
In  1612  the  English  established  a factor}^  here;  in  1615  a treaty  was  com luded  with  tlie  Mogul  by 
Sir  Thomas  Roe,  on  very  favourable  terms.  In  1617  the  Dutch  commenced  trading  at  Surat.  About 

1660  the  river  Taptee  being  incommoded  with  sand  banks  at  Ranier,  the  then  mart  town  on  this  river, 
the  English  removed  two  miles  further  down  on  the  opposite  side,  near  a castle  which  had  luen  built  many 
years  before,  to  secure  the  trade  from  the  Malabar  pirates;  others  following  the  cxamjile,  witiiin  a few 
years  the  place  became  a large  town,  but  without  walls,  and  so  continued  till  the  Muhrattas  in  UiGl  came 
and  plundered  all  but  the  European  factories,  which  were  on  their  guard.  After  this  disaster,  at  thi‘  re(|uest 
of  the  inhabitants,  the  Mogul  enclosed  v^ith  walls  a space  of  ground  about  four  nfilcs  in  cucumimnee,  to 


m 


SURAT. 


buiW  tlie  cltj  in ; but  tlie  number  of  people  increasing  with  the  trade,  several  large  suburbs  were  added, 
Surat  flourished  till  1686,  when  it  suffered  materially  by  a war  with  the  English,  which  was  continued  for 
three  years,  and  during  which  period  many  of  their  valuable  ships  were  captured.  In  1695  the  trade  was 
molested  by  the  ]*inglish  pirates,  which  subjected  the  Company’s  factory  to  much  trouble  and  inconvenience. 
In  1705  the  villages  around  were  plundered  by  the  neighbouring  Mahrattas,  and  Surat  besieged;  but  the 
enemy  being  unprovided  with  artillery,  made  no  impression  on  the  c ity.^ 