

Gold  and  silver  rupees,  with  their  subdivbions,  ore  the  common  coins,  and  the  weights  are  similar 
to  those  of  Surat. 

The  trade  is  chiefly  centered  in  Surat;  the  produce  of  the  neighbouring  country,  consisting  of  cotton, 
cotton  yarn,  piece-goods,  &c.  being  generally  sent  thither. 


SURAT. 


1.1  r 

SURAT  is  situated  on  the  South  side  of  the  River  Taptee,  or  Tappco,  about  20  miles  IVoni  the  sco. 
Vaux's  Tomb,  on  Swalley  Point,  the  North  side  of  the  entrance  of  the  river,  is  In  lonwitiule  2P  I North, 
and  latitude  72^  ,51'  East.  Tlie  anchoring  ground  for  large  ships’ in  Surat  roails,  is  in  7 or  H fathoms, 
Vaux’s  tomb  bearing  N.  j E.  and  the  entrance  of  False  River  K.  S.  E.  The  tides  run  here  at  the  rate  ot*  fiNcy 
miles  an  hour,  but  near  the  bar  they  do  not  run  with  such  rapidity. 

The  navigation  up  the  river  to  Surat  is  very  ditticult,  in  consequence  of  tlie  sands  frecpiently  sliit'ling, 
by  which  new  channels  are  formed,  and  the  old  ones  shut  up.  Near  two-thirds  of  the  distance  from  the 
bar  to  Surat,  is  a continued  chain  of  banks,  having  but  narrow  channels  belvvc'cn  IIkmu. 

On  the  right  hand  side  of  the  river,  about  four  miles  within  the  bar,  is  a creek,  uhich  leads  to  a small 
village  called  Domus,  where  there  is  a guard-house,  situated  on  a rising  ground,  with  a serje.nit's  guaid, 
who  send  to  the  chief  at  Surat  an  account  of  the  arrival  and  departure  IVoin  the  roads  of  all  sliips  of  e\ery 
nation,  of  which  a register  is  made.  From  Domus  to  Surat  is  about  fifteen  miles  by  water,  by  land  about 
ten.  The  city  stands  close  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  extends  a considerable  distanei'  along  s\unv;  the 
castle  is  a large  quadrangular  building,  with  a circular  and  capacious  bastion  at  cacli  angle,  mounted  wiih 
three  tiers  of  guns,  pointing  ditTerent  ways;  the  lowest  are  30  pounders,  tlie  second  and  tlie  upper 
18  and  12  pounders;  there  are  near  200  cannon  mounted  in  the  castle,  liesides  21  at  the  saluting  battery: 
the  lower  guns  are  not  above  G feet  above  the  level  of  the  river  at  high  water,  nheii  it  u ashes  the  castle 
walls.  The  houses  for  the  Commandant  and  officers  are  not  only  conviaiient,  but  many  oi’lhem  ileganl; 
the  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  arc  also  well  lodged.  On  one  ol  the  bastions  is  hoisted  tlie 
British  flag,  and  on  its  opposite,  the  Mogul’s.  There  is  a wall  and  ditch  iuelosing  iIm'  city,  and  another 
surrounding  the  suburbs;  the  distance  round  the  outer  wall,  is  n(‘ar  twelve  miles;  the  intermediate  space 
between  the  two  walls  is  a mile  wide,  and  as  populous  in  proportion  to  its  (‘xtiait,  as  the  cil\.  In  the 
outer  wall  are  thirteen  gates,  including  three  on  the  banks  of  the  river;  in  the  inner  are  four  gat(*s,  two 
of  winch  lead  to  the  castle,  the  keys  of  which  are  carried  to  the  chief  every  night  at  sunset,  when  thi‘y 
ore  locked:  they  are  opened  at  daybreak  in  the  morning. 