

This  island  is  the  receptacle  of  all  the  pirates  on  the  coast,  and  here  they  are  supplied  with  grain  and 
water,  being  always  ready  to  put  to  sea  whenever  they  find  it  seasonable.  These  pirates  always  give  a part 
of  every  thing  they  take  as  a tribute ; and  the  colours  of  all  the  vessels  taken  are  placed  over,  the  tomb  of  a 
Mahometan  saint,  called  Sallee  Pier,  who  was  interred  on  the  east  neck  of  tlie  island.  He  has  also  some  rela- 
tion on  the  island,  who  is  allowed  a few  of  the  fiags;  and  there  arc  two  men  appointed  to  watch  them. 

The  island  is  subject  to  the  Siddee  of  Radjapore,  and  pays  him  a small  acknowledgment  annually.  The  * 
inhabitants  are  chiefly  of  the  Gentoo  persuasion ; but  they  pay  that  respect  to  the  Mahometan  Pier  * 
merely  out  of  compliment  to  the  Siddee.  The  island  has  very  few  animals  upon  it. 

GOAPNAUT  POINT 

Is  in  latitude  21®  12  North,  and  is  so  called  by  the  Gentoos,  in  consequence  of  a famous  place  of 
worship  that  is  built  here,  dedicated  to  their  god,  Goapnaut.  This  building  is  said  to  be  of  mud,  but  it 
has  the  appearance  of  a fortification,  with  a very  high  flagstaff  to  it,  and  the  priests  who  attend  here, 
keep  a flag  constantly  flying.  It  lias  a few  thick  bushy  trees  about  it,  forming  a neat  regular  grove. 
This  point  may  be  seen  5 or  6 leagues  in  clear  weather,  and  has  a dangerous  shoal  projecting  near  fbur 
miles  from  it  to  the  eastward. 


GOGO. 


a,u 

GOGO  is  7 miles  to  the  N.  W.  of  the  small  island  of  Peram,  and  is  la  latitude  21*^  4<r  Nortli^  and  longi- 
tude 72*^  23'  Bast.  It  is  a place  of  some  trade,  and  has  fortifications  sulhelcntly  ^rong  to  resist  any 
attack  from  the  neighbouring  pirates.  The  houses  ore  mostly  built  of  stone,  unil  there  being  many  old 
erections,  a jierson  wanting  to  build,  purchases  three  or  four  of  tliem,  on  purpose  to  have  the  stones  for  his 
house.  Most  of  them  are  two  stories  high,  but  very  dose  and  badly  planned  for  a hot  climate;  they  are 
generally  tiled,  and  form  a Tery  pleasant  prospect  from  the  road  whei-e  the  small  vessels  anchor,  which' 
if  in  about  3 fathoms,  directly  abreast  of  the  town,  tlie  pagoda  on  Peram  In'oring  S.  S.  Iv 

Gogo  is  chiefly  inhabited  by  Lascars,  whose  numlicr  is  computed  to  l>e  about  2,000,  fit  for  sea/ 
when  all  present,  which  seldom  or  never  is  the  case.  These  people,  when  on  board  BnghMi  vessels,  arc  tho* 
most  active  and  best  seamen  in  India;  they  are  likewise  |>ossessed  of  a spirit  ot'  liravery,  scarce  to  bo 
equalled  in  any  of  the  other  native  tribes ; and  will,  when  practised,  exercise  a great  gun  as  skilfully’ 
an  European.  When  they  arc  at  home,  they  parade  about  in  their  best  apjwrel  and  swords,  and 
will  scorn  to  do  any  work,  until  they  have  s|)cnt  all  the  money  of  th(i  last  voyage;  when  that  is  gone,  they 
cliecrfully  return  to  sea,  leaving  part  of  their  impress,  or  advance,  1>eliind  them,  for  the  use  of  their  rela^ 
lions,  as  it  is  customary  to  pay  them  four  or  six  months  wages  in  advance : they  nre  then  hound  for  the' 
voyage  or  season.  The  serang,  or  boatswain,  is  generally  the  bondsman  to  the  commander  for  all  his 
people.  It  is  remarked  that  they  seldom  quarrel  iimong  themselves;  they  arc  exceedingly  quiet  on  board, 
and  obedient  to  their  commancling  officers;  they  never  drink  liquors,  but  will  at  time's  intoxicate  them- 
selves with  opium,  wliich  they  smoke  with  tobacco.  They  are  strict  Mahometans,  Small  vessels  from 
SO  to  250  tons  burthen  are  built  here,  and  ships  may  have  any  damage  repaux'd  with  case  aiul  expedition,- 
and  receive  a suj)ply  of  necessary  stores. 