

This  place  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese  under  Albucjiierque  in  1509.  It  was  then  described  as 
begirt  with  walls  and  towers,  being  a strong,  beautiful,  well-governed  city,  its  appearance  renewing  in  the 
memory  of  the  Portuguese,  that  of  their  o>vn  country.''  On  their  arrival  they  attacked  the  shipping  in  the 
harbour,  consisting  of  200  sail,  of  which  some  were  sunk,  others  taken,  and  the  rest  fled.  Of  all  the  ships 
that  were  taken  full  of  immense  riche.s,  only  four,  and  two  gallies  w^erc  preserved  ; the  rest  were  plundered 
and  burnt.  Albuquerque  having  settled  an  advantageous  peace,  returned  to  tlie  southward.  In  15Ji  they 
obtained  permission  to  build  a fort,  which  in  forty-nine  days  was  made  so  strong  as  to  resist  the  attempts 
of  the  Prince,  >\1io  repented  of  his  conces.sion.  In  1537  the  King  of  ('ambay,  wanting  to  destroy  the  Por- 
tuguese, made  an  attack  upon  them,  but  lost  his  life  in  the  attempt^  and  Diu  was  surrendered  to  them.  The 
gold  and  silver  found,  did  not  exceed  200,000  pardos,  but  the  quantity  of  ammunition  was  incredible ; 
cind  amongst  the  brass  and  iron  guns  were  several  of  prodigious  size,  one  ot  which  was  s(*nt  to  Por- 
tugal as  a rarity,  and  kept  at  the  Castle  of  St.  Julien,  and  called  the  great  gun  of  Diu.  In  1538  an  at- 
tempt w^as  made  to  regain  possession,  but  without  success;  and  in  151-5  another,  which  met  a like  fafe. 
The  Portuguese  remained  in  quiet  po.ssession  till  about  1670,  when  the  town  was  suq^rised  by  the  Muscat 
Arabs,  who  for  three  days  plundered  the  rich  city  and  churches,  and  loaded  their  \Tssels  with  the  pro])crty, 
which  was  immense.  They  mounted  some  cannon  on  a church,  and  fired  on  the  fort,  but  to  little  pur- 
pose; for  the  Portuguese  in  the  castle  were  forbid  by  the  priests  from  firing  at  the  cliurch,  lest  an  unlucky 
shot  should  sacrilegiously  deface  some  holy  image.  The  Arabs  having  ceased  their  plunder,  became  secure 
«nd  negligent,  upon  which  the  Portuguese  sallied  forth  from  the  castle,  killed  about  a thousand,  and  com- 
pelled the  rest  to  abandon  the  place,  and  retire  to  their  sliips.  Diu  has  never  recovered  this  loss,  having 
been  dwindling  ever  since.  There  are  not  above  200  Portuguese  here ; the  remainder  of  the  inhabitants 
4re  Banians,  Persees,  Moors,  &c.  and  may  be  about  4D,000,  few  of  them  men  ot  large  propeit}  , the 
trade  which  was  formerly  carried  on  here,  having  been,  from  the  conduct  of  the  Portuguese,  removed  to 
Surat  and  the  neighbouring  places:  but  if  the  island  w’ere  in  the  possession  of  any  other  European  poi^er, 
it  w'ould  soon  regain  its  former  importance,  as  from  its  situation  and  security,  it  may  be  considered  the  he.st 
station  for  trade  on  the  western  side  of  the  peninsula  of  India. 