

Bate  produces  cocoa  nuts,  beetle  nut,  and  grain,  but  in  small  quantities,  and  some  trade  is  carried 
on  in  dates,  sugar,  and  rice,  in  dows,  having  tlie  Rajah  of  Bate's  pass. 

JIGAT. 

Jigat  Point  is  in  latitude  22°  15'  North,  and  longitude  69°  East.  On  it  is  a pagoda;  the  place  where 
it  stands,  was  formerly  called  Jigat  More,  but  now  by  the  Hindoos,  Dorecur.  At  a distance  the  pagoda  has 
very  much  the  appearance  of  a ship  under  sail;  it  is  a circular  building,  with  curious  wrought  pillars  on 
the  outside,  which  support  a dome  covering  an  upper  gallery,  immediately  under  which  there  is  a lower 
one,  of  nearly  tlie  same  dimensions;  and  on  the  inland  side  joining  to  it,  a pyramid  rises  on  a base  above  the 
dome,  on  the  top  of  which  they  hoist  a white  flag.  The  whole  is  enclosed  by  a wall  and  bastions,  with  loop- 
holes, to  appearance  without  cannon.  In  the  vicinity  of  it  are  a number  of  small  buildings,  probably 
tombs.  The  wall  of  the  pagoda  extends  to  the  sea-beach,  and  can  be  approached  very  near  by  a vessel,  but 
there  is  no  anchoring  with  safety,  it  being  all  rocky  ground.  Great  numbers  of  pilgrims  from  the  interior 
visit  Jigat  pagoda,  and  are  supplied  witli  necessaries  from  Goomtee  and  Bate.  About  a gun-shot  withiii 
the  pagoda  is 

GOOMTEE. 

The  town  is  strongly  fortified,  and  is  the  place  where  the  principal  persons  reside,  who  used  to  fit  out 
vessels  for  piratical  purposes.  The  Governor  is  a Hindoo,  independent  of  the  Rajah  of  Nagore.  A ship 
can  approach  within  gun-shot  of  this  fort  without  danger.  Near  Goomtee  is  a small  fort,  called  Cutcb 
Ghur,  belonging  to  the  Rajah  of  Bhooj,  and  garrisoned  by  hb  troops,  for  the  purpose  of  claiming  any  pro* 
perty  that  may  be  captured  by  the  pirates  belonging  to  the  Cutch  merchants. 

The  Coast  of  Guzzerat  from  Jigat  Point  to  Din  Head  is  but  little  known  to  Europeans,  being  sel- 
dom frequented,  on  account  of  the  pirates,  who  are  very  numerous  here,  Tke’princijpel  t^ns  are  Poor- 
bunder,  in  latitude  about  21°  40'  North,  and  longHnde  69^45'  East  Novibunder,  in  latitude  about  21°  25" 
North,  and  longitude  70°  T East.  Mangarole,  in  latitude  21°  5'  North,  and  longitude  70^  23  East,  and 
Pattan,  in  latitude  20°  50'  North,  and  longitude  70°  40  East 


DIU. 


l.»l 

DIU  belon^js  to  the  Portuguese.  'This  island  is  about  2 miles  from  Din  IIo.'nl,  the  soutlicni  point  of 
the  coast  of  Guzzerat,  which  is  in  latitude  20^^  42  North,  and  longitude  71- 7 East.  The  channel  bi - 
Iwecn  is  only  navigable  by  fishing  bouts  at  half  tide,  the  westcTii  entrance  having  hut  i or  5 fo(‘t  »at  low 
water  on  the  bar.  This  entrance  is  defended  by  a square  fort.  Diu  Island  is  about  G[  miles  long  from 
East  to  West,  and  IJ  broad  from  North  to  South:  on  the  east  end  of  it  the  castle  and  town  arc  situated. 
It  is  one  of  the  best  built  and  most  strongly  fortified  cities  in  India,  the  castle  having  upwards  of  100 
pieces  of  cannon  mounted,  many  of  which  are  brass : from  the  castle  runs  a wall  w liich  surrounds  the 
whole  town,  having  half-moon  towers  at  equal  distances.  Tlicrc  arc  only  two  gates,  one  of  the  sea,  the 
other  of  the  land,  and  both  are  shut  at  sunset.  The  houses  within  the  walls  are  built  ol’  free-stone,  some 
of  ivhich  are  four  or  live  stories  high,  inhabited  by  Iranians.  U'hereare  also  several  churclies  and  convents. 
The  streets  are  extremely  narrow,  but  kept  very  clean.  The  landing  place  is  at  a flight  of  stone  steps  o|k 
posite  the  custom-house,  at  the  entrance  of  which  are  many  shops  and  warehouses  fur  goods.  On  the  cast 
side  of  the  castle  there  is  water  sufficient  for  a 74  gun  ship  within  500  yards  of  the  walls,  if  she  avoids  a 
rock  above  water,  which  is  joined  to  a line  of  rocks  from  the  shore. 