


Mahomedans 
Armenians  and  Jews%%v 
Hindoos 


Customs, 

per  cent., 
ditto 
ditto 


T.  B.  K.  Ekotra.  War. 


a. 


ToIbI. 

..4f  per  cent. 
»4|  ditto. 
m7  ditto. 


The  customs  collected  at  this  time,  were  dirided  as  under  mentioned. 

The  Mogul  Government,  and  the  Mahrattas,  or  Pesbwa,  and  Guickwas  Chonteas  received  two  thirds 
of  per  cent,  from  Mahomedans,  of  3}  per  cent  from  Armenians,  and  of  6 per  cent  fiiMB  Hindoos 
The  Company  received  in  right  of  the  command  of  the  Mogul’s  fleet,  to  wMch  they  hud  succeeded  at  the 
same  time  as  that  of  the  castle,  one  third  of3{  per  cent  from  the  Mahomedans,  one  third  from  the  Armenians 
and  Jews,  and  one  third  of  6 per  cent  from  the  Hindoos,  besUos  the  whole  of  the  Ekotra,  oit  aceoiwt 
of  the  war  charges,  from  each  sect  resi>ectively. 


SUllAT. 


l&l 

On  the  4th  of  January,  1763,  the  rates  of  the  customs  were  again  altereil,  tii. 

Customs.  T B.  K.  Ekotra.  War  Total. 

Mahomodiins  (exceptions  as  before) per  per  ctMit. 

Ariiienians  and  ditto  \ ditto. 

Hindoos  ditto  ditto. 

The  division  of  the  customs  continued  as  above,  with  this  difference,  that  more  was  reoei\cd  from  the 
Moliomedans,  and  less  from  the  Hindoos. 

Till  the  year  1766,  it  appears  that  the  passing  of  goods  in  tliis  department  had  lieen  entrusted  to  the 
native  Daroga ; but  in  the  month  of  May,  in  the  last-mentioned  yeai*,  it  was  onlered  that  no  goods  should 
be  exported  without  the  pass  of  the  English  Phoorza  master,  nor  imported  without  a translate  of  the 
Bhurtas,  or  manifest  signed  by  him  : and  as  goods  were  discharged  hy  tlie  Phoorza,  the  Naboli,  or  native 
government,  and  sometimes  the  Mahrattas,  in  view  to  their  claim  of  chowte,  had  people  to  see  that  no 
more  was  exported  than  the  quantity  expressed  in  the  Bhurtas ; and  as  when  country  vessels  imported, 
sepoys  were  sent  from  the  Phoorza,  who  accompanied  the  goods  from  town,  to  prevent  their  being 
landed  or  shipped  elsewhere,  it  was  on  the  some  occasion  ordained  that  proper  |)eople  should  he  employed 
for  these  purposes  on  Uhalf  of  the  Company.  On  this  system  the  French,  Dutch,  and  Portuguese  tra- 
ding under  jihii'maund  privileges,  were  not  subject  to  the  Khooshka  customs  on  their  trade  with  Surat  by  sea 
or  land,  but  all  natives  were : so  that,  according  to  the  original  system,  a Latty  merchant,  or  dependent 
on  the  English  Company's  government,  after  paying  to  them  the  duty  on  his  gooils  imported  hy  sea,  or  a 
Mogul  sutyect  to  the  native  government  Phoorza,  had  each  of  them  again  similarly  to  account  for  the 
Khooshka  duty,  on  carrying  their  goods  into  the  interior  country;  but  from  the  example  of  the  Latty  de- 
partment ill  exacting  its  duty  only  once,  the  double  duties,  thus  payable  at  the  Phoorza  and  Khooshka, 
appear  to  have,  within  these  last  eight  or  ten  years,  fallen  much  into  disuse,  or  been,  in  fact,  for  the  greater 
part,  evaded  : for  instance,  the  importers  through  the  Phoorza  re-exporting  tlieir  goods  by  sea,  and  land- 
ing  them  at  a convenient  port,  either  up  or  down  the  coast,  according  to  their  ultimate  destination : 
and  in  like  manner,  although  upon  importation  by  land,  they  had  cijually  to  pay,  in  the  first  instance, 
not  only  the  Khooshka  duty,  but  again  that  of  the  Phoorza,  or  Latty,  according  as  the  im|>orters  were 
esteemed  Mogul  subjects,  or  English  dependents,  on  the  same  goods  when  exported  hy  sea,  yet,  agree- 
aliile  to  established  usage,  piece  goods  for  exportation  have  been  exempted  from  Khooshka  import  duty, 
which  constitutes  by  far  the  principal  article  in  that  branch  of  customs.  In  the  imports  Irom  tlie  interior 
districts  there  was  also  another  class  of  exemptions  under  what  were  called  Mogul  dukdlas,  (»r  coun- 
try  certificates,  which  arc  subject  only  to  tlie  two  Ekotras  to  the  Company  and  the  Nabob,  that  Iiave  been 
above  specified,  besides  Bengal  certificate  goods,  as  hereatler  notici*d. 