

IX.  1st.  And  for  the  greater  encouragement  of  the  native  officers  in  the  custom-house  department  to 
be  vigilant  in  their  duty,  it  is  hereby  provided,  that  in  all  cases  where,  by  reason  of  an  under-valuation  in 
the  manifest,  double  duties  shall  be  decreed  to  be  levied,  or  where  goods  shall  be  confiscated,  in  conse- 
quence of  their  owners  being  detected  in  the  attempt  to  smuggle  them,  as  above  noticed,  half  of  the  amount 
of  the  said  double  valuation  duty,  or  half  the  produce  of  such  confiscated  goods,  sliall  go  to,  and  be  equally 
divided  between  the  aforesaid  officers  of  the  custom-house  station  where  such  an  atti  injit  at  iinilcr-vahia- 
tion,  or  such  act  of  smuggling  was  detected;  and  the  native  officer,  or  officers,  being  the  searcher,  or  other 
person  or  persons,  belonging  to,  and  dependent  on  such  custom-house  station,  who  were  the  immcdiiUe 
agents  in  the  detection  of  the  said  fraud  or  frauds. 

2d.  Relates  to  the  divisions  of  such  penalties  and  confiscations. 


106 


SURAT. 


X.  1st.  In  all  cases,  where  the  value  of  the  goods  cannot  be  ascertained  by  tlie  exhibition  of  the  mani- 
fest (as  may  happen  in  the  coasting  trade,  or  otherwise),  the  duty  to  be  levied  in  the  following  manner. 

2d.  The  owner,  or  agent,  to  deliver  in  a written  applicatioji  under  his  signature^  specifying  the  quan« 
tity  and  description  of  the  goods,  with  the  place  whence  im|)orted,  and  the  invoice  prices  thereof,  pro- 
ducing at  the  same  time  the  original  invoice,  in  proof  of  the  accuracy  thereof;  after  comparing  which 
with  the  application,  and  finding  them  to  correspond,  the  custom-master  is  to  countersign  the  apjdication 
in  question,  and  having  caused  his  seal  to  be  impressed  upon  the  back  of  the  original  invoice,  and  deposited 
a copy  thereof,  together  with  the  signed  application,  in  his  office,  he  is,  after  receiving  the  amount  of  the 
duty,  to  bo  calculated  on  the  price  mentioned  in  the  invoice,  to  pass  the  contents  in  the  usual  form,  subject 
always  to  the  same  penalties  and  forieiturcs,  for  under-valuation,  or  fraudulent  disembarkation,  as  are  spe^ 
rified  in  Section  VIII.  and  with  the  like  encouragement  to  the  custom-house  officers  to  be  vigilant  in  the 
detection  thereof,  as  provided  for  in  Section  IX. 

3d.  In  all  cases  where  the  custom-master  may  be  satisfied  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  the  party- 
presenting  the  application,  to  specify  the  invoice  price,  he  is  to  dispense  therewith,  and  require  only  a de- 
scriptive enumeration  of  the  articles,  the  duty  on  which  must  be  levied  by  appraisement,  at  the  current 
prices  in  the  city  of  Siu^at. 

XI.  Tarccls  for  gentlemen,  native  or  European,  and  necessaries,  are  to  be  passed  at  the  discretion 
of  the  custom-master,  and  the  duties  on  ships’  manifests  finally  settled  by  him,  without  any  reference. 