

The  Supreme  Government  did  not  at  the  time  approve,  nor  have  since  extended  their  sanction  to  these 
reductions,  and  have  recently  been  pleased  to  signify,  that  although  certificate  goods  from  the  other  Presi- 
dencies,  or  Bombay,  the  exportation  of  which  it  may  be  an  object  to  encourage,  may  be  admitted  to  pass 
free  under  the  subsisting  regulations,  yet  all  other  imports  to,  and  all  exports  from  Surat,  may  be  sub* 
jected  to  the  former,  or  other  modified  rates  of  duties,  at  the  same  time  that  an  additional  duty  of  1 per 
cent,  has  been  ordered  to  be  levied  for  marine  charges,  and  has  accordingly  taken  place  in  the  Latty  since 
April,  1800. 

Those  instructions,  and  the  changes  that  have  taken  place  in  the  interior  administration  of  Surat, 
whereby  all  the  riglits,  prerogatives,  and  functions  of  the  Nabob’s  Government  have  devolved  by  treaty  to 
the  English  East  India  Company,  rendering  a new  mode  of  Custom-house  regulations  necessary,  the  foL 
lowing  rules  are  enacted  for  this  purpose. 

I.  The  Latty,  Phoorza,  and  Khooshka  departments  shall  be  under  the  charge  of  one  custom-master, 
with  one  or  more  assistants. 

II.  Relates  to  the  oath  to  be  taken  by  the  custom-master. 

III.  Relates  to  the  seal,  and  inscription,  for  the  custom-house. 

IV.  Relates  to  the  accountants,  and  other  officers  in  the  different  departments. 

V.  To  ascertain  and  distinguish  between  goods  that  should  pass  through  the  Latty,  or  Phoorza,  and 
Khooshka  departments,  all  merchants  and  others  applying  to  pass  their  goods  at  either  of  the  Latty, 
Phoorza,  or  Khooslika  custom-housas,  shall  at  the  same  time  enter  into  an  obligation  to  pay  a fine  of  10 
per  cent,  on  the  value  of  the  goods  thus  passed,  in  case  they  shall  afterwards,  either  from  the  pniperty  in 
the  merchandise,  or  the  description  of  the  owner,  be  detected  in  having  applied  in  the  wrong  channel;  and 
as  an  additional  precaution,  it  is  ordered  that  no  goods  be  exported  or  imported  under  borrowed  names, 
but  that  the  real  owner,  as  well  as  agent,  be  always  specified. 

VI.  The  custom-houses  to  be  opened  for  the  transaction  of  business,  every  day  (Sunday  excepted) 
from  nine  o’clock  in  tlie  morning,  until  three  in  the  afternoon. 

VII.  1st.  The  following  are  the  rules  prescribed  for  the  collection  of  the  duties  on  imports  by  sea. 


SURAT. 


16^ 


sa.  With  respect  to  the  ships,  vessels,  and  commerce  of  those  European  nations  possesslnjjr  phinnaumls 
from  the  Great  Mogul,  the  same  rules,  precautions,  and  observances  are  to  be  Ibllowed  in  the  de|)aitinent 
of  the  Phoorza,  as  have  hitherto  obtained,  as  well  in  respect  to  their  European  as  Indian  comiuerce,  ad- 
hering to  the  established  practice  in  regard  to  each  branch,  the  collector  being  attentive  to  report  to  Gu- 
vernnaent,  and  to  propose  the  correction  of  any  abuse  that  experience  may  shew  to  exist  therein. 