

XIV.  No  exemptions  whatever  to  be  allowed  for  goods  imported  by  land  or  sea,  iiiulcr  ]Mo<nil  da- 

killas,  or  from  the  custom-house  at  Bownaghur.  ^ 

XV.  In  conformity  to  the  usage  adverted  to  in  Clause  2d  of  the  preamble  to  this  regulation,  piece- 
goods,  consisting  of  battas  and  white  dooties,  imported  hy  land  or  sea,  for  re-exportation,  are  to  be’subjeet 
to  the  payment  of  the  import  duty  only,  unless  dyed,  chintzed,  or  otherwise  altered  \\iihm  the  to^^n  i in 
which  case,  they  arc  to  pay  an  additional  duty  of  per  cent,  on  exportation. 

XVI.  The  boat-master  is  not  to  grant  a pilot  to  any  vessel,  until  a certificate  .shall  bo  produced  to 
him  from  the  custom-master,  of  the  import  and  expdrt  duty  on  her  trade  having  been  duly  ])aid. 

XVII.  The  pilot  of  every  vessel  which  may  have  received  her  clearance,  shall  be  onU  red  by  the  boat- 
master  to  report  to  the  custom-master,  if  any,  and  what  goods  are  receivorl  on  hoard  in  the  river,  atlcr  the 
receipt  of  such  clearance,  and  to  indorse  the  same  on  the  liack  of  the  clearance. 

XVIII.  The  custom-master  is  to  grant  receipts,  on  application  being  made  for  them,  for  all  goods  landed 
from  ships,  and  lodged  in  the  custom-house.  The  custom-master  shall  he  held  re.sjionsible  for  delivering  from 
the  custom-house  all  good.s  for  which  receipts  shall  have  been  so  granted.  Should  the  captains,  officers,  or 
passengeis,  omit  to  take  such  receipts  upon  tlieir  goods  being  landed,  and  lodgc'd  as  above  lucntiomui,  they 
are  not  to  be  entitled  to  indemnification  for  any  part  of  them  which  may  be  lost  in  passing  tlirougli 
the  custom-house. 

XIX.  Relates  to  the  modes  of  keeping  the  accounts  of  goods  imported  into  Siirnt  by  sea, 

XX.  Ready  money  only  is  to  be  received  from  merchants  in  payment  of  the  duties,  except  that  a credit 
of  from  three  to  six  months  may  he  allowed  for  the  duty  on  goods  imported  from  beyond  sea,  to  such 
persons  as  shall  deposit  sufficient  security  for  the  payment  of  the  amount  when  it  may  become  due;  the 
amount  of  which  outstanding  and  secured  duty,  the  collector  is  carefully  to  note  at  the  bottom  uT  cacli  of 
his  cash  accounts,  which  he  is  to  send  monthly  to  the  Presidency. 

XXI.  The  duty  on  cotton  is  an  exemption  from  the  general  rale  of  customs,  as  settled  in  Section  XII. 
and  is  fixed  annually,  according  to  the  established  practice,  both  as  to  rate  and  valuation,  in  tJie  ninnncr 
recited  in  the  first  article  of  this  preamble. 

XXII.  On  all  other  imports  by  land,  the  duty  is  to  be  collected  at  the  rates  specified  in  Section  XII. 
and  in  the  manner  recited  in  Clauses  2d  and  3d,  Section  X. 