

XII.  1st.  'fhe  rate  of  duty  to  be  collected  at  the  Latty,  Phoorza,  and  Khooshka  custom-houses  (if 
passing  througJi  the  latter)  to  be  4 per  cent,  on  the  Surat  price  of  all  foreign  goods  imported  by  sea,  in  ships 
sailing  with,  or  being  tlie  property  of  persons  residing  or  navigating  under  the  protection  of  the  English 
East  India  Company,  without  any  deduction,  or  super-addition  for  fees,  or  otherwise,  together  with  1 per 
cent,  on  the  Latty,  on  account  of  the  marine  charges,  noticed  in  the  preamble  to  this  regulation,  and  in  the 
Phoorza  and  Khooska,  with  the  Company’s  Ekotra  (instead  of  the  aforesaid  1 per  cent,  for  marine  charges) 
that  has  b(M'n  already  adverted  to  in  its  first  clause. 

2d.  The  extra  1 [ler  cent,  in  the  Latty,  and  the  Ekotra  in  the  Phoorza  and  Khooshka,  are  to  be  sepa* 
ratcly  collected  by  ihe  custom-master  from  the  general  duty  of  4 per  cent,  above  described. 

,‘W.  All  merchandise  im|K)rted  in  ships  not  sailing  with,  or  not  being  the  property  of  persons  residing, 
or  navigating  under  the'  protection  of  the  English  East  India  Company,  and  of  which  the  manifest  shall  be 
exhibited,  is  to  be  subject  to  the  same  duties  as  are  specified  in  Clause  1st  of  this  section,  together  with  an 
established  advance  thereon,  regulated  as  follows:  from  which  advance,  goods  from  Bussorah,  Mocha, 
•Tudda,  and  ports  in  the  Gulfs  of  Persia  and  Arabia,  are  to  be  exempted,  and  also  goods  which,  from  the 
manifests  not  being  exhibited,  must  be  regulated  by  the  provision  in  Clause  3d,  Section  X. 

60  per  cenh 
15  ditto. 

15  ditto. 

12  ditto. 

20  ditto. 

10  ditto. 

XIII.  Ist.  Certificate  goods  from  Bengal,  and  all  other  ports  of  the  British  dominjons  in  India,  not 
subordinate  to  the  Presidency  of  Bombay,  and  goods  certified  to  have  already  paid  duty  at  any  place  ei* 
port  subordinate  to  the  Presidency  of  Bombay,  to  enjoy  the  established  exemption  at  Surat,  under  foL 
lowing  qualifications  as  to  the  former. 


Cargoes  by  Eoreign  European,  or  American  sliips  (not  included  under 
Section  VII.  clause  2d.)  on  on  advance  of 

Ditto  from  Bengal 

DitU)  from  the  (’ousts  of  Africa  and  (’oroniandel,  and  from  Malacca, 
Aclieen,  and  Siam  . 

Ditto  from  Ceylon 
Ditto  from  China^ 

Ditto  from  this  Coast,  between  the  Indus  and  Cape  Comorin « 


SURAT. 


167 


2d.  Goods  imported  under  certificates  from  Bengal,  or  Coromandel,  or  Sumatra,  or  Prince  of  Wales's 
Island,  to  be  liable  to  an  import  duty  of  2^  per  cent,  the  amount  of  which  is  to  he  restored  by  an  e.iuivnlent 
drawback,  whenever  re-exported  by  land  or  by  sea. 

3d.  Neither  Cochin,  nor  Ceylon,  nor  Canara,  arc  comprehended  for  the  present  u ithin  the  sense  of 
the  two  preceding  clauses,  but  are  till  furtlicr  orders  to  he  considered,  as  far  as  regards  the  customs,  i,,  the 
light  of  foreign  dependencies.  ’ 