

The  Persees  rank  next  to  the  Europeans.  They  arc  an  active,  industrious,  and  clever  people,  and 
possess  considerable  local  knowledge.  Many  of  them  are  very  opulent,  and  each  of  the  European  houses 
of  agency  have  one  of  the  principal  Persee  merchants  concerned  with  them  in  most  of  their  foreign  specu- 
lations. They  are  become  the  brokers  and  Banians  of  the  Europeans.  The  factors  belonging  to  these  dif- 
ferent houses  resident  in  China,  Bengal,  &c.  are  generally  Persees,  and  the  correspondence  is  carried  on 
in  the  country  language,  so  that  the  British  merchant  knows  no  more  than  they  communicate  to  him. 
The  servants  attached  to  Europeans  at  this  presidency  are  Persees,  and  are  the  best  of  any  in  India. 

There  arc  many  considerable  Portuguese,  Armenian,  and  Hindoo  merchants  resident  here,  who  pos- 
sess great  property,  and  are  men  of  much  integrity.  There  are  likewise  some  Borah  merclianls,  or  Maho- 
mdan  Jews,  who  carry  on  a great  trade  with  Guzzerat,  and  other  places  to  the  northward.  Upon  the 
whote,  Bombay  may  be  considered  the  emporium  of  Persia,  Arabia,  and  the  western  parts  of  India,  and 
where  the  manufactures  and  produce  of  all  parts  of  the  world  may  be  readily  procured. 

Bombay  claims  a distinguished  rank  among  our  foreign  naval  arsenals ; it  has  always  been  famous  for 
ship-building,  and  formerly  supplied  Bengal  and  other  parts  of  India  with  shipping,  and  when  any  consi- 
derable repairs  were  wanting,  they  were  obliged  to  proceed  to  Bombay  to  have  them  effected.  Many  fine 
^ihips  have  lately  been  built  at  Bengal,  so  that  this  branch  of  commerce  at  Bombay  is  rather  diminis^d. 
WithirLthese  few  years,  many  merchant  ships  of  considerable  burthen,  from  COO  to  1300  tons,  for  the 

Z2 


m 


BOMBAY. 


country  trade,  and  the  service  of  the  East  India  Company,  have  been  built  here,  which,  in  point  of  beauty 
ui  construction,  excellent  workmanship,  and  durability,  are  superior  to  any  class  of  merchant  ships  in  the 
world.  Bombay  has  the  peculiar  honour  of  being  the  first  place  in  the  British  dominions  out  of  Europe, 
at  which  a ship  of  the  line  was  ever  built ; it  has  also  added  several  fine  frigates  to  the  royal  navy : they 
are  all  built  of  Malabar  teak,  which  is  esteemed  su|)erior  to  that  of  any  other  part  of  India.  The  builds 
ers  are  Persees,  who  are  very  skilful  and  assiduous,  so  that  for  the  skill  of  its  naval  architects,  the  superi- 
ority of  its  timber,  and  the  excellence  of  its  docks,  Bombay  may  be  considered  of  the  first  importance  to 
the  British  Empire  in  India. 

Bombay  was  settled  by  the  Portuguese  soon  after  the  discovery  of  the  passage  by  the  Cape  in  1627. 
The  Englisli  and  Dutch  formed  a plan  to  obtain  possession  of  it,  and  make  it  a station  independent  of  the 
native  powers  ; but  the  Dutch  commander  dying,  it  was  abandoned.  In  1661  King  Charles  II.  set  on  foot 
n treaty  with  Portugal  for  his  marriage  with  the  Infanta,  when  it  was  detennined  to  embrace  this  opportu- 
nity of  procuring  the  cession  of  some  convenient  port  for  the  East  India  Company,  as  part  of  the  Infanta’s 
portion.  Accordingly,  by  the  treaty  of  marriage  dated  the  23d  of  June,  1661,  the  Crown  of  Portugal 
ceded  and  granted  to  the  Crown  of  England  the  island  and  harbour  of  Bombay  in  full  sovereignty.  On  the 
basis  of  this  treaty,  and  to  render  the  island  an  immediate  dependency  on  the  Crown,  the  King,  in  March, 
1662,  dispatched  a fleet  of  men  of  war,  under  the  command  of  the  Earl  of  Marlborough,  to  receive  the 
possession  of  the  island  and  its  dc'pendencies  from  the  Portuguese.  On  his  arrival  doubts  arose  wliether  the 
treaty  included  Bombay  and  its  dependencies  (Salsette,  &c.)  or  tlie  island  of  Bombay  only.  The  Viceroy 
therefore  refused  to  surrender  the  island,  upon  which  the  Earl  of  IMarlboroiigh  with  the  men  of  W'ar  pro- 
ceeded to  Surat  for  refreshments,  and  from  thence  to  Europe,  and  the  ships  with  the  troops  to  the  island  of 
Anjedivah  on  the  Malabar  Coast,  where  the  General,  Sir  Abraham  Shipman,  and  the  greater  part  of  the 
troops  died.  His  successor,  in  November,  1664*,  concluded  a treaty  with  the  Viceroy  of  Goa,  renouncing, 
on  the  part  of  England,  all  pretensions  to  the  dependencies  of  Bombay,  and  accepting  the  cession  of  the 
island  only  It  was  accordingly  delivered  over  to  the  English  on  the  25th  of  February,  1665. 