

In  the  centre  of  the  town  is  a large  open  space,  called  the  green,  which  in  the  fine  weather 
season,  is  covered  with  bales  of  cotton,  and  other  merchandise,  entirely  unprotected:  around  the 
green  are  many  large  well  built  and  handsome  houses;  the  Government  house,  and  the  church,  which  ia 
an  extremely  neat,  commodious,  and  airy  building,  are  close  to  each  other,  on  the  left  of  the  church  gate. 
On  the  right  of  the  churcli  gate  is  the  bazar,  which  is  very  crowded  and  populous,  and  where  the  native 
merchants  principally  reside;  at  its  commencement  stands  the  theatre,  a neat  handsome  structure.  This 
part  of  the  town  suffered  much  by  a destinictive  fire,  which  broke  out  in  February,  1803,  and  destroyed 
nearly  three-fourths  of  the  bazar,  together  w'ith  the  barracks,  custom-house,  and  many  other  public  build-^ 
ings,  and  property  of  immense  value  belonging  to  the  native  merchants.  Many  houses  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  castle  were  battered  down  by  the  artillery,  to  stop  the  progress  of  the  flames,  and  preserve  the 
magazine,  or  in  all  probability  the  whole  town  would  have  been  destroyed.  Since  which  period  tliis  part 
of  the  town  has  been  rebuilt,  and  the  whole  much  improved,  at  a considerable  expence  to  the  Company^ 

The  dockyard  is  large,  and  well  contrived,  having  naval  stores  of  all  kinds  deposited  in  warehouses, 
together  with  large  quantities  of  timber  for  repairing  and  building  ships,  and  forges  for  all  kinds  of  smithes 
work.  The  dry  dock  has  scarce  its  equal  for  size  or  convenience;  it  has  three  divisions  and  three  pair  of  strong' 
gates,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  receiving  three  ships  of  the  line  at  the  same  time.  Near  the  dock,  is  a conve- 
nient place  to  heave  down  several  ships  at  once,  which  is  done  well,  and  with  great  expedition.  Here  is 
also  a rope  walk,  which  for  length,  situation,  and  convenience,  equals  any  in  England,  that  in  the  King's 
yard  at  Portsmouth  only  excepted;  and  like  that,  it  has  a covering  to  protect  the  workmen;  cables,  and 
all  sorts  of  lesser  cordage,  both  of  hemp  and  coir,  are  manufactured  here. 

Close  to  Bombay,  separated  only  by  a small  creek,  fordable  at  low  water,  is  Colabah,  or  Old  Woman’Is 
Island,  which  partly  foniis  the  North  side  of  the  harbour;  it  is  about  2{  miles  long.  Near  its  southern 
extremity  stands  the  light-house;  this  building  is  of  a circular  form,  and  has  within  it  a flight  of  steps  to 
ascend  to  the  top;  the  height  is  upwards  of  150  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  the  light  may  be  seen 
in  clear  weather  the  distance  of  seven  leagues.  There  is  also  a signal  station,  where  a regular  watch  is 
kept,  day  and  night,  the  expcncc  of  which  is  defrayed  by  a rate  levied  on  all  vessels  frequenting  the  port. 
On  this  island  are  barracks  for  the  military,  and  occasionally  a camp  is  formed  here,  being  esteemed  a 
healthy  situation.  It  has  many  delightful  villas  scattered  about.  The  Point  of  Colabah,  on  which  the 
light-house  stands,  is  guarded  on  all  sides  by  an  extensive  reef  of  rocks,  divided  into  prongs;  the  most 
dangerous  is  the  S.  W.  prong,  which  forms  the  northern  boundary  of  the  entrance  into  the  harbour,  and 
Tull  reef  the  other;  the  breadth  of  the  channel  between  them  is  about  three  miles. 