

Dumaun  was  formerly  a place  of  some  commerce ; but  at  present  it  is  much  reduced.  Ship-building 
is  carried  on  here  to  a considerable  extent,  and  some  beautiful  ships  of  800  tons  burthen,  built  of  teak, 
Imve  recently  been  launched.  Next  to  Bombay,  this  is  the  best  place  to  lay  up  small  vessels  in  for  the 
tnonsooii,  the  river  being  clear  of  danger  for  three  miles  above  the  forts.  Dumaun  was  taken  by  the 
Portuguese  in  1530.  About  four  years  afterwards  it  was  ceded  to  them  by  treaty  with  the  King  of  Cambay, 
mid  they  have  retained  possession  ever  since,  though  several  attempts  have  been  made  to  wrest  it  from  them. 

Provisions  of  all  kinds  are  remarkably  cheap  here.  The  water  is  brought  to  the  sea  side  in  jars, 
by  Gentoo  >vomen,  The  fire-wood  is  also  brought  down  in  carts,  at  one  rupee  per  load. 

BASSEIN. 

This  town  is  situated  several  miles  up  a river,  the  entrance  of  which  is  in  19°  18'  North.  It  is  of 
considerable  size,  and  strongly  Ibrtified  ; the  streets  are  wide  and  regular.  In  the  middle  of  the  town  is 
a large  sipiare,  in  wliicli  are  many  good  houses.  In  1532  it  was  taken  by  the  Portuguese,  and  plun- 
dered, and  4^)0  pieces  of  cannon  taken  away.  In  1534,  by  a treaty  with  the  King  of  Cambay,  Bas- 
sein  was  given  up  to  the  Portuguese  for  ever,  with  its  dependencies  by  sea  and  land ; it  was  likewise 
agreed  that  all  ships  bound  for  the  Red  Sea  from  Cambay,  should  set  out  from  this  port,  and  return 
to  pay  the  duties ; that  none  should  go  to  other  places  without  leave  from  the  Portuguese ; and  that 
no  ships  of  war  should  be  built  in  any  of  its  ports.  In  consequence  of  this  arrangement,  Bassem  became 
a place  of  great  trade ; but  it  declined  as  the  Portuguese  power  fell  off*.  It  was  taken  from  them  by  the 
Mahruttas,  and  again  in  1780  by  the  English.  It  was  restored  to  its  late  masters  by  the  treaty  of  1782, 
jsince  which  period  it  has  been  ceded  to  the  English,  in  whose  possession  it  still  remains. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


Bombay. 


Description^ Coins’^ Remarks  on  Coins;  their  Weighty  i^'c.  — lVcights—Mcasures^Commene  oj 

Bmibay  and  Surat —Commerce  with  London— Extracts  from  the  Act  of  Parliament  authorizing 
Individuals  trading  to  the  British  Settlements  in  India — Company's  Regulations  relative  to  Tonnage^ 
furnished  under  the  Act’— European  Articles  suitable  to  the  Bombay  Market-Price  Current  of  European 
Articles— Commerce  with  Hamburgh— Denmark— Lisbon— Madeira— Statement  of  Commerce  with  Foreign 
Europe— Commerce  with  the  United  States  of  America — Commerce  with  the  Korihern  Parts  of  Guzzerai 
—Suraty  and  the  adjacent  Villages— Bombay— Coast  if  Coromandel— Coasts  of  Malabar  and  Canara— 
Bengal— Ceylon— StatemerU  of  Commerce  with  British  Asia — Commerce  with  the  GulJ'  of  Arabia — Gulf  of 
Persia— Cashmere^  ^c.—Cutch  and  Scindy — Bassein^  and  Villages— Goa^  and  the  Coast  of  Cancan— Pegu 
—Pulo  Pinangy  and  the  Eastward— Batavia— China — lartoM^  Places — Statement  of  the  Commerce  with 
Foreign  Asia^  — General  Recapitulation — Balance  in  Favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat-^Price  Current  of 