

XXIII.  All  goods  shall  be  passed  at  the  custom-house  with  the  least  possible  delay,  and  official  bills, 
signed  by  the  custom-master,  shall  be  given  on  all  imports  and  exports,  of  whatever  description. 

XXIV.  to  XXVII.  Relate  to  the  keeping  copies  of  registers  of  goods  irnporltMl  both  by  sea  and  land. 

XXVIII.  The  custom-master  and  his  officers  arc  required  to  bring  to  tlie  custom-house*  nil  boats  at- 
fempiing  to  pass  the  town  \trithout  landing;  and  should  any  goods  be  found  on  board,  they  .sliuiJ  be  iiubie 
to  confiscation,  in  the  manner  directed  in  Clause  2,  Section  X. 

XXIX.  No  tolauts,  or  weighmen,  or  appraisers,  nor  any  other  servants  whatever,  to  be  emplo)  ed  in 
the  ditties  of  the  custom-house,  excepting  such  as  are  furnished  with  a certificate  from  the  cii.stom-mastcr. 

XXX.  In  cases  in  which  Government  may  deem  it  proper  to  grant  exemptions  from  duties  to  indi- 
tidUflii,  the  Cu^om-master  wilt  furnished  with  special  orders  regarding  such  exemptions. 


103 


SURAT. 


TROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Trovisions  of  all  kinds  are  in  abundance,  and  reasonable.  Peas,  asparagus,  and  cucumbers  are 
amongst  the  numerous  vegetable  s.  The  river  allbrds  ample  supplies  uf  fish,  and  bread  is  better  than  in  anj 
]»art  of  India,  the  wheat  licrc  being  very  excellent. . Firewood  is  scarce,  and  the  timber  that  is  required  for 
building,  is  imported  from  Dumaun  and  the  Malabar  Coast.  Water  is  j)rocured  from  wells,  that  of  the 
river  before  the  town  being  almost  always  brackisli. 

DUMAUN, 

Or  Demaiin,  the  principal  place  belonging  to  the  Portuguese,  next  to  Goa,  on  this  side  of  India,  is 
situated  up  a river,  in  latitude  20^  2^  North,  and  longitude  73^  4'  East.  The  mouth  of  the  river  i.s  de- 
fended by  two  forts,  one  on  each  side  of  it,  and  157  yards  asunder.  St.  Jerenomi  is  the  smallest,  and  to 
the  northward.  The  main  fort  is  an  irregular  pentagon,  with  ten  bastions  to  it,  mounted  hut  indiflercntly 
with  cannon,  though  some  of  them  are  of  brass,  and  of  a very  large  calibre.  The  inside  of  the  fort  is 
neatly  laid  out  in  streets,  crossing  each  other  at  right  angles.  Very  few  but  those  of  the  military  live 
witliin  the  fort,  and  not  many  of  them;  for  the  utmost  frugality  is  required  to  make  both  officers  and  sol- 
diers appear  decent  in  their  dress;  so  that  a great  number  of  the  large  houses,  built  in  former  times,  are 
now  vacant,  and  going  to  decay.  The  two  gates  of  the  main  fort  bear  North  and  South,  distance  about 
500  yards.  Within  the  walls  are  seven  churches,  besides  two  in  ruins.  The  troops  stationed  here  are 
about  100  in  number,  and  their  military  operations  seem  to  be  carried  on  with  ease  and  regularity.  From 
abreast  of  the  forts  to  the  outside  of  the  bar  is  1,}  mile.  The  bar  is  very  flat,  and  mostly  a hard  sand. 
There  are  not  more  than  2 feet  water  on  the  bar,  low  water  spring  tides,  and  there  is  a rise  on  ordinaiy 
tides  of  17  feet,  so  that  on  springs  there  are  never  loss  than  3 fathoms  at  high  water.  Dumaun  is  known 
from  sea  by  two  very  high  steeples,  and  a fort  on  a hill,  about  two  miles  to  the  soutiiwai’d  of  the 
river.  The  Governor,  Custom-master,  and  Commandant  of  the  troops  form  the  council  upon  all  public 
affairs.  The  salaiy  of  the  (iovernor  is  4000  rupees  a year;  and  that  he  may  not  get  too  rich,  he 
relieved  from  Goa  every  third  year. 