

The  Island  of  Salsette  is  separated  from  Bombay  by  a narrow  arm  of  the  sea,  capable  of  receiving 
small  craft  only;  it  is  about  20  miles  long,  and  15  broad.  The  soil  is  rich,  and  by  proper  cultivation,  ca- 
pable of  producing  any  thing  that  will  grow  in  tropical  climates.  This  island  belonged  to  the  Portuguese,, 
and  ought  to  have  been  ceded  to  England,  along  with  Bombay,  in  1662;  the  fulfilment  of  this  artide  how- 
evec,  being  evaded,  the  island  remained  in  their  possession,  till  it  was  taken  from  them  by  the  Mahraitas.. 


BOMBAY.  ,7, 

^ was  ^rwards  taken  by  the  English  In  1780,  and  has  continued  in  their  possession  ever  since.  It  .nay 
he  considered  granary  of  Bombay  Here  arc  excavations  of  rocks,  much  more  numerous  than  tl.oi 
if  Elephanta,  but  not  equal  to  them  either  in  size,  or  w^orknianship. 

Nearly  opposite  to  Bombay  Castle,  at  three  miles  distance,  is  Butclier’s  Island,  on  which  is  a small 
fart  with  a guard  of  soldiers.  About  two  miles  from  this,  and  still  fronting  Uie  fort,  is  the  small,  but  cele- 
Brated  island  of  Elephants.  The  immense  excavations  and  figures  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock,  causes  this 
island  to  be  visited  by  Europeans  frequenting  Bombay.  Caranjah  produces  rice,  poultry,  and  vegetables. 

At  the  entrance  of  the  harbour  are  two  small  islands,  Ilenery  and  Kenery ; the  former  is  about  a mile 
distance  from  the  main ; it  is  very  small,  and  surrounded  with  fortifications. 

Kenery  is  likewise  small,  and  lies  due  South  of  the  light-house,  in  latitude  180  42  North,  and  is  just 
iliscernible  from  the  decks  of  the  ships  in  Bombay  harbom'.  It  is  nearly  of  a circular  form,  and  has  a small 
creek  on  the  N.  E.  side,  where  boats  He,  and  is  the  only  landing-place  about  it.  The  island  is  near.  (JOO 
yards  in  circumference,  surrounded  by  a wall  irregularly  divided  by  towers,  but  no  cmbrasure.s,  or  the 
appearance  of  cannon  mounted ; it  is  covered  with  houses,  and  veiy  populous. 

The  inhabitants  of  Bombay  arc  composed  of  persons  from  almost  every  Asiatic  nation.  Notliing  has 
contributed  more  to  the  prosperity  of  the  island  than  the  mildness  of  its  government,  and  the  toleration  of 
all  religions : Persees,  Mahometans,  Gentoos,  Arabs,  and  Roman  Catholics  are  alike  protected. 

The  European  houses  of  agency  at  tliis  presidency  are  few  in  number.  No  one  of  them  could  subsist 
Upon  the  advantages  of  the  agency  business  alone,  it  being  very  confined,  and  tlie  profits  in  a great  mea- 
sure absorbed  by  interest  of  money  on  the  cash  balances  they  are  obliged  to  keep,  and  the  expences  of  the 
establishment.  Their  advantages  arise  principally  from  mercantile  transactions;  and  though  they  hold  out 
the  agency  business  to  be  the  line  they  confine  themselves  to,  yet  without  trade  they  would  scarcely  gain 
a subsistence.  Agency,  however,  gives  them  the  command  of  a capital,  which  enables  them  to  embrace 
every  favourable  opportunity  that  occurs,  to  forward  their  commercial  [lursuits.  They  usually  allow 
9 per  cent,  interest  for  money  deposited  in  their  hands ; their  charges  for  commission  and  agency  arc  here- 
after enumerated.  Many  great  and  uncommoa  events  have  occurred  during  the  war,  which  contributed 
in  a great  measure  to  advance  the  opulence  of  the  merchants  of  the  presidency.  The  fortunes  ac(]uired 
have  been  considerable  and  rapid,  more  particularly  amongst  those  who  were  proprietors  of  .ships.  These 
advantages  will  subside  on  the  return  of  peace,  and  the  merchants  and  ship  proprietors  must  resort  to 
Iheir  former  pursuits,  the  Indian  and  China  commerce. 