

The  Company,  in  a statement  of  their  trade,  ports,  shipping,  &c.  publi  bed  in  lOfiH,  speaking  of 
Bombay,  say,  that,  by  means  of  their  Isle  of  Bombay,  they  have  brought  thither  the  principal  part  of 
“ the  trade  of  Surat,  where  from  400(1  families,  computed  wlu*n  the  Company  took  possession  of  it,  they 
are  since  increased  to  50,000  families,  all  subject  to  the  Company’s  laws ; that  the  Company  had  made 
“ a most  successful  war  with  the  Mogul,  and  brought  him  to  reasonable  terms,  confirmed  by  that  Prince’s 
own  phirmaund,  and  secured  by  a strong  garrison  at  Bombay,  which  being  one  of  the  best  ports  in 
India,  and  lying  so  near  Surat,  the  great  emporium  of  the  Tiulian  trade  to  Arabia,  Persia,  Bussornli, 
“ and  the  Red  Sea,  if  the  English  trade  had  not  been  brought  thither  to  load  home,  and  not  at  the  river 
‘‘  of  Surat  as  formerly,  it  would  not  have  been  near  so  beneficial.” 

Since  that  period,  the  island  has  continued  increasing  in  wealth  and  consequence,  and  bids  fair  to  be 
the  most  durable  of  the  British  possessions  in  India. 

The  government  of  Bombay  and  its  dependencies  is  by  law  vested  in  a Governor  and  three  counsel, 
lors,  who  are,  in  respect  to  the  native  powers  of  India,  levying  war,  making  peace,  collecting  and  applying 
revenues,  levying  and  employing  forces,  or  other  matters  ot  civil  or  military  government,  under  the  con- 
troul  of  the  Government  General  of  Bengal;  and  are,  in  all  cases  wliatever,  to  obey  their  orders,  unless  the 
Court  of  Directors  shall  have  sent  any  orders  repugnant  thereto,  not  known  to  the  Government  General, 
of  which,  in  that  case,  they  are  to  give  the  Government  General  immediate  advice.  1 he  Court  of  Di- 
rectors appoint  the  Governor  and  members  of  the  Council,  and  likewise  the  Commander  in  Chief  of  tiie 
forces : the  latter  is  not,  ex  officio,  to  be  of  the  Council,  but  is  not  disqualified  from  being  so,  if  the  Court 
of  Directors  shall  tldnk  fit  to  appoint  him;  and  when  he  is  a member  of  the  Council,  he  takes  precedence  of 
the  other  counsellors.  The  civil  members  of  the  Council  are  to  be  appointed  from  the  list  of  civil  servants, 
who  have  resided  twelve  years  in  the  service  in  India.  The  method  of  conducting  business  at  the  Council- 
board,  is  as  follows:— IVlatters  propounded  by  the  President,  are  first  proceeded  upon:  he  may  adjourn  the 
discussion  of  questions  put  by  the  other  members  of  Council,  but  not  more  than  twice.  All  orders  arc  ex- 
pressed to  be  made  by  the  Governor  in  Council.  The  Governor  has  power  to  act  contrary  to  the  opinions 
of  the  other  members  of  the  Council,  taking  upon  himself  the  whole  responsibility.  On  such  extraordinary 
occasions,  the  Governor  and  counseUors  are  to  communicate  to  each  other  their  opinions  and  reasons  by 
minutes  in  writing,  and  to  meet  a second  time;  and  if  both  retain  their  first  opinion,  the  minutes  arc  cn- 
tered  on  the  consultations,  and  the  orders  of  the  Governor  are  to  be  valid,  and  put  in  execution. 