

Goods  to  be  registered  previous  to  shipping,  in  books  kept  by  the  Company,  describing  the  marks, 
numbers,  and  tonnage  of  eveiy  package.  Goods  shipped  either  in  London  or  in  India,  without  being  so 
teetered,  to  be  subject  to  seizure,  and  to  the  penalties  of  trading  without  the  Company’s  licence. 

Goods  imported  and  exported  to  be  sulyect  to  the  same  duties,  &c.  as  the  like  articles  of  the  Company) 
and  to  no  other,  except  the  Company’s  charge  of  3 per  cent.  The  Company  not  answerable  for  embez- 
zlement, waste,  losses,  or  damages  of  goods,  on  board  ship,  in  their  warehouses,  or  in  the  transit  of 
the  goods  to  or  from  the  ships;  but  the  Company’s  officers  and  servants,  in  charge  of  goods,  or  by 
whose  means  loss,  &c.  thereon  is  sustained,  to  be  liable  to  answer  for  the  same;  and  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors, on  indemnity  that  the  Company  shall  not  suffer  thereby,  may  deliver  up  their  officer's  covenants, 
be.  on  which  the  owners  of  the  goods  so  lost,  may  recover. 

The  Company  to  provide  3000  tons  of  shipping  for  the  export  and  import  of  private  trade,  which  may 
be  inme**^  or  diminished  by  the  direction  of  the  Board  of  Controul,  upon  representation  being  made  to 
them;  but  if  the  Court  of  Directors  think  the  Board  order  too  large  an  increase,  they  may  appeal  to  the 
Ring  in  council. 

In  time  of  peace,  to  charge  for  freight  on  private  goods  d?6per  ton  out,  and  £15  per  ton  home;  and 
In  time  of  war,  or  preparation  for  war,  when  the  Company  pay  an  increased  rate  of  freight,  they  may 
charge  the  private  traders  in  the  same  proportion,  so  long  as  the  circumstances  shall  continue.  No  increase 
in  the  rate  of  freight  to  be  made  tiU  the  Court  of  Directors  shall  communicate  their  reasons  for  the  .same 
to  the  Board  of  Controul,  and  obtoin  their  consent  thereto,  which  rate  may  be  also  reduced  or  discontinued. 

In  August,  in  every  third  year,  the  Court  of  Directors  to  consider  whether  any,  and  what  abatement 
can  be  made  in  the  rate  of  freight,  and  to  certify  the  same  to  the  Board  of  Controul,  whose  orders  are  to 

regulate  the  rate  to  be  charged.  , a . • 

Persons  intending  to  ghip  goods  in  private  trade,  to  give  notice  thereof  to  the  Company  s Secretary  in 

Rngiond  before  the  last  day  of  August,  specifying  the  destination  of  the  tonnage,  the  goods  required,  and 


BOMBAY. 


when  the  goods  will  be  ready ; to  pay  the  freight  before  the  15th  of  September,  exe^tthe  Dlrei^rs  take 
security  for  the  same,  and  before  the  30th  of  October  to  deliver  a list  of  the  sorts  and  quantities  of  goods 
to  be  exported ; in  default  whereof,  or  if  the  goods  are  not  ready  in  the  limited  time,  the  deposit,  or  se- 
curity, to  be  forfeited.  And  for  goods  to  be  shipped  in  India,  notice  is  to  be  given  within  a time  to  be 
limited  by  the  Governments  in  India,  to  persons  authorized  by  them  to  receive  the  same,  stating  the  sorts 
and  quantities  of  goods,  time  when  to  be  ready,  and  paying  freight,  or  giving  security  for  the  payment 
of  the  same  in  Great  Britain : if  the  goods  are  not  provided  in  time,  the  deposits,  or  security,  to  be  for- 
feited. If  any  tonnage  required  by  private  traders,  shall  remain  unoccupied,  the  Company  may  apply  the 
same  without  any  allowance  to  the  parties  for  whom  it  was  allotted ; and  if  more  tonnage  should  be  re- 
quired than  is  allotted,  the  quantity  allotted  to  be  divided  equally  among  the  parties  applying  for  the  same. 