

Civil  servants,  or  persons  licensed  by  the  Company,  if  not  under  restrictions  to  the  contrary,  may  act 
as  consignees  to  private  traders.  If  the  Court  of  Directors  do  not  license  a sufficient  number  of  persona 
for  that  [lurpose,  tlie  Board  of  Controul,  on  representation . being  made  to  them,  may  order  a sufficient 
number  of  free  merchants  to  be  licensed  accordingly ; such  persons  to  be  subject  to  the  authority  of  the 
Company,  and  not  to  reside  more  than  ten  miles  from  a principal  settlement  without  permisrion. 

The 'duty  of  5 per  cent,  and  chai'ge  of  2 per  cent,  on  goods  from  India  repealed,  and  a charge  of  3 per  , 
cent,  only ' substituted  in  lieu  thereof.  Mot  more  than  5s.  per  ton  to  be  charged  by  the  East  India  Dock 
Company  foi'  dock  rates,  wharfage,  cartage,  &c.  of  private  trade  goods,  wliich  the  East  India  Company 
is  to  pay,  and  deduct  the  same  from  the  produce  of  such  goods. 

East  India  House^  ISM  of  Novembtr^  180$. 

Terms  and  Conditions  under  which  ike  East-India  Compmiy  are  willing  to  fumiah  tonnage^  exclusm  of  that  to  b& 

. 2)tovidcd  by  the  Act  of  the  33d  of  His  present  Majesty^  Cap.  5S. 

I.  That  the  application  for  tonnage  be  received  on  the  first  Wednesday  in  the  months  of  September,, 
December,  and  Mat  ch  in  each  year,  and  that  such  applications  be  endorsed,  « Private  application  for  ton- 
nage;"' and  that  any  application  made  in  the  intermediate  months,  unless  required  by  advertisement,  will 
be  considered  only  in  the  ensuing  quarter. 

II.  That  all  applications  be  made  by  the  persons  who  actually  ship  goods,  and  not  by  any  agent  or 
clerk,  and  specify  that  the  sard  goods  are  bona  fide  intended  to  be  sent  to  India  on  account  of  the  persona 
making  the  a]iplication,  or  on  commission  received  from  persons  in  India,  whose  names  must  be  inserted  kc 
the  applications;  and  the  person  making  application,  must  engage  to  verify  the  aame  by  affidavit,  if  sq 
i^equircd  by  the  Court  of  Directors. 

III.  That  every  application  do  specify  the  tonnage  of  measurable  and  heavy  goods  respectively,  the 
particular  articles  of  which  each  species  of  tonnage  consists,  the  presidencies  to  which  they  ai'e  to  be 
consigned,  and  the  periods  when  the  same  will  be  ready  to  be  shipped. 

IV.  That  no  material  deviation  be  permitted  in  the  articles  or  tonnage  specified  in  any  request,  after 
^ch  request  shall  have  been  granted. 

V.  That  no  ap|)liration  for  a less  quantity  than  one  ton  be  granted. 

VI.  That  the  Court  of  Directors,  in  order  to  encourage  the  export  of  a sufficient  suppty  of  neces* 
•ary  articles  for  consumption  in  India,  do  not  intend  to  restrain  the  exportation  wholly  to  the  Act,  which 
limits  the  articles  to  such  as  are  of  the  growth,  produce,  or  manufacture  of  Great  Britain ; but  the  Court 
reserve  to  themselves  the  power  oflimiting  the  exportation  of  articles  which  are  not  of  the  growth,  produce^ 
or  manufacture  of  Great  Britain,  or  the  exportation  of  which  by  individuals  is  not  p^rmitted^by  lhe^ 
Ac^  to  such  quantities  as  the  Court  may  judge  proper.  ' And  they  furthet  seserve^  to  themselves  a 