

XXII.  That  should  the  produce  of  such  goods  or  wine  be  paid  into  the  Company's  treasury,  at  citln  r 
of  the' three  Presidencies,  or  Bencoolen,  bills  will  be  granted  on  the  Court  of  Directors,  on  the  terms  of 
the  season  allowed  to  other  individuals. 

XXIII.  That  the  proprietors  of  goods  shall  be  exactly  on  a similar  footing  with  the  Company,  in 
respect  to  short  delivery,  as  is  contained  in  tlie  terms  and  conditions  under  whicli  the  ships  sliall  hu\c  Uem 
engaged. 

XXTV.  That  each  ship[)er  of  goods,  jointly  with  the  ('ornpany,  shall  be  entitled  to  all  a\\o\yaiwc^  lor 
ship  damages  and  siiort  delivery,  not  exceeding  per  ton  on  their  rt'spective  tonnage,  that  iS  to  say, 
i?4.  per  ton  to  such  persons  who  occupy  the  like  proportion  of  tonnage  out  and  home,  whether  the  damage 
he  on  the  outward  or  homeward  goods,  and  £2  irer  ton  on  tlie  outward  good.s,  and  Uie  like  sum  on 

lib 


180 


BOMBAY, 


the  homcwartl  goods,  when  they  belong  to  different  proprietors,  averaging  on  the  whole  at  tlie  rate  of  JP5 
per  ton  on  the  builder's  measurement,  agreeably  to  the  terms  under  which  tlie  ships  shall  have  been  engaged. 

XXV.  That  in  all  other  cases,  the  owners  of  goods  will  be  subject  to  the  same  decisions  and  determU 
nations  only,  as  the  Company  themselves  are  liable  to. 

XXVI.  That  the  tonnage  of  all  goods  (except  the  ai  ticles  before  mentioned)  be  calculated  according 
to  the  computation  of  tonnage  used  by  the  Company. 

XXVII.  That  three  days  at  least  shall  be  appointed  by  the  Court  for  shipping  goods  on  board  of  each 
ship,  appointed  to  carry  out  the  same,  and  that  public  notice  shall  be  given,  at  least  tliree  days  before  such 
day  of  shipping,  by  the  officer  for  private  trade,  outwards. 

XXVIll.  That  not  any  order  will  be  given  by  the  officer  in  the  private  trade,  outwards,  for  goods 
allowed  to  be  shipped  on  freight,  until  tlie  several  persons  who  are  permitted  to  export  the  same,  shall 
have  delivered  into  the  office  an  exact  account  of  the  tonnage  of  each  article,  which  they  have  been  allowed 
to  ship. 

XXIX.  That  before  any  goods  shall  be  shipped,  the  same  shall  be  registered  with  the  officer  for  pri- 
vate trade,  outwards,  in  books  to  be  kept  by  him  for  that  puqiose,  whicii  registry  shall  descrilie  the  marks 
and  numbers  of  eacli  bale  or  package  of  goods  to  be  shipped,  and  the  amount  of  the  whole  tonnage  allowed 
to  the  person  so  shipping,  and  all  goods  which  shall  be  shipped,  without  being  so  registered,  will  be  consi- 
dered as  goods  illicitly  .shipped,  and  the  goods  will  be  subject  to  such  seizure  and  forfeitures,  and  the 
owners,  shippers,  and  agents  concerned  therein,  to  such  forfeitures  and  penalties,  as  any  person  shall  be 
subject  to  by  law,  for  carrying  on  trade  to  and  from  the  East  Indies  without  the  Company’s  licence. 