


BOMBAY. 


I8.i 

power  to  reduce  the  quantities  of  any  particular  description  of  goods  applied  for  by  any  individual,  which 
may  appear  to  them  to  operate  to  the  exclusion  of  others. 

VII.  That  not  more  than  fifty  chests  of  wine,  or  fifty  hogsheads  of  beer  belonging  to  one  person  be 
laden  on  any  ship. 

VIII.  That  the  tonnage  of  wine,  or  chests  of  liquor  on  freight,  lie  calculated  at  two  chests,  containing 
twelve  dozen  (}uart  bottles  each  to  the  ton,  and  not  at  three  chests  to  the  tun,  us  has  occasionally  been  the 
practice  heretofore. 

IX.  That  the  tonnage  of  carriages  on  freight  be  calculated  as  follows,  ru. 


A coach,  or  barouche 
Chariot 
Phaeton 
Curricle  .. 

Two-wheel  chaise 


%%.%%%%%%%%%%  % 


10  tons. 
S ditto, 
fi  ditto. 

1 1 ditto. 
2 ditto. 


X.  That  not  more  than  two  four-wheel  carriages,  or  four  two-wlieel  carriages,  be  laden  on  any  ship, 
nor  any  one  house  be  permitted  to  ship  more  than  one  carriage  on  each  sliip. 

XI.  That  if  quicksilver  be  allowed  to  be  shipped  on  freight,  no  expence  or  risk  thereby  be  incurred 
liy  the  Company  or  owners  of  the  ship. 

XII.  That  the  peace  rate  of  freight  for  good.s  shipped  in  b!ngland  on  extra  ships,  for  India,  he  at  a 
rate  not  exceeding  £5  per  ton;  and  that  such  additional  freight  be  paid  for  goods  shipped  in  England  in  war, 
as  the  circumstances  of  the  time  may  render  necessary. 

XIII.  That  the  peace  rate  of  freight  homeward  shall  not  exceed  per  Ion;  nnd  that  such  additional 
freight  be  paid  on  goods  laden  in  India  on  extra  ships,  in  war,  the  circumstances  of  the  time  may  render 
neces.sary. 

Paragraphs  XIV.  to  XVTTT  are  regulation.s  lespecting  Madeira  wine,  already  detailed  page  0. 

XIX.  That  all  persons  do  make  a deposit  in  the  Cuiiipuny's  treasury,  within  fifteen  days  after  their 
requests  to  ship  goods  or  wine  shall  have  been  granted  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  of  the  amount  of  freight 
chargeable  on  such  goods  or  wine,  at  the  rates  above  mentioned,  under  iJie  regulations  of  the  act. 

XX.  That  the  Court  of  Directors  do  reserve  to  themselves  the  right  of  allotting  to  any  of  the  .ships  in 
their  service,  bound  to  the  respective  [daces  of  consignment,  the  goods  or  wine  in  such  proportions  as  tluy 
may  think  proper ; at  the  same  time,  the  Court  will  endeavour  to  comi)ly,  as  far  us  c ircumstances  w ill 
admit,  with  the  particular  wishes  of  the  proprietors,  respecting  the  sliipping  of  their  goods  or  wine. 

XXI.  TJiat  if  the  goods  allotted,  as  before  mentioned,  be  not  sent  on  board  the  .shi[>s  [)i vvious  to  the 
day  appointed  by  the  Court  for  the  ships  clearing  out  at  the  Custom-house,  tlie  iVeiglit  paid  on  such  goods 
shall  be  forfeited. 