

The  commanders  of  the  Bombay  and  China  ships  frequently  dispose  of  their  tonnage  to  the  merchants 
at  a stipulated  rate  of  freight  for  each  particular  commodity,  and  advance  their  money  on  respondentia  on 
the  goods,  at  a premium  of  10  p(*r  cent,  the  rate  of  exchange  being  316  Bombay  rupees  per  100  Spanish 
dollai*s,  payable  30  days  after  the  ship's  arrival  at  Whampoa. 

The  Company’s  regulations  relative  to  their  proportion  of  tlie  tonnage  from  Bombay  to  China  are 
inserted  hereafter. 

The  export  of  cotton  from  Bombay  to  China  has  in  some  seasons  amouiiled  to  80,000  bales,  each 
half  a candy,  or  about  3751bs.  making  in  the  whole  30  millions  of  pounds. 

Tlie  Company's  sliijis,  of  w hich  tliere  arc  generally  four  or  five  destined  to  Bombay  and  China,  carry 
H part;  the  remainder  is  taken  in  country  ships  belonging  to  the  European  and  native  merchants.  From 
the  excellent  manner  in  which  it  is  packed,  the  largest  class  of  the  Company's  ships  will  take  upwards  of 
four  thousand  bales,  and  still  retain  room  for  a few  articles  which  they  collect  in  the  Straits  of  Malacca. 

The  cotton  trade  from  this  side  of  India  to  China  is  but  of  recent  date.  It  commenced  about  35  years 
ago.  A considerable  famine  which  happened  about  that  period,  induced  the  Chinese  Government  to  direct, 
by  an  imperial  edict,  that  a greater  proportion  of  the  lands  should  be  thrown  into  the  cultivation  of 
grain,  to  prevent  the  like  calamity  in  future.  The  circumstance  gave  rise  to  this  branch  of  commerce, 
which  Increased  progressively  till  the  commencement  of  the  late  war.  The  scanty  supply  during  that  pe- 
riod, the  inattention  to  tlie  quality,  and  the  many  frauds  that  had  been  practised,  prompted  the  Chi- 
nese to  again  incrca.se  the  grow  th  of  tliis  commodity  within  themselves,  which  has  made  it  rather  H 
precarious  trade. 

The  demand  for  China  articles  at  Bombay  amounts  to  about  30  lacs  of  inipees  per  annum ; and  the 
specie  thrown  in  by  this  commerce,  aids  the  circulation  at  Bombay  very  considerably,  amounting  on  an 
average  of  five  years,  1808  to  1806,  to  Sicca  Rupees  27,03,907  per  annum. 

Sugar  and  sugar  candy  form  one  of  the  most  material  articles^  of  import  from  China.  To  throw  thU 
branch  of  trade  more  witiiin  tlie  Britivli  dominions,  the  Government  a few  years  since  took  off  the  duties 
on  Bengal  sugar,  which  is  now  more  Li  demand. 


BOMBAY. 


219 


COMMERCE  WITH  CASHMERE,  &c. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merciiantlise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
Cashmere,  Punjab,  Deccan,  Khandeish,  &c.  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  likewise  of  tlie  merclian- 
dise  and  treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  during  the  same  period;  together  witli  a list  of  Uie 
articles  of  wiiich  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 