

Goods  landed  expressly  for  exportation,  or  transshipped  in  the  harbour,  to  pay  the  same  import  duty 
AS  other  goods,  and  no  drawback  to  be  allowed. 

All  goods,  though  imported  for  private  use,  are  to  pay  duties.  Nothing  but  wearing  apparel  to  ^ass 
duty  free.  And  all  baggage  to  he  inspected  at  the  Custom-house* 

All  goods  or  packages  of  every  description,  timber  excepted,  to  be  landed  and  inspected  either  at 
the  Bunder  Custom-house  within  the  Fort,  or  at  MuzjiH  Bunder  without,  but  at  no  other  landing  place. 

N.  B.  The  Custom-house  is  open  for  the  transaction  of  business  every  day,  Sundays  excepted,  from 
nine  o’clock  in  the  morning  until  five  in  the  evening. 

Additional  Duty.— An  additional  duty  of  one  per  cent,  on  account  of  the  Honourable  Company's 
marine,  is  also  levied  on  all  goods  imported  on  the  same  principle,  and  under  the  same  regulations  as  the 
old  established  duties. 

Town  Duties.— Cotton  impoi*ted  in  bales  or  docras,  to  pay  one  rupee  per  Surat  candy,  without  any 
drawback  on  re-exportation.  The  other  town  duties  hare  been  aboliisbed  by  Government  from  May  1|  1806. 


BOMBAY. 


225 


EXPORT  DUTIES. 

I.  No  goods  to  be  exported  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  without  permission  of  Government. 
TI.  The  exportation  of  liquors  of  ail  kinds  to  New  South  Wales  strictly  prohibited, 

III.  All  export  duties  withdrawn. 

IV.  No  salt  permitted  to  be  exported  to  Calcutta. 

V.  No  other  opium  than  Bengal,  permitted  to  be  imported  or  exported. 

VI.  All  opium  prohibited  to  be  exported  to  China. 

N.  B.  Manifests  of  export  cargoes  required. 


CUSTOM  HOUSE  REGULATIONS. 

To  Captain  of  the  Honourable  Company's  Ship 

Sir,  I have  it  in  command  from  the  Honourable  the  Governor  in  Council  to  direct  that 
after  twenty-four  hours  of  your  arrival  in  t1ie  harbour,  and  previous  to  any  private  trade  being  permitted  to 
be  landed  from  your  ship,  you  will  please  deliver  in  a general  manifest,  and  that  yourself  anti  oflieers  attend 
one  of  His  Majesty’s  Justices  of  the  Peace,  with  a particular  account  of  the  whole  of  your  respective  invest- 
ments, before  whom  yourself  and  they  will  make  affidavit  in  the  fi)llowing  form,  and  then  deliver  into  my 
office.  And  if  any  goods  not  manifested  are  landed,  they  will  be  liable  to  confiscation.  I am,  Sir,  &c. 

Bombay  Custom  House^  Custom  Master, 

0 

Manifest  of  the  whole  of  my  Investment  on  Board  the  Ship 


FORM  OF  AFFIDAVIT. 

I commander,  or  chief  officer,  &c.  make  oath  and  say,-  that  the  annexed  copy 

of  my  investment  exhibits  a true  and  faithful  statement  of  the  whole  thereof,  and  that  the  sums  written 
opposite  to  the  several  articles,  arc  the  true  and  just  prime  cost  thereof. 