

Upon  the  ship’s  arrival  in  port  in  India  or  at  St.  Helena,  to  salute  the  fort  with  9 guns. 

And  the  ship  to  return  the  same  salutes  as  given  by  the  forts  in  India,  at  the  commander’s  going 
on  shore,  or  coming  off'. 

An  Europe  ship  being  saluted  by  a country  vessel,  to  return  2 guns  less. 

N.  B.  These  regulations,  as  far  as  relate  to  the  firing  salutes  at  China,  are  rescinded,  and  no  guns  are 
to  be  fired  there,  unless  by  express  leave  or  order  of  the  supra-cargoes  in  writing. 

OWNER’S  INSTRUCTIONS  RELATIVE  TO  GUNPOWDER. 

" You  are  to  pay  at  every  port  you  anchor  at  belonging  to  the  Company,  one  bairel  of  gunpowder, 
and  take  a receipt  for  the  same;  by  the  neglect  thereof,  several  ships  have  paid  five  guineas  alter  their  ar- 
rival in  England.’^ 

Immediately  on  a ship’s  arrival  in  Bombay  harbour,  the  gunpowder  is  landed,  and  .sent  to  the  Company’s 
magazine,  where  it  is  dried,  and  repacked,  if  nccessaiy.  The  charges  attending  the  landing,  drying,  reship- 
ping,  &c.  «re  considerable,  seldom  amounting  to  less  than  150  rupees  each  ship. 


2J2  * BOMBAY, 

ItEGUI^TIONS  RELATIVE  TO  GUNPOWDER. 

I.  That  all  powder  on  private  account  will  in  future  be  received  at  the  magazine  at  Mazagon^  and 
at  no  otliCT  place. 

II.  That  application  for  receipt  or  delivery  must  be  made  at  the  office  of  the  commissary  of  stores, 
at  least  twelve  hours  beforehand. 

III.  Magazine  hours  from  8 in  the  morning  till  4 in  the  afternoon,  every  day,  Sundays 

IV.  None  can  I)e  admitted  except  in  complete  and  unexceptionable  packages,  perfectly  free  from  iron, 
and  not  covered.  Where  any  are  tendered  whieh  the  commissary  or  his  people  may  think  objectionable, 
lie  has  orders  to  substitute  proper  barrels,  which  will  be  charged  to  the  owmers. 

V.  As  the  magazine  is  infested  with  white  ants,  it  is  recommended  to  such  as  may  have  powder  to  lodge, 
to  provide  themselves  with  teak-wood  barrels,  or  boxes.  The  Company  cannot  be  at  any  charge  on  account 
of  the  damage  thus’ occasioned;  and  whenever  it  occurs,  the  commissary  will  substitute  teak-wood  barrels, 
which  will  be  charged  to  the  owners;  and  similarly  in  all  cases  where,  from  decay,  or  other  causes,  the 
packages  may  become  objertionnblp 

OWNERS'  ALLOWANCES. 

The  owners  of  the  regular  ships  In  the  Company's  service  usually  make  the  following  allowances : 

Commander  and  Purser  during  the  ship’s  stay  in  rupees  per  day. 

Tabic  homeward  for  commander  and  officers,  <£^50,  ditto. 

60  bags  paddy,  which  are  considered  equal  to  10  quarters  of  grain  for  homeward  use. 

Godown  rent  for  ship’s  stores,  water  casks,  provisions,  &c.  about  50  rupees  per  month. 