

Presents  to  Dubash  for  his  attendance,  procuring  provisions,* &c.^..vfrom  .500  to  1000  rupees. 

Daily  allowance  to  officers'  table  on  board,  a quarter  of  mutton,  vegetables,  and  bread,  amounting 
to  about  2 rupees  per  day. 

By  a clause  in  the  charter  party,  the  Company  is  to  supply  for  the  use  of  the  ship  during  her  stay  in 
India,  to  be  coinputed  from  the  delivery  of  her  dispatches  from  Europe,  at  the  rate  of  £200  per  month, 
the  exchange  at  Bombay  is  fixed  at  28.  3d.  per  rupee,  whieh  is  1777  3 10  Rupees. 

SEAMEN’S  WAGES,  &c. 

In  the  event  of  being  ol)liged  to  sliii)  lascars  in  lieu  of  seamen  pressed  into  His  Majesty's  service, 
their  pay  is  as  follow^s,  which  is  paid  at  the  presidency  six  months  in  advance,  viz^ 

1 serang,  6 months  at  30  rupees  per  month  180 

1 tiudal,  ditto  20  ditto  120 

1.5  lascars,  ditto  cach'»«12  ditto  1080 

Batta  money  to  be  repaid  in  England  w ithout  interest  350 

Forming  a total  expence  Rupees  1730 

The  practice  of  paying  so  much  wages  in  advance,  may  be  considered  the  cause  of  so  many  firey 
occurring  amongst  the  Bombay  shipping,  as  there  is  reason  to  beligve  they  are  often  intentional. 

Lascars  are  likewise  employed  in  the  monsoon  to  assist  in  working  the  ship  out;  their  pay  is  as  follows: 
serang  250  reas  per  day;  tindal  175  reus  per  day;  and  each  lascar  125  reas.  A country  boat  is  also  occa* 
gionally  employed  in  lieu  of  the  ships’  boat.s,  for  carrying  off  provisions,  &c.  at  2 rupees  per  day. 


ISOMBAY^ 


BOAT  AND  COOLEY  HIRK 


The  sliip's  long  boat  Is  generally  employed  in  landing  tho  investmenfe  of  the  coniinander  and  ofliccr>, 
and  in  carrying  off  stores,  water,  &c.  The  charges  for  cooloy  hin*  are 

1 sling  and  men  for  carrying  a butt  of  beer,  or  pipe  of  wine^.Rupecs  1 0 0 
1 hogshead  or  a chest  of  wine  0 2 0 


Hoisting  from  the  boat  upon  the  wharf  at  the  bumler,  per  butt  ....  0 1 0 


For  carrying  dead  weiglit,  4 annas  per  candy;  1 anna  per  candy  for  hoisting;  and  2 annas  per  candy 
for  weighing.  For  cases  and  other  packages,  according  to  w eight  and  dimensions. 


FREIGHT  FROM  BOMBAY  TO  CHINA. 

Regulations  of  the  Court  of  Directors  for  loading  the  Company  s Ships  from  Bombay  to  China^  Madras  to  China  ^ 

Bengal  to  China^  and  from  Port  to  Pori  in  India, 

I.  It  IS  determined  that  in  most  cases  cotton  shall  be  sent  on  the  Company's  account  from  Bombay, 
Madras,  and  Bengal,  to  China,  to  the  extent  of  three-titlths  of  the  whole  tonnage,  builder's  measurement, 
without  reckoning  as  part  of  the  tonnage  the  kentledge,  and  1. 50  tons  of  dead  weight,  which  may  be 
laden  in  England  ; and  that  the  remainder  of  the  tonnage  tlie  ship  may  be  capable  of  conveying,  shall  be 
allowed  to  the  commander  and  officers,  on  their  entering  into  the  usual  bonds  to  guurante(‘  the  Companr 
against  any  claims  their  owners  may  make  for  the  port  to  port  Ihiight  of  such  tonnage,  and  on  their  un- 
dertaking that  the  Company  shall  not  be  subjected  to  any  expcncc  whatever,  whether  for  screwing  tlie 
Company's  cotton,  or  otherwise. 