

II.  Every  man,  on  having  his  name  registered,  as  above  set  forth,  shall  receive  a ticket  marked  with 
the  letters  P.  B.  and  the  number  in  which  he  stands  in  the  general  register,  which  lie  is  to  wear  on  his 
right  arm,  immediately  above  the  elbow,  and  on  the  oulshle  of  his  clothes,  if  he  wears  a coat  with  sleeves, 
subject  to  punishment  if  he  ever  appears  without  the  said  ticket,  or  if  the  same  shall  be  concealed,  or  other- 
wise placed  than  above  directed. 

III.  A separate  register  sliall  also  be  kept  of  hamauls  in  service,  specif}' ing  their  master  or  mistress’s 
name,  and  the  name  of  each  hamaul,  with  the  time  of  his  entry  into  such  service. 

IV.  Tliat  on  liaving  his  name  entered  in  the  said  separate  register,  each  man  shall  receive  another 
ticket,  or  ticket  of  service  with  a niimlier  upon  it,  wddeh  he  is  to  wear  on  his  left  arm,  immediately  above 
the  elbow,  and  on  the  outside  of  his  clothes,  if  he  wTars  a coat  with  sleeves,  subject  to  punishment  if 
seen  without  it;  and  which  ticket  he  is  to  return  into  the  office  of  police  when  he  is  discharged. 

V.  No  person  shall  (‘mploy  hamauls,  but  by  an  application  to  the  superintendent  of  police. 

VI.  No  hamaul  shall  presume  to  serve  any  master  or  mistress,  without  an  application  has  first  been 
regularly  made  for  that  puqiose  at  the  office  of  police,  and  a ticket  of  service  granted  to  liim  in  conse- 
quence thereof. 

VII.  Every  person,  on  discharging  any  hamaul,  or  set  of  hamauls,  is  requested  to  notify  the  same  to 
the  su[M*rlntendent  of  police,  with  the  reasons,  if  any,  of  such  discharge. 

VIII.  No  hamaul  shall  be  discharged  from  his  service,  without  first  receiving  his  pay  up  to  the  day- 
on  which  he  is  discharged;  though  it  may  be  optional  wdth  any  master  or  mistress  to  keep  their  hamauls 
ill  arrears  for  u period  not  exceeding  fillf'CMi  days,  in  order  to  guard  against  their  absconding  without  cause, 
or  any  other  misconduct,  which  may,  upon  investigation  before  the  proper  authority,  render  it  necessary  for 
such  arrears  of  pay  to  be  forfeited. 

IX.  No  hamaul  engaged  by  the  month,  shall  be  permitted  to  leave  his  service  without  giving  one 
montli’s  previous  warning. 

X.  On  hamauls  being  discharged  by  any  master  or  mistress  without  receiving  their  wages  up  to  the 
day,  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  superintendent  of  jjolice  to  see  that  they  receive  them,  by  applying  to  their 
master,  &c.  or  to  the  proper  Court  for  that  purpose. 

XL  Every  hamaul  leaving  his  service  without  being  regularly  discharged,  and  without  coming  to  the 
office  of  police  to  make  the  same  known,  and  to  deliver  up  his  ticket  of  service,  shall  suffer  such  punish- 
ment as  the  offence  may  seem  to  merit. 