

X.  If  any  fire  should  happen,  or  any  signal  of  distress  be  made,  on  board  a vessel  in  the  harbour, 
the  dock-gates  are  to  be  thrown  open,  that  every  assistance  fi'om  the  shore  may  be  conveyed  to  her. 

XI.  When  a ship  is  either  coming  into,  or  going  out  of  dock  in  the  night,  the  gates  are  to  be  open 
for  the  master  attendant's  and  builder's  people  to  pass. 


BOMBAY. 


S31 


XII.  The  tindals  of  the  Bunder  boats  having  any  reports  to  make  on  service,  arc  to  be  permitted 
to  pass. 

XIII.  When  the  builder  is  repairing  any  ships  afloat,  he  may,  on  his  own  authority,  desire  the  sentries 
to  allow  country  boats  to  quit  the  dock  stairs  with  artifiwrs,  planks,  tools,  &c. 

The  following  are  the  charges  on  ships  entering  the  ducks. 

Every  English  ship,  the  first  4.50  nipees. 

Ditto  every  subsequent  spring  eacli  350  (littd. 

Every  foreign  sliip,  the  first  springs  ()00  ditto. 

Ditto  every  subsequent  spring,  each  — 500  ditto. 

REGULATIONS  RELATIVE  TO  SALUTES  BY  THE  COMPANY  S SHIPS. 

Re.solved,  that  it  be  a standing  order  in  future,  tliat  no  other  salutes  with  guns  be  allowed  of  tliaii 
those  mentioned,  and  that  upon  all  otlier  occasions  the  commanders  do  salute  with  dicers  according  to  their 
own  discretion,  and  the  present  rules  of  the  navy,  and  Hint  fbe  following  regulations  be  printed,  and 
inclosed  in  the  Company’s  packets  to  tlieni,  for  their  .strict  eompliance  tlKM’ewitli. 

On  the  King’s  birth-day,  a royal  salute  from  the  commodore  of*  21  guns. 

A Governor,  at  his  coming  on  board,  or  going  on  shore  at  any  of  the  principal  settlements  in  India,  at 
St.  Helena,  or  in  England,  to  be  .saluted  with  19  guns. 

One  of  tlie  Council  taking  passage  for  Ji^urope,  on  his  coming  on  board,  9 guns. 

N.  B Any  person  dismissed  the  Conijiany’s  service  is  not  to  be  saluted. 

A Chief  going  on  shore  to  take  the  charge  of  a factory,  or  quitting  the  same,  11  guns. 

One  of  the  Council  of  any  settlement  in  India  quitting  the  ship  when  dispatched,  7 guns. 

N.  B.  No  salute  to  the  [)crson  who  musters  Uic  ship  at  St.  Helena. 

Supra-cargoes  going  on  shore  on  tlie  ship’s  arrival  at  China  or  Mocha,  and  coming  on  board  at  her 
departure  for  Europe,  9 guns. 

The  Hoppo  coming  on  board  to  measure  tlie  ship,  and  going  on  shore,  9 guns. 

Mandarins  of  high  rank  on  a visit,  coming  on  board,  1 J guns;  going  on  shore*,  1 1 guns  and  3 cheers. 

English  ships  to  salute  each  other  in  ports  belonging  to  foreign  powers,  only  7 guns. 

And  if  more  than  one  ship  there,  the  salute  of  the  arriving  ship  to  be  returned  by  the  Commodore  only. 

All  foreign  salutes  to  be  continued  in  the  usual  manner. 