

II.  If  at  any  period  the  Company  shall  have  a larger  quantity  of  eotton  than  the  tonnage  reserved 
for  their  own  use  will  stow,  and  may  not  otherwise  have  occasion  for,  the  Government  may  dispose  of 
the  same  to  the  commanders  and  officers  at  prime  cost. 

III.  In  the  event  of  the  trade  being  relinquished  by  the  Company  for  a season,  the  tonnage  reser\Td, 
as  before  mentioned  for  the  Company,  is  to  be  disposed  of  to  the  best  bidder,  at  a specific  rate  per  ton  of 
-50  cubical  feet,  after  the  ship’s  arrival  at  Bombay,  Madras,  or  Bengal,  giving  due  notice  of  such  deti  r- 
mination,  and  of  the  period  fixed  for  receiving  proposals  in  writing  lor  the  letting  of  the  same ; and  if  the 
commander  and  officers  offer  at  a rate  per  ton  equal  to  the  highest  bidder,  tJic  preference  is  always  to  be 
given  to  them,  but  they  are  to  deliver  their  proposals  at  the  same  time  w itii  the  other  tenderers,  and  are 
not  to  be  allowed  to  amend  their  tender  after  their  proposals  have  been  signed. 

IV.  If  the  Company's  proportion  of  the  tonnage  should  be  disposed  of  to  the  commanders  and  officers, 
it  must  be  under  a condition  that  the  freight,  together  with  the  proceeds  of  the  cotton,  shall  be  paid  into 
the  Canton  treasury,  for  the  latter  of  w hich  hills  on  England  w ill  be  granted,  at  the  ciiriTiit  rate  of  ex- 
change;  and  this  condition  is  also  to  extend  to  the  proceeds  of  the  regular  privilege  of  the  commanders. 

V.  That  in  voyages  from  one  Presidency  to  another  in  India,  if  the  Governor  and  Council  hav« 
nothing,  or  only  a proportion  of  her  free  tonnage  to  let,  t!ie  commander  shall  have  a fair  and  reasonable 
preference  given  him  to  occupy  it,  and  that  no  person  whatever  shall  Iiave  it  on  the  same,  or  lower  terms; 
or  in  the  event  of  the  commander  paying  the  ship’s  demurrage,  from  the  beginning  of  lier  lading,  to  the 
delivery  of  the  cargo,  at  each  consigned  port,  he  shall  have  the  option  to  occupy  the  ship  on  such  terms, 
if  the  Company  do  not  provide  a cargo,  or  on  ills  paying  such  proportion  of  the  demurrage  as  lie  may  occupy 
of  the  outward  tonnage  she  is  engaged  for. 

VI.  In  all  cases  the  commander  is  to  exonerate  the  Company  from  all  claims  of  the  owners,  in  re- 
spect of  the  outward  tonnage,  or  any  part  thereof  so  occupied. 

VII.  Proper  covenants  are  to  be  entered  into  at  the  Presidency  where  the  ship  lades,  for  the  payment 
of  the  demurrage  that  may  be  due  at  the  consigned  port, 

Hh 


!934 


BOMBAY. 


^ European  Houses  of  Agbncv. 

Bruce,  Fawcett,  and  Co.  John  Leckie. 

Forbes  and  Co.  S.  Beaufort. 

Shotton  and  Co. 

Wine  Merchants  and  Shopkeepers. 