

90... 

95 

100 


.105 

..110 

115 

120 

125 


LIGIlt-IIOlTSE  DUES. 

A duty  of  10  rupees  per  100  tons  is  collected  by  the  master-attendant  from  every  merchant  vessel 
anchoring  in  the  harbour,  towards  defraying  the  expence  of  the  light-house. 


230 


BOMBAY. 


WHARFAGE. 


The  following  are  the  rates  of  charge  for  flic  use  of  the  cranes  at  the  Bunder  wharf,  viz. 


Hoisting  large  spars  each 
An  anchor  under  20  cwt. 
Ditto  above  ditto 
A gun  under  ditto 
Ditto  above  ditto 
A large  bale 
A small  bale  or  cask 
A horse 


Hs.  Q.  n. 
2 0 0 

0 8 0 
10  0 
0 2 0 
1 0 0 
.010 
0 0 48 
0 1 0 


^ %%%%  V‘%>  V% 


A bullock  or  cow  0 1 0 

A carriage  or  large  box  0 10 

Articles  conveyed  in  the  Company's  crall,  to  pay  half  the  amount,  whctlier  belonging  to  His  Majesty 
or  to  merchants. 


DOCK-YARD  REGULATIOxNS. 

I.  No  boats  but  those  belonging  to  His  Majesty's  ships,  the  Honourable  Company's  cruisers,  and  the 
establishment  of  the  yard,  are  to  use  the  stairs  of  the  dock;  with  the  exception  of  the  boats  of  the 
Honourable  Company's  chartered  ships,  when  their  commanders  are  in  them. 

II.  Natives  of  every  description  not  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  yard,  or  the  ships  and  vessels  before 
mentioned,  or  concerned  in  the  ships  under  repair,  are  to  be  excluded  from  the  dock-yard. 

III.  No  baggage  or  stores  to  be  carried  through  the  yard  by  any  other  than  the  crews  of  the  ships 
and  vessels,  except  with  an  order  from  the  Honourable  the  Governor,  II is  Excellency  the  Admiral,  the 
commanding  officer  of  the  forces,  the  superintendent  of  the  marine,  the  master-attendant,  or  town 
major;  and  all  baggage  and  stores  so  passed,  are  to  be  accompanied  by  a certificate  from  the  officer  to 
whom  they  belong. 

IV.  The  dock-gates  are  to  be  shut  after  sunset,  the  wicket  being  left  open  till  the  evening  gun  is 
fired;  after  which,  nobody  belonging  to  the  ship.s  in  the  harbom*,  below  the  rank  of  a commissioned 
officer,  is  to  be  allowed  to  land,  or  enter  the  dock-yard,  without  the  express  permission  of  one  of  the  au- 
thorities above  mentioned. 

V.  Boat's  crews  are  not  to  be  permitted  to  quit  their  boats  at  the  stairs,  after  the  hour  of  shutting 
the  gates. 

VI.  Small  craft  are  not  to  deliver  fire-wood,  or  any  other  lading,  within  the  limits  of  the  yard,  with- 
out the  siiperintendenfs  sanction. 

VII.  The  shij)s  and  vessels  in  dock  arc  not  to  land  any  lumber  whatever  on  tlie  pier. 

VIII.  No  cargo  of  any  description  is  to  be  landed  in,  or  passed  through  the  yard,  from  or  to  any 
ship  in  dock,  without  the  superintendent's  permission  in  writing. 

IX.  No  palanquins  arc  to  remain  in  the  yard  without  the  permission  of  one  of  the  authorities 
above  mentioned. 