


2\  ditto. 

[ ditto. 
1 ditto. 


[ ditto. 
1 ditto. 

i ditto. 
5 ditto. 
2[  ditto. 
1 ditto, 
\ ditto. 


one  constituent  to  another , 


V,  \ ditto. 


XVIII.  On  public  or  private  securities,  jewels,  or  other  valuables  lodged,  and  after- 


wards withdrawn  before  the  amount  is  realized 


Half  commission. 


XIX.  On  procuring  money  on  Respondentia,  payable  in  Eurojie,  India,  or  elsewhere  2 ditto. 
XX  On  recovery  of  bonds  or  bills  for  persons  returned  to  Europe,  over  due  at  the 


time  of  their  departure 


XXL  On  procuring  loans  of  money,  exclusive  of  the  commission  on  llie  receipt  of  casli 
XXII.  On  debts,  where  a process  at  law  or  arbitration  is  necessary, 
and  if  recovered  through  such  means 
XXIII.  On  managing  the  affairs  of  an  estate  for  an  executor  or  administrator,  on 


the  amount  recovered^ 


XXIV.  On  guaranteeing  bills  or  bonds  by  indorsement  or  otherwise 

XXV.  On  attending  the  delivery  of  contract  goods  to  the  Company  . 

XXVI.  On  the  receipt  and  payment  of  all  monies  not  arisingfrom  the  proceeds  of  goods 
on  which  commission  has  already  been  chai’ged,  (or  \ per  cent  on  receiving,  and 
i per  cent,  on  paying,  at  the  option  of  the  agent),  independently  of  any  charge 
that  may  become  requisite  through  the  necessity  of  employing  agents  elsewhere 

XXVII.  Where  the  debtor  side  of  the  account  exceeds  the  creditor  side  by  advances 
made,  the  agent  to  have  the  option  of  charging  his  commission  upon  the  total  of 
either;  and  the  balance  of  interest  carried  forward  to  the  account  of  the  euiTent 
year,  to  be  considered  as  money  paid  or  received,  and  chargeable  accordingly  «% 

Hh2 


2 ditto. 
1 ditto. 
2\  ditto. 
.5  ditto. 

5 ditto. 
2[  ditto. 
1 ditto. 


1 ditto. 


1 ditto. 


^^30 


BOMBAY. 


XXVIII.  When  the  balance  of  an  account  due  by  the  constituent  is  brought  forward 
from  an  account  of  the  preceding  year,  and  not  paid  in  the  course  of  the  succeed- 
ing one,  commission  may  be  charged  thereon,  or  upon  the  residue  that  may  be 
unpaid:  the  agent  in  the  latter  case  to  have  the  option  of  charging  his  commis- 
sion upon  the  residue,  or  upon  the  sums  received  towards  the  discharge  of  the 
original  balance  due  at  the  commencement  of  the  year  1 per  cent 

RATES  OF  COMMISSION  ON  SALES. 

In  the  event  of  the  whole  of  an  investment  not  being  dis|>osed  of  by  private  sale,  the  remainder  is  sent 
to  auction,  or  to  a conunission  warehouse  for  sale,  of  which  there  are  several  in  tlie  settlement,  where 
every  attention  is  paid  to  the  lotting  and  arranging  the  property,  and  the  value  guaranteed  on  the  follow- 
ing terms,  rw. 

On  Private  Sales.— A commission  of  5 per  cent,  on  what  is  sold ; 1 per  cent,  for  goods  sold  by  the 
proprietor  after  having  been  deposited  for  sale  in  the  warehouse,  but  no  charge  will  be  made  for  goods 
returned  unsold. 