

The  following  is  an  aecount  of  the  number  of  persons  in  the  military  employ  of  the  East  India  Com- 
pany on  the  30tli  of  April,  1807;  which  will  be  useiul  in  ulTording  an  idea  of  the  nature  and  numbers 
of  the  diirercnt  corps  of  which  the  army  is  composed,  md  particularly  as  no  material  alteration  in  the 
numbers  of  regiments  is  known  to  have  taken  place  since  that  period,  except  in  those  of  His  Majesty. 


EUROPEANS. 


4 Major  Generals. 

1 Chaplain. 

7 Colonels. 

2 Surgeons,  members  of  medical  board. 

28  Lieutenant  Colonels. 

29  Surgeons. 

30  Majors. 

32  Assistant  surgeons. 

129  Captains. 

10  Civil  servants  in  military  employ. 

22  Captain  Lieutenants. 

19  Conductors. 

342  Lieutenants. 

420  Serjeants. 

125  Ensigns. 

1.53  Drummers  and  fifers. 

5 Cadets. 

4284  Rank  and  file 

3 Quarter  Masters. 

NATIVES. 

3 Commandants.  . 

31  Scrangs. 

29.5  Subadars. 

136  Tindals. 

242  Jcmauldars. 

1.569  Lascars. 

1224  Havildars. 

.398  ArhTirers. 

404  Drummers  and  fifers. 

5 Native  doctors. 

19112  Rank  and  file. 

25  Writers. 

And  washermen,  puckallies,  bullock  drivers,  and  every  other  description  of  native  followers,  1517. 
The  total  number  of  persons  in  the  Company’s  military  employment  on  the  Bombay  establishment 
on  the  30th  of  April,  1807,  according  to  the  above  abstract,  was  as  follows: 


^Commissioned  officers,  medical  department,  chaplains,  and  civil 
Europcans«%«%v%%%-|  servants  in  military  cmployments^^^^^^»^.>^^^%%vv>%^v»>^-.^>^  775 

C Non-commissioned,  rank  and  file,  including  invalids  and  pensioners  5234 

# 6009 


Natives 


' Commissioned,  non-commissioned,  rank  and  file,  including  invalids, 
pensioners,  and  the  Governor’s  peons 
Artilleiy,  and  store  lascars,  firemen,  and  all  of  these  descriptions 

on  the  invalid  and  pension  lisU  1736 

Camp  followers,  including  artificers,  doctors,  writers,  puckallies, 

bullock  drivers,  washermen,  sweepers,  ^18 

8503* 

Total  of  Europeans  and  natives  ^ 


31043 


BOMBAY. 


Ui7 

In  the  year  1796  a considerable  alteration  took  place  in  the  constitution  and  system  of  the*  Company’s 
army.  Previous  to  that  period  tlic  officers  were  exposed  to  peculiar  hardships.  The  increase  of  territory 
had  led  to  the  increase  of  numbers,  with  which  neither  the  gradations  of  rank,  nor  the  jiroportions  ofoflicers,. 
particularly  of  field  officers,  were  in  conformity.  The  hi^diest  rank  was  that  of  Colonel;  and  as  proin(»tioii 
only  took  place  in  the  line,  the  progress  was  so  slow  as  to  aflonl  hut  a distant  and  discouraging  prospect  of 
attaining  it.  No  provision  existed  for  the  relief  of  any  who,  from  ill  health  or  other  cireumstanees, 
found  it  necessary  to  visit  their  native  country;  nor  for  the  retreat  of  those  \\Iio,  afller  a rc'rlaiii  ninnher 
of  years  of  service,  might  wish  to  retire.  These  several  eircumslanees  were  hroiiglit  to  the  consideration 
of  tlie  Court  of  Directors  and  Board  of  Controul,  who  entered  into  a very  laborious  exainination  of  the 
.subject,  and  finally  determined  upon  an  entire  new  arrangement  of  the  army.  The  detail  of  this  arrange- 
ment was  coniiniinicated  to  India  by  letters  dated  January,  1706.  By  this  ineasiiie  llie  prospect  of 
promotion  was  greatly  enlarged;  the  rank  of  Major  Ceneral  was  inslitnffd  in  the  romjjany’s  sei’\iee;  the 
tuiinher  of  field-offieeis  was  increased;  and  the  expeelatiini  attaining  the  higher  ranks  was  rendered 
more  encouraging,  by  the  establishment  of  the  principle  of  promotion  in  regiments  accoiding  to  seni.aity, 
as  follows:  In  the  European  and  native  infantry  to  the  rank  of  Licadenant  Colonel;  in  the  native  cavalry 
to  the  rank  of  Captain,  and  afterwards  in  the  line.  The  promotion  in  the  aitillery  was  eontiiiucsl  hy  seniority 
in  the  whole  corps,  according  to  the  practice  in  Ilis  ]\Iaj(‘sty  s service.  laheral  provision  was  made  for 
allowances  to  a limited  number  of  officers  on  furlough  in  Europe,  and  for  the  event  oi*  a total  ladircment 
after  the  service  of  a certain  number  of  years.  A modification  of  the  rule  of  promotion  was  din'ctcd  hy 
letters  to  India,  dated  in  June  and  July,  1798,  establishing  it  generally  to  he  to  the  rank  of  Major  in 
the  respective  regiments,  and  afterwards  by  seniority  in  the  whole  corps,  excepting  the  artillery,  in  which 
the  promotion  continued  by  seniority. 