

We  have  also  sanctioned  a table  of  fees  and  allowances  to  be  received  for  the  discharge  of  this  duty, 
and  for  reimbursing  the  expences  attending  it,  and  we  have  prohibited  the  baggage  warehouse-keepers 
from  receiving  any  other  than  the  authorized  allowances,  upon  pain  of  our  severest  displeasure. 

As  we  have  erected  this  establishment  for  the  sole  puipose  of  the  convenience  of  our  servants  and 
others  who  may  return  to  Europe,  we  direct  that  our  intentions  in  this  respect  be  made  public,  and  be 

constantly  affixed  up  in  the  export  offices  of  our  several  Presidencies,  and  that  it  be  signified  to  all  our 

servants  returning  to  Europe,  that  it  is  our  desire  that  they  apply  to  our  said  warehousc-kec*pers,  Messrs. 
Marter  and  Evans,  to  clear  and  deliver  them  their  baggage,  wines,  and  presents,  as  we  liave  directed 
Messrs.  Marter  and  Evans  to  transact  every  branch  of  business  connected  with  this  department,  which  will 

render  the  agency  of  all  other  persons  unnecessary. 

Passengers  arriving  from  India,  are  liable  to  inconvenience  from  being  ignorant  of  the  law,  winch 
prohibits  calicoes  being  printed,  painted^  stained,  or  dyed,  and  also  silk  goods  from  being  worn  or  used 
in  this  country ; and  such  goods,  although  made  into  apparel,  are  of  necessity  taken  out  of  their  haggugc, 
and  detained  by  the  officers  of  the  revenue.  We  direct  therefore  tliat  napkins,  &c.  which  contain  a co- 
loured stripe,  however  smaU,  be  considered  to  be  prohibited,  and  cannot  be  passed  in  England  os  part  of 
their  baggage. 


BOMBAY. 


m 


TABLE  OF  FEES  AND  CHARGES  ON  BAGGAGE,  &c. 

Fixti  Ij/  the  Court  of  Dinclors,  ond  payable  to  the  Warehouse  Keepers  of  Baggage,  on  the  Clearance  of 
Baggage,  Wine,  tjc.  belonging  to  Passengers  and  others  from  India. 


ON  BAGGAGE. 


£ s.  d. 


Cliargcs,  including  fees  and  dock  dues,  on  a chest  or  trunk  of  apparel,  containing 
above  8 ditto  and  not  exceeding  15  solid  feet 

above  4 ditto  and  not  exceeding  8 ditto  0 15  0 

on  a chest  of  drawers  or  a couch,  containing  apparel  or  15  0 

on  an  empty  couch  or  a Sea-cot  and  bedding  0 8 0 

on  a child's  couch  0 15  0 

on  a small  package  of  little  value  from  2s.  Cd.  to  7s.  6d.  in  proportion. 

Cording  and  sealing  (if  required)  per  package 


GOODS  CLEARED  BY  VALUATION. 


Charges,  including  fees  and  dock  dues,  on  goods  not  exceeding  gross  value^i.^ 
above  £5  and  not  exceeding  i?10  ditto 
above  i^lO  and  not  exceeding  £20  ditto 
above  .£^20  and  not  exceeding  d£^30  ditto 
above  X^30  and  not  exceeding  ^^50  ditto 
above  <£^50  at  the  rate  per  cent  oL 

TEA. 

Charges,  including  fees  and  dock  dues,  on  a package  not  exceeding  ^10  gross  value*^ 
above  i?10  and  not  exceeding  £20  ditto 
above  .£*20  and  not  exceeding  £?30  ditto 
above  .£^30  and  not  exceeding  £50  ditto 
above  £50  at  the  rate  per  cent,  of . 