

That  gentlemen  proceeding  to  England  in  the  under-mentioned  stations,  be  restricted  from  taking 
with  them  a larger  tonnage  of  baggage  and  stores  than  the  following,  exclusive  of  their  bedding,  a table^ 
and  a sofa,  or  two  chairs,  for  their  respective  cabins,  viz. 


Gentlemen  of  Council  and  General  Officers 

Colonels  of  His  Majesty’s  or  Company’s  Service,  and  Senior  Merchants^ 
Lieutenant  Colonels  and  Junior  Merchants 


5 tons. 
4 ditto. 
3 ditto. 
2{  ditto. 
> 2 ditto. 


BOMBAY. 


2(5J 

That  gentlemen  proceeding  to  England  in  either  of  the  above-mentioned  stations,  who  may  he  per- 
mitted to  bring  home  their  families  with  them,  he  restricted  from  taking  more  toiina»e  than  onc’  half  of 
the  preceding  allowance,  in  addition,  as  the  ladies' 

That  married  ladies  proceeding  to  their  husbands  in  England,  bo  restricted  from  taking  more  than 
two-thirds  of  the  tonnage  prescribed  for  a gentleman  of  the  same  rank  ns  thur  husl)an(ls. 

That  Writers,  Lieutenants,  Ensigns, and  other  cabin  passengers,  he  restricted  from  taking  a larger  (]uan- 
tity  of  baggage  and  stores  than  one  ton  each,  exclusive  of  their  bedding,  a table,  and  sofa,  or  two  chairs. 

That  married  ladies  proceeding  to  their  husbands  in  England,  of  eitlior  of  these  last-mentioned  de- 
scriptions, l)e  restricted  from  taking  more  than  a similar  quantity  of  baggage. 

That  such  gentlemen,  of  either  of  these  last-mentioned  descriptions,  who  may  he  permitted  to  bring 
home  their  wives  with  them,  be  restricted  from  taking  more  than  onc  ton  iti  addition,  as  the  ladies' baggage 

That  single  ladies  be  restricted  from  taking  more  than  the  same  quantity  of  baggage  and  cabin  furniture. 

That  all  excess  of  baggage,  beyond  the  above-mentioned  quantities,  on  wdiatever  ship  it  may  be 
brought  home,  be  invariably  charged  freiglit,  at  the  charter-party  rate  per  ton,  and  that  the  said  l)aggage 
be  not  delivered  from  the  Company's  warehouse  till  such  freight  shall  have  been  paid  into  the  Company's 
treasury. 

Extract  from  a General  Letter  in  the  Commercial  Department^  dated  September  7,  1S08. 

In  our  letter  of  31st  October,  1799,  we  informed  you  that  we  had  appointed  Messrs.  Hyde  and 
Marier,  clerks  in  our  Accountants'  office,  to  act  as  agents  in  the  clearance  ot  baggage,  wines,  and  presents 
from  the  Company's  warehouses,  and  that  we  had  been  induced  to  ajppoint  our  own  servants  to  conduct 
this  business,  in  order  that  they  might  be  accountable  to  us  for  the  propriety  of  their  contluct.  The  in- 
crease which  has  taken  place  in  the  civil  and  military  establishments  of  our  several  Presidencies,  and  the 
conse(juently  augmented  number  of  persons  returning  to  Europe,  have  determined  us  to  make  a separate 
department  for  the  purpose  of  clearing  baggage,  wines,  and  presents,  and  we  have  appointed  Mr.  William 
Marter  and  Mr.  William  Evans  to  be  warehouse-keepers  of  baggage,  subject  to  our  own  immediate  inspec- 
tion and  controul,  and  we  have  made  such  arrangements  with  His  Majesty's  Board  of  Customs,  for  ascer- 
taining and  paying  the  duties  on  baggage,  &c,  as  will  ensure  the  greatest  possible  dispatch  in  the  delivciy  of 
the  articles  to  the  respective  proprietors. 