

A Lieutenant  is  permitted  to  retire  on  the  half  pay  of  Enaip^tt^  if  his  constitution  should  be  so  impaired 
as  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  his  rontinning  in  Tmlin 

Every  officer  returning  on  furlough,  and  wishing  to  retire  from  fhe  service,  musi  make  ii  declarntion 
to  that  effect,  within  twelv(»  months  after  hi.s  arrival  in  England;  and  in  case  of  Ids  neglecting  so  to  do,  he 
must  at  the  expiration  of  his  furlough,  either  return  to  India,  or  be  held  to  have  rclimjuished  the  service, 
and  not  be  entitled  to  retire  on  pay,  unless  he  has  continued  to  serve  in  India,  from  his  first  arrival,  for  the 
space  of  twenty-two yearsy  without  having  a furlough;  in  that  case  he  is  allowed  two  years  Ix'lbre  he  shall 
be  called  upon  to  signify  his  intention  of  retiring;  but  he  can  only  be  allowed  the  pay  of  the  rank  lie  held 
at  the  expiration  of  twelve  months  from  his  arrival  in  Europe. 

Promotion,  in  consequence  of  officers  retiring  in  England,  takes  place  from  the  time  when  such  officers 
are  permitted  by  the  Court  to  retire. 


FUntOUGII. 

Subalterns  must  be  ten  years  in  India,  before  they  can  be  entitled  (except  in  case  of  certified  sickness), 
to  their  rotation  to  be  absent  on  furlough,  and  the  same  rule  is  applicable  to  Assistant  Military  Surgeons. 
The  furlough  to  be  granted  by  the  Commander  in  Chief  at  each  Presidency,  with  the  approbation  of  llie 
respective  Governments. 

Chaplains  must  have  been  seven  years  in  India  before  they  can  be  allowed  furlough  (except  In  cases  of 
sickness)  with  the  pay  of  their  corresponding  rank,  viz.  CapUdn. 

The  period  of  furlough  is  three  years,  reckoning  from  its  date  to  the  day  of  the  return  of  the  officer 
to  his  Presidency.  No  officer  on  furlough  can  receive  pay  for  more  than  tw^o  years  and  a half  from  the 
period  of  his  quitting  India. 

At  a Court  of  Directors,  held  on  the  23d  January,  1810, 

Resolved,  That  in  future,  whenever  tlie  absence  of  a military  officer  from  India  shall  exceed  the  period 

LI 


256 


BOMBAY. 


of  his  regular  furlough,  no  further  leave  of  absence  shall  be  given  to  him  upon  the  mere  production  of  a 
medical  certificate  or  other  unauthenticated  statement  of  circumstances;  but  that  previous  to  such  leave 
being  granted,  proof  of  the  statement  made  by  the  party,  in  supjjort  of  his  application,  shall  be  adduced  to 
the  Committee  of  Correspondence  by  personal  examination,  or  by  such  other  evidence  as  shall  be  deemed 
satisfactory  to  the  Committee. 

At  a Court  of  Directors,  held  on  the  1st  March,  1811, 

A report  from  the  Committee  of  Correpondence,  dated  this  day,  being  read,  calling  the  Courfs  attention 
to  the  evident  misapprehension  of  the  meaning  of  the  70th  section  of  the  Act  of  the  33d  of  his  present 
Majesty,  cap.  52,  as  to  the  time  of  absence  after  wliicli  civil  and  military  officers  may  return  to  the  Com- 
pany's service  in  India ; 