

The  following  are  the  duties  payable  on  goods,  wares,  and  merchandise  imported  into  Great  Britain 
by  the  United  East  India  Company,  and  secured  in  warehouses;  also,  of  the  duties  on  such  goods,  wares, 
and  merchandise  when  taken  out  of  such  warehouses,  to  be  used  or  consumed  in  Great  Britain;  together 
with  the  drawback  to  be  allowed  on  the  exportation  of  certain  of  those  goods,  wares,  and  merchandise 
firom  Great  Britain. 


Olf  WAREHOUSING. 

Goods,  wares,  and  merchandise  inioorted  by  the  East  India] 
Company,  and  secured  in  warehouses,  under  the  condi- 
tions, regulations,  and  restrictions,  directed  and  required 
by  39  Geo.  III.  cap.  59,  viz. 

Muslins,  plain  Nankeen  cloths,  muslins,  or  white  calicoes, 
flowereo  or  stitched  cent.l 

Plain  white  calicoes,  plain  white  dimity,  and  all  goods,  wares, | 
and  merchandise  prohibited  to  be  worn  or  used  in 
Clreat  Britain  per  cent. 

C)oflee  and  cocoa  jjer  cent.j 

,A11^ other  goods,  wares,  and  merchandise  (except  hullioii,! 
cotton  wool,  saltpetre  and  tea)w^^w»%^^w>%v%  per  cent. 


rermanent 

n.irv 

Tomi)arary,  or 
War  Dinv. 

T^tal. 

P s.  d. 

37~ 

.£*  s.  d. 

7 10  0 

2 10  0 

• 

10  0 0 

2 10  0 

0 10  8 

3 0 8 

2 10  0 

0 10  8 

3 0 8 

1 0 0 

0 0 0 

1 0 0 

2 0 0 

0 13  4 

2 13  4 

Which  several  values  sihall  be  ascertained  according  to  the  gross  price  at  which  such  goods  respectively 
ahall  have  been  sold  at  the  public  sales  of  the  said  Company,  without  any  deduction  or  abatement  whatsoever. 

For  the  conditions,  regulations,  and  restrictions  under  which  the  said  duties  may  be  seeux  ed  by  bond, 
4tl  39  Geo.  111.  cap.  59. 


M m 


200 


BOMBAY. 


Clood'^,  wni  (s,  and  niercliandlsc  so  imported  and  warehoused  (not  being  prohibited  to  be  worn  or  used 
III  Gi  c.it  Britain),  may  be  delivered  from  such  wai chouse  for  the  purposes  of  being  used  or  consumed  in  Great 
Jh  ituin,  on  payment  of  the  following  duties,  exclusive  of  the  duties  belbre  mentioned,  paid  or  secured  by  the 
said  Company  on  warehousing  any  of  the  said  goods;  and  also  on  jiayment  of  such  excise,  or  other  duties, 
as  shall  he  due  or  pa)  able  thereon  at  the  time  of  such  delivery^ 

N.  B.  The  duties  are  to  he  paid  hy  the  purchasers. 

DUTIES  TAVABLE  ON  EAST  INDIA  GOODS  IMBOKTED  IN^JD  GREAT  BRITAIN. 


0\  WARElIOUSINO. 


atioii  of  cneli  and  every  public  sale. 

For  every  iT(M)  of  tlie  real  value, 

India  sales,  of  muslins,  plain  nankeen  cloths,  muslins 

or  white  calicoes  flowered  or  stitched,  imported  hyj 
1 lit ‘III  cent 

For  every  <XMOO  of  tlie  real  vidiie  of  all  plain  wdiite  calicoes, 
plain  wliite  dimities,  and  of  all  goods,  wares,  and  iner- 
chjiiulis(‘s  prohihited  to  be  worn  or  used  in  Great  Jbi 
lain,  imported  hy  titem  per  cent, 