


0 8 0 
0 12  0 

0 15 

1 1 

1 5 

2 10 


0 8 
0 12 

0 15 

1 1 
2 10 


WINE. 

.2  2 0 
. 1 10  0 
. 0 18  0 
. 0 12  0 

No  goods  are  to  be  delivered  from  the  warehouses  before  the  above  charges  have  been  paid,  and  all 
other  duties  and  charges  to  which  such  goods  are  liable.  , 

N.  B.  The  above  charges  do  not  include  the  custom-house  dues,  nor  the  charge  for  carriage  from  the 
East  India  warehouse  to  the  residence  of  the  proprietor  of  the  goods* 

East  India  ffme^  October  3,  1810, 


Charges,  including  fees  and  dock  dues,  on  a butU.^ 
on  a pipe  ^ 
on  a half  pipe  . 
on  a quarter  cask. 


BOMBAY. 


Extract  from  the  Act  of  Parliament  relative  to  Presents,  Baggage,  tj-c.  imported  from  India. 


Whereas  certain  duties  of  customs  are  payable  on  certain  articles  according  to  tlie  true  and  real  value 
thereof,  to  be  ascertained  by  the  gross  price,  at  which  sucli  goods  shall  liave  been  publicly  sold  at  the 
sales  of  the  East  India  Company ; and  whereas  much  inconvenience  and  delay  have  arisen  in  the  payment 
of  the  duties,  and  delivery  of  articles  brought  from  the  East  Indies,  either  as  presents,  or  for  private 
use,  particularly  specimens  of  natural  history,  models,  drawings,  and  other  articles,  tending  to  illustrate 
or  improve  the  arts  and  sciences,  arising  from  the  necessity  of  such  articles  being  exposed  to  public  sale  by 
the  East  India  Company,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  value  according  to  which  tlie  dutic's  payable  by  law  are 
to  be  levied  and  collected,  and  such  articles  are  also  thereby  frerpiently  exposed  to  great  injury  ami  da- 
mage; and  whereas  it  is  expedient,  in  order  to  remedy  such  inconvenience  and  dtday,  that  the  duties  of 
customs  payable  on  such  goods,  should  be  ascertained  without  the  same  being  in  future  ex[iosed  to  public 
sale;  be  it  therefore  enacted,  that  from  and  after  the  fifth  day  of  July,  1809,  it  shall  and  may  be  lawful 
for  any  person  or  persons  who  shall  import  or  bring  into  Great  Britain,  from  any  port  or  place  within 
the  limits  of  the  charters  granted  to  the  East  India  Company,  of  the  article's  before  mentioned,  or 
any  articles  whatever  (not  being  prohibited  to  be  used  or  consumed  in  Great  Britain),  on  which  the  duties 
of  customs  are  now  chargeable  according  to  the  value  thereof,  either  as  presents  or  for  private  use,  and 
not  by  way  of  merchandise,  to  enter  the  same  with  the  proper  ofiicors  of  His  Majesty’s  customs,  such 
goods  having  been  first  lodged  and  housed  in  warehouses  according  to  law ; and  that  the  value  of  such  goods, 
according  to  which  the  duties  of  customs  are  due  and  payable,  shall  be  ascertained  according  to  the  decla^ 
ration  of  the  value  thereof,  to  be  made  by  the  owners  or  proprietor,  or  his  known  agent,  In  the  like  manner 
and  form,  and  under  all  the  rules,  regulations,  and  restrictions,  and  subject  and  liable  to  such  and  tho 
like  forfeitures  and  penalties  as  are  presenbed,  directed,  and  imposed,  with  respect  to  goods  not  imported 
by  the  Company,  and  on  which  the  duties  of  customs  are  payable  according  to  the  value  thereof. 