2,500 

C^aptam 

2,000 

2,000  1 

2,000 

^ubaltci  IIS 

1,500 

1,500 

1,500 

And  that  the  commanders  do,  upon  no  account,  refuse  to  receive  the  sums  herein  stated  for  the  passage 
and  accommodation  of  gentlemen  of  the  above  description  from  India,  respectively. 

That  the  commanders  of  the  Company's  regular  ships  lie  ench  ronstrained  to  receive  on  board  their 
respective  ships  at  least  two  officers,  of  the  description  above  mentioned,  returning  to  Europe,  and  that 
the  larboard  third  part  of  the  great  cabin,  with  the  passage  to  the  quarter  gallery  taken  off,  be  appro- 
priated to  their  accommodation. 

That  tlic  commanders  of  the  Company's  extra  ships  shall  be  likewise  constrained  to  receive  on  board 
one  officer  returning  to  Europe,  of  the  above-mentioned  description,  and  that  such  officer  be  accommo- 
dated with  a cabin  on  the  starboard  side,  abaft  the  Chief  Mate's  cabin,  and  abreast  of  the  spirit-room,  of 
not  less  dimensions  than  7 feet  long  and  6 w’ide. 

That  in  the  event  of  the  return  of  the  whole  of  one  of  His  Majesty's  regiments  to  Europe,  the  Go- 
vernments in  India  shall,  in  such  case,  allot  the  wliolc,  or  such  part  of  the  great  cabin  of  each  ship  for  the 
accommodation  of  the  officers,  as  the  Governments  may  deem  proper,  due  notice  thereof  being  given  to  the 
commanders;  and  that  the  sums  to  be  paid  for  the  passage  of  each  officer,  be  the  same  as  those  above  stated 
for  officers  returning  on  military  duty. 

That  the  commanders  be  not  permitted  to  demand  more  than  the  following  sums  for  the  passage 
and  accommodation  at  their  tables,  from  India,  of  the  following  gentlemen,  who  shall  be  certified  by  tht 
Governor  and  Council  to  be  under  the  necessity  of  rclurning  to  England. 


From  hengal. 

From  Madrafi. 

From  Bombay. 

Sicca  Kupecb. 

Arcot  Rupees. 

Bombay  Rupees. 

Factors  % %%^% 

2,000 

27000 

2,000 

1,500 

1,500 

1,500 

'I'hat  in  case  any  commander  shall,  by  any  ways  or  means,  directly  or  indirectly,  either  in  England  of 
India,  take  or  receive  any  further  sum  or  sums  of  money,  or  other  gratuity  or  satisfaction,  for  the  passage 
of  any  Writer,  Subaltern  Officer,  Assistant  Surgeon,  or  Cadet,  to  or  from  India,  such  commander  shall  for- 
feit and  pay  to  the  Company,  for  the  use  of  Poplar  Hospital,  treble  the  sum  so  taken  beyond  the  sums 
before  mentioned;  and  for  the  purpose  of  making  himJself  liable  to,  and  securing  such  payment,  the  com- 
mander of  every  ship  in  the  Company’s  service  shall,  before  he  is  sworn  in,  give  bond  to  the  Company, 
ill  the  penalty  of  -PIOOO. 

That  if  any  I'hird  Mate  should,  directly  or  indirectly,  either  demand  or  receive  from  any  Assistant 
Surgeon  or  Cadet,  accommodated  at  his  mess,  a larger  sum  than  the  rate  fixed  by  these  regulations,  he  be 
fined  treble  the  amount  of  the  excess,  for  the  use  of  Poplar  Hospital,  and  that  such  fine  be  deducted  from 
bis  wages,  or  bis  account  of  private  trade,  as  the  Court  may  direct 