


General  Oilicers^s 


aC2.5() 


Gentlemen  of  Council,  or  Colonels 
Lieutenant-Colonels,  Majors,  senior  and  junior  merchants  and  factors^w 
Captains 


2()0 

1.50 

125 


That  the  commanders  be  absolutely  restrained  from  demanding  more  than  the  following  sums  for  the 
passage  and  accommodation  at  their  tables  of  persons  proceeding  to  India,  in  the  ('ompany’s  service,  in  the 
following  stations,  vtz. 

Writers  and  Subalternsvvv^^^>%w.^.^^v«'v%.%«^  i?110 

Assistant  Surgeons  and  95 

Including  the  charter  party  allowance  to  the  owners  of  the  ship. 

That  the  Third  Mates  be  likewise  restrained  from  demanding  more  than  the  sum  of  JP&Jj  for  the  ac- 
commodation of  an  Assistant  Surgeon,  or  Cadet,  who  may  proceed  in  theii*  mess  to  India,  exclijisive  of  the 
charter  party  allowance  to  the  owners. 

That  in  order  more  effectually  to  prevent  more  than  the  allowances  aforesaid  being  taken  from  Writers, 
Subaltern  Officers,  Assistant  Surgeons,  and  Cadets,  the  several  sums  stipulated  for  the  outward-bound  passage 
of  those  persons,  whether  the  two  latter  shall  he  at  the  Captain's  table,  or  Third  Mate's  mess,  shall  be  paid 
by  them,  respectively,  to  the  Paymaster  of  Seamen's  Wages,  and  the  order  for  the  reception  of  any  person, 
in  either  of  those  stations,  on  board  any  of  the  ships  in  the  Company's  serviee,  shall  not  be  delivered,  until 
tliey  shall  have  produced  the  Paymaster’s  receipt  for  the  amount  so  ordered  to  be  paid  him;  and  that  the 
several  allowances,  hereby  directed  to  be  deposited  in  his  hands,  be  paid  to  the  Commander,  or  to  the  Third 
Mate,  or  their  respective  agents  properly  authorized  to  receive  the  same. 

That  the  Commanders  be  not  permitted  to  demand  more  than  the  following  sums  for  the  passage 
and  accommodation  at  their  tables,  of  officers  in  his  Majesty’s  service  proceeding  to  India  in  the  following 
stations,  vtz» 


General  Officers 

r^nlnn<»l« --  - 

T JputenAnt-r^olonidfl  and  Maiors 

j.T5 

jLjaw u v^aicaii caiiu 

Captains  and  Surgeons 

Subalterns,  and  Assistant  Surgeons*.^^ 

no 

Exclusive  of  the  charter  party  allowance  to  the  owners,  paid  by  the  Company. 


L12 


260 


BOMBAY. 


RATES  OF  PASSAGE  MONEY  FROM  INDIA  TO  ENGLAND. 

That  the  commanders  of  the  Company's  ships  be  not  permitted  to  demand  more  than  the  following 
sums  for  the  passage  and  accommodation  at  their  tables,  from  India,  of  officers  either  in  his  Majesty's  or 
the  Company's  service,  who  shall  be  returning  to  Europe,  either  on  sick  certificate  or  military  duty,  viz. 


From  Hen|ral. 

From  Madras. 

From  Hombay. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Aicot  kiipecs. 

Bombay  Rupees. 

I-^ieu  tenant— 

2,500 

2,500 

2,500 

2,500 

2,500 

