

That  the  several  sums  ^bovc  mentioned  be  established  for  the  passage,  outward  and  homeward,  of  the 
several  persons  of  the  descriptions  before  stated;  and  that  the  same  do  apply  only  to  such  accommodations 


BOMBAY. 


861 


«8  those  persons  are  respectively  entitled  to,  under  the  existing  regulations  of  the  Company;  and  that  any 
additional  accommodation  or  cabin  may  be  agreed  for  with  the  cmnihandcr,  and  paid  fin-  sepurutely,  with- 
out being  considered  as  a deduction  from  the  sum  fixed  by  the  Court  for  the  passage  money  of  each  person. 

Previous  to  any  blaclc  servant,  or  a wife  ol  any  non-commissioned  oflicer,  or  priv'ate,  either  in  llis 
Majesty's  or  the  Company’s  service,  being  aUowed  to  come  to  England  in  attendance  uiwn  passengers  on 
board  any  ship  whatever,  a deposit  of  i?l(X)  must  be  made  into  the  Company’s  treasury  at  the  Presidency 
where  she  is  to  embark. 


RATES  OF  PASSAGE  MONEY  FROM  BOMDAY  TO  OTHER  PARTS  OP  INDIA. 

The  following  is  a table  of  rates  of  passage  money,  to  bo  demanded  by  tlic  commanders  of  country 
•hips,  from  individuals  proceeding  on  leave  of  absence,  viz. 


From  1st  May  From  1st  Sept, 

to  1st  Sept.  to  1st  May 

.Rupees  80  Rupees  80 

100  100 


To  the  Malabar  Coast 

adras  1 1.50 

rrince  of  Wales’s  Island^^v.^s.^^^^.^^.^150 200 

Malacca  1 50 2(H) 

Fort  Marlborough  ^...^.^.^....200 

China  too im 


REGULATIONS  RELATIVE  TO  PASSENGERS’  BAGGAGE  FROM  ENGLAND  TO  INDIA. 
At  a Committee  of  Shipping,  the  22d  June,  1795, 

Resolved — That  gentlemen  proceeding  to  India  in  the  under-mentioned  stations,  be  not  allowed  to 
take  with  them  a larger  tonnage  of  baggage  and  stores  than  the  following,  exclusive  of  their  bedding,  a 
table,  a sofa,  or  two  chairs,  for  their  respective  cabins,  viz. 


Gentlemen  of  Council 
General  Officers 

Colonels  in  His  Majesty’s  or  the  Com- 
pany’s service 
Senior  Merchants 


3 1 tons. 
3x  ditto. 

3 ditto. 
3 ditto. 


I^ieutenant-Coh^nels 
Junior  Merchants 
Majors , 

Faclors^^ 

Captains 


2|  ton.s. 
2j  ditto, 
2 tlitto. 
2 ditto. 
1{  ditto 


That  such  gentlemen,  proceeding  in  either  of  the  above-mentioned  stations,  who  may  be  j)ernutted  to 
carry  out  their  wives  with  them,  be  allowed  to  take,  as  the  ladies’  baggage,  an  additional  tonnage,  ccpial  to 
one  half  of  the  preceding  allowance. 

That  married  ladies  proceeding  to  their  husbands  in  India,  be  allowed  to  carry  two-tlilrds  of  the  ton- 
nage prescribed  for  a gentleman  of  the  same  rank  as  her  husband. 

That  Writers,  Lieutenants,  Ensigns,  and  otlier  cabin  passengers,  he  not  allowed  to  carry  a larger  (piari- 
tity  of  baggage  and  stores  than  one  ton  each,  exclusive  of  their  bedding,  a table,  a sofa,  or  two  chairs’,  and 
a washhand  stand. 