

That  married  ladies  proceeding  to  their  husbands  in  India,  of  either  of  these  last-mentioned  dcscriji- 
tions,  be  allowed  to  carry  a similar  quantity  of  baggage  and  cabin  furniture. 

That  such  gentlemen,  of  either  of  these  last-mentioned  descriptions,  who  may  be  permitted  to  carry  out 
their  wives  with  them,  be  allowed  to  take  one  ton  additional  as  the  ladie.s’  baggage. 

That  single  ladies  be  allowed  the  same  quantity  of  baggage  and  cabin  furniture  as  Writei's.' 


262 


BOMBAY. 


At  a Committee  of  Shipping,  5th  October,  1808, 

The  Committee  referring  to  their  resolution  of  22d  June,  1795,  respecting  the  allowance  of  tonnage 
for  passengers'  baggage  outward-bound,  and  being  of  opinion  that  the  same  is  sufficient  for  every  needful 
accommodation  in  the  voyage ; but  it  having  been  the  practice  for  passengers  to  ship,  as  part  of  their  baggage, 
glass  and  earthen  ware,  %lso  cabinet  ware,  and  other  ailicles  of  housekeeping  in  India-— 

Resolved,  That  none  other  articles  than  wearing  apparel,  or  such  others  as  shall  be  really  intended 
for  the  use  of  the  respective  passengers  in  the  voyage,  be  allowed  to  be  shipped  as  baggage,  musical  instru- 
ments for  ladies,  and  books  excepted. 

That  books  and  musical  instruments,  when  requested  to  be  shipped,  be  included  in  the  tonnage  of 
baggage  prescribed  for  each  passenger  by  the  Committee's  resolution  of  the  22d  June,  1795,  before 
mentioned. 

That  gentlemen  returning  to  India  in  the  under-mentioned  situations,  be  allowed  to  take,  as  part  of 
their  prescribed  tonnage  of  baggage,  the  following  quantities  of  wine  for  their  own  use  in  the  voyage,  pro- 
vided that  they  severally  make  application  to  this  Committee  for  permission  to  ship  the  same,  and  state, 
under  their  own  hand,  that  the  wine  is  hona  Jide  intended  for  tliat  purpose,  viz. 

Gentlemen  of  Council  and  General  Officers  2 chests. 

Colonels,  Lieutenant-Colonels,  and  1 ditto. 

Senior  and  J unior  1 ditto. 

That  all  requests  to  ship  possengers'  baggage  be  laid  before  this  Committee,  and  in  the  event  of  any 
excess  beyond  the  prescribed  tonnage,  application  to  be  made  in  writing  to  this  Committee,  by  the  indivi- 
duals for  whose  use  the  articles  are  requested,  stating  the  particular  causes  of  the  excess.  And  that  no 
order  be  given  for  shipping  passengers’  baggage  in  future,  until  this  Committee’s  decision  on  the  request 
for  the  same  shall  have  been  certified  by  the  clerk  to  this  Committee. 

REGULATIONS  RELATIVE  TO  PASSENGERS’  BAGGAGE  FROM  INDIA  TO  ENGLAND. 

Extract  from  the  Honourahk  Company's  Instmctionsy  dated  the  26th  August,  1801.  (Public  Department,) 

Para.  8.  Having  adverted  to  the  immense  quantity  of  baggage  brought  home  by  the  passengers 
arrived  in  the  Company’s  ships,  and  being  desirous  of  promoting  every  regulation  that  appears  to  us  likely 
to  increase  the  im))ortation  of  surplus  tonnage,  we  have  investigated  this  as  one  cause  which  has  occasioned 
the  reduction  of  that  important  benefit  both  to  the  Company  and  owners;  the  space  occupied  by  the  paa- 
sengers"  baggage  in  one  of  the  ships  lately  arrived,  having  amounted  to  the  immense  quantity  of  63  tons, 
(’onceiving  therefore  some  regulation  necessary  to  be  adopted,  to  correct  as  much  as  possible  this  growing 
evil,  and  to  prevent  such  immense  quantities  of  baggage  being  imported,  to  the  ultimate  exclusion  of  the 
('oinpany’s  cargo,  we  liave  come  to  the  following  resolutions;  and  we  direct  that  you  adopt  every  other 
means  which  may  appear  necessary  towards  carrying  the  same  into  effect,  viz. 