

Lustrings. 

ShalbafTls. 

Carridai'ries. 

Elatclies. 

Nillaes. 

Silk  skeins. 

Chillacs. 

Ginghams,  striped. 

Niccapnees. 

Silk,  wrought. 

Chintz. 

Ditto,  clouded. 

Neganepauts. 

T aff’aties. 

Cotton  Romals. 

Guinea  stuffs. 

Photaes. 

Te|>oys. 

Chilloes. 

Gurrasoots. 

Poises. 

Tapseils. 

Coopees. 

Gold  atlas. 

Peniascoes. 

Tutahumsey. 

Cushtaes. 

Habassies. 

Polampores. 

S70 


BOMBAY. 


J)y  13  Geo.  III.  chap.  G8,  sc(  t.  3G.  From  the  ratification  of  the  definitive  treaty  of  peace  with  France, 
the  East  India  C’ornpany  may  sell  for  home  consumption  or  exportation,  warehoused  silk  handkerchiefs, 
provided  that  they  shall  not  in  any  one  year  sell  or  expose  to  sale  more  than  50,000  pieces,  of  the  usual 
len^dh,  and  the  sorts  usually  exposed  to  sale. 

COMPANY’S  MARINE. 


The  marine  on  this  establishment  was  originally  instituted,  and  has  been  maintained  for  services  of 
€ftnsidcrable  iinjiortance  to  the  interests  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  to  the  commerce  in  general  on 
the  western  side  of  India.  It  is  in  fiict  a species  of  navy.  The  merits  and  services  of  the  officers,  and  the 
extensive  benefits  derived  by  the  docks  and  arsenals  are  well  known.  The  immediate  leading  objects  of 
this  establishment  arc 

I.  The  protection  of  the  ti  ade,  wliich  is  eonsiderable,  from  port  to  port  from  pirates. 

II.  The  defence  of  the  ('ompany’s  trade  and  possessions,  in  time  of  war,  against  European  enemies. 

HI.  The  transport  of  troops,  kv. 

IV.  For  making  nautical  discoveries. 

V.  For  conveying  packets  to  and  from  the  Red  Sea,  Persian  Gulf,  &c. 

In  the  year  the  Court  of  Directors  entered  upon  a full  examination  of  the  subject  of  the  mai*ine 

department  of  tliis  Pr<‘sideiicv,  in  which  they  took  Into  consideration  tlie  deficiency  of  the  establishment 
upon  its  constitution  at  that  time,  and  forwarded  such  instructions  for  its  improvement  in  every  respect  as 
appeared  nnpiisite.  The  situation  of  the  olticiu  s drew  likewise  their  particular  attention,  and  regulations 
were  passed  respecting  their  rank,  placing  it  in  a relative  proportion  with  that  of  the  officers  of  the  army, 
which  had  recently  been  consiiiorably  improved.  The  principle  of  granting  furlough,  and  allowing  total 
retirement  after  prescribed  periods,  with  the  pay  of  theii*  respective  ranks,  was  also  instituted,  in  like 
manner  as  in  tlic  military  service. 

From  the  nature  of  tlie  service  in  lime  of  war  particularly,  the  annual  expcnce  of  this  department  is 
fluctuating  and  uncertain  in  its  amount.  INIeasurcs  are,  however,  adopted  to  cheek  and  controul  the  expen- 
diture, and  keep  it  within  sucli  limits  as  arc  consistent  with  the  efficiency  of  the  service. 