

ARRANGOES 

Are  a kind  of  beads  formed  from  the  rough  cornelian,  chiefly  in  demand  for  the  African  trade,  of 
various  forms,  barrel,  bell,  round,  and  are  all  drilled.  The  barrel  shaped  kind,  cut  from  the  best  stones,  arc 
from  two  to  three  inches  long,  and  should  be  chosen  as  clear  as  possible,  whether  red  or  whiti’,  having  a 
good  polish,  and  free  from  flaws ; the  bell  shape  are  from  one  to  two  inches  long,  and  inferior  in  every 
respect;  the  latter  beads  are  made  from  veiy  inferior  stones,  and  are  ol  little  value.  Considerable  quan- 
tities were  formerly  imported,  but  in  consequence  ol  the  abolition  ol  the  slave  trade,  the  demand  is  now 
very  trifling.  The  quantities  sold  are  blended  with  cornelians. 

20  cwt.  of  arrangocs,  or  arrango  beads,  arc  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £53  IGs.  3d, 
per  cent,  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty  oC17  18s.  9d.  in  all  i^71  15s.  per  cent. 

AWL, 

Or  morinda,  is  a tree  of  a middling  size,  growing  on  the  Coast  of  jNIalabar,  and  other  parts  of  India, 
the  root  of  which  spreads,  and  strikes  into  the  ground  three  or  four  feet;  the  trunk  is  used  only  foj-  fuel. 
The  roots,  which  are  long  and  slender,  are  usetl  as  a dye  in  many  parts  of  India;  the  colouring  matter  re 
sides  chiefly  in  the  bark  of  the  root.  The  small  twigs  which  contain  little  wood,  bear  a higlier  price  than 
the  larger  pieces,  therefore  the  roots  when  dug  up,  are  divided  into  three  sorts,  coarse,  inediuni,  and  flue: 
the  coarse  sells  for  about  a rupee  per  maund,  the  medium  tw  o or  three,  and  the  fine  four  rupees  jicr  maund. 
Independent  of  the  consumption  of  this  dye  in  the  province  of  Malabar,  large  quantities  ol  it  arc  <‘X])ortcd 
to  Guzzerat,  and  the  northern  parts  of  Hindostan,  to  the  amount  of  several  lacs  of  rupees  p(  r annum. 
It  is  seldom  imported  into  Europe.  In  the  Maich  sale,  1807,  a quantity  of  20  cwt.  i\us  .sold  lor  120. 


BEETLE  NUT— CARDAMUMS. 


S76 


BEETLE  NUT, 

Or  Betel  Nut,  is  the  fruit  of  the  Areca  Palm,  a fine  slender  upright  tree,  not  above  6 inches  in  diameter 
fit  bottom,  and  upwards  of  .30  feet  liigh.  The  leaves  grow  similar  to  those  of  the  cocoa  nut  tree,  and  the  nuts 
are  in  clusters.  The  husk,  which  is  yellow  on  the  outside,  and  brown  and  fibrous  within,  covers  a nut  about 
the  size  of  a nutmeg : at  one  end  it  is  rather  flat;  it  is  white  and  marbled  within  with  purplish  veins,  of  a 
light  brown  externally,  moderately  astringent,  and  insipid  to  the  taste.  Beetle  nut  is  grown  in  various 
parts  of  India,  the  Malay  Peninsula,  and  the  Eastern  Islands.  That  produced  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar  is 
of  two  sorts,  boiled  and  raw  : tlie  former  is  tlie  nut  cut  in  slices,  and  boiled  with  a small  quantity  of 
Terra  Japonica;  then  dried,  when  it  is  fit  for  sale;  the  other  is  the  nut  in  the  state  we  see  it.  When  new 
and  good,  the  nut  will  fiave  a whitish  skin  on  the  broad  end ; but  when  old,  the  skin  is  easily  rubbed  ofL 
Those  wliicli  are  worm-eaten  and  decayed,  sliould  he  rejected. 