

III.  The  Bengal  cotton  imported  is  much  like  that  of  Surat,  but  of  rather  shorter  staple,  the  superior 
kinds  being  reserved  for  the  manufacture  of  muslins  and  other  piece*  goods. 

IV.  Of  Madras  cotton  but  little  is  imported;  it  is  in  general  dirty,  containing  much  seed,  which  reduces 
its  value  in  England  very  considerably.  Small  quantities  are  occasionully  met  with  raised  from  Bourbon 
seed,  which  it  resembles  in  staple,  but  falls  far  short  in  cleanness  and  roloor. 

The  first  memtiori  we  Iwve  of  cotton  as  an  article  of  trade,  is  in  Hackluyt’s  collection  of  voyages,  from 
a little  work  entitled  “The  Process  of  English  Policy."  After  enumerating  the  articles  which  constitute 
the  trade  of  England  with  various  other  countries,  it  states  that  “ Genoa  resorts  to  England  in  her  huge 
ships,  named  carracks,  bringing  many  commodities,  as  silk,  paper,  wool,  oil,  cotton,  &c."  This  work 
was  printed  ns  early  as  1430 ; and  it  is  probable  that  much  earlier  than  that  period,  England  was  supplied 
with  cotton  from  the  Levant.  The  Genoese  possessed  this  trade  till  about  1511;  from  that  period  till 
1534,  according  to  llackluyt,  “ ships  of  London  and  Bristol  imported  from  Sicily,  Candia,  Cyprus,  and 
other  parts,  silks,  rhubarb,  wines,  oils,  cotton  wool,  Turkey  carpets,  galls,  and  Indian  spices.’’  The 
Levant  trade  was  soon  after  engrossed  by  the  merchants  at  Antwerp,  and  till  1575  entirely  abandoned  by 
the  English.  After  the  sacking  of  Antwerp  the  English  trade  to  the  Levant  revived,  and  in  1()21  was  in 
a flourishing  state,  as  appears  from  the  testimony  of  Mr,  Munn,  in  his  Treatise  on  the  Trade  of  India,  in 
which  cotton  is  enumerated  as  one  of  the  many  articles  imported  from  the  Mediterranean. 

From  the  above  it  appears  evident  that,  previous  to  the  discovery  of  America  and  the  West  Indies, 
and  for  some  time  afterwards,  England,  and  probably  all  Europe,  were  supplied  with  cotton  from  the 
Levant  In  1641  U is  stated  that  “ the  town  of  Manchester  buys  cotton-wool  in  London,  that  comes  first 
from  Cyprus  and  Smyrna whence  it  may  be  inferred  that  no  considerable  quantities  were  as  yet  im- 
ported from  our  West  India  islands.  In  1660,  a law  |)assed  prohibiting  the  landing  any  cotton  the  growth 
of  our  Asian,  African,  or  American  colonies,  except  in  the  English  dominions. 

Since  that  period  the  importation  of  cotton  into  Great  Britain  has  progressively  and  rapidly  increased, 
ns  will  ap[)ear  from  the  following  statement,  from  which  some  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  astonishing  and 
unexampled  increase  and  prosperity  of  our  coiton  manufactures. 

Total  lbs.  Average  per  annum. 

