

They  an,*  seldom  imported  into  England,  though  they  might  be  of  use  in  some  manufactures. 

Beetle  Nut  is  an  article  of  considerable  trade  from  port  to  port  in  India.  In  the  year  1805,  there  wag 
imported  into  tlic  British  Presidencies,  from  various  parts,  to  tlie  following  amount,  viz. 

Bengal  Sicca  Rupees  2,41,165 

Fort  St.  George  and  its  dependencies 

Bombay  and  3,02,323 

Sicca  Rupees  11,10,694 

Large  quantities  arc  annually  imported  into  China  from  Pulo  Pinang  and  the  Malay  Peninsula. 


CARDAMUMS 


Are  produced  in  several  parts  of  India,  but  the  best  are  from  the  Malabar  Coast,  and  are  the  sort 
usually  broiiglit  to  England.  They  are  the  produce  of  a small  plant,  growing  in  some  places  without  cul- 
tivation ; in  others  they  arc  propagated  by  cuttings  from  the  roots ; in  the  third  year  the  plants  come  to 
perfection,  bearing  abundantly  for  a year  or  two,  and  then  die.  The  capsules  are  gathered  as  they  ripen, 
and  when  dried  in  the  sun,  are  fit  for  sale. 

The  usual  crops  raised  in  Malabar  arc  estimated  at  about  100  candies,  wliich  are  distinguished  by  the 
places  of  their  growth,  and  are  esteemed  as  follow  : 


I.  Wynaad  w'hich  is  said  to  (>roduce . 

II.  Tamaratchery 

III.  Uartinaad  or  Cadutinadai^.^.^...^ 

IV.  C Qor 


Candies  65 


About  5 candies  of  an  inferior  quality  are  procured  from  Velater,  which  are  sold  at  about  half  the 
price  of  the  others.  Many  merchants  by  looking  at  cardamums,  can  tell  the  country  whence  they  came. 
Those  from  Wynaad,  including  those  also  of  Cartinaad  and  Tamaratchery,  contain  many  round,  full 
white  grains,  or  capsules.  Those  of  Coorg  have  fewer  black,  or  light  ones,  T he  Velater  sort  are  long, 
dark  coloured,  and  thin  skinned.  The  East  India  Company  have  not  traded  in  cardamums  since  1797 ; 
they  always  purchased  them  by  contract  from  the  merchants  oq  the  Coast,  and  had  them  garbled.  At 
their  last  purchase,  8 candies  of  6401bs.  or  51201bs.  as  received  from  the  contractor,  produced  only 
candies  of  5G01bs.,  or  4060 lbs.;  the  bad  and  rejected  are  sold  to  the  Arabs.  Cardamums  are  never 
garbled,  except  for  the  Europe  market;  they  are  exported  chiefly  to  Bengal,  Bombay,  Surat,  Cutch,  and 
the  dlllerent  ports  in  Arabia.  Cardamums  should  be  cliosen  full,  plump,  and  difficult  to  be  broken,  of  a 


GREATER  CARDAMUMS— CHAYA  ROOT— COCOA  NUTS. 


277 


briglit  yellow  colour,  of  a piercing  smell,  with  an  acrid,  l)itterisli,  though  not  very  unploasanl  taste,  and 
particular  care  should  be  taken  that  they  are  properly  dried.  Tliey  are  reekoiKul  to  ke(*p  b(\st  in  a 
body,  and  are  therefore  packed  in  large  chests  well  jointed,  pitched  at  the  scams,  and  olheiu  ise  properly 
secured,  as  the  least  damp  greatly  reduces  their  value.  Previous  to  the  sales  in  England,  tluw  shoiiltl  he 
allotted  into  parcels  of  about  one  cwt.  each,  that  quantity  being  more  suitable  to  piirchasi  rs  than  a lot  of 
six  or  eight  cwt.,  which  the  chests  they  ai*c  imported  in,  usuully  contain. 