

Arrack  is  seldom  imported  as  an  article  of  trade,  though  the  East  India  Company  allow  20  leagers  to 
be  brought  in  each  ship,  except  in  those  from  China,  on  paying  the  custom  and  excise  duties,  and  to  the 
Company  2 per  cent,  on  the  sale  value,  and  Gd.  per  gallon;  upon  what  exceeds  that  quantity,  2 sliillinga 
is  charged.  The  proportional  shares  .are  as  follow  : 

(’ommamler  Gallons  1971 

(Ihief  25G 

Second  ditto  205 

Third  ditto.  Purser,  and  Surgeon,  each  154  gafions  4G2 

Fourth  Officer  102 

Fifth  Mate,  Boatswain,  Gunner,  and  Carpenter,  each  51  gallons  204 

forming  a total  of  3,200  gallons,  being  20  leagers,  each  of  160  gallons. 


ARRANGOES— AWr 


The  follotoiriff  arc  the  Eaut  India  Company's  Regulations  for  shipping  Jrrfulx,  ij  r. 

No  arrack  or  oilier  spirits  are  permlited  to  be  shipped  in  India,  or  China,  on  any  ol'  the  Company \ 
ships  returning  to  Euro[)e,  except  such  as  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  ship's  company  on  tiio  voyages  or  in 
the  immediate  privilege  of  the  commander  and  oflicers. 

Each  cask  or  chest,  shipped  for  the  use  of  the  ship’s  company,  shall  be  marked  ‘‘  Stores,"  and  each 
cask  or  chest,  shipped  on  the  private  account  of  any  of  the  officers,  shall  be  mark(3d  with  the  name  at 
length  of  the  person  to  whom  it  belongs;  and  Mich  casks  or  chests  ns  shall  not  be  so  marked,  shall  be  taken 
and  deemed  to  be  the  projicrty  of  the  commander.  In  order  to  ascertain  the  sums  to  be  charged,  as  here- 
after mentioned,  before  the  respective  accounts  shall  be  adjusted  and  passcil  the  Court,  the  arrack  and  other 
s])irits  received  into  the  warehouse,  shall  be  the  first  private  trade  articles  put  up  to  sale  by  each  ship. 

Should  those  marked  “ Stores”  be  refus(*d  to  be  bought,  or  not  sell  for  a sum  equal  to  the  King’i} 
and  Company’s  duties,  the  difference  shall  be  charged  to  the  owners  in  thiir  account  of  freight  and  demurrage. 

Should  those  marked  with  the  name  of  the  respective  oflicers  of  the  ship,  or  those  deemed  to  be  the 
property  of  the  commander,  in  the  same  manner,  sell  for  less  than  tlie  duties  before  speciHi'd,  the  difference 
shall  be  charged  in  their  respective  accounts  of  private  trade;  but  shoidd  it  so  happen  that  an  officer  im- 
porting  arraek  or  other  spirits,  has  not  a sufficient  quantity  of  other  goods  to  answer  the  deficiency  ari^ing 
as  aforesaid,  then  in  that  case  such  officer  shall  not  be  employed  again  in  the  Company’s  service,  until  he 
has  paid  the  amount  of  such  deficiency  into  the  Company’s  treasury. 

Q’he  duties  and  drawbacks  on  arraek  are  the  same  as  those  on  brandy. 

Tlio  tonnage  of  arrack  is  calculated  at  252  gallons  per  ton, 