

Necklace  s,  ear-rings,  and  other  trinkets  are  manufactured  at  Cambay  from  cornelians,  and  are  an  arti- 
cle of  trade  to  Europe;  they  sliould  be  chosen  of  pure  clear  colours,  w^ell  cut,  and  free  from  cracks  and  flawa^ 


COTTON  WOOL.  279 

Cornelian  stones  are  sometimes  imported  in  their  rongli  state  from  Bombay.  In  chusinfr  them,  such  as 
are  chipped  should  be  rejected,  as  those  have  been  tried  and  refused  by  the  stonecutters  at  Cambay. 

The  following  is  the  amount  of  the  sah>  value  of  the  various  kinds' of  cornelian  iroods,  vh.  stones,  neck- 
laces,  ear-rings,  arrangoes,  &c.  sold  at  the  (’onipuny’s  sales  in  the  years  IStM  to  IHOS  inelusisc. 

1S07 

1808  

1800  no  {U’coiiiit, 

20  cwt.  of  cornoHans  are  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  on  the  man ii fact ii red  articles  is 
£o3  16.V  3f/.  percent,  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty  XTr  IS.v.  Od.  making  in  the  whole  i71  1.ja-. 
per  cent.  The  rough  stones  pay  the  same  duty  as  unmanufactured  goods. 


1804  ........ — 4 

1 80 j 50*10 

1806  1747 


, COTTON  WOOL. 

Among  tlie  various  raw  materials  that  are  produced  in  the  Hrltish  possessions  in  India,  and  wliieli  arc 
exceedingly  valuable  and  of  great  iiiiportaiiee  to  our  home  ninnufuc  tures,  the  article  of  fine  cotton  wool 
claims  the  pre-eminenee  over  every  thing  else.  The  very  cheap  rate  at  which  tliis  arllde  can  he  produced, 
renders  it  peculiarly  desirable  that  eneoiiragement  should  bo  given  to  its  cultivation  and  iin|)orta- 
(ion.  Though  the  cotton  from  the  western  side  of  India,  coiniuonly  denominated  Suiat  cotton,  is  the 
principal  part  of  those  imported,  yet  ns  cotton  of  very  superior  (pialitles  may  ho  proiluced  in  India,  in 
(luantlty  amply  adeciuate  to  the  coii.sumption  of  Great  Britain,  it  would  obviously  be  the  interest  of  this 
country  to  encourage  the  importation  of  the  raw  material,  rather  than  the  manufaeUires  of  India;  and  to 
that  advantage  would  he  added,  what  in  the  present  situation  of  public  alfairs  is  an  important  coiisuh'ration, 
the  becoming  independent  of  America,  for  an  article  actually  of  the  first  necessity  in  our  nuuuifai  tures. 

Cotton  is  the  soft  and  vegetable  down  wdiicli  forms  the  covering  or  envelope  of  the  seeds  of  the  cotton 
plant.  It  is  the  spontaneous  production  of  three  parts  of  the  globe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  Anna  ica.  It  is  im- 
ported from  the  West  Indies,  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  settlements  in  South  America,  likewise  (icorgia, 
and  the  southern  states  of  North  America.  The  islands  and  sliores  of  the  Mcdit(‘rranean  long  snpplicNl 
Europe,  and  within  these  few  years  considerable  quantities  have  been  imported  IVom  Surat,  iMadi  as,  and 
Bengal,  and  occasionally  from  the  islands  of  Bourbon  and  Mauritius. 