

The  cotton  from  these  different  quarters  of  the  globe  varies  considerably  in  the  colour,  length,  strength, 
and  fineness  of  the  fibre.  White  is  in  general  considered  of  secondary  quality.  The  cotton  ot*  the  Levant 
is  distinguished  by  its  want  of  colour,  and  the  chief  part  of  that  from  North  America  is  also  white.  Yellow, 
when  not  the  effect  of  accidental  wetting,  or  inclement  season,  is  indlaitivc  of  greater  fmen(*ss.  The 
cotton  of  the  West  Indies  and  of  South  America  is  called  yellow,  but  inclines  more  to  cr(‘am  colour. 

The  East  India  cottons  rank  in  the  following  order:  Bourbon,  Surat,  Bengal,  Madras. 

I.  Bourbon;  this  is  the  most  even  and  uniform  in  quality  of  any  other;  it  is  of  a long  silky  stapl(», 
very  clet^n,  and  is  the  most  valuable  kind  imported  into  England,  except  the  Sea  Island,  (Georgia. 

II.  Of  the  Surat  cottons,  the  Ahniood  is  the  best ; the  fibre  is  very  fine,  hut  not  of  long  stajile.  The 
specimens  upon  which  experiments  have  been  made,  fully  prove,  that  if  such  cotton  could  always  he  im- 
ported, it  would  command  a high  price,  and  meet  a ready  market  to  the  extent  of  6,()()(),(K)t)ll)s.  without 
interfering  with  the  growth  of  our  West  India  Islands.  The  other  places  are  Baroaeh,  Bownagluir,  Surat, 
Jambooser,  Oclasur,  Hansoote,  &c.  The  finest  Ahmood  cotton  could  have  been  purchased  at  Surat  for  IIA 
to  123  rupees  per  candy  of  7 cwt.  some  years  since,  but  lately,  from  the  competition  to  I Ik*  nor  thward  for 
cotton  for  the  China  market,  it  has  risen  to  above  180  rupees  per  candy : even  at  that  price  it  would  answer 
as  a remittance;  but  great  advantages  would  be  ucc|uired  by  freeing  the  cotton  of  every  particle  of  foulness. 


COTTON  WOOL. 


m 

as  well  as  rvciy  mixture  of  tinged  or  inferior  staple  before  it  is  packed  up,  leaving  nothing  to  be  made  up 
into  bales  but  t!ie  purest  cotton,  by  which  the  value  would  be  much  increased  in  England,  and  the  freight 
would  be  considerably  reduced  by  tlie  impurities  left  behind,  which  pay  a iVeight,  and  are  not  only  a great 
injury  to  the  sale  and  value  of  the  cotton,  but  the  picking  alone,  which  costs  3d.  per  lb.  in  England,  could 
be  performed  for  one  penny  in  India. 

It  is  impossible  to  be  too  attentive  to  the  great  object  of  shipping  no  cotton  but  what  is  perfectly  clean; 
it  should,  in  fact,  he  put  into  that  precise  state  in  which  it  is  placed  hy  the  women  of  India  previous  to  its 
being  spun  into  yarn.  Ti'he  coarse  and  middling  qualities  should  be  rejected,  as  they  do  not  suit  the  Euro- 
j)ean  market,  not  only  on  account  of  the  high  freight,  hut  because  it  would  be  inex|)edient  to  interfere  with 
the  system  of  the  West  India  planters,  who  are  increasing  the  culture  of  these  qualities  of  cotton,  and  be- 
cause it  might  in  some  degree  interfere  with  the  commerce  in  this  article  carried  on  with  China. 