

Til  IGl.^,  Sir  Diidli^y  Digges,  in  reply  to  an  attack  which  had  been  made  upon  the  Company's  trade, 
stated  the  annual  consumption  of  this  country  at  4o(),0001bs.  ])cr  annum.  If  Sir  Dudley  was  correct  in 
this  asM'iiion,  jicppcr  must  have  been  at  that  time  in  more  general  use  tlian  at  subsequent  periods. 

^ In  IGil,  Air.  ]\lnnn  stated  the  annual  consumption  of  Europe  to  be  (),0()0,(X)01bs. 

In  Afalyues,  in  his  “ Centre  of  tlie  Circle  of  Commerce,*'  (piotes  the  cost  price  of  pepper  in  In- 
dia at  "J!d.  j)er  lb.  anil  the  sale  price  at  Is.  8d.  About  this  time  the  price  of  pepper  at  Lisbon  was  2s. 
pi‘r  11).  Tli(‘  Dutch  at  this  period  state  that  jicpper  cost  at  Java  from  5 to  7 dollars  a pccul. 

Among  tlie  expedients  to  whic'h  King  Charles  II.  in  his  necessity  was  compelled  to  have  recourse,  was 
his  obliging  the  Jlast  India  ('oinpany  to  sell  to  the  Crown  the  whole  pepper  which  was  in  theii*  warclioiises, 
amounting  to  (j07,.52‘2  llis  wliich  was  bought  by  the  King  on  credit  ot  2s.  Id.  per  lb.  or  £63^283  11  1. 
This  pepper  w\as  sold  to  dillercnt  merchants  for  ready  money,  at  Is.  8d.  per  lb.  or  d6^50,C26  17  1;  and 
many  years  elapsed  before  the  Company  could  get  their  account  finally  adjusted. 

In  the  seven  years,  from  1(>6I  to  1670,  the  quantity  of  popper  imported  was  9,426,387  lbs.  or  on  an 
average  1,316,669  lbs.  per  annum,  by  which  it  is  e\ident  that,  making  a large  allowance  for  the  home  con- 
suinjition,  there  must  liavc  been  considerable  quantities  exported. 

Ill  167.5-6,  it  appears  that  ginger  had  become  a sub.stitute  for  pepper,  and  the  sale  of  pepper,  in 
Italy,  Tiukcy,  or  the  North  of  Europe  had  failed,  on  account  of  the  wars  in  Poland,  and  the  price  had 
fallen  to  7d.  jier  lb.  in  England.  Tlic  Company  sent  instructions  abroad  fixing  the  purchase  price  at  2|d. 
or  at  the  most  3d.  per  II). 

In  1680,  IMr.  Papillon,  who  wrote  a treatise  on  the  East  India  Trade,  states  the  quantity  of  the  pepper 
annually  consumed  in  this  country  at  1 80,000  lbs.  at  8d.  per  Ih.  i^6,000. 

In  the  infancy  of  the  C'ompuny’s  concerns,  their  investments  of  pepper  were  chiefly  provided  at  Acheen> 
Bantam,  Borneo,  Jambee,  Jacutra,  the  present  Batavia,  Macassar,  Priaman,  Patany,  Siam,  Succadana, 
and  other  jilaces  in  the  eastern  seas.  Their  principal  factory  was  at  Bantam,  to  'which  all  the  othera 
were  Mibonlinate.  Tlie  voyages  were  circuitous,  and  articles  were  bought  and  sold  as  markets  offered. 
After  disposing  of  iMiropean  goods  on  the  Coasts  of  Coromandel  and  Malabar,  they  took  in  some  articles  of 
piece-goods  for  a part  of  their  returning  cargo,  and  others  for  ti'affic  among  the  eastern  islands,  with  which 
they  obtained  pepper  to  complete  their  lading  for  Europe. 