

Pepper  is  produced  on  the  Malabar  Coast,  on  Sumatra,  and  many  other  of  tlie  Eastern  Islands;  it  is 
an  article  in  which  a considerable  trade  is  carried  on  with  the  British  settlements  in  India,  with  China, 
and  with  the  different  maritime  powers  of  Europe. 

The  Malabar  pepper  is  esteemed  the  best;  next  that  of  the  west  coast  of  Sumatra;  and  lastly,  that 
produced  on  the  Malay  Peninsula,  Java,  and  the  neighbouring  islands;  of  the  whole,  that  from  Palembang 
and  from  Borneo,  is  considered  the  worst. 

There  are  two  denominations  of  Pepper  in  commerce,  black  and  white. 

Black  Pepper  is  of  two  sorts,  light  and  heavy;  the  former  in  its  original  state  having  a niimlicr  of  bad 
grains,  sticks,  and  dirt  in  it:  this  is  carried  to  China,  but  should  be  rejected  for  the  European  markets.  I'hat 
which  is  well  garbled  and  clean,  having  the  stalks,  bad  giains,  and  other  impurities  taken  out,  is  denomi- 
nated heavy  pepper,  and  is  the  sort  usually  brought  to  Europe.  Pepper  should  be  chosen  of  a pungent 
smell,  extremely  hot  and  acrid  to  the  taste,  in  large  grains,  firm,  sound,  and  with  few  wrinkles,  of  which 
it  will  always  Iwve  some.  Reject  that  which  is  much  slirivelled  and  small  grained,  or  which,  on  being 
rubbed,  will  break  to  pieces. 

White  Pepper  is  also  of*  two  sorts,  common  and  genuine  : the  former  is  made  by  blanching  the  groins 
of  the  common  black  pepper.  For  this  process  the  best  and  soundest  grains  arc  selected,  and  steeped  in 
water.  In  about  a week  the  skin  bursts,  which  is  aftei’wai'ds  carefully  separated  by  drying  in  the  sun,  rub- 
bing between  the  bands,  and  winnowing.  But  little  of  this  sort  is  jirepared,  the  price  in  England  fluc- 
tuating much,  being  frequently  as  low  as  the  black  pepper ; but  the  w hite  has  this  obvious  recommendation,, 
that  it  can  be  made  of  no  other  than  the  best  and  soundest  grains,  taken  at  the  most  iierfect  slate  of  matu- 
Pity.  The  genuine  white  pepper,  as  it  is  called,  is  composed  of  the  blighted  or  imperfect  grains  picked  in 
small  quantities  from  the  heaps  of  black  pepper,  and  retains  more  of  the  qualities  of  tlie  black  than  the- 
manufactured  sort  does.^ 


PEPPER: 


IVpprr  wan  in  demand  in  England  long  before  the  East  India  Company  was  established;  it  was  ob- 
tained partly  from  Lisbon,  and  partly  through  the  medium  of  the  I.evant  or  Turkey  Company.  The 
suj)ply  from  Lisbon  was  checked  by  the  war  which  took  place  with  Spain  at  the  latter  end  of  the  six- 
teenth century;  and  the  Dutch,  by  supplanting  the  Portuguese,  having  obtained  a considerable  share  in  this 
hrancli  of  eastern  traffic,  the  article  rose  in  the  British  market  from  4s.  to  8s.  per  lb.  In  159'^,  by  the  capture 
ot  tlie  Spanish  carrack,  IVIadre  de  Dios,  a large  quantity  which  formed  part  of  her  cargo,  lowered  the  price 
considerably.  This  capliire  in  a great  degree  led  to  the  detemnnntion  of  entering  upon  a trade  to  the  East 
Indies,  direct  from  this  country.  For  many  years  after  the  Company's  establishment,  pepper  formed  the 
most  iinjiortant  article  of  their  imports.  As  the  early  voyages  were  made  upon  separate  accounts,  it  would 
1)(*  (lillieiilt,  it  not  inipossil)le,  to  ascertain  with  any  degree  of  accuracy  the  quantities  procured,  or  whether 
they  were  nioie  or  less  than  competent  to  the  home  demand;  the  probability  is,  that  England  very  early 
pnrtieipated  in  the  supply  of  the  continent. 