

• Hemp  in  its  rough  state  pays  a duty  of  fis.  per  ton  of  20  cwt.  The  tonnage  is  calculated  at  50  cu- 
bical feet  to  a ton. 

LIGNUM  COLUBRINUM, 

Snake  wood,  or  snake  root,  is  the  wootly  part  of  the  tree  which  produces  Nux  Vomica.  It  is  of  a heavy 
ilose  substance,  covered  with  an  iron  coloured  bark,  of  a yellow  colour  internally  with  whitish  streaks. 
In  rasping  or  scraping,  this  wood  emits  a faint,  but  not  disagreeable  smell;  when  chewed  for  some  time, 
it  discovers  a very  bitter  taste.  It  should  be  chosen  in  ponderous  sound  pieces,  about  a foot  and  a half 
lone  free  from  worms  and  dust.  It  is  seldom  imported  from  the  East  Indies. 

® Oo2 


<84 


MANGOES—NUX  VOMICA— PEACOCKS'  FEATHERS. 


Mi\NGOES. 

This  fruit,  when  fully  ripe,  is  yellowish  or  reddish,  replete  with  a fine  agreeable  juice,  having  a large 
stone;  it  cuts  like  an  apple,  but  more  juicy.  Mangoes  are  sent  to  Eurofie  as  a pickle,  and  are  prepared  in 
the  following  manner;  when  nearly  ripe,  they  are  cut  in  two,  the  kernel  taken  out,  and  the  vacant  space  filled 
with  chillies,  garlic,  ginger.  Sec.  after  which  they  are  put  in  vinegar,  and  sent  as  presents  to  Europe  and 
elsewhere.  They  should  be  chosen  of  a bright  yellow  colour,  firm  and  fleshy,  free  from  fibres,  and  of 
an  agreeable  smell;  and  care  should  be  taken  to  fill  the  cask  full  of  pickle,  or  they  will  be  apt  to  spoil  on 
the  voyage.  The  permanent  duty  is  3s.  per  gallon,  and  the  war  duty  Is.  making  in  the  whole  4s.  per  gallon. 

Mode  of  foncarding  Maogot  Plants  to  Europe. 

The  vegetative  quality  of  the  stone  or  kernel  not  seeming  to  be  long  preserved,  the  readiest  method 
of  obtaining  the  plants  in  Europe  is  to  set  a quantity  of  the  nuts  in  a tub  of  earth,  and  when  the  plants  are 
grown  a foot  high,  to  ship  them,  placing  a covering  to  protect  them  from  the  spray  of  the  sea,  being  very 
careful  not  to  water  them  too  much  on  the  passage.  When  the  ship  arrives  in  a cold  climate,  they  should  be 
screened  from  the  cold. 


NUX  VUMICA 

Is  the  produce  of  a middling  sized  tree,  growing  plentifully  on  the  Malabar  Coast;  the  berry,  or  fruit 
of  which  is  about  the  size  of  an  apple,  covered  with  a hard  shell,  somewhat  resembling  the  pomegranate, 
of  a rich  beautiful  orange  colour  when  ripe;  filled  with  a pulp  eontaining  the  seeds,  or  Nux  Vomiea;  these 
are  flat  and  round,  about  an  inch  broad,  and  of  the  thickness  of  a dollar,  on  both  sides  prominent  in  the 
middle,  of  a grey  colour,  covered  with  a woolly  kind  of  matter,  internally  hard  and  tough  like  horn, 
having  a taste  considerably  bitter,  with  very  little  snwll.  Chuse  such  as  are  large,  clean,  and  new,  free 
from  dust  and  dirt,  rejecting  the  decayed  and  worm-eaten.  An  extract  of  Nux  Vomica  has  been  recently 
imported  from  India;  but  to  what  use  it  has  been  applied,  is  uncertmn. 