


2SS 


eupiiouhhjm 

Is  the  concrete  resinous  juice  of  a pricklyshrub,  grooving  in  Malabar  anti  various  ports  of  India.  It  i< 
in  tears  of  an  irregular  form,  some  of  which  are  found,  on  being  bivken,  to  contain  little  thorns,  twigs,  &c. 
others  are  hollow  without  any  thing  in  the  cavity ; the  tears  are  of  a bright  light  yellow,  between  a straw 
and  a gold  colour  on  the  outside,  and  whitt*  within;  easy  to  break,  having  but  little  smell,  but  the  taste  is 
violently  sharp  and  acrimonious.  It  is  to  be  chosen  dry,  clean,  and  of  a bright  colour ; its  acrid  taste  is 
the  great  mark  of  its  goodness,  and  this  ought  to  be  such  os  to  inilaine  the  whole  mouth,  on  holding  a very 
small  piece  thci'cln  tor  u short  space  of  time. 


FISH  MAWS 

Are  an  article  of  trade  from  various  parts  of  India  to  t'liin.n,  where  they  are  much  esteemed.  In 
chusing  them  care  should  be  taken  that  they  are  properly  cured,  or  they  will  be  subject  to  decay,  and  not 
be  worth  the  freight;  the  largest  are  to  be  preferred. 

rOMUM  INDICUM, 

Or  Malabathrum,  is  sahl  to  be  the  leaf  of  the  cassia  lignea  tree.  The  leaf  is  large,  of  an  oblong 
figure,  smooth  and  glossy  on  tlie  upper  side,  and  less  so  on  the  lower.  Its  colour  is  a dusky  green  on  one 
side,  and  a pule  brown  on  the  other.  It  is  furnished  with  three  ribs,  running  its  whole  length,  very  pro. 
tuberant  on  the  lower  side;  and  it  has  two  smaller  ones  near  the  edges.  Its  smell,  while  fresh,  is  aromatic 
and  aorecable,  somewhat  resembling  that  of  a mixture  of  cloves  and  cinnamon;  its  taste  is  rather  acrid  and 
bitterish,  but  very  aromatic;  when  chewed,  it  renders  the  saliva  slimy  and  glutinous.  The  more  aromatic 
the  flavour,  the  warmer  the  taste,  an<l  the  fresher  and  better,  the  more  it  ia  esteemed. 

8 cwt.  of  Folium  Indicum  is  allowed  to  a ton. 

HEMP. 

The  Island  of  Salsette  produces  two  sorts  of  this  commodity ; one  resembles  the  Bengal  Paut,  the 
leaves  and  young  fruit  of  which  are  used  as  food,  and  the  fibrous  part  employed  in  several  kinds  of  cordage. 
The  other  resembles  the  Sunn  of  Bengal,  and  is  much  esteemed  for  its  strength  and  durability,  being  pre- 
ferable to  that  of  Bengal  for  cotton  ropes,  where  very  great  strength  is  necessary;  it  is  the  best  substitute 
for  hemp  yet  known,  and  could  the  cultivator  be  ensured  a certain  price,  and  a ready  market  for  the  com- 
modity, very  large  quantities  would  be  produced.  It  has  occasionally  been  imported  both  by  the  East 
India  Company  and  individuals ; but  the  heavy  freight  it  is  subject  to,  has  prevented  it  being  a profitable 
remittance.  The  purer  and  cleaner  it  is  when  packed,  the  more  it  is  esteemed. 