

The  jiermanent  duty  on  oil  of  sandal  is  £51  5s.  per  cent,  and  the  temporary  or  W'ar  duty  i?17  Is.  8(1* 
in  all  of  GS  Gs.  8d.  [ler  cent. 


SKSAMUAI. 

Tliis  |)lant  is  small  and  annual,  and  yields  seeds,  from  which  an  oil  is  extracted  in  many  parts  of 
India,  that  will  kcej)  many  years,  and  not  accjuire  any  rancid  smell  or  tasti*,  but  in  two  years  become 
(|uit(^  mild;  so  that  when  theivarm  taste  of  the  seed,  which  is  in  the  oil  when  first  drawn,  is  worn  oftiit  is 
used  for  all  the  purposes  of  salad  oil.  It  is  in  common  use  in  China  and  Japan. 

SHAWLS 

Arc  mjifnufuctured  in  Cashmere,  aii<l  from  tlience  forwarded  to  Surat,  Bengal,  and  other  parts  of  India. 
The  wool  of  which  they  arc  manufactured,  is  not  produced  in  the  couiitiy,  but  brought  from  Thibet;  it 
is  originally  of  a dark  grey  coloui,  and  is  bleuclied  in  C.'ishmerp,  The  yarn  nf  this  wool  is  stain<*d  with  such 
colours  as  may  be  judged  best  Milled  fur  .sale,  and  after  being  woven,  the  piece  is  once  washed.  The  bor- 
ders, which  usually  display  a variety  of  figures  and  colours,  are  attached  to  the  shawls  after  fabrication,  but 
111  so  nice  a manner,  that  the  junction  is  not  discernible.  The  texture  of  the  shawl  resembles  tliat  of  the 
slialloon  of  Ihirope,  to  which  it  has  probably  communicated  its  name.  The  shawls  usually  consist  of  three 
sizes,  two  of  which,  the  long  and  the  small  square,  are  in  common  use  in  India,  and  are  the  sorts  usually  im- 
ported into  England;  the  other,  long  and  very  narrow,  with  a large  mixture  of  black  colour  in  them,  are  w'om 
as  ji  girdh*  by  many  of  the  Asiatics.  They  an'  generally  sold  in  pairs,  and  the  price  varies  according  to  the 
quality,  it  being  considerably  enhanced  by  the  introduction  of  flower-work.  For  the  English  market, 
those  with  coloured  grounds  and  handsome  rich  borders  and  flowers,  are  most  esteemed ; the  plain  white 
shawls  being  closely  imitated  in  England,  are  seldom  in  demand. 

SQUILLS, 

Commonly  called  the  sea-onion,  are  knotty,  crumpled,  bulbous  roots,  like  the  onion ; they  are  large, 
conical,  consisting  of  tlcsliy  scales,  thin  at  each  edge,  surrounded  by  others  diy  and  shining.  They 
shoiihi  be  chosen  plump,  sound,  fj  t sli,  and  full  of  juice,  and  cure’shoiild  be  taken  that  they  are  free  from 
worms;  having  the  outward  skin  teken  off,  of  a jcd  colour,  with  but  little  smell,  full  of  a bitter  clammy 
juice,  nauseous,  acrid,  and  bitter,  and  if  much  handled,  ulcerates  the  skin. 


TURBITH— ZEDOARY. 


m 


TURBITII 

Is  the  cortical  part  of  the  root  of  a species  of  convolvulus,  hroup^ht  from  the  East  Indies  in  ohlnn/; 
pieces  of  a brown  or  ash  colour  on  the  outside,  and  whitish  within.  At  first  it  makes  an  impression  of 
sweetness  on  the  taste,  but  wlien  cliewed  for  some  time,  betrays  a nauseous  aei  imony.  'Die  best  is  pon- 
derous, not  wrinkled,  easy  to  break,  and  discovers  to  the  eye  a large  quantity  of  resinous  matt(‘r. 