

Tlie  prices  at  Fort  Victoria  are  as  follow: 

Bullocks  large,  and  very  good 12  to  14  Rupees  each. 

Iluy  for  ditto,  suffeient  for  a week 1 j to  2 ditto. 

Rice  per  bag  of  .5  maunds 5 to  0 ditto. 

I addy  ditto  2 to  3 ditto. 

Fowls,  of  a middling  size 2 to  3 ditto  per  dozen. 

Iliieks,  2 to  3 ditto  ditto. 

Sheep,  which  are  indifferent  C to  8 Rupees  each. 

Firewood,  including  boat-liire.,.....^^...., 4 Rupees  per  1000  billets 

The  general  mode  of  payment  for  supplies  is  by  draft  on  Bombay,  payable  at  sight 


SEVERNDROOG— GHERIAH. 


59.1 


SEVERNDROOC;* 


Is  a low  island  situated  about  a musket  shot  iVom  the  continent,  hearing  from  llie  entrance  of  Hancoot 
River  S.  E.  distant  4 leagues.  It  was  one  of  the  Pirate  Angrias  principal  fortresses;  it  >n:is  strongly,  hut 
not  regularly  fortified,  the  greatest  part  of  the  works  being  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock,  and  tin*  rest  u Ith 
stones  10  or  12  feet  square,  having  upwards  of  50  guns  mounted  on  the  ramparts.  On  tlie  main  land  tluTe 
were  three  forts,  the  largest  of  which  was  called  Port  Goa,  built  in  the  same  iiuinner,  ^>ith  Uio,.  square 
stones,  and  mounting  40  guns ; the  other  two  were  built  with  stones  of  an  irregular  sliape,  and  v^wh  of  them 
mounting  20  guns.  In  1755  an  Englisli  fleet  under  Commodore  James,  attacked  Sevei  ndroog,  running 
within  100  yards  of  it.  He  in  a few  hours  ruined  the  walls,  and  set  it  on  fire:  a powder  magazine  also  hlow"^ 
ingup,  the  people,  to  the  number  ot  about  1000,  abandoned  the  place,  and  embarking  in  boats,  attianpted 
to  make  their  escajic  to  Fort  Goa,  but  were  all  intercepted,  and  made  prisoners  I»y  the  Fn.dish.  The 
whole  force’s  being  then  turned  upon  (loa,  a white  flag  was  soon  hung  out  as  a signal  to  suin  nder.  The 
Governor  however  passed  over  to  Severndroog,  where  he  hoped  to  he  able  to  maintain  his  ground,  not- 
withstanding the  ruinoas  state  of  the  fortifications.  The  fire  was  now  renewed  against  this  fiitrcss*  and 
the  seamen  of  the  fleet  having  cut  a passage  through  one  of  the  gates  with  their  axrvs,  the  garrison’  soon 
siiiiendcred.  About  the  same  time  tlie  two  other  forts  on  the  main  surrendered  to  the  Afahrallas;  so  that 
four  of  Angela’s  forts,  which  had  for  a series  of  years  been  diH’med  impre  gnable,  were  reduced  in  one  day. 
The  island  was  given  up  to  the  Mahrattas,  who  still  retain  possession. 


GHERIAII. 

Gherlah  Point  and  flagstaff  arc  In  latitude  16o  31"  North;  and  the  fort  at  the  entrance  of  the  harbour 
about  a mile  furtlicr  to  the  northward.  The  point  which  forms  the  south  side  of  the  enlranci*,  is  higli  and 
bluff,  and  is  in  longitude  25  East.  The  flagstaff  stands  on  a hill  to  the  southward  of  the  fort,  and 
may  be  seen  a considerable  distance.  The  harbour  is  excellent,  the  vessels  in  it  being  landlocked,  and 
sheltered  from  all  winds.  There  is  no  bar  at  the  entrance,  the  depths  tiiere  being  from  5 to  7 fathoms, 
and  from  3 to  4 fathoms  inside  at  low  water. 