

QH 


SOS 


GOA. 


thereupon  gave  it  every  strength  by  increasing  the  fortifications,  and  encouraging  commerce.  It  flourished 
for  a scries  of  years  with  unrivalled  splendour,  and  became  the  centre  of  the  riclies  of  India,  and  one  of 
the  greatest  marts  in  the  universe. 

Goa  contains  a great  number  of  handsome  churches  and  convents,  with  a large  hospital,  well  endowed^ 
and  kept  in  good  repair.  In  one  of  these  churches,  dedicated  to  Bon  Jesus,  is  the  chapel  of  St.  Francis 
ile  Xavier,  whose  tomb  it  contains.  This  chapel  is  a most  superb  and  magnificent  place.  The  tomb  is  entirely 
of  fine  black  marble,  brought  from  Lisbon;  on  the  four  sides  of  it,  the  principal  actions  of  the  life  of 
the  Saint  are  most  elegantly  carved  in  basso  relievo:  these  represent  his  converting  the  difierent  nations 
to  the  Catholic  faith ; the  figure  is  done  to  the  life,  and  most  admirably  executed.  It  extends  to  the  top 
in  a pyraniidical  form,  which  t(Tminatos  with  a coronet  of  mother  o'pearl.  On  the  sides  of  the  chapel 
arc  many  excellent  paintings.  This  tomb  and  chapel  are  justly  esteemed  the  greatest  rarity  in  the  place. 

At  present  it  is  garrisoned  by  the  British  troops. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Accounts  arc  kept  in  pardos,  tangas,  vintiiis,  and  budgerooks,  but  there  are  good  and  bad  of  each 
kind;  1 pardo  is  worth  4 good  or  5 bad  tangas,  16  good  vintins,  or  20  bad;  the  pardo  is  also  divided  into 
240  good  or  300  bad  rCas. 

3'Jie  current  coins  are,  the  St.  Thome,  a gold  piece  which  passes  for  1 1 good  tangas  ; it  weighs 
grains  troy,  and  is  of  the  purity  of  18  carats,  and  worth  about  6s.  8d.  sterling. 

The  silver  coin  is  the  pardo,  which  is  of  two  sorts  : the  Pardo  Xerapldin  passes  current  for  5 good 
tangas  each,  about  7}d.  sterling;  and  the  common  pardo  for  4 tangas;  the  former  has  on  one  side  a figure 

of  St.  Sebastian,  and  on  the  other  a sJieaf  of  arrows. 

The  budgerook  is  made  nf  tin,  having  on  one  side  a globe,  and  on  the  other  two  arrows  crossed. 

Spanish  dollars,  Venetians,  Rupees,  and  all  other  foreign  coins  pass  current  here,  but  the  price  fluctuates 
'according  to  the  quantity  in  the  market. 

Weights.— The  ipiiiital  of  4 arobas  is  in  common  use,  but  they  have  the  Indian  candy  thus  divided: 

lb.  oz.  *lrs. 

1 Rattle  { is  equal  to  avolrdupois^^^*^  10  8 

24  Rattles  V make  l 1 Maund  24  12  0 

20  Maunclii  * ^ ^ Candy  495  0 0 

COMMERCE. 

The  trade  carried  on  by  the  Portuguese  is  very  trifling,  compared  with  what  it  formerly  was.  There  are 
seldom  more  than  three  ships  sent  from  Portugal  to  India  in  the  year,  and  these  generally  proceed  to 
the  llritish  settlements,  to  complete  their  cargoes  for  Europe.  ^ ^ 