

10  cwt.  of  I'urhlth  are  allowed  to  the  ton.  The  ]K'rinaiient  duty  is  i’S  Ss.per  cwt.  ami  tlie  temporary 
or  war  duty  £2  10s.  making  in  the  wliole  I’ll  is.  per  cwt. 

ZKDOAUV 

Is  produced  in  Ceylon  and  Malabar,  and  brought  from  thence  in  fddong  pieces  of  a modei  ate  tliiek- 
ncss,  and  two  or  three  inches  long,  or  in  roundish  pieces  about  an  inch  i)i  diameter,  extenuiMy  wiinkled, 
and  of  an  ash  colour,  but  internally  of  a hrownisli  red ; its  .smell  is  ngreeahio,  and  its  taste  aromatie  and 
somewhat  bitter;  it  impregnates  water  with  its  smell,  a slight  l)itterm“'S,  a considerable  warmth  and  pun- 
gency, and  a yellowi.sh  brown  colour.  Cliii.se  such  roots  as  are  heavy  and  lV(‘e  from  worms,  njecting  llutso 
wliich  are  decayed  and  broken. 

10  cwt.  of  Zedoary  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £[>  Is.  per  cent,  and  tlic  tcinporaiy 
or  war  duty  £1  8s.  making  in  tlio  whole  £5  12s.  per  cent. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Coast  of  Concan. 


Coailuf  Cuiican;  ih  Kxhnt—hatitool,  or  Fort  Victoria— Scverndroog—Ghtrinh— Description ; JlfelunJy,or 
Mala-un  Pirates  Ooa  ; Description — and  Measures — Commerce— Commerce  betiecen 
the  Coast  of  Concan  and  the  British  Settlements — Historical  Facts  relative  to  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the 
Discocerics  and  Compicsts  of  the  Portuguese  in  the  East  Indies. 


THE  western  side  of  the  Peniiisiila  of  Indio  is  generally  rolled  the  Malabar  Coast.  This  appellation 
belongs  proj)erly  to  the  southern  part,  for  the  whole  extent  eompreliends  three  province.s,  viz.  Conean, 
Catiara,  and  Malabar.  Tlic  Coast  of  Concan  is  the  northernmost,  extending  to  Cape  Ramus. 

BANCOOT. 

Bancoot  River,  in  latitude  17°  .57  North,  and  longitude  73°  9 Ea-st,  is  about  lamflcs  East  of  Bombay: 
it  has  10  feet  on  tlie  bar  at  low  water,  and  on  spring  tides  21  feet.  The  channel  is  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  entrance  of  the  l iver ; but  being  narrow,  ought  not  to  be  approached  without  a pilot.  The  anchorage 
for  large  ships  is  in  .5  fathoms  abreast  of  the  fort.  Upon  the  south  side  of  the  entrance  of  the  river, 
and  on  a very  high  hill,  stands  l-’ort  Victoria,  commanded  by  a resident,  and  a company  of  sepoys, 
besides  a number  of  hx  als,  who  live  in  or  near  the  Fort.  This  place  was  taken  from  Angela  by 
the  j;ngli.sh  in  175.5,  and  remains  in  their  possession.  The  object  of  the  Bombay  Government  in  retain, 
ing  po.ssession  ot  Hanroot  and  its  dependencies  was,  to  protnire  live  provisions,  and  in  particular  homed 
cattle.  The  ihief  supply  got  for  the  marine,  was  from  theSiddec's  country,  to  which  Bancoot  is  contiguous. 
It  was  a port  of  great  trmie  before  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  Angria,  but  at  present  it  is  very  insignificant! 
Ships  occasionally  stop  here,  and  send  their  boats  on  shore  to  procure  bullocks,  which  are  far  superior  to 
those  purchased  at  Bombay;  and  when  homeward  bound  from  Bombay,  a supply  of  cattle  and  poultry  may 
be  secured  by  application  to  the  resident,  and  appointing  some  conspicuous  signal,  that  the  ship  may  be 
known  on  her  appearance  off  the  river,  svhen  the  stores  are  immediately  sent  off, 