

The  fort  of  Gheriuh  stands  on  a promontory  of  rocky  land,  about  a mile  long,  and  a quarter  I)rond. 
Nearly  a mile  from  the  entrance  of  the  harbour,  which  forms  the  mouth  of  a largo  river,  tiie  promontory 
projects  to  the  S.W.  on  the  right  of  the  harbour,  and  on  the  sides  contiguous  to  the  water  is  endosc’d  by 
a continued  rock,  about  50  feet  high,  on  which  the  fortifications  are  built ; these  arc  a double  wall 
with  round  towers,  the  inward  wall  rising  several  feet  above  the  outward.  The  neck  of  land  by  which 
the  promontory  joins  to  the  continent,  is  a narrow  sand,  beyond  which,  where  the  ground  expands,  is 
a large  open  town,  or  pettah.  The  river  directing  its  course  to  the  S.AV.  w aslies  the  north  .side  of  the 
town,  the  neck  of  land,  and  the  promontory.  On  the  neck  of  land  arc  docks,  where  grabs  are  built  and 
repaired. 

Gheriab  was  the  capital  of  Angria  the  Pirate,  whose  dominions  at  one  period  extended  to  witfiiii 
a few  miles  of  Bombay,  about  150  miles  to  the  southw^ard,  and  from  30  to  GO  in  breadth.  'J’his  pii  atic/il 
state  had  for  upwards  of  50  years  rendered  itself  formidable  to  the  trading  ships  of  ail  tlig  European  nutiuns 
in  India,  and  the  English  Company  had  kept  up  a marine  force  at  a considerable  annual  cxpciiee,  to  pro- 
tect their  own  ships,  and  those  of  the  merchants  established  in  their  settlements. 

In  1717  an  unsuccessfbl  attempt  was  made  upon  Gheriah  from  Bombay  by  aVinsiderabJe  naval  force, 
with  a numerous  body  of  land  forces  on  board.  In  1735  the  Dutch  sent  a strong  force  from  Batavia,  to 
attack  it,  in  which  they  were  defeated.  In  1736  Angria's  vessels  took  tlie  Derby  East  Indiaman,  ricldj 


MELUNDY,  OR  MALWAN. 


SPG 

Jaden,  ulsi)  the  Restoration  armed  ship  of  20  guns  and  200  men,  fitted  out  purj)0seljr  to  cruise  against  them, 
and  several  of  less  note  from  the  (’ompanv.  From  the  French  they  took  the  Jupiter,  of  JO  guns,  with  400 
slaves  on  hoard,  and  also  made  seviral  captures  from  the  Dutch.  They  had  the  presumption  to  attack 
Commodore  Idsle  in  the  Vigilant  of  (it  guns,  the  Ruby  of  50,  and  several  other  ships  in  company.  In 
1751  tlic  Bombay  Government  proposed  to  the  Mahrattas  the  reduction  of  Gheriah,  and  a tieaty  was 
fonfludcd  Ix’twcen  them  for  the  purpose,  whenever  there  should  he  a proper  opportunity,  TJ»e  necessity 
of  this  treaty  was  soon  j)ci  ceivcd;  lor  in  FebruJiry,  1754,  Angria's  fleet  attacked  three  Dutcli  ships  of  5(>, 
.‘l(i,  and  IS  gnus,  hiirnt  th(»  two  large  ones,  and  took  the  other.  Angria  grew  insolent  on  this  success,  built 
several  ves^scls,  se  t two  large  ships  on  the  stocks,  and  boasted  he  should  soon  be  master  of  the  Indian  seas. 