

*1  he  city  ol  Goa  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  an  island  about  twelve  miles  long  and  six  broad,  sevcai 
miles  from  the  entrance  of  the  river.  Halfway  between  Aigoada  and  Goa  is  a large  town,  at  which  the 
V^iceroy  or  Governor  General  has  a residence.  The  many  buildings  on  each  side  ihe  river,  which  is  very 
broad,  makes  a splendid  appearance,  particularly  the  convents,  being  generally  placed  in  elev.ated  situations. 
In  the  centre  of  the  city  is  a noble  square,  in  which  are  the  cathedral,  the  Viceroy’s  palace,  the  Jesuits’ 
convent,  and  the  Inquisition,  all  of  which  are  fine  buildings.  The  two  last  have  been  shut  uj)  since  the 
suppression  of  the  Jesuits.  The  city  is  hwge,  the  streets  straight,  the  houses  regularly  and  hand.soiuely 
built  of  stone,  in  the  European  style,  many  of  them  large  and  magnificent,  but  uniiihabiti^d. 

On  the  arrival  of  the  Portuguese  on  the  Malabar  f’oast,  Goa  was  a most  ojinhuit  place,  and  well 
fortified.  It  was  subject  to  Zabaim,  a potent  monarch,  who  w as  then  engaged  in  war  with  several  tributary 
Princes.  Timoia,  a neighbouring  pirate,  who  had  submitted  to  the  rortuguese,  strongly  ndvi.si'd  the  great 
Albuquerque  to  seize  the  opportunity  of  attacking  Goa,  represented  its  great  opulence,  and  the  honour 
and  wealth  that  would  attend  hissucces.s.  The  Portuguese  listened  to  his  advice,  and  after  several  assaults, 
made  himself  master  of  the  city,  by  an  agreement  with  the  inhabitants.  This  h;q)pened  on  February  ICJtli, 
ISIO.  The  citizens  took  the  oaths  of  allegiance  to  King  Emanuel.  He  found  in  tlie  jdacc  imntcn.se 
quantites  of  ammunition,  forty  gi’eat  cannon,  in  the  dock.s  forty  men  of  war,  and  in  the  stables  numlx'i  s 
of  fine  Persian  and  Arabian  horses.  A mutinous  spirit  pervading  the  Porlugircse  army,  this  naturally 
infected  their  new  subjects,  who  repenting  their  disloyalty,  conveyed  their  sentiments  to  their  late  Sove- 
reign. He  assembled  a large  army  on  the  continent ; and,  notwithstanding  every  endeavour  of  Albu(|uer(jue, 
effected  a landing  on  the  island.  The  Portuguese  defended  themselves  witli  great  valour;  luit  finding  the 
place  no  longer  tetiable,  their  commander  determined  to  retire,  lie  einbaikcd  with  great  seen  cy  iveiy 
thing  that  was  necessary ; when  on  the  30th  of  May  of  the  same  year,  after  a sliort  conlliet,  he  madt*  good 
his  retreat  to  Rapander,  a neighbouiing  town,  where  he  resolved  to  winter.  Zabaim  proved  a In  ave  and 
active  enemy,  and  compelled  Albuquerque  to  remove  his  quarters  several  times.  At  leiiglh  receiving  a strong 
reinforcement  of  Portuguese  and  other  supplies,  he  renewed  his  attempt  on  Goa,  aiul  ai'ter  scver.il  sharp 
actions,  made  himself  again  master  of  the  city,  by  a most  fierce  and  bloody  as«ault,  the  delence  bring 
equally  obstinate  with  the  attack,  since  , which  period  it  has  remained  in  their  possession,  Albuquenpie 