

Tliey  sail  without  any  written  commission,  and  with  instructions,  it  is  understood,  to  take  all 
vessels  that  they  can  master,  except  those  having  English  colours  and  passes.  Sometimes,  liowever, 
they  are  regardless  of  the  English  protection,  which  they  thus  contrive  to  evade.  One  pirate  boat  boards 
the  intended  prey,  and  demands  her  pass ; and  while  some  person  pretends  to  read  it,  others  pick  a 
quarrel  with  some  of  the  crew,  and  comiiience  a scuffle,  in  which  the  pass  is  removed  or  destroyed; 
however,  they  take  kkt  little,  perhaps  nothing,  and  depart.  Soon  after  another  pirate  boards  her, 
and  finding  no  pass,  pretends  that  the  reasons  offered  for  its  absence,  are  lies,  and  takes  all.  In  these 
cases  complaint  is  of  course  made  by  the  plundered  owner  to  the  Bombay  Government,  and  restitution 
u demanded,  and  generally  made  without  much  demur. 


GOA. 


297 


BetTreen  Melundy  and  the  entrance  to  Goa  River,  are  the  forts  of  Newtce,  Roree,  Chiracole,  and 
Chapra;  the  two  latter  belong  to  the  Portuguese,  but  seldom  shew  their  colours  to  ships  |)assing. 

GOA 

Is  the  capital  of  the  Portuguese  possessions  in  the  Past  Indies,  the  seat  of  the  \ iceroy,  Ihe  sec  of  an 
Archbishop,  who  is  primate  of  the  East,  and  tlie  supreme  court  of  judicature  for  all  the  I’orlugiKse  in  Asia, 
and  to  which  all  others  are  subordinate.  Algoadu  Point,  in  latitude  lo^  29  North,  and  longitude  7 J 
Eas^  forms  the  northern  extremity  of  Goa  Buy;  it  has  a lighthouse  and  small  fort  on  it,  but  tlie  principal 
forti$  situated  close  to  the  sea,  on  the  S.  E.  side  ol  the  headland,  where  there  is  a well  of  excellent  water, 
from  which  the  shipping  is  supplied.  Nostra  Senhora  de  la  Cabo,  a large  monastery,  of  a white  appeuruiiee, 
is  situjited  on  the  summit  of  tire  bluff'  point  of  land,  about  2}  miles  S.  J-:.  of  Aigoada,  which  forms  the 
south  side  of  the  bay.  The  common  anchorage  is  abreast  Aigoada  Port,  the  llagstaff  beming  about  Nortli, 
at  half  a mile  distance  from  the  shore. 

The  btu-  at  the  entrance  of  the  river  is  about  two  miles  to  tlie  eastward  of  Aigoada  Point,  ha^lng  l(i 
or  18  feet  on  it  at  high  water  springtides;  but  the  bottom  about  it  being  haid  and  rocky,  aiul  the  clmniu  l 
winding  and  intricate,  a ssliip  ought  not  to  enter  the  river  witliout  u jillot.  ARcr  the  early  pait  of  Muy 
it  is  con.sidered  unsafe  to  remain  at  the  anchorage  in  the  road  ; tiie  Poiingiiese  then  bcnd  llicir  large  ship.s 
that  cannot  go  into  tlie  river,  to  Murinagon  roads,  4*  or  5 mile.s  to  the  southward  of  Aigoada  fort,  wlicje 
they  are  sheltered  from  the  S.  VV.  monsoon,  by  mooring  close  under  the  N.  K.  side  of  that  |)eiiinsuia. 