

SANDAL  WOOD. 

Tlie  tree  which  produces  sandal  wood,  grows  only  on  the  Malabar  Coast,  the  Island  of  Timor,  and  one 
or  two  islands  in  the  eastein  seas ; but  the  Malabar  is  the  best.  The  tree  bos  something  of  the  appearance 
of  a large  myrtle,  with  stilf  branches ; its  leaves,  which  ore  about  two  inches  long,  and  three  quarters  of 


SANDAL  WOOD. 


an  moil  broad,  are  like  those  of  the  privet,  smooth  and  shining;  It  bears  a small  i cd  flower,  and  the  berry  is 
about  the  size  of  a pea,  smooth,  juicy,  and  black,  when  ripe.  The  common  size  of  the  tree  at  the  root, 
when  it  is  cut,  is  about  nine  inches  in  diameter,  but  sometimes  considerably  larger.  Wlien  the  trees  are 
felled,  the  bark  is  taken  ofl’;  they  are  then  cut  into  billets,  and  buried  in  a dry  jdm'e  for  two  months,  during 
which  period  the  white  ants  will  eat  the  outer  wood  without  touching  tlie  heart,  which  i>  the  sand.il;  it  i> 
then  taken  up  and  smootlied,  and  according  to  their  size,  sorted  into  three  kinds.  The  deeper  llie  colour, 
the  higher  is  the  perfume;  and  hence  the  merchants  sometimes  divide  sandal  into  r(*d,  yellow,  and  white; 
but  these  are  all  diflTerent  sliadcs  of  the  same  colour,  and  do  not  arise  from  any  diflerence  in  the  .species  of 
the  tree.  Tlie  nearer  the  root,  in  general  the  higher  is  tlie  perfume.  Tlie  billet  ucuresl  tlie  root  is  com- 
monly called  root-sandal,  and  is  of  a superior  <juality. 

Sandal  wood  is  sorted  into  three  sizes.  Before  the  year  1707,  that  was  reckoned  of  the  first  siz  •,  of 
which  35  billets  made  a candy  of  5G01b.'4.;  the  second  size  45  pieces,  and  the  third  size,  55  pieces.  Since 
the  year  1797,  the  sizes  have  been  reduced;  tlie  first  sort  now  contains  (>5,  the  second  .sort  7^2,  and  the 
third  sort  90  pieces  to  a candy:  all  pieces  smaller  than  these,  all  irnt  and  knotty  piece's,  whalevir  may  be 
their  size,  together  with  t*uttings,  roots,  and  the  like,  arc  called  Carippn,  and  form  n fouilli  soil.  The 
chips  which  are  removed  in  polishing  the  logs,  form  a fifth  ussortnunt  The  three  first  only  are  sent 
to  China.  The  Carippu  is  chiefly  sent  to  Bengal  and  Muscat,  and  the  chips  to  ( ’ntch  and  ^Muscat. 

The  produce  of  the  coast  is  said  to  be  about  2000  candies  per  annum,  sonulimes  mori'.  'J'he  (’ompany 
used  to  send  about  BOO  candies  to  China;  all  the  remainder  was  sent  by  pi  ivate  trade  rs  to  Bengal,  Bom!)ay, 
Cutch  and  Muscat.  The  Company’s  resident  makes  the  purchase  from  the  nu'rchants  on  the  sea-coast  for 
ready  money.  These  have  always  on  hand  a considerable  stock,  as  sandal  rather  improi  es  by  keeping. 

The  prices  paid  on  account  of  the  Company  from  1794  to  1800  wtjc  as  folloiv: 