

In  175(i  an  Faiglish  licet  of  four  sail  of  t!ic  line,  several  frigates,  and  the  Company's  marine  vessels, 
under  Adiniial  Watson,  with  alwut  2000  troops  on  board,  aided  by  the  Mahratta  fleet  and  army,  attacked 
(iheriah,  which  soon  surrendered,  and  was  taken  possession  of  by  the  British  forces.  There  were  found  in 
the  place  200  pieces  of  cannon  and  six  brass  mortars,  a great  quantity  of  ammunition,  military  and  naval 
stores  of  all  kinds,  besides  money  and  efiTt^cts  to  the  amount  of  i?l 25,000,  which  were  divided  among  the 
captors,  without  any  reserve  either  for  the  nation  or  the  Company.  Angria’s  fleet,  which  consisted  of  eigiit 
grabs  and  a great  number  of  gallivats,  were  destroyed,  as  also  two  large  ships  upon  the  stocks,  one  of 
wliieli  was  intended  to  carry  forty  guns. 

It  was  given  up  to  the  Alahrattas,  who  have  held  it  ever  since. 

MELUNDY,  OH  MALWAN. 

This  island  is  in  latitude  IG'^  3 North,  and  is  the  principal  place  of  the  pirates  on  this  coast;  it  is 
strongly  foitifieil,  and  tliei  e is  a considerable  fort  on  the  main  land  near  it,  to  protect  their  vessels.  These 
pirates  are  called  Malwaas,  an<l  are  a very  cruel  race.  None  hut  the  Rajah  fits  out  vessels,  which  are  of 
three  kinds,  gallivats,  sliehars  and  grabs:  the  first  have  in  general  two  masts,  and  are  decked  fore  and  aft, 
have  square  topsails  and  top-gnllunt  sails,  and  are  rigged  mostly  after  the  European  fashion.  The  shebar 
is  also  of  two-mast’<,  the  atler-mast  and  bowsprit  very  short;  they  have  no  topmasts,  and  very  little  ngging, 
and  aie  not  decked  ; their  largest  sail  is  extended  on  a yard  of  very  great  length,  running  up  to  a point, 
many  feet  higher  than  theina>t;  they  sail  well,  and  arc  fine  vessels  in  fair  weather  and  smooth  water; 
many  of  them  are  of  more  than  150  tons  burthen.  The  grab  is  distinguished  from  other  vessels  by  having, 
jiiNteail  of  bows,  a projecting  prow;  they  arc  decked,  and  have  either  two  or  three  masts,  and  are  rigged 
in  the  luiropean  maiiiK'r.  I'lucli  of  the  Rnjalfs  vessels,  of  all  of  these  descriptions,  carries  eight  or  ten  small 
larriage  guns,  and  about  1(K)  men.  Their  general  rendezvous  is  Pigeon  Island.  On  leaving  port,  each 
pirate  lasear  receives  two  rupees,  the  serang  eight,  and  on  their  return  they  get  corn,  according  to  their 
success,  and  3 or  I rupees,  ami  more  corresponding  with  their  rank  and  good  fortune.  Their  cruise  seldom 
exceeds  fil’leen  days.  All  prizes  are  the  property  of  tlie  Rajah,  wdio  is  at  the  sole  expence  of  tlie  outfit.  The 
vessels  taken  are  seldom  retained,  unless  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  ser^dee;  the  cargo  becomes  tlie  Rajah's 
property,  and  ihi*  vessel  is  reh’nsed. 