

1492.  In  this  year  Columbus,  in  the  .service  of  the  King  of  Spain,  discovered  the  continent  of 
America,  the  sovereignty  of  which  he  claimed  for  that  Monarch,  and  by  a bull,  dated  May  4th,  1493. 
the  Pope  Alexander  VI.  confirmed  his  title,  and  strictly  prohibited  all  persons  whatever,  on  pain  of  ex- 
communication,  to  touch  at  any  port  or  place  within  the  limits  of  a line  wliich  he  decreed  to  be  drawn 
from  pole  to  pole,  at  the  distance  of  100  leagues  to  the  westward  of  the  Azores,  without  leave  of  the 
Spaniards.  The  Portuguese  were  dissatisfied  with  this  decree;  and  by  an  adjustment  between  the  two 
Crowns,  which  took  place  on  the  7th  of  June,  1493,  it  was  agreed  that  the  imaginary  line  should  be  ex- 
tended 270  leagues  farther  westward  of  the  Azores,  and  that  all  future  discoveries  made  eastward  of  the 
aaid  line,  should  belong  to  the  Portuguese,  and  all  westward  to  Spain. 

1493.  Bartholomew  Diaz,  a person  remarkable  for  prudence,  and  skill  in  navigation,  was  em- 
ployed by  the  King  of  Portugal  to  proceed  along  the  South  Coast  of  Africa,  which  he  accordingly 
trailed  till  he  reached  a liigh  cape,  which  he  doubled,  and  sailed  a good  way  beyond  it;  ho  gave  it  the 
name  of  Cabo  Tormentoso,  or  the  Cape  of  Storms,  from  the  boisterou.s  weather  he  experienced  near  it. 
On  his  return  to  Portugal,  tlie  King  changed  its  name  to  Cabo  Bona  ICspcranza,  or  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  which  name  it  has  ever  since  retained. 

1497.  The  narrative  of  Diaz,  with  the  accounts  of  the  Indian  Peninsula  and  commerce  transmitted 
by  Covillam,  confirmed  the  opinion  which  had  been  long  entertained  of  the  practicability  of  opening  a 
passage  to  India,  by  sailing  round  the  southern  extremity  of  Africa.  The  Portuguese  therefore  equipped 
a squadron  of  four  ships  under  Vasco  de  Gama.  They  sailed  from  Lisbon  on  Friday,  July  8th,  1497,  rounded 
the  Cajie  of  Good  Hope,  November  20th;  and  having  proceeded  along  the  coast  as  far  as  the  River 
Cuama,  or  Good  Signs,  they  hove  down  and  repaired  tlieir  ships,  and  left  it  on  the  22d  of  January,  1498. 
On  the  1st  of  March  they  discovered  Mosambique,  where  they  had  a narrow  escape  from  being  cut  off  by  the 
Moors.  On  the  7th  of  April  they  arrived  at  Moinbas,  and  on  the  13th  at  Melinda ; at  the  latter  place  they 
were  received  in  a friendly  manner,  and  supplied  with  a pilot  for  the  Indies;  on  the  20th  of  May,  1498,  they 
arrived  at  Calicut,  and  met  with  a favourable  reception;  but  the  misrepresentations  of  the  Moors,  whose 
commerce  was  endangered  by  the  arrival  of  the  Portuguese,  had  such  an  effect  on  the  Samorin, 
Or  King,  that  he  began  to  lay  snares  for  their  destruction.  Do  Gama  had  early  intelligence  of  his  designs; 
he  therefore  hastened  on  board  his  ship,  and  wrote  a letter  to  the  Samorin,  complaining  of  tin's  breach 
of  faith*  The  Samorin  returned  a polite  answer,  laying  the  blame  on  his  ministers  and  the  Maho-^ 
metaiUt  and  added  a letter  to  the  King  of  Portugal,  wherein  he  accepted  the  propositions  made  him,  and 