


302 


HISTORICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


promised  ft  free  trade  to  his  subjects.  De  Gama  thereupon  proceeded  to  Aiijediva,  wliere  having  repaired 
his  vessels,  ho  sailed  for  Europe*.  On  the  2()th  of  March,  MlH),  he  doubled  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  in 
the  month  of  September  arrived  safe  at  Lisbon,  after  a voyage  of  two  years  and  ten  months. 

1500.  The  second  Portuguese  fleet  for  India,  consisting  of  13  ships,  under  Cabral,  sailed  from  the 
Tagus  March  9th,  1500,  and  discovered  the  Coast  of  Brazil  April  24th.  They  experienced  very  tempes- 
tuous weather  oft  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in  which  several  of  their  ships  were  lost.  In  one  of  them  was 
Bartholomew  Diaz,  who  first  rounded  the  Capt*.  They  visited  Mosambique,  Quiloa,  and  Melinda,  and 
arrived  at  Calicut  September  13th.  The  Samorin  sent  to  compliment  Cabral  on  his  arrival,  and  invited  him 
on  shore.  On  his  landing  he  was  kindly  received,  and  permission  granted  to  build  a factory ; but  in  conse- 
quence of  the  Samorlrfs  intentions  being  n'prcsented  as  mischievous,  the  Portuguese  General  commenced 
hostilities  by  seizing  the  ships  in  the  roads.  The  inhabitants  thus  provoked,  attacked  the  factory,  forced 
the  gates,  pillaged  and  bunit  the  house,  and  of  60  people  that  were  in  it,  murdered  50;  the  remainder  with 
difliculty  escaped  on  board  their  ships.  The  Portuguese  took  ample  revenge  by  burning  ten  vessels  richly 
laden  in  the  port,  making  slaves  of  their  crews,  and  battering  tlie  town  by  their  artillery;  after  whicli  they 
proceeded  to  (^ochiii,  olf  whieli  place  tlu'y  arrived  December  20tli,  1500,  concluded  a treaty  with  the  Prince, 
and  settling  a factory,  obtained  cargoes  for  their  ships,  and  on  January  10th,  1501,  sailed  for  Europe,  where 
they  arrived  on  July  31st,  having  on  board  ambassadors  from  Cochin,  Quilon,  and  Cananore.  Of  the 
ships  which  sailed  under  Cabral  six  only  returned,  the  others  having  been  lost  in  tlie  coui-se  of  the  voyage. 
On  his  passage  to  hhiropc,  Cabral  si  ttled  factories  at  Melinda,  Mombas,  and  Querimba,  ami  compelled 
several  of  the  Ihinces  on  the  East  Coast  of  Africa  to  become  trilmtary  to  the  Portuguese. 

1502,  Vasco  de  Gama  sailed  a second  time  for  India,  with  a fleet  of  20  ships  from  the  Tagus.  March 
3d  vibiU'd  Sofala,  and  being  kindly  received,  obtained  leave  to  settle  a factory.  He  then  sailed  for  Mosam* 
bi(pie,  where  he  experienced  a kinder  reception  than  on  his  former  voyage,  and  likewise  obtained 
permission  to  settle  a factory.  On  July  12th  he  arrived  at  Quiloa,  whose  Prince  became  tributary  to 
liiin.  He  then  proceeded  to  Cananore,  concluded  a treaty  of  commerce,  loaded  some  of  his  ships,  and  then 
departed  for  Calicut,  which  lie  cannonaded,  destroying  many  of  the  houses,  and  the  palace,  and  took  several 
ahips  in  the  roads,  wdiosc  cargoes  were  of  considerable  value;  he  then  returned  to  Cananore,  from  whence 
lie  sailed  for  Europe  December  20th,  1503,  and  arrived  at  Lisbon  September  1st,  1504, 