

1519.  The  Spaniards  laid  claim  to  Banda,  and  the  Malacca  Islands,  as  falling  within  the  line  laid 
down  by  the  Poj)e  in  1493.  The  Emperor  (.'harles  V.  employed  Ferdinand  Magellan  to  explore  them 
by  a new  route  westward,  through  the  straits  which  bear  his  name.  In  Ins  way  he  discovered  the 
Philippine  Islands,  where  he  lost  his  life  in  a skirmish  with  the  natives.  The  ships  reached  Tidore,  and 


S04 


HISTORICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


returned  home  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  This  was  the  first  voyage  made  round  the  world.  The 
Spaniards  made  many  unsuccessful  attempts  to  obtain  possession  of  the  Moluccas ; at  length  the  King  of 
Portugal  lent  the  Emperor,  his  brotlier-in-luw,  350,000  ducats,  on  condition  of  Iiis  not  being  disturbed 
therein  till  the  money  was  repaid,  wlikli  was  never  done,  nor  has  Spain  ever  renewed  the  claim. 

1520.  The  islands  of  Bahreen  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  Catif,  subjected  to  the  Portuguese. 

1521.  A fleet  was  sent  against  Diu,  but  finding  it  strongly  fortified,  the  attack  was  abandoned.  Tliia 
year  the  Portuguese  l)uilt  a fort  at  TcTiiate,  and  found  the  Spaniards  had  obtained  possession  of  Tidorc. 

The  trade  with  (.’Iiina  liaving  been  secured  by  the  means  of  Andrada,  his  brother  Simon  in  this  year 
obtained  leave  to  proceed  thither  with  five  ships;  but  in  conse(|Ucnce  of  the  misconduct  of  the  Portuguese, 
•the  Chinese  massacred  the  greater  part  of  them,  and  the  rest  escaped  to  Malacca. 

The  spice  trade  was  at  this  period  so  advantageous,  that  De  Witt,  in  his  “ Interest  of  Holland,”  says 
it  yielded  the  King  of  Portiigal  above  200,000  ducats  yearly ; he  also  observes  tliat  when  the  spice  trade 
centered  in  Calicut,  the  great  staj)le  of  India,  and  ^vas  carried  to  Bussorah  and  Egypt,  and  from  thence 
to  ("airo  by  caravans,  and  shippi'd  for  Europe,  tlie  Sultans  of  Syria  and  Egypt,  through  whose  dominions' 
they  passed,  derived  an  annual  revenue  of  80,000  ducats  in  customs. 

The  Venetians  having  for  centuries  enjoyed  the  sole  commerce  in  spices,  till  lately  deprived  of  it  by 
the  Portuguese,  made  at  this  time  an  eflbrt  to  acquire  some  considerable  benefit  therefrom,  by  making 
a proposal  to  the  Court  of  Lisbon  to  take  off  all  the  spice  annually  imported  (over  and  above  what  that 
kingdom  itself  might  consume),  at  a certain  fixed  price ; but  tlie  proposal  was  rejected. 

The  Portuguese  made  an  attack  upon  Acheen  on  Sumatra,  in  which  they  were  repulsed  with  groat 
loss,  ill  consequence  of  which  the  Sumatrans  became  ever  after  very  inveterate  enemies  to  them,  and 
committed  numerous  cruelties  upon  such  Portuguese  as  fell  into  their  hands. 