

1525.  The  fort  built  by  the  Portuguese  at  Calicut,  being  attacked  by  the  natives  in  considerable 
force,  they  were  compelled  to  withdraw',  after  having  demolished  the  fortifications. 

1520.  In  this  year  the  Portuguese  discovered  the  island  of  Celebes.  They  plundered  and  destroyed 
Dofar  on  the  Coast  of  Arabia,  and  Massuah  on  the  Coast  of  Abyssinia. 

1527.  Mangalore,  Porca,  and  Chitwa  on  the  Malabar  Coast  were  plundered  and  burnt  by  the 
Portuguese.  In  this  year  Tidore  was  taken  from  the  Spaniards,  and  the  island  of  Borneo  discovered. 

1529.  The  towns  of  Bassein  and  Tannah  were  this  year  subjected  to  the  Portuguese. 

1530.  A Portuguese  fleet  proceeded  up  the  river  Tapter,  buint  Surat,  and  several  other  villages. 
'About  this  time  Dumaun  was  taken,  and  a treaty  concluded  with  the  King  of  Cambay  upon  terms  very 
favourable  to  the  Portuguese,  who  obtained  bis  permission  to  build  a fort  at  Diu.  In  this  year  the  natives 
expelled  the  Portuguese  from  the  island  of  Temate. 

1531.  In  this  and  the  following  yeai*  the  Portuguese  destroyed  Gogo,  Fate,  Mangarole,  and 
most  of  the  other  towns  on  the  Coast  of  Gua^erat. 

1532.  Aden  was  this  year  rendered  tributary  to  the  Portuguese. 

1534.  The  King  of  Cambay  ceded  Bassein  and  its  dependencies  to  the  Portuguese  in  perpetuity. 

1537.  The  King  of  Cambay,  repenting  of  his  grant  to  the  Portuguese  to  build  a fort  at  Diu, 
made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  dislodge  them,  in  which  he  lost  his  life,  and  the  Portuguese  obtained  the 
entire  possession  of  the  island.  Malacca  was  twice  attacked  by  the  forces  of  the  King  of  Acheen,  but 
were  repulsed  with  considerable  loss.  In  this  year  the  island  of  Magindanao  was  discovered. 

1538.  The  Turks  fitted  out  a strong  fleet  at  Suez,  and  made  an  attempt  upon  Diu,  but  were  repulsed 
witli  great  slaughter.  On  their  return  to  the  Red  Sea,  they  expelled  the  Portuguese  from  Aden. 

1540.  About  this  period  the  Portuguese  first  traded  to  Patany,  Cambodia,  and  Cochin  Chin^ 

1542.  The  coast  of  Japan  W'as  discovered  by  three  Portuguese,  jwho  were  driven  thereon  in  n junki 
bound  from  Siam  to  China,  and  were  received  very  favourably  by  the  Japanese 


PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


m 

154d.  In  this  year  the  King  of  Cambay  made  another  unsuccessful  attempt  to  obtain  |)ossc5sion  of 
Diu,  in  consequence  of  which  the  Portuguese  took  and  destroyed  Gogo,  and  many  other  places  on  the 
sea-coast  of  his  dominions.  Dclagoa  Bay  was  this  year  first  visited  by  the  Poiliiguese. 

1517.  The  King  of  Achcen  made  another  unsuccessful  attempt  upon  Malacca. 

1648.  In  tliis  year  an  offer  was  made  to  the  Emperor  to  advance  the  350,000  ducats  to  redeem  the 
ipice  islands,  upon  condition  of  having  the  profits  of  the  trade  for  six  years,  and  after  that  period  to  re- 
volve to  the  Crown.  The  Emperor  would  not  admit  of  it,  so  tliat  the  Portuguese  retained  possession  of 
those  islands  till  their  kingdom  was  united  to  Spain. 