

1503.  A fleet  from  Portugal,  under  Albuquerque,  visited  Socotra,  Guardafiii,  and  Curia  Muria 
Bay.  On  Ids  arrival  at  Cochin  he  obtained  leave  to  build  a fort,  and  likewise  .settled  a factory  at  Quilon, 
This  yeoi*  Saldaiilia  Bay  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese,  and  Mombas,  Zanzibar,  and  Brava,  on  the 
East  Coast  of  Africa,  became  tributary  to  them. 

1505.  Calicut  was  again  bombarded  by  the  Portuguese,  who  burnt  Cranganore,  and  captured  many 
vessels  belonging  to  the  Moors,  acquiring  considerable  booty. 

At  this  period  there  were  three  ports  in  the  East  in  which  the  Maliometans  were  established,  and 
from  whence  they  carried  on  all  their  commerce  to  the  most  distant  parts  of  the  Indies:  these  were,  Aden 
on  the  Coast  of  Arabia ; Ormus,  in  the  Persian  Gulf;  and  Malacca,  in  the  straits  of  the  same  name.  Tlie 
Portuguese  therefore  prepared  to  make  themselves  masters  of  them,  by  sending  out  large  fleets  with 
numerous  land  forces.  The  King  of  Quiloa  refusing  to  pay  tribute,  the  Portuguese  took  and  plundered 
the  town,  and  built  a strong  fort,  leaving  a garrison  of  600  men;  they  were  afterwards  driven  out  by  the 
Arabs,  who  have  kept  possession  of  the  j)Iace  ever  since. 

1507.  On  March  25th,  a licet  of  22  ships  sailed  from  Lisbon  under  Francis  Almeyda,  upon  whom 
the  King  of  Portugal  conferred  the  title  of  Vice  King  and  Governor  General  of  the  Indies.  He  arrived 
at  Mombas  on  August  8th,  where  his  boats  being  fired  upon,  he  battered  the  forts,  took  the  city 
by  storm,  and  made  slaves  of  the  iuhabitants.  From  thence  he  proceeded  to  Anjediva,  and  built  a fort 


PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


m 


He  then  sailed  to  Onore,  whore  being  ill  roccivod,  he  burnt  the  town,  and  the  shippinn;  that  wore  in 
the  harbour ; proceeding  then  to  ('ananorc,  he  likewise  built  a fort. 

In  this  year  the  Portuguese  built  a fort  at  Sofula,  surveyed  tlie  Maldive  Lslnnds,  and  discovered  the 
Island  of  Ceylon. 

1507.  IMu.skat  was  this  year  su!)jcctod  to  the  Portugueso,  w'ho  committed  groat  ravages  mi  the  towns 
upon  the  Coast  of  Africa,  plundering  and  burning  all  that  did  not  become  tributary.  Tin*  licet  un<lcr 
Albuquerque  made  an  attempt  upon  Ormus,  which  was  unsuccessful.  Malacca  was  first  viNited  by  the 
Portuguese  in  this  year. 

1508.  A fleet  in  two  divisions,  under  Tristan  d'Acunha  and  Alphonso  Albuquerque,  sailed  from 
Lisbon  March  (>th.  The  former  discovered  the  islands  which  bear  his  name.  On  (heir  passage  to  India, 
they  visited  Jlrava,  which  being  in  rebellion  against  the  Portuguese,  w'as  p1und(Ted  and  biii  nt,  and  great 
cruelties  practised  upon  the  inhabitants.  Socotra  was  likewise  taken,  after  considerable  resistance. 