

1509.  The  Portuguese  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  upon  Din,  but  the  shjp[)ing  in  the  harbour  was 
destroyed.  Tlie  Island  of  Sumatra  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese. 

.In  this  year  the  c.ty  of  Calicut  was  taken,  plundered,  and  burnt  by  the  Portuguese. 

1510.  The  city  of  Goa  was  surrendered,  and  the  Viceroy  Albuf[uerque  made  Ids  public  entiy 
February  17th ; it  was  soon  after  retaken  by  the  natives,  but  on  Noveanber  was  again  sulijccted  to  tin: 
Portuguese,  and  the  garrison  put  to  the  sword.  Several  forts  were  built,  and  Goa  from  this  period  became 
the  capital  of  the  Portuguese  possessions  in  the  East  Indies. 

Zanzibar  neglecting  to  pay  the  stipulated  tribute,  was  plundered  and  destroyed  by  the  Portuguese. 

1511.  On  May  2d,  Albuquerque  sailed  from  Goa  for  Malacca,  wdicre  he  arrived  July  Lt.  On  the 
24th  the  tow'ii  was  attacked,  and  after  an  obstinate  resistance,  taken  by  storm,  and  plundered.  The 
Portuguese  visit(*d  Siam,  and  were  kindly  received. 

1512.  Albuqucnpie  sent  three  ships  to  the  Spice  Islands.  They  visited  Palembang,  on  Sumatra ; 
the  islands  of  Ternate,  Bouro,  Amboyna,  and  Banda,  where  they  obtained  large  quantities  of  spices 
In  this  year  the  Portuguese  plundered  and  destroyed  Surat. 

1513.  Albuquerque,  wdth  a large  fleet  and  army,  made  an  attempt  upon  Aden,  w hich  w as  unsuccessful ; 
he  then  proceeded  up  the  Red  Sea,  being  the  first  Portuguese  wlio  had  entered  it.  They  wintered  at  tJie 
island  Cainaran,  and  then  returned  to  India,  without  effecting  any  object  of  importance. 

1514.  On  February  20th,  Albuquerque  sailed  for  Ormus,  wdiere  he  arrived  March  26th.  The  island 
was  surrendered,  and  a fort  built ; the  Viceroy  then  returned  to  India,  and  died  on  the  bar  at  Goa,  Decem- 
ber 16th,  1515.  At  this  period  the  Portuguese  power  was  at  its  height. 

1516.  The  successor  of  Albu(|ucrque,  Soarez,  fitted  out  a considerable  fleet  for  the  Red  Sea.  On 
his  way  thither  he  stopped  at  xVden.  The  inhabitants  being  ajiprchensive  of  an  attack,  sent  dejmties  to 
offer  their  submission.  The  Portuguese,  relying  on  their  professions,  neglected  the  erection  of  a fort,  and 
any  attempts  to  secure  the  place,  of  which  the  people  took  advantage,  and  in  a sliort  time  put  themselves 
into  such  a posture  of  defence,  as  to  defy  any  of  the  Portuguese  to  obtain  possession.  An  unsuccessful 
attempt  was  made  upon  Judda;  but  Zeyla  was  taken,  and  burnt. 

1517.  The  Portuguese,  under  Soarez,  proceeded  to  Columbo,  where,  after  a sharp  contest,  the  King 
agreed  to  become  tributary  to  them,  paying  annually  l,2f)0  quintals  of  cinnamon;  and  they  obtained 
possession  of  Point  de  Galle.  In  this  year  Ferdinand  Andrada  arrived  at  Canton,  where  he  settled  a trade, 
and  returned  with  a valuable  cargo  to  Molucca.  The  Portuguese  took  and  burnt  the  tow^i  of  Barbora. 