

1555.  The  Portuguese  took  and  plundered  Tatta,  and  put  8(XX)  of  the  inhabitants  to  tlie  sword. 

1667.  The  western  powers  of  India  having  formed  a league  against  the  Portuguese,  the  King  of 
Achecn  was  invited  to  accede  to  it,  and  in  conformity  with  the  engagements  by  which  he  was  hound,  he 
attacked  them  in  Malacca  with  a numerous  fleet,  having  on  board  upwanls  of  15,000  men,  and  200  pieces 
of  artillery;  a regular  siege  was  commenced,  and  an  assault  given,  in  which,  after  prodigious  efforts  of  va- 
lour, and  imminent  risk  of  destruction,  the  besieged  remained  victorious.  This  was  esteemed  one  of  the 
most  desperate  and  honourable  sieges  the  Portuguese  experienced  in  India,  their  whole  force  consisting  of 
but  1500  men,  of  whom  only  200  were  Europeans. 

1670.  At  this  period  the  successes  which  had  attended  the  Portuguese  in  various  parts,  had  gained  them 
the  highest  military  reputation;  their  fleets  covered  the  ocean,  and  their  dominions  and  sdtiements  extended 
along  the  eastern  and  western  sides  of  fbe  vast  African  continent.  From  the  lied  Sea  to  China  and  Japan, 
they  were  sole  masters  of  the  riches  of  the  east;  and  in  America,  the  fertile  and  extensive  regions  of  Brazil 
completed  their  empire. 

1578.  The  King  of  Acheen,  having  made  .several  attempts  against  Malacca  without  success,  ho  ’ 
in  this  year,  assisted  by  some  of  the  neighbouring  Princes,  made  another  attempt,  and  invested  it  with  a fleet? 
of  300  sail,  80  of  which  were  junks  of  400  tons  each;  but  after  a siege  of  three  months,  and  the  loss  of 
upwards  of  10,000  men,  they  withdrew. 

1580.  In  this  year  the  Crown  of  Portugal  was  annexed  to  that  of  Spain,  from  wliicli  period  the  Por- 
tuguese interests  in  India  were  left  to  their  fate;  the  union  with  Spain  was  an  event  which  dampe^d  their 
national  character  and  spirit  of  adventure,  and  in  a great  measure  expatriated  the  Portuguese  in  Asia  from 
those  in  Europe,  now  forming  only  a dependency  on  the  Crown  of  Spain.  At  this  period  they  possessed 
the  following  places : 

Sofala,  Mosambique,  and  Mombas,  on  the  East  Coast  of  Africa,  Muscat  in  Arabia,  the  Island  of 
Ormus,  and  Bussorah  in  the  Persian  Gulf ; Diu,  on  the  coast  of  Guzzerat;  a fortified  factory  at  T)uniaui> 
the  town  and  castle  of*  Choul,  and  a factory  at  Dabul;  the  city  of  Bassein,  the  island  of  North  Salsetto, 
and  the  town  of  Tannah;  the  island  of  Bombay;  the  town  and  fort  of  Goa,  which  was  the  capital  of  their 
possessions ; a factory  at  Onore,  at  Barcelore,  at  Mangalore,  at  Cannanore,  and  the  town  of  Calicut ; 
a factory  at  Cranganore,  the  port  of  Cochin,  and  a factory  at  Quilon.  They  had  also  established  them- 
•elves  in  several  parts  of  Ceylon.  On  tlie  Coromandel  Coast  they  liad  stations  at  Negapetam,  St.  Thome, 
and  Mausulipatam,  and  had  established  commercial  stations  in  the  province  of  Bengal.  They  had  also 
factories,  or  liberty  of  trade,  at  Pegu  and  Martaban,  a station  at  Junkceylon,  and  had  taken  po.ssession  of, 
and  fortified  Malacca;  but  they  do  not  appear  to  have  had  any  establishments  of  consequence  on  the 
islands  of  Sumatra  or  Java. 