

1439.  Cape  Bojadore  was  first  doubled  in  this  year,  and  in  the  ibHowing  year  the  Portuguese  vessels 
proceeded  along  the  coast  as  far  as  Cajie  Blanco,  so  that  in  the  course  of  about  forty  yeajn|||^y  had 
discovered  about  500  miles  of  the  Coast  of  Africa. 

1444.  The  Portuguese  sent  an  embassy  to  Rome,  when  the  Pope  by  a bull,  dated  in  1444,  bestowed 
Cfn  the  crown  of  Portugal  the  sovereignty  and  dominion  over  all  the  lands  which  had  hitherto  been 
discovered,  and  ail  that  should  be  discovered  on  the  Coast  of  Africa  as  far  as  the  Indies. 

1446.  In  this  year,  Nuno  Tristan  doubled  C«pe  Verd,  on  the  Coast  of  Africa. 

1448.  The  Azores,  or  Hawk  Islands,  were  discovered.  They  were  at  this  time  uninhabited. 

1449.  The  Cape  de  Verd  Islands  were  discovered;  the  first  was  called  the  Isle  of  May,  because 
tfie  Portuguese  land^  on  it  on  May  Day;  they  also  landed  on  two  others,  which  were  named  St.  Jmesp 
and  St  Philip,  but  the  remainder  were  not  visited  till  about  1460. 

1463.  At  this  period  the  Portuguese  had  discovered  the  coast  as  far  as  Sierra  Leone. 

1471.  In  this  year  the  island  of  St.  Thomas  was  discovered,  and  on  New  Year's  Day,  in  the 
lowing  yeai^  anotlm  island  on  the  same  coasl^  which  they  called  Annabon. 


301 


PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

1484*.  Diego  Cam  discovered  the  kingdom  of  Congo,  and  liroiight  to  Portugal  an  account  of 
«•  Christian  monarch  who  reigned  in  ^Ethiopia,  which  iiuliiced  King  John  II.  of  Portugal  to  .send  some 
ti’ustjr  persons  to  gain  intelligence;  but  they  returncil  without  performing  much  service. 

1487.  Pedro  de  Covillam  and  Alonzo  de  Payva,  two  Portuguese  who  spoke  Araliie  perfectly,  set  out 
from  Portugal  for  ^Ethiopia.  They  went  to  Alexandria,  thence  to  (hiiro  as  merchants,  and  proceeded  with 
a caravan  of  Moors  to  Tor  on  the  Red  Sea,  where  they  were  informed  of  the  trade  to  Calicut.  Sailing 
thence  to  Aden,  they  parted,  CovillamAowards  India,  and  Payva  towards  .'Ethiopia,  resolving  at  an  appointed 
time  to  meet  again.  From  Aden,  Covillam  went  in  a IMoorish  ship  to  Cananore,  and  from  thence  to  Con. 
being  the  first  Portuguese  that  ever  was  in  the  Indian  seas.  From  thence  he  passed  to  Sofala  on  the  Fast 
Coast  of  Africa,  to  visit  the  gold  mines,  where  he  gained  intelligence  of  Madagascar,  called  hy  the  Moors 
tlie  Island  of  the  Moon.  From  Sofala  he  went  back  to  Aden,  and  so  to  l^gypt,  where  he  learned  that  hi.s 
companion  was  dead.  He  then  went  again  to  Tor,  thence  to  Aden,  where  hearing  of  the  tame  of  tlie  city 
of  Ormus,  he  sailed  thither,  and  having  observed  what  was  most  remarkable,  he  returned  to  the  Red  Sea. 
He  then  went  to  discover  the  Court  of  the  King  of  Abyssinia,  where  he  was  detained  a prisoner  till  1520, 
when  he  was  released,  and  returned  to  Europe. 