


Of  silks,  and  other  piece-goods,  damasks,  tafTaties,  sarsnets,  coiinterfoit  cloth  of  gold,  unwronglit 
China  silk,  white  twisted  silk,  &c.  of  calicoes  hook  calicoes,  lawns,  broad  white,  fine  starched,  coarse 
white,  brown  broad,  and  several  other  sorts.  There  were  also  (|uilts,  carpets,  canopies,  and  various  other 
commodities;  the  whole  of  which  were  valued  at  a modi  rate  computation  at  50,000. 

The  Spanish  Court  being  totally  engrossed  by  their  immense  American  empire,  and  the  politics  of  Eu- 
rope, paid  little  attention  to  Portuguese  India.  Few  supplies  arrived  from  Europe.  The  commanders  on 
the  different  stations  ceased  to  act  in  concert  with  each  other;  unrestrained  by  a regular  government,  each 
endeavoured  to  enrich  himself  The  mother  country  groaned  under  the  yoke  of  Spain.  Mostly  natives  of 
the  East,  the  Portuguese  in  India  lost  all  relative  affection,  and  the  tie  which  bound  them  together,  was 
now  but  a single  thread. 

1595.  The  Dutch,  on  their  first  voyage  to  Bantam,  experienced  gi’eat  opposition  A'om  the  Portuguese 
in  conducting  their  commerce  with  the  natives,  in  consequence  of  which  a war  commenced,  by  which  the 
Portuguese  interests  in  India  suffered  very  considerably^ 

1001.  The  English,  on  their  first  appearanro  in  tlie  eastern  seas,  also  experienced  every  obstacle  from 
the  Portuguese  in  condacting  their  commerce,  whereupon  hostilities  commenced,  and  continu(‘d  for  many 
years.  In  this  year  Captain  Lancaster  captured  a large  Portuguese  ship,  bound  from  Goa  to  Malacca,  with 
a valuable  cargo  of  piece-goods,  and  other  commodities. 

1603.  The  Dutch,  with  a large  force  from  Europe,  made  attempts  to  dblodge  the  Portuguese  from 
Mosambique  and  Goa,  both  of  which  were  unsuccessful, 

1605.  The  Dutch  succeeded  in  expelling  the  Portuguese  from  Amboyna  and  Tidore,  and  by  degrees 
engrossed  the  whole  of  the  spice  trade,  which  they  retained  near  200  years. 

1609.  In  this  year  the  Spaniards  and  Dutch,  who  had  been  at  war  with  each  other  for  a considerable 
time,  concluded  a truce  for  twelve  years,  each  party  retaining  the  advantages  then  in  their  i)oss{*ssion, 

1610.  At  this  period  the  commerce  of  the  Portuguese  was  so  considerable,  that  an  English  traveller 
mentions  his  having  seen  in  one  fleet  240  sail  of  merchantmen  bound  to  Surat  and  Cambay. 

1611.  In  this  year  the  Dutch  were  driven  out  of  Tidore  and  Banda  by  the  Spaniards. 

1612.  The  Dutch  obtained  a grant  of  the  exclusive  commerce  in  cinnamon  from  the  King  of  Candy, 
and  the  prohibiting  all  Europeans  trading  thither  without  their  leave,  notwithstanding  the  Portuguese  were 
in  possession  of  the  principal  ports  of  the  island,  which  they  had  fortified. 