

1635.  The  Dutch  expelled  the  Portuguese  from  the  Island  of  Formosa,  and  held  possession  of  it 
till  1661,  when  the  Chinese  succeeded  in  ilriviiig  them  oiiL 

163S.  In  con8e(|uence  of  the  cruelties  committed  by  the  Portuguese  in  Ceylon,  the  King  of  Candy 
eent  to  Batavia  for  assistance  against  tliem,  whereupon  an  alliance  was  concluded,  by  which  the  Dutch 
undertook  to  furnish  an  army  and  a fleet  for  the  service  of  the  King,  to  reduce  the  fortresses  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  Portuguese,  and  when  dismantled,  to  put  them  into  his  hands ; on  tlie  other  hand,  it  was 
stipulated,  that  the  King  should  provide  an  army,  and  pay  the  Dutch  the  expence  of  their  expedition,  and 
that  they  should  be  allowed  to  keep  some  port  as  a secure  retreat.  In  consequence  of  this  treaty,  the 
Dutch  in  1639  sent  a considerable  force  from  Batavia,  and  made  themselves  masters  of  Trincomalee  and 
Satecalo,  which  they  demolished,  and  delivered  over  to  the  King,  and  in  the  following  year  they  reduced 
Negombo  and  Point  de  Galle.  The  Portuguese  soon  after  succeeded  in  retaking  the  former  place  fron^ 
the  Dutch,  and  blockaded  the  latter  for  two  years  without  obtaining  possession  of  it. 

1640.  In  this  year  Portugal  again  became  a separate  sovereignty;  but  the  spirit  of  the  nation  was 
much  broken,  and  from  the  increased  strength  of  the  Dutch  in  India,  they  did  not  possess  sufficient 
resources  to  recover  their  ancient  power  there.  The  English  at  Surat,  on  receiving  intelligence  of  this 
event,  formed  a convention  with  the  Viceroy  of  Goa^  for  their  mutual  defence. 

The  Dutch  in  Ceylon,  on  receiving  advice  of  the  revolution  in  Portugal,  and  of  the  tsuce  between  the 
King  and  the  United  Provinces,  agreed  that  eaeh  should  continue  possessed  in  the  Indies  of  what  was 
actually  in  their  power  at  the  conclusion  of  this  treaty.  From  the  imprudence  of  the  Portuguese  the 
treaty  was  broken  off,  and  the  war  continued  for  a series  of  yei^s  with  varied  success. 

In  this  year  the  Dutch  succeeded  in  obtaining  possession  of  the  port  of  Malacca^  which  was  a 
serious  loss  to  the  Portuguese^  as  their  trade  suffered  eoBsiderebly  in  consequence.  About  this  time,  the 


PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


sr« 


Portuguese  were  expelled  from  Japan,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Dutch,  after  experiencing  most  dread- 
ful persecutions  and  massacres,  in  which  it  is  said  upwards  of  4^K),(XX1  Japanese  Christians  perished. 

1G^1«3.  The  Dutcli  Government  at  Batavia,  with  a view  of  weakening  tlie  relations  bytween  the 
Portuguese  and  English,  sent  a commissaiy  to  Goa,  in  order  to  negotiatt*  a peace.  As  tlu*  Dutch  lind 
obtained  many  advantages  over  the  Portuguese  fleets,  it  was  proposed  that  the  Portugu(*se  should  cede 
their  possessions  in  Ceylon ; but  the  Dutch  having  experienced  several  defc*ats  on  that  island,  the  \ icc  roy 
rejected  the  proposal,  as  inadmissible.  The  negotiation  was  therefore  broken  off,  and  tlie  Dutch  assi  nibling 
their  fleet,  blockaded  Goa. 