

In  this  year  an  English  fleet,  under  Captain  Best,  was  attacked  near  Surat  by  a Portuguese  fleet  of  very 
superior  force,  and  after  four  successive  engagements,  the  Portuguese  were  defeated,  to  the  great  astonish- 
ment of  the  natives,  who  had  hitherto  considered  them  as  invincible. 

1615.  The  King  of  Acheen  made  another  attempt  upon  Malacca,  with  a fleet  of  590  sail,  of  which 
100  were  large  gallies,  having  on  board  60,000  men.  This  expedition  shared  the  fate  of  former  ones;  it  was 
defeated  with  a loss  of  20,000  men,  and  a great  number  of  their  vessels. 

1620.  The  Danes  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  posRes.s  themselves  of  Cc’ylon.  The  Portuguese 
also  fearing  the  Dutch  had  the  same  object  in  view  (as  they  hod  formed  a treaty  with  the  King  in  1612)' 

Hr  2 


SOS 


HISTORICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


now  marie  sncIi  additions  to  their  fortifications  along  the  coast,  that  the  King  of  Candy  was  prevented  from 
liolding  a correspondence  with  any  foreign  power  without  their  permission. 

In  this  year  the  Portuguese  made  an  attack  upon  an  English  fleet,  under  Captain  Shillinge,  but  were 
defeated  with  loss,  and  the  English  commander  lost  his  life  in  the  action.  Ry  these  victories  the  English 
character  w’as  much  raised  in  the  estimation  of  the  natives,  while  that  of  the  Portuguese  declined. 

1622.  The  Portuguese  were  expelled  from  Ormus  by  the  Persian  and  English  united  forces;  they 
made  an  attempt  soon  after  for  its  recovery,  w hich  proved  unsuccessful. 

1C2S.  In  this  y(‘ar  the  King  of  Acheen  made  his  last  attempt  upon  Malacca,  with  a force  of  20,000 
men;  but  were  so  complettdy  defeated,  that  not  a ship,  and  scarcely  a man  escaped. 

lf>30.  A large  Portuguese  fleet  blockaded  Surat  with  a view  of  preventing  the  entrance  of  any 
English  ships  into  the  roads,  and  the  Viceroy  of  Goa  made  application  to  the  Governor  of  Surat  to  have 
the  exclusive  trade  of  the  port  granted  to  them,  which  was  refused.  On  the  appearance  of  an  English 
fleet  of  five  ships,  a sharp  action  ensued  with  that  of  the  Portuguese,  in  which,  without  being  decisive, 
the  English  ships  had  tlie  advantage.  This  action  was  followed  by  others,  the  English  being  still  able  to 
maintain  their  ground.  The  Portuguese  Admiral  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  burn  the  English  ships; 
they  however  succeeded  in  making  good  the  landing  of  their  cargoes. 

1631.  In  this  year  the  Portuguese  were  expelled  from  Mombas,  on  the  East  Coast  of  Africa 

1634.  An  agreement  took  place  between  the  English  and  Porluguese,  in  the  form  of  a truce,  or  ces- 
sation of  hostilities,  by  which  the  Portuguese  ports  were  to  be  open  to  the  English,  and  the  English  facto- 
ries to  act  on  fi*k?n<lly  terms  towards  the  Portuguese;  and  this  truce  was  to  continue  between  the  two  na- 
tions till  six  months  after  the  determination  of  the  Courts  of  England  and  Spain  on  this  subject  should  be 
known  in  India.  This  contract,  however,  was  not  sanetionnl  by  the  English  Government. 