

1669.  The  Dutch  took  Macassar  from  the  Portuguese,  likewise  St.  Thomt'^  near  Madras. 

1670.  The  Muscat  Arabs  invaded  and  plundered  Diu,  but  were  driven  out  in  a short  time  with 


considerable  loss.  , . i i x 

1699.  Dr.  Gemelli,  who  returned  this  year  from  his  six  years’  travels  round  the  globe,  treating  of  the 

Portuguese  conquests  in  the  East  Indies,  observed  that  the  remains  of  them  were  so  very  uiconsidcraWe, 

is  scarcely  to  defray  their  own  expences# 


niBTOUICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


aio* 


1731.  Tlic  Portuguese  trade  with  India,  although  rigorously  confined  to  the  subjects  of  tlie  mother 
CCTUntry,  was  never  put  into  the  hands  of  an  exclusive  Company  incorporated  by  charter,  except  during  a 
short  tiin<>in  1731,  w lien  the  King  of  Portugal  granted  permission  for  one  ship  to  make  me  voyage  to  Surat 
rtiid  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  and  back  to  Portugal,  exclusive  of  all  others,  for  which  end  a Company 
was  established,  whose  capital  was  limited  to  600,000  crusados,  and  the  subscribers  were>  soon  after  the 
return  of  tlic  ship,  to  be  paid  back  their  principal,  and  dividend  of  the  profits.  This  experimi'iit  was  at- 
tended wdth  Init  little  success,  The  Sovereign  always  retained  the  direction  of  the  East  India  trade  in  his 
own  hands,  and  granted  from  time  to  time  privileges  of  letting  out  vessels,  in  a certain  limited  manner,  to 
private  copartnerships  and  individuals,  who  thus  enjoyed  a monopoly  of  the  supplies  required  of  both 
Indian  and  European  commodities. 

1752.  The  monopoly  of  the  East  India  trade  continued  vested  immediately  in  the  Crown  until  thk 
yc'ar,  when  it  was  said  to  be  abolished;  but  various  important  articles  still  continued  subject  to  the  royal 
privileges,  and  could  only  be  bought  in  India,  and  sold  in  b2urope  on  the  King's  account. 

1 780.  For  many  years  past  it  had  been  a matter  of  indifference  what  became  of  the  East  India 
trade.  From  the  splendid  pre-eminence  which  it  once  possessed  over  every  other  branch  of  the  Portu- 
guese commcTcc,  it  had  sunk  to  a few  annual  voyages,  in  consequence  of  the  bad  management  of  the 
trade,  the  limited  demand  for  Asiatic  commodities,  and  the  facility  with  which  Portugal  was  supplied  from 
Rrazil  with  many  of  the  articles  formerly  received  from  the  East.  The  few  remaining  Asiatic  possessions 
produced  so  little  to  the  Crown  of  Portugal,  that  it  had  been  more  than  once  debated  whether  it  would 
not  be  to  their  interest  to  abandon  them  altogether;  and  there  b reason  to  believe  that  it  was  purely  a reli- 
gious motive  that  hindered  this  measure  from  taking  place. 

1810.  The  following  is  a statement  of  the  commerce  carried  on  between  the  British  possessions  in 
India  and  Portugal,  from  the  year  1795  to  1806  inclusive.  In  the  first  seven  years,  1795  to  1801,  the  account 
of  imports  and  exports  from  Bengal  only  b stated;  those  of  Madras  and  Bombay,  of  which  no  correct 
account  has  been  kept  at  those  Presidencies,  are  estimated  together  at  one  fourth  of  those  of  Bengal.  lu 
ibc  years  1802  to  1806  that  of  the  whole  possessions  b stated  together. 