

1644.  The  negotiations  between  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch,  which  had  in  the  former  year  been 
broken  off,  w^as  renewed  on  the  1st  Noveml^er,  1644,  and  a treaty  of  peace  concluded  between  the  two 
powers  in  India,  by  which  the  prizes  taken  by  either  were  to  he  given  up,  and  a moiety  ol  the  cinnamon 
trade  ceded  to  the  Dutch. 

1648.  The  Arabs  succeeded  in  expelling  tlie  Portuguese  from  the  port  of  Muscat. 

165^.  The  war  on  Ceylon  between  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch  was  renewcui,  and  lasted  many 
years,  in  which  the  latter  power  sustained  several  defeats;  they  however  succeeded  ultimately  in  expelling 
the  Portuguese.  In  October,  1665,  they  captured  Caliture;  and  in  May  following,  the  fortress  of  ( olinnbo, 
the  capital  of  the  Portuguese  possessions  on  the  island.  The  King  of  Candy  assisted  at  this  siege,  and  in.* 
sifted  that  it  should  be  put  into  his  hands,  agreeable  to  treaty,  whieh  tlu^  Dutch  [)osibivL‘ly  reliiscil,  on  the 
plea  that  a large  sum  of  money  was  due  to  them,  for  which  they  meant  t(»  keep  ( oliimbo  as  a security, 

1656.  In  this  year  the  Dutch  obtained  pos.<*ession  of  Calicut  from  the  Portugiu'sc. 

1659.  The  Dutch  captured  Jafnapatam,  the  last  place  on  Ceylon  in  possession  of  tlie  Portuguese,  on 
June  24th,  1658.  The  garrison  were  made  prisoners  of  war,  and  transported  to  Butuviu.  Negapatam,  ami 
several  other  places  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  were  likewise  taken  from  them  by  ilie  Dutcli. 

1661.  By  a treaty  of  marriage  between  the  Infanta  of  Portugal  and  King  Charles  II.  the  Crown 
of  Portugal  ceded  and  granted  to  England  the  island  and  harbour  of  Bombay  in  full  sovereignty  ; but 
it  was  not  transferred  for  some  time„  in  consequence  of  the  insti  uctioiis  not  bcuig  sufficiently  explicit,  the 
English  claiming  the  island  and  its  subordinates,  whereas  the  Portuguese  would  only  agree  to  tlie  cession 
of  Bombay  alone,  which  the  English  were  afterwards  under  the  necessity  of  accepting. 

At  the  mediation  of  England,  a negotiation  was  set  on  foot  between  PoitugaJ  and  Holland.  The 
Dutch  having  reduced  the  greater  part  of  the  Portuguese  jiossessions  in  India,  which  losses  were  in 
tome  measure  balanced  by  the  expulsion  of  the  Dutch  from  Brazil,  and  the  capture  of  numerous  Dutch 
ships  by  privateers,  a treaty  was  concluded  between  the  two  powers,  by  which  each  was  to  retain  wlmt 
was  then  in  their  possession. 

1664.  Notwithstanding  the  treaty  concluded  between*  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch  in  Euro|M',  tlie 
latter  power  continued  to  attack  the  Portuguese  settlements  in  India,  and  succeeded  in  capturing  Quilon 
in  1661,  Cranganore  in  1662,  Cochin  in  1663,  and  most  of  the  other  places  on  the  Malabar  Coast;  by 
which  acts,  in  open  defiance  of  a treaty  between  the  two  countries,  tlie  Dutch  became  the  paramount 
European  power  in  the  East  Indies,  and  Portugal  was  reduced  to  Uie  mere  possession  of  Goa,  of  Mosam- 
bique,  Diu,  Macao,  and  a few  other  dependencies  on  the  CoasU  of  Malabar  and  Coromandel. 