

All  these  possessions  were  subordinate  to  the  supreme  government  at  Goa,  where  a Viceroy  presided 
over  Uie  civil  and  military,  and  an  Archbishop  over  the  ecclesiastical  ^airs  of  the  whole  of  this  extensive 
dominion. 

ilr 


306 


MISTOHICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


The  Crown  of  Portugal  derived  from  these  settlements^  during  a period  of  upwards  of  fifty  years,  a 
elear  annual  revenue  of  X'!s?.)0,UO0,  after  paying  the  salary  of  the  Viceroy,  about  X^4,000  a year,  together 
with  that  of  the  subordinate  Governors,  and  the  whole  expence  of  the  civil,  military,  and  ecclesiastical 
establishments.  This  revenue  was  derived  from  the  duties  leviedl  on  alt  goods  imported  and  exported  at 
the  diilereiit  places  that  have  Ikhmi  enumerated,  from  the  tribute  paid  by  some  of  the  small  states  on  the 
Coast  of  Malabar,  for  the  jjrotection  afforded  them;  and  from  the  sale  of  those  vessels  that  were  captured^ 
wdicn  found  trading  in  the  Indian  S(‘as,  without  a passport  from  the  Portuguese  Viceroy. 

With  j'cspeet  to  the  trade  carried  on  between  Portugal  and  India,  there  are  no  data  wherewitli  to  form 
a correct  estimate  of  its  proiits;  but  from  the  quantity  of  goods  sent  annually  to  Lisbon,  from  the  knovva 
value  of  those  gojxls  in  India,  and  from  the  prices  which  they  fetched  at  that  time  in  Europe,  the  profit  on 
them  could  not  have  l>een  less  than  i?  150,000  per  annum.  The  Portuguese  historians  state,  that  a fleet  of 
twenty  ships  of  various  burthens  sailed  regularly  every  year  from  Goa  to  Lisbon,  laden  wdtli  tlie  commo- 
dities of  India  and  China;  and  though  not  noticed  by  those  writers,  it  is  known  that  Indian  goods  then 
produced  in  Europe  a profit  of  at  least  30  per  cent.  In  estimating  ilie  wealth  which  Portugal  derived 
from  her  Indian  settlements  and  commerce,  the  private  fortunes  of  individuals  must  also  be  taken  into  tho 
•account.  In  the  course  of  the  filly  years  alluded  to,  some  of  the  Viceroys  returned  to  Portugal  witE 
X’300,(X)0,  several  of  the  Gorernors  and  Generals  with  i?  100,000,  and  many  subordinate  officers,  both  civil 
and  military,  with  from  l':5?0,000  to  £A0y00(K  The  priests  too  realized  considerable  fortunes,  both  from 
the  exorbitant  exactions  they  were  authorized  to  make,  and  from  plundering  the  native  villages,  in  order 
to  compel  the  inhabitants  to  embrace  tlie  llomish  faith.  It  appears  from  the  candid  narratives  of  some  of 
the  Portuguese  historians,  that  many  of  those  fortunes  were  acquired  in  an  iniquitous  manner;  and  that  in 
proportion  as  they  added  to  the  opulence,  they  promoted  the  corruption,  and  accelerated  the  downfal  of 
the  mother  country. 