

1580.  At  this  period,  a pirate  committed  great  rarages  upon  the  coasts  of  Cliina,  and.  obtaining  pos-^ 
session  of  the  Island  of  Macao,  not  only  blocked  up  the  iwrt  of  Canton,  but  besieged  the  city.  The  Chi- 
nese had  recourse  to  the  Portuguese,  who  readily  offered  their  assistance,  and  not  only  compelled  the 
pirates  to  raise  the  siege,  but  drove  them  out  of  Macao.  The  Emperor  in  consequence  granted  them  the 
island,  with  permission  to  make  a settlement.  They  built  a town^  and  fortified  it  after  the  European 
manner,  which  iliey  still  continue  to  hold,  paying  tribute  and  customs  to  the  Chinese. 

1587.  The  Spaniards  being  about  to  invade  England,  Queen  Elizabeth  equipped  a strong  fleet  under 
the  command  of  Sir  Francis  Drake,  to  annoy  their  trade  and  that  of  Portugal..  He  took  several  ships,  one 
of  which  was  the  St.  Philip,  a Portuguese  earrack,  the  first  vessel  the  English  hod  ever  token  coming  from 
the  East  Indies.  The  papers  of  this  ship  afforded  so  much  information,  as  to  the  value  of  the  Asiatic 
trade,  and  the  mode  of  conducting  it,  that  the  English  historian^  Camden,  considers  them  as  having  fur- 
nished the  first  idea  of  establishing  a trade  thither  from  England. 

1592.  In  this  year  another  great  earrack,  called  the  Modre  de  Dios,,  was  taken  by  the  English,.and 
carried  into  Dartmouth.  The  following  account  of  the  ship  and  cargo  will  tend  to  shew  the  nature  of  the 
shipping,  and  the  extent  of  the  Portuguese  trade  witii  the  East  Indies  at  this  perigd. 

The  ship  was  165  feet  long,  from  the  beak  head  to  the  stem;  46  feet  10  inches  broad  on  the  secona 
close  deck,  whereof  she  had  three.  She  drew  31  feet  water  on  leaving  Cochin,  but  not  above  S6  feet  on 
her  arrival  at  Dartmouth,  September  7,  1592.  She  carried  in  height  seven  several  stories,,  one  main  orlop,, 
three  close  decks,  one  forecastle,  and  a spar  deck,  of  two  floors  or  j)ieces;  the  length  of  her  keel  was  100 
feet,  her  mainmast  121  feet,  and  her  main  yard  106  feet  long.  By  this  perfect  commensuration  of  the 
parts  appears  the  Imgencss  of  tl;c  whgle,  fgr  beyoud  tb^  WQUld  of  UiO  biggest  shippingin  England,  either 
for  war  or  commerce^ 


PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


A)? 


A catalogue  of  her  carp  was  made  out  in  LeadenhallStrett,  when  it  was  found  that  the  prineipul 

waves,  after  the  jewels  (which  were  no  doubt  of  great  value,  though  they  never  came  to  light),  consisted  of 


Aloes. 

Cocoa  nuts. 

Eiaiikincense, 

Ambergris. 

Camphire. 

(linger. 

Benjamin. 

Civet. 

Gahingal. 

Cloves. 

Elephants'  teeth. 

Hides! 

Cinnamon. 

Ebony  wood. 

Musk. 

Myrulxilans. 

INIace. 

Nutnu'gs. 
Porcelain  ve'?si‘ls. 
Popper. 