


200  tons  pepper. 

51,fKX)  pieces  of  dungarees. 
8^000  ditto  paulkaes. 
10,000  ditto  percollaes. 


50  bales  cardamums. 
2000  pieces  broad  baftaes. 
2000  ditto  sevaguzzies. 

50  candies  cassia  lignea. 


Dungaree  is  the  lighter  sail  cloth  of  India,  end  the  quantity  might  have  been  ordered  in  consequence 
of  some  expectation  of  a war  svith  Holland,  but  only  8000  pieces  were  procured.  The  intention,  never- 
theless, proves  that  thb  part  of  the  coast  was  at  that  time  in  repute  for  the  abun^ce  of  its  manufactures, 
which  at  present  scaroily  supply  more  tlian  the  consumption  its  dimmished  inhabitants  require. 


AXJEDIVAII. 


MA 


( GINS,  WEIGHTS,  AVD  MEAStmES. 

Coins.— Accounts  arc  kept  in  pii^rodos,  fhnams,  and  j)icc.  All  har/rains  with  the  country  nuurliHnfs 
are  made  for  Darwar  [)aiTodas,  wliioli  are  lanairi'^,  or  4S  iina,q;inary  jcttals ; — six  rash,  or  pier,  arc  riTkoiu'il 
a lanani  in  accounts,  hut  they  rise  and  fall  in  the  hazar ; one  pice  is  six  hiidgcrooks. 

The  Darw’nr  pagoda  always  pa‘-'ses  for  3}  rupees. 

'1  he  \ enetian  passes  for^  to  .57  jeltals,  or  4*;^  to  fanams. 

The  (iuhher  ditto  ,5J  to  .5t  ditto 


The  Darwar  pagoda  being  coined  in  the  pr*»vincc,  is  most  esteemed  hy  the  natives,  but  the  Ikeri 
pagodas  are  worth  more;  they  are  of  the  same  fineness,  laif  diHhr  in  form  and  weight,44)!:  of  these  being 
equal  to  Darwar  pagodas.  Spanisli  dollars  pass  curre  nt  here. 

WmoiiTs.— .One  seer  is  near  Soz.  Ifklwts.  Troy:  42  seers  make  1 maiind,  ami  2f)  niauiuls  1 candy, 
which  makes  the  candy  about  514  Ihs.  l ioz.  though  it  is  commonly  reckoned  52()lbs.  aroirdupoi**. 

Measure. — The  long  measure  is  the  covid,  equal  to  IH  English  inches. 


IMroilTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


During  th(»  period  the  I'nglish  had  a factory  liere,  a considerahle  trade  was  cairied  on  with  Persia  and 
Arabia.  Prom  the  former  place  were  Imported  almonds,  dat(‘s,  rose-wat(T,  and  raisins,  and  from  Arabhi, 
horses,  drugs,  &c.  Of  European  goods,  iron,  lead,  sword  blades,  knives,  branch  coral,  uiid  wearing  apparel 
for  the  Portuguese,  were  imported;  and  the  returns  were 


P(;pj)er,frce  on  board,  2‘2Danvar  pagodas  per  candy 
Coarse  brown  cloth  2 rupees  per  piece 
Coarse  brown  muslin^%3  ditto 


Goa  Arrack  % ^ % 'V  20  to  25  rupees  per  hhd, 

Schiraz  wiuc  40  rupees  per  cliest. 

Uose-wnter  40  ditto 


Besides  which,  cardamurns,  cassia,  nux  vomica,  some  bezoar,  ajid  a few  other  trifling  articles,  were  to  be 
procured.  The  best  pepper  on  the  coast  was  produced  in  this  district. 


PROVISIOxNS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 


On  this  part  of  the  const  there  are  plenty  of  good  bullocks;  but  (hey  are  forbidden  to  be  killed,  on 
account  of  the  religious  prejudices  of  the  natives.  Poultry  may  be  procured,  ami  the  bay  abouiiJa  with 
various  sorts  of  excellent  fisli.  Wild  peacocks  are  in  plenty  in  the  neighbouring  woods. 