

The  candy  at  Merjee  is  equal  to  540 lbs.  avoirdupois;  4^2  bales  or  robins  of  rice  are  a corge. 

FORTIFIED  ISLAND. 

This  island  is  in  latitude  14°  19  North,  about  two  miles  from  Onore;  it  derives  its  name  from  being 
fortified  all  round  with  a stone  w^all,  having  guns  mounted  on  towers  at  projicr  distances.  The  landing  place 
is  at  the  south  end,  where  there  is  a fort  witli  eight  guns  mounted.  The  island  is  about  six  miles  in  circum- 
ference, and  about  one  in  the  nearest  part  from  the  main  land  ; between  is  a channel  for  large  boats. 

A small  trade  is  carried  on  with  this  island  for  a kind  of  reddle,  which  is  used  by  the  natives  for 
painting  theii'  houses ; here  is  abundance  of  good  fresh  water. 

ONORE 

Is  situated  in  latitude  14°  18  Nortli,  on  the  north  side  of  a salt-water  river.  Near  its  entrance  is -a 
shoal,  on  which  are  only  nine  feet  at  low  water ; within  it  has  sufficient  depth  to  receive  vessels  drawing  16 
or  18  feet ; the  best  channel  is  at  the  south  part  of  tlie  entrance  of  the  river.  It  is  navigable  a considerable 
way  inland,  whicli  makes  it  convenient  for  bringing  down  the  pepper  and  sandal  wood,  which  are  the  prin- 
cipal articles  that  are  exported  from  hence.  A ship  may  anchor  in  the  roads  with  Onore  flagstaff  E.N.E. 
and  Fortified  Island  N.  by  W.  about  a mile  from  the  shore.  Fresh  water  is  rather  scarce  here. 

Onore  was  formerly  a place  of  considerable  trade,  and  Hyder  had  established  docks  for  building 
frigates  and  other  ships  of  war;  it  was  taken  by  the  English  under  General  Matthews  in  1783,  and 
the  garrison  put  to  the  sword,  but  restored  to  Tippoo  by  the  treaty  of  Mangalore,  who  soon  after  totally 
demolished  it.  In  the  river  are  the  remains  of  some  ships  which  were  sunk  by  our  troops  when  the  place 
was  taken.  It  is  now  recovering  fast,  a custom-house  and  many  new  houses  having  been  built. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS  and  MEASURES. 

('oiNs.— The  common  currency  here  consists  of  Ikeri,  Sultany,  and  >Bahadary  pagodas;  Surat  and  Madras 
rupees,  which  arc  considered  of  equal  value ; fanams,  a small  silver  coin ; and  dubs,  a copper  coin. 

10  ^ 1 fanam. 

5 1 fanams  y make  -<  1 rupee. 

4 rupees  ( i pagoda 


ONOnE. 


31^ 


Wecohts.— The  seer  weight  is  the  same  as  at  Mangalore;  it  ought  to  weigh  24  Bombay  rupees,  but 
tliesc  licing  scarce,  in  their  stead  dubs  are  commonly  used,  and  are  somewhat  heavier. 

The  number  of  seers  contained  in  the  mauiul,  varies  according  to  tlie  goods  sold,  i*’.:. 


Common  articles  in  the  bazar  are  40  seers  or 
1 eppei  % 42 

Beetle  nut  45  [ 

Dry  cocoa  nut  kernels  4hS 

Jaggery  44 


lbs.  24, .55* 

27,92 
29,40 
20,82 