

These  islands  were  visited  \iy  the  Portuguese  under  Vasco  de  Gama  in  1499,  on  liis  return  to  Europe' 
from  Calicut,  where  he  furnished  his  ships  with  cordage,  of  which  they  were  in  great  want. 

TELLICHERRY, 

The  principal  English  settlement  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  is  in  latitude  1 1®  45'  Nortli,  and  longitude 
75®  32'  East,  and  about  ten  miles  to  the  southward  of  Cannanore.  In  fine  weather,  shipi  anchor  in  the 
“ roads  in  five  fathoms,  the  flagstaff  bearing  N.E.  by  N.  off  the  town  1|  to  2 miles  ; but  when  tlicre  is  a 
chance  of  unsettled  weather,  they  should  anchor  well  out  in  7 or  8 fathoms ; for  his  Majesty’s  ship  Superb,, 
of  74  guns,  was  lost  here  in  1782:  the  fleet  having  anchored  in  5 and  5{  fathoms,  a heavy  sea  began  to 
roll  in,  which  made  her  strike  on  the  anchor  of  another  ship.  There  is  a ledge  of  black  rocks  facing  the 
fort,  where  small  vessels  have  been  known  to  lie  during  the  S.W,  monsoon. 

Tellicherry  Fort  is  of  considerable  size,  with  strong  walls,  though  rather  in  a ruinous  condition^ 
having  convenient  houses  for  the  Chief  and  gentlemen  of  the  factory;  that  of  the  Chief  is  a large  and  hand- 
some building.  About  a mile  to  the  southward  is  a small  fort  called  Mile  End,  and  at  a short  distance 
to  the  northward  of  Tellicherry  is  a blockhouse,  surrounded  by  a stone  wall,  having  some  cannon  mounted. 
There  arc  two  towns,  one  bordering  on  the  sea-coast,  the  other  in  the  wood:  tlie  principal  inliabitants  of 
the  former  are  Portuguese ; those  of  thi  latter  natives.  Between  the  town  and  the  fort  is  an  extensive  and 
open  place;  on  one  side  is  a pleilsant  garden  belonging  to -the  Chief,  who  has  likewise  a small  one  ad- 
joining his  house.  There  is  an  excellent  ride  through  the  wood,  much  frequented  by  the  European  residents. 

In  1781  Tellicherry  was  for  a long  period  blocjcaded  by  Hyder  Ally’s  forces;  the  works  with  which 
they  blocked,  up  the  place,  were  covered  by  a fortified  camp  at  a moderate  distance.  In  January,  1782,  a 
considerable  reinforcement  arrived  from  Bombay,  under  the  command  of  Major  Abingdon,  who  imnie# 
diately  formed  a plan  for  relieving  the  town,  and  concerted  Lis  measures  so  well,  tliat  he  had  surprised, 
idtacked,  and  curried  the  enemy’s  several  forts  before  day  on  tlie  moruing  of  the  6th  of  January,  and 

T t • 


TELLICHERUV. 


3^ 

pursued  Ids  success  with  such  celerity,  that  he  stormed  their  fortified  camp  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  and 
completely  routed  their  forces.  Several  hundreds  of  the  enemy  were  killed,  and  near  1,500  taken  prisoners. 
Tlie  spoil  was  very  considerable,  consisting  of  a numerous  artillery,  with  a large  quantity  of  military  stores 
and  a number  of  elephants,  which  w'ere  found  in  the  forts  and  redoubts.  By  this  success  the  communi- 
cation with  the  country  was  opened,  and  the  coast  for  several  miles  on  either  side  of  Tellicherry,  wa» 
entirely  cleared  of  the  enemy. 