


Ale  and  porter. 

Cloths. 

Hosiery. 

Saddlery. 

Boots  and  shoes. 

Glass  ware. 

Oilman's  stores. 

Stationery. 

Brandy. 

Guns  and  pistols. 

Perlumery. 

Salt  provisions. 

Books  & pamphlets. 

Hats. 

Plate  & placed  ware. 

Wines. 

The  exports  from  Cananorc  consist  of  the  under-mentioned  articles 

Cardamums.  j 

Cassia  Lignea.  i 

Pepper. 

Sharks'  fins. 

Coir.  1 

Nux  Vomica.  I 

Sandal  wood. 

Tortoise  shelL 

LACCADIVE  ISLANDS. 

This  Archipelago  of  low  islands  is  opposite  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  and  extends  from  latitude  10®  North, 
to  about  12®  North,  having  an  extensive  channel  separating  them  from  the  coast.  There  are  nineteen 
principal  ones,  most  of  them  surrounded  with  reefs  and  steep  rocks;  and  as  their  true  position  and 
limits  seem  not  correctly  determined,  are  avoided  as  much  as  possible.  The  southernmost  one  is 

MINICOY, 

And  is  in  latitude  8®  17'  North,  and  longitude  73®  18'  East.  It  is  about  miles  long,  and  half  a 
mile  broad,  extending  in  the  form  of  a crescent  to  the  N.  W.  having  a coral  reef  across  it,  the  channel 
Uirough  wliich  is  very  intricate  and  narrow,  having  only  two  fathoms  water.  The  town  is  situated 


KALPENI— UNDEROOT-.TELLlcnERRV. 


within  this  rerf;  the  inhabitants  are  very  civil.  A trade  is  carried  on  from  hence  to  Cannanore,  in  coir 
and  cocoa  nuts,  and  at  tfab  island  is  caught  the  fish  called  commelmutch,  so  niucli  esteemed  in  JMalabar. 

KALPENI 

Is  about  37  leagues  in  a N.  N.  E.  direction  from  Minicoy;  it  is  about  four  miles  long,  and  one  broad, 
surrounded  with  reefs,  through  which  is  a small  opening  on  the  S.W.  side  of  the  island,  where  boats  go  to 
the  town,  wliich  is  in  the  midst  of  cocoa  nub  trees. 

UNDEROOT.  ^ 

This  island  is  about  three  miles  long  from  oast  to  west,  and  1|  broad;  it  is  in  latitude  10®  4-8  North, 
and  longitude  74-®  East.  It  is  well  planted  with  cocoa  mit  trees;  the  town  is  on  the  north  side  of  the  island, 
and  consists  of  a few  houses  scattered  along  the  sca-side.  Turtle  may  be  taken  here.  TIio  water  is  tolei  ably 
good,  and  the  inhabitants  are  poor  and  inoffensive.  This  island  is  the  nearest  of  the  group  to  the  Malabai' 
Coast,  and  is  about  38  leagues  distant  from  Mount  Dilly. 

The  remainder  of  the  Laccadives  are  not  so  well  known  as  the  al)ove,  most  of  the  islands  being  sur- 
rounded by  coral  reefs,  and  are  dangerous  to  approach  in  vessels  of  any  burthen.  | 

The  greater  part  of  these  islands  are  subject  to  the  Queen  of  Cannanore ; the  inhabitants  arc  all 
Moplas,  and  very  poor;  they  subsist  chiefly  on  cocoa  nuts  and  fish,  liaving  no  grain;  their  boats  arc  made, 
of  cocoa  nut  stems,  and  their  houses  are  entirely^ consti  ucted  of  that  valuable  tree.  The  principal  export  im 
coir,  and  that  which  is  made  here,  has  been  at  all  times  esteemed  the  best  in  India ; it  lias  always  beeir 
used  by  the  Arabs,  and  our  ships  in  the  Indian  Ocean  generally  prefer  it  to  hempen  cordage  for  running 
rigging.  Ambergris  is  occasionally  to  be  met  with  among  these  island.s. 