

Of  copper  coins,  the  Bombay  pice  coined  in  England,  and,  Tippoo’s  dubs  are  current  here;  these 
with  their  fractions  },  and  J are  the  only  small  coins  in  use.  Cowries  are  not  in  circulation. 

In  payment  for  goods  or  debts,  eveiy  person  must  receive  these  coins  at  the  above  rate  of  exchange* 
The  money  changei’s  give  silver  for  gold  at  the  regulated  price;  but  they  take  a small  batta,  or  exdiangg^ 


MANGALORE. 


317 

W1.CI.  they  give  gold  for  .silver.  They  also  give  copper  for  silver  at  the  regulated  price,  hut  demand 
10 J dubs  for  the  silver  funaiii. 

Accounts  are  commonly  kept  in  Sultany  pagodas,  rupees,  and  annas;  olliers  are  kept  in  pagodas, 
a nominal  fanam  of  It)  to  a pagoda,  and  annas,  or  16  parts  of  tlicse  fannms. 

Weiohts.— Ihe  seer  used  for  Aveighing,  contains  4'^97  grains,  which  is  rather  more  tlian^itRomliay 
rapes.  The  seer  Ls  divided  into  halves,  quarters,  eighths,  and  sixteenths.  The  numher  of  seers  in  the 
maund  varies  according  to  the  goods  to  be  disposed  of. 


The  mannd  I)y  which  goods  are  sold  in  the  mai  ket  is 46  seers,  or  lbs.  t?8,l  t 

The  maund  by  which  the  merchants  purchase,  and  by  whicli  tlie  t'ompany  buy 
and  sell,  weighs  lb  rupees  more, 

Jaggery  is  bought  and  sold  by  the  maund  of’ 40  seers I j 


The  candy  contains  20  maunds,  and  varies  accordingly,  liom  .Vri  lbs.  to  5R1)}  llj«. 

Measures.— rhe  seer  in  the  bazar  is  formed  by  mixing  eipml  (juuntitit's  of  sail,  and  ol’lhe  nine  most 
common  grains,  and  then  by  taking  of  the  mixture  84  Bombay  rupees  weight;  this  fills  the  seer  measure, 
and  is  about  73,683  dec.  cubical  inches.  The  moray  contains  38  seers,  or  about  bushel. 

The  grain  measure,  by  which  the  farmers  sell  their  crops,  is  thus  formed:  64,125  cubical  inches  make 
1 hany,  14  hanies  make  1 cullishigay,  3 cullisliigays  make  1 niudi  or  moray,  which  is  about  J,2525  biisIicL 

Grain,  salt,  and  sometimes  pepptr,  are  sold  by  measure;  of  this  last  a pucka  seer,  or  73,683  cubical 
inches,  is  reckoned  to  weigh  51}  Bombay  rupees.  The  corge  for  rice  is  49  morays. 

IMPORTS. 

The  principal  imports  are,  cotton  cloths  from  Surat,  Cutcli,  and  Madras.  The  Surat  blue  cloth  is  the 
most  common;  it  is  36  cubits  long,  2 broad,  and  of  a very  dark  colour,  selling  here  from  18  to  50  rupees 
per  corge;  and  coarse  white  cloth  from  Cutch,  Bownaghur,  and  other  plac(‘s  to  the  northward  of  Bombay. 

Salt  from  Bombay  and  Goa;  the  former  sells  at  70,  the  latter  at  50  jiagodas  the  ciimba. 

Raw  silk  for  the  use  of  the  manufacturers  above  the  Ghauts,  is  imported  from  China  and  Bengal;  and 
from  Muscat,  a kind  of  red  dye,  a species  of  madder,  is  brought. 