

The  English  established  a factory  here  in  1669,  for  supplying  themselves  witli  pepper.  The  Dutch 
also  had  a resident  here  for  a number  of  years.  The  principal  produce  at  present  is  grain. 

CANANORE 

Is  situated  at  the  bottom  of  a small  bay,  which  is  one  of  the  best  on  the  coast.  The  town  contains 
many  good  houses  belonging  to  the  Mussulman  merchants;  the  remainder  are  chiefly  huts.  The  fort  is 
situated  on  a kind  of  peninsula,  which  forms  the  hay,  and  is  in  latitude  IP  51'  North,  and  longitude 
75“  25' East;  it  is  very  strong,  and  since  the  province  has  belonged  to  the  Company,  it  has  been  consi- 
derably strengthened  with  works  after  the  European  fashion,  and  is  now  the  head  quarters  of  the  tioopa 
atationed  in  Ae  province,  for  which  it  seems  well  adapted. 

Ships  may  anchor  abreast  the  fort,  in  from  ii  to  5 ^thorns.- 


320 


LACCADIVE  ISLANDS— MINICPY. 


Cananorc  was  first  visited  hy  tlic  Portuguese  in  1501,  where  they  were  kindly  received.  They  obtained 
permission  to  build  a fort,  and  soon  after  found  occasion  to  quarrel  with  the  inhabitants,  and  took  the 
city,  of  which  they  retained  possession  till  driven  out  by  the  Dutch  about  1660.  The  Dutcli  strongly 
fortified  it,  expending  in  the  year  1 670,.  «P50,000  on  the  fortifications.  At  length  finding  it  of  no  utility 
to  them  in  a commercial  point  of  view,  it  was  in  1770  sold  to  a native  Prince  for  100,000  rupees; 
it  was  afterwards  taken  by  Tippoo,  and  in  December,  1700,  it  was  taken  from  him  by  the  English, 
under  Major-General  Abercrombie,  and  has  remained  in  their  possession  ever  since. 

Some  indificrent  bullocks  and  poultry  are  to  be  procured  here;  watering  is  difficult  and  expensive,  and 
‘fire-wood  is  scarce. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASUl 

All  sorts  of  Indian  coins  pass  current  here ; the  weights  and  meas^p  are  the  same  as  at  Tellicherry. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


t 

isMs  £ 


The  district  of  Cananore  is  small,  extending  in  no  part  more  than  two  miles  from  the  fort ; yet  the 
Uiliby,  or  Queen,  pays  a revenue  of  14,000  rupees  as  a land  tax,  and  the  Company  receive  all  the  customs. 
She  is  allowed  to  collect  all  the  other  revenues.  Most  of  the  Laccadive  Islands  belong  to  her,  and  she 
lias  several  vessels,  which  constantly  trade  to  Arabia,  Bengal,  Surat,  and  Sumatra,  from  whence  the 
following  articles  are  imported. 


Almonds.  1 

Camphirc. 

Opium. 

Arrack. 

Dates. 

Piece-goods. 

Benjamin. 

Horses. 

Rose-water. 

Sugar  candy. 

Turmeric. 

Tobacco. 


By  the  outward-bound  East  India  ships  for  Bombay,  which  occasionally  stop  here  on  their  way  up 
the  coast,  and  by  roasting  vessels  from  Bombay,  are  imported  for  the  consumption  of  the  Europeans 
itationed  at  Cananore,  and  in  its  neighbourhood,  the  under-mentioned  articles,  viz. 