


ANJEDIVAH. 

This  island  is  in  latitude  14°  41  North,  about  two  miIe.^from  the  shore,  to  the  southward  of  Carwar 
head.  It  is  about  a mile  in  length,  and  jiossessed  by  llie  Portuguese.  It  appeals  on  the  outside  barren  and 
rocky,  but  on  the  side  next  the  land  it  is  pleasant.  Here  are  a small  town  and  castle,  and  a few  gardens;  it 
is  chiefly  used  to  transport  felons  to  from  Goa  and  the  island  of  Dili.  Tliey  are  taught  to  spin  cotton  thrcRd 
and  yarn,  and  to  weave  stockings,  which  are  the  best  made  in  this  part  of  India,  and  very  cheap. 

Anjedivah  was  important  in  former  times  for  being  the  place  where  the  first  Portuguese  voyagers 
careened  and  refitted  their  ships,  and  it  was  the  retreat  of  the  British  troojis  sent  from  England  to  take 
possession  of  Bombay,  on  the  King’s  marriage  with  the  Infanta  of  I’ortngal;  but  theV  iceroy  of  Goa  refusing 
to  deliver  it,  the  troops  were  landed  here,  when  their  commander,  Sir  Abraham  Shipman,  died;  and  the 
troops,  for  want  of  provisions  and  accommodation,  and  from  the  unhealtliiness  of  the  climate,  were 
reduced  from  400  to  lO'I  men,  previous  to  the  island  of  Bombay  being  ceded  by  the  Portuguese,  which 
took  place  in  1661r-5. 

In  case  of  necessity,  a ship  may  find  shelter  from  the  S.  W.  moiuioon  uncU*r  tliis  island. 

S a 


314 


MERJEE—FOllTIFIED  ISLAND-ONORE. 


MERJEE. 

This  river  is  In  latitude  14®  30'  North,  and  longitude  74°  3r  East,  about  18  miles  S.  E.  fityta 
Anjedivah.  The  entrance  is  between  two  bluff  points,  one  to  the  northward,  the  other  to  the  south- 
ward, which  is  the  highest,  and  defended  hy  a redoubt,  near  which  is  a cluster  of  fine  green  trees  that 
makes  it  very  remarkable.  Just  within  the  south  point,  on  the  side  of  a hill,  stands  a small  square  fort 
built  of  brown  stone,  and  near  it  the  village.  This  place  suffered  in  a siege  it  sustained  from  Hyder,  and 
in  the  reign  of  his  son  it  w'as  nearly  deserted.  Merjee  river  is  recommended  for  ships  wooding  and 
watering,  it  being  very  expensive  and  tedious  at  most  other  places  on  the  coast.  Upon  the  northern  side 
of  the  river,  on  tJie  hill  you  may  cut  good  and  large  fire-w'ood,  and  rice  may  be  procured  in  any  quantity. 
Fresh  water  is  to  be  had  also  in  great  plenty,  extremely  soil  and  good,  nnd  with  the  greatest  ease,  as  you 
do  not  go  into  the  river ; the  watering  place  is  a very  fine  sandy  cove,  just  within  the  north  point  of  the 
westernmost  part  of  the  bay,  where  your  bouts  may  land,  and  you  can  roll  your  casks  upon  the  sand  to 
a low  stone  wall  about  a foot  high,  over  which  you  may  dip  your  buckets  into  the  pool  of  fresh 
water,  and  a large  fleet  may  water  in  two  or  three  days.  The  most  convenient  situation  to  anchor 
is  about  a mile  from  the  north  bluff,  having  Fortified  Island  near  Onore  in  one  with  the  southern 
extreme  of  the  land  bearing  S.  S.  E.  The  river  in  no  place  has  less  than  4{  fathoms  at  half  ebb ; on 
the  bar  there  are  3 fathoms,  and  within  it  7 fathoms,  till  near  the  town,  so  that  if  there  was  occasion, 
a ship  might  enter  the  river,  but  it  would  be  necessary  to  send  a boat  first  to  sound  the  bar. 