

A considerable  trade  is  carried  on  with  the  Muscat  Arabs,  their  vessels  bringing  horses,  dates,  kis- 
mbses,  &c.  taking  in  return,  rice,  pepper,  and  a few  other  ai  ticles. 

MANGALORE. 

This  town  is  situated  near  the  mouth  of  a considerable  river,  in  latitude  12°  50  North,  and  longitude 
75°  7 East;  it  is  navigable  only  by  small  vessels,  there  being  but  10  or  11  feet  water  on  the  bar.  The 
anchorage  for  large  ships  is  abreast  the  fort  and  river,  with  the  flagstaff  about  E.  by  N.  distance  from  the 
the  town  2 or  2}  miles.  The  castle  is  large  and  strongly  fortified,  and  so  situated  as  to  command  and 
protect  the  town  and  entrance  of  the  river.  There  are  some  other  small  forts  in  its  neighbourhood,  at  the 
back  of  the  town,  and  at  tlic  entrance  of  the  river.  The  town  is  of  considerable  extent. 

Mangalore  was  the  principal  seaport  in  the  dominions  of  Hyder,  and  a place  of  considerable  trade. 
In  17fi8  it  was  taken  by  the  English,  and  the  shipping,  consisting  of  nine  large,  and  several  smaller, 
brought  away;  it  was  however  soon  recovered  by  Hyder.  In  1781  he  had  so  far  replaced  his  navy  as  to 
have  nearly  finished  several  ships  of  the  line,  and  some  frigates  and  sloops,  when  it  was  taken  by  General 
Matthews.  In  1793  it  was  invested  by  'J'ippoo  in  person,  with  an  army  of  140,000  men,  assisted  by  the 
French.  The  Governor,  Colonel  Campbell,  made  a most  gallant  defence,  and  suffered  every  extreme  of 
famine,  till  the  place  was  givcm  up  on  honourable  terms  at  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  when  it  was  found 
a mere  heap  of  rubbish.  It  came  again  into  the  possession  of  the  English  at  the  conquest  of  Mysore,  and 
has  continued  so  ever  since. 

Since  the  Company  acquired  the  government  of  tlie  country,  many  considerable  merchants  froiiji 
Bombay,  Surat,  and  Cutch  have  settled  here,  and  the  trade  has  much  increased.  The  vessels  employed  in 
it  are  mostly  belonging  to  other  ports.  Vessels  from  Muscat,  Aden,  Mocha,  Judda,  and  other  places  come 
here  for  grain,  and  large  quantities  are  sent  to  various  places  on  the  coast. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 


Coins.*— The  following  are  the  coins  in  common  currency  here,  and  their  value  in  rupees,  viz. 


Ikeri  or  Swamy  pagoda  4 Rupees. 

Baliadary  or  Hyder’s  pagoda^w^w.,,^^  4 ditto. 
Sultany  or  Tippoo’s  ditto  4 ditto. 

Eristna  or  Mysore  ditto<v«««%««%»%«<%%%%^««  4 ditto. 


Madras  or  star  pagoda  31  Rupees. 

Porto  Novo  ditto  3 ditto 

Canter  Raya  or  Ikeri  fanam  ditto. 

Vir  Raya  fanam  | ditto. 


Of  silver  coins,  the  Surat  and  Madras  rupees  are  considered  of  equal  value,  and  pass  for  5J  silver 
fanams,  the  same  as  are  current  in  Malabar;  in  the  bazar  they  exchange  for  10  dudus  or  dubs,  but  in 
revenue  are  taken  for  14  dubs  each. 