

From  Anjengo  are  brought  piece-goods  manufactured  there,  cocoa  nuts,  and  coir  cordage. 

CHITWA 

Is  in  latitude  10®  23  North,  and  longitude  7(P20'  East,  about  six  miles  S.  S.E.  from  Paniani.  The 
village  stands  on  the  north  side  of  a river;  it  is  small,  and  a place  of  but  little  trade.  Ships  anchor  off  this 
place  in  six  fathoms  abreast  the  river,  which  Ls  wide,  but  will  only  admit  boats  or  small  vessels.  The 
])utch  had  formerly  a fort  here,  from  wliieli  they  wxre  driven  by  Hyder,  about  1770. 

CHANG  ANORE, 

Or  Aycotta  River,  is  about  three  miles  to  the  soutlnvard  of  Cliitwa;  it  has  a bar  at  its  entrance,  with 
five  or  six  feet  water  on  it,  and  14  or  16  feet  inside.  The  towm  is  about  three  mih’s  from  the  sea.  It  was 
visited  by  the  Portuguese  soon  after  their  arrival  in  India,  who  were  kindly  received.  Bi  return  tlic*y  captured 
a ship  laden  with  spices  bound  from  Calicut  to  Cranganoie,  The  inhabitanU  wtre  preparing  to  revenge 

IT  u 


330 


COCHIN. 


themselves,  when  a Portuguese  fleet,  under  Soarez,  landed  a body  of  men,  and  assisted  by  the  King  of  Cochin^ 
attacked  their  army,  gained  a victory,  pursued  the  fugitives  into  the  town,  and  set  it  on  fire.  This  hap- 
pened in  1.504-.  The  Portuguese  built  a strong  fort  near  the  spot,  and  a new  city  was  erected,  of  wliich 
they  retained  possession  till  1660,  when  the  Dutch,  under  Commodore  Goens,  made  themselves  masters  of  it 
without  meeting  the  least  resistance,  and  yielded  it  to  the  Samorin,  to  whom  it  formerly  belonged;  but  on 
his  breaking  his  word  with  them,  tliey  retook  and  fortified  it. 

Cranganore  was  first  visited  by  the  English  in  1615,  under  Keeling,  who  obtained  liberty  of  trade, 
and  permission  to  settle  a factory;  and  it  was  agreed  by  a treaty  with  the  Samorin,  dated  March  10, 1615, 
that  the  English  and  the  Samorin  should  join  their  forces,  and  expel  the  Portuguese  from  Cochin,  which 
when  conquered,  should  be  ceded  to  the  English;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  any  attempts  were  made  for  the 
purpose.  On  the  Dutch  obtaining  possession  of  Cranganore,  the  English  were  expelled,  and  the  natives 
of  tlie  coast  prohibited  from  trading  with  any  foreign  nation,  without  permissioti  of  the  Dutch. 

This  place  is  remarkable  for  liaving  been  the  residence  of  a republic  of  Jews,  part  of  the  tribe  of  Ma- 
nasseh,  who  had  been  carried  into  captivity  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  sent  numbers  of  them  to  this  distant 
place.  Tlieir  history  states  tliat  they  amounted  to  20,000,  and  that  they  were  three  years  in  travelling  to 
this  place,  from  the  time  of  their  setting  out  from  Babylon.  When  they  arrived,  they  were  treated  kindly 
by  the  natives,  and  allowed  every  indulgence.  In  process  of  time  they  increased  in  numbers,  and  grew  so 
wealthy  as  to  purchase  the  little  kingdom  of  Cranganore.  At  present  they  are  few  in  number,  and  very  poor. 