

COLNS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASTTRES. 

Coins. — The  coins  current  here  are  pagodas,  rupees,  fanams,  pice,  and  tars.  There  are  two  kinds  of 
fanams;  the  one  is  a small  gold  coin,  with  a considerable  alloy  of  silver  and  copper ; the  other  a silver  coin ; 
the  pice  and  tar  are  copper,  coined  in  England. 

2 tars  'I  ^ I pice. 

10  pice  I make  } 1 fanam. 

5 fanams  ) Cl  Bombay  rupee. 

The  following  are  the  rates  at  which  gold  coins  commonly  pass  current  at  Tellicherry. 

Porto  Novo  pagodas  rupees.  Venetians,  5 nipees  each;  but  if  paid  to  merchants. 

Star  pagodas  3^  ditto.  520  rupees  per  100  Venetians. 

Sultany  ditto  4 0 50  Surat  gold  mohurs  15  nipees  each 

but  to  pay  for  goods,  430  rupees  per  1 00  pagodas  Bombay  ditto. 

In  selling  goods,  all  bargains  should  lie  made  for  Bombay  rupees,  or  you  will  lose  considerably  by  the 
coins  you  arc  obliged  to  take  here,  more  jiarticularly  the  Venetians,  which  seldom  fetch  more  tlian  four 
rupees  each  at  Bombay,  and  upon  j>agodas  the  loss  is  from  a quarter  to  half  a rupee  each. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  rupees,  quarters,  and  reas,  the  same  os  at  Bombay. 

Weights. — The  commercial  w'cights  are  pollams,  maunds,  and  candiCvS,  thus  divided:  20  pollams 
make  I maiind,  and  20  maunds  1 randy,  which  is  n^ckoned  equal  to  600 lbs.  avoirdupois;  but  the  maund 
does  not  exceed  281  Ih*-  which  makes  the  randy  only  .^70  lbs. 

Measures,-— The  long  mcusuies  are  the  covid,  and  the  guz ; the  former  18  inches,  and  the  latter  28 
inches. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

A considerable  inland  and  foreign  trade  is  carried  on  here.  Most  of  the  ships  from  China  bound  to 
Bombay  and  Goa,  touch  here,  and  dispose  of  part  of  their  cargoes,  which  is  mostly  resold  to  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  interior,  who  make  their  returns  in  the  produce  of  tlie  country,  such  as  ginger,  pepper,  cocoa 
nuts,  coir,  and  cotton  cloth,  which  is  very  good  and  cheap;  they  have  a particular  kind  of  towels, 
esteemed  the  best  in  India.  Here  are  several  Portuguese  merchants,  likewise  a few  Persees.  Many 
of  the  natives  are  men  of  considerable  profierty,  more  particularly  Mousa,  who  is  considered  the  richest 
man  on  the  Malabar  Coast. 

There  are  several  sliops  for  European  goods.  The  articifes  suitable  to  the  consumption  of  the  place, 
are  such  as  are  enumerated  at  Cannnnore,  being  chiefly  for  the  use  of  the  military  and  Europeans  sUtioned 
in  tlie  province;  but  the  quantity  required  is  not  to  any  considerable  extent. 

The  commerce  carried  on  between  the  British  Presidencies  of  Bengal,  Madras,  and  Bombay  with  the 
Coast  of  Malabar  is  considerable.  At  Bengal,  the  trade  of  the  whole  western  side  of  India  is  classed  under 
the  head  of  the  Coast  of  M&iabar;  at  Madras, ProTiace  of  Malabar  is  kept  separate ; and  at  Bombay  li 
is  classed  with  that  of  Canarck 