

Cranganore,  and  a fort  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  named  Aycotta,  gave  rise  to  the  important 
war  of  the  Mysore.  They  had  been  taken  by  the  Dutch  from  the  Portuguese  about  1660.  Hyder,  seeing 
the  conveniency  of  Cranganore  to  his  kingdom,  in  1780  seized  and  garrisoned  it.  In  the  ensuing  war,  the 
Dutch  repossessed  themselves  of  it.  In  1789  Tippoo  determined  to  make  himself  master  of  it,  and  raised 
a great  army,  which  so  alarmed  the  Dutcli,  that  they  resolved  to  dispose  of  the  two  forts  to  the  Rajah  of 
Travancorc,  an  ally  of  tlie  English,  in  order  to  divert  the  storm  from  themselves.  Tippoo  marelied  with 
his  whole  forces,  and  attacked  the  lines  of  Travancore.  The  battle  between  his  army  and  that  of  the  Rajah, 
the  latter  in  defence  of  Cranganore,  on  May  1,  1790,  was  the  signal  of  the  general  war,  on  which  com- 
menced the  first  campaign  in  June  following.  This  glorious  war  was  concluded  by  the  partition  treaty, 
which  put  us  ill  possession  of  the  whole  coast  for  an  extent  of  120  miles. 

COCHIN 

Is  situated  in  latitude  9®  57'  North,  and  longitude  76®  29'  East,  and  stands  on  the  south  side  of  the 
entrance  of  the  most  considerable  river  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  but,  like  the  other  rivers,  has  a bar,  which 
is  navigable  by  ships  drawing  14  or  15  feet  water.  The  channel  is  on  the  northern  shore.  There  is  at  times  a 
surf  on  the  bar ; strangers  ought  therefore  to  be  careful  in  running  for  the  river  in  their  boats,  as  accidents 
have  happened  to  persons  unacquainted,  crossing  the  bar  late  in  the  evening.  The  common  anchorage  is  in 
five  to  six  fathoms,  with  the  flagstaff  bearing  E.  N.  E.  about  three  miles  off  shore. 

Cochin  was  the  capital  of  the  Dutch  possessions  on  the  western  side  of  India,  the  seat  of  government, 
and  to  which  all  other  places  were  subordinate. 

The  present  town  is  small,  being  about  a mile,  or  little  more  in  circuit;  its  size  has  been  reduced  by 
the  Dutch,  in  order  to  make  it  more  defensible  with  a small  garrison,  and  it  is  now  completely  fortified. 
When  the  Dutch  first  took  it  from  the  Portuguese,  it  was  a large  city,  the  remains  of  which  are  now  a 
town,  about  a mile  and  a half  distant  from  Cochin,  called  Mutton  Cherry;  the  intermediate  space 
is  waste  ground,  excepting  a broad  and  deep  ditch,  which  forms  a semicircle,  extending  from  the  river 
to  the  sea,  over  which  is  a drawbridge.  As  the  town  is  close  to  the  sea  on  one  side,  and  the  other  side  is 
on  the  banks  of  the  south  entrance  of  the  river,  it  is  thus  by  art  made  a very  strong  island.  There  is  not 


COCHIN. 


irater  sufficient  fbr  large  ships  to  come  near  enough  on  the  seaside  to  batter  the  walls,  or  even  for  a fr  igate 
to  enter  the  harbour,  as  a bar  is  thrown  up  about  a mile  from  the  shore,  which  makes  it  very  dangerous 
even  for  boats  going  from,  or  coming  to  shore  at  improper  times.  The  entrance  of  the  river  is  narrow  for 
some  little  space  above  the  town,  when  it  widens  by  degrees,  and  becomes  large  and  spacious. 