

Ilyder  Ally  having  advanced  towards  Calicut,  it  was  voluntarily  surrendered  to  him  by  the  Samorin, 
who  restored  him  to  his  dominions,  on  condition  of  paying  a small  tribute.  In  1782  it  was  taken  by  the 
English,  the  enemy  expelled  the  country,  and  the  Samorin  restored  to  his  possessions. 

The  town  was  afterwards  taken  by  Tippoo,  the  place  destroyed,  and  the  inhabitants  removed  to 
Ileypour;  but  when  the  English  conquered  the  province,  the  natives  returned,  and  rebuilt  the  town,  which 
at  present  contains  upwards  of  5000  houses,  mostly  mean  buildings. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Coins.— The  principal  coins  in  circulation  are  tars,  fanams,  and  rupees ; but  accounts  are  kept  iu 
rupees,  quarters,  and  reas,  us  at  Bombay. 


IG  tars  or  vis 
5 fanams 
35  rupee's 
3i  rupees 
IG  rupees 


1 fan  am 
1 rupee. 

1 star  [mgoda. 

1 Port  Novo  pagoda. 

1 Bombay  gold  mohur- 


Weights.— 100  pools  make  1 niaund  of  301bs.,  and  20  maunds  1 cancly  of  GOOlbs.  avoirdupois. 
Long  Measure.— 1 covid  is  18  inches,  and  1 guz  is  287V  inches.  Timber  is  sometimes  measured  at 
Calicut  by  the  covid  and  borel ; 12  borels  (when  the  timber  is  sawed,  and  24  when  unsawed)  are  1 covid. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


Vessels  from  the  Red  Sea,  and  Arabia,  the  northern  ports  frequent  this  place  for  timber  and  plank, 
bringing  with  them  the  commodities  of  their  respective  countries.  Very  little  European  goods  are  sold, 
except  a few  necessaries  for  the  use  of  the  military  stationed  here. 

Timber  and  plank  are  the  principal  articles  of  export;  but  the  under-mentionecli  are  sometime! 
procurable  here, 


('ardamiims. 
Coculus  indicus. 
Cassia. 

Cutch. 


Cowries. 
Columbo  root. 
Coir  cordage. 
Cocoa  nuts. 


Ginger. 

Pepper. 

Rice. 

Sharks’  fins. 


Sandal  wood. 
Turmeric. 
Tamarinds. 
Wax. 


Some  piece-goods  ore  manufactured  in  the  neighbourhood,  similar  to  the  Madras  long  cloth;  they 
are  of  six  calls  fineness,  that  is  to  say,  contain  in  the  warp  744  threads,  and  the  pieces  fire  72  covids  long, 


CALICUT. 


327 


by  9j  in  width.  The  prices  vary  from  30  to  35  gold  ftinams,  according  to  the  quality.  Very  few  are 
made  of  a superior  kind.  They  are  sometimes  bleached,  and  sent  to  Europe. 

The  duties  on  exports  are  rated  ad  valorem ; it  is  therefore  advisable,  in  making  bargains  at  Calicut,  to 
agree  at  a certain  price  deliverable  on  board* 

PRICES  OF  DRUGS  AND  SPICES  IN  CALICUT  IN  1520. 

The  following  list  of  commodities,  and  their  prices,  is  extracted  from  a Portuguese  author  wlio  visited 
Calicut  at  the  above  period,  which  will  serve  to  shew  the  nature  of  the  trade  then  carried  on. 

Lac  of  Martaban,  if  it  be  the  best,  is  worth  the  frazil,  which  is  221bs.  6oz.  of 
Portugal,  after  lOoz.  to  the  lb.  which  is  about  4()lbs.  weight  of  the 
subtele  of  Venice,  i.s  in  value  18  fanams,  which  are  18  marcels  of  silver, 
for  1 fanam  is  about  1 marcel  of  silver. 