

PANIANI, 

Or  Panyany  River,  is  in  latitude  10=^38'  North,  and  longitude  70^  13  i:ast,  and  navi-ahh*  on]>  hy 
small  craft,  the  water  being  shoal.  The  town  is  scattered  over  a sandy  plain  on  the  south  side  the 
river,  and  contains  about  500  houses  belonging  to  the  trad(n\sj  with  above  40  mos(|U(>s,  and  up^\ard.s  ol' 
1000  huts  inhabited  by  tlic  lower  orders  of  people.  It  is  very  irregularly  built,  but  many  of  Liu*  bouN('> 
are  two  stories  high,  and  appear  to  be  very  comfortable  dwellings;  they  are  huilt  of  sLoiu*,  and  tlialehed 
with  cocoa  nut  leaves.  The  huts  are  inhabited  by  boatmen  and  fishermen,  wlio  wt  re  fornicrly  Miu  uas,  a 
low  cast  of  Hindoos,  but  now  tliey  have  all  embraced  the  fiiitli  of  JMahomet.  All  the  moMpu  s are  tbat<  lied, 
and  their  principal  entrance  is  at  the  cast  end,  where  the  roof  terminates  abruptly  in  faneit'ul  mouldings 
and  carved  work,  that  by  the  natives  are  considered  ornamental.  31ie  Frcntb  and  Fnglish  bad  formerly 
factories,  which  were  removed  about  1070. 

Near  this  place  there  is  a remarkable  gap  in  the  mountains,  called  the  Gliauts,  ilirough  whicli  tlic 
N.  E.  monsoon  blows  in  general  stronger  than  on  any  other  part  of  the  coast. 

IMP(3RTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

About  fifty  years  ago  the  merchants  of  this  place  were  very  ricli,  and  pt)^se^^ed  vessels  that  traded  to 
Surat,  Mocha,  Madras,  and  Bengal ; hut  tlie  oppression  of  Tippoo  reduced  them  t(»  great  povi  rty,  and 
most  of  them  are  now  under  the  necessity  of  acting  as  agents  to  Moiisa,  .a  rieli  Mussulman  merchant  of 
Telliclieriy.  They  have,  however,  many  trading  boats  called  patamars,  whicli  on  an  avei  agc  cony  50,000 
cocoa  nuts,  or  1,000  mudies  of  rice,  equal  to  500  Bengal  bags  of  2 maunds  each : these  frequent  Tellitberry 
and  Calicut  for  supplies  of  such  European  and  Bengal  goods  as  are  in  request  on  this  part  of  the  coast. 

Paniani  is  also  frequented  by  vessels  from  different  places  on  the  coast;  those  from  Bombay  bring-' 
wheat,  fenugreek,  several  kinds  of  pulse,  jaggery,  and  salt,  and  take  in  return  teak  wood  and  cocoa  nuts. 

From  Radjapour,  a town  in  the  Mahratta  country,  vessels  bring  the  same  kinds  of  grain  that  air 
brought  from  Bombay,  and  also  sugar  cane,  jaggery,  and  cutcb,  and  take  away  the  same  returns. 

From  Gheriah  arc  brought  mucli  jaggery  and  ciitcli,  and  coco.a  nuts  are  taken  in  return. 

Mucli  rice  is  exported  from  hence  to  the  northern  parts  of  the  province,  but  there  is  no  trade  carried 
on  with  the  Maldives. 

From  Cochin  are  imported  canoes,  spices,  sugar,  wheat,  mustard  seed,  &c.  The  returns  are  iron 
amelted  in  the  interior,  and  rice,  both  roiigli  and  freed  from  the  liusk. 