

The  general  direction  of  the  island  is  north  and  south.  Its  length  from  Dondra  Head  tt)  Point  Pedro 
is  about  250  miles,  and  its  greatest  breadth  about  150,  in  shape  much  resembling  a pear.  TImj  territories 
belonging  to  Great  Britain  form  a belt  round  the  island,  extending  in  some  j)Iaces  not  more  than  six  miles, 
in  some  thirty,  and  on  the  northern  side  near  sixty  miles  into  the  interior.  The  inland  |)r(»viiices  cut 
off  from  all  communication  with  the  sea,  and  occupying  the  greater  |>art  of  the  island,  arc  still  sulyect  to 
the  King  of  Candy,  whose  capital  is  situated  nearly  in  the  centre  of  his  dominions. 

The  first  Europeans  who  made  any  settlement  on  this  island,  were  the  Portuguese,  ^\ho  landed  Iiera 
in  1505;  but  it  was  twelve  years  after  that  period  when  they  began  to  settle  factories  in  consequence  of  the 
opposition  they  experienced  from  the  Aiabs,  who  apprehended  tlie  loss  of  tlieii'  trade  in  cinnamon,  with 
which  they  had  hitherto  supplied  all  Europe,  'flie  Portuguese  were  kindly  received,  and  formed  a treaty 
with  the  King  of  Candy,  who  agreed  to  pay  annually  250,000  lbs.  of  cinnamon,  on  condition  tiuit  the  fleet! 
of  Portugal  should  defend  his  coasts  from  invasion.  They  soon  after  obtained  permission  (o  Iiuild  u fort 
at  Columbo.  In  1023  the  King  of  Candy  made  w^ar  against  them;  but  being  defeated,  was  obliged  to 
accept  of  a peace,  on  condition  of  paying  the  Portuguese  two  elephants  a ycai-  by  way  of  tribute. 

The  Dutch  first  landed  here  in  1602.  In  1038,  in  consequence  of  tlie  cruelties  and  insolence  of  the 
Portuguese,  the  King  of  Candy  sent  an  embassy  to  Batavia,  to  request  the  assistance  of  the  Dutdi  against 

K X 


S38 


ARirO— CONDATCIIY—CALPENTEEN. 


them.  An  alliance  was  formed,  and  the  Dutch  sent  an  army  and  fleet  for  that  service;  and  by  open  wars  and 
secret  contrivances,  they  in  the  course  of  about  fifty  years  expelled  the  Portuguese  from  tlie  island,  of 
wliich  they  retained  possession  till  179C,  when  the  ports  belonging  to  them  were  taken  by  tlie  English 
forces,  who  continue  masters  of  the  sea  coasts  of  the  island. 

The  principal  ports  and  trading  places  are  Aripo,  Calpenteen,  Negombo,  Columbo,  Matura,  Point 
de  Galle,  Batticaloe,  Trincoinalee,  and  Jafihapatam.  Of  these,  Columbo,  Point  de  Galle,  and  Trincomalee 
are  the  only  ones  frequented  by  large  ships. 

ARIPO 

Is  about  four  leagues  to  the  southward  of  the  east  end  of  Manar,  and  about  two  miles  north  of  the 
•cene  of  the  pearl  fishery,  in  latitude  about  8"^  47  North,  and  longitude  79^  40'  East.  Here  is  a small 
fort  of  two  bastions,  containing  one  building  of  two  stories,  end  some  lower  houses*  The  works  are  but 
slightly  constructed,  and  the  post  seems  never  to  have  possessed  either  strength  or  consequence.  Being 
intended  only  as  the  residence  of  an  occasional  guard,  and  situate  on  a barren  shore,  it  answers  all  the 
purposes  which  are  required.  About  500  yards  to  the  north  of  the  fort,  lies  a small  village  chiefly  inha- 
bited by  fishermen,  and  adorned  with  a neat  Portuguese  chapel  rising  from  its  centre.  The  beach  is  steep, 
And  the  large  donies  lie  so  close  to  the  shore,  that  a person  might  step  into  them;  at  the  same  time  they 
ride  in  perfect  security.  The  gulf  being  narrow,  no  surf*  is  perceptible.  A house  has  been  buflt  here  for 
the  Governor,  which  is  the  most  beautiful  building  on  the  island;  but  it  is  only  inhabited  during  the  period 
of  the  fishery,  which  is  carried  on  at 