

In  the  neighbourhood  of  Negombo  the  cinnamon  plantations  commence,  and  spread  over  a wide 
.space  of  the  country,  and  with  only  a few  interruptions,  stretch  far  beyond  Columbo. 

Fish  is  caught  here  in  great  abundance  and  variety,  and  large  <juantitics  are  e.xpi)rted  in  a dried  state 

COLUMBO. 

Or  Colombo,  the  seat  of  governmgnt,  and  the  capital  of  the  British  possessions  on  the  island,  is  in 
latitude  6®  57'  North,  and  longitude  80°  East.  The  anchorage  for  large  shijis  is  about  2 miles  from  the 
town,  the  flagstaff  bearing  south,  but  small  vessels  run  nearer  in.  There  being  no  shelter,  this  roail  is  much 
exposed  in  the  S.  W.  monsoon ; it  is  therefore  unsafe  for  ships  to  remain  during  that  period. 

The  fort  is  composed  of  seven  bastions  of  different  sizes,  connected  by  intervening  curtains,  and  de- 
fended by  300  pieces  of  heavy  cannon.  It  measures  a mile  and  a cpiartcr  in  circumference,  and  occupies  a 
situation  almost  entirely  insulated : the  sea  encompassing  two-thirds  of  the  works,  and  the  other  third 
being  bounded  by  an  extensive  lake  of  fresh  w’ater.  A communication  is  opened  with  the  country  on  two 
sides  by  narrow  necks  of  land  or  causeways,  running  betwixt  the  sen  and  the  lake,  by  (he  cutting  of  which, 
the  fortress  would  be  converted  into  an  island.  From  the  nature  of  its  position,  and  there  being  no  rising 
ground  which  commands  it,  Columbo  is  a place  of  considerable  strength ; and  if  well  garrisoned,  capable  of 
making  a vigorous  resistance ; it  however  surrendered  by  capitulation  to  the  British  forces. 

Four  of  the  bastions  look  towards  the  sea ; the  three  others  face  the  lake,  and  command  the  cause- 
ways leading  into  the  fort,  the  situation  of  which  is  cool,  pleasant,  and  heultliy;  and  in  these  respects  it 
forms  a more  comfortable  residence  for  a garrison  than  any  other  military  station  in  India. 

A projecting  rock,  on  which  two  batteries  are  erected,  affords  shelter  to  a small  semicircular  bay  on 
Uie  north  side  of  the  fort.  Here  the  landing  place  is  rendered  pleasant  and  convenient  by  a wooden  ijuay, 
extending  about  100  feet  into  the  sea,  and  answering  well  for  the  loading  and  unloading  boats.  The 
deptlj  of  water  is  not  sufficient  to  allow  sloops  or  large  donies  to  lie  alongside  of  the  (piay;  those  not 
exceeding  100  tons  burden,  ride  at  anchor  at  the  distance  of  only  a cable’.s  length  from  it,  and  .smaller 
vessels  moor  close  along  the  shore.  Large  ships  seldom  come  within  this  road  ; and  when  they  do,  they 
keep  at  a greater  distance.  A bar  of  sand,  on  some  parts  of  which  the  water  is  not  ten  feet  deep,  extends 
from  the  projecting  rock  across  the  bay.  As  the  channel,  in  which  it  can  be  crossed,  is  liable  to  shift, 
and  not  easily  dbcovered,  ships  commonly  anchor  about  a mile  beyond  it,  and  only  in  the  fine  weather  ot 
the  safe  season  venture  to  go  witliin  the  bar.  The  outer  road  affords  secure  anchorage  tor  no  more  than 
<ix  months  in  the  year,  from  the  beginning  of  October  to  the  end  of  March,  when  the  wind  blowt 