


CAPE  COMORIN, 

The  southern  extremity  of  the  Peninsula  of  Hindostan,  b situated  in  latitude  8°  5 N.  and  longitude 
770  44'  East.  Between  Anjengo  and  tUs  Cape  there  arc  several  villages  on  the  coast,  which  are  only  fro-- 
quented  by  small  coasting  vessels. 

MALDIVES. 

These  are  a great  range  or  chain  of  numerous  low  islands  and  rocks,  nearly  on  a meridian  from 
7°  6'  North  to  0°  38'  South  latitude ; the  large  islands  are  inhabited,  and  abound  with  cocoa  nuts, 
but  many  of  the  others  are  only  sandbanks  and  barren  rocks.  The  greatest  breadth  of  the  range  i.s  said 
to  be  30  to  34  leagues,  and  is  formed  of  large  groups  or  clusters,  called  by  the  natives  Attoilons,  and  are 
thirteen  in  number,  the  principal  of  which  is  denominated  Male,  or  King  s Island,  and  is  on  the  east  side 
of  the  south  point  of  the  Male  Attollon.  The  road  seems  unsafe  for  large  .ships,  the  bottom  being  coral,, 
and  the  anchorage  very  near  the  shore,  which  is  lined  with  rocks ; it  is  customary  to  moor  with  tu  o or 
three  anchors  and  hawsers  fast  to  the  shore,  to  prevent  a ve.ssel  from  sheering  about.  The  boats  belonging  to 
the  natives  lie  inside  the  rocks,  the  passages  between  which  are  secured  at  night  by  booms.  The  houses 
are  built  of  wood,  and  covered  with  leaves  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree,  and  are  scattered’ about,  not  together  in  a 
town.  The  King's  house  is  two  stories  high,  and  a handsome  building.  They  Iwve  many  cannon  in 
different  parts  of  the  island,  more  particularly  near  the  King’s  residence,  where  is  their  magazine. 

These  t«land«  were  discovered  by  the  Portuguese  in  1507.  They  soon  after  obtained  leave  to  build  a 
fortified  magazine  at  Male,  which  they  accordingly  did  of  wood  and  earth,  having  no  better  materials; 
but  soon  shewing  a dbposition  to  rule  over  the  natives,  and  to  give  the  law  in  matters  of  commerce,, 
they  were  expelled,  since  which  period  no  European  power  has  endeavoured  to  form  a setUement. 

Formerly  these  islands  were  much  frequented  by  trading  ships  from  India ; but  from  the  ilifficulties 
f— «>rivn«»»»i  in  procuring  a cargo  for  a large  vessel,  and  the  danger  attending  the  navigation,  it  has  lately 
been  given  up,  and  the  trade  is  carried  on  in  their  own  boats,  some  of  them  of  30  tons  burden,  whicli  are 
formed  of  cocoa-nut  trees.  They  arrive  at  Balasorc  in  fleets  of  about  30  or  30,  in  the  months  of  June  or 
July,  when  the  S.  W.  monsoon  is  steady  in  the  bay  of  Bengal.  They  are  Mahometans,  dress  after  the 
of  the  Moors  of  Indio,  ond  appear  to  be  an  industrious  quiet  people. 


0 


33« 


MALDHTii. 


COINS. 

Tlioir  moDPy  is  of  silver  only,  called  larins,  and  the  value  about  a quai’ter  of  a rupee  each.  All  oilier 
monies  pass  current  by  weight,  and  every  man  keeps  weights  for  the  purpose,  so  that  they  are  frequently 
oblige<l  to  cut  dollars,  nipees,  &e.  into  j)ieces  to  pay  for  any  commodity. 