

part  of  the  coast. 

There  are  several  villages  on  the  coast  between  Cochin  and  Quilon,  which  are  only  frequented  by  the 
small  coasting  vessels,  for  coir,  timber  for  ship-building,  and  pepper. 


QUILON. 

The  fort  of  Quilon  is  situated  on  a point  of  land,  in  latitude  8°  ol  North,  and  longitude  18 
East,  about  3 miles  to  the  southwawl  of  Iviker  river,  which  is  a wide  inlet  leading  to  scveial  livxrs,  one 
of  them  communicating  with  Alipee  and  Cochin,  navigable  only  by  flat-bottomc<l  boats.  1 ho  Company 
have  warehou.ses  at  Quilon  for  pepper,  and  their  ships  call  here  to  receive  it  on  board. 

The  Portuguese  settled  here  soon  after  their  arrival  on  the  Malabar  Coast.  At  that  penod  the  budd- 
ings were  very  splendid,  and  the  fortifications  numerous,  and  strong.  It  was  taken  from  Uicm  by  the 


334 


ANJENGO. 


Dutcli  in  1662,  who  reduced  it  to  a narrower  compass.  It  was  formerly  a place  of  considerable  trade,  but 
of  late  years  it  has  fallen  to  decay,  and  the  fortifications  arc  now  in  ruins.  There  are  many  bouses  scattered 
about  the  point,  and  to  the  southward,  near  the  pepper  warehouses,  is  a Portu;i;uese  church. 

ANJENGO 

Is  situated  in  latitude  30  North,  and  longitude  77"  East,  about  20  miles  to  the  southward  of 
Quilon.  It  is  tlie  most  southerly  possession  belonging  to  the  Company  on  the  Malabar  Coast.  The  fort 
is  regular,  having  two  bastions  joined  by  a curtain,  all  of  them  mounted  witli  cannon,  as  is  likewise  a 
platform  towards  the  sea.  On  tlie  land  side  it  is  secured  by  a broad  and  deep  river,  which,  after  winding 
round  the  greatest  part  of  tlic  fort,  empties  itself  into  the  sea  a little  to  the  southward.  This  river  would 
l)e  useful,  but  it  has  a bar  navigable  only  for  small  vessels.  The  ('hief,  and  the  Company's  servants  reside 
within  the  fort;  and  as  there  is  no  tavern  or  place  of  accommodation  for  visiters,  the  Chief  generally 
entertains  them  during  their  stay  in  the  roads.  There  are  a few  small  houses  and  huts  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
fort,  but  nothing  that  deserves  the  name  of  a town.  Ships  generally  anchor  with  the  flagstaff  bearing 
E.  N.  Fi.  in  11  or  12  fathoms,  about  2 miles  from  the  shore.  The  principal  intention  of  this  settlement  is 
the  procuring  pepper  produced  in  the  Travancorc  country,  the  Rajah  of  which  is  under  an  engagement 
to  the  Company  to  supply  a certain  quantity  at  a stipulated  price;  but  in  consequence  of  a misunderstanding 
relative  thereto,  a war  commenced  with  the  Rajah  in  1808,  whicli  ended  in  the  English  acquiring  possession 
of  all  the  strong  places  in  his  dominions,  and  settling  a peace  upon  their  own  terms. 