

The  English  obtained  permission  to  settle  and  fortify  a factory  at  Anjengo  in  1694,  on  condition  tliat 
they  would  agree  to  purchase  all  the  pepper  produced  in  the  country,  and  pay  2^  per  cent,  on  all  goods 
imported  and  exported,  with  a present  of  75  sequins.  In  1720  the  Chief  and  several  of  the  Company’s 
servants  liaving  given  offence  to  the  Queen,  were  invited  to  her  residence  about  12  miles  from  Anjengo, 
where  they  were  treacherously  cut  off.  The  factory  was  soon  re-established  upon  its  old  footing,  and  since 
that  period,  the  Company  have  remained  in  undisturbed  possession. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  an»  MEASURES. 

Coins.— Accounts  are  kept  in  rupees,  fanams,  pice,  and  budgerooks,  thus  divided: 


4 budgerooks 
12  pice 

6 Gallion  fanams 

7 Travancore  ditto%<^^ 


1 pice. 

1 fanam. 
1 rupee. 
1 rupee. 


An  Anjengo  fanam  is  reckoned  in  the  Company’s  account  at  | of  a rupee.  There  arc  two  kinds  of 
fanams,  Gallion  and  Travancore;  the  former  are  the  best  by  16  per  cent. 

Foreign  coins  pass  current  here,  the  mean  rates  of  exchange  being  as  under: 


Negapatam  pagoda  passes  for 
Madras,  or  3 Swamy  pagodas 
Forto  Novo  pagoda 
Venetians 

Mexico  dollars,  full  weight.^ 

Ducatoons  in 

Borribay  or  Surat  rupees 


20  to  21  Gallion  fanams. 
19  to  19x  ditto. 

17  to  18  ditto. 

22  to  22i  ditto. 
12itol3  ditto. 

14|  to  15  ditto. 

6 to  5i  ditto. 


lOOox.  Mexico  dollars  at  12|  fanams  per  dollar  weight,  and  5 j fanams  per  rupee,  produce  Rs.  242  3 65, 
Weights.— The  maund  is  28  lbs.  avoirdupois,  and  20  niaunds  1 candy,  equal  to  560 lbs.  avoirdupois, 
Urbich  is  equal  to  7 factory  maunds,  20  seers  of  Bengal,  or  22  Madras  maunds,  3 vis,  8 pollams. 
Measures.— The  ADjengo  covidis  half  an  English  yard,  or  18  inchcs.r 


CAPE  COMORIN— MALDIVES. 


tm 


COMMERCE. 

Pepper  is  the  staple  commodity,  which  is  generally  purchased  on  account  of  the  Company,  and  shipped 
olT  in  tonics,  or  country  boats,  on  account  of  the  surf'.  There  are  some  coarse  wliitc  plece-goiKls  nianu* 
{oclured  here  for  the  Europe  market.  A few  drugs,  such  as  cassia,  zedoary,  coculus  indicus.  See.  are  to  be 
met  with,  and  coir  in  considerable  quantities.  The  European  articles  imported  arc  very  trifling,  con-- 
sisting  of  a few  necessaries  for  the  Chief  and  his  establishment. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

But  few  articles  are  to  be  procured  here.  No  beef,  on  account  of  the  religious  prejudices  of  the 
natives;  a few  fowls,. vegetables,  and  fruit  are  all  that  can  be  reckoned  upon.  Water  is  scarce  and  very 
indifferent;  but  at  the  red  cliffs,  a few  miles  to  the  northward  of  Anjengo,  it  is  said  to  be  good,  but 
difficult  to  be  shipped,  on  account  of  a considerable  surf  which  generally  prevails  on  the  coast,  particularly 
to  the  southward,  which  renders  it  unsafe  to  attempt  landing  in  a ship's  boat.  The  charge  for  filling  water 
by  country  boats,  is  three  rupees  a butt. 