

There  are  in  this  town  one  large  and  two  smaller  squares.  At  the  end  of  the  former,  next  the  sea,  is 
the  Governor’s  house,  and  at  the  other  end  is  the  main  guard-house.  The  (jovcrnor'.s  is  a noble  edifice, 
with  a long  and  spacious  terrace  fronting  the  sea;  and  the  guard-house  is  liki:\vise  a handsome  build- 
ing, with  barracks  for  300  soldiers  on  the  ground  floor,  and  a shaded  walk  in  front,  with  arches,  over 
wliich  are  convenient  lodging-rooms  for  officers.  Hound  the  walls  of  the  squares  an*  planted  trees,  which 
not  only  afford  a cool  walk,  hut  a convenient  place  for  exercising  the  military  in  garrison.  Here  is  a large 
well-built  and  airy  church.  fi 

The  streets  are  all  straight;  the  houses  regularly  and  handsomely  built  of  brick,  and  kept  in  excellent 
order.  The  channels  for  the  water  are  on  each  side  the  street,  narrow  and  ileep;  the  sides  and  bottom  are 
covered  with  red  tiles,  each  about  fourteen  indies  square,  and  thick  in  proportion.  The  whole  town  is 
covered  with  small  gravel;  the  streets  and  squares  are  raised  in  the  middle,  and  slope  gently  to  the 
channels,  so  that  even  in  the  rainy  season  the  streets  are  clean  and  neat. 

The  ramparts,  which  extend  round  the  town,  arc  very  high  and  strong,  and  I)(*sidcs  having  guns 

planted  on  them,  arc  strengthened  by  three  bastions  on  the  land  side.  Here  are  only  two  gates,  one 

about  the  middle  of  that  side  facing  the  river,  (where  there  is  a handsome  wharf  the  whole  Icngtii  of 
tlie  town),  and  the  other  on  the  land-side  facing  the  drawbridge  leading  to  Mutton  Cherry.  In  the 
daytime  the  place  seems  to  be  well  inhabited.  The  natives  who  occupy  shops,  come  in  from  Mutton 
Cheny,  but  must  all  depart  before  sunset,  w^hen  the  gates  are  shut,  and  the  keys  carried  to  the  Go- 
vernor; and  none  but  the  garrison  and  inhabitants  are  suffered  to  remain  within  the  walls,  except 
passengers  by  sea,  who  must  take  their  lodging  at  the  tavern,  the  only  one  in  the  town. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  entrance  of  the  river  is  a spacious  handsome  green  lawn,  of  more  thnn 

ft  mile  in  breadth,  which  readies  along  the  banks  of  the  river,  opposite  to  and  above  the  town;  as 

the  river  is  there  very  narrow,  it  serves  as  the  town  ditch.  This  beautiful  lawn  forms  an  csjihinade, 
which  is  terminated  by  a thick  and  well-grown  wood  of  cocoa  nut  and  other  trees. 

Cochin  was  one  of  the  first  places  visited  by  the  Porliiguese  affer  their  arrival  at  Calicut.  It 
was  at  that  time  governed  by  a Prince  who  had  been  tributary  to  the  Saiiiorin,  and  who  shewed  every 
ftct  of  friendship  to  the  Admiral  Capral,  and  his  companions.  The  Prince  contiiiucil  faitidul  to  his  new 
ftllies,  and  assisted  them  with  a considerable  array  against  the  Samorin.  At  length  lorUinc  deciding  against 
him,  the  Samorin  burnt  his  capital,  and  made  himself  master  of  his  dominions ; but  the  Portuguese  in 
1503  expeUed  him,  and  reinstated  the  reigning  Prince.  The  imiiortant  service  thus  rendered  the 
l^rince,  led  the  way  to  the  foundation  of  their  eastern  empire ; they  solicited  permission  to  erect  a place  of 
strength,  for  the  better  protection  of  the  Portuguese  merchants  and  factors,  which  the  Piince,  grateful  for 
the  favours  he  had  received,  readily  granted.  Accordingly  a fortress  was  expeditiously  erected  on  an 
eminence  which  commanded  the  town  of  Cochin;  a church  and  other  public  buildings  were  also  built, 
officers  were  appointed  to  fill  the  different  civil  and  military  stations,  and  priests  were  chosen  to  perform 
the  public  duties  of  religion;  and  thus  the  first  establishment  of  the  Portuguese  in  India  was  regularly 
formed.  Cochin  became  under  its  new  masters  a place  of  great  commerce  tUl  the  year  IGfiO,  faUd  to 
the  Portuguese  power  in  this  part  of  India.  It  was  attacked  by  the  Dutch  under  Commodore  Goens, 
The  garrison  made  a most  gaUant  defence,  nor  was  it  taken  till  after  great  Joss  on  luith  sides.  Tlie 
Dutch  made  it  the  capital  of  their  settlements  on  the  western  .side  of  India;  hut  it  was  taken  from  them 
hy  the  English  at  the  commencement  of  the  war,  and  continues  in  their  possession. 