

CONDATCHY, 

About  three  miles  distant  from  Aripo,  where  in  general  nothing  is  to  be  seen  l)ut  a few  miserable  huts, 
and  a sandy  desert;  but  during  the  period  of  the  pearl  fishery,  it  branches  out  into  a populous  town,  seve- 
ral streets  of  which  extend  upwards  of  a mile  in  lengtli.  The  scene  altogether  resembles  a crowded  fair  on 
the  grandest  scale.  The  Bay  of  Condatchy  is  the  principal  rendezvous  for  the  boats  employed  in  the 
fishery.  The  banks  wlicrc  the  fishery  is  carried  on,  extend  several  miles  along  the  coast  from  Manar 
southward,  off  Aripo  and  Condatchy.  The  principal  bank  Is  opjmsite  to  the  latter  place,  about  twenty 
miles  from  the  shore,  and  is  10  miles  in  length  and  2 in  breadth. 

Tl)e  vessels  employed  in  the  fishery  do  not  belong  to  Ceylon,  but  come  from  different  ports  of  the 
continent,  particularly  Tuticorin,  Karical,  and  Negapatam  on  the  Coromandel  Coast,  and  Quilon  on 
tlie  Malabar  Coast.  The  fishing  season  commences  in  February,  and  ends  about  the  beginning  of  April. 

CALPENTEEN. 

Tlic  Fort  of  Calpenteen  is  situate  upon  the  north  end  of  a peninsula,  or  neck  of  land,  which  extends 
about  sixty  miles  along  the  coast,  and  during  the  N.  E.  monsoon  becomes  an  island.  The  fort  is  about 
.*100  feet  square,  and  has  four  bastions,  one  at  each  angle.  At  present  no  guns  are  mounted.  Within 
tlie  fort  is  a square  of  houses,  wliich  are  chiefly  occupied  as  barracks.  The  house  of  the  commandant  is 
about  400  yards  from  the  fori ; neai'  it  stand  several  other  excellent  houses  fronting  the  sea.  A large  native 
village  and  nriany  detached  cottages  are  interspersed  amongst  the  trees.  Here  are  an  excellent  wharf  and 
landing  place. 

A small  trade  is  carried  on  by  the  natives  in  exporting  salt  fish,  and  dried  fish  roes  to  Columbo,  and 
bringing  back  rice  in  return;  and  muck  wood  is  sent  from  this  part  to  the  Coast  of  Coromandel.  At 
this  place  are  raised  excellent  mangoes  and  pomegranates,  and  wild  honey  may  be  purchased  of  a very 
superior  quality.  It  is  in  a liquid  state,  of  the  consistenci^  of  oil,  and  preseiTed  in  pots  or  bottles^  with 
a few  grains  of  rice  in  the  husk  floating  on  the  top. 


KEGOMBO— C0LUMn6. 


.tiff 


NEGOMBO 

Is  situated  near  a small  rircr,  in  latitude  about  17'>  15'  Nortli,  and  is  about  (i  loaum  ^ liom  (^iluuibo 
The  anchorage  is  abreast  the  fort  in  5 or  6 fathoms.  'I'lic  fort  is  an  irregular  pentagon,  li.n  iug  foui'  bastions, 
on  each  of  which  is  erected  a round  turret.  Four  of  the  sides  arc  ccpial,  but  the  lirtli  is  t onsidoniblv 
smaller  than  the  rest.  The  greater  part  of  the  works  are  constructed  of  sand  and  tin  t’;  but  the  g.iti’w.iy, 
a front  of  wall  on  each  side  of  it,  and  a belfry,  are  built  of  stone  and  line  mortar.  The  area  within  i> 
occupied  by  ranges  of  low  barracks  formed  of  brick,  and  roofed  with  tiles.  TIu!  mansion  of  the  eomnuiiul- 
ant  stands  opposite  to  the  fort,  in  a cool  and  pleasant  situation,  between  tlie  sea  and  the  river.  'I'lie  village 
is  beautiful,  the  houses  arc  dean  and  neatly  built,  separated  from  each  other  by  rows  of  trees  connected 
together  by  lofty  hedges.  A consi<lerable  number  of  Dutch  iiimilies  have  fixed  their  residence  at  this  phu’c, 
many  of  whom  are  reduced  to  great  poverty.  The  parish  church  of  Negombo,  built  by  the  Dutch 
Government,  stands  within  the  village,  but  is  unroofed  and  in  ruins. 