

Elephants’  teeth. 

Sandal  wood. 

Wax. 

AVssels  wliich  do  not  draw  more  than  14  feet  water,  load  and  unload  at  Mutton  Cherry. 


ALIPEE—PORCA—QUILON. 


333 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 


Plenty  of  good  provisions  may  be  Imcl,  particularly  all  kinds  of  poiiltry.  It  is  usual  for  ships  pro- 
ceeding on  their  voyage  to  and  from  Bombay  and  Surat,  to  toueh  at  this  place,  to  take  in  a stock  of 
fresh  provisions,  all  of  which  are  very  reasonable  when  coinpared  with  the  prices  paid  at  tlie  scUleinenls 
belonging  to  the  English  on  this  side  of  India. 

Geese,  large  and  good w (>  Rupees  a pair. 

Turkeys,  common  size  3 ditto. 

Ditto,  if  picked  and  4 ditto. 

Ducks  which  arc  middling  good  3 Rupt'es  per  do.'*:cn 

Fowls  are  in  general  small.  Bullocks  arc  procured  from  Cliitua,  hut  are  small,  at  about  8 rupees 
each.  Good  yams  and  other  vegetables  are  to  be  procured,  with  various  kiiuls  oi  Iriiit. 

ALIPEE 


Is  situated  in  latitude  42'  North,  near  a river,  which  has  a communication  wilh  that  of  Quilon, 
and  runs  neaidy  parallel  wdth  the  coast;  the  banks  are  woody,  aiul  tl»e  lands  well  cultivated,  'FIh*  town 
of  Alipce  is  of  considerable  size,  and  very  populous,  having  many  good  houses;  it  belongs  to  the  U.ij.ih 
of  Travaiicore,  whose  flag  is  generally  kept  flying:  there  are  a few  guns  on  the  beach,  but  no  regular  foili- 
fications.  There  is  a kind  of  a tavern  kept  by  a Portuguese,  but  the  accommodations  are  ilirty  and  had. 

There  are  a number  of  merchants  settled  here,  some  of  whom  act  as  agents  for  the  houses  at  Bombay. 
A few  drugs  are  to  be  procured  hero,  such  as  coeulus  indieus,  curdtunum.s,  zedoary,  cassia,  and  ct)lh*e. 
Elephants’ teeth  are  likewise  to  be  met  with  occasionally;  pepper,  grain,  and  tiiTdjer  form  the  pniu  ipal 
articles  of  trade,  but  the  pepper  is  reserved  for  the  Uajuh  to  supply  the  Company,  and  their  ships 
occasionally  stop  here  to  receive  it  on  bumd.  Small  coasting  vesse  ls  are  sometimes  built  liere. 

rORCA 


Is  situated  in  latitude  9^  30'  North,  and  longitude  76^  34  East,  about  9 leagues  S.  by  E.  from 
Cochin.  It  is  a small  town,  consisting  of  low  houses  covered  with  cadjau  leaves ; there  is  one  house 
with  white  walls  larger  than  the  others,  liy  which  this  place  may  be  distinguislud.  3’Jie  aiieliorage  is  in 
5 or  6 fathoms,  the  white  house  bearing  N.  E.  by  E.  distance  off  shore  1 1 to  2 miles. 

Porca  was  taken  by  the  Portuguese  about  1527,  wlio  erected  a factory  here,  of  wliieli  tliey  reluiiu  d 
possession  till  about  IGGO,  when  they  were  driven  out  by  the  Dutch.  The  English  liki  wisc  bad  a fietoiy 
for  procuring  pepper;  but  were  compelled  to  abandon  it  on  the  Dutch  obtaining  the  ascendency  on  this 