

Vy 


316 


COLUMBO. 


declared  the  purchaser,  in  wliich  case,  the  duties  of  the  goods  shall  be  computed  on  the  amount  of  such 
ofler,  otherwise  on  the  invoice  price.  Provided,  that  if  such  non-eniinierated  goods  shall  amount  to  more 
than  10,000  rix-dollars  on  tlie  iniporter's  estimate,  the  invoice  thereof  shall  not  be  published  without  the 
pcrniission  oi‘  the  Coniptrolh  r of  tlie  Customs. 

2(1.  AVIhtc  any  quantity  of  iniportc'd  goods,  being  partly  in  the  tariff,  and  partly  non-enumcrated, 
sliall  not  amount  to  more  than  1000  rix-dollars  in  the  whole,  the  importer  may,  at  his  option,  either  pay 
duty  by  the  tariff  as  to  tlie  articles  therein  mentioned,  and  advertise  tlie  rest  for  sale,  or  advertise  the  en- 
tire inv(\stment  in  one  list,  and  pay  the  duty  accordingly,  as  provided  under  the  foregoing  exception. 

3d.  Indiaim  n dirc'ct  from  Europe,  and  ships  direct  from  China,  will  be  permitted,  on  application  for 
tliat  piiipos(*5  to  land  the  whole  or  any  part  of  their  investnumts,  and  expose  the  same  to  sale,  and  to  re- 
ship llie  nndispos(‘d  goods  duty  fre(‘,  but  paying  duty  upon  those  sold  according  to  the  tariff,  as  to  all  arti^ 
cles  therein  mentioned,  and  for  other  articles  upon  the  sales,  an  account  wdiercof  is  to  be  exhibited  to  the 
Custom  Master  or  Comptroller,  on  oath,  if  required. 

4th.  lJnvalu(‘d  nrtieles  imported  by  native  traders,  not  exceeding  the  amount  of  200  rix-dollars, 
may,  at  tlu'  option  of  the  owner,  eitlicr  be  valued  by  advertisement  as  aforesaid,  or  by  the  Custom  Master, 
subject  to  the  revi^ion  of  tlie  (Comptroller. 

VII.  The  exportation  and  importation  respectively  of  the  following  artick^s  are  strictly  prohibited, 
except  under  the  (|ualifications  after  mentioned,  or  by  the  express  permission  of  Government. 

The  exportation  of  cinnamon,  except  a small  quantity  not  exceeding  ten  pounds,  being  hona  fdc  for 
the  vessel’s  use. 

Tlw  importation  of  salt,  salt[ictr(s  sulphur,  gunpowder,  lead,  ammunition,  and  arms,  except  such  as 
may  hahond  /i(k  for  the  use  or  defence  of  the  vessel,  or  intended  and  duly  reported  for  a different  destination. 

\ni.  That  it  such  prohibited  goods  shall  be  shipped  or  landed,  or  shall  bo  found  miexported  on  board 
any  sliip  or  vessel,  contrary  to  the  prohibition  contained  in  the  foregoing  articles,  or  if  any  unprohibited 
goods  sliall  be  shipped  or  landed  without  payment  of  the  duties  chargeable  on  the  same,  or  shall  be  found 
on  board  any  ship  or  vessel,  without  being  duly  entered  and  exported,  all  such  goods  shall  be  confiscated 
to  Ilis  Majesty’s  use,  together  with  tlie  ship  or  vessel  on  which  the  same  shall  have  been  shipped,  or  from 
w hich  landed,  or  in  which  found  unreported. 