

Xx8 


340 


COLUMBO. 


from  the  N.  E.  off  the  land.  During  the  other  six  months,  the  S.  W.  wind  blows  from  the  sea  upon 
the  shore,  and  in  that  season  a ship  seldom  looks  into  the  road.  Strictly  speaking,  there  is  no  harbour 
at  Columbo;  for  the  little  bay,  which  affords  shelter  to  small  craft,  does  not  deserve  that  name. 

Near  to  the  wharf  stand  the  Master  Attendant’s  or  Harbour  Master’s  office,  and  the  sea  custom-house. 
From  thence  an  arched  passage  leads  to  another  gateway  opening  into  a square  green,  railed  in  for  the  gar- 
rison parade  in  the  north  corner  of  the  fort.  On  the  left  hand  is  the  Town  Major’s  office;  on  the  right  is 
seen  the  principal  street  running  from  north  to  south,  the  hjngth  of  the  town,  and  terminated  by  a lofty 
gateway  and  belfry.  On  one  side  of  the  parade  ground  stands  the  church,  of  a heavy  appearance;  on  the 
other  a houye  built  for  the  supreme  court  of  judicature,  ornamented  with  a light  cupola,  and  situated  in  the 
centre  of  a row  of  public  offices. 

The  internal  appearance  of  the  fort  is  extremely  beautiful,  the  streets  being  broad,  straight,  regularly 
planned,  intersecting  one  another  at  right  angles,  and  shaded  on  each  side  by  double  rows  of  trees.  The 
houses  are  neatly  built,  fronted  with  verandas  on  pavements  raised  several  feet  from  the  ground,  before 
which  are  plots  of  grass  and  flowers.  They  arc  built  of  stone,  and  in  general  have  only  one  floor. 
There  arc  a few,  however,  of  two  stories,  which  are  much  esteemed,  and  command  charming  prospects. 

The  Govcnimcnt  house,  which  fronts  the  seu  on  the  north  side  of  the  fnrt.  Is  u haiulsuinc  building  of 
two  stories,  with  two  wings  on  one  floor,  attached  to  which  are  the  offices  of  Government.  The  hospital 
is  a commodious  building  and  well  aired,  and  the  barracks  are  comfortable;  but  the  prisons  do  not  merit  so 
favourable  a description.  The  powder  magazine  is  a huge  and  awkward  structure,  lying  close  to  the^ 
cliurcli,  exposed  towards  the  sea,  and  but  ill  adapted  to  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  intended. 

Three  gates  open  from  the  fort  towards  the  sea.  Three  others  communicate  with  the  land : the  delfl, 
or  main  gate,  which  leads  to  tlie  pettah;  the  south  gate,  which  opens  on  the  road  leading  to  Point  de  Galle; 
and  a winding  sally|}ort,  wliicli  communicates  by  causeways  and  bridges  with  a rugged  peninsula,  commonly 
called  Slave  Island.  Here  is  a mud  village,  a bazar,  and  an  excellent  parade. 

The  pettah,  or  outer  town,  is  situated  a few  hundred  yards  to  the  eastward  of  the  fort.  The  town  is 
neat,  clean,  regular,  and  larger  than  that  within  the  fort.  Five  streets,  each  half  a mile  in  length,  run 
parallel  to  one  another,  and  the  same  number  intersect  them  at  right  angles.  The  pettah  is  of  a square 
form,  and  was  formerly  defended  on  the  land  side  by  a wall.  The  north  side  is  bounded  by  the  sea,  the 
south  by  the  lake,  and  the  west  by  fJie  eastern  esplanade.  On  this  side,  within  the  limits  of  the  pettah, 
stands  the  burial  ground  of  the  settlement. 