


JAFFNAPATAM, 


The  houses  in  tlic  fort  arc  very  indiircrcnt,  far  inft,  ior  to  colia-rcs  In  Englan.l ; scarce  one  of  ll.cm  is 
wotor-proof.  Many  ol  the  buildings  are  in  ruins,  fr,m»  the  edicts  of  jiroUactod  sieges,  the  diI,u,idutions 
of  which  have  never  been  repaired.  The  roof  oftlie  ganison  cinncl.  was  likewise  hatt.-re.l  down,  in 
which  condition  it  stUl  continues,  and  the  si.ell  is  employed  as  a tennis  court  for  the  amusement  of  the 
soldiers.  About  half  a mile  from  the  foit  stands  a native  village,  where  the  produetion.s  of  the  country 
are  brought  to  market,  and  exposed  for  sale. 

Trincomalee  was  taken  by  assault  oa  January  11,  17S^,  by  the  llritish  forces  under  Sir  Edward 
Hughes;  but  on  26th  August,  it  was  wrested  from  tliem  l.y  the  French  under  Sulfrein,  who  restored  it  to 
the  Dutch  at  the  conclusion  ot  the  peace.  It  was  taken  posse.ssion  of  by  the  English  in  I7!).5,  and  still 
continues  in  their  Imnds. 

There  are  several  watering-places.  The  ships  that  take  their  water  in  Back-biiy,  hlJ  it  in  the  fort, 
where  a wooden  pier  is  built  to  facilitate  the  landing ; and  those  wlio  lie  in  the  liarbour,  must  fill  it  at  tlie 
well  in  the  town,  where  they  will  have  a t|uartcr  of*  a mile  to  roll  their  casks. 

Refreshments  for  present  use  may  be  got  here,  but  in  small  (|uaiititics,  and  not  more  than  sufTicient  to 
supply  two  men  of  war.  The  only  provisions  to  be  had  are  beef,  buffaloes,  bogs,  and  a few  fowls;  little 
or  no  vegetables,  and  those  very  dear.  As  for  salt  provisions,  there  are  none  to  be  piocured. 

Although  the  situation  of  this  porf  makes  it  a most  ronveniejit  plaee  for  trade,  yet  scarce  any  is 
carried  on,  and  there  is  not  a ship  belonging  to  the  place. 


JAFFNAPATAM. 

The  fort  and  town  of  Jaffnapatam  are  situated  in  latitude  9®  44  North,  and  longitude  80- 15'  East 
The  former  is  regularly  built  in  the  figure  of  a |>entagoii,  witli  five  ba.stioiis,  and  is  furnished  with 
broad  ditches  and  an  extensive  glacis.  It  appears  to  l>e  the  most  modern,  and  is  by  far  the  neatest  and 
best  constructed  fortress  in  Ceylon.  It  is  at  the  .some  time  extremely  clean,  and  in  a good  state  of  repair. 
One  side  runs  parallel  to  the  strait  which  separates  the  peninsula  of  Jaffna  from  the  rest  of  Ceylon ; the 
other  sides  are  environed  by  an  open  and  well-cultivated  plain.  A large  square  occupies  the  centre  of  the 
fort,  the  interior  of  which  is  a plot  of  grass,  enclosed  with  peat  rails,  and  bounded  by  streets  of  excellent 
houses,  shaded  by  majestic  trees.  On  one  side  of  the  square  stands  a large  church,  of  Dutch  architecture. 
* At  right  angles  to  it,  ai  e situated  the  commodious  mansion  of  the  Commandant,  and  other  public  buildings, 
employed  as  offices  for  the  purposes  of  Government.  The  third  side  is  composed  of  comfortable  houses 
rented  from  the  Dutch  by  English  officers;  and  the  fourth,  which  contains  the  gate,  is  made  up  of  barracks 
for  private  soldiers.  The  only  other  street  w ithin  the  fort  runs  parallel  to  tlie  l)ack  of  tlie  west  side  of  the 
square;  being  more  obscure,  it  is  inhabited  by  mechanics,  and  the  lower  orders  of  the  community.  Some 
large  buildings,  apparently  designed  as  barracks  and  magazines,  lie  unoccupied  facing  the  ramparts. 