

mity of  a narrow  and  crooked  peninsula  that  bounds  the  East  and  S.  E.  sides  of  Trincomalce  Bay,  and 
sepai  att  s Buck  Jlay  from  it,  and  from  the  great  bay  to  tlie  southward.  Ships  generally  moor  abreast  the 
town  During  the  S.  W.  monsoon  ships  lie  in  Back  Bay,  with  Flagstaff  Point  bearing  S.  S E about 
a mile  distance.  This  harbour,  from  its  centrical  position,  and  tlie  easy  ingress  and  egress  which  it  affords 
at  all  seasons,  is  beltin’  adajitod  for  bi’ing  made  a marine  depot,  and  a rendezvous  for  his  Majesty’s  squa- 
drons, than  any  other  station  in  India.  The  view  of  Trincomalce  from  Back  Bay  is  striking  and  beautiful. 
On  one  band  stands  a projecting  clilf,  rising  in  many  places  perpendicularly  from  the  sea  upwards  of  100 
feet,  and  the  broken  hill  above  it  is  elevated  about  200  feet  more.  The  flag.staff  is  placed  near  to  the 
outermost  point  of  the  rock ; and  along  the  summit  and  declivities  of  the  higher  ground  are  situated  the 
bungalow’s  of  tlie  onieers,  and  barracks  of  the  private  soldiers.  On  the  other  hand,  a line  of  native 
villages  are  slnah'd  amidst  groves  of  cocou-nut  trees.  The  great  body  of  the  fort  and  town  of  Trin- 
comalee  is  situated  at  the  bottom  of  the  rock,  and  joined  to  a narrow  neck  of  land,  running  parallel 
to  the  .«ea,  and  separating  the  harbour  from  tw’o  adjacent  bays,  one  of  which  lies  on  each  side  of  the 
promontory. 

T\w  guns  of  Trincomalce  command  both  bays,  the  former  on  the  south,  the  latter  on  the  north  side 
ol‘  the  Ibi  tilled  rock.  Fort  Ostenburg  protects  the  mouth  of  the  harbour;  that  fortress  stands  upon  a mount 
three  miles  west  of 'rrinconinlee.  One  chain  of  the  butteries  surrounds  the  base,  rfnd  another  the  summit 
ofthi'  hill.  The  greater  part  of  the  w’orks  of  both  these  forts  w’as  built  by  the  Government  of  Portugal. 
Some  additions  were  made  to  it  by  theFreneb  during  the  short  time  they  had  posse.ssion  of  this  place:  but 
little  or  nothing  was  done  by  the  Dutch.  Seveiity-tw’o  pieces  of  cannon  are  mounted  on  the  ramparts  of 
Ti  incomal(‘^*,  and  ;>()  on  those  of  Ostenburg. 

Hie  fortifications  of  3’rincomalee  form  a sweep  upw’ards  of  a mile  in  length,  encompn.ssing  the  bottom 
of  the  rocky  hills  on  the*  sides  eoiiiiected  wnth  the  adjoining  land:  that  part  of  it  which  projects'  farthest  ' 
into  the  sen,  is  sufliciently  protected  by  the  steepness  of  the  cliffs,  and  the  depth  of  the  surrounding  ocean. 

A .small  redoubt  is  situated  on  the  declivity  of  the  hill  overhanging  the  town,  and  several  pieces  of  cannon 
are  planted  on  its  different  summits.  No  comiminicuiion  can  he  carried  on  with  this  promontory  but 
through  the  gates  of  the  fort;  and  w ere  all  the  works  raised  a little  higher  on  the  hill,  the  citadel  would 
be  im[)r(  pliable.  The  only  disadvantage  attached  to  this  noble  harbour  is,  that  the  tide  does  not  rise  to  a 
•JiiirK  lcnt  lK'ii>ht  to  admit  of  the  construcliou  of  wet  docks  for  vessels  of  a large  size. 