

The  blossoms  grow  on  slender  foot-stalks,  of  a pale  yellow  colour  from  tlie  axillsG  of  the  leaves,  and 
the  extremity  of  the  branches.  They  arc  numerous  clusters  of  small  white  flowers,  having  a brownisli 
tinge  ill  the  centre,  about  the  same  size  os  the  lilac,  which  it  resembles.  The  flower  is  monopetalous, 
stellated  into  six  points,  has  nine  stamina,  and  one  stile,  It  produces  a fruit  of  the  form  of  an  acorn, 
in  taste  resembling  the  olive,  and  when  dry,  it  becomes  a thin  shell,  containing  an  oval  kernel  about  the  size  of 
the  seed  of  an  apple.  The  smell  of  the  blossom  is  not  strong,  but  extremely  pleasant,  resembling  a mix- 
ture of  the  rose  and  lilac.  The  fruit,  when  boiled  in  water,  yields  an  oil  which  floats  ut  the  top,  and  an- 
swers for  burning  in  lamps.  When  allowed  to  congeal,  it  becomes  of  a solid  substance  like  wax,  and  is 
formed  into  candles.  The  smell  of  it  is  mucli  more  agreeable  than  that  of  cocoa-nut  oil;  but  it  is  only  used 
fur  these  purposes  in  the  interior  of  the  island. 

The  appearance  of  this  tree  strongly  resembles  that  of  tlie  Laurus  Cassia,  and  the  bark  of  the  old 
wood  [lossesses  the  same  qualities.  The  cinnamon  of  Ceylon,  however,  is  greatly  improved  by  cultiva- 
tion ; and  that  which  is  most  highly  prized,  is  sUipped  from  shoots  of  young  trees. 

The  trees  which  are  planted  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  cinnamon,  shoot  out  a great  number  of 
branches  a[)parently  from  the  same  root,  and  are  not  permitted  to  rise  above  the  height  of  ten  feet.  Those 
sprouts  which*  are  cut  down  to  be  barked,  are  of  the  thickness  of  a common  walking  stick,  and  yield  an 
incomparably  fine  cinnamon  bark,  and  from  these  shoots  come  the  sticks,  which  in  appearance  resemble 
those  from  the  hazel-tree,  but  of  which  the  baik  has  a cinnamon  smell  when  rubbed.  Cinnamon  is 


CINNAMON. 


35r> 

barked  in  tlie  woods  at  two  cliiTrrent  seasons  of  tlic  year : tlio  first  is  termed  tlie  grand  Imrvest,  and 
lasts  from  April  to  August ; the  second  is  the  small  harvest,  and  lasts  from  November  to  January.  The 
barking  is  performed  in  the  following  manner: — A good  rinnamon-treo  is  looked  out  for,  and  ehostm  by  the 
leaves,  and  other  characteristics,  'fhose  branches  \>  liieh  are  thn  e years  old,  are  lopped  otf  willi  a common 
crooked  pruning  knife,  from  which  the  outside  pellicle  of  the  bark  is  scraped  olf‘;  the  twig^  are  then 
ripped  up  long  ways  with  the  point  of  a knife,  and  the  bark  gradually  loosened  till  it  can  he  entirely 
taken  off.  The  smaller  tubes  or  quills  of  it  are  inserted  into  the  larger,  and  tlius  spn*ad  out  to  dry, 
when  the  bark  rolls  itself  up  still  closer  together,  and  is  then  tied  into  bundles,  and  finally  carried  off: 
each  bundle  is  then  bound  round  with  rattans,  and  packed  up,  atler  having  previously  uinlergonc  an 
examination  by  tasting  and  chewing,  which  is  a very  tn)uhlesojnc  and  disagreeable  ollicc : it  is  but  seldom 
a person  is  able  to  hold  out  two  or  three  days  successividy,  as  the  cinnamon  deprives  the  tongue  and 
lips  of  all  the  mucus  with  which  they  are  covered.  Each  bundle  is  then  made  nearly  the  lengtli  of  four 
feet,  and  is  weighed  off  to  881hs.  subsequently  to  its  being  well  secured.  It  is  sewed  in  double  gunnies, 
and  when  .stowed  in  the  sliip’s  hold,  loose  black  pepper  is  spriiikl(*il  over  the  bales,  to  fill  up  every  hole 
and  interstice,  by  which  means  the  cinnurnon  is  preserved  in  its  original  goodness. 