


DONDRA  1IEAD-.TKNGALLE-.BATIC.\L0E. 


3.51 


across  the  water  to  a fortification  of  larger  dimensions.  The  works  of  this  fort  liave  been  begun  on  a re- 
gular and  handsome  plan,  but  arc  only  half  completed,  consisting  at  present  of  two  points  and  a half  of 
a pentagonal  star;  they  defend  the  place  as  far  as  it  is  immediately  conncf  ted  with  the  land,  but  it  lies  en- 
tirely open  both  towards  the  seu  and  the  river.  The  two  wooden  bridges  are  coiineeted  toge  ther  by  a sinall 
island,  lying  near  to  the  west  side  of  the  river.  They  arc  built  of  strong  |)iles  driven  into  the  sand,  and 
covered  with  planks,  of  sulfieient  breadth  for  carriages,  but  without  balustrades. 

The  guns  of  this  fort  were  sometime  since  removed  to  Point  cle  (ialle,  and  none  are  rd  present 
mounted.  In  the  centre  of  it  is  a large  square,  formed  of  good  houses,  and  a neat  Pi  otestant  cliapel;  from 
^ this  a fine  street  extends  along  the  banks  of  the  river  towards  the  sea,  occupied  by  families  of  Dutch  ex- 
traction. There'are  likewise  several  comfortable  well-furnished  houses  ranged  on  the  oppo>ite  sitle,  .it  a 
greater  distance  from  the  river,  in  one  of  which  the  Rewemie  Agent  for  the  district  resides. 

Plenty  of  wood  and  good  water  may  be  procured  in  the  river,  the  entrance  to  whicli  is  alioiit  half  a 
mile  to  the  westward  of  the  fort.  Boats  go  a small  distance  up  this  river  to  fill  water;  but  the  coming  in 
is  made  dangerous  by  the  rocks  which  lie  under  water,  and  the  outset  of  the  stream  is  to  strong,  that  any 
boat  touching  on  them,  is  in  danger  of  being  overset;  therefore  it  is  best  to  lia\e  the  nali\es  to  [lilot  you 
in.  Ships  anchor  here  in  the  N.  E.  monsoon  abreast  the  town  in  20  iathoms. 

DONDUA  HEAD, 

The  southern  extreme  of  Ceylon,  is  in  latitude  5.5'  Nortli,  and  longitude  SO^  \li  East;  it  is  n low 
point,  with  a grove  of  tall  cocoa-nut  trees  on  its  extremity.  Near  it  is  Dondra,  a jiopulous  village,  >\liirli 
must  at  one  time  have  been  a place  of  great  note,  and  much  resorted  to  on  account  of  a Iliiido)  temple  in 
its  vicinitv,  formerly  a magnificent  striietiire,  now  in  ruins.  The  I’ertugiUM'  and  Dutch  used  mimy  of  the 
stones  for  erecting  Matura  Fort.  Theie  is  still  a small  temple  much  iiequented  by  tlie  ('ingalese. 

TENGALLE 

Is  about  fifteen  miles  to  the  N.  E.  of  Dondra  Head,  and  is  known  by  tli(‘  small  foil  and  ruins  of  an 
old  pagoda,  situated  on  an  elevateil  ami  projecting  point  of  land  on  the  west  side  of  tlie  b.iy.  Th(‘  bay 
itself  is  of  considerable  extent,  l)eing  4;  miles  from  Tengalle  Point  to  the  extreme  point  of  land  opposite. 
Oft’ from  each  point  run  extensive  and  dangerous  reefs;  within  them  is  good  aneliorage  and  shelter  during 
the  S.  W.  monsoon.  Here  is  a fortress  of  two  bastions,  erected  on  the  summit  of  a small  hill,  containing 
the  ruins  of  three  large  houses,  and  on  the  sea  beach  are  the  remains  of  a large  building,  wliieli  appears  to 