

The  Dutch  cinnamon  inspectors  divided  the  bark  into  the  following  kinds,  viz  : 

I.  The  first  and  best  sort  of  cinnamon,  which  is  peculiar  to  the  island,  is  called  by  the  natives  rasse 
coronde,  or  sharp  §wcet  cinnamon.  It  is  this  choice  sort  which  is  exporteil  yearly  by  the  East  India 
Compmiy,  by  whom  it  has  been  prohibited  under  severe  penalties,  that  any  other  sort  should  he  mix(*d  with  it. 

II.  Is  called  cannallc  coronde,  which  is  bitter  and  astringent  cinnamon.  The  bark  of  this  tree  comes 
off  very  easily,  and  smells  very  agreeably  when  fresh,  but  it  has  a bitter  taste. 

III.  Is  called  cappi roe  coronde,  which  implies  camphorated  cinnamon,  because  it  has  a very  strong 
smell  of  camphire.  This  sort  is  only  found  in  the  King  of  Candy's  dominions. 

IV.  Is  called  the  wcllc  coronde,  or  sandy  cinnamon;  because,  upon  chewing  it,  one  feels  ns  it  W'crc 
bits  of  sand  between  the  teetli ; hut  in  fact  there  is  nothing  sandy  in  it.  The  Irnrk  of  this  tree  comes 
off  readily,  hut  it  is  not  so  easily  rolled  as  other  sorts  are,  being  apt  to  burst  open  and  unfold  itself. 
It  is  of  a bhurp  and  bitterish  taste,  and  the  root  of  it  produces  but  a sjiiall  quantity  of  camphire. 

V.  Is  called  scwcl  coronde,  or  glutinous  cinnamon.  Tliis  sort  acquiiTs  a very  considerable  degree 
of  hardness,  which  the  chewing  of  it  sufficiently  proves.  It  lias  otherw  ise  little  taste,  and  an  ungrateful 
smell,  but  the  colour  of  it  is  very  fine,  and  it  is  often  mixed  with  the  first  and  best  sort,  the  colour  being 
much  alike,  excepting  only  that  in  the  good  sort,  some  few  yellowish  spots  appear  towards  the  extremities. 

VI.  Is  called  nicke  coronde.  The  bark  of  this  tree  has  no  taste  or  smell  when  taken  olf,  and  is  made 
use  of  by  the  natives  only  in  physic,  and  to  extract  an  oil  to  anoint  their  bodies. 

VII.  Is  called  davvel  coronde,  which  is  drum  cinnamon.  The  wood  of  this  tree,  when  grow'ii  hard, 
is  light  and  tough,  and  of  which  the  natives  make  some  of  their  vessels  and  drums.  The  liark  is  stripped 
while  the  tree  is  yet  growing,  and  is  of  a pole  colour.  It  is  used  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sixth  sort. 

VIII.  Is  called  cattc  coronde,  or  thorny  cinnamon,  for  this  tree  is  veiy  prickly.  The  hark  is  some- 
what like  cinnamon  in  appearance,  but  the  leaves  are  different;  and  the  bark  it  sell*  ha.s  nothing  either  of 
the  taste  or  smell  of  cinnamon.  Tlie  natives  use  it  in  medicine. 

IX*  Is  called  mael  coronde,  or  the  flowering  cinnamon,  because  this  tree  is  •alw  ays  in  blossom. 
The  substance  of  the  wood  never  becomes  so  solid  and  weighty  in  this  as  in  the  otlier  cinnninon-trco 
before  mentioned,  which  are  sometimes  eight,  nine,  or  ten  feet  in  circumference.  If  this  ever-flower- 
ing cinnamon  be  cut  or  bored,  a limpid  water  will  issue  out  of  the  wound,  but  it  is  of  use  only  for  the 
leaves  and  bark. 