

have  becij.thc  mansion  occupied  by  tlie  Dutch  Resident. 

The  landing-place,  which  is  perfectly  free  from  surf,  lies  under  the  rising  ground  on  which  th(‘  fort 
stands,  having  the  ruins  of  a house  a little  to  the  south  of  it.  About  a cpiarter  of  a mile  from  tl.e  landing 
place,  passing  the  fort,  is  a well  containing  good  water.  A pathway  leads  directly  from  the  fort  to  the  well, 
where  water  may  be  filled,  and  the  casks  rolled  down  the  beach.  A small  jetty  built  at  the  landing-place, 
W'ould  greatly  facilitate  the  loading  of  the  boats. 

RATICALOE. 

About  two  miles  up  a small  arm  of  the  sea,  is  the  Island  of  Baticaloe,  in  latitude  7"  45  North,  and 
longitude  81°  53  East.  It  is  about  three  miles  in  circumference,  and  there  is  a pleasant  walk  on  the  sand 
bei^h  round  it.  The  fort  is  of  a square  construction,  having  four  bastions,  nearly  uniform,  on  which  2i 
guns  are  mounted.  The  internal  dimensions  are  small,  containing  only  a low  barrack,  a granary,  a ma- 
gazine,  and  the  spacious  mansion  of  the  Commandant.  Anittle  village  stands  a few  hundred  yards  from 
the  wafts  of  the  fort,  and  several  huts  are  scattered  over  the  island.  At  the  farther,  end  of  it  are  two  Por- 


TUIXCOJIALLE. 


rlJ? 

tiigiicso  rliiipcls  williiii  a Nliort  distanrc  of  oacli  otlirr,  neatly  built  of  stone.  The  great  body  of  the  inha- 
bitants arc  Hindoos  and  Alahonictaiis.  The  number  of  IVotostant  Christians  is  very  small. 

The  inlet  of  the  sea,  which  Min  oiinds  the  little  Island  of  Batiraloe,  extends  thirty  miles  into  the 
fountry,  and  contains  several  other  Islands  of  similar  diineiisions.  The  frith  in  many  places  is  one  mile 
broad,  and  affords  excellent  navigation  for  boats.  TJnfoilunately  a sand  bar  stretches  across  the  entrance, 
on  which  are  no  more  than  six  feet  water,  so  that  only  small  vessels  can  come  into  it ; but  when  once  en- 
tered,  they  ride  in  complide  security.  Hie  anchorage  is  about  two  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  river,  bear- 
ing about  South,  and  the  Friar’s  Hood,  a remarkable  mountain  about  five  leagues  inland,  S.S.W.  The 
road  is  not  always  safe  in  the  N.Jl.  monsoon,  but  in  the  S.  W.  monsoon  it  is  always  so. 

You  may  ^^ater  at  the  island,  landing  your  casks  at  the  whaif,  and  roll  them  to  a well  on  the  green. 

It  is  nea'ssai  y to  carry  funnels  and  buckets  to  draw  the  water  up.  Wood  may  be  cut  on  the  banks  of  the 
river,  near  the  bar,  in  any  quantity.  Bullocks  and  other  rclV(‘shments  are  in  abundance. 

THINCOMALEE. 

'J  his  bay,  tin*  entrance  of  which  is  about  five  miles  broad,  is  formed  by  Foul  Point,  Its  S E.  extreme, 
and  Mag^tall  Point,  in  latitude  North,  and  longitude  81"  24  East.  This  point  is  the  northern  extre- 