

About  half*  a mile  to  the  eastward,  stands  the  pettah,  or  outward  towm,  containing  several  thousand 
inhabitants.  All  the  streets  are  of  a proper  breadth,  one  lialf  of  them  running  parallel  to  each  other,  and 
thq  other  half  intersecting  them  at  right  angles.  The  houses  are  neat  and  clean,  and  tlie  outer  walls  com- 
pletely white.  The  principal  street  runs  tlu'ough  the  centre  of  the  town ; it  is  finely  shaded  on  each  side  by 
rows  of  large  trees  towering  above  the  houses,  which  are  only  one  story  high,  but  raised  a few^  steps  from 
the  ground  on  a paved  terrace,  having  verandas  or  porticos  before  them. 

All  the  native  inhabitants  are  included  under  the  description  of  Malabars.  About  one  Jialf  of  them  are 
Hindoos  ; the  other  half  are  nominal  Christians,  with  a small  proportion  of  Mahometans. 

Most  of  the  Dutch  families  who  formerly  resided  at  Trincomalee,  have  removed  to  this  place,  which 
affords  them  cheaper  living,  and  more  agreeable  retirement.  The  country  is  fruitful ; a constant  bustle  per- 
vades the  daily  mmkets,  and  a regular  trade  with  the  opjjosite  coast  of  India  aflbrds  many  opportunities  of 
improving  a small  fortune.  This  is  the  only  district  of  Ceylon,  the  revenue  of  which  exceeds  its  expences. 

Z z 


S64  ' 


CALAMINDER  WOOD— CINNAMON. 


Ariicks  procurable  on  the  Island  of  Ccylmiy  ivith  Directions  how  to  chusc  them, 
CALAMINDER  WOOD 

Is  the  name  given  to  a beautiful  wood  procurer!  at  Ceylon,  that  takes  a polish  as  smooth  as  a looking 
glass;  it  is  so  hard, tliat  the  common  edge-tools  cannot  work  it,  but  it  must  be  rasped  and  almost  ground 
into  shape.  The  heart  or  woody  part  of  the  tree  is  extremely  handsome,  with  whitish  or  pale  yellow,  and 
black  or  brown  veins,  streaks,  or  waves;  in  the  root  these  waves  are  closer  and  dai*kcr.  The  nearer  it  is 
taken  from  the  root,  the  more  it  is  esteemed,  as  higher  up  in  the  trees  the  veins  are  thinner  and  paler. 

CINNAMON. 

The  cinnamon  tree,  or  Laurus  Cinnamonum,  is  a species  of  laurel.  The  trees  in  their  uncultivated 
state  grow  to  the  height  of  20  to  30  feet;  the  tnink  is  about  three  feet  in  circumference,  and  puts  out  a 
great  number  of  large  spreading  horizontal  branches  clothed  with  tliick  foliage.  The  roots  are  fibrous,  hard 
and  tough,  covered  with  an  odoriferous  bark;  on  the  outside  of  a greyish  brown,  and  on  the  inside  of  a 
reddish  hue.  They  strike  about  three  feet  into  the  earth,  and  spread  to  a considerable  distance.  Many  ot 
them  smell  strongly  of  camphire,  which  is  sometimes  extracted  from  them. 

The  leaves  are  of  an  oval  shape,  from  four  to  six  inches  in  length,  and  from  two,  to  two  and  three 
quarters  in  breadth,  of  a smooth  surface  and  plain  edge.  They  are  strongly  marked  by  three  principal 
nerves,  which  with  four  smaller,  all  take  tlieir  rise  from  the  pedicle.  The  middle  nerve  stretches  to  the 
fioint  of  the  leaf.  The  two  others  nearly  bisect  each  half  of  it  lengthwise.  The  four  smaller  radiate,  in  a 
corre8|X)nding  manner,  towards  the  edge  of  the  leaf  From  these  a great  quantity  of  diminutive  fibres 
.spread  in  all  directions,  completing  the  textui’e  of  the  leaf.  The  stalk  of  it,  which  is  three-(j[uarters  of  an 
inch  in  length,  is  very  pleasant  to  eat,  and  when  chewed,  flavours  strongly  of  cinnamon;  but  is  fresher,  and 
more  full  of  juice.  The  leaf  itself  has  scarcely  any  taste.  When  the  young  leaves  first  shoot  out  from 
the  tops  of  the  branches,  they  are  partly  of  a bright  red,  and  pai'tly  of  a pale  yellow  hue.  Ailcr  a short 
time  they  become  of’  a beautiful  pea-greeii,  and  when  they  have  attained  full  maturity,  they  put  on  a dark 
olive  colour.  The  ujiper  surface  is  of  a deep,  and  the  back  of  the  leaf  ot  a light  gieen,  and  shoot  out 
from  the  stalks,  directly  opposite  to  each  other. 