

The  inhabitants  of  Ceylon  say  there  is  yet  another  sort  of  cinnamon,  wliich  they  call  lonpat  coronde, 
or  the  three-leaf  cinnamon.  This  grows  in  the  Candy  country,  and  is  little  known. 

Zx2 


356  ' 


CINNAMON. 


The  cinnaiuon-tree  flourishes  only  in  a small  portion  of  the  island.  It  is  confined  to  the  S.  W.  angle, 
formed  by  the  sea  coast,  from  Ncgonibo  to  Matura.  The  largest  cinnamon  plantation  is  situated  in  the 
vicinity  of  Colunibo,  and  is  upwards  of  twelve  miles  in  circumference;  others  of  a smaller  size  lie  near 
Negonibo,  Calture,  Point  de  Galle,  and  Matura,  and  all  stretch  tdong  the  sea  coast. 

The  best  cinnamon  is  known  by  the  following  properties : it  is  thin,  and  rather  pliable;  it  ought 
to  be  about  the  substance  of  royal  paper,  or  somewhat  thicker.  It  is  of  a light  colour,  and  rather 
inclinable  to  yellow,  bordering  but  little  upon  the  browm : it  possesses  a sweetish  taste,  at  the  same  time  is 
not  stronger  than  can  be  bonie  without  pain,  and  is  not  succeeded  by  any  atlter  taste.  The  more  cinna- 
mon departs  from  these  characteristics,  the  coarser  and  less  sei*viceable  it  is  esteemed,  and  should  be  re- 
joc'ted  if  it  bo  hard,  and  thick  as  a half-crown  piece;  if  it  bo  very  dark-coloured  or  brown;  if  it  be  very 
pungent  and  hot  upon  the  tongue,  'with  a taste  bordering  upon  that  of  cloves,  so  that  it  cannot  be  suffered 
without  pain,  and  so  that  the  mucus  upon  the  tongue  is  consumed  by  it  when  several  trials  are  made  of 
it;  or  if  it  has  any  after  taste,  such  as  to  be  harsh,  bitter,  and  mucilaginous.  Particular  care  should  be 
taken  that  it  is  not  false  packed,  or  mixed  with  cinnamon  of  a common  sort. 

This  spice  was  known  to  the  ancients  long  before  nutmegs  or  cloves.  In  1621  no  mention  is 
made  of  cinnamon  as  an  article  of  import  from  India.  The  Portuguese  being  in  possession  of  Ceylon,  it 
was  to  be  procured  only  at  Lisbon.  In  1686  the  Dutch  imported  from  tlie  island  17(),0001bs.  of  cinnamon, 
which  is  stated  to  have  been  rather  less  in  quantity  than  in  some  preceding  years.  It  #Duld  be  difficult,  if 
not  impossible,  to  trace  the  quantities  brought  into  Europe  at  this  early  period.  In  1730  it  appanrs  tlie 
Dutch  imported  in  ten  ships  640,000  lbs.  In  1766  the  King  of  Candy  agreed  to  deliver  to  tlie  Dutch  all 
the  cinnamon  whicli  grew  in  his  territories  at  five  pagodas  per  bale  of  88  lbs.  In  the  five  years,  1775  to 
1770  inclusive,  the  amount  sold  on  an  average  was  380,000  lbs.  per  annum. 

The  following  Is  an  account  of  the  quantities  of  cinnamon  sold  at  the  Dutch  East  India  sales  in  tho 
years  1785  to  1791  inclusive,  together  with  the  sale  amount  in  each  yeai*. 