

Arrack,  per  leager  to  1,50  ditto.  Surat  ditto  to  12  ditto. 

1 atna  ricc*  10  rupees  per  bag.  Coast  ditto  4?  to  6 ditto. 

Mooghy  7 to  8 ditto.  Pepper  5 ditto  per  parah.  » 

Bengal  wheat. 7 to  8 ditto.  Coffee — 7 ditto. 

Surat  ditto  9 to  10  ditto.  I Loose  coir  20'ditto  per  candy. 


Salt  is  very  good.  31ie  retail  price  varies  from  12  fanaiAs  per  parah  of  40  lbs.  but  if  purchased  in  quan- 
tities, Government  would  sell  it  for  what  it  stands  them  in,  which  is  from  six  to  nine  fanams  per  parah. 

The  water  w^ithin  the  fort  at  Columbo  is  brackish,  consequently  bad  for  drinking.  Good  w ater  must 
be  brought  from  the  di^^tance  of  II  mile:  it  is  conveyed  in  skins  or  leathern  sacks. 

POINT  DE  GALLE. 

This  fort  and  tow  n are  built  upon  a low  rocky  promontory,  in  latitude  6°  4 North,  and  longitude 
SO"*  20  East:  the  harbour  is  formed  between  the  point,  and  a piece  of  sloping  land  to  the  eastward.  The 
entrance  of  the  hay  is  jihout  a mile  w ide ; but  having  many  scattered  rocks  about  it,  a pilot  is  necessary 
to  carry  a ship  to  the  anchorage,  which  is  abreast  the  town  in  five  fathoms. 

Th(‘  fort  is  about  a mile  and  a cpiarter  in  circumference.  Some  of  the  bastions  command  the  bay;  the 
works  are  substantial  and  extensive,  and  it  would  be  a place  of  great  strength,  w'ere  it  not  overlooked  by 
some  adjacent  eminences.  The  houses  in  the  fort  are  large,  commodious,  and  comfortably  furnished.  That 
of  tlic  C ommandant  is  a building  of  extensive  dimensions.  Almost  all  the  European  inhabitants  live  within 
the  fort ; only  a few  large  houses  are  built  without  it,  extending  along  the  shore  to  the  southward.  Cot- 
lag(‘s  and  hamlets,  the  abodes  of  the  native  Cingalese,  are  scattered  about  in  all  directions. 

Point  do  (ialle  ranks  next  to  Columbo  in  point  of  trade.  It  was  here  that  the  Dutch  used  to  ship  the 
cinnamon  and  other  |)roduce  of  the  island  for  Europe ; and  it  is  still  occasionally  used  for  that  purpose. 
Sliips  sometimes  call  here  on  their  way  to  Columbo,  and  take  in  what  cinnamon  is  raised  in  the  neighbour- 
hoofl ; aftei  w'ards  complete  their  cargo  at  the  Presidency,  and  on  some  occasions  sail  direct  for  England : 
otliers  proceed  to  Madras,  hnid  the  cinnamon  there,  to  be  divided  amongst  different  ships,  and  take  in  a 
new  lading;  this  latter  method  is  only  practised  in  time  of  war,  when  it  is  not  found  convenient  for  the 
regular  ships  of  the  Company  to  touch  at  Columbo. 

MATURA 

Is  situated  in  latitude  5®  58  North,  and  longitude  80^  40  East.  The  fort,  which  is  square,  and  built 
of  stone,  stands  on  the  west  side  of  a river.  The  gate  communicates  with  two  wooden  bridges  leading 