

CHANK  i^IIELLS, 

Or  the  common  conch  shell,  is  an  article  of  trade  from  Cev ion  to  the  Coast  of  fUiromaiidel  and  Bengal, 
where  they  are  used  in  beetling  the  finer  cloths  manufactured  there,  and  as  wiist  ornainenls  for  the  women, 
when  sawed  into  narrow  rings,  and  the  edges  polished.  They  are  also  nu  t with  at  ('hlttagong  and  Aracan. 

These  shells  are  fisluxl  up  hy  divers  In  the  Gulf  of  Muiuir,  in  about  tv\o  fathoms  w ater.  They  are  of 
a spiral  form,  and  oi’e  chiefly  exported  to  Bengal,  where  they  are  saw  ed  into  rings  of  various  sizes,  and 
worn  on  the  arms,  legs,  fingers,  and  toes  of  the  Hindoos.  A chank  opiaiing  to  the  right  hand  is  highly 
valued  by  the  natives  of  India,  and  being  rarely  found,  always  sells  tor  its  weight  in  gold. 

PEARLS 

Are  hard,  white,  and  shining,  usually  roundish,  found  in  a testaceous  fish  of  the  oyster  kind;  they 
are  formed  of  the  nature  of  the  shell,  and  consist  of  a number  of  coats ‘spread  w illi  perfect  regiilurity  one 
over  another,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  several  coats  of  an  onion,  or  like  the  several  strata  of  stones 
found  in  the  bladder  or  stomachs  of  animals,  only  much  thinner. 

Pearls  are  generally  divided  into  oriental  and  occidental,  more  from  their  qualities  than  llu  ir  place  of 
produce,  tlie  oriental  being  reckoned  the  best.  The  principal  oriental  pe  arl  fisheries  are  in  the  (Julf  of 
Manar,  the  Persian  Gulf,  Sooloo  Archipelago,  and  on  some  of  the  Japan  Islands. 

The  principal  pearl  fisheries  in  America  are  St.  Margarita  and  the  Gulf  of  Ali  xmo.  In  Europe 
pearls  are  also  met  with  on  the  coasts  of  Livonia,  Courland,  Scotland,  and  vai  ious  other  places. 

The  Ceylon  oyster  banks  are  scattered  over  a space  at  the  bottom  of  the  Gulf  of  Manar,  e xtendi ng  about 
30  miles  from  north  to  south,  and  24  from  east  to  west.  There  are  14  beds,  hut  they  are  not  all  productive, 
and  not  more  than  two  or  three  can  be  fished  in  one  season;  the  largest  is  ten  miles  in  length,  and  two 
miles  in  breadth ; the  others  are  much  smaller.  The  depth  of  water  over  the  different  banks  varies  from 
3 to  15  fathoms,  but  tlie  best  fishing  is  found  in  from  six  to  eight  fathoms.  The  pearl  banks  are  about 
fifteen  miles  from  tlie  shore  of  Condatchy. 

The  pearl  oysters  in  these  banks  are  all  of  one  species,  and  of  the  same  regular  form,  but  of  dif- 
ferent  qualities  and  denominations,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground  to  wliich  they  are  attached.  1 lu;  shape 
of  the  oyster  is  an  imperfect  oval,  pretty  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  cockle,  about  9J  inches  in  cir- 
cumference, with  a segment  cut  off  by  a straight  line  at  the  hinge,  or  point  of  union  of  the  two  valves. 
The  body  of  the  oyster  is  white,  fleshy,  and  glutinous.  The  inside  of  the  shell  is  brighter  and  more 
beautiful  than  the  pearl  itself;  the  outside  is  smooth^  unless  when  covered  wUh  corals,  sponges,  and 
other  marine  production^ 