

After  the  pearls  arc  separated  from  the  sand,  wa.shed  with  salt  water,  dried,  and  rendered  perfectly 
clean,  they  are  sorted  into  classes  according  to  their  sizes,  by  being  passed  through  ten  brass  sieves,  or 
saucers  full  of  round  holes.  The  saucers  arc  all  apparently  of  one  size,  but  made  so  as  to  go  one  withirr 
the  otlier.  They  are  distinguished  into  numbers,  20,  30,  SO,  80,  100,  200,  400, 600, 800, and  1000.  This 
is  a kind  of  ratio  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  different  sizes  of  pearls;  and  probably  the  distinguislung 
numbers  in  some  measure  correspond  with  the  quantity  of  holes  in  each  bason.  These  com|)]ete]y  occupy 
the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  and  as  they  increase  in  number,  they  nece.s8arily  decrease  in  size.  The  pearls  are 
thrown  into  a promiscuous  heap  into  the  uppermost  sieve,  which  being  raised  a little,  and  shaken,  the  greater 
part  of  them  pass  through  into  the  second  sieve,  and  only  those  remain  which  exceed  a large  pea  in  size. 
The  second  sieve  is  shaken  in  the  same  manner;  the  pearls  that  remain  in  it,  are  of  the  size  of  a small  pea, 
or  grain  of  black  pepper.  The  quantity  of  pearls  gradually  increases  as  the  size  diminishes.  Those  which 
full  through  the  tenth  saucer  (\o.  1000)  belong  to  the  class  of  tool,  or  seed  pearls,  so  called  from  the 
smallness  of  their  .size. 

The  pearls  contained  in  the  sieves  20  to  80  inclusive,  are  distinguished  by  the  general  name  of  mell, 
or  the  first  order.  Those  of  the  sieves  from  No.  100  to  1000  are  denominated  vadivoo,  or  the  second  order. 


PEARLS. 


359 


» 


Both  these  orders  are  divided  into  various  sorts,  according  to  their  shape,  lustre,  and  other  qualities, 
amongst  which  are  annees,  annadaree,  kayarel,  samadiem,  kulJipoo,  koorwel,  pesul,  and  tool. 

Annees  arc  the  first  sort,  perfectly  round,  and  of  the  most  brilliant  liistn*. 

Annadaree  is  a subdivision  of  them,  possessing  the  same  qualities  in  an  inferior  degree. 

Kayarel  is  the  next  in  beauty,  but  not  so  completely  round,  and  of  a duller  colour.  To  this  class 
belong  the  samadiem,  which  is  nearly  of  the  form  of  a pear,  and  the  kallipoo,  whicli  has  flat  sides. 

The  koorwel,  or  third  class,  is  a double  pearl,  ill-shaped,  and  of  a dull  water;  to  it  may  be  added  the 
pesul,  the  most  deformed  of  all  the  pearls,  and  the  tool,  or  seed  pearl,  the  most  diminutive. 

The  different  descriptions  of  pearls  arc  sent  to  different  markets;  hut  at  the  fishery  all  the  kinds  are 
generally  sold  mixed  together  at  200  pagodas  per  pound. 

The  method  of  determining  tlie  price  of  the  different  sorts  of  pearls  is  regulated  by  au  imaginary  cri- 
terion, estimating  the  proportion  of  that  quality  which  attaches  to  them  the  highest  value.  It  has  the  ap- 
pearance of  being  intricate  and  difficult,  but  is  considered  siiiiph*  by  those  who  understand  it.  Size,  round- 
ness, and  brightness  seem  to  be  the  qualities  on  wdiich  it  hinges. 