

White  Cuystal  is  found  both  crystallized  and  worn  smooth  by  tlic  whaler;  is  in  uneven,  Hal, 
and  long  pieces,  lull  of  pits  and  hollow's;  the  colour  is  clear,  more  or  l(‘ss  of  a watery  hue  or  shining  white ; 
it  sometimes  is  found  in  lump.s  of  six  inclies  in  diameter. 

Yellow  Crystal  is  nearly  the  same  as  the  white,  only  witii  tliis  distinction,  that  it  a|)p<wf  of 
a disagreeable  yellow  colour;  it  is  .seldom  if  ever  crystallized,  but  always  worn  down  smooth  by  the 
agitation  of  the  water  into  round  pieces,  with  a rough  knobby  surface. 

Brown  Crystal  is  distinguished  from  the  former  by  its  being  of  a blackish  cast,  or  that  of  [mlc  ink. 
When  laid  upon  any  substance,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  transparent,  but  may  be  seen  through  if  viewed 
against  the  light.  The  pieces  arc  the  size  of  a walnut,  and  are  cut  into  buttons  and  other  uses. 

Black  Crystal  is  quite  black  and  shining,  but  not  transparent;  some  pieces  are  as  large  as  a 
walnut,  others  as  small  as  a pea.  They  arc  cut  and  polished  for  buttons,  and  bear  a great  resemblance 
to  jet;  it  is  very  common,  and  of  but  little  value. 

Jarocon,  or  Zircon,  is  a kind  of  stone  of  the  nature  of  a diamond,  l)ut  much  softer;  according  to 
some  lapidaries,  the  jargoon  comes  next  in  hardnes.s  to  the  sapphire;  and  as  they  have,  when  cut  and  po- 
lished, a great  resemblance  to  the  diamond,  they  are  made  up  in  various  kinds  of  jewellery;  they  are 
generally  very  small,  of  a smooth  surface,  and  a bright  shining  lustre.  The  larger  they  arc,  tlie  more  they 
arc  esteemed. 

Blue  Sapphire. — Sometimes  these  arc  so  pale,  that  they  almost  exhibit  the  appearance  of  water,  but 
generally  they  are  of  a dark  blue,  uniformly  coloured,  and  of  round  and  various  other  sliapes ; th(*y  are 
sometimes  to  be  met  with  a.s  large  as  a hazel-nut,  but  most  of  them  are  much  smaller. 

Green  Sapphire  occurs  of  a bright  green,  a greenish,  and  a palish  white  colour,  and  is  a genuine 
sapphire,  which  is  fit  for  cutting,  and  njiplied  to  that  purpose. 

Water  Sapphire  is  the  name  of  a stone  which  very  much  resembles  white  crystul,  but  uJicn 
viewed  against  the  light,  is  both  clearer  and  whiter;  it  is  especially  distinguishable  by  its  hardness,  in  which 
it  surpasses  the  crystal,  and  is  much  dearer.  The  largest  are  of  the  size.*  of  a walnut. 

Red  Tourmalin. — When  laid  upon  a tabic,  it  appears  dark  and  opaque,  but  being  held  against  the 
lights  is  of  a pale  red  hue.  They  are  sometimes  as  large  as  a pea,  but  most  of  thePi  arc  about  the  .size  of 
a grain  of  rice,  and  frequently  damaged  and  imperfect;  the  colour  is  in  general  equally  distributed. 