

The  revenue  derived  from  pearls  in  the  years  1803  to  1800  inclusive  was  £15,4^5.  159. 

CEYLON  STONES. 

Stones  of  various  kinds  are  found  on  Ceylon,  but  the  greater  part  of  them  are  of  a veary  inferior  quality, 
^rhe  Moors  carry  on  a considerable  trade  in  them.  All  such  stones  as  are  transparent,  and  sufficiently 
hard  to  take  a polish  by  grinding,  are  called  precious  stones.  They  are  known  by  the  following  names. 

UiJUY.— The  ruby  is  more  or  less  ripe,  which,  according  to  the  Indian  expression,  means  more  or 
less  higli-coloured.  The  ruby  is  for  the  most  part  blood  red ; the  deeper  red  the  colour,  the  larger  the 
stone,  and  the  clearer  it  is,  without  any  flaw,  so  much  greater  is  its  value ; however,  they  arc  seldom  found 
here  of  any  considerable  size  : for  the  most  part,  they  are  small,  frequently  of  the  size  of  particles  of  grave), 
grains  of  barley,  &:c.  'The  higher  the  colour,  the  clearer  and  more  transparent  they  are. 

Amethysts. — These  stones  are  sometimes  found  of  a large  size,  but  generally  very  small;  the  larger 
their  dimensions,  the  paler  and  less  coloured  they  are,  and  therefore  less  valued  and  esteemed.  The 
small  are  of  the  deepest  colour,  but  notwithstanding  of  no  great  value.  The  dearest  and  most  valuable  arc 
those  which  are  high-coloured,  without  flaws,  and  of  some  tolerable  size. 

Hoe  AI.S  are  dark-coloured  stones,  darker  than  the  ruby,  and  not  so  hard.  They  are  found  mostly  In  small 
pieces,  are  cut  for  .setting  in  rings,  and  ara  frequently  exposed  to  sale  for  rubies. 

Hyacinths  are  small  yellounsh  brown,  or  reddish  stonw,  which,  as  well  as  robals,  are  frequently 
oflored  for  sale  under  the  denomination  of  nibies. 


CEYLON  STONES. 


, 361 

CiNNAMOM  Stone  derives  its  name  from  iU  colour,  which  in  some  measure  resembles  the  oil  drawn 
from  the  best  and  finest  cinnamon  ; it  is  not  however  always  alike,  but  more  or  less  pale,  or  of  a deep 
orange  colour.  Phesc  stones  are  seldom  found  of  any  considerable  size  in  a perfect  state;  but  they 
are  in  general,  even  the  small  ones,  cracked  longways  and  across,  which  destroys  their  cl(*arnebs,  and 
renders  them  unfit  for  cutting. 

^ Cat’s  Evk  is  the  name  of  a very  hard  stone,  which  approaches  more  or  less  to  white,  or  green,  and  is 
semi'diaphanous,  with  a streak  of  the  breadth  of  aline  in  the  middle,  which  is  much  wdiitcr  than  the  stone 
itself,  and  throws  its  light  to  what  side  soever  it  is  turned.  In  this  respect  therefore  it  resembles  a cat’s 
eye,  whence  it  derives  its  name.  The  largest  is  of  the  size  of  a hazel-nut;  others  are  found  much 
smaller.  In  its  rough  state  it  seems  to  have  no  angles  nor  signs  of  crystallization.  Its  value  is  in  pro- 
portion to  its  size  and  purity.  One  of  the  size  of  a nut,  without  flaws  and  other  imperfections,  is  sojnctiincs 
valued  at  50  or  60  rix-dollars.  They  are  cut  convex  and  oblong,  without  faces,  so  that  the  streak  which 
intersects  them,  comes  in  the  middle,  and  they  are  afterwards  set  in  rings,  which  arc  worn  by  the  natives. 