


358 


PEARLS. 


Tlie  pearls  are  commonly  contained  in  the  thickest  and  most  fleshy  part  of  the  oyster,  contiguous 
to  one  of  the  angles  of  the  shell  close  to  the  hinge.  An  oyster  frequently  contains  several  pearls: 
one  lias  been  known  to  produce  150,  including  the  seed  or  dust  pearls;  and  100  oysters  have  been  opened 
without  yielding  one  pearl  large  enough  to  be  of  any  estinuitioii. 

The  pearl  oyster  is  said  to  attain  its  maturity  at  the  age  of  seven  or  eight  years ; after  which  its 
existence  soon  terminates,  and  its  contents  are  washed  away  by  the  waves. 

The  fishery  generally  bc'gins  about  the  20th  of  February.  Sometimes  Government  fishes  the  banks  at 
its  own  risk  ; sometimes  the  boats  are  let  to  many  speculators,  but  most  frequently  the  right  of  fishing  is 
sold  to  one  individual,  who  sub-rents  boats  to  others. 

In  1801.  the  fishery  was  let  by  Government  to  a notlve  of  Jafliiapatam.  For  thirty  days’ fishing,  with 
i.jO  boats,  he  came  under  an  obligation  to  pay  300,000  Porto  Novo  pagodas.  He  sold  the  right  of  fishing 
to  some  of  the  best  equipped  boats  for  .3000  pagodas  each,  and  that  of  others  for  2500,  but  kept  by  far 
the  greater  part  of  them  to  fish  on  his  own  account. 

3’he  bouts  with  their  crews  and  divers  come  from  Manar,  Jafliiapatam,  Nagore,  Tuticorin,  Travan- 
core,  .and  other  parts  of  the  Coast  of  Coromandel.  They  arrive  completely  equipped,  and  are  open  boats  of 
one  ton  burden,  about  45  feet  long,  7 or  8 broad,  and  3 feet  deep,  having  but  one  mast  and  one  sail ; and 
unless  when  heavily  laden,  do  not  draw  more  than  eight  or  ten  inches  water.  The  crew  generally  consists 
of  23  persons,  10  of  whom  are  divers,  10  mundnes,  or  men  to  haul  up  the  divers;  1 tindal,  1 steersman,  a 
boy  to  bale  out  water,  and  a man  to  take  care  of  the  boat.  To  these  is  added  a peon  on  the  part  of  the 
renter,  to  guard  against  fraud. 

The  period  the  divers  continue  under  water,  in  the  depth  of  seven  fathoms,  seldom  exceeds  a minute, 
sometimes  a minute  and  a half;  but  other  persons  who  are  willing  to  allow  the  greatest  latitude,  say  they 
never  knew  a diver  remain  under  water  more  than  two  minutes.  In  ground  richly  clothed  with  oysters, 
a diver  often  brings  up  in  his  basket  160  oysters  at  a dip ; but  when  they  are  thinly  scattered,  he  frequently 
collects  no  more  than  five.  One  boat  has  been  known  to  land  in  one  day  33,000  oysters,  and  another 
not  more  than  300. 

The  oysters  are  generally  allowed  to  remain  in  heaps  for  ten  days  after  they  are  brought  on  shore, 
that  time  being  necessary  to  render  them  putrid.  They  are  not  esteemed  good  to  eat,  being  of  a much 
fatter  and  more  glutinous  substance  than  the  common  oyster.  When  they  are  opened  fresh,  they  are  some- 
times dried  in  tlie  sun,  and  eaten  by  the  lower  classes  of  people. 