

The  pearls  arc  then  drilled.  The  largo  ones  are  generally  drillc'd  first,  in  order  to  bring  in  the  hand  to 
work  with  more  ease  on  the  smaller  size,  and  an  expert  w^orkman  in  the  course  ot  a day  will  per- 
forate 300  small,  or  600  large  pearls.  They  are  then  washed  in  salt  and  wate  r,  to  prevent  the  stains  which 
would  otherwise  be  occasioned  by  tlic  perforating  instrument. 

The  next  branch  of  the  liusiness  is  the  arranging  the  pearls  on  strings;  this  is  considered  the  most 
difficult  operation  in  the  profession  of  the  pearl  merchant,  and  is  one  in  which  very  few  excel. 

The  pearls  of  the  largest  size,  being  most  costly,  and  esteemed  as  emblems  of  greatness,  find  a ready 
sale  among  the  rich  natives  of  the  Nizam's  dominions,  Guzzerat,  and  the  other  parts  of*  India. 

The  finest  annee  pearls,  from  the  size  of  tlie  .sieve  No.  30,  to  that  of  No.  80,  which  make  most  beau- 


tiful necklaces,  are  sent  to  Europe. 

A handsoiYK'  necklace  of  pearls,  smaller  than  a large  pea,  costs  from  ITM  to  .^300;  but  one  about 
tlie  size  of  a peppercorn,  may  l)C  procured  for  i>13:  the  former  pearls  sell  at  u Ruinea  each,  mul  the  latler 
at  eighteen  iwnce.  When  the  pearls  dwindle  to  the  size  of  .small  shot,  they  are  sold  at  a very  trilling  pnee. 

The  smaller  sorts  are  sent  to  the  markets  of  Ilydruhad,  Poona,  .and  Guzzerat,  in  whieli  lasl-mcn- 
tioned  place,  pearls  of  a yellow  tinge  are  preferred  to  those  of  a pmr  white,  being  considered  as  having 
arrived  at  greater  maturity,  less  liable  to  fade,  and  i-etaining  their  lu.stiv  to  a longer  jieriod.  'I’hc  n luse 
and  lower  orders  of  all  the  pearls  turn  to  good  account  in  the  China  market,  wl.ere  those  of  superior  value 

cannot  be  so  readily  sold.  ^ 

Pearls  are  sometimes  met  witli  of  various  coloui>,  of  an  exipiisite  silveriikc  brightness,  transparent, 

semi-transparent,  opaque,  brown,  and  black.  ^ , . i>,i  -l'- 

One  of  the  largest  pearls  liitherto  known,  is  described  by  Taveriiierto  to  he  in  the  |.osses.sion  of  the  Iv  mg 

of  Persia.  It  was  bought  by  him  at  the  Bahreen  fishery,  and  cost  .32,000  toinands,  upwards  of  X'1I0,000. 

It  is  in  the  shape  of  a pear,  very  regular,  and  without  fault. 

Another  pearl  belonging  to  the  Great  Mogul,  and  perfectly  round,  is  the  largest  in  the  world  of  that 

fimire  measurinir  0,62  English  inches  in  diameter. 

A li««l  dW  from  in  Sgore  the  .Iroping  li<m.  wmshmS  *>78  car«b,  cmriBl  for  mie  from  Ilol- 
ta.dtoSt.P.tmbur6hinim  It  w»  purolimbl  in  India  for  W.OOO  florin.,  ntonl  .n.l  .... 

offered  for  sole  nt  donbie  that  sum;  it.  colonr  and  rplendonr  rrere  remarkably  fine. 

The  Kina  of  Spain,  Philip  II.,  had  a pearl,  rrhioh  he  pareharod  from  a trareller.  It  aeighed 
85  carat.,  wa.  rained  at  160,000  ddhna,  «>d  wa.  prodaced  from  tlr.  pearl  0.1, cry  at  SI.  MergaeMte 