

Smirraer  mentton.  a pearl  in  the  pomemion  of  the  Prince  Maroat.  a.  herns  ‘k'’  met  waadcrtal  m 


SGO 


PEARLS. 


« 

the  world,  not  so  much  for  its  siiBC,  for  it  weighed  only  carats,  nor  for  its  perfect  roundness,  but  be- 
cause it  was  so  clear  and  transparent  as  to  be  almost  seen  through.  The  Great  Mogul  offered  40,000 
crowns  lor  this  pearl,  which  was  refused.  Tavernier  also  mentions  having  sold  a pear-shaped  pearl  to 
the  uncle  of  the  Great  Mogul,  wliich  weighed  55  carats. 

Pliny  says  that  pearls  are  the  most  valuable  and  excellent  of  all  precious  stones ; they  were  much 
esteemed  by  the  ancients,  and  an  extraordinary  value  put  upon  the  larger  kinds.  We  are  told  that  Servilia, 
the  mother  of  Marcus  Brutus,  presented  one  to  Ciesar  of  the  value  of  jC’50,000  of  our  money  ; and  that 
Cleopatra  dissolved  one  worth  ^250,000  In  vinegar,  which  she  drank  at  a supper  wiiliMtu-k  Antony. 

IVarls  from  the  fishery  of  Ceylon  arc  more  esteemed  in  England  than  from  any  other  part  of  the 
world,  being  of  a more  i-egiilar  form,  and  of  a finer  silvery  white  than  the  Persian  |)earl.  They  should 
be  chosen  round,  of  a bright  lustre,  free  from  stains,  foulness,  and  roughness  ; tliey  are  sometimes  brought 
to  Europe  undrilled,  Imt  are  not  of  so  much  value  as  when  drilled  and  strung ; and  tlie  pearls  should  be 
as  near  as  possible  of  an  equal  quality  throughout  each  string. 

The  finest,  and  what  is  called  the  true  shape  of  the  peaid,  is  a perfect  round ; but  if  pearls  of  a consi- 
deral)le  size  arc  of  the  shape  of  a pear,  as  is  not  uiifrequeiitly  the  case,  they  are  not  less  valued,  as  they 
serve  for  ear-rings  and  other  ornaments ; their  colour  should  be  a pure  white,  and  tJiat  not  a dead  and  lifeless, 
but  a clear  and  brilliant  one;  they  must  be  peiiectly  free  from  foulness,  and  their  surface  must  be  naturally 
smooth  and  glossy.  Pearls  that  arc  rough  on  the  surface,  spotted,  or  dull  in  colour,  irregular  in  their  shapes, 
and  not  perfectly  round,  should  be  rejecled.  It  is  also  an  imperfection  when  tliey  have  large  drilled  holes, 
or  arc  rubbed  flat  about  the  edges  of  their  holes  hy  long  use.  As  no  allowance  is  made  for  tassels,  care 
should  be  taken  that  as  little  silk,  &c.  are  in  them  as  possible. 

Of  the  smallest  size,  or  seed  pearl,  the  most  diminutive  is  of  more  value  than  the  middle  size,  provided 
it  runs  smooth,  round,  and  of  a fine  silvery  lustre.  Tliis  kind  being  sold  by  the  ounce,  cai*c  should  be 
taken  that  the  tassels  are  very  slight,  as  an  allowance  of  £6  per  cent,  only  is  made  in  England,  though 
the  bilk,  &c.  are  generally  much  heavier. 

The  permanent  duty  on  pearls  is  i?10  cent,  and  the  tem|>orary  or  war  duty  £3.  Cs.  8d.  making 
in  the  whole,  jC’IS.  fis.  8d.  per  cent. 