

3 A 


CEYLON  STONES. 


Grernt  Tourmalin  is  of  a dark  hue,  sometimes  bordering  a little  upon  yellow,  sometimes  upon  blue, 
most  frequently  upon  black ; it  is  in  not  a few  instances  transparent,  and  in  others  covered  with  an  opaque 
surface ; it  is  in  thick  and  thin  pieces  of  irregular  forms,  sometimes  os  large  as  a walnut,  sometimes  as  small 
as  groats.  The  green,  or  chrysoprase,  is  beautiful,  of  a grass  green  colour,  clear  and  transparent,  and  is 
used  for  cutting.  This  is  properly  called  the  green  tourmalin. 

Yellow  Tourmalin  is  called  likewise  tourmalin  topaz,  because  it  sometimes  bears  a great  resemblance 
in  colour  to  the  topaz ; in  appearance  It  is  very  much  like  amber;  some  are  more  saturated  or  ripe,  almost 
of  an  orange  colour;  some  are  of  a paler,  and  some  of  a whitish  yellow.  They  aie  cut  for  the  purpose  of 
settuig  in  rings,  and  are  frequently  handsome. 

"WiiiTE  Tourmalin.— It  is  more  or  less  white,  almost  always  the  colour  of  milk,  so  that  its  trans- 
parency is  not  perfectly  clear.  It  is  often  found  in  pieces,  which  have  spots  or  streaks  in  them.  It  is  cut 
for  setting  in  rings,  and  is  among  the  most  common  stones  in  Ceylon. 

Tar  IPO  is  the  name  given  in  Ceylon  to  a white  stone,  which  in  all  probability  is  nothing  more 
than  white  crystal ; its  colour  is  pure  white,  or  somewhat  of  a watery  cast,  but  not  so  dear  and  transpa- 
rent as  the  crystal.  It  is  always  in  shapeless  lumps,  and  is  cut  for  setting. 

Topaz. — This  is  in  general  a beautiful  transparent  stone,  of  a shining  gold  colour,  met  with  in 
various  parts  of  tlu;  world,  in  the  Brazils,  Ceylon,  and  Madras;  they  should  be  chosen  large,  of  a bright 
deep  colour,  free  from  cracks,  flaws,  or  clouds;  those  that  have  a reddish  tinge  should  be  rejected 


CHAFFER  XVIH. 


Coast  from  Cape  Comorin  to  Madras. 


Coofl  of  TinncveU^-^Tuticorin^Commerce  with  Madras-^^Point  Cahjmen---N€gap(ilmn--^Coins^Commr^ 

with  Madras  Nagorc — Karical — Tranquchar — Coinsy  Wtr^hiSy  and  Measures — Commerce Ilisloncaf 

P'oets  relative,  to  the  Commerce  of  Dcnmirk  with  the  East  IndicH — Ikvicotta — Porto  Novo Coinsy  Weifrhtsy 

and  Measures^Cuddalore-^Commerce  of  the  Southern  Division  of  the  Carnatic  ?vilh  Madras^lZndi- 
cherry;  Description — CoinSy  Weights,  and  Measures — Historical  Facts  rclatite  to  the  Commerce  and 
Conquests  of  Fratwe  in  the  East  Indies-^Allemparva^Sadras— Seven  Pagodas-^Covehng^Historical  J'acU 
relative  to  the  Commerce  of  Ostend  with  the  East  Indies^Mcluipour,  or  St.  Thomi. 


THE  Coast  of  India  from  Cape  Comorin  to  Point  Ramen,  which  forms  the  N.  W.  side  of  the  Gulf  of 
Manar,  is  culled  the  Tinnevelly  Coast.  It  is  only  frequented  by  small  coasting  vessels.  Point  Ramen  is  in 
some  degree  connected  with  the  Island  of  Ceylon  by  a narrow  ridge  of  sand  and  rocks,  called  Adam's  Bridge. 