

Merchandise  exported  during  the  same  period  — 11,05,505 

Xmpoits  exceeded  the  17,05,616 

Amount  of  treasure  exported  from  Tranquebar  during  the  same  pcrio(U».......»..«w.«.»>....>...  13,26,319 

Balance  against  Tranquebar.. ................Sicca  Rupees  30,31,935 


TRANQUERAtt 


3C» 


RISE  AND  PHOr.llKSS 

OF  THK 

COMMERCE  BETWEEN  DENMARK  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

The  Danes  were  from  tlie  most  early  times  di.linsuislied  by  their  martial  temper,  and  addicted  to 
maritime  expeditions.  The  British  isles,  after  being  long  harassed  by  their  incursions,  bicame  for  a time 
a part  of  then-  dominions.  They  had  also  a large  share  in  the  holy  wars;  but  by  this  martial  spirit,  and  the 
losses  whieh  attended  it,  the  power  of  Denmark  deelined.  Christiern  IV.  was  the  first  monarch  who  applied 
himself  to,  the  promoting  commerce  and  discoveries,  and  he  gave  his  sanction,  about  the  year  1C12, 
to  a number  of  merchants  who  had  associated  themselves  at  Copenhagen  for  carrying  on  a trade  with  the 
East  Indies.  They  formed  a capital  of  250  shares,  of  1000  rix-dollars  each,  and  made  the  necessary 
preiiarations  for  equipping,  and  sending  a siiua.lron  to  the  East  Indies,  which  did  not  leave  Copenhagen  till 
1615,  and  arrived  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel  in  1616,  where  they  were  kindly  received. 

1616.  A Dutch  factor,  named  Boschower,  being  sent  to  Ceylon  to  negotiate  a treaty  of  commerce  with 
the  King,  he  was  received  with  much  respect,  and  concluded  the  treaty,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  Dutch 
Government  at  Batavia.  He  so  ingratiated  himself  with  the  King,  that  he  became  Chief  of  his  Council, 
commanded  his  armies,  and  was  created  Prince  of  Migiionne.  He  prevailed  u|)on  the  King  to  send  him, 
with  the  title  of  Amba.ssador,  into  Europe.  His  credentials  were  directed  to  the  States-CIcneral ; but  besides 
these,  he  had,  in  case  his  application  to  them  should  fail,  full  power  to  treat  with  any  other  European 
put||utate,  who  shouhl  be  dispased  to  assist  the  King  in  recovering  his  dominions  from  the  Portuguese. 
He  sailed  from  Ceylon  May  9th,  1615.  On  his  arrival  in  Holland,  being  very  coldly  received,  he  proceeded 
to  Copenhagen,  where  he  was  treated  in  a manner  more  suitable  to  his  pretensions.  His  propositions 
were  favourably  received  by  the  Danish  East  India  Company,  who  entered  into  a negotiation  with  him; 
and  a treaty  being  coneluded,  it  was  ratihed  and  eonllrmed  in  the  suceewling  year  by  the  King,  Christiern  IV. 
who  granted  a man  of  war,  the  Elephant,  to  carry  him  back  to  Ceylon-  the  Com|)any  likewise  added 
some  of  their  ships;  and  the  whole  squadron  was  put  under  the  command  of  a Danish  nobleman.  They 
sailed  from  Copenhagen  March  30th,  1619,  and  anchored  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  on  the  19th  of  July 
in  the  same  year,  from  whence  they  proceeded  to  Ceylon;  but  meeting  with  very  bad  weather,  numbers  died 
on  the  passage,  and  amongst  the  rest  the  Ambassador.  On  the  arrival  of  the  squadron  at  Trincomalee, 
advice  thereof  was  sent  to  the  King,  who  disavowed  the  treaty.  The  Danish  Commander  therefore  proceeded 
for  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  when  he  purchased  of  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore  the  port  of  Tranquebar  and  a 
district  around  it,  and  left  the  forces  that  should  have  been  disembarked  at  Ceylon,  to  garrison  the  fort 
tliat  was  erecting,  and  on  which  he  bestowed  the  name  of  Danebourg.  In  his  return  he  anchored  in 
Table  Bay  August  30th,  1621,  and  arrived  safe  at  Copenhagen  early  in  the  following  year. 