

1705.  The  commerce  with  India  was  much  reduced  at  this  period.  In  this  year  the  first  missionaries 
were  sent  from  Denmark.  They  sailed  from  Copenhagen  the  25th  of  November,  1705,  and  arrived  at 
Tranquebar  in  the  beginning  of  July,  1706.  In  the  course  of  their  mission  they  met  with  innumerable 
obstacles  and  difficulties,  so  that  but  few  of  the  natives  were  converted  to  the  Christian  faith. 

1728.  The  Ostend  East  India  Company  liaving  been  suppressed,  a Dutch  mercliant,  who  had  been 
concerned  in  it,  proceeded  to  Copenhagen,  where  he  applied  himself  to  King  Frederick  IV.  and  made 
proposals  of  extending  the  trade  to  the  East  Indies.  The  arguments  he  made  use  of  induced  the  King  to 
suffer  his  sclicmc  to  be  put  iu  execution;  and  that  it  might  be  done  more  conveniently,  the  Danish  Com- 
pany were  transferred  from  Copenhagen  to  Altona:  and  in  order  to  induce  foreigners  to  engage  in  this 
undertaking,  his  Danish  Majesty  granted  a new  charter,  dated  in  April,  1728,  for  promoting  the  com- 
merce of  the  said  Company  to  the  Indies,  China,  and  Bengal,  the  chief  articles  of  which  were  these,  vis. 

“ The  nc>v  subscribers  shall  have  an  equal  share  and  right  with  the  old  members,  in  all  the  concessions 
and  privileges  granted  to  the  said  Company  by  his  present  Majesty  and  his  august  predecessors;  and  like- 
wise  in  all  the  forts,  settlements,  revenues,  houses,  magazines,  ships,  effects,  and,  in  short,  whatever  the 
Company  is  possessed  of  at  this  day,  or  may  acquire  in  time  to  come.— -The  old  shares,  or  actions,  which 
are  in  number  250,  of  1000  rix-dollars  each,  shall  subsist  and  remain  as  they  are,  and  shall  have  the  same 
right  as  the  new  shares. — The  Directors  shall  declare  and  affirm,  upon  their  honour,  that  all  Ihe  debts  of  the 
Company  do  not  exceed  160,000  rix-dollars  in  specie.-— TheUnited  Company  are  obliged  to  discharge  and  pay 
the  said  sum,  upon  condition  that  the  old  shares  shall  have  no  dividends  till  1733;  and  if  the  said  debts  should 
appear  to  exceed  the  said  sum,  the  old  shares  shall  be  answerable  for  the  overplus, and  the  new  subscribers  shall 
not  he  obliged  to  contribute  thereto. — Each  new  share  to  be  1000  rix-dollars,  payable  by  certain  instal- 
ments, and  not  to  be  liable  to  any  seizure  or  stop  upon  any  account  whatsoever. — The  Directors  shall 
yearly  communicate  to  the  subscribers  an  exact  and  particular  account  of  the  Company's  affairs*  The 


3TI 


BETWEEN  DENMARK  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

dividend  shall  be  replated  upon  the  said  account  in  a General  Court  of  the  Company  by  the  majority 
ot  voices.— 1 he  Directors  are  not  allowed  to  undertake  any  trade  but  the  commerce  in  the  East  Indies 
upon  the  Company’s  account,  without  the  consent  of  the  members  thereof,  nor  lend  the  ( ompany’s  money 
to  any  person  whatsoever:  they  shall  take  an  oath  of  exact  observation  of  this  article.— All  the  merchan- 
dise  which  shall  be  sold  at  any  other  place  than  Copenhagen,  shall  be  paid  in  the  Bank  at  Hamburgh, 
to  one  or  more  merchants,  to  be  chosen  by  the  subscribers. — The  money  arising  from  the  new  subscription, 
shall  be  employed  in  sending  out  ships  to  Tranquebar,  Bengal,  and  China,  and  for  no  other  use  whatever.— 
A General  Court  of  the  Company  to  be  held  as  soon  as  possible,  to  chuse  Dii*ectors,  &c.” 