

The  marks  for  anchoring  vary  according  to  the  monsoon : in  the  southerly  one  bring  the  flag-staff 
to  bear  W.S.W.  in  five  or  six  fathoms;  and  in  the  northern  monsoon  it  b to  be  brought  to  bear  west.  By 
this  means  the  passage  becomes  easier  to  boats  passing  to  and  from  the  shore. 


Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 

riecc-goodswv%<.%.^-.^^%%v^»%Sicca  Rupees  1,03,019 

Iiuligo  29,8,34  I 

Bectle-nut  4,108  II 

Oram  4,285 


Sundries 


,v,  37,125 


Imports  in  1805  Rupees  1,78,451 


TBANQUIIBAR.  , 

1 10  settlement  belonging  to  the  Danes  in  the  East  Indies,  is  in  latitude 

11“  North,  and  ongitude  79^  58  East.  The  town  is  upwards  of  two  miles  in  circumferenc”  lie  st^et! 

bls^n“  surrounded  with  a good  stone  wall,  having  several 

bastions  well  provided  with  artillery.  Before  the  gate  that  leads  into  the  country  stands  a fine  citadd 

The  ^ort  towards  tlie  sea  is  well  built,  and  regular,  remarkable  for  its  extraonlinary  whiteness,  being  visible 
a great  distance,  and  the  bastions  arc  supplied  with  brass  cannon.  Within  the  walls  of  the  city  there  are 
tlwee  Christian  churches;  one  belonging  to  the  Portuguese  Jesuits,  who  were  settled  here  before  the  Danes 
Aion  IS  the  church  belonging  to  the  inhabitants  and  garrison.  The  third  is  that  of  the  Mis,slonaries,  called 
Jerusalem,  and  consecrated  August  U,  1707.  There  is  also  a large  mosque  for  the  Mahometans,  and 
sei  oral  pagodas  for  the  Gentoos  within  the  walls.  The  district  belonging  to  the  town  is  of  con.sider«blc 
extent,  full  of  villages,  many  of  them  large  and  well  built,  and  tl.e  p.  ineipal  one  is  thought  to  contain  as 
many  inhabitants  as  the  town  of  Danehurgh,  and  several  mosques  and  pagodas. 

Tramiuebar  was  first  visited  by  the  Danes  in  1016,  at  which  perioil  they  found  the  Portuguese  Jesuits 
settled  there,  who  had  built  a church,  and  made  a great  many  converts  among  the  natives.  The  Danes 
made  an  application  to  the  Kajah  for  permission  to  settle  a factory,  and  were  kindly  received.  In  about 
five  years  after,  the  Hajah  entered  into  an  agreement  with  them  for  the  port,  and,  a cei  tain  district  round  it, 
which  he  sold,  or  rather  farmed  to  them,  at  the  annual  rent  of  2000  pagodas.  In  1021  they  built  the  fort 
for  the  defence  of  the  place,  and  tlie  inhabitants  who  had  settled  in  tlie  town  under  its  protection. 
Tranquebar  soon  changed  its  appearance,  and  from  being  a place  of  no  note,  became  of  consi- 
derable  importance.  In  1699  the  Danes  being  on  bad  terms  witli  the  Rajah  of  Tanjorc,  he  resolved 
to  dispossess  them  of  Tranquebar;  and  assembling  an  army  of  J0,O(XI  men,  began  the  siege.  The 
Danes  applied  to  the  English  at  Madras  for  assistance,  which  was  readily  granted.  The  Rajah's  forces, 
after  incredible  labour  and  patience,  had  brought  their  trenches  within  jiistol-shot  of  the  walls,  when  the 
English  reinforcements  arrived.  In  a day  or  two  after  their  arrival,  a sortie  was  made  from  the  garrison, 
and  in  a short  time  the  Rajah  was  compelled  to  raise  the  siege,  and  retii  e wilhin  his  own  territories,  leaving 
the  inhabitants  to  continue  their  occupations  without  molestation.  It  was  again  besieged  by  the  Rajah  in 
1718,  but  he  was  unable  to  make  any  impression;  since  which  period  the  Danes  eontimied  in  undisturbed 
possession,  till  hostilities  commenced  with  the  English,  when  it  surrendered  to  them. 