

The  materials  for  the  history  of  the  Danish  East  India  commerce  are  very  scanty;  but  it  appears  that 
in  twenty  years,  they  had  opened  a trade  with  the  Moluccas,  which  enabled  their  Directors  at  Tranquebar 
to  send  home  large  vessels  richly  laden,  with  cargoes  well  assorted  from  all  parts  of  India;  but  in  consequence 
of  the  wars  in  which  Denmark  became  involved,  the  affairs  of  the  Company  were  deranged,  and  they 
were  prevented  corresponding  regularly  with  their  settlement  at  Tranquebar,  which  circumstance  disabled 
the  colony  from  sending  ships  as  usual  into  Europe.  This  alteration  in  their  affairs  was  severely  felt  by 
them,  and  at  the  same  time  reduced  them  in  the  estimation  of  other  Europeans,  and  diminished  their 
credit  with  the  natives. 

1654.  'Ihe  state  of  the  Danish  commerce  was  so  reduced,  that  the  Government  of  Tranquebar  are 

3B 


370 


t 


RISE  AND  PROeiRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


stated  in  this  year  to  have  made  an  offer  to  the  Dutch  to  deliver  up  the  fort  to  them,  on  payment  of 
their  debts,  which  offer  was  rejected. 

1661.  Walter  Schonten,  a famous  Dutch  navigator,  who  visited  Tranquebar  at  this  period,  observes, 
as  if  it  was  something  remarkable,  that  there  were  two  Danish  ships  in  the  port ; and  he  further  remarks, 
that  their  flags  were  but  rarely  seen  in  other  ports  in  the  Indies,  and  that  they  were  upon  very  bad  terms 
with  the  natives,  by  whom  they  were  kept  in  constant  alarm,  and  experienced  great  losses. 

1670.  The  Danish  East  India  Company  gave  up  their  charter,  and  made  over  their  settlements  to 
the  Government,  as  an  indemnification  for  the  sums  it  had  advanced.  A new  Company  was  therefore 
formed.  The  King,  Christiorn  V.  gave  them,  in  ships  and  effects,  to  the  amount  of  310,828  livres;  and  the 
adventurers  advanced  732,600  livres.  This  second  undertaking  being  entered  upon  without  suffieient  funds, 
proved  more  unsuccessful  than  the  former;  and  after  a few  voyages,  Tranquebar  was  left  to  itself. 

1684.  The  Rajah  of  Tanjore  having  under  various  pretences  interrupted  their  communication  with 
the  interior,  and  extorted  large  sums  of  money  from  tliem,  Tranquebar  was  so  reduced,  that  they  are  said 
to  have  pawned  three  of  the  bastions  of  tlie  fort  to  the  Dutch,  for  such  a sum  of  money  as  enabled  them 
to  keep  tlie  garrison  and  inhabitants  from  starving : these,  however,  were  redeemed  in  the  ensuing  year. 

1698.  The  Company  obtained  a new  charter,  by  which  they  were  bound  to  make  certain  advances 
to  the  royal  treasury. 

1699.  Ti’anqucbar  was  besieged  by  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore,  and  would  have  been  taken,  bad  not  the 
English  rendered  such  assistance,  as  compelled  the  natives  to  raise  the  siege. 