


NEGAPATAM. 

The  fort  is  in  latitude  10®  43  North,  and  longitude  79®  39'  East;  it  is  a regular  pentagon  with  wet 
ditches,  and  tlie  whole  of  the  fortifications  are  strong,  and  in  good  repair.  The  town  is  situated  to  the  north- 
ward of  the  fort,  near  which  is  a river  capable  of  receiving  small  country  vessels,  which  has  two  entrances, 
one  to  the  northward,  and  the  other  to  the  southward,  the  land  between  them  forming  an  island;  the 
boats  use  the  windward  entrance  in  passing  out,  and  the  leeward  one  in  returning,  according  to  the  monsoon. 
On  the  north  side  of  this  river  is  a strong  batteiy,  to  which  boats  entering,  must  go  within  the  length  of 
their  oars,  and  the  landing-place  is  close  to  it.  There  is  a bar  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  which  in  bad  weather 
breaks  very  much,  and  becomes  dangerous. 

The  common  anchorage  in  the  fair  season  is  abreast  the  fort  in  five  fathoms,  1 ^ to  2 miles  off  shore. 
Tn  unsettled  weather  it  is  prudent  to  anchor  further  out  in  6 or  7 fathoms,  the  flagstaff  bearing  W.  | S. 
and  the  highest  of  the  five  pagodas  at  Nagore  N.  W.  which  is  good  holding  ground. 

Negapatam  formerly  belonged  to  the  Portuguese.  The  Dutch  took  it  in  l660;  they  strengthened 
the  fortifications,  and  it  became  the  most  considerable  place  belonging  to  them  on  the  Coromandel  Coast. 
Negapatam  was  besieged  by  the  English  in  1781.  The  fleet  under  Sir  Edward  Hughes  blocked  it  up 
by  sea,  and  the  land  forces  under  Sir  Hector  Munro  invested  it  by  land.  The  garrison  amounted  to  about 

8.000  men  of  all  sorts,  and  far  exceeded  tlie  besiegers  in  point  of  number,  whose  whole  force  did  not  exceed 

4.000  men  capable  of  effective  service.  On  October  29th,  1781,  the  strong  lines,  flanked  by  redoubts  which 
the  Dutch  hod  thrown  up,  to  cover  and  defend  the  approaches  to  ^e  town,  were  attacked,  and  carried  by 


negapatam. 


365 


storm.  On  November  3d,  the  General  opened  ground  against  the  north  face  of  the  fort ; and  the  approarhcs 
were  carried  on  with  unusual  rapidity.  On  the  7th  a battery  of  ten  1 8 pounders  being  ready  to  open  within 
300  paces  of  the  walls,  the  Adtniral  and  General  sent  a joint  letter  of  summon.s  to  the  Duteh  Governor, 
which  he  answered  with  great  respect,  but  no  less  firmness.  The  garrison  made  two  desperate  sallies  with 
almost  their  whole  force,  but  were  driven  back  into  the  town  with  much  loss  in  both.  A battery  being 
opened  w ith  great  effect  on  the  face  of  a bastion  which  was  intended  to  be  breached,  the  enemy  demanded  a 
parley , and  on  the  12th  of  November,  commissioners  were  sent  out  to  settle  the  terms  of  capitulation  with  the 
Admiral  and  General.  By  these  the  town  and  citadel,  and  every  thing  they  contained  belonging  to  the 
Goveniment  or  Company,  were  surrendered;  private  property  was  secured,  and  the  inhabitants  pro- 
tected in  their  house'’  and  estates,  upon  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance.  The  garrison  wer#  allowed  military 
honours,  and  then  became  prisoners  of  war;  and  the  Governor,  Council,  and  civil  officers  were  retained 
on  parole.  The  whole  loss  of  the  besiegers,  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  amounted  to  no  more  than 
133  men.  A numerous  artillery,  with  large  quantities  of  shot,  .shells,  military  and  artillery  stores  were 
found  in  the  place.  The  Dutch,  at  the  (leace  in  1782,  ceded  the  place  and  its  dependencies  to  the  English, 
who  have  retained  it  ever  since. 