

T 34*,S03 

Sundries  WV%%«'V%  1 ,4s3jOOO 

Exports  in  Sicca  Rupees  7,93,601 

NAGORE. 

About  four  miles  from  Negapatam,  in  latitude  10°  47  North,  are  the  five  white  pagodas  of  Nagore; 
they  are  excellent  sea-marks  for  distinguishing  the  river,  whicli  is  close  to  them  on  the  north  side,  wliere 
a great  trade  is  carried  on  in  piece-goods,  rice,  &c.  The  river  has  a bar,  on  which  arc  eight  feet  at  high 
water,  spring  tides.  There  are  several  vessels  of  two  or  three  hundred  tons  burthen  belonging  to  this  place, 
navigated  by  natives,  w^ho  conduct  them  to  the  west  coast  of  Sumatra,  Acheen,  the  Straits  of  Malacca,  and 
other  places  to  the  eastw'ard,  where  they  have  a constant  trade.  The  anchorage  in  Nagore  Road  is  about 
miles  off  the  entrance  of  the  river,  in  3 or  6 fathoms,  the  five  pagodas  bearing  W.S.W.  Nagore  was 
tdken  and  plundered  by  the  French  under  Lally  in  1768. 

KARICAL 

Is  situated  in  latitude  10°  52  North,  and  longitude  80°  8'  East.  This  settlement,  with  the  places 
de[iending  on  it,  belonged  to  the  French,  and  was  granted  to  them  liy  the  King  of  Tanjore  in  1739;  and  in 
1 745,  a number  of  villages  was  added  to  it.  In  the  wars  between  the  English  and  French  it  frequently  changed 
masters.  It  carries  on  a great  trade  in  piece-goods  and  rice.  Two  rivers,  both  navigable  branches  of  the 
Cavcr>',  run  through  this  district,  and  fertilize  the  country,  ivhich  abounds  in  rice  and  other  provisions. 

The  fort  of  Karical  stands  300  yards  from  the  sea-side  on  the  northern  bank  of  a river;  it  is  an  oblong 
square  completely  fortified,  but  w'ants  space,  its  internal  area,  exclusive  of  the  four  bastions,  not  exceeding 
100  yards  from  west  to  east,  and  60  from  north  to  south.  The  bastions  admit  only  three  guns  in  their 
faces;  but  each  of  the  curtains  is  covered  with  a ravelin  much  more  spacious  than  the  bastions,  and  mounting 
six.  A wet  ditch  runs  between  the  three  curtains  to  the  north,  west,  and  south,  and  their  ravelins:  but  on 
the  east  face  the  ditch  surrounds  the  ravelin  likewise.  A covered  way  well  pallisaded,  and  a complete  glacis 
enclose  the  whole.  Karical  was  besieged  by  the  English  under  Major  Monson  in  1760:  it  surrendered 
in  April,  the  garrison  became  prisoners  of  war,  and  the  property  of  the  inhabitants  was  respected.  Besides 
small  arms  and  stores,  there  were  taken  in  the  place  155  pieces  of  cannon  of  all  sorts,  and  nine  mortars, 
with  a large  stock  of  ammunition.  At  this  period  the  French  had  acquired,  by  various  purchases  and 
008*410113  from  the  Government,  districts  round  the  fort  containing  1 13  villages,  of  which  the  Customs  of  the 
[)ort  and  town  produced  about  30,000  pagodas  a year.  It  was  surrendered  to  the  French  at  the  peace, 
but  again  taken,  and  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  English.  The  'town  is  on  the  north  side  of  the  fort  sepa- 
rated by  an  esplanade,  and  is  large,  spacious,  and  well-built. 