


376 


DEVICOTTA— PORTO  N^PVO-^UDDALORE. 


DEVICOTTA. 

This  fort  u situated  on  a small  island  juk  witf^  the  entrance  of  Coleroon  Hirer,  in  latitude  about 
IP  22  North,  which  has  within  its  bar,  water  sufficiient  for  large  ships.  The  fort  is  strong,  and  built  of 
brick.  In  1749  it  was  in  the  possession  of  its  lawful  master,  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore;  but  the  English,  under 
Major  Lawrence,  determined  to  make  themselves  masters  of  it.  It  was  soon  forced,  and  the  garrison  obliged 
to  save  themselves  by  flight.  The  Company  had  it  in  contemplation,  to  form  this  acquisition  into  a harbour, 
and  obtained  a cession  of  distnct  from  the  Rajah;  but  the  project  has  bqen  long  abandoned.  In  this 
part  are  to  be  seen  up  the  country  the  four  famous  pagodas,  called  the  Chalambaram  pagodas. 

PORTO  NOVO 

Is  situated  in  latitude  11°  32  North,  and  longitude  79’  45'  East.  It  was  formerly  a place  of  consi- 
derable trade,  where  the  French  and  Dutch  had  factories.  Here  is  a river  navigable  only  for  small  country 
vessels.  Fresh  water  is  filled  out  of  a tank  a little  way  up  ihU  river,  hut  it  is  brackish,  had,  and  apt  to 
give  the  flux.  The  road  of  Porto  Novo,  by  being  sheltered  to  the  S.  E.  by  the  Coleroon  Shoal,  is  by  far 
the  smoothest  and  safest  on  the  Coromandel  shore.  Here  you  may  anchor  in  six  fathoms,  the  flagstaff 
W.  I N.  2 miles  off-shore,  and  the  southernmost  of  the  Chalambaram  pagodas  S.  W. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  collums  of  paddy,  or  in  chucknims.  The  collum  is  a measure  which  is  between 
70  and  80  quarts,  but  varies  in  different  parts.  The  medium  price  of  a collum  of  paddy  is  3|  gold,  or 
7 silver  fananis,  about  Is.  4d.  sterling;  so  that  100,000  collums  of  paddy  at  the  afore-mentioned  price,  will 
produce  15,555  Star  pagodas  25  fanams. 

In  the  Tanjore  country  the  Star  pagoda  is  valued  at  4.5  Madras,  or  silver  fanams;  1 chuckrum  is 
equal  to  20  Madras,  or  10  gold  fanams;  2 cliuckrums  and  1 fanam  is  equal  to  1 Porto  Novo  pagoda. 

The  Porto  Novo  pagoda  passes  current  at  Madras  for  37  j Madras  fanams.  100  Porto  Novo  pagodas 
are  reckoned  83^  Star  pagodas,  and  100  Star  pagodas,  equal  to  120  Porto  Novo  pagodas.  In  the  Company's 
accounts  the  Porto  Novo  pagoda  is  reckoned  at  30  fanams. 

CUDDALORE 

Is  about  three  leagues  to  the  northward  of  Porto  Novo,  in  latitude  1 1°  43  North,  and  longitude  79® 
50  East.  The  river  is  small,  shut  up  by  a bar  at  the  entrance,  and  navigable  only  by  boats.  The  town 
extends  about  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  north  to  south,  and  about  half  a mile  from  east  to  west.  Three 
of  its  sides  are  fortified:  that  to  the  sea  is  for  the  greater  part  open;  but  the  river  passing  between  Fort 
St.  David  and  the  town,  flows,  just  before  it  gains  the  sea,  along  the  eastern  side  of  the  town,  of  which, 
whilst  it  washed  the  skirts  on  one  hand,  it  was  on  the  other  separated  from  the  sea  by  a mound  of  sand, 
which  the  surf  throws  on  the  shore  in  most  parts  of  the  coast.  It  is  very  populous,  and  a place  of  some 
trade.  A little  above  the  town  stands  Trivada  pagoda,  which  forms  a citadel  to  a large  pettah,  or  town. 
The  marks  for  anchorage  are  tiie  flagstaff  N.  W.  and  Fort  St.  David  N.N.  W.  off-shore  about  1-J  mile. 