

1604.  Gerard  Lc  Roy,  a Fleming,  who  had  made  voyages  to  India  in  the  Dutch  service,  having 
offered  himself  as  a pilot,  in  case  a French  East  India  Company  could  be  established,  such  a company  was 
formed  under  the  King’s  Letters  Patent,  dated  the  1st  of  June,  1604,  by  which  they  had  an  exclusive 
trade  granted  them  for  fiflcon  years,  on  the  setting  out  of  their  first  ship ; and  they  were  exempted  from 
the  payment  of  all  duties  on  imports  for  the  first  two  voyages.  This  design,  however,  came  to  nothing, 
in  consequence  of  disputes  amongst  the  proprietors,  and  a want  of  sufficient  capital. 

1611.  The  project  of  trading  to  India  was  again  revived,  and  a new  Company  erected  by  letters 
patent,  dated  March  2,  1611 ; but  the  same  difficulties  that  rendered  the  former  scheme  abortive,  had  a 
similar  effect  upon  this,  so  that  for  four  years  no  attempt  was  made  to  carry  on  the  trade. 

1615.  Two  merchants  of  Rouen,  Muisson  and  Canis,  petitioned  the  King  tliat  the  privileges  granted 

to  tfeis  inactive  Society,  might  be  transferred  to  them,  offering  to  fit  out  ships  that  very  year.  This  proposal 

was  opposed  by  those  who  were  interested  in  the  former  establishment ; wlicreupon  a coalition  took  place 

between  the  two  parties,  and  letters  patent  were  granted,  dated  the  2d  of  July,  161.5,  which  were  regi- 

stored  in  Parliament  in  September  following,  allowing  them  an  exclusive  privilege  of  trade  for  12  years. 

% 

1616.  The  Company  fitted  out  two  shipn,  under  the  command  of  De  Nets  and  Beaulieu.  The  voyage 
was  in  aU  respects  fortunate  and  well-conducted,  though  In  the  end  it  did  not  turn  to  any  great  account; 
for  the  Dijtch  Government  at  Batavia  published  an  order,  requiring  all  the  subjects  of  the  States-General , 
that  wwe  on  board  those  ships,  to  quit  them  immediately.  The  commanders,  finding  it  out  of  tlieir  power  to 
bring  both  «hip«  home,  the  one  commanded  by  Beaulieu  was  therefore  sold,  and  all  their  goods  brought  to 
France tm  the  largest;  notwithstanding  which  unforeseen  difficulty,  and  the  great  cx|>ence  incurred  in  the 
undertaking,  it  was  managed  so  prudently  as  to  prove  a saving  voyage. 

1619.  The  Company  having  made  the  necessary  preparations  for  anotlier  voyage,  and  taken  all  pos- 
able  precaution  for  rendering  it  successful,  two  ships,  under  the  command  of  Commodore  Beaulieu,  sailed 
from  Harfleur,  October  9,  1619.  The  voyage  was  conducted  with  skill  and  address,  and  a cargo  for  both 

3C  2 


380  * RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 

ships  procured  at  Sumatra.  One  of  the  ships  wu  aOerwards  burnt  at  Bantam,  at  Aa  instigation  of  tiic 
Dutch,  liaving  a cargo  on  board  valued  at  near  ^80,000  sterling.  The  Commodore  arrived  with  the  other 
at  Havre  de  Grace  on  the  1st  of  December,  1620.  The  .sale  of  this  cargo,  chiefly  pepper,  which  bore  a 
liigh  price  in  France,  defrayed  the  cost  of  the  voyage,  notwithstanding  the  loss  of  the  other  ship  and  cargo. 