

The  civil  war  which  broke  out  in  France,  interrupted  the  progress  of  the  Company,  disabled  the 
members  from  contributing  the  funds  necessary  to  its  support,  and  diverted  the  attentbn  of  the  Govern- 
ment, without  which  it  could  not  subsist.  Upon  which,  some  private  traders  in  Normandy  endeavoured 
to  avail  themselves  of  the  Company's  charter,  from  whence  sprung  the  original  design  of  forming  a set- 
t lenient  on  the  Island  of  Madagascar. 

10.13.  The  privileges  granted  to  the  Company  lieing  expired,  .some  merchants  of  Dieppe  sent  some 
>e';els  to  Madagascar  and  India,  which  made  profitable  voyages  j but  their  trade  w’as  very  limited. 

1012.  Cardinal  iliehlieu,  desirous  of  reviving  the  commerce  with  India,  obtained  a patent,  dated  the 
2Uh  of  June,  101-2,  for  a new  Company  (being  the  third)  of  twenty-four  persons,  with  the  cxclu.sive  trade 
ol  all  the  countries  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  for  ten  years.  These  privileges  w’ere  conflrmesl 
September  20,  1043.  All  these  it  quietly  enjoytMl  for  ten  years,  during  which  period  tliey  sent  every 
year  a vessel  to  Madagascar;  so  that  though  the  name  of  an  East  India  Company  was  kept  up,  yet  they 
were  possessed  of  no  trade,  but  contented  themselves  with  fruitless  attempts  to  settle  a colony  on  Mada- 
gascar, in  the  hope  that  it  might  be  the  means  of  rendcruig  their  future  commerce  with  India  more  secure 
and  advantageous. 

1652.  The  Company,  notwithstanding  the  langubhing  state  of  their  concerns,  obtained  a patent  for 
a renewal  of  their  privileges  for  fifteen  years  from  December,  1652.  Soon  after  the  Duke  de  la  Meilleray, 
Master  of  the  Ordnance,  succeeded  in  getting  possession  of  the  Company's  forts  on  Madagascar,  but 
found  them  not  worth  keeping.  At  his  death,  his  interest  in  the  island  was  sold  for  20,000  livres. 
By  this  transaction  the  Company  became  insolvent,  and  the  Duke's  property  was  all  lost. 

1660.  Some  merchants  of  Rouen  obtained  a patent  for  an  exclusive  trade  with  China,  Tonquin, 
Cocliin-China,  and  the  neighbouring  islands;  but  they  had  scarcely  begun  to  make  the  necessary  prepara- 
lioiis  for  carrying  their  privileges  into  effect,  when  they  were  absorbed  by  the  new  Company  of  the  Indies. 

1664.  The  famous  Colbert,  Minister  of  Louis  XIV.  conceived  the  design  of  reviving  the  French 
East  India  Company,  notw’ithstanding  the  misfortunes  which  had  disappoint^  the  hopes  of  his  prede- 
cessors. In  August,  1664,  an  edict  was  issued,  containing  forty-seven  articles.  Their  import,  among 
other  things,  was — ^I’hat  the  Company  should  be  formed  of  His  Majesty's  subjects,  even  of  the  Nobles, 
without  any  dread  of  derogating  from  their  nobility. — That  each  share  could  not  be  less  tbnq  LOOff  livres, 
nor  the  augmentations  under  500. — That  strangers  of  any  Prince  or  State  whatsoever,  migbi  be  incorpo- 
rated with  the  Company;  and  that  those  who  should  have  in  it  20,000  livres,  should  be  reputed  di»nigcn»^ 
and  in  that  respect  should  enjoy  all  the  privileges  of  real  subjects.— That  a chamber  of  general  direction 
should  be  established,  composed  of  twenty-one  directors;  whereof  twelve  should  be  of  the  City  of  Paris, 
and  nine  others  of  the  provinces;  and  that  the  said  chamber  might  estahluh  particular  ones  when  and 
where  it  should  judge  proper. — That  His  Majesty  empowered  the  Company  to  navigate  solely,  excluave 
of  his  other  subjects,  in  all  the  Indian  seas,  east  and  south,  during  the  term  of  fifty  years.— That  it 
shoidd  have  for  ever  the  possession  of  tlie  Island  of  St.  Lawrence,  or  Madagascar,  and  of  all  the  other 
lands,  places,  and  isles  it  might  conquer  from  the  enemy  and  the  natives,  to  enjoy  them  in'  aQ  property, 
scigneury,  and  justice,  without  reserving  any  thing  therein,  but  sole  fealty  and  liege-homage,  iW^  the 
duty,  rent,  or  service  of  a crown  and  sceptre  of  gold,  weighing  100  marks,  upon  each  demise  of  a King; 
granting  him  also  the  power  of  nominating  and  establishing  all  officers,  militaiy  and  civil  s though  tho 