

Weights.— Gold  and  silver  are  weighed  by  the  seer,  pagoda,  rupee,  and  fanam;  a seer  weighs  28 j 
rupees,  81  j pagodas,  or  73^  fanams;  a rupee  weight  b equal  to  30  fanams,  or  480  nellos;  a pagoda 
weight  b 9 fanams,  or  144  nellos;  thus  3 ru|)ees  are  equal  in  weight  to  10  pagodas. 

71  j pagodas  weigh  a French  mark,  or  3778  English  grains,  so  that  the  seer  contains  4293  grains.  ' 

The  commercial  weights  are  the  candy  of  20  maunds,  each  maund  8 vb.  The  Pondicherry  maund 
is  25  lbs.  14oz.  5 dr.  avoirdupois. 

Measures. — Rice,  and  all  other  sorts  of  grain  are  sold  by  the  garce  of  600  mercals;  and  100  mercab 
are  nearly  18  English  bushels. 


COMMERCE. 

The  extent  of  the  commerce  carried  on  between  France  and  Pondicherry  b enumerated  hereafter 
under  the  head  of  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  French  Commerce  with  the  East  Indies.'  Piece-goods 
formed  the  most  material  article,  part  of  which  was  supplied  from  Karical  and  Yanaon,  two  sn^  settle* 
ments  subordinate  to  Pondicherry  on  the  Coromandel  Coast;  and  the  remainder  consisted  of  pepper, 
indigo,  and  a few  other  articles.  The  coasting  or  country  trade  carried  on  to  and  frOm  POndieherr/  was 
always  trifling,  it  being  principally  confined  to  the  Englbb  settlements. 


PONDICHERRY. 


379 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS 

OF  TilK 

COMMERCE  BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

The  riches  which  the  Portuguese  drew  from  tlie  East  Indies,  in  consequiMice  of  the  discovery  of  the 
passage  round  the  Cape  ot  Good  Hope,  soon  induced  the  French  to  follow  them,  in  order  to  partake  of 
the  advantages  derived  from  the  commerce  carried  on,  and  to  supply  themselves  with  the  s|)i<Ts,  silks,  and 
other  Eastern  commodities,  of  which  they  con.sumed  considerable  quantities;  but  they  did  not  embark  in 
it  with  the  spirit  and  enterprise  necessary  for  the  success  of  so  arduous  an  undertaking. 

1.537.  Francis  I.  who  was  desirous  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  his  subjects,  exhorted  them  by  a 
proclamation  in  this  year  to  engage  in  foreign  commerce,  and  laid  before  them  the  advantages  that  would 
result  from  complying  with  his  desires.  The  proclamation  was  repeated  a few  yeiirs  allerwards.  This  con- 
duct was  imitated  by  Henry  III.  who,  in  an  edict,  dated  the  loth  of  December,  1.578,  pressed  the  same 
point,  but  with  very  little  eifect,  either  from  want  of  attention  in  his  subjects,  or  the  inability  of  tlie  Crown 
to  render  that  assistance  which  was  considered  necessary  in  such  an  undertaking. 

1601.  A society  in  Bretagne  fitted  out  two  ships  for  the  East  Indies,  in  May  IGOl . I'hcy  arrived  at 
Madagascar  in  February  following,  where  they  remained  till  May,  and  in  July  they  were  cast  aw^ay  on 
the  Maldivc  Islands.  Laval,  one  of  the  survivors,  remained  there  till  1611. 