

the  whole  front  of  the  place  on  the  sea-shore;  but  its  width  from  the  shore  to  the  ditch,  which  sepa- 
rates  it  from  the  Black  Town,  is  not  more  than  300  tolses;  this  space  is  filled  with  handsome  houses,  but 
few  of  them  are  more  than  one  story  high.  It  contains  a parish  church,  the  duty  of  which  is  performed 
by  the  Capuchins  of  the  French  mission. 


378 


PONDICHERRY. 


Pondicherry  was  first  visited  by  the  French  in  1674.  After  their  retreat  from  StTbomej  they  obtained 
leave  of  the  King  of  Visiapour  to  form  a settlement  there^  and  soon  after  permission  to  erect  fortifications. 
In  1693  the  Dutch,  desirous  of  expelling  the  French,  besieged  Pondicherry  with  a numerous  army,  which, 
after  a long  siege,  surrendered  upon  very  honourable  conditions  on  the  6th  of  September,  1693.  The  Dutch, 
immediately  they  were  put  in  possession,  began  to  erect  fortifications,  which  rendered  it  at  that  period  one 
of  the  strongest  places  in  India.  On  the  conclusion  of  a general  peace  in  1696,  the  place  was  restored  to 
the  French,  who  put  it  in  such  a state  of  defence,  as  to  secure  it  against  any  attempts  on  the  part  of  the 
Dutch  or  native  powers. 

In  1748  Pondicherry  was  besieged  by  the  English  under  Admiral  Boscawen;  but  they  were  compelled 
to  raise  the  siege,  with  the  loss  of  a great  number  of  men.  In  1760  it  was  taken  by  Sir  Eyre  Coote, 
after  a blockade  of  nearly  six  months.  Orders  from  the  French  Court  having  been  intercepted,  directing 
Lally,  the  Governor-General,  to  destroy  every  maritime  place  in  India  belonging  to  the  English,  which 
might  fall  into  their  hands,  the  latter  adopted  the  same  resolution;  and  all  the  splendid  buildings  that 
the  bombs  and  shot  had  spared,  became  in  a very  short  time  a heap  of  ruins.  Pondicherry  was  restored 
at  the  peace.  The  French  quickly  rebuilt  the  town,  and  gave  superior  strength  to  the  fortifications;  it  was, 
however,  taken  by  the  English  in  October,  1778,  but  restored  at  the  conclusion  of  the  peace.  In  1793  it 
again  fell  under  the  dominion  of  the  English,  in  whose  possession  it  still  remains. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Coins.— Accounts  are  kept  in  pagodas,  fanams,  and  cash ; 60  cash  making  1 fanam,  and  24  fanams 
1 pagoda.  The  coins  current  are  pagoda.s,  rupees,  and  fanams,  also  copper  cash  or  dudus,  thus  divided: 

20  dudus  ) f 1 fanam. 

24  fanams  » I 1 pagoda. 

There  are  various  kinds  of  pagodas  current  here,  and  are  nearly  all  of  the  same  weight.  That  of 
Pondicherry  was  originally  equal  in  value  to  the  Star  pagoda;  but  its  standard  has  been  considerably  lower- 
ed; it  passes  for  3}  rupees,  though  the  exchange  varies  from  350  to  360  rupees  per  100  Pondicherry 
pagodas.  The  exchange  for  Spanish  dollars  is  from  210  to  215  rupees  per  100  Spanish  dollars. 