


1668.  Hitherto  .the  Company  seem  to  have  confined  themselves  to  the  Isle  Dauphine;  and  the  ad- 
vantages they  began  to  draw  from  thence,  gave  them  great  exiiectutions  for  the  future.  Two  kreigners, 
who  offered  them  their  services,  induced  tlieni  to  carry  their  views  farther.  The  first  was  a Dutchman, 
namwl  CaTroii,  who  had  been  president  of  the  commerce  of  tliat  nation  at  Japan,  and  who,  trora  discon- 
tent, had  retired  into  Franco.  Tlie  otlier  was  Mareara  Avanchinz,  a native  of  Persia,  who  hud  spent  a 
creat  part  of  his  life  in  the  East  Indies,  in  the  quality  of  a mercliant.  Tlie  first  was  engaged  to  form 
^dements  for  the  Company  in  the  Indies  and  Japan,  in  1666;  in  the  same  year,  Mareara,  the  Persian,  set 
sail,  in  order  to  co-o|»rate  witli  him  in  the  same  cause,  being  invested  with  the  title  ot  Counsellor  to  the 
Council  of  the  Isle  Dauphine,  and  Director  of  all  the  Factories  of  the  Company  in  the  Indies,  Persia,  and 
the  countiy  of  the  South.  They  proceeded  to  tlie  Isle  Dauphine,  from  whence  tliey  departed  on  the 
Idth  of  October,  1667,  in  order  to  settle  the  first  factory  of  the  Company  in  llie  city  of  Surat,  they 
•nchored  at  Cochin  on  the  24th  of  December,  where  tliey  were  kindly  received  by  the  Dutch  ; from 
thence  they  proceeded  to  Surat,  where  they  arrived  February  13,  1668,  and  reported  they  « ere  to  e 
followed  with  large  consignments;  but  those  not  appearing,  the  native  merchants  a uia  conceive  a 
contempt  of  the  French  agents,  who  shortly  after  returned  to  the  Isle  Dauphinc. 

1669.  The  French  obtained  a phirmaund  from  the  King  of  Golcondali,  dated  Dewmber  .5,  1669, 

granting  permission  to  setUe  a factory  at  Mausulipatam,  and  to  negotiate  tlirough  all  his  domuuons  for 


382  « 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


ever,  ^viliioLit  paying  any  duties,  either  inwarcU  or  outwards,  fur  the  King's  ships,  or  for  those  of  the 
Company.  A factory  was  therefore  established,  and  the  commerce  carried  on  with  zeal  and  diligence.  They 
also  obtained  permission  to  form  factories  at  Bantam  and  Siam,  and  commenced  a trade  with  Cochin  China. 

1670.  The  advantages  procured  from  the  Coast  of  Golcondah  were  the  more  valuable,  as  the  East 
India  Company  began  to  perceive  that  but  little  profit  was  to  be  expected  from  the  Isle  of  Dauphine:  every 
thing  was  ill-managed  in  that  island  by  the  Directors  and  Council,  and  the  Company's  funds  embezzled  ; 
for  which  the  King,  by  an  arret  of  the  1st  of  April,  1669,  ordained  a rigorous  enquiry  to  be  made.  His  Ma- 
jesty, having  taken  upon  himself  the  losses  which  the  Company  should  sustain  in  the  first  ten  years  of  this 
eiiterpris?,  was  in  a particular  manner  interested  in  repressing  those  abuses.  He  determined  to  take  back 
the  sovereignty  of  the  island,  which  he  had  yielded  in  perpetuity  to  the  Company.  This  change  was 
decided  by  an  airet,  dated  November  12,  1670.  The  Company  therefore  transferred  the  Sovereign  Council 
troiii  the  Isle  of  Dauphine  to  Surat,  to  the  members  of  which  full  powers  wxre  given,  both  in  civil  and 
criminul  cases,  by  letters  patent  in  the  month  of  January,  1671. 