

1 672.  A considerable  armament  was  sent  out  under  De  la  Haye,  consisting  of  twelve  large  ships, 
liaving  2,(X)0  troops  on  board,  (great  part  of  whom  died  at  Madagascar),  with  a view  of  taking  possession 
of  Ce}lon,  and  oilier  places  belonging  to  the  Dutcb  in  India.  They  established  themselves  at  Trincomalee, 
ironi  which  the  Dutch  force  found  it  <Ufficult  to  remove  them.  From  thence  they  sailed  to  the  Coro- 
iiiaiidel  Coast,  and  unexpectedly  landed  300  men  and  some  cannon  at  St.  Thome,  which  they  took  by 
storm  in  July,  1672,  and  resisted  the  numerous  forces  of  the  natives,  who  could  not  expel  them.  The 
Dutch  having  sent  a considerable  force  against  it,  it  surrendered  to  them  on  the  26th  of  August,  1674, 
on  condition  that  the  garrison  should  be  transported  to  Europe,  and  the  place  reded  to  tlie  King  of 
Golcondah;  whereupon  the  French  obtained  permission  to  form  a factory  at  Pondicherry,  which  after- 
wards became  their  principal  settlement. 

167.5.  The  affairs  of  the  Company  being  in  a state  of  embarrassment,  a general  Court  of  the  Proprietors 
was  called  at  Paris,  before  whom  a true  state  of  their  concerns  was  laid,  and  a report  thereon  made  to  the 
King,  who  issued  a declaration,  dated  Sejitember  13,  1675,  importing  that  a dividend  of  10  per  cent, 
should  be  paid  to  such  of  the  proprietors  as  had  completed  their  payments ; tliat  with  respect  to  those  who 
had  not  completed  theirs,  they  should  have  to  the  1st  of  July,  1676;  and  upon  completing  their  payments, 
should  have  a discount  of  10  per  cent. ; that  the  capitals  of  such  as  neglected  to  complete  their  subscriptions, 
should  be  forfeited  for  the  use  of  the  Company ; and,  lastly,  tliat  whereas,  through  the  losses  and  discou- 
rngeinents  to  which  all  new  undertakings  are  liable,  the  East  India  Company  had  incurred  a debt  of 
4., 060, (MX)  livres,  His  Majesty  forgave  freely  and  for  ever  the  said  sum  advanced  for  their  service.  This 
e xtraordinary  generosity  of  the  Crown  was  followed  in  the  ensuing  year  by  the  freeing  the  merchandise 
bought  at  their  sales,  from  all  duties  inward  and  outward,  except  those  transported  to  Lyons,  and  even  those 
were  to  pay  only  a fourth  of  the  usual  duties  upon  entry,  and  those  of  the  custom-house  belonging  to  that 
city.  Such  was  the  situation,  and  such  the  benefits  bestowed  upon  this  Company  by  the  French  Govern- 
ment in  tlie  first  ten  years  of  its  existence. 

1681.  The  Company's  funds  being  still  inadequate  to  the  prosecution  of  the  trade,  some  private 
merchants  expressed  their  willingness  to  embark  their  fortunes  in  it,  provided  they  might  obtain  licences; 
and  the  Company  having  signified  to  the  King  that  it  might  prove  beneficial  to  them,  if  they  had  a power 
to  grant  such  indulgences,  His  Majesty  granted  permission  to  private  traders  to  engage  in  this  commerce 
iijion  the  following  conditions : — That  they  should  transport  themselves  and  their  effects  on  board  the 
Company's  ships,  both  outward  and  homeward ; that  they  should  pay  their  freight  and  passage  before 
their  de{^ure ; that  the  goods  they  brought  home,  precious  stones  only  excepted,  should  be  exposed  at 
the  Company’s  sales  and  sold  with  theirs,  paying  them  a duty  of  five  per  cent,  and  their  produce  fairly 