


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


381 


Con^MUij  might  hare  it  in  its  power  to  nominate  ambassadors  in  His  Majesty's  name  to  the  Indian 
Kings  and  Princes,  and  make  treaties  with  them.— That  the  Company  might  send  the  specie  in  gold  or 
ailrer  it  should  have  occasion  for  in  its  commerce,  notwithstanding  tlie  pruliibiliuns  enacted  by  the  laws 
and  ordinances  of  the  kingdom;  and  this  by  a paiticiilar  permission,  and  a writing  granted  in  its  favour. 
That  His  Majesty  should  advance,  or  defray  out  of  his  own  revenues,  the  fil'th  part  of  the  cxpencc 
necessary  for  the  three  first  equipments,  for  which  he  was  not  to  be  reimbursed  till  the  expiration  ot  the 
first  ten  years,  and  without  interest;  and  in  case  it  should  be  found,  by  a general  account,  that  the  Com- 
pany had  sustained  a loss  in  its  capital,  the  loss  should  devolve  upon  the  sum  advanced  by  His  Majesty. 
That  the  Indian  merchandises  consumed  in  France  should  pay  but  the  hall  ot  the  duties  regulated  by  the 
tariffs;  and  that  those  designed  for  other  countries,  and  the  exempted  provinces,  either  by  sea  or  land, 
should  pay  no  duties  on  importation  or  exportation;  as  also  the  timber  and  other  neci^ssary  articles  foi  tht 
building  and  fitting  out  of  the  Company’s  ships. — And,  lastly,  that  His  Majesty  should  pay  the  ( oinpany 
50  livres  per  ton  for  the  merchandise  its  ships  should  curry  into  the  countries  of  its  concession,  and  1!i 
livres  for  those  brought  back  and  discharged  in  the  kingdom.— His  Majesty  also  granted  the  t oinpan)  a 
seal,  having  for  a legend,  '‘Ludoviei  XIV.  Francitc  et  Navarra  Rv/ris  SigMwni,  L sum  supremi  Consilii  Galha 
OrimlaU.tC'  and  for  arms,  an  azure  globe  and  fleur-dc-luce  of  gold,  with  this  inscri|»tion,  “ Florebo  quocunupie 
Jerar;"^  the  supporters  being  two  figures,  one  representing  Peace,  and  the  other  Plenty. 

1665.  The  Island  of  Madagascar  being  considered  of  great  importance  by  the  French,  it  was  de- 
termined that  an  effectnal  settlement  should  be  formed,  and  a code  of  repilations  was  drawn  up  for  the 
colony,  which  attracted  the  public  approbation.  Numbers  of  persons  offered  themselves  to  go  over  an 
settle  there.  Accordingly  on  March  7,  1665,  four  large  ships,  equipped  both  for  war  and  trade,  sailed 
from  Brest,  and  arrived  safely  at  Madagascar  on  the  lOtli  of  July  following;  the  name  of  which  they 
changed  to  Isle  Dauphinc,  in  honour  of  the  heir  apparent  to  the  crown  of  France. 

1666.  The  King,  by  a declaration  in  June,  1666,  granted  the  Company  permission  to  make  e.sta- 
blishments  at  Port  Louis  for  their  magazines,  and  at  places  along  the  rivers  Ilennelon  and  Ponscot,  for 
dock-yards,  fit  for  the  building  of  tlicir  ships.  They  had  also  granted  them  all  void  and  waste  places  be- 
longing to  the  King  in  the  places  above  mentioned.  It  is  from  this  grant  that  Port  L'Orieiit  was  formed, 
which  the  Company  possessed  to  the  period  of  their  exclusive  trade  being  abolislicd. 