

1693  The  war  which  broke  out  between  the  maritime  powers  in  Europe,  deeply  affected  the  whole 
commerce  of  France,  more  particularly  that  of  their  East  India  Company,  which  was  already  scarcely  able 
to  support  itself.  The  Dutch  landed  a conslilerable  quantity  of  arms  and  stores  from  a fleet  of  ninetL>en 
ships,  to  attack  Pondicherry,  and  which  they  invested.  It  surrendered  to  them  on  honourable  conditions, 
on  the  6th  of  September,  1693.  This  event  put  an  end  to  the  Company’s  authority  and  influence  on  the 
Coast  of  Coromandel.  The  Dutch,  on  obtaining  pssession,  raised  new  walls,  and  increased  the  fortifications. 

1696.  Upon  the  conclusion  of  a general  peace,  Pondicherry  was  restored  to  the  French,  with  all  its 
new  fortifications,  upon  payment  of  £5,000  to  the  DuUh  Government  for  the  expences  incurijd.  As 
soon  as  the  news  of  the  surrender  arrived  in  France,  the  East  India  (Company  rccinved  orders  from  the 
Government  to  put  the  place  into  such  a condition  as  to  secure  it  against  any  future  attempts  upon  it. 


1698.  The  Dii'ectors,  notwithstanding  the  unfortunate  condition  of  their  affairs,  resolved  to  use  their 
utmost  efforts  to  resume  their  trade  as  a Company;  but  were  unable  to  bring  about  what  they  desired: 
they  therefore  accepted  a proposal  for  carrying  on  a trade  to  China,  by  a private  person  under  the  authority 
of  theCompany.  This  was  effected  by  granting  a licence,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  Crown,  to  M. 
a rich  meiehant,  who  fitted  out  a large  ship,  called  the  Amphitrite,  for  that  voyage,  bhe  sailed  in  March, 
1698,  and  returned  safe  to  France  on  the  3d  of  August,  1700,  very  richly  laden. 

1701.  The  success  of  the  Amphitrite’s  voyage  encouraged  M:  Jourdan  and  those  who  were  concern^ 
with  him,  to  fit  out  the  same  ship  again,  which  they  did  in  the  Spring  of  the  year,  and  she  returned  in 


SM  ' 


itm  jkm  PBOGBSM  m n»tiQiiom 

the  month  of  September,  IfOS,  equaHj  iuccMsfiilMi  W the  ^ 

shipwreck  on  her  ftlling  down  Canton  Biver  to  proe^  on  her  lioiMweid4AB^^  ^ 

The  Companj  petitioned  the  King  in  the  begfainhig  of  thli  yeer,  ilettif  they  eeWb  mder  iliiii 
difliciilties,  that  without  his  Majeit/s  assistance^  their  trade  aad  eitahnshfnente  nwel  %e  dhaiMbhed: 
Louis  XIV.  therefore  lent  them  850, (KX)  Urres,  upon  condition  that  the  Dtrectom  adeanoed  ailA 
livres,  and  the  proprietors  50  per  cent,  upon  their  respective  capitals.  With  this  condition  the  Dlhxston 
complied,  but  the  Proprietors  absolutely  rethsed.  ^ Their  refusal  occasioned  a tedious  dispute^  wMch  lasted 
till  1704,  when  the  Court  decided  by  an  arret,  that  the  Proprietors  should  receive  the  profits,  and  be 
liable  to  the  debts  of  the  Company,  in  proportion  to  their  respective  interests  in  its  capital;  that,a  general 
state  of  their  affairs  should  be  immediately  laid  before  them;  and  that  a committee  oi  five  should  be  chosen 
out  of  their  own  body,  without  whose  consent  the  Directors  should  be  restrained  from  borrowing. 