

1708..  It  does  not  appear  that  the  foregoing  regulations  had  any  good^effect;  for  in  this  year  the  Com* 
pnny  became  in  a manner  absolutely  bankrupts ; so  that  the  King  by  an  arret  staid  all  prosecutions  at 
law  against  them  for  debt;  and,  that  the  trade  to  India  might  not  entirely  cease,  granted  the  Company 
permission  to  enter  into  a treaty  to  lease  out  their  privileges  upon  the  best  terms  they  could,  to  any  private 
persons  w'lio  slioiild  be  inclined  to  contract  with  them.  In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  they  granted  leave  to 
M.  Croizat  to  fit  out  two  ships  in  the  name  of  the  East  India  Company,  upon  eondition  that  he  paid 
them  15  per  cent,  upon  all  goods  imported  under  this  privilege,  and  2 per  cent,  upon  all  the  prizes  they 
.should  make  beyond  the  line;  with  a farther  reservation  that  the  Company  might  be  at  liberty  to  brlllg 
home  on  board  his  ships,  ten  tons  of  whatever  commodities  they  pleased,  without  payment  of  freight* 

1712.  The  Company  entered  into  a treaty  with  some  private  traders  at  St.  Maloes,  by  which  Hnff 
yielded  up  to  them  all  their  privileges. 

By  an  arret,  dated  in  February,  1712,  a new  Company  was  established  for  trading  to  China,  uncon- 
nected with  the  East  India  Company,  or  witli  those  private  merchants  who  traded  to  India ; and  theii^ 
privileges  were  granted  for  a period  of  fifty  years ; but  they  only  sent  two  ships  to  China  previous  to  their 
being  incorporated  with  the  Company  of  the  West,  in  1719. 

1714.  The  East  India  Company's  privileges  being  nearly  at  an  end,  the  directors  represented  to  the 
King  that,  in  order  to  put  them  in  a condition  of  paying  the  debts  which  they  had  contracted  to  support 
the  trade,  they  most  humbly  prayed  him  to  extend  their  privileges  ten  years  longer.  His  Majesty  granted 
their  request,  with  this  restriction  only— That  the  tenth  of  all  prizes  taken  by  the  Company's  ships,  or 
those  of  their  associates,  beyond  the  line,  should  henceforward  belong  to  the  High  Admiral  of  France.  This 
arret,  wliicli  is  dated  the  29th  of  September,  1714,  renewed  the  prohibition  against  importing  into  France 
any  jirinted  cottons  or  stuffs,  of  silk  unmixed,  of  silk  and  cotton  mixed  with  gold  and  silver,  of  bark  oi 
trees,  and  unwrought  silk,  even  under  pretext  of  ex|>orting  them  abroad.  This  application  for  an  exten- 
sion of  their  exclusive  trade,  does  not  appear  to.  have  been  with  a design  to  make  use  of  it  thenuelves, 
but  to  enable  others  to  carry  it  on,  and  to  draw  some  advantage  from  their  advances  and  gains. 

1717.  In  the  month  of  August,  the  Government  of  France  established  the  Company  of  the  West, 
better  known  by  the  name  of  the  Mississippi  Company,  and  conferred  upon  them  for  twenty-five  years  the 
f'xclusive  trade  and  property  of  Louisiana,  together  with  the  beaver  trade  of  Canada ; the  Canada  Company 
being  on  this  occasion  incorporated  with  the  new  one. 