

1720.  In  February,  the  management  of  the  Royal  Bank  of  France  was  transferred  to  the  Company 
of  the  Indies.  From  this  period  may  be  dated  the  downfal  of  the  system.  The  quantity  of  paper  thrown 
into  circulation  lowered  its  credit,  together  with  that  of  the  Company's  slock.  In  order  to  support  the 
system,  it  was  decreed  that  the  value  of  the  coin  should  be  raised,  and  that  the  bank-bills  should  be 
reduced  to  half  their  value,  and  the  shares  from  9000  to  5000  livres.  This  mode  of  reducing  the  dispro- 
portion between  the  paper  currency  and  the  coin  was,  perhaps,  the  least  unrcasonuhle  that  could  have 
been  adopted  in  the  desperate  situation  of  affairs  at  that  period;  it,  however,  tlirew  the  whole  country 
into  misery  and  confusion.  All  were  anxious  to  rescue  what  little  they  could  from  the  general  wTeck; 
many  families,  who  had  long  ilourislied  in  affluence,  were  utterly  ruined ; and  the  splendid  vision  of  re- 
establishing public  credit  vanished. 

The  Company's  stock,  at  the  termination  of  their  career,  consist'd  of  600,000  shares  of  .WO  livres 
each,  which  entitled  the  proprietors  to  annuities  of  80  livres  per  share,  proceeding  from  interest  of 
Government  paper-loans,  &c.  These  600,000  shares,  representing  300,000,000  livres,  probably  cost 
those  who  were  actual  stock-holders  at  the  time  of  the  stoppage,  near  300,000,000  livres.  There  originally 
belonged  to  the  King  100,000  shares,  and  a like  number  had  been  reserved  by  the  Company,  all  of  wliich 
hhd  been  sold  at  exorbitant  profits. 

In  this  year  the  Company  established  a factory  at  Moebn,  for  securing  to  themselves  a regular  supply 
of  coffee,  and  with  a view  of  participating  in  the  trade  of  the  Red  Sea. 

1721.  On  the  26th  of  January  an  office  was  created,  to  wliich  the  holders  of  the  Company's  shares, 
and  Government  securities  of  all  kinds  were  to  be  submitted,  and  their  validity  afterwards  discussed. 
The  result  of  this  inspection  was  that  the  bank-notes  which  had  been  circulated,  amounted  to 
JPl  12,350,000  sterling:  of  these  i’29,471,977  10s.  were  ordered  to  be  burnt,  without  any  compensation. 
The  stockholders  were  condemned  to  a restitution  of  ^7,808,912  10s.  lOd. : and  various  other  modes 
were  contrived  to  lessen  the  national  debt,  which  at  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.  amounted  to  near 
JP100,000,000  sterling,  but  which  was  now  reduced  to  less  than  one-fifth  of  that  amount.  The  Comjmny's 
shares  were  redaced  to  56,000;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  any  comiiensation  was  ever  made  to  the 
immense  moss  of  stockholders  whose  property  was  thus  annihilated. 

The  Directors  fitted  out  three  ships  for  India  towards  tlie  end  of  the  year  1720,  which,  besides 
carrying  a large  cargo  of  European  commodities  and  manufactures,  had  on  board  a great  quantity  of 
silver  in  specie  and  bullion.  This  measure  raised  the  credit  of  the  Company,  and  augmented  the  value  of 
their  actions.  The  Directors  likewise  ordered  improvements  to  be  made,  and  magazines  to  be  erected  at 
L'Orient.  The  arrival  of  these  ships  in  India,  and  the  accounts  of  the  changes  of  the  Company's  affairs 