


BETWEEN  PRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


* 383 


accounted  for ; that  these  licences  should  be  in  force  for  five  years  only ; and  that  if  they  should  be  found 
prejudicial  to  the  affairs  of  the  Company,  the  directors  might  abridge  or  cancel  them  at  their  pleasure. 
The  public  came  so  eagerly  into  this  proposal,  that  the  directors  entertained  great  hopes  of  deriving 
considerable  benefit  from  it ; but  the  proprietors,  jealous  of  the  profits  made  by  the  free  traders,  in  two 
years'  time  obtained  a repeal  of  this  regulation,  and  their  charter  remained  in  full  force. 

1684.  With  a view  of  .supporting  their  monopoly,  and  restoring  their  credit,  the  Company  obtained 
permission  from  Uie  King,  to  new  model  their  Government,  by  putting  the  whole  management  of  their 
concerns  into  the  hands  of  twelve  directors,  who  were  each  of  them  to  pay  30,000  livres  upon  the 
forfeited  actions,  and  to  be  allowed  reasonable  salaries.  And  it  was  resolved,  that  all  who  had  not  made 
their  payments,  should  forfeit  their  shares  to  the  Company,  with  a proviso  that  if  in  two  years  they  mode 
good  their  payments,  they  should  enter  into  their  former  rights,  and  have  all  their  actions  restored.  This 
regulation  was  confirmed  by  a royal  edict,  dated  in  February,  l(>8o.  In  the  ensuing  year,  with  a view 
of  increasing  tlie  funds  of  the  Company,  eight  more  directors  were  added,  who  were  to  make  up  the  stock 
they  held  00,000  livres  each.  These  sums  brought  such  a supply  to  the  Company’s  cash,  that  ho|)es  were 
entertained  that,  alter  so  many  disappointments,  they  would  be  put  upon  a solid  foundation. 


1687.  The  East  India  Company  importing  considerable  quantities  of  gold  ajid  silver  brocades  and 
painted  cottons,  which  were  in  great  esteem  in  France,  and  met  a ready  sale,  the  manufacturers  set  up 
a general  clamour,  stating,  that  unless  a stop  was  imnie<liati‘ly  put  to  the  importation  ol  the.se  silks  and 
cottons,  they  should  be  all  ruined.  Whereupon  an  edict  was  published,  dated  January  27,  1087,  by 
which  this  branch  of  commerce  was  prohibited,  and  it  was  with  considerable  difficulty  that  the  Company 
obtained  permission  to  dispose  of  those  they  had  on  hand,  and  expected  by  the  next  ships. 

Soon  affer  the  alwve  edict,  another  came  out,  prohibiting  the  sale  of  piece-goods  to  forelgncr.s,  upon 
a supposition,  that  if  they  could  not  purcha.se  Indian  manufactures,  they  mu.st  purchase  those  of  1' ranee. 
A high  duty  was  also  laid  upon  raw  silk,  of  which  the  Company  Imported  at  this  period  considerable 
quantities.  From  these  circumsUnccs,  the  Company’s  affah-s  assumed  a more  gloomy  aspect  than  before. 