


5,334,712  lbs.  coflee,  tea,  drugs,  &c. 
387,820  pieces  of  calico,  stulFs,  &c. 

4,284  packets  of  canes. 

500  ditto  Malacca  ditto. 

71  pieces  Cossiinbuzar  handkerchiefs. 
39  ditto  painted  ditto  for  samples. 


5, (XX)  fans. 

2,124  sheets  of  paper,  painted. 
28,000  fish  and  counters. 

1,992  cabarets  of  varnish. 

55  chests  of  China^-warc. 
189  rolls  ditto. 


besides  numerous  small  articles,  the  particulars  of  which  arc  not  enumerated. 

In  this  ytar  the  Company,  being  desirous  of  extending  their  commerce,  sent  a mission  to  the  Court 
of  Persia,  which,  after  experiencing  many  difficulties,  obtained  permission  to  establish  a factory  at 
Bussorah;  but  the  trade  curried  on  was  but  of  trifling  extent. 

M.  Dumas,  the  Governor  of  Pondicherry,  obtained  permission  of  the  Mogul  to  coin  money  in  the 
Fort,  and  from  50  to  60  lacs  of  rupees  were  annually  struck  for  several  years,  by  which  the  Company 
derived  an  anmml  gain  of  near  4,00,000  rupees. 

1738.  The  French  obtained  j)ossession  of  Karical,  which  was  confirmed  to  them  by  a grant  from 
the  King  of  Tanjore,  dated  the  20th  of  February,  1739,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  district  were  ordered 
to  acknowledge  and  obey  the  French  as  their  lawful  Sovereign.  The  revenue  arising  therefrom,  compre- 
hending the  farm  of  tobacco  and  betel,  with  the  duty  on  imports,  amounted  to  about  10,000  pagodas. 


BET^VEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


389 


1740.  The  Great  Mogul  having  been  dethroned  by  Thomas  Koli  Khan,  the  Viceroys  of  the 
different  provinces  began  to  erect  kingdoms  for  themselves.  The  Nabob  of  Arcot  assembled  a large  army, 
and  reduced  several  ol  the  neighI)ouring  Princes;  but  the  Mahrattas  declaring  themselves  against  him,  he 
was,  in  action  with  them  in  17JI),  defeated,  and  kilh^d.  llis  wife  and  family  took  refage  at  Pondicherry, 
where  they  were  kindly  treated.  At  thia  time  the  fortifications  were  in  such  reputation  among  a people 
who  had  never  before  .seen  any  thing  equal  to  tiumi,  that  the  principal  natives  sent  their  w'ivc  s,  children, 
and  treasure,  to  remain  there  during  the  war.  The  iNIalirattas  demanded  them,  and  threalened  to  besiege 
Pondicherry;  they  continued  in  the  fcid  till  April,  1741,  and  having  plundered  every  place  within  their 
reach,  and  tried,  without  snece  s whit  tliroafs  would  do  with  the  I’^eneli,  they  ac(‘Opted  a small  present, 
and  retired.  Thus  ended  this  wai',  wliieh  strongly  recommended  the  Krenth  to  the  favour  of  the  reigning 
Mogul  and  his  Miriisteis,  who  senl  th  * French  Governor,  Dumas,  a vest  of  honour,  'fhe  son  of  the 
deceased  Nabob  came  to  Poi:  liehu  iy,  and  made  a cession  to  M.  Dumas  personally  of  three  districts,  to 
the  value  of  near  X’lOOjOOo  stciiing  per  annum,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  Mogufs  letter  patent, 
who  also  declared  M.  Dumas  a Nabob,  being  the  first  honour  of  that  kind  ever  conferred  upon  an 
European  in  India,  and  gave  him  the  command  of  horse.  On  the  arrival  of  M.  Dupleix,  who 