

This  convention  w’as  in  reality  nothing  more  than  a cessation  of  hostilities  for  eighteen  months,  since 
there  was  no  positive  obligation  on  either  of  the  Companies  to  adopt  the  opinions  of  their  representatives, 
expressed  in  the  provisional  treaty.  The  French  were  left  to  enjoy  the  revc^nues  of  all  those  territories 
which  they  had  acquired  during  the  war.  These  incomes,  according  to  the  accounts  published  by  them, 
were  as  follow: — From  Karical  96,000  rupees;  from  Pondicherry,  and  the  villages  in  its  district,  105,000; 
from  MausuUpatara  and  its  dependencies,  and  from  the  contiguous  territories  of  Divi,  Nizampatam, 
Devicottah,  and  Condavir,  14,41,000;  from  the  four  provinces  of  Ellore,  Mustaphanaghiir,  RajaJimuiidrum, 
arild  Chicacole,  31,00,000;  from  lands  in  the  Carnatic,  17,00,0(K);  and  from  the  Island  of  Seringlmni  and 
its  dependencies,  4,00,0(}6;  in  all  68,42,000  rupees,  or  ^855,2.50  sterling. 

The  accessions  made  by  the  English  during  the  war  produced  only  a revenue  of  8,00,000  rupees,  or 
J?100,000,  drawn  from  lands  mortgaged  by  the  Nabob,  to  pay  what  they  had  spent  on  his  account. 

3£ 


394  < 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


The  two  powers  being  now  at  peace  with  each  other,  gave  their  whole  attention  to  the  management 
of  their  respective  territories,  revenues,  and  alliances  to  the  best  advantage,  without  infringing  the  truce. 
M.  Godeheu,  having  fulfilled  the  principal  intentions  of  his  commission,  quitted  Pondicherry,  and  returned 
to  France,  leaving  the  power  of  the  Governor  much  more  limited  than  it  had  been  at  the  time  of 
M.  Dupleix. 

1757.  The  English  having  received  intelligence,  by  way  of  Aleppo,  that  war  had  been  declared 
between  France  and  Great  Ri  itain  in  the  preceding  month  of  May,  made  preparation  for  the  attack  of 
Chandei  nagore,  notwithstanding  the  disastrous  state  of  their  own  affairs  in  the  province  of  Bengal.  On  the 
21-th  ol’  March  the  i Inglish  attacked  the  Fort,  which,  after  a vigorous  resistance,  surrendered  by  capitulation, 
on  condition  that  the  officers  of  the  garrison  were  to  be  prisoners  on  their  parole  of  honour,  with  liberty  to 
cairy  their  effects  where  they  pleased,  on  promising  not  to  serve  against  the  English  during  the  war;  that 
the  soldiers  of  tin;  garrison  should  be  prisoners  of  war  so  long  as  the  war  continued;  that  the  Sepoys  were 
not  to  be  prisoners;  tluit  no  European  should  reside  at  Cliandernagore,  but  the  French  Jesuits  might  go 
wherever  they  pleased,  with  all  the  ornatneiits  of  their  Church ; and  that  the  French  Directors  and  Counsellors 
should  go  where  they  pleased.  This  was  a great  loss  to  the  French,  who  had  in  the  Foit  183  pieces  of 
cannon,  from  24  pounders  downwards,  with  great  quantities  of  ammunition.  Besides  the  ships  and  vessels 
sunk  below,  to  obstruct  the  channel,  they  sunk  and  ran  ashore  five  large  ships  almve  the  Fort,  and  the 
English  took  four  sloops  and  a snow  : the  plunder  collected  amounted  to  upwards  of  X^1(X),0(X)  sterling. 