

1 be  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  articles  relate  to  the  settlements  of  both  nations 
and  tlieir  distriels,  w^heretiy  it  was  agreed  that  all  places,  excepting  those  which  should  be  stipulateil  in 
the  definitive  Ireat)^  to  remain  in  the  possession  of  the  two  nations,  should  he  di  livi  red  up  to  the 
Government  of  Hindostun.  The  Governors  then  proceeded  to  give  their  opinion  what  plac(*s  each 
migiit  retain  without  a risk  ot  eng.igiiig  them  in  future  w^ars,  either  with  one  atmlher,  or  w ith  the 
Princes  ot  the  country.  In  the  Lanjore  country  the  English  were  to  possess  Devicottah,  and  the  Freneli 
Karical,  with  their  districts;  on  the  (voast  ot  Coromandel  the  English  were  to  enjoy  Fort  St.  David  and 
Madras,  and  the  hrench  to  keep  Pondicherry,  wdth  districts  of  e(|iml  value;  and  if  it  should  appear  that 
the  English  possessions  in  the  kingdom  ot  Tanjore  and  in  the  Carnatic  together,  wei'e  of  more  value 
than  the  French  possessions  in  those  countries,  then  the  French  were  to  be  allow'ed  an  equivalent  for  tliis 
difference  in  a settlement  to  be  chosen  between  the  River  of  Goiidecama  and  Nizampatam.  Mausiili- 
patam  and  Divi  were  to  he  ceded;  or  if  the  French  held  one,  the  English  were  to  retnin  the  fdher.  The 
Rivers  of  Narsipore  and  Ingerani  were  to  he  free;  and  as  the  English  had  Vizagapatiiin,  in  the  Chicacole- 
country,  the  French  were  to  settle  a factory  tliere  on  an  equality  witli  it. 

By  the  eighth  article  it  was  agreed  that  these  conditions,  accepted  on  botli  sidts,  nlthoiigh  they  were 
not  to  be  law  for  a definitive  treaty  in  Europe,  should  nevertheless  produce  a Irncc  Ix  Iuchmi  the  two 
nations  and  their  allies,  until  nows  was  received  in  India  of  the  answers  made  in  Euro|KJ  concerning  thi» 
agreement. 

By  the  ninth  article,  neither  nation  was  allowed  to  procure,  during  the  truce,  any  new  grant  or 
cession,  or  to  build  forts  for  the  defence  of  new  establishments,  hut  only  to  rebuild  and  n pair  the 
fortifications  then  subsisting  in  the  establishments  they  possessed  at  that  time,  in  order  to  jirevcnt  theif 
entire  ruin. 


By  the  tenth  article  it  was  agreed,  that  until  the  arrival  of  answers  from  Europe  to  these  articles, 
which  w'cre  to  be  dispatched  by  the  first  sliips,  to  be  submitted  to  the  decision  of  the  two  Companies, 
under  the  pleasure  and  approbation  of  the  two  Crowns,  the  two  nations  should  not  proceed  to  any  cession, 
retrocession,  or  evacuation  of  what  they  then  po.sses.sed;  and. 

Lastly,  that,  in  regard  to  any  indemnification  the  two  nations  might  expect  for  the  expences  of  the 
war,  this  article  should  be  amicably  adjusted  in  the  definitive  treaty. 