

1754.  The  dispute  between  the  French  and  English  East  India  Companies  became  the  object  of 
ministerial  consideration  in  Europe.  The  Directors  of  the  English  Company  made  representations  to  the 
Government  of  the  hostilities  in  which  they  were  involved  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  and  solicited 
their  support,  either  to  terminate  or  carry  on  a war,  which  their  own  resources  were  unable  to  continue 
against  the  French  Company,  supported  by  their  Government.  The  British  Ministry,  seeing  the  necessity 
of  interfc'ring  vigorously,  began  a negotiation  with  that  of  France  on  the  subject,  and  ordered  a squadron 
of  men  of  war  to  be  equipped,  and  one  of  the  King’ s regiments  to  embark  for  the  East  Indies.  This 
convinced  the  French  Goveniment  that  a perseverance  in  their  schemes  of  conquests,  and  obtaining 
dominion  in  India,  would  soon  involve  the  two  nations  in  a general  war,  for  wliich  they  were  unprepared; 
they  therefore  consented  that  the  disputes  of  the  two  Companies  should  be  adjusted  by  Commissaries  in 
India,  on  a footing  of  equality,  without  any  regard  to  the  advantages  of  which  either  the  one  or  the  other 
might  be  possessed  when  the  treaty  should  be  concluded:  and  as  the  French  Company  considered 
M.  Dupleix  was  not  a fit  person  to  negotiate  a peace,  they  took  the  resolution  of  removing  him  from  the 
Government  of  Pondicherry,  and  appointed  M.  Godeheu,  one  of  their  Directors,  their  Commissary,  and 
at  the  same  time  Coinmunder-General,  with  absolute  authority  over  aU  their  settlements  in  the  East 
Indies.  The  English  (Company  appointed  Mr.  Saunders,  Governor  of  Madras,  to  treat  with  M.  Godeheu, 
who  arrived  at  Pondicherry  August  2,  1754;  and  immediately  on  landing,  proclaimed  his  commission,  and 
took  upon  him  the  administration  of  the  Government.  He  also  acquainted  Mr.  Saunders  of  the  intentions 
for  wliich  he  was  sent  to  India.  The  arrival  of  an  English  fleet,  under  Admiral  Watson,  induced 
M.  Godeheu  to  shew  such  moderation  in  his  proposals,  that  a suspension  of  anns  was  agreed  upon  before 
the  terms  of  the  treaty  were  adjusted.  The  allies  on  both  sides  were  included  in  this  suspension,  which 


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND^TllE  EAST  INDIES.  , 303 

romlicherry,  niul  all  other  plates  nii  the  (oast  of  Coroniuiuld  where  the 
English  aad  hrencli  had  troops,  on  the  11th  of  Ottuher,  to  continue  till  the  IJth  of  January. 

A treaty  was  ailerwards  signed,  which  was  published  on  the  lltli  of  January,  17.W,  the  day  on 
which  the  suspension  of  arms  ended,  consisting  of  eleven  artieJes,  by  wbitli  it  was  agreed— 

I li  st,  tliat  the  tivo  Companies  should  renounce  for  ever  all  Moorish  (loM  rnnicnl  and  dignity,  and 
should  never  interfere  in  any  diflerence  that  might  arise  hehvren  the  Princes  of  the  country. 