

3D  2 


388  ’ 


BISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


in  Europe,  astonished  their  seiTants,  more  particulaily  as  they  came  backed  \^ith  assurances  of  a regular 
correspondence  in  future.  They  therefore  began  to  discharge  the  most  pressing  of  the  demands  upon 
them,  and  to  provide  suitable  returns  with  the  remainder. 


1723.  In  the  course  of  1721  and  1722  the  Company  were  not  in  a condition  to  send  a single  cargo 
to  India.  This  interruption  of  their  commerce  excited  the  raillery  of  all  Europe.  In  1723  two  ships 
were  fitted  out  for  Pondicherry;  and  though  their  cargoes  were  not  very  valuable,  the  Directors  ol  the 
several  factories,  and  the  people  employed  under  them,  were  regularly  paid,  and  the  debts  of  the  old 
Company  w^ere  finally  extinguished. 

Notwithstanding  tlie  French  commerce  was  in  so  reduced  a state,  Pondicherry  was  strengthened  by 
new  fortifications;  in  con.spf|uence  of  which  the  inhabitants  increased  considerably.  The  walls,  which  were 
now  begun  on  a design  to  enclose  the  town  within  them,  were  to  be  completed,  In  part,  at  the  cxpence  of 
the  Company,  and  the  remainder  at  that  of  the  iiihabitunts.  About  this  period  tlie  French  obtained 
possession  of  Mahe,  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar. 

1725.  In  the  month  of  June,  Louis  XV.  being  conic  of  age,  confirmed  to  the  Company  for  ever  their 
privilege  of  exclusive  trade  in  slaves,  gold-dust,  &c.  from  Cape  Blanco,  along  th(‘  Coast  oJ'  Africa,  to  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  the  sole  trade  of  every  kind  from  the  Cape  eastward  to  Cape  Horn  in  South 
America,  including  all  the  coasts  and  islands  of  the  Indian  and  Pacific  Oceans.  Tiie  King  also  made 
many  regulations  respecting  their  concerns,  and  gave  them  a discharge  of  all  demands  which  might  be 
made  upon  tliem  by  the  Bank.  He  also  caused  to  be  cancelled  many  old  and  intricate  accounts,  and  ordered 
all  papers  and  accounts  belonging  to  the  Company,  and  not  relating  to  commerce,  to  be  burnt.  It  was  only 
after  the  Company  of  the  Indies  were  delivered,  though  with  the  loss  of  almost  the  whole  of  their  capital, 
ftom  all  matters  of  finance,  that  they  could  be  truly  considered  as  a commercial  Company. 


1734.  Notwithstanding  the  serious  diflSculties  the  Company  of  the  Indies  had  been  involved  in, 
they  were  enabled  to  send  out  two  or  three  ships  annually  for  several  years.  Their  number  afterwards 
increased;  and  the  East  India  trade  had  by  this  time  so  greatly  improved,  that  fouiteen  ships  were  sent 
out  the  preceding  year,  whereof  twelve  arrived  in  August,  1734,  fi’om  the  East  Indies  and  China,  and 
they  were  enabled  to  put  up  to  sale  the  following  East  India  merchandise: 