

While  a particular  war  was  thus  carried  on  in  Asia,  a general  peace  was  concluded  in  Europe,  which 
was  definitively  signed  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  on  the  7th  of  October,  whereby  it  was  agreed  “ that  there  .should 
be  a Christian,  universal,  and  perpetual  peace,  as  wtII  by  sea  as  land;  that  there  should  he  a general  oblivion 
of  whatever  had  passed  during  the  war;  that  each  party  should  be  put  into  the  posse.ssion  of  all  Iii.s  effects, 
honours,  and  revenues,  which  they  either  actually  enjoyed,  or  ought  to  have  enjoyi  d,  at  the  commencement 
of  the  war,  notwithstanding  all  disposals,  seizures,  or  confiscations  occasioned  by  the  war;  that  all 
prisoners  and  hostages  should  be  returned  without  ransom ; and  that  all  the  conquests  that  had  been  made 
since  the  commencement  of  the  war  in  the  East  Indies,  or  any  other  part  of  the  world,  should  be  restored 
without  exception.”  Madras  was  accordingly  restored  to  the  English;  but  tlie  French  had  destioyed  the 
greater  part  of  the  Black  Town. 

The  late  war  having  brought  to  Pondicherry  and  Foil;  St.  David  a number  of  troops,  greatly  superior 
to  any  which  either  of  the  two  nations  had  assembled  in  India  before,  the  two  settlements,  when  no 
longer  authorized  to  fight  against  each  other,  took  tlie  resolution  of  employing  their  anus  in  the  contests 
between  the  native  Princes.  On  the  death  of  the  Nizam  ul  Mulck,  Soubah  of  the  Decan,  which  took  place 
in  1748,  the  succession  was  contested  between  Nazir-jing,  the  son,  and  Muzapher  jlng,  the  grandson  of 


99«  . 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


ihe  deceased.  A com})etition  was  also  maintained  for  the  Nabo1)sbip  of  Arcot,  on  the  part  of  Chunda-saib 
against  Anaverdy  Khan^  who  had  been  nominated  to  that  situation  by  the  late  Nizam.  Nazir-jing  and 
Anaverdy  Khan  united  their  forces  against  Muzapher-jing,  who  had  been  joined  by  Chunda*saib. 
M.  Dupleix,  on  the  part  of  the  French,  engaged  to  assist  the  latter,  on  a promise,  in  case  of  success,  of  being 
granted  the  town  of  Vilanour  with  its  dependencies,  consisting  of  4-5  villages.  A long  series  of  hostilities 
ensued,  during  the  progress  of  which  Anaverdy  Khan  was  killed  in  battle;  Nazii-jing  was  assassinated; 
and  Muzapher-jing  appointed  Soubahdar  of  the  Decan.  The  immediate  advantages  arising  to  the  French 
East  India  C'ompany  by  these  concessions  were  a territory  near  Pondicherry,  producing  annually  96,000 
rupees;  that  of  Karinil,  valued  at  106,000  rupees;  the  City  of  Mausulipatam  with  its  dependencies, 
yielding  a revenue  of  144,000  rupees;  in  all  a revenue  of  d£^4J, 2.50  sterling;  but  these  advantages  were 
small  in  comparison  of  those  which  M.  Dupleix  expected  to  obtain  from  liis  extensive  authority,  though 
it  was  not  constitutionally  confirmed  by  the  Mogul.  Chunda-saib  was  also  declared  Nabob  of  Arcot.  The 
treasures  of  Nazir-jing  were  computed  at  .P2,000,000,  and  ihe  jewels  at  -£^500,000.  The  new  Viceroy 
gave  1^50,000  to  the  French  troops,  and  as  much  to  the  East  India  Company  for  the  expeiices  they  had 
incurred  in  the  war.  On  this  M.  Dupleix  assumed  the  state  of  an  eastern  Prince,  held  his  Court,  and  was 
publicly  proclaimed  Nabob.  Muzapher-jing  was  soon  alter  killed,  and  was  succeeded  by  Salabat-jing, 
who  confirmed  every  thing  which  had  been  granted  to  the  French,  who,  in  return,  acknowledged  his  right 
to  the  Government;  Cliiinda-saib  also  lost  liis  life.  The  French  continuing  to  support  Salabat-jing  as  Prince 
of  the  Decan,  the  provinces  of  Mustaphanagur,  Ellore,  llajahmundy,  and  Chicacole  were  given  up  to  the 
French  East  India  Company  in  full  sovereignty.  This  acquisition,  added  to  Mausulipatam,  rendered  them 
masters  of  the  sea-coast  of  Coromandel  and  Orixa,in  a regular  line  of  6(K)  miles  from  Mootapilly  to  Jagger- 
naut.  The  revenues  of  these  provinces  were  computed  at  42,87,000  rupees.  These  territories  rendered  the 
French  masters  of  the  greatest  dominion,  both  in  extent  and  value,  that  had  ever  been  possessed  by  Euro- 
peans in  the  empire  of  Hindostan,  not  excepting  the  Portuguese  when  in  the  height  of  their  prosperity. 