


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIE’S.  • 30! 

41.  f mounting  398  guns,  under  M.  de  la  Bourdonnais,  arrived  on 

the  Coromandel  Coast,  and  on  the  25th  of  June  had  an  action  with  the  English  fleet,  then  under 
Commodore  Peyton,  consisting  of  six  ships,  mounting  270  guns.  Commodore  Barnet  liaving  died  at 
Fort  St.  David’s  m April,  when,  after  an  indecisive  action,  the  French  Commander  proceeded  to  Pondi- 
cherry, and  the  English  to  Bengal. 

The  French  made  preparations  for  besieging  Madras,  whereupon  the  English  called  upon  the  Nabob 
to  fulfil  his  promise  of  restraining  the  French  from  committing  hostilities  against  them  by  land,  who, 
though  he  did  not  give  Mr.  Dupleix  a positive  permission,  he  refrained  from  making  any  prcjiarations,  or 
even  using  menaces  lo  prevent  tlic  French  from  attacking  them.  On  the  3d  of  September  the  French 
fleet  anchored  about  four  leagues  to  tlie  soutliward  of  Madras,  where  the  troops,  artillery,  and  stores 
were  landed;  the  army  consisted  of  1,100  p^uropeans,  400  Caffics,  and  UHJ  native  troops,  and  there 
remained  on  board  the  fleet  1,800  Eiiroiiean  seamen.  On  the  7th  of  Septemher  they  began  to  bombard 
the  town,  which  continued  till  the  10th,  when  it  surrendered  on  ca|)Itulation.  It  was  agreed  that  the 
English  should  surrender  themselves  prisoners  of  war,  that  the  town  should  be  imnu'diately  delivered  up, 
but  that  it  should  be  afterwards  ransomed.  The  French  colours  wen*  hoisted  on  the  Fort,  and  a C’om|)any’s 
ship  in  the  roads  was  taken  possession  of  without  resisbnice.  Thu.s  the  P'l  ench  obtained  possession  of  the 
principal  English  settlement  on  the  roast  without  the  lo.ss  of  a man,  which  they  retained  till  the  peace 
of  Aix-la-Chapelle;  The  French  made  two  unsuccessful  attempts  to  capture  Cuddalore.  The  Nabob  of 
Arcot  made  an  attack  upon  the  PVench  at  Madras;  but  his  array  was  repulsed,  and  a peace  was  concluded 
between  the  two  powers  In  February,  17i7. 

1748.  A considerable  English  fleet,  under  Admiral  Boscawen,  was  sent  to  India,  witli  instructions 
to  attack  the  Mauritius  in  his  way  to  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  whlcli  was  attempted,  but  did  not  succeed. 
They  arrived  at  P'ort  St.  David  July  when  it  was  determined  to  undertake  the  si(‘gp  of  rondicla  rry, 
the  garrison  of  which  consisted  of  2,000  l!luropeans  and  3,000  native  troops,  under  M.  Dupleix.  The 
English  made  no  impression  on  the  place,  and  the  ai’my  being  sickly,  it  was  decided,  on  the  30lh  or 
September,  to  raise  the  siege,  during  which  they  lost  1,005  Europeans  in  action  and  by  sickness. 
M.  Dupleix  ordered  Te  Dennis  to  be  sung  as  soon  as  the  siege  was  rais(*(I,  and  sent  letters  to  all  the 
native  Princes  an  the  coast,  and  to  the  Great  Mogul,  acquainting  them  that  lie  liud  repulsed  the  most 
formidable  attack  which  had  ever  been  made  in  India,  and  be  received  from  them  the  highest  compliments 
on  his  own  prowess,  and  on  the  military  cliaracter  of  his  nation. 