

A fleet  of  twelve  sail  arrived  at  Pondicherry  from  France,  Septembers,  1757,  and,  after  landing 
upwards  of  1,000  Europeans,  and  large  quantities  of  battering  cannon,  mortars,  and  ammunition, 
proceeded  to  the  Mauritius.  M.  Bussy,  who  commanded  the  French  forces  at  Mausullpatam,  imme- 
diately on  hearing  of  the  capture  of  Cliandernagore,  attacked  Vizagapatam,  which  surrendered  on  the 
24tli  of  June. 

1759.  A fleet  of  nine  sail  of  the  line  and  two  frigates,  under  M.  de  Ache,  having  a large  body  of 
troops  on  board  under  M.  Lally,  arrived  at  Pondicherry  on  the  22d  of  April.  Every  success  was  expected 
to  follow  the  arrival  of  this  armament.  The  ships  WTre  to  drive  the  English  squadron  off  the  coast;  the 
troops,  with  those  already  at  Pondicherry,  were  to  demolish  the  English  settlements;  and  such  was  the 
confitlcnce  of  not  meeting  an  enemy  in  the  field,  that  the  instnictions  formed  at  Versailles,  ordered  M.  Lally 
to  open  his  operations  by  the  siege  of  Eort  St.  David.  He  marched  from  Pondicherry  with  an  army  of 
3,500  Europeans  and  a larg(?  body  of  Sepoys,  entered  the  district  of  Fort  St.  David  on  the  29th  olf 
April,  and  invested  Cuddalore,  which  surrendered  on  the  3d  of  May.  The  French  then  began  the  siege 
of  Fort  St.  David,  which  surrendered  uj)on  capitulation  on  the  2d  of  June.  The  garrison  consisted  only 
of  200  Europeans,  IIT  invalids  and  artillery,  and  200  seamen,  w'ho,  together  with  their  officer^,  the 
Deputy-Ciovernor,  and  Council,  were  carried  prisoners  to  Pondicherry.  The  French  afterwards  destroyed 
the  foitilicalions  of  Fort  St.  David,  and  reduced  the  whole  to  a heap  of  ruins;  they  also  wantonly  destroyed 
the  villas  and  bullding-i  in  the  adjacent  country.  On  the  4th  of  June  Devicottah  was  abandoned  by  the 
English  on  the  approach  of  a detachment  of  the  French  army.  The  French  then  made  preparations  for 
besieging  Madra.s  with  an  army  of  3,500  Europeans,  2,000  Sepoys,  and  2,000  cavalry;  the  siege  com- 
menced on  the  12th  of  December,  1758,  and  continued  till  the  17th  of  February,  1759,  when  it  was 
abandoned,  after  sustaining  a \ery  heavy  loss  in  men,  ammunition,  and  stores.  The  adjacent  powers  1^ 
fixed  their  attention  on  tlie  siege  of  Madras,  and  the  English  acquired  much  reputation  in  the  eyes  of  the 
natives  by  the  deferxe.  They  soon  after  took  Mausulipatam  by  storm,  which  was  furnished  with  120  pieces 
of  cunoon  and  abundance  of  military  stores.  This  success  induced  Solabat-jing  to  desert  his  aUies,  the 


• 


BETWEEN  FllANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

French,  and  enter  into  a treaty  with  the  English,  by  which  he  Jigreeil  “ to  oblige  the  French  troops,  then 
in  the  Decaii,  to  evacuate  that  country;  never  to  permit  them  to  settle  there;  to  keep  none  of  them  in  his 
service;  and  neither  to  protect  them,  nor  to  call  them  to  bis  assistance;’ 