

1783.  The  English  fleet  returned  to  Madras  at  the  end  of  April,  1783,  from  whence  tliey  proceeded 
to  watch  the  motions  of  the  French.  The  great  object  of  the  English  was  the  expulsion  of  the  French 
from  the  Carnatic;  but  though  they  were  now  left  to  fight  the  battle  nearly  alone,  yet  they  Were  so 
strongly  fortified  in  Cuddalore,  so  abundantly  provided  with  artillery,  ammunition,  and  every  provision 
for  war,  and  their  force  so  considerable,  both  with  respect  to  the  quality  and  number,  that  it  was 


11)1 


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


considered  a task  of  great  difficulty  to  dispossess  them  of  that  hold  which  they  had  spent  so  much  time  and 
labour  to  render  unassailable.  The  Marquis  de  Bussy  had  lately  arrived  to  take  the  command,  and  had 
brought  with  him  the  last  division  of  the  forces  from  the  Mauritius;  these  consisted  of  some  ol'  tin*  best 
troops  and  oldest  regiments  in  the  French  service.  Their  European  force  was  thorcibie  very  considerable; 
and  it  was  further  strengthened  by  a body  of  Sepoys  which  Tippoo  Sultan  had  lell  to  act  as  auxiliaries. 
The  English  stormed  and  carried  the  outworks  on  the  7lh  of  June,  with  gr(*at  slaughter  on  both  sides. 
On  the  20th  of  June  another  action  took  place  between  M.  Sufli  ien  and  Sir  Edward  Hughes  oiV  Chiddalore, 
which  was  indecisive;  this  was  the  fifth  and  last  battle,  and  concluded  the  severe  course  of  naval  warfare 
between  the  two  nations  in  India,  in  which  great  valour  was  displayed  on  both  sides.  On  the  2.5th  of 
June  the  b rench  garrison  made  a sally  from  Cuddalore,  in  which  they  suffered  severely,  and  were  driven 
back.  In  this  action  the  24<th  battalion  of  the  English  Sepoys  on  tlu*  Bengal  estahlishmenf,  with  another 
belonging  to  Madras,  fought  some  of  the  oldest  and  best  troops  of  France  with  the  bayonet,  and  foiled 
them  at  that  favourite  European  weapon,  which  is  considered  the  most  trying  test  of  the  firmness  and 
excellency  of  soldiers.  The  loss  of  the  French,  in  killed  and  prisoners,  amounted  to  near  100  men;  that  of 
the  English  was  small,  and  principally  fell  upon  the  Sepoys. 

In  two  or  three  days  after  the  sally,  the  Medea  frigate  arrived,  under  a flag  from  Madras,  at  Cuddalore, 
and  brought  intelligence  of  the  conclusion  of  peace  between  the  two  nations;  in  conse(|ucncc  of  which,  a 
mutual  cessation  of  hostilities,  and  restoration  of  prisoners  immediately  took  place. 

The  French  under  Cossigny  w'cre  assisting  Tippoo  in  the  siege  of  Mangalore  when  the  news  of  peace 
arrived;  they  immediately  retired  to  Malie,  which  was  delivered  up  to  them. 

The  preliminary  articles  of  peace  were  concluded  at  Paris  on  the  20th  of  April,  17S3.  By  this  treaty 
it  was  agreed  that  Great  Britain  should  restore  to  France  all  the  settlements  taken  in  the  course  of  the 
war  in  Bengal,  Bahar,  and  Orixa,  with  the  liberty  of  surrounding  Chandernagore  with  a ditch  to  carry 
off  the  waters,  and  engage  to  secure  to  the  subjects  of  France,  whether  in  a Company  or  as  individuals, 
a safe,  free,  and  independent  trade  on  the  Coasts  of  Coromandel,  Orixa,  and  Malabar,  as  it  was  carried 
on  by  the  French  East  India  Company.  Great  Britain  was  also  to  restore  to  France,  Pondicherry  and 
Karical,  and  to  secure  the  two  districts  of  Villanour  and  Bahour  to  Pondicherry  ns  an  additional  district, 
and  to  Karical  the  four  Magans  bordering  upon  it.  Mahe  and  the  factory  at  Surat  were  to  be  restored  to 
the  FVench,  with  the  liberty  to  conduct  their  trade  on  tliat  side  of  India,  agreeable  to  llie  princij)Ics  con- 
tained in  the  thirteenth  article.  It  was  also  agreed  that  if  the  allies  in  India  of  cither  power  should 
refuse  to  accede  to  the  pacification  after  four  months'  notice,  they  should  thence  forth  lia\e  no  further 
assistance  on  either  side. 