

These  disasters  occasioned  great  bickerings  between  M.  Lally  and  the  Governor  and  Council  at  Pon- 
dicherry. All  the  revenues  collected  by  the  French,  when  their  poss(*ssions  were  most  extended,  had  nexor 
sufficed  for  the  expences  of  the  troops.  Much  ground  had  been  lately  recovered  by  the  English.  No  money 
remained  in  the  treasury  at  Pondicherry,  and  the  discontent  and  distres«(‘s  of  the  army  had  convinced  tlie 
Government  they  could  not  be  trusted  any  longer  than  they  were  regularly  paid. 

1759.  A .small  squadron,  under  Count  d’J'’staing,  captured  the  FiUglish  factoiy  at  (lond)roon,  in  the 
Persian  Gulf,  on  the  14th  of  October,  1759.  From  thence  they  proceeded  to  the  x\est  coast  of  Sumat  a, 
to  attack  the  English  settlements  there.  Natal  surrendered  at  discretion  on  the  7th  oi*  February  followinu; 
Tappanooly  shared  the  same  fate;  and  Bencoolen  was  attacked,  hut  defended  till  the  inhabitants  had 
secured  their  best  effects,  when  it  surrendered  to  the  French,  who  committed  all  the  ravages  in  their 
power,  and  carried  oil  all  the  effects  they  could  obtain,  to  Batavia  and  the  Isle  ol*  Fi  ance,  when  the  seltle- 
ment  was  abandoned. 

1760.  The  English,  under  Colonel  Cooto,  defeated  the  whole  of  the  French  force  under  IM.  I.ally 
at  Vandewash,  in  January,  with  great  loss;  their  cannon,  tents,  stores,  nr.d  l)aggage  weie  taken,  a wl  the 
remainder  of  tlie  army  letreated  to  Pondicherry.  The  English  nflterwards  took  Alempnrvah  nr.d  Arcot, 
and  in  April  they  obtained  posses.sion  of  Karical,  in  which  were  155  pieces  of  cannon,  with  a large  stock 
of  ammunition  and  stores.  This  loss  was  severely  felt  by  the  Freiu  h,  as  it  afforded  them  a constant  inlet 
to  the  territories  of  Tanjore;  and  by  various  purchases  and  cessions  from  the  Government,  they  had 
acquired  districts  round  the  fort  containing  1 13  villages,  of  which  the  farms,  with  the  customs  of  the 
town  and  port,  yielded  30,090  pagodas  per  annum.  Cuddalore,  and  most  of  tlie  other  places  in  possession 
of  the  French,  were  taken  by  the  Fnglish. 

1761.  Pondicherry  had  been  blockaded  by  land  and  by  sea  for  many  months,  and  surreiuleretl  on 
the  16th  of  January,  1761,  to  the  British  forces  under  Colonel  Coote.  3’lie  total  number  of  l luropean 
military  taken  were  2,072 ; the  civil  inhabitants  were  381 ; and  tlie  artillery  fit  for  service  were  500  pieees  of 
cannon,  and  100  mortars  and  howitzers.  The  ammunition  and  military  stores  were  in  great  ahiiiidanee. 
The  settlement  of  Malic,  on  the  Malabar  Coast,  surrendered  on  the  13th  of  February,  1761;  and  on 
the  6th  of  April,  Gingee,  the  last  place  in  possession  of  the  French,  was  siirrendei'cd  to  the*  English. 
This  day  terminated  the  long  contested  ho.stilities  between  the  two  rival  European  luUions  in  (.’oromaiulel, 
and  left  not  a single  ensign  of  the  French  nation  under  the  authority  of  its  Government  in  any  jiart  of 
India.  Thus,  after  a war  of  fifteen  years,  which  commenced  in  17d6,  and  eontinaed  from  that  time,  with 
scarcely  the  intermission  of  one  year,  tlie  same  measure  of  exlir|)ation  was  retaliated,  which  had  been 
intended,  and  invariably  pursued,  by  the  Frencli  Councils  against  the  English  commerce  and  power. 
Such  was  the  object  of  De  la  Bourdonnais’s  expedition,  of  the  whole  government  and  ambilioii  of 
•M.  Dupliex,  and  of  the  great  armament  of  naval  and  land  forces  which  arcompanied  M.  J.ally  to  India, 
who  constantly  declared  that  he  had  but  one  object,  whicli  was  not  to  leave  an  Englishman  in  the  Fi  nin- 
8ula.  To  retard  as  much  as  possible  the  facility  of  the  French  re-establishing  themselves  in  (’oromandel, 
if  restoration  should  be  made  at  the  conclusion  of  a general  peace,  the  principal  buildings  and  fortifications 
of  Pondicherry  were  destroyed. 