


400  < 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


her  old  rivals,  as  enable  lier,  with  the  aid  of  the  native  powers,  with  whom  the  English  were  at  war, 
to  chase  them  entirely  out  of  India.  A squadron  was  sent  out  under  M.  de  Sufirien,  who,  on  his  passage 
out  in  1781,  made  an  unsuccessful  attack  upon  an  English  fleet  in  Port  Prayo,  on  tlie  Island  of  St.  Jago, 
on  the  Ihtli  of  April.  From  thence  tiny  proceeded  to  the  Mauritius,  where  he  was  joined  by  some  French 
ships,  which  made  his  force  12  sail  of  the  lino,  besides  six  frigates,  and  transports  having  a considerable 
body  of  land  forces  on  board.  They  made  their  appearance,  and  anchored  about  four  miles  from  Madras  on 
he  lotli  of  February,  1782,  wlicre  the  English  Ih'et,  under  Sir  Edward  Hughes,  consisting  of  nine  sail 
of  the  line,  were  then  at  anchor.  The  French  fleet  weighed  in  the  afternoon,  and  stood  to  the  southward, 
Wlieii  tlic  English  follow  ed  their  example,  and  in  the  moming  tliey  captured aeveral  of  the  smaller  vessels, 
and  the  I.Hiiri'^lon,  a Ifirgo  ship  of  tons  burthen,  deeply  laden  wdth  a eargo  of  the  utmost  value  and 
importance  to  bolli  parties,  consisting  of  a considerable  train  of  artillery,  intended  as  a present  to  Hydcr 
Ally,  a large  quantity  of  gunpow^ler,  niul  a complete  assortment  of  other  military  stores.  This  valuable 
prize  had  likew  ise  on  hoard  a number  of  military  officers,  together  with  3(X)  European  troops.  This  brought 
on  a severe,  hut  iiuh’cisive  action  between  the  two  fleets.  Another  action  took  place  on  the  12th  of  April, 
in  wliich  both  fleets  suffered  severely:  the  French  proceeded  to  Batecalo  to  refit,  and  the  English  to 
Trincomnl(‘p,  which  w^as  then  in  their  possession.  Though  these  actions  were  not  decisive,  yet  they  werc» 
particularly  the  first,  of  great  importance  in  their  consequences  to  the  English.  Their  enemies  kept  that 
great  force  which  France  had  been  long  collecting  at  the  islands ; and  all  India  was  in  expectation  of  the 
mighty  blow  which  she  was  now  to  give,  and  which  it  was  supposed  would  have  proved  fatal  to  the  British 
interests  in  that  part  of  the  globe.  It  was  with  this  idea  that  Hydcr  Ally  first  ventured  to  invade  the 
Carnatic;  and  he  was  induced,  notwithstanding  his  repeated  defeats,  to  reject  every  overture  tending  to  an 
accommodation.  The  natives  of  India  were  astonished  to  observe  that,  with  so  vast  a superiority  of  force, 
the  French  fleet  would  not  venture  to  attack  the  English  in  the  open  road  of  Madras;  but  that,  on  the 
contrary,  the  latter  instantly  [lursued  tlu'  superior  enemy,  took  or  dispersed  the  convoy  under  his  protection, 
and  ill  a very  hard  fought  battle,  wherein  they  had  other  disadvantages,  besides  a superiority  of  force  to 
encounter,  left  the  claim  to  victory  undetermined.  Nothing  could  have  impressed  the  native  Princes 
and  States  more  strongly  with  an  opinion  of  the  great  superiority  of  tlie  English  in  all  naval  affairs  than 
these  circumstances,  and  they  afforded  great  mortification  to  Ilyder  Ally;  he  had,  however,  received 
some  assistance  IVoin  the  French  in  troops  and  stores,  w^hich  had  been  landed  at  Cuddalore,  still  in  pos- 
session of  the  French.  Another  action  took  place  between  the  fleets  on  the  6th  of  June,  in  which  both 
suffered  a great  loss:  the  English  had  310  men  killed  and  wounded,  and  the  French  779.  The  French 
fleet  afterwards  succeeded  in  taking  Trincomalce  on  the  29th  of  August,  which  was  of  great  importance 
to  them.  'Fhe  English  fleet  appearing  off  there  on  the  2d  of  September,  to  their  great  mortification, 
observed  the  f'rench  colours  flying  on  the  forts,  and  fifteen  sail  of  the  line,  and  ten  or  eleven  frigates, 
besides  smaller  vessels,  at  anchor  in  the  bay.  The  following  morning,  September  3,  the  French,  fully 
sensible  of  their  superiority,  stood  out  to  sea,  and  an  action  took  place,  which  was  reckoned  one  of  the 
iKjst  fought  actions  recorded  in  naval  history;  the  loss  sustained  by  the  English  amounting  only  to  51 
killed,  and  2S3  wounded,  and  it  afterwards  appeared  that  of  the  French  was  412  killed,  and  676  wounded. 
The  French  returned  to  Trincomalee  on  the  night  of  the  action,  wht*n,  in  going  in,  one  of  their  ships 
of  the  line  was  lost;  and  the  English  to  Madras,  from  whence  they  proceeded  to  Bombay  to  refit. 