

By  the  edict  of  1764  the  Isles  of  France  and  Bourbon  became  the  property  of  the  Government, 
whereby  the  Company  saved  2,000,000  livres  per  annum.  They  were  likewise  relieved  from  the  expences  of 


BETWEEN  FBANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


I 


907 


Port  L’Orient.  The  Company  applied  themselves  to  the  re-establishment  of  their  commerce,  the  resto- 
ration of  their  forts  and  settlements  in  India,  the  construction  of  ships, 


1709.  The  trade  between  France  and  India  revived  very  considerably  after  the  peace.  In  a few 
years  tlie  annual  sales  amounted  to  near  2(),0()(),()00  livres,  and  in  1709  they  amounted  to  near  ,17,(K)0,()00 
livres.  Notwithstanding  this  apparent  prosperity,  tlie  (,'oinpuny\s  eoiicerns  were  rnpiiHy  declining:  their 
debts  were  daily  increasing;  the  expences  incurred  in  replacing  their  fortifications  and  buildings  in  India, 
far  exceeded  their  expectations;  the  profits  arising  from  their  trade,  fell  much  b(‘low  what  they  formerly 
were ; while  the  charges  of  their  Government  amounted  to  more  tlian  double  what  they  had  been  esti- 
mated at.  These  circumstances  induced  the  King,  by  a decree  dated  the  1.1th  ol  August,  1709,  to 
suspend  the  exclusive  privilege  of  the  India  Company,  and  granted  to  all  his  subjirts  the  liberty  of  nn\i- 
gating  and  trading  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  The  decree  which  opened  this  nen  tiact  to  piiMitc 
traders,  required  them  to  provide  themselves  with  passpoits  from  the  India  Company,  and  ob!ig(*d  them  to 
make  their  returns  to  Port  L’Orient,  and  no  where  else.  It  established  a duty  on  all  goods  imported,  uhidi, 
by  a second  decree,  issued  the  0th  of  Seiitemlier  following,  was  fixed  at  per  cent,  on  all  goods  toming 
from  India  and  China,  and  at  3 per  cent,  upon  all  commodities  of  the  growth  and  produce  of  the  Islands 


of  France  and  Bourbon. 

The  above  decree,  by  only  suspending  the  privilege  of  the  Company,  seemed  to  lea\e  th(‘  propiu  tors 
the  power  of  resuming  it;  but  they  determined  to  liquidate  their  concerns  in  such  a manner  as  to  .secure 
their  creditors’  and  the  remains  of  their  own  fortunes.  For  this  purpose  they  oilered  to  give  up  to  the  I mg 
all  their  ship.s,  thirty  in  number;  all  the  warehouses  and  other  buildings  belonging  to  them  at  1 ort 
L’Orientundin  India;  tl.e  property  of  their  factories,  with  the  munufaetures  dependent  on  U.em;  all 
naval  and  military  stores;  and,  lastly,  2,4^0  slaves  whieh  they  had  in  the  islands.  All  these  articles  nere 
valued  at  30,(X)0,000  livres  by  the  proprietors,  who  at  »h<!  same  time  reipiestei  le  pnyinen  o 
1«..500,0(K)  livres  whieh  were  due  to  them  by  Government.  The  King  agreed  to  tl.e  proposal  Im  lessened 
the  purchase-money ; not  that  the  effects  were  not  of  still  grealer  value  while  they  remained  n.  the  hands 
of  the  Company,  but  being  made  over  to  the  Government,  they  hiought  an  addition..  nu.«..d.n.nee  upon 
it;  so  that  instead  of -I6,.500,0(W)  livres  which  the  proprietors  demanded,  the  K.ng,  ^ 