

1777.  3’he  French  merchants  resident  in  Bengal  carried  on  their  commerce,  after  the  suspension  of 
their  Company’s  exclusive  privileges,  on  payment  of  tlie  same  duties  Avhich  had  formerly  been  paid  by  the 
(Company.  But  in  April,  1776,  the  English  Government  at  Calcutta  directed  their  revenue  officers  to 
charge  them,  as  individuals,  with  4 per  cent,  on  the  amount  of  their  invoices  on  all  goods  except  foreign 
salt,  on  which  all  persons,  whether  companies  or  individuals,  were  to-  |>ay  10  mpees  per  100  maunds. 
The  French  merchants  remonstrated  against  this  regulation,  and  urged  that  the  duties  of  2^  per  cent, 
had  l)een  paid  with  great  <*xaclness  hy  the  merchants  at  Chaiidernagore,  according  to  immemorial  usage, 
and  the  privileges  of  their  nation.  Tlie  Dutch  and  Danish  merchants  joining  in  the  application,  the 
English  Government  determined  to  let  the  goods  of  French  private  merchants  puss,  on  payment  of  per 
cent.,  still  reserving  their  right  of  4 per  cent,  when  they  should  think  proper  to  claim  it. 

1778.  I'lto  Americans  having  declared  themselves  inde|>endent  of  Great  Britain,  the  Frencli  entered 
into  a treaty  of  friendship  and  commerce  with  them.  This  was  considered  by  the  British  Government  as  a 
declaration  of  war,  and  acted  upon  accordingly. 

The  English  b'.ast  India  Company,  foreseeing  the  consequences  which  the  French  treaty  with  America 
must  nccessaiily  produce,  an*!  being  determined  not  to  hazard  the  security  of  their  possessions  by  paying 
tp/3  great  an  attention  to  formalitie.s,  which  carry  no  further  value  than  what  them  immediate  interest 
induces  the  respective  parties  to  affix  to  them,  a bold  and  decisive  measure  for  the  final  reduction  of  the 
French  power  in  India  was  immediately  resolved  upon.  Their  instmetions  were  fortunately  conveyed  with 
unusual  expedition  to  Madras,  and  preparations  were  immediately  made  for  undertaking  the  siege  of 
Pondicherry.  The  fiirce  destined  for  that  service  was  assembled  by  the  21st  of  August,  and  the  place 
closely  invested;  and  on  the  18lh  of  September  the  batteries  were  opened  under  the  powerful  fire  of  28 
pieces  of  heavy  cannon  and  27  mortars.  Notwithstanding  the  dismantled  state  in  which  Pondiclieriy  was 
restored  to  the  French  at  the  end  of  the  former  war,  the  fortifications  were  in  no  contemptible  condition, 
and  their  deficiency  in  strength  was  amj)ly  supplied  by  the  gallantry  of  M.  de  Bellecombe  (who  was  both 


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


I 399 


Governor  of  the  town  and  Gcneral-Coniinandant  of  all  the  Freiicli  settlements  in  the  Indies),  and  the 
resolution  of  his  brave  garrison,  who,  though  nearly  cut  oil'  from  every  hope  of  sueeour,  persevered  to  the 
last  extremity  in  a determined  and  nohle  defence.  On  the  Kith  of  Oetoher,  the  day  |)revious  to  that 
fixed  by  the  English  for  a general  assault,  a capitulation  was  proposed,  which  was  agreed  to  l)y  the 
English.  The  conquerors  gave  the  most  ample  and  honourable  testimony  to  the  gallantry  of  the  Flench 
in  the  terms  of  caj/itulalion.  The  conditions  were  suitahlc*  to  the  generosity  of  lho<e  entiinents; 
and  every  requisition  that  did  not  interfere  with  the  pnhlie  hcncfiL  or  security,  was  liherully  agreed 
to.  It  was  only  on  those  aecounls  tliat  it  was  determined  to  send  the  lliiropeaii  jmit  of  the  garrison  to 
France,  and  to  disband  the  Sepoys  and  native  troops,  instead  of  sending  them  tt)  the  Mauritius,  as  pio- 
posed.  The  garrison  were  allowed  all  the  honours  of  war,  and,  as  a pailicular  mark  of  attention  to 
M.  Bellecombe,  the  regiment  of  Fond ieherry  were,  at  his  retjuest,  allowed  to  keep  their  coh)urs.  A 
numerous  artillery,  amounting  to  about  300  jiieees,  heeame  a jirize  to  tlie  coinpierois;  all  pulilie  propeity 
underwent  the  same  fate,  hut  wdiatevor  was  private,  was  secured  to  the  owners  3 he  l^nglish  lrt)<)ps 
employed  in  the  siege,  amounted  to  10,500  men,  of  whom  1,500  weie  lMii*op(‘a  ns;  the  gaiiison  b)  mar 
3,000,  of  whom  900  w^ere  FiUropeans.  33ie  English  loss  amounted  to  2'^  I killed,  ami  G9J  woundeil,  that 
of  the  garrison  to  200  killed,  and  ISO  wounded. 