

1726.  Notwithstanding  the  strenuous  opposition  of  all  those  nations  engaged  in  the  East  India  trade, 
the  affairs  of  the  Company  appeared  to  be  in  a very  prosjierous  state.  Several  ships  arrived  from  India 
and  China  with  valuable  cargoes,  the  sale  amount  of  which  was  about  5,000,000  florins.  In  the  month 
of  September  a meeting  of  the  proprietors  was  called,  when  the  Directors  stated  to  them  that  their 
trade  had  been  so  successful,  that  they  were  enabled  to  carry  250  florins  to  the  account  of  every  share  in 
the  capital,  of  which  750  had  already  been  paid  in,  which  completed  the  original  amount  of  the  share 
1000  florins ; but  this  prosperity  was  not  sufficient  to  keep  up  the  spirits  of  the  proprietors  under  the  pres- 
sure of  the  confederacy  raised  against  them. 

1727.  The  Court  of  Vienna,  being  likely  to  be  brought  into  a war  by  her  perseverance  in  favour  of 
the  Ostend  East  India  Company,  concluded  a treaty  with  the  maritime  powers,  which  took  away  those 
apprehensions  that  the  settlement  of  this  Company  had  raised.  The  treaty  was  signed  at  Paris  on  the  26th 
of  May,  1727,  the  first  article  of  which  runs  thus— « His  Imperial  and  Catholic  Majesty,  having  no  other 
view  than  to  contribute  to  the  public  tranquillity  of  Europe,  and  observing  that  the  commerce  of  Ostend 
has  given  birth  to  jealousy  and  uneasiness,  consents  that  there  shidl  be  a suspension  of  the  charter  of  the 


OF  OSTEND  WITH  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


411 


Ostend  Company,  and  of  all  the  traffic  between  the  Austrian  Netherlands  and  tlie  Indies,  during  the  term 
of  seven  years.”  By  the  fifth  article  it  was  agreed,  “ That  the  ships  which  sailed  from  Ostend  bbfore  this 
convention,  the  names  whereof  were  to  be  ^ven  in  a list  on  the  part  of  his  Imperial  Majesty,  were  to  be 
permitted  safely  to  return  home;  and  in  case  any  of  them  should  be  taken,  it  was  agreed  that  they  should 
be  bona  fide  restored  with  their  cargoes.” 

This  treaty  was  a terrible  blow  to  the  Ostend  Coinjiany.  The  proprietors,  aware  that  their  absolute 
suppression  would  be  required,  turned  their  thoughts  to  consider  whether  some  method  might  not  be  found 
of  establishing  themselves  in  some  other  part  of  His  Majesty’s  dominions,  where  it  might  not  bo  liable  to 
those  formidable  objections  which  had  been  raised  againist  this  attempt  in  the  Austrian  Netherlands.  Trieste 
and  Fiume,  both  in  the  Gulf  of  Venice,  were  the  only  seaports  in  the  Austrian  dominions.  The  Emperor, 
who  was  desirous  of  participating  in  the  East  India  trade,  did  his  utmost  to  render  these  ports  commodious; 
but  the  natural  obstacles  were  too  great  to  be  .surmounted ; and  much  money  was  spent  in  the  attempt  of 
establishing  magazines,  and  in  repairing  the  fortifications,  when  the  project  was  given  up. 