

SEVEN  PAGODAS, 

Or  Mahabalipooram.  The  following  account  is  extracted  from  the  Asiatic  Resrarclies: 

They  are  situated  about  thirty-eight  miles  to  the  .southward  of  iAIadras,  and  present  to  the  distant 
view  only  a rock;  but  on  examination,  tbe  following  curious  ruins  are  found. 

“ The  attention  is  first  arrested  by  a Hindoo  pagoda,  covered  with  sculpture,  and  hewn  from  a single 
mass  of  rock,  about  26  feet  high;  a great  surface  of  tlie  rock  near  this  structure  is  covered  witli  large 
figures  of  men  and  animals,  all  proving  the  sculptor  to  have  possessed  no  inconsiderable  skill.  Opposite  to 
these,  and  surrounded  by  a wall  of  bricks,  are  several  pagodas  of  great  antiipnty.  Adjoining  are  several 
excavations;  a scene  of  sculpture  fronts  the  entrance  of  one  of  them,  in  which  arc  groups  of  very  interest- 
ing  figures.  In  the  way  up  the  rock  a prodigious  circular  stone  is  passed  under,  so  placed  by  nature  on 
g smooth  and  sloping  surface,  that  you  are  in  dread  of  its  crushing  you  before  you  clear  it.  The  top  of 


KISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


the  rock  is  strewed  with  bricks,  the  remains,  it  is  said,  of  a palace  anciently  standing  on  this  site.  De- 
scending over  immense  beds  of  stone,  you  arrive  at  a spacious  excavation,  having  a temple  with  numerous 
figures  of  men  and  animals.  Over  this  temple,  at  a considerable  elevation,  is  a smaller  one,  wrought  from 
a single  mass  of  stone.  Adjoining  is  a temple  in  the  rough,  and  a large  mass  of  rock,  the  upper  part 
roughly  fashioned  for  a pagoda.  This  whole  rock  is  a species  of  extremely  hard  granite,  and  must  have 
taken  immense  labour,  and  a great  number  of  men  to  have  finished  these  structures. 

“ East  of  the  village,  and  washed  by  the  sea,  is  a pagoda  of  stone,  containing  numerous  figures  ; one 
of  a gigantic  stature  is  observed  stretched  on  the  ground,  and  represented  as  secured  in  that  position.  The 
surf  here  breaks  as  far  out  as  the  ruins  of  the  city,  which  are  incredibly  large  and  magnificent.  Many  of  the 
masses  of  stone  near  the  shore  appear  to  have  been  wrought.  A Bramin,  about  fifty  years  of  age,  a na- 
tive of  the  place,  states  that  his  grandfather  had  frequently  mentioned  his  having  seen  the  gilt  tops  of 
five  pagodas  in  the  surf,  now  no  longer  visible.  About  a mile  to  the  southward  are  other  structuies  of 
stone,  that  have  been  left  unfinished;  the  southernmost  is  about  forty  feet  in  height,  hewn  from  a single 
mass;  the  outside  is  covered  with  sculpture.  The  next  is  also  cut  from  one  solid  mass  of  stone,  about  foi*ty- 
nine  feet  high,  and  rent  through  the  middle  from  the  top  to  the  bottom;  a large  fragment  from  one  corner 
is  observed  on  the  ground;  no  account  is  preserved  of  the  powerful  cause  that  produced  this  destructive 
effect.  Around  these  are  various  groups  of  figures,  such  as  lions,  elephants,  &c.’’ 