

1717.  Some  private  merchants  obtained  permission  from  tire  Government  to  send  a ship  or  two  to 
India;  they  returned  with  valuable  cargoes,  and  their  success  encouraged  otliers  to  lit  out  more  in  the  same 
manner.  Some  enterprising  foreign  mercliants  observing  this  promising  commencement  of  an  East  India 
trade,  made  proposals  to  the  Court  of  Vienna  for  the  establishment  of  a regular  Company,  with  the 
Emperor  s charter  for  a term  of  years,  wdiich  were  favourably  received. 

The  Dutch  soon  after  captured  one  of  the  licensed  ships,  under  the  plea  that  she  w^as  engaged  in  an 
illicit  trade.  The  Emperor  made  a demand  for  satisfaction,  which  not  being  attended  to,  he  issued  a com- 
mission  of  reprisal,  and  the  sliip  was  retaken  and  brought  into  Ostend. 

1720.  The  merchants,  re-encouraged  by  the  patronage  and  support  of  the  Emperor,  dispatclied  five 
ships  to  India,  and  in  the  year  following  six  more;  three  for  China,  one  for  Mocha,  one  for  the  Coast  of 
Malabar,  and  the  last  for  Bengal.  The  Dutch  were  seriously  alarmed  hy  these  exertions,  and  seizeil  one 
of  the  ships,  and  ordered  her  cargo  to  be  sold,  notwithstanding  the  remonstrances  of  tlie  Imperial  Minister 
at  the  Hague.  This  misfortune  was  followed  by  another;  un  English  privateer  ca[)tured  one  of  the 
homeward-bound  ships  very  richly  laden,  which  so  discouraged  the  mercliants,  that  they  ordered  a new 
ship  they  were  then  fitting  out,  to  be  laid  up;  but  in  May  and  June,  1721,  two  sliips  arrived  safe  from 
India,  and  in  September  two  more,  the  cargoes  of  which  sold  so  w ell,  as  to  indemnify  the  merchants  for 
former  losses,  and  put  them  in  a condition  to  carry  on  their  commerce  with  more  spirit.  The  only  thing 
wanted  was  a legal  establishment,  which  had  been  promised,  but  liitlicrto  delayed,  to  avoid  an  open  quarrel 
with  the  maritime  powers,  who  had  remonstrated  against  the  violation  of  the  Treaty  of  Munster,  con- 
cluded in  1648,  by  which  the  Spaniards  had  agreed  to  preserve  their  trade  and  navigation  within  the  limits 
as  they  were  then  conducted. 

1723.  In  the  month  of  August,  the  Emperor  published  the  letters  patent  he  had  graiilcd  to  the 
Ostend  Company.  In  the  preamble,  the  Emperor,  in  addition  to  the  titles  ol  the  House  ol  Austria,  stybal 
himself  King  of  the  East  and  West  Indies,  the  Canary  Islands,  &c.  with  a view  .o  grace  tliis  new  ami 
ample  grant,  which  was  for  thirty  years;  with  licence  to  trade  to  the  East  and  West  Indies,  and  on  all 
the  coasts  of  Africa,  on  both  sides  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  their  ships  observing  the  usual  customs. 

The  capital  was  fixed  at  6,000,000  florins,  in  6000  actions  or  shares.— Twelve  of  these  shares  were  to 
entitle  the  proprietor  to  a vote,  but  foreign  proprietors  were  entirely  excluded  from  voting. — The  Company 
were  authorized  to  ship  military  stores,  and  all  kinds  of  merchandise,  without  any  exception  whatever.— 
They  were  permitted  to  build  forts  in  whatever  parts  of  the  Indies  tliey  should  think  fit,  and  also  to  furnish 
them  with  all  kinds  of  arms,  artillery,  and  ammunition  that  they  thought  convenient. — They  were  likcAvise 
allpwed  to  build  and  equip  ships,  of  whatever  size  they  thought  proper,  in  any  of  the  ports  of  his 
Imperial  Majesty's  dominions.— -They  were  authorized  to  make  leagues,  trcatic'<,  and  alliances  with  the 