


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


407 


IftlO.  he  Islands  of  Bourbon,  and  Mauritius,  or  tlio  Isle  of  Franco,  had  long  afforded  shelter  and 
protection  to  a very  largo  nurnbor  of  French  privateers,  many  of  which  were  of  great  force.  These  pri- 
vateers had  been  extiemely  fortunate  in  capturing  the  ships  Ix  longing  to  the  English  India  Cinnpany,  and 
those  ships  which  cirriod  on  the  trade  from  |3ort  to  port  in  India,  to  an  enormous  value.  Their  captures 
they  took  either  to  the  Isle  of  France,  or  Bourbo?i,  but  principally  to  the  former,  as  being  a place  not  only 
of  greater  strengfh,  hut  garrisoned  and  protected  by  a larger  force.  Tbe  advantage  to  the  captors,  how- 
ever, bore  IK)  pDoortion  to  the  loss  which  was  sustaineil  by  the  English;  for  though  the  prizes  generally 
reached  the  IslaiuK  with  saiety,  yet  it  was  impossible  to  convey  the  ])rodnce  or  the  cargoes  of  them,  witli 
the  smallest  chance  of  escape,  to  any  j)ai*t  of  lOurope.  In  these  islands,  therefore,  but  piineipally  in  the 
Isle  of  France,  was  deposited  immense  wealth,  consLtiiig  of  tlie  rich  cargoes  of  the  various  ships  which 
had  been  captured  dining  the  war.  In  tbe  hopes  of  gaining  this  bmity,  and  at  the  same  time  for  the  pur- 
pose of  rooting  out  the  numerous  privateers  wdiich  ariuoyed  the  Indian  sc.'W  and  trade,  an  i‘Xpe«!itioii  was 
planned,  first  agaii;st  Bourbon,  and  afterwards  again.st  the  Isle  of  Fiance. 

The  Island  of  Bourbon  surrendeicd  the  9th  of  July,  1810,  by  capitulation,  and  on  the  Jd  of  Decem- 
ber, 1810,  the  Isle  of  France  likewise  surrendeicd  to  a British  forte,  under  ()( neral  .Micreiomble  and 
Admiral  Bertie:  seven  frigates,  three  English  East  Indiamen,  and  numerous  country  ships,  with  an  im- 
incn.se  quantity  of  goods  of  various  kinds,  w ere  the  result  of  this  ex|)edition,  w hich  terminated  the  extirpa- 
tion of  the  naval  force  of  the  French  in  the  Indian  seas,  and.  the  sulijugation  of  their  last  remaining  colo- 
nial territory. 

ALLEMPARVA. 

This  fort  is  about  twenty-four  miles  to  the  northward  of  Pondicherry.  It  formerly  belonged  to  tbe 
Nabobs  of  the  Province,  and  was  given  by  them  to  the  French  in  1751).  It  has  many  w ells  of  good  w ater, 
which  arc  not  to  be  found  in  all  parts  of  the  coa.st  near  the  sea.  It  was  taken  by  the  English  in  iitiO. 
Tbe  fort  was  of  stone,  siiuare,  of  moderate  extent,  with  four  round  towers  at  the  angles,  a parapeted 
faussc-bray,  and  a wet  ditch  witliout  a glacis.  Tbe  petlah  extends  along  the  coast  to  the  nortinvard. 

SADRAS 

Is  about  .seven  leagues  N.  N.  E.  from  Allemparva.  Here  the  Dutcli  had  a settlement;  it  w’as  sur- 
prised by  a French  detachment  in  1759,  who  took  po.sse.s.sion  of  the  town,  and  made  the  garrison  and  all 
the  Dutch  inhabitants  prisoners,  notwithstanding  the  Dutch  w^ere  at  that  time  a neutral  nation;  but  it  was 
afterwards  delivered  up  again.  The  fort  and  towm  are  now  in  a ruinous  condition.  About  seven  miles  tu 
the  northward  of  Sadras  arc  the 