

The  Company  obtained  another  arret  in  July,  strictly  prohibiting  all  French  siihjecfs  from  purchasing 
from  foreigners  any  East  India  goods,  or  any  foreign  cotton  goods  of  any  kind,  except  tlM»se  destined  for 
the  African  slave-trade.  Those  w ho  had  such  goods  in  their  possession,  or  had  already  oidt  red  them  from 
foreigners,  were  allowed  till  the  lOlh  of  August,  1786,  to  dispose  of  them,  or  send  them  out  of  the  king- 
dom.  For  the  encouragement  of  the  Calico  Printers,  the  Company  w^ere  authorized  to  piircliasc  cotton 
goods  from  foreigners  for  the  siij)ply  of  the  print-fields,  till  their  ow  n imports  should  be  sufiicient  to 
answer  the  demand;  and  they  w' ere  obliged  to  sell  India  painted  calicoes  for  exportation  only,  the  use  of 


them  in  France  being  strictly  prohibited. 

The  King  made  over  to  the  Company  the  sliip  Dauphin,  which  he  had  sent  to  China  on  his  own  account; 
and  that  they  might  be  a body  purely  commercial,  he  relieved  them  from  the  cares  and  expeiiccs  of  sove- 
reignty in  India,  l)y  taking  them  upon  himself.  The  Company  immediately  made  a sale  at  1/Gricnt 
of  such  cotton  goods  as  they  had  bought  at  Copenhagen  and  other  places,  together  with  the  goods  imported 
from  India  by  the  private  merchants,  amounting  to  about  10,000,000  livres. 


1786.  In  March  and  April  the  Company  fitted  out  eight  ships  for  India  and  China,  which  with 
their  cargoes  cost  20,000,000  livres.  In  October  the  ship  Douphin  arrived  from  China,  and  several  sliips 
of  the  private  traders  from  India.  The  Company  made  a second  sale,  in  which  were  incliuicd,  as  in  the 
former  sale,  .some  goods  bought  of  the  foreign  Companies;  the  amount  was  about  24,000,000  livres,  and 
the  buyers  who  came  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom,  were  well  pleased  with  their  purchases. 

* 3 F 8 


m 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  t)F  THE  COMMERCE 


The  Company  now  dispatched  a second  fleet,  consisting  of  ten  ships,  the  outfit  and  cargoes  of  which 
cost  19,000,000  livres.  To  defray  this  expenditure,  they  obtained  an  arret  on  the  21st  of  September, 
1780,  for  adding  20,000,000  to  their  capital  stock,  ah3  extending  the  duration  of  their  privileges  to  15 
years.  The  new  stock  was  mostly  sidiscribed  for  by  the  monied  men  of  Paris,  which  gave  the  merchants 
at  the  seaports  a just  cause  of  complaint  against  such  an  abuse  of  the  exclusive  privilege  as  debarred 
them  from  obtaining  any  participation  of  it,  except  by  paying  a considerable  advance  on  it. 

1787.  Some  difficulties  having  arisen  in  the  East  Indies  relative  to  the  meaning  and  extent  of  the 
13tli  article  of  the  Treaty  of  Peace,  they  were  cleared  up  by  a particular  convention,  by  which  a safe, 
free,  and  independent  trade,  such  as  was  carried  on  by  the  French  East  India  Company,^  was  secured  to 
the  subjects  of  France,  “ whether  they  exercise  it  individually  or  as  a Company^  as  well  in  the  Nabob- 
ship  of  Arcot,  and  in  Madura  and  Tanjore,  as  in  Bengal,  Bahar,  and  Orixa,  in  the  Northern  Circars,  and, 
in  general,  in  all  the  British  possessions  on  the  Coasts  of  Orixa,  Coromandel,  and  Malabar.  The  French 
were  restricted  from  importing  more  than  200,000  maunds  of  salt  annually,  which  were  to  be  delivered  to 
them  at  a place  appointed  by  tlie  Government  of  Bengal,  at  the  fixed  price  of  120  rupees  per  100  maunds. 
18,000  maunds  of  saltpetre,  and  300  chests  of  opium  were  to  be  delivered  annually  for  the  commerce  of  the 
French,  on  the  demand  of  their  agents  at  Bengal,  at  the  price  established  before  the  late  war.  The  six 
ancient  factories  of  Cossimbuzar,  Chandernagore,  Dacca,  Jugdea,  Balasore,  and  Patna,  with  the  terri- 
tories belonging  to  them,  were  acknowledged  to  be  under  the  protection  of  the  French  flag,  and  subject  to 
French  jurisdiction.  The  ancient  houses  of  Soopore,  Keerpoy,  Cannicole,  Mohunpore,  Serhampore,  and 
Chittagong,  as  well  as  the  dependencies  on  Soopore,  were  also  secured  to  France,  together  with  the  faculty 
of  establishing  new  houses  of  commerce;  but  without  any  jurisdiction  or  exemption  from  the  ordinary 
justice  of  the  country  exercised  over  British  subjects.  The  French  without  the  limits  of  those  factories 
were  entitled  to  an  impartial  administration  of  justice  in  all  cases;  and  delinquents  flying  from  justice, 
whether  Europeans  or  natives,  were  to  be  reciprocally  delivered  up.  The  restitution  of  Yanaon,  already 
delivered  to  the  French,  was  confirmed. 