

The  following  traditional  account  was  given  by  the  Bramins  on  the  spot: 

Another  Prince  (perhaps  one  of  the  conquerors)  about  KKX)  years  ago,  was  desirous  of  having  a 
great  work  executed;  but  the  Hindoo  sculptors  and  masons  refused  to  perform  it  on  the  terms  he  proposed. 
Attempting  force,  they,  in  number  about  4000,  fled  with  their  effects  from  his  country  hither,  where 
they  resided  four  or  five  years,  and  in  this  interval  executed  these  magnificent  works." 

COVELONG 

Is  about  three  leagues  to  the  northward  of  the  seven  pagodas.  The  Ostend  East  India  Company  oh., 
tained  permission  to  trade  here,  and  settle  a factory,  on  their  first  arrival  in  India;  they  afterwards  built  a 
fort,  which  became  their  principal  settlement,  and  of  which  they  retained  possession  till  their  charter  was 
suspended  in  1731.  The  fort  afterwards  went  to  ruins,  and  the  natives  built  another  near  it,  which  they 
called  Saudet  Bunder.  1'he  French  got  possession  of  it  by  stratagem  in  the  beginning  of  1750;  it  was  taken 
from  them  by  the  English,  under  Colonel  Clive,  in  1752.  The  garrison  surrendered  at  discretion.  The 
place  mounted  about  thirty  pieces  of  cannon ; besides  which,  there  were  found  fifty  other  pieces  of  the 
largest  calibre,  which  proved  to  be  part  of  the  artillery  taken  at  Madras  by  De  la  Bourdonnais. 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS 

or  THE 

COMMERCE  OF  OSTEND  WITH  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

When  the  Seven  United  Provinces  of  the  Netherlands  became  a free  State  in  1698,  the  inhabitants 
of  the  remaining  provinces  were  excluded  by  the  King  of  Spain  from  carrying  on  any  traffic  with  either 
the  East  or  West  Indies;  they  therefore  contented  themselves  with'  such  trade  as  they  could  safely  and 
legally  transact  till  1638,  when  the  King  of  Spain  granted  them  the  liberty  of  trading  to  those  parts  of 
India  which  were  possessed  by  the  Portuguese,  then  also  his  subjects ; but  before  any  benefit  could  be  de- 
rived from  this  grant,  Portugal  revolted,  and  their  kingdom  again  became  independent.  From  thii^  period. 


OF  OSTEND  WITH  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


» 


109 


for  near  sixty  years,  during  which  time  these  provinces  remained  subject  to  Spain,  notiiing  was  done  on 
the  subject  of  a trade  with  India. 

1698.  Charles  II.  the  last  of  the  Austrian  Kings  of  Spain,  granted  a clmrter  for  erecting  a Company 
to  trade  in  such  parts  of  the  East  Indies  as  were  not  in  the  possession  of  other  nations.  The  capital  was  to 
consist  of  2,000,000  florins,  one  fourth  to  be  raised  in  October,  1698,  the  rest  in  1700  and  1701 ; but  they 
were  prevented  from  taking  any  advantage  of  their  charter,  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  the  King  in 
1700,  and  the  long  war  which  took  place  for  the  succession  to  tlie  Crown  of  Spain;  and  when  the  Nether- 
lands fell  under  the  dominion  of  Austria,  the  merchants  w^erc  debarred  from  trading  to  India  in  any  other 
manner  than  that  which  had  been  allowed  to  the  subjects  of  Spain,  which  was  by  tlie  way  of  Cape  Horn, 
and  no  farther  west  in  the  Indian  Seas  than  the  Philippine  Islands. 