


1730.  The  Directors  then  attempted  to  carry  on  a trade  under  the  passports  of  the  Kings  of  Prussia 
and  Poland,  in  which  they  encountered  great  difficulties.  One  ship,  the  St.  Theresa,  under  Polish 
colours,  proceeded  to  Bengal  for  a cargo,  where  she  was  taken  by  the  English;  another,  the  A|)olIo.  from 
China,  under  Prussian  colours,  arrived  .safest  Hamburgh  in  September,  1731.  The  ministers  of  the 
maritime  powers  resident  in  that  city,  presented  a strong  memorial  to  the  Senate,  insisting  that  the  vessel 
should  be  sequestered,  and  her  contents  secured;  but  matters  were  not  pu.shcd  to  extremities : the  Senate, 
however,  prohibited  the  citizens  from  having  any  concern  with  vessel  or  cargo  .so  circumstanced,  and  the 
proprietors  were  allowed  to  remove  their  goods  away  clandestinely. 


1732.  The  Emperor  in  a rescript  to  his  Minister  at  Hamburgh,  dated  October  1,  1732,  states, 
“ that  being  informed  that  the  late  Company  of  Ostend,  notwithstanding  the  signification  of  his  pleasure, 
had  caused  a ship,  freighted  with  commodities  from  the  Indies,  to  be  sent  thither,  in  oi-dcr  to  be  expo.sed  to 
sale  in  that  city,  his  Imperial  Majesty,  being  resolved  not  to  permit  either  the  lute  Company,  or  any  of  the 
subjects  of  his  hereditary  countries,  to  carry  on  a trade  contrary  to  treaties,  desired  that  they  would 
sequester  any  goods  which  might  be  brought  thither.”  This  determined  conduct  put  an  end  to  all  the  con- 
trivances of  the  Directors  of  the  Ostend  Company  to  elude  the  suppression  of  their  commerce  with  the  Eas»^ 
Indies,  which  had  given  so  much  uneasiness  to  the  different  maritime  powers. 


1775,  In  this  year  Mr.  William  Bolts,  who  had  formerly  been  in  the  service  of  the  Endl"' 
India  Company,  presented  a proposal  to  the  Empress  of  Germany  for  establi.shing  a trade  ®''‘' 

the  East  Indies  from  her  ports  in  the  Adriatic.  The  Empress  approved  of  his  proposal,  ^ 
of  June,  1775,  signed  a charter,  whereby  she  authorized  him,  during  the  space  often  yea^'^  ""  “ 

trade  with  vessels  under  the  Imperial  flag,  from  her  ports  in  the  Adriatic,  to  Fersiy^^^  freight"  03? 
Africa;  to  carry  negro  slaves  from  Africa  and  Madagascar  to  America;  to  takea^^^ 
for  the  Imperial  ports,  or  any  others,  for  account  of  foreigners,  whose  property 

fiscation,  even  if  they  should  belong  to  nations  at  war  with  her;  to  take  po^,^^  J 

territories  which  he  might  obtain  from  the  Princes  of  India;  and  she 
to  him,  or  freighted  by  him,  and  the  people  belonging  to  them,  should  be  edi 
at  aU  times,  whether  of  peace  or  war;  that  she  would  provide  hinv 


?hat  the  vessels  belonging 

tciiiwiiTO  o . , 1 iji  ®*’'’<-‘st  or  detention 