

This  agreement  was  confirmed  by  the  Emperor  Joseph  II.  who  authorized  them  to  raise  the  sum 
of  two  millions  of  florins,  the  proposed  capital  of  the  new  ‘‘  Imperial  Company  of  Trieste  for  the  Com- 
merce of  Asia.”  Proli  and  Co.  immediately  opened  subscriptions  to  complete  their  capital,  valuing  the 
present  stock  of  tlie  Company  at  1 ,()()0,(K)()  florins,  whereof  800,000  were  their  own,  and  200,000  the  pro- 
perty  of  Mr.  Bolts;  and  for  the  remaining  1,000,000,  they  invited  subscribers  to  take  sliares  of  10(X) 
florins  each.  They  appointed  tlieinselves  Directors  at  Antwerp,  and  Mr.  Bolts,  with  another,  Directors  at 
’^riestc;  and  they  reserved,  as  a compensation  to  themselves,  a commission  of  2 per  cent,  on  the  gross  sales 
**^^.uropc. 

t a meeting  of  proprietors,  held  at  Antwerp  in  September,  1781,  it  was  recommended,  in  conse- 
(picnce  0 jiiaritimc  powers  being  engaged  in  war,  to  send  out  as  soon  as  possible  six  ships  for  China 
and  Coast  of  Africa,  and  three  for  the  Southern  Whale  Fishery.  For  these  exten- 

sive outfits  proposed  to  borrow  a large  sum  of  money;  and  the  proprietors  present  authorized  them 
to  raise  a sum  ^ exceeding  the  amount  of  their  capital  subscribed.  The  Directors  immediately  began  to 
cfpiip  the  bhqis  t*  Trieste  and  Leghorn,  and  contracted  for  the  purchase  of  others  in 

England.  In  ^ reported  that  they  had  6,000,000  florins  and  six  ships  under  the  Imperial 

flag,  all  in  The  liopes  excited  by  the  bustle  attendant  on  these  preparations,  were  consi- 

derably dampe  y ^ rination  they  received  of  their  factory  at  Delagoa  Bay  being  destroyed  by  the 
Portuguese,  who  c aim  'overeignty  and  exclusive  commerce  of  the  East  Coast  of  Africa. 

In  this  year  five  s , ^ 

^ • b *d  3 428, Ostend,  which  had  been  declared  a free  port  in  1781,  from 

China,  having  on  oai  exclusive  of  China-ware  and  other  commodities.  This  fortu- 
nate arrival  was  ^ ^./^ompany’s  ship,  the  Imperial  Eagle,  having  on  board  a very 

valuable  cai  go,  eing  ^ harbour  of  Cadiz.  Many  of  the  proprietors  were  so 


OF  OSTEND  WITH  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


413 


dufheartencd  by  this  disaster,  that  they  sold  out  their  stock  at  near  40  per  cent,  below  par,  and  the  event 
soon  shewed  that  the  purchasers,  even  on  those  terms,  were  greater  suflerers  than  the  sellers;  for  In  the 
same  year  the  Company  were  declared  bankrupts  to  the  amount  of  1(),00(),()(K)  florins. 

1787.  Notwithstanding  the  Imperial  Company  were  in  such  a situation,  several  ships  were  sent  to 
India  from  Hamburgh,  Ostend,  Trieste,  I.eghorn,  and  several  other  ports,  laden  witli  large  quantities  of 
British  manufactures,  and  in  which  merchants  rc'^ident  in  London  were  interested,  by  which  the  markets 
were  so  overstocked,  that  most  of  those  concerned  in  these  adventures  were  ruined;  and  the  commanders 
and  officers  of  the  English  East  Indiamen  w’ere  sucli  sciious  sulTerers  by  this  unexpected  interference,  that, 
by  way  of  alleviation,  the  duties  upon  their  investments  were  remitted  by  the  Governments  in  India. 