

to  him,  or  freighted  by  him,  and  the  people  belonging  to  them,  should  b^ 

at  aU  times,  whether  of  peace  or  war;  that  she  would  provide  him/  f y , na 

would  take  care  to  obtain  redress  for  him,  if  attacked  or  molested.^^  connexion  with  a mercantile  house 
Having  thus  succeeded  in  obtaining  a charter,  Mr.  Bolts  f^p,  Leghorn  and  Trieste  and  th«e 

at  Antwerp,  Proli  and  Co.  They  agreed  to  fit  out  and  load  / ’ 


3G2 


H2 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Mr.  Bolts  should  proceed  to  India,  in  order  to  establish  factories,  and  conduct  the  business,  leaving  the 
charter  in  the  hands  of  his  partners,  with  authority  to  form  an  Indian  house  of  trade  at  Trieste.  He 
then  proceeded  to  London,  where  he  purchased  a ship,  and  sailed  for  Leghorn  in  March,  1776,  from 
whence  he  departed  for  India.  Having  settled  factories  at  Delagoa  Bay,  the  Nicobar  Islands,  and  on  the 
Malabar  Coast,  he  returned  with  three  ships  to  Leghorn,  where  he  arrived  in  May,  178L 

1781.  'Fhe  arrival  of  ships  laden  with  East  India  goods  in  his  dominions,  induced  the  Grand  Duke 
of  Tuscany  to  favour  Mr.  Bolts,  by  whose  exertions  this  measure  had  been  brought  about.  He  gave  him  a 
charter,  dated  May  20,  1781,  for  an  exclusive  trade  between  Tuscany  and  all  the  countries  beyond  the 
Cape  dc  Verd  Islands,  to  be  conducted  in  two  ships  under  Imperial  or  Tuscan  colours,  and  to  continue 
till  the  expiration  of  his  Imperial  charter. 

Immediately  that  Mr.  Bolts’s  arrival  at  Leghorn  became  known  to  his  creditors  in  various  parts  of 
Europe,  they  got  the  ships  and  cargoes  arrested.  This  measure  took  place  in  consequence  of  the  treachery 
of  his  partners,  who  had  refused  to  honour  the  bills  he  had  drawn  on  them  from  India,  and  who  left  him 
to  support  all  the  charges  he  had  incurred  in  forming  the  new  estahlislirnents.  Thus  circumstanced,  he 
was  under  the  necessity  of  transferring  the  Imperial  and  Tuscan  charters  to  his  partners,  in  order  to  raise 
a joint  stock  of  2,000,000  florins.  He  renounced  any  right  he  might  have  in  any  ships  they  had  sent  to 
China  during  his  absence,  except  a commission  of  2 per  cent,  on  the  gross  sales  of  the  cargoes;  «andhetook 
upon  himself  the  property  of  a ship  called  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  with  her  cargo,  which  had  been 
seized  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  1781.  In  return,  they  advanced  him  a sum  of  money  to  liquidate 
some  of  tlie  most  pressing  demands  upon  him,  for  which  they  took  security  upon  his  property  in  the  trade; 
it  was  also  stipulated  that  lie  might  for  once  send  two  ships  to  India  or  China  on  his  own  sole  account, 
only  [laying  to  them  6 per  cent,  on  the  gross  amount  of  the  sales  of  their  cargoes  in  Europe. 