

Since  that  period  ships  have  occasionally  visited  India,  under  some  of  the  above-enumerated  flags; 
but  the  regulations  which  took  place  on  the  renewal  of  the  English  EjinI  India  (’ompuny's  charter  in  1793, 
entirely  put  a stop  to  the  foreign  trade  carried  on  with  British  ea})ital;  and  the  foreign  merchants  not 
having  sufficient  property  to  curry  it  on,  it  is  now  entirely  at  an  end. 

MELIAPOTJH, 

Or  St.  Thome,  is  about  three  miles  to  the  southward  of  Madras.  This  town,  wdiich  lies  close  to  the 
sc&*slde,  is  almost  a hca[)  of  ruins.  There  arc  some  chnrehes,  especially  a catlietlral,  the  See  of  a Bishop 
Suffiragan  to  Goa,  and  in  whose  diocese  arc  all  the  Portuguese  churches  on  the  Goast  of  Coronmndcl. 

Inland  there  are  high  mountains,  the  northernmost  of  which  is  known  from  the  others  round  it,  hy 
being  rounder  and  flutter,  with  a church  built  t)ti  its  top.  This  is  called  St.  Thomas's  IMoimt,  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  which  are  the  country  houses  of  many  of  the  European  residents  in  Mailras. 

At  the  time  the  Portuguese  became  possessed  of  Meliapour,  it  was  quite  in  ruins;  they  changed  the 
name  of  it  to  St.  Thorne,  from  the  discovery  they  had  made  that  St.  Thomas  had  siiffered  martyrdom  near 
this  place.  Marco  Paulo,  who  visited  India  in  12G9,  reports  that  he  was  informcul  that  the  body  was 
deposited  in  a chapel  in  that  city.  It  w as  discovered  on  the  search  made  after  it  In  1.522,  and  the  remains 
n'ere  carried  to  Goa,  wdiere  they  w ere  interred  with  much  I’espert.  It  w^as  to  this  place  that  the  Bishop 
of  Sherborn  was  sent  by  King  Alfred,  and  returned  w ith  rich  gills  of  spices  and  pearls.  The  Portuguese 
rebuilt  the  city,  and  it  became  an  opulent  place,  Imt  it  declineil  on  the  rise  of  Madias. 

In  July,  1072,  St.  Thomas  was  taken  hy  the  French,  under  l)e  la  llayc.  In  1074  it  was  retaken 
by  the  Dutch,  and  given  up  to  the  King  of  Golconduh. 


END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


Phinted  by  S.  M^Dowall,  Leadesuall  Street. 


