

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS a

ence in which we not only manipulate one thing at a time, we give priority
attention only to those causes specifically relevant to the consequent of inter-
est (if and only if the hypothesized causal variable takes on the value x’,
then the effect occurs and everything else in the hypothesized world is pretty
much identical to the actual world),

Fearon’s proposal is open to challenge on the ground that it arbitrarily
rules out causes that, because of their location in complex systemic networks
of causation, do not have effects that can be conceptually isolated. For our
part, we see no easy resolution of the tension between the desire of meth-
odologists to “hold other things equal” and the insistence of latter-day Leib-
nizians that once we tamper with one element from the past, we have to
trace through the causal implications for all other elements, in effect creating
a full-fledged alternative world for each counterfactual. The argument is best
engaged on a case-by-case basis, with a minimum of metaphysical postur-
ing. Investigators should obviously be sensitive to systemic effects and be
precise about the implications of implementing their hypothesized causes in
hypothetical worlds. In some cases, the grounds for suspecting systemic
effects will be weak and the counterfactual exercise can approximate the
austere parsimony of the thought experiment; in other cases, the grounds for
suspecting systemic effects will be powerful and counterfactual exercises
will acquire the rich narrative trappings of scenario generation, with detailed
stories and subplots elaborated around why certain historical paths were not
taken and what would have had to be different to activate them (Chapter 12,
Weber).

2. Cotenability: Logical Consistency of Connecting Principles

Every counterfactual is a condensed or incomplete argument that requires
connecting principles that can sustain, but not imply, the conditional claim
(Goodman 1983). When explicitly articulated, these connecting principles
are often complex, even in the case of such seemingly simple counterfac-
tuals as “If the match had been scratched, it would have lighted.” The con-
necting principles specify, within reasonable limits, everything else that
would have to be true to sustain the counterfactual, including the necessary
amount of friction generated by the scratch, the chemical composition of the
match, the absence of water, the presence of oxygen, and so forth.

In our view, connecting principles should satisfy three minimal criteria.
‘They should be specified reasonably precisely, be consistent with each
other, and be consistent with both the antecedent and consequent. Unfor-
tunately, as several contributors point out, counterfactual arguments in
world politics often fail the first test so badly that it is impossible to tell how
well they might have fared against the second and third tests. Focusing on

