

fifteen years been employed in conducting our 
relations with the Sikh chiefs on the British side 
of the Sutlej, for a report upon the subject. Cap- 
tain Wade, the Assistant at Loodeeana, who 
had latterly been entrusted with the subordi- 
nate charge, under the Resident at Dehlee, of 
the correspondence with Runjeet Singh, was 
similarly called upon, and both officers submit- 
ted voluminous reports, containing valuable 
information on all the points required. That of 
Captain Murray seemed to be the result of 



\^" 



Vv 



PREFACE. Vll 

much reading and research, and to be prepared 
from materials collected during the whole period 
of his residence amongst the Sikhs. He had 
evidently consulted with care all the Persian 
and other books, that afford any insight into 
the history of the Sikhs, or of the Moghul and 
Afghan officers who came into contact or colli- 
sion with them ; while his account of the rise 
and fortunes of Runjeet Singh appeared to 
have been compiled from the reports and verbal 
information of intelligent persons who had served 
under him, corrected and tested by a laborious 
examination of the Akhbars or native news- 
papers, files of which were recorded in his 
office : a valuable Appendix was added, contain- 
ing the result of his personal observations and 
enquiries into the habits, customs, rules, and 
observances of the Sikhs. The report was 
defective in arrangement, being put together 
with no view to publication, but unfortunately 
this highly esteemed and distinguished officer 
died very soon after the Governor General 
visited those parts, when it was his Lordship's 
intention to have requested him to prepare from 
his expose, a volume calculated to diffuse the 
information he had collected, and to give public 
and general utility to the result of his labours. 

There is no doubt, that, if this officer had 
lived, the work would have been executed in a 



Vlll PREFACE* 



manner worthy of his abilities. His sudden 
death has rendered it necessary, that what he 
left incomplete, and had put together in haste, 
without due order, or arrangement, or regard to 
the accuracies of style, should be completed and 
revised by another hand. The whole of the his- 
torical part of his report has required to be re- 
written : The arrangement has been partially 
altered, and the narrative has been cast into 
chapters in the form it now assumes, besides 
which there is new matter added from Captain 
Wade's report and from other sources. It has 
hence been impossible to place Captain Mur- 
ray's name on the title-page as the author, so as 
to make him responsible, before the public, for 
what he never saw or approved. It will how- 
ever be understood that, except in the tenth and 
eleventh Chapters of Continuation, the task of 
the Compiler of the following pages has been 
merely that of redacteur^ and that the merit of 
having collected the information, which gives to 
the work any interest or value it may possess, 
belongs almost entirely to Captain Murray. 
Indeed, next to the desire to rescue from the 
oblivion of a record-oflSce, information calcu- 
lated to be so extensively useful, and to give to 
the Public, access to what had been collected 
with so much labour and research, the motive 
that has principally influenced the Compiler to 
undertake the preparation of this volume for 