

H. T. P. 

Calcutta^ May, 1834. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

PA6B 

Affairs of the Punjah on the decline qf the Dehlee Sovereignty to the 
Battle qf Paneeput and separation of the territory from Hindoostan, 1 

CHAPTER II. 

Operations qf the Afghans in the Punjab, The condition of the Sikh 
associations, and the rise and exploits of the principal Chiefs and 
Misuls, The Puryab abandoned to them by the Afghans. Their 
proceedings for the occupation qf the territory, 21 

CHAPTER III. 

Feuds and contentions qf the Sikhs, Rise and fall qf different Chi^s. 
The history of Churut Singh and Maha Singh, ancestors of Rur\jeet 
Singh, traced to the death qf the latter, and Runjeet*s assumption qf 
the direction qf affairs, 38 

CHAPTER IV. 

The early administration of Rutyeet Singh, His aggrandizement at 
the expense qf other Sikh Sirdars, to his treaty with the British 
Gotemment, and exclusion from the countries east qf the SutUj, • • 60 



XIV CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER V. 

British arrangements with the Chi^s east of the Sutl^, Transactions 
in the Punjab tending to the further aggrandizement qf Rut^eet 
Singhy 71 

CHAPTER VI. 

Marriage qf Khuruk Singh, the heir-apparent of Rur^eet Singh, attend' 

ed by Colonel Ochterlony. Acquisition of the Kohi-noor Diamond 

from Shah Shooja. Severe treatment and flight qf that Prince to 

Loodeeana* Conquest qf Kashmeer, by Futeh Khan Vuzeer, and 

acquisition of Attuk, by Rwyeet Singh, 89 

CHAPTER VII. 

First expedition of Runjeet Singh against Kashmeer, Fails, Failure 
qf Runjeet Singh's health. Expedition against, and capture qf 
Mooltan, The army deprived of its plunder. Death of Futeh Khan, 
Vuzeer qf Kabool, Runjeet Singh*s advance to Peshawar, 104 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Second expedition and conqtiest of Kashmeer, Arrangements for conso- 
lidating the Sikh authority in the kills. Conquests on the Indus, 
Arrival and entertainment qf French Officers. Disgrace and confine- 
ment qf Suda Koonwur, Runjeet* s Mother-in-law, 121 

CHAPTER IX. 

OperaJtions in Peshaumr, Affair with a party qf Moosulman fanatics, 
Mohummud Uzeem Khan retires and leaves Peshawur to Rur^jeet 
Singh, Death of that Chi^-^also qf Sunsar Chund, Disturbances 
in the Gundgurh Mountains, Yar Mohummud confirmed as Governor 
for Ruf^eet Singh at Peshawur, Futeh Singh Aloowala retires from 
the Durbar, Rise of Seyud Ahmed, the Mohammedan Saint and 
reformer, troubles occasioned by him, Unrodh Chund of Kangra 
moved to a discreditable alliance, flies across the SutleJ. His pos- 
sessions seized. Further disturbances and troubles from Seyud 
Ahmed, His defeat and death, • 136 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER X. 



Missim of Lieutenant Bume8 with a present qf dray horses for Run- 
jeei Singh. His journey through Sindh, and up the Indus and Ravee 
to Lahdr. Mission to Lord William Bentinck at Shimla, Meeting 
arranged between the Governor General and Runjeet Singh. Takes 
place in October 1831. Commercial Treaty concluded between the 
British Government and Sindh, • . • . 152 