



A. D. 1745-6. INTRIGUES AT LAiHOR. S 

persons who invoked the name of GooRooGoviND, and 
a reward was offered for the heads of his disciples. This 
rigoar and summary proscription checked the progress 
ef Sikh proselytism, and the enthusiasm of the votaries 
of the Gooroo was considerably diminished. Many cut 
their long hair and curtailed their flowing beards to avoid 
detection and death, and others fled across the Sutlej 
into the adjoining province of Sirhind, where they found 
protection or concealment in the wide wastes which lie 
to the west of Puteeala and Naba. 

Not long after this event, the younger brother of 
YuHEEA Khan, by name Shah Nuwaz Khan, rose 
in insurrection against him, and succeeded in establishing 
himself in the two provinces of Lah6rand Mooltan, mak- 
ing prisoner Yuheea Khan, with all his state officers. 
He nominated a Hindoo, named Kaonra Mul, to be 
Dewan in lieu of Lukhput Raee, but left Adeena 
Beg Khan, who had risen under his father Zukareea 
Khan, and governed with much vigour the difficult 
district of the Jalundhur Dooab, in both civil and mili- 
tary charge of that tract. Yuheea Khan escaped 
from Itabdr, and hastening to Dehlee, laid his com- 
plaint before the Vnzeer, his uncle Kumur-ood-deen 
Khan, who was at the same time privately informed, 
that Shah Nuwaz Khan, in fear of the consequences 
of his act, had opened a correspondence with Ahmed 
Shah Abdalee. The Shah had recently seized Kabool 
and Peshawur in ejection of the Dehlee Soobahdar, 
Nasir Khan, an event that had excited much alarm 
at the capital. The Vuzeer availing himself of his 
relationship appealed to his nephew's sense of honor, and 
addressed to him a strong remonstrance on his defection 



9 LAHOR TAKEN BY AHMED SHAH. A. D. 1747, 

from allegiance^ desiring him not to seek the degrada- 
tion of serving Ahmed, the pusool or mace-bearer of 
Nadir, but to be faithful to the hereditary sovereign of 
his family and race. The young man's pride was touch* 
ed, and although doubtful what might be the issue of the 
complaint of his elder brother, he prepared himself 
to oppose the advance of the Dooranees, and with- 
drew from further correspondence with Ahmed Shah. 
Undeterred by this change of counsels, the Abdalee 
crossed the Indus near the fort of Attuk, in the year 
1747, and sent his domestic priest, Sabir Shah, in 
advance to Lah6r, hoping through his negotiations or 
intrigues to bind Shah Nuwaz Khan to his first offers, 
or at all events to secure a friendly reception to his army. 
Shah Nuwaz, however, was now staunch in his alle- 
giance to Dehlee, and placed himself in the best posture 
of defence his scanty means would permit. He further 
gave to his court a pledge of fidelity by causing the 
agent of the Abdalee to be murdered. Ahmed Shah 
was greatly incensed at this violence done to the person 
of his ambassador and confidential servant, and crossing 
the Ravee, inarched immediately to attack Shah Nuwaz 
Khan in the entrenched position he had taken up undec 
the walls of Lahdr. The resistance offered was slight; 
the defences were soon mastered by the Dooranee war-r 
riors, and Shah Nuwaz escaping fled to Dehlee; the 
city of Labor was shortly after reduced, and its resources 
fell a prey to the Abdalee, who raised there a heavy 
contribution. 