



JL. n. 1743. THE SIKHS GROW FORMIDABLE. 3 

that religion. The long hair on the head, and flowing 
beard, the entire renunciation of tobacco, and the use 
of the audible salutation of " Wah Gooroo-jee he futehy* 
(victory to Gooroo jee,) proclaimed that the ploughshare 
had been exchanged for the avenger's sword, and that 
the maxims and precepts of the grunth of GooROO 
GoviND had prevailed over the more peaceable doc- 
trines of the vedas and shastras of pure Hindooism. 
The spirit of the revived sect displayed itself at first 
in secret association and isolated acts of depredation. 
Bodies of armed men, in tens and twenties, called 
Dharwee in the dialect of the province, that is, high- 
waymen, infested the routes of communication, attacked 
villages or plundered in towns, according as their local 
connections invited to either mode of seeking wealth or 
the means of support. The early neglect of the ruling 
authority enabled the associations to prosper, and the 
most successful chiefs purchased horses with the proceeds 
of their spoil, and mounted and armed their followers. 
Their example and success made the cause popular with 
the young and adventurous, so that the number who took 
to these courses augmented daily, until the chiefs formed 
their respective dehras or encampments in open defiance 
of the ruling authority, and sought celebrity by bold and 
hardy enterprizes, which gave security in the awe they 
inspired, while the wealth and reputation resulting 
afforded the means of further strengthening themselves. 
The distractions of the Moghul empire, and the intrigues 
and imbecilities of the vice-regal court at Lah6r, gave 
encouragement to the system pursued, not only by the 
neglect to punish, but by the occasional availment of 
the services of individual chiefs, so that many of them 
assumed an organized martial appearance, and not con tent 

A 2 



4 THE SIKHS DEFEATED AND PROSCRIBED. A. D. 1744-4& 

with ravagiDg the open country, approached the sacred 
reservoir of tlie Sikhs at Umritsur and maintained them- 
selves in that vicinity. The different associations were 
united by common interest, no less than by the professioa 
of a new faith ; and a system of general confederation 
for defence, or for operations requiring more than single 
efforts, was earfy arranged between the chiefs. 

' The evil had spread and had acquired some head b€^- 
fore the attention of the Governor Yuheea Khan was 
sufficiently roused to induce him to make an exertion to 
put it down. At length, however, his revenue failing 
from these disorders, he sent out a small detachment of 
government troops under command of Jusput Raeb, 
brother of his Dewan or prime minister, Lukhput 
Raee. They proceeded first against a body of insurgent 
Sikhs who were devastating the country, and driving off 
the flocks and herds in the vicinity of Yumeenabad, 
which lies to the North of Lahdr. The detachment was 
overpowered, and JuspUT Raee being slain, his men 
dispersed. Lukhput Raee Dewan, however, hastened 
from Lah6r to avenge his brother's death, and the insur- 
gents retreated before him into the north eastern corner of 
the Punjab, where he inflicted on them a severe chastise- 
ment. The Dewan brought back with him many prison- 
ers, whose heads were struck off without remorse in the 
Ghora-Nukhas, or horse market, outside the city wall of 
Lah6r. The spot is now called by the Sikhs *' Shuheed- 
gunf" the place of martyrs, in memory of this event, 
and a sumadh ox tomb has been erected there in honor of 
the Bhaee Jaroo Singh, which marks the site. After 
this success a proclamation was issued in the name of 
the Grovernbr Yuheea Khan, denouncing death to all 