

CHAPTER XI. 

The character and policy qf Rur^eet Singh, His revenues. Strength 
of his army. General observations, 178 

APPENDIX. 

On the Manners, Rules, and Customs qf the Sikhs, By Captain 
W. Murray , , 191 



CHAPTER FIRST.* 



A. D. 1742 to 1761. 



Affairs of the Punjab on the decline of the Dehlee 
Sovereignty to the Battle of Paneeput and separation 
of the territory from Hindoostan. 

Xhe empire founded in Hindoostan by Babur, and 
supported by the vigour and abilities of several genera- 
tions of celebrated Princes, fell speedily to dissolution 
after the accession of MoHUMMUD Shah. The invasion 
of Nadir Shah gave a violent shock to its stability, 
which was already undermined by the growing power of 
the Mahrattas ; and the inroads of the Abdalee, Ahmed 
Shah, though made in support of the faith of Mohum- 
MUD, and successful in checking that reaction of Hindoo 
vigour, which threatened at the time to overwhelm it, 
accelerated nevertheless the fall of the house of Tymoor, 

* This Chapter is entirely from Captain Murray, who has the merit of 
being the^ first to collect and put together in a consistent narrative, the 
loose fragments and materials that exist, in respect to the events in the 
Punjab at this period. 



2 YUHEEA KHAN VICEROY OF LAHOR. A. D. 1742. 

which he uniformly treated with neglect and humiliation. 
The court of Dehlee ceased thenceforward to be looked 
up to as the source of protection, of honors, or of punish- 
ments. The satraps, and officers, nominally acting under 
its authority, assumed every where independence: the 
provinces were dismembered^ and a spirit of disafifection 
was roused in all parts of the empire. The history of 
Hindoostan ceases from this period to be that of any 
ruling dynasty, and must be traced in the detail of the 
events of each province, and in the transactions, by 
which the several Nuwabs, Rajas, and Princes, — the 
sects, nations or associations of chiefs, rose each in turn 
to power, in displacement of the royal authority, and in 
successful rivalry with one another. It is the object of 
the following pages to collect and exhibit in continuous 
narrative, the occurrences of this description in the 
Punjab, and to trace the rise of the chief who now 
sways the destinies of that province, and of a large bor- 
dering territory, with a vigour of authority, unknown to 
any other part of India, not subject to the dominion of 
^Europeans. 

YuHEEA Khan, the son of Zukareea Khan, 
commonly styled Khan Buhadoor, held the viceroyalty 
of Lah6r, when the J4t Zumeendars of the Punjab em- 
poverished by long extortion, and driven at last to 
desperation, took to rapine and plunder for the support of 
themselves and families, and as a bond of union and ex- 
citement against their oppressors revived in their customs 
and ceremonies, the latent flame of the Sikh ritual. They 
proclaimed the faith and tenets of GoviND Singh, the 
last acknowledged Gooroo or spiritual guide of the Sikhs, 
and took the Paiul of initiation into the mysteries of 