



PREFACE. IX 

the press, has been the wish to do honor to this 
distinguished and lamented officer, and to lay 
before his friends, and the world, a lasting testi- 
mony of his worth and talents. 

The task has been performed during the 
leisure of a sea voyage and residence in Van 
Diemen's Land for health. Nothing has since 
been added, and the narrative accordingly termi- 
nates abruptly with the Treaties concluded by 
the British Government with Sindh in 1832. 
It would doubtless have cost little additional 
trouble to have introduced another chapter 
bringing down the course of events to the pre- 
sent day (1834 ;) but to do so would have required 
a resort to records, and to documents not legiti- 
mately within the Compiler's reach, or familiar 
to his recollection, and from their connection 
with passing transactions, not ripe probably for 
public exhibition. To such, therefore, he has 
not sought access, and after all, until the career 
of the Ruler of the Punjab shall have reach- 
its natural term, the close of the narrative must 
have been equally abrupt, wheresoever the 
line had been drawn. It has hence appear- 
ed preferable to let the curtain drop for the 
present, at the marked epoch of the conclu- 
sion of the Treaties referred to, which were 
published in the past year, reserving what may 

b 



X PREFACE. 

follow, to the date of the decease of the promi- 
nent character of the work, to be added here- 
after, in case at any future period the public 
should take sufficient interest in the affairs of 
the Punjab, to call for a renewed publication. 

/ It may be proper to add, that while the first part 

of this work was already in the Printer's hands, 
a Persian account of the affairs of the Sikhs 
in the Punjab, was obligingly communicated to 
the Compiler by Sir Charles Metcalfe. The 
manuscript had been delivered to Sir Charles 

> by its author, Khooshwuqt Raee, who was for 
many years the Agent and Intelligencer of the 
British Government at Umritsur. The narra- 
tive comes down to 1812 only, but is very full 
in respect to the early history of the Sikh Sir- 
dars, and contains much information and useful 
matter, not to be found elsewhere. The oppor- 
tunity which was thus presented of comparing 
an original work of this kind with the Memoir 
of Captain Murray, has not been lost. The 
result has afforded a satisfactory corroboration 
of the accuracy of this officer : indeed, the corres- 
pondence of date and circumstance in many 
important particulars leads almost to the con- 
clusion, that Khooshwuqt Raee's narrative must 
have been amongst the materials from which 
the Memoir was prepared. Some occasional 



PREFACE. XI 

discrepancies and additional facts or illustrations 
have been noted separately at the close of the 
volume. The Compiler's grateful acknowledg- 
ments are particularly due to Sir Charles 
Metcalfe, for the liberal frankness with which 
so valuable a material has been made available 
to improve and correct this publication, and it 
is to the same high quarter, that he is indebted 
for access to the materials from which the Map 
has been constructed, which is prefixed to the 
volume. 