

Ahmed Shah when at Dehlee in the train of Nadir 
Shah, had not been an inattentive observer of the state 
of things at ithat Court. The imbecility of Mohummud 



A. D. 1748. HIS FURTHER ADVANCE OPPOSED. 7 

Shah^ the overgrown power, the discords and intrigaes 
of the great Ameers or grandees, and the little obedi- 
ence paid to the royal authority at the capital as well 
as in the interior, had not failed to attract his attention, 
and the confusion likely to follow the departure of the 
invading army, afforded matter of speculation for an 
ambitious man seeking where eventually to push his own 
fortune. The unparalleled success which had attended 
his first efforts in Afghanistan, and the advantage to 
which he systematically turned his present means in 
laying the foundation of future grandeur, encouraged 
him to hope from what he saw and heard of the condition 
of things at Dehlee, that the time was favorable for an 
attempt to erect for himself an empire on the ruins of 
that of the house of TvMOOR. Having mastered Lahdr^ 
therefore, he determined on an immediate advance towards 
Dehlee, and crossing the Beah and Sutlej without oppo-» 
fiition, approached Sirhind. 

The Vuzeer Kumur-ood-deen Khan was not defi-^ 
cient in energy, and made preparation to meet the invader. 
Calling out the principal chiefs of Rajpootana with their 
respective quotas, he placed the king's eldest son Prince 
Ahmed in nominal command, and with this force and the 
troops at the capital took up an intrenched position at 
the village of Munoopoor, nine miles from Sirhind. The 
Abdalee Shah having reconnoitered the position deemed 
himself too weak to attempt a storm of the works : en-* 
camping in the neighbourhood therefore, he directed his 
efforts against the supplies of the Dehlee army, and sent 
detachments to cut off convoys and intercept the commu- 
nications with the capital. This led to continual skir-^ 
mishes and partial engagements^ which amused both 



8 RETREAT OF AHMED SHAH. A. D. 1748* 

armies for a moDth without producing any thiug decisive. 
An event however then occurred that brought about an 
immediate change in the aspect of things. The Vnzeer 
was killed whilst at evening prayers by a random shot 
from the Dooranee artillery, and from that time forward 
there ceased to be any commander in chief in the Dehlee 
camp. The Rajpoot chiefs who had come upon his invi- 
tation, and were held together by his influence and repu- 
tation, feeling confidence in no other leader, began to 
desert the royal standard, and retired to their respective 
estates. The Abdalee hearing of this deemed the moment 
favorable to assume the offensive, and ordered an attack, 
notwithstanding the inferiority of his numbers. A panic 
fell on the imperial army and disorder began to spread in 
the camp. Meer Munoo, however, son of the deceased 
Vuzeer, seized the critical moment, and bringing a body 
of fresh troops to the points assailed, led them himself 
to the charge, and repulsed the Dooranees with consi- 
derable slaughter ; so much so that Ahmed Shah deemed 
it necessary to relinquish his designs for the present, 
and retired precipitately across the Punjab in order to 
repair his losses. His retreat was unmolested, and he 
recrossed the Attuk without making any effort to main- 
tain his footing at Lah6r. The Punjab was thus reco- 
vered for the Moghul, and the Government of Lah6r and 
Mooltan was conferred by the Dehlee Court on Meer 
Munoo, with the title of Mooyyunool-Moolk, in re- 
ward andacknowledgmentof his service on this important 
occasion. 