



Jk. B. 1762. EXCESSES AGAINST THE SIKHS. 25 

Maldr Kotila, who was in the action, that the entire 
killed and wounded of the Sikhs in this battle did not 
exceed 12,000. The want of master-rolls and the irregular 4 
formation of Indian armies, which are always mere asso^* 
ciations of chiefs, all representing their force larger than 
the reality, must necessarily make it difficult, if notimpos- 
sible, ever to ascertain the real loss sustained in action. 
This disaster is however characterised in Sikh tradition, 
as the GhuloO'Ghara or bloody carnage; Ala Singh, 
of Puteeala, chief of the Phool family, was made prisoner 
at Bnrnala, and carried by the Shah to Lahdr. There, 
at the intercession of Shah Wuleb Khan the minister, 
he was released npon an engagement to pay tribute, 
and his manly conduct and demeanour having secured 
him the Shah*s favor, he was honored with the title of 
Raja, and dismissed with a rich dress of state. 

The Shah in irritation against the sect for the trouble 
they had given iiim, not less than from bigotted zeal against 
all idolaters and infidels, signalized his march through 
Umritsur, by the demolition of the Sikh temf^le of Hur- 
mnndur and of the saored reservoir. The first was blown 
up with gnn-powder, s^d the reservoir, beisides being de- 
faced and filled np as far as materials and time permit- 
ted, was poUated with the blood and entirails of cows 
and bullocks^ a sacrilege Bven greater in the eyes of the 
schismatic disciple of GooROO Govind than of the 
Qfthodox Brahminical Hindoo. 

The Shah's attention was now turned towards Kash- 
meer, where his Governor Sookh Jeewun had for 
nine years conducted the administration without remitr 
ting any portion of the revenues to the Royal treasury. 

D 



26 THE SIKHS TAKE SIRHIND A. D. 1769>« 

The co-operation of Run j est Dbo» Riga of Jammoo, 
having been secured with some difficalty» a strong de- 
tachment was sent from Lah6r ander command of NooR- 
OOD-DEEN, and the Raja conducted it across the Peer 
Punjal mountains into the valley, which submitted after 
a slight resistance. Sookh Jeewun being made pri- 
soner, was punished with the loss of his eyes. Ahmed 
Shah having made these arrangements to secure his 
territory east of the Indus, returned to Kabool at the 
end of the year 1762. He left Kabulbb Mul, a 
Hindoo, as his Governor of Lah6r. 

No sooner had the Abdalee departed, than the Sikhs 
re-appeared in the field. A Goormutta, or council of the 
sect, was held publicly at Umritsur, and a large body of 
them marched thence to Kusoor, (or K&soor,) which was 
taken and sacked, and yielded a considerable booty. 
Elate with this success they collected a larger force, and 
determined on the attack of Sirhind. They appeared 
before the place with 40,000 men, who encamped in two 
divisions, to the east and west of the town. In the 
month of December 1763, the Governor and Zyn Khan 
moved out to risk an action with the Sikhs* The forces 
joined battle at Peer Zyn Munayra, a village about seven 
miles east of Sirhind, when fortune favored the Sikhs, 
and the Moosulman leaders were slain. The town of 
Sirhind was then carried, and most of the buildings 
razed to the ground, the Sikh animosity against t)^e 
place being excited by the recollection, that the wife and 
infant son of their saint GooROO GoviND had there 
been inhumanly put to death by VuzEER Khan, the 
governor for Aurungzeeb. Not a house was left standing, 
and it is even to this day deemed a meritorious act by a 