

The invasion of the Abdalee, and the occupation of 
the forces on both sides in the struggle for empire 
on the plains of Sirhind, were favorable to the further 



A. D. 1748. AHMED SHAH RETURNS. 9 

rise of the Sikhs, whose depreciations were for the 
interval unchecked, and who again showed themselves 
by day, and ventured even to satisfy their religious pre- 
judices by stolen visits to the shrines of their faith at 
Umritsur. The new Governor of Lahdr, Meer Munoo, 
confirmed Kaonra Mul in the ojBSce of Dewan, and 
found the disorders created by these associations, and by 
fanatics of the sect who sprung up in numbers, to be one 
of the first objects requiring his attention. A small party 
of Sikhs had the audacity to throw up a mud work which 
they called Ram-Rounee, (but which having been since 
enlarged is now called Ramgurh) in the district and im- 
mediate vicinity of Umritsur, and Sikh plunderers 
scoured the country in all directions. Meer Munoo 
surrounded and captured Ram-Rounee, and stationed de- 
tachments to preserve the peace of the country, who had 
orders to detain all Sikhs, and to shave their heads and 
beards. By these energetic measures the public confi- 
dence was restored: the Sikhs were again compelled to 
fly the country or hide their heads, and proselytes to 
their faith and habits became more rare. 

Ahmed Shah Abdalee had retired only to recruit his 
strength, and was by no means inclined to relinquish his 
designs on Hindoostan. In the following season from 
that of his first invasion, that is, after the close of the 
rains of 1748, he again crossed the Indus, and inter- 
rupted all Meer Munoo's plans for establishing himself 
in his government and better ordering its administration. 
Being apprehensive that his force was too weak to resist 
the invader, he applied to Dehlee for reinforcements, and 
in order to gain time sent a mission to the Abdalee camp 
to ofier terms of compromise and negociate for the Shah's 

B 



10 ENTERPRIZE OF SHAH NUWAZ KHAN. A. D. 1749, 

retirement. He followed up this measure by himself 
moving out of Lah6r, and pitched his camp at Sondhura^ 
on the south bank of the Chun^b. This state of prepara- 
tion and the known character of the Lah6r viceroy 
deterred the Abdalee for the time from attempting to 
force his way into Hindostan. He was content there- 
fore to accept a promise of the revenue of the four 
districts, Pursuroor, Goojrat, Se^l-Kot, and Aurungabad, 
which had formerly been assigned to Nadir Shah, and 
then retraced his steps toKabooI. 

This success of Meer Munoo and the credit resulting 
excited envy in the grandees at Dehlee, and instead of 
meeting further reward from the court, an intrigue there 
deprived him of the government of M ooltan, which was 
conferred on Shah Nuwaz Khan. The viceroy in 
possession, however, was not of a temper to submit 
patiently to such supercession, and he detached his 
minister Kaon R A Mul to oppose the new governor. 
Shah Nuwaz Khan advanced to the frontier of Mool- 
tan, with a force collected for the purpose of securing his 
investiture, but finding himself overmatched could pro- 
ceed no farther. For about six months he maintained 
himself on the frontier without any thing decisive occur- 
ring, but at the end of that time he was induced to 
hazard a battle with theDewan, in which he was defeated 
and slain. Meer Munoo created Kaonra Mul Raja 
for this service, and invested him with the subordinate 
charge of Mooltan and the adjoining districts. 