

As might be expected, Meer Munoo failed to remit 
to Kabool the revenues of the four districts stipulated, and 
the Abdalee Ahmed Shah had thus a pretext for again 



A, D. 1751, AHMED SHAH'S THIRD INVASION. 11 

crossiDg the Indus, which he did in the season 1751-2, 
and advanced to the right bank of the Chunab. SooKH 
Jeewun, a Hindoo, was sent thence to Lah6r to demand 
thefuifilnientof the engagement. Meer MuNOO replied, 
that the promise had been made in the exigency of the 
moment, and he did not look upon himself as bound to 
abide by the strict letter, but free to act according to cir- 
cumstances. He offered, however, to pay now what might 
be due, upon the condition of the Dooranee army being 
immediately withdrawn. Not expecting this offer to be 
accepted, Meer Munoo called in Adeena Beg Khan 
and Raja Kaonra Mul with their respective forces, to 
Labor, where an intrenched camp was prepared at Sbah- 
durra in the environs. He himself advanced to meet the 
Abdalee, and retired before him as he moved eastward un- 
til both chiefs approached Labor, when the viceroy entered 
his entrenched position under the walls of the city. For 
four months he maintained himself in this post, and was 
proof against every endeavour of the Shah to entice him 
out of his entrenchment. The blockade maintained was 
however strict, and supplies then began wholly to fail. 
The only food or forage for the horses and ammunition 
cattle consisted of chopped straw from the roofs of huts 
and bazars, and grain and flour were selling at an exor- 
bitant price. A council of war was called in this emer- 
gency, when Adeena Beg gave it as his opinion that as 
no succour or reinforcement could be expected from 
Dehlee, an action ought to be risked before their pro- 
visions wholly failed, as might be expected in a few days, 
if the blockade continued. Raja Kaonra Mul was 
opposed to this advice, he observed that the Viceroy's 
troops were mostly raw levies, who were no match in the 
field for the hardy veterans of the Shah. That the 

» 2 



12 MEER MUNOO DEFEATED. A. D. 176^. 

country for a wide space ronnd had been foraged and 
wasted, and the distress for provisions was not less in 
the Dooranee camp than in their own — that in twenty 
days more the hot weather would set in, when the 
northern troops of the Shah would find the sun and wind 
intolerable in the plains, and hence would be compelled 
to retreat or to attack them in their lines to disadvantage. 
There can be no doubt that the advice of the Hindoo was 
the preferable and more prudent course, but the viceroy 
was young, and not free from the impatience and impe* 
tuosity of youth, and the opinion of Adeena Beg fell 
more in accordance with his own disposition. Early in 
the morning therefore of the 12th April 1752, his army 
moved from its lines and took up ground on an elevated 
spot marked by an old brick-kiln. The Shah prepared 
immediately for action. His artillery was ordered to 
advance, and a cannonade was kept up between the two 
armies until the afternoon, when the Shah observing 
some confusion ordered a charge by a select body of 
cavalry, which was so far successful as to induce Meer 
MuNOO to retire again within his entrenchments. In the 
retreat Raja Kaonra Mul's elephant chanced to tread 
on an old grave, the earth of which sinking strained and 
nearly disabled the animal. Before the Mahout could 
extricate him, the Raja was overtaken and slain by a 
Dooranee horseman, and his loss, when it came to be 
known in the entrenched camp, occasioned a panic and 
desertion so general, that the viceroy was compelled, by 
diminished numbers, to retire within the city wall. In this 
exigency Adeena Beg Khan abruptly withdrew with 
his troops, and Meer Munoo, finding the fortifications of 
the city out of repair and untenable, was induced to yield 
to circumstances^ and tendered his submission to the Shah. 