



A. D. 1756. AHMED SHAH MA.RCHES TO DEHLEE. 16 

traversed the Punjab and entered even the imperial city 
without experiencing the smallest opposition. His 
detachments plundered Muthra and threatened the city 
of Agra, and the Shah having formed a matrimonial con- 
nexion with the family of Tymoor, laid the capital under 
heavy contribution, and confiscated to his own use the 
property of the grandees and principal inhabitants. His 
cupidity being thus satisfied, he retired, leaving the 
throne of the Moghul in the same weak hands, and 
helpless condition in which he found it. But he seized 
on the Punjab and Sirhind, and gave the government of 
both provinces to his son Tymoor, with whom he left 
bis confidential officer Juhan Khan and a detachment 
of troops of no great strength, and then returned to 
Kabool. 

Since the death of MfiER MuNOO, Adeena Beg 
Khan had assumed entire independence in his subordi- 
nate government in the Jalundhur Dooab, and had appro- 
priated the revenues to his personal use and in providing 
the means of maintaining himself. One of the first acts 
of the young Prince Tymoor was to summon this chief 
to Lahdr as a dependant of his government. The wary 
veteran however evaded prompt compliance, alleging the 
necessity of his presence in his districts to check the 
increasing audacity of the Sikhs who were encamped in 
his vicinity, and, were he to desert his post, might secure 
a permanent hold in the country. The Afghan Prince 
not satisfied with this excuse, sent a detachment of his 
troops to seize Adeena Beg, whereupon the latter 
strengthened himself by association with the Sikhs, of 
whom he took a considerable body into pay, and with 
them retired before the Afghans into the northern 



16 ADEENA BEG SUCCOURED BY HOLKUR. A. D. 1756-57. 

hills. Being now fully committed with the Dooranees^ 
his mind, fertile in resources, sought the means of suc- 
cour and relief in a quarter, which would not readily 
have occurred to another. He applied to the Muhrattas^ 
whose reputation for enterprize and daring adventure 
was then high, and whose chiefs were at the time encamp- 
ed near Dehlee. He stipulated for the payment of 9 
daily sum for their aid, and pointed out the rich harvest 
of spoil that was within their reach. The expedition was 
entered upon with alacrity, and MuLH AR Rao Holkur, 
with some other chiefs of that nation, marched immediate- 
ly for the Punjab, where they were joined on passing the 
Sutlej by Adeena Beg, with a swarm of Sikh plunderers, 
and the whole advanced rapidly on Lahdr. The Prince 
Tymoor and Juhan Khan were unable to stem this 
torrent of invasion, and retired precipitately to the Indus. 
Their retreat was harassed by frequent attacks, and most 
of their baggage taken. The Muhrattas then overran the 
whole country, and their main body returned to Dehlee, 
but a detachment of this nation was left in the occupation 
of Labor. 

Adeena Beg Khan did not long survive this event. 
He died in 1758, having latterly, and indeed for a long 
time, played a very conspicuous part in the diplomacy of 
the Punjab and Hindoostan. His address, experience, 
and extensive knowledge recommended him early to the 
notice of the viceroys, who in succession ruled Lah6r: 
under them he rose through the gradations of ojQGice, 
nntil his services were at last recompensed by the dele- 
gated administration of a troublesome but very fertile 
region. During a season of unusual disorder and diffi* 
culty, he maintained his station^ and kept his territory 