



A. D. 1758. HIS DEATH AND CHARACTER. 17 

prosperous and profitable : while in the midst of strug- 
gles for dominion between contending nations, and in the 
conflict of parties, and the intrigues of chiefs, all stronger 
than himself, he contrived to acquire something at every 
change, and availed himself of every opportunity to ag- 
grandize and strengthen his power, with a depth of cunning, 
and a readiness which gained for him a high reputation 
for wisdom. He was a master of the arts and shifts of 
Indian diplomacy. The Sikhs he amused, and secured 
immunity from their depredations, by occasionally paying 
for their services, and he would even buy their forbear- 
ance when too weak to coerce them. When his ruin was 
determined upon by the Abdalee Afghans, he bribed 
the Muhrattas to enter the field against them, and by this 
means eflfected the expulsion of the prince, who drove 
him to such extremity, together with his minister, whom 
be suspected as the instigator of the mischief. How he 
would have played his part in the great struggle impend- 
ing between the Muhrattas and Abdalee Afghans can 
only be surmised, death having saved him from the 
vengeance or politic mercy of the Shah. He left no issue 
or successor to perpetuate his name and authority, but his 
memory lives in the Punjab, and he is respected even by 
the Sikhs as the last of the Moghul rulers in their country. 

The Muhrattas were now the ruling power of Hindoo- 
Stan ; their forces traversed the country, from the 
Dukhun to the Indus, and Himalaya, and no one ven- 
tured to take the field against them. The Moosulman 
Soobahdars, who had asserted independence, in the deca- 
dence of the Moghul empire, trembled for their prin- 
cipalitiesy and seemed to have no alternative but sub- 
mifsioDi and the payment of Chout to this upstart 

c 



18 RE- APPEARANCE OF AHMED SHAH. A. D. 1759. 

Hindoo sovereignty, or absolute extinction. In this 
state of things the re-appearance of the Abdalee, 
Ahmed Shah, east of the Indus, was hailed by a large 
party in Hindoostan as a source of salvation, and 
welcome succour. Shooja-ood-Doula, in Oudh, the 
celebrated Nujeeb-ood-Doula, who governed Dehlee 
and the Northern Dooab, the Rohilla Chiefs, and all 
the Mohummedan families settled in the Dooab, or 
west of the Jumna, prepared to range themselves 
under the standard of the Shah, and to fight the great 
battle for their faith and independence under his leading. 
The Muhratta detachment retired before the Shah from 
Labor to Dehlee, pillaging and laying waste the country 
as they went. The fertile plains of Sirhind conse- 
quently exhibited an appearance of desolation, that 
induced the Abdalee, as well for the convenience of 
obtaining supplies, as to unite with the Mohummedan 
chiefs of Hindoostan, to cross the Jumna at Boorea into 
the Dooab. Here he fell in with and overpowered a 
Mahratta detachment under Duttajee Sindheea who 
was slain, and Mulhar Rao Holkur was overtaken 
soon after by two Afghan generals, who routed his troops, 
and had nearly taken the chief himself by surprise. 
When the rainy season approached, the Abdalee can- 
toned his army in the Dooab between Sekundra and 
Anoopshuhur, the country round Dehlee, and to the west 
of the Jumna, having been completely ravaged and laid 
waste by the Muhrattas. 