



CHAPTER SECOND.* 



A. D. 1761 to 1771. 



Operations of the Afghans in the Punjab. The condition^ 
of the Sikh associations, and the .rise and exploits of 
the principal Chiefs and Misuls. The Punjab aban-*. 
doned to them by the Afghans. Their proceedings for 
the occupation of the territory. 

iV.HMED Shah made no stay in the Punjab, and troubled 
himself little with the disorders that prevailed in its inter- 
nal administration. The governor he left at Lah6r was 
little better than the military commandant of an out-post, 
oollecting revenues and levying contributions as he could, 
for the support of his detachment, and in aid of the gene- 
ral resources of the Shah. The imperfect hold thus 
retained of this territory, and the weakness of the detach- 
ment left with the Afghan governor, Khaja Obyd, were 
highly favorable to the Sikhs, who throve upon the dis- 
order which prevailed ; and, in the neglect with which 
they were treated, secured strong holds and fastnesses in 
different parts of the country, and added greatly to their 

* In this Chapter several facts have been added to Captain Murray's 
Narrative, on the authority of the Report of Captain Wade, v^rhose infor- 
mation as to the origin of the family of Runjeet Singh, will have been 
derived from the most authentic sources. 



22 RUNJEET SINGH'S ANCESTORS. A. D. 1750. 

power and resources. Amongst others, the ancestors of 
RuNJEET Singh, the present ruler of the Punjab, ap- 
peared early in the field as leaders of enterprize, and 
acquired a reputation that was daily on the increase. The 
family boasts of no antiquity, the first of whom any tradi- 
tionary recollection is preserved was a petty Zumeendar, 
named Desoo, a Jath, of the SAnsee tribe, who resided in 
a village of the district of Manjha, called Sookur-chuk. 
His patrimony was confined to three ploughs and a well, 
and little is known of him, except that he was the father 
of NoDH Singh, whose son Churut Singh, founded 
the fortunes of the family, by establishing a Surdaree 
or chieftainship, which his descendants, Muha Singh 
and Runjeet, have improved into the sovereignty over 
a wide and fertile territory, 

Nodh Singh was the first of the family who embraced 
the Sikh religion : he sought in marriage the daughter of 
Goolab Singh, a Zumeendar of Mejithia, who was 
already initiated in the rites of that faith, and the Pahul 
was proposed as the condition of the nuptials. Nodh 
Singh yielded; and, after his marriage, gave up his 
father's plough, and purchasing, or otherwise procuring a 
horse, joined the association headed by Kapoor Singh, 
of Goojrat, which bore the title of FyzooUapoorea. 

Nodh Singh is stated to have died in 1750; when 
Churut Singh, following his father's courses, but dis- 
daining to serve in a subordinate capacity, associated with 
himself his brothers-in-law DuL Singh and JodhSingh, 
and with their help, raised some followers, whom he main- 
tained and kept together by successful predatory enter- 
prizes. His wife was of Gujuraolee, a village lying not 