



A. D. 1762. THE SIKHS MAKE HEAD AGAINST THE )(FGHANS. 23 

far north of Labor, and through the influence of her 
family, he obtained leave to erect in its vicinity a small 
mud fort to serve as a place of safe custody for bis plun- 
der, and of retreat for his family and followers. The post 
was convenient, from its vicinity to Labor, as a rallying 
point for other Sikh associations ; and in 1762, it attracted 
the attention of Khaja Ob yd, who marched with a force 
to ncKe it and eject Churut Singh from the neighbour- 
hood. The Sikhs, however, attached importance to the 
post, and a large body tendered their aid for its defence. 
When the governor approached Gujuraolee, they threw 
a select body into the gurhee, and hovering about, watch- 
ed his camp. Khaja Obyd had entertained for the 
enterprize a number of Sikh troops, who opened a clan- 
destine correspondence with their brethren, and ultimately 
deserted in a body to the enemy. The governor's other 
troops immediately took panic and dispersed, and Khaja 
Obyd himself had barely time to mount a fleet horse and 
escape, when the Sikhs broke into his camp and plunder- 
ed all his baggage. 

After this defeat, the Afghan governor dared scarcely 
to show himself beyond the walls of Labor; and the Sikh 
Dul, or assembly of chiefs and followers, was publicly 
held at Umritsur, where the bathings and other ceremo- 
nies of the Dewalee being performed, it was resolved to 
invest Jundeeala, a placeheldbyNERUNJUNEEGooROO, 
a Hindoo, who had made submission and taken service 
with Ahmed Shah, and hence had incurred the ven- 
geance of the votaries of GooROO Govind. 

The report of these events roused the attention of 
\hmed Shah, who, in November 1762, again appeared 



24 AHMED SHAH RETURNS. A. O. 1763. 

on the Indus. From thence he made^ with a select 
detachment, one of those long and rapid marches, for 
which he was celebrated, in the hope of surprising the 
Sikhs, who had invested, and were still employed in 
the siege of Jundeeala. They obtained, however, a 
few hour's notice of his approach, and breaking ap their 
camp, dispersed in different directions, most of them 
flying beyond the Sutlej. The Shah rejoined his main 
body at Lahdr, and ordered his governor of Sirhind to 
watch the Sikhs, and call out the several Moosulman 
Sirdars and Jageerdars, with their contingents, to operate 
against them. The Shah was informed by express soon 
after this, that the main body of the Sikhs was at Kos 
Buheera, on the south bank of the Sutlej, (whose course 
from Feerozpoor is from east to west,) and that Zyn 
Khan, with the Baroach and Muler Kotila Moosulmans, 
was watching their movements. The Shah immediately 
prepared a strong detachment of cavalry provisioned for 
three days ; and, leaving Lahdr as secretly as possible, 
led them himself against the enemy. On the evening of 
the second day he crossed the Sutlej, and made a halt 
of a few hours only at Loodeeana. By sunrise on the 
following morning lie joined Zyn Khan, and found him 
already engaged with the Sikhs, for these latter trusting 
to their great numerical superiority had thought to over- 
power the Sirhind governor, and attacked him in his 
camp. The appearance of the high sheep-skin caps of 
the Shah's body-guard and northern troops, gave ttn 
immediate turn to the battle, and the Sikhs were broken 
and fled. The pursuit was continued west as far as 
Hureeana-Burnulla, and the slaughter was great. It has 
been estimated at from 25 to 30,000 men, but CaptMn 
Murray states he was assured by an old Moosulman of 