



A. D. 1764. AND LAHOR. 27 

Sikhy to pull down three bricks from any standing wall of 
Sirhind, and convey them to the Satlej or Jamna to be 
cast there into the river. 

The audacity of this enterprize recalled Ahmed Shah 
to Lahdr, he re-appeared there in Jannary 1764, being 
his seventh invasion of Hindoostan. His arrival was the 
signal for the Sikhs to disperse and seek refuge in the 
deserts west and south of Puteeala and Nabah. Raja 
Ala Singh, of the former place, had obtained the ruins 
of Sirhind from the Joomla chief, BHA£fi Boodha 
Singh, to whom the town had been assigned by unani- 
mous vote of the chiefs who made the capture, the Raja 
giving him a few productive villages in exchange. By 
the influence of the minister, Shah Wulbb Khan, he 
obtained from the Shah a confirmation of his tenure. The 
disorders which prevailed were matter of deep regret to 
the Abdalee, but the means or time was wanting for their 
effectual cure, and he retraced his steps to Kabool, 
without having done anything for the punishment or 
suppression of the Sikhs. He was no sooner gone, than 
they collected again, and ventured to attack Lah6r. 
Kabuleb Mul was compelled to fly, and the city being 
mastered, was parcelled out by the captors in three divi- 
sions, which were assigned respectively to Lehna Singh, 
GoojUR Singh, and Sobha. Ahmed Shah returned 
to punish this outrage, and advanced as far as the Sutlej , 
the Sikhs flying before him to the deserts south of the 
Ingraon, and no enemy appearing on whom he could 
wreak his vengeance. On his arrival at the Sutlej, Umur 
Singh, the grandson of Raja Ala Singh, then recent- 
ly deceased, waited upon him, and received investi- 
ture with the title of Mnha-Raja-Rajugan-Muhindnr 

D 2 



S8 DEATH OF AHMBD SHAH. Jk. D. 1T79. 

Bohadar, which title is now borne by the head of the 
Puteeala family. In the midst of these operations aDasta, 
or body of 12,000 of the Shah*s army, suddenly quitted his 
camp without orders, and marched back to Kabool. The 
Shah followed to reclaim or punish them, but his retreat 
was harrassed by parties of Sikhs, who plundered much 
of his baggage, and hung on his .flanks and rear until he 
had passed the Chunah. 

The Shah having thus quitted the field, the Sikhs 
remained undisputed masters of the Punjab, and spread- 
ing ovec the country occupied it as a .permanent inhe- 
ritance, every Sirdar, according to his strength, seiaing 
what fell in his way, and acknowledging no superior, 
nor submitting to the control of any body,, nor to any 
constituted authority whatsoever. Their proceedings were 
unmolested by any further interference from the. west, 
where Ahmed Shah continued to reign until his death in 
1773, from a cancer in his face. His son and successor 
Tymoor enjoyed his throne in peace for twenty years, 
and made no attempt to recover Lahdr, and the Punjab. 
These, with the province of Sirhind, and the country east 
as far as the Jumna, fell into the possession of the chiefs 
and associations who had hitherto subsisted on plunder, 
and were for the most part of low origin, and wholly 
deficient in education and useful knowledge. 