

The court of Poena on being apprised of the arrival 
of the Shah, and of the defeat of Duttajee Sindheea 
and Mulhar Rao Hulkur, prepared for a great 
efiTort to maintain their supremacy in Hindoostan. The 



A. D. 1769. OPPOSED BY THE MUHRATTAS. 19 

retainers of the state were called out, and an immense 
army advanced towards Dehlee, under the command of 
SuDASHEEo Rao Bhao, commonly called the Bh^o, 
with whom went WiswAS Rao, the Peshwa's eldest 
son, and the heads of all the principal Muhratta families. 
On the march the chiefs in advance fell in and 
swelled the train, and the whole reached Dehlee, pillag- 
ing without remorse as they went, and encountering no 
where any opposition. 

The Jumna which divided the two armies was still 
unfordable, and the Bh&o, after a short halt at Dehlee' 
moved northward to Kurnal, where his army was occupi- 
ed for a few days in the siege of Koonjpoora, the 
possession of a Puthan family, on the west bank of the 
Jumna. The place was taken by storm after an obsti- 
nate resistance by the head of the family, Nijabut 
Khan, who was slain in the last assault. The Mahratta 
army then moved back on Paneeput, and allowed the 
Shah to ford the Jumna with all his cavalry, on the 23d 
of October. The Bh&o judged himself to be unequal 
to cope with the Shah in the open field ; he accordingly 
threw up intrenchments and took up a position about the 
town of Paneeput, and there waited the attack of the 
enemy. The Abdalee strengthened by the junction of 
the confederate forces of Oudh, Rohilkhund, and of all 
the Mohammedan Chiefs of upper Hindoostan, surround- 
ed the Mahrattas, and aimed to cut off the Bhdo's sup- 
plies. For three months, the two armies lay close to 
each other, occupied in skirmishes and partial actions, 
and the Shah maintained his blockade. At the end of 
this time, want began to be felt in the Bh&o's lines, and 
the distress from this cause increased to such a degree 

c 2 



20 BATTLE OP PANEEPUT. A. D. 1761. 

as to compel the Bhdo to risk an action. On the 7th of 
January 1761» he led his army oot of their intrenched 
position at day break, and prepared for the final struggle. 
The Muhrattas were entirely defeated, and both WisWAS 
Rao and the Bh&o were slain in the action, with many 
other principal Muhratta chiefs. There have been few 
battles attended with greater carnage than history as- 
signs to this. The lowest computation of the loss sus- 
tained by the Muhrattas, fixes the number engaged at 
200,000, of whom more than half were slain in the action 
or pursuit : and, considering how far from their own 
country they fought, and that the intermediate tract was 
mostly hostile, our wonder at the loss will be lessened. 
But the moral efibct on the Muhratta nation was greater 
even than the actual loss. Their entire force had been 
put forth for the struggle, and defeat was for the moment 
felt as the annihilation of their ambitious hopes, and the 
destruction of their power. 

The Abdalee remained for a few days after this im- 
portant victory in the city of Dehlee regulating the affairs 
of Hindoostan. He then returned through the Punjab 
to Kabool, appointing Khaja Obyd and Zyn Khan 
to be his governors in Lah6r and Sirhind, which he de« 
signed permanently to annex to his own dominions. 