



4. D. 1752. LAHOR AND KASHMEER TAKEN. 18 

The Abdalee was well pleased so to close the campaign : 
he sent his principal officer, JuhanKhan, into the city, 
to conduct the viceroy to his presence, and treated him 
with all courtesy and respect, declaring his admiration of 
the determined spirit, conduct and deportment displayed 
by him on all occasions. He exacted a large sum of 
money from him for the expences of the campaign, and 
then reinstated him as viceroy on his own part both of 
Labor and Mooltan. 

Before retiring to his own dominions, Ammed Shai^ 
determined on the occupation of Kashmeer, and a strong 
detachment was sent thither under command of Ubdool- 
LA Khan, who succeeded in penetrating to the valley, 
and establishing the Shah's authority there without opposi- 
tion. The Hindoo, Sookh-Jeewun, a Khutree of Ka- 
bool, was selected for the government, and the rainy 
season being now near, the Shah re-crossed the Indus, 
and carried back his army to Kabool. 

Mber Munoo did not long survive these events : he 
was killed by a fall from his horse, whereupon his widow, 
a woman of spirit and address, proclaimed her infant son 
as successor in the viceroyalty, and succeeded in estab- 
lishing an administration in his name. Before ten 
months had expired, however, this hope was likewise 
cut off, the infant dying of the small pox. The Begum 
then proclaimed her own name, and dispatched agents to 
Dehlee and to Kabool to procure her acknowledgment. 
To the Vuzeer at Dehlee her daughter was offered in 
marriage, and he came to the banks of the Sutlej to cele- 
brate the nuptials. By these acts the Begum secured 
herself against present supercession, and her authority 



]4 MBER MUNOO'S WIDOW SUCCEEDS HIM. A. D, 1753-64. 

was displayed in an act of cruelty, the motives of which 
have left a taint of scandal on her reputation. Upon the 
accusation of having designs upon the viceroyalty, Mber 
Bhskareb Khan, an influential officer of thelate vice- 
roy, was seized by her order, and carried into the interior 
apartments, where he was so severely beaten with shoes 
and sticks as to expire under the punishment. The 
Begum's personal concern in such an act gave credit to 
the imputation, very generally believed at the time, that 
it was committed in revenge for some personal disap- 
pointment of a kind never forgiven by a woman. 

A female viceroy was not likely to display much acti- 
vity in suppressing associations like those of the Sikhs, 
which meddled not with her ease and pleasures at the 
seat of government. Their number and audacity accord- 
ingly increased rapidly, and bands of these bearded depre- 
dators were continually to be seen, traversing the various 
districts of the Punjab, sweeping ofi* the flocks and herds^ 
and laying waste the cultivation, unless redeemed by a 
prompt contribution. Disorder, anarchy, and confusion 
gained head in the province, as in all other parts of Hin- 
doostan. 

It was not until after an interval of four years, that 
is, in the season 1755-6, that Ahmed Shah Abdalee 
appeared again in the field. In all his previous incursions 
he had been met by the energy of local governors, and the 
Debtee court had made efibrts, or at least had displayed 
some interest and anxiety in checking his advance. 
On the present occasion, such was the condition of wreck 
and revolution to which the empire was reduced, that no 
one ofibred any where to impede his march^ and he 