

He was 45 years of age, and had risen from a com- 
mon Dharwee or highwayman, to be Sirdar of a separate 
Misul, with a territory computed to yield about three 
lakhs of rupees. He left a widow, Dbsan by name, 
with two sons and a daughter, called respectively Maha 
Singh, SuHUJ Singh and Raj Koonwur. The eldest 
son Maha Singh, then ten years of age, succeed- 
ed to the Sirdaree, but the widow and Jy Singh 
Gbunee assumed the immediate direction of affairs. 
It was determined by them to assassinate J hunda Singh 
Bhungee, who was the main stay of the Jummoo 
Ri^a^s party, and the avowed enemy of both the Sookur- 
Chukeea and Ghunee Misuls. A sweeper was tempted 



40 JHUNDA SINGH ASSASSINATED. A. D. Itli. 

by a large bribe, to undertake this hazardoas enterprize, 
and be succeeded in effecting his purpose by firing 
at and mortally wounding the Bhungee chief, as he was 
walking unattended through the Jummo^ camp. The 
Sookurchukeea and Ghunee Sikhs being satisfied with 
the revenge thus taken, withdrew soon after from the 
enterprize in which they had engaged. The Bhungee 
troops had similarly left the opposite camp on the death 
of their chief. Thus Brij-Raj Deo was left alone to 
settle with his father his rights of inheritance to the Raj-: 
before the departure, however, of MahaSingh, he went 
through the ceremony of an exchange of turbands (Dus- 
tarbudlee,) withBRiJ-RAJ, which bound him to brother- 
hood for life. These events occurred in 1774.* ; 

Several subordinate Sirdars of Churut Singh's re- 
xsently formed Misul, mistrusting the youth of Maha 
Singh, or dissatisfied with the Regent widow, aimed 
now to shake off their dependence. Of these, oneDnuRUM 
Singh was the first to commit himself by an overt act of 
xebellion. He relied on the succour and countenance of 
<Jhunda Singh, Jhunda Singh's successor, in the 
Sirdaree of the Bhungee Misul, but was deceived in his 
expectations, and suffered forfeiture of his lands for con- 
tumacy, before any aid could come to his relief. The rest 

* Captain Wade gives ITTl as the date of Churut Singh's death, an^ 
states It to have occurred in a general action with the Bhungee Sikhs at 
Suhawara, near Jusar Dodeh, in the Rich,hua Dooah. He concurs in 
assigning the bursting of his matchlock as the cause of Churut Singh's 
death, but says that Jhunda Singh was shot by a man of his own ftatf 
in the course of the action. The discrepance, except that of date, is not 
very material ; but it is singular that such an event should be so diffef;- 
ently reported to the two officers— Captain Murray is deemed the supe- 
rior aumority, and his version has therefore been adhered to. In like 
manner, Captain Wade diflfers from Captain Murray in the date assigned 
to the birth of Maha Singh. Captain W. places it in 1757, making hiilk 
14 years old in 1771, when Churut Singh died according to his version. 
Captain Murray fixe» it in 1764, making him 10 years old in 1774. 



A. D. 1778. MAHA SINGH'S FIUST ENTERPRIZE. H 