



A. D. 1775. SIKH LORDSHIPS. -33 

When the Misuls acquired their territorial posses- 
sions, it became the first duty of the chiefs to partition 
out the lands, towns, and villages amongst those who 
considered themselves as having made the conquest, 
Shamil, or in common. Every Surkunda, or leader of 
the smallest party of horse that fought under the stand- 
ard of the Misul, demanded his share, in proportion to 
the degree in which he had contributed to the acquisition, 
and, as they received no pay from the chief, and he had 
no other recompense to offer for their services, there was 
no resource but to adopt this mode of satisfying them. 
The sirdaree or chief's portion being first divided off, 
the remainder was separated into Puttees or parcels for 
each Surkunda, and these were again subdivided and 
parcelled out to inferior leaders, according to the number 
of horse they brought into the field. Each took his portion 
as a co-sharer, and held it in absolute independence. 

It was impossible that this state of things should subsist 
long in the Punjab, any more than it had done in England, 
France, and other countries of Europe, when they similar- 
ly fell a prey to hordes of associated warriors, who 
acknowledged no systematic general authority or govern- 
ment. When the link of a common enemy and common 
danger was removed, and the chiefs were converted from 
needy adventurers to lords of domains, discords and mutual 
plunderings commenced, as temper, ambition, or avarice, 
excited to contention. Cause of quarrel was never 
wanting in the confusion of the coparcenary system. The 
disputes and divisions which subsisted in each lordship, 
favoured the designs of the aspiring from without, whoso 
mA being solicited by one of the parties, an opening was 
frequently found to ejectboth. In cases of frontier disputes, 
orofinjnry, or wrong of any kind sustained or fancied, the 

E 



^ STATE OF MANNERS, A. D. 1779. 

chief would call upon his kindred and retainers to fur- 
nish him the means of redress, and they would feel 
bound by a sense of honor not to fail, when the Chara^ 
or gathering was demanded in such a cause ; but in a 
matter of internal strife within the Misul, every one 
would be free to choose his own side, and either party 
would deem it fair to fortify itself with any aid it could 
command from without. Upon occasions of gathering, 
it became customary for the chief, or person demanding 
it, to pay a rupee per kathee or saddle ; in other respects, 
the service was gratuitous, and plunder was the reward 
expected by those who joined either standard. The 
past life and habits of the Sikhs precluded any scruples 
on their part as to the conduct or character of their 
associates. The most daring culprits found ready admis- 
sion into their ranks, and it was a point of honor to deliver 
no one upon demand of a neighbour, whatever migbt be 
the crime laid to his charge. Hence arose the practise 
of Gaka, or self-redress, by individuals, no less than by 
chiefs ; and every owner of a village was compelled to 
surround his possession with a wall and ditch, while in 
towns, or places held in joint property, the houses of the 
coparcenary, and of all who were exposed to the appetence 
or revengeful passions of others, \^ere built as towers or 
keeps, and a fort in joint tenancy would orditmrily be 
divided by an inner retrenchment, as a protection against 
treachery from the fellow occupant. 