



/k. D. 178^. WHO YIELDS TO MAHA SINGH. 45 

were immediately dispatched to recall JusA SinCh, and 
to assure him of aid and support, if disposed to make an 
effort for the recovery of his lost possessions. The des- 
poiled chief was living by depredations in the Dooab of 
the Jumna and Ganges, with the wilds of Hansee and 
Hisar for his place of refuge ; having satisfied himself of 
the motives of Maha Singh's offer, and being convidced 
that it was sincere, he lost no time in returning into the 
Punjab, with all the force he could collect. 

The combined troops of Maha Singh and Jus a Singh 
now appeared suddenly within a few miles of Battala, the 
principal town of Jy Singh's possessions, and where 
he had fixed his residence. Here they were joined by 
SunsarChund, Raja of KdtKangra in the hills, and by 
Umur Singh Bugreh, and some other disaffected tri-^ 
butaries of the Ghunee Sirdar, who had been stirred up by 
Maha Singh. Jy Singh was now called upon to render 
up the share of the Ramghureea possessions, which had been 
allotted to him, and, on his refusal, the invaders proceeded 
to occupy and ravage the country. Jy Singh made a 
gathering of his Misul, and placing his son 600R BuKHSH 
Singh at the head of 8000 horse, sent him to punish and 
expel the invaders. An action ensued, in which GooR 
Bukhsh exposed himself with youthful rashness, and wad 
slain ; whereupon his followers dispersed and fled, and 
the victors soon after made themselves masters of Battala, 
when Jy Singh being humbled, was compelled to sue 
for peace. It was granted to him by the young chief he 
had insulted, under condition that he should render up 
the Ramghureea lands to JuSA Singh, and the fort of 
Kangra, which he had obtained by stratagem, to SUN« 
9A.R Chund. These terms being accepted, the allies 



46 MARRIAGE OF RUNJEET SINGH. A. D. 1785* 

retained the town of Battala, but towards the close 
of the year SuDA KooNWUR, widow of GoorBukhsh 
Singh succeeded by intrigue with the inhabitants in 
ejecting the garrison and recovering it. 

Jy Singh had set his hopes on the promise afforded 
by the character of GooR Bukhsh; and though he had 
two other sons, by name Bagh Singh and Nidhan 
Singh, he treated them with neglect, his whole affections 
being engrossed by the family of his deceased son. The 
widow, SuDA KooNWUR, had paramount influence, and 
gained an entire ascendant over the old man, and as she 
was of an aspiring, bold spirit, she procured that a sepa- 
rate appanage of some villages about Sohnan and Hajee* 
poor should be set apart for the surviving sons, while she 
regulated every thing at Battala for the interest of her- 
self and her only child by GooR Bukhsh, a daughter. 
At her suggestion, a negociation was opened for the afS- 
ance of the girl, whose name was Mehtap-koonwur, 
to RuNJEET Singh, the young son of Maha Singh, 
whom she hoped thus to bind to a permanent reconcilia- 
tion, and through his friendship and powerful support to 
secure for herself the Sirdaree upon her father-in-law's 
decease. Maha Singh assented readily to the union, 
and the Mungnee, or betrothment, of the children was 
duly performed in the year 1785, and contributed further 
to raise Maha Singh in power and reputation ; for 
through the friendship of the Ramghnreea Sirdar, and 
Kangra Raja, which was permanently secured by his 
aid in the recovery of their lost possessions, added to 
the influence resulting from this close connexion with the 
Ghunee Misul, there was no one in the Punjab, or of 
the^Sikh nation, that could compete with him in authority. 