

were deterred by this example, and the moment appearing 
favorable, the naptials of Maha Singh were celebrated 
in 1776, with the daughter of Gujput Singh, of Jeend, 
to whom he had previously been betrothed. Jy SingH 
and a large armed force of Sookurchukea and Ghunee 
Sikhs crossed the Sutlej with the Burdt to Bndrookh, 
where the young chief was met by his bride ; and a large 
concourse of Sirdars of the nation did honor to the cere^ 
mony, it being with them obligatory to give attendance 
on such occasions, and the omission being looked upon 
as a slight and a wide deviation from propriety. 

Maha Singh is next heard of as the associate of Jy 
Singh in an enterprize for the capture of Rusool-Nugur, 
now called Ram-Nugur by the Sikhs, situated on the 
east bank of the Chunab, and held by a Jdt Moosulman, 
named Peer Mohummed, who was at the head of the 
ancient tribe of Chutta, styled sometimes Munchureea, 
from a considerable town in their occupation, and many of 
whom have embraced the religion of the Koran. The 
pretext for this attack was, that the tribe had given up to 
the Bhungee Misul a large piece of ordnance, left behind 
by the Abdalee Shah, and placed with them in deposit, 
from inability to cross it over the Chunab. This gun was 
of much celebrity, and is now known as the Bhungee 
Top : it was claimed for the Khalsa or Sikh nation at 
large, to be appropriated by an assembly of chiefs. Rnsool 
Nugar was besieged and blockaded for four months, and 
the Bhungee Sikhs being employed at the time in plunder- 
ing and seeking possessions, or in levying tribute in the 
Mooltan and Buhawuipoor districts, neglected to afford 
Bucconr or relief. The place consequently fell to Maha 
Singh, who acquired great reputation by this early feat 

F 



42 BIRTH OF RUNJEET SINGH. A. D. 1780. 

of arms, so mach so, that many independent Sirdars, 
who had hitherto attached themselves to the Bhanged 
Misul, transferred their services and preferred to follow 
his leading in war, and to live under his countenance 
and protection. 

Two years after this event, on the 2d November 1780, 
a son was born to Maha Singh, by his wife, of the Jeend 
family, and named Runjeet Singh. The child was 
attacked by the small-pox at a very early age, and the 
disease taking an unfavorable turn, his life was endanger- 
ed, whereupon the father, according to Asiatic custom, 
made large donations to the poor in charity, fed multi- 
tudes of Brahmins and holy men to secure their prayers, 
and sent gifts to the sacred temples at Kangra and 
Juwala-Mookhee. The boy recovered, bat .with th6 
loss of one of his eyes, whence he is termed Kana^ or 
the one-eyed ; and his face in other respects is marked 
with the disease. Maha Singh was engaged at this 
period in settling the territory he had inherited or acquir- 
ed, and in extending his influence and connexions. The 
Bhungees lost their principal Sirdars, and having aimed 
to establish themselves in Mooltan, brought down on 
themselves an Afghan army, which retook the city from 
them, and further ejected them from Buhawulpoor and 
Munkera. The consequence was, that the power of the 
Misul was effectually broken, and the rising fortune and 
reputation of Maha Singh enabled him to extend bis 
relations and strengthen himself from its ruin. He was 
cautious, however, of engaging in any direct hostility with 
his Sikh brethren, well knowing that to follow such means 
of aggrandizement, would breed ill will, and lead probably 
to a confederacy, and gathering for his .destcacti(m« 