

The tenure that has been described above is the Pttfo#* 
daree, that of every associate in the Misul of less rank 
than a Sirdar, down even to the single horseman, who 
equipped and mounted himself: all these regulated entire- 
ly the management of their putee, fining, confining, or 



A. D. 1773. AND LAND TENURES. 35 

even farther illtreating, according to their pleasure, any 
Znmeendar, or working Ryot of their allotment. His 
complaint could not be listened to or redressed by any 
superior ; but in case of quarrel with an equal, reference 
would be made to the Surkunda, and if his decision fail- 
ed to give satisfaction, an appeal might be made to the 
general Sirdar. The more ordinary mode, however, was 
to collect friends and relations, and seek a prompt self- 
redress. It was not legitimate for a Puteedar to sell his 
tenure to a stranger, but he might mortgage it to satisfy 
any present want, and at his demise might settle by will, 
to which of his male relations it should go. Reciprocal 
aid for mutual protection and defence, was the relation 
on which a Puteedar stood in other respects to the Sir- 
dar, and the only condition of his tenure. 

Besides the Puteedaree, however, there were three 
other tenures created, arising out of the circumstances, 
in which different chiefs found themselves, from the man- 
ner of their association with those who composed their 
Misul. These were the JUisuldaree, the Tabadaree and 
the Jageerdaree. 

Bodies of inferior strength, or petty chiefs with their 
followers, attached themselves sometimes to a Misul, 
without subscribing to any conditions of association or 
dependence. The allotments of land assigned to such, 
would be considered as the free reward of their co-ope- 
ration, and would be held in no sort of dependence ; they 
were called Misuldaree. If dissatisfied with his chief a 
Mifiuldar might transfer himself with his possessions to 
another, under whose protection or countenance he might 
prefer to continue. 

K 2 



36 LAND TENURES. 4..D. 1773» 

A T&lddar was on the other band a retainer, as the 
word is understood in Europe, one completely subser- 
vient ; the lands which were his reward, were liable to 
forfeiture for any act of disobedience or rebellion, and 
at the caprice of the Sirdar might be resumed upon any 
occasion of displeasure. 

The third class of tenures or Jageers were given ta 
ne^dy relations, dependents, and entertained soldiers 
who deserved well, and the holders were liable to be 
called upon for their personal services at all times, with 
their quotas or contingents, equipped and mounted at 
their own charge, according to the extent of the grant* 
These were even further under the power of the Sirdar 
than the Tdbadaree grants. Both were hereditary only 
according to his pleasure, the lands of them formed part 
of the allotment set apart for the Sirdaree, and the Misul, 
or association, had, of course, nothing to say in such 
assignments. 

The religious and charitable appropriations and grants, 
viz, those made to Sikh Gooroos, Soodees, and Baidees, 
or to endowments for temples, and for charitable distribu- 
tions of alms, and sometimes even to Moosulman Peer- 
zadas, need no description, for they had nothing to dis* 
tinguish them from what are found all over India. 