



A. D. 1701. FURTHER PROJECTS. 47 

or command equal means if called upon for an exertion. 
Tlie result was favorable to the prosperity of the country, 
and the Punjab for several years during this chiefs 
ascendancy, enjoyed a repose and tranquillity to which it 
had long been a stranger. 

Until 1791 Maha Singh continued to administer in 
peace the territory he had acquired, and to exercise his 
influence for the benefit of those connected with him. 
In that year GoojUR Singh, the Sikh chief of Gooj rat, 
died, and Saheb Singh, his son, succeeded to the Sir- 
daree. The sister of Maha Singh had been given 
in marriage to Saheb Singh by Churut Singh, 
but the ties of affinity had little influence in restrain- 
ing ambitious views, and the desire of aggrandizement 
which filled the mind of Maha Singh, was not to be so 
checked. He deemed the moment favorable for asserting 
superiority over Goojrat, and for claiming tribute. Saheb 
Singh evaded <^ompliance, alleging that his father was an 
adherent of the Bhungee Misul, and had never fought 
under the standard of the Sookurchukeea, to whom he 
acknowledged no dependance. Maha Singh marched 
on receiving this reply and besieged Saheb Singh inhis 
fort of Soodhurp. The Goojrateea chief applied in 
his distress to the Bhungee Sikhs, and Kurum Singh 
DooLOO came with the strength of that Misul to interrupt 
the siege* Though not strong enough to enter the field 
with Maha Singh, they hovered about his camp, and 
put him to considerable inconvenience for supplies ;. a 
detachment of the Sookurchukeeas however succeeded 
after a time in beating up the quarters and plundering the 
camp of the Bhungees, after which the siege proceeded. 
Maha Singh had been three months before the place. 



\ 



48 DGATH OF MAHA SINdH. A. D. 1792. 

when in the early part of the year 1792 he became seri- 
ously ill. The siege was immediately broken up, an'd the 
chief being carried back to his principal place of resi- 
dence Goojraolee, expired there in the twenty-seventh year 
of his age. He was brave, active, and prudent beyond his 
years, and left a high reputation amongst his nation, for all 
the qualities of a Sirdar. He shook off the trammels of his 
mother's guardianship at the early age of seventeen, and 
some time after, having detected her in an intrigue with a 
Brahmin, put her to death with his own hand ; an act of 
barbarous justice, that does not seem to have lessened his 
reputation, or in. any way to have affected his character 
injuriously in the eyes of his cotemporaries. 

Maha Singh left only one son, the present Runjeet 
Singh, who was then in his twelfth year. His mother 
became regent, and was assisted by the minister of her 
husband, LuKHOOor Lukhput Singh. Suda Koon- 
WUR, the minor chiefs mother-in-law, exerted also much 
influence in the conduct of affairs, and in the year 
following, viz. in 1793, the demise of Jy Singh left 
the Ghunee Misul likewise under her direction, every 
thing having been prepared before hand, for the exclusion 
of the sons of that Sirdar. 