

7th. The Nishan-wala Misul, headed by SUN- 
GUT Singh and Mohur Singh, the standard 
bearers of the Dul, or assembled Sikh army. 



A. D. 1773. SIKH MISVLS. 31 

whence the tiame was derived. The families of 
both chiefs are extinct, and Umbala, one of its 
possessions, lapsed in consequence to the British: 
Sfaahabad belonging to subordinate chiefs, is 
under protection, 12,000 

8th. The Fyzoollapoorea Misul, sometimes 
styled Singhpoorea, headed by KUPOOR Singh 
and Khooshhal Singh, of FyzooUapoor, a vil- 
lage near Umritsur, the Mohummedan name of 
which the Sikhs changed to Singhpoor. The 
chiefs were Jkt Zemindars, Kupoor Singh was 
styled Nuwab by his followers ; their possessions 
west of the Sutlej, have been seized, but those to 
the east are still held by their descendants under 
British protection, • • • • 2,500 

9th. The Krora-Singhea MisuU headed by 
Krora Singh, and afterwards by Bhugaeel 
Singh, both J^ts. Krora Singh left no heir. 
Bhugaeel Singh's possessions in the Punjab 
have been absorbed, but his widow holds Chi- 
loundee and 22 other villages east of the Sutlej, 
under British protection. Chicheroulee belong- 
ing to a subordinate chief of the Misul, is also 
under protection, and Bhud&wur has lasped, • • • • 12,000 

10th. The Shuheed and Nihung Misul, head- 
ed by KuRUM Singh and GoorBuksh Singh. 
The name which signifies Martyrs, was acquired 
by the first chiefs, ancestors of those named, 
who were beheaded by the Mohummedans at 
Domduma, west of Puteeala. Their possessions 
lie east of the Sutlej, and are protected, •••••• 2,000 



82 SIKH MISULS. A. D. 1T73. 

11 tb . The Phoolkea and Bhyhea Misul, bead- 
ed by Raja Ala Singh, and afterwards by 
Baja Umur Singh, bis grandson, of Pateeala. 
Pbool was tbe J&t progenitor of the Puteeala, 
Nabab, Jeend, and Kytbul cbiefs, all of whom 
are under British protection, 5,000 

12tb. Tbe Sookur-Chukea Misul, beaded by 
Churut Singh, ancestor of Runjeet Singh, 
tbe present sovereign of Labdr, whose progeni- 
tors were J&t Zumeendars of Sookur-Chuk, . • • • 2,500 



69,500 






In the above list the Misul of Churut Singh holds 
tbe last place, and was formed probably after tbe suc- 
cessful defence of Gujraolee, and tbe defeat of Khaja 
Obyd had raised the reputation, and given a new dis- 
tinction to that chief. Every Misul acted independently, 
or in concert, as necessity or inclination suggested, but 
there was generally an assembly of tbe chiefs called tbe 
Surgut Khaha, held twice a year at Umritsur during 
the Bysakbee and Dewalee festivals, which • occur in 
April and October. On these occasions, after bathing 
in the sacred reservoir, they generally held a^ Goor' 
mutta, or special council, where expeditions of import- 
ance, or any matters of more than ordinary moment 
were submitted to their united wisdom. If the Joint 
forces of several Misuls took the field upon any pre- 
datory enterprize, or to collect Rakha (Black Mail)* 
tbe army assumed the denomination of a Dul of tbe 
Khaha Jee. 