

The above explanation has been necessary to give 
some idea of the state of things, which resulted from the 
two provinces of Lah6r and Sirhind being left to be 
occupied by the Sikhs, when, finally abandoned by the 
Afghans, as they had previously been by the Moghul and 
Dehlee ofiicers. The European reader will at once be 



A. D. 1773* FEUDAL SYSTEM. 37 

strack by tbe similarity between the condition of things 
above described, and the relations which have been handed 
down to us of what occurred in England, when the Saxons 
similarly spread and occupied that country ; and when 
Clovis and the Franks seized the fairest portion of GauK 
The arrangements for government were the very rudest 
that the most ignorant tribes ever devised : and, though 
the ideologist may find something attractive in contem- 
plating such attempts to realize in practise the dream of 
universal independence and equality of condition between 
individuals, he must, indeed, be a bold speculator in 
politics, who would assume that any class could find hap- 
piness, contentment, or rest, in a country ruled by seven-. 
iy thousand sovereigns, as were the unfortunate provinces 
of Lahdr and Sirhind, when the Sikhs assumed dominion 
over them. 



CHAPTER THIRD. 



A. D. 1773 to 1791. 



Feuds and contentions of ilie Sikhs. Rise and fall of 
different chiefs. The history of Churut Singh and 
MaJia Singh, ancestors ofRunjeet Singh, traced to the 
death of the latter, and Runjeefs assumption of tAe 
direction of affairs^ 

In resuming tbe progress of events in the Punjab, the 
narrator has henceforward only to record the squabbles 
and petty feuds, which arose amongst the chiefs thus left 
in possession, and as these ordinarily were of little inter^ 
est and less variety, those only deserve relation, which 
contributed to produce the status now observed, in other 
words, those in which the ancestors of RuNJEET SiN6H» 
or himself, bore a part. 

The hill Raja of Jummoo, Runjeet Deo byname, 
had a misunderstanding with his eldest son Bru-Raj, 
and desired to set aside his pretensions to the succession 
in favour of the youngest, Meean Dulel Singh. In 
order to secure his hereditary rights, Brij-Raj broke 
into rebellion, and applied to Churut Singh, offering 



A. D. 1774. CHURUT SINGH SLAIN. 39 

a large yearly tribute on condition of his aiding to effect 
the deposition of his father. Churut Singfi having 
an old enmity against RuNJEET Deo, closed with the 
offer, and strengthening himself by association with Jv 
Singh of the Ghuneea Misul, their united force march- 
ed into the hills and encamped atOodhachur, on the bank 
of the Busuntee river. The Raja having received 
timely notice of the designs of the heir-apparent, had 
made corresponding preparations for resistance. The 
defence of the capital he reserved to himself, but col- 
lected a force to oppose the invasion, composed of auxi- 
liaries from Chumba, Noorpoor, Busehur, and Kangra, in 
the hills, to which were added, besides a party of his 
own troops, the confederated forces of the Bhungee 
Misul under Jhunda Singh, whom he induced to lend 
his services in the extremity. The two armies lay en- 
camped on opposite sides of the Busuntee, and in a par- 
tial skirmish between the Sikh auxiliaries Churut 
Singh was killed by the bursting of his own matchlock. ^ 