

The Sirdars or chiefs of the Sikh nation had been fol- 
lowed into the field by relations, friends, and volunteers, 
and not ordinarily by hired retainers. Most of these 
looked upon themselves as partners and associates in each 
enterprize, and regarded the lands now acquired as a 
common property in which each was to have his share^ 



4. D. 1765 to 1773. SIKH associations. 29 

according to the degree in which be might have contri- 
bnted to the acquisition. The associations were called 
Misuls, implying that they were Gonfederaoies ofequals, 
nnder chiefs of their own selection. The chief was to 
lead in war,: and act as arbiter in peace : he was respected 
Md treated, with, deference by the inferior Sirdars, but 
these owned no obligation to obey, beyond what they 
might consider to be for their own reciprocal benefit, or 
for the well being of the Misul. The confederacies had 
each their distinguisbing title, and at this period there 
are twelve principal Misuls enumerated^ which together 
could bring into the field about 70,000 horse. The fol- 
lowing is a recapitulation of them.' 

Number qf Horse* 

1st. The Bhungee Misul, at the head of which 
were the chiefs HuREE Singh, Jhundee 
Singh and Ghunda Singh, originally three 
J&t cultivators of the Dooab. The Misul de- 
rived its nam^ from the extraordinary addiction 
of its members to the use of Bhung, an intoxi- 
cating smoking material, prepared from the 
leaves of the Hemp plant. Its possessions are 
now incorporated in the Labor dominions, 10,000 

2nd. The Ramgurheea Misul, taking its name 
from a village east of Lahdr, of which the chief, 
JusA Singh, was originally a Thoka or carpen- 
ter. Its possessions are also incorporated in 
Runjbet Singh's dominions, 3,000 

3rd. Xhe Ghunneya Misul, headed by Jy 
Singh, a J&t of Ghunnee, which lies also east 
of Lah6r. Its possessions have likewise been 
seized by Runjeet Singh, , 8,000 



80 SIKH MISULS. A. D. 1773. 

4th. The Nulreea Misul, deriving its name 
from Nakree, a tract of country lying sonth* 
west of Lahdr, and bordering on Mooltan. It 
had several leaders, all J&t caltivators, of low ex- 
traction. Its possessions have been seized, and 
it no longer exists as a separate body, 2,000 

5th. The Aloowala Misul, headed then by 
JusA Singh, Kulal, or mace-bearer, who rose 
to great eminence amongst the Sikhs, and by his 
followers was honored with the title of Badshah. 
His possessions lay on both sides of the Sutlej, 
and the present chief, a descendant of J USA 
Singh, holds those to the east under British pro- 
tection. He is a grandee of the Court of RuN- 
JEET Singh, treated with distinction, but subject 
to continual exactions on account of his Punjab 
territory, 3,000 

6th. The Duleeala Misul, headed by Tara 
Singh Ghyba, a shepherd of Dulee, a village 
on the Ravee, east of Labor, who received the 
nickname of Ghyba, from his ingenious devices 
for conveying goats and lambs across the torrents 
to feed. Tara Singh's possessions are incor- 
porated in Run J eet Singh's dominions, but the 
Roopur, and some other Sirdars of the Misul, 
having possessions east of the Sutlej, are under 
British protection, # • 7,500 