



A, D. 1781. AMBITIOUS VIEWS OF MAHA SINGH. 43 

Again, the Afghan power was still too formidable, and 
too united, for him to hope to aggrandize himself at the 
expense of that nation. Plis restless spirit was, however^ 
not long in finding a quarter in which to pursue his 
schemes at pleasure. 

Raja RuNJEET Deo of Jummoo was dead, and his 
son Bru-Raj Deo having succeeded to that Raj, 
proved unworthy and debauched, so that discontent pre- 
vailed in the principality, and afforded an opening for 
interference. Maha Singh tempted by this state of 
things, resolved to exact tribute, and enforce fealty from 
his turband brother; he accordingly moved with a force 
into the hills, and Bru-Raj being in no condition for 
resistance, fled to the Trikota-Devee mountain, a three- 
peaked eminence, where is an Usthan or temple of Bi- 
shun-Devee, in which the Hindoo Devotee presents an 
offering of cocoanuts, deemed more agreeable to the 
benevolent goddess than the heads of goats. The town 
of Jummoo was at this period very prosperous and rich, 
for, in consequence of the distractions of the Punjab, 
many of the wealthy merchants had been induced to seek 
an asylum, or to establish a branch-firm within the hills 
beyond their influence. Jammoo was well situated for 
this purpose, while under Runjeet Deo the resort of 
this class of persons to his dominions was encouraged, and 
they lived in ease and security. Maha Singh and his 
Sikhs sacked the town, and ravaged the whole territory of 
Jummoo, and he is reported to have brought away a large 
spoil, including much specie and valuables of all kinds. 

By this conduct Maha Singh, though he enriched 
himself, raised also many enemies. The Bhungee Sikhs 

F 2 



44 QUARREL WITH JY SINGH, A. D. 1781. 

who had long maintained a connexion with Jammoo, 
were highly irritated, and, what was even of more conse- 
quence to Maha Singh's rising fortunes, the displea- 
sure and jealousy of his old Mentor and guardian, Jy 
Singh, of Ghunee, was incurred. This chief was now in 
the zenith of his power, and was of a haughty imperious 
temper. Maha Singh on his return from the hills pro- 
ceeded with his booty to Umritsur, with the double pur- 
pose of paying his respects to J y Singh, and performing 
his ablutions in the holy reservoir. The old chief receiv- 
ed him with marked coolness and displeasure, so much i^o 
that Maha Singh assuming the demeanour of an inferior, 
approached with a tray of sweetmeats in his hand, and 
begged to be made acquainted with the cause he had 
given for offence, professing his sense of filial obligation 
and attachment to Jy Singh, and offering any atone- 
ment in his power. Jy Singh was stretched at length 
on his couch, and, drawing his sheet over him, called 
out loudly and rudely, that he desired to hear no more 
of the Bhugtea's (dancing boy's) pathetic conversa- 
tion. Maha Singh retired in high indignation at this 
reception, and determined to be revenged for the insnlt* 
He mounted his horse, and, with a few followers, made 
his escape secretly from Umritsur, where Jy Singh's 
power and influence were paramount, and returned to his 
home to seek the means of executing his purposes. Being 
too weak to enter the field against the Ghunee and Bhun^ 
gee Misuls alone, he cast about for associates, and deter^ 
mined to make a friend of JusA Singh, Sirdar of the 
Ramghureea Misul, who had recently been ousted from 
his possessions in the Punjab by a confederacy of the 
Aloowala and Ghunee associations, and the latter had 
b^en considerable gainers by the aggression. Agenta 