

The extensive permanent occupations and usurpations, 
thus made by Runjeet Singh on the east and south 
banks of the Sutlej, excited the alarm of the Sikh 
chiefs, situated between that river and the Jumna, and, 
after a conference, it was determined by them, to send 
a mission to Dehlee, composed of Raja Bhag Singh, of 
Jheend,BHAEELAL Singh, ofKythul, and Chyn Singh 
Dewan, of Puteeala, in order to solicit that their posses- 
sions might be taken under the protection of the British 
Government. The mission reached Dehlee, and waited 
on Mr. S ETON, the Resident, in March 1808. The an- 
swer they received, though not decisive, was encouraging 
to their hope, that the Lah6r ruler would not be sufiered 
to extend his usurpations eastward, to their prejudice 
and eventual annihilation. Intelligence of this mission, 
however, no sooner reached Labor, than Runjeet 
Singh, feeling disquieted, dispatched agents to invite 
the three chiefs who composed it to wait upon him, that 



A. A. 1B08. BRITISH MISSION TO LAHOR. 65 

he might endeavour to allay their fears. They accord* 
ingly went to his camp at Umritsur, where they were 
received with marked favor and attentions, and no effort 
was spared in the endeavour to detach them from the 
design of forming any connexion with the British 60^ 
vernment. 

Pending these transactions, the alarm of an invasion of 
India being meditated by the French Emperor, Napo- 
leon Buonaparte, becoming rife, Lord Minto deter- 
mined to send missions to ascertain the condition of the 
countries intervening, and the feeling of the rulers, 
chiefs, and people. The growing power of Run J EST 
Singh, whose authority was now completely established 
in the Punjab, made it essential to include his court, and 
the collision threatened by the recent proceedings and 
known designs of Run J eet, east of the Sutlej, formed an 
additional motive for deputing a British Agent to Lahdr. 
Mr. now Sir Charles Metcalfe, was the negoci- 
ator selected on this occasion, and the announcement 
of the intended deputation was received by Run J eet 
Singh, while the Jheend and Kythul chiefs were in 
attendance on him. To them the contents of the des- 
patch were communicated, and the matter formed the 
sabject of much anxious conference and deliberation. 
It was determined to receive Mr. Metcalfe at Kasoor, 
whither RuNJEET marched for the purpose in September 
1808. On the envoy's arrival, he was received with 
the usual attentions, but had scarcely found the opportu- 
nity to enter on the subjects proposed for discussion with 
the Sikh chief, when the latter suddenly broke up his 
camp from Kasoor, and crossed the Sutlej with his army. 
Forced- Kot was immediately occupied by him and made 

I 



66 RUNJEET AGAIN CROSSES THE SUTLEJ. A.D. 180&. 

over to SudaKoonwur in ejection of Goolab Singh, 
and RuNJEET then proceeded against the Moosulman 
possession of Muler Kotila. Tlie Puthan family hold- 
ing it was reduced to extremity, and agreed to a large 
money payment, giving a bond of a lakh of rupees, to which 
the Pnteeala Raja was induced, by the deposit of some 
strongholds, to be security. Mr. Metcalfe accompanied 
RuNJEET Singh to Fureed-Kot, but refused to counte- 
nance any military operations east of theSutlej. He ac- 
cordingly remained near that river until his Govern- 
ment should determine what to do in the juncture, and 
addressed in the interval a strong remonstrance against 
such aggressions, committed in the very face of his 
proposition to make the matter the subject of discussion 
and negociation between the Governments. In the mean 
time RuNJEET Singh continued his progress to Umbala, 
which with its dependencies, he seized, and made over to 
the Naba and Kythul chiefs. He then exacted tribute 
from Shahabad and Thanesur, and returning by Puteeala, 
made a brotherly exchange of turbanf s with the weak 
Raja Saheb Singh. After this expedition he again 
gave Mr. Metcalfe the meeting at Umritsur. The 
Government at Calcutta had in October determined on 
its course, and the envoy was now instructed to avow, 
that the country between the Sutlej and the Jumna was 
under British protection, and although that Government 
had no design to require the surrender of possessions 
occupied before its interposition, it must insist on the 
restoration of all that had been seized during the late expe- 
dition of Runjeet Singh. To enforce this demand, and 
support the negociation, a body of troops was advanced to 
the frontier under Colonel, afterwards Sir David Och- 
terlony, and an army of reserve was formed and placed 