



A. D. 1804. RAPACITY. 65 

moQQtaiiieers. The occasion was taken to invest Soojan- 
poor, which was held by the Sikh chief Boo DH Singh 
Bhcjgut, from whom a sum of ready money, a large 
piece of ordnance, and the three districts of Buhrampoor^ 
Dharnmkot, and Sookhalgurh^ were extorted. 

From the Jalundhar Dooab, where these operations 
bad carried him, Runjeet Singh crossed the Ravee, 
and returned to Lah6r by a detour through Sealkot and 
Rusoolnugur, plundering as he went. The widow of 
Choor-Mul was, during this march, deprived of Phug- 
wara, which was given in an exchange to Futeh Singh 
Aloowala. Sunsar Chund ventured again into the 
plains towards the close of the year, and seized several 
towns in the Jalundhur, but decamped again on the march 
thither of Runjeet with a body of Aloowala and Ghunee 
confederates. In February following, the Hill Raja again 
appeared, and having seized Hoshyarpbor and Bijwara, 
attempted to maintain himself there. ' From both, how- 
ever, he was expelled by the Sikhs, and Runjeet Singh, 
after this service, made a tour of exaction, in which, 
either as gift or tribute, he obtained considerable sums 
from the old Sikh chiefs, Tara Singh Ghyba, Dhurum 
Singh, of Umritsur, and Boodh Singh, ofFyzoolla- 
poor. . His conduct excited the jealousy and fears of all 
the Sirdars, who had hitherto enjoyed independence, and 
immunity from molestation. They saw that Runjeet 
aimed to reduce them to fealty and subservience; yet 
were they so divided, and filled with jealousies, and with- 
out a head or leader, that they attempted nothing, and 
could devise no scheme to relieve themselves from his 
arbitrary exactions, and from the forfeiture and resump- 
tion with which he seemed systeinatically to visit the 



56 EXACTIONS FROM CHUNAB SIRDARS. A. D. 1804. 

family of every chief that died. It was in this year 
that DuL Singh, the brother-in-law of Churut Singh, 
died, wheD Run J EST acquired Akulgurh^ and Jum- 
mabad by escheat, these places being held as dependen- 
cies of the Sooknrchukea Misul. DuL Singh had been 
in disgrace some time before his death. 

The dissensions of the four sons of Tymoor Shah, 
HuMAYOON, MuHMOOD, Shah Zuman, and Shah 
Shoojah, began at this time to produce distractions in 
the Afghan empire, which led to the royal authority 
being every where held in contempt. Runjeet Singh 
was encouraged by this state of things to direct his views 
westward, and after a Duseria, passed in more than ordi- 
nary excess at Lahdr, he determined in the year 1804 to 
seek further aggrandizement by the seizure of the depen- 
dencies of that empire, east of the Indus. He accord- 
ingly crossed the Ravee in October; and, having the 
Aloowala chief in attendance, moved to Ramhugur on 
the Chunab, and thence to Jhnng, held by Ahmed Khan, 
a chief of considerable note. The Khan made his sub- 
mission, and bought off the invaders. Saheewal and 
Kot Maharaja, possessions of two Balooch Moosulmans, 
were next visited, and an acknowledgment of supre- 
macy with presents of horses and other gifts, saved them 
from ravage. As the season advanced preparation was 
made to visit the neighbonrhood of Mooltan, but the 
governor Mozuffur Khan anticipated the design, and 
averted the evil from his subjects and dependents by the 
transmission of timely and rich presents. Relations 
were then established with all the Moosulman chiefs and 