



A. D. iaa9. ADVANCE OF BRITISH ARMY. 67 

nnder the command of Major General St. Leger, to be 
prepared for any extended operations, the activity, and 
supposed hostile designs of Runjeet Singh might ren- 
der necessary. 

Colonel OcHTERLONY crossed the Jumna at Booreea 
on the 16th January 1809, and as he approached Umbala, 
Runjeet Singh's detachment left there retired to the 
Sutlej. Taking en route the several places visited by the 
Sikh army, the British commander reached Loodeeana 
on the Sutlej, and took up a position there on the 18th 
February following. His march viras hailed by the people 
and chiefs, as affording the promise of future protection 
and tranquillity, and they vied with one another in the 
display of their gratitude and satisfaction. 

Up to this period, Runjeet Singh had maintained 
in the conferences to which the envoy was admitted, that 
the Jumna, and not the Sutlej, was the proper boundary 
of the British possessions, and that in right of his supre- 
macy over the Sikh nation, no less than as Governor of 
Labor, he was. warranted in asserting feudal superiority 
over all the chiefs of that nation between those two rivers. 
The existing independence of Pnteeala and the other 
principalities, had no weight in argument with a chiefs 
whose domination was the right to plunder and usurp, 
according to the condition of his army, and who aimed 
only to secure himself this. The arrival of Colonel OcH- 
terlony on the Sutlej, however, opened his eyes to a 
new fear, which was, that if he longer resisted, offers of 
protection might be made to chiefs in the Punjab, which 
would effectually curb his ambitious views, and must 
involve him in collision — and, perhaps, hostility, with a 

I 2 



68 NEGOCIATIONS. A. D. 1809. 

power he never thoogkt himself capable of seriously 
opposing in the field. His resolations were hastened by 
an event that occarred in his camp. The Moburrum» the 
first and sacred month of the Mohammedans^ commenced 
in 1809 towards the end of February, and the followers 
of this faith, in the suite of the envoy, prepared to cele- 
brate the deaths of HusUN and Hoosein, the two sons 
of Ulee, with the usual ceremonies. The Akalees, or 
fanatic priests of the Sikhs, took umbrage at this per- 
formance of Mooslim rites in the Sikh camp, and at 
Umritsur; and collecting in a body, headed by Phoola 
Singh, a bigot of notorious turbulence, they opened a 
fire of matchlocks, and attacked the envoy's camp. The 
escort was called out, and though composed of two compa- 
nies of Native Infantry and sixteen troopers only, this small 
body charged and routed their party, after which, the biers 
were buried with the usual forms. Runjeet himself 
came np at the close of the fight ; and immediately 
it was over, advanced in person to make apologies to the 
envoy, expressing his admiration of the discipline and 
order displayed by the British detachment, and promis- 
ing his best exertions to prevent any repetition of such 
disorders. The circumstance made an impression on his 
mind as to the unfitness of his own troops to cope with 
those under European discipline, and determined him ta 
secure peace and friendship at the sacrifices demanded. 