

Little care was taken of the education of Runjeet 
Singh : the means were furnished to him of gratifying 
every youthful passion or desire, and his early years were 
passed in indulgence and in following the sports of the 
jGeld. He was never taught to read or write in any lan- 
guage. While still in tutelage, however, a second marriage 
was contracted for him with Raj Koonwur, a daughter 
of the Nukee chief, Khujan Singh. 



A. D. 1793. RUNJEET SINGH's FIRST MEASURES. 49 

Upon attaining the age of 17 years, Runjeet Singh, 
in imitation of his father, assumed in person the conduct 
of affairs, and dismissed the Dewan : it is further stated 
that, under the guidance of DuL Singh, his father's 
maternal uncle, who had long borne ill-will to the Dewan, 
LuKHOO was dispatched on an expedition to Kitas, 
where he was slain in an affray with the Zumeendars, not 
without suspicions of contrivance. His father's example 
gave sanction to an act of further cruelty in Runjeet 
Singh. The regent mother was accused of having led 
a life of profligate indulgence, the late Dewan being not 
the only paramour admitted to her favors. Upon receiving 
evidence to this, it is said, that Runjeet Singh gave 
his sanction to, or at least connived at, her being put to 
death, and the old chief, DuL Singh, is designated as the 
perpetrator of the act by means of poison.* Runjeet 
Singh, with the advice of Suda Koonwur, carried 
on now in person all the affairs of his Sirdaree, and the 
difficulties he experienced, with the means by which he 
extricated himself, and made every circumstance contribute 
to his further rise, will form the subject of the Chapters 
which follow. 



* The above particulars are from Captain Wade's Report. Captain 
Murray merely states, that ^' he dismissed the Dewan, and caused his 
mother to be assassinated." Captain Wade assigns the year 1787 for the 
decease of Maha Singh, and states him to have been born in 1757, as 
before remarked, which are discrepancies of date with Captain Murray, 
for which I am unable to account ; the latter is the authority followed. 



CHAPTER FOURTH- 



A. D. 1794 to 1808. 



The early administration of Runjeet Singh, His aggran- 
dizement at the expense of other Sikh Sirdars, to his 
treaty with the British Government, and exclusion 
from the countries east of the Sutlej. 

In the course of the years 1795, 1796, and 1797, the 
Punjab was twice exposed to invasion by Shah Zuman, 
who had recently succeeded the peaceful Tymoor on the 
throne of KabooK The Sikhs ventured not to oppose 
him openly in the field, and his coming^, therefore, 
was a source of infinite confusion, leading to a temporary 
abandonment of their possessions by the Sirdars near his 
route. In 1798 the Shah advanced again, and entered 
Lah6r, without opposition ; but, after a few months stay 
there, finding it impossible to make any arrangements for 
the permanent occupation of the country, or to render 
the Punjab in other respects a source of advantage to 
himself, he retraced his steps to his hereditary dominions 
west of the Indus, and the Sikh Sirdars returned each to 