

* Captain Wade states that Tara Singh died during this expedition, 
and that on this occasion Runjeet Singh made an acquisition of eight lakhs 
of Rupees in cash, and of the jewels of the deceased chief, which were of 
great value. The treasure is alleged to be the first of any extent that was 
so obtained. Captain Murray, however, places the death of Tara Singh 
in 1807-8, during the second expedition of Kunjeet Singh across the Sut- 
lej, and Captain W. appears to have confounded the two visits. 



INTRIGUES IN PUTEEALA. , 61 

all the territory held by the family in the Punjab was 
resumed, and assigned for the present in Jageer to Nyaj* 
Singh Utharawala, From Kasoor, Runjeet Singh 
proceeded S. W. towards Mooltan, and occupied and 
kept garrisons in various dependencies of that govern- 
ment. In April the town of Mooltan was mastered, but 
the governor held out the fort, into which the principal 
inhabitaDts had retired with their valuables. Being unpro- 
vided with the means of siege, Runjeet accepted a sum 
of money from MozUFFUR Khan, and returned to Lalior 
in Mav. In the interval before the rains, he detached a 
force against Deena-nugur under the Kangra hills, and 
levied exactions in that neighbourhood from several 
Sikh and mountain chiefs, who had hitherto enjoyed im- 
munity from their dependence on the Ghunee Misul,^ 
with the head of which, SuDA KooNWUR, Runjeet 
stood in such close relation. The measure gave offence 
to that lady, and the foundation was thus laid for the 
differences and intrigues which led eventually to her ruin. 

The wife of the Puteeala Raja was an ambitious 
intriguing woman who had long sought to set aside her 
husband, or at least to procure the assignment of a sepa- 
rate territory for her minor son KuRUM Singh. When 
JuswuNT Rao HoLKUR passed through Puteeala on his 
way to the Punjab, she had endeavoured to make him in- 
strumental to her views, and that wily chief made the state 
of things which prevailed, conducive to bis own enrich- 
ment, but being pressed for time, in consequence of tha 
approach of Lord Lake, he left matters between the Raja 
and Ranee as they were. The quarrel being now renew- 
ed, the Ranee sent, in the rains of 1807, to invite RuN- 
jbet Singh to espouse her cause, promising him a 



62 RUNJEET AGAIN CROSSES THE SUTLEJ. A. D. 1807. 

famous brass piece of ordnance belonging to the faofiily, 
and wliich bore the name of KuREE Kahn, and, also a 
diamond necklace of known valae, as the price of his 
assistance. The Labor chief gladly seized the occasion to 
interfere, and crossed the Sutlej at Hureeke-Patun, 
where that river is joined by the Beah. In the month 6f 
September, on his route towards Puteeala, he seized all 
the remaining possessions of the deceased Ilias-Raee, 
and distributed them amongst his dependents and allies. 
Before Runjeet Singh reached Puteeala, the Raja and 
Ranee had come to a reconciliation, the latter having, 
through the mediation of the Jheend and Than^sur 
chiefs, obtained for her son a separate Jageer of 
50,000 Rupees per annum. The Raja now made some 
demur to render up the gun and necklace promised by 
his Ranee, but Runjeet Singh appealed to the invita- 
tion he had received, and his appeal being backed by the 
condition of his force, the two articles were given up 
according to promise, though with evident reluctance ; 
and Runjeet marched with them in possession to reduce 
Nurayutigurh, which was surrendered, and made over to 
the Aloowala chief, after an unsuccessful attempt to take 
it by storm, \^hich was attended with a loss of near 400 
killed and wounded. 