



INTRIGUES. 51 

the territory he had acquired, and which had been evacu- 
ated on the Shah's approach. Runjeet Singh was 
one of those who retired before the Shah, and on this 
last occasion he joined other Sirdars similarly circum- 
stanced with himself, or otherwise linked to his Misul^ 
and made an expedition across the Sutlej, where he em- 
ployed the interval" of the Shah's stay at Lah6r in a tour 
for the exaction of tribute/ and for the reduction to his 
authority of any towns or villages he could master. 

Upon the retirement of the Shah, Runjeet Singh 
began to entertain designs for securing Labor to him- 
self, and his mother-in-law, Suda Koonwur, encouraged 
and lent her aid to forward his views. The city was at 
this time in the joint possession of Chyt Singh, Mo- 
HUR Singh, and Saheb Singh. Runjeet Singh, 
however, by an opportune service to Zuman Shah, ob- 
tained from that prince ia grant with permission to take 
possession. The Afghan had been compelled to preci- 
pitate his retreat from the Punjab, by intelligence of 
designs from Persia on the side of Herat, having for their 
object the support of the claims of Shah Mahmood. 
On arriving at the Jhilem, that river was found swollen 
with temporary rain, so that the Afghan artillery could 
not be crossed. Not thinking it expedient to wait on 
this account. Shah Zuman wrote to Runjeet Singh, 
to extricate and forward to him the guns left behind, 
holding out the hope, that bis known wishes in respect to 
Lah6r might be complied with, if this duty were well 
performed. The politic Sikh raised eight, out of the 
twelve guns, from the bed of the river into which they 
had sunk, and forwarded them to the Shah, from whom he 
received in return the grant he desired. The remaining 

g 2 



52 LAHOR MASTERED BY RUNJI^T SINGH. A. D. 1799. 

four guns were raised only in 1823, and are now in the 
arsenal at Lahdr''^. 

Armed with this authority as an influence over the 
Mohummedan population of the town, and assisted by 
the credit and troops of Suda Koonwur, Runjeet 
Singh prepared an expedition for the seizure of the city 
of Lahdr. The three Sikh chiefs in possession were 
shameless in conduct, profligate and debauched, and 
neglectful of the means of securing themselves. They 
had few troops or retainers, and their administration was 
most unpopular. In order to prepare the way for the 
success of his scheme, Runj eet Singh deputed Kazee 
Ubdoor-ruhman, a native of Rusoolnugur, to open an 
intrigue with some of the principal Moosulman inha- 
bitants. Meer Mohkum, manager for Chyt Singh, 
with MoHUMMUD AsHiK and Meer Shadee, were 
won over to assist the project, and promised on the 
approach of Runjeet Singh, to open one of the gates 
to him; accordingly he marched, accompanied by his 
mother-in-law, and, having been admitted without oppo- 
sition, Chyt Singh and his two co-partners, were com- 
pelled to accept Jageers for subsistence; and Runjeet 
Singh thus established his own authority, and made 
arrangements to secure his conquest. His successful 
aggression and acquisition of a place so famous excited 
the jealousy of all rival Sirdars, and an assembly of troops 
for recovery of this city took place at Basim. Goolab 
Singh Bhungee, Saheb Singh of Goojrat, and Nu* 
JUM-ooD-DEEN of Kasoor, were the chiefs at the head of 