

* The fact of Runjeet Sing's having obtained aerant of Lahdr from 
the Afghan Sovereign, is not mentionea by Captain Murray. The state* 
ment, with the circumstances under which it was alleged to be procured, 
is made on the authority of Captain Wade. 



A. D. 1802. BIRTH OF KHURUK SINGH. 53 

the confederacy most active in hostility to Runjeet 
Singh. After a few months of debate however, and 
some fruitless skirmishes, finding the young chief well 
prepared, their army broke up, and the city was left ever 
after in Runjeet Singh's uninterrupted possession. 

The Moosulmans of Kasoor, a considerable town, stated 
to be about 25 k6s S. E. of Lah6r, incurred the just 
resentment of Runjeet Singh, as well by the part 
their chief had taken in this confederacy, as by depreda- 
tions since committed by them up to the gates of the city. 
His next enterprize was against their possessions, and in 
1801-2 Nujum-ood-deen was compelled to submit to 
terms, binding himself to furnish a quota of troops under 
his brother Kootub-ood-deen, and to become a feuda- 
tory of Runjeet Singh. In the same year the young 
chief, having proceeded to bathe in the sacred reservoir 
of Gooroo Ram-Das at Tarun-Turun, met there Sirdar 
FuTEH Singh, of the Aloowala Misul, and contracting 
a friendship with him, made an exchange of turbands. 

The year 1802 was marked by the birth* of Khuruk 
Singh, the present heir-apparent of Maha Raja Run- 
jeet Singh: his mother was Raj-Koonwur, daugh- 
ter of Khuj AN Singh of Nukee. In the same year, the 
fort of Cheniot held by JusA Singh, son of theBhungee 
chief, Kurum Singh Dooloo, was besieged, and, 
after a short resistance, taken by Runjeet Singh, who 
made to the expelled chief a trifling allowance for main- 
tenance. 

* Captain Wade places this event after the decease of DuL Singh, and 
pending measures to occupy his Jageer and fort of Aleepoor, which, 
according to Captain Murray, would make it in 1804. The year 1802, is, 
however, assigned as the date by both OlBcers. 



54 FURTHER ENTERPRIZES. A. D. 1802-3. 

In the month of December 1802, Runjeet Singh 
assembled his own and SuDA Koonwur's forces, and 
being joined by the Aloowala, the three united Misals 
fell suddenly on the family of GooLAB SiNGH, the last 
Bhungee Sirdar of note, who had been always at feud 
with Maha Singh when living, and was at the head of 
the confederacy which had attempted to recover Lah6r. 
GooLAB Singh had died in 1800, leaving a widownam- 
ed Ranee Soorha, and a son Goordut Singh, still 
a minor, under her guardianship. The moment was con* 
sidered favorable to break for ever the power of the 
Bhnngees. Accordingly, the widow was called upon to 
surrender the fort of Lohgurh in Umritsur, to give up the 
great Bhungee gun, and in other respects to submit to 
the confederates. Feeling unequal to resist, the helpless 
widow evacuated Lohgurh, and fled with her child, and 
the family has since sunk to indigence and obscurity. 

' Pending this operation, a domestic feud occurred in 
Kasoor; and, Nujum-ggd-deen being assassinated, was 
succeeded in the Sirdaree, by Kggtub-ood-deen, his 
brother. The juncture appearing favorable, Runjeet 
Singh moved down, with a large force of confederated 
Sikhs against that territory, but after plundering the 
open country for three months, finding he could make no 
impression on the strong holds which are numerous in 
the district, he accepted a pecuniary payment, and retired. 
In March of this year. Raja Sunsar Chund, of K&t 
-Kangra, in the hills, made a descent into the plains and 
plundered some villages in the territory of SuDA KooN- 
WUR, that is, belonging to the Ghunee Misul. She called 
for the aid of her son-in-law, who marched immediately 
with Futeh Singh Aloowala, and soon expelled the 