

* Formerly Aleepoor, a posBession of the Chitta Moosulmans. The. 
name was changed oy the Sikhs on their capturing the place in 1770. 



A. D. 1806. RUNJEEr VISITS HURDWAR. 67 

families settled about the Cbiinab and Jhylatn ; and, 
altUoagh the amount obtained in this first visit in the. 
way of tribute, or by gifts, was not large, the effect 
of the operations of the season was beneficial for the 
ulterior views of the aspiring Sikh, for the chiefs, as 
far as the Indus, began to see to what quarter their hopes 
and fears must thenceforward be directed : most of them 
at once made their election for submission to the ruler of 
Labor, and withdrew from this period from further con- 
nexion with the Kabool court or its officers. 

In February 1805 Runjeet Singh returned to his 
capital, which was now established at Lahdr, and cele- 
brating there the Hoolee Saturnalia, he went afterwards 
with a slight attendance to the annual fair held at the 
time of performing ablutions in the Ganges at Hurdwar. 
The ceremonies of his religion being there completed, hei 
returned towards the beginning of June, and employed the 
rains in farming oat the revenues of the districts retained 
in his personal administration to the highest bidders. This 
has ever been his only scheme of revenue managements 
The farmer has full powers even of life and death over 
those committed to his tender mercies, and his lease is a 
mere licence to rob. 

After the Dusera of 1805, the Sikh army was again led 
by Runjeet Singh into the Mohummedan Territory be« 
tween the Chunab and Indus, and the chief of Jhung was 
called upon to settle for an annual tribute, the demand 
upon him being now raised to 120,000 rupees. Before 
however this negociation could be brought to a conclusion, 
Runjeet Singh was recalled by intelligence of the near 
approach of Juswunt Rao Holkur and Ameee Khan 

H 



58 HOLKUR'S flight to liAHOR. A. B. 1805-6. 

from the east, pursued by the British army under Lord 
Lake. Futeh Singh Aloowala was accordingly 
left to make arrangements with the chiefs of the west, 
and RuNJEET hasteningback in person to Umritsur, met 
there the fugitive Muhratta, with whom he had no easy 
part to play. Juswunt Rao threatened to continue 
his flight westward towards the Kabool dominions. 
Lord Lake however had arrived on the Beah or Beas, 
and was prepared to follow, and it was neither convenient 
nor wise to permit operations of the kind that must 
ensue, to be carried on in the Punjab. On the other hand 
RuNJEET Singh, though he would have proved an use- 
ful auxiliary to either party, was sensible of his inability 
to offer open resistance. In this state of things the rela- 
tions he maintained with Juswunt Rao Holkur were 
friendly, but not encouraging, and that chief being disap- 
pointed in the hope of raising the Sikh nation to a 
co-operation in hostility with him against the British, 
yielded to the difficulties by which he was surrounded, 
and made his terms with Lord Lake in a treaty conclud- 
ed on the 24th December 1805. Friendly engagements 
were further exchanged by the British Commander with 
RuNJEET Singh, and the Aloowala Sirdar ; and in the 
course of January 1806 the two armies, which had inspired 
so much alarm in the Punjab, returned to Hindoostan, 
leaving the Sikh chiefs to celebrate the Hoolee unembar- 
rassed by their presence, and with joy and rejoicings 
commensurate to the fears they had entertained. Run J ebt 
Singh's excesses at this festival produced a disease which 
confined him for four months. Towards the end of the 
rains, he re-appeared in a new field, and entered on mea- 
sures which in their sequel had material influence on bis 
future destiny and fortunes. 