

While engaged before Nurayungurh, the old chief 
Tara Singh Ghyba, who was serving with Runjeet 
Singh, died, and his followers secretly conveyed the 
corpse across the Sutlej to his fort of Rahoon, where the 
funeral obsequies were performed, and the widow and 
sons made preparation to maintain their possessions. 
While the body however was yet on the pyre, Runjeet 
Singh's detachment, whichhad followed on theevent being 



A. D. 1807. BIRTH OF SHEER SINGH. 63 

ascertained, arrived to demand a surrender of treasures, 
and to enforce a resumption of the chiefs territory. After 
a slight resistance, the family was compelled to submit, and 
though the sons at first received a small provision for 
subsistence, they were soon deprived of even this means 
of support, and have since lived in indigence. On his 
route back from Nurayungurh, Runjeet Singh seized 
Moonda, south of the Sutlej, from the son of Dhurum 
Singh, and sold it to the Jheend Sirdar : and Bhulolpoor 
and Bhurtgurh were similarly taken from Bhughaeel 
Singh's widow. In December, Runjeet Singh re- 
turned to Lahdr, and was presented by his wife, Mehtab- 
KooNWUR, with twins. The boys were named Sheer 
Singh and Tara Singh, but Runjeet has never fully 
acknowledged them as his own offspring. Mehtab-Koon- 
WUR's fidelity had for some time been suspected by her 
husband, and she had, in consequence, been living with her 
mother, Suda Koon WUR. The report ran, that the boys 
were procured by the latter from a carpenter and weaver, 
and were produced as born to her daughter, the public 
liaving for some time previously been prepared for the 
birth, by reports circulated of Mehtab being with child. 
Sheer Singh has latterly been honored with military 
commands and a Jageer, and was fortunate in having 
been the leader of the expedition, wherein the Mohum- 
medan pretender, Seyud Ahmed was slain in 1831; but 
neither before nor since this event, has he ever been 
recognized by Runjeet as his own son, and Tara 
Singh is treated with uniform neglect. 

The commencement of 1808 wasmarked-by the seizure 
of Pathun Kot, under the Kangra hills, belonging to 
J YMUL Ghunea, and by exactions from chiefs in the hills 



64 ALARM OF EASTERN CHIEFS. A. B. 1808« 

and plains in that direction. Mohkum Chund Dbwan 
was employed simultaneously in settling arrangements 
with the dependents of the Duleeala Misul, at the head of 
which Tara Singh Ghyba had continued, while he lived. 
Most of the feudatories were confirmed on jdieir agreeing 
to transfer their allegiance, and furnish contingents of horse 
to be constantly in attendance. Seeal-Kot and Sheikhoo* 
poora, south of the Sutlej, were next seized, and annexed 
to the immediate territory of the Lahor chief by Mohkum 
Chund, and the Dewan being kept in the field during 
the rains, seized various other places on both sides of the 
Sutlej, from the Anundpoor Mukawal valley downwards^ 
and confirmed to his master all that had formerly be- 
longed to Tara Singh or to Bhughaeel Singh. 