



A. D. 1806. RUNJEET CROSSES THE SUTLEJ. 69 

The Rajas of Puteeala and Naba were at feud on 
account of some lands, situated between the village of 
Doluddee and the town and fort of Naba. The Jheend 
chief. Raja Bhag Singh, was the ally of Naba, and so 
were the Ladwa and Ky thul chiefs, but their united forces 
were unequal to a contest with their powerful neighbour 
of Puteeala. In this extremity, Bhag Singh, of Jheend, 
the maternal uncle of Runjeet, was deputed to invite 
his assistance to the weaker party ; and, the Dusera was 
no sooner over, than the ruler of Labor hastened across 
the Sutlej to take part in this quarrel. He passed the 
river at Loodeeana, and mastering the place, presented it 
to Raja Bhag Singh in exclusion of Ranee Nooroon- 
NissA, mother of Rao Ilias, to whom it had belonged. 
Saneewal was next seized from another defenceless 
widow,* this class of occupants being regarded by RuN- 
JEET as his legitimate prey. The place was given in 
Jageer to MohkumChund Dewan, but restored after- 
wards on realization of a Nuzurana of 30,000 Rupees. 
Driving the Puteeala troops out of Doluddee, the invader 
approached Munsoorpoor, where Maha . Raja Saheb 
Singh, successortoUMUR Singh, was in position with his 
main body. The Maha Raja, by a sum of money and the 
present of apiece of artillery, propitiated the Lah6r chief, 
and JuswUNT Singh, of Naba, contributed also to satis- 
fy his cupidity, whereupon he was induced to remove the 
scourge of his ill-organized all-ravaging army back into 
the Punjab. Doluddee was restored to Puteeala at the 
intercession of Raja Bhag Singh, and Runjeet Singh 
taking the opportunity to pass the Dewalee and perform 
bis ablutions in the holy tank of Thanesur, re-crossed the 

• Maee Li;ch,hmee, widow of Sodha Singh— She invited the aid of 
Runjeet Singh, being at issue with her son, who held her at the time in 
confinement. 

H 2 



60 KASOOR TAKEN. A. D. 1806-7. 

Sutlej after that festival, and bent his course via Rahoon, 
the residence of Tara Singh Ghyba=^ to the holy fires 
of Jawala Mookhee. Here he met Raja SUNSAR Chund^ 
of Kangra, who solicited his aid against Umur Singh, 
the Goorkha commander, before whom all the chiefs of the 
hills, from the Gogra to the Sutlej, had fallen in succession, 
and whose detachments were then ravaging Kangra. 
The price demanded by Runjeet for his services being 
deemed excessive, the interview led to no present 
arrangement between the chiefs, but as the difficulties of 
the Hill Raja increased, the negociation was afterwards 
renewed. 

The year 1807 was marked by the lapse and resump- 
tion of Pursroor and Chumara, possessions of NuR 
Singh deceased, an old Sikh Sirdar. A Jageer for 
mere subsistence was assigned to the son. Runjeet 
next prepared a formidable expedition against Kasoor, 
which had long been a thorn in the side of his power, and 
from the conquest of which, as being a Moosulman pos- 
session, he hoped for an access of credit and popularity 
amongst his own sect and nation. In February 1807 he 
invaded the territory with a large force, and Kootub- 
ood-deen was compelled to shut himself up in bis for- 
tress at Kasoor. Internal seditions and broils completed 
the ruin of this Putban family, and in Marcb the chief 
surrendered at discretion. He was left in possession of 
a small territory south of the Sutlej, and bound to furnish 
a contingent of troops on demand. Kasoor itself and 