



A. D. 1811. SHAH ZUMAN COMES TO LAHOR. 87 

RuNJBET Singh regulated his conduct, \iz. the deter- 
mination to level into subjects and dependents, owing all 
to himself, every one who was in a position to assert 
independence, or who prided himself on a separate 
origin, and enjoyed patrimonies, won by his own or his 
ancestor's swords. Runjeet Singh, who was himself 
free spoken, and allowed great latitude in conversation to 
his courtiers, received at this period a rebuke for the grasp^ 
ing disposition he displayed in his treatment of the old 
Sikh, Sirdars from JoDH Singh Ramghureea, himself a 
reduced chief of the class. When taking his leave to 
join MoHKUM Chund in the operations against the 
Fyzoollapooreea Sirdar, Runjeet Singh ordered him 
presents as a mark of favor. He begged, however, with 
characteristic frankness, that such honors might be dis- 
pensed with in his case, for he should deem himself for- 
tunate in these times, if allowed to keep his own turband 
on his head. Runjeet Singh took no offence at this 
freedom, but smiled and told him to be faithful and of 
good cheer. 

The year 1811 closed with a visit to Lah6r by Shah 
ZuMAN, the brother in exile and misfortune of Shah 
Shooja, with the addition of deprivation of sight. He 
tame with his family and dependents in the course of 
M ovember, but experiencing only neglect from the Sikh 
chief, returned soon after to Rawul-Pindee, where he 
bad been residing for some months. Shah Shooja, 
since his failure in September to obtain entrance or recep- 
tion at Mooltan, embarked in a desperate attempt to push 
his fortune again beyond the Indus. He was, however, 
defeated with the loss of his principal officer, Ukrum 
Khan, and was compelled to seek personal safety in 



€8 THE EX-PRINCES APPLY TO BRITISH GOVT. A.D. 181 !• 

secret flight. The brothers had, in the early part of the 
year, deputed a son of Zuman Shah to Loodeeana, to 
learn if there was any hope of assistance in men or money 
from the British Government. The Prince, however, 
though received with much attention and civility, was 
distinctly informed, that no such expectations mast be 
entertained by either member of the royal family of 
Kabool. 



CHAPTER SIXTH. 



A. D. 1812—1813. 



Marriage of Kliuruk Singh, the heir-apparent of Runjeet 
Singh, attended by Colonel Ochterlony, Acquisition 
of the Kohi-noor Diamond from Shah Shooja. Severe 
treatment and flight of that Prince to Loodeeana. 
Conquest of Kashmeer, by Futeh Khan Vuzeer, and 
acquisition of Attuk, by Runjeet Singh. 

In the beginning of the year 1812, the Court of Labor 
was occupied in preparations, for celebrating with due 
magnificence the marriage of the heir-apparent KooN- 
WUR Khuruk Singh, with the daughter of Jymul 
Ghuneea, the same chief from whom Runjeet Singh 
had taken Puthan-Kot, in the Jalundhur Turaee. An 
invitation was sent to Colonel Ochterlony at Loo- 
deeana to honor the ceremonies with his presence, and 
an envoy being despatched to conduct him to Lah6r, 
the Colonel crossed the Sutlej on the 23d of January, 
with a small escort, to which, by particular desire of 
Runjeet, a galloper gun was attached, the Sikh Chief 
haviug intense curiosity to see how this branch of artillery 