



A.D. 1810-11. SHAH MVHMOOD CROSSES THE INDUS. 63 

In December ISIO, Saheb Singh, who had been 
expelled from Goojrat, was invited to return, and invest- 
ed with a considerable Jageer, and Bagh Singh 
Holoowala was released from conGnement, and similarly 
honored. In the same month, the release of Nidhan 
Singh was obtained by the Bydee priests, who felt 
their honor concerned in his treatment, after one of their 
body had been inveigled to give a personal guarantee. 
They accordingly sat Dhurna on Runjeet, until he con- 
sented to release his prisoner: NiDHAN Singh would^ 
however, accept no Jageer, or stipend, but retired from 
the Lahdr dominions, and took service with the governor 
ofKashmeer. 

In January 1811, Futeh Khan, of Saheewal, was 
liberated with his family at the intercession of an Oodasee 
priest, and retired to Bnhawulpoor. A small Jageer 
was likewise conferred on Dhurum Singh, the ejected 
proprietor ofDhurum-Kot, in the Jalundhur, after which, 
Runjeet Singh proceeded on a tour to Pind-Dadur- 
Khan, in which vicinity he captured three small forts 
belonging to Moosulman Chiefs ; but on the 24th Febru- 
ary, intelligence reached his camp, that Shah Muhmood 
had crossed the Indus with 12,000 Afghans, before whom 
the inhabitants of the country were flying. Runjeet 
Singh immediately took up a position at Rawul-Pindee, 
and deputed his secretary, Hukeem Uzeez-ood-Deen, 
to enquire of the Shah his views in this incursion. This 
agent was crossed by emissaries from the Shah, on their 
way to Rawul-Pindee, for the purpose of explaining, that 
the punishment of Ata Mohummud, and the governors 
of Atuk and Kashmeer, who had aided Shah Shoojah's 
late attempt on Peshawur, was the only object of the 

L 2 



64 KHOOSHHAL SINGH'S RISE TO FAVOR. A. D. 1811, 

present march; whereupon Runjeet Singh, being 
relieved from his apprehensions, waited upon the Shah, and 
after a friendly interview, both returned to their respec- 
tive capitals. Runjeet Singh found at Lah6r, a car- 
riage from Calcutta, which had been forwarded as a 
present from the Governor General, Lord Minto. This 
being the first vehicle on springs, in which he had ever 
sat, the novelty and ease of motion were highly gratify* 
ing to him, and an agent was deputed to Calcutta to 
make suitable acknowledgments for the present. The 
Chief, however, was too wily to adopt generally this mode 
of conveyance, which would have imposed the necessity 
of first making roads. 

In April and May, Runjeet Singh had armies in 
three directions, one about Kangra, collecting tributes, 
a second acting against Bhimbhur and Regaoree, and the 
third, under his son Khuruk Singh, accompanied by 
Dewan Mohkum Chunp, resuming the possessions of 
the Nukee Chiefs. Runjeet Singh remained in per- 
son at his capital, directing the whole, and this period of 
bis life is marked by the sudden rise to favor of a young 
Gour Brahmin, named Khooshhal Singh, upon whom 
the most extravagant gifts were daily lavished, and who 
was raised to the important and lucrative ofiice of Deohree 
Wala, or Lord Chamberlain, with the rank of Raja, 
and vested besides with extensive Jageers. Runjbei! 
Singh had ever led a most dissolute life; his debauch- 
eries, particularly during the Hoolee and Dussera, were 
shameless, and the scenes exhibited on such occasions 
openly before the Court, and even in the streets of Lah6r, 
were the conversation of Hindoostan, and rival the 
irorst that is reported in history of the profligacies of 