



^•D. 1809#. GETS POSSESSION OF KANGRA. 75? 

the forces of the confederate hill chiefs, who were at the 
time engaged in the attempt to cut ofTUMUR Singh's sup-> 
plies, and so compel his retirement. Umur Singh made 
an effort to deprecate this interference, and sent to offer 
to Runjeet Singh, a money equivalent for Kangra. 
The fort, however, had a value in the eye of the aspiring 
Sikh, which made him regardless of the temptation offered' 
to his avarice. This stronghold has the reputation in 
Hindoostan of being impregnable. Sunsar Chund> 
notwithstanding his engagement, could not reconcile it 
to his honor to part with the fort, and evaded Runjeet 
Singh's importunity for a Sikh garrison to be admitted 
within its walls. In August, having proceeded in person 
to the vicinity, and being still put off with excuses, the 
Sikh's patience became exhausted. He accordingly 
placed the Raja's son, who was in attendance with him, 
under restraint, and having ascertained that the army of 
Umur Singh was in great straight for supplies, and short 
of ammunition, he directed a chosen body of Sikhs to 
advance boldly to the gate, and demand entrance. They 
suffered considerably in killed and wounded as they 
ascended, but on reaching the gate were received into 
the fort, which thus fell into the power of Runjeet 
Singh, on the 24th of August 1809. Umur Singh 
being foiled in his purpose, and having no desire to involve 
himself with the Sikhs, came to an understanding with 
Runjeet Singh, and, having secured by his connivance 
the means of transport, retired across the Sutlej. 

On the 31st of September, Runjeet Singh having 
completed arrangements with the hill chiefs, and taken 
the. necessary steps to secure his possession of Kangra^ 
fetarned to the Jalundhur Dooab, and seized the Jageer 



78 RE-ORGANIZES HIS ARMY. A. D. 1809. 

of Bhughaeel Singh's eldest widow, who had recently 
died there : his Dewan was similarly employed, in seiz- 
ing the districts of Bhoop Singh Fyzoollapoorea, whose 
person he secured treacherously at an interview. 

It was at this time, and influenced apparently by 
observation of the efficiency and discipline maintained 
by the British Sipahees with Mr. Metcalfe, that RuN- 
JEET Singh commenced the formation of regular batta- 
lions on the British model, entertaining for the purpose 
Poorbees, that is, natives of the Gangetic provinces, 
and Sikhs from the other side of the Sutlej. These he 
formed into bodies of three and four hundred, and procured 
deserters from the British ranks, whom he employed to 
drill them, and nominated to be commanders with superior 
pay. His artillery was also formed into a separate corps 
Under a Darogha, or superintendent; and the cavalry 
attached to himself, he divided into two classes, one called 
the Ghor-chur Suivars, and the other the Ghor-chur>Khas, 
the first being paid in money, and the latter by Jageers, 
both classes however were mounted on horses, the proper- 
ty of the state* 