

Sixth. Merchants conveying articles, the produce of 
Europe, for the use of the detachments atLoodeeana, or of 
any other British force or detachment, should not be sub- 
ject to transit duty, but must be protected in their passage 
through the Sikh country. 

Seventh. In like manner horses for the cavalry when 
furnished with passports from competent officers, must be 
exempt from all tax. 

The above declaration being published and circulated, 
became the charter of rights, to which the chiefs have 
since looked, and appealed, for the settlement of all ques- 
tions that have arisen between them and the British 
Government. The matters specifically provided for, were 
those that immediately pressed. There has been much 
however of intricate dispute between rival candidates for 
Sirdarees ; — between chiefs who had divided their terri- 
tory before the declaration of protection was published, 
and had bound themselves to their co-proprietors by 
mutual obligations ; between chiefs and their dependents 
of the Sikh nation, as well as Zumeendars, as to the 
extent of right and authority possessed at the time of 
the declaration of protection ; — and, perhaps more than 
all, boundary disputes and quarrels regarding participated 



74 COLONEL OCHTERLON\'S MEASURES. A. D. 1812. 

rights. These differences, whenever they have arisen, 
have required adjustment and arbitration by the British 
officers on the spot, and have formed the subject of con- 
tinual references to the Supreme Government at Cal- 
cutta. The regulation of successions was also a matter, 
that from the first required to be undertaken by the pro- 
tecting authority, and failing heirs of any kind according 
to Sikh custom and law, the escheat is considered to fall 
to the protecting state. 

Until the year 1812, the duties of protection, and the 
settlement of these mutual disputes, though giving con- 
stant employment to Colonel Ochterlony, the British 
officer, appointed superintendent of Sikh affairs, produc- 
ed nothing of sufficient moment to require relation. In 
that year, however, the disorders in Puteeala consequent 
upon the Raja's imbecility, produced a crisis that called 
for an exertion of^ authoritative interference. The pro- 
tected territory was invaded by a public depredator, for 
whose punishment and expulsion the Puteeala Raja was 
called upon to furnish a quota of horse. This chief holds 
territory yielding a revenue of more than thirty lakhs of 
rupees, yet the whole force he could furnish on the 
occasion consisted only of two hundred horse of the very 
worst description, and these arrived so late in the field a3 
to be of no use. Colonel Ochterlony, taking with 
him the Chiefs of Jheend and Naba, proceeded to Putee- 
ala to remonstrate with Muha Raja Saheb Singh upon 
the evidence of inefficiency afforded by this state of things, 
and it was endeavoured to persuade him to discard th^ 
low favorites: who ate up his revenues, and prevented 
those better disposed from carrying on any consistent 
system of government, and from introducing the desired 