



A. D. 1811. IMPUTATIONS TO WHICH IT GAVE RISE. 85 

ancient Rome. The Chief himself would parade tho 
streets in a state of inebriety, on the same elephant with 
his coartezans, amongst whom one named Mora acquire 
ed most celebrity by her shamelessness, and by the favor 
with which she was treated. Coin was at one time struck 
in her name, and her influence seemed without bounds. 
In August of this year, however, she was discarded, and 
sent to be incarcerated in Puthan-Kot, and the favor she 
enjoyed seemed to be transferred to the Brahmin youth 
and his brothers. If this conduct in the ruler of Lahdr 
should excite surmises, as to the motives of the ex- 
traordinary attachment shown to a graceful youth of 
the appearance of Khooshhal Singh, the reader 
must yet make allowances for the habits in which the 
Chief was brought up, and the examples by which he 
was surrounded. The Sikhs are notoriously addicted to 
paederasty, and other unnatural lusts, and the worst that 
is said of Roman and Grecian indulgence in such propensi* 
ties, would find a parallel at the Durbars of the Chiefs 
of this nation on either side of the Sutlej. The truth of 
history forbids the veil being thrown altogether over such 
facts and traits of character, howsoever revolting it may 
be to allude to them. But the reputation of Run J bet 
Singh, though justly, it is feared, tainted with the foul 
blemish, does not sufier in the eyes of his nation from 
this cause, howsoever the circumstance may be regarded 
by strangers. 

Of the twelve original Misuls, or confederacies of 
the Sikhs, there were now remaining in the Punjab, 
only that of Run J set Singh himself, the Sookur- 
chukea, with the Ghuneea, Ramgurhea, and Aloowali^ 
all closely associated with him, and ranged it may be 



86 BHOODH SINGH EXPELLED. A. D. 1811. 

«aid under his standard. The Phoolkea and Nihung 
Misuls, which being settled east of the Sutlej, enjoyed 
the advantage of British protection, and the Fyzoolla- 
poorea, which had possessions on both sides that river, 
and the head of which Boodh Singh Sirdar had 
uniformly declined to give his personal attendance on 
RuNJEET, complete the list which Runjeet Singh 
was aiming further to reduce. The conduct of Boodh 
Singh at last brought down upon him the vengeance of 
the Lah6r ruler. On the 19th September 1811, Dew an 
MoHKUM Chund, attended by Jodh Singh Ram- 
GURHEEA, and other Sirdars, entered the Jalnndhur 
Dooab, with the declared design of seizing the FyzooUa- 
poorea possessions in the Punjab. Boodh Singh 
waited not for the attack, but fled immediately to 
Loodeeana for personal security. His troops, influenced 
by the point of honor, made a resistance of some days, 
1)efore surrendering the principal forts of Jalundhur and 
Puttee, but gave both up on the 6th and 7th of October, 
before any impression had been made on the walls, or 
defences, and after a needless sacrifice of lives, Boodh 
Singh has since been content with the lot of a protected 
Sikh chief, living on the means aflbrded by his posses- 
sions East and South of the Sutlej. In December .of 
the same year, Nidhan Singh, son of the old 
Ghuneea Chief Jy Singh, was deprived of the sepa- 
rate Jageer assigned to him, in order to secure the 
Sirdaree to his elder brother's widow, SuDA KooNWUR. 
His person was seized and placed under restraint at 
Labor, while a detachment marched to capture his two 
forts of Hajeepoor and Phoolwara, no tie of affinity being 
recognized as a motive for deviating from the systematic 
prosecution of the course of policy, by which it appears 