



A. D. 1312. PUTSEALA RAJA DEPOSED. 75 

improvements into the administration. , The attempt to 
procure a change of ministers by persuasion failed, but 
the Raja made many professions of a determination to 
exert himself to effect the desired reforms. Being left 
again to himself, his conduct became so violent and irre- 
gular, as to betray symptoms of an aberration of reason ^ 
and the Colonel was compelled to proceed again to his 
capital, in order to allow his outraged subjects and depen- 
dents to put things on a better footing, and to prevent 
the Raja's removal from power from producing convul- 
sions, or a breach of the general tranquillity. Saheb 
Singh was now deposed, and placed under limited 
restraint. AsKOOR Ranee, his wife, in association 
with a shrewd Brahmin minister named Nundee Rao, 
was appointed regent for the heir-apparent, the pre- 
sent Raja, KuRUM Singh, who was then a minor, and 
affairs were conducted in his name. Maharaja Saheb 
Singh died a few months after his deposal. The 
Ranee's doubtful reputation for chastity, and knowa 
character for turbulence and intrigue, made her admi^ 
nistration unpopular, while the profusions of Saheb 
Singh had secured him many partisans. Hence the part 
taken by the British Superintendent in the establishment 
of this scheme of administration, although his motives 
were appreciated by the discerning, made a great sensa- 
tion amongst the Sikhs, by the lower order of whom, and 
particularly by the turbulent, and designing, the Raja's 
removal from power was regarded as an act of tyranny and 
injustice, produced by intrigue, and influenced by worse 
motives. When Colonel Ochterlony was at Puteeala, 
in prosecution of these measures, he was attacked in his 
palanquin by an Ak&lee fanatic, who with his drawn sword 
had nearly taken the Colonel's life. He escaped, however, 

K 2 



76 RUNJEET PROCEEDS INTO THE HILLS. A. D. 1809; 

with slight wounds by seizing hold of the sword, and 
the assassin being secured^ was sentenced to be confined 
for life at Dehlee. 



In the above notice of occurrences east of the Sutlej^ 
the events of the Punjab have been anticipated. It is 
now time to resume the narrative of Runjeet Singh's 
usurpations, and of the expeditions and enterprizes by 
which he consolidated and extended his dominions. 

The first operation in which the Lah6r army was engag- 
ed after Mr. Metcalfe's departure in May, 1809, was 
against Kangra, in the hills ; but before moving in that 
direction, Runjeet Singh gave order to place the fort 
of Feel6r, on the Sutlej opposite to Loodeeana, and also 
Govind-gurh, in Umritsur, where his treasure was, and 
still is deposited, in the best possible condition for de- 
fence. The walls were rebuilt, and a deep ditch, scarped 
with masonry, was added to the works of both strong- 
holds, which being completed, the chief moved into the 
bills. 

Kangra was at this time besieged by Umur Singh 
Th&pa, the Goorkha commander, but held out against 
him. The garrison, however, being reduced to extremity. 
Raja SuNSAR Chund tendered the place to Runjeet 
Singh, on condition of his lending troops to raise the 
siege, and expel the Goorkhas from the territory west 
and north of the Sutlej. The engagement was gladly 
entered into by Run J eet, and on the 28th May, he arrived 
with his army at Puthan-Kot, in the Jalnndhur Turaee, a 
possession of Jymul Ghuneea, which he seized and 
confiscated. Thence he sent a detachment to strengthen 