



CHAPTER FIFTH. 



A. D. 1809 to 1811. 



British arrangements with the Chiefs east of the Sutlej* 
Transactions in the Punjab tending to the further 
aggrandizement of Runjeet Singh, 

JLHE declarations with which the British force under 
Colonel OcHTERLONY advanced to the Sutlej, were in 
strict conformity with the application, made by the chiefs 
occapying the country between the Indus and Sutlej, 
through the mission deputed by them to Dehlee in March 
1808. Protection was promised, and no demand of 
tribute or of contribution of any kind made, to defray the 
charges incurred by the obligation to afford it. The 
recency of their experience of the rapacity of a Sikh 
army, and the conviction that there could be no security 
to themselves, and still less to their families, under a ruler 
like the chief who had now the ascendant in the Sikh 
nation, made all the Sirdars rejoice that their prayer had 
been acceded to by the British Government ; and the 
advance of its forces to the Sutlej was looked upon in 
consequence with no jealousy, but as a measure necessary 
to effect the purpose contemplated. 



72 BRITISH DECLARATION OF PROTECTION. A.D. 1809w 

A treaty having been now concluded with Runjeet 
Singh, it became necessary to fix, somewhat more speci- 
fically than had been hitherto done, the relations that were 
to subsist henceforward between the protecting power 
and its protected dependents. It was determined to give 
the desired explanation of the views of the British 
Government on this subject, by a general proclamation, 
rather than by entering into any separate engagement 
with the numerous chiefs afi^ected by the measure. Ac- 
cordingly on the 6th May 1809, an Italanama, or general 
declaration, was circulated to the Sirdars, intimating to 
them as follows. 

First. That the territories of Sirhind and Malooa, (the 
designation assumed by the Sikhs of Puteeala, Naba, 
Jheend, and Kythul) had been taken under British pro- 
tection, and Runjeet Singh had bound himself by treaty 
to exercise in future no interference therein. 

Second. That it was not the intention of the British 
Government to demand any tribute from the Chiefs and 
Sirdars benefiting by this arrangement. 

Third. That the Chiefs and Sirdars would be permit- 
ted to exercise, and were for the future secured in, the 
rights and authorities they possessed in their respective 
territories prior to, find at the time of the declaration of 
protection by the British Government. 

Fourth. That the Chiefs and Sirdars should be bourn} 
to offer every facility and accommodation to British 
troops and detacbn^nts, employed ia securing the prote<> 
tion guaranteed, or for purposes otherwise connected with 



A. D. 1809. OBLIGATIONS UNDER IT. 78 

the general interests of the state, whenever the same 
might be marched into, or stationed in, their respective 
territories. 

Fifth. In case of invasion or war, the Sirdars were to 
join the British standard with their followers, whenever 
called npon. 