



A.D. 1810. THE SIEGE FAILS. 81 

supply of grain had been laid in» and the fort contained 
an abundance of fresh water. The little impression made 
on the walls by the Sikh artillery confirmed the courage 
of the defenders. The great Bhungee gun, which dis* 
charged a ball of two and a half maunds kuchha, had 
been brought down for the siege, but the materials for 
such an operation were so defective in the Sikh army, 
and the necessary science and experience were so want- 
ing, that RuNJEET Singh having suffered the loss of 
many valuable men and officers, and particularly of Atar 
Singh, a favorite and confidential companion, who was 
blown up in a mine, was compelled to grant terms to 
MozUFFUR Khan, and retired on receiving payment of 
a lakh and 80,000 rupees. On the 25th of April, he 
returned to Lahdr, mortified greatly by his ill success, and 
throwing the blame on his officers and Jageerdars. He 
now devoted himself to increase the number of his regular 
battalions, and formed a corps of Sikhs, called, ** Orderly 
Khas,'^ or select orderlies, to whom he gave superior pay, 
and the advantage of carrying his dusfuks, or orders, ta 
chiefs, and districts, on whom they were thus billeted at 
high rates. A horse artillery was likewise formed, and 
improvements were set on foot in every branch of the ser- 
vice, which were all closely superintended by Runjebt 
in person. 

Gundha Singh, who in January preceding, bad 
secured by the sacrifice of his father's treasures, a tern* 
porary confirmation of his estates, did not long enjoy 
what he purchased so dearly. In June 1810, a strong 
detachment was sent to Vuzeerabad, and the entire 
possessions of the late JoDH Singh were sequestered, a 
few villages only being left to .afford subsistence to the 



82 AN INSTANCE OF BAD FAITH. A. D. 181Q 

youthful victim of this insidious policy. The surviving 
widow of Bhugaeel Singh, Ranee Ram-Koonwur, 
was at the same time expelled from Buhadurpoor, which 
she held as a Jageer for subsistence. She took refuge at 
Loodeeana, and obtained a few villages which had belong- 
ed to her husband, on the protected side of the Sutlej. 

• 

• After the Dussera, in the month of October following, 
RuNJEET Singh moved in person to Ramnugur, on the 
Chunab, and summoned to his presence Nidhan Singh 
of Huttoo. . The Chief refused attendance, except under 
guarantee of a Sodee, or Sikh priest, whereupon his fort 
of Dushut was invested on the 17th October. RuNJEET 
Singh's batteries, however, opened against the place 
without avail in producing a surrender, and an attempt 
made to influence the garrison, by severities, and ill usage 
of their wives and families, who fell into the besieger's 
power, was equally ineffective. The Sikh Priest Bydee 
JUMEEYUT Singh was then employed to mediate for 
the submission of this spirited Chief, and upon his 
guarantee and the promise of a Jageer, the Sirdar waited 
on RuNJEET Singh, who regardless of the solemnity 
of the engagement he had contracted, put him in irons 
on the 30th October. In the beginning of Novem- 
ber, Bagh Singh Huloowala, with his son Soobha 
Singh, who were in camp with their followers, fell under 
the displeasure of the Lah6r Chief, and were placed 
under restraint, and all their territorial possessions 
confiscated; after which Runjeet Singh returned to 
his capital, and detached Mohkum-Chund Dewan to 
enforce the collection of tribute, and to complete arrange- 
ments in the hills, where the Rajas of Bhimbhur and 
Rajaoree, and the tribe of Chibh-Bhdo, were refractory*. 