

JoDH Singh, of Vuzeerabad, died towards the close of 
1809; and oh the first day of the new year Runjeet 
Singh Arrived there to enforce the resumption of his 
territorial possessions. A large sum of money was ten* 
dered by GtJNDHA SiNGH, the son of the deceased, as the 
price of his confirmation, and the Lah6r chiefs avarice 
being tempted, he refrained from present occupation of 
the estates, and conferred the Shal and Turband of inves- 
titure on the heir. A dispute between the father and son 
of Goojrat affording the opportunity, he succeeded ia 



A.D. 1810. SHAH SHOOJAH JOINS RUNJEET. 79 

expelling both, and in confiscating that territory ; after 
which, he proceeded to the country east of the Jihlum, as 
far as Saheewal, and exacted tribute and contributions from 
the Balooch and other Moosulman chiefs of that quarter. 

On the 2nd of February, in the midst of these opera- 
tions, it was announced to Runjeet Singh, that Shah- 
Shoo j a was approaching to seek refuge in his territory, 
having been compelled to yield to the ascendancy 
acquired by his brother. Shah Mahmood, through the 
vigour and talents of the Vuzeer Futeh Khan. The 
Ex-Shah joined the camp of Runjeet at Khooshafo on 
the day following, viz. the 3rd February 1810, and was 
received with much outward respect, Runjeet having 
gone forth in person to conduct him in, and sending a 
Zeeafut of 1250 Rs. to his tents upon his alighting. The 
Shah, however, returned to Rawul Pindee on the 12th 
February, to join his brother ZuMAN Shah, leaving 
Runjeet ^ingh to prosecute his operations against 
the Moosulman chiefs east ofthe^^^^psi A succour of 
men and money had been tendered bj^i^li^ Government of 
Kashmeer, and by Ata MoHUMMUlirjEHAN, son of the 
old Vuzeer Sheer Mohummud ; and, thus aided. Shah 
Shooja made an attack on Peshawur, and was received 
there on the 20th of March- In September following, 
however, he was expelled by Mohummud Uzeem, bro- 
ther of Futeh Khan, and driven again across the 
Indus, whereupon he endeavoured to obtain admission 
into Mooltan without effect. In the mean time, however, 
events of interest had occurred in the Punjab. 

The Saheewal chief had accepted terms from Runjeet 
Singh on the 25th of January, but failing to pay the 



80 MOOLTAN BESIEGED. A. D. 1810. 

entire amount agreed upon (80,000 rupees,) that town 
was invested on the 7th February. Futeh Khan, the 
Sirdar, surrendered; but upon some demur in giving up 
a dependency of Saheewal, named Lukhomut, he was sent 
in irons to Lah6r, and kept there in close confinement 
with all his family, the whole of his estate being seques- 
tered. On the 15th February, Runjeet's army was 
before Ooch,h, the proprietors of which place, Seyuds of 
Geelan and Bokhara, waited on the Sikh with horses, and 
this conduct, added to the estimation in which their tribe 
is held for sanctity by both Hindoos and Mohummedans, 
propitiated the chief, and they were left in possession 
under an engagement to pay tribute. On the 20th Febru- 
ary, such was the rapidity with which RuNJEET Singh 
prosecuted his measures, the whole Sikh army was before 
Mooltan ravaging the surrounding territory, consequent- 
ly upon a refusal by Mozuffur Khan to pay the sum 
of three lakhs of rupees, which had been demanded from 
him: Runjeet Singh now demanded the fort of Mool- 
tan, declaring that he desired it for Shah Shooja, to 
whom Mozuffur Khan was bound, and had engaged 
to render it. This specious pretext made no change in 
Mozuffur Khan's resolution to defend the place to the 
utmost. Runjeet Singh reconnoitred, and marked out 
ground for different batteries, and lines of approach, 
assigning them to different chiefs, with the promise of 
rich Jageers to those who made the quickest advance, and 
most impression. Arrangements were made to secure 
the transmission of supplies by water, as well as by land, 
from Lahdr and Umritsur, and every thing betokened a 
determination in the Sikh chief to master this important 
possession. The garrison was not disheartened, but 
made the best dispositions possible for defence. A large 