



94 MEETING OF RUNJEET AND FUTEH KHAN VUZEER A. D. 1812. 

was a necessary preliminary. The Sikh army defeated 
the confederated Chiefs with great loss, and Run J bet 
Singh pushing his success, occupied both Bhimbur and 
Rajaoree, in the early part of November, and received 
the submission of the discomfited Mohummedan Chiefs 
of both places on the 13th of the month. The rest of 
the confederates were compelled to fly into Kashmeer, 
where they were received by the Governor, Ata 
MonuMMUD. 

FuTEH Khan, the Vuzeer of Shah Muhmood, was 
at this time upon the Indus, whither he had come to 
punish the two brothers, who held Attuk and Kashmeer, 
for the assistance they had rendered to Shah Shooja, 
and to recover the two provinces for KabooL He had 
sent forward a detachment of 8000 Afghans to Rohtas, 
and was already planning operations against Ata Mo- 
HtJMMUD of Kashmeer, when RuNJEBT obtained his 
successes against the Bhimbur and Rajaoree chiefs. It 
became essential, that engaged as the Lah6r and Kabool 
forces were So closely upon the same field, the two leaders 
should come to a mutual explanation of their views and 
intentions ; accordingly Runjeet Singh sent agents 
with an overture for this purpose, and invited the Vuzeer 
to an interview upon the Jihlum, in order that they might 
concert a joint expedition against Kashmeer. Futeh 
Khan being no less desirous to come to an understand* 
ing with the Sikh, the meeting was agreed upon, and 
took place on the 1st December, when it was settled that 
Runjeet Singh should place a force, under his Dewan 
MoHKUM Chund, at the Vuzeer's disposal in the expe- 
dition he meditated, and should give every facility for the 
passage into Kashmeer, by the passes of Rajaoree, which 



A.D. 1^13. KASHMEER REDUCED BY THE VUZEER. 95 

he had recently subdued. The aid of a detachment of 
Afghans to be employed afterwards against Mooltan, 
and a share of the plunder of Kashmeer, were the returns 
stipulated for this succour. Runjeet Singh desired 
a portion of the revenues of the valley, but the politic 
Vuzeer objected to any participation in the permanent 
resources of the province, and preferred agreeing to a 
Nuzurana of nine lakhs from the spoil expected. Having 
on these terms secured the assistance of 12,000 Sikhs, 
under the Dewan Mohkum Chund, the Vuzeer pro- 
ceeded on his expedition, and the joint armies commenced 
their march, while Runjeet returned to Lah6r. A 
heavy fall of snow impeded their progress, and the Sikhs 
being less inured to the severities of a mountain winter 
than the northern troops, were outstripped by the Vuzeer ; 
who, penetrating into the valley in February, drove Ata 
MoHUMMUD from his stockades, and in a short time 
reduced him to submission, and obtained all the strong- 
holds in the province, without receiving much assistance 
from Mohkum Chund and the Sikhs. Runjeet 
Singh made great rejoicings at Labor on receiving 
news of this success, treating the operation as a 
joint one, tending equally to his own as to the Vuzeer's 
glory. A deep intrigue was, however, in progress, 
which the issue of the Kashmeer expedition brought 
immediately to light. JuHAN Dad ^H AN, the gover- 
nor of Attuk, despairing after his brother's defeat in 
Kashmeer, of bis own ability to resist the Vuzeer sin- 
gle handed, and knowing he had little favor to expect from 
him, had previously placed himself in correspondence 
with Runjeet Singh, to whom he promised the fort of 
Attuk for a Jageer, in case he should be reduced to ex- 
tremity, Runjeet, accordingly^ when he returned him- 