

In the mean time Ram Dyal having passed the 
mountain barrier, and debouched upon the valley at 
Heerapoor, was attacked on the 22d July, by a party sent 
against him by Uzeem Khan, The Kashmeerian, 
were defeated, and followed to Soopyn. On the 24ths 
Ram Dyal assaulted the town : but it was well defended 
by Shookoor Khan, and the assailants were repulsed, 
whereupon the Sikhs retired again to the Peer-Pnnjal 
mountains to wait reinforcements. Bhya Ram Singh, 
hearing of this discomfiture, deemed it necessary to halt 
at BuhramguUee, with the support he was bringing up, 
in order to secure the pass. 



A. D. 1814. runjeet's defeat and retreat 107 

MoHUMMUD UzEEM Khan seeing matters in this 
critical position, thought the time favorable for offensive 
operations against the main army, which had already 
suffered much from sickness, and more from desertion. 
On the 29th July, Roohoollah Khan, the Poonch 
chief, approached, and commenced a desultory fire on 
the Sikh position. On the following morning he renewed 
Lis attack with more vigour, and Runjeet Singh was 
compelled to fall back on Mundee. Being pursued thither, 
he tired the town, and directing his disciplined batta- 
lions to cover the retreat, continued his retrograde 
march to Poonch, which he reached on the 31st July, 
with the loss of many men, and his principal officer 
MiT-SlNGH Buhraneea, and stripped of nearly all his 
baggage. The army was now no longer in a state of 
organization or discipline, and setting fire to Poonch, 
Kunjeet Singh quitted the camp and continued his 
flight to Bhoohee, whence he with a few attendants took 
the nearest route to Labor, which he reached on the 12th 
August. 

Ram Dyal and the Jageerdars serving with him in 
the detachment which had penetrated into the valley, 
were surrounded, and their supplies were cut off, but 
the detachment was allowed by ITzeem Khan to re- 
tire, and was furnished with a safe conduct to the Sikh 
frontier, in consideration of the friendship professed 
by this Governor for Dewan Mohkum Chund, its 
commandant's grandfather. That distinguished officer 
of Runjeet Singh had himself been prevented by 
indisposition from taking part in the expedition. He 
warned his master however of the difficulties he must 
expect if he allowed himself to be overtaken in the 

o 2 



lOff DEATH OF MOHKUM CHUN D DEW AN. A. D. iai4^15« 

hilh by the rainy season, and patticalarly pointed out 
the necessity of providing large depdts in Bhimbur and 
Bbjaoree, in anticipation of a determined opposition 
from the Moosulman chief, and the whole popalation of 
Poonch. All had happened exactly as he predieted^ 
and the ruler of Lah6r returned to lament the deprivation 
of his Dewan's experience and judgment, no less than 
his tried skill and valour, in this important expedition. 
The illness however which prevented him from accom- 
panying the Sikh army increased, and in the course 
of October, soon after the return of Runjebt Singh 
to Lahdr, he died amidst the regrets and lamentations 
of all well-wishers to the power of the Sikhs, and to the 
dominion of Run jbet Singh. In his private character 
the Dewan was liberal, upright, and high-minded : hef 
enjoyed the confidence of the troops placed under his 
cominand, and was popular and much respected amongst 
the entire Sikh community. 