

M 



90 MARRIAGE OF KHURUK SINGH, A. D. 1812. 

was equipped in the British service. Colonel Ochter- 
LONY was accompanied by the Rajas of Naba, Jheend, 
and Kythul, and on arriving near Umritsur on the 28th> 
received the Istuqhal, or meeting of honor, from the 
Chief of the Sikhs, who had gathered to his court, on 
this occasion, all his Sirdars, and indeed the whole nation 
of Sikhs appeared to be assembled to do honor to the 
nuptials. 

The ceremony was performed at the residence of 
Sirdar Jymul Singh in Futehgnrb, and, after its 
conclusion on the 6th of February, the whole party return- 
ed to Umritsur. SuDA Koonwur alone was not 
present; indisposition was assigned as the reason of her 
non-attendance on the occasion, but her dissatisfaction at 
the failure of an attempt to procure from Runjeet 
Singh,. her son-in-law, the public acknowledgment dur- 
ing these ceremonies, of the two boys she had brought 
up as twins born to her daughter, was generally be- 
lieved to be the true cause of her absence. 

Runjeet Singh received Colonel Ochterlony 
with marked distinction, appointed his principal officers 
to show him every object worth seeing at Lah6r, and 
pressed upon him an invitation to stay and see the festivi- 
ties of the Hoolee, which would be celebrated in March. 
The Colonel declined this honor for himself, but th6 
Sikh Chiefs who had c6me with him gladly accepted i(^ 
and the Bbye of Kythul obtained by cunning and intrigue 
during the orgies, a grant from the Lah6r Ruler ^f 
Goojurawul, on the protected side of the Sutlej. The 
frank confidence displayed by Runjeet Singh in his 
present reception of Colonel Ochterlony was much 



^.D. 1812. ATTENDED BY COLONEL OCHTERLONY. 91 

in contrast with tfae suspicious mistrust with which Mr. 

Metcalfe had been treated. Runjeet showed the 

Colonel his troops, and particularly the new battalions he 

was raising, and further took him over the fortifications 

of Lahdr, and inspected with him some new works he 

was constructing for their improvement, and to connect 

the Juma Musjid with the palace. His prudent Dewan, 

MoHKUM Chund, and the Sirdar Gundha Singh, are 

reported to have remonstrated against the communication 

of such knowledge, to a professional person of a nation, 

that might have designs which would enable him to turn 

it to account adversely. Runjeet, however, observed 

with shrewdness, that if such were their sentiments, 

they should have advised his withholding the invitation 

altogether from the Colonel, for it was too late to begin 

now to show distrust. 

After the conclusion of these ceremonies and festivi- 
ties, the armies of Lah6r resumed active operations. 
KooNWUR Khuruk Singh was sent with a strong 
force against Bhimbur and Rajaoree, where Sooltan 
Khan, the Moosulman holder of the former territory, 
proved a formidable enemy, having recently over- 
powered and slain his relation Ismaeel Khan, who had 
been left, as the result of previous operations, in the 
possession and management of a large portion of the 
territory, DuL Singh was at the same time sent with 
another force to plunder and levy tribute from MuzUF- 
FUR Khan at Mooltan; and a third under Desa Singh 
was again detached to Kangra. Runjeet Singh in 
person made a tour into the Jalundhur Dooab towards 
the Turaee, whither he summoned various hill chiefs, 
and made with th*em fresh arrangements attended with 