

N 2 



100 rUTEH KHAN VTJZEEB I>EFEATED. A.D.1B13. 

the support of his battalion, some fresh troops, and artillery^ 
nnder Ghouseb Khan, \7hich bad come in sight, bat 
his order was not obeyed. Dost Mohummud now 
attacked with his horse, and the Sikhs were sinking 
before him, when the Dewan in person on his elephant, 
carried np two gans, which discharging grape checked 
the Afghans. By this time it was noon, the heat of the 
san had become intense, and a strong hot wind blew the 
dust into the faces of the Afghans. Under! these disad- 
vantages, the Vuzeer did not think proper to ctarry the 
troops he had in reserve into action, and those who had 
beeh engaged being exhausted, the battle ceased. The 
Vuzeer retired across the Indus to Peshawar, leaving the 
Dewan free to relieve the fort, which having eflFected, 
MoHKUM Chund returned to Lah6r in August, to 
receive the reward of his service; aiid to prefer his com- 
plaint against the officers, whose disobedience had so 
nearly proved' fatal. They received the punishment, 
attaching to correspondence with the enemy, which was 
detected as the motive of their so critically holding back 
from the action. 

In the rains of 1813 nothing particular occurred, but 
toward the close of that season Runjeet Singh com- 
menced preparation for an expedition into Kashmeer; 
In October he visited Jawala-Mookhee» and Kangra, and 
thence marched, vi& Seeal-Kot and Ynzeerabad to the 
Jyhlum, where he summoned all his Jageerdars, andnU 
th6 tributary bill chiefs, to be in attendance with theit 
respective quotas. Strict musteir was taken of each 
party as it arrived, and fines were imposed if the number 
was short, or the equipment in any respect deficient; 
Great preparation had also been made to bring an effed* 



A. p. 1813^14. . FURTHER EXTORTIONS. 101 

tive artillery into the fields and to improve that mounted oa 
camels^ and the whole having been reviewed, RuNJEET 
Singh, on the 11th November, crossed the Jyhlum, 
and entered the town of Rohtas. The Vuzeer Futeh 
Khan was brought from Peshawur by these preparations 
to the Derajat, on the west bank of the Indus, which cir- 
cumstance, added to intelligence, that the snow lay still 
deep op the Peer-Punjal mountains, induced Runjee'^ 
Singh to suspend his proposed expedition until the fol- 
lowing spring., .He accordingly sent a detachment to 
occupy and s^ize the passes in the hills beyond Rajaoree, 
and to select places for grain and store-depdts, and then 
returned, vi4 Robtas, to Lah6r, where he arrived on the 
26th of December. 

' • * - ■ . » 

The confiscation of the hill territory of Hureepoor, 
and its annexation to the Lahdr Khalsa, (fisc), was th^ 
first act which marked the return of the Sikh ruler to his 
capital. Bhoop Singh, the Raja, whose treacherous 
seizure and confinement preceded the confiscation, receiv- 
ed on its completion a small Jageer for subsistence. Th^ 
next act of Runjeet Singh was more shamelessly 
extortionate. Hearing that Shah Shoqja had still 
some jewels of rare value, a demand was made for them; 
and, on the Shah's declaring that he had none left, the Sikli 
determined to judge for himself, and sending Bhy A Ram 
Singh with a party of females to search the interior 
apartments, caused to be brought into his presence, every 
box or packet the Shah possessed. The Shah's head 
Eunuch was then made to open them, and Runjeet 
seized, and retained for himself, all the most precious 
articles, with the swords, pistols, and two cart loads of 
carpets, and women's dresses. The Shah was then 
ordered to remove from the Shahlemar garden and palace 