

* This diamond was one of those described by Tavernier, as adornin|f 
the Peacock throne at Dehlee. It is the largest known to exist, and is 
by Hindoos supposed to have belonged to the Pandoos of Mythological 
celebrity, before it fell into the hands of the Moghul Sovereigns, it is 



98 THE KOH-I-NOOR IHAMOND EXTORTED. A.D. 1813* 

waited on the Shah, with a few attendants to receive it# 
He was received by the exiled Prince with much digni* 
iy, and both being seated, a pause and solemn silence 
ensued, which continued for nearly an hour. Run;ieet 
then getting impatient, whispered to one of his atten- 
dants to remind the Shah of the object of his coming. 
No answer was returned, but the Sbah with his eyes 
made the signal to an Eunuch, who retired, and brought 
in a small roll, which he set down on the carpet at equal 
ilistance between the Chiefs. Runjeet desired Bhoo- 
ANEE Das to unfold the roll, when the diamond was 
exhibited, and recognized, and the Sikh immediately 
retired with his prize in hand. The Shah was now left 
more at liberty, his guard being withdrawn : a letter was, 
however, intercepted a few days after from Kazee Sheer 
MoHUMMUD, one of his followers, toMoHUMMUDUzEEM 
Khan, the new governor of Kashmeer, containing a pro- 
position to assassinate Runjeet Singh, and advising the 
Vuzeer Futeh Khan to make a simultaneous attack on 
Lah6r. The Sikh sent for one of the Princes of the exiled 
family, and through him transmitted the letter, with its 
writer, who had been seized, to the Shah. The Ex-king 
sent both back, begging of Runjeet Singh to punish 
the Kazee as he might deem fitting. In the idea, that 
a confession of the Shah's privity would be extorted, the 
guard on duty were desired to lay on with their shoes^ 
and with sticks. The Kazee fainted under the blows he 
received, declaring, however, to the last, his master's 
entire innocence, he was then committed to prison, whence 

■* 

nearly an inch and a half in length, and an inch wide, and rises half an 
inch from its gold setting. Nadir Shah robbed the Dehlee family of it, 
and Ahmed Shah Abdalee got possession of it in the pillage of Nadu 
Shah's tents after his assassination. 



X. D. 1813. MARCH FOR THE RELIEF OF ATTUK. 99 

Shah Shooja after a time purchased his release by a 
payment of 20,000 rupees. 

FuTEH Khan Vazeer after his return from Kashmeer, 
had sat down before Attuk, and pending the negociation 
at Labor, upon his demand for its surrender, closely 
blockaded the fort Dewan Mohkum Chund had been 
sent to the vicinity, to act as occasion might require, and 
in the beginning of July, intelligence was received from 
him, that the garrison was reduced to such straight for 
supplies, that, unless very shortly relieved, they must 
surrender. Runjeet Singh held a council upon this, 
and it was determined to relieve the fort, even at the 
risk of the attempt producing hostilities with the Vuzeer. 
Orders to this effect were accordingly sent immediately 
to the Dewan, who being encamped at Boorhan, march- 
ed at break of day on the 12th July 1813, to execute 
them. On that day he made a short march to an outpost 
on a rivulet, held by a piquet of the Vuzeer's army, which 
retired in the night. The Dewan marched again next 
morning leisurely along the rivulet, that his men might 
drink, and be always fresh for action, the weather being 
extremely hot. At ten in the morning, he came to the 
Indus, at about five miles from the fort. The Kabool 
army was here drawn up to oppose his further advance; 
its vau being composed of a body of Moolkea Moosul- 
mans, supported by a body of cavalry under Dost 
MoHUMMBD Khan. The Dewan took up his ground, 
forming his cavalry in four divisions, and the only battalioa 
of infantry that had yet come up, in square. The Mool- 
keas immediately made a resolute charge on the batta- 
lion; but were received with so heavy a rolling fire as to be 
driveaback with severe loss. The Dewan ordered up for 