



96 RUNJEET SINGH ACQUIRES ATTUK. A. D. 1813. 

self to Labor, left a detachment under Dya Singh» in 
.the vicinity of the Indus, to be ready to occupy that 
important fortress, whenever it should be given up. . In 
March, 1813, Runjeet Singh heard that his oflScer had 
been admitted, and that the place was held and adminis- 
tered in his name. He accordingly lost no time in re- 
inforcing the detachment, with a strong convoy, containing 
every thing necessary to place the fort in a complete state 
of defence, and DeveeDas andHuKEEM UzEEZrOOD- 
Deen were sent as commissioners to settle the country 
surrounding, which formed the dependency of Attuk. 
FuTEH Khan Vuzeer cried out against this usurpation, 
and deeming himself absolved by it, from the conditions 
upon which he had obtained the co-operatiou of the Sikhs 
under the Dewan, he dismissed them without any share 
of the booty obtained; and then nominating his brother, 
UzEEM Khan, governor in Kashmeer, he marched to 
Attuk, and made upon Run jeet a demand for its surren- 
der. This was spun out into a negociation^ — and, of course, 
evaded by the Sikh. With the Dewan MoHKUM Chund, 
Shah Shooja came to Labor, where a demand was 
immediately made upon him, and upon his principal wife^ to 
surrender the Koh-i-noor diamond, a JTageer being pro- 
mised with a fort as the condition of compliance. The 
Shah denied that he had it, and the VuFA Begum 
declared, it had been placed in pawn with a Muhajun to 
obtain supplies for the Shah in his distresses. Runjeet 
Singh disbelieving these assertions, placed guards round 
the Shah's residence, and allowed no access or egress 
without strict search. The exiled family, however, being 
proof against the severity of mere restraint, the prohibi- 
tion of food was added, and for two days the Shab, 
with his wives^ family, and servants, suffered absolute 



A. D, 1613. SBVERITIES PRACTISED ON SHAH SHOOJA. 97 

deprivation ; but their firmness was even proof against this 
trial, and Runjeet Singh, from a regard to his own 
reputation determined to proceed with more art, and 
ordered food to be supplied. On the first of April, there 
were produced in his durbar two notes, purporting to be 
from the Shah to Futeh Khan Vuzeer, and to other 
Afghan chiefs, descriptive of his sufierings, and prating 
for their efibrts for his deliverance. These were stated 
to have been intercepted, but were generally believed to 
have been fabricated. It was now assumed to be indis- 
pensable to take precautions against the intrigues and 
machinations of the Shah, and a guard of two compaiiies 
of Sikhs, from the newly raised corps, being added to that 
previously set over the premises where he resided, threats 
of a transfer of the Shah's person to Govind-gurh, with 
treatment of the most galling and injurious kind were 
resorted to, in order to enforce compliance with .the 
demand for the jewel. Having tried remonstrance in 
vain, the Shah next resorted to artifice, and solicited two 
months' delay, to enable him to procure the diamond from 
certain Muhajuns with whom it was asserted to be pledg- 
ed, and he said that some lakhs of rupees must be expend- 
ed to efiect this. Runjeet Singh reluctantly consent- 
ed to allow the time solicited, and severities were 
accordingly suspended for a season. They were renewed, 
however, before the period expired, and Shah Shooja, 
wearied out by them, and seeing that the rapacity of the 
Sikh would not hesitate even at the sacrifice of his life 
for its gratification, agreed at last to give up the precious 
jewel.* Accordingly, on the 1st of June, Runjeet 