



102 ESCAPE OF SHAH SHOOJA'S BEGUMS, A.l>. lB14<'ld« 

to a common house in the city, and was subjected there 
to strict surveillance. After experiencing *every kind of 
indignity and discomfort, he determined to attempt an 
escape with his family. Towards the end of November, 
it was reported to Runjbet Singh, that the Begums of 
Shah Shoo j a were missing, whereupon the Shah's per- 
son was placed under a guard, and alternate threats and 
promises were employed to induce him to declare where 
they were gone. He denied all knowledge of their mo- 
tions or intentions. The city was searched, and egress 
forbidden to all veiled women, and all merchants having 
property of the Shah's, or of any members of his family, 
in deposit, were ordered to surrender it into the Sikh 
treasury. These precautions were, however, taken too 
late. It was ascertained that the Begums had left the 
bouse of Sfiah Shooja in the dress of Hindoo females, 
and thence had been conveyed to the banking house of 
Baluk Bam, the agent or correspondent of Soogun 
Chund, a great banker at Debtee, and treasurer of the 
British Residency there ; that by him they had been assist- 
ed in passing out of the city, and provided with the means 
of making their way to Loodeeana, where they had arrived 
safely, and making themselves known to Captain Birch, 
the Assistant, in temporary charge of the station, wer6 
received with hospitality and attention. Baluk Ram 
was seized by Runjbet Singh for the part he had taken 
in this evasion, and was compelled to show his books, and 
render up all property in, his possession belonging to the 
Shah or his family. He received, however, no further 
punishment. 

In April 1815, Shah Shooja himself made his escape 
in disguise from the close confinement in which he was 
held. His guard was disgraced, and a reward offered 



A. D. 1815. AND SHAH SHOOJA.— HIS ADVENTURES. 103 

for recovery of the prisoner, but the Shah succeeded in 
reaching the hills, where he was hospitably received by 
the petty Raja of Kishteewar. Here he collected a body 
of 3000 men, and in the winter season made an attempt on 
Kashmeer : but the cold prevented his passing the Peer- 
Punjal range, and his troops dispersed. His condition 
was now desperate, but after a long and circuitous jour- 
ney over the Kooloo mountains with few attendants, and 
fewer comforts, he at last, in September 1816, joined his 
family at Loodeeana, and placed himself under the pro- 
tection of the British Government. A provision of 
50,000 Rs. per annum was assigned for the maintenance 
of the Shah ia his exile, while he might, remain in the 
British territory. With the intermission of one unfortu- 
nate enterprize, he was led to engage in for the recovery 
of his lost power, after the murder of Futeh Khan in 
1818, he has since continued to avail himself of this 
asylum, and he has been joined at Loodeeana by his 
sightless brother Shah Zuman, whom, with his family 
already in abject poverty, Runjeet Singh took no 
trouble to detain. To this prince a separate allowance 
of 24,000 Rupees per annum has been assigned. The 
chronological order of events has been somewhat antici- 
pated, in order to bring the misfortunes of these princes 
into one connected relation,^ The first expedition of 
Runjeet Singh against Kashmeer will take us back 
into the year 1814. The events, however, which pre- 
ceded or attended it, will more fitly form the subject of 
another chapter. 