

M 2 



92 SHAH ZUMAN AGAIN SEEKS LAHOR. A. D. 1812. 

increase of tribute. The resumption of Shoojanpoor 
from BooDH Singh Biiugut was the only operation of 
that kind effected on this occasion. Returning to Lah&r 
on the 23d of May, Runjeet Singh received intelli- 
gence there of the success of Khuruk Singh against 
Bhimbur, Jummoo and Ukhnoor. The Koonwur was 
honored with a grant of these places in Jageer, and he 
placed them in the management of Bh ye Ram Singh. 
DuL Singh had also succeeded in extorting a consider- 
able sum from Mozuffur Khan of Mooltan, 

In August of the same year, Jymul Singh, the 
father-in-law of Khuruk Singh, died suddenly, and it 
was generally believed, that his death was occasioned by 
poison administered by his wife. Runjeet Singh 
constituted himself the heir to all the treasure, accumu- 
lated by this chief during a long life of parsimony and 
usurious dealing. Much of his wealth was, at the time of 
his decease, out at interest with Muhajuns of Umritsur, 
all of whom were called upon to account with the Labor 
treasury. In the following month the families of the two 
ex-Shahs of Kabool, i. e. of Shah Zuman and of Shah 
Shoo J A sought an asylum at Labor. The latter chief 
had added largely to his experience of adversity. After 
escaping from the unfortunate enterprize, he had under- 
taken in September preceding, his person was seized by 
JuHAN Dad Khan, the Governor of Attuk, by whom 
lie was sent to his brother Ata Mohummud of Kash- 
meer, who held him a close prisoner. The helpless 
Shah Zuman brought both families to the Sikh capital, 
where RuNJEET Singh professed much interest in 
the misfortunes and fate of Shah Shooja, and ^seemed 
as if disposed to make an effort against Kashmeer to 



A.D. 1812. BHIMBUR AND RAJAOREE REDUCED. 93 

procure his liberation, and to obtain that province for 
Lim. He was then preparing an expedition against 
Shimbur, in the Peer-Punjal range of mountains, and 
the wife of Sfiah Shooja was led by these profes- 
sions to believe, and to represent to her husband, that 
he would find a friend in the ruler of Labor. The 
Shah made his escape from confinement during the 
operations subsequently undertaken against the valley by 
FuTEH Khan Vuzeer, and was led by these hopes to 
direct his flight towards Labor. He made good his way 
out of Kashmeer, by seeking the Peer-Punjal mountains ; 
where, finding an opportunity to join the force under 
MoHKUM Chund, he came down with him to Lah6r, 
there to experience only new persecutions, excited by the 
desire kindled in the breast of RuNJEET, to obtain 
possession of the famous diamond the Koh-i-Noor, and 
other rich jewels ascertained to be still in this Prince's 
possession. The relation, however, of the means by which 
these were extorted, belongs to a later period. 

After the Dussera, at the close of the rains, the Sikh 
army was assembled, and led entire by RUNJEET Singh 
in person, against the Moosulman Chiefs of Bhimbur 
and Rajaoree, who, though pressed by the expeditions 
before directed against them, made head again, imme- 
diately the force was withdrawn, and were now assisted 
by a confederacy of Chiefs and Jageerdars of their faith, 
and by succour from the Governor of Kashmeer. The 
possessions of these Chiefs commanded the approaches 
to the Peer-Punjal mountains, and there is reason to 
believe that Runjeet Singh had even at this time, an 
eye to the conquest eventually of the valley of Kashnmer, 
to which the occupation of both Bhimbur and Rajaoree 