

The losses sustained by RuNJEET in this expedition 
required some time to repair. The Sikh army was not 
therefore in a coiidition to take the field at the close of 
the Dussera of 1814 as usual : but in April 1815, a; 
fbr6e was employed^ under Ram DyAl and DuL 
SiNGfi, ravaging the Mooltan and Buhawnlpoor ter- 
ritories, and exacting tHbntes and contributions in that 
neighbourhood. RuNJEEt SiNGH himself passed thd 
hot weather at Adeena-nugur, raising and dincipliniiig 
new battalions ; and especially recruiting mei^ of tiie 
Goorka nation, of whose valour he began to enter^ 
tain a very high opinion, from' having watched tbd 
operatiot^s, which during the season had passed in tbe 
hill colintry east of the Sutlej. The British Govemmeai 



A. D. 1815^ RUNJEET REPAIRS HIS LOSSES. 109 

had engaged in iiostilities with the Goorkhas, and Colonel, 
afterwards General Ochterlony, had taken the field 
there against Umur Singh> who for six months, 
maintained himself at Ramgurh and Maloun, and 
haffled the known skill and the superior forces of this 
experienced commander. His final discomfitare, and the 
dispossession of the Goorkhas from all the hill territory 
west of the Gogra or Kalee river, occasioned a break- 
ing up of their power, which was highly favourable to 
RtJNJEBT*s views, and procured him many men of this 
nation particularly well adapted for hill warfare. 

In the mean time, the defeat of the Sikh expedition 
against Kashmeer encouraged the Moosulman Chiefs 
of Bhimbur and Rajaoree to break out into rebellion, 
and towards the close of the year 1814, the son of the lat- 
ter who was detained as a hostage at Lahdr, effected his 
escape and joined his father. The Bhimbur insurgents 
were headed by the brother of Sooltan Khan, who 
since he made his submission in 1813, had been himself 
detained by RuNJEET SiNGH, and was now a close 
prisoner at Lahdr. 

Tn October, after the Dussera of 1815, the Sikh army 
was called out, and its rendezvous for muster appointed 
at Seealkot. A division was sent in advance under Ram 
Dyal and Dul Singh to punish the Bhimbur and 
Rajaoree Chiefs, and to ravage their territories with 
fire and sword. Poonch was saved from a similar 
visitation by its greater elevation, and by the setting in 
of winter with severity. Run J bet Singh was not yet 
prepared for an attempt to retrieve his fortune and lost 
reputation, by another expedition against Kashmeer.' 



110 CONFISCATIONS. A. D. 1816. 

He was content therefore to employ the season in con- 
firmiDg his authority in the hills before subdued, and in 
punishing the disobedient and refractory Rajas and Chiefs 
on this side the Peer-Punjal range. He returned to 
Lah6r on the 28th December, where he was waited upon 
by Beer Singh, the Rajahof Noorpoor, inthe hills, who 
had failed to attend the summons to rendezvous at Seeal- 
Kot. A heavy mulct was imposed, which being beyond 
the Chiefs means, he offered his Thakoors, or house- 
hold Gods, of silver and gold, in pawn, but these not 
sufficing, he was arrested at the door of the Durbar, or 
hall of audience, on the 20th January 1816, and next 
day was sent off in a Palkee to witness the seizure 
and confiscation of his all, and to render an account to 
the sequestrators. He declined the petty Jageer offered 
to him for subsistence, and after a fruitless attempt to 
recover his fortress and territory by force, took refuge 
within the British territory. A second example was made 
of the Raja of Juswoul Omed Singh, for a similar 
failure. Being stripped of his possessions, however, he 
accepted the Jageer tendered. 