



CHAPTER SEVENTH. 



A. D. 1814 to 1818. 



First expedition of Runjeet Singh offainst Kashmeer. 
Fails. Failure of Runjeet Singh's health. Expedi- 
tion against, and capture of Mooltan. The army 
deprived of its plunder^ Death of Futeh Khan, 
Vuzeer of KabooL Runjeet Singh's advance to 
Peshawur. 

XvUNJEBT Singh having celebrated the Hoolee and 
bathed at Umritsar, moved his army in April 1814, iato 
the Hill country about Kangra, to enforce the collection 
of his tributes, and the personal attendance of the Rajas 
Yiiik their contingents. Having thus strengthened him- 
self with a large body of hill-men, he moved to Bhimbur 
on the 4th June; and, advancing slowly from thence, was 
metby AgurKhan, the chief of Rajaoree, through whose 
territory lay the route to Kashmeer. On the 11th June, 
the army arrived at Rajaoree, and disencumbering itself of 
heavy baggage, equipped itself for mountain movement, 



A. D. 1814. EXPEDITION AGAINST KASHMEER , 105 

preparatory to the passage of the famous Peer-Punjal 
range. An attempt had been made to gain the Poonch 
Raja, RooH-ooLLAH Khan, to the Sikh cause, but he 
pleaded engagements with Kashmeer, and the presence 
of his son as a hostage with Uzeem Khan, the governor. 
After a consultation of the principal officers however, it 
was determined, nevertheless, ths^t the main army, com- 
manded by RuNJEET Singh in person, should pursue the 
Poonch route, £md endeavour to penetrate by the Toshu 
Mydan pass, \yhile a strong diversion should be made by 
BnluramguUa towards Soopyn in the valley. 

The cavalry being dismounted, and every man furnish- 
ed with provisions for three days, a detachment was 
formed, and sent forward on the 15th June, under 
Ram Dyal, a grandson of Mohkum Chund Dewan, 
with whom were DuL Singh and o&er Jageerdars. 
They appeared before the post at Buhramgulla on the 
JLStfa, and after.a little negociation, obtained possession 
of the pass, on payment to the defenders of the arrears 
due to them by the Poonch Raja. Heavy rain set 
in on the 20tb June, and the Sikh army beginning to 
suffer from the wet and cold, and the supplies already 
running short, the march of the main body was delay- 
ed until the 26(h. On thQ 28th, however. Run J eet 
Singh reached Poonch, aud found it evacuated ; the 
Raja having given orders to his people to attempt no 
resistance in arms, but to desert their towns and vil- 
lages, to bury or remove the grain, and to hover in 
sipall parties on the flanks of the invaders. The 
coQseqaences of this system had already begun to be felt, 
and compelled a halt at Pooocb for further supplies, 
until the 13th July. Thence advfuicing by Mmndee, 



106 A DETACHMENT REACHES THE VALLEY. A. D. 1814. 

RuNJEET Singh reached Tosha Mydan on the 18lb, 
where he found Mohummud Uzeem Khan with the 
forces of Kashmeer, drawn up to oppose his progress. 
The Sikh army took up its position in face of the 
enemy, and remained for some days inactive. Here 
Runjeet Singh received intelligence from the detach* 
ment at Buhramgulla. On the 19th July, Ram Dyal 
and the Jageerdars ascended the Peer-Punjal moun- 
tains^ by the Suraee and Mudpoor pass, driving before 
them the Kashmeer troops left to defend it. Runjeet 
Singh was uneasy at this precipitancy, thinking his 
detachment out of reach of support, and liable to be 
overpowered ; he sent off immediately therefore a rein- 
forcement under Bhya Ram Singh. The Rajaoree 
chief recommended an attack of Uzeem Khan, as the 
best means of preventing his undertaking any thing 
against the detachment, but Runjeet Singh having 
reconnoitered the position, deemed the attack too hazard- 
ous. It is probably the only thing that would have 
prevented the disasters which followed. 