

JuBUR Khan, who had been left by Mohummud 
Uzeem, Governor in Kashmeer, was at Soopyn with 
five thousand men, to make his stand for the possession 
of the valley. The troops he had were however raw, and 
hastily raised, and unable to compete with the disciplined 

q2 



^24: CONQUEST QF KASHMEBR. A. B, 1819. 

battalions led by Misur Dew AN Chund, which besides 
pi^nombered them greatly. On the 5th July» the Sikhs 
Jiaving been famished with supplies and reinforcements 
from the rear, the Misur advanced to Soopyn, and imme* 
diately on coming in view of the Kashmeer army, order- 
ed an attack, which, after a few hours of smart fighting, 
attended with considerable loss on both sides, was com* 
pletiOly successful. The Afghans and troops of Jubur 
Khan fled at once across the mountains towards the 
Indus, leaving the valley to be occupied without further 
opposition by the victorious army of Runjeet Singh. 
Great was the joy of this chief at his success. The cities 
of Lah&r and of Umritsur were illuminated for three 
nights, and MoTEE Ram,^ son of the late Dewan 
lyioHKUM Chund, was sent as governor of the valley^ 
ftccompanied. by a strong body of troops, for the reduo<^ 
tioQ of Durbund and other strong holds, and with instruc- 
tions to spare no effort to bring the Poonch and Rajaoree 
chiefs to accept terms and make their submission. 

The arrangements, consequent upon the subjugation of 
Kashmeer, occupied Runjeet Singh for the remainder 
of the year 1819. Towards its close, the Sikh army was 
again called out, and led by Runjeet Singh in person 
to Mooltan, whence operations were directed for ravage 
ing the territories of the Nuwab of Buhawulpoor, and 
southward as far as Bfaukur, belonging to the Meers of 
Sindh, with a view to extort augmented tribute and 
contributions. Dera Ghazee Khan, on the west bank 
pf the Indus, was at the same time wrested from its 
Governor, ZuMAN Khan, and, in the settlement madd 
with the Buhawulpoor chief, the place was given to him 
in farm at a heavy rent. > 



A. D. 1820. DEATH OF RAM DYAL. 125 

RuNJEET Singh returned to Lah6r in April, 1820, 
bringing with him a horse of high repute, that he had 
extorted from Hafiz Ahmed Khan of Munk^ra. Many 
subsequent enterprizes were undertaken for similar 
animals ; the love for them, and the desire to possess all 
of any repute for excellence, being a growing passion 
carried by the Sikh chief almost to folly. The horse 
acquired in this instance, bore the name of Soofed-Puree. 

In Kashmeer the troops were employed in petty opera- 
tions against isolated chiefs. One of these. Sheer 
Zuman Khan of Gundgurh, having risen in rebellion^ 
Ram Dyal, the governor's son, and the hopeful grand- 
son of the late Dewan Mohkum Chund, was employed 
against him, and unfortunately met his death in an action, 
that took place, which was a source of deep regret to 
Runjeet Singh, no less than to his father Moteb 
Ram, and of general sympathy with all ; for be was 
a rising officer of great promise in the Sikh army. 
The Raja of Rajaoree, Agur Khan, was in the 
coarse of May seized, and made prisoner by Goo- 
lab Singh, brother of Meean Dheean Singh, the 
Deohreewala, or Lord of Privy Chambers, of the 
Labor Court. For this service, the family obtained 
in Jageer, the principality of Jummoo, with which 
they had long been connected. In June, the troops 
employed in Kashmeer, having suffered much from sick- 
ness, were relieved, and the Governor Motee Ram, 
who was of pacific devotional habits, was changed for 
a more martial chief in the person of HuRBB SiNGH 
Nalooa, a Sikh Jageerdar, who had killed H tiger single- 
banded on horse-back, with the sacrifice, however, of 
his horse. 