



128 SUDA KOONWVR DISGRACED. A. D. laSO. 

high expectations. She remonstrated against the order 
in vain, and being herself in the Sikh camp, then pitched- 
at Shah-Dehra, and consequently in the power of BuN4 
JBET Singh, she felt the necessity of complying so far» 
as to execute a deed making the assignment required. 
But she had no sooner done so, than she plotted the 
means of escape, and after a time left the camp Secretly 
in a covered carriage. Intelligence of her evasion was. 
conveyed to Run J BET by Bysakh Singh. Desa 
Singh was accordingly sent with a detachment of horse 
to bring her back, and she was committed by her 
son-in-law's order to close confinement. Not content 
with this punishment, Runjeet Singh ordered a 
division of his army to march and sequester all hec 
wealth and territory, and this was effected, after a 
resistance of a few weeks by one of her female attendants, 
who was in charge of the fort of Uttol-gnrh, her princi* 
pal strong hold. Thus, after an influence,' maintained 
for nearly thirty years, fell at last this high-spiritect 
woman. She bad been serviceable to Runjeet Singh^ 
indeed, was the main stay of bis power, in the early 
part of hi9 career, and it was, through her intrigues^ 
and with her aid, that RuJNJ bet was able to assuntfi 
authority sa early, and to put aside his Jl^other and 
her Dewan. The independence she assented, and thet 
high tone she w^S(ific<Histomed to assume^ diad for somq 
time beea irksoo^ .to the 8ik)i ruler in his growing 
fortunes, and her ruin was prepared by the course oi 
events, no less than by. her own unbending disposition^ 
She bore the restraint of her confinement with gre«l 
impatience, continually beating her breast in lamentatiooi^ 
and venting imprecations on the bead of her ungratefnl 
son-in-law. 



■ • » 



A. D. 1821^ EXPEDITION AGAINST MUNKERA. 129 

Another domestic event which in the time of its occurs 
rence somewhat preceded the catastrophe of Suda 
Koonwur's fall, was the birth of a son to KooNWUR 
Khuruk Singh. The event took place in February 
1821, and was the occasion of great festivity and rejoic- 
ing; the child was called Nou-Nihal Singh. In 
April, RuNJEET moved to Adeenanugur, and remain- 
ed there till July, occupied in collecting the hill tributes^ 
The two petty territories of Kishteewar and Man-K6tj 
were in this interval, annexed to the Lah6r Khalsa. The 
harshness of Huree Singh having made him unpopular 
and obnoxious to the inhabitants of Kashmeer, he had 
been removed again in December 1820, and the mild and 
peaceable Motee Ram was now re-appointed governor. 

The above events having occupied the hot season and 
rains of 1821, the Sikh army was called out as usual after 
the Dussera) and Runjeet Singh taking the command 
in person, led it to the Indus, into the possessions of the 
Chief of Mnnk^ra, Bhukur, and Leea, south of M ooltaui 
Annual contributions and forced presents had for some 
time been habitually extorted from Hafiz Ahmed, the 
Nuwab : it was determined to reduce and assume posses- 
sion of the whole of his country. With this view, the army 
marching by Ram-Nugur, Noor-Meeanee, Pind-Dadur- 
Khan, and Bheera-Khooshab, reached' the Indus af 
Meeta-Thana, and on the 6th November, was encamped 
opposite to Dera-I»maeol-Khan. A detachment of 8000 
men was sent across, and the place was surrendered on 
the 9th by Manik Raee. Bhukur, Leeab, Khangurb; 
and Moujgurh, were then all successively reduced without 
resistance. Munk^ra, fortified with a mud wall, and hav- 
ing a citadel of brick, but protected more by its positioD,' 