



A. D. 1818. AND TAKEN BT STORM, 115 

immediately complied wilh, his two forts of Mozaffar- 
garh and KhaDgurh were stormed and taken. In the 
course of February the city of Mooltan was occupied, 
and its citadel closely invested without much loss. The 
approaches were made according to no consistent plan, 
but every Jageerdar and chief erected his own battery, 
and a promiscuous fire was kept up from guns and small 
arms against every part of the defences. The means of 
the garrison were however so deficient, that even under 
this irregular method of attack, the wall of the citadel 
was, by the continual fire kept up,'^breached in several 
places, and the upper works and defences were nearly de-* 
molished in the course of the month of April. In May the 
approaches were carried close to the Dhool-kot, or fausse 
braye of the works, and the army became eager to be led 
to the storm; but Runjeet Singh, who, though absent, 
regulated every thing connected with the siege, forbad 
any risk being run, and continued his ofier to the Nuwab 
of a Jageer if he would surrender. He was obstinate in 
his refusal, and seemed determined to hold out to the last 
extremity. While matters continued in this state^ an 
Akalee fanatic, Sadhoo Singh^ on the 2d of June^ 
advanced without orders with a few companions, and 
attacked sword in hand, the Afghans in the Dhool-kot, 
who, being at the time asleep or negligent, were over- 
powered. The men in the Sikh trenches, seeing tjUs, 
advanced simultaneously on the impulse of the moment 
to support the attack, and the entire outwork was carried 
with a slaughter of those defending it. Flushed with 
this success, the assailants attempted the fort, and found 
ready entrance by the breaches made, the garrisoa not 
expecting assault, nor being prepared for a consistent 

|ind determined resistance. The citadel was tbas sad' 

p 2 



116 BOOTY RECOVERED FROM THE ARMY. A. D. 18lft. 

denly carried, MozuFFUR Khan with his four sons, 
and hoasehold, made a final stand at the door of his 
residence, bat fell covered with wounds. Two of 
his sons, Shah Nuwaz Khan and Huq Nuwaz, 
were also killed on the spot, and a third was left badly 
wounded. ScJRFURAZ Khan, the fourth, who had been 
vested by his father with the government under himself, 
was found in a vault or cellar, and taken prisoner. The 
citadel was now sacked, and an immense booty fell to 
the troops engaged in tbe assault. RuNJEBT Singh, 
however, was not content, that his treasury should be 
defrauded of the wealth known to have been laid up in 
this citadel, and which he had long coveted and hoped 
to have secured by a surrender on capitulation. He 
accordingly issued peremptory orders for the immediate 
return of the whole army to Lah6r, with exception to a 
detachment, under Jodh Singh Kulseea, of sufficient 
strength to hold the place, and conduct the local adminis- 
tration. SooKH Dy AL, who had taken the farm of Jhung, 
as above stated, was nominated to the civil government. 
Upon the arrival of the army at Lahdr, proclamation was 
made, that the plunder of Mooltan was the property 
of the State, and all soldiers, officers, or Jageerdars, 
possessing any article of spoil, or any money obtained 
in the sack of the fort, were ordered to bring the 
same in, and to account for the whole to the treasury, 
under penalty of heavy mulct or confinement. It afibrds 
a strong proof of the awe, in which the power and sources 
of information possessed by Runjeet Singh, were 
held by his troops, that this order produced no outrage 
or general resistance. Most of the spoil was traced and 
collected for the treasury, and, though rendered up with 
much discontent, and with many efforts at concealment 