

After the Dussera in October, Runjeet Singh's 
first journey was iqto the hills, where he paid a visit tq 
Raja Sunsar Chund at Nadoun, and collected his 
yearly tributes ; thence returning, he efiected the confis- 
cation of the Jageers and territories of Beer Singh 



A. X). 1817. RUNJEET'S HEALTtt FAILS. 118 

and Dewan Singh, two brothers of the late JoDff 
Singh Ramgurheea, valued at five lakhs of rupees yearly 
revenue. The persons of both chiefs were seized, as they 
came to the Durbar to pay their respects, without suspi- 
cion of any design against them being entertained by the 
Lah6r ruler. Umritsur was illuminated for the return of 
its sovereign on the 13th of December. 

The constitution of Runjeet Singh, though it must 
have been excellent to have carried him so long through 
a course of life consisting of alternate toils and de- 
baucheries, each extreme in degree, began now to yield 
to these incessant trials. His digestion failed, and 
with loss of strength, thinness of body, and the incapacity 
for much exertion, were superinduced. Towards the 
commencement of 1817 his health was seriously im^ 
paired, and he submitted to a course of regimen prescrib- 
ed by his native physicians, which continued for forty 
days, but produced in the end little permanent benefit. 
No military enterprize or other active operation is re- 
corded as having been undertaken in this year. The 
Sikh ruler's principal source of anxiety in the course of 
it, arose from an attachment to Ram Lal, the brother 
of his chamberlain, Khooshhal Singh, upon whom 
such unlimited bounties had been lavished, and who 
had become the great court favorite, and the bottle com- 
panion of his master. Ram Lal could not be induced 
by the most seductive ofiers to give up his Brahminical 
thread, and adopt the Sikh ritual and customs as his bro- 
ther had done. In order to avoid further importunity 
on the subject he fled to his home east of the Sutlej, 
where he was beyond the reach of the Lahdr ruler, who, 
provoked that be should have escaped, wreaked a real 

p 



114 MOOLT AN ATTACKED, A. D. lOll^lS. 

or pretended vengeance on his chamberlain, by remov<^ 
ing him from office, and placing him under restraint 
Ram Lal returned for his brother's sake, and ultimately 
received the Pahul or Sikh initiation, and changed his 
name to Ram Singh. 

The following season was employed in preparation for 
an expedition against Mooltan, of which the resources had 
been annually drained by forced contributions, ravage, 
and waste, so as to lead Runjeet Singh to hope that 
JdozuPFUR Khan's means of defence and preparation 
were now so impaired, as to make the city and fort an easy 
conquest. Before undertaking this enterprize, however, 
Runjeet Singh gave liberty to Ahmed Khan of 
Jhung, whom he had held in close confinement for nine 
months. A small Jageer was assigned to him for subsist- 
ence. The Sikh army had been ordered to rendezvous 
in the beginning of the year 1818 on the south-west 
fVontier of the Sikh dominion. KooNWUR Khuruk 
•Singh was now appointed to the nominal command^ 
aided by MisUR Dewan Chund, who had risen 
by his merit and activity from a low situation to be 
Commandant of the Artillery, and who undertook for 
the reduction of the fort of Mooltan, if vested with the 
chief command during the siege. The jealousy of the 
Jageerdars, who objected to serve under a man of yester- 
day, obliged Runjeet Singh to adopt the plan of send- 
ing his heir-apparent in nominal command of the whole. 
All the boats on the Ravee and Chunab were put in 
requisition to carry supplies and stores for the army, and 
the march was commenced in January 1818. A demand 
was made of an exorbitant sum in cash and of fivectf 
MozuFFUR Khan's best horses, and this not being 