

R 



130 SIEGE OF MUNKERA. A.B. 1821^ 

iD the midst of a desert, was now the only strppgbpld 
remaining. It was situated amongst sand hills, in which 
there was a difficulty of supplying a besieging army witli 
fr^^h water. A division w^s advanced for the investment 
of this place on the 18th, and Be^ldars were set-to dig 
w^llsy.and seek every .where for water, the trpops being 
supplied in the first instance, at great expense and trouble 
by land conveyance of this necessary from A(ouj|gurh, on 
camels, ponies, or bullocks. By the 25th IS^pvember,' 
wells sufficient having been sunk, a further division wai^ 
advanced to complete the investment of the place, an4 
KuNJEET Singh moved there himself sopn ^fter, with 
bis head- quarters, to superintend the conduct pf th^ 
siege. !p!ach tfageerdar as usual wfts allowed to conduct 
his own approaches, and an active rivalry and spirit of 
competition was kept up amongst them by Aunjeet 
Singh. Between the 26th Novepdher, and the 6th an(^ 
7th of December, the besieger's works were carried close 
to the ditch of the place, but not without ^ufifering from 
the continual fire pf the besieged. The Nuwab HAF12; 
Ahmed, conceiving that enough pow had been done ibir 
his honor, proposed terms, and stipulated for the sai:ren4^K 
of Munk^ra, under condition of Ms being allowed tQ 
march out with bis^arms and personal property, and of 
receiving thp town of D^ra-Ismaeel-Khan, with a suit* 
ablQ Jageer,. B.UNJEET 3{NGH granted the terms, an^ 
desired to be put in possession of one of the gates qf 
the fort. Solemn pledges were eicchanged, and j|fii;|i 
dresses sent to the Nuwab, and every jaeans taken tp 
allay his suspicions. Qn the 14th December 1821, b« 
admitted a Sikh detachment, and surrendered the gat9|i 
to it ; and on the 18th9 be came ont with 300 follower^ 
w4 encamped at a «pot assigned to. hira within the ^ii^Ji 



A. i). 1822. ARRIVAL OlP FRENCH OFj^ICERS. 131 

^oshioti. On the 20th, he waited on Runjeet Singh, 
tad was received with marked attention. An escort was 
sent with him to Dera-Ismaeel-Khan, and the treaty, as 
a new example of Sikh faith, was observed to the letter, 
and fully executed. An engagement for tribute was no^ 
enforced on the Balooch Moosulmans of Tonk and Sagut 
west of the Indus, and the Sikh army then moved to Dera- 
Deen-Punah. RtNJEET SiNGri here embarked on the 
Indus, sending his army by land to Mooitan. At Dera 
Ghazee Khan, he arranged with the Nuwab of Buhawnl- 
poor for an increase of tribute, and of rent upon the farms 
he held of that place, and Mitteen K6t. On the 10th 
January 1822, he rejoined his army at Mooitan, but on the 
16th posted on to Labor, leaving it to follow. On arrival 
at his capital on the 27th, he learned that one of hiS 
principal Sirdars and Jageerdars, Jy Singh Utareewala^ 
had gone over to the Afghans west of the Indus. 

It was in March of the year 1822, that the iSrst Euro- 
pean adventurers presented themselves at Runjeet 
Singh's Durbar, seeking military service, and enters 
tainment. There arrived in that month two Frenci 
oiBcers, one Monsieur Ventura, an Italian by birth, 
and the other Monsieur Allard. Both had left Europe 
to seek their fortunes in the East, upon the death blow 
given at Waterloo, to the hopes of the military youth of 
France* They had since been employed in Persia, but 
liking not the subordinate place they were there required 
to fill, they made their way after a time, through Kan^ 
dahar, and Kabool, to Lahdr. Runjeet Singh was at 
first very suspicious of their motives, and could not at all 
understand what could have induced two young men to 
leave their native country, and travel so far. He coold 