

After completing his arrangements in the hills, 
Runjeet Singh having bathed at Turun-Tarun, moved 
with his army into the territories of Mooltan and 
Buhawulpoor, where the still unripe crops and abundant 
herds presented the means of enforcing contributions or 
inflicting irredeemable injury. The Sikh detachments 
penetrated down the Indus, to the verge of the Sindh 
territory, and MoHUMMUD Khan, Chief of Bhukur 
and Leeah, of the family ejected by the present Meers of 
Sindh, having recently died, a demand of tribute was 
made on his successor Hafiz Ahmed Khan, On hm 



A. D. 1816. EXPEDITION DOWN THE INDUS. Ill 

refusal, his forts, Khangarh and Muhmoodkot, were occu- 
pied, and Phoola Singh Akalee was allowed to perpe- 
trate there atrocities and insults to the Mohummedan 
population of the most revolting description. Hafiz 
Ahmed soon after paid down a sum of money to procure 
the withdrawing of the Sikh garrisons, and thus recover- 
ed his forts with part also of the plunder extorted. 
Ahmed Khan of Jhung was now summoned to the 
presence, and called upon for a large contribution. On 
pleading inability, he was sent prisoner to Lah6r, while 
three battalions proceeded to occupy, and annex to the 
Khalsa, the whole of his possessions, reckoned to yield 
about four lakhs of yearly revenue. They were farmed 
to Lala Sookh-Dyal for 1,60,000 rupees. Futeh 
Singh Aloowala was at the same time employed in 
seizing Ooch and Kot-Muharaja, the first held by 
Seyuds, who had hitherto been respected, and were 
DOW provided with a Jageer ; and the second by a chief 
named Rujub Ulee Khan, who was sent prisoner to 
Lahdr. 

RuNJEET Singh returned from the south west, and 
re-entered his capital on the 20th May. Here he learned 
that the Vuzeer Futeh Khan had employed the season 
in a march across the Pukholee and Dumtour hills, into 
Kashmeer, where he aided his brother in enforcing the 
collections^ and establishing his authority in the valley, 
and then returned by the same route. The Sikh detach- 
ment under Ram Dyal and Dul Singh had remained 
upon the frontier to watch his motions. 

A domestic matter now occupied the attention of 
RuNJEET Singh. His second wife^ the mother of 



112 KHURUK SINGH'S MOTHER DISGRACED. A. D< 1816. 

KooDwur Khuruk Singh, was accused of scandal- 
ous improprieties^ and particularly of too notorious and 
close an intimacy with Bhya Ram Singh, the Koon- 
wur's Dewan. Runjeet Singh had lavished much 
territory in Jageer upon the heir-apparent, and the 
management was undertaken by his mother and the 
Dewan, upon the usual condition of maintaining an effici- 
ent contingent of horse, for service with the Sikh army. 
Complaint, however, was loud and frequent, that the 
Jageers were the scene of extortion and mismanagement, 
while the condition and equipment of the Koonwur's con- 
tingent was deemed by Runjeet highly discreditable. 
He first endeavoured to procure a reform by exciting the 
pride of bis son, who was of age to take an interest in 
such things, but the influence of the mother and Dewan 
preventing apy amendment, the Sikh ruler was at length 
compelled to interfere more authoritatively. The Dewan 
Ram Singh was thrown into confinement, and ordered 
to account for his stewardship of the Jageers, ai)d the 
Koonwur's mother was directed to fix her residence in 
the fort of Shekhoopoor. Khuruk Singh was repri- 
manded for allowing such proceedings ; and Bhooanee 
Das of Peshawur, was assigned to him as a new Dewan, 
Several lakhs of rupees and some. valuable jewels were 
extorted from Ram Singh, whose banker Ootum 
Chunp of Umritsur, was also called to account, and 
made to refund what he held for tjhe ex-Dewan. 