

The intelligence of these events determined RuNJESf 
Singh to carry his army across the Indus in the ensuing 
season, more especially as a detachment of Sikhs hkdt 
recently been overpowered by the Khotuk Moosulmansi 
and every motive of policy required, that this should tiol 
pass unrevenged. The troops having been called out is 



A. D. 1818. RUNJEET TAKES PESHAWCR. 119 

October, advanced to Attuk under Runjibbt's personal 
coinniand, and the river being forded ^ith some loss^ 
thefortreiSsof Kbyrabad, with Jngheera, and the territory 
on the opposite bank, were reduced and occupied. No 
immediate resistance was offered, F^EROZ KhAN, thb 
chief of the Khntuk tribe, made his submission, and 
RuNJEET Singh having ascertained that no organized 
force was in the field to oppose him, directed an advance 
on Peshawur. The city was entered on the 20th Novem- 
ber, Yar Mohummud Khan, the governor, retiring, 
as the Sikhs advanced, into the mountains occupied by 
the Yoosufzye tribes of Afghans. 

RuNJEET Singh remained. with his army three days 
in Peshawur, and then returned, leaving as governor on 
his behalf, JuHAN Dad Khan, to whose treachery he 
was indebted for the possession of Attuk, but whom he 
had left unrewarded hitherto, and without the promised 
Jageer. He furnished him, however, with neither troops, 
nor money, to maintain the possession. Accordingly, the 
Sikh army had no sooner crossed the Indus on its return^ 
than Yar Mohummud came down from the mountains 
with the Yoosufzyes, and expelled the Sikh governor: 
JuHAN Dad Khan fled to the southward, and there 
fell in with Shah Shooja, whom the state of affairs 
in Kabool had tempted from Loodeeana again to try his 
fortune. From him he received a free pardon, and join^ 
ed his standard. The curse of Fate was, however, on 
every enterprize undertaken by this prince, whose 
character, though amiable in many respects, and irre- 
proaqhable in all, possessed not the energy to inspire awe, 
and attach followers in troubled times, or to give confi- 
dence to those disposed otherwise to favor his cause. 



120 FAILURE OF SHAH SHOOJA's ENTERPRIZE. A. D. 1818. 

Shah Shoo j a returned destitute to Loodeeana, after a 
few months of vain wandering, and fruitless negociation 
with the Meers of Sindh, and other quondam tributaries 
and dependents of the Afghan empire now no more ; and 
JuHAN Dad Khan then made his peace with the Court 
of Herat, and proceeded thither, despairing of obtaining 
favor or advancement at that of Lah6r. 



CHAPTER EIGHTH. 



A. D. 1819 to 1822. 



Second expedition and conquest of Kashmeer. Arrange' 
mentsfor consolidating the Sikh authority in the hills. 
Conquests on the Indus. Disgrace and confinement 
of Suda Koonwur, Runjeet's Mother-in-law. Arrival 
and entertainment of French officers. 

In February and March 1819, Desa Singh Majhiteea 
was employed by Runjeet Singh, with Raja Sunsar 
Chund, in collecting the hill tribates. In the course of 
their operations they came in contact with the Raja of 
Kuhloor, whose capital, Bulaspoor, is on the British side 
of the Sutlej, but who held at that time extensive posses- 
sions north and west of that river. This chief refusing 
the tribute demanded, Desa Singh marched to occupy 
his territory, and having dispossessed him of all he held on 
the right bank of the boundary river of British protection, 
sent a detachment across it against Bulaspoor. Captain 
Ross, the Political Agent in the adjoining hills, and Com- 
mandant of a battalion of Goorkha light troops, stationed 