



126 APA SAHBB & MR. MOORCROFT AT LAHOR. A. D. 1820. 

In this season, the Court of Lah6r received two visitors, 
one the ex- Raja of Nagpoor, Moodajee Bhoosla, 
commonly called Apa Saheb, who escaped as a fugitive, 
and in disguise, after the campaign, which ended in the 
capture of Aseergurh, and which finally reduced the last 
Idahratta opponent in arms of the British Supremacy in 
India. Tiie fugitive resided some time at Umritsur, while 
RuNJEET Singh was with his army to the south-west, 
but on this chief's return, he was required to quit the 
capital and dominions of the Sikh, whereupon he retired 
to seek refuge in the hills with Raja SuNSAR Chund. 
There, engaging in some intrigue with the Kabool Princes 
at Loodeeana, he was required by the Raja to leave his 
court, whereupon he proceeded to Mundee, where the 
chief Eeshuree Sein gave him temporary protection. 
The British Government, though aware of the locality 
of this fugitive's residence, made no demand for his 
person, and troubled itself no further, than to obtain 
information of his proceedings and designs. 

The other visitor was the Superintendent of the 
Company's Studs in India, the adventurous traveller 
Mr. MooRCROFT, who passed through Lah6r, on his 
route to Ludak, as a merchant proceeding to purchase 
horses in Bokhara. He was received with much civili* 
ty and attention by the Sikh, and from Ludak, which he 
reached vid Mundee, made good his route across the nor^ 
them mountains into Kashmeer. Thence descending inte 
the plains he went to Bulkh, and met his death, by fever^ 
in a rash attempt to pass a tract of unhealthy country, of 
the malaria of which at the particular season, be was fully 
forewarned, but relied too confidently on his European 
remedies, and on his own medical skill. . 



A. D. 1820. INTRIGUES AGAINST SUDA KOONWUR. 127 

After October the master of the Sikh army was taken 
at Seeal-kot, whither Runjeet Singh proceeded by 
the route of Buttala. Thence, skirting the hills, and 
sending detachments against the turbulent Chib-Bhao 
tribe to ravage their possessions ; be proceeded to Rawul 
Pindee, and dispossessing the chief, NuND Singh, 
annexed it to the Khalsa. RuNJEET Singh returned to 
Lah6r on the 13th December, and for the rest of the sea- 
son was occupied chiefly in domestic arrangements. 

■t • 

Sheer Singh, the eldest of the children brought 
forward by SuDA KooNWUR, had been adopted, and 
brought up by her with great expectations. He was noin^ 
approaching man's estate, aud began to be clamorous for a( 
Jageer, and separate establishment. Runjeet Singht 
himself encouraged him in this, hoping that the Ranee 
would make a provision suitable, from the possessionsr 
of the Ghunee Sirdaree in her management. She, how- 
ever, desired to force the recognition of the young man, 
and the making provision for him, on Runjeet, who 
was obstinate in refusing. The wily Sikh fomented the 
dispute between Sheer Singh and his adoptive mother, 
and gained over Bysakh Singh, an old and highly 
confidential retainer of the Ghunees, who was in great 
trust with SuDA KooNWUR. After this intrigue had 
been carrying on for some time, and Sheer Singh's 
complaints had made their impression, unfavorable to 
SuDA Koonwur, Runjeet Singh thought matters 
ripe for an authoritative act of interference on his part. 
He accordingly sent to his mother-in-law an order, id 
October J 820, to set apart half of her own Jageer for the 
suitable maintenance of the two youths Sheer Singh 
and Tara Singh, whom she had brought up with such 