

Q 



122 SECOND EXPEDITION AGAINST KASHMEER. A. D. 1819. 

at Sabathoo, marched immediately to the point threat- 
ened, and was joined there by a detachment from 
Loodeeana, ordered out by the Resident at Dehlee. This 
promptitude alarmed the Sikh ruler, and Desa Singh 
was ordered, not only to recall his detachment, but to 
wait upon Captain Ross, and offer every explanation 
and apology in his power. 

Nothing material occurred in the early part of this year, 
but the season was occupied in preparation for a second 
expedition against Kashmeer. To this Runjtebt Singh 
was encouraged, partly by his recent success against 
Mooltan, which had given him confidence in his troops, 
and had added largely to their reputation, but mainly by 
the state of the Afghan power, and the knowledge, that 
MohummudUzeem Khan had carried with him the most 
efficient of the troops in the valley, '!o forward bis other 
designs, and was far absent, and in no condition to render 
assistance to the Governor he had left behind him. Misur 
Dewan Chund, the conqueror of Mooltan, was selected 
by Runjeet Singh to command the present expedition, 
the Sikh ruler being influenced, partly by his bodily infir- 
mities, partly by a superstitious notion, that fortune and 
fate were against his personal success in the valley, bat 
mainly perhaps by the knowledge, that the more impor- 
tant task of expediting supplies, and supporting thd 
armies operating in advance, could best be performed 
by himself, to determine to remain within bis own frontier, 
and in the plains of the Punjab. 

In the month of April, the Sikh army was marched 
towards the frontier, and a select and strong division 
was formed there under the Misur's command to lead tbi) 



A. D. 1819. THE VALLEY PENETRATED. 128 

advance. A second army was formed to support this 
officer, and placed under the command of KooNWUH 
Khuruk Singh; while Runjeet Singh kept with 
himself a reserve to be employed as occasion might require 
in expediting stores and supplies. 

By the beginning of June, Misur Dewan Chund 
had occupied Rajaoree and Poonch, and all the hills 
and passes, south of the Peer-Punjal range. The sup- 
porting division was accordingly advanced to Rajaoree, 
to keep open the communications. The Chief of this 
last place was in rebellion, and acting with the Raja of 
Poonch in the defence of the Peer-Punjal passes. Run- 
jeet Singh, however, had given liberty to Sooltan 
Khan of Bhimbur, after a confinement of seven years^ 
and had secured the aid of his advice and co-operation, 
by holding out hopes of extensive benefit to result to him 
from the success of the enterprize. On the 23d June, 
the Misur attacked the Rajaoree and Poonch Rajas in 
their position at the Dhakee Deo and Maja passes, and 
carried them, thus securing to himself a road over the 
Peer-Punjal. Khuruk Singh with his division advanc- 
ed now to Surdee Thana, and Runjeet Singh with his 
reserves came up as far as Bhimbur, while Misur 
Dewan Chund, crossing the barrier mountains, descend- 
ed into the valley, and took up a position at Suraee Ulee 
on the road to Soopyn. 