



A. D. 1818. DEATH OF FUTEH KHAN VUZEER. 117 

still the severities practised on the obstinate, and the ma- 
tnal jealousies and envy of their fellows, felt by those who 
bad been compelled to disgorge, led generally to the 
discovery of all that was valuable, so that the Toshuk^ 
khana, or jewel-office, of the Lah6r ruler, was enriched 
by this respoliation of the troops. There is but one 
example of similar audacity in a commander, and that 
was the terrible Nadir Shah, who, upon his return 
from India, when his army was crossing the Attuk, plac- 
ed a guard at the ferry, and as every one came over, 
searched his person and baggage, for every" article of the 
spoil of Dehlee, that the soldiers or followers of his 
army might have secured. 

SURFURAZ Khan and his wounded brother ZooLPi* 
KAR Khan were conducted to Lah6r, where Runjeet 
Singh assigned them a small stipend for subsistence. 
The capture of Mooltan was the only operation of the 
season, the whole Sikh army having been employed against 
the place since January, and the rains having set in as it 
fell. During that season Govind Chund, Raja of 
Datarpoor, in the hills, dying, his territory was annexed 
to the Khalsa, and his son was held in durance until he 
consented to accept a Jageer. 

This season of necessary inactivity produced, however^ 
another event of great influence on the future fortunes of 
Runjeet Singh. In the month of August 1818, the 
Vazeer Futeh Khan, whose energy and talents had 
raised Shah Muhmood to the throne of Kabool, and 
who alone kept together the turbulent and discordant 
materials of which the Afghan empire had been composed, 
was plotted against by the Prince Kamran^ the son of 



U8 TEOUBMS IN AFOHANISTAN. A. jy. 1818. 

MUHMOOD, and being treaoberoasly seized, was first 
blinded, and soon after put to death by his order. The 
y azeer had fifty brothers, all at the head of governments; 
or otherwise in the possession of power and wealth, and 
the cry to vengeance was general throaghout the kingdom. 
MoHUMMUD UzEEM posted from Kashmeer, leaving 
a. younger brother, Jubur Khan, in the valley. Taking 
the direction of the measures of resistance organized, 
he defeated the troops of Kamran, and dislodged his 
garrisons from the neighbourhood of Kabool, Ghiznee, 
and Kandahar, so that in a few months the authority of 
the weak Shah Muhmood, and his rash ill-advised son, 
was confined to the city and plain of Herat, and the rest 
of the Afghan territory was assumed and portioned out in 
separate governments and independent principalities, by 
the powerful members of this extensive family. The 
plea put forward by Kamran for his conduct towards 
the Vuzeer Futeh Khan, was, his having plundered 
the property of Feeroz-ood-deen, a prince of the blood 
royal, whom he expelled from the government of Herat, 
in order to recover it for Muhmood. The real cause, 
however, was jealousy of his power and reputation, and 
the vain conceit entertained by Kamran, that the 
Vuzeer's abilities could be dispensed with, and affairs 
conducted as well by the household and family of the 
imbecile nominal sovereign. 