



A. D. 1830-31. IS SLAIN IN BATTLE. 151 

sent a detachment against him, under Sheer Singh, 
and in the early part of 1831, the detachment was fortu- 
nate enough to fall in with him, when after a short, but 
smart engagement, the Seyud's force was dispersed and 
himself slain. His head was cut off, and sent in to be 
recognized and identified. His followers in Hindoos tan 
have, however, difficulty in believing yet, that he is dead; 
and still hope to see him revive in energy, and display 
himself in some great action, for the permanent benefit 
of the faith of MoHUMM UD, and for the extension of the 
dominion and power of its professors. 

Since the death of the Seyud, the neighbourhood of 
Feshawnr has been comparatively tranquil, and there has 
been no occasion to call out the Sikh army, nor has 
RuNJEET Singh engaged in any military enterprize of 
importance. 



CHAPTER TENTH. 



A. D. 1829 to 1831. 



Mission of Lieutenant Burnes with a present of dray 
horses for Ruryeet Singh. His journey through Sindhf 
and up the Indus and Ravee to Lahdr, Mission to 
Lord William Bentinck at Shimla. Meeting arranged 
between the Governor General and Ruryeet Singh, 
Takes place in October 1831. Commercial Treaty 
concluded between the British Government and Sindh. 

iVhbn Lord Amherst retarned to Earope in 1828> 
he carried with him the shawl tent presented by RuN- 
J E£T Singh to the King of England. It was determined 
to send from England a return present, and a very extra** 
ordinary selection was made; upon whose advice, has not 
transpired. It was resolved to send to Run jeet Singh, 
on the part of His Majesty, a team of cart horses, four 
mares and one stallion, upon some conception, that, ia 
his love for horses, Runjeet Singh must be a breeder 
of the animal, and would be well pleased to have mares 
of large size to cross with the breeds of the Punjab. The 
fact, however is, that Runjeet has no breeding stud nor 



A. D. 1829. PRESENT FROM THE KING TO RUNJEET. 153 

establishment, and cares only for entire horses of high 
courage, well broken in to the manage of Hindoostan, 
that he can ride himself, on parade, or on the road, or set 
his choice sirdars and favorites upon. The result fully 
showed this, for when the cart horses arrived at his court, 
the stallion was immediately put into the breaker's hands, 
and taught the artificial paces usuaL This animal with 
its enormous head, and coarse legs, stands always in the 
palace yard, or before the tent of the chief, decorated 
with a golden saddle, and necklaces of precious stones, 
and is sometimes honored by being crossed by RuNJEET 
Singh himself. The mares are never looked at, and are 
matters of absolute indifference to the Sikh. It is, how- 
ever, an anticipation to state what happened on the ar- 
rival of the animals, their adventures on the road to Lah6r, 
involved matters of higher interest. 

It was resolved to make the transmission of this pre- 
sent, a means of obtaining information' in regard to the 
Indus, and the facilities, or the contrary, it might ofier to 
navigation. The recent successes of Russia in Persia, 
and the probability of that power entertaining further 
designs, either present, or hereafter, when the succes- 
sion of Abbas Meerza to the throne of Persia, might 
render that kingdom a province of Russia, made it desir- 
able, that every intelligence should be collected, as to the 
frontier states of India, and the means of defence offered 
by this great river barrier in particular. The dray 
horses were accordingly sent out to Bombay, and the 
Supreme Government instructed Sir John Malcolm, 
the Governor of that presidency, to take measures to have 
them forwarded under charge of an intelligent and pru- 
dent officer, in boats up the Indus. Some demur was 