

R 2 



132 runjeet's suspicions. a. D. 182^. 

not believe, that employ in his service was a safficient 
object to have induced such a journey. They had stated 
their views verbally, and had besides given several repre- 
sentations in Persian, but these failed to satisfy the sus- 
picious chief. He accordingly desired them to write 
down their views and wishes in their own language, and 
having thus obtained a paper in the French language^ 
RuNJEET sent it to his Agent at Loodeeana, to be there 
literally translated for him'^, and returned. On obtaining 

* The French paper referred to, was to the following effect. 
A Sa Majeste le Roi. 

Sire,— Les bont^s dont yotre Majesty nous a combl^s depuis notrc 
arriv^e en cette capitale sont innombrables. Elles correspondent k la 
haute id^e que nous nous etions faits de Texcellence de son bon coeur ; 
et la renomm^e, qui a port€ jusqu' k nous le nom du Roi de Lahdr, n' a 
rien dit en comparaison de ce que nous yoyons. Tout ce qui entoure 
yotre Majesty est grande, digne d'un souyerain, qui aspire k Timmorta- 
lit€. Sire, la premiere fois que nous ayons eu I'honneur d'etre present^s 
li yotre Majesty, nous lui avons expose le motif de notre yoyage. La 
reponse qu'elle adaign^enous faire nous tranquillise ; mais elle nous 
laisse dans Tincertitude pour Tavenir. C'est pour ce motif que nous 
ayons eu Thonneur de faire, 11 y a d6}k quelques joui^, une addresse avotrd 
Majesty, pour sayoir si notre arriy^e dans ses etata lui etait agr^ble, et 
si nous puissions lui ^tre de quelque utility par nos connoissances de Tart 
de la guerre, acquises comme ofiSciers superieurs sous les ordres imme- 
diats du Grand Napoleon Bonaparte, souyerain de la France. Votr^ 
Majesty ne nous a pas tir^ de Tincertitude, puisqne nous n'ayons paa 
encore rien d'ordres de sa part. Nous ayons done renouyelM notr^ 
demande en langue Francaise d'apr^s le conseil de Noor-ood-deen 
Saheb, qui nous fait croire qu*un employ^ aupr^s de yotre august^ 
personxie connoit notre langue. Dans cette incertitude nous suppliom 
yotre Majesty de daigner nous fiaire transmettre ses ordres, que nous 
suiyrons tonjours ayec la plus grande ponctualit6. 

Nous ayons Fhonneur d'etre, ayec le plus profbnd respect. 

Sire, 

De Votre M^jest^ les tr^s humbles, tr^s ob^issans 

et tr^s deyou^s Seryiteurs, 

Ch. Ventura. Ch. Auahd.^ 
Lahdr, Ist April, 1822. 



a. I>. 1822. VENTURA AND ALLARD ENTERTAINED. 133 

this satisfaction^ RuNJEET Singh gave to the two 
French officers assurance of employ ; and houses in 
Lah6r, with handsome salaries, were at once assigned to 
them. Monsr. Ventura was an Infantry Colonel in the 
French service, Monsr. Allard had similar rank in the 
Cavalry. They were both set to instruct troops in the 
European method of exercise and manoeuvre. The native 
commandants were at first extremely jealous of the favor 
shown to these Europeans, and of their exercising any 
authority or command; more especially because on 
Runjeet Singh's asking their opinion of the troops in 
their present condition, they had expressed themselves 
very slightingly as to their state of discipline and drill. 
At first they were employed on the troops at the capital, 
which were under Runjeet's own eye, and Monsieur 
Allard received orders to raise a corps of Dragoons, to 
be disciplined and drilled like the Cavalry of Europe. 
These officers by their conduct won further confidence in 
the course of time, and some others, particularly Monsieuif 
Court, who was brought up at the Polytechnic Institu- 
tion at Paris, have followed, and joined them in subsequent 
years. VENTURA is now (1833) employed with upwards of 
10,000 men in a separate command of importance towards 
Moohan, and there is a perfect confidence and good 
understanding between him, and those serving under 
him. The feeling is, however, still so adverse to Euro- 
peans on the part of the Sirdars, as to make the 
situation of these officers very hazardous and delicate 
in the event of RuNJEET Singh's decease. Monsieur 
Ventura, moreover, in 1829, had a quarrel with the 
heir-apparent, Khuruk Singh, which was with difficul- 
ty adjusted, and the consequences of which will be 