

V9ho had served with mach zeal and honor. He was 
threatened with a heavy mulct, and in other respects 
treated disparagingly ; whereupon he took poison at 
night, and so relieved himself from further troubles. The 
army moved, in December, towards Rawul Pindee, 
whence Hukeem Uzeez-ood-deen was sent forward to 
Peshawur, to demand tribute from Yar Mohummud 
Khan the Governor. This chief, being unprepared for 
resistance, collected some valuable horses, and forwarded 
them as tribute, which satisfying Runjeet Singh for 
the time, he returned to his capital in January, making 
the pilgrimage of Kitas on his route. 

Mohummud Uzeem Khan disapproved of the com- 
promise made by his brother of Peshawur, and marched 
from Kabool to superintend the affairs of this quarter in 
person. He arrived at Peshawur on the 27th January ; 
and Yar Mohummud, fearing to meet him, sought a 
temporary refuge in the Yoosufzye hills. Runjeet 
Singh now ordered his army to cross the Indus, and the 
the river was forded on the 13th March. Feeroz Khan, 
the chief of the Khutuks, being dead, a sequestration was 
made of all his possessions. On the 14th March, the 
army entered Akora, where it was joined by the fugi- 
tive, Jy Singh Utareewala, who was now anxious 
to make his terms, and be re-admitted to favor. His 
pardon was granted. Intelligence was soon after brought^ 
that Mohummud Zuman Khan, nephew of Uzbbm 
Khan, with Sudbbq Khan, son of the deceased 
Khatuk chief, Feeroz Khan, were in position at 
Noashubur near the camp, with about 4000 men, and 
had already cut off some parties of foragers. Run* 
J BET Singh ordered his army to be formed, directly ha 

s 



138 OBSTINATE RESISTANCE OF MOOSULMANS. A. D. 1823, 

learned this intelligence, and marched forthwith to attack 
the Moosulmans. The battle commenced with a furious 
charge led by Phoola Singh Akalee, a Sikh despe- 
rado, who was in the habit of rushing forward, with some 
followers of like zeal, at the commencement of action. 
The Moosulmans, however, also felt their battle to be a 
religious one, and met the fanatic Sikhs with corres* 
ponding zeal and bigotry ; so that the latter were com- 
pletely destroyed, and their leader slain. Fresh troops 
were now ordered up by Runjeet Singh, but the 
Mohummedans stood firm, and resisted every attack 
until sunset, by which time they had lost nearly half their 
originally small number, but still maintained their ground 
on two insulated hills. Kunjeet Singh now ordered 
his cavalry to surround the whole position of the enemy, 
and directed his Nnjeeb and Goorkha battalions, to 
charge and dislodge them. Twice did these troops 
advance to the charge, and twice were they repulsed by 
the determined body opposed to them, nor could the 
utmost efforts of Runjeet's army dislodge them from 
their position before nightfall. In the course of the 
night, the remnant of the band cut their way through the 
surrounding posts of the Sikhs, and so made good their 
retreat to the mountains. 