



134 suDA koonwur's lands south of sutlej a. d. 1823. 

likely to be felt injurioasly whentbis prince dhall succeed 
his father. 

Towards the beginning of April, RuNJBET Singh 
went to Ukhmar, in the Jammoo hills. His army was in 
the field, under MisUR Dewan Chund, watching the 
movements of Uzeem Khan, who had come down to 
Peshawur ; where being joined by the fugitive Jageerdar, 
Jy Singh Atareewala, he was pushing back the Sikh 
posts and garrisons towards the Indus, and even threaten- 
ed Khyrabad, the principal station held by them on the 
western bank. In June, Runjeet returned to his 
capital, without achieving any enterprize of note. 

; Amongst the possessions of Suda Koonwur, was a 
small territory, called Himmutpoor Wudnee, lying south 
of the Sutlej, and held by her under grant from Runjeet 
Singh, made in September 1808, in consideration of a 
payment of 15,000 rupees. This territory being on the 
protected side of the Sutlej, could not be confiscat- 
ed with the rest. Runjeet Singh, however, compel- 
led his mother-in-law to execute in his favor, a deed 
of relinquishment of right to the territory, and armed 
with this, his agent proceeded to take forceable posses- 
sion. Upon resistance, however, by Suda Koonwur's 
manager, and complaint to the British authorities, this 
deed was at first not admitted as valid, and the lands were 
ordered to be left in the former management. They 
continued thus to be preserved from the grasp of the 
Lahdr ruler, until 1828, when upon further representa- 
tion, the Supreme Government consented to Runjeet 
Singh's assuming them under his management. Suda 



A. D. 1828, GIVEN UP TO RUNJEET. 135 

Koonwur's position was not in the least improved by 
this resalt. She continued, and to this day (1833) 
continues, to be held a close prisoner, and howsoever 
humanity may plead in her behalf, one does not see how 
she could well be treated otherwise^ being what she is, 
and has been. 



CHAPTER NINTH 



A. D. 1823 to 1831. 



Operations in Peshawur. Affair with a party ofMoosuU 
man fanatics. Mohummud Uzeem Khan retires and 
leaves Peshawur to Runjeet Singh, Death of that 
Chief — also of Sunsar Chund. Disturbances in the 
Gundgurh Mountains. Yar Mohummud confirmed as 
Governor for Runjeet Singh at Peshawur. Futeh 
Singh Aloowala retires from the Durbar. Rise of 
Seyud Ahmed, the Mohummedan Saint and reformer, 
troubles occasioned by him. Unrodh Chund of Kangra 
moved to a discreditable alliance, flies across the Sutlej* 
His possessions seized. Further disturbances and 
troubles from Seyud Ahmed. His defeat and death. 

In October, after the Dussera of 1823, the Sikh army 
was assembled at Kohtas, and master taken of the 
Jageerdars' contingents. RuNJEBT Sing was on this 
occasion more than ordinarily severe in taking account of 
the numbers, and equipment of the men produced^ and 
amongst other chiefs, who fell under his animadversioa 
for neglect, was DuL Singh Mih^rna, an old Jageerdar^ 



A. D. 1822-23. RUNJEET MARCHES TO PESHAWUR. 187 