



A. B. 1829. SEYUD AflMED*S RE-APPEARANCE. 149 

In the bourse of 1829, Seyud Ahmed again appeared 
in the field in great strength, and his vengeance was di- 
rected against Yar Mohummud Khan, who, he declar- 
ed, had sacrificed the cause of his religion by swearing 
allegiance, and accepting service from the Sikhs. As the 
Seyud approached Peshawur, Yar Mohummud moved 
out with such troops as he could collect for its defence. 
In the action which followed, however, he received a 
mortal wound, and his troops dispersed. Peshawur was 
saved to Runjeet Singh by the opportune presence 
there of Monsieur Ventura, who had gone with a small 
escort, to negociate with Yar Mohummud Khan for 
the surrender of a famous horse called Lylee. The horse 
had been demanded in the previous year, but the Afghans 
declared it was dead. The falsity of this declaration 
being discovered, a written engagement had been extort- 
ed from Yar Mohummud, pledging himself for its deli- 
very, and Monsieur Ventura was deputed to enforce the 
execution of this deed. Upon the death of Yar Mohum- 
mud, he took upon himself to make dispositions for the 
defence of Peshawur, and wrote to Runjeet Singh for 
instructions as to his further proceedings. The Sikh 
directed the city to be delivered over to SooLTAN Mo- 
hummud Khan, brother of the deceased Yar Mohum- 
mud, but urged the securing possession of the famous 
horse Lylee, as an indispensable preliminary. Monsieur 
Ventura succeeded fully in thisnegociation, and brought 
away Lylee, leaving Sooltan Mohummud in posses- 
sion of the government of Peshawur. 

M. Ventura had not been long gone, when Seyud 
Ahmed appeared again, with his host of Yoosufzyes, 
before Peshawur, and Sooltan Mohummud, venturing 



150 SEYUD AHMED TAKES PESHAWUR. A. D. 1830. 

an action, was defeated, so that Peshawur fell under the 
temporary power of the fanatic Chief. Runjeet SiNOfi 
took the field with his army in the early part of 1830, to 
panish this pretender. . On his crossing the Attuk, how^ 
ever, and approaching Peshawar, the insurgent force dis« 
solved before him, and nothing tangible appeared on 
which he could wreak his vengeance. He returned to 
Lah6r, leaving a strong detachment across the Indus, to 
act as occasion might ofiTer, and having restored Sooltan 
MoHUMMUD to his government. This Chief, after the 
departure of Runjeet Singh, found it convenient to 
come to terms with Seyud Ahmed> who again came 
down, and by a sudden attack carried Peshawur. The 
Governor consented, to allow free passage to men and 
money proceeding to join the reformer — to place the 
administration of justice in Peshawar in the hands of a 
Kazee, and bfiicers of the reformed faith and principles, 
and to pay monthly to the Seyud the sum of 3000 rupees^ 
The city was on these conditions restored ta Sooltan 
MoHUMMUD, but the Seyud had no sooner retired, than 
the Kazee and two Moolvees left to administer justice 
according to his reformed principles, were slain in a popa-* 
lar tumult. Seyud Ahmed's difficulties increased, for the 
Yoosufzyes took offence at some innovations he desired to 
introduce into the marriage ceremony, and were alarmed 
by his announcing the doctrine, that a tenth of all income, 
or revenue, should be subscribed for religious and state 
purposes. The wild untutored nM>antaineers rose againsi 
the preacher's authority, and not only rejected these doo-t 
trines, but compelled the Seyud, and his immediate fol* 
lowers, to leave their mountains. He fled across the 
Indus, and found a temporary refuge in the mountains of 
Pekhlee and Dhumtour. Runjeet Singh, however^ 