



A. D. 1825. INTRIGUES AND SEQUESTRATIONS. 143 

exaggerated reports were spread at first of the suc- 
cesses of the Burmese, and there were not wanting 
counsellors to instil into the ear of the Lah6r ruler, 
that the time was approaching, when the field would 
be open to him to the east. It was at this period, 
that Mr. Moorcroft forwarded to Calcutta, a let- 
ter of Prince Neselrode, the Russian Minister for 
Foreign Afiairs, addressed to Rcjnjeet Singh, purport- 
ing to introduce an agent named Agha Mehdee. The 
agent it seems was endeavouring to make his way by the 
difficult route of Tibet, and either died, or was murdered^ 
some few stages from Lud^k. There Mr. Moorcroft 
obtained his papers, and amongst them this letter, which 
he procured to be translated afterwards by M. KsoMA 
de Koros, with whom he fell in on his travels. The 
letter, except as introductory of the agent, was merely one 
of compliment, with assurances of protection to any 
merchants of the Punjab, who might penetrate to the 
Russian dominions. 

No Military enterprize was undertaken in the season 
1824-1825: but, towards April 1825, sequestration was 
made of all the Jageers and possessions formerly assign- 
ed to Dewan Mohkum Chund, and now managed for 
MoTEECHUNDby Kripa Ram, the Dewan's grandson. 
The bad management of the Jageers, and the inefficient 
contingent kept up by this agent, were the assigned 
reasons, Motbe Ram himself being left in his govern- 
ment of Kashmeer, and subjected to no indignity, or 
diminution of favor, consequent upon the sequestration. 
In the Dussera of 1825, the army was called into the field, 
with the avowed purpose of an expedition against Sindh. 
With this view. Run J bet Singh marched the troops to 



144 FLIGHT OF FUTBH SINGH ALOOWALA. A. D. 1825-29. 

Pind-Dadar-Khan, bat learning there, that the Sindb 
coantry was suffering from scarcity and famine, he gave 
up the design, and returned to Lah6r on the 24th Novem- 
ber. An agent he had sent into Sindh to demand tribute, 
returned with Vakeels from the ruling Meers, who for 
some time continued to reside at Lahdr. It was at this 
period that Runjeet Singh's close associate hitherto, 
and turband brother, Futeh Singh Aloowala, conceiv- 
ed some suspicions as to the safety of his position at the 
Lah6r Durbar, and suddenly left that capital to place 
himself in security within the possessions held by him on 
the protected side of the Sutlej. RuNJEET Singh was 
much vexed at this sudden step of his old ally, and made 
great efforts to induce the chief to return, and resume 
his place in his Durbar. The British officers, while they 
confirmed him in the assurance of the inviolability of his 
territory on the protected side of the Sutlej, advised his 
not yielding to vague suspicions, as a ground for breaking 
a friendship of so long standing, as had subsisted between 
himself and Runjeet. Guided by this advice Futeh 
Singh some time after, that is, in April 1827, yielded to 
the invitations of the Lahdr ruler, and returning to hik 
Durbar was well received, the Maha Raja sending his 
grandson Nou-NiHAL, to give him the meeting of honor. 
He soon, however, became an object of rapacity, being 
called upon to pay tribute, or take in farm at no easy rent, 
much of the territory he had hitherto enjoyed free, by thai 
assignment of his turband brother. 