

There were not more of the Moosulmans engaged on 
this occasion, than between four and five thousand men, 
and these were mere mountaineers and villagers, who 
turned out for the Ghazee, that is, to fight the religious 
battle against the infidel Sikhs. Disciplined professional 
soldiers there were none amongst them, yet did they 
resist, for a whole day, the entire army of Run J BET 
Singh, who had in the field against them not less thap 



A. D. 1823* PESHAWUR OCCUPIED. 139 

24,000 men^ and all his best troops. There were 
upwards of 1,000 men (Captain Wade says 2,000) killed 
and wounded on the side of the Sikhs^ and amongst them 
four officers of distinction, Phoola Singh Akalee, 
Ghurba Singh, and Kurum Singh Chahul, two 
Jageerdars, and Bulbhudur Singh Goorkhalee. The 
last named was the officer who had defended Nalapanee, 
with so much determination, against Generals Gillespie 
and Martindell, at the commencement of the British 
war with Nipal. After peace was re-established, he 
formed an ill-fated connexion with the wife of another, 
and, by the law of Nipal, his life became forfeit to the 
injured husband. This led to his expatriating himself, 
and taking employment from Runjeet Singh, where, 
after serving with distinction, he died in a manner worthy 
of his reputation. 

MoHUMMUD UzEEM Khan was, during this action of 
the Ghazee, or 6ghters for the faith, at Chumkawa, 
about four miles and a half east of Peshawur. He made 
no effort to succour, or support the warriors, and was 
watched in his position by a Sikh force under Kripa 
Ram, Sheer Singh, and Huree Singh, which had 
advanced by the opposite bank of the river. Upon learn- 
ing that the party was overpowered, and had dispersed, he 
retired himself to Jalalabad on the Kabool road, leaving 
the field clear to Runjeet Singh and the Sikh army. 

On the 17th March, RuNJBET SiNGH made his entry 
into Peshawur, and advanced the army to KhyburDurra, 
where it was employed in pillaging and destroying the 
cultivation. It suffered much, however, from the activi- 
ty and bigotted spirit, with which the Moosulman popula^^^ 

s 2 



140 DEATH OF MOHUMMUD UZB£M KHAN. A. D. 182S 

tion attacked its parties^ and cat off all stragglers ; aD< 
the camp was kept daring the night continaally on thi 
alert by their daring skirmishes. 

In April, Runjeet Singh secured the sabmissiono 
Yab Mohummud Khan, who came with some fim 
horses, including the far-famed Kuhar, and with areques 
to be allowed to hold Peshawur as a tributary of Lahdr 
The Sikh was well content to make a settlement for th< 
city and surrounding territory on this basis. Havinj 
effected it, he returned to his capital in person on th 
26th April. 



y. 



Mohummud Uzbem Khan died in the followinj 
month, and the event contributed to produce ^urther con 
fusion in the affairs of Afghanistan ; for while he lived 
he was looked upon as the head of the family in succes 
sion to Futeh Khan, whereas after his death th< 
numerous brothers and nephews of that chief acknow 
lodged nobody, and their quarrels and contentions coveret 
with outrage and disturbance, all the fairest portion o 
the Afghan territory. Muhmood and his son Kamrai 
were conflned to the fort and city of Herat, beyoni 
which their name was no where respected, nor could thei 
exercise any authority. 