

After the Dnsserah, in October, the Sikh army being 
again called out, was led by Runjeet Singh down the 
Indus, with the professed design of an attack upon 
Sindh. The river was crossed in November, and the 
whole of that month was occupied in reducing Bhntee 
villages, and exacting contributions from the Baloodi 
and other Jageerdars, whose possessions lay on tho 



A. D. 1824. HUREE SINGH BESET IN THE HILLS. 141 

extreme northern frontier of the Sindhian territory. The 
Lahdr Chief was however content with having thus felt 
his way this season, and in December moved his army 
homeward. At the close of the year Raja SuNSAR 
Chund of Kangra died, and was succeeded by his 
son Unrodh Chund. A Nuzarana was demanded on 
the succession ; and, upon the young Raja demurring to 
the payment, Runjeet Singh summoned him to attend 
in person at his summer residence of Adeenanugur. He 
was persuaded by the FuQEER Uzeez-ood-deen ta 
obey the summons^ and met the court at Juwala Mookhee. 
On arrival, an exchange of turbands took place, and mutual 
pledges were interchanged, between him and Khuruk 
Singh on the part of the Durbar; and, after much 
negociation, a lakh of rupees was at last settled, and paid^ 
as the Nuzoikna of accession, by Unrodh Singh. 

Huree Singh Nulowa, who had been left with a 
force to overawe the turbulent Moosulman population of 
the mountains about Gundgurh and Dnrbund, contrived 
by several harsh and vexatious proceedings, and particu* 
larly by the seizure of a Seyud's daughter of beauty, and 
credit in her tribe, to drive the whole into insurrection. 
The insurgents collected in such force, as to compel 
Huree Singh to stockade himself, and remain on the 
defensive, and he wrote to Runjeet Singh, represent- 
ing the difficulties of his situation, and soliciting rein- 
forcements. Runjeet ordered him to put on a bold 
face, and maintain himself as he could, but sent no im- 
mediate reinforcements, indeed the rains had' set in, and 
it was not easy to do so. HuREB Singh in the meaof 
time being attacked, suffered a severe loss, and was com- 
pelled to retire before the insurgents. The Sikh army 



142 CAMPAIGN IN THE KASHMEER MOUNTAINS. A.D* 1824. 

was in consequence of this disaster, called out earlier than 
usual, and directed against the hills between the Indus 
and Kashmeer, in the early part of October. By the 
19th, RuNJEET had penetrated with a division of his 
troops to Gundgurh, but found the population dispersed, 
and nothing but empty walls and deserted houses ; the 
place with all the surrounding villages was burnt and pil- 
laged, the unripe crops were used for forage to the army, 
andRuNJEET Singh following the deserters, determined 
to ford the Indus after them, an attempt in which many 
lives were lost, but the object was effected on the 3rd 
November. When the army was well across, MoHUM- 
MUD Yar Khan was summoned to attend from Pesha- 
wur, which after some hesitation he did on the 16th 
November, bringing a present of horses, which were at 
first rejected, as of inferior quality, but, being replaced by 
others, the offering was accepted, and the terms on which 
Peshawur had been assigned were renewed with fresh 
protestations and oaths of allegiance on the part of the 
Afghan chief. On the 30th November, the Sikh army 
re-crossed the Indus, not without further loss, from the 
depth and bad footing at the ford. , On the 10th Decern-* 
her, Runjeet Singh re-entered his capital by no means 
satisfied with the result of the expedition of the season, 
for he had incurred heavy expenses in preparation, and 
yet had been able to inflict no blow on the turbulent 
body of Mohummedans in insurrection, and had levied 
very little in the way of tribute and contribution. No 
further expedition was attempted in 1824, nor in the 
early part of the following year. Indeed the Burmese 
war had been commenced by the British Government, 
and Runjeet Singh seemed to watch with intense 
interest all the events and operations of it. The most 