

The year 1826 passed without any military enterpriiM 
or event of importance. Sadiq Mohummud Khan, 
the Nuwab of Bahawulpoor, died in April, and was sao^ 
ceeded by Buhawul Khan^ the present Nuwab^ whb 



k. D. 1826*27. RISE OF SEYUD AHMED; 145 

renewed his father's leases and engagements with RuN- 
JEET SlNGH^ for the territory he held west and north 
of the Sutlej. In September, a question arose upon the 
application of Qootub-ood-deen of Kasoor to be re^ 
ceived under British protection, as holder of Mundot 
and Rnmnawala on the left bank of the Sutlej, but the 
fendatorv relations this chief had come under to Runjeet 
Singh for these, as for his other possessions, forbad 
the British Government from holding out the hope that 
he could be received under protection as an indepen- 
dent Chief. An unsuccessful attempt by Beer Singh» 
£x-Raja of Noorpoor, in the Hills, to recover the 
territory, from which he had been ejected since 1816, 
forms the only other event recorded in this year. He 
wag defeated and made prisoner by Desa Singh* 
A main cause of the inactivity of the Sikhs arose from 
the increasing infirmities of Runjeet Singh: His 
indispositions and ailings increased upon him so much, 
towards the end of the year, that he applied to the British 
Government for a medical officer, and Dr. Andrew 
Murray was sent over from Loodeeana to attend hi« 
Highness^ 

It was in the early part of 1827, that the reformer 
Seyud Ahmed, raised the green standard of Mohummud 
in the Mountains inhabited by the Yousuf-Zyes, and com- 
menced a religious war against the Sikhs» This indivi- 
dual was originally a petty officer of horse in the service of 
Ameer Khan, Upon the breaking up of the military 
establishment of that Chief in 1818-19, Seyud Ahmed 
took a fanatic turn ; and fancying he had received special 
revelations, went to Dehlee, and associated lumself 
with some Mooluvees of sanctity of that city. One of 

T 



146 .SEYUD AHMED DEFEATED. . A. D. 1827. 

them collected these revelations into a book ; and from 
ittheSEYUD, and his associates, and followers, com* 
menced preaching against many irregularities that had 
crept into the practise of the Mohummedan religion. 
Amongst the principal were, the reverence paid by the 
Mooslims of Hindoostan to the tombs of saints and rela-* 
tions, the manner of their celebrating the death of H U8UN 
and HooSEiN, the sons of Ulbe, and other similar 
ijustoms, which these reformers denonnced as idolatroas, 
and as deviations from the pure precepts of the Koran, 
in 1822, Seyud Ahmed came down to^ Calcntta, and 
was there ranch followed by the Moosalman population. 
Thence he took ship to make the pilgrimage of Mekka. 
On his return, he travelled through Hindoostan, and 
declared the intention of devoting himself to the service 
of his religion, by waging an interminable holy war 
against the Sikh infidels. Many zealots and fanatics 
j6ined him, and subscriptions of money were poured in 
upon him from all parts of the British possessions* Thus 
armed and prepared, he made bis way to the hills near 
Peshawur, and raised the Mohumdee Jhenda as above 
stated amongst the Yoosufzye Moosulmans. RuNJEBT 
Singh was compelled by the formidable character of the 
insurrection thus organized, to send a strotig force across 
the Attdk, for the protection of Kbyrabad and his interests 
in that quarter. In the month of March 1827, the 
Seyud at the head of a countless irregular host, ventured 
to attack this force, which was commanded by Boo0ii 
Singh Sindoowaleea, and had 'thrown up works to 
strengthen itself in- its position; The Sikh discipUfae 
and superior equipment' secured them an '^asy Victory, 
and the Seyud, being entirely defeated^ retired with bis 
followers into the hills^ whence he kept up a desulieiy 