



A. D. 1827. MISSION TO LORD AMHERST. 147 

and annoyiug warfare with the Sikhs, direated against 
their convoys and small detachments. 

.Lord Amherst passed the hot season of the year 
1827» at the station of Shimla, near Subathoo, in the 
hills east of the Sutlej. The proximity of this posi- 
tion, to Lah6r induced Runjeet Singh to send a 
mission of compliment to His Lordship, with presents, 
and amongst others a handsome tent of shawl for the 
King of England. The mission was received with 
distinction, and a return compliment made of the same 
kind. : Captain Wade, the officer at Loodeeana, throagb 
whom the correspondence with the Lahdr ruler was. 
conducted, and some officers of the Governor General'^ 
personal suite, were deputed to Lah6r with return pne« 
sents, and a suitable retinue, to express the Gover-» 
nor General's satisfaction at the terms of cordiality 
and friendship, which subsisted between the two states. 
In 1828, the British Commander in Chief, Lord CoM«- 
BERMERE, passed the warm season at Shimla, and a 
complimentary Vakeel was sent over by Runjeet 
Singh, to oiTer his congratulations. It was his Lord-* 
ship's desire to procure an invitation in person to 
Lahdr, but the wily Chief evaded compliance with this- 
wish. 

• - ' 
At the Durbar of Lah&r, at this time, the entire favor, 
of the Chief was engrossed by Raja DiiBBAN Singh,-. 
the Chamberlain, and his brothers GooLAB SiNOH and 
Soochet Singh, Meeans of Jummoo, where their 
influence had been re-established under Runjbbt 
Singh* s authority, by the grant of the place in Jageer in 
1819, as before related. Hbera Singh, a boy of about 

t 2 



148 FAVOR SHOWN TO DHBBAN SINGH. A. D. 1827-1!8» 

twelve years of age, son of Raja Dheban Singh, 
was the object of particular favor, Runjeet Singh 
seldom suffering him out of his sight, and seeming to 
delight in humouring all his whims and caprices. In 
common with his father and uncles, he was created Raja, 
and Runjeet Singh studied to procure him a high 
matrimonial alliance. It was about this time that Raja 
Unrodh Chund, son of Sunsar Chund of Kangra, 
paid a visit to Lah6r, with his family, on his route to 
attend the nuptial ceremonies of the Aloowala's son, 
Nihal Singh. He had with him two sisters, on whom 
Raja Dheean Singh cast his eyes, desiring them to be 
joined in matrimony with his family. The pride of the 
hill chief was roused at the proposition of so degrading 
an alliance, but the influence of Runjeet Singh pro^ 
cured from him a written promjise, that the two young 
women should be at his disposal. The mother of Unrodh 
Chund, however, succeeded in carrying them off, and 
took refuge with them in the hills under British protec- 
tion, whither Unrodh Chund himself soon followed, 
leaving his possessions on the other side of the Sutlej at the 
mercy of Runjeet Singh, who sequestered the whole, 
and received the surrender of them without any resistance 
from Futeh Chund, Unrodh's brother. A Khawas or 
concubine of Raja Sunsar Chund, named Guddun,. 
was enticed away from the family, and fell on this occa« 
sion into Runjeet Singh's hands, with several children 
she had borne to the late Raja. Two of the daughters 
the Sikh married himself, and upon a son he conferred, 
the title of Raja with a considerable Jageer. The nup-» 
tials of Heera Singh were at the same time celebrated 
with great pomp, though not with a member of the Kan- 
gra family. 