

The very favorable disposition in which the ruler of 
Lah6r seemed to be at this juncture, encouraged Lord 
William Bentinck to hope, that a proposition for a 
personal meeting between himself and Runjeet Singh 
would be likely to be well received. He accordingly 
instructed Captain Wade> when at Lahdr, on the occa- 
sion above related, to sound the Chiefs confidential 
advisers on the subject. As anticipated by His Lord- 
ship, the Ruler of Lah6r showed great desire for the meet- 
ing, but some difficulty was at first started in respect to 
the etiquette of a previous return mission, Runjeet 



160 MEETING OF RUNJEET & THE GOV. GENL. A. D. 1831. 

Singh having paid his Lordship the compliment of 
sending, one, similarly composed to that which waited 
on Lord Amherst. The mission had been received 
by Lord William Bentinck in April, soon after his 
arrival at Shimla : its members were the Dewan MooTEB 
Ram, son of Mohkum Chund, Huree Singh Sirdar, 
and the secretary, Fuqeer Uzeezooddeen. They 
had been treated by the Governor General with mnch 
distinction^ and a return mission of some of the princi- 
pal ofBcers of His Lordship's suite had been promised^ 
or rather held oat in expectation. The personal meet- 
ing between the heads of the two states would neces- 
sarily deprive Runjeet Singh of this compliment; for 
in the first place, the time would scarcely allow of both, 
seeing that the intended journey of the Governor General 
to Ajmeer and Rajpootana required, that, if arranged 
at all, the interview should take place before the end of 
October, and in the second, if a formal mission were sent, 
immediately before the meeting, it would have the ap- 
pearance in the eyes of the world, of being sent to suppli- 
cate, or induce the ruler of the Sikhs to come to the 
interview, whereas the rank and position of the Head of 
the British Government required, that the honor of a per- 
sonal conference with him should be sought. 

With a liberality, not inconsistent with his general 
character, Runjeet Singh, having made up his mind to 
the interview, gave up the point of etiquette, and pre- 
paration was made on both sides, for the meeting to take 
place on the Sutlej about the 20th of October, without any 
previous return mission : the neighbourhood of Roopur 
was subsequently fixed upon as the most appropriate and 
convenient spot for the meeting. 



A. D. 1831. PREPARATIONS. IGl 

In order to give the requisite ^clat to the occasioD, and 
to form a saitabie escort, the Governor General ordered 
up to Roopur from Meerut and Kurnal, two squadrons 
of European lancers, with the mounted band of the regi- 
ment, (H. M. 16th Lancers,) an European Regiment 
(H. M. 31st Foot) two battalions of Native Infantry 
(the 14th and 32d,) .and eight guns of horse artillery, 
also two squadrons of Colonel Skinner's Irregular 
Horse. . The escort was thus composed, in order to 
exhibit to RuNJEET SiNGH, whose curiosity was much 
excited as to the formation and equipment of the various 
arms and corps of our military force, as much variety as 
possible. In marching the Europeans through the Sikh 
territory, the population was somewhat scandalized at as- 
certaining, that beef was killed in camp for their rations. 
The slaughter was made in the night, as secretly as pos- 
sible, still the fact transpired, and became matter of com- 
plaint from the Sikh Sirdars. The reply to them was, 
that it was no business of theirs to enquire what was 
done within the precincts of a British camp, that our 
customs prevailed there, and these could not be yielded 
to their scruples, though every care should be taken to 
prevent the obtrusion of any thing that was offensive. 
There is no doubt that the prejudices of the Sikhs were 
much outraged by the slaughter of oxen, but it would 
have been extremely bad policy to yield the point in this 
instance ; for were it conceded, and the necessity to arise 
hereafter of bringing a considerable force of Europeans 
into the country, similar concession would be expected 
when it would be impossible to grant it, and the popula- 
tion would be excited, from the want of previous know- 
ledge and preparation for the thing, as a necessary evil 
attendant on the march of Europeans, no less than by the 