



168 COL. POTTINGER*S MISSION TO SINDH. A. D. 1831. 

the British Government, he might, with every profession 
of a desire to forward them, contrive by intrigae and 
secret working to counteract the negociation. 

On the very day before His Highness arrived at Roo- 
pur, instructions had been issued to Lieutenant C(rfonel 
PoTTiNGER to prepare for amission to Sindh, with a 
view to the negociation of a commercial treatry, having 
for its object, to open the navigation of the Indus to the 
trade of Europe, and of India. The negociation was to 
be separate with each of the three independent Meers, 
but Colonel Potting ER was directed to proceed first 
to Hydurabad, to arrange with Mber Moorad Uleb, 
for a free passage for vessels, and merchandize, through 
the mouths, and Delta of this great river* The basis of 
the negociation was to be, to obtain guarantees against 
the levy of irregular duties, or wanton obstruction of any 
kind to boats and merchandize, to offer a guarantee against 
loss of revenue to the Sindh Government from the adop- 
tion of the scheme, and so to procure, that the river Indus 
should become again the channel for extensive commerce, 
and be frequented securely by the craft and vessels of 
all the adjoining districts, and even of Europe. The 
object of entering upon this negociation, at the particular 
juncture, was perhaps in some measure political, having 
reference to the necessity of being prepared against the 
possibility of designs on the part of Russia, should she 
succeed in establishing her influence in Persia. The 
Governor General, however, was not prepared to make 
any avowal or display of such motives, and a commercial 
treaty, stipulating for the free navigation of the river, 
seemed to him the better form in which to open relations 
with the Governments and Chiefs who occupied its banks. 



A. B. 1831 -32» REFLECTIONS. 169 

The main argument, however, against treaties of this 
description is their tendency to lead to embarrassing dis* 
cussions, and to produce irritation, and acrimonious feel- 
ings, while the views acted upon by the British Govern- 
ment are not properly understood by the Chiefs. The 
whole of Sindh is held in Jageers by Chiefs, who claim 
to be, and are de facto, independent, exercising almost 
sovereign authority in their respective domains. These 
Sirdars will not readily be brought to respect boats and 
merchandize, passing through their possessions, but 
detention will take place on the plea of examination, and 
presents will be expected, or forced purchases made, or 
obstructions of different kinds offered, the complaint 
against which, even if the assembly of Meers at Hydura- 
bad should be disposed to listen to such a complaint at 
all, must lead to long and irritating discussions, and yield 
little redress in the end. The perpetual residence of a 
British Agent, to take up the advocacy of such representa- 
tions, will be indispensable, and his doing so, will pro- 
duce continual bickering and discontent, and generate 
ill-will in those with whom he comes into collision. It 
is, however, most probable, that merchants will fear 
to incur the risk and trouble, incident to such adven-^ 
tures, and will thus allow the treaty to become a dead 
letter, like the commercial treaties already concluded 
with Siam and Cochin China, and even with the Burmese 
Court, where the British Governmefit has a Resident 
Envoy to look after the execution of the stipulations 
entered into. 