

u 2 



156 LEAVEFORTH£MISSIONTOPASSOBTAINED. A.D. 1831. 

all that was stated of the diflScalty of navigations and of 
the dangers from the unsettled state of the coantry ; and 
pointed out that the horses and bulky carriage could 
not by possibility be forwarded in any other way than 
by water, so that it would be a most unfriendly act 
to both Governments to refuse a passage. The season of 
1831 was fast wearing away, and there was still delay in 
the Council at Hydurabad, in making up its mind on this 
important matter. A strong letter however of Colonel 
Potting ER at last convinced the Chiefs, and Mber 
MooRAD Ulee, the ruler of the country, in particular, 
that permission for the horses, and other articles of pre- 
sents, to pass up to Lahdr, could not in decency, and with- 
out giving offence, be refused. The requisite leave was 
accordingly forwarded, and Lieutenant BuRNES sailed 
again on the 10th March, and on this occasion entered 
the Ruchel mouth by Kurachee Bundur, the extreme 
western channel of the river, llere difficulties were 
made, and delays interposed, so as to induce Lieutenant 
BuRNES to start by land for Hydurabad, in the hope of re^ 
moving them by personal negociation. He had proceed- 
ed no further than Tatta, when after much chicanery he 
received the required permission to pass by the route of 
the Indus. Boats of the country were now furnished to 
him, and every possible assistance rendered for his con* 
veyance to Hydurabad, no effort being spared to obliterate 
the effects of the previous unfriendly treatment he had 
experienced. At the capital he was received in Durbar 
with great distinction, a chief of rank was appointed to 
attend him on his journey, and the best accommodation- 
boats on the river, even those of the ruling Meer himself^ 
were assigned for his conveyance. Every where in Sindh 
he met with the same i^ttention, and proceeded on his 



A. D. 1831. LT. BURNES SAILS UP THE INDUS. 15T 

voyage by Tatta to Hydarabad^ and thence after a short stay 
to Bhukur» making his observations as the boats leisurely 
proceeded. The Mission reached Tatta on the 15th, and 
Hydorabad on the 18th April, 1831, and the month of 
May had closed before it left the Indas, and entered the 
Chunab. The river was then at its lowest, but no where 
was there the slightest difficulty, or obstruction to the 
navigation. 

It may be necessary to state, that Sindh is divided into 
three independent Governments : the first, and by far the 
most considerable, is Hydurabad, ruled at this time by 
Meer Moorad Ulee, last survivor of the four brothers, 
who, in 1780, eflfected the revolution, which transferred 
the dominion of the country to the present Talpoor Meers. 
The second division is that of Khyrpoor, to the north of the 
first, and lying on both sides of the river Indus. Its pre- 
sent ruler is Meer Roostum Khan, the eldest son of 
Meer Soohrab Khan recently deceased. The third 
division is that of Meerpoor, .lying towards Kuchh, and 
ruled by Meer Ulee Moorad Khan. These sub-divi- 
sions of the country, had their origin in a partition made 
amongst the principal conspirators, by whose exertions 
the Talpoorees obtained power. 