

Having passed through the Hydurabad territory, 
Lieutenant Burnes was received with even increased 
attention and kindness by the ruler of Khyrpoor, who 
professed a strong desire to cultivate a more inti- 
mate relation with the British Government, and made 
Lieutenant BuRNES the bearer of a communication 
to this efifect to the Governor General. By this 
chief the mission was carried forward to the territory of 



158 ARRIVAL AT MOOLTAN, A. D. 183U 

the Nawab of Bubawulpoor, without experiencing the 
smallest obstraction or difficulty of any kind : there wa^ 
found no where less than eight feet water, and the cur- 
rent was moderate, and easily overcome, even where from 
rocks, or hard soil at the banks, the water-way was con- 
tracted. The month of May was now passing, during 
which the navigation of the Ganges is much obstructed 
by strong westerly winds, and by the want of water, but 
no difficulty of the kind impeded the passage up the 
Indas at this season. The Buhawulpoor chief was alrea* 
dy in political relation, both with RuNJEBT Singh and 
with the British Government : from him therefore LieuU 
BuRNES was sure of receiving every kindness. On the 
SOth May, the fleet reached Mittunkot, and embarking 
on other boats provided by the chief of the Daood- 
pootras (BuHAWUL Khan) entered the Chunab, or as it 
is sometimes called the Punjnud, being the united streanl 
of the waters of the Punjab. A. little below Mooltan, the 
escort and party sent by Runjbbt Singh to receive and 
conduct the Royal* present, met Lieutenant BuRNBS 
with boats of the Punjab, adapted to the navigation of the 
winding Ravee. In these Lieutenant BuRNBS and his 
party embarked on the 12th Jane, and soon reached 
Mooltan. The mouth of the Ravee is further up thd 
Sutlej, and he did not enter that branch till the 23d June. 
The rainy season overtook the Mission while in that river^ 

* It is a singular circumstance, that Sir J. Malcolm in all the instmc- 
tions he gave Lieutenant Colonel Pottinger and Lieutenant BurnSS 
in regard to this Mission, never mentioned, nor gave the smallest intima* 
tion to either officer, that the dray horses were a present from the King of 
England. They made the discovery after the difficulties in respect to the 
passage through Sindh had been overcome, when a direct correspondence 
with the Mission was opened by the Governor General. Up to this tiiMi 
they had believed, and had represented the present to be sent from the 
British Government in India. 



▲. D.1881* AND AT LAUOR. Xd9 

and the progress up it was tedious in the extreme, being 
dependent entirely on the track rope. 

On the 17th of July, Lieutenant BuRNES reached 
Lahor, where his arrival with the present from the Kipg 
of England, and with the letter of Lord Ellen borough 
which accompanied it, was a source of great pride and 
rejoicing to Runjeet Singh. The attention he paid 
to Lieutenant Burnes was very marked, and he had in- 
vited Captain Wade over from Loodeeana, to assist at 
the ceremonial of reception. From Lah6r, Lieutenant 
Burnes proceeded to Shimla, to render to the Go- 
vernor General an account of his mission, and to lay 
before his Lordship the valuable information obtained 
during it. This enterprizing and zealous officer obtaine4 
VL\% Lordship's permission, to return to his presidency of 
Bombay through Persia, ai^d to explore the route of 
Buikh and Bokhara, after first crossing the Punjab and 
Kabool territory, in order that he might be the means, of 
adding information of this little known route, to the storeif 
of intelligence already contributed by him. , 