

w 2 



164 CONDUCT OF RUNJEBT SINGH. A. D. 1881# 

outer tent, all the Enropean gentlemen were collected, 
and RuNJBET Singh was detained in it a short time, 
that several of them might be presented to him, standing, 
as he passed through. In a further tent chairs were laid 
out, and the Muha-Raja, with the chiefs of his nomina- 
tion, and some select officers of the suite, was led thither 
by the Governor General for a more private conference. 
It was amusing to see the pains taken by RuNJEBT 
Singh in the arrangement of his part of the ceremony. 
He waited at the door of the outer tent, and himself 
called, and told off, the chiefs that were to proceed to 
the inner, making them precede himself in order to 
prevent confusion or crowding. They were all like him- 
self dressed in yellow, that and light g^een being the 
favorite colours of his court, and called Busuntee, 
or the colours of spring. Some wore elegant highly 
polished armour, with scarfs of this colour, and the 
splendour of the attire of all was very striking. The 
inquisitive, and apparently frank manner of the Sikh 
Chief, made the conference pass off with more liveliness 
than is usual on such occasions of ceremony. Presents of 
every variety of manufactured stuffs, which had previous- 
ly been sent for, from Calcutta, Dacca, and Bunarus, 
with guns and jewels of value, a fine Burmese elephant, 
and two select thorough-bred young horses from the 
Hissar stud, were laid out, or passed in review before 
his Highness. Dresses of honor, and presents were 
also laid out for the heir-apparent, and other chiefs, 
according to a list obtained from his Highness. The 
Muha-Raja examined carefully every article of his own 
present, and then sent for the keeper of his wardrobe, 
and desired him to receive charge, and pack up the 
articles forthwith. He took his leave, apparently highly 



A. D. 1831* RETURN VISIT OF THE GOV. GENL. 165 

pleased with the interview, and at the door of the tent, 
called up, and paraded before the Governor General, his 
own favorite horses, telling the names, and merits of 
each. Again, as he passed through the street of troops, 
he stopped to examine the different corps, and his enqui- 
ries into every minute particular were renewed. It was 
noon, before he reached his own camp in returning. 

On the following day, the Governor General returned 
the visit, and was met at the bridge of boats by RuN- 
JEET Singh. His Lordship was escorted by the 
Lancers, who, with their mounted band, preceded the 
cavalcade. Runjeet Singh was much struck with 
their appearance, particularly with that of the Band; 
and, after they had crossed, and drawn up on the farther 
side of the river, he went up to them, and listened 
for some time to their playing, while the suite crossed. 
The Sikh troops formed line, from the bridge to the 
Muha-Raja's tents, which, consisting chiefly of Kundts 
and Shumeeanas, tastefully arranged, wereof red color, and 
covered a large space. The lining of all the Shumeeanas, 
under which the chairs were placed for the Governor 
General and his suite, was of shawl, beautifully worked, 
and that, under which sat the Governor General and His 
Highness himself, was a sheet of inlaid pearls and jewels 
of great value. The Muha-Raja, after the party were 
seated, introduced his chiefs in succession, and each as 
be came forward, presented Nuzurs of Dutch gold se- 
quins, both to his Highness and to the Governor Gene- 
ral. The horses were again brought forth, and exhi- 
bited in superb trappings, and after an hour passed in 
lively conversation, the presents for the Governor General 
were laid out, and His Lordship took bis' leave* 