



106 ENTERTAINMENTS AND REVIEWS. A. O. 1831. 

Evening entertainments were afterwards excbangedp 
and reviews held of the troops collected on both sides. 
The Muha-Raja seemed particularly strnck with some of 
the evolutions exhibited before him by the British Re- 
giments, and sent his Sirdars up to the ranks, to examine 
particularly how they were executed. He himself also 
went up to the squares formed by the Infantry, to see 
how many ranks knelt, and how many kept up fire, show- 
ing in all things a most insatiable curiosity. 

On the 31st October, the last day of the interview, the 
Muha-Raja came across the river, to witness some artil- 
lery practice with grape and spherical-case shot. His 
astonishment at the effect on the curtain at different 
distances, from four hundred to one thousand paces, was 
extreme. After amusing himself afterwards with firing 
at a chutur, or umbrella, with one of the six pounders, 
and exhibiting feats of horsemanship, and dexterity, by 
his Sirdars, he was presented by the Governor Genend 
with two nine pounder horse artillery guns, with horses, 
and equipments complete. 

The evening of this day, was that of the parting ia- 
terview, which it was arranged was to take place at the 
entertainment given by the Governor General. At 
RuNJEET Singh's particular request, a paper was exe- 
cuted, and delivered to him on this occasion, promis- 
ing perpetual friendship from the British Government* 
A complete model of an iron suspension bridge, made 
up at Calcutta for the purpose, was also presented to his 
Highness, and excited his applause and admiration. On 
the following morning, viz. the 1st November 1831, both 
camps broke ground, and commenced their march in 



A. D. 1831. SINDH AFFAIRS. 167 

opposite directions, after a week of magnificence and 
mutual display, reminding one of the days of '* the field 
of cloth of Gold." 

No business of importance was transacted at this in- 
terview: RuNJEET Singh, however, invited the two 
ofiicers he thought most in the Governor General's con- 
fidence to his tent, and in the midst of much desultory 
conversation, pat to the ofiicial secretary, who was one 
of them, several questions in respect to Sindh, as if 
desirous to open a negociation, and concert measures, in 
relation to that state ; or at least to come to an understand- 
ing, as to the views of the British Government in respect 
to it. He said the vukeels of Sindh were in attendance 
in his camp, and he asked if he might introduce them to 
the Governor General. Upon being answered in the 
afiirmative, he added, that it was a very rich country, 
and much treasure had been accumulated there, ever 
since Nadir Shah's invasion of Hindoostan, that there 
was no standing army, and no soldiers, except the popu- 
lation at large, who would be called from the plough to 
take the field against an invading force. He then made al- 
lusion to the Meers having sent back Lieutenant BURNES, 
and to their general character for pride and haughtiness. 
It appeared evident that the Muha- Raja had learned, or 
at least suspected, that the British Government had some 
further views in respect to Sindh; also, that nothing 
would be more gratifying to him, than to be invited to 
co-operate in an attack upon that state. Notwithstand- 
ing however the desire thus shown, to come to an under- 
standing on the subject, it was not thought advisable to 
make any communication yet to the ruler of Lah6r ; for 
it was conceived, that, if made aware of the intentions of 