

* The East India Company in its earlier commercial 
treaties appears to have acted on a different principle, 
the extension of its own trade, and the privileges of 

X 



170 REFLECTIONS. A. D. 1821*32. 

its own boats, vessels, and merchaDdise, beings the 
usual objects of stipalation and solicitude. lts*agi9Qt was 
on the spot to conduct the trade, and to see that the 
conditions were not riolated, and on this very footings 
the Company had formerly a commercial treaty with 
Sindh, which soon after the establishment of the Talpoor 
Meers, was put an end to by the rude expulsion of the 
British Agent. The revival of negooiation for a mere 
commercial treaty, with silence in respect to any Political 
object, appears calculated to produce an impression, 
that the Government still has a mercantile profit exclu- 
sively in view ; and such an understanding will neither 
elevate its character, nor add to its weight and influence, 
in guiding the counsels of the different chiefs with whom 
relations of the kind may be established. But, after all, 
the great objection to such a connexion seems to be, that 
it offers no impediment to the courts with whidi we enter 
into such relations, opening or continuing intrigues and 
direct negociations with the very states against which 
it may be desired to make preparation. At the very time 
of entering upon the negociation with Sindh, it was 
known, that an agent from Persia w^ at Hydurabad, 
offering a daughter of the king in marriage to the favorite 
son of Meer Moorad Ulee. If however the state of 
Sindh were allowed to connect itself in close relation 
with Persia, the commercial treaty we might conclude, 
would be no bar to the Russians insinuating themselves 
where the Persian court had paved the way for their 
influence. They might thus turn the resources of Sindh 
against us, or at least neutralize, or obstruct any advan- 
tage we might hope to derive from them, in the defence 
of the western frontier of India. If ever Hindoostfusi U 
invaded from the west, the battle must clearly be fought 



A. B. 1831-32. POTTINOER ARRIVES AT HYDURABAD. 17X 

tipoD the Indas, and it would be a failure of common 
foresight, were measures not taken to secure, that the 
chiefs, states, and tribes, upon its banks, should be 
unanimous and hearty in their exertions to repel the 
invader* It may be said, however, that the time is not 
come for making provision for such objects : but whether 
the danger be near, or remote, it would scarcely be 
consistent with prudence to engage in measures likely to 
produce alienation, or to lower the respect and influence, 
which as holders in declared and full sovereignty of the 
principal part of Hindoostan, the British Government 
ought naturally to possess with the remainder. 

Colonel PoTTiNGER, on receipt of his instructions, sent 
immediate intimation to the Meers of Sindh, and in par- 
ticular to Meer Moorad Ulbe at Hydnrabad, of his 
being commissioned by the Governor Greneral to confer 
with them on some important matters, and he requested 
the requisite permission to proceed to Hydurabad for 
the purpose. This having been granted, after some 
demur, and the Bombay Government having provided 
the necessary escort, establishment, and equipment far 
the Envoy of the Supreme Government, Colonel Pot- 
ting ER moved from Kuchh, and arrived at Hydura- 
bad in the course of February, 1633. He immediately 
explained the views of the British Government, and 
delivered the letter from the Grovernor General to MfiSfl 
MooRAD Ulbe, in which they were stated at length. 
A series of long and tedious discussions was then com- 
menced, during which several projects and counter- 
projects, and drafts of treaties, were mutually exchanged. 
After much negociation, a Treaty was at last concluded 
with Meer Moorad Ulbe Khan, on the part of thie 