

u 



164 MISSION OF LT. BVRNES UP THE INDUS. A. B. 183(K 

anticipated on the part of the rulers of Sindh to allowing 
them passage through the Delta and lower part of the 
river, but it was assumed that the governing Meers, 
situated as they were relatively to Runjeet SingH 
on one hand, and the British Government on the other, 
would not readily incur the risk of offending both powers* 
by refusing a passage altogether, if it were insisted 
upon. 

Sir John Malcolm, having received the horses, for- 
warded them to Kuchh, and appointed to the Mission to 
Lahdr, in charge of them. Lieutenant BURNBS, the Assis-* 
tant to Colonel Potting er, who was in Political charge 
of that district and of the British relations with Sindh* 
The young oflScer thus selected had been in the Quartet^ 
Master General's Department, and was in every respecl 
qualified for the duty. With him was sent Ensign Lec« 
kie, as a companion, and to take the charge, in case of 
any thing happening to Lieutenant BurneS;. Sir John. 
Malcolm added to the dray horses the present of a 
carriage of his own, as useless an article to RuNJEBT 
Singh as the mares. The highly ornamental carriage 
sent to him by Lord MiNTO in 1810, after being used 
for a few days as a novel plaything, had ever since 
remained neglected in the great arsenal at Lah6r. The 
carriage and horses, however, being laden in appropriate 
vessels, were dispatched from Kuchh towards the end <tf 
the year 1830, and Sir John Malcolm thought the 
most politic course would be, to send them without previ- 
ous notice or correspondence with the Meers of Sindh, 
thinking the necessity they would thus be under of decide 
ing suddenly, would be likely to contribute to the saeeess 
of the expedition. 



▲'. D. 1831. OPPOSITION OF THE MEERS OF SINDH. 155 

•Lieatenant B urn es accordingly started, carrying with 
kim the letters announcing the purpose of his comingi 
and entered with his Beet one of the mouths of the Indus, 
Passing up to the first inhabited town he forwarded his 
dispatches to Hydurabad. After a detentioa of some 
days, he was, on the 1st February, met by an officer and 
guard from Darajee, who requested him to wait at the 
mouth of the river, till orders should arrive from Hydura-^ 
bad. With this he complied, but there experienced so 
much incivility from the Kurachee people, who relieved 
the guard from Darsyee, that he resolved to return and 
wait in Kuchh till the Meers should decide upon his 
coming. The reply of the Meers to the applications made 
for this purpose being delayed beyond reason, Lieut« 
BuRNBS sailed again for the Indus, and entered the 
Pyteeanee mouth of that river. Permission to land being 
still refused, and even fresh water being withheld, Lieut. 
BuRNES found it necessary again to retrace his steps^ 
and was nearly lost in a storm, which scattered his 
fleet, and drove the vessel which carried himself upon the 
bar at the mouth of the Pyteeanee. The month of 
February was lost in these fruitless attempts to penetrate^ 
The objections of the Meers seemed to be insuperable. 
They were at this time founded mainly on the alleged 
difficulty of the navigation, and on the distracted state of 
the country between Sindh and Lah6r, both of which 
were greatly exaggerated, in order to dissuade Iiient. 
BURNBS from attempting the route by the. river Indus« 
The mission having returned to Kuchh, as above stated 
on the 23d February, Colonel PoTTiNGBR opened a cor-* 
respondence with the Meers, and sent an agent to Hydu* 
rabad to endeavour to overcome the repugnance shown to 
letting it pass through Sindh. lie made light of coarse of 