

w 



162 ARRIVAL AT ROOPUR. A. D. 1831. 

recollection, that heretofore the concession had been made 
to their religious feelings. 

The troops having arrived at Roopur, the Governor 
General, who had left Shimla on the 19th October^ and 
in descending took the opportunity of making an excur- 
sion in the Hills with few attendants, entered the camp 
on the evening of the 22d. Runjebt Singh came into 
his camp, on the opposite side of the Sntlej, on the 
morning of the 25th, escorted by 10,000 of his best horse, 
and about 6,000 trained infantry. He was immediately 
waited upon by a deputation from the Governor Gene- 
ral, headed by Major General Bamsay, brother to the 
Commander in Chief, Lord Dalhousie, and by his 
Lordship's Principal Secretary. KooNWUR Khurcjk 
Singh, with six principal Sirdars of the Sikhs, came at 
the same time to present the Muha-Raja's compliments 
to the Governor General. It was arranged, that Run- 
jeetSingh should visit the Governor General next 
day in the morning. 

As the time approached for the meeting, RuNJEEt 
Singh began to entertain apprehension, that some trea- 
chery or foul play must be designed : late over night, he 
sent to Monsieur Allard to say, that he should not 
attend the meeting of the morrow. Monsieur Allard 
waited upon him immediately, and exerted himself to 
remove these suspicions, and restore confidence, offering 
to stake his own head, that nothing would happen that 
was disagreeable. He left the Muha-Raja still irreso- 
lute, and the astrologers were summoned. They con- 
sulted the Grunth, and declared the result favorable, but 
told His Highness to take with him a couple of apples, 



A. D. 1831. FIRST MEETING* 163^ 

and to present them to the Governor General and to bis 
Secretary : if they were at once taken without demur, 
he was to consider it as a good omen, and might proceed 
in full assurance, that the result of the meeting would 
give him satisfaction. On the morning of the 26th Octo- 
ber, a deputation went to conduct the Muha-Raja to 
camp, and he started at sunrise. A bridge of the flat- 
bottomed ferry boats of the Sutiej had been constructed 
for the convenience of communication. Runjeet 
Singh made to cross over before him, 3000 of his best 
Gorchur cavalry, dressed in new yellow silk quilted 
coats, also about 800 of Monsieur Allard's dragoons ; 
he then took his breakfast of a highly spiced cordial, and 
sent over the chiefs he meant should attend on their 
elephants. This occupied some time, for the boats were 
fragile and would allow but few elephants to be on the 
bridge together. Lastly, His Highness passed over in per- 
son, and then, to prevent all confusion, ordered the guard 
at the bridge to permit none else from his camp to cross 
over. With the escort and attendance thus formed, the 
Sikh Chief crossed the open plain, at the further end of 
which lay the camp of the Governor General, from the 
centre of which a street was formed of the British troops 
collected. On reaching the end of the line, the Mq^a- 
Raja stopped to examine each corps, and put an infinity 
of questions as to their equipment, asking the use and 
cost of every strange article, that caught his eye. In 
the middle of the street he was met by the Governor 
General, and presented the apples, as enjoined by 
the astrologers : they were freely and at once taken. 
His Highness then crossed into the Governor Gene* 
raVs bouda, and the two Chiefs proceeded, together to 
the tents of audience that had been prepared. In an 