

Besides which, the Customs of the Punjab 
yield to Run j eet Singh, 19,00,^M> 

An Item, called Mohurana, being a Fee 
on every paper submitted for the Seal of 
Runjeet Singh, 5,77,000 

Making a total Khalsa Revenue of 1,48^1,500 

The same Officer estimates that there 
remains, still appropriated in Jageers, or 
held by old Sikh families, and establishments, 
without paying any thing to the Khalsa, 
territory yielding, 1,09,28,000 

Thus making the entire resources of the 
country under the dominion of Runj eet, Rs. 2,58,09,500 

This total is not very wide of the revenue set down in 
the books of the Moghul Government, as the produce of 



REVENUBS OF RUNJBET SINGH. 185 

Uie Lab6r Sooba; and, consideriDg that Kashmeer, and 
some territory south of the Satlej is incladed^ the corres- 
pondence of amount is in favor of the correctness of the 
estimate, for the province cannot be so productive under 
the Sikhs, as it was in the peaceable times of the Moghul 
dominion. 

Run J BET Singh has for many years been hoarding 
treasure, and the fort of Govindgurh, built by him, and 
kept always in excellent repair, is the principal place for 
its deposit. Captain Murray, speaking from, the best 
information he could collect, which, however, was neces- 
sarily very imperfect, and vague, estimates the value of 
the property accumulated by RuNJEBT Singh in cash, 
jewels, horses, and elephants, to be not less than ten 
crores of rupees, or the same number of millions of 
pounds sterling. By some the estimate is carried much 
higher, but such computations, being for the most part 
conjectural, err generally on the side of excess. 

The military force of the Lahdr State is set down by 
the same officer, and his authority is the safest to follow 
on the point, as follows : 

Ist. The available regular troops, 

Cavalry disciplined by Monsieur Al- 
LARD, and the special troops mounted 
on horses of the State, the Gorchur, Men. 
and Gorchur Khas, •••• 12,811 

Infantry, Disciplined Battalions, 
Ncyeebs, and troops, more or less drill- 
ed under the eye of the Muha-Bsga, • . 14,941 



186 MILITARY FORCES OF RUNJEET SINGH. 

Total regular troops, horse and foot, 27J!75ll 

Garrison corps, inclading the troops 
employed in Kashmeer, — Cavalry, . . • 3000 

Infantry, variously armed and 
equipped, 23,950 26,950 



^ 



Contingents of Sirdars, consisting, 
in the plains, principally of cavalry, 
but in the hills of foot soldiers, 27,312 

Total troops, horse and foot, 82,014 

The artillery of Runjeet Singh consists of 376 
guns, and 370 swivels, mounted on the backs of camels, 
or on light carriages adapted to th^r size. For 
these, there is no corps of artillery regimented, and 
organized, as is the custom in European armies, but 
there is a Darogha, at the head of a large establishment^ 
which if Runjeet Singh were making preparation for a 
siege, could not be set down at less than 4 or 5000 men ; but 
in time of peace, or when no such operation was in agita- 
tion, the number would be infinitely reduced. Several 
of the corps of cavalry, and all the battalions of infantry^ 
have guns attached to them, the gunners of which are 
borne on the strength of the respective corps. The 
Jinsee, or heavy train only, is distinct from the rest of 
the army. 