

It cannot be said, that Runjeet Singh has yet given 
to the Punjab any constitution or fixed form of Govern- 
ment. There is no law, written or oral, and no courts 
of justice have been any where established. The Gooroo* 
Mata, or old council of the Sikhs, has, with every other 
institution adapted to the state of things which existed 
before the establishment of the supremacy of the present 
ruler, been entirely discontinued. The last council of thf 
kind was held, when Holkur fled into the Punjab,^ and 
the British armies followed in pursuit, and it was a qnes^ 
tion what part the Sikhs as a nation should take in the 



AND OF HIS <50VERNMENT. 188 

jancture. RuNJEfiT Singh> though the most influential 

chief, pretended not then to any supremacy of dominion^ 

and the question was one, which, as it concerned the whole 

body of the Sikhs, required that all should have a yoice 

in determining. At present the Government appears to 

be a pure despotism, the standing army, ever ready for 

active service, and eager to be employed where plunder 

and exaction are the objects, forms the whole machinery 

of administration. By it only the treasury is filled, and 

control exercised over state officers, powerful subjects, and 

indeed over every class of the population. The personal 

influence, and verbal orders of the head of the state, form 

again the exclusive hold upon the discipline and affec^ 

tions of the troops. Thus the whole power and authority 

centres in the single individual, whom fortune, and his 

own abilities have placed at the head of affairs ; and} 

upon his being removed from the scene, unless there be 

another to fill his place, with equal energy, and command 

over the attachment and affections of his dependents^ 

which, it is to be feared, is not the character of KhUt 

RUK Singh, every thing must necessarily fall into con* 

fusion. 

The territorial possessions of RuNJBET SiKGH, com- 
prize now the entire fork of the Punjab, as bounded by 
the Indus and Sutlej, the two extreme rivers. He holds 
besides Kashmeer, and the entire hill country to the 
snowy range, and even Ludak beyond the Heemalaya : for 
though many of the Rajas of this tract still remain in their 
possessions, they have been reduced to the character of 
subjects, paying tribute equal to their utmost means, and 
contributing men to the armies of Lahdr, whenever called 
upon. Besides this extensive territory, RuNj bet Singh 



184 REVENUES OF RUNJEET SINGH. 

has abont 45TaIook8 entire, or in share with 
others, on the British side of the Satlej ; 
and westward of the Indus, he holds Khyra- 
bad, Akona, and Peshawar, Darra-Ghazee- 
Khan, which has been farmed to the Nuwab 
of Buhawulpoor, and Dnrra-Ismaeel-Khan, 
assigned to Hafiz Ahmed Khan of 
Mankera, as before related. He also levies 
tributes from the Balooch Chiefs of Tonk 
and Sagur to the southward. Captain Mur- 
ray estimates that the amount of Land 
Revenue and Tributes, annually levied from Rupees. 
the whole of these possessions, is 1,SI4,03,900 