



192 APPENDIX. 

fraud, and perjary are the natural concomitants of sach 
a mode of condacting affairs. Money^ fear, and favor, 
can purchase an oath, can determine a village boun- 
dary dispute, and screen a criminal from detection, and 
the infliction of punishment. In some instances an 
accused person will call for the Dibb^ or ordeal of inno- 
cence, plunge his fingers in boiling oil, bear a heated 
ploughshare on his hands for 50 to 100 yards, challenge 
his accuser to the trial by water, and, if he escape unhurt, 
his purity is declared, and freely acknowledged. 

Witchcraft and spells, (Jadoo and Moot), have a pow- 
erful influence over the fancies and actions of the Chiefs 
and other inhabitants of the Sikh States. A sudden indis- 
position, a vomiting of blood, or any unusual ailment, 
for the nature and cause of which a native cannot very 
readily account, are generally attributed to the malice 
and invention of a rival, or to an evil disposed member 
of the family. The possession of a waxen or dough 
eflSgy, some party-colored threads, and small human bones 
discovered in the dwelling, or about the person of a sus- 
pected individual, are convincing proofs of guilt and 
wickedness.'*^ 



* '* The harmless flame, which insensibly," says Gibbon, '^ melted a 
waxen image, might derive a powerful and pernicious energy from the 
afirighted fancy of the person whom it was maliciously designed to 
represent." One of the reasons Raja Juswunt Singh of Nabah, assign- 
ed for his wish to disinherit his eldest son and heir was, that he had been 
engaged in some mischievous practises, and destructive enchantments, 
with one Bhaee Dighanoo, to ruin the health of his father. Sirdar 
Bhoop Singh of Roopur, advanced a similar charge against hid nncle 
Darwa Singh. Both these Chiefs bear the character of being well 
informed men, and wiser than their neighbours. Rutun Koonwur, the 
widow of MuHTAB Singh, Chief of Thanesur, adopted a sickly boy, to 
whom she became immoderately attached, and vainly hoped he might bf 



APPENDIX — SUPERSTITIONS. 193 

Good and bad omens,'^ lucky and unlucky days^ and 
particular hours of the day and night for commencing a 
journey and returning home^ are carefully observed by 
the Sikhs, and by all other classes in the Punjab, whether 
engaged in the most momentous enterprizes, or in the 
common concerns of life. Prior to the field being taken 
with an army,t a visit of ceremony being paid to a dis^ 
tant friend, or a pilgrimage heiog made, the Muhoorut, 
or auspicious moment for departure, and return, must be 

admitted to succeed to the laaded property she held for life. In 1828, the 
boy died, and Ruttun Koonwur, in a paroxism of grief, filed a formal 
complaint, charging his death, through magical arts, to her nephew 
JuMERUT Singh, producing in Court some body clothes, and on no better 
evidence directing her Vakeel to prosecute him for murder. The case 
was set at rest by reasoning on its absurdity, and Rutun Koonwur 
consoled herself by the adoption of another boy. In September 1829, a 
Thanadar of the Thanesur Ranee, hanged a Brahmin suspected of magic. 
The Ranee dismissed the Thanadar from his situation. 