

Towards the British Government his conduct has been 
marked with equal sagacity. Careful not to offend to the 
point leading to actual rupture, he contrived to make his 
gain of the juncture, at the very moment when the British 
Government stept forward to confine his dominion to the 
Sutlej, and to wrest from his grasp, the valuable tract 
between that river and the Jumna, which was all held 
by Sikhs, and regarded by him therefore as his legitimate 
and certain prey. When the ill-will and suspicion, 
engendered by this interference, had subsided, and he 
felt assured that the interposing Government had no 
desire to push its conquests, or further to interfere with 
his ambitious views, he cultivated the friendship of its 
officers, and has since desired to exhibit himself to the 



GENERAL REFLECTIONS. 189 

world as anited by close relations, and on the bestnnder^ 
standing with it. He seems to be now thoroughly con- 
vinced, that its friendship, and engagements may be 
relied upon, and there cannot be a doubt, that if ever the 
occasion should arise, to render it necessary to make pre- 
paration against invasion from the west, he would side 
heartily with us, and show zeal in repelling the invader. 
His professions, his interest, and his inclinations, are all 
for us at present, and he derives no little strength and 
security, from giving it out, that he is on such terms with 
the British nation. 

Having thus conducted the reader, in the foregoing 
pages, through the gradations by which the Sikh power 
has been raised to its present flourishing and imposing 
condition, it remains to lay before him some insight into 
the habits and manners peculiar to this sect, to enable 
him to appreciate the character of the nation, and the 
peculiar traits which distinguish it from the rest of the 
population of Hindoostan. This has been amply done 
to hand by Captain MURRAY, who has collected, in an 
Appendix to the report he laid before Lord William 
Bentinck, the result of his own observations, during 
a residence of more than fifteen years amongst the Sikhs, 
attended with hourly intercourse with individuals of all 
classes, added to the necessity of listening, to represen- 
tations of all descriptions, with a view to the arbitration 
or adjustment of their disputes. Captain Murray's 
remarks and the facts he has collected, though put toge- 
ther without much regard to arrangement, and evidently 
with no view to publication, are nevertheless so replete 
with useful information and intelligence, that to withhold 
them would be unpardonable. On the other hand, the 



190 CONCLUSION. 

weight of the authority would be lost if they were to be 
recast and combined into a more studied form by another 
hand. It is proposed, therefore, to conclude this little 
volume, by the transfer verbatim into it of the Appendix, 
devoted by this oflScer to the delineation of ** the Man- 
ners, Rules, and Customs of the Sikhs." The canons 
reader will be well repaid the labour of a perusal. 