



176 TREATY WITH SINDH. A. O. ia32» 

It deserves to be noticed that neither of the above trea- 
ties was definitively settled, until the Chief of Kbjrpoor 
had already entered into an engagement with the British 
Government. The jealousy, indeed, that was felt at this 
proceeding, and the fear lest the Khyrpoor Chief shoald 
be severed for ever from the association of Talpoor Meers, 
were mainly instrumental in bringing Meer Moorad 
to sign. The engagement with Meer Roostum Khapt 
was to the following effect : 

** A Treaty, consisting of 4 Articles, having been con- 
** claded on the 2d Zeekad 1247, A. H«, corrrespond- 
" ing with the 4th April, 1832, between the Hon'ble 
" East India Company and Meer Roostum Khan, 
" Talpoor Buhadoor, Chiefof Khyrpoor in Sindh, through 
*' the Agency of Lieutenant Colonel Henry Pottin. 
'' GER, Envoy on the part of the British Government 
" acting under the authority vested in him by the Right 
" Hon'ble Lord William Cavendish Bentinck, 
*^ 6. c. B. and G. c. H., Governor General of the British 
" possessions in India, this engagement has been given 
** in writing at Shimla, this day, the 19th June 1832, 
'' both in English and Persian, in token of the perfect 
*^ confirmation and acknowledgment of the obligations 
'' it contains in the manner following: 

Article I. ^' There shall be eternal friendship between 
" the two States. 

Article II. ** The two Contracting Powers mutually 
** bind themselves from generation to generation never to 
'^ look with the eye of covetousness on the possessions of 
'* each other. 

Article III. " The British Government having re- 
•* quested the use of the River Indus and the roads of 
•• Sindh for the Merchants of Hindoostan, &c, the 



A. D. 1832. TREATY WITH KHYRPOOR. 177 

" Government of Khyrpoor agrees to grant the same 
** within its own boundaries, on whatever terms may be 

settled with the Government of Hydarabad, namely, 

Meer Moorad Ali Khan, Talpoor. 

Article IV. " The Government of Khyrpoor agrees 

to furnish a written statement of jast and reasonable 
' duties to be levied on all goods passing under this 
' Treaty, and further promises, that traders shall suffer 
' no let or hindrance in transacting their business." 



44 
44 

44 



CHAPTER ELEVENTH. 



JTie character and policy ofRuryeet Singh. His revenues* 
Strength of his army. General observations. 

JLHB personal character of the present ruler of Lah6r 
and that of his government will best have been gathered, 
from the perusal of bis acts, as related in the preceding 
Chapters ; nevertheless it may be useful to sum up the 
result, and to explain the present condition of his terri- 
tory, its resources, and the military means at this Chief's 
command. 

It has before been stated, that Bunjeet Singh had 
no education in any branch of learning or science. Be 
cannot read or write in any language, but the habit of 
hearing papers read in Persian, Punjabee, and Hindee, 
and great assiduity in his attention, even to the minutiae of 
business, have given him a facility in following, and un- 
derstanding for the most part what is so submitted to 
him : so that, although quite unable to appreciate elegan- 
cies of style, or to dictate verbatim what should be writ- 
ten, he transacts business rapidly, is ready with a short and 
decided order upon any report or representation read to 
him, and when the draft of his instruction is submitted, 
after being prepared in due form; he sees at once whether 