

His stature is low, and the loss of an eye from- the 
small pox takes away much from his appearance, which 
however is still far from being unprepossessing, for his 
countenance is full of expression and animation, and is set 
off with a handsome flowing beard, grey at 50 years of 
age, but tapering to a point below his breast. In his 
youth he must have had much vigour and activity, but he 
is now so emaciated, and weak, as to b^ compelled ^to 



CHARACTER OF RUNJEET SINCH. 181 

Udopt a singular method of mounting the tall horses, on 
which he loves to ride. A man kneels down before him» 
and he throws his leg over his neck, when the man rises 
with the Muha-Raja mounted on his shoulders: he then 
approaches the horse, and Runjeet Singh, putting his 
right foot into the stirrup, and holding by the mane, 
throws his left over the man's head, and the back of the 
horse, into the stirrup on the other side. His love of bis 
horses is extreme, and has been already several times 
inentioned. He has them continually in his sight, cover- 
ed with jewels and rich caparisons, and they are the 
objects of his frequent caresses. He is himself plain and 
simple in dress, and quite unreserved in all his habits ; 
and his diet consists of high stimulants of which he par* 
takes sparingly. He has great delight however in mili* 
tary parade, and display, and spends nearly the half of 
every day in seeing reviews, or examining equipments, or 
in some way studying to promote the efficiency of some 
branch of his army. He also seems to take pleasure in 
seeing his courtiers and establishments decorated in jew- 
els and handsome dresses, and it is not to be denied, that 
they show considerable taste, for the splendour of the 
display of his Durbar is very striking. Although no 
bigot, and active in restraining the zeal and fanaticism of 
the Akalees, and others, Runjeet Singh is yet scru- 
pulous in the performance of all the prescribed observ- 
ances of the Sikh faith, and, for a certain number of hours 
every day, has the Grunth read before him by Grooroos, 
and is liberal in his charities to Fuqeers and men of re* 
puted sanctity. He is indeed superstitious in the extreme^ 
readily conceiving fancies in respect to his destiny, and 
fortunes, and never failing to consult astrologers before 
entering upon any important ondertakiDg, 



18!? CHARACTER OF RUNJEET SINGH, 

: With respect to the policy and internal Governmeat of 
RUNJEBT Singh, the most remarkable featare is, thd 
entire absence of any thing like system, or principle in 
his management His career thronghont has been that of 
an encroaching nsnrper, and seizor of all within his reach, 
bat what he has so possessed himself of, he subjects to no 
systematic administration. The whole is committed to 
&rmers, with full power to deal with the lives and pnn 
perties of the producing classes of the population. Run* 
J BET Singh trusting to his own military means, for the 
control of these farmers, and for the exaction from them 
of any extra gains he may learn that they have made. 
Nevertheless his extortions are directed chiefly against 
the old Sikh families, and his own state officers: mer- 
chants and traders are protected, and the duties and 
taxes, to which they are subjected, are not for the most 
part immoderate. Runjebt Singh has however shown 
a disposition himself to become a dealer in some articleis, 
as in shawls, salt, &c. and all that he touches becomes of 
course monopoly, or in some other shape the source of 
exaction and corrupt gain. 