

The above accumulation of resources, and of force^ 
has grown up, and been produced entirely by the care 
and exertions of the Muha-Raja. His father left him 
nothing, but a body of Sikh cavalry, little superior ^to 
that of his neighbours; who have all now been reduced 



REFLECTIONS. 187 

to the condition of subjects. RuNJEET SiNGH has, in 
the formation especially of his military force, evinced the 
same enquiring activity, the same attention to minutiae, 
and perseverance in watching the execution of his 
plans, which characterized the first Peter of Russia; 
and, compared with all that we see and hear of other 
chiefs who have raised themselves to high dominion, he 
ranks amongst those, whose means have been the least 
exceptionable, his career being stained by no bloody 
executions, and by much fewer crimes, than are chargeable 
against most founders of dynasties. The want of a gene- 
ralizing mind, to refer things to fixed principles, and to 
lead to the formation or adoption of systems, and a 
deficiency of the intelligence resulting from education, 
or from habitual converse with men of high cultivation, 
have been the main defects of his character, and are the 
causes of Runjeet Singh's Government being based 
on no solid forms, and institutions, which can be reckoned 
upon to carry on the machine, when the present regu- 
lator of all is removed from the scene. But where were 
such to be found amongst an association of Sikh banditti^ 
formed from the outcasts of society, and from the dregs 
in particular of the agricultural class, men all in most 
desperate circumstances and driven by want to adopt 
the life of robbers? All that was educated, and refined, 
had disappeared from the Punjab, before Run J BET 
Singh was born. The natural effect however of the 
union of authority in his person, has been, to create a 
court, where, in the course oftime, science and refinement 
will be reproduced, or collected from the countries 
around, as the habits of peace and luxury, come to super- 
cede the bustle, and perpetual activity of war and mili- 
tary expeditions. 

z 2 



188 GENERAL REFLECTIONS. 

And let not those, who are disposied to give to RlTN« 
JEET Singh the credit dae to him as foander of a kiagu 
dom and dynasty, take exception at the circamscribed 
limit of his dominion, as lowering his merit in comparison 
with others. The circumstances of iiis position, with the 
British Government on one side, — fresh risen to a majes- 
ty of power, that it would have been madness for him to 
think of encountering, and with the prejudiced and fanatic 
Moosnlman population of Afghanistan upon every other 
frontier, have been barriers against extension, which it 
was impossible to overcome, and effectually forbad the 
hope of carrying the Sikh dominion beyond its present 
limits. The gain that has already been made upon the 
latter, and the manner in which the brave and bigotted 
Mohummedans, have, in many instances, been reconciled 
to the sway of a hated, and even despised sect, are 
amongst the most creditable features of the policy, and 
career of Run j bet Singh. 