

* To hear a partridge call on your right hand as you enter a town<« 
cranes passing from left to right—meeting a bareheaded person— a 
jackass braying as you enter a town or yillage— a dog shaking his head 
and ears on quitting home— to meet a corpse or a Brahmin— to hear a 
female jackall howling during the night— sneezing on going out or com- 
ing into a house or room, &c. &c. are bad omens. The contrary are good 
omens. To hear a partridge call on your left — cranes passing from right 
to left— to meet a Mehtur or Sweeper— to behold pearls in your sleep. If 
a Moosulman dream of seeing the moon, it is as good as an intertiew with 
the Prophet, Sfc. ^c— An eminent Native Merchant came to me on business 
from Umritsur, and died at Loodeeana, of the Cholera Morbus. His 
followers very gravely told me that my remedies must be unavailing, for 
on entering the town, many bare-headed men of the Goojur cast had 
been met by the deceased. 

t A gang of burglars being brought before me in 1819, admitted in 
evidence, that two pieces of coloured muslin had been tossed over their 
left shoulders, on hearing a jackall call on their right hand, soon after 
quitting Kurnal, where the burglary had been perpetrated. Dessa-Sool, 
or unlucky day s— Saturday and Monday, to the east— Sunday and Friday, 
to the west— Tuesday and Wednesday, to the north, and Thursday to 
the south. The contrary are Siddh J6g, or lucky days. 

2a 



194 APPENDIX— SUPERSTITIONS. 

predicted by a Pandit^ and the Pandit on his part is 
guided by the jogtne or spirits ; which pervade every 
quarter of the compass. To avert the pernicioas conse- 
quences likely to ensue from unfavorably prognostics or 
dreams, charity is recommended, and in general given 
very freely on such occasions, by natives of rank and 
wealth. These, and many hundred other absurd pre- 
judices and superstitious notions, are carried into the 
most solemn affairs of state. It is no uncommon practise 
of Run J BET Singh, when he contemplates any serioi^ 
undertaking, to direct two slips of paper to be placed 
on the Grunth Sohil, or sacred volume of the Sikhs. On 
the one is written his wish, and on the other the reverse. 
A little boy is then brought in, and told to bring one of 
the slips, and, whichever it may happen to be, his High- 
ness is as satis&ed as if it were a voice from heaven. 
A knowledge of these whims, and prepossessions, is 
useful and necessary. They obtain, under varied shapes, 
and in diversified shades, throughout the Eastern world, 
warping the opinions, and directing the public and pri- 
vate affairs of all ranks in society, from he despot to the 
peasant, from the soldier in the battle-field, to the crimi- 
nal at the tree of execution. It must be a pleasing duty 
to every public servant to endeavour to gain the confi- 
dence, and win the affections of the Chiefs and people 

* When the Surhind Division, composed entirely 'of Sipahees, WM 
directed, under the command of Sir David Ochterlony, againit t|i0 
Goorkha power in 1814, it V7as suggested by Nund Singh, the accredited 
agent of Rdnjeet Singh, that the first march should be made at the 
Dusehra. It being mentioned to him, that this was too early, he beg- 
ged that the tents and a few men might move out on that day. He 
was gratified, and the success that attended this Division in all its opera- 
tions, was attributed more to the choice of an auspicious hour, than 
to the wisdom, prudence, and gallantry of its commander, his officers, 
and men. 