



CHARACTER OF RUNJEET SINGH. 179 

it fally meets his view. Confidential secretaries are per- 
petually in attendance, and are frequently called up ia 
the night, to expedite orders, as the sudden recollection, 
or caprice of the Muha-Raja, suggests the issuing of them. 
His memory is excellent, and stored with minute, as 
well as important circumstances. His disposition is at 
the same time watchful, and his eye quick and search- 
ing, so that nothing escapes his observation ; while the 
perspicacity displayed in his appreciation of character, 
and in tracing the motives of other's actions, gives him 
a command and influence over all that approach him, 
which have been mainly instrumental to his rapid rise. 
With great acuteness, he has a lively imagination ; and 
though never for an instant forgetful of any ends he may 
have in view, there is a frankness and naivete about his 
conversation, peculiarly agreeable. His observations 
and remarks are given ordinarily in short, terse, incohe- 
rent phrase, or in the shape of interrogatories, but they 
are such, as remain fixed in the recollection of the person 
to whom they are addressed, as uncommon, and as dis- 
playing an original thinker. He has great power of dis- 
simulation, and, under the greatest frankness of manner, 
and even familiarity in his intercourse, csm veil subtle 
designs, and even treachery. In action he has always 
shown himself personally brave, and collected, but his 
plans betray no boldness or adventurous hazard. Ad- 
dress, and cunning, nay, even corruption, have always 
been preferred by him, as instruments of success, to any 
dash of enterprize, calculated to excite admiration or 
inspire awe. His fertility in expedients is wonderful, 
and he is never at a loss for a resource in the greatest 
difficulties, but many of his actions evince caprice, and 
even instability of purpose, for the motive of them cannot 

Y 2 



180 CHARACTER OF RUNJBET 8IN6H* 

be traced or imagined. His uniform condact and career 
through life, prove him to be selfish^ sensual, and licentious 
in the extreme; disregardfulof all ties of affection, bloody 
or friendship in the pursuit of ambition, or pleasure; and 
profligately greedy— plundering and reducing to misery 
without the slightest feeling, or remorse, widows, orphans 
and families possessing claims to consideration and 
respect, that one wonders should not have been recogni:&^ 
ed, even if it were only from policy. In his youth he 
was lavish in his gifts to favorites, and there was libera- 
lity in his general dealings, but, as age has come over 
him, avarice, and the desire of hoarding, have becon^e the 
ruling passions, and he is approached, even by his confi. 
dential officers and those in favor, with more apprehen- 
sion of robbery and exaction from themselves, than df 
hope to add to their accumulated means through his indul* 
gence. His temper was in youth excellent, and always 
under command, but the irritability of an impaired con-^ 
stitution frequently now overpowers him, and he has been 
known to break out into fits of passion, and to descend to 
use personal violence towards the objects of his rage ; 
but, withal, there is no ferocity in his disposition, and be 
has never taken life, even under circumstances of aggra* 
vated offence. 