



APPENDIX— JUSTICE. 195 

of a conquered country, by the impression of his acquaint- 
ance with, and seeming regard to their peculiarities and 
propensities, and in the superintendence and manage- 
ment of their concerns, to know the bents by which he 
may seize and work upon them. To totich upon such 
feelings without giving offence, demands on all occa- 
sions, the exercise of discretion, temper, and judgment : 
but when successfully done, ft is easy by a kindly manner 
and persuasive address, to lead the misguided and 
ignorant from error and antiquated usages, to appreciate 
the advantages attendant on intellectual improvement, 
and the benefits resulting from science and moral feeling. 

In the Sikh States, the administration of civil and cri* 
minal justice is vested in the Sirdar, or chief. Crimes 
and trespasses, as in the middle ages, are atoned for by 
money : the fines are unlimited by any rule, and generally 
levied arbitrarily according to the means of the offender, 
whose property is attached, and his family placed under 
restraint to enforce payment. These amerciaments form 
a branch of revenue to the chief, and a fruitful source 
of peculation to his officers, who too frequently have 
recourse to the most harsh and cruel means to elicit 
confessions, and extort money for real or imaginary 
ofiences. He who gains his point, pays his Shookurana, 
or present of gratitude, and he who is cast, pays his 
Jureemana, or penalty. The wealthy may secure jus- 
tice, but the indigent are likely to obtain something less. 
The larger the bribe the more chance of success. A case 
where the right is clear and undeniable, is often allowed 
to lie over, that the present may be augmented. All 
officers under the chief, and employed by him in districts 
and departments, follow his example ; but are ultimately 

2 A 2 



196 APPENDIX — CRIMES. 

thrown into a bora, or dnngeon, and required to refnnd, 
and when they have satisfied the cupidity of their supe- 
rior, they are generally permitted to resame their fane* 
tions, honored with the shawl as a mark of favor. Capi- 
tal punishment is very seldom inflicted. The most incor- 
rigible culprits are punished with the loss of either one 
or both hands, and deprivation of nose or ears ; bat muti- 
lation is rare, for whoever has the means to pay, or can 
procure a respectable security to pay for him within a 
given time, may expiate the most heinous transgressions** 

On the commission of a data or burglary, a quzzakeef, 
or highway robbery, the chief, within whose jurisdiction 
the act has been perpetrated, is called upon to make 
restitution ; and, should he decline, the chief whose sub- 
ject has suffered, resorts to the Lex talionis^ and drives off 
several hundred head of cattle, or retaliates in some way 
or other. This summary method of obtaining indemnifi- 
cation for all robberies attended with aggravating circum- 
stances, is a measure of absolute necessity, as many of 
the petty Chiefs, their Officers and Znmeendars, harbour 
thieves, and participate in their guilty practises. 