

t Intermarriages between the J4t Sikh Chiefs, and the Aloowaleah 
and Ramgurheah families, do not obtain, the latter being KukUs and 
Thokas (mace bearers and carpenters) and deemed inferior. 

X The present Rajah of Nabah, Juswunt Singh, and six of the Singh- 
Pooreah Chiefs, are by a connubial union of this nature. Maha R^ja 
Rdnjeet Singh has gone some steps further : He took by Kurttwah 
a lady betrothed to his father Maha Singh : He has also taken Dya 
KooNwuR and Rutun Koonwur, the widows of Saheb Singh, the chief of 
Goojrat, his own uncle-in-law. 



APPENDIX— WIVES. 209 

to the hasbandy should make bat an insincere and heart- 
less impression. Females are daily accused before Chiefs 
and their officers of breaches of conjugal virtue, and of 
having absconded to evade the claims of a father, or 
mother-in-law, or the established rights of a Jeth, or a 
Daitvur. When they have fled into the territory of 
another Chief, it is often difficult to obtain their restitu- 
tion, but the solicitations of a Pnnchayt, and the more 
forcible argument of reprisals, are in the end efficacious, 
and the unfortunate woman, if she do^otin a fit of despe* 
ration take opium, or cast herself into a well, is necessi- 
tated to submit to the law of the land, which she will again 
violate on the first opportune occasion. Sense of shame, 
or feelings of honor, have no place in the breast of a J&t,"*^ 
and the same may be said of men of other low tribes. 
They will make strenuous exertions for recovery of their 
wives, after they have absconded, and will take them back 
as often as they can get them, bickering even for the 
children the woman may have had by her paramour, as some 
recompense for her temporary absence, and for the ex- 
pense and trouble they have incurred in the search for herf 

Debtors and revenue defaulters who abscond, and find 
protection in a foreign state, are seldom demanded, and 
if demanded, never surrendered by even the most petty 
Chief. The promise is made, that, when the delinquent 
has the means, he shall discharge whatever sum may 
appear, on a scrutiny into his accounts, to be fairly doe 

* The old Chief Taea SineH Ghyba often declared, that a JkVn nose 
reached to Mooltan, and that if he lost a part of it for any offence, 
there would still be enough remaining. Implying that he was a stranger 
to shame and could survive disgrace. 

t Law of Moses, Deuteronomy, Chap. Std v. 16 and 10. 

2 c 



210 APPENDIX— ENDOWMENTS. 

by him. It is not ancommon for a depatation, composed 
of the beads, or of some respectable inhabitants of a 
town or tillage, from which a person has removed, to 
proceed and wait upon the Chief with whom a fugitive 
may find an asylum, and, entering into stipulations for 
bis personal safety, to receive him back, if be be willing 
to return. 

In the Sikh states there are no compulsory laws for 
raising money for the relief of the indigent. Most 
fnqeers belong to a punf, or sect, and each sect has its 
temples, which are endowed with lands and villages, 
(termed Oordoo and Poora) by the chiefs, and to which 
Churhawa, or offerings of grain and money, are made by 
its votaries. An elemosynary establishment is some-^ 
times founded, in places of great resort, by chiefs and 
wealthy natives, and named Suda-birt, at which every 
i^tranger is entertained for a certain number of days, and 
fed gratis. Every Hindoo temple has its Mukunf, or 
head, to whom are attached his immediate Chelas or fol^ 
lowers, who parade the country, towns, and villages, ask- 
ing, or demanding charity, which forms the support of 
their superior and themselves, and is freely distributed to 
the needy stranger and weary traveller, who may stop at 
their gate, or desire a lodging and a meal within the courts 
of the Thakaor-Dwara, 