

When a petty theft is substantiated, either through the 
medium of a Muhur-khaee, or the production of a Mooddo 
or Numoona, (the confession of one of the thieves, or a 
part of the stolen property) the sufferer has generally, 

* Statutes were passed in the reigns of Henry 8th, Edward 6tli, 
Elizabeth, andjAMfis Ist, sanctioniog, and directing the loss of the rig;ht 
and left hand, and of an ear, for offences which would by a Sikh, scarce- 
ly be deemed deserving the infliction of a mulct. 

t This is an Arabic or Turkish word. In the provincial dialect we 
have Dharwee. 



APPENDIX — SUCCESSIONSr. 197 

as a preliminary to pay the Chuharum, or fourth, as a 
perquisite to the Chief, or his Thanadar, ere he can recover 
the amount of his losses. Independent of this, the Muhur- 
khaee, or approver, generally stipulates for a full pardon, 
and that no demand shall be made on the confessing delin- 
quent for his Kundee, viz. any, or such portion of the 
property, as may have accrued to him as his dividend of 
the spoil. This share of the spoil becomes chargeable to 
the other thieves, and on settling accounts it is distributed 
equally amongst them. 

In all cases of stolen cattle, it is an established rule 
^hen the Soordgh-Khoj, or trace of the footsteps, is car- 
ried to the gate, or into the fields of any village, the 
Zumeendars of that village must either shew the track 
beyond their own boundary, and allow the village to be 
searched, or pay the value of the cattle.'*^ 

The rules of succession to landed property in the 
Sikh States are arbitrary, and are variously modified in 
accordance to the usages, the interests and prejudices 
of different families, nor is it practicable to reduce the 
anomalous system to a fixed and leading principle. A 
distinction obtains in the Canons of Inheritance, between 
the Manjhee and Malwa Sikhs, or Singhs : the former 
are so termed from the tract situated between the Ravee 
and Beeah rivers, from which they originally sprung, 
migrating thence and extending their conquests through 
the Punjab, and into the Sirhind province, where being 
of a military and predatory character, they soon conquered 

* Hume, in treating of the Anglo-Saxons, says *'If any man could 
track his stolen cattle into another's ground, the latter was obliged to 
shew the tracks out of it, or pay their value.'' 



198 APPENDIX— SUCCESSIONS. 

for themselves a permanent possession. The Malwa 
Chiefs, are the Puteeala, Jheend, and Naba Rajahs, and 
the Bhaee of Khytul. The three first namied are descen- 
dants of a common ancestor named PHOOL9who was Chon- 
dharee of a village near Balenda, and are from him often 
coUectiyely styled the Phoolkeean. The progenitor of the 
Bhaee of Khytal, having rendered some service to one of 
the Sikh Gooroos, the appellation of Bhaee, or brother, 
was conferred apon him as a mark of distingaished appro- 
bation ; and the persons of all the Bhaees are conse- 
qaently held in a degree of respect above their fellows. 