

Bloodshed between Zumeendars in a boundary dispute, 
is sometimes atoned for by giving a nata, or daughter, in 
marriage to a relative of the deceased, or commuted to 
the payment of 150 to 200 rupees, or 125 beegahs of 
land. In general, however, revenge is sought, and the 
Khoon-buha, or price of blood, deemed insuflScient satis- 
faction, particularly when a mother has to lament the 
loss of a favorite child, or a wife with a family, the 
bereavement of a husband. 

Claims to islands in a river flowing between two 
Manors, and to alluvions, are determined by what is 
called the Kuchmuch^ or Kishtee-bunna, which practice 
or rule assigns the land to the proprietor of the bank, or 
main, upon which the alluvion is thrown, and from which 
the water has receded. If the island be formed in the 
centre of the river, and there be depth of water on each 
side of it, sufficient for boats to ply, in this case it be- 
comes the joint property of the Chiefs on both banks.* 

* This appears a very ancieot custom, being mentioned by Blackstonb, 
viho derived his information from Jiractan. 

2 B 2 



204 APPENDIX — WATBR-COVRSBS. 

This custom which obtains in the Sikh States, with regard 
to alluvion, is universal, so far as my knowledge in the 
local laws and usages of India has extended, wherever 
lands are liable to such accident by an alteration in the 
course of rivers. In the case of lands cast by the change 
of the stream from one side of the river to the other, 
though one Chief gains, and another loses, yet it is 
customary to preserve the rights of the Zemindar, if he 
consent to cultivate the lands. The decided enmity of 
two Chiefs is seldom a bar to an arrangement, in which 
each finds or perceives an advantage to himself, either 
immediate or prospective, for streams in India are so 
subject to change, that the land lost one rainy sciason 
may be regained in the next, or even in the cold weather, 
when the river falls and the floods cease. 

The use and abuse of the ancient privilege of the 
Zumeendars in damming up, and turning the course of a 
stream into artificial Kools, or cuts, for the purpose of 
irrigating the lands in its vicinity, causes disputes and 
bloodshed ; and, after much angry dissention, the result 
is generally a compromise stipulating for a reciprocal 
enjoyment of the gifts of nature. In some instances, 
and in contiguous estates, the parties will agree to take 
equal shares of the water, either by the hour, or the day, 
or by measurement ; in other cases, one will receive two- 
thirds, and his neighbour one- third only, according to 
their respective and pressing wants. The land-holderi, 
whose possessions are adjacent to the hills from which and 
their base, these streams and springs take their rise, 
require and demand a very large portion of the water for 
their rice lands, into which it is diverted by numberless 
water-courses, drawn with great ingenuity by the culti* 



APPENDIX — WATER-COURSES. 205 

valors into distant and coantless parterres. Those who 
hold land at a distance, and lower down the river, in the 
more arid districts, are querulous, that the streams do 
not flow unobstructed in their natural course, which 
would give them the unabsorbed portion to irrigate their 
wheat and barley crops. 