

When the country, overrun by the Sikhs, had been par- 
celled out into new allotments, the former divisions into 
districts, as established during the reigns of the Dehlee 
Emperors, and recorded by the Kanoongoes, or rale- 
tellers, became void, and much angry litigation arose 
in respect to the village boundaries, and waste lands. 
The cultivators originated the cause of dispute, and the 
effect was in roost cases an appeal to arms, and an effusion 
of blood, before the claims of the parties could be heard, 

2 B 



202 APPENDIX— BOUNDARY DISPUTES. 

and decided by a convention of neighbouring Zameendars, 
selected to draw a line of demarcation, and boand by 
a solemn oath to act impartially.* The litigants made 
choice of an equal number of Moonsifs or arbitrators, in 
some cases one each, in others two to three each. These 
committees would prolong their sittings for weeks and 
months, being all the while fed and paid by the parties, 
caressed and threatened by their chiefs, their relatives 
and friends, influenced by party spirit, governed by fear, 
and little verifying the saying common amongst them oC 
** Punch men PurmisurT Five different modes of 
accommodation were in general adoption amongst these 
Punchayts — 1st, An equal division of the land in dis- 
pute. — 2nd, The Punchayt selected the oldest and most 
respectable member of their committee to define the 
limit, the others consenting to abide by his award. — 3rd, 
A moiety of the line of demarcation was drawn by the 
arbiters of the one party, and the remaining portion by 
those of the other. — 4th, The Punchayt referred the 
final adjustment to an old inhabitant of a neighbouring 
village, upon whose local knowledge and experience they 
placed more reliance than on their own limited informa- 
tion. — 5th, It sometimes occurred to the Punchayt to 
leave the division in the hands^of one of the disputants, 
whose probity and reputation were established in the 
vicinity. 

Village boundary disputes, attended with aggravating 
circumstances, between the Chiefs and cultivators of 

* The oath administered to the person who erects the boundary pillars, 
if a Hindoo, is the 6unga-Ju], or the Chour, or raw hide of the cow, or 
swearing by his son. If a Moossulman, the Qoran, or the placing his, 
hands on his son's head. The Chour, and swearing by his own child, 
are the most binding. 



APPENDIX — BOUNDARY DISPUTES. 208 

contiguous and rival states, are of daily occurrence, and 
the right and title to the smallest slip of land is contest- 
ed with an obstinacy quite disproportionate to its intrinsic 
value. Little attention is paid by the Chiefs or their 
subjects to the justice or reasonableness of a case ; it is 
quite suflScient, according to Sikh notions, that a claim be 
advanced and presented, as something may be obtained, 
and nothing can be lost by the reference to a Punchayt, 
which will use its endeavours to please, and harmonize its 
decision to the wants and wishes of those by whom it has 
been selected. 