

The practice of succession to property, both real and 
personal, amongst the Manjhee Singhs, is by Blmee^ 
blind and Choonda-bund. The first being an eqnal 
distribation of all lands, forts, tenements, and moveables, 
among sons, with, in some instances, an extra or doable 
share to the eldest termed " Khurch-Sirdaree,^' assimi- 
lating to the double share in the law of Moses.* Choonda- 
bond is an equal division among motheni for their 
respective male issue.f 

When aManjheeSingh dies, leaving no male offsprings 
his brothers, or his nephews of the full blood, assume the 
right of succession, to which the widow or widows 
become competitors. According to the Shasters, (if they 

♦ Deuteronomy, Chap, xxi, v. 15, 16, 17. 

t This practice of Choonda-bund is agreeable to the Hindoo Law. 
Vtara says ** If there be many sons of one man, by -different mothers, 
but in equal number and alike by class, a dittribution amongst the 
mothers is approved to Brihaspati." If there be many springs from one, 
alike in number and in class, but born of rival mothers, partition mast 
be made by them, according to law, by the allotment of shares to the 
mothers. 



APPENDIX — SUCCESSIONS. 199 

may be considered applicable to public property and 
Chiefships,) the prior title of the widows is held •* but 
the Sikhsy with a view to avt)id an open and direct viola* 
tioQ of a known law, have a custom termed Kurawa or 
Chadur-dula, which obtains in every family, with the 
exception to those of the Bhaees. The eldest surviving 
brother of the deceased places a white robe over, and the 
neeth, or ring in the nose of the widow, which ceremony 
constitutes her his wife* 

This practice accords with the Hindoo and Mosaic 
Lawsf and acts as a counteractive to the many evils atten- 
dant on female rule. If the free will of the widow were 
consulted, it is scarcely to be doubted, she would prefer 
the possession of power, and the charms of liberty, to the 
alternative of sacrificing her claims to her brother-in-law, 
and taking her station amongst his rival wives. Judging 
from the masculine disposition, — want of modesty, and 
of delicate feeling, which form the characteristic feature 
of Sikh females, necessity, and not choice, must have led 
them to yield to the adoption of an usage, which mast 
often be repugnant to their natures, and disgusting to 
their thoughts. 

On failure of brothers and nephews, the general prac- 
tice is, equal division of lands, and personal effects^ 
amongst the surviving widows of Manjhee Singhs. 

* In the Bengal and most generally current Shasters, this is the rule : 
but not in the Mithila province, (Tirhoot, &c.) the widow is there ex- 
cluded, and receives only a maintenance. 

t Deuteronomy, Chap, xxv, v. 5 to 10. 

t Yajuyawoleva says, " If a brother die without male issue, let another 
approach the widow once in the proper season." And Mbnu ordains, 
" having espoused her in due form, she being clad in a white robe." 



200 APPENDIX— SUCCESSIONS. 