

The Moosulman classes have their Peerzadas, who. 
make their rounds amongst their mooreeds, or disciples^ 
and receive from them such neeaz, or offerings, as they 
can afford, or may choose to present. Since the decline 
of the Muhomedan, and the rise and establishment of the 
Sikh power, the Peerzadas have to lament the loss in 



APPENDIX— MENDICANTS. 211 

-nlany instances, and the diminotion in others, of their 
village endowments. They still retain, however, a por- 
tion of the lands they held during the reigns of the Empe- 
rors of Delhi, attached to their principal rozas, tombs^ 
or seminaries, but the rents from them, and the trifle 
given in neeaz, are barely sufficient to maintain them- 
selves and families in respectable circumstances, and to 
support the Khadims, or servitors, in constant attend- 
ance at the tombs of their saints. 

Every village, independent of the fixed dues to the black- 
smith, carpenter, washerman, to choomars, and sweep- 
ers, has its 7nulka, or incidental expenses, charged on its 
cultivators for what are termed aya, gya, or grain, ghee, 
&c. given to wandering fuqeers and needy passengers. 
The punch or heads of the villages, who supply the mulha, 
collect it in cash from the villagers, twice during the 
year, and it not unfrequently gives rise to altercation and 
dispute, from the real or supposed inclination of the 
punch to impose upon them, under the specious and piou^ 
name of charity, much of which finds its way into the col- 
lectors own pocket. 

Hindoo and M.oo8u\mwii fuqeers are found located in and 
around every town and village, and each has his Tukeeaht 
or place of abode, to which a few beegahs of land aro 
assigned, the gift of the Zumeendars, who, in other res- 
pects, also, take care of the common holy fraternity, that 
their blessing may continue to be upon them. 

The Jinsee, or grain lands, are cessed by the Kun, 
(appraisement), or the Butaee, (division of the produce 
in the field;) both are exceptionable. It requires a 

2 c 2 



s:^^ m'FA'^AM . ^^ ^ ^ami 



212 APPENDIX— LAND REVENUE. 

very discerning and experienced man, to estimate the 
quantity in a field of standing grain : In some it is over, 
and in others nnder rated. The Bataee is detailed and 
tedious, an establishment also is required to watch the 
different Kulwarah, or heaps of grain on the field. 
Cultivators are apt to steal it during the night, and in 
stormy and wet weather much of it is damaged, ere it 
can be housed. It is a common saying *' But€iee lootaee/* 
or Butaee is plunder. Some Chiefs exact a half of the 
produce, others two-fifths, and a few, one-fourth. Sugar- 
cane, cotton, poppy, indigo, and all the lands under the 
denomination of the Zubtee, are assessed at fixed rates, 
and the rent is received in cash. 

In the Sikh states, the lands of most towns and villages 
are parcelled out into puttees, tumfs, or divisions, 
amongst the Punch, or Zumeendars, who are answerable 
for the Sirkar's or Ruler's share. In some, where there 
are no ostensible heads, the lands are held by hulsaree, or 
ploughs. Thus, if in a village society, there be twenty- 
five ploughs, and 2500 beegahs, the Jinsee and Zubtee 
lands, are equalized amongst the Asamees, or husband- 
men, which gives 100 beegahs to each plough, and each 
Asamee pays his own rent, much on the principle of a 
Byotwar settlement. In general, the Punch hold a few 
beegahs, and also the Puchotrah, (5 per cent.) on the net 
collections, in Inaum. 