

Adoption by the widows is not allowed, and the female 
line is entirely excluded from the succession, to prevent 
the estates merging in the possessions of another family. 

The inconvenience, and evil, originating in the pre- 
vailing practice amongst the Manjhee families, of suc- 
cessive and minute sub-divisions of landed property, 
aggravated by the system of coparcenary possession, are 
seen, felt, and acknowledged, and the mischief of such a 
system cannot be too soon remedied.'*^ 

Amongst the Malwa Singhs, the rights of primo- 
geniture in the males are respected, and Jageers, or 
grants of land, are assigned for the maintenance of 
younger sons, by which the many inconveniences, notic- 
ed in the practice, or rule established amongst the 
Manjhee families, are obviated. 

* The Agrarian Law thus adopted amongst the Manjhee Singhs, and 
the condition to which it has reduced many families, may receive illus- 
tration from the analogous picture drawn by Sir Jbhn Davis in his work 
entitled Discovery qf the causes, why Ireland toas never entirely subdued by 
the English, << The custom of Gavil-kind did breed another mischief, for 
** thereby fevery man being born to land, as well bastard, as legitimate, 
*' they all held themselves to be gentlemen. And though their portions 
" were never so small, and themselves never so poor, for Gavil-kind most 
« needs in the end make a poor gentility, yet did they scarce descend to 
*' husbandry, or merchandize, or to learn any mechanical art or science. 
'* Besides these poor gentlemen were so affected to their small portions of 
'^ land, that they rather chose to live at home by theft, extortions and 
" cashering than to seek any better fortunes abroad. The lesser proprietors 
** should be encouraged to attach themselves to, and acknowledge the 
'* authority of some neighbouring superior. This is an arrangement that 
" will not be attended with the least loss to them in a pecuniary point of 
" view, and it will ensure the certainty of having so many horse at com- 
** mand under one leader, instead of having many individuals, without a 
'< head, or what is worse, so insignificant, as not to be remembered 1a a 
" moment of exigency." 



APPEN DIX — SUCCESSIONS. 201 

The Malwa Singhs^ with exceptioQ to the Bhaees, 
sanction and admit the usage of Kurawa, thereby oppos- 
ing a bar to disputed saccession between the brothers ^ 
nephews, and the widows of a deceased chief. 

The Bhaees of Khytul, and other places, although they 
reject the union by Kurawa, yet set aside the claims of a 
widow, in favor of the brothers and nephews of one dying 
without male issue. The widows of Bhaees receive small 
Jageers for their support during life. 

The Mahomedan families scattered over the Sikh 
States, who have been enabled to preserve their existence, 
and the shadow of power, reject the ordinances of 
their Law-givers, and are guided by rules of their own 
forming. Were the Mahomedan and Hindoo laws on 
inheritance, as inculcated by the Shura and Metakshara, 
to be made the leading principle in succession to landed 
property, very few, if any, of the many principalities in 
India would remain entire, and a common distribution 
would become universal, to the extinction of great 
estates, and the annihilation of the chiefs with their 
aristocratical influence. 