



APPENDIX — MARRIAGES. 207 

which the needy parents or gaardians had received 
money, ornaments, or clothes. If both parties be the 
subjects of one Chief, they appear before him, and either 
he, or his officers, satisfies them^ or refers the decision to 
a Punchaytof the same class as the disputants. If the 
complainant and defendant happen to reside in separate 
jurisdictions, and cither of the Chiefs persevere in evad- 
ing a compliance with the rule in such cases, or reject 
the award of a Punchayt, Gaha, or self-indemnification, 
is adopted by the opposite party, and the subjects, pro- 
perty, and cattle of his neighbour are picked up, and 
detained until satisfaction be ofiered and procured. The 
other side issues its letters of marque, and this pernici- 
ous system is frequently carried to the commission of 
serious outrage, and to infractions of the public tran- 
quillity.* 

It is not a rare occurrence for a parent or a guardian 
to be convicted of marrying a girl to one man, after her 
betrothment to another. The Chief, or a Punobayt, in 
general, in such cases, gives a verdict that the plain- 
tiff is entitled to a female from the family ; and if there 
be not one, the parents or guardian must find a sub- 
stitute; or, as a dernier expedient, to which the in* 
jured party very unwillingly assents, the money he may 
have expended, or a trifle in excess with interest, is 
decreed to be restored to him, that he may find a spouse 
elsewhere. 



* A demand was made on the state of Putteeala, by a subject of the 
Nabah Rajah, for the price of a baffaloe ralaed at 15 Rupees, but which 
on the settlement of the account by reprisal, exceeded 900. The case is 
still in dependance between them. Between the same states and by the 
same system, one rupee accumulated io a few years to 1500. 



208 APPENDIX— WIDOWS. 

Amongst all the Jat families^t and some others oF the 
lower classes in the Punjab, a custom prevails, on the 
demise of one brother leaving a widow, for a surviving 
brother to fake his sister-in-law to wife by Kurawah or 
Chadurdalna, (see inheritance.) The offspring by the 
connexion are legitimate, and entitled to sacceed to a 
share of all the landed and personal property.^: It is 
optional with the widow, to take, either the eldest, 
(Jeth), or the youngest, who is generally preferred and 
deemed most suitable. Should she determine to relin* 
quish worldly ideas, and to reside chaste in her father- 
in-Iaw*s house, she may adopt this course; but such 
instances are very rare, particularly in the case of young 
females, and are not to be looked for in a society, and 
amongst tribes, notorious for the laxity of their morals 
and for the degeneracy of their conceptions. 

In default of surviving brothers, and in accordance 
with acknowledged usage, the widow is at the disposal 
of her father-in-law's family : From the moment she has 
quitted the paternal roof, she is considered to have been 
assigned as the property of another, and ceases to have 
a free will. Where the Hymeneal bond is so loosely and 
irrationally knit, it is not a matter of surprise, that the 
feeble tie and servile obligation, which unite the wife 