

It seems to be a question how far a Chief may be justi- 
fied in entirely obstructing the course of a natural stream, 
and in appropriating the waters to his own exclusive 
advantage, to the serious detriment and loss of his neigh- 
bours, whose rights he may seem bound to respect, so .far 
as they have relation to property. On the whole, it ap« 
pears most just, that all should partake, as far as circum- 
stances will admit, of a share in the water of a natural 
stream or rivulet, and that when the absolute wants of 
those on the upper part of the stream have been supplied, 
the surplus should be again turned into, and permitted to 
flow in its bed, to satisfy others lower down, whether for 
irrigation, or the consumption of the people, and cattle, 
in the arid districts. The lesser currents do not swell in 
tlie hot months, as is the case with the larger rivers, 
which debouche from the Himala, and are fed in warm 
weather by the liquefaction of the snow : the supply of 
water in them is hence often so scanty, as scarcely 
to administer to the necessities of those near their 
beads, whilst the distress of others, farther down the 
stream, induces them to become more clamourous 
as the c|uautity decreases; and ultimately stops short 
of them. 

Bunds, or dams, are always constructed, after the 
ains have ceased, to raise the water to u level with the 



•A jkHAjt A-^A A.*A jn 



206 APPENDIX— MARRIAGES. 

surface, aud to reader it applicable to the parposes of 
irrigatioD ; were a total prohibition of this beneficial 
practice to be enacted, large tracts on many estates^ 
throQgh which streams flow, in deep channels, woald 
become uncaltivated ; and the villages depopulated, to 
the serious loss of the proprietors, and the ruin of their 
Zumeendars. With the view of relieving the deficiencies 
experienced from the want of the fluid in the arid districts 
lower down, a substitute for the dam might be found in a 
Hydraulic wheelof simple construction, to draw the water 
to the level, and in places where the banks are compara* 
tively low, it will only be requisite to dig the tooi, or cut, 
for the reception and carriage of the water deeper, and to 
raise it in the cut by sluice boards. The churrtu, or lea- 
thern bags, in common use at wells, with a relief of bul- 
locks, might also be serviceable in other spots. AH these 
expedients, however, fall very short of the utility and 
cheapness of the dams, when water requires to be 
conveyed many miles, and every tool is a canal in 
miniature. 

Nuptial contracts are made in early youth by the 
parents or nearest of kin, who, in too many cases, are 
influenced more by pecuniary and sordid motives, than 
by the welfare of the children. Disagreements are very 
common relative to betrothments, (mungnee), and to 
breaches of a promise of marriage, (nata or nisbutj 
amongst all classes of the inhabitants. In some instances, 
real or imaginary diseases, or bodily defects, will be 
alleged by one of the contracting parties, as a reason why 
the bargain should be annulled ; in others, a flaw in the 
cast, and in most a discovery, that the girl had been pro- 
mised to two, three, or four difibrent families, from all of 