

In most cases of Suttee, it will generally be observed, 
that a slow reluctant promise has been exacted from, or 

* RuNJEET Singh became anxious to establish a Copper Mint at Umrit- 
sur, and prohibited the importation of pice from Jaghadree. The mer* 
chants of Jughadree retaliated, and withheld the exportation of copper 
from their town, and gained their point. 

The Rajah of Puteeala has attempted to raise the duties in trade, and 
failed, from his territory being avoided. 

t This allusion is made to the frightful scenes, which occurred on the 
demise of the Hill Rajahs of Kooloo, Nahun, and Juswouly and other 
places. 



APPENDIX — SUTTEES, 215 

made by the wretched woman in an unguarded moment, 
when under the impulse of grief. A multitude is imme- 
diately assembled round her dwelling and person; cla- 
mour and precipitancy succeed, no time is permitted for 
reflection ; honor, shame, and duty all now combine to 
strengthen her bloody resolution, and the scene is hurried 
through and closed.* 

* In 1826, after the domain of Umbala lapsed to the Hon'ble Company, 
a very young Brahmin woman heard of the demise of her husband in a 
foreign land and expressed a determination to immolate herself with part 
of his clothes. A concourse of people instantly gathered around her and 
the utmost excitation prevailed. Being absent at the time, the office 
Moonshee, theThanadar of Umbala, and the Soobadar on duty, all three 
Hindoos of high caste, took upon themselves the task and responsibility 
of preventing the sacrifice, dispersed the multitude, and induced the 
young creature to await a reply to the express they had despatched to 
me. A threat to confine and prosecute all instigators, and a pension of 
three rupees per month saved the Brahminee, and she survives, honored 
in her family and respected in society as a living Suttee, totally falsifying 
the current belief, that recantation brings disgrace, scorn, and contempt. 
On the demise of the Hill Rsyas of Bulaspoor and Nahan in 1824 and 
1827 there was no Suttee, and the practice has disappeared in the Hill 
States under the protection of British Government. 



NOTES. 



Page 2— Last line of the page. 

Initiation by drinking of the Pahul is a rite established 
by GooRoo GoviND, and is thus described by Khoosh- 
WUQT Raee. The candidate and the initiator wash their 
feet with water, and then put sugar into the liquid and stir 
it with a knife, while they repeat fire quatrains, the first of 
which runs as follows : 

Surawuk sidh sumoh sidhanak dekh phiryo ghur Jogee Jutee Kee, 
Soor surawuk sidh surawuk sunt sumoh un^k mutee kee — 
Sare hee desko dekh phiryo mut kooo nu dekhut pranpntee kee 
Sree Bhugwan kee Bhuye kripa bin ek rutee bin ek rutee kee. 

I have been round and have seen all kinds of devotees, Jogees and Jutees, 
Holy men, practisers of austerities, men wrapped up in contemplation of 

the Divinity with all their many ways and habits, 
Every country have I travelled over, but the truly godly I have seeii no 