

The system of assessment by the Kun or Bntaee, 
pleases the agricultural community, and the Chiefs, who 
pay their armed retainers and establishments every six 
months in kind, with a small sum in cash called poJuX" 
kee or clothing : it also accords with their internal plan 



APPENDIX — TRANSIT DUTIES. 2l3 

of managemeDt. On some small estates, with compara- 
tively few followers, it works well, bat it is not at all 
adapted to extended territory and great governments.'* 

The chief sources of oppression on the people, under 
Sikh rule, emanate, 1st, from the exaction of the Siwaee" 
Junta, or extraordinary imposts, levied in cash on every 
village under the general head of the Huq-Huboobnuzur- 
bhet, and branching out into a variety of names. 2nd, 
The inhuman practice of Kar-hegar, or the impress of 
labour of the inhabitants without recompense ; and 3rd, 
the violence to which they are exposed from licentious 
armed dependents, quartered in the forts and towers 
which cover the country, and prey on the villages. 

Every major and minor chief exercises the privilege 
by prescription of taxing trade, yet the duties, though 
levied at every ten to twenty miles, are light. A prac- 
tice called hoonda-bara prevails in the mercantile com- 
munity. A trader gives over charge of his caravan of 
goods to a nanukpootrah, who engages to convey it for a 
stipulated sum from Jughadree to Umritsur, the empo« 
rium of the Sikh states, paying all the duties. The 
nanukpootrahs, from the sanctity which attaches to their 
persons as the descendants of Nanuk, the founder of 
the Sikh faith, enjoy certain exemptions, and are leas 
subject to molestation from custom house importunity 
than others. Beema, or insurance, maybe had at a cheap 
rate from the Nouhureeah merchants to all parts of India. 
Should any grievous or vexatious tax be imposed on 

* RuNJEET Singh, when urged by his officers to abandon the farming 
system, and introduce the Run and Butaee, always replies, '* that he 
cannot give his time and attention to the weighing and boutiog of grain." 



214 APPENDIX — SUTTBE8. 

the trade by a chieC he suffers an alienation of this branch 
of his revenue^ by the route being changed through the 
possessions of another, who has the power to protect, and 
the inclination to encourage the transit of traffic through 
his domains.* 

Sikh women do not burn with the corpse of their hus- 
bands. A single exception occurred in 1805, in the 
town of Booreeah, on the death of the chief Rae Singh, 
when his widow made a voluntary sacrifice of herself, 
rejecting a handsome provision in land. There exists no 
prohibition against the Suttee. In all cases they are un- 
derstood to be willing victims, and much real or pretend- 
ed dissuasion is exercised by the public functionaries, 
and by friends and relations, to divert the miserable 
creature from her destructive intentions. That affection 
and duty have not always place in this class of fdo de se, 
which would explain and extenuate such a deed, and con* 
vert the offspring of superstition into a noble act of self- 
devotion, is obvious from the frequency of Suttee, and 
from the fact that it is not only the favored wife, but a 
whole host of females, that sometimes are offered up to 
blaze on the pyre of their deceased lord.f 