

Page 60 — Also. 

In 1807, JoDH Singh was gained over to close alliance 
with Runjeet, and K. R. gives a long detail of the means 
used to cajole biro. Amongst other things, Runjeet Singh 
asked permission to inspect the fort of Ramgurh, and went 



323 NOTES. 

there thinly attended. He professed great admiratioii of 
the fortifications, and ordered the foundations of 9 fort for 
himself, afterwards called Govindgurh, to be laid down accord- 
ing to the same plan. Jodh Singh was the son of JusA 
Singh, Maua Singh's ally against Jy Singh. He joined 
with his Misul the army that was led by Runjebt Singh 
against Kasoor in 1807, which is stated at 30,000 horse, 
being the united force of the Sookorchukeeas, Ghuneeas, 
Aloowalas, and Rumgurheeas. After eight days' fighting, 
an oat-work of the place was carried, when Shu rf-ood- dee N 
and others deserting, Kootub-ood-deen surrendered. 

Page 61 — Tenth line. 

MozuFFUR Khan is said to have paid eighty thousand 
rupees, and to have given five horses to be rid of the Sikh 
army. Daring the march back, a Zumeendar came up 
mounted on a fine horse to pay his respects. Runjebt 
Singh coveted the horse, and his over zealous courtiers 
demanded it rudely. The rider being ofibuded, rode up to 
Run J bet's elephant and made several cuts at him. The 
guard and attendants gathered round, but none was found 
that could match the Zumeendar in horsemanship and swprdr 
play. After having wounded and unhorsed several, he was 
shot and his horse thus secured. 

Page 63-— Eleventh line. 

It was about this time, that is, towards the close of 1807, 
that Mohkum Chund presented himself at the Court of 
RuNJEET Singh, and was appointed Dewan. He had 
served in this capacity with Saheb Singh of Goojrat, and, 
until his appointment, Runjebt Singh had no officer of 
this description. 

Page 63— The end. 

K. R. assigns the capture of Puthan Kot and Seeal Kot 
to the previous season, that is, 1807-8. 



NOTES. 223 

Page 68— Middle of the page. 

Khooshwuqt Raee says the Akalees intended to have 
taken their revenge upon the mission by a night attack, to 
prevent which Runjeet Singh sent 600 of his best troops 
to mount guard about Sir Charles Metcalfe's camp. 
In the morning. Sir Charles moved to a greater distance 
from Umritsur, and the Akalees dug up and burned the 
buried biers and every relic they could find of the Mohume- 
dan rite. 

Page 77 — Middle of the page. 

SuNSAR Chund played a double part through the whole 
of this negociation. After his engagement with Runjeet 
Singh, he entered into treaty with Umur Singh, promis- 
ing to surrender the fort to him, and thus obtaining leave 
to bring away his family, contrived to throw into the place 
his brother with four months supplies, thus hoping to keep 
it against both claimants. Runjeet Singh, however, seiz- 
ed Unrodh Chund as a hostage, and obtaining from 
SuNSAR Chund an order to be received into the place, brib- 
ed Umur Singh, whose army was sickly and pressed for 
supplies, in order to secure access to the gate, when no 
opposition was offered to his entrance. 