

2 D 2 



220 NOTBS. 

Amongst others, MuLiKA Zumaneb, a Defalee Queen, and 
one of the widows of MbbrMunoo. HurbbSinoh^ the son 
with other members of the family of KajaKAONRA MuL, was 
also living there in splendour; and DilputRabe, the son of 
LuKHPUT Rabb, had likewise settled there, with the remains 
of several other families of Nobles of the Dehlee, or Vice 
Regal Courts. Runjbet Deo treated all these refugees 
with much distinction, and particularly enjoined his son to 
continue to them the same courtesy. Brij Raj, however, 
was no sooner seated on the Gudee, than he made them the 
objects of his extortion. From UuREB Singh he is said 
to have obtained 50 lakhs of rupees. 

Page 43 — End of the second paragraph. 

KiloosHWUQT Rabe statcs the plunder obtained by Maha 
BiNGH, from Jummoo, at two Krores of Rupees, but this 
seems much exaggerated. He also states that Brij Raj 
had been killed in an action with a Bhungee detaehment, 
and his son, Chyt Singh, was the Raja, when Maha Singh 
captured and sacked the town. 

Page 44 — 14th line from the bottom. 

According to K. R., Jy Singh ordered his people to 
shoot Maha Singh, and Goor Bukhsh, his son, in vain 
interceded to save him, — he also says, that Maha SinGh went 
off immediately from the interview, and was pursued and fired 
at as far as the village of Mejithia, but escaped fortunately 
without injury, 

Page 49 — End. 

Khooshwuqt Rabe is silent in respect to the fate of 
RuNjEET Singh's Mother, but admits that the Dewan was 
made away with, and adds that Run jeet was for some time 
after distrustful of the whole race of Mootusudees, and would 
employ none. 



NOTES. 221 

Page 53 — End of the page. 

J USA Singh of Chunduneeot, or CbeDiot, is said to have 
Surrendered to Runjeet Singh, upon a promise of restora^ 
tion sworn on the Holy Grunth, but was nevertheless made 
prisoner immediately on presenting himself, and stripped of 
all his possessions. Runjeet Singh being taxed with the 
perjury, called for the holy volumes on which he had sworn, 
and the wrappers being opened, some bricks in the shape of 
books were all that was found. 

Page 54 — End of the paragraph. 

Goo LAB Singh Bhungee died, it is said, from excessive 
drinking. Lohgurh stood a siege, and was taken by assault, 
— the besiegers having found entrance by a wicket gate, left 
open to act as an embrasure for an enormous gun. The 
place was taken in the midst of a storm in the month of 
December, and Goordut and his mother escaping, were 
all night exposed to the cold and rain, but found refuge at 
last with JoDH Singh> head of the Rumgurheea JVlisul, 
whose fort Ramgurh was not very far distant. Runjeet 
Singh found his aunt, the sister of Maha Singh, in the 
fort, and sent her off in a ruth, or covered cart, next morn- 
ing, to share the misfortunes of Ranbb Sookha. 

Page 60 — End of the paragraph. 

The result of Runjeet Singh's expedition of this season, 
from the time of his leaving Umritsur until bis return, is 
stated by Khooshwuqt Raee, to have been seven elephants, 
nine pieces of ordnance, fifty horses^ and about two lakhs of 
rupees in cash. 