

His service in India began in 1809, when he 
went to Bengal as a Writer, being one of 
the new School of Civil Servants provided by the 
College recently established by the Court of Di- 
rectors at Hertford and Haileybury. He held 
a distinguished place among them, and after the 
usual initiatory career, which was passed at the close 
of Lord Minto'a Administration, he was selected to 
accompany Lord Hastings in his first tour through 
the Proviiicea, From that time he was consecu- 
tively attached to the Secretariat or to offices in 
close and confidential relation with the head of the 
Government. He was employed on several Missions 
to inquire into alleged grievances and suggest 
remedies when symptoms of mal-ad ministration 
were apparent, notably in 1819, when the land 
tenures of Burdwan fell into such confusion as to 
interfere with the collection of land revenue. The 
law he suggested and framed for the correction of 
tliis mischief still stands unaltered in the code of 
the Presidency as the charter of Putnee tenant-right. 

In 1822 he received from Lord Hastings the ap- 
pointment of Persian Secretary, and in 1823 filled 
Mr. Butterworth Bayley's place as Judicial Secre- 
tary when that gentleman was appointed temporary 
member of Council. Upon the arrival of Lord Am- 
herst as Governor-General, when that temporary 
employment ceased, he took a furlough to Europe, 
and on his return found a Secretaryship awaiting 
him, first in the territorial, and afterwrards in the 
public or general dtjpartment, to which the financial 
was added upon Mr. Holt Mackenzie's retire- 
ment. Upon the arrival of Lord William Ben- 
tinck he accompanied that Governor-General 
in his visit to the recently acquired Burmese 
territory and to the Eastern settlements, and 
was selected to accompany him as Political and 
Financial Secretary in the tour of inspection he 
undertook in 1830-31. He was, hotvever, too inde- 
pendent in his views of policy,and too ready to state 
his opinions, which were always Conservative, to 
agree long with Lord W, Bentinck, and after 18 
months' service in his camp, his health having 
suUered, he returned to Calcutta and Vesumed Ids 
ortico there. He was very soon, however, com- 
pelled to take a voyage to sea for his health, when 
he visited the colony of Van Diemen's Land or 
Tasmania, then of recent establishment. On his 
return in 1834 a new Constitution had been provided 



for India by the Act of 'Parliameiit* paaaed'in 1833, 
but the Governor-Genen^ was at Ootacamund, in 
the south of India, and unable, therefore, to give it 
full etlect until the end of the year)1834. In the mea- 
sures adopted for this purpose Mr. Prinse^ took a 
prominent part, not always in accordance with the 
views of the Governor-GeneraU But Lord William 
Bentinck was by this time on the eve of his return 
to Europe, and when be tinally went, in the early 
part of 1835, Mr. Prinsep was called by Sir Charles, 
afterwards Lord Metcalfe, to fill the vacant 
seat m Council occasioned by Lord William's 
departure. This appointment was not confirmed by 
the Court of Directors, who preferred the claims of 
seniority, and it was not until 1840 that Mr. 
Prinsep obtained a permanent seat iu the Supreme 
Council. Lord Auckland was then Governor- 
General, and the Expedition into Afghanistan had 
extended the British arms and influence over the 
length and breadth of that kingdom. Mr. Prinsep's 
views on the subject of that Expedition were 
opposed to those of the Governor-General, and he 
advised an armed demonstration in support of and 
in alliance with the existing Government of Ameer 
Dost Mahomed, instead of attempting to super- 
sede that ruler and re-establish the ejected IQnsr 
Shah Shoojah. But his advice came too late. Lord 
Auckland, unable to make up his mind to permit 
his Agent, IVIajor Bums, to accede to Dost Maho- 
med's urgent request for such support, had com- 
pelled that chief to look for aid from Russia, and to 
accept the assurances of safety and support con- 
veyed tlirough the Russian Agent Viokovitch. The 
result was that tlie Russo-Persian attack on Herat 
was foiled, and Shah Shoojah was re-established at 
Kandahar and K&bul by British arms. After two 
years of success, however, a reactionary spirit was 
excited iu the population, and in the winter of 
181()-4l our isolated troops at K4bul were sur- 
rounded and their supplies cut off. The entire force 
was destroyed in the attempt to return to 
Hindostan, and of the army of occupation two 
garrisons only remained at Jellalabad and 
(jandahar, which the inclemency of the season inado 
it iinpussiblo to reinforce or bring away. This was 
the condition of things when Lord Auckland left 
India and wan succeeded by Lord EUenborough in 
I the be<riiinin£^ of 181'J. The ollnrts made to restore 
the inlluenco of tiio Britisli aruis in Afi^hanintan 
and tlie events which followed are sutlioiently 
known. 