                                                                   282                                            Social History                            vol. 30 : no. 3
                                                                   geographical and social communities known as the ‘neighbourhood’: the industrial colonies
                                                                   and handloom weaving villages nestling on the moors, which played a signiﬁcant role in
                                                                   fomenting and sustaining the disturbances.
                                                                      Many of the historiographical disagreements over the nature and purposes of Luddism have
                                                                   resulted from historians evaluating the extent of its organization and its links with republican
                                                                   radicalism. Thompson and Thomis represent the two extremes of interpretation. The former
                                                                   posited the movement as revolutionary and expansive; the latter believed it was apolitical,
                                                                   limited and reactionary. Dinwiddy held the moderate position, arguing that Luddism was a
                                                                   combination of different strands of working-class activism, including both revolutionary and
                                                                   non-radical trade-union elements.3 Problems of the reliability of evidence from magistrates’
                                                                   spies and the secretive nature of the movement have ensured that the question of motivation
                                                                   remains contentious.4 The respective roles of the early trade unions and the wider working-
                                                                   class communities in sustaining Luddism are also at issue. The trade unions were still




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   fragmented into occupationally segregated combinations in this period. Calhoun has argued
                                                                   that once popular protest movements attempted to stretch their organization beyond their
                                                                   community base, they foundered for want of support and shared identity.5 According to his
                                                                   formulation, therefore, Luddism did not achieve its aims because activists were unable to
                                                                   bridge the forty-mile gap between the northernmost outbreaks in Staffordshire and the
                                                                   southernmost disturbances in Cheshire.6 Nor were they able to have signiﬁcant revolutionary
                                                                   or reforming potential because they were unable to co-ordinate their activities with Sir Francis
                                                                   Burdett and the London radicals, regardless of whether or not this was their intention.
                                                                      These historiographical preoccupations often neglect the fact that the movement was able to
                                                                   sustain itself for a relatively long period of time in the face of vigorous surveillance and arrests
                                                                   by magistrates and their spies. In Nottinghamshire, attacks on machinery began in March 1811
                                                                   and continued in sporadic bursts until the Spring Assizes of March 1812. The troubles in
                                                                   Yorkshire emerged from about February 1812. The ﬁrst disturbances in Lancashire were also
                                                                   recorded in that month, when a mill was set on ﬁre on Oxford Road, Manchester, and the
                                                                   bulk of the outbreaks occurred in the region in April and May. 7 Food rioting did not subside
                                                                   until the Assize trials in late August, and the military were still required to patrol the streets in
                                                                   Bolton and Stockport to prevent more trouble. Huddersﬁeld magistrate Joseph Radcliffe was
                                                                   continuing to receive Luddite death-threats in 1813. 8 At this point in the war, when grain
                                                                   prices were high, wages were decreasing and a general war-weariness was rising, the ﬁnancial
                                                                   and organizational strength and levels of commitment of any popular movement would have
                                                                   been tested. Yet Luddism was seen as a real threat to the general public order by the
                                                                   magistrates. As their desperate letters to the Home Ofﬁce illustrate, written in the early hours



                                                                     3
                                                                       E. P. Thompson, The Making of the English            J. Calhoun, ‘Community, Class and Collective
                                                                   Working Class (Harmondsworth, 1968); M. Tho-             Action: Popular Protest in Industrializing England
                                                                   mis, The Luddites, Machine-Breaking in Regency           and the Theory of Working Class Radicalism’
                                                                   England (Newton Abbott, 1970); Dinwiddy, op. cit.        (D.Phil., Oxford, 1979).
                                                                     4                                                         6
                                                                       See B. Bailey, The Luddite Rebellion (Stroud,            Bailey, op. cit., 35.
                                                                                                                               7
                                                                   1998); R. Reid, Land of Lost Content: The Luddite            Reid, op. cit.
                                                                                                                               8
                                                                   Rebellion, 1812 (London, 1986).                              West Yorkshire Archives, Leeds (subsequently
                                                                     5
                                                                       See M. Chase, Early Trade Unionism: Fraternity,      WYAL), WYL 280, Radcliffe Mss.
                                                                   Skill and the Politics of Labour (Aldershot, 2000); C.
