                                                                   286                                            Social History                             vol. 30 : no. 3
                                                                   gesture in transmitting shared memories, transmitting radical ideas, sustaining protest networks
                                                                   and structuring social action.24 The ‘generalized beliefs’ Smelser posited as necessary for action
                                                                   can thereby be re-evaluated. They were not strictly or mindlessly irrational but, rather, based
                                                                   on a shared culture and references which inﬂuenced people to act as much as did tangible
                                                                   leadership and organization. Psychology and some ‘irrational’ forces in this qualiﬁed sense thus
                                                                   have their place in collective action, together with the more traditional emphasis on structural
                                                                   causes.
                                                                      Elements of Smelser’s theory can be revised in analysis of the disturbances of 1811–12.
                                                                   ‘Generalized beliefs’ were a shared discourse or mythology necessary to bind participants in
                                                                   protest together. He identiﬁed ﬁve types of generalized belief: hysteria, ‘wish-fulﬁlment’,
                                                                   hostility, and ‘norm-oriented’ and ‘value-oriented’ beliefs:

                                                                          Hysterical beliefs lead to panic; wish-fulﬁlment beliefs to the ‘craze’; hostile beliefs to




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                          scapegoating and in extreme cases mob violence; norm-oriented beliefs to reform
                                                                          movements and counter-movements; and value-oriented beliefs to political and religious
                                                                          revolution, nationalist movements, secessions and cults.25

                                                                      These myriad categories can be simpliﬁed into two motivations: negative and positive. Both
                                                                   could arguably be seen in the terse situation built up in rapidly urbanizing areas of Britain
                                                                   during the Napoleonic wars. The negative motivation of hysteria and hostility were observable
                                                                   among food rioters, who imagined or exaggerated the rumours of forestalling and engrossing
                                                                   by grain dealers and shopkeepers. Hence the main focus of the riots was selling the grain at a
                                                                   ‘fair price’. ‘Badgers’ were targeted en route to the market, and the servants of gentlemen
                                                                   offering to buy up the stocks at a higher price were also viliﬁed.26 For example, the Oldham
                                                                   diarist William Rowbottom described the workings of the moral economy in late October
                                                                   1799, when a ‘large mob of people from Saddleworth and the Neighbourhood of Oldham’
                                                                   ﬁrst descended into Oldham to the marketplace, giving the dealers three days’ notice to lower
                                                                   prices. They assembled again ‘according to their promise’, not in the town centre but on the
                                                                   New Road leading to Ripponden. They then took possession of the meal before it got to
                                                                   Oldham market, selling it at what they regarded as a fair price.27 The rioters were therefore
                                                                   well aware of the routes of supply and the market networks. The enemy was generalized or
                                                                   made generic in popular imagination to include prejudices against Jews and Quakers, the latter
                                                                   being quite prominent in the grain trade in this period and thus obvious targets.28 Positive
                                                                   beliefs of restoring the ‘norm’, ‘values’ or ‘wish-fulﬁlment’ could be also seen in food riots and
                                                                   wage negotiations, which were attempted by the Manchester executive committee of weavers



                                                                     24                                                       26
                                                                        J. Epstein, ‘Radical dining, toasting and               A. Booth, ‘Food riots in the north west of
                                                                   symbolic expression in early nineteenth century          England, 1790–1801’, Past and Present, LXXVII
                                                                   Lancashire: rituals of solidarity’, Albion, XX (1988),   (1977), 84–107.
                                                                                                                              27
                                                                   271–91; J. Epstein, In Practice, Studies in the              Oldham Local Studies, typescript, diaries of
                                                                   Language and Culture of Popular Politics in Modern       William Rowbottom.
                                                                                                                              28
                                                                   Britain (Stanford, 2003); P. Connerton, How                  See K. Navickas, ‘The Cragg family memor-
                                                                   Societies Remember (Cambridge, 1989).                    andum book: society, politics and religion in north
                                                                     25
                                                                        N. Smelser, Theory of Collective Behaviour          Lancashire during the 1790s’, Northern History,
                                                                   (London, 1998), 83–4.                                    XLII (March 2005), 151–62.
