                                                                   August 2005                              Mythology of Luddism                                            285
                                                                   oath to the soldier-spy Holland Bowden on the road to Bolton, most of the prosecution
                                                                   witnesses were members of the Bolton local militia and/or employed as spies for magistrate
                                                                   Colonel Fletcher. One said he ‘heard that he knew where these men met, as it was generally
                                                                   talked of in the croft, amongst the workmen. They said a man they called General Ludd was
                                                                   reviewing about 300 men, two or three times a week.’ 18 Many spies were deliberately
                                                                   searching for Ludd rather than for other participants. Abraham Kaye, a private in the Bolton
                                                                   militia, reported that he saw ‘one called General Ludd, who had a pike in his hand, like a
                                                                   serjeant’s halbert; I could not distinguish his face, which was very white, but not the natural
                                                                   colour’. Other spies claimed they recognized John Hurst as General Ludd. The hysteria of
                                                                   magistrates in facing a crisis of public order engendered these delusions, both among their spies
                                                                   desperate for information and among the victims of the brutal interrogatory tactics of
                                                                   magistrates such as J. S. Lloyd of Stockport.19
                                                                       Applying developments in sociology and historical geography to Luddism adds a different




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   dimension to Binﬁeld’s emphasis on the eponym of General Ludd. The role of a mythical
                                                                   character in the disturbances of 1811–12 has some parallel in sociological theories of collective
                                                                   action. The work of Smelser has been discredited by other sociologists, particularly his focus
                                                                   on ‘irrational’ forces and shared myths in promoting movements. They stress, rather, the
                                                                   importance of conscious mobilization, organization and resources, and thus explicitly disavow
                                                                   psychological and socio-psychological factors such as grievances and discontent.20 Smelser’s
                                                                   periods of strain and crisis are replaced in Tilly’s analysis by an almost constant state of
                                                                   ‘contention’ in quotidian life, which has a broader inﬂuence in evolving what he terms as
                                                                   ‘repertoires’ of action than the ‘moments of madness’ which bring them to the surface.21 Food
                                                                   riots in this period were indeed only a manifestation of the greater economic strains the war
                                                                   was placing on local markets, as ‘badgers’ – the itinerant dealers and middle-men – were forced
                                                                   to travel further in search of produce, in turn stretching local supplies.
                                                                       More recent voices in sociology have moved away from the depiction of collective action as
                                                                   calculated in structure and solely political in aim. They have suggested that identity and culture
                                                                   are as important as organizations and structural change to social movements, and they
                                                                   illustrated how social movements have drawn on religious and other beliefs to mobilize their
                                                                   supporters and construct collective identities.22 Polletta, for example, has argued that narratives
                                                                   are a signiﬁcant factor in social movements. By explaining past events and formulating
                                                                   possibilities for the future, shared narratives were a key method of deﬁning collective identity.
                                                                   They encouraged the spread of protest among disparate groups, particularly in the initial
                                                                   stages.23 Epstein and Connerton have highlighted the importance of ritual, ceremony and


                                                                      18
                                                                        The Trials of all the Prisoners. . .Convicted at   (Cambridge, Mass., 1995).
                                                                                                                             21
                                                                   Lancaster Assizes. . .August 1812, 50.                       Tilly, op. cit.; Tarrow, op. cit., 104.
                                                                      19                                                     22
                                                                        Reid, op. cit.; B. Turner, ‘A loyal Englishman?         Barkan and Snowden, op. cit., 24–5; F.
                                                                   John Lloyd and aspects of oath taking in 1812’ in       Polletta, ‘Contending stories: narrative in social
                                                                   M. T. Davis (ed.), Radicalism and Revolution in         movements’, Qualitative Sociology, XXI, 4 (1998),
                                                                   Britain (Hampshire, 2000).                              419–46; B. Klandermans, The Social Psychology of
                                                                      20
                                                                        S. Barkan and L. Snowden, Collective Violence      Protest (Oxford, 1997).
                                                                                                                             23
                                                                   (Boston, 2000); S. Tarrow, ‘Cycles of collective             F. Polletta, ‘ ‘‘It was like a fever.’’ Narrative
                                                                   action’ in M. Traugott (ed.), Repertoires and Cycles    and identity in social protest’, Social Problems, XLV
                                                                   of Collective Action (London, 1995); C. Tilly,          (1998), 143.
                                                                   Popular Contention in Great Britain, 1758–1834
