                                                                   August 2005                            Mythology of Luddism                                        287
                                                                   who were the remnants of the previous decade’s strike organization. These formed part of the
                                                                   ‘moral economy’, which envisaged what Smelser called the ‘reconstruction of a threatened
                                                                   normative structure’, that is, the pre-war prices, wage levels and presumed notions of social
                                                                   stability.29 They were part of the campaign for peace and parliamentary reform which had
                                                                   shown resurgence from 1808 and was attracting an increasing number of both working classes
                                                                   and middle classes to its principles and organization. It encompassed positive demands for an
                                                                   end to the distress by a restoration of an imagined English ‘constitution’ through the removal
                                                                   of parliamentary corruption and a widening of the electoral franchise.
                                                                      Polletta’s focus on the use of narrative in the forming and consolidating of social movements
                                                                   points to the signiﬁcance of Luddite ballads. Popular ballads have been somewhat ignored by
                                                                   social historians, primarily because of the difﬁculty of extracting ‘pure’ songs composed orally
                                                                   by the working classes from the generic and commercial broadside ballads, which were often
                                                                   adapted dramatically by paid hacks. Yet other historians have recognized that music was a




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   crucial part of both quotidian life and working-class ‘extraordinary events’.30 Ballads thereby
                                                                   infused the character into popular narrative and memory. The Manchester magistrate
                                                                   Reverend William Robert Hay noted one in his scrapbook which had the refrain: ‘Enter, No
                                                                   general but Ludd means the poor any good.’ 31 Binﬁeld’s anthology includes ballads from
                                                                   Nottingham and Derbyshire with the titles, ‘General Ludd’s Triumph’, ‘Well Done Ned
                                                                   Ludd’ and ‘Hunting a Loaf’.32 The apparent paucity of surviving printed Luddite ballads does
                                                                   not mean that they were unpopular, but rather that they were transmitted orally. For instance,
                                                                   a letter exists in papers of the Huddersﬁeld magistrate Joseph Radcliffe, purportedly from ‘John
                                                                   and Maria Middleton at Haughton’ in Staffordshire to their son James in Nottingham. It
                                                                   reported their elation at a Luddite ‘victory’ he had related to them: ‘We have enjoyed
                                                                   ourselves over a pot or two of beer and heared [sic] Mr Luds song.’ 33 The different sorts of
                                                                   ballads were used for different purposes to the same end. Oral ballads may have been used to
                                                                   drill up support before attacks on machinery or provision warehouses, such as ‘The Cropper’s
                                                                   Song’, reputedly sung by Huddersﬁeld croppers in February 1812 before the destruction of
                                                                   William Cartwright’s shearing frames. Surviving written and later printed ballads, such as were
                                                                   composed after the events, infused them into popular memory, including ‘T’ Three Cropper
                                                                   Lads o’ Honley’, about the murder of William Horsfall in Honley, West Riding, in March
                                                                   1812.34
                                                                      General Ludd was not the only ﬁctional character in popular imagination. Historians have
                                                                   emphasized the popularity of the character of John Bull in this period, as a positive focus of
                                                                   national identity. He was portrayed by pamphleteers and caricaturists as independent in mind
                                                                   and occasionally in political thought, but nevertheless patriotic and a staunch opponent to
                                                                   threats to British liberty.35 Furthermore, from the Napoleonic wars, the character appears to

                                                                     29
                                                                       These ideas were explored by E. P. Thomp-         Mun. A. 3. 7, scrapbook 7, 299.
                                                                                                                            32
                                                                   son in Customs in Common (London, 1991).                   Binﬁeld, op. cit.
                                                                     30                                                     33
                                                                       M. Vicinus, The Industrial Muse: A Study of            WYAL, Radcliffe Mss., WYL 280/369, letter
                                                                   Nineteenth Century British Working Class Literature   of 19 April 1812.
                                                                                                                            34
                                                                   (London, 1974); H. Barker and D. Vincent,                  Binﬁeld, op. cit., 201–3.
                                                                                                                            35
                                                                   Language, Print and Electoral Politics, 1790–1832,         M. Taylor, ‘John Bull and the iconography of
                                                                   Newcastle-under-Lyme Broadsides (Woodbridge,          public opinion in England, c.1712–1929’, Past and
                                                                   2001).                                                Present, CXXXIV (1992), 93–128.
                                                                     31
                                                                       Chetham’s Library, Manchester, Hay Mss.,
