                                                                   288                                        Social History                              vol. 30 : no. 3
                                                                   have been regionalized in popular ballads and dialect literature, as ‘Jone O’Grinﬁlt’ in the
                                                                   Lancashire series of broadsides and ‘Bob Cranky’ in Newcastle, although this has not been
                                                                   discussed in the historiography of Britishness.36 It indicates how a shared sense of Britishness
                                                                   needed to be ﬁltered through regional identities to be disseminated and accepted nationally.
                                                                   General Ludd can be regarded as a subversion of the character of John Bull. The psychological
                                                                   impact of over two decades of war had certainly left its mark. This was the ﬁrst period of war
                                                                   in which the general population participated in great numbers: voluntarily in the volunteers
                                                                   and via subscriptions for national or voluntary defence; mandatory in the militia. The fear of
                                                                   being called up to serve in the militia was general and affected all classes; the militia ballot was
                                                                   held periodically in every parish and hiring a substitute to serve was increasingly expensive.
                                                                   Historians have recognized the great extent to which this participation affected people
                                                                   psychologically. Colley and others have suggested that the experience was on the whole
                                                                   positive, infusing a patriotic sense of shared British identity against the French.37 The other,




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   more negative, side was also signiﬁcant, however, and came to the surface during the Luddite
                                                                   disturbances. The volunteer corps, in particular, did not assert an unquestioning patriotism, but
                                                                   rather the defence of highly local power structures and identity against military centralization
                                                                   and compulsion.38 While John Bull was a positive ﬁgure, General Ludd formed an expression
                                                                   of the negative side of defensive patriotism. In forming a positive leader of trade defence for his
                                                                   supporters, like the volunteers, he embodied a provincial alternative to the generalized images
                                                                   of military bravery and patriotism propagated by the government.
                                                                      Unlike the defensive patriotism of the invasion scares or the hopeful euphoria during the
                                                                   ﬁnal victories of 1814–15, the period 1811–12 displayed a peak in war-weariness for the
                                                                   general British population. Some people in industrializing areas under economic and
                                                                   psychological strain therefore found catharsis in the military drilling and oath-taking which
                                                                   comprised elements of Luddism. General Ludd and his regiments were not merely tropes but
                                                                   opposition expressed in action – opposition which directly mirrored and in some senses
                                                                   subverted their previous experiences of the volunteers and the ballot. Another contributing
                                                                   factor to the military ethos of Luddism was that, in 1807, Castlereagh had disbanded the
                                                                   volunteer regiments and transferred them to more centralized units of local militia.39 The
                                                                   Luddite regiments were thus not only a means of training for attacks on machinery but also a
                                                                   reaction to the element of compulsion and government dominance perceived to have been
                                                                   introduced into what had been a voluntary means of demonstrating patriotism and local
                                                                   identity.
                                                                      North-west Luddism also reﬂected, and possibly was based upon, the cellular organization
                                                                   of oaths of the United Englishmen of 1798–1802 or unionized weaving and spinning


                                                                      36
                                                                        Manchester      Central    Library,     BRf.    Lancashire under the Threat of Napoleon, 1798–
                                                                   824.04.BA1, Ballad collection, vol. 4, 155, ‘Loyal   1812’ (D.Phil., Oxford, forthcoming, 2005).
                                                                                                                          37
                                                                   Jone’ (printed by J. Haddock, Warrington); R.            L. Colley, Britons, Forging the Nation, 1707–
                                                                   Elbourne, Music and Tradition in Early Industrial    1837 (New Haven, 1992).
                                                                                                                          38
                                                                   Lancashire, 1780–1840 (Woodbridge, 1980), 79; R.         J. E. Cookson, ‘The English volunteer move-
                                                                   Colls, The Collier’s Rant: Song and Culture in the   ment of the French wars, 1793–1815: some
                                                                   Industrial Village (London, 1977). My thesis         concepts’, Historical Journal, XXXII (1989), 867–91.
                                                                                                                          39
                                                                   includes a chapter on the subject of ‘Lancashire         M. Smith, ‘Loyalty and Opposition in the
                                                                   Britishness’ in broadside ballads: ‘Redeﬁning        Napoleonic Wars: The Impact of the Local Militia,
                                                                   Loyalism, Radicalism and National Identity:          1807–15’ (D.Phil., Oxford, 1984).
