                                                                   Social History Vol. 30 No. 3 August 2005




                                                                                                     Katrina Navickas

                                                                         The search for ‘General Ludd’: the
                                                                              mythology of Luddism1
                                                                   In attempting to make sense of the working-class disturbances of the period 1811–13, both




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   contemporaries and historians have searched for ‘General Ludd’ and his followers. The
                                                                   magistrates who sent out their spies to uncover the underground organization of the
                                                                   movement, the witnesses and prosecutors at the Assize trials giving their versions of events, the
                                                                   parliamentary Secret Committee set up to investigate the disturbances, and the historians who
                                                                   rely on evidence surviving from these sources have all attempted to understand Luddism’s
                                                                   scope and revolutionary potential. Yet Luddism can be analysed and understood in a different
                                                                   light. This article discusses aspects of its mythology and shared identity: that is, how Luddism
                                                                   was seen and transmitted in a more abstract form than physical organization. In assessing what
                                                                   it meant for its participants and opponents rather than what it actually achieved in practice,
                                                                   some suppositions can be suggested as to why Luddism developed in the way it did and
                                                                   managed to sustain itself for a relatively long period of time.


                                                                                                                    I
                                                                   Strictly deﬁned, Luddism refers to working-class attacks on labour-saving machinery. Its
                                                                   participants were often workers who felt that innovating manufacturers were threatening their
                                                                   livelihoods by introducing into their factories cropping or shearing frames or powerlooms
                                                                   during the period of economic distress of 1811–13. On the other hand, it has been recognized
                                                                   that the situation encompassed a much wider scope of action and participation. Methods of
                                                                   protest included food riots and threatening letters to magistrates and manufacturers. Most
                                                                   distinctively, the nature of the disturbances was more complex in Lancashire and Yorkshire
                                                                   than in Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire. In these northern regions, Luddism encompassed
                                                                   meetings composed of early trade unions and of radicals.2 Both these strands within the
                                                                   working classes had links to, but were not directly involved in, the attacks on machinery. It
                                                                   could also include the silent but inactive acquiescence of the affected towns, where
                                                                   populations had their own separate grievances against local authorities or government. Pennine
                                                                   Luddism in this respect was a wider phenomenon. It was an expression of discontent from the


                                                                     1                                                    2
                                                                      I have been able to undertake this research          J. R. Dinwiddy, ‘Luddism and politics in the
                                                                   thanks to funding from the Arts and Humanities       northern counties’, Social History, IV (1979), 33–63.
                                                                   Research Board.

                                                                   Social History ISSN 0307-1022 print/ISSN 1470-1200 online ª 2005 Taylor & Francis
                                                                   http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
                                                                   DOI: 10.1080/03071020500185406
