                                                                   August 2005                            Mythology of Luddism                                        283
                                                                   of the morning, many anxiously felt that they did not have the military manpower to prevent
                                                                   an uprising, however removed from reality that possibility was.
                                                                      Luddism was not a movement with clear aims and organization, in contrast to the
                                                                   concurrent middle class-led campaigns against the Orders in Council or for peace. It was not
                                                                   structured as successfully or widely as the emerging parliamentary reform movement would
                                                                   become after the war. By its very nature, it had to be secretive and rely on other means of
                                                                   communication and identity to propagate itself. Most of the evidence for the motivation and
                                                                   organization of Luddism has accrued from historians piecing together events from the sparse
                                                                   and biased details provided in magistrates’ letters to the Home Ofﬁce and witness statements at
                                                                   the Assize trials. These obviously have to be seen through the ﬁlters of their authors’ bias and
                                                                   have not satisfactorily explained why Luddism sustained itself for as long as it did.
                                                                      Binﬁeld’s recent anthology of Luddite texts has gone some way to correcting this
                                                                   imbalance.9 Together with an interpretative preface by Randall, he uses post-modern




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   methodology to interpret the myriad ballads, threatening letters and internal communications
                                                                   of the disturbed regions in 1811–13. Previously, the so-called ‘linguistic turn’ has analysed
                                                                   post-war radicalism and the growth of class consciousness in Britain in the nineteenth century.
                                                                   It was argued that tropes and symbols were transmitted in protest to create a shared identity,
                                                                   which in turn promoted action.10 Unlike radicalism, Luddism was more a movement of pro-
                                                                   action rather than re-reaction. Images, symbols, place and, as Binﬁeld argues, ‘discourse’ were
                                                                   essential to this action. Tropes common to all participants and their supporters created the pan-
                                                                   regional identity of Luddism. They therefore provide a means of viewing the movement with
                                                                   a different historiographical focus. Binﬁeld’s approach not only highlights a shared language
                                                                   among Luddites but also successfully demonstrates the regional variations in this language and
                                                                   the political opinions therein expressed. Hence Lancashire Luddism was unique for its wider
                                                                   awareness of national and international economic conditions and trade networks, which
                                                                   Binﬁeld attributes to the more virulent Jacobin tradition within the region. The main purpose
                                                                   of the anthology is to highlight the signiﬁcance of the shared trope of ‘General Ludd’, which
                                                                   was infused into the organization and identity of Luddites in all disturbed regions. He discusses
                                                                   the imaginary ﬁgure’s role as an ‘eponym’ in some areas, while in other districts it became a
                                                                   ‘metonym’, embodying a whole range of intangible concepts or opinions under one tangible
                                                                   imagined leader.11 Luddism was nevertheless a potent and forceful movement across regions
                                                                   because it was generated ‘not by conspiracy or the sudden emergence of class consciousness’
                                                                   but rather by ‘the creation and appropriation of the eponym Ned Ludd’.12
                                                                      Luddism found its strength and ability to cross the boundaries of ‘community’ and region
                                                                   not in its physical organization or network but rather in irrational forces shared by its members
                                                                   in discourse. Writings of the Luddites raises new questions as well as answering many others.
                                                                   Why were the inhabitants of industrializing areas using an imaginary ﬁgure at this point in the
                                                                   war? Why did magistrates, spies and even the Home Ofﬁce appear to have subscribed to the
                                                                   concept of ‘General Ludd’ as well as the protestors themselves? Binﬁeld’s argument can be



                                                                     9
                                                                      K. Binﬁeld, Writings of the Luddites (Baltimore,   and Discourse in Early Nineteenth Century England
                                                                   2004).                                                (Ithaca, 1999).
                                                                     10                                                     11
                                                                       See, for example, M. Steinberg, Fighting               Binﬁeld, op. cit., 46.
                                                                                                                            12
                                                                   Words, Working-Class Formation, Collective Action          ibid., 18.
