                                                                   August 2005                          Mythology of Luddism                                       289
                                                                   committees who had gone on strike in 1799, 1808 and 1810. They may not necessarily have
                                                                   taken part in any of these previous forms of organization, but they all shared knowledge of
                                                                   them. Drilling Luddites were in the minority, but this does not mean that the general
                                                                   population was not affected by the atmosphere of militarism. Rather, they chose to take out
                                                                   their anger in ‘natural justice’40 by attacking the houses of manufacturers and magistrates as
                                                                   well as participating in food riots. Indeed, food rioting was much more prominent as a means
                                                                   of protest among the Lancashire and Cheshire populace than in Yorkshire or Nottinghamshire
                                                                   in 1811–12. The Luddite set-battles against powerloom factories in Middleton, Westhoughton
                                                                   and Stockport were rather isolated incidents, provoked by magistrate spies or used as a last
                                                                   resort in imitation of the frame-breaking in the other counties.41 It also led to a shared silence
                                                                   about the machine-breaking, either through acquiescence or fear. This was not a class identity
                                                                   but a shared identity of the ‘neighbourhood’, community or wider region. It proved decisive
                                                                   in prolonging Luddism, helping the evasion of arrests. Many activists appear to have travelled




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   from other towns to take part in agitation, as was the case with Oldham and Saddleworth
                                                                   colliers and weavers involved in the assault on Daniel and Emmanuel Burton’s factory and
                                                                   house at Middleton, Lancashire.42
                                                                      General Maitland was ordered up from the south by the Home Ofﬁce to quell the
                                                                   disturbances in Lancashire and Yorkshire. On 9 May 1812, he wrote a report about the
                                                                   situation he had found when he arrived in Lancashire. It perhaps best summarizes the
                                                                   conclusions the historian must take:

                                                                          That it exists I have no doubt, but I do not believe either to the extent or combination
                                                                          credited by many. . . . The Magistrates and Persons who have been writing to
                                                                          Government, seem to me, to stop generally exactly where they ought to begin, and
                                                                          where they try anything of the kind, their zeal leads them to think they have done a most
                                                                          meritorious Act.43

                                                                     He concluded that Luddism was a serious problem, but that the magistrates and
                                                                   manufacturers were exaggerating the nature of an oath-taking conspiracy. His military efforts
                                                                   deliberately but respectfully attempted to counteract the bias of the magistrates, and they
                                                                   succeeded in calming the situation, although he also had recourse to using spies. His report
                                                                   judged: ‘There must be, and very naturally, great variety of opinions on the subject of what is
                                                                   the real bottom of all this scene, possibly the wisest mode of answering it is that all the apparent
                                                                   causes contribute in some degree to the present state of the country.’ 44 In short, Luddism was
                                                                   the result of various pressures engendered or brought to the surface by the wars. It was an
                                                                   outburst emanating from over a decade of mistrust between manufacturers and employees of
                                                                   many trades, which had previously been seen in the conﬂicts over the Masters and Servants
                                                                   Acts, Combination Acts and later turnouts over wage reductions. It also involved the general
                                                                   population whose anger had become exacerbated by their direct or indirect experience of the



                                                                     40                                                  43
                                                                      Rudé, The Crowd in History, op. cit.                National Archives: Public Record Ofﬁce
                                                                     41
                                                                      Bailey, op. cit., 147.                          (subsequently PRO), HO 40/1/1/64–5, part 2, 9
                                                                    42
                                                                      Oldham Local Studies, Diaries of William        May 1812.
                                                                                                                         44
                                                                   Rowbottom, typescript.                                  ibid.
