                                                                   August 2005                          Mythology of Luddism                                     293
                                                                      Reid believes that Whittaker’s statement displayed ‘not the ranting of a rabid revolutionary
                                                                   but the apologia of a naı̈ve idealist’.59 The Luddites based their organization and networks on
                                                                   experience of unionized action, but they had wider horizons. Whittaker claimed that he
                                                                   initially thought the meetings he attended were merely combinations to advance wages, but he
                                                                   became disillusioned with their increasingly violent plans. He attended a meeting of delegates
                                                                   in a Manchester pub, where ‘never was more surprised in my life when I heard the Manchester
                                                                   delegate lay down the plans and communications with other towns, ﬁrst acting [as] if all
                                                                   Persons there were friends’.60 Whittaker may have been a spy, which further illustrates the
                                                                   extent of the common delusion between activists and the forces of order. The signiﬁcance of
                                                                   the delegates’ plans was their vision. It was not just Whittaker who was naı̈ve: so were the
                                                                   Manchester committee members who seemed to him and the magistrates as so organized and
                                                                   revolutionary.
                                                                      Pan-regional networks may not have worked in practice, but perceptions of them were




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   crucial. Thomas Miller of Stockport was present at the meeting and reported: ‘all was going on
                                                                   far beyond expectation that the Country Districts were pushing it from one to another as fast as
                                                                   possible that 900 had taken the Oath in Manchester’.61 Mythology was reliant upon
                                                                   superlatives: that thousands were taking the oath. It was essential that the oath network was
                                                                   perceived to be crossing geographical and trade boundaries. Thomas Whittaker’s statement
                                                                   again expressed this belief:

                                                                          James Buckley, Manchester, has administered the oath to several thousands I believe, I
                                                                          have heard him say seven hundred in one day, he has the tailors under his discretion. . . .
                                                                          Mr Hyde [of] Edgley Stockport has taken the Oath and also every male spinner in his
                                                                          factory. Sampson Robinson Stockport is doing the same amongst the Hatters.62

                                                                     Some pan-trade co-operation was envisaged, although it became strained when the spinners
                                                                   and tailors apparently refused to give any more subscriptions to the Manchester executive
                                                                   committee.63
                                                                     Again, the contributions of the spies inadvertently added to this mythology and ﬁltered into
                                                                   Luddite imagination. Colonel Fletcher’s spy ‘B’ claimed that Napoleon was ready to supply
                                                                   men and arms and that 10,000 men and 30,000 men were standing by in Ireland to bolster the
                                                                   coming revolution.64 Before the attack on Westhoughton mill, the spy John Stones apparently
                                                                   persuaded some local workers in an alleged secret committee that radical leaders in London
                                                                   were only waiting for the northerners to rise. Colonel Fletcher then reported that the attack
                                                                   had been postponed because preparations for a simultaneous rising in the capital were not
                                                                   complete.65 This was a total fantasy and another signiﬁcant element of the mythology of
                                                                   Luddism. Concurrently, the popularity and scope of peace and reform petitions to the
                                                                   Commons, and addresses to Colonel Wardle and Sir Francis Burdett congratulating them for
                                                                   exposing the Duke of York corruption scandal of 1809, were increasing. The inﬂuence of


                                                                     59                                                 63
                                                                       Reid, op. cit., 168.                               Dinwiddy, op. cit.
                                                                     60                                                 64
                                                                       PRO, HO 42/121/433–4, statement of Tho-            PRO, HO 40/1/1/4, Fletcher to Beckett, 11
                                                                   mas Whittaker, 4 July 1812.                        April 1812; Reid, op. cit., 124.
                                                                     61                                                 65
                                                                       PRO, HO 42/121/433, 4 July 1812.                   Bailey, op. cit., 67.
                                                                     62
                                                                       ibid.
