                                                                   294                                       Social History                            vol. 30 : no. 3
                                                                   these popular campaigns infused Luddite mythology. They therefore shared a perception of
                                                                   the extent of connections and delusions reliant upon London. A prisoner of the Stockport
                                                                   magistrate J. S. Lloyd spoke of Burdett as destined to become the ﬁrst president of the
                                                                   Commonwealth when George III and the Prince Regent had been despatched.66 Henry
                                                                   Brougham was also crucial in fostering ideas of wider connections. He acted as a defence
                                                                   lawyer for the ‘Thirty Eight’, arrested in Manchester in May 1812 during a meeting to discuss
                                                                   reform, and he also defended the Luddites against over-zealous magistrates and their spy system
                                                                   in the Commons debate on the Secret Committee Report into the disturbances.67 Knowledge
                                                                   of these links with London personalities was evolved by extremists and other activists into
                                                                   plans for a rising being reliant upon Burdett and the other London reformers. On 29 April
                                                                   1812 a gaoler at Lancaster Castle found a letter in the pocket of a Bolton cloth worker, written
                                                                   by James Burdett on 16 April, which mentioned his brother Francis and linked him with the
                                                                   cause of the Bolton committee.68 The fact that those Luddites who were not directly involved




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   in moderate reform meetings took up the idea of support from London again demonstrates the
                                                                   intricate web of connections and ideas circulating within Luddism. The support of Ireland and
                                                                   France was still a hope, but the Luddites evinced their recognition of the growing importance
                                                                   of the role of parliament and London radical leaders in furthering their demands. This may
                                                                   indeed have been a consequence of the increasing size and effectiveness of the petitioning
                                                                   movements for peace and reform which would form the basis of organization for popular
                                                                   radicalism after the war.
                                                                      There was much more to the character of General Ludd than a simple product of popular
                                                                   imagination in a period of war-weariness. General Ludd was imagined because the increasingly
                                                                   radical-leaning general population was searching for a leader. In 1812 they could not ﬁnd one
                                                                   locally or were unable to raise one themselves because of magistrate repression. Most of the
                                                                   Jacobin radicals of the 1790s had long gone. Furthermore, according to Eckersley, Major
                                                                   Cartwright and his metropolitan supporters distanced themselves from the working classes
                                                                   during the 1800s in an attempt to create an elite radical political party in parliament.
                                                                   Cartwright only reached the north on a popular reform campaign once dissension within his
                                                                   chosen party made this goal unachievable and after Luddism had begun to subside.69 The only
                                                                   genuine ‘gentleman leader’ of the 1800s in Lancashire was Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph Hanson
                                                                   of Strangeways Hall, Salford. He supported the campaign for peace, was almost elected for
                                                                   Preston in 1807, and became a popular hero after his imprisonment for speaking at a mass
                                                                   meeting calling for the minimum wage held at St George’s Fields in Manchester in May 1808.
                                                                   He was, however, isolated among the loyalist elites and reticent radical friends in Manchester
                                                                   and died in 1811, after again representing the weavers at a parliamentary Select Committee to
                                                                   examine their distress.70 The ‘Friends of Peace’ in Liverpool also had the potential to become
                                                                   new radical leaders, but they were suspicious both of working-class action and Burdettite
                                                                   radicalism and remained aloof.71 On the national scale, there had been popular ‘hero-worship’


                                                                     66                                                  70
                                                                        Reid, op. cit., 176.                                E. Little, ‘Joseph Hanson, weavers’ friend’,
                                                                     67
                                                                        Liverpool Mercury, 22 May 1812.                Manchester Region History Review, V (1991), 22–30.
                                                                      68                                                 71
                                                                        Reid, op. cit., 146.                                J. Cookson, The Friends of Peace. Anti-War
                                                                      69
                                                                        R. Eckersley, ‘Of radical design: John Cart-   Liberalism in England, 1793–1815 (Cambridge,
                                                                   wright and the redesign of the reform campaign,     1982).
                                                                   c.1800–1811’, History, LXXXIX (2004), 560–80.
