                                                                   292                                      Social History                          vol. 30 : no. 3
                                                                      Information was thus transmitted orally as well as in newspapers; people were aware of who
                                                                   received the latter and relied on them for news. The assassination of Spencer Perceval was
                                                                   quickly disseminated in this way throughout the north and, to the magistrates’ horror,
                                                                   welcomed by the general populace. Colonel Fletcher of Bolton wrote:

                                                                         The death of Mr Perceval has ﬁlled all good Loyalists with grief – and what is to be
                                                                         particularly lamented is that the Mob should have expressed Joy on such a melancholy
                                                                         occasion. It would appear as of John Bulls character had experienced a [change] and that
                                                                         he is become [a symbol] for Treason, stratagems and spoils.55

                                                                     This appears to have been a common attitude in all the Luddite counties. Thomas Parker, a
                                                                   captain in the Norfolk militia, called up to suppress the disturbances, wrote to his father from
                                                                   Congleton:




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                         What a dreadful thing the Murder of Mr Perceval. The Assassin has taken his trial and
                                                                         found Guilty and was to be executed this day. There were I am sorry to say great
                                                                         rejoicings on this melancholy event both in Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire, the Bells
                                                                         were set ringing in several Towns in both Counties.56

                                                                      The vicar of St Mark’s, Liverpool, the church on the street where Bellingham lived,
                                                                   preached a sermon on the ‘melancholy event’. In response, he received a letter signed by
                                                                   ‘Jenkins, Lt de Luddites’, which ridiculed his sermon and added, ‘had it been in any other place
                                                                   than the church, my pistol would have silenced the blasphemy’. It went on to speak of the
                                                                   ‘brave and patriotic Bellingham’ and threatened death to the ‘depraved George the Prince’.57
                                                                   Threats like these were isolated and not indicative of any serious revolutionary danger, but
                                                                   they show how information and a shared discourse or mythology of action could be spread
                                                                   among disturbed regions.
                                                                      A key theme repeated in testimonies, reports and other contemporary records of Luddism
                                                                   was a perception on the part of those confessing to be Luddites and the magistrates’ spies that
                                                                   they were part of a much wider pan-regional network. Their language and beliefs in this
                                                                   respect were very similar to the evidence given by the United movement and the striking
                                                                   weavers and spinners of the previous decade. For example, the information given by Thomas
                                                                   Whittaker, a silk weaver from Stockport, in 1812, was typical of Luddite rhetoric and vision,
                                                                   but was also reminiscent of United and unionized claims:

                                                                         Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire were in a very forward state and it was doubted if they
                                                                         would wait for the other counties that it was calculated that Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire,
                                                                         Lancashire, Cheshire, Derbyshire, Westmorland and Cumberland would have 500,000
                                                                         men capable of bearing arms that one third of them were in good discipline.58



                                                                     55
                                                                       PRO, HO 40/1/1/115, Fletcher to Beckett,      T. Parker Snr, 18 May 1812.
                                                                                                                        57
                                                                   15 May 1812.                                           Reid, op. cit., 159; PRO, HO 42/123, Blacow
                                                                     56
                                                                       Lancashire County Record Ofﬁce, Preston,      to McMahon, 27 May 1812.
                                                                                                                        58
                                                                   Parker Mss., DDB acc 6685, box 27, T. Parker to        PRO, HO 42/121/433–4, 4 July 1812.
