                                                                   August 2005                           Mythology of Luddism                                   295
                                                                                                                                  72
                                                                   of national military leaders, particularly Admiral Nelson, but Trafalgar was becoming a
                                                                   distant memory as Lord Wellington still faced setbacks on the Iberian peninsula and war with
                                                                   America was exacerbating the economic distress. By 1812, the rhetoric of reform petitions was
                                                                   taken directly from the resolutions of the metropolitan radicals, and Burdett was called upon to
                                                                   present the Manchester petition of June 1812. Yet local radicals adapted the reform resolutions
                                                                   to the more democratic tendencies of northern temperament. Furthermore, Burdett’s circle
                                                                   lacked the intimacy of being local or instantly accessible.73 Luddites therefore created a
                                                                   ﬁctitious or mythic ﬁgure to guide them, anonymous yet visible, in order to combat the
                                                                   authority of the magistrates with an imaginary ﬁgure made corporeal in the nightly drilling on
                                                                   the moors or as the author of threatening letters.
                                                                      ‘Irrational’ beliefs in a shared discourse and knowledge of geography thus played a major
                                                                   part in popular agitation in 1811–13. General Ludd was more than an epithet. The exaggerated
                                                                   delusions of the extent of the movement meant more than they achieved in practice. There




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   was a ﬁne line between reality and truth: hence the difﬁculties both contemporaries and
                                                                   historians have had understanding what actually occurred. Yet many participants, as well as
                                                                   magistrates, could not decipher it either. The mythology was so potent that it persisted in
                                                                   popular memory and in counter-reaction against loyalists long after the Luddites had been
                                                                   transported or executed. It thereby contributed to the reactions against repression of the post-
                                                                   war mass platform and popular radicalism exempliﬁed at Peterloo. The mythology of Luddism
                                                                   further sheds new light on the current historiographical emphasis on the effect of the French
                                                                   wars on British national identity. It suggests that the impact of the wars on the general
                                                                   population was not altogether positive or enabling of loyal and patriotic nation-building, but
                                                                   rather one where psychological links and shared identities among regions were made under
                                                                   circumstances of war-weariness and opposition to government or local magistrates.
                                                                                                                                           St John’s College, Oxford




                                                                     72                                                   73
                                                                        G. Jordan and N. Rogers, ‘Admirals as heroes:       Manchester Archives, BR f.942.7389 Sc13,
                                                                   patriotism and liberty in Hanoverian England’,       Scrapbook, 15; Dinwiddy, op. cit., 62.
                                                                   Journal of British Studies, XXVIII (1989), 201–24.
