                                                                   290                                        Social History                            vol. 30 : no. 3
                                                                   prejudices of the manufacturers, their decisions over settlement and their openly hostile
                                                                   attitude to demands for peace and parliamentary reform. The mythology of Luddism was a
                                                                   means of coping with disappointment and frustration. It is signiﬁcant that, in their attempts to
                                                                   counteract working-class organization, local magistrates also subscribed to this mythology,
                                                                   raising the possibility that loyalists as well as radicals were searching for a leader in this period.
                                                                      Luddism formed an apolitical strand of popular politics which was radical not necessarily in
                                                                   ideology, but in its deﬁant opposition to the forces of order and consequently of loyalism. It
                                                                   therefore sought to subvert the authority of these forces using the same methods of control.
                                                                   The magistrate was a common enemy of all Luddites, following two decades of loyalist
                                                                   reaction against radicals and working-class combinations in the industrializing districts. This
                                                                   hatred crossed regions; it was no longer a case of personal animosity and speciﬁc retribution,
                                                                   but one of collective opposition. Binﬁeld has pointed to the conscious use of legalistic
                                                                   language in Luddite texts in imitation and subversion of the discourse of the forces of order.




Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 13:11 10 October 2011
                                                                   Hence the ‘Soliciter [sic] to General Ludd’ sent a ‘summons’ to Huddersﬁeld magistrate Joseph
                                                                   Radcliffe, ‘ﬁled against you in Ludd Court at Nottingham’. The threat required him to desist
                                                                   acting as a magistrate or else ‘General Ludd and his well organized army’ would levy the
                                                                   summons against his person and property ‘with all Destruction possible’. 45 During the attack
                                                                   on Goodair’s mill in Edgeley, Stockport, on 14 March 1812, the crowd was led by two men
                                                                   dressed as women, referred to among the crowd as ‘General Ludd’s wives’.46 This was part of a
                                                                   symbolic defence mechanism against the magistrates. It was a disguise of identity and
                                                                   furthermore was a deliberate subversion of authority and norms.
                                                                      Furthermore, this subversion was not conﬁned to rhetoric or symbol but practised with an
                                                                   acute awareness of the use of geography against the magistrates. Colonel Fletcher of Bolton
                                                                   reported meetings of Luddites held in the ﬁelds within direct sight of his house, in preparation,
                                                                   he believed, for attacking his house and that of the manufacturer Thomas Ainsworth. He
                                                                   alleged that, before the attack on Burton’s mill at Westhoughton, the perpetrators mustered in
                                                                   a ﬁeld and then ‘repaired to Dean Moor two miles distant where the General caused them to
                                                                   pan in review’.47 The Pennine villages and towns provided a psychological environment for
                                                                   protestors and strikers as well as a physical one of control and secrecy. Furthermore, they often
                                                                   took place in areas of ambiguous jurisdiction. The moors overlooking the river Tame and
                                                                   Ashton-under-Lyne in Lancashire were one place where participants were in view of the
                                                                   magistrates but could escape into the neighbouring counties of Cheshire and the West Riding
                                                                   of Yorkshire. The Revd Henry Broughton wrote anxiously to Lord Sidmouth: ‘During divine
                                                                   service some hundreds assembled on a hill near Ashton-under-Lyne, hoisted a ﬂag, went
                                                                   through the manoeuvres of a regiment and before any military could arrive, dispersed.’ 48
                                                                   Some had the temerity to organize in broad daylight but, crucially, when the local elite were in
                                                                   church. The Revd William Hay reported that a ‘very riotous mob assembled from various
                                                                   parts of the country at Ashton-under-Lyne’ on 20 April 1812. They broke into provision
                                                                   warehouses and shops ‘throughout the town’ and then ‘proceeded into Cheshire, thro’


                                                                     45                                                   47
                                                                       Binﬁeld, op. cit., 212; WYAL, Radcliffe Mss,          PRO, HO 40/1/1/87–94, Fletcher to Beck-
                                                                   WYL 280/364, letter to J. Radcliffe, 20 March        ett, 22 April 1812.
                                                                                                                           48
                                                                   1812.                                                     Reid, op. cit., 175–6; PRO, HO 40/1/1,
                                                                     46
                                                                       R. Glen, Urban Workers in the Early Industrial   Broughton to Sidmouth, 17 June 1812.
                                                                   Revolution (London, 1984).
