Acknowledgments




It is perhaps fitting that a thesis which takes collaboration as its focus has only come to fruition

through the help and support of so many other people. There are almost too many people to

name here, but, unlike the British colonists who feature in the following pages, I think it is

important to try. I am especially grateful for the feedback and stimulating debate provided by

members of the world history community at Cambridge, in seminars, workshops, and reading

groups. I would particularly like to thank Naomi Parkinson, who helped me to think through

my jumbled and often contradictory ideas on our many train journeys to and from London.

Steph Mawson’s last-minute proof-reading was incredibly valuable and she has also provided

so many interesting contributions over the years – not least in opening up my mind to the

broader story of the Chinese in southeast Asia. The reading group and, in particular, Tom

Smith, Callie Wilkinson, James Poskett, Tom Simpson, Lachlan Fleetwood, Hatiçe Yildiz, and

Alix Chartrand, helped me to develop my knowledge of parts of the world that I would never

have thought could have had such an impact on the places that I was writing about. They

have also been supportive and understanding friends. I am likewise grateful to the conveners

of the graduate world history workshop, with whom I worked for several years, whose

endlessly fascinating ideas about how we might encourage the exploration of world history

(not least through our conference!) helped me to broaden my thinking about our subject.

       There are so many scholars whose reasoned advice and resourceful critiques have

shaped this thesis. This thesis would never have got off the ground were it not for Emma

Hunter, who provided essential supervisory support in my first term and who remains an

enthusiastic voice of encouragement for which I am grateful. Jagjeet Lally’s constructive

criticism was incredibly helpful for forcing me to think through the parameters of the thesis

in its early days. Alicia Schrikker and Mark Frost were kind enough to participate in a panel

that I organised on empires in Sri Lankan history and gave fascinating papers on slavery and

cosmopolitanism in Sri Lanka that guided my own research as it progressed. I am thankful to

those who have provided generous feedback and help over numerous years, in particular

Renaud Morieux, John McAleer, and Bernhard Fulda. Others have been especially helpful in


                                                iii
