Abstract              The Anglo-Dutch Imperial Meridian in the Indian

                      Ocean World, 1795-1820
                      James Wilson




What happened when the Dutch and British empires overlapped across the Indian Ocean in

the late eighteenth century? Histories of these empires generally focus on their early modern

rivalry through patterns of war and trade that subsided after Britain’s invasion of Dutch

colonies during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1792-1815). Instead, this

thesis unearths the relationship between Britain’s capture of three Dutch Indian Ocean

colonies – Ceylon, Java, and the Cape Colony – and the rise of the modern state-building

enterprises of the British empire. It traces a collection of Anglo-Dutch epistemic exchanges

initiated in littoral spaces amid occupation, comprised of political ideas, such as liberalism

and autocracy; policies of settlement and work; and cultural information tied to gender and

status. These exchanges generated epistemic interdependencies between British and Dutch

colonists, establishing new and intrusive ruling practices that shaped British governance

while recycling models of colonialism and revolutionary change from the Dutch empire.

       I chart this history through contingent life histories describing people who travelled

between the Cape, Java, and Ceylon. These include a Dutch teacher, whose involvement in

republicanism and anti-slavery reveals that Dutch liberalism was used by Britain’s despots to

extend their powers. I follow Chinese migrants who show how engagements between Chinese

and British and Dutch colonists determined British policies of landholding and labour. I trace

Dutch and British ruling elites who reveal that officials created migration regulations tied to

Dutch notions of status. This is the period of C.A. Bayly’s ‘imperial meridian’, which describes

the British empire’s transformation into garrison states in the Indian Ocean in answer to a

global age of revolutions. Conversely, this thesis maps the rise of Britain’s empire over an

Anglo-Dutch faultline linking the early modern and modern eras, revolutionary and counter-

revolutionary practices, and the connections and conflicts of an Indian Ocean world.
