providing me with criticism on my (perhaps sometimes inaccessible) writing, as well as

suggestions for wider reading and research, specifically John Rogers, Ruth Watson, Tim

Harper, Nira Wickramasinghe, Durba Ghosh, Elizabeth Elbourne, and Peter Mandler.

       The research for this thesis was undertaken in London, Cape Town, and Colombo,

where I benefited from the support of archival staff and academics. Erika and Jacobus at the

Western Cape Archives were knowledgeable guides and were essential in pointing me

towards the private papers that proved to be such a treasure trove of sources on Capetonian

life in the nineteenth century. Nigel Worden was so positive about my early research in Cape

Town and gave me many useful tips in where to look for records. Chris Holdridge was a

fantastic host, without whom I would not have had a social life in Cape Town. I am especially

grateful to James Marshall, who made the long trek to Cape Town for my final week in the

city and with whom I had a fabulous time exploring the western Cape. The staff at the Sri

Lanka National Archives also deserve particular thanks for their help. Nadeera Rupesinghe

showed me around Colombo and helped me to see the importance of understanding Sri

Lanka’s Dutch period. Crispin Bates was a thoughtful and ever-enthusiastic companion in the

archives. Sandagomi Coperahewa gave me a warm welcome at the University of Colombo

and a place in which to study and think while I was there. Closer to home, Michael Killough,

Harry Miller, Tom Lewin, and Matt Griffiths were fantastic hosts for my trips back and forth

between London and Cambridge and remain ever-inquisitive and wonderful friends.

       I am also grateful for the assistance and financial support offered by the University of

Cambridge. I have been lucky enough to be the recipient of funds from so many sources in

the university over the years, in particular the Cambridge Home and EU Scholarship Scheme,

which granted me my original (and long sought-after) funding. In my final year, the support

of the Prince Consort Fund was invaluable. The Smuts Memorial Fund and the History

Faculty generously provided support for my many trips abroad. Without the generosity of

Sidney Sussex College and, in particular, the Parry Dutton Fund, I would not have been able

to go to conferences as far apart as Edinburgh and Denver, Colorado. I am especially thankful

to the Royal Historical Society for providing me with funding to travel in my final year.

       There are, of course, some people without whom this thesis would never have begun

and would certainly never have been completed. My supervisor, Sujit Sivasundaram, has

been a bounteous and ever-patient source of support, aid, and encouragement through the



                                              iv
