Introduction


Ceylon and in identifying the cross-colonial entanglement of ideas, policies, and information

as the key driver of the emergence of modern state-building in these places. Temporally, the

Anglo-Dutch meridian is more limited than Bayly’s model, covering the years between 1795

– when the British first invaded the Dutch colonies – and 1820 – the point by which British

control of the Dutch colonies (other than Java) was consolidated. Nevertheless, the Anglo-

Dutch meridian also feeds into the wider picture that Bayly painted in Imperial meridian. Some

of the idiosyncratic elements of state-building pioneered in the Anglo-Dutch colonies bled

into the sites of empire that formed the focus of Bayly’s work, like India and Singapore.

       In practice, this thesis explores British state-building across five themes that relate to

Bayly’s meridian while also revealing critical points of Anglo-Dutch entanglement. In this

way, this thesis builds on Bayly’s work by revealing aspects – and limitations – of colonial

reform that his work did not consider, for example in the relationship between reform and

Dutch ideas or in British reformers’ reliance on a wide array of Dutch agents and practices.

For instance, the opening chapters of this thesis are concerned with the ideological themes of

liberalism and anti-slavery. Ideology was the primary driving factor for reform throughout

Imperial meridian, in which Bayly explored how liberal and anti-slavery ideas that originated

in the revolutionary era were adopted by Britain’s autocrats to legitimise imperial expansion

and the establishment of colonial states. Yet throughout this thesis we will see how Britain’s

autocrats adopted forms of liberal thinking drawn from Dutch thinkers connected with the

Batavian Republic and the colonies of the Dutch empire in the Indian Ocean. We will examine

how this engagement with Dutch liberalism left Britain’s autocrats exposed to critiques that

precipitated their downfall later in the century. Later, we will explore how Britain’s autocrats

argued against slavery due to their engagement with Dutch anti-slavery advocates, whose

understanding of slavery was characterised by anxieties about the Netherlands’ decline.

       This thesis will likewise investigate the establishment of an innovative and racialised

colonial bureaucracy across three further themes: hierarchy, labour, and territorialisation.

State-building on these three themes was essential for the emergence of what Bayly saw as a

new type of colonial state, which was interested in ordering its subjects and spaces more

closely and thereby extracting resources from them. Accordingly, where Bayly examined the

consolidation of local hierarchies in the Second Empire through the confirmation of private

property-ownership, this thesis will reveal how colonial governors appropriated Dutch legal



                                               5
