Introduction


The Dutch, the British, and the imperial meridian



The story of the Scaleby Castle and its cast of characters arriving in occupied Batavia occurred

against a backdrop of war, revolution, and the British empire’s rise across the Indian Ocean.

Ani, Frederik, Maria, and Thomas were travelling at the end of the French Revolutionary and

Napoleonic Wars (1792-1815), during which Britain had occupied not only Java but a raft of

Dutch East India Company (VOC) colonies around the ocean rim. Most of these invasions

followed the surrender of the Dutch Republic to revolutionary France in January 1795, after

which the French turned the Netherlands into a client state called the Batavian Republic and

forced the stadtholder (monarch) into exile in Britain.8 The stadtholder apparently encouraged

the British to take the VOC’s colonies to stop them from falling to the French, and the British

happily obeyed. They captured the Cape Colony in southern Africa in September 1795, and

then Cochin and Malacca in Asia. They occupied Ceylon, the Dutch colony in the littoral

regions of present-day Sri Lanka, the following year and formally annexed it in the Treaty of

Amiens in 1802. Java capitulated during another round of invasions fifteen years later.

         These invasions came at a critical interval in British imperial history. In his seminal

Imperial meridian: the British empire and the world, C.A. Bayly described the years between 1780

and 1830 as a transitional period – an imperial meridian – in which a second British empire

rose through the conservative reaction of the British ruling elite to the revolutions in France

and America.9 For Bayly, this was a period in which Britain turned away from America and

came to rule colonies around the Indian Ocean, such as those taken from the Dutch. It was

also a period in which colonial expansion was underpinned by the posting of proconsular

despots to govern the new colonies. These autocrats ruled under the oversight of the Colonial

Office in London and drew their authority from military power and local alliances. In the past,

Britain’s colonial presence in the Indian Ocean had been shaped by the East India Company

and its trading entrepôts in India. Yet in the place of company outposts there now emerged

colonial states, and naturally the East India Company presidencies were not unaffected by




8 For a brief narrative of these invasions and their impact on the inhabitants of the Dutch empire, see Ulbe Bosma
and Remco Raben, Being ‘Dutch’ in the Indies: a history of creolisation and empire, 1500-1920 (trans. Wendie Shaffer,
Singapore, 2008), pp. 72-94.
9 C.A. Bayly, Imperial meridian: the British empire and the world, 1780-1830 (London, 1989), especially pp. 100-247.




                                                         2
