Introduction


and disrupts narratives of its origins and modernity by locating its development within a

wider cross-colonial history of the Indian Ocean world. Generally, historians have visualised

the Second Empire from the perspective of the British – or indeed the Colonial Office – as a

matrix of colonial states connected to one another and the metropole by the movements of

British governors and colonists.17 Yet by taking the perspective that particular entanglements

formed between people in and between the occupied Dutch colonies, this thesis decentres the

British view and returns to the fore a set of spaces associated with the Dutch empire around

the Indian Ocean. The power of a cross-colonial perspective here is not only that it reveals the

Second British Empire’s diachronicity – as a construct that emerged in conversation with its

predecessors – but also that it emphasises the practices and people that continued to move

across colonial boundaries according to historic and evolving patterns of movement that did

not disappear with the rise of the British empire. Their stories are obscured by British colonial

archives that are intended to tell stories of the ascendancy of Britain and its ruling elite.

         In this thesis, entanglements form between people in the Cape Colony, Ceylon, and

Java – which are described collectively here as the Anglo-Dutch colonies – because the British

and Dutch converge on them and exchange ideas and information. These exchanges give rise

to epistemic interdependencies, while, in the setting of occupation, some ideas and pieces of

knowledge are also manipulated and redeployed by ruling elites to establish new practices of

state-building. In working with epistemic sources, this thesis returns to Bayly, who developed

a decentralised definition of knowledge in Empire and information.18 Writing about India, Bayly

cast knowledge as something gathered by the state from networks of go-betweens and scribes

and the public sphere.19 In his view, knowledge was dispersed across ‘overlapping groups of

knowledge-rich communities’, each with their own threads of thought and information that

intersected when they contacted one another.20 In this thesis, strands of knowledge as well as

information and ideas likewise intersect as the British and Dutch interact with one another.




17 David Lambert and Alan Lester, eds., Colonial lives across the British empire: imperial careering in the long nineteenth
century (Cambridge, 2006); Alan Lester, Imperial networks: creating identities in nineteenth-century South Africa and
Britain (London, 2001); Zoë Laidlaw, Colonial connections, 1815-45: patronage, the information revolution and colonial
government (Manchester, 2005).
18 C.A. Bayly, Empire and information: intelligence gathering and social communication in India, 1780-1870 (Cambridge,

1996), pp. 1-9.
19 Ibid., p. 3-4, 180-246.

20 Ibid., p. 5.




                                                            7
