Introduction


categories to establish hierarchies among migrant peoples. Bayly likewise established labour

reform as one of the imperial meridian’s most hypocritical yet important elements, namely in

the way in that alternative forms of forced labour came to replace slavery in the aftermath of

slave trade abolition as a way of sustaining growing demand for colonial capital. In this thesis,

the shift towards the use of coerced labour will be contextualised in a longer story that reveals

how officials absorbed Dutch racial stereotypes about people and the controls needed to drive

their work. Where Bayly studied territorialisation as a key feature of the rise of the expansive

colonial state in company-ruled India, this thesis will show how reformers were indebted to

older Dutch visions of spaces, including forts, as sites for protecting white settlement.

       These narratives will emerge through this thesis. First, however, we need to consider

what the Anglo-Dutch meridian means for the study of the Second Empire and how we might

trace the exchanges and interdependencies of ideas, policies, and information that lay at its

heart and now lie at the heart of this thesis. In order to do this, we also need to understand

the background to the Anglo-Dutch meridian in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

       This introduction begins with a discussion of the aims of this thesis. It then charts the

rise of the Anglo-Dutch empires and their histories of rivalry and collaboration through the

early modern era. It outlines the historiography of the imperial meridian, showing how this

era is perceived as a period of transition but also how its study has created divergent schools

of thought. On the one hand, historians highlight the overlap between British and Dutch

modes of governance, and show that this period was defined by traditions and practices

shared across empires. On the other hand, this period has been positioned as a phase that saw

the rise of a distinctly British empire typified by anglicisation. Subsequently, this introduction

asks how we might build on recent advances in the historiography of empire to show that this

was a period of sustained entanglement between the British and the Dutch empires. In so

doing, it reflects on what this thesis might reveal about interactions between unequal empires

through the consolidation of colonialism across the nineteenth-century Indian Ocean world.



Aims and approaches



The purpose of this thesis is to open up a way of looking at the Second British Empire which

recovers the centrality of formerly marginalised voices in the making of its autocratic states



                                                6
