Introduction


         This thesis traces these exchanges through the life histories of the people who made

them. Life histories force us to see worlds in the terms of the people who lived in them. They

show that people complicated seemingly ‘well-ordered’ colonial spaces by drawing together

‘jurisdictions, milieus, identities, and even temporalities’.27 They likewise reveal how lines of

inclusion and exclusion were formed across time and space and the ways in which people

navigated social ostracism and statuses that were socially or racially contingent.28 They bear

a specific relevance to the Second Empire, however, because, as Kirsten McKenzie points out,

it was an emergent formation dependent on forms of patronage that elevated the importance

of individuals.29 The structure of this thesis is therefore formed from the lives of the Scaleby

Castle’s characters: Ani, Frederik, Maria, and Thomas. Each of their lives reveals a series of

entanglements tied to different people. Each life history is pieced together from fragmentary

sources including letters, autograph books, logs, and official records that illuminate their

travels. Each chapter begins with a brief narrative of an episode from one of their histories,

which is related to a broader theme of exchange. These life histories are not representative

and often incomplete, and consequently they are joined throughout to other contemporary

biographies. Yet together they reveal the Anglo-Dutch imperial meridian and locate the state-

building practices that emerged between the British and Dutch empires in the Indian Ocean.



The British and the Dutch in the early modern Indian Ocean world



Britain’s occupations of the Dutch colonies and the entanglements that emerged out of them

were actually only a chapter in a longer history of Anglo-Dutch rivalry and collaboration that

dated back into the early modern era. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the VOC

and the British East India Company clashed through a series of Anglo-Dutch wars.30 Yet they



27 Achim von Oppen and Silke Strickrodt, ‘Introduction: biographies between spheres of empire’, Journal of Imperial
and Commonwealth History 44 (2016), pp. 717-729, at p. 718.
28 Clare Anderson, Subaltern lives: biographies of colonialism in the Indian Ocean world, 1790-1920 (Cambridge, 2012),

p. 8; see also Emma Rothschild, The inner life of empires: an eighteenth-century history (Princeton, 2011); Jasanoff,
Liberty’s exiles; David Lambert and Alan Lester, ‘Introduction’, in Lambert and Lester, eds., Colonial lives, pp. 1-31.
29 Kirsten McKenzie, Imperial underworld: an escaped convict and the transformation of the British colonial order

(Cambridge, 2016), pp. 1-24, 276-84.
30 For an outline of the engagements between the British and the Dutch during this period, see Femme S. Gaastra,

‘War, competition, and collaboration: relations between the English and Dutch East India Company in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries’, in H.V. Bowen, Margarette Lincoln, and Nigel Rigby, eds., The worlds of the
East India Company (Woodbridge, 2002), pp. 49-68.


                                                          10
