Introduction


forced migration between its principal colonies.22 These circuits drove parallel migrations of

Europeans and Chinese, for whom trade and labour brought new opportunities. Company

officials and traders moved between the Netherlands and the Cape, and from there between

Java and Ceylon, with travel facilitated by relationships of marriage and patronage (fig. 2).23

Chinese traders, sailors, and artisans travelled to Batavia in such numbers that the city was

‘basically a Chinese colonial town’ in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.24 From there,

Chinese went to other colonies as sailors and exiles.25 Knowledge and ideas lurched along

these routes: Cape colonists adopted the language of Dutch revolutionaries, while the arrival

of Chinese in Java gave rise to cultivational practices that the VOC replicated in Ceylon.26

         Forced migration ceased when the British took the Dutch colonies. Yet as this thesis

will show, European and Chinese travel between these locations persisted. Amid the rise of

the Second Empire, such travel was even supported by British ships that sailed the routes of

the VOC’s vessels – which included among them the Scaleby Castle. It was in this context that

people from Britain’s empire, such as officials and soldiers, also moved into and between the

Dutch colonies with their own ideas about how to govern. In this setting, a range of concepts

and practices from across the Dutch and British empires were exchanged through a mixture

of oral and textual mediums. Such mediums included conversations among reformers in

political societies, printed texts and newspapers, and bureaucratic procedures. From there,

information and ideas were appropriated and redeployed by the colonial ruling elite.




22 On forced migration in the Dutch empire, see Kerry Ward, Networks of empire: forced migration in the Dutch East
India Company (Cambridge, 2009); on slavery, see Markus Vink, ‘‘The world’s oldest trade’: Dutch slavery and slave
trade in the Indian Ocean in the seventeenth century’, Journal of World History 14 (2003), pp. 131-77; for the history
of the VOC empire more broadly, see Femme S. Gaastra, The Dutch East India Company: expansion and decline (trans.
Peter Daniels, Zutphen, 2003).
23 For a discussion of patterns of European migration in the eastern Dutch empire, see Bosma and Raben, Being

‘Dutch’, pp. 26-65; for the replication of these patterns among European colonists at the Cape, see Robert Ross and
Alicia Schrikker, ‘The VOC official elite’, in Nigel Worden, ed., Cape Town between east and west: social identities in a
Dutch colonial town (Hilversum, 2012), pp. 26-44.
24 Leonard Blussé, ‘Batavia, 1619-1740: the rise and fall of a Chinese colonial town’, Journal of Southeast Asian Studies

12 (1981), pp. 159-78, at p. 160. For a more recent picture of Chinese migration to Batavia, see idem. and Nie Dening,
eds., The Chinese annals of Batavia, the Kai ba lidai shiji and other stories (1610-1795) (Leiden, 2018), pp. 3-24.
25 On Chinese migration to the Cape, see James C. Armstrong, ‘The Chinese exiles’, in Worden, ed., Cape Town

between east and west, pp. 101-27.
26 For the use of Dutch revolutionary language by the so-called Patriots at the Cape, see Teun Baartman, ‘The

politics of burgher honour in the Cape’, in Penny Russell and Nigel Worden, eds., Honourable intentions? Violence
and virtue in Australian and Cape colonies, c. 1750-1850 (London, 2016), pp. 94-107; for the VOC’s attempts to replicate
Chinese agricultural practices in Ceylon, see Donovan Moldrich, Bitter berry bondage: the nineteenth century coffee
workers of Sri Lanka (Colombo, 1989), p. 22.


                                                           9
