Introduction


Raffles’s reforms set the stage for the growth of the Dutch Crown state that introduced Java’s

cultuurstelsel (cultivation system) in the 1830s. This declared all land the property of the state

and required a portion to be set aside for the production of crops for the government.130

         For some historians, the Dutch were therefore key to the making of a British empire

that was both socially and culturally assimilationist. Scholars have stressed that the Second

Empire’s history was generally one of antagonism. Peter Marshall argues that the empire was

a ‘formidable military machine’, through which Britons articulated support for chauvinistic

projects (realised more often in rhetoric than in practice) such as free trade and anti-slavery.131

This drove the British in Java to spread hostile discourses drawn from the Anglo-Dutch wars,

denouncing the Dutch as ‘selfish, unrelenting, and oppressive’, and elevating themselves as

‘liberal … and enlightened’.132 Jean Gelman Taylor has suggested that British rule in Java was

combined with an ‘assault on Indies culture’, through which British ruling elites attempted to

reform the behaviour of Dutch colonists.133 For Taylor, these efforts were clearest in the social

organisations that were taken over or established by Raffles and his entourage in Batavia: the

Society of Arts and Sciences, the Auxiliary Bible Society, and, most of all, the Java Benevolent

Institution. Taylor argues that the latter, seemingly an anti-slavery organisation founded by

Raffles, played host to an almost unrelenting form of British chauvinism that denigrated and

attempted to reform Dutch behaviour. This belligerency appeared in the other colonies, too.

Histories of the Cape have focused on the emergence of settler colonialism. This was a form

of colonialism predicated on the migration of British people, and the application of a form of

colonial sovereignty wrought through the degradation of non-whites and non-Britons via the

manipulation of violence and systems of criminal justice and land administration.134 As such,

Anglo-Dutch social histories of this period are often narratives of disconnection. Ulbe Bosma

and Remco Raben suggest that the British and the Dutch maintained ‘separate’ lives in Java

and Ceylon.135 After their invasion of Ceylon, the British categorised everyone who served the


130 Robert van Niel, Java under the cultivation system: collected writings (Leiden, 1992); see also Bosma, ‘The cultivation
system’, pp. 275-91.
131 P.J. Marshall, ‘British assessments of the Dutch in Asia in the age of Raffles’, Itinerario 12 (1988), pp. 1-16, at p.

13.
132 Ibid., p. 8.

133 Taylor, Social world of Batavia, pp. 101-5.

134 See for instance Lisa Ford, Settler Sovereignty: Jurisdiction and Indigenous People in America and Australia, 1788-1836

(Harvard, 2010); Elizabeth Elbourne, Blood ground: colonialism, missions, and the contest for Christianity in the Cape
Colony and Britain, 1799-1853 (McGill, 2002).
135 Bosma and Raben, Being ‘Dutch’, p. 81.




                                                           25
