Introduction


with the paintings of Jan Brandes, and described his image of the plantain squirrel in his

Zoological researches in Java.158 Brandes’s painting, Horsfield reported, had been published in a

set of Swedish transactions by the naturalist Sven Ljung, a student of Linnaeus, whose own

researchers had, of course, been connected to the imperial activities of the VOC in the

eighteenth century.159 Yet Anglo-Dutch collaboration in science ultimately reflected what was

an unequal relationship between the British and the Dutch. Raffles claimed the achievements

of his subordinates as his own, and failed to acknowledge even his closest colleague, the Dutch

archaeologist Nicolaus Engelhard, when he used his drawings for The history of Java.160

         These imbalances were replicated in attempts by officials to manipulate Anglo-Dutch

ideas to introduce new forms of state rule. Raffles’s intrusive land tenure system was not only

a continuation of Daendels’s reforms, but also picked up on a longer history of ideas about

land ownership that bridged the Anglo-Dutch empires. As John Bastin has shown, Raffles was

influenced by the ideas of the Patriot officer Dirk van Hogendorp, whose writings were shown

to him by a freemason and member of the executive council of Java, Herman Muntighe.161 Van

Hogendorp proposed in a 1799 report that the Dutch introduce a system of land taxation to

their colonies to increase revenues and secure the freedom of cultivators.162 Van Hogendorp’s

ideas had themselves emerged out of a visit to Bengal during his time as second resident of

Patna. There, he had met with the EIC’s governor-general, Lord Cornwallis, and discussed

the latter’s ideas for reform, which were concerned with the introduction of the zamindari

system that secured the land of local magnates.163 Van Hogendorp praised Cornwallis’s

reforms and proposed his own. ‘The English have … by the granting of property of land to its

inhabitants … made their territorial possessions of very much greater importance and profit’,

he wrote.164 Conversely, the Dutch, ‘by adhering to the old system and making … commercial

interests the main object, have neglected entirely our territorial possessions’.165 Van

Hogendorp’s ideas should be seen in the context of the emergence of the Patriots and the

decline of the VOC, which popularised notions of freedom and rendered the Dutch company


158 Thomas Horsfield, Zoological Researches in Java, and the Neighbouring Islands (London, 1824), p. 267.
159 Ibid., p. 267.
160 Jordaan, ‘Nicolaus Engelhard’, p. 50.

161 Bastin, Raffles’s ideas on the land rent system, p. 152.

162 Ibid., pp. 12-13.

163 Ibid., p. 12.

164 Ibid., p. 12.

165 Ibid., pp. 12-13.




                                                         30
