Introduction


unevenness of encounter. Conversely, the Anglo-Dutch meridian – with its emphasis on using

life histories to follow the evolution of British state-building through occupation – provides a

case study for what happens when entanglements form in contexts of unequal power.

         Writing on the theme of entanglement, historians of the British and Spanish empires

in the Atlantic, such as Jorge Cañizares-Esguerra, have argued that that the Anglo-Iberian

empires should be viewed not as separate but entwined formations.148 For these historians,

entanglements are principally material interdependencies, made by people who exchanged

commodities across empires and came to rely on one another for what were, in effect, inter-

imperial supply chains. Cañizares-Esguerra suggests that ‘the production, distribution, and

commercialisation of any staple triggered a series of commercial … entanglements that

rendered the entire Atlantic basin into a large borderland of porous boundaries’.149 Yet

entanglements could also be made up of knowledge, exchanged among brokers and soldiers

as they crossed imperial boundaries. As Kristie Flannery writes, the British and Spanish

empires became closely entangled in the Philippines during the Seven Years’ War (1756-63),

after the British occupation of Manila. Soldiers defected across military lines, exchanging

knowledge between the two empires. The British replicated Spanish policies related to

Manila’s Chinese, while the Spanish employed British engineers to work on their fort.150

         In the scholarship on the British and Spanish empires, the focus on entanglement has

rightly allowed voices otherwise side-lined by imperial history to be brought back into the

fold, not as marginalised peoples but as key figures in, say, the oceanic trade routes across

which goods were exchanged, or as sources of inter-imperial information. Accordingly, this

has enabled historians to deconstruct seemingly British-dominated trades, and ideas and

inventions that appeared to be largely British, and reposition them as creations of the Iberian

Atlantic or Indian Ocean worlds (Cañizares-Esguerra describes some British ideas as ‘nothing

more than disguised translation or piracy’).151 This has focused attention on the way in which




148 Jorge Cañizares-Esguerra, ‘Introduction’, in Jorge Cañizares-Esguerra, ed., Entangled empires: the Anglo-Iberian
Atlantic, 1500-1830 (Philadelphia, 2018), pp. 1-15, at p. 4.
149 Ibid., p. 3.

150 Kristie Patricia Flannery, ‘The Seven Years’ War and the globalisation of Anglo-Iberian imperial entanglement:

the view from Manila’, in Cañizares-Esguerra, ed., Entangled empires, pp. 236-54.
151 Cañizares-Esguerra, ‘Introduction’, pp. 3-5.




                                                        28
