Introduction


Laidlaw demonstrates that the growth of the Second Empire was linked to the extension of

networks of imperial agents and acquaintances that connected the metropole to the Crown

colonies and sent ‘influence, patronage, and information’ between sites of British empire.145

The spread of these networks was entwined with the expansion of the Colonial Office itself,

which received colonial information and distributed appointments in London and which

increased in size and jurisdiction across this period. Through the early nineteenth century,

this system seemed to underpin the development of autocratic states in the Crown colonies,

with governors functioning as mediators between centre and periphery.146 Yet it also offered

opportunities for processes of subversion and resistance that uncovered abuses of power by

Britain’s colonial governors. Kirsten McKenzie shows how imperial networks were liable to

misuse by transoceanic agitators, whose voices they frequently amplified. She analyses the

case of the ex-convict William Edwards, who drew the language of abolition into a personal

legal conflict with the Cape Colony’s governor, Charles Somerset (r. 1814-26), and prompted

a wide-ranging debate about the limits of sovereignty and liberty in British colonies after

reports on the conflict were sent across the empire. McKenzie argues that the Second Empire

was thus home to ‘endless interpersonal controversies that marked imperial governance.’147



Entanglements and power in the Indian Ocean world



Rather than trying to explain the emergence and significance of the Second Empire in terms

of endogenous connections and therefore the assimilation of the Dutch, this thesis argues that

we should see the period between the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries as an era

of sustained entanglement between British and Dutch subjects in the Anglo-Dutch colonies,

over which British states were assembled as a consequence of equations of power. In so doing,

this thesis makes an intervention into the literature on imperial entanglements. Recent work

on entanglement is valuable for the way in which it has encouraged historians to consider the

exogenous worlds of which empires were a part, drawing attention to the go-betweens who

crossed imperial boundaries and worked across regimes around the oceans. Yet it is often

easily critiqued for its concern with connectivity, which flattens power relationships and the


145 Ibid., pp. 14-16.
146 Ibid., p. 61.
147 McKenzie, Imperial underworld, pp. 23-4, 103-58.




                                                       27
