Introduction


unfashionable.166 Perhaps it was this which prompted Muntighe, habitually an opponent of

Patriots like van Hogendorp, to suggest them to Raffles. Either way, entanglements formed

across the occupied Dutch colonies ultimately underpinned intrusive practices of governance.



Uncovering entanglement



Anglo-Dutch entanglements like the above were widespread during the imperial meridian,

in which they shaped British efforts to establish autocratic states. Yet they have been obscured

by archives that stress the achievements of the British and obfuscate the roles of people who

did not fit into (subordinate) colonial categories.167 The challenge for historians has therefore

been to draw attention to the silences and contradictions in official records, through which

stories of entanglement might be recovered.168 For the Second Empire, these stories emerge

primarily through documents that the government struggled to define. As Zoë Laidlaw

argues, Britain’s empire for much of this era was an incomplete formation.169 Accordingly,

officials had yet to work out how to classify numerous documents and subjects according to

categories or structures. In the archives in Sri Lanka and Cape Town, and even those of the

Colonial Office, one therefore finds extensive folders of miscellaneous documents about

which officials were uncertain. It is in these folders that we can uncover fragmentary sources

about entanglement; for instance, letters and petitions from Dutch subjects and even records

of the Scaleby Castle’s travellers. There are letters from Frederik Turr in the Colonial Office’s

miscellaneous files and a petition from Maria Fichat in the in-letters received at the East India

Company agency in Cape Town. These documents provide momentary details of lives and

hints of the exchanges of information in which these people participated.170 When

contextualised with other sources – including printed texts like almanacs and newspapers –

they reveal a broader picture of cross-colonial entanglement around the Indian Ocean. This




166 On the decline of the VOC and its ideas, see Nierstrasz, In the shadow of the company, pp. 189-218.
167 For a reading like this of Anglo-Iberian archives, see Entangled Empires, p. 5.
168 Ann Laura Stoler, Along the archival grain: epistemic anxieties and colonial common sense (Oxford, 2009), p. 1.

169 Laidlaw, Colonial connections, pp. 1-12.

170 Turr to Peel, 11 July 1812, The National Archives UK (TNA), CO 48/16, p. 28; see also Bird to Pringle, enclosing

‘Memorial of Mrs Fichat’, 5 July 1814, BL, IOR/G/9/13, p. 90.


                                                        31
