Introduction


empires in the Atlantic Ocean, in particular, belonged to ‘the same hemispheric system or

community’, defined by ‘circulations of peoples and staples (to say nothing of ideas)’.152

         Yet one naturally wonders about the relations of power that played out among these

‘circulations of peoples’. What happened when one entangled empire was more powerful

than the other, and its traders and go-betweens were infused with both a sense of imperial

superiority and the ability to make this felt? Could entanglements occur within or beyond

single empires? These questions seem key in light of criticisms of global history levied by

scholars. Global historians’ view of the world in terms of connections has been criticised as

imperialist, as it elevates a language adopted by colonists to describe forms of globalisation

pioneered by empires.153 The obsession with the network is said to have mystified the

relationships that lead ‘to differentiation and polarization’ by emphasising ‘multiple and

unprioritised flows’ of people.154 How can entangled narratives work with these issues?

         Entanglements formed between the Dutch and British empires during the imperial

meridian give us an idea of how such connections might work in settings of unequal power,

such as occupations. For instance, information exchanged among those who worked across

Anglo-Dutch regimes was used to legitimise British rule and create state-building practices.

For instance, Roy Jordaan reveals how Thomas Raffles depended on ‘a Masonic experiment

in supranational governance’ to establish his rule over Java, drawing the support of Batavian

freemasons, who were largely former members of the VOC’s governing elite, to staff the

offices of his state.155 The Batavian official elite were also keen to reintroduce the corrupt

practices of the VOC period that had made them wealthy, and which had been undermined

by Daendels. This drove Anglo-Dutch interdependencies in the gathering of knowledge, for

example through investigations into Javanese natural and social history.156 These drew on a

history of Dutch interest in science around the Indian Ocean. The Society of Arts and Sciences

funded and facilitated the work of Raffles’s colleagues, such as the American naturalist

Thomas Horsfield, who served the Dutch and British regimes.157 Horsfield was acquainted



152 Flannery, ‘The Seven Years’ War’, p. 236.
153 Sujit Sivasundaram, ‘Towards a critical history of connection’, pp. 346-84.
154 Heyman and Campbell, ‘The anthropology of global flows’, pp. 131-48, at 134.

155 Roy Jordaan, ‘Nicolaus Engelhard and Thomas Stamford Raffles: brethren in Javanese antiquities’, Indonesia 101

(2016), pp. 39-66.
156 Ibid., pp. 59-66.

157 Ibid., p. 53-4.




                                                       29
