Introduction


of Chinese migration in these places can be used as lenses for understanding the development

of Anglo-Dutch policies on land and labour between Sri Lanka and Java. It shows how this

was a time of flux in which Britons adopted a mixture of coercive and liberal policies, giving

the empire’s autocracies a rather schismatic appearance. Yet in this context Britons drew on

perceptions of Sino-Dutch interaction to cast Chinese migrants as would-be liberals, who

might embrace freeholding and freer modes of work. On this basis, officials in Sri Lanka tried

to establish communities of Chinese yeoman farmers. However, these experiments failed, and

when the British took Java they adopted negative Dutch attitudes towards the Chinese and

promoted land seizures and forced labour. These ideas underpinned a shift towards the use

of coercive practices across Britain’s empire – as Raffles even took them to Singapore.

       Chapter Five, ‘Company and state’, looks to Thomas Harington to make a materialist

argument for the complexity of the transition between company and state during the imperial

meridian. In particular, it shows how the principal sites of territorialisation and settlement

associated with the VOC – colonial forts – were maintained by the British in Ceylon and at the

Cape even as they were neglected elsewhere, as a result of shared strategic concerns and fears

about revolution. It argues that their maintenance meant that forms of bureaucratisation that

emerged with the British state were therefore pioneered in the former Dutch forts – and that

the forms of territorialisation practised by the VOC were consequently reflected in the early

bureaucratic regulations of the British colonial state. These regulations were subsequently

exported out of the colonial fort and into the town, extending the forms of control adopted by

the VOC to the controls used by the British to govern increasingly large swathes of colonial

land. Thomas Harington negotiated this transition as he established himself as a merchant in

Cape Town and found himself subject to and engaging with the state’s regulations.

       The lives of those who travelled on the Scaleby Castle accordingly reveal a history of

Anglo-Dutch entanglement that draws the Indian Ocean and Dutch and Chinese voices into

a disruptive and decentralised history of the imperial meridian. Britain’s autocratic states can

be revealed as complex and contradictory cross-colonial constructs. It is worth noting, at this

point, that the only picture we have of the Scaleby Castle contains no hint of the Anglo-Dutch

history that was contained within the ship, and instead seeks to historicise it in a singular

British imperial context. This image (fig. 8) was an imagined depiction of the Castle painted

by the artist Thomas Whitcombe in 1820. It shows the Scaleby Castle firing a cannon shot, in



                                              39
