Introduction


uncover some of those who sailed along these routes, the exchanges they made, and their

consequences for state-building in the Second British Empire. Chapter One, ‘Liberal reform

and despotism’, takes up Frederik Turr’s story, following his life before he boarded the Scaleby

Castle to show how Dutch liberal ideas were used by British autocrats at the Cape and in

Ceylon. Historicising Turr’s life with two others – Egbert Bletterman, a civil servant, and

Dorothea Ross, a Cape diarist – it argues that Frederik was part of a European middle class

that thrived in the Anglo-Dutch colonies and became a source of reformist agitation. The

middle class replicated patterns of migration from the VOC era while adopting liberal ideas

from the Batavian Republic and framing them in the language of British loyalism. Frederik

was particularly enthused by the Batavians’ ideas about education and introduced them in

his position as a schoolteacher. However, such ideas were appropriated by British officials,

who saw in them a chance to consolidate proconsular despotisms. Consequently, this chapter

shows how the Second British Empire’s autocracies were indebted to Dutch liberalism.

       Chapter Two, ‘Anti-slavery’, connects Frederik Turr’s life history after his journey on

the Scaleby Castle to the growth of anti-slavery in the British empire. It argues that exchanges

between Anglo-Dutch colonists, in particular among the middle classes and governing elites,

allowed arguments against slavery to come to the fore in Britain’s colonial states. Dutch anti-

slavery in this period is often dismissed as non-existent, while anti-slavery is seen as a British

invention. Yet this chapter suggests that Dutch figures like Frederik – as well as the Cape’s

fiscal, Willem van Ryneveld, and Johannes Stork, a burgher in Colombo – played key roles in

bringing anti-slavery to the forefront of colonial politics. They adopted Batavian arguments

against slavery and combined these with anti-slavery ideas provided by Britons. As with

liberalism, officials used anti-slavery policies to entrench autocratic control. Nevertheless,

anti-slavery, seemingly an innovation of British empire, can be recast as Anglo-Dutch.

       Chapter Three, ‘Colonial hierarchies’, examines how legal categories entrenched by

Dutch colonial regimes were adopted and extended by British ruling elites in the creation of

migration controls. Countering the dominance of migration as a theme in this thesis, this




                                               37
