Liberal reform


leadership founded an agency for national education, run by the reformers Johannes Hendrik

van der Palm and Adriaan van den Ende, and adopted Tot Nut’s plans for reform, buoyed by

the number of regulators that the society could supply.51 Van der Palm introduced new school

districts, inspectorates for public schools, and provided for the central training and

examination of teachers. In 1806, van den Ende expanded the inspectorates so that they

covered private and church schools and required that teachers secure certificates in order to

practise. These reforms focused on primary schools and were intended to mould children into

a Christian citizenry. The Batavians’ schools accordingly taught a range of subjects like

Geography and History, ‘shot through with … moral earnestness’.52 Crucially, this differed

from systems in France, which stressed higher education as training for bureaucrats.

         Some of these reforms found their way to the Cape with the Batavian government that

was posted there in 1803. This was led by the curious mixture of a governor who was a Dutch

nobleman, Jan Willem Janssens (r. 1803-6), and a Patriot commissioner-general, Jacob de Mist.

One of the few things that de Mist accomplished during his brief tenure at the Cape was to

draft proposals for an expansive education system, proposing an increase in the number of

common schools and the growth of the curriculum so that it advanced teaching in ‘Dutch with

purity’ as well as Christian morality.53 Unusually for a Batavian reformer, at least in Europe,

he also turned his attention to higher education, at Cape Town’s Latin School. Formerly, the

Latin School had served those hoping to study in Europe and taught only Greek and Latin.54

However, de Mist reimagined its purpose, proposing that its pupils be taught ‘Geography,

History, and Christian principles’, in addition to Greco-Roman history, which would inform

students of the ‘great and famous deeds of their … statesmen’.55 He argued that this would

allow them to develop into that ‘class of citizens to whom in riper years important posts of

the Government may be entrusted’.56 Necessarily, the Latin School’s teachers were ordered to

be proficient in the ‘pure spelling, speaking, reading, and writing of the Dutch language’.57 De

Mist resigned in 1804, but he established the School Commission to oversee his reforms.58


51 Much of the information in this paragraph is drawn from Schama, Patriots and liberators, pp. 534-46.
52 Ibid., p. 537.
53 ‘Publication of De Mist’, 1804, in Report of a commission into the educational system, appendix V, p. 16.

54 Report of a commission into the educational system, p. xiv.

55 Publication of De Mist, 1804, in Report of a commission into the educational system, appendix V, pp. 15-17.

56 Ibid., p. 17.

57 Ibid., p. 18.

58 Report of a commission into the educational system, p. xii.




                                                          51
