Liberal reform


been obscured by the fact that they lasted ‘only one term of office’, and were rolled back by

subsequent British and Dutch regimes in Java and Sri Lanka.18 This chapter follows van Goor

in arguing that Dutch liberal ideas can be identified at the interface of the British and the

Dutch across the Indian Ocean. Yet it also shows how the articulation of these ideas in the

uneven setting of occupation meant that they were used to entrench autocracy, anticipating

reactionary regimes and drawing a formative link between liberal reform and despotism.

         In making this argument, this chapter proposes that liberal ideas were spread between

the Netherlands and the Anglo-Dutch colonies by a pan-European urban middle class that

thrived in the colonies during occupation. The term ‘middle class’ describes a set of people

with entwined aspirations, relationships, and attachments, formed from Europeans of

moderate socio-economic stature who lacked the wealth and power of the elite but aspired to

join their ranks by gaining those things. This group consisted of low-ranking former VOC

officials and vrijburgers (burghers), some newer British and Dutch colonists, and their families.

They were, if male, traders, notaries, businessowners, and junior officials.19 The link between

the middle class and liberal ideas rested on the ambiguous relationship of these people to

power. While the middle class assumed mastery next to non-Europeans and slaves, they were

subordinate to the British governors and senior Anglo-Dutch officials and plutocrats who

made up the elite.20 There were also distinctions among the middle class, as some Dutch were

worse off materially and socially than Britons. As such, the middle classes were motivated by

two key concerns: the maintenance of status and political agitation. In pursuit of the former,

they perpetuated patterns of migration, marriage, and patronage that had been practised in

the Dutch empire, while embracing those of the British. Seeking to agitate, they picked up on

ideas for reform that they discovered in the Netherlands and the Anglo-Dutch colonies and


18 Van Goor, Prelude to colonialism, p. 96.
19 Some of these people have already been described as middle class in the Cape context. See, for instance, Kirsten
McKenzie, ‘Social mobilities at the Cape of Good Hope: Lady Anne Barnard, Samuel Hudson, and the
opportunities of empire, c. 1797-1824’, in Tony Ballantyne and Antoinette Burton, Moving subjects: gender, mobility,
and intimacy in an age of global empire (Urbana, 2009), pp. 274-95, especially p. 276 for the middle-class experience of
empire; idem., The making of an English slave-owner: Samuel Eusebius Hudson at the Cape of Good Hope 1796-1807
(Rondebosch, 1993); Gerald Groenewald, ‘Entrepreneurs and the making of a free burgher society’, in Nigel
Worden, ed., Cape Town between east and west: social identities in a Dutch colonial town (Hilversum, 2012), pp. 45-64.
20 For histories of the elite in the Anglo-Dutch colonies, see Robert Ross, ‘The rise of the Cape gentry’, Journal of

Southern African Studies 9 (1983), pp. 193-217; Jean Gelman Taylor, The social world of Batavia: Europeans and Eurasians
in colonial Indonesia (2nd edn, Madison, 2009), pp. 74-113; McKenzie, ‘Social mobilities’, pp. 274-95; Ulbe Bosma and
Remco Raben, Being ‘Dutch’ in the Indies: a history of creolisation and empire, 1500-1920 (trans. Wendie Shaffer,
Singapore, 2008), pp. 26-103; Wayne Dooling, ‘The making of a colonial elite: property, family, and landed stability
in the Cape Colony, c. 1750-1834’, Journal of Southern African Studies 31 (2005), pp. 147-62.


                                                          44
