Liberal reform


framed in loyal rather than oppositional terms, Britain’s autocrats were able to use them to

aid these intrusive projects, while still demonising their progenitors as their enemies.

         This chapter begins with an overview of the rise of Dutch liberal ideas. It charts their

ascendancy amid the establishment of the Batavian Republic and its transformation into the

kingdom of Holland – which was ruled by Napoleon’s brother, Louis Bonaparte, between

1806 and 1810 – as well as their rearticulation in colonies around the Indian Ocean world. It

then returns to Frederik Turr to trace the rise of the middle classes and their role in spreading

liberal ideas between the Netherlands and Anglo-Dutch colonies. First, it explores Frederik’s

place in the middle class, alongside two other people: Dorothea Ross, a diarist, and Egbert

Bletterman, a postmaster. Their lives reveal how Britain’s occupation of the Dutch colonies

made space for a class that was socially aspirational and politically agitational. Second, this

chapter demonstrates how these people were behind key reforms at the Cape and in Sri Lanka

in the early nineteenth century. These reforms were inspired by liberal ideas reworked in

colonial settings. Finally, this chapter uncovers how such ideas were used for the purposes of

British autocratic states. It reveals that they were framed by the middle class in the language

of loyalism and shows how Britain’s autocrats deployed them to entrench despotism.

         This chapter repeatedly compares and contrasts Frederik’s story with those of Egbert

Bletterman and Dorothea Ross. In so doing, it emphasises two areas of reform to which they

contributed, both of which were originally intended to develop a colonial citizenry: namely,

education and the post. In terms of the former, Frederik reveals the efforts of middle-class

reformers to establish new systems of schooling that promoted the right to education, and

knowledge about history and geography, while fostering a society shaped by the principles

of Dutch Protestant evangelism. Frederik’s story can be paired with that of Dorothea Ross,

whose writing reveals how these sorts of reforms were framed in loyalist terms. Dorothea was

a Cape-born, Dutch-speaking diarist who was also the illegitimate daughter of a slave and a

VOC soldier.24 While she argued for liberal reforms, she also married a British printer, George,

and sought to maintain her status in the middle class.25 Consequently, she spoke in terms of



24 For Dorothea’s diary, see ‘Reis na England – D.C. Ross’, 1813-14, Western Cape Archives (WCA), De Beer papers,
A779, pp. 1-40; for Dorothea’s parents, see ‘Baptism of Dorothea Catharina Steyn’, 13 February 1785, Dutch
Reformed Church registers, 1660-1970, WCA, microfilm, reel 2, fiche 214, number 107. See also J.A. Heese, Die
herkoms van die Afrikaner (Cape Town, 1971), p. 162.
25 Peter Philip, British residents at the Cape 1795-1819: biographical records of 4,800 pioneers (Cape Town, 1981), p. 358.




                                                           46
