Liberal reform


even become ‘contagious’ if the Cape Patriots’ demands were not met.39 After all, he said,

representation was an inalienable right. ‘Any people which does not consist of slaves must

have a visible representative acting for it with the supreme rulers’, he reasoned.40

         The VOC resisted the demands of the Cape Patriots, and many of the issues that they

raised remained unresolved at the time that the British invaded the Cape in 1795. In the short

term, therefore, the greatest impact that the Cape Patriots had was in dividing the colony’s

population along political lines. As Teun Baartman has shown, some colonists disdained the

protestors, casting them as ‘those who so inappropriately dared to call themselves patriots’.41

Similarly, the Cape Patriots were aggressive towards burghers who opposed them. When a

member of the burgher militia, Jan Lutsche, suggested to the VOC’s Council of Justice that he

had been mistreated by protesting burghers, he was denounced by his superiors in the militia

as a traitor and told by the burgher lieutenants that he was suspended from duty.42 By the

time that the British became interested in the Cape Colony, the disaffection had spread east to

the interior district of Graaff Reinet, where Dutch settlers objected to the imposition of a new

landdrost (Resident) by the VOC in the language of the Cape Patriots.43 Conversely, the

Batavians who ruled the Cape for almost three years following the Treaty of Amiens (1802)

generally took a more reticent path to governance, upholding forms of servitude in order to

satisfy the Cape Colony’s slave-owning landholders and secure its faltering finances.44

         The populations of Ceylon and Java were marked by similar sorts of political schisms

in the years after the establishment of the Batavian Republic, as the VOC’s officials broadly

aligned themselves with the Orangists and private colonists with the Patriots. The governor

of Ceylon, Johan van Angelbeek, was a moderate VOC official who was apparently opposed

by his republican subordinates, and there were rumours of a coup against him immediately



39 Nederlandsch Afrika, p. 3. Original text: ‘De Engelsche Amerikaanen kunnen door de Planters der beide Indiën
worden nagevolgd; hun voorbeeld kan besmettelyk worden.’
40 Du Toit and Giliomee, Afrikaner political thought, I, p. 240.

41 Baartman, ‘Politics of burgher honour’, p. 104.

42 Ibid., p. 103.

43 For a list of the grievances of the Graaff Reinet burghers in their own words, see ‘Memorial of the burghers of

Graaff Reinet’, 29 October 1795, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony, I, pp. 208-11; for a more general exploration
of the Graaff Reinet rebellions, see Susan Newton-King, Masters and servants on the Cape eastern frontier, 1760-1803
(Cambridge, 1999), pp. 210-31; for the a discussion of the radical sailor protests that occurred during the British
period, see Nicole Ulrich, ‘International radicalism, local solidarities: the 1797 British naval mutinies in southern
African waters’, International Review of Social History 58 (2013), pp. 61-85.
44 This is the argument advanced in William M. Freund, ‘The Cape under the transitional governments, 1795-1814’,

in Elphick and Giliomee, eds., The shaping of South African society, pp. 324-57.


                                                           49
