Liberal reform


‘enterprise and execution’, despite the fact that the regime was operating in unfavourable

conditions – war – and trying to create policies that were ‘never before tried or thought’.72

         The introduction of a postal service in Java, along with the proposals for an expansive

education system in the Cape Colony, reflect the wide colonial parameters of Dutch liberalism

at the beginning of the nineteenth century. This was an ideology that was becoming effective

in reforming the organs of the colonial state, if not in the remaking of government in its

entirety. However, the advocates of such liberal ideas, like Daendels and Jacob de Mist, were

generally explicitly linked to the Batavian Republic and the kingdom of Holland. As such,

they fell out of fashion during the periods of British occupation in the Dutch colonies; after

Napoleon’s annexation of the Kingdom of Holland to France in July 1810; and following the

liberation of the Netherlands from France at the end of 1813.73 Daendels, in particular, was

denounced by British colonists as a tyrant who had roused ‘the phlegm of the Dutchman’

during his time in Java.74 What happened to the liberal ideas that they had once espoused?



The middle class and the politics of reform



There was one group with whom the liberal ideas of Daendels and de Mist did not totally fall

out of fashion in later years: the middle class. These were people who had seen their fortunes

transformed – for better and for worse – amid the revolutionary age and the British invasion

of the Dutch colonies. For instance, Frederik Turr was appointed to the Cape’s Latin School

following a scandal among British and Dutch colonists that saw him cast as a stable candidate

for the rectorship.75 The school had formerly been run by Lawrence Halloran, a fake priest

who antagonised the Dutch by claiming that the British were subject to ‘incessant Persecution’

under the ‘Dutch System of Jurisprudence’ which applied to the colony under the terms of the

capitulation.76 Halloran was eventually exiled from southern Africa, at which point Frederik

was brought in from London as his replacement.77 For Frederik, this was something of a turn


72 ‘Generaal reglement’, Bataviasche Koloniale Courante, 5 January 1810, p. 1.
73 For the politics surrounding the annexation, see Schama, Patriots and liberators, pp. 611-22.
74 Letter from Weltevreden by James Bayley, 25 April 1812, BL MSS Eur. D970, pp. 8-9.

75 ‘Digest of the records’, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony, X, pp. 412-13.

76 Halloran to the Earl of Liverpool, 8 May 1811, in Theal, Records of the Cape Colony, VIII, pp. 58-9; for more on

Halloran’s life, see Robert Ross, Status and respectability in the Cape Colony, 1750-1780: a tragedy of manners
(Cambridge, 1999), pp. 43-4.
77 Ross, Status and respectability, p. 44.




                                                        54
