Liberal reform


         Another emphasis of liberal reform in the Batavian Republic was the establishment of

a nationalised postal service instead of the private system then running in the Netherlands.

Like schools, the creation of a government-run post was seen by some among the republic’s

leadership as a means of stimulating the citizenry. For instance, the Batavian finance minister

and later right-hand man of Louis Bonaparte, Alexander Gogel, suggested that a postal service

should exist ‘for the People, for convenience, and not for taxation’, as it would ‘help promote

the general prosperity’.59 Gogel’s support for a public service was based on what he saw as its

importance for the flourishing of trade and communication. ‘The Post Office should be a true

benefit to commerce and traffic among men’, he proclaimed, while a private service was ‘an

unbearable burden, and more of a hindrance to all internal and foreign trade’.60 In making this

argument, Gogel drew on a long history of calls for reform: the regulation of the post had once

been a concern of the Doelisten movement of Amsterdam burghers, who had argued for the

overhaul of the corrupt Dutch state back in the 1740s.61 Accordingly, the postal service in the

Netherlands was nationalised in 1803 under the oversight of Jacob George Hahn, a Patriot and

postal officer, and a regulated system run by seven commissioners was introduced.62 In 1804,

this was joined by a statute ensuring that all letters would be regarded as confidential.63 Yet

Hahn’s system was not enough for Gogel, who regarded the revenue that it brought into the

state’s coffers as somewhat unsavoury. A state monopoly on conveying packages was

therefore created on his orders in 1807. Meanwhile, more post offices were built to improve

access to the state system, and costs of postage were standardised across the country.64




59 Izaak Jan Alexander Gogel, Memoriën en correspondetiën: betrekkelijk den staat van ‘s Rijks geldmiddelen in den jaare
1820 (Amsterdam, 1844), p. 82. Original text: ‘Zij bestaan om het Volk, tot gerief en niet tot belasting.’ For a more
detailed exploration of Gogel’s thoughts and the Dutch post, see Jan Postma, Alexander Gogel (1765-1821):
grondlegger van de Nederlandse staat (Hilversum, 2017), pp. 150-1.
60 Gogel, Memoriën, p. 82. Original text: ‘Zoo zeer als de posterijen eene ware weldaad voor den handel en het

verkeer onder de menschen behoorden te zijn, zoo zeer worden ze thans eenen ondragelijken last, en meer
belemmerend voor allen binnen en buitenlandschen handel, vooral voor den zoo zeer aanmoediging verdienenden
kleinhandel.’
61 Friso Wielenga, A history of the Netherlands: from the sixteenth century to the present day (trans. Lynne Richards,

London, 2015), p. 121.
62 Schama, Patriots and liberators, p. 449; for more on the post office in the Batavian Republic and Kingdom of

Holland, see also Eduardus Antonius Bernadus Josephus ten Brink, Geschiedenis van het Nederlandse postwezen, 1795-
1810: het ontstaan van een rijksdienst onder de Bataafsche Republiek en het Koninkrijk Holland (Amsterdam, 1950); for the
original document detailing the requirements for the Batavian Republic’s commissioners, see Instructie voor
commissarissen der Bataafsche posterijen (1803).
63 Willemijn Ruberg, Conventional correspondence: epistolary culture of the Dutch elite, 1770-1850 (Leiden, 2011), p. 63.

64 Ibid., p. 62.




                                                          52
