Liberal reform


         Some among the middle class even began to view Batavian interests like education,

denominational equality, and Christian morality in a British imperial setting. During her trip

to London, for instance, Dorothea Ross wrote admiringly of the city’s churches, observing that

men were able to go ‘to any church that they wish’, and were ‘so religious’ under their desire

to ‘eat’ and ‘play’.164 She likewise claimed that London was home to a ‘great abundance’ of

‘public schools, orphan houses, and hospitals for the poor’ and at the same time admired a

house for soldiers’ wives, where, she said, twenty women were staying with their children,

all of whom were clean, well-clothed, and given Christian instruction in a sermon.165 Crucially,

Dorothea also approved of the perceptible link between education and religion in London.

On a ‘great day’, she recalled seeing one thousand children marched into St Paul’s Cathedral,

where she and George had gone to hear a speech.166 It is likely that Dorothea was writing,

here, about the annual meeting of the charity schools, an event organised at St Paul’s to which

children from London’s numerous charity schools were invited. By 1813, the event was

steeped in anti-Dissenting fervour; two years previously, Bishop Marsh had used the sermon

to argue against the self-sufficient system of education proposed by Joseph Lancaster, who

backed denominational equality.167 Dorothea seems to have seen it as a moral endeavour.

         Back at the Latin School, Frederik Turr’s curriculum displayed the extension of the

Batavian ideas over higher education.168 At the same time, they were becoming more accepted

in government. By 1812, Governor Cradock had adopted the commission’s proposals and

actually established regulated primary schools across the colony, particularly in rural districts

such as Graaff Reinet.169 In part, of course, Cradock allowed these reforms because they were

a way of spreading the English language and Protestantism, both goals of the government.170

Cradock’s order that primary schools be built across the colony came with the conditions that

the posts of church clerk and teacher be combined and instruction rendered in English where


164 ‘Reis na England – D.C. Ross’, 1813-14, WCA, De Beer papers, A779, p. 25. Original text: ‘London is vol kerken
daar men in gaan kom in welke kerk dat men wil … zo godsdienstig is de menschen in London, onder alle hunne
lust voor [?] eten en schouwburg spelen.’
165 Ibid., p. 26. Original text: ‘Deeze wonderlijk stad … . Publicke schoolen, weesen huisen en hospitalen voor den

armen zijn hier in groote overvloed.’
166 Ibid., pp. 26-7. Original text: ‘Op een grooten dag is er meer als 1000 school kinderen na St Paules gegaan om

een groote redevoering te hooren.’
167 Herbert Marsh, ‘A sermon preached in the cathedral church of St Paul’s, London’, The Pamphleteer 1 (1813), pp.

49-80.
168 Schama, Patriots and liberators, p. 535.

169 Report of a commission into the educational system, pp. xix.

170 Sturgis, ‘Anglicisation’, p. 8.




                                                        66
