Liberal reform


        Egbert followed his Batavian counterparts in improving the tappal as a system for state

communication as well as a means by which individuals could engage with government via

‘petitions, applications, remonstrances, &c’.182 Writing to Governor Maitland (r. 1805-1811) in

August 1805, shortly after Maitland’s arrival on the island, Bletterman suggested rationalising

the tappal by introducing uniform standards for payment according to the distance that a letter

was travelling.183 He also argued for greater state control. Egbert proposed that letters from

Europe should be sent by the postmaster to the governor’s secretary before being dispatched

elsewhere and also that letters sent from the presidencies of India should be delivered free of

postage. He likewise consolidated the central role of the postmaster general, who would now

be present at the opening of packages from India and would function as a superintendent

over messengers carrying letters, recording their names and the letters they carried. This

system was to be extended across the individual tappal stations dotted along the Sri Lankan

coast. Egbert also followed the Batavians on private communications. He proposed that letters

sent on any ‘subject of a personal nature’ between officers and soldiers should be ‘considered

as private’, while allowing for the tappal to be used for individual correspondence among

officials and individuals, for petitions as well as ‘bills of exchange … treasury notes, or any

other description of paper’.184 Egbert’s reforms indeed coincided with the wide uptake of the

tappal as a system for private correspondence. The map above (fig. 10) shows the destinations

of private letters from a tappal packet that was stolen near Colombo in September 1805.

        More than just applying Batavian ideas to Sri Lanka, Egbert’s reforms were moreover

designed to incorporate the island’s existing forms of communication into the mechanisms of

a liberal colonial state. In particular, he mandated that olas (palm leaf manuscripts typically

sent between Lankans and aped by the British) should be subjected to the same rate of postage

applied to letters, thereby defining their place in law as letters coming under the jurisdiction

and oversight of the postmaster general.185 Following a request from the collector of Mannar,

Egbert mandated that instructions for the distribution of tappal packets be issued in Tamil.186

Perhaps intentionally, Egbert’s reforms resembled those introduced at the Cape one year later



182 Bletterman to Maitland, 20 August 1805, SLNA, 6/274.
183 Ibid.
184 Ibid.

185 Bletterman to Maitland, 20 August 1805, SLNA, 6/274.

186 Torpey to Arbuthnot, 15 May 1806, SLNA, 6/155.




                                                      69
