Liberal reform


provinces.245 However, Egbert’s position became shrouded in controversy because his private

trade with his Cape relatives was drawn to the attention of the colonial government.246 The

tappal, meanwhile, was gradually turned into a government post office that was accessible to

the public. In 1836, one year before the creation of a general post office in India, Egbert’s

reforms were repealed and replaced in Sri Lanka, and a monopoly on the transmission of post

was awarded to the new post office.247 Egbert’s contradictory legacy therefore persisted.

         Ultimately, these histories demonstrate that liberal ideas and despotism in the Second

Empire cannot be viewed in isolation and must be considered together as part of a reciprocal

history. They were both products of a complex process – occupation – in which Dutch and

British colonists were drawn together in colonies across the Indian Ocean. Although autocracy

was entrenched, Britain’s invasions were kept incomplete, as autocrats’ powers were at least

somewhat contingent on the liberal ideas that would eventually prove to be their downfall.

When liberal colonists challenged central authority and British chauvinism more widely, as

in the mid-nineteenth century, the autocrats almost inevitably fell from grace.248




245 ‘Letters – what free of postage in Kandyan provinces’, 1818, in A collection of advertisements, minutes, general rules
and circular letters circulated from time to time by the authority of government, and now regulating the public business of
the island (Colombo, 1824), p. 363.
246 ‘Egbert Bletterman’, p. 83.

247 ‘For protecting the revenue derived from the post office, and for revising the rates of postage’, in A collection of

legislative acts of the Ceylon government from 1796: distinguishing those now in force, II, pp. 57-58.
248 See McKenzie, Imperial underworld, pp. 103-58; Bayly, Imperial meridian, pp. 235-47; for a globally-oriented history

of nineteenth-century liberalism, see Bayly, Recovering liberties, pp. 104-245.


                                                           78
