Liberal reform


Empire. However, while the legacies of this period were mostly autocratic, its liberal effects

also endured. The Bible and School Commission continued its work in the Cape Colony until

1841. By 1823, it was overseeing the education of 1,115 slaves and slave children.240 In 1827, it

provided a survey of Cape education for the liberalising Commission of Eastern Inquiry,

indicating that it ran twenty-six free schools in the colony’s rural districts, in most of which

Dutch continued to be taught alongside English – thus demonstrating Robert Ross’s argument

about anglicisation’s failure in the Cape’s rural areas.241 The Eastern Inquiry, which became

one of the most famous humanitarian commissions of the 1820s and a bane to governors like

Charles Somerset, introduced reforms of the Cape’s judicial system and the government’s

administration but saw little that needed to change about the colony’s education system.242

         Nor do the stories revealed in this chapter necessarily end here. The following chapter

will explore the second half of Frederik Turr’s life, when he travelled to Java aboard the Scaleby

Castle and joined the anti-slavery organisation founded by Governor Thomas Raffles, the Java

Benevolent Institution. The Benevolent Institution’s legacy was similarly mixed and Raffles

used it to both legitimise his despotism and streamline communications between officials and

the central government. Nevertheless, Frederik successfully reformed many of its operations

according to Dutch models of anti-slavery. For his part, Egbert continued to try to convince

the British of his loyalty. In his time away from the role of postmaster, he joined the Colombo

branch of the British and Foreign Bible Society and sat on its committee along with a number

of leading Britons like the sitting magistrate Thomas Twistleton and the civil servant William

Tolfrey, known for his oversight of the translation of the Bible into Sinhalese.243 Apparently,

Egbert’s efforts were sufficient, as he was reappointed postmaster general in 1815 by Robert

Brownrigg and held the position for another two years.244 During this time he extended a

comparable set of reforms for the management of the tappal in the newly-annexed Kandyan




240 ‘Report upon the slaves and state of slavery at the Cape of Good Hope’, in Theal, Records of the Cape Colony,
XXXV, p. 365.
241 Report of a commission into the educational system, p. xxvii.

242 For a list of the issues covered by the Commission of Eastern Inquiry, see ‘Index’, in Theal, Records of the Cape

Colony, XXXV, pp. 402-403; see also McKenzie, Imperial underworld, p. 5; for a general picture of the work of these
commissions, see Laidlaw, ‘Investigating empire’, pp. 749-68.
243 Ninth report of the British & Foreign Bible Society, p. 62.

244 ‘Egbert Bletterman’, p. 83.




                                                         77
