Liberal reform


         Accordingly, many Dutch members of the middle classes also adopted loyalist rhetoric

as a means of securing social and political capital, especially following the liberation of the

Netherlands. Gerrit Buyskes and his fellow freemasons publicly thanked Governor Cradock

for his service on his departure from the Cape.204 Meanwhile, Dorothea Ross imagined herself

in a sort of British world. At St Helena, she contrasted the harshness of the terrain with the

houses that were ‘neatly built by Englishmen’.205 At Ascension, she was drawn to ‘a huge flag

planted on top of the highest mountain by an English captain’.206 In London, she publicly

displayed her attachment to Britain, visiting ‘Westminster [Abbey] … where all the kings and

great people will be buried, there are also a thousand statues, among which are Lord Nelson

and Mr. Pitt’.207 Visiting the Tower of London, she examined the crown jewels, ‘so full of

diamonds … more gold and diamonds than I would ever have thought to have seen’.208

Critically, she contrasted her loyalism with the behaviour of non-Britons: Madeira was ‘full of

Roman priests and beggars’, and home to ‘brazen’ dancing of the sort that ‘would not be

permitted in England’.209 Her trip also reminded her of the Cape’s place in the British empire:

among the animals of the royal menagerie, a monarchical zoo, were those ‘from the Cape’,

including an elephant that was able to open doors and could pick up a half-pence with his

trunk.210 George Ross repeated her observations in a poem he wrote shortly after the Rosses’

return to the Cape Colony in January 1814. George III was a ‘venerable KING’ and ‘Lord of

Freedom’, he wrote, who ‘Upheld LIBERTY’, and brought ‘destruction’ to the ‘Tyrant’.211

         The spread of loyalism was dangerous for reformers, however, as it legitimised their

opponents, as well as the manipulation of their ideas for the benefit of British autocracy. This



204 ‘Address to His Excellency Lt. General Sir J.F. Cradock’, 29 April 1814, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony,
X, p. 106.
205 ‘Reis na England – D.C. Ross’, 1813-14, WCA, De Beer papers, A779, pp. 2-3. Original text: ‘Eenige van die

huisen, hier zijn zeer netjes gebouwd op den Engelse manier.’
206 Ibid., p. 5. Original text: ‘Niets aanmerkelijk als een grote vlagge stok die voor omtrent zo jaar is door een

Engelsche capiteyn op de hoogste berg daar geplant.’
207 Ibid., pp. 20-21. Original text: ‘Wij zijn naar Westminster gegaan, daar alle de Konings en groote lieden worden

begraven, daar zijn de duizend beelden, onder welke is Lord Nelson en de Heer Pitt.’
208 Ibid., pp. 21-22. Original text: ‘Alle de kroonen die vol diamanten … zoveel gond en diamenten heb ik nooit

gedacht om te zien.’
209 Ibid., pp. 32-33. Original text: ‘Dit stad van Madera is zeer aanzienlijk maar het is vol Roomsche priestes en

bedelaars … daar fraaije dansen is te zien, maar zwelke onbeschaamde dansen zonder niet in Engeland
gepermitteerd worden.’
210 Ibid., pp. 22-23. Original text: ‘Wij hebben ook alle de wilde dieren van alle landen gezien, onderwelke zijn veel

van de Kaap.’
211 ‘Ode for His Majesty’s Birth-day’, Cape Town Gazette and African Advertiser, 4 June 1814, p. 2.




                                                          72
