Liberal reform


bargaining for the advancement of their own reforms. Now, governors could implement their

vision of an English education system in the new common schools, promoting ‘the ultimate

employment of the English language in all official and judicial business’.230 Somerset indeed

used the state’s schools to counteract the private institutions of which he disapproved, such

as the school managed by the abolitionist Thomas Pringle in Cape Town, which he claimed

spread ‘the most disgusting principles of Republicanism’.231 Somerset accordingly mandated

the hiring of British masters for the state-run schools; eight such teachers were recruited from

Scotland in 1822 and 1823 and were paid well by the regime. When another institution was

set up in 1826 to replace the Latin School, it was managed by an Anglican clergyman who was

paid £600 for the first years of his tenure. In 1826, Somerset’s successor, Richard Bourke (r.

1826-28), introduced further regulations for state schools, mandating the use of the Bell or

Lancaster system and the teaching of English. All teachers needed to show support for ‘the

King and constitution’.232 The Cape’s governors therefore used the School Commission’s

reforms to extend their own vision of colonial administration. As they exerted control over

education, so they anglicised other elements of the colony. They introduced aggressive land

reforms in rural areas and displaced Boer farmers in favour of settlers from Britain.233

         Across the Indian Ocean in Sri Lanka, Egbert Bletterman was similarly dethroned by

British fears about his true loyalties. Egbert had used the Colonial Office’s letter to prove his

loyalty to North. However, the more conservative Maitland became suspicious of Egbert’s

loyalties and removed him as postmaster soon after he became governor. Maitland suggested

that it was exceptionable that a foreigner like Bletterman should be postmaster general.

Egbert, he felt, must ‘with all his attachment, have a natural feeling with regard to his own

countrymen’.234 Meanwhile, Egbert’s reforms were used to consolidate the place of the tappal

as the military post of an autocratic state. In March 1812, Maitland revised Egbert’s laws and

mandated postage charges for letters being sent to anyone other than the central figures of the

government, including the chief justice, commissioner of revenue, military secretary, and the



230 The information in this paragraph is drawn from Sturgis, ‘Anglicisation’, p. 11.
231 Ibid., p. 16.
232 Ibid., p. 17.

233 See Elizabeth Elbourne, Blood ground: colonialism, missions, and the contest for Christianity in the Cape Colony and

Britain, 1799-1853 (McGill, 2002); for an exploration of British land policy in the Cape at this time, see also L.C.
Duly, ‘The failure of British land policy at the Cape, 1812-21’, Journal of African History 6 (1965), pp. 357-71.
234 Toussaint, ‘Egbert Bletterman’, p. 83.




                                                          75
