Liberal reform


with the humiliation of a link to Frederik Turr, the original commissioners publicly supported

their board’s transformation, attaching their names to a proclamation written by Jones, issued

on 8 July. This argued that ‘the Bible ought to be in the hands of every christian’, praised

Britain as the place where endeavours to educate ‘less enlightened fellow-christians’ had

taken place, and spoke of the need to further diffuse Christianity into ‘benighted Africa’.222

         In practical terms, the Commission pledged to introduce ‘the system of education,

established in England by Dr. Bell and Mr. Lancaster’, creating a free school in Cape Town

based on Bell’s principles.223 Lancaster and Andrew Bell, an Episcopalian priest, had each

created systems in which pupils taught each other, with an emphasis on ‘discipline’.224 These

were far removed from the Batavian model: through these systems, one master could teach as

many as one thousand pupils, writing on sand.225 Nevertheless, the president of the Cape’s

Tot Nut, Gerard Beelaerts van Blokland, also called for their introduction, and, in the Dutch

edition of The Cape Town Gazette, wrote a poem praising ‘Great Britain … who works hard for

freedom’.226 The Cape’s schools were now in the hands of its governors. The Latin School

declined on their watch. Governor Somerset refused to appoint a Dutchman to the rectorship

and, in 1821, the school was turned into an English grammar.227 Still, something of a reforming

legacy endured. The commissioners equated Lancaster’s system with Andrew Bell’s in their 8

July proclamation, failing to mention the former’s emphasis on denominational equality and

the latter’s explicit attachment to Anglicanism.228 While Alexander’s vision for the Cape’s

schools was almost theocratic, then, the commissioners focused only on modes of teaching,

thereby neutralising some of the more chauvinistic elements of Bell’s Anglican system.229

         Nevertheless, the ending of the School Commission’s independence was a significant

coup for Governor Cradock and his successors. Previously, the commissioners had jostled

with the Cape’s governors over the introduction of English teaching, cooperating only after



222 Ibid., p. 41.
223 Ibid., p. 42; for the debate about the Bell and Lancaster systems in a global context, see Sujit Sivasundaram,
Nature and the godly empire: science and evangelical mission in the Pacific, 1795-1850 (Cambridge, 2005), pp. 66-77.
224 ‘Minute of the Bible and School Commission on the circulation of the scriptures and the religious education of

the poor – establishment of free schools’, in Report of a commission into the educational system, appendix V, pp. 41-42.
225 Ibid., p. 42.

226 ‘Gelukwensching aan ‘t Volk van Nederland’, Cape Town Gazette and African Advertiser, 4 June 1814, p. 2.

227 Report of a commission into the educational system, p. xxiv.

228 Marsh, ‘A Sermon’, p. 61.

229 ‘Minute of the Bible and School Commission’, in Report of a commission into the educational system, appendix V, p.

41.


                                                          74
