Two              Frederik Turr
                 Anti-slavery




Frederik Turr boarded the Scaleby Castle in July 1814, shortly before it sailed for Batavia from

the Cape Colony. On the ship, at the time, was Juliana van de Kaap, a ‘free servant of color’

employed by Frederik’s fellow passenger, Maria Fichat. A former slave, Juliana had been set

free by Maria shortly before boarding the Castle, on the orders of British officials who said that

they could not ‘sanction any slave being received on board that ship’.1 Their reasoning was

simple: the slave trade had been prohibited by the British parliament seven years earlier, in

1807, and to allow a slave to travel on the Castle would be tantamount to allowing the slave

trade to continue.2 The archival record contains no traces of a meeting between Frederik and

Juliana, but perhaps the presence of slaves and freed slaves like her at the Cape and on ships

encouraged Frederik to consider the institution of slavery in the former Dutch colonies. He

emerged as a public opponent of slavery after arriving in Java, becoming one of the first and

only Dutchmen to join the Java Benevolent Institution, the anti-slavery society established by

Java’s governor, Thomas Stamford Raffles (r. 1811-16), in December 1815.3 Writing in The Java

Government Gazette the following month, Frederik admitted that his Dutch ‘progenitors’ had

‘committed crimes’ by introducing an ‘eastern policy’ that encouraged slavery, and welcomed

the creation of what he hoped was ‘a rational and beneficent system of general Philanthropy’.4



Anti-slavery in the imperial meridian



Anti-slavery spread across the British empire in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

It was an ideology that shifted with time and context, but its advocates in this period generally




1 Pringle to Bird, 5 July 1814, British Library (BL), India Office Records (IOR) G/9/20, p. 64.
2 See Bird to Pringle, 5 July 1814, BL, IOR/G/9/13, p. 90; ‘Memorial of Mrs Fichat’, 8 July 1814, Western Cape
Archives (WCA), Colonial Office (CO) 3897.
3 ‘List of subscribers to the Java Benevolent Institution’, Java Government Gazette, p. 5.

4 ‘Letter from a liberal colonist’, 13 January 1816, Java Government Gazette, p. 2.




                                                    79
