Anti-slavery


         In addition to imported chattel slaves, localised forms of slavery were common to Sri

Lanka and Java. As James Warren observes, slavery across southeast Asia was not ‘historically

synonymous with property’ and instead slaves were often prisoners taken in slaving raids.70

People could likewise be forced into bonded labour as a form of payment for a debt, and this

practice had much in common with the Kandyan system of rajakariya that was adopted by the

British in Sri Lanka after the end of the slave trade.71 Caste-based slaves were also common to

Sri Lanka’s northern provinces. Known as nalavas, pallars, and koviyars, they were retained as

agricultural labourers by members of superior castes.72 Unlike their counterparts in the chattel

trade, they lived independently and were called to work when it was deemed necessary.

Nevertheless, the line between chattel and caste slavery was blurred. The Dutch manumitted

caste slaves and made use of their labour. There were instances in which colonists seized caste

slaves from their masters as payment for debt or taxes and sold them on as chattel.73

         Williams’s account of Cape slavery shows that some Britons objected to the absence of

freedom in colonial contexts where subjugation was the norm for many.74 Yet not all Britons

were opposed to slavery. The author James Cordiner wrote that Edmund Lushington, a judge

who later served as Ceylon’s chief justice, acquired a ‘Cingalese young man … as his butler’,

which ‘enabled him to live at less expense than any of his neighbours in similar situations’.75

Britons were also key participants in the slave trade before it was banned. At the Cape, the

German trader Ernst Heckrath described how a merchant, Michael Hogan, used a privateer

to capture ‘large vessels from the Mauritius, very lately a slave trader, a Spanish vessel, with

450 slaves which were sold here a piece 400 rixdollars on average’.76 Hogan also seized ‘two

small vessels … under French colours, with cargoes of slaves for the Mauritius, [and] a French

Brig on shore on the coast of Madagascar laden with slaves … from the coast of

Mozambique’.77 The slave trade indeed persisted through Britain’s first occupation of the


70 James Francis Warren, ‘The structure of slavery in the Sulu zone in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries’,
in Gwyn Campbell, ed., The structure of slavery in Indian Ocean Africa and Asia (London, 2004), pp. 111-127, at p. 111.
71 Ibid., p. 111; on Kandyan slavery, which included within its constellation rajakariya, see Simon Sawers,

‘Memoranda and notes on the Kandyan law of inheritance, marriage, slavery etc. by Simon Sawers’, in Fredric
Austin Hayley, The laws and customs of the Sinhalese or Kandyan law (Colombo, 1923), appendix I, pp. 1-33.
72 Schrikker and Ekama, ‘Through the lens of slavery’, pp. 190-1.

73 Ibid., 191.

74 James Williams to Mary Williams, 5 January 1797, WCA, Kirkland papers, A1790, pp. 1-2.

75 James Cordiner, A description of Ceylon: containing an account of the country, inhabitants, and natural productions (2

vols., London, 1807), I, p. 81.
76 Heckrath to Jackson, 2 April 1800, WCA, Heckrath papers, A734.

77 ‘Petition from Michael Hogan’, 16 April 1800, WCA, British Occupation (BO) 116, pp. 81-6.




                                                          89
