Anti-slavery


        This chapter continues Frederik Turr’s life history and contextualises his anti-slavery

activities alongside those of other Dutch advocates. It begins with an overview of slavery and

British and Dutch anti-slavery activities, before addressing each colony. It looks first to the

Cape, where the senior official Willem van Ryneveld articulated a set of qualified anti-slavery

arguments as fiscal. He adapted the ideas of the Patriots and they informed his efforts to

develop a commission of inquiry that investigated clandestine slave trading and extended the

Crown’s jurisdiction into prosecutions over the slave trade. Van Ryneveld’s contingent anti-

slavery was tied to his place among the Cape’s governing elite. More radical arguments were

made elsewhere by the middle classes. This chapter subsequently turns to Java and Frederik

Turr’s role in the Java Benevolent Institution. It reveals that, while the institution began as a

belligerent society, it was reformed through Frederik’s interventions into a Dutch-inspired

organisation focused on ideas of improvement. However, Frederik’s success enabled Raffles

to use the institution to collect depositions about slavers who challenged his prohibition of

slave trading and extend protections for slaves in places not under his control. Finally, this

chapter turns to Sri Lanka, where Johnston’s efforts to introduce anti-slavery reforms were

influenced by juries formed from Dutch elements of the middle classes – like the burgher

Johannes Stork – and the governing elite. These jurors designed the proposal for liberating

slave children and the government developed their ideas to entrench the Crown’s autocracy.



Slavery and anti-slavery in the Anglo-Dutch empires



In January 1797, the British soldier James Williams wrote to his sister Mary to complain of his

distaste for the Cape Colony. ‘I am completely tired of the southern extremity of Africa’, he

told her, ‘and sigh again for Old England’.42 James’s feelings were drawn from the disgust he

felt when confronted with slavery. ‘I have nothing to say about the Cape’, he said, ‘except that

at my first arrival every thing appeared strange and some things disgusting particularly being

waited upon by black slaves, it is shocking to see so many fellow creatures in a state of

servitude’.43 James described visiting a slave auction in which three hundred and fifty slaves

had been ‘brought from the Coast of Guinea’ to be sold.44 They had been ‘kidnapped, stole or


42 James Williams to Mary Williams, 5 January 1797, WCA, Kirkland papers, A1790, pp. 1-2.
43 Ibid., p. 1.
44 Ibid., p. 2.




                                                     85
