Anti-slavery


Gelman Taylor argues that the Java Benevolent Institution was part of an aggressive project

to reform the Dutch in a British image, implemented by a belligerent Thomas Raffles.39

         This chapter uncovers another rationale behind the rise of anti-slavery in the British

empire. It demonstrates that critical anti-slavery reforms were drawn from exchanges of ideas

among the Anglo-Dutch governing elite and middle classes. The Dutch revised and extended

British anti-slavery policies that were limited in their efficacy, amending them according to

ideas of social and economic improvement derived from Dutch thinkers. This argument

follows two particular developments in Dutch historiography. In a recent article, Maartje

Janse has argued that the apparent paucity of anti-slavery in continental Europe in fact shows

that Europeans rejected and adjusted British models of anti-slavery campaigning.40 Similarly,

Angelie Sens has suggested that studies of Dutch anti-slavery that are informed by the British

experience are frequently problematic, as the Dutch articulated different arguments linked to

their concern with national decline and improvement.41 This chapter proposes that we can

transpose Janse’s theory to the colonial setting to reveal how the Dutch modified and rejected

British models across the Second Empire. In so doing, we can also see how – following Sens –

Dutch colonists made different claims related to their concern with decline and renewal.

         Returning to a theme of the previous chapter, this chapter concurrently shows how

governing elites used Dutch models of anti-slavery to develop autocracy. Some Dutch anti-

slavery advocates worked from senior posts within government, while others, like Chapter

One’s liberals, were drawn from the ranks of the middle class. Consequently, Dutch advocates

either worked for the benefit of colonial autocrats or vocalised their ideas in unequal settings

which allowed British governing elites to appropriate them for the same effect. Accordingly,

this chapter uncovers a cross-colonial history of anti-slavery that also reveals the inequalities

and overlaps between different models of anti-slavery campaigning. It seeks to challenge the

historiographical assumptions that contrast anglocentric anti-slavery with Dutch slavery or

which describe two independent metropolitan intellectual traditions concerning slavery.



39 Jean Gelman Taylor, The social world of Batavia: Europeans and Eurasians in colonial Indonesia (2nd edn, Madison
2009), pp. 105-6.
40 Maartje Janse, ‘‘Holland as a little England’? British anti-slavery missionaries and continental abolitionist

movements in the mid nineteenth century’, Past & Present 229 (2015), pp. 123-60.
41 Angelie Sens, ‘Dutch antislavery in a decline-ridden society, 1750-1815’, in Gert Oostindie, ed., Fifty years later,

pp. 89-101, at 90. See also idem., ‘Dutch debates on overseas man and his world, 1770-1820’, in Bob Moore and
Henk van Hierop, eds., Colonial empires compared: Britain and the Netherlands, 1750-1850 (Utrecht, 2003), pp. 77-93.


                                                         84
