Anti-slavery


this settlement’.144 Yet the true cause was almost certainly Willem’s encounter with the Rosalia.

As it happened, the commission – which was formed of Willem, the collector of customs,

Francis Dashwood, and a member of the court of justice, Clemens Matthiessen – met in Cape

Town’s town hall for twelve meetings between May and June. The commissioners summoned

colonists who had bought slaves after January 1808, and asked them to produce evidence that

they had purchased them legally, under threat of a fine of one thousand rixdollars.145 Among

those summoned were those who had bought slaves from the Portuguese ships the Constantia

and the Rosalia.146 Crucially, the commission was intended to extend Willem’s powers over

the slave trade in and beyond Cape Town. Under its authority, Willem ordered the landdrosts

of the districts of Graaff Reinet and Swellendam to interrogate settlers over their purchasing

of slaves.147 He also extended the commission so that it sat for extraordinary meetings beyond

its initial brief, in order to ‘make a more full and faithful report upon the subject’.148

        Ironically, Willem’s expansion of the fiscal’s powers over the slave trade was in part

motivated by a desire to extend the jurisdiction of Caledon’s Crown autocracy. In prosecuting

the slave trade at the Cape, Willem frequently clashed with the vice admiralty court, which

administered the prosecution of slavers for the navy. Having received intelligence about the

smuggling of slaves from the Rosalia, for instance, Willem dispatched a sheriff to ‘execute the

orders of the Fiscal’ and began proceedings against the ship’s owners in the court of justice.149

Yet the admiralty also sent a marshal to investigate the ship and began different proceedings

in the vice admiralty court. Much to Caledon’s ‘mortification’, each court claimed its own

capacity ‘to decide, and one (the Admiralty) the right of immediately executing its decrees’.150

Embarrassingly, the court of justice and the admiralty came to different conclusions over the

Rosalia, with the former deciding to prosecute – compelling the owner to pay three times the

value of the slaves that he had landed – and the latter dropping the charges. The functioning

of different legal systems at the Cape undermined the governor and contravened the terms of



144 ‘Proclamation by the earl of Caledon’, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony, VI, pp. 319-20.
145 ‘Report of the commission of inquiry’, WCA, CO 4437, p. 1. For a different take on some of these events, see
M.C. Reidy, ‘The admission of slaves and ‘prize slaves’ into the Cape Colony, 1797-1818’ (MA thesis, Cape Town,
1997).
146 ‘Report of the commission of inquiry’, WCA, CO 4437, p. 2, 42.

147 Ibid., p. 44.

148 Ibid., p. 47.

149 Caledon to Castlereagh, 18 May 1808, in Theal, ed. Records of the Cape Colony, VI, p. 331.

150 Ibid., p. 331.




                                                      98
