Anti-slavery


Anticipating Caledon’s arguments to Castlereagh, Willem said that a sudden ban on the

importation of slaves would ‘occasion a general injury’, as there were not enough ‘white or

free persons’ at the Cape to reproduce the work done by slaves.137 Slaves could not therefore

be freed ‘without sacrificing the Colony’.138 Writing in 1805 under the Batavians, Willem

repeated his previous claims but peppered them with nods to the latest arguments about

slavery across the Dutch empire. There must be labour ‘for the development of agriculture’,

he observed, and so-called free labour was proving unworkable. Khoisan would ‘never do the

ordinary farming work of digging the land and so on’, as they preferred ‘to spend their time

in laziness and idleness’.139 As such, while Willem said that he was ‘in full agreement with all

the philosophers and all reasonable people’, he argued that ‘one must accept things as they

are’.140 Yet Willem was not totally intransigent. He followed de Mist in suggesting that it

would be possible to make slavery ‘unnecessary for the Colony’ by introducing ‘measures for

improvement … with calm consideration and cautious guidance’.141 Adjusting these

arguments for the Cape, he argued that, if the slave trade had to be banned, it should be done

absolutely rather than by degrees, so as to mitigate damage to the economy. There should be

‘a fixed system concerning every important point of administration … slaves should be

imported into the Colony or not’.142

         Willem was likely irritated by the vacillation over slave trading that emerged after the

British returned to the Cape in January 1806. Accordingly, in his post as fiscal – in which he

prosecuted slave traders on the behalf of the Crown – he became a key voice against the trade

at the Cape. On 25 April 1808, he launched criminal proceedings against the Portuguese

owner of a slave ship called the Rosalia, who was accused of offloading slaves in Table Bay.143

Four days later, he emerged as the driving force behind the establishment of a commission of

inquiry investigating clandestine slave trading in the colony. Caledon claimed credit for the

commission’s creation, suggesting that he had convened it after receiving representations

‘that a considerable number of slaves’ were being ‘clandestinely landed and disposed of in


137 Ibid., p. 47.
138 Ibid., p. 47.
139 ‘W.S. van Ryneveld’s A sketch of the condition of the colony in 1805’, in Du Toit and Giliomee, Afrikaner political

thought, I, p. 52.
140 Ibid., p. 52.

141 Ibid., p. 53.

142 Ibid., p. 53.

143 Caledon to Castlereagh, 18 May 1808, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony, VI, pp. 330-1.




                                                         97
