Anti-slavery


him to ‘the cares of the world’, as a Dutch colonist might ‘experience in the midst of an English

popular election’.188 Conversely, many of the Dutch were hostile to the institution. Some

worried that it would abolish slavery immediately.189 Others retorted that, while slavery

would find ‘few advocates’ among them, describing them as ‘illiberal, narrow-minded …

unfeeling wretches’, as Anglicus had done, would hardly endear them to the anti-slavery

cause.190 Consequently, when the institution initially met – at the Ryswick premises of the

Harmony Society – few Dutch attended.191 Seeking to defuse the controversy, the institution

disclaimed ‘all intention whatever of interfering with the right of property in Slaves’.192

         Ultimately, a solution came from Frederik Turr, who saw in the controversy a chance

to seize the institution from the British and turn it into a society that advocated for an end to

slavery and the slave trade along the gradual and capacious lines of Frossard’s model. Turr

wrote to the Gazette in January 1816, under the pseudonym ‘A Liberal Colonist’, to critique

the actions of some of the institution’s members.193 He objected to the stereotyping of the

Dutch as illiberal and contended that the ‘declaration intended to calm the prejudices’ of his

‘countrymen, and satisfy their feeble minds that no intention existed of violating their

property’ was offensive.194 The Dutch, he said, were no different to the British; it was simply

the case that they had not secured ‘that great engine, a free press’, which would have rendered

‘liberal ideas more familiar to the people’.195 As such, the Dutch should not ‘be stigmatized as

the victims of unconquerable prejudice’, while the institution, as an ‘association of Dutch and

English Philanthropists’, should adhere more closely to the ultimately gradual model of the

African Institution.196 He called on the Dutch to dismiss the idea that ‘our weak faculties should

not be so dazzled with the full splendour of liberal ideas’ and suggested that they fight for

policies that guaranteed their economic and social well-being: ‘the prosecution of rational, just

and attainable views, the foundation of our future prosperity in these regions will be … more

likely to attract us, than a narrow scheme projected on a mortifying principle of adaptation to


188 Ibid., p. 2.
189 ‘A meeting of subscribers’, 6 January 1816, Java Government Gazette, p. 5.
190 ‘Letter from a colonist’, 6 January 1816, Java Government Gazette, p. 2.

191 ‘A meeting of subscribers’, 6 January 1816, Java Government Gazette, p. 5.

192 Ibid., p. 5.

193 ‘Letter from a liberal colonist’, 13 January 1816, Java Government Gazette, pp. 2-3. The Dutch author is very likely

Turr, as he references his travel, chair on the institution’s committee, and quotes a Latin phrase by Horace.
194 Ibid., p. 2.

195 Ibid., p. 2.

196 Ibid., p. 3.




                                                         104
