Anti-slavery


our inferior and limited capacities’.197 While Frederik’s language was dramatic, he spoke in

terms of loyalism and liberalism. Appealing to the British, he quoted the satirist John Gay,

describing how Britain’s free press had generated ‘earlier advances in knowledge and wisdom

than the rest of Europe’.198 Yet he also cast the Netherlands as fertile ground for liberal ideas,

even claiming that once the Dutch ‘had the benefit of all the knowledge that has been diffused

in England’, they would ‘profit by it, [more] than the British Legislature has done’.199

         Frederik’s intervention was a success. The institution adopted a gradual plan that was

founded on ideas of economic and social improvement. Writing to the directors of the African

Institution in 1816, the Java institution’s committee anticipated that the ‘liberal sentiments

which actuate the public mind in England and Holland will be … effective in relieving the

sufferings of their fellow creatures’ in Java.200 Their charter adjusted that of the African

Institution. Following their African counterparts, the Java committee called for the spread of

‘useful arts of Europe’ among ‘the Natives’ but added a clause about the promotion of the

‘peace and happiness’ of their ‘more civilized neighbours’.201 As in Sierra Leone, economic

improvements were to be focused on the distribution of ‘useful seeds, and plants, and

implements of husbandry’ but these were also intended to encourage islanders to discard the

‘piratical habits’ that were said to have upheld slavery and instead cultivate land.202 The Java

committee likewise argued for the adoption of printing, ‘with a view to the diffusion of

information’.203 Regarding the slave trade, the institution pledged to gather information about

the breaking of the law ‘by daring speculators’ and give it to Batavia’s magistrates.204

Information would be collected by a network of ‘Agents and Correspondents … established

throughout these Islands’.205 They promised to protect emancipated slaves and create ‘a




197 Ibid., p. 3.
198 Ibid., p. 3.
199 Ibid., p. 2.

200 Eleventh report of the African Institution, p. 15.

201 ‘Extract from the fundamental laws of the African Institution, explanatory of the means whereby it proposed

and has succeeded in promoting civilization and improvement in Africa and application of the same laws with
such additions as local circumstances require [in Java]’, 14 February 1816, in Eleventh report of the African Institution,
pp. 77-78.
202 Ibid., p. 78.

203 Ibid., p. 79.

204 Ibid., p. 79.

205 Ibid., p. 80.




                                                          105
