Anti-slavery


the benefactors of the human race’.229 Johnston enclosed with his letter copies of the eighth

and ninth reports of the African Institution. Poignantly, the institution’s ninth report included

an article on proceedings under the Slave Trade Act in Ceylon.230 It recounted, in particular,

the trial of an Arabic captain, Ahmad Kassim Patchiren, who was ‘well known in all the

different ports of Madagascar, and of the Eastern Coast of Africa’ and who had been accused

of abducting a child in Galle.231 Many of the jurors would have been personally familiar with

this trial, as it had played out in front of a grand jury ‘composed of the Dutch gentlemen of

Colombo’ in 1814.232 No doubt Johnston understood its significance.

         If Johnston thought he needed to persuade the special jurymen to endorse his proposal

to end slavery, however, he was mistaken. Some of the jurymen had personal experiences of

slavery, while others argued for slave rights. In June 1815, Johannes Stork came to the aid of

his niece, Carolina Stork, when she was trafficked from Tuticorin in India to Colombo by J.

Matthyse, the commander of a cutter named Tartar.233 Matthyse abducted Carolina, who was

‘between 13 & 14 years’, without the knowledge of her parents, and abused her during the

voyage to Colombo.234 Once Johannes and his wife, Mrs Armour, learnt about Carolina’s

arrival in Colombo, they petitioned the city’s magistrate, Thomas Twistleton, asking him to

arrest Matthyse. Yet while Twistleton briefly apprehended Matthyse, he erred on taking the

case further: he was unsure, he said, whether the case fell within his jurisdiction, as the crime

had begun in Tuticorin. Moreover, Matthyse had presented bail, which he was inclined to

accept, despite Johannes’s numerous protestations. Eventually, Carolina was rehoused with

her aunt, while the supreme court under Alexander Johnston intervened to refuse Matthyse’s

bail.235 As such, Johannes would have had strong motivations to support Johnston’s proposal.

His fellow juror Richard Morgen also favoured slave rights: when a petitioner, Louis Perera,

requested that Morgen provide him with a copy of a slave deed from the Dutch period so that

he might prove that someone was a slave, Morgen retorted that it was none of his business.




229 Ibid., p. 95.
230 ‘Proceedings under the Slave Trade Felony Act in the island of Ceylon’, in Ninth report of the directors of the African
Institution (London, 1815), pp. 88-111.
231 ‘Copy of a letter from the Hon. Sir Alexander Johnston’, in Eleventh report of the African Institution, pp. 95-96.

232 Ibid., p. 96.

233 Twistleton to Colonial Secretary, 24 June 1815, SLNA, 6/490.

234 Ibid.

235 Ibid.




                                                          109
