Anti-slavery


correspondence with England and Holland’ to draw greater ‘public attention both in Great

Britain and the United Netherlands’ to the ‘Slave-traffic … in the Eastern Archipelago’.206

         Frederik’s intervention reshaped the popular narrative concerning the institution. In

April 1816, a correspondent calling himself ‘Philo-Colonius’ wrote to the Gazette, observing

that the ‘horrors attendant on the traffic … had been pathetically depicted to the [Dutch]

Colonists’ and suggesting that they would have openly supported the institution from the

start had they not been disparaged by British chauvinists.207 ‘No public proof was … extant of

their being insensible’ to the institution’s ‘principles … or deaf to the arguments breathed

forth in almost every work published in their own Country during the last twenty years’, he

said.208 However, Frederik’s work also helped Raffles’s information-gathering efforts and his

attempt to establish control over Java and the Malay archipelago. The public involvement of

the Dutch in the institution allowed the British to cast it as a society that brought colonists

together to ‘raise the fallen and succour the oppressed’.209 Yet the institution itself continued

to act as a vehicle through which Raffles gained legal information from slaves, slavers, and

Dutch officials. William Colebrooke was enabled as its secretary to gather sworn depositions

documenting the experiences of slaves and the crimes of those involved with slaving. The

state’s antagonists in these documents were always described as Chinese traders or Malay

rajas; as such, these statements legitimised the growth of the British state over the archipelago

and its trade routes by legitimising the government’s management of slaves’ bodies in these

places.210 Among the depositions collected was the account of Thomas de Rozario, a ‘gun-

room steward’, who was taken by a Malay raja at Pulo Aura, before being sold into slavery.211

De Rozario’s position was unlawful, and ‘he suffered much for nine months’.212 It was only

when he was delivered to the British that he was relieved of his suffering and apprenticed.




206 Ibid., p. 80.
207 ‘Letter from Philo Colonius’, 20 April 1816, Java Government Gazette, pp. 2-3.
208 Ibid., p. 2.

209 Ibid., p. 2.

210 ‘Deposition of Thomas de Rozario’, February 1816, in Eleventh report of the African Institution, p. 92.

211 Ibid., pp. 91-2.

212 Ibid., p. 92.




                                                         106
