Three             Maria Fichat
                  Colonial hierarchies




Contrary to what we might sometimes imagine, travel between colonies was not always a

smooth process. Most of the Scaleby Castle’s passengers were forced to acquire permission

from authorities before they were allowed to board the ship. This was a long and drawn out

procedure that involved petitioning the governor, his subordinates, or the agents of the East

India Company (EIC) for their approval. One frequently had to invoke social and cultural

attachments in order to convince them of one’s right to travel. It was also probable that one

would have to repeat the procedure on arrival in one’s destination in order to secure the right

to stay there. The Capetonian Maria Fichat, who was moving to Batavia on the Scaleby Castle

to reunite with her British husband, James – a customs official in Raffles’s government – had

several attachments at her fingertips. In a petition to the Cape’s governor, Charles Somerset

(r. 1814-26), she drew attention to her British marriage and her Dutch family. She adopted the

moniker ‘Mrs. James Fischatt’ and noted that James was ‘in the Service of Government’, while

signing her petition as ‘Fischatt, born Styney’.1 She also suggested that she and her daughter

(also Maria) be permitted to ‘proceed on the H.C. Ship Scaleby Castle … to join her Husband’.2

Maria’s choice of attachments were shrewd. When her petition was received by officials, they

commented that they had ‘no objection to her proceeding with her child to Batavia’, so long

as the governor was completely ‘satisfied of the truth of the statement made by Mrs. Fichatt’.3



Dutch orders and the colonial state



Maria’s experiences are testament to the influence that particular hierarchies held over the

middle classes and ruling elite in the Anglo-Dutch colonies. Maria’s presentation of herself as

both Anglo-Dutch and married indeed allowed her to secure permission to travel across the


1 See Bird to Pringle, enclosing ‘Memorial of Mrs Fichat’, 5 July 1814, British Library (BL), India Office Records
(IOR) G/9/13, p. 90.
2 Ibid., p. 90.

3 Pringle to Bird, 5 July 1814, BL, IOR/G/9/20, p. 64.




                                                       116
