Colonial hierarchies


so-called natives (inlanders).21 Its definition varied across time and space, but towards the close

of the eighteenth century it was being used to refer to Europeans like the British and French,

Chinese, Malays, Moors, and some Malabars, as well as unidentified seafarers who arrived in

the colonies. Codifying the category of the stranger allowed the company to make laws for

those whom it did not always control, and extend its jurisdiction so that it could determine

their legal rights across a range of issues – to work, purchase land, and travel in the colony.

         This chapter shows how the status of the stranger was extended under the British and

used to prohibit the migration of non-Anglo-Dutch ethnic groups who were cast as foreign to

the colonies. It was targeted at particular peoples, with Malabars being subject to harsher

controls than Europeans like the French. In making this claim in terms of ethnicities, this

chapter casts ethnicity as a relational identity that emerged out of connections between and

among people, but which was also a critical interest of the ruling elite as a form of social

classification.22 In recent decades, scholars have reclaimed ethnicities from the state – which

was understood as their purveyor if not necessarily their progenitor – by describing them as

identities wrought through processes of self-examination relative to the people whom one

encountered on an everyday basis. This has allowed ethnicities to be imagined not as fixed

categories but as shifting constructs evoked through social and cultural attachments that

developed over time and with equations of power. Nevertheless, vague notions of ethnicity

were deployed by governing elites in discriminatory policies that tried to manipulate ethnic

groups. Increasingly, particular social and cultural attachments, like those associated with

Malabars, were seen to overlap with notions of strangeness, while others – specifically those

linked to the British and the Dutch – allowed one to distance oneself from the category.

         The second status that was important here was that of being married according to the

Roman-Dutch legal system. Roman-Dutch marriage was invariably Protestant and linked to

the Dutch Reformed Church (DRC) and occasionally Lutherans. It was regulated to prevent

strangers as well as servants and soldiers from establishing familial ties with burghers and




21 For the early usage of the category in Java, see Peter Carey, ‘Changing Javanese perceptions of the Chinese
communities in central Java, 1755-1825’, Indonesia 37 (1984), pp. 1-47, at p. 6.
22 These claims follow John L. Comaroff, ‘Ethnicity, nationalism, and the politics of difference in an age of

revolution’, in Edwin N. Wilmsen and Patrick McAllister, eds., The politics of difference: ethnic premises in a world of
power (London, 1996), pp. 162-85; see also Sujit Sivasundaram, ‘Ethnicity, indigeneity, and migration in the advent
of British rule to Sri Lanka’, American Historical Review 115 (2010), pp. 428-52.



                                                        120
