Colonial hierarchies


higher-ranking colonists and assuming their legal rights.23 Partly this was a corollary of the

Protestant leanings of the VOC’s leadership, who felt that marriage should be a protected

Christian status derived from the authority of the DRC – which in the revolutionary age

seemed to be in decline. Yet the regulations were also driven by a wider concern about the

threat posed to Dutch colonialism by the influence of strangers and servants.24 The process of

becoming married in the Dutch colonies was accordingly elaborate. If one wanted to marry

across lines of ethnicity or class it became even more complicated. This chapter shows how

governing elites in the Anglo-Dutch colonies continued to view Roman-Dutch marriage as an

important status even under the British. It shows that the VOC’s regulations were kept alive

during this period and that such marriages were linked closely to the right to migrate. This

consolidated a hierarchy that prioritised the migration of the middle classes and ruling elite

and sanctified Roman-Dutch marriage over other relationships – diverging from British India,

where the distinction between marriage and concubinage was increasingly blurred.25

         Judging by her petition, Maria Fichat was well aware of the importance of a legal

Dutch marriage and Anglo-Dutch ethnicity for negotiating controls on migration. This

chapter uses her story, among others, to follow the history of Dutch hierarchies under the

British. It begins with an overview of the policies towards migrants introduced by the British

and Dutch at the time of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. It reveals that British

and Dutch ruling elites had different concerns: those in Britain and India stressed prohibition

and the surveillance of Europeans, while the Dutch perfected laws regulating marriage and

strangers. Nevertheless, ruling elites in the Anglo-Dutch colonies channelled the Dutch

categories when creating their own migration controls. This chapter uncovers this overlap

first by exploring the use of strangeness. It shows that the ruling elite applied notions of

strangeness in law that also held significance for the middle class. The status was deployed

against non-Anglo-Dutch ethnic groups to prevent their migration and negate their rights to



23 There was a longstanding historical relationship in the Dutch empire between marriage, citizenship rights, and
colonial settlement. See Bosma and Raben, Being ‘Dutch’, pp. 33-8; Schrikker, ‘Conflict resolution in Dutch Sri
Lanka’, pp. 227-44. On the regulation of marriage and sexual relations across empires more generally, see Tony
Ballantyne and Antoinette Burton, eds., Moving subjects: gender, mobility, and intimacy in an age of global empire
(Urbana, 2009).
24 Bosma and Raben, Being ‘Dutch’, pp. 27-8, 33-8.

25 In India, rights associated with marriage were by the end of the eighteenth century being accorded to people in

unmarried relationships if they were cohabiting, despite social pressure to marry. See Durba Ghosh, Sex and the
family in colonial India: the making of empire (Cambridge, 2006), pp. 35-68, 170-205, especially pp. 171-2.



                                                     121
