Colonial hierarchies


connection to an existing burgher family.60 These practices echoed those in the Netherlands,

where burghership was managed by government and linked to town privileges.61 Migrants

would also be subject to questioning from the church and the magistracy on arrival in a new

town, and sureties would be required from similar authorities in their place of origin.62

         The status of the stranger developed along these lines as a way of extending the VOC’s

authority while creating a set of latent subjects. In Java, the status appeared amid efforts by

the company to introduce legal protections for Chinese and Muslims who lived in other

kingdoms around the Malay archipelago during the seventeenth century.63 When the sultan

of Mataram signed a contract with the VOC in 1677, he agreed to acknowledge Chinese,

Malays, and Moors as ‘strangers’ who fell under the VOC’s jurisdiction.64 Later the category

was extended to include people ‘of whatever description’, besides Dutch and Javanese, and

linked to different legal regimes: strangers who travelled in Java’s interior without a passport

would be fined not by the interior landdrosts (Residents) but by the courts of justice based in

the coastal cities of Batavia, Semarang, and Surabaya.65 The category was also used in Ceylon,

where it was defined as including people like Moors, non-Dutch Europeans, and otherwise

unidentified migrants. In the southern parts of the island, which was increasingly framed by

the Dutch government as ethnically Sinhalese, the category could also include Malabars.66



60 One generally had to apply to company officials for burghership, and would be given a certificate on a successful
application. For a discussion of the process of application at the Cape and the considerations involved, see Truter
to Bird, 7 June 1816, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony, XI, pp. 119-24. See also Groenewald, ‘Entrepreneurs
and the making of a free burgher society’, pp. 65-83; Bosma and Raben, Being ‘Dutch’, pp. 36-7.
61 On burghership in the Netherlands, see Simon Schama, The embarrassment of riches: an interpretation of Dutch

culture in the golden age (London, 1988), p. 7.
62 Henk Looijestein and Marco van Leeuwen, ‘Registering Identity in the Dutch Republic’, in Keith Breckenridge

and Simon Szreter, Registration and recognition, pp. 211-52, at p. 213.
63 Carey, ‘Changing Javanese perceptions’, p. 6; ‘strangers’ were also banned from certain parts of Java early on,

see Jan Breman, Mobilising labour for the global coffee market: profits from an unfree work regime in colonial Java
(Amsterdam, 2015), pp. 91-2.
64 Carey, ‘Changing Javanese perceptions’, p. 6.

65 This is the status quo as described in ‘Regulation for the more effectual administration of justice in the provincial

courts of Java’, 11 February 1814, in Proclamations, regulations, advertisements, and orders, printed and published in the
island of Java by the British government and under its authority (3 vols., Batavia, 1816), II, p. 91. For laws leveraged
against ‘strangers’ such as the Chinese, see Leonard Blussé, ‘John Chinaman abroad: Chinese sailors in the service
of the VOC’, in Alicia Schrikker and Jeroen Touwen, eds., Promises and predicaments: trade and entrepreneurship in
colonial and independent Indonesia in the 19th and 20th centuries (Singapore, 2015), pp. 101-12, at p. 105.
66 As in ‘Plakkaat gebiedende alle illegaal vreemdelingen binnen drie maanden het grondgebied van de compagnie

te verlaten, verbiedende de opvarenden van buitlandse schepen om zonder toestemming aan land te gaan’, 12 July
1743, in Hovy, ed., Ceylonees plakkaatboek, II, pp. 481-2. See also ‘Biljet waarbij de (verpachte) van rechten van
vreemdelingen die langer dan een jaar en zonder speciale vergunning op Ceylon verblijven en geen oeliamsdienst
willen verrichten, geregeld wordt’, 12 August 1751, in Hovy, ed., Ceylonees plakkaatboek, II, pp. 563-5; ‘Biljet
verbiedende de Moslims, Chittys en anderen die aan de oeliamsdienst onderworpen zijn, om zonder borgstelling



                                                        127
