Colonial hierarchies


concubinage’, which were a ‘foul and filthy indecency’.86 From 1761, any ‘Gentoos or

Mahometans’ discovered ‘in concubinage with Christian women’ were imprisoned.87

         Anxieties about migrants in the revolutionary age gave rise to stronger regulations on

the process of marriage. Cape Town became a site of anxiety because it was flooded with

French mercenaries during the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War. Extramarital relations apparently

flourished, persuading the DRC – led by the young evangelical ministers Christiaan Fleck and

Helperus van Lier – to censure women who became pregnant outside wedlock.88 In Ceylon in

1788, the VOC likewise legislated on marriages between Protestants and Catholics, requiring

officials to inform the company in advance if they desired to marry a Catholic. This would

have targeted Portuguese burghers but also the soldiers who had been stationed there in the

Anglo-Dutch War.89 Regulations on marriage were also a key feature of Batavian rule at the

Cape. Superficially, the Batavians democratised marriage. They introduced denominational

equality while increasing the number of matrimonial courts beyond Cape Town. In 1804,

Jacob de Mist allowed marriages to be solemnised by municipal officials such as landdrosts,

‘without the Ceremony being performed in a Church’.90 However, in accordance with their

worries about strangers, the Batavians also made it more difficult for marriages to take place

with and among such people. Janssens ordered that ‘total strangers … not natives of this

Colony … or passengers who have been here a short time’ would ‘on no occasion be noted for

marriage unless by a written permission from the Governor’, who would investigate the ‘civil

state and situation of such stranger’. Marital commissioners were told to act ‘with the greatest

circumspection, especially towards strangers’ in cases where one party had previously been

married.91 Crucially, the Batavians introduced in law a provision denying strangers the right




86 Bosma and Raben, Being ‘Dutch’, p. 28; see also Markus P.M. Vink, Encounters on the opposite coast: the Dutch East
India Company and the Nayaka state of Madurai in the seventeenth century (Leiden, 2016), pp. 114-15.
87 ‘Index to the legislative acts of the Dutch government of the island of Ceylon’, in A collection of legislative acts of

the Ceylon government from 1796: distinguishing those now in force (2 vols., Colombo, 1853-4), I, p. 412.
88 Gerald Groenewald, ‘Een spoorloos vrouwspersoon: unmarried mothers, moral regulation, and the church at

the Cape of Good Hope’, Historia 53 (2008), pp. 5-32.
89 ‘Reglement op het trouwen van Protestantent met Katholieken’, in Hovy, ed., Ceylonees plakkaatboek, II, p. 894; on

the troops stationed in Ceylon during and after the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War, see Alicia Schrikker, Dutch and British
colonial intervention in Sri Lanka, 1780-1815 (Leiden, 2007), pp. 59-60.
90 ‘Proclamation’, 26 April 1806, in Richard Plaskett and T. Miller, eds., Proclamations, advertisements and other official

notices published by the government of the Cape of Good Hope (Cape Town, 1827), p. 23.
91 ‘Provisional orders respecting the celebration of marriages of the inhabitants of the country districts of the

Batavian colony the Cape of Good Hope’, 20 September 1804, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony, XI, p. 501.



                                                         131
