Colonial hierarchies


Generally, those deemed strangers were registered and given rights to live in certain spaces

if they carried out labour for the company or paid certain taxes. For instance, a law was

introduced in 1707 that forced those ‘coming to Colombo’ to report their names to officials, on

pain of being declared a ‘suspicious person’ and thrown in prison.67 In 1659, all Moors and

Hindus in the south of the island were required to live ‘in the gravettes [suburbs] of Galle,

Matura, & Belligam’, all coastal towns, ‘on pain of correction’.68 In 1744, ‘strangers – so Moors

… of the coast and elsewhere’ were told to register so that they could be marshalled for ‘oeliam

service’, a form of customary labour service typically associated with caste.69

         At the Cape, the status of being a stranger in many ways functioned as a precursor to

burghership. The Dutch fiscal Johannes Truter suggested that the status referred to ‘all …

persons who successively arrived here, not then or previously in the service of the East India

Company, or not having specially obtained Burgher right’, although he conceded that it

described most ‘persons of foreign nations’.70 Strangers had ‘only precarious residence’, were

not allowed to purchase land, ‘and were obliged on the first order of the Government to leave

the Colony’.71 The Swedish botanist Carl Pieter Thunberg suggested that strangers were also

generally charged more to purchase goods and foodstuffs than VOC servants or burghers.72

However, the government also allowed strangers to become burghers if they obeyed the law

or married into a burgher family, and there was likewise some slippage between the rights

conferred on burghers and certain strangers. This was a key point of contention between the

company and the burghers who protested as the Cape Patriots during the 1780s. The original

petition that the Cape Patriots sent to the company’s directors in the Netherlands – the Herren

XVII – demanded that ‘neither English, French or other foreigners should be allowed to settle

at the Cape or possess in property or … hire houses to exercise Burgher trades … or be allowed




en zonder aantekening hiervan in hun passen hun woonplaatsen te verlaten’, 14 April 1745, in Hovy, ed., Ceylonees
plakkaatboek, II, pp. 514-15.
67 ‘Statement of the placats which the late Dutch government made for the regulation of their settlements’, TNA,

CO 54/27, p. 24.
68 Ibid., pp. 19-20.

69 ‘Advertissement gelastende de illegaal op Ceylon verblijvende vreemdelingen om zich bij de secretaris van

politie te laten registreren en oeliamsdienst te verrichten’, in Hovy, ed., Ceylonees plakkaatboek, II, p. 505. Original
text: ‘Vreemdelingen – zoo Mooren, heydenen als anderen – van de overcuste en elders.’
70 Truter to Bird, 7 June 1816, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony, XI, p. 120.

71 Ibid., p. 120.

72 V.S. Forbes, ed., Carl Peter Thunberg: travels at the Cape of Good Hope, 1772-1775 (trans. J. Rudner and I. Rudner,

Cape Town, 1986), p. 167.



                                                       128
