Colonial hierarchies


the investigation and deportation of anyone politically undesirable.48 Customs officials were

appointed to Britain’s ports, where they recorded the names, occupations, and residential

histories of travellers. Travellers were then issued with a certificate that they were supposed

to show to local authorities when settling in a town. As with the company, certain people were

given an easier time than others: these included merchants and – until 1798 – those who had

resided in Britain for more than a year. Unlike the company, however, lawmakers in Britain

also made a clear distinction between Britons and so-called ‘foreigners’, a term that was

applied to everyone non-British, irrespective of their country of origin.49 As such, these rules

would have affected non-Europeans, even though they were not their principal target. By

1814, nuances were being made between Europeans and other foreigners: in July of that year,

any ships that arrived with ‘Asiatic sailors’ were ordered to pay a bond for each sailor to

ensure that they returned to Asia. These laws were strengthened over later decades.50

         The British controls had a knock-on effect for any Europeans hoping to travel onwards

to the colonies, because one’s politics and country of origin were conflated. This was especially

the case if the colonies were administered by the Crown, as one had to apply for permission

from the Colonial Office. While it was generally easier for Britons to travel to the Crown

colonies, other Europeans were compelled to prove that their political beliefs lay in the right

places. In 1812, the under-secretary of state for the colonies, Robert Peel, suggested to one

would-be traveller that ‘no person’ arriving in Britain ‘from France or from Countries under

the controul of France’ was ‘allowed to proceed to the colonial possessions of His Majesty’.51

This was despite the traveller marshalling an array of Britons to speak in his favour, and also

suggesting that he was a refugee from tyranny in the Netherlands who felt ‘more Indian than

Dutch’.52 Later in the same year, however, a woman, L. Bolres, was allowed to travel to the

Cape Colony because ‘her connections are good and … with affection to the British

government, some of them employed by it’.53 A merchant, Mr. Pelligrini, was likewise allowed

to travel to the Cape despite once serving in the French army because ‘he has left the French



48 This paragraph draws on information from Morieux, The channel, pp. 296-300.
49 Ibid., p. 299.
50 Land, ‘Customs of the sea’, pp. 181-2.

51 Peel to de Nys, 19 February 1812, BL, IOR/G/21/65.

52 De Nys to Peel, 17 February 1812, BL, IOR/G/21/65.

53 Caledon to Colonial Office (quoting Bathurst), July 1812, The National Archives UK (TNA), Colonial Office (CO)

48/16, pp. 26-7.



                                                    125
