Colonial hierarchies


licensing, building infrastructure, and overseeing new applications for burghership.81 Some

of these developments were writ large across other Dutch colonies. In December 1786,

residents of Colombo Fort, where the VOC kept its military and administrative offices, were

prohibited from hosting ‘strange serfs’ whose presence seemed to cause ‘debauchery’.82

         Relatedly, the VOC also increasingly regulated marriage during this period. For some

this was a response to growing anxieties about the decline of religiosity in the late eighteenth

century, but for others it was about consolidating the distinction between Dutch burghers and

company officials on the one hand and strangers, servants, and soldiers on the other. The

regulation of marriage therefore transcended politics. Historically, the process of becoming

married in Roman-Dutch law had always involved a degree of circumspection. Prospective

couples would be questioned by marital commissioners, and only after the granting of a

certificate would the ceremony be allowed to take place.83 Banns would then need to be

published on three successive Sundays.84 Additional stipulations were made for interracial

marriages: from July 1664, in Ceylon, all ‘native’ women who hoped to marry a Dutch colonist

were required to obtain a further certificate stating that they had confessed, while all those

who married soldiers were required to attend church at least once a week.85 Distinguishing

Roman-Dutch marriage as a legal status allowed the VOC to proscribe concubinage, which it

cast as un-Christian. Thus the Dutch in Ceylon introduced punishments for ‘whoredom and




81 For the origins of the Burgher Senate, see ‘Secretary of the Burgher Senate (Raad der Gemeente)’, Western Cape
Archives (WCA), 1/83, pp. 1-7.
82 ‘Plakkaat: politieverordening voor stad en kasteel van Colombo’, 28 December 1786, in Hovy, ed., Ceylonees

plakkaatboek, II, p. 869. Original text: ‘Maar degeene die daarenbooven aan vreemde lijfeygenen in zijn huys
geleegentheid mogt geeven tot dobbelen en speelen, dan wel tot zuypen en andere debauches, zal een boete van
vijftig rijxdaalders aan den fiskaal … verbeuren.’
83 On the process of marriage in the Cape Colony, as in the Netherlands and Dutch empire more generally, and its

connection to legal rights and colonial settlement, see Gerald Groenewald, ‘‘A mother makes no bastard’: family
law, sexual relations and illegitimacy in Dutch colonial Cape Town, c. 1652-1795’, African Historical Review 39
(2007), pp. 58-90, at pp. 63-4; see also Bosma and Raben, Being ‘Dutch’, pp. 33-8; for the VOC’s restrictions on
marriage among people of lower social classes, see Marion Peters, ‘VOC-vrouwen op de kust van Coromandel’,
Jaarboek van het centraal bureau voor genealogie 58 (2004), pp. 68-104; for the connection between marriage,
colonialism, and rights elsewhere in the early modern Dutch colonial world, see Susanah Shaw Romney, ‘With &
alongside his housewife’: claiming ground in New Netherland and the early modern Dutch empire’, William and
Mary Quarterly 73 (2016), pp. 187-224; Laura J. Mitchell, ‘Belonging: family formation and settler identity in the
VOC Cape’, South African Historical Journal 69 (2007), pp. 103-25.
84 This was typical of marriages across the Dutch empire. For the practice at the Cape, see ‘Provisional orders

respecting the celebration of marriages of the inhabitants of the country districts of the Batavian colony the Cape
of Good Hope’, 20 September 1804, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony, XI, p. 504.
85 ‘Resolutie dat inlandse vrouwen slechts op vertook van een bewijsbriefje van de kerkeraad dat zij belijdenis

doen, zullen mogen trouwen met Nederlanders’, 18 July 1664, in Hovy, ed., Ceylonees plakkaatboek, I, p. 115.



                                                     130
