Colonial hierarchies


to become an ‘Inhabitant or Burgher’ if they ‘married during their stay in this Colony’.92 They

would need to receive the ‘permission of the Governor’ regardless of their status.93

         Amid their efforts to draw out the distinction between burghers and strangers, the

Batavians also denied access to Roman-Dutch marriage to those sections of society who were

less socially respectable, like soldiers, servants, and slaves. As we saw in previous chapters,

burghers frequently distinguished themselves from these groups.94 Thus, according to a law

introduced by the commissioner-general, J.A. de Mist, in 1804, no soldiers under the rank of

officer were permitted to marry ‘without their producing a written permission from the

Commander of the Corps to which they belong’.95 Equally, the marital commissioners were

told ‘not to note … for matrimony’ any marriages among ‘Christians with heathens, slaves

with free people, nor slaves among themselves’.96 The previous year, the government had also

introduced a law binding servants to their employers for eighteen months after their arrival.

This law empowered the Batavian government to imprison and even expel ‘without …

process’ anyone defined as a ‘Labourer, Coachman, or Servant, House Keeper, Ladies Maid

[or] Servant Maid’ who departed the service of their employer.97 Crucially, one corollary of

this law was that it prevented such people from being married, as it became an offence to

‘harbour the said serviceable People’ – even if they had been discharged by their employer –

without official approval.98 Clearly, the Dutch practice of managing individuals was one of

the few political compromises of the revolutionary era – unlike Britain’s partisan prohibitions.



Stranger things



Writing to Governor Somerset in 1818, Johannes Truter suggested that the distinction between

strangers and burghers at the Cape had become muddied in the first years of British rule in


92 Ibid., p. 505.
93 Ibid., p. 505.
94 See the memorial sent by burghers in Sri Lanka to Alexander Johnston complaining over the social composition

of his juries. ‘Petition addressed to Alexander Johnston by over 40 burghers’, 15 July 1815, SLNA, 25.1/27.
95 ‘Statement of the laws, ordinances, and regulation at present in force in the colony of the Cape of Good Hope

with respect to the form and manner in which marriages should be celebrated in order to secure their validity’, 22
April 1818, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony XI, p. 494.
96 ‘Provisional orders respecting the celebration of marriages of the inhabitants of the country districts of the

Batavian colony the Cape of Good Hope’, 20 September 1804, in Theal, ed., Records of the Cape Colony, XI, p. 502.
97 ‘Extract of a proclamation issued by the governor & council of the Cape of Good Hope’, 30 June 1803, TNA, CO

48/2, pp. 335-8, at p. 336.
98 Ibid., pp. 337-8.




                                                     132
