Land and labour


between the British and Dutch empires, it suggests that Chinese who had once worked as the

engine of Dutch colonialism in Batavia now played a crucial role in Britain’s rise.

         The aim of this chapter is to uncover the continued significance of Chinese migration

into the Anglo-Dutch colonies for the making of British colonial policies during the imperial

meridian. Specifically, it argues that the Chinese who travelled to and resided in Java and Sri

Lanka during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were a critical influence on policies of

land and labour introduced by British officials in those places. Indeed, Chinese migrants

persuaded those officials to appraise and adjust the policies of their Dutch predecessors. In

the context of the Second British Empire, these developments informed a broader transition

towards the widespread use of coercive policies that underpinned the rise of autocracy and

even determined colonial attitudes towards Chinese sailors such as Ani. Another aim of this

chapter is to reposition scholarship on the Chinese in the Second Empire so that it takes into

account the legacy of Sino-Dutch engagement in southeast Asia that preceded the growth of

the British empire in that region of the Indian Ocean world. Studies of Anglo-Chinese

engagement at this time have generally focused on exchanges of knowledge in China or on

Chinese who came to British colonies such as Penang and worked on board ships as sailors

from the 1780s. Such narratives chart Anglo-Chinese interaction through a series of well-

known events and exchanges, starting with the Macartney Embassy that visited the Qianlong

emperor in 1793 and charting the ascent of the tea and opium trades and the coercion of

Chinese migrants into indenture.12 This chapter shows how some of these developments were

connected to a longer history of Chinese migration between the former Dutch colonies.

         This chapter consequently highlights the importance of sites of Chinese migration for

British colonialism in southeast Asia, and makes a special argument for the particularity of

those based in former Dutch colonies including Java and Ceylon. In so doing, it draws on

Ulrike Hillemann’s suggestion that Chinese migrant settlements should be brought more

closely into narratives of British imperial history, as contact zones where colonial thinking


12 See, for instance, Ulrike Hillemann, Asian empire and British knowledge, pp. 106-87; Henrietta Harrison, ‘Chinese
and British diplomatic gifts in the Macartney Embassy of 1793’, English Historical Review 123 (2018), pp. 65-97; Fa-
ti Fan, British naturalists in Qing China: science, empire, and cultural encounter (London, 2004), pp. 11-39; Man-Cheong,
‘‘Asiatic’ sailors and the East India Company’, pp. 167-81. On the rise and fall of the Anglo-Chinese opium trade,
see Carl A. Trocki, Opium and empire: Chinese society in colonial Singapore, 1800-1910 (London, 1990); for indenture
and the use of Chinese labour more generally, see Richard B. Allen, ‘Slaves, convicts, abolitionism and the global
origins of the post-emancipation indentured labour system’, Slavery & Abolition 35 (2014), pp. 328-48; Stan Neal,
‘Jardine Matheson and Chinese migration in the British empire, 1833-53’ (D. Phil thesis, Northumbria, 2015).


                                                         156
