Land and labour


work in Trinidad in 1806.22 Encounters between Britons and Chinese aboard the East India

Company’s ships – where Chinese sailors were employed through similar agreements – are

likewise seen to have encouraged the racialisation of the Chinese and their work prior to

indenture’s mid-nineteenth century moment.23 Yet this chapter argues that modes of work

shifted unevenly between freedom and coercion through this period, with the character of

Chinese work in particular fluctuating with the twists and turns of the Anglo-Dutch rivalry.

The Lankan migrants were part of a scheme that promoted freeholding and freer modes of

work. It was their scheme’s failure amid Java’s invasion that gave rise to more sinister forms

of labour and informed the wider appropriation of systems like rajakariya in Sri Lanka.

           This chapter begins with a broad overview of these themes. It examines the longer

history of Chinese migration to southeast Asia and the peculiarity of the relationship between

the Chinese and the Dutch in Java – as well as the shifting fortunes of Chinese migrants that

accompanied the emergence of the British empire. It demonstrates that the British adopted

inconsistent policies towards land and labour across their Indian Ocean empire, creating a

space for interventions from the Dutch and the Chinese. Afterwards, it shows how British

engagements with Chinese in Java in the late eighteenth century gave rise to specific visions

of how labour and landholding might operate in the British empire. In particular, it follows

the statesman and author John Barrow, who visited Java with the Macartney Embassy in 1793

and proposed on the basis of his experiences that Chinese migrants might be induced to

become freeholders who would cultivate new crops for the empire. Barrow’s ideas were put

in practice in Ceylon after the British took the colony from the Dutch – a marker, no doubt, of

Britain’s rising interest in southeast Asia. Finally, this chapter demonstrates that the failure of

the Sri Lanka schemes coincided with a shift in Anglo-Dutch relations following the invasion

of Java that encouraged British officials to entrench coercive policies. It shows how officials

like Thomas Raffles (r. 1811-16) appropriated negative Dutch stereotypes about the Chinese

and replicated the sorts of policies that the Dutch East India Company (VOC) had used against

them. These had broader repercussions across the British empire, in particular in Singapore.




22   Allen, ‘Slaves, convicts, abolitionism’, pp. 328-48.
23   Man-Cheong, ‘‘Asiatic’ sailors and the East India Company’, pp. 167-81.


                                                       159
