Land and labour


would have any expenses incurred during the voyage deducted from their salary.40 Sailors

were exempt from the poll tax that was levied on other Chinese in Batavia, but had to pay a

temporary tax of twelve stuivers a month during their time there.41 A sailor might nevertheless

experience greater degrees of freedom the further afield they travelled from Batavia. James C.

Armstrong observes that life at the Cape for Chinese – whether sailors, convicts, or exiles –

was generally freer than in Batavia, as Cape authorities did not try to ban forms of Chinese

sociability, such as gambling houses, which were heavily regulated in Java.42 Yet in Europe

the company’s grip tightened once again: Chinese sailors were confined to the VOC’s wharfs.

Blussé suggests that their living conditions were probably ‘relaxed but … very boring’.43

         Despite the preponderance of regulations in Batavia, some Chinese were able to amass

wealth and land, especially the overseers and devolved officials like captains. The Chinese

author Wang Dahai described how the wealthiest Chinese owned sumptuous gardens and

plantations with varieties of fruit and crops. He recorded that the captain at Pekalongan, a

city in central Java, maintained one ‘about an acre in extent, beautifully shaded with trees’,

with ‘all kinds of flowers and plants’, a half-acre grove of orange trees, a lattice covered in

vines, a sirih (betel leaf) ‘plantation’, and numerous coconut trees.44 Chinese likewise rented

gardens and plantations from Dutch landowners or Javanese nobility and turned them into

sugar plantations that were farmed by Javanese labourers or slaves. These were particularly

common in the ommelanden, which were the locus of the Chinese rebellion in 1740.45 Writing

in the 1730s, the author Cheng Xunwo – who travelled from Fujian to Batavia to work as a

teacher – described how sugar mills had been built across the ommelanden, and were staffed

by ‘the budie millers, who run the mill; caifu, who take care of the books and the apparatus;

and the manlu, who supervise the workers’.46 In the eastern provinces of Besuki, Panarukan,

and Probolinggo, the Han family from Fujian became prominent landowners after Herman


40 Ibid., p. 107.
41 Ibid., p. 105.
42 James C. Armstrong, ‘The Chinese exiles’, in Nigel Worden, ed., Cape Town between east and west: social identities

in a Dutch colonial town (Hilversum, 2012), pp. 101-27.
43 Blussé, ‘John Chinaman’, p. 109.

44 Ong Tae Hae (Wang Dahai), The Chinaman abroad, or, a desultory account of the Malayan archipelago, particularly of

Java (trans. W.H. Medhurst, Shanghai, 1849), pp. 11-12. For a brief biographical description of Wang Dahai, see
Blussé and Dening, eds., Chinese annals, p. xii. Blussé and Dening record that Wang Dahai’s work was originally
published under the title Haido Yizhi in 1806.
45 Blussé and Dening, eds., Chinese annals, p. 11.

46 Cheng Xunwo, ‘Brief account of galaba’, c. 1740, in Blussé and Dening, eds., Chinese annals, p. 209, for a brief

biography of Xunwo, see p. 47.


                                                       162
