Land and labour


year, with ‘teas, raw silk … coarse china-ware, sweetmeats, nankeen, [and] paper’.58 Some of

these junks even sailed onwards to Sri Lanka. The British captain Robert Percival observed

that ‘every year … a Portuguese or Chinese ship’ arrived in Colombo ‘from Macao with teas,

sugar, candied sweet-meats … these articles meet with a very speedy sale’.59 He suggested

that the junk’s arrival caused ‘a great deal of gold and silver to be carried out of the island’.60



Land and labour in the early Second British Empire



In the context of the Second British Empire, Chinese migration became significant for the way

in which it shaped British policies towards land and labour. Broadly, these policies oscillated

during this period between approaches that were liberal or coercive in character. For instance,

reforms of landowning aimed to induce local landowners or yeoman peasants into cultivating

land. Yet these reforms were intended to extend British control by generating support for the

colonial regimes among landowning groups like Bengal’s zamindars, while also allowing land

to be brought under cultivation and registered by government. Thus in 1793, the East India

Company in Bengal agreed with zamindars to both fix the revenues raised by the state from

their land and establish for them permanent security of tenure, in an agreement known as the

‘Permanent Settlement’.61 The effects of the settlement were mixed, as some zamindars could

not afford the taxes, but it generally guaranteed their position as a loyal local elite.62

         The zamindari system is habitually compared with the ryotwari system implemented in

southern India by the administrator Thomas Munro, initially during his management of the

ceded districts around Madras between 1800 and 1807.63 Drawing on Scottish agrarian

patriotism as well as the system of land revenue used by the former ruler of Mysore, Tipu

Sultan, Munro commanded that lands should be assessed for taxation on an individual basis

at the level of each independent peasant.64 Assessments were carried out by a collector and

local subordinates, and the collector was granted the judicial authority to punish any abuses


58 Raffles, History of Java, I, p. 228.
59 Robert Percival, An account of the island of Ceylon (2nd edn, London, 1805), pp. 138.
60 Ibid., p. 138.

61 Bayly, Imperial meridian, p. 156.

62 Ibid., p. 156.

63 Ibid., p. 157; see also Alicia Schrikker, Dutch and British colonial intervention in Sri Lanka: expansion and reform

(Leiden, 2007), pp. 191-2.
64 Schrikker, Dutch and British colonial intervention, p. 192; Bayly, Imperial meridian, p. 157.




                                                        165
