Land and labour


of power. Munro believed that this encouraged farmers to cultivate land, while fostering a

key connection between government and peasant. In fact, advocates of the rytowari and

zamindari systems alike were motivated by the idea – advanced by Jeremy Bentham in his 1787

work Defence of usury – that land was productive when unfettered.65 This contrasted with the

government-controlled lands and sharecropping tenancies that were frequently hallmarks of

Dutch empire, at least before Daendels sold the Dutch regime’s lands in eastern Java.66

        Incongruously, ryotwari was habitually used to justify the extension of colonial power

and the removal of indigenous headmen. In India, the extension of the ryotwari system drove

colonists to disband the poligars who had formerly managed the distribution of land. In Sri

Lanka, Governor Thomas Maitland (r. 1805-11) likewise used the rhetoric of ryotwari when he

tried to degrade the powers of the island’s headmen.67 Writing to the colonial secretary, Lord

Castlereagh, in January 1809, Maitland complained that crop yields were rapidly improving

in districts like Mannar and Trincomalee but not in ‘the Cingalese part of the Island, where

Government is alone able to get at the Native through the Medium of a Head Man

[mudaliyars]’.68 Maitland’s dislike of the mudaliyars was already well-established: on another

occasion, he had blamed the ‘uncivilized state of the island’ on ‘their authority subversive of

every amelioration and improvement and acting in the strongest sense of … imperium in

imperior’.69 In fact, the headmen had long acted as tax collectors and administrators of land

and work, organising the distribution of tenancies and the extraction of labour services.70 Yet

Maitland began a policy of ‘diminishing the Power of the Modeliars’.71 First, he dispatched

his subordinates to conduct land surveys of Sri Lanka as well as Madras, where the ryotwari

system was now in full swing. Second, he tried to undermine the headmen by granting greater

powers to colonial officials that allowed them to control taxes in place of the headmen.72

        British colonial labour policies likewise bridged ideas of freedom and coercion. Thus

despite Frederick North’s abolition of service tenures in Ceylon, slavery remained common.

North’s own use of enslaved Mozambicans as soldiers, for instance, drew the attention of


65 Bayly, Imperial meridian, pp. 158-9.
66 Ibid., p. 159.
67 The argument here references Schrikker, Dutch and British colonial intervention, pp. 193-4.

68 Maitland to Castlereagh, 10 January 1809, The National Archives UK (TNA), Colonial Office (CO) 54/31.

69 Schrikker, Dutch and British colonial intervention, p. 190.

70 Ibid., p. 194.

71 Maitland to Castlereagh, 10 January 1809, TNA, CO 54/31.

72 Schrikker, Dutch and British colonial intervention, pp.190-4.




                                                    166
