Land and labour


belonging to of one of the Council’s members and treated to a large dinner.93 Barrow’s early

experiences of Java were therefore mediated through a Dutch colonial palate: he was fed a

collection of Javanese foods, ‘fowls in curries and pillaws [pilau],’ and ‘an elegant desert … of

Chinese pastry’.94 The diplomats were later taken to festivities at Alting’s residence, as part of

Java’s celebrations for the stadtholder’s birthday. Barrow saw the governor’s garden lit up by

‘thousands of Chinese painted lanterns, hanging in festoons from the branches of the trees’,

while guests were treated to an ‘exhibition of fire-works, partly European and partly

Chinese’.95 Standing front of the house were many ‘theatres’, where ‘Chinese comedians were

entertaining the crowd … they continued to act without intermission the whole night’.96

         Barrow used his time in Java to investigate and romanticise the forms of cultivation

and landholding practised by the Chinese under the Dutch in Java. He observed that the

Chinese owned or rented landholdings, on which they cultivated gardens and plantations. In

Batavia itself, they were ‘horticulturalists rather than agriculturalists’, as they administered

smaller plots of land that were dedicated to the growth of ‘every species of vegetable for trade

… in all seasons of the year, and at times when the most indefatigable attention [is] required’.97

Later speaking in front of a House of Commons select committee investigating Chinese

migration to the Caribbean, he observed that ‘all the gardens in the … town are cultivated by

the Chinese’, as well as ‘pepper plantations, coffee plantations, and all the rice grounds’.98

         Central to Barrow’s narrative was a sense of Chinese expertise, picking up on the

particular industries in which they were involved in Java. He remarked, for example, that

they cultivated sugar cane – which was also boiled as a form of purification – and planted

catjang (cowpea) in pods resting on the earth. Catjang was, in Barrow’s eyes, especially

valuable for ‘the oil expressed from the seed, which is … also exported to China’.99 Barrow

reported that the Chinese used unique modes of fertilisation to help with the growth of crops,

sinking ‘large tubs or earthen vessels’ into their ‘gardens’, to collect ‘animal and vegetable




93 Ibid., p. 204.
94 Ibid., p. 206.
95 Ibid., p. 207.

96 Ibid., p. 208.

97 Barrow, A voyage to Cochinchina, pp. 217-218.

98 ‘Minutes of evidence taken before the select committee on west-India labourers’, 1 May 1811, in House of Commons

Papers 225, vol. 2, appendix 1, p. 13.
99 Barrow, A voyage to Cochinchina, p. 190.




                                                      170
