Land and labour


Graham, the migrants put in their homes tablets with ‘Chinese characters’, upon which were

written ‘the names of the forefathers of the families’, and which were hung over high tables

adorned with lamps.157 Such objects – which represented a connection with the migrants’

birthplaces, and likewise underscored the importance of migration to the survival of the

patriline – were a common feature of Chinese homes in southeast Asia.158 As Mark Frost has

written, they indicate that Chinese migrants envisaged their lands as key parts of a wider

Chinese region of ‘haibang’ (maritime states) connected by the trading networks that spanned

the Nanyang and even reached to the Qing empire itself.159 They were often complemented

by the construction of temples, administrative buildings, and fraternal kongsi which acted as

regional centres for dispersed clans.160 In Galle, they suggest that the Chinese viewed their

lands as settlements rather than spaces of cultivation, and their fields as homes rather than

farmland. They also suggest that the buildings intended by colonists as homes may have been

repurposed by the migrants as administrative or organisational structures. In fact, Gibson

observed that the migrants had even appointed two men, ‘who seemed to be held in some

estimation among themselves’ as headmen, who perhaps needed a headquarters.161 Through

the headmen, Gibson observed, ‘all grievances were made known to the Government’.162

         The headmen were almost certainly more than intermediaries. The migrants also

began to organise trade and labour, and would likely have managed community groups to

distribute the rewards of cultivation among themselves. Gibson noted that they had solicited

trade in several ways. Initially, they had had grown ‘onions, pompions [pumpkins], yams,

and those sort of things’ by themselves, and sold these goods in nearby markets. Then, they

had married local women and dispatched them ‘to attend and sell the things in the market’.

Finally, they sent letters to China requesting certain foodstuffs, which Gibson naively believed

were only ‘for culinary purposes’, rather than commerce.163 These included ‘productions …

introduced from the East’, specifically ‘different kinds of vegetables’ and black pepper



157 Maria Graham, Journal of a residence in India (Edinburgh, 1813), p. 94.
158 Adam McKeown, ‘The social life of Chinese labour’, in Tagliacozzo and Chang, eds., Chinese circulations, pp. 37-
61; see also Frost, ‘Emporium in imperio’, pp. 29-66.
159 Frost, ‘Emporium in imperio’, pp. 46-47.

160 Ibid., p. 48.

161 ‘Minutes of evidence taken before the select committee on west-India labourers’, 2 May 1811, in House of

Commons Papers 225, vol. 2, appendix 1, p. 31.
162 Ibid., p. 31.

163 Ibid., p. 31.




                                                      179
