Land and labour


as to encourage another Trial’.179 Critically, he suggested that freer forms of landholding had

undermined the scheme: there had been ‘some error in the mode of managing People’, which

had led to their becoming ‘a burthern to Government without benefit … from their Industry

their Knowledge or their Example’.180 Indeed the migrants had taken up ‘gambling and

profligate Persuits or idleness’, subversive behaviours associated with the Chinese in Java.181



Java’s invasion and the rise of coercion



The failure of the Sri Lanka schemes coincided with the invasion of Java in 1811, which

skewed British perceptions of Chinese migration away from the sorts of views held by John

Barrow and towards the negative stereotypes spread by the latter’s Dutch regime. Prior to

Java’s invasion, the British and the Dutch had been at loggerheads – not least in their rhetoric

– and the promotion of an oppressed migrant community who might be rendered free like the

Chinese appealed to the former’s sense of superiority. Yet, with the invasion, British colonists

no longer needed to rely on Barrow’s now twenty-year-old observations of Java’s Chinese,

and adopted more immediate Dutch sources to inform their policies and perspectives.

Equally, the threat of the Dutch was extinguished in southeast Asia, allowing more cordial

relations to flourish between the Europeans in place of the Anglo-Chinese connection.

          British colonists in Java quickly turned on the Chinese. Citing the Dutch executive

council, Thomas Raffles suggested that Chinese only ‘acquired opulence’ by forcing the

Javanese peasantry to become ‘slaves of the soil … all the public markets are farmed by them

and the degeneracy and poverty of the lower orders are proverbial’.182 In the first volume of

his History of Java, Raffles indeed quoted from Dirk van Hogendorp’s report on the island –

which we might recall was given to him by a Dutch member of the Council, Herman Muntighe

– in which he cast the Chinese as both monopolistic and oppressive. ‘They have exclusively

all the farms of the government taxes and revenues, both in the Company’s districts and in

the dominions of the native princes’, van Hogendorp claimed, ‘the burthens they have to bear

are, on the contrary, very trifling … they are exempt from all feudal and personal services,


179 Ibid., p. 118.
180 Ibid., p. 118.
181 Ibid., p. 118.

182 Raffles, History of Java, I, p. 225.




                                             182
