Company and state


Thibault, were central to the implementation of these policies. This chapter reveals that the

British were struck by the same anxieties to continue the VOC’s policies in the Cape Colony

and Ceylon. First, it examines the improvement of forts by the British. It follows the engineer

George Bridges, who worked with Thibault at the Cape on the upkeep of the Dutch

fortifications, before moving to Ceylon and applying similar plans to the fort in Trincomalee.

Bridges’ contemporaries in Colombo Fort also worked with the Dutch to strengthen its

defences. Second, this chapter reveals the persistence of Anglo-Dutch forts as protected spaces

for settlement, and the ways in which this was reflected in the bureaucratic procedures that

emerged around them. It follows one of the more famous residents of the Cape’s castle, the

diarist Anne Barnard, and the magistrate Thomas Twistleton in Colombo Fort, and argues

that they attempted to consolidate the fort as a site of colonisation secure from the threat of

subversive politics and people. Finally, it returns to Thomas Harington, to show how the

regulations applied to the fort were exported to city. As a new resident of Cape Town and a

source of official anxiety, Thomas reveals this transition. This chapter shows how he

subverted and followed emergent regulations when building his new home in Cape Town,

called Harington House, which was designed after the style of none other than Louis Thibault.



Defence and the maritime fort in the Napoleonic Wars



As with the news of revolution that preceded it in 1789, the announcement of war between

France and its European rivals – Austria and Prussia from 1792, and Britain, Portugal, and

Spain from 1793 – ricocheted around the Indian Ocean world, prompting different responses

from colonists.35 The French persisted with a strategy perfected during the eighteenth century

of cutting the British out of the Indian Ocean through Mauritius, while neglecting their forts

in Pondicherry and Chandernagore in India. French strategists had long imagined Mauritius,

small and fort-less, as the ‘Gibraltar of the East’, and ‘the Key to the Indian Ocean’, and had

overseen an extensive programme of battery-construction along the island’s coastline with




35 On the movement of revolutionary ideas around the Indian Ocean during this period, see C.A. Bayly, ‘The
‘revolutionary age’ in the wider world, c. 1790-1830’, in Richard Bessel, Nicholas Guyatt, and Jane Rendall, eds.,
War, empire and slavery, 1770-1830 (Basingstoke, 2010), pp. 21-43.


                                                      199
