Company and state


elsewhere – in, say, the British or French empires – were neglected or demilitarised. These

principles were upheld in bureaucratic procedures that were overlaid first onto the fort and

later transposed over the city, where they were combined with further attempts to define and

defend spaces of colonial settlement. Accordingly, this chapter makes the argument that forms

of territorialisation and settlement endured across the period encompassing the decline of

company governance and the emergence of the modern colonial state. Territorialisation, as a

process through which a particular geographical space is categorised and arranged under

authority, was manifested in the construction of military defences around a certain space; the

introduction of new rules and regulations attached to that space; and its observation and

surveillance.31 Historically, territoriality has been linked with stasis, but this chapter follows

recent historiographical and theoretical interventions in suggesting that it was an important

consequence of the intersection of different people and strands of knowledge across the Indian

Ocean world.32 Settlement refers to a form of colonisation premised on the establishment of a

community via the exclusion of others.33 In the context of the British empire, this generally

meant white colonisation, which was realised through violence and the disenfranchisement

of non-whites. Its analysis has been a primary concern of historians of southern Africa and

other settler colonies, like Australia, but it has been neglected in the Sri Lankan setting.34

         This chapter begins by examining the different military strategies and policies of the

French, British, and Dutch during the revolutionary wars, which, for the latter, underscored

the place of the fort as a key site of territorialisation and settlement. It argues that VOC officials

panicked about the growth of revolutionary forces across the globe and the threat of invasion.

Unlike the French or British, they attempted to improve the defensive capabilities of their forts

in the strategic locations of Ceylon and the Cape, while underscoring their function as

protected sites of settlement. Certain colonists, such as the Capetonian architect Louis Michel


31 For a narrative of territorialisation in relation to the island, see Sivasundaram, Islanded, especially pp. 92-3 on the
importance of ‘fixity’ at this moment for colonial governance.
32 On the theoretical link between deterritorialization and globalization, see Arjun Appadurai, ‘Disjuncture and

difference in the global cultural economy’, Theory, Culture & Society 7 (1990), pp. 295-310; conversely, on
territorialization in the context of globalization, see Josiah McC. Heyman and Howard Campbell, ‘The
anthropology of global flows: a critical reading of Appadurai’s ‘Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural
economy’’, Anthropological Theory 9 (2009), pp. 131-48. On inequalities formed at the intersection of global
connections, see Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, Friction: an ethnography of global connection (Oxford, 2005), pp. 1-20.
33 On colonial settlement in the context of the Second British Empire, see Lisa Ford, Settler sovereignty: jurisdiction

and indigenous people in America and Australia, 1788-1836 (Harvard, 2010), especially pp. 26-9.
34 See, for instance, Elizabeth Elbourne, Blood ground: colonialism, missions, and the contest for Christianity in the Cape

Colony and Britain, 1799-1853 (Montreal, 2002);


                                                          198
