Company and state


Soldiers, Burghers, Tradesmen, Blacks and Whites, and others’.85 The most recent attempt to

segregate the fort was made in 1786 by Governor Willem van de Graaff (r. 1785-94). Ostensibly

fearing the ‘eradication of good customs’ and ‘sinfulness’, van de Graaff’s regime ordered all

‘blacks or free slaves’ out of the fort, and banned anyone from living there ‘except for the

Company’s servants, their widows and children, and those with burgher status that have [a]

particular tradecraft … making them useful and necessary to the residents of the Fort’.86

         After arriving in Ceylon, van Angelbeek quickly positioned Colombo Fort as a critical

redoubt for the Dutch company in Asia. Thus, VOC servants, their families, and trade goods

were brought from Dutch-ruled cities in India such as Tuticorin to Colombo Fort, along with

spices from across Ceylon.87 The fort was maintained as a shelter for colonists: while ‘private

persons’ were allowed to take refuge in the fort, it was determined that they would only be

permitted to remain inside if they had enough provisions to last them for six months. Van

Angelbeek also oversaw the construction of defences around the fort, which, as at the Cape,

took on a Franco-Dutch character. The engineer M. Duperon was placed in charge of the fort’s

exterior defences, and erected a fleche – a sort of round spiral turret that was a favourite of

Vauban – at the Galle Face.88 Equipped with four cannons, this looked out over Beira Lake to

the south, and across one of the narrow roads that led into the fort along the southern coastline

from Galle. Other fortifications, including chevaux de frise, or horse barricades – another

Vauban trademark – were then constructed outside the fort’s gates by men from the European

and Malay regiments, who were paid in extra rations of arrack and bread. Some of these

additional fortifications were disguised with elements of Lankan coastal terrain, such as rows

of coconut trees positioned on raised sand barricades. Concurrently, any houses that had

encroached from Old Town onto Beira Lake and the buffelsveld were torn down, on the advice

of a French engineer, M. de Cipierre, who had travelled to Colombo from Pondicherry.89


85 Christoph Fryke and Christoph Schweitzer, A relation of two voyages made into the east Indies (trans. D. Brown,
London, 1700), pp. 343-4.
86 ‘Plakkaat: politieverordening voor stad en kasteel van Colombo’, 28 December 1786, in L. Hovy, ed., Ceylonees

plakkaatboek: plakkaten en andere wetten uitgevaardigd door het Nederalndse bestuur op Ceylon, 1638-1796 (2 vols.,
Hilversum, 1991), II, pp. 867-8. Original text: ‘Dat bij ons in aamerking genoomen zijnde, hoe verschijdene
plakkaten en ordonantiën tot handhaaving van rust en zeekerheid voor de inwoonders, tot uytbrijding van goede
zeeden onder dezelven en tot bevordering van zindelijkheid en reinigheid der stad.’
87 A.B. Fyers, ‘A collection of notes on the attack and defence of Colombo, in the island of Ceylon’, Journal of the

Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 10 (1888), p. 367-9.
88 Ibid., p. 366; on Vauban, see Jean-Denis G.G. Lepage, Vauban and the French Military under Louis XIV: An Illustrated

History of Fortifications and Strategies (Jefferson, 2010), p. 113.
89 Fyers, ‘A collection of notes’, p. 366-85.




                                                        207
