Company and state


Settling the fort



The continued significance of forts as territorialised spaces at the Cape and in Sri Lanka under

the British meant that these structures also persisted as important sites of protected colonial

settlement. Under the Dutch, the Castle of Good Hope, Colombo Fort, and Fort Frederick

hosted VOC employees. Otto Mentzel reported that there were two hundred soldiers and four

hundred such people living and working in the Castle of Good Hope during the 1730s.143

There were, of course, distinctions between the housing provided to, say, a soldier, compared

to high-ranking officials, but to some extent this was a corollary of the process of settlement,

which involved a working-out of hierarchies among colonists, and between colonists and

colonised. Mentzel recalled how one bastion in the Castle of Good Hope held fifty soldiers

‘crowded into two moderately sized rooms’, undoubtedly less comfortable than the splendour

of the government house.144 Ranked beneath the soldiers were the slaves and labourers who

were brought into the castle to work on the defences or in homes. Archaeological evidence

suggests that they made a shelter under one of the balconies in the castle’s inner courtyard.145

Those who were considered most subversive were excluded from the castle entirely, as they

would be refused entry or (in something of a contradiction) confined to the dungeon. In 1795,

those in the dungeon included the Italian Patriot Louis Pisani, who in 1795 styled himself as

leader of the Swellendam burghers and led them into a rebellion against the company.146

         Colombo Fort was also secured through settlement. Besides VOC officials, it was filled

with a great many people: one might find slaves, carpenters, masons, smiths, and tailors, not

to mention soldiers.147 Yet the fort was also arranged around sites of VOC power, while most

houses were reserved for officials and merchants. The government houses stood at the north

end next to the most luxurious houses, which were large and spacious, and fronted by wide

verandas that looked out onto ‘pretty Walks of Nut-trees, set in a uniform order’, with ‘red

and white flowers’.148 James Cordiner described the government house as ‘handsome’ and

‘spacious’, and recalled how successive governors gave audiences and received ambassadors


143 Dooling, ‘The castle’, pp. 14-15.
144 Mentzel, Geographical and topographical description, I, p. 66.
145 Dooling, ‘The castle’, p. 12.

146 George McCall Theal, Compendium of South African history and geography (3rd edn, Lovedale, 1877), pp. 143-4.

147 De Silva and Beumer, Illustrations, p. 221.

148 Fryke and Schweitzer, A relation of two voyages, p. 343.




                                                       217
