Company and state


that it focused on the supply of centralised resources between the castle and the Cape’s many

fortifications.125 Writing in October 1800, while George Yonge was ruling the colony, Thibault

mused that his plans would allow the Cape to become ‘a Gibraltar’, while a failure to follow

them would leave the colony exposed to attack in the wars that would succeed ‘this frightful

revolution’.126 Thibault claimed that Bridges agreed with his plans, and felt that a resourceful

system of defence should be established at the Cape. Thibault’s suggestions were probably

the inspiration for George Yonge’s own beliefs about the Cape’s importance and the necessity

of improving the Castle of Good Hope. Yonge had apparently wanted to seize Thibault’s plans

but had been persuaded against taking such an action by his aide-de-camp, Cockburn.127

          Thibault’s project perhaps also shaped British plans to turn Trincomalee in Sri Lanka

into a base for the navy. Situated on Lanka’s north-eastern coast, on a rocky promontory that

curved around a large bay, Trincomalee was a natural base for a harbour. 128 At the time that

the British arrived, it was ordered, like Colombo, around a fort, called Fort Frederick, which

surmounted ‘a huge rock to the seaward’, and was built over a Hindu religious site.129 The

writer James Tennant later claimed that the Portuguese demolished a Hindu temple, and used

the stonework to build the fort; some of the stones therefore bore ‘inscriptions in ancient

characters’, which could be seen ‘in the walls of the fort, and on the platforms for the guns’.130

Like Colombo Fort, Fort Frederick was a site of settlement, with houses, a church, bungalows,

and a barracks that ran along the summit of the rock.131 At the base of the rock, the fort met

with a town, called the pettah, while a naval fort, Ostenburg, stood three miles away, over

Trincomalee’s natural harbour. Writing in 1807, the British author and colonial official James

Cordiner described Fort Frederick as almost ‘impregnable’, with its fortifications forming ‘a




125 Ibid., p. 312.
126 Ibid., p. 312. Original text: ‘Je pourrois reprendre dans le cas ou le cap resterait a l’angleterre, on peut faire du
Cap un Gibraltar, et si on néglige de la fortifier d’après un Système raisonné et Général, il pourroit essuyer un coup
de main á la premiere Guerre qui aura lieux après cette affreuse révolution.’
127 Ibid., pp. 311-12.

128 For a nineteenth-century description of Trincomalee and its fort, see James Emerson Tennant, Ceylon: an account

of the island physical, historical, and topographical with notices of its natural history, antiquities, and productions (4th edn,
2 vols., London, 1859-60), II, pp. 482-5.
129 Ibid., p. 483.

130 Ibid., p. 485.

131 James Cordiner, A description of Ceylon: containing an account of the country, inhabitants, and natural productions (2

vols., London, 1807), I, pp. 268-9.


                                                             213
