Company and state


Conclusion



This chapter has reimagined the story of the rise of the colonial state by exploring how modes

of territorialisation and settlement persisted across the juncture between the decline of the

VOC and the emergence of a British government concerned with bureaucratic procedure and

information-gathering. Accordingly, it has found points of commonality in the way that the

Dutch and the British envisaged their forts in the Anglo-Dutch colonies, in spite of emerging

strategic distinctions between the European empires in different parts of the Indian Ocean

world. This suggests that, in Ceylon and at the Cape, we can see the entanglement of military

knowledge – between people like Thibault, Bridges, and Yonge – and the way in which this

knowledge was later extrapolated outwards through the emergence of the colonial state.

         Perhaps unsurprisingly, this system continued to expand in later years in both Sri

Lanka and the Cape. In the former – as indicated by Thomas Twistleton’s growing interest in

Kandyans – the invasion of Kandy entailed the growth and reimagining of the machinery

used to contain and regulate the fort and the pettah into the interior provinces. In particular,

permits were introduced and administered by Twistleton and others, creating exclusive

spaces of areas across the island, and of the island itself, from which Malabars in particular

were proscribed.235 Yet the administrative arm of the state also continued to grow across the

expanding city. Therefore, by 1834, we find new laws for a Colombo city police regularising

the constabulary across not only the fort and the pettah but also the suburbs (or ‘Four

Gravets’) and the ‘port’, which emerged as distinct and spatialised, territorialised units in the

1820s and 1830s.236 Likewise in the Cape Colony, the procedures applied to the castle and town

were rearticulated across the interior in the first half of the nineteenth century.237 Thibault died

in 1815, but his role was taken over by the Dutch monarchist Charles d’Escury, who – it so

happened – was both a friend of the stadtholder and the man who had denounced Frederik



235 As described in Chapter Three. See, for instance, Twistleton to government secretary, 18 July 1816, SLNA, 10/130;
see also the interview of a Malabar traveller reproduced in Sivasundaram, Islanded, p. 52.
236 ‘Ordinance for improving the police within the town, fort, and four gravets and port of Colombo; and for

consolidating and amending the laws relating to the same’, 22 May 1834, in A collection of legislative acts of the Ceylon
government from 1796: distinguishing those now in force (2 vols., Colombo, 1853-4), II, pp. 2-7; on the territorialisation
of the port in the later nineteenth century, see Sujit Sivasundaram, ‘Towards a critical history of connection: the
port of Colombo, the geographical ‘circuit’, and the visual politics of new imperialism, ca. 1880-1914’, Comparative
Studies in Society and History 59 (2017), pp. 346-84.
237 See Duly, ‘The Failure of British Land Policy at the Cape’, pp. 357-71.




                                                          230
