Conclusion


remain over the extent of Anglo-Dutch entanglement in particular thematic areas; the means

and ways through which entanglement actually took place; and indeed the willingness of

certain Dutch subjects to share ideas with – rather than resist – their British oppressors.

         On the first point, the introduction to this thesis laid out five themes that drove a

dialogue with Bayly’s imperial meridian while highlighting the importance of Anglo-Dutch

entanglement to the reform of British colonial states. In so doing, it made a conscious choice

to elevate these themes above others – such as trade; legal systems; or industry – that may

have brought to bear a more limited picture of Anglo-Dutch entanglement. On trade, for

instance, the British generally antagonised the Dutch as monopolistic and proclaimed their

own inclination towards free trade. While – as Bayly shows – reforms on trade through the

imperial meridian were limited, this period presaged the emergence of British free trade

imperialism later in the nineteenth century.27 On the law, this period also saw the British

abolish older Dutch courts, such as the landraden in Sri Lanka, and replace them with new

magistrates.28 Covering these themes would probably have told a more discordant story of

this period. Yet the purpose of this thesis has not been to repeat the familiar narrative of

Anglo-Dutch rivalry and straightforward British ascendancy. Rather, it has been to stress

those points where the British and the Dutch did share ideas, to reveal the limits of Bayly’s

specific vision for the imperial meridian and the importance, going forward, of situating this

transformative period of British imperialism in a world of overlapping empires populated by

diverse peoples with expansive histories of exchange. If the selection of themes in this thesis

checks its analytical spread, it also allows us to critique the vision of the British empire as

modernising and disruptive that has prevailed in the study of the imperial meridian.

         One can also question the extent to which the Anglo-Dutch imperial meridian could

practically occur. Practices of engagement were very likely constrained by limited language-

learning among British and Dutch officials; few British officials spoke Dutch and few Dutch

officials spoke English. Indeed many communicated in French.29 In this way, the Anglo-Dutch



27 On Anglo-Dutch rivalry over trade, see P.J. Marshall, ‘British assessments of the Dutch in Asia in the age of
Raffles’, Itinerario 12 (1988), pp. 1-16; Nicholas Tarling, Anglo-Dutch rivalry in the Malay world, 1780-1824 (London,
1962).
28 Schrikker, Dutch and British colonial intervention, p. 156, 217.

29 See, for instance, the letters of the Swiss VOC official Jacob Burnand. Schrikker, Dutch and British colonial

intervention, p. 91; Burnand to Grey, 12 February 1812, Sri Lanka National Archives (SLNA), 6/382; letter from
Burnand, 25 October 1814, SLNA, 6/326.


                                                         237
