Conclusion


hailing Boyce for his defence of the ship.10 In turn, Batavia’s magistrates set up a commission

to investigate the claims being made by the ship’s crew, and take depositions that could be

sent to the colonial government.11 This commission was staffed by the bailiff, the Dutch-born

magistrate Abraham Anthony Cassa, whose powers were likened in law to those of a ‘Water

Fiscal’, and our erstwhile traveller Frederik Turr.12 No doubt in his post Frederik channelled

the experience he had gained from Louis Bonaparte’s Raad van Justitie en Politie back in the

Kingdom of Holland, in which he had been so vociferous that he had been denounced to the

British government by a refugee. Frederik took depositions from Bartlett and Macgregor,

focusing on their imprisonment on board the Peacock. He asked Macgregor whether he had

spoken with ‘the officers of the enemy’s ship, before the action between her and the honorable

company’s cruiser’, and inquired as to how long he had been on the Peacock before he was

taken prisoner.13 Macgregor told Frederik that he had ‘scarcely’ had the chance to tell the

Americans about the peace before he had been seized and taken below, with one commenting

that it seemed impossible to avoid ‘a little brush’ with the Nautilus.14 Bartlett explained that

he had been ‘instantly ordered … below, not being allowed to ask any question’.15 The

depositions consequently implicate the Americans. They doubtless reflect the interests of

Raffles’s autocracy and his aforementioned eagerness to gather information about maritime

lawlessness in order to develop governmental control over the seas around Java. However,

given what we know about Frederik Turr, there was probably a further logic at work here.

Frederik renounced the Americans, to whom his fellow republicans had once looked for

inspiration, and instead expressed clear discomfort at the prospect of people being seized at




10 ‘Since our Extra Gazette,’ Java Government Gazette, 8 July 1815, p. 4.
11 ‘Evidence of Mr. Joseph Bartlett’ and ‘Evidence of Mr. Macgregor’, undated, in James, A full and correct account,
pp. ccix-xi; on the magistrates, see Hendrik E. Niemeijer, ‘The Central Administration of the VOC Government
and the Local Institutions of Batavia (1619-1811) – an Introduction,’ in Louisa Balk, Frans van Dijk, Diederick
Kortlang, et al., eds., The archives of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) and the local institutions in Batavia (Jakarta)
(Leiden, 2007), pp. 61-86, at pp. 67-9; on their development under Raffles, see ‘Regulation for the police
administration of Batavia’, 13 May 1814, in Proclamations, regulations, advertisements, and orders, printed and published
in the island of Java by the British government and under its authority (3 vols., Batavia, 1816), II, pp. 105-12.
12 ‘Regulation for the police administration of Batavia’, 13 May 1814, in Proclamations printed in the island of Java, II,

p. 105.
13 ‘Evidence of Mr. Macgregor’, undated, in James, A full and correct account, pp. ccx-xi.

14 Ibid., p. ccxi.

15 ‘Evidence of Mr. Joseph Bartlett’, undated, in James, A full and correct account, p. ccx.




                                                          233
