Conclusion


histories of Anglo-Dutch regime change by historians like Alicia Schrikker and Jurrien van

Goor, this thesis has therefore demonstrated that the Dutch and the British empires cannot be

viewed in isolation or succession.26 Instead, it has shown that they were part of an oceanic

world in which the practices and peoples of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) empire

continued to characterise British states even after the former seemed to decline. This allows

us to reimagine the imperial meridian more generally as a period of sustained and influential

entanglement across empires. This is valuable in enabling us to critique narratives of the

origins and modernity of the Second Empire and contest the view of imperial reform as a

process realised first and foremost by the Colonial Office and Britain’s colonial officials.

         Concurrently, by identifying the flow – or what might be more aptly described as the

lurching and stumbling – of ideas and information among Anglo-Dutch colonists through the

use of life histories, this thesis has uncovered power amid the imperial meridian. The lives of

the Dutch and Chinese figures revealed here show how a variety of people from around the

Indian Ocean subverted, challenged, and added to British knowledge. However, their ideas

and information were also appropriated and redeployed by Britain’s local autocrats for their

own purposes. Sometimes – as with the autocrats’ adoption of Dutch liberal policies – this laid

the groundwork for challenges to British despotism later on in the nineteenth century. Yet

what the lives in this thesis have principally revealed is that this was a time in which cross-

colonial ideas and information were used to underscore inequality between the British and

their subjects, through say the promotion of the English language or in the consolidation of

autocratic power. In turn, this was a period during which cross-colonial ideas could actually

be used to obfuscate diverse relationships and foster the image of an empire built on British

innovation. In stressing the unevenness of the Anglo-Dutch meridian in this way, this thesis

has highlighted the ways in which entanglements could promote colonial inequality. It shows

that, in using life histories to analyse entanglement, we can write histories of connection that

draw attention to power and inequality rather than flattening these parts of the past.

         Here, it is nevertheless important to consider the limits of what this thesis has set out

as the Anglo-Dutch imperial meridian. Certainly, the Anglo-Dutch imperial meridian is more

limited than Bayly’s model in terms of its geographic and chronological scope. Questions also



26See Alicia Schrikker, Dutch and British colonial intervention in Sri Lanka, 1780-1815: expansion and reform (Leiden,
2007); Jurrien van Goor, Prelude to colonialism: the Dutch in Asia (Hilversum, 2004), pp. 83-98.


                                                        236
