Conclusion




The Sunda Strait is a passage of water that runs between Java and Sumatra, tying the Java Sea

to the Indian Ocean.1 During the occupation of Java, the East India Company patrolled the

strait with cruisers that sailed between Batavia, Bengal, and Madras, carrying despatches and

chasing down supposed pirates and smugglers.2 For a moment in June 1815, however, the

strait became the focus of a conflict that brought Anglo-Dutch colonists together against the

United States of America. One of the company’s cruisers, the Nautilus, was engaged by an

American sloop of war called the Peacock.3 The commander of the Nautilus, Charles Boyce,

recalled how he had seen ‘a strange sail’, and sent one of his crewmembers, Joseph Bartlett, to

investigate.4 Bartlett was seized by the Peacock along with the master attendant of Anjer, R.B.

Macgregor, who had decided to investigate the ship himself.5 The Peacock later closed in on

the Nautilus and opened fire, killing six crewmembers.6 The Peacock’s attack was viewed by

the Nautilus’ crew as an act of aggression. Britain and the United States had been enemies

during the War of 1812 (1812-15), but peace had been agreed in February.7 Apparently this

news had not reached the Peacock’s crew.8 When it became clear, as the wounded were taken

ashore, that a peace had been agreed, the Peacock gave up the Nautilus and sailed away.9

         After the engagement, the Nautilus returned, beleaguered, to Batavia. It soon came to

the attention of the authorities, and a report was published in The Java Government Gazette


1 For an exploration of slave raiding and piracy in this area during the nineteenth century, see James Warren, The
Sulu zone: 1768-1898: the dynamics of external trade, slavery, and ethnicity in the transformation of a southeast Asian
maritime state (2nd edn, Singapore, 2007), pp. 149-251.
2 Boyce to marine board, 24 September 1815, in William James, A full and correct account of the chief naval occurrences

of the late war between Great Britain and the United States of America (London, 1817), p. ccvi.
3 Ibid., p. ccv.

4 Ibid., p. ccvi.

5 ‘Evidence of Mr. Joseph Bartlett’ and ‘Evidence of Mr. Macgregor’, undated, in James, A full and correct account,

pp. ccix-xi.
6 ‘Since our Extra Gazette,’ Java Government Gazette, 8 July 1815, p. 4.

7 For a historical account of this incident, see James R. Fichter, So great a proffit: how the east Indies trade transformed

Anglo-American capitalism (London, 2010), p. 253; see also Christine F. Hughes, ‘Lewis Warrington and the USS
Peacock in the Sunda Strait, June 1815’, in William S. Dudley and Michael J. Crawford, eds., The Early Republic and
the Sea: Essays on the Naval and Maritime History of the Early United States (Washington, DC., 2001), p. 115-36.
8 Boyce to marine board, 24 September 1815, in James, A full and correct account, pp. ccvi-vii.

9 Ibid., p. ccvii.




                                                       232
