Conclusion


part in practices of exchange: for instance, Dutch colonists who lamented the arrival of the

British in their colonies and British colonists who demonised their Dutch counterparts. In

Chapter Two, we saw how the British soldier James Williams denounced the Dutch in the

Cape Colony for their use of slaves, casting himself as an alien in a foreign land in letters to

his brother.32 Similarly, Danelle van Zyl-Hermann has shown how Dutch residents of Cape

Town found the British occupation of the colony exasperating and emotionally distressing.33

In Sri Lanka, several hundred Dutch colonists actually left Colombo for Batavia because they

feared that the British would confiscate their slaves.34 That so many colonists left Sri Lanka is

striking; it suggests that antipathy between colonists was in some ways more common than

its inverse. Again, these stories reveal something of the limits of the Anglo-Dutch imperial

meridian and illustrate that its entanglements were never all-encompassing. Yet these stories

also emphasise a broader point that lies at the heart of this thesis, if not the wider literature

on entanglement: Anglo-Dutch epistemic exchanges developed British control in the context

of occupation. In so doing, they elevated not only connectivity but the forces of disconnection,

including anglicisation, despotism, and antipathy. Where existing histories of entanglement

often build into a bigger picture of increasing connectivity – a sort of crescendo – the picture

left by the Anglo-Dutch meridian is more mixed. It points to a world in which entanglements

drove disharmony among unequal peoples. As such, it remains principally a story of state-

building rather than connectivity, of which the end result was oppression and empire.



Local resistance and the Anglo-Dutch imperial meridian



It is nevertheless true that resistance played an important role in framing the parameters of

Anglo-Dutch state-building. Resistance was driven by clashes among the agents of colonial

states and those promoting what we might describe – following Bayly – as local patriotisms.

In the years after Imperial meridian, Bayly came to argue that colonial states in Asia and Africa

contended with divergent patriotic identities that were formed among networks of scholars


32 James Williams to George Williams, 30 October 1798, Western Cape Archives (WCA), Kirkland papers, A1790,
p. 2.
33 Danelle van Zyl-Hermann, “Gij kent genoegt mijn gevoelig hart’: emotional life at the occupied Cape of Good

Hope, 1798-1803’, Itinerario 35 (2011), pp. 63-80.
34 Alicia Schrikker, ‘Caught between empires: VOC families in Sri Lanka after the British take-over, 1806-1808’,

Annales de démographie historique 122 (2011), pp. 127-47.


                                                      239
