Conclusion


entanglements that were wrought between British and Dutch colonists around the ocean rim.

It shows how these entanglements influenced British state-building in colonies like Java, but

also the rise of the Second Empire as a sovereign entity. Who would have thought that the

information that formed the basis of a diplomatic spat between the British empire and the

United States – over the last engagement of the War of 1812 – would be drawn from a Dutch

teacher with Patriot beliefs of his own? Like so many other aspects of Frederik’s life, this was

a story of entanglement that has been hidden from view by the empire that it supported.

Frederik had moved to Batavia according to historic patterns of travel across the former Dutch

empire. He had learnt his trade in the civil services of the republican governments in the

Netherlands. He was ostracised from the Latin School at the Cape for spreading ideas that

placed him at odds with the British administration, but his ideas had still been adopted by the

British regime. He would later transform the Java Benevolent Institution into an Anglo-Dutch

organisation, but the only person who received any acclaim for that society was (and still is)

Raffles.25 Here was Frederik again, shaping, in his own way, the future of the British Empire.



The Anglo-Dutch imperial meridian and its limits



Guided by the varied lives of the Scaleby Castle’s cast of characters – Frederik, Maria, Ani, and

Thomas – this thesis has charted the story of the Anglo-Dutch imperial meridian, in which the

rise of the state-building enterprises of the Second British Empire was characterised by the

entanglement of British and Dutch knowledge in and between the former Dutch colonies of

the Cape Colony, Java, and Ceylon. In so doing, it has brought a different perspective to bear

on the Second British Empire and C.A. Bayly’s original imperial meridian that unearths the

continued significance of Dutch empire and the Indian Ocean world for the transformation of

British empire during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In particular, it has

revealed that transitions between forms of colonial rule were rarely linear or even logical

developments but the products of intractable and reciprocal relationships formed between

colonists and subjects – British, Dutch, and Chinese alike – who were brought together across

this period with a rich variety of ideas, policies, and information. Building on more recent



25Jean Gelman Taylor, The social world of Batavia: Europeans and Eurasians in colonial Indonesia (2nd edn, Madison
2009), pp. 105-6.


                                                      235
