Conclusion


imperial meridian might be said to suffer the same limitations as the cosmopolitan histories

that have generally proved popular in the study of the Indian Ocean world: in emphasising

conversations across lines of difference, they skew towards the study of elites at the expense

of their subordinates and paint a picture of engagement that is too rosy to be real.30 On this

charge, it is right to say that the Anglo-Dutch meridian is not an all-encompassing history,

and the picture of entanglement that it paints is certainly limited to particular (often small)

groups of people: specifically, governing elites; the middle class; and Chinese settlers. Many

among these groups would not have been able to talk with one another directly and would

have relied on translators. Yet it stands to reason that language was not always a limiting

factor. Of the entanglements described in this thesis, the majority were facilitated in spaces

where one would have had access to translation: for instance in masonic societies; through the

pages of The Cape Town Gazette, which was published in Dutch and English; in cross-cultural

social circles; in government and bureaucracies. Other practices were observed, and it is in

cases like these that one finds misconceptions introduced into the Anglo-Dutch meridian, as

in the case, for instance, of John Barrow and his writings on the Chinese in Java. The point

worth noting here is that the Anglo-Dutch imperial meridian was not experienced universally

or uniformly. It was uneven and unequal even for those who stood at its heart. Yet this should

not detract from the wider point: that the exchanges described here not only happened but

form an important addendum to Bayly’s original vision of a British imperial meridian.

         More broadly, the Anglo-Dutch imperial meridian – like much of the recent literature

on entanglement and empire – can be critiqued for elevating stories of connection over those

of disconnection. In Tony Ballantyne’s work on the entanglement of British and Māori ideas

and practices in early colonial New Zealand, for instance, we are presented with a picture in

which Māori become increasingly and inevitably entangled with the British as the nineteenth

century progresses; entanglement is cast as a gradual and uneven process that nevertheless

persists – over time – in creating a globe that is more connected than that which came before.31

In some ways, this has the effect of pushing to the margins stories of resistance, minimising

the impact of those who opposed or fought entanglement or who isolated themselves from

others. In the Anglo-Dutch setting, there are indeed many stories of people who did not take


30 On cosmopolitanism and its critiques, see Carol A. Breckenridge, ed., Cosmopolitanism (London, 2002); David
Bell, ‘This is what happens when historians overuse the idea of the network’, New Republic 25 (October 2013).
31 Tony Ballantyne, Entanglements of empire: missionaries, Māori, and the question of the body (Auckland, 2016).




                                                       238
