Conclusion




The end of the Second Empire



In the Anglo-Dutch colonies that remained part of the British empire – Ceylon and the Cape

Colony – the legacy of entanglement was of course the rise of autocratic states, and more

generally an expansive British empire that was able to wield ideas, information, and policies

against its enemies. Nevertheless, Anglo-Dutch entanglement also sowed the seeds of the

Second Empire’s demise during the 1830s and 1840s. This is in keeping with the destabilising

potential of entanglement as a lens for viewing empire. While it allows us to identify cross-

colonial interactions and relations of power in the making of colonial states, it also points to

the instability of those states, and their inability to totally control the exchanges on the back

of which they came to power. This section accordingly charts the intersection between Anglo-

Dutch entanglement and the fall of the Second Empire in the mid-nineteenth century.

         As C.A. Bayly and more recently Kirsten McKenzie and Zoë Laidlaw have shown, the

Second British Empire’s autocracies and their forms of rule persisted into the 1840s but were

increasingly challenged by metropolitan and colonial liberal reformers. Laidlaw demonstrates

that reformers transitioned from fighting slavery to contesting the overblown powers of the

colonial despots, through the many and wide-ranging humanitarian commissions that were

dispatched to the colonies by the Colonial Office during the 1820s and 1830s.98 Two of these

visited the Cape Colony and Ceylon, where they proposed reforms of labour, criminal justice,

education, and governance that ultimately curtailed the powers of the colonial autocrats.99

C.A. Bayly suggests that these interventions marked the beginning of the end for the Second

Empire, and anticipated the emergence of restricted governorships, symbolised by the

creation of colonial legislatures in Ceylon in 1833 and the Cape Colony in 1854.100

         In some ways, the commissioners kept alive the spirit of Anglo-Dutch liberal reforms

from the start of the century. As we saw briefly in Chapter Two, one of the commissioners

who visited both the Cape Colony and Sri Lanka was William Colebrooke, once secretary of



98 Zoë Laidlaw, ‘Investigating empire: humanitarians, reform and the Commission of Eastern Inquiry’, Journal of
Imperial and Commonwealth History 40 (2012), pp. 749-68.
99 Kirsten McKenzie, Imperial underworld: an escaped convict and the transformation of the British colonial order

(Cambridge, 2016), p. 5.
100 C.A. Bayly, Imperial meridian: the British empire and the world, 1780-1830 (London, 1989), pp. 217-47.




                                                      249
