Conclusion


We might also recall that the Institution – in 1816, just before the return of the Dutch – had

likewise recommended the annexation of regions like Makassar in order to end slavery.84

         As Ulbe Bosma points out, the persistence of Anglo-Dutch cooperation in Java was of

great irritation to the Dutch metropolitan government, which sought to exercise increasing

authority over Java throughout this period. In 1824, Willem I denounced van der Capellen’s

‘liberal and Anglophile’ policies, and subsequently established the Nederlandsche Handel-

Maatschappij (Netherlands Trading Company), which was designed to funnel Dutch capital

into Java and the Malay archipelago for the benefit of the Netherlands.85 Willem’s actions can

be set against the backdrop of resurgent tensions between the Anglo-Dutch empires, and

attempts by the metropolitan governments to settle the status of their colonies in the eastern

Indian Ocean. In the same year, the British and the Dutch agreed a new Anglo-Dutch Treaty

in London, which was intended to partition India and the Malay archipelago between the two

empires.86 This treaty arose, in the words of the British foreign secretary, George Canning,

from ‘jealousies and suspicions, and … out of the acts of subordinate agents’, which could

‘only be removed by a frank declaration of intention’.87 The Dutch agreed to cede all their

factories in India and Malacca to the British, and acknowledged British supremacy over

Singapore; the British gave up Bengkulu and Sumatra to the Dutch.88 Both powers pledged

not to interfere in those regions claimed by the other empire, binding themselves to engage

‘no Treaty … with any Native Power in the Eastern Seas’ that would exclude the other ‘from

the Ports of such Native Power’.89 The Dutch and the British governments concurred that

orders should be dispatched ‘by the Two Governments to Their Officers … not to form any

new Settlement on any of the Islands in the Eastern Seas’ without the approval of the other.90

Finally underpinning this treaty was a focus on free trade. While the treaty protected the

Dutch monopoly over the spice trade in the Moluccas, both empires were banned from



84 Thomas Raffles, The history of Java (2 vols., London, 1817-30), II, p. cxcvii.
85 Bosma, ‘The cultivation system’, p. 277.
86 For the historical context and the treaty negotiations, see Lennox A. Mills, British Malaya, 1824-67 (Oxford, 1966),

pp. 69-80.
87 ‘Note of British plenipotentiaries to the plenipotentiaries of the Netherlands’, 17 March 1824, in ‘Papers relative

to the execution of the treaty of 1824 by the Netherland authorities in the east Indies’, House of Commons Papers 284,
vol. 49 (1840), p. 7.
88 ‘Treaty between His Britannick Majesty and the king of the Netherlands’, in House of Commons Papers 284, vol.

49, pp. 1-7.
89 Ibid., p. 5.

90 Ibid., p. 6.




                                                         247
