Conclusion


who was a member of the Ceylon branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. In November 1846, Palm

gave a paper at the Asiatic Society describing the school system under the VOC, and stressing

that education had been undertaken in the vernacular. He provided a list of dictionaries and

religious texts that had already been translated by the Dutch into Sinhalese and Tamil.124

         In this way, Dutch colonists remained an important influence on British empire in the

years beyond those studied in this thesis. While the memory of Dutch empire in Ceylon and

the Cape Colony inevitably became more distant, those who had lived through the Anglo-

Dutch imperial meridian continued to draw on some of its most prominent themes – liberal

reform and education, for instance – to challenge the dominance of the autocrats who in the

1810s and 1820s had repurposed Dutch ideas for their own ends. These changing fortunes

reflect transitions in the metropole, as the Colonial Office developed greater oversight over

colonial rulers through this period. Yet they were also a legacy of entanglement. Britain’s

autocrats in the Anglo-Dutch colonies had depended on Dutch forms of knowledge, ideas,

and information as a way of underpinning their power. In their dependence on these ideas,

they had fostered their growth within the colonies that they governed. Those Dutch colonists

who engaged with reform in the 1830s and 1840s therefore found themselves adopting liberal

concepts that had become popular due to the efforts of their forebears earlier in the century.



Entanglement and the politics of memory



By way of an epilogue, it is worth considering how Anglo-Dutch interdependencies have been

written out of colonial history and why it is accordingly important to open up the British

empire at its interstices. In researching the stories of the Scaleby Castle’s characters, and those

people with whom their lives intersected, it has become clear that most of what was Anglo-

Dutch (or Sino-Anglo-Dutch) has been reimagined by historians and the public as British. This

has allowed the history of the British empire to be cast as monotone; an observation that

remains true of public debate, if no longer academia. Often, Dutch and Chinese figures do not

appear in retellings of the British empire’s history, and their paucity in the history books also

means that other figures – including women and non-elites – have likewise disappeared from


  ‘Reports to secretary of state on past and present state of H.M. colonial possessions, 1848’, Command Papers
124

(House of Commons) 1126, vol. 34 (1849), p. 493; Rev. J.D. Palm, ‘The education establishments of the Dutch in
Ceylon’, Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain & Ireland 2 (1847), pp. 105-83.


                                                       253
