Conclusion


the stories of which they were a significant part. This, of course, is largely a consequence of

the power imbalances that underpin the history (and histories) of the British empire, and the

way in which sources have been placed in archives that are designed to tell stories about the

ascendancy of British men. Yet it is also a consequence of the way in which we make

assumptions about the British empire, seeing British histories where developments were

actually Anglo-Dutch – or, say, Anglo-French, or Anglo-Mughal. In a more critical era of

global historical writing, it is worth bearing these intersections in mind, because they reveal

the subversive or disempowered voices amid older narratives like the imperial meridian.

         This study opened by considering the stories of those who sailed on the Scaleby Castle,

and the way in which their lives were notably absent from the memorialisation of the Castle

in Thomas Whitcombe’s painting of the ship. Like the ship, their memorialisation carries some

important lessons for us, going forward. Many of the people uncovered here do not feature

outside of the archive; those that do are often remembered (sometimes inaccurately) for being

British, or for the accomplishments of their British husbands. More generally, their lives point

to both an anglicisation and gendering of British history. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Ani’s only

trace in the archive remains his entry in the Scaleby Castle’s logbook.125 Maria Fichat has fared

little better. She featured in Peter Philip’s compendium British Residents at the Cape, 1795-1819

as the wife of James Fichat (shorn – like other women – of her own entry), and left a discernible

track through the colonial archive as a result of her travels.126 Yet it is James Fichat’s land deals

and disputes that have featured in subsequent histories and anthologies of the Cape Colony.127

Maria’s fate was in many ways shared with those of other Dutch women, such as Dorothea

Ross – Chapter One’s diarist – who has been remembered for her British husband’s imperial

careering.128 A brief article published by his descendants in a family history journal details his

travels to Tasmania and England, where he settled with Dorothea and some souvenirs of their

time in southern Africa, including an assegai (spear), a ‘coolie hat’, and a boomerang. His

journal went with his family in England, while Dorothea’s remained in Africa.129 Of all the

women featured in this study, it is predictably Sarah Batt who has been best memorialised.


125 Journal of the Scaleby Castle, 11 October 1813 to 14 November 1815, BL, IOR/L/MAR/B/34J, fo. 4.
126 Peter Philip, British residents at the Cape 1795-1819: biographical records of 4,800 pioneers (Cape Town, 1981), p. 125.
127 James L. Buchanan, ed., Cases decided in the supreme court of the Cape of Good Hope as reported by the late Hon. William

Menzies, esquire (3 vols., Cape Town, 1870-1903), I, pp. 418-19.
128 Eddie Ross, ‘George Ogilvie Ross in four continents’, North West Kent Family History 4 (1987), pp. 300-1.

129 Ibid., p. 300.




                                                           254
