

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 
1763-1816 



imsfft 



, ■ pPprJr 


li y .V/7/77/' . 1 lil ■!(*/' 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA: 

FIRST ESTABLISHMENT AND STRUGGLE. 



jncrn' 



FRENCH IN INDIA 

1763-1816 



By 

S. P. SEN, B.A. (i.OND.), D.PHII... D.riTT. (GAT.) 
DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY* UNIVERSITY OF (M.Cin I'A 



n #£\ 

f. \ 





\ /• V 

\ - \ 

Y 

V ; v7 \ 





o \ 

: S | 

§ l 

y .4// Mi'Jih Reset xteM 

/ Copyright, 1(^8, by S l\ Si n. 

O 


5 * 4 ' — 


fV. •• 605-^7 


Edition, February 1958. 


— S^r 






Published by Kirma K I . MUKHOPAwiyay, 

6/1 A, Uandiharam Akrur Lane, Calcutta-ii!. 
Primed by Gossain k Co. (Printers) Private l to.. 
71, Grime l ane, Calcutta-1*. 



MliRE v 


MW/sr^ 


V R E V A C E 

The present work is the first attempt to write a compre¬ 
hensive history of the French in India during the eventful 
period, 1763 to 18 ih. The period was less thrilling in drama¬ 
tic interest than the time of Dupleix, Bussy and [.ally, but 
nonetheless of deep historical interest, since it was during these 
years that the political destiny of India was slowly but definitely 
taking a new shape. The year 1763 marked the dose of the 
most dramatic phase of Anglo-French rivalry in India. That 
rivalry, however, did not end so abruptly but continued for 
nearly another half a century It was not till the end of the Re¬ 
volutionary and Napoleonic: Wars that the old dreams of the 
French faded away, and they accepted as final their position 
in India settled by the Treaties of 1814-1 5, a position in which 
there was no more possibility of a political rivalry with the 
English. / Thus, the principal object of the present work is to 
carry on the story of Anglo-French rivalry in India from the 
point where it is generally assumed to have ended to the time 
when it really came to a final close. But while putting emphasis 
on the political projects, intrigues and actual military efforts 
of the French to retrieve their fortunes in India, sufficient 
attention has also been given to the internal history of the 
French Settlements, including administration, economic condi¬ 
tion, trade and commerce etc., so as to make the work a com¬ 
prehensive history of the French in India for the period under 
review, and not merely an account of the later phase of Anglo- 
French hostilities, like Malleson's Final French Straggles in 
India and o) the Indian Seas. 

For convenience of treatment the work is broadly divided 
into four sections. The first deals with the period from the 
re establishment of the French in India after the Treaty of 17(13 
to the outbreak of the Anglo-French war in 1778. leading to 
the capture of all the French Settlements; the second covers the 
period of war, from 1778 to 1/83; the third traces the course 
of events from the conclusion of peace to the outbreak of the 
next war in 1793; an d the fourth covers the period of the Re¬ 
volutionary and Napoleonic Wars, which dealt the hrial blow 




A 





w French political aspirations in India. Fo avoid repetitions 
of well-known events of Indian history during the period under 
review and constant explanatory references to the policies and 
actions of the Indian Powers, there has been given at the begin 
ning a fairly long introductory account of the general political 
situation in India, with particular reference to those Indian 
Princes with whom the French had some connections. Then 
comes the first section of the work. It begins with a sketch of 
the French policy in India, the condition of the French Com¬ 
pany and the character of the French administration under 
Louis XV and Louis XVI, to show that Fran ce had neither any 
]: best will nor a dequa te reso urces to retrieve her lost position 
in India after the Seven Years’ War. Phis account of conditions 
in France is followed by two Chapters on the internal history 
of the French Settlements in India from 1765 to t^2# and thro 
on the diplomatic projects of various French agents in India 
and relations with the country Powers. The second section, 
consisting of six Chapters, deals with the policy of inaction of 
the French during the critical first two years of the war, the 
despatch of an expeditionary force to India in 1781, the brilliant 
naval actions of de Suffrcn, the land operations under Duche- 
min, Hoffelfae and Hussv, relations with the country Powers, 
and the effect in India of the sudden conclusion of peace in 
Europe. I he third section has two Chapters on the tortuous 
course of \nglo-French negotiations in India for the execution 
of the Treaty of 1783 and the revival of French trade and 
commerce after the establishment of a new Company of the 
East Indies. Then follow two Chapters on the internal histor) 
of the French Settlements from 1783 to 1793, anc * ^ na ^Y a 
Ghaptet on French relations’ with the country Powers during 
the same period. The fourth section has two Chapters on the 
Anglo-French conflict in the East during the Revolutionary 
and Napoleonic Wars, resulting in the total extinction of the 
French power after the capture of the Isles pf Txafl fe and 
Bourbon. The last Chapter deals with the return of the 
French to India under the terms of the 'Treaties of 1814 and 
1815, which restored all French possessions, but with such 
severe limitations as to eliminate the possibility of any further 
political rivalry with the English. 