

The extension of the English power in India in the closing 


Ml HtSTftr 


1MK I'OtrUCAL SCENE IN INDIA 



<SL 


years of the 18th century and the early years of the 19th 
lay, in a sense, in the inexorable process of history l! was 
inevitable, once the English had established a decided military 
superiority over the Indian Powers. But it may be observed 
that, one important motive force for the expansion of the English 
power to its logical conclusion was the fear of French rivalry, 
even after 1793 when all the French possessions in India had 
been captured and the political influence of the French totally 
eliminated. It was the French menace that precipitated the 
fall of Tipu. It was again the presence of French military 
adventurers in the service of Hyderabad and of the Marathas 
that prompted the English to eliminate that potential source 
of danger by bringing the two Indian Powers under effective 
English military control through treaties of Subsidiary Alliance. 
In that sense it may be said that the French by their potential 
threat, more imaginary than real, helped the expansion and 
consolidation of the English power in India 


IE The Mughal Emperor. 

Among the Indian Powers the premier position was held 
by the Emperor of Delhi, not because of any real political and 
military importance but for his shadowy claim of suzerainty 
over all the other Princes. In reality, the Empire was a mere 
name and the Emperor reduced to a puppet in the hands of 
his all-powerful ministers. On the murder of Emperor 
Alamgir JJ in 1759 his son Prince Ali Gauhar, then a homeless 
wandering adventurer, assumed the Imperial title* as Shah 
Alam IF. He was not as worthless a person as he turned out 
to be in later life, but gave some promise of being able to 
retrieve the Imperial dignity from the depths into which it had 
fallen. In the earlier part of his career he gave proof of vigour 
and energy, if not persistent yet remarkable on occasions. As a 
Prince destined to inherit the throne, he had fled away from 
the capital to save himself from the tyrant, Firuz Jang, who 
was ruling the Empire in the name of his father, the puppet 
Emperor Alamgir II. Friendless and penniless, he wandered 
from place to place, struggling desperately against adversity 
and trying to gain allies and collect adventurous bands round 
him with the object of recovering the eastern provinces of the 

B 



MlNISr^ 



Empire from the English. His successive attempts on Patna 
and a raiding incursion into Bengal were frustrated by the 
quick moves of the English, but he faced all hardships with 
courage and cheer. If the Prince had died young, or if he had 
disappeared completely from the political scene after 1760, his 
11 me would have been hallowed with the same romantic glory 
as that of the Young Pretender in British history. But fate 
denied him that chance, and he lived to be one of the most 
despicable figures who ever sat on the throne of Delhi. 

Shah Vlam if had his first taste of ease and affluence after 
making his final peace with the English in 1765, But living 
under their protection at Allahabad, he constantly sighed for 
the throne of his ancestors and dreamed of restoring the old 
Imperial authority. For years the English humoured him by 
promising to restore him to his capital as soon as the rains were 
over, but in the end he realised that the ‘English rains* would 
never stop and that if he was to return to Delhi he must look 
to other quarters for help. Just about this time th< Marathas., 
recovering from the terrible shock of Panipat, returned to north 
India to regain their lost position, and nothing was more 
natural than that Shah Alam should throw himself into the 
arms ot the southerners in the hope of being at last; restored to 
his ancestral capital. Negotiations were hastily concluded in 
1771, and despite the advice of the English and of the pro- 
English and peace-loving party in the Darbnt the Emperor set 
out for his capital, where he was installed in January 1772 with 
the help of his Maratha allies. 