

After giving an outline of the general scheme, it is necessary 





to Held a few words about how fai the present work may claim 
to have covered new ground. Ft may be observed at the outset 
that while many scholarly books have been written on the 
history of the French in India down to 1763, particularly on 
the twenty years of the most dramatic phase of the Anglo 
French conflict in this country, there is not a single work, either 
in French or in English, dealing with the later period, after 
17H3. Mallcson's book, Final French Struggles in India and on 
the. Indian Sms. admirable in its own way, covers only a part 
of the period and deals mainly with the Anglo-French conflict 
during 1778 to 1783. There arc again very good French 
biographies of Bussy and de Suffren, giving a detailed account 
of the same phase of Anglo-French conflict, but a toinprehen 
sive history of the French in India during the eventful period 
from 1763 to 18*6 had yet to be written. The present svork, 
based principally on unpublished records, is the hist of the 
kind, dealing with all the different aspects of the history of the 
French in India from 1763 to i8i<>,—political, military, 
administrative, economic and commercial. Thus, for the first 
time a connected account has been given of French political 
projects and diplomatic activities a the Courts of the various 
Indian Princes during the half-century following the Treat) 
of Paris, 1763. Secondly, the important administrative changes 
of 1770, 1785 and 1791-93 have been treated in detail for the 
first time, as also the difficulties faced by the French authorities 
in India due t ojftck of finance and more t o lack o f interest .jm 
the part of the Home Government. Thirdly, Anglo-French 
commercial disputes and French rading activities in India 
during the period under review have been discussed in full. 
Another feature of the work that may be mentioned here is the 
account of the revolutio nary rno vcmetifs in the different Settle 
nicrtls, following the news of the Revolution in France. That 
interesting episode in the history of the French in India is not 
very well-known, although Madame Labernadic has written 
a most fascinating book on the subject. 

About the period of the war, 1778 to 1783, the* present work 
has covered nearly the same ground as Malleson’s Final French 
Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas ; but it gives a more 
detailed account, based on original records, of French naval 
and land operations and of French relations with the country 




Hrf)Wers than Malleson’s book. Besides, many erroneous views 
of Malleson, Roux, and other historians about persons and 
events have been sought to be corrected in the light of original 
documents not noticed by them. To give just a few examples, 
An attempt has been made to explain the conduct of Duchemin 
and Hoffelize, who have been accused of cowardice and pusilla¬ 
nimity by nearly every historian of the period (except Marti- 
neau). The difficulties facing Bussy in 1783-83 have also been 
brought out clearly to prove that he did not deserve that con¬ 
demnation which he has generally received from historians. 
Then again, great care has been taken to describe the delicate 
relations between the French and Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan, 
their conflicting interests and lack of good-will and co-opera 
tion. That analysis is intended to bring out one of the prin¬ 
cipal causes of the failure of the French expedition in 1783-83. 