

1 he treatment of French policy and activities in the East 
during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars has not been 
detailed as in the earlier sections of the book. The reason 
is that in 179; France lost all her possessions in India, and 
since the present work is concerned mainly with the French 
in India, French projects and activities outside India are of 
interest only to the extent that they were connected with the 
principal rheme of our story. Nevertheless, a critical analysis 
of the Eastern policy of Revolutionary and Napoleonic France 
and a connected account of French diplomatic, military and 
naval efforts relating to India have been given as fully as 
required by the general plan of the present work. 

Only a few words need be said here about the sources 
utilised, as a more detailed account will be found in the Biblio- 
fP' a phy at the end. In writing a history of the French in India 
l have naturally depended more on French than on English 
■ecords. It is only on a few aspects of the subject that Eng¬ 
lish records are of any material value, like the Anglo-French 
war of 1778*83 or French diplomatic activities at the Courts of 
*hc Indian Princes injurious to English interests. But for the 
major part of the work materials could be supplied by French 
records, mostly unpublished. At the same time I have been 
careful to avoid giving a mere one-sided account, and wherever 
English sources are available or throw some light on the subject, 

I have utilised them to cneck up or to supplement the account 


imSTfiy 



taken from French sources, as will be found particularh in the 
second section of the work dealing with the war of 1778-8^. 
Where it has not been possible to come to a definite condu- 
sion, J. have given both the English and the French version- so 
as to enable the reader to form his own judgment. In con¬ 
nection with the use of original records, it may be mentioned 
here that 1 have relied more on the correspondence, memo ires 
and reports of persons who took an active part in the events 
narrated than on second-hand information, either contem¬ 
porary or later. At; the same time, in judging the conduct or 
the motive of an actor in respect of any event J have carefully 
subjected it, wherever possible, to the criticism of persons not 
so directly involved. 

About the original records, I may state that l made a most 
exhaustive use of all the French manuscript documents, pre¬ 
served in the Archives of Pondicherry, about five-six11 s of 
which relate to the period under review. It is a matter of deep 
regret that all the documents were taken to France at the time 
of the transfer of the French Settlements to the Indian Union. 
The Pondicherry records were almost complete for the purpose 
of reconstructing the history of the French in India from 1763 
to 1 793- There were only a few major gaps which had to be 
filled up with the help of documents preserved in the Biblio- 
th&que Rationale and the Archives of the Ministries of Colonies, 
Navy, War and Foreign Affairs in Paris. I have math full use 
of all the relevant documents preserved in these Archives, as 
also those in the India Office (Commonwealth Relations Office) 
in London, so as to make rny account is complete as possible. I 
must, acknowledge here my debt of gratitude to Madame Yv. 
R. Gaebete, President of the Sociite de L'Hi toire de Utlal de 
Pondichtry, to M. Schermack of the Socidte des Amis dc In 
Bibhothtque Rationale, et des Grandes Biblioth&ques de France, 
Paris, and to the French Consulate in Calcutta for their kind 
help in getting copies of records horn the Archives of Pondi¬ 
cherry and Paris. I am also thankful to Miss Sujata Ghosh, 
Mrs. Snigdha Roy and Mr. Pranab iliswas for their kind help 
in preparing the index. 