

in the south too the English came to acquire increased 
political and military importance during the period under 
review. Bombay first came into prominence as a result of 


mtSTffy. 



THE rOUTlOAI, SCENE IN INDIA 


<SL 


conflicts with the Marathas [row 1775 to 1782, and Madras 
grew in importance ami power as a result of successive wars 
with Mysore between 1767 and 1799. Neither of the southern 
Presidencies possessed, however, military resources and territorial 
revenues adequate to sustain them against their formidable 
Indian adversaries, and they were saved from utter destruction 
only by the support of the Bengal Government,—military, 
diplomatic and financial. Indeed, the preservation of the 
English power in the south during the critical years, 1775 to 
1783, was due to the assumption of over all control and respon¬ 
sibility by the Bengal Government. It ensured unity of action, 
in spite of grave divergences of opinion as between Bombay 
and Madras and also as between the two southern Presidencies 
and Bengal. The concentration of authority with respect to 
diplomatic relations and military operations was first made by 
North's Regulating Act of 1773 and further strengthened by 
Pitts India Act of 1784. But apart from these two Parlia¬ 
mentary Acts, it was the exigencies of the military situation 
that placed Bombay and Madras under the control of the 
Bengal Government. 

The thirty years from 1763 to 1793 constituted an eventful 
period for the two English Presidencies in the south, Bombay 
made its first territorial acquisitions on the mainland, but what 
was more important was that it embarked on that policy of 
intervention in the internal politics of the Maratha Confederacy 
which was destined to end in the total destruction of that Power, 
lor Madras also the period was clearlv indicative of the future. 
The English had established military control over the Carnatic 
and assumed responsibility for its defence, while keeping 
administrative authority in the hands of the Nawab. It gave 
rise to many difficult problems, the only solution to which lay 
in tearing off the fiction of the Nawab’s independence, as in 
Bengal, and the assumption of full powers by the real masters. 
"1 hen again, the acquisition of the Northern Sarkars in 176b 
necessitated the establishment of close diplomatic relations with 
Hyderabad and the promise of English military assistance against 
all enemies. It was the commencement of a process which 
was to lead to the Subsidiary Alliance in Wellesley’s time and 
the establishment of effective English control over that state. 
Finally, it was during these years that the Madras Presidency 


WHlST/fy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


considerably enlarged by the acquisition of new territories, 
mainly at the expense of Mysore. At the end of the period 
the English emerged as undoubtedly the strongest military Power 
in the south, as they had become in the north after Plassey 
and Buxar. 

Till i79 ;a the English had to reckon with not only the 
Indian Powers but also with the French, who, if not a formidable 
antagonist, 'still retained enough capacity for trouble and 
constituted a potential source of danger. With the final extinc¬ 
tion of the French power in 1793. the English found their way 
dear for a further advance and extension of their political 
dominion. They had already attained the position of being 
the strongest power in India. In the closing years of the 18th 
century they proceeded to carry their work to its logical cortclu- 
sion, the achievement of full sovereignty over the entire sub¬ 
continent. The three Indian Powers who still retained their 
independence and had some military strength left: wore liquidat 
ed one after another. Hyderabad was induced to enter into a 
treaty of Subsidiary Alliance (1798) and thereby to barter away 
its independence for a guarantee of protection against its two 
powerful neighbours, the Marathas and Mysore. Mysore, which 
had been dismembered and crippled in 1792, was finally crushed 
in 1799. I hen came the turn of the Marathas. 'Faking 
advantage of the internal strife among the Marathas, the English 
imposed the Treaty of Bassein (1802) on the Pcshwa, the nominal 
head of the Marat ha Confederacy. It led inevitably to the 
second Ynglo-Maratha war, which put the English position in 
India beyond any effective challenge. In north India Sindhia s 
power was decisively broken, and the Mughal Emperor became 
a protege of the English. The English gained indirect control 
over most of the Maratha states, and although by the. political 
settlement of 1805 they showed a policy of moderation not 
required by the results of the war, the formidable nature oi 
their military power was clearly brought home to their adver¬ 
saries. Thus, even before the final extinction of the Maratha 
power in 1817-18, the English had attained the position of 
de facto sovereign power in India, which received international 
recognition by the treaties of 1814 and 1815 at the end of the 
Napoleonit Wars. 