

CALICUrXS Jzj' Z+giTnANQUEBAR 

PO V W A 6 0 ^ 

l‘ 4 v\ 74 VJJP£t | NEGAPATAM 
COCHlN^r" ? 

JRINKOHAU 


BAY OF BENGAL 


80 °' 


88 


L.P- 































































MINfSr/^ 


CHAPTER 1 




THE POLITICAL SCENE IN INDIA 

A detailed study of the history of the French in India from 
1763 to 1816 requires, as a necessary introduction, a short sketch 
of the political condition of India during that eventful period. 
It was an era of transition from the old order to the new, 
from the political chaos and confusion following the disruption 
of the Mughal Empire to the emergence of peace, ordered 
government and administrative units in the 19th century. The 
events of the period arc all well-known; the leading personalities 
and their policies have long been subjects of controversy among 
historians; and their merits and demerits have been discussed 
most thoroughly in numerous contemporary and later works. 
It is neither possible in a short sketch, nor necessavv for out 
main purpose, to go over those details once again. All that 
need he attempted here is to give a very brief account of the 
principal Indian Powers during the period under review. It 
will help us to get a better view, against the background of 
the wider political setting of the country, of the policies and 
aspirations of the French, their intrigues and diplomatic rela¬ 
tions, and finally the failure of all efforts to revive their lost 
influence and power. 

1 . The Expansion oj the English Tower. 

The most dominant factor in the Indian political situation 
during our period was the emergence of a new Power, which 
by the end of the century stood forth as the inevitable heir to 
the Mughals. The English first obtained their political control 
over Bengal in 1757, and although for a few years they main 
mined the fiction of the Nawab’s independence, their power 
w’as visibly demonstrated the making and unmaking of 
successive rulers,—Mir Jafar being replaced by Mir Kasim and 
the latter again by Mir Jafar. The treaty with Najmuddaulah 
in February 1765 brought the entire administration under the 
effective control of the English, through a minister to be chosen 

% > r '\*y' . , . ' - ■ ; . * 



4 k then’ and holding office at ihcii pleasure. A few months 
later their position was further strengthened and regularised 
by the Imperial grant of the Omani of Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa. There followed a few years of dual government, ended 
by their assumption of full powers of administration under 
Warren Hastings. At the same lime their independent posi¬ 
tion in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa was signalised by the discon¬ 
tinuance of the payment of 26 lakhs of rupees promised to the 
Eniperoi in return for the grant of Dnran . Thus the fiction 
<>f Mughal suzerainty was torn by the cold logic of facts. 

Once entrenched in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, the English 
v re soon led by circumstances to extend their influence even 
turther. I he battle of Buxar (1764) put tfie whole of Oudb at 
their mercy, hut they were prudent enough not to extend their 
direct control over the country. This apparent self-denial on 
their part was prompted by two reasons: fust., their lack of 
adequate resources to hold such a vast area; and second, their 
b ar of rousing the hostility of other Indian Powers and uniting 
them in a common opposition. So by the treaty 0! 1765 the 
country was restored to the Nawab, Shuja-ud-daulah, for 50 
lakhs of rupees, with the exception of two districts. Kora and 
Allahabad, which were bestowed on the homeless Emperor, 
Shah Ahan II, in exchange for the grant, of Diwani. Thus, 
by a single deal the English regularised their position in Bengal, 
Bihar and Orissa, obtained a grateful alls in the Nawab of 
Otidh, secured a buffer state to guard their western frontier, 
and kept the wandering Emperor closely attached to them by 
giving him a home and deluding hopes, repeated year after 
year, of restoring him to his ancestral capital. After 1765 the 
English position in north India remained unassailable, parti 
cularly after the impressive demonstration of their military 
power in the conquest of Rohilkhand (1774), the march of 
Goddard’s army across the sub continent' (1778-79), the capture 
of the Gwalior Fort (1780) considered impregnable till then, 
and the decisive defeat inflicted on Sindhia (1781), the only 
Indian Power who could come near to challenge the English 
position in the north. 