

Till his death in 1775 Shuja-ud-daulah remained true to his 


connection with the English out of convenience, although for a 
few years after 1765 French intrigues ir north India centred on 
him as a possible ally for an invasion of Bengal, lie had in 
his service a number of French military adventurers, the most 
prominent of them being Gentil, whose possible influence on 
him was dreaded by the English. The supposed danger was 
finally removed in 1775, when on the death of Shuja-ud-daulah 
the English exerted effective pressure on his successor, Asaf-ud- 
daulah, to dismiss all the Frenchmen in his service. Anyway, 
even the presence of French officers did not materially affect 
the friendly relations between Shuja-ud-daulah and the English. 


MIN isr^ 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


y the Treaty of Benares, 1773, Shuja-ud-daulah got back the 
two lost districts of Kora and Allahabad which the Emperor 
had wanted to transfer to his Maratha protectors. Shortly after 
he also received English military assistance for the conquest of 
the Rob ilia country. Under Asaf tid-daulah the English grip 
over Oudh was further tightened. Although the Nawab retain¬ 
ed full independence in internal administration, he became 
completely dependent on English military support and was kept 
under close observation by their agent at his Darbar, It was 
impossible for him to get rid of the English alliance and follow 
an independent policy; and from this time the principality of 
Oudh lost all real importance as a factor in north Indian 
politics. “ \ 


IV'. The Marat has. 


In the south there were three principal Powers, all jealous 
of the extension of the English dominion and therefore poten¬ 
tial allies for the French,—the Maratha Confederacy, Hyderabad 
under Nizam Mi and Mysore under Haidar Ali. Of these the 
most important was the Maratha Confederacy. It was the 
strongest from the military point of view, and about the middle 
of the 18th century it even appeared as the Power destined to 
seize the whole inheritance of the Mughal Empire. But the 
greatest obstacle to any united and concerted effort on the part 
of the Marathas was the decline of the authority of the central 
government and the consequent increase of power of the 
dependent chiefs. The vigorous and united state built up by 
Shivaji became partially decentralised not long after his death 
under the pressure of military necessity, and what controlling 
and paramount authorit) there still remained in the hands of 
the central government was shattered beyond repair in the 
second half of the 18th century by the disaster of Panipat and 
the dispute over succession to the Peshwaship which started 
shortly after. The process of decentralisation went so far that 
the chiefs of the outlying parts, the Bhonsla, the Gaikwar, the 
Sindhia and the Holkar, assumed virtually independent author¬ 
ity, till one of them, Mahadaji Sindhia, even overshadowed the 
central government. That was why although the Maratha Con¬ 
federacy as a whole represented the strongest military factor 