

Shah Alam regained the Imperial capital at last, but what a 
sad inheritance it was! Rebellions and foreign invasions had 
so completely obliterated all landmarks that it was difficult, to 
recognise any trace of the old Empire. The authority of the 
Imperial Government was confined to the city of Delhi and 
its environs, and all around subordinate vassals had raised 
themselves up a* independent potentates. The Nawab o r Oudh, 
the nominal Wazir or Chancellor of the Empire, and the Nizam 
of Hyderabad were too powerful to be disturbed. The eastern 
provinces, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, had permanently passed 
into the Jlands of the English, and even the annual tribute of 
26 lakhs of rupees promised by them in 1765 was discontinued 
after 1770 The Marathas were back in north India to 


Ml Htstjfy 



THE POUTICAI, SCENE IN INDIA 


<SL 


establish their authority which had been shattered on the 
fateful field of Panipat. Then there remained lesser Powers, 
the Ruhelas and the Sikhs, the Jats and the Rajputs. For the 
next sixteen years after the return of Shah Alam to his capital, 
the Imperial Government was engaged in vainly trying to sup¬ 
press these Powers and to revive a fragment of the old Empire. 
But in the end all efforts proved fruitless, ami lar from there 


being a revival of even a shadow of the old glory, the Imperial 
authority was prostituted by successive petty tyrants to gain 
their selfish ends, and the Imperial farnil) was subjected to the 
grossest insult and cruelty ever recorded in history at the hands 
of the Ruhela chieftain, Ghulam Qadir. The feeble lamp of 
the war-torn and desolate Empire would have flickered abruptly 
in 1788 but for the timely protection given by Mahadaji Sindhia 
which hept it burning for a few years more. Finally, after the 
defeat of Sindhia (1803) in the second Anglo-Maratha war the 
shadowy Emperor passed under English protection and ceased 
to have any political importance. Ehe Empire of the Mughals 
came to an unceremonious end as the British Raj became an 


established fact. 

The failure of all attempts to resuscitate the Empire may 
be attributed to three principal factors: the character of Shah 
Alam; the chronic financial difficulties; and the want of a suit¬ 
able leader among the nobles and generals of the Empire, gifted 
with imagination to plan and vigour to carry it out. In contrast 
with his earlier career of adventure, after his restoration at 
Delhi Shah Alam lost himself completely in the pleasures of the 
hareth, and the only initiative he occasionally took in politics 
was in spinning webs of backstair intrigues which proved 
entirely futile. It was impossible that the Empire could be 
revived under such a shadowy figure. The second factor was 
financial distress. The outlying parts of the Empire had been 
parcelled out among powerful vassals, who professed allegiance 
to the Emperor but paid no tribute. Even the crownlands were 
diverted for the purpose of maintaining the minister in power 
and his army. The only way of relieving the financial distress 
was to exact tributes from refractory vassals, but that required a 
huge initial outlay on military preparations beyond the capa¬ 
city of the Imperial Government. 