




WNISTffy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


actually dictated peace. I he English had to conclude a 
nsive alliance with him which was incompatible with their 
treaty with Nizam Ali, since each alliance was directed against 
the othe t. 

B) the treaties of 1766 and 1768, the English were given 
possession of only four of the Northern Sarkars, the fifth one, 


Guntoor, to remain under Basalat Jang, Nizam Alt’s brother, 
for life. But they were anxious to acquire Guntoor earlier, 
lor two reasons: first, to round off their territories along the 
coast; and second, to eliminate the French menace, since Basalat 
J. ng had taken in his service a body of French troops coni 
mantled by de Lall£e. The declaration of war with France in 
1778 made the menace more pressing than ever, and the Madras 
Government opened direct negotiations with Basalat Jang, with¬ 
out any reference to his suzerain and brother, Nizam Ali. 
Basal.i» Jang also, anxious to get the protection of the English 
against Haidar’s aggression, readily agreed in 1779 to rent 
Guntoor to them. It gave mortal offence to Nizam Ali. who 
replied to the English by taking into his service the French 
troops dismissed by his brother. Basalat Jang. There were 
under him two great French captains, de Lai Ice, and Aumont, 
ami French influence in Hyderabad, once the scene of Bussy’s 
glorw seemed quite promising when Montigny first arrived at 
Poona about the middle of 1779. Nizam Ali went, even further 
ami started active negotiations for a ‘Triple Alliance’ between 
him. Haidar AU and the Marathas. In spite of mutual 
jealousies which prevented any permanent bination of the 
three southern Powers, the negotiations did nor* meet with any 
difficulty, since both Haidar Ali and the Marathas were at this 
time at war with the English. The plan of the allied Powers 
was not merely to harass the English position in the south, but 
also to send an expedition to Bengal with the help of Mudaji 
Bhonsla. 

i he English were very much alarmed at the prospect of 
such a powerful coalition and at once set about breaking it up 
before it had the time to become fully cemented. They entered 
into negotiations with Mudaji Bhonsla with a view to detaching 
him from the coalition and bought off the expeditionary force 
sent against Cuttack. Sindhia was conciliated by holding out 
to him the prospect of leadership of the Maratha Confederacy, 


THE POUTICAJU SCENE IN INDIA 



earnest appeals for peace were sent out iron) Madras to the 
Poona Government. Finally, the menace of the coalition was 
for the time being completely removed by conciliating Nizam 
Ali, its prime mover. The action of the Madras Government 
in acquiring Guntoor from Basalat Jang was disowned by the 
Supreme Government in Calcutta and the territory was restored. 
Nizam Ali went back to his old alliance and friendship with 
the English. He did not, however, dose the doors upon the 
French but, like a wily diplomat, maintained at least an appear 
ance of friendship towards them, whom he claimed as the 
traditional allies of Hyderabad. 