




THE POLITICAL SCENE IN INDIA 

and would have been the most important ally for the 
French, a treaty with the Poona Government was of little con¬ 
sequence unless similar terms could be arranged with all the 
chiefs after overcoming their mutual rivalries and jealousies. 

The death of Peshwa Balaji Baji Rao in June 1761, under 
the shock of the Panipat disaster, opened an unhappy chapter 
of dispute for the headship of the state, leading ultimately to 
the ruin of the Maratha power. Balaji Baji Raos successor, 
Madhav Rao, being young was placed under the guardianship 
of his uncle Raghuriath Rao. The latter, although personally 
brave and having military talents, proved to be weak and vacil 
luting in politics and gave the English their first opportunity 
to exploit the internal divisions oi the Marathas. Immediately 
after the death of Balaji Baji Rao the Nizam decided to attack 
the Marat has, taking advantage of their military weakness after 


the Panipat disaster; and although the plan was ultimately 
abandoned owing to the defection of the Nizam's Maratha 
troops, the incident was important in history as it was then for 
the first time that Raghunath Rao turned to the English at 
Bombay for military assistance, a policy which was destined to 
prove so fatal to the Maratha power. 

Madhav Rao, on coming out of liis period of tutelage, 
proved to be a much abler man than his uncle in directing the 
affairs of the state, and had he lived long enough he might have 
been able to retrieve the Maratha fortunes even after the shat¬ 
tering blow at Panipat. His prudence and tact were demons¬ 
trated by his conduct towards his erratic uncle, Raghunath Rao. 
who even took to arms against the Poona Government with the 


help of Nizam Ali, ever on the alert to exploit Maratha dissen 
sions to his own advantage, Madhav Rao was wise in diplomacy 
and vigorous in war, and under him the Marathas won a series 
of victories over Nizam Ali and Haidar All as a ho in northern 
India. Indeed, the growing power of the Marathas alarmed 
the Bombay Government so much that in 1767 the latter sent 
an agent named Mostyn to Poona to report on the state of 
affairs there and to prevent an alliance of the Marathas with 
Nizam Ali or Haidar Ali, which could not but be dangerous to 
the English position in the south. But unfortunately for the 
Marathas, ihe career of the young and vigorous Peshwa was cut 
short in November 1772. The death of Madhav Rao proved 


misTfy 



THE FRENCH IN 1ND; 


<SL 


^ fatal the Maiiftha power than the disaster of Panipat. 
a immediately opened the floodgates of internal .strife and 
consequent foreign intervention. 

Mudhav Rao was succeeded by his worthless brother 
J f ,n Rao - J ust ljdorc l»is death Madhav Rao. wanting to 
guard against internal dissension, had released his uncle, 
aghunath Rao, from prison and had entrusted Narayan Rao 
hts ere. But relations between the uncle and Che'nephew 
uerc not happy, and Raghunath Rao was again kept confined 
U ‘ * P a,ac « at Poona. The intrigues of Raghunath 