

The later history of the Marathas may be sketched very 
briefly, as being unconnected with the hopes and plans of the 
French. Although the French sought to maintain diplomatic 
relations with the Marathas for some time more, with empty 
promises of military assistance against the English on the out¬ 
break of the next war in Europe, the Marathas could hardly 
place any reliance in them and turned back completely from 
the idea of an alliance with the French. Franco-Maratha 
diplomatic relations practically came to an end with the with¬ 
drawal of the French envoy, Montigny, from Poona in 1788, 
although occasional exchange of letters between Pondicherry 
and Poona continued till 179:3. 

After the Treaty of Salbai the Marathas turned their atten¬ 
tion to the extension and consolidation of their dominions, 
avoiding any conflict with the English and maintaining out¬ 
wardly friendly relations with them. In north India Sindhia 
established his secure control, taking the Mughal Emperor 
under his protection. But for a temporary eclipse in 17 $ 8 » die 
Maratha power in north India remained unchallenged till the 
second Anglo-Maratha war in 1803-5. 1 R south India too the 
period saw* a marked increase in Maratha power. The Marathas 
defeated Tipu in 1785-87 and the Nizam of Hyderabad in 
1795. In the third Anglo-Mysorc war (1790-92) the Mara¬ 
thas co-operated with the English and made substantial terri¬ 
torial gains in return. 

Thus, down to about the close of the century the Maratha 
power maintained its vigour despite the lack of unity among 




MIMSr#, 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


r different chiefs and particularly the personal rivalry between 
nilhij and Nana Phadna is. But the situation changed 
tlur abruptly after the accession of Baji Rao H (son of the 
<1 English ally, kaglmnath Rao) as JPeshwa in 1796 and 
aaie worse after the death (1800) of the astute diplomat and 


statesman, Nana Phadnavis, who had guided tlie destiny of the 
Marathas for more than two decades. Within two years of the 
death ol Nana Phadnavis internal strife among the Marathas 
took such i violent form that Baji Rao II. driven out from 
Poona, sought the assistance of the English and concluded a 
treaty of Subsidiary Alliance with them. The Treaty of 
Bassein (*802) gave the English an opportunity of establishing 
themselves at the heart of the Maratha dominions. Their 
position was challenged by the other members of the Maratha 
Confederacy, hindhia, Bhonsla and Hoik ir, but the second 


Anglo Maratha war demonstrated more clearly than before the 
military superiority of the English. All the Maratha states had 
to recognise the fact and agree to new relations with the 
English, which considerably curtailed their independence. 
After the second Anglo-Maratha war, there set in such a rapid 
process of decay and disintegration in all the Maratha states 
that when the final hour of reckoning came with the 
English, none of them was in a position to give a real light. 