

The third factor was the depraved character of the nobility 




THK FRENCH IN INDIA 


o! the Empire. Most of them, like Abdul Ahad Khan, belonged 
to the category of polished courtiers. The onlv man who 
towered above the puny figures of the time Was Najaf Khan. 
This Persian adventurer offered the only hope of a partial 
restoration of the Empire. He was a fine soldier and con¬ 
siderably strengthened the Imperial army by a combination of 
Mughal cavalry with European-trained infantry battalions. lie 
paid particular attention to the improve mein of the artillery 
and secured the services of European adventurers like Madec, 
Sombre and Modavc, with their well-trained and well-armed 
contingents. But, unfortunately, Najaf Khan was kept out of 
effective control of affairs too long bv the machinations of his 
rivals, and when at last he came to power at the end of 1779 
it was only for a short period. With his premature death in 
1782 vanished all hopes of resuscitating the Empire. 

When such was the condition of the Empire, it is not a little 
surprising at first that the French in their diplomatic plans 
from 1765 to 1783 should have so much relied upon it as an 
important factor in the coalition of Indian rowers to be formed 
against the English. Some of the French agents, like Chevalier, 
no doubt overrated the military strength of the Empire and the 
abilities of the men who were in control of its affairs. But at 
the same time it cannot be overlooked that with all its weakness 


the Empire could yet have played an important part in the 
projected coalition against the English, if sustained by French 
troops and French money. The prestige of the Imperial name 
was still very high, and the adherence of the Emperor to the 
coalition would have considerably strengthened the forces 
arrayed against the English. During the first Anglo-Maratha 
war the 7> oona Court made strenuous efforts to gain the co¬ 
operation of the Emperor, and the Government of Calcutta in 
alarm sent a confidential agent, James Browne, to Delhi to 
counteract the Maratha intrigues. Both sides knew well the 
value to be attached to the adherence of the Emperor to the 
projected coalition. 


III. Ondh. 


Besides the Emperor, the only other north Indian Power 
who deserves some notice here was the Nawab of Oudh, ruling 


imSTffy 



THE POLITICAL SCENE IN INDIA 


Si 


WA vast area from the border of Bihar to the course of 
anges in the west. During the early pari of our period at 
least, Oudh had not passed so completely under English, control 
as to lose all political importance. Tim principality, originally 
subject to die Mughal Emperor, was made virtually independent 
by the all-powerful Wazir or Chancellor of the Empire, Safdar 


Jang, aboil the middle of the 18th century. On his death in 
1754. lie was succeeded by his son, Shuja-ud-daulah, who ruled till 
1775. Shuja-ud-daulah also was appointed Wazir of the Empire, 
but for all practical purposes lit ruled as an independent 
Prince, deriving his strength from his own armed forces and 
the vast territory he had under his direct control. In 1759 he 
gave some token help to the fugitive Prince AH Gauhar in his 
attempt to recover Bengal and Bihar, and in 1763 he not only 
gave shelter to the expelled Nawab of Bengal, Mir Kasim, but 
even went to war with the English in his support. I he decisive 
defeat at Buxar in 1764 and the treaty of alliance which follow¬ 
ed in 17O5 opened a new chapter in the history of Oudh. The 
principality passed gradually under English control, although 
the Nawab long retained his independence so far as internal 
administration was concerned. Bv the Treaty of Allahabad 
Shuja ud-daulah got back all his territories, with the exception 
of Kora and Allahabad which were given 10 the Emperor. From 
the English point of view' the arrangement was most politic, 
particularly when they were not ready to annex Oudh and 
assume direct responsibility for its defence. It secured the 
friendship of Shuja-ud-daulah and created a convenient buffer- 
staLe to guard their western frontier against sudden invasion. 