

1 he Power which had once aspired after the inheritance of the 
Mughal Empire suffered an inglorious exit from the political 
scene. 


V. Hyderabad. 

Next to the Maratha Confederacy in importance was 
Hyderabad, not so much for its military strength as for the 
crafty diplomacy of its ruler. Nizam Ali. Originating from 
the Mughal Viceroyalty of the Deccan, Hyderabad became 
virtually independent in the second quarter of the 18th century 
under Nizam uEmulk. From 1751 to 1758 it was the scene of 
French milkary exploits which later showed the way to their 
more successful rivals, the English. It was in Hyderabad that 
for the first time Bussy demonstrated how an Indian state could 
be kept under effective foreign domination while outwardly 
preserving its independence. The connection between Hydera- 


Miwisr^ 


THE I’OMTICAL' SCI ME IN INDIA 

^UiSf+aiui Fiance was so close that during the French expedition 
of 1782-83 Bussy and all the Frenchmen who had knowledge of 
Indian affairs felt confident of the support of their traditional 
friend and ally. 

When Bussy left Hyderabad on the summons of Lath in 
1758. the five Northern Sarkars, the stronghold of the French, 
fell into the hands of the English. In order to regularise their 
position they obtained from the Emperor, Shah Alain, a grant 
of these territories by the Treaty of Allahabad in 1765. But 
although armed with the Imperial grant, they had to come to 
an agreement with Nizam All before they could take possession 
of the territories. By the Treaty of Mutual Assistance, con¬ 
cluded in November 1766, the Northern Sarkars were ceded to 
the English for an annual tribute of 9 lakhs of rupees, and in 
return the English agreed to furnish the Nizam with troops 
against his enemies, the tribute for the Sarkars to be remitted 
every vear that he might require such military assistance. The 
treaty of 1766 was in fact directed against Haidar Ali, whose 
increasing power had alarmed both the English and Nizam Ali 
Since Nizam Ali was at this time in league with the Marathas, 
there was thus formed a ‘Triple Alliance’ to curb the overween¬ 
ing ambition of Haidar. 

Bui the diplomatic relations among the three southern 
Powers were quickly changing, and alliances were formed with 
as much rapidity as broken. The frontier districts between the 
three states were always changing hands, and each Power was 
ever on the alert to take advantage of any temporary weakness 
of the others. Since 1761 Nizam Ali had attacked rhe Marathas 
three times, first, to take advantage of the expected disorder 
following the death of Baiaji Baji Rao; second, in alliance with 
Raghunath Rao; and third, in alliance with Janoji Bhonsla. 
But after these three attempts Nizam Ali drew closer to the 
Marathas with a view- to check the ever-growing ambition of 
Haidar. In 1767 the English, Nizam Ali and the Marathas 
attacked Haidar. 7he Marathas w*ere quickly bought off. and 
Nizam Ali also withdrew from the English alliance for a time 
and Coined with Haidar But in 1768 he changed sides once 
more and renewed the alliance with the English. It did not, 
however, affect the course of the war with Haidar. Victorious 
in the field, Haidar appeared before Madras in March 1769 