


iHt FRENCH IN INDIA 

nas given to Col. Goddard) to inarch overland to Bombay, 
admittedly a daring project, which more than anything else 
demonstrated to rhe Indian Powers the military strength of the 
English. 6 

/ he expedition sent by the Bombay Government met with 
a disastrous failure, partly because of the smallness of the force 
and the mismanagement of the military operations, and partly 
because of the unexpected support that the Poona Government 
under Nana Phadnavis got from all the important Maratha 
chiefs. In January 1779 the English were forced to a humiliat¬ 
ing treaty at Wadgaon, and although the treaty was promptly 
repudiated by the Bombay Government, it had the effect of 
shattering their military prestige in the eyes of the Indian 
Powers, lo some extent the position was retrieved by the 
campaigns of Goddard in Gujarat, the capture of the Gwalior 
i*ort by Popharn and the defeat inflicted on Sindhia at Sipri by 
Carnac, which raised the English name again. The English 
promptly captured Bassein and the other islands they coveted, 
tnd Goddard moved up to the Bhor Ghat to secure the Konkan 
tud threaten Poona. But the difficulty of maintaining a large 
fcice during the rains in the face of an elusive enemy of an 
overwhelming numerical superiority led to the withdrawal from 
the Bhor Ghat, leaving the Marathas at libertv to pillage the 
Konkan. 

The English were at this time at war with Haidar Ali and 
had suffered severe reverses at his hands. The Madras Govern¬ 
ment made a frantic appeal to Poona for peace, and the Supreme 
Government in Calcutta also, alarmed at the possibility of a 
general alliance among the Marathas. Nizam Ali and Haidar 
Ali, at once hastened to end hostilities with the Marathas. 
Through the mediation of Sindhia the Treaty of Salbai was 
concluded in May 1785. The treaty provided for a general 
pacification in south India, including in its scope the Bhonsla, 
Nizam Ali and Haidar Ali; the restitution of all conquests made 
since the Treaty of Purandhar; and the exclusion of other 
European nations from the Maratha dominions. Although on 
the surface the trean was honourable to the Marathas, it really 
marked the end of the first chapter of the disintegration of the 
powerful Confederacy. It was brought about by several factors: 
the internal dissensions at Poona, the defections of Mudaji 




misr^ 


^ • G oi^\ 

THE POLITICAL SCENE IN INDIA 

of Berav and Fateh Singh Gaikwar of Baroda, 
the north-Indian imprests of Mahadaji Sindhiu which impelled 
him to remain on friendly terms with the English. A part of 
the responsibility must he shared by the French, who raised 
hopes in the hearts of the Maratha leaders without being able 
to fulfil them, as will be described in later chapters. Relying 
on the promises held out by the French, Nana Phadnavis 
delayed the final exchange of ratification till February 1783- 
The failure of the French to give them any military assistance 
so alienated the Marathas that after 17H3 they definitely 
abandoned the idea of an alliance with I 4 ranee, and the later 
political overtures from Pondicherry received but scant consi¬ 
deration at Poona. 