

In the third AngloMysore war (1790-92) the Nizam, like 
the Marathas, cooperated with the English and was rewarded 
with territorial gains at the cost of Tipu. But he was soon to 
learn that English friendship was an inconstant thing. When 
he was attacked by the Marathas in 1795, he received no 
help from the English and suffered a disastrous defeat. It is 
not surprising that after this lesson his relations with the English 
became cool and he sought to improve his military position by 
augmenting the French force in his service under Raymond. 
It did not mean, however, that there was any connection between 
Hyderabad and the Revolutionary Government in Paris, nor 
that Nizam Ali really expected any help from that quarter as 
against the English. When Wellesley arrived, the French men¬ 
ace loomed very large in the imagination of the English. So 
he promptly turned to eliminating that danger by procuring 
the dismissal of all the French troops then in the service of 
the different Indian Princes. His first success was in winning 
over the Nizam of Hyderabad, who, afraid of his stronger 
neighbours, signed the treaty of Subsidiary Alliance (1798) 
offered by Wellesley, dismissed all French troops, and bartered 
away his political independence lor a guarantee of English 
protection. 

VJ. Mysore . 


The third important Power of south India was Mysore, 
ruled by an adventurer of remarkable vigour and ability. 
Starting his career in a humble capacity in the service of Nanjraj, 
the chief minister of the Raja of Mysore, Haidar Ali rose step 
by step, increasing his wealth and military strength, until in 



Ml NtSTftf 


^ • G o^X 

I HE FRENCH IN INDIA 

was in a position to supplant his pa 
ih< >ur t of government himself, keeping the nominal Raja 
in dose confinement. His rise to power was helped not only 
by the internal troubles in Mysore but also by the opportunities 
presented by the Anglo-French conflict in the Carnatic, which 
gave him his first lessons in European methods of warfare. It 
was during the Carnatic wars that began his close connection 
with the French which remained the traditional policy of 
Mysore throughout the rule of his family. 

Under Haidar Ali ibe decadent state of Mysore was suddenly 
raised to a political and military importance which it had never 
enjoyed before, fn the course of a few years it absorbed nil 
the petty principalities lying beyond its original frontiers and 
came to extend up to the river Krishna in the north and the 
Malabar Coast in the west. Such a rapid expansion was made 
possible by a variety of factors,—-the remarkable abilities of 
Haidar both in war as well as in diplomacy; the anarchical 
conditions which prevailed in the south as a legacy of the 
prolonged wars of succession in the Deccan and the Carnatic; 
the weakness and disunity of the petty chiefs, Maratha, Pathan 
and \ayar, who were (rushed one after another; the decline 
of the Maratha power as a result of the disaster of Panipat and 
even more of the internal dissensions after 177a; and finally, 
the jealousy and suspicion between the Courts of Poona and 
Hyderabad Which prevented any concerted action to check the 
rising Power in the south. 