

.to and his wife bore fruit, and on the goth August myn there 
no r out a mutiny in the army resulting in the murder of 
^ i.i i:. ao. Raghunath Rao was next acknowledged as the 
eshwa. lmt hts power was short-lived because of the opposition 

Phadnuvd! J,U1 ' tCrS hCade<1 1)V Sakharam Bapu and Nana 

Raghunath Rao’s first care as Peshwa was lo fight against 
"" i and Haidar All, both of whom were always on the 
u.eu to exploit troubles among the Marat has. Nizam Ali was 

P ,‘rr ,1" o a,U V bUI thrOU S K the “placed generosity of 
treiH U l ' - a ° 1C <iul not sufler any loss of territory for 

m"; H, a ^ mS so iS 0,d . fricnd Raghunath Rao next turned 
j !>ut ' n the f’idst of a victorious campaign 

:; ,s M,ddc,dv recaUed hy the news ?* the birth <* a pi*. 
Pedn ' b d ai M- a " Ra °' who was at OIlce proclaimed as the 
adta ll ' , M * n,Stenal P art > at Poona. Raghunath Rao 
success ' oona, but although he gained some initial 

. i ' ! ! ,iun y f he Ministerial party and might have 

,. k, n “ P lbr °PPOshio n by a swift march on the capital, at 

and ‘Zn..7 POr T e T mCnt he '° St his i"‘%»ient, vacillated 

Sindhn Hit 01 '’ '- VUh thC h0pC ° f S ainin o alliance of 
nm H .° i ar i aml ‘he English of Bombay. While the two 
n '** 11 Maratha chiefs showed no inclination to help 
1 :1 !’ * he £n ^ ish readl, y agreed through their 

Hrnnb'u atqU1,e S SeUe ' Bassein «"» the waller islands near 


from^m H r ba V aU , th0ritiCS had thdr eycS M thtse territories 
bom some tune back, and the news that the 


,,i ... l *“ 11 me Portuguese were 

coocluion rT q o ei th '' m frorn tfu “ Marat has precipitated the 
' 1 '“■> “I S..«t (March ,775), bv which .he 


mmsT/fy 



English agreed to offer niilitan assistance to Raghunaih Rao 
in exchange foi the cession of the coveted territories. It was 
thus that the English gained their first opportunity to interfere 
in Maratha politics. The island of Salsette was captured by 
them in Decembej 1774, even before the conclusion of a define 
live treaty with Raghunaih Rao, and an army under Col. 
Keating took the field with instructions to conduct Raghunaih 
Rao to Poona. But in spite of a few initial successes this 
expedition came to nothing. The Supreme Government in 
Calcutta, newly appointed under the Act of 1773 with powers 
of control over the subordinate Presidencies, grew alarmed at 
the prospect of a prolonged war with the Marathas, ordered 
Bombay to withdraw its troops immediately, and sent Col. 
Upton to negotiate a treaty of peace and friendship with the 
Poona Government. On the tst March 1776 the Treaty of 
Purandhar was signed, by which the English gave up the cause 
of Raghunaih Rao but were allowed to retain Salsette. 

Relations, however, did not improve between the English 
and the Marathas. The Bombay Government continued to 
give shelter to Raghunath Rao and at the same time com- 
plained that the Poona Court was putting obstruction in the 
way of the implementation of the treaty. The thing was that 
the Bombay Government was most unwilling to give up its 
policy of territorial acquisition, which was required for the 
safety of Bombay and security of commerce with the interior 
of the country. It thus took the earliest opportunity to break 
the treaty and resume hostilities. Three factors were responsible 
for this development; first, the approval by the Court of Di^ec 
tors of the policy of the Bombay Government in respect of the 
Treaty of Surat; second, the appearance of Saint-Lubin at 
Poona for negotiating a Franco-Maratha treaty which alarmed 
the English greatly; and third, the outbreak of dissension be¬ 
tween the leaders of the Poona Government, Sakharam Bapu 
and Nana Phadnavis. On the overtures of Sakharam Bapu the 
Bombay Government at once agreed to intervene in Maratha 
politics and overthrow Nana Phadnavis and his party from 
power. Hostilities were resumed in November 1778. On this 
occasion the policy of the Bombay Government was approved 
by the Supreme Government in Calcutta, and the latter even 
sent a strong army under Col. Leslie (after his death the corn 