

That was the disastrous end of the policy initiated by 
Dupleix so far as the French were concerned, while their more 
successful rivals, the English, taking their inspiration from the 
same ideas built up a vast empire in India. The net result of 
the Seven Years’ War has been stated by Voltaire thus in his 
Precis du Siicle d<: Louis XV: “At l ast t he re jw as Jeft to 
French in this part of the world only regret for having spent 
immense sums for over forty years for^ main taming a Company 
which never made the least profit, which never pa id to its 
shareholders and creditors from the profits of its commerce, 
winch in its Indian administration lived only on secret brigan¬ 
dage and which had been sustained only by a part of the farm¬ 
ing of tobacco granted to it by the Kinffi a memorable and jpu 
haps useless example of the little knowledge which the French 
have had so far about the grand and ruinous commerce of 
India”*. 

1 Voltaire —Precis du Sidclr de Loui\ XV (Oeuvres Completes, XXII), 

P 3m. 


WNlSTffy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


<tt doubt Voltaire ricvt 1 had any sympathy for the policy 
of Dupleix, but there are other French historians also who have 
condemned the French colonial adventure in India during the 
Seven Years' War. Martineau in his biography of Bussy points 
out that Bussy had no genuine interest in the task assigned to 
him by Dupleix and that his idea of a sound colonial policy 
was entirely different from that of Dupleix, In his celebrated 
letter of 1755 Bussy had represented to Dupleix "that our 
settlements on the coast were sufficient for our commerce and 
that therefore it was useless and perhaps dangerous to remain 
in the: Deccan, where we would run the risk of being obliged 
to take sides in the quarrels of the country princes to the detri¬ 
ment of our commerce" 1 * . Bussy believed that the real strength 
of a country lay in t homogeneous territory, sufficiently large 
to resist attacks, anything beyond which "is a luxury and some¬ 
times a danger Martineau does not hide his preference for 
the policy of Bussy to that of Dupleix, although he admits thai 
the policy of Dupleix "was entirely the modern theory of 
colonisation, a theory which triumphed after his death, and 
one can quite understand why it found so many apologists 
later" 3 4 . But he asserts that at the time it was conceived b) 

Dupleix, "no polic\ was more inopportune. It wou ld hav e 

been much more useful to retain in Europe all our land and 
naval forces, an 3 it is perhaps because we dispersed them to 
Canada and India, particularly to Canada, that we lost the 

Seven Years’ War. At that time.the primary interests of 

France required her to confine her attention to Europe. When 
the house is on fire, one does not think of the stable; it is 
Voltaire who was right"; 1 . 

Flic failure of the French in India in the Seven Years' War 
is generally attributed to a number of factors,—the rashness and 
arrogance of Lally, the violent discord between Laliy and the 
Company's officers at Pondicherry, the acute want of money 
which crippled French military operations, the recall of Bussy 
from the Deccan, the had choice* of officers, the timidity of 