

Immediately after his usurpation of power in 1761 Haidar 
Ali started on a career of conquest and by 1763 considerably 
extended his dominions in the north, the most important 
acquisitions being Sera and Bednore. The northern drive 
brought him inevitably into conflict with the Marathas and for 
many years the territory lying between the Tuugbhadra and 
the Krishna remained the bone of contention between the two 
Powers. Although Haidar had counted on the decline of the 
Maratha power after the disaster of Panipat, he was soon dis¬ 
illusioned, and throughout the rule of the young and vigorous 
Pcshwa Madhav Rao he suffered repeated checks to his ambi¬ 
tions It was not till the outbreak of internal dissensions among 
the Marathas. following the untimely death of Madhav Rao. 
flMt Haidar got his opportunity to extend his dominions as far 




WNtSTffy 




I NK POI.mC.AI 

lyj j.V / • / 

\ J 

'" ,rt |{h us the river Krishna. 


SCENE IN INDIA 


<SL 


mu t> v.iiv f ^,v-i He received his first check in 17 ^ 4 * 

when the Peshwa himself came with an army vastly superior 
to his own and inflicted a decisive defeat, on him. Haidar had 
to give up most of his new acquisitions and purchase peace by 
paying a huge sum of money as tribute. But immediately after, 
in he turned his arms in a different direction and con¬ 

quered the Malabar country from petty Nayar chiefs. Before 
he had the time to consolidate his hold over the newly aequnct 
territories he had to face a new danger a combined attac k by 
the three neighbouring Powers, the Mar at has, Nizam Ah and 
the English, the last acting on behalf of the nominal ruler o 
the Carnatic. Haidar succeeded in breaking up the coalition 
by diplomacy. The Marathas were purchased with money and 
Nizam Ali was even induced to enter into an alliance with him 
against the remaining Power of the coalition, the English, 
alliance did not last long but it served Haidar’s purpose, and 
after two years of indecisive campaigns he practically dictated 
peace to the English in 1 7 ® 9 ■ 

Bv the peace treaty the English engaged to enter into a 
defensive alliance with Haidar, which was flatly contradictory 
to their earlier treaty with Nizam Ali. Besides, they had no 
real intention to render military assistance to the ambitious 
nilet of Mysore, whose rise to power constituted the gravest 
source of danger to the Carnatic. Haidar soon found it out 
when in 1771 be was again engaged in a war with the Marathas, 
who appeared this time bent on his total destruction and refused 
to be purchased with money. He was, however, saved by the 
sudden death of Peshwa Madhav Rap and .he outbreak of 
internal d’ssensions at Poona, which even enabled hun to take 
the offensive. It was from this time that lie found his path 
cleared of all obstacles. Although in 177-1 he had to face 
another Maratha invasion under Raghunath Rao, who succeed 
<*d his murdered nephew Narayan Rao as Peshwa, he -'as again 
saved by the news of a sudden revolution at Poona which placed 
the Ministerial parly opposed to Raghunath Rao in powci. 
Haidar at once entered into a pact with Raghunath Rao, who 
ceded to him all Maratha rights south of the Krishna in return 
for financial assistance for his war against the Ministerial parts. 