

III. The Treaty of Paris and the restoration oj 
French territories. 

By Art. 11 of the Treaty of Paris France was given back 
all the settlements and factories she possessed in India iti 1749. 
This pur her back in her old position before Dtipleix launched 
his ambitious schemes for the mastery of the Carnatic and the 
Deccan. Only one exception was made, in the case of Chander 
nagore. The French were deprived of the right of fortifying 
the place or constructing any kind of defensive works and of 
introducing troops in the settlement beyond the number required 
for the maintenance of internal law and order. This restriction 
had to be accepted in recognition of the reality of the situation 
in Bengal, There the English had obtained complete masters 
and could not be expected to suffer the existence of any foreign 
fortified settlement with a large* number of troops constituting 
a threat to their position. Together with their settlements and 

1 Voltaire- Precis du $*#cle de Lotus XI (Oeuvres Completes, XXII), 

p m 









MWisr^ 



FRENCH POLICY IN INDIA 



L 


$6$ the old trading rights and privileges of the Frencl 


e also recognised by the treaty. 


Thus, with the exception of the restriction regarding 
Chandernagore the treaty of 1763 seemed to have placed the 
two nations, the French and the English, in the same relation 
to each other as had existed in 1749. But in reality a profound 
change had come over in their respective positions in India 
by the steady expansion of the English power, and when the 
French returned to India in 1765 they found the old balance of 
power completely upset. In 1749 both the nations were on a 
footing of equality in Bengal and on the Coromandel Coast, 
while neither of them had any political influence in the interior 
of the country. In 1765 while the French position remained 
nearly the same, the English had obtained the mastery of Bengal 
and the Carnatic; Oudh was at their mercy; they were in 
occupation of the Northern Sarkars, wrested from the French, 
and the ruler of Hyderabad had been reduced to a subordinate 
ally dependent on their protection; even the Mughal Emperor 
was living as their pensioner. The dream of Dapleix had 
come true, but for the benefit of his adversaries. 

After the conclusion of peace in Europe, Jean L aw de 
La ur is ton was appointed Governor of the French settlements in 
India and Roy al Commissioner for taking possession of the 
settlements from the English. Law de Laurision had been the 
Chief of the French factory at Kasimbazar in 1757, when the 
English moved against it after the capture of Chandernagore. 
Law then started on hi 5 career of wandering and adventure, 
taking service under Prince Ali Gauhar, later to become Emperor 
Shah Alam II, and being taken prisoner by the English in Jan¬ 
uary 17(11. His courageous behaviour won for him due recogni¬ 
tion on his return to France at the end of the war. He was pro 
moted to the rank of a Colonel and created a Chevalier of .St. 
Louis. Finally he was appointed Governor of the French settle 
meats in India in 1764. He received his instructions on the 18th 
March 1764, started for India on the 1st April and landed at 
Madras on the 59th January 1765. He took possession of Kaiikal 
on the lBth February and of Pondicherry on the nth April 1765. 
The other French possessions were also restored in the course 
of the year. 