

After the sketch of the political condition of India from 
1763 to 1816, we may proceed to a brief review of the nature 
of French political ambitions in India, the history of the 
Compagnic des I rides and the condition of the French Govern¬ 
ment after the Seven Years’ War. It will help a better under 
standing of the French activities in India given in the succeeding 
chapters and will also offer an explanation for the contract 
between the zeal of the Frenchmen in India for a revival of 
political influence in this country and the indifference of the 
home authorities. 

I. The Policy of Dupleix . 

Every student of Indian history will admit the importance 
of the part played by the French in giving a new turn to India’s 
political destiny in the 18th century. Of the four great Euro¬ 
pean nations who came to India for trade, the French appeared 
last on the scene. Rut they were the first to conceive the 
ambitious project of building up a large territorial empire in 
India. It was possible for them to do so because of the political 
condition of India in the first half of the 18th century. But 
equally important, at least, was the genius of one man, Dupleix. 
It was Dupleix who first showed the way of intervening in the 
internal disputes of Indian Powers and of acquiring political 
control over vast territories through puppet Indian Princes. 

There is <ome difference among historians about the exact 
nature of the political ideas of Dupleix. 1 he admirers of 
Dupleix hold him up as a pioneer among empire-builders and 
credit him with a mature and well-thought-out political plan, 
which failed only because of the apathy and negligence of the 
French Government and the Company. Thus Henri Martin in 
his monumental Histoire de France writes about Dupleix: 
“The genius of a Richelieu had matured in a Factory. Dupleix 





was the first to realise the inevitable result of the contact 
between the static societies of the East and the progressive 

societies of Europe.; lie had seen Asia, like America 

and like the whole world, destined to submit to the law of the 

European races .Dupleix judged India destined to be 

conquered, not by other Asians, like those who had ravaged her 
before, but by Europeans: among the European powers, Portu¬ 
gal had (alien and Holland was declining; there remained only 
Eranee and England. Dupleix was determined to give India 

to France.His plan was as much prudent in respect 

of means as audacious in respect of the final objective ” l 2 . For 
f he failure of Dupleix to achieve this ambitious project, Martin 
put the entire blame on the French Government and the Com¬ 
pany. “Asia would have been ours if, with Dupleix and Bussy 
in India, we could still have Louis XIV and Colbert at Versailles, 
or if wc could have only Law. But in place of Louis XIV and 
Colbert, wc hat! Louis XV and Madame de Pompadour and the 
inept merchants who directed the Company of the Indies ' 3 . 
Again, “There is not a single instance in modern history of a 
nation being betrayed to this extent by its own Government*’*. 