

Although Raghunath Rao did not succeed in establishing 
his authority at Poona even with the help of his English allies. 


c 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


^eypucL served Haidar well and he quickly consolidated his 
hold over the territories ceded to him. By taking the side of 
Raghunath Rao, however, he incurred the enmity of the 
successful Ministerial party at Poona, who in 1777 induced 
Nizam Ali to make a joint attack on him. Haidar saved him¬ 
self by buying off Nizam Ali’s general and then inflicting defeat 
on the Marathas. But soon after, in 1779, threw' up Raghu¬ 
nath Rao and entered into a pact with the Ministerial party 
at Poona, by which he retained all the advantages he had 
secured by his agreement with Raghunath Rao in return for 
joining a coalition of the Marathas and Nizam Ali against the 
English. Haidar had his own grievances against the English, 
their refusal to honour the treaty of 17^9 with respect to 
giving him military assistance against his enemies; their occupa¬ 
tion of the Sarkar of Guntoor and lending troops to Basalat 
Jang, his enemy; the traditional dispute with the Nawab of the 
Carnatic, a prot£g£ of the English; and finally their capture of 
Mafic in defiance of his warning that it would be considered 
as an act of hostility against him. Thus the stage was set for 
a three Power attack on the English. Although English diplo 
macy succeeded in detaching Nizam Ali from the coalition, 
Haidar started the war in 1780 which lasted for nearly four 
years. 


At the end of the war in 1784 Mysore stood as the leading 
military power in south India, which roused the jealousy of 
tlu Marathas and Nizam Ali. In 1785 the two Powers com¬ 
bined and declared war on Tipu who had succeeded his father 
in December. 1782. Tipu thought it prudent to purchase 
peace in 1787 by paying a large sum of money and ceding a 
row districts. / he coalition of the Marathas and Nizam Ali 
did not, however break up at once, and when at the beginning 
of 1790 the English declared war on him, following his attack 
on their ally, the Raja of Travancore, he found both the 
Powers ranged against him in alliance with the English. The 
treaty imposed upon him in 1795 narked unmistakably the 
beginning of his fall, the final destruction being postponed by 
a few years more. 


Mysore under Haidar and 1 ipu was always considered as 
the special ally of the French, Such an impression, however, 
was based not so much on real connections as on the hopes 


MINlSr^ 


£** ' G °* 


I HE POLITIC#A). SCENE IN INDIA 

"entertained by each side to make use of the other tor its own 
advantage. As we shall see in later chapters, there was little 
basis or a solid agreement between them and no real unity of 
interests despite their common animosity against the English. 

In spite of this, however, both sides maintained die illu¬ 
sion of a close friendship and co-operation against the English, 
even after 1793 when the French lost all their bases in India. 
In the end this illusion did not bring any benefit to eithei 
party, but only helped the expansion of the English power. 
When Wellesley came out to India, he found Tipu engaged 
in set ret negotiations with the French in the fsle of li met.. 
The French expedition to Egypt and the indiscreet proclama¬ 
tion of Malartic, Governor of the Isle of France, calling for 
volunteers for service under Tipu. roused English suspicions 
still further about French designs on India. 1 he suspicions 
might or might not have been justified, but they served as. a 
good pretext for English action against Tipu, to crush him 
completely and deprive the French of any base in India. The 
war of 1799, which ended in the destruction of Mysore as an 
independent State, was the result of the policy of maintaining 
the illusion of Franco-Mysorean friendship, which did not in 
reality exist. 