

VII. The Nawab of the Carnatic. 

Before concluding our review of the Indian Powers in the 
south a brief notice may be taken of two other Princes, 
Muhammad Alt and Basalat Jang, who although of no practical 
importance played nevertheless an interesting part in the 
tangled politics of the period by rousing the jealousy and fca>- 
of the principal competitors in the field. Muhammar *. 
Nawab of the Carnatic, owed his position entirely to the Eng¬ 
lish. He was their candidate in the succession dispute; it was 
their arms which had defeated his rival and his French suppor¬ 
ters; and it was their victory in Europe and America that had 
made France recognise him in the peace treaty as the lawful 
ruler of the Carnatic. It was not surprising therefore that the 
English should have continued, even after peace, that font- 
plete military control over the Carnatic which they had estab¬ 
lished during the war. On the other hand, what was surprising 




win/s r ff) . 


IMK FKFNCH IN INDIA 

unlike as in Bengal where the establishment of miii- 
rny control was followed within fifteen years by the assump¬ 
tion of complete administrative power, the English continued 
to preserve th< independence of the Nawab of the Carnatic so 
far as internal administration, including revenue, was concerned. 
Not only that, they even secured from the Mughal Emperor 
by (be Treaty of Allahabad of 1765 the severance of the 
traditional dependence of the Nawab of the Carnatic on the 
Subaclar of the Deccan and handed over to him the admiuis 
tration of the Northern Sarkars, ceded to them by Nizanr Ali. 

Ibis seeming prescrvance of the independence of the 
Nawab was due to a number of factors,—the initial reluctance 
oi the English to assume administrative responsibility; the 
complete control which they had over the person of the Nawab 
who lived at Madras with his whole family under close guard; 
the garrisoning of his principal forts by English troops and the 
presence of a large number of English officers in his army; and 
finally the influence ol the persons, including most of the 
Company's servants at Madras, who were interested in lending 
tnoiun to the Nawab at exorbitant rates of interest, the loans 
being secured b) the assignment of revenues of particular 
disn ins. Muhammad Ali was quick to realise the importance 
of the last factor and tried to utilise it to influence the policy 
>>[ the English Government of Madras. For a time he played 
■ us game with success and made use of the English to conquer 
the rich principality of Tanjore for him in 1773. although he 
v »> not allowed to retain it long. But the Nawab and his 
English creditors over-reached themselves, and shortly after 
shirt orders were sent from England to restrain their corrupt 
inllucncc over the Madras Government. During the second 
\tigloMysore war (1780-84) the Nawab was even deprived of 
hE administrative independence, the control being taken over 
the English Government for the more efficient prosecution 
of the war. Although he was restored in his authority at the 
etui of the war. the control over administration was once more 
taken up by the English during the third Anglo-Mysore war 
(* 79 °- 9 *)» Thus long before the discovery of the Nawabs 
treacherous correspondence in 1799* leading to the permanent 
assumption of the administration of the Carnatic by the Mad- 