


1 Martineau- Dupleix ci t lndc Yrangaisc, Vol. I. Introduction, p. vi. 

3 Ibid, Vol. II, Introduction, p. ix. 

3 Ibid, Vol. Ill, p. 418. 




miST/fy. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<§L 


weak ness jjf JEraiice in a colonial struggle, as demon 
strated clearly i;i other theatres of conflict too diiring the Seven 
Years’ War. Rut the value of his political conception was realised 
by the French as well as by their more successful rivals, the 
English. Jt is not really true that the French Government and 
the Company did not appreciate the importance of Dupleix's 
project. But for his reverses in the Carnatic, he would not 
have been so abruptly recalled. Even when he was replaced 
by G Mleheju, it did not mean a complete reversal of his policy 
or a throwing away of any of the material advantages secured 
by him. Godeheu’s treaty with the English in 1754 still left the 
French in possession of the additional territories round Pondi¬ 
cherry and Karikal which had been acquired earlier; in occupa¬ 
tion of important posts in the Carnatic; and in enjoyment of 
the extensive jagir of the four Northern Sarkars with a 
controlling authority in Hyderabad. Thus, not a single material 
advantage had been sacrificed, except the extremely doubtful 
prospect of securing the mastery of the Carnatic. If the Seven 
Years’ War had not broken out shortly after, the French would 
have got time to consolidate their position thus secured, making 
it easier to realise the political project of Dupleix. 


II. The Seven Years' War and the Destruction of 
French Hopes. 


During the Seven Years’ War France made earnest efforts 
to retain the advantages she had secured in India and even to 
ensure the realisation of Dupleix’s project in full by eliminating 
the English completely from the Coromandel Coast. That there 
was no indifference on the part of the French Government is 
admitted by the eminent historian Henri Martin, who is other¬ 
wise so critical of the Government of Louis XV. France sent 
out jo India stron land and n aval forces, which she could 
spare consistent with her and America w 

her interests were more vitally affected. Martin only dislikes the 
choice of the leader. Daily, and regrets that “such a person had 
been given the resources which Dupleix never had at his 
disposal from 1747 to 1754” 1 . Ultimately the French suffered 


1 Maittn-'-ffij/oirtf de France , Vol. XV, p. 538. 





a decisive defeat, and far from realising the ambitious project 
of Dupleix or retaining the advantages left to them by the 
treaty of Godeheu, they even lost all their old settlements and 
< lories in India. Chandernagore was the first to be captured 
by the English iri March <757, followed by the expulsion of 
the French from all the subordinate factories in Bengal. The 
recall of Bussy from the Deccan in 1758, to strengthen Lally's 
forces for the war in the Carnatic, left the Northern Sarkars 
exposed to an English attack from Bengal. The Sarkars were 
promptly lost together will/ the two old settlements of Ma.suli- 
paiam and Yanam, and French influence in the Dec can, so 
laboriously built up by the genius of Bussy, was completely 
destroyed. Nor were the French more fortunate in the 
Carnatic. Their offensive operations miscarried, ail their 
strongholds in the Carnatic were lost one by one, and finally 
they suffered a most decisive defeat at Wandiwash (January 22, 
1760). After a blockade of several months Pondicherry capitu 
lated on the 16th January, 1761. Karikal had been captured 
earlier; Mahe on the Malabar Coast and the two remaining forts 
in French hands in the Carnatic. Jinji and Thiagar were also 
lost in the course of the year. 