




THE POLITICAL SCENE IN INDIA 



<§L 


i'as Government, the indications were quite dear about the 
objective of English policy. 

Even when Muhammad Ali retained his nominal indepen¬ 
dence his real position was universally known, and none of the 
Indian and European Powers who maintained WakiU at his 
C ourt considered him to be a political factor of any importance 
He was, however, an adept in intrigue and kept up an illusion 
in the minds of many about his real intentions. That was the 
part he played in the tangled politics of (he south. 


VIII. Basalat Jang. 

Basalat Jang was the younger brother of Nizam Ali, equally 
ambitious and crafty but far less able. His importance in the 
complex, political situation of the south was derived from two 
factors,— first, occupation of the .Sarkar of Gimtoor, interposed 
between the Carnatic and the four Sarkars ceded to the English 
by Nizam Ali; and second, employment of a body of French 
troops in his service, commanded first by Z6phir and later by de 
Lallde. He thus tame to be feared by the English as a source 
of danger to their power in south India, particularly because 
of his control of a small seaport at Motupalli which enabled 
him to keep up regular communication with the French. To 
eliminate this danger the English were anxious either to get 
earlier possession of Guntoor, which by their agreement with 
Nizam Ali in 1766 was to be retained by Basalat Jang for his 
life-time, or to prevail upon Basalat Jang to dismiss the French * 
contingent irx his service. They tried the second alternative» 
first hut without success, as Basalat Jang required a body of f> 
European troops to further his ambitions. He was on un-j 
friendly terms with his brother, Nizam Ali, and at conflict wilhh 
Haidar Ali; and he even entertained hopes of conquering theft 
Carnatic with the help of the French. But in 1779 his fortunes e 
were at a low ebb. Pondicherry had fallen to the English and e 
Haidar was threatening his territories. He then threw himself 
into the arms of the English, dismissed the French contingent 
in his service and rented the Sarkar of Guntoor to the Madras 
Government, in return for the assistance of a body of English 
troops for the defence of his other possessions. The English , 
were thus freed from one source of danger, but it brought them 


misr^ 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

TimTconflict with Nizam Ali, who reseated their occupation of 
Glintoor without any reference to him and in reply attempted 
to form a coalition of the three southern Powers against them. 
To conciliate him Guntoor was restored to Basalat Jang next 
year. After the latter's death in 1782, the Sarkar remained in 
the possession of Nizam Ali until finally made over to the 
English in 1788. Anyway, with the English occupation of 
Guntoor in 1779 Basalat Jang lost what little political impor¬ 
tance had been attached to him till then. 




misr/fy. 


CHAPTER U 




the government, the company and french 

POLICY IN INDIA 