

On the other hand, Alfred Martineau, who has written the 
most sober and authoritative biography of Dupleix, asserts that 
Dupleix did not start with any conception of empire*building, 
that he was gradually driven to it by circumstances he had not 
foreseen earlier, and that the failure of his project was due at 
least as much to his own wrong moves and miscalculations as 
to the indifference of the home government. As Martineau 
states, “If the psychologist could penetrate with certainty into 
the thoughts of statesmen, there would be little, very little 
indeed, in then actions which would appear to him inspired by 
high ideas, particularly by foresight and plans for the future. 
Chance and self-interest guide them more than one would like 
generally to confess. Dupleix did not escape this common law. 
Coming to India with the sole object of making money, he was 
led unexpectedly b\ the course of events and by a sort of frnan 
vial necessity to .1 policy of territorial expansion which he had 

1 Mania -Histoirc de France, Vol \Y\ pp. 307 308. 

2 Ibid. p. 458. 

a Ibid, p. 464. 




FRENCH frOMCY IN INDIA 


<§l 


not foreseen earlier, and even the vaguest idea of which he 
did not form for the first time til) twenty seven years after his 
arrival in the peninsula'* 1 * . Analysing the motive which 
prompted Dupleix to conceive the idea of a colonial empire, 
Martineau writes, “Constantly embarrassed in his trading opera¬ 
tions by the delay or insufficiency of funds coming from France, 
he came slowly to the idea that 'he only means to get rid of 
such embarrassments was to find money in India, without wait 
ing for funds from i nrope and without having to seek the 
assistance of bankers. That made it necessary to have a fixed 
territorial revenue, the* collection of which could be assured 
only by the exercise of a political power. T hus was first con* 
ceived and later developed more fully in the mind of Dupleix 
the idea of creating for our advantage a sort of colonial empire 
in India, where we would be practically the masters under the 
authority, more nominal than real, of Indian princes, who 
would owe their thrones or their security to us. But this idea, 
which was to change the face of India and in a certain measure 
that of the world, was not in his mind at any time before the 
year 1749 or perhaps before 1750”*. Discussing the causes of 
the failure of Dupleix, Martineau has emphasised the wrong 
judgment and blind obstinacy of Dupleix himself. No doubt, 
at the beginning, the error was legitimate; but in the later 
stage, when came an unending series of misfortunes and disillu¬ 
sions, it became evident that the substance was being sacrificed 
for the shadow. The blindness or the obstinacy of Dupleix 
was the principal cause of his fall’* 3 . 

In spite of such divergence of opinion about the origin, 
nature and practicability of the political conceptions of Dupleix, 
the fact remains that he had indicated a new way which was 
to lead one day to the establishment of European domination 
in India. Mis importance in history is not lessened by the fact 
that he himself did not succeed in his efforts. His failure may 
be explained in various ways,—his own wrong moves and 
miscalculations, the lack of supp ort from the Fre nch Govern¬ 
ment and the Company, or, most important of all, the futida- 