

1 Martinrau- Bussy n i’/nde Franfaist, p. 445. 

- Ibid, p. 450. 

3 Ibid, p. 449. 

4 /bid, p. 450. 




miST/fy 



FRENCH POLICY IN INDIA 

/ • J 

^^Fgwwhich deprived Lally of naval support at every cri 
moment, and many others. It is useless to try to assess the 
extent to which each of these factors contributed to the French 
defeat. The French Government, shaken by the intensity of 
public opinion, found a scapegoat in Lally. who was s entence^ 
to death for %etFaymg the interest of the nation”. Voltaire 


condemned it as '‘one of those murders which are committed 
with the sword of justice” 1 . Even Martin who is so strongly 
critical of Lally has to observe, 4t The real criminal on whom 
posterity would fasten the responsibility for the loss of India. 
wauTnot Comte de Lally* hut the King who had ordered his 
death”*. Voltaire perhaps diagnosed more correctly than most 
French historians of later days the real cause of French failure 
\n India in the Seven Years’ War. “The re al can.se was the 
same as in other parts of the world; the su periority of the Eng¬ 
lish fleet, the carefulness and perseverance of that ua.tifiin its 
credit, its ready money and that spirit of patriotism which is 
stronger in the long run than the trading spirit and the greed 
for riches** 5 . 

The war in the later stage had proved so disastrous to 
France in every theatre of conflict that by 1762 the French Gov¬ 
ernment was forced to the necessity of IfeETng peace at any 
cost. The Preliminaries of Peace were signed at Fontainebleu 
on the 3rd November 1762, followed by the conclusion of a 
definitive treaty signed in Paris o n the 10th February 1763* The 
terms of the Treaty of Paris were jJmos^jushinjr for France. 
“France had lost the flower of her nivy, herjast..dominion ..in 
North America, the remains of the conquests, of Dupleix. and 
Bossy, her best possessions on the western coast of Africa and 
several in the Antilles. England had acquired an enormous 
increase of territory and an overwhelming arrogance of tone. 
For the first time since the Middle -Ages she had defeated Prance 
by her own strength and almost without allies, France, on the 
contrary, having several powerful auxiliaries' she had defeated 
France only bv the superiority of hei 


1 Voltaire-—/• ragment: s on India t p. 86. 

2 Martin — Htstoirc de France, Vol. XV, p. 572. 
9 Voltaire, op . cit., p. 74. 

4 Martin, op. cit., Vol. XV, p. 597. 




minis 


I HE FRENCH IN INDIA 


inimitable style has described the result of the war thus: 
4 ‘hi tht course of this disastrous war, the State lost, the most, 
br illia nt part of the nation's youth, more than half the money 
in circulation, its navy, "its commerce, it ; Trc 3 it. One would 
think that ii would have TJeen very easy to avert such great 
misfortunes by coming to a compromise with the Engl ish for a 
small territory in dispute in Canada. But some ambitious 
persons, just to prove their worth and their necessity to the 
State, precipitated France into this fatal war. It was the same 
in 1741 The amour-propre of two or three persons was suffi¬ 
cient to desolate the whole of Europe. France was in such a 
pressing needjof peace that she considered those who concluded 
the treaty as benefactors of the country. The debts which 
pressed heavily on the State were much greater than those of 
even the reign of Louis XIV. Only the extraordinary expenses 
for the war in just one year amounted to four hundred millions; 
let one imagine the rest from that. France would have lost 
heavily even if she had been victorious” 1 . 