

Discussing tire lack of success of the Compagnie des hides 
Orientates , Kaeppelin observes: ‘Thus the Company after 
iifty-five years of its existence had not succeeded in laying down 
a solid foundation for the French in India or even in establish 
ing a regular commerce” 1 . The main causes of this failure 
were: 1 hc^rtgicTcontrql of the State, depriving the shareholder 
of any independence or initiative; the Protectionist policy of 
the Government, which hit the most profitable branch of the 
Company’s trade; the lack of capital necessary for sustained 
commercial activity; and the European policy of Louis XIV, 

1 Karppelin —La Compagnie des bides Orientates et Francois Martin, 

p- 645- 


MIN ISTfiy 


FRENCH POUCV IN INDIA 



involving continuous wars 
Company’s existence. 


Sl 

for nearly half the period of the 


V. Law's System. 

1 he incorporation of the Company in Law s novel and 
complicated financial system resulted ultimately in further 
shaki ng of public confidence in commercial ventures. It is not 
necessary here to go into the details of the principle under¬ 
lying Law’s system atid the methods adopted in its application. 
The essence of Law’s system was an extensive use of credit in 
all financial transactions and the virtual replacement of metallic 
currency by paper money in normal circulation. I here was 
nothing basically wrong wdtb the system, provided the credit 
structure was not unusually inflated and paper money thrown 
into circulation out of all proportion to ihe metallic reserve. 
Unfortunately, these cautions were not observed. 4 The Com 
pany was united with Law s Bank and took over the entiie 
management o f th e finances of the State,, including the national 
debt, law’s system seemed to promise miraculous results, which 
roused the credulity and greed of all sections of the people. 
The Bank started issuing paper c urrenc y without any limit. 
The .Company’s shares also were multiplied with an amazing 
rapidity, and public confidence shot up their value in an 
abnormal craze for getting rich quickly. 

The inevitable result followed in 1730. Some adverse 
reports led to suspicions about the st abil ity of the system. 1 hen 
the suspicions deepened into panic 5rid finally came the crash 
towards the end of 1730. Law tried various methods to avert 
the catastrophe but in the end fled away to Holland. T h< 
administrators of the Bank and of the Company were arrested 
and thrown into prison. Liquidators were appointed by the 
Government for the two bodies. So far as the Company was 
concerned, its privileges were suspended and an examination 
of its accounts was ordered. Holders of shares were required 
to present them for verification. Out of 135 034 shares presented 
only 50,000 were accepted as genuine and the rest cancelled 1 . 

1 Barbicr— La Compagnie tran<;nise dcs Indes, p. 33. 

(Revue Historiquc de Unde Fran^aisc, Pondicherry, III, iqiQ)* 




Mr msr/fy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

“Ta spite of the unhappy ending of his system. Law had demon 
sfrated the power of credit and rendered useful services so far 
as the Compagnie des ltides was concerned. He had in effect 
revived the vitality of an organ, tried and discredited. He had 
given it a powerful impulse and the development of the Com¬ 
pany in the course of the 18th century owed much to him” 1 2 . 