

The French came back to India in 1765 and their first 






WNIST/fy 



oug!n was o 11* build their position on the same footing of 


equality with the English which had existed before the war. 

1 lie very hum ilia ujxg terms of the Treaty of Paris made them 
determined to work for a revival of their lost political influence, 
ft was no doubt too late to attempt a restoration of the old 
balance;of power. But Frenchmen in India, whether officials 
or adventurers in the service of the Indian Princes, were full of 
hopes and believed that they could still retrieve the position of 
their nation by building up alliances with important country 
Powers. Thus, down to the next outbreak of Anglo-French 
hostilities in India during the War of American Independence 
they submitted to the French Government innumerable diplo¬ 
matic and military projects which, however, received little serious 
attention in Paris for the first ten years. For an explanation 
for this contrast between the zeal and optimism of Frenchmen 
in India and the indifference '>f the home authorities, we have to 
turn to the conditions in France after the Seven Years' War. 
The re-establishment of the French position in India, as 
envisaged by those who drew up the diplomatic and military 
projects* required the support of the French Company and of 
the French Government. But the French Company, which had 
never much vitality, had become completely moribund after 
1763 an d was suppressed in 1769, while the attention of the 
French Government was fully absorbe d by internal troubles and 
Euro pean complications, leaving it little mclmauon to think 
of its distantTncTfan possessions. Nor was the corrupt and effete 
administration of Louis XV, dominated by the King’s mistresses 
who had the power of appointing and dismissing ministers, 
really in a posinorT to adopt any bold and Imaginative policy 
in colonial matters. 


IV. The Compagine des Indes Orientates . 


To understand the situation of the French Company at the 
end of the Seven Years’ War it is necessary to trace very briefly 
its earlier history, revealing two principal sources of its weak¬ 
ness, — organi sation and finance. French trading ventures in the 
East started really from 1664, after the establishment of the 
Compagnie des Indes Orientate v, although some abortive at¬ 
tempts had been made earlier by the Compagnie des mers 





FRENCH POLICE IN INDIA 



i rtentales (1G04), the Compagnie des Moluqucs (1615) and the 
Compagnie d’Orient (1642). I he establishment of the 
Compagnie des hides Orientales was due principally to the 
initiative of Colbert, and it started its career with the advantage 


of full governmental protection and patronage. The Company 
was given trading monopoly in the East for fifty years, with 
the power of acquiring territories, maintaining forces and making 
war and peace. But the organisation, virtually sponsored by 
the State, had little public enthusiasm and support behind it, 
and that remained the greatest, source of its weakness through¬ 
out. French capital was shy and Colbert had to resort to every 
conceivable method of persuasion and threat to raise money 
for the Cotnpany. The first subscriptions raised represented in 
reality a forced loan. 