

T he desperate position of the Company soon attracted the 
attention of the Government. The Government, warned by 
the repeated loans floated by the Company, determined to 


1 Aot>c Rayrial- A Philosophical and Political History of the Settle¬ 
ments and Trade of the Europeans in the East and West Indies (tr. by 
Jmtamond), II. p. 381. 



THE FRENCH fN INDIA 


<SL 


fiiirr into the suite of its finances. The immediate occasion 
for it was supplied by the Company itself. It appealed to the 
Government for assistance and furnished detailed statements 
about its financial position. The Government published the 
ufcments. and immediately the Company became the object 
of bitter public c riticis m. It may be noted th.u there were 
many in France who were strongly opposed in principle to the 
preservation of a monopoly Company. Others opposed the 
Company in the hope of getting a share of the profitable eastern 
trade for themselves. In the public controversy of the time 
the Company found an ardent supporter in Necker, later to 
become so celebrated as Finance Minister. The most severe 
critic of the Company was Morellgj, a noted economist 

>f the time. He thoroughly exposed the hopeless condition of 
the Company, giving full details of the Company's finances at 
different periods. 

Morellet’s forceful attack combined with public condemna¬ 
tion sealed the fate of the Company. The Company’s term of 
concession was to last till 1770. but the Government suspended 
its privileges bv a decree on the 13th August 1769. Although 
n did not mean permanent suppression, the shareholders of the 
Company deemed it prudent to liquidate the concern promptly 
in a manner that would secure the interests of their creditors 
and the remains of their own fortunes. For this purpose they 
offered to give up to the King all the Company’s ships, thirty 
in number; all the warehouses and other buildings belonging 
to them at Lorient and in India; the property of their settle¬ 
ments and factories together with the manufactures dependent 
on them; all naval and military stores; and lastly 2450 slaves 
then owned by the Company. The total was valued at 30 
million livres, to which the shareholders added i6| million livres 
as being due to them by the Government. The King agreed 
to the Company's proposal, but chose to reduce the purchase 
money to 30 millions in all. An ddit was issued in January 
1770. creating a perpetual annuity of i,soo,ooo livres upon a 
capital of 30 millions for the benefit of the shareholders 1 . 

1 Abbe Raynal I Philosophical and Political History of the Settle¬ 
ment* ami Trad> of the Europeans in the East and JVest Indies (tr. by 
Jmtamond), II. pp. 391 39a. 




mmsr/fy 



That was the end of an institution which, as Barbiei notes. 

‘ was not devoid of either greatness or power and which, better 
directed, would have obtained immense results'”. That is 
certainly true, but. as it stood after the Seven Years War the 
organisation had no vitality left and was not in a position to 
undertake ambitious schemes for the re-establishment of French 
political influence in India. 