

At the same time the Company was de priv ed of the pos 
Ability of acc umul ating a regular floating capital for its com¬ 
mercial transact 1011 s. From the very beginning of the Fr nch 
Company it. had been the practice to pay the shareholders a 
fixed dividend irrespective of the results of trade. From 1723, 
by a Royal Order, the re constituted Company was required to 
pav to the shareholders a dividend of 15° livres per sharr 1 hese 
dividends were paid from the only secure source of the Coin 
p my’s income, the monopoly of the sale of tobacco which had 
been granted to the Company in discharge of the Government’s 
obligation for the large sum of money lent by the Company 


1 Abb£ Raynat-~/l Philosophical and Political History of the Settle- 
ments and Trade of the Europeans in the East and West Indies (tr. by 
Justamond), U. p. 375, 2 Ibid, p. 376. 3 Ibid . 


Ml NIST/f^ 



THE FRENCH TN INDIA 



under Law's administration. In 1723 the monopoly of the rale 
of tobacco yielded a profit of million livres and it rose to 
more than 8 millions in 1735. 1 2 'This secure source of income, 
which should have been turned to accumulate a lloating capital 
for the Company for its commercial operat ions, was diverted for 
the benefit of the shareholders. 

'fire shareholders, thus assured of a fixed dividend, were 
not much interested in the success of the Co mg atiy^ Trade. The 
Company, deprived of the means of raising a fl oati ng capital, 
had to live on credit and publiexonbdence. Before the out 
break of the War of. the Austrian Succession, the Company had 
enjoyed a fairly long period of prosperity, but it could not suc¬ 
ceed in constituting a floating capital from the profits of its 
commerce. As long as the shareholders received their dividends 
and the Directors their emoluments, nobody ‘worried about the 
future. As Barbier has observed, “This explains to a large 
extent the inertia encountered by Dupleix in his difficult hours 
when the success of his venture required unanimity of efforts” 3 . 

VII. Trade and Finance of the Compagnie des lndes. 

Under such a defective organisation not much commercial 
development could be expected. But surprisingly enough the 
Company showed remarkable commercial expansion down to 
the outbreak of the Seven Years’ War. The foundation was 
laid by Law, who in 1719 acquired for the Company the port of 
Lorient which was to remain in its possession till 1764. There 
the Company built a magnificent naval station and arsenal. 
Law had also given a strong impulse to the construction and 
acquisition of ships, and ifter the fall of his system he left to 
the Company more than a hundred ships of different tonnage. 
These initial advantages helped the Company in the expansion 
of its commerce. From 17*5 to 1759 the Company sent out to 
India an average of 20 vessels a year, while the returning 
vessels numbered on an average 15 a year. During the same 
period the Company spent #72,4*6,39* livre; for the purchase 