

Down to the outbreak of the War of the Austrian Succes¬ 


sion the Company managed to meet all expenses from these 
fixed revenues and the profits of commerce. But the extraordi¬ 
nary expenses of the war combined with its losses created a crisis 
for the Company in 1745. The s uspen sion of the payment of 
dividends in that year first brought home to the shareholders 
the gravity of the situation. The payment of dividends, at a 
much 'rSfuccd rate, was resumed in 1746. After the war the 
revival of trade held out hopes for the Company to be able to 
make good its losses and to look for better days. 

But while the Company was trying to carry on by means 
of borrowing and other financial expedients, it found itself 
called upon 10 meet additional expenses arising out of the 
enterprises of Dupleix. “In these circumstances it is easy to 
understand that being always faced with the prospect of an 
immediate bankruptcy the Company showed an increasing 

hostility to the execution of the plans of Dupleix.It 

refused to envisage military and political projects which 
appeared certainly onerous for the present and with an uncer¬ 
tain prospect for the future” 2 . However, the condition of the 
Company was not wholly desperate and a few years of peace 
and commercial revival would have helped its recovery. But 
the Seven Years' War dealt it a mortal blow, from which re- 


‘ Bar bier— La Cornpagnir fran#aise des l tides, p. 77. 

<Kevin Historic oe <\e llnde Fra»i<;aise, Pondicherry, III, 1919). 
2 ibtd, p. 90. 



Ml MSTfty 



FRENCH POLICY IN fNDIA 


became extremely difficult, specially because ol the 
colossal expense on the reconstruction of the settlements in 


India, completely destroyed !>y the English. 


VI ff. The end of the Compagnie des Indes. 


There was, however, an earnest effort on the part of the 
Company to retrieve the situation. In 1764 the shareholders 
nude a representation to the Government stating ffiat thtT 
primary responsibility for the mismanagement and losses of the 
Company lay with it and praying that the Company might be 
treed from strict Governme n tal control. They secured their 
object partially, and by an Mit of 1764 Governmental control 
was considerably relaxed and the direction of the Company 
reorganised. At the same time in order to secure the interests 
of the shareholders the Government stipulated that “a sufficient 
fund should be detached from that portion of the contract 
which was then free, to secure to every share a capital of 1,600 
livres and an interest of 80 livres” 1 . 

The reorganised Company made strenuous efforts to put 
things in order. The most pressing debts were paid out of 
the permanent revenues, und by means of loans and lotteries 
sufficient money could be raised for commercial operations Jn 
fact, the trade of the Company revived with surprising rapidity, 
not falling much short of the level reached in its better days. 
But this seeming prosperity was wholly artificial. The real 
position of the Company was desperate. The Company began 
its trading operations reckoning upon a larger capital than it 
really possessed. Its debts mounted rapidly. It had to face a 
keener competition in India from the English than before the 
war. Moreover, its credit in India was ruined, and it had to 
undertake a heavy responsibility for reconstructing and main¬ 
taining its settlements in India. 