

hi f>reign policy Choiseul recast the system of alliances 
as dictated by the real Interests of France. The Austrian 
alliance, which had cost France so dear in the Sevcn~Years' War. 
he wanted to subordinate to the Family Compact with Spain. 
Spain was a more certain and natural ally and, in view of her 
navy and overseas territories, a more important ally in a 
colonial war with England. Choiseul thus endeavoured to 
establish closer relations with Spain, and to encourage Spain 
in reorganising tun navy, as preparatory measures for the 
inevitable war with England. But his work was cut short by 
his sudden dismissal in 1770, ostensibly on the grounds that 
his support to Spain over the question of the Falkland Islands 
had brought France on the brink of a war with England and 
that he was supporting the Parlements then at conflict with the 
Crown. But the real cause of his fall was the displeasure of 
Madame du Barri. 


Choiseui’s plan relating to India deserves some notice here. 


1 Martin —Histoire dr France, Vol. XVI, p. *48. 


Ml MSTfiy 



boon after the end of the Seven Years’ War he started prepara¬ 
tions for the next trial of strength with England, in which an 
expedition to India was to constitute an important part of the 
over-all French strategy. Choiseul believed that in any war 
with England the principal objective of France should be a 
direct invasion of the island. But for that invasion at least a 
temporary naval superiority in the Channel was an essential 
pre requisite. Since even the combined forces of France and 
Spain were not calculated to give that superiority, it was 
necessary to weaken the English fleet in home waters by creat¬ 
ing diversions in outer seas. One of these diversions was to be 
a threat against India, where England had such large vested 
interests that she could not fail to send a strong naval squadron 
there to ward off a French attack. The Isle of France could 
serve as a convenient naval and military base for a surprise 
attack on India, and for three years, from 1768 to 1770. a large 
number of troops and ships were sent there in accordance with 
the general plan. Thus when the Falkland Islands dispute 
arose between England ;md Spain in 1770, which seemed to 
bring the prospect of war very near, French preparations had 
already gone far for putting ChoiseuTs plan into execution. 
But a part of the French fleet at Port Louis in the Isle of 
France was destroyed by a storm in 1770. Shortly after, the 
dismissal of Choiseul led to the abamWjfcment of his plan and 
the recall of most of the troops and ships from the Isle of 
France. 1 

The fall of Choiseul was one of the most glaring symptoms 
of the rot in the administration. The great minister, who had 
done so much to revive the power and prestige of France, was 
sacrificed to the whims of a woman, desjpite his acknowledged 
ability and despite the open"*expression of public support for 

1 For details regarding Ohoiscul's plan, see I aeour-Gavet— La Marine 
tnili Loire de In France sous Louis XV: Cast ex— Les hides miliUdrts de la 
marine ou XVfILme siMe. See also the Report of Capt. Lockhart Russel, 
54th July 177a, on the French defences in the Isles of France and Bourbon, 
the plans of a French expedition to India in alliance with sonic of the 
country Powers, and the strength of the French forces in the islands even 
after the abandonment of Choiseul's plan. Russel had been sent by Cartier, 
Governor of Bengal, and he did his espionage v/ork very well (C.R.O.— 
The French in India Series, Vol. XVII). 