

Colbert had hoped that once given a start, the Company 
vo ufd i rtcou rse of time be able to draw more and more on the 
spirit of enterprise of the business and capitalist class B it 
that hope wfc> never realised. \\ ithin a decade the Compare s 
commercial operations practically came to an end for want of 
money. In 1683 Colbert tried to save the situation bv permit¬ 
ting private merchants to take part in the Eastern trade, pro¬ 
vided they made use of the Company’s vessels and paid a 
commission of 10% to the Company on their exports and 
imports, besides the normal freights. Although this measure 
was intended to enable the Company to strengthen its financial 
resources, it really resulted in inducing the Company to follow 
the easy-going method of allowing outsiders to make use of its 
trading privileges and living mcre h on the com missions^and 
freights paid by them. C olber t’s death in 1683 was a great 
:,knv lb the Company. Whaler o t . recov ery jherg. 

yet might Have been for the Company were destroyed by the. 
long wars in which France was engaged in the closing years of 
the 17th and the early years of the l&th century. 

During the War of the Spanish Succession the financial 
condition of the Company became so Tad tKat it w f as compelled 
10 suspend its tra ding operations and to le av e its lactorics in 
India to their fate. The situation was saved ir. bvThe 

enterprise oFsome merchants of St. Malo, who entered into 
agreements with the Company for continuing the trade of the 
Indies on their own account by paying commissions to the Com- 





MINlSr^ 



paay for the use of its trading rights and privileges. In 1715, 
on the expiry of the fifty years’ ten * of trading monopoly in 
the East, the Company’s privileges were extended for another 
period of ten years. But the Company, anxious to retain its 
legal rights, was not in a position to make any use of them 
itself. So it transferred its rights to a newly constituted Society 
of Merchants of St. Malo on nearly the same terms as before. 
This agreement, however, lasted only for five years, till 1719, 
when the Compagnie des Index Orientates was amalgamated 
with Law’s Compagnie d* Occident under a new name, the 
Compagnie des Indes, to which was entrusted the whole of the 
colonial trade of franc?. The new Company took over all the 
establishments, ships and merchandise of the old Company, 
together with its debts both in France and in India. 

Apart from the shyness of capital and lack of business enter¬ 
prise in France, another factor which crippled the French Com¬ 
pany was the reversal of die commercial polic y of Colbert after 
the latter’s death and the triumph of the Protectionist doctrine. 
In 1686 the Frenc h Government prohibited the importation of 
primed cloth from India in th e in ter est o f home manufactures, 
This measure was the result of the rivalry between manufactur¬ 
ing^ and comjnercial interests, which became increasingly acute 
after the death of Colbert. In 1702 the Company sustained 
another setback by the prohibition of the importation of silk 
manufactures from India. Finally, in 1709 the prohibition of 
the importation of all kinds of cotton goods from India marked 
the complete victory of Protectionism. 