

IX. The Trench Government after the Seven Years’ War. 

If the French Company was not in a position to undertake 
ambitious political projects in India after the Seven Years’ War. 
the French Government, which took over all the Company s 
possessions in India in 1770, was in no better position. The 
Government of Louis XV had neither the will nor the strength 
to follow a vigorous foreign policy. It seas not due to the 
absence of any able minister, for Choiseul, who remained the 
leading figure in the ministry front 1758 to 1770, certainly 
belonged to the best tradition of French statesmanship. T he 
real reason was the character of the administration , pres ided 
over by a dissolute king an d dominate d by intriguing mi| 
tresses and fi^uYr cabitH "<s hd liaa^ ihc~poWCT of appointing and 
removing ministers and diet iting the policy of th< Goy u 
No constructive forms'and' nV amsistetu policy in home and 
foreign affairs were possible under such an administration. In 
fact, the later period of the reign of Louis XV is remembered 
in history as the pre paratory.jtkage for the Revolution. As 
Henri Martin has summed up: "The end of the reign of Louis 
XV shows only ruins, which accumulate and prepare for the 
grand ruin:"""the buttresses and the outer-works have fallen: it 
will not take long for the main edifice to crumble down into 
tbe abyss"*. 

In spite of the losses of tbe Seven ^ ears War and internal 
ivw Mic like the suppression of the Jesuits and the conflict 
between the (..town and the Parle nents. French policy, both 
internal and external, showed surprising vigour under^ the able 

1 Barbirr La Comftagnie Fran^aise des 1 rides, p. 95 (Rt’vue Historiquc 

I'lndc Fmn^aise, Pondicherry, III. 19*9) 

2 Marlin Hhtoire dp France, Vol. XVI, p, nop. 






mtSTfiy 



THE FRENCH VS INDIA 


(tioa of Chqrieul. The basis of Choiseut's policy was to 
prepare the country for a return match with England and to 

For that, 


.ivengc the defeat and losses of the Seven Years’ War. 


he took in hand a thorough re-organisation of the army and 
the navy. As Martin has pointed out, it was the reforms of 
Choiseul which laid the foundation of the glories of French 
arms during the War of American Independence and the 
Revolution. Choiseul paid particular attention to the develop 
ment of the navy, .so essential in a colonial war. The French 
navy, which had been practically annihilated in the Seven Years' 
War. could boast of {*>4 ships of the line and 50 frigates in 1770 
uhen Choiseul left office. Not only that, the efficiency of the 
officers and crews had greatly improved, the artillery of the fleet 
had been renewed and the arsenals and storehouses were filled 
with war materials. It has been said that the great expenses 
which Ehniscul incurred for his ambitious programme of 
military anS naval reforms contributed to the financial bank- 


ruptcy of the Government. But that is certainly not true; the 
cause of the financial ruin lay elsewhere, “the regime of privi 
leges and abuses which weighed heavily on the society, and 
which had become, so to say, identical with the society" 1 . 