

VI. The Re-constitution of the Compagnie des Indes. 

1 he failure of Law’s system did not mean the end of the 
Company. After the storm had passed and the situation h id 
cleared up somewhat, the Company received a fresh lease of 
life. The French Government was keen on preserving the 
Company and helping it to develop on proper lines. An arrSt 
of aand March 17*3 reconstituted the Company and defined 
its relations to the State. In 1725 all its old privileges were 
confirmed a$d at the same time its past liabilities wiped oft. 
But while reconstituting the Company the Government was 
not willing to give it much freedom of action. “In place of 
leaving it master of its own destiny under broad State control, 
the Company was placed under strict dependence on the Gov¬ 
ernment, which considerably hampered its working and became 
one of the important cau ses o f its ruin. The spirit of initiative 
and hardy enterprise, which would have perhaps been en¬ 
couraged if the shareholders interested in the development of 
the Company and in its success could have directed its opera¬ 
tions without any restraints, was thus from the beginning dis¬ 
couraged or paralysed by such subjection to tutelage” 8 . 

For keeping the Company under proper surveillance there 
was set up a Conseil des Indes, with members selected by the 
King from among the officers of his Council and of th< Vav\ 
TmcT also prominent merchants. The* twelve Directors of the 
Company were likewise" to be selected by the King. The only 
concession made to the shareholders was that they were to elect 
at their annual meeting eight S ynd ics to look after their interests. 
In fact, no annual meeting was called till 1745, when on a strong 
representation from the shareliolders they were given the right 

1 Bat bier —-La Compagni/ b ran^aisr des hides, p, 24. 

2 Ibid, pp. 25 26. 





FRENCH POLICY IN INDIA 


<§L 


fleeting twelve persons from whom the King would choose 
six Syndics. But even this concession was not maintained in 
practice. The Directors were also reduced to the status of 
simple clerks and the real management of the Company lay in 
he hands of the King’s agents. 

In 1730 a Commissary appointed by the King was intro 
duced into the administration of the Company. 1 he result is 
described by Abb 6 Raviiai: “From this period there was an 
end to all freedom of debate; there was no longer any cornice 
lion between those vvJVo had the management of affairs, and 
the pr opri e tors; 110 immediate intercourse between the managers 
and the government. All was directed by the influence, and 
according uTtfie views of the Court. Mystery, that dangerous 
veil oF arbitrary administration, concealed all the operations h 
In i745~the King appointed two Commissaries. "From this time 
two parties were formed. Each Commissary had his own .scheme, 
his own favourites, and endeavoured to get his own projects 
adopted. Hence arose divisions, intrigues, informations, and 
animosities, which though they originated in Paris, extended as 
far as India, and there broke out in a manner so fatal to the 
nation” 2 . To remedy the situation a third Commissary was 
later appointed. “This expedient, however, served only to 
increase the evil. Despotism had prevailed while there was but 
one; division ensued on the nomination of two; and from the 
moment three were appointed, all was anarchy and confusion”." 