

When Law took over in April 1765. Pondicherry was com¬ 
pletely in ruins and for the first few months of his administra¬ 
tion he took up his residence in the village of Oulgaret, included 
in the French possessions and just a short distance to the west 
of the town. The other officers also were accommodated in the 
surrounding villages pending the reconstruction of the town. 
The first task of the administration was to clear the debris and 
erect administrative and military buildings as quickly as 
possible. The efforts of the administration were supplemented 
by the tenacity and enterprise of private persons, who now 
returned to Pondicherry after nearly four years of exile in the 
neighbouring foreign settlements. 1 hey lodged themselves in 
tents and improvised huts and set about re-building their 
houses on the old sites. ~Lhe speed of reconstruction was almost 
a marvel, md in the course of just three years a whole new 
town had been built on the ruins of the old. and that in spite 




misTfy 



oT the difficulties presented by lack of materials. Stones had 
to be procured from as far off as Jinji and wood from the Isle 
of France. One advantage the builders had, namely that the 
foundations of most of the buildings had remained intact, the 
English having destroyed only the walls; and the bricks from 
the demolished buildings were largely utilised in the work of 
reconstruction. Le Gentil gives us a graphic description of the 
work o reconstruction and of the new town as it stood in 17*18, 
three years after the re-establishment of the French at Pondi¬ 
cherry' 1 ; and his description is fully corroborated by the accounts 
of Bourcet, the engineer entrusted w ith the work of retonstiuc- 
tion. “The untiring work of the French in the reconstruction 

of Pondicherry recalls to me the ant.In fact even the 

ant is not seen to work with so much diligence as the French 
woiked during this fhsi period/* In the course of just live 
months the streets had been cleaied of debris, and about 200 
European and 2,000 Indian houses had been built. Before the 
end of the first year a powder magazine had been constructed 
on the site of the old Fort and several warehouses and Govern¬ 
ment offices had been built. 

The new town grew up within the old limits and most of 
the priVate houses were built on the old sites, but internally 
there were many changes in the layout of the streets and in 
the sites of the government buildings. The town was divided 
into two parts by a canal which separated the European from 
the Indian quarter. The first stretched from the sea to the 
canal, and the latter from the canal to the line of fortifications. 
In the centre of the European quarter was the parade ground 
of the old citadel.. It was now planted with trees and on its 
four sides were erected new government buildings,—the Gover¬ 
nor's palace and the Administrative office on the north, ware¬ 
houses on the south, and military barracks Oil the east and 
west. It was in the layout of the streets that a great change 
was introduced. The new streets were all straight, stretching 
from east to west and from north to south and cutting each 
other at right angles. They were Ixirdered with rows of trees 
and presented a pleasing view to the eye. In the work of 
reconstruction much attention was paid to beauty; trees were 