


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

hiri. Choiseul was dismissed and banished to his country se<n 
of Chanteloup. It was then that for the first rime since the 
Jm >n<k\ i portion of the court and high society manifested 
publicly an\ formidable opposition to the government. All 
that was great in France made it a point of honour to go and 
felicitate the Duke de Choiseul in his retreat, and gave the 
appearance of a triumph to his disgrace*' 1 . Louis XV, who so 
quietly yielded to the persuasion of his mistress had to repent 
later. When he heard of the partition of Poland, he was for 
a moment indignant at being counted for nothing in Europe. 
‘Ah he exclaimed, “if Choiseul had been here, things woidd 
have gone on otherwise’*. 

After the fall of Choiseul, the ministry was dominated for 
the remaining vears of Louis XV’s reign by a triumvirate, con¬ 
sisting of Maupcou as Chancellor, Abb£ Terr ay in charge of 
Finance and Duke d’Aiguillon as Foreign Minister. Maupeou’s 
great achievement was the abolition of an old institution of 
Fiance, the Parlements 9 which in spite of serious defects consti¬ 
tuted the onlv organ of opposition to royal despotism, and the 
creation of a new judicial organisation more subservient to the 
King’s will. D’Aiguillon’s tenure of the Foreign Office resulted 
in completely destroying the influence which Choiseul had built 
up for France in European diplomacy. Till the ministry of 
Vergennes France suffered a total eclipse in European politics. 
Poland was partitioned by Russia, Austria and Prussia and the 
Crimea was conquered from the Turks by Russia, with France 
helplessly looking on. The third member of the triumvirate, 
Abbe 1 ‘crray, was responsible for a gross mismanagement of the 
finances. He had no constructive plan and his only object was 
to find resources by any means whatever to meet the growing 
expenses of the State. He made no attempt to check the 
monstrous extravagance of the Court and Louis XV continued 
to exhaust the treasury hv his disgraceful prodigalities. Abb£ 
Terray’s reforms “struck at the fluids of the State, and were 
nothing but a real and shameful bankruptcy. The assessment 
of the contributions was at the .same time raised beyond all 
measure, and Terray destroyed the most glorious work of 
Machault, the regulation for the free circulation of grain in the 




1 Bonnechose --History of Fra net. p. 468. 


FRENCH POLICY IN INDIA 

interior of the kingdom. Terray abolished it for the sake of 
embarking in infamous speculations, of which the alarm and 
misery of the people guaranteed the success” 1 . 

As to the King, when everything was crumbling down 
round him, he “continued to offer to all the spectacle of his 
shameful debaucheries, and the still more dangerous example 
oFTvot blushing at them...... He joined a sordid avarice to 

his depraved tastes, and created for himself a private wealth, 
which he increased by the most odious means: at a period of 
famine, he, as well as his minister Terray, speculated upon the 
misery of his people, by gambling upon the augmentation of 
the price of corn: at length, devoured by ennui, tired even of 
pleasures, disgusted with everything, he died of the small pox, 
on the 10th May, 1774. at the age of sixty-four” 2 . 