


<SL 


lompany’s by Royal Administration in 1770. The infantry 
was organised in one battalion, known as the ‘Battalion of 
India*, divided into 10 companies. At Pondicherry there were 
40 officers, including the fitat Major , and 560 men. There was 
also a company of artillery consisting of too men including 
officers, about half being stationed at Pondicherry. The sepoy 
forces were organised in 6 companies of 100 nun each including 
officers. 

A great change in military organisation followed the estab 
lishment of Royal Administration in 1770. By a Royal Ordin¬ 
ance, dated 40th December 1774, the Battalion of India was 
replaced by the Regiment of Pondicheiry. 1 It was divided into 
two battalions, each consisting of 9 companies, one of grenadiers 
and eight of fusiliers. Some time later the artillery force was 
also re organised. There were after 1770 two separate companies 
of artillery, one belonging to the Royal Corps and another 
attached to the old Battalion of India. By a Royal Ordinance 
of 3rd February' 1776 the two separate companies were amal¬ 
gamated and formed into onr autonomous artillery company 
tflf gunners and bombardiers. 2 * The organisation of the sepoy 
force also underwent a change. By a Provisional Regulation, 
dated 12tli November 1773, Law re constituted the sepoy force 
into one battalion of 11 companies, one of grenadiers and to 
of fusiliers. One curious innovation that Law introduced was 
that one company was to consist wholly of pariahs or outcastes 
converted to Christianity. 9 The motive we cannot guess; it 
might have been his dislike to mix up castes in the army, not 
unlikely to cause resentment among the upper-caste men; or it 
might have been his belief that the Christian pariahs would be 
more loyal than other Indians. However, the innovation was 
abolished by a Royal Ordinance dated January 20, 1776, which 
stipulated that men ‘’of all religions shall be admitted into 
service, without any distinction or pre-eminence of one sect over 
another. His Majesty desires that never shall am separation by 
sect or caste be made in the Company but that they be mixed 


1 P.A. im. 17*. 

2 /bid, ms. at*. 

31 /bid, in??. 183. 


MlWfSjgjj. 



PONDICHERRY '>.% 

■JK' 

KtiuHstinclly as loyal soldiers of one and the same King/ 1 
After the fall of Pondicherry in 1761 a large number ol 
Frenchmen belonging to the armed forces were scattered all 
over India and took to the career of military adventurers in the 
service of the various Indian Princes. 1 hey were technically 
deserters from the French army, but in view of the inadequate 
strength of the garrison at Pondicherry it was thought desirable 
to take them back into service again. Moreover, many of them 
had shown great organising ability, had risen to positions ot 
eminence and power and had acquired great influence over the 
country Powers; their roadtnission into service would have been 
of inestimable value in any military operations in India. So a 


