


HI. Organisation of the Army . 


Related to he subject of fortifications was the question 
of troops and their organisation, since, as we have seen, the 
adoption of Bourcet's plan required the maintenance of a very 
large garrison. Here too there was the same neglect and pro¬ 
crastination on the part of the Company’s authorities and the 
French Government alike. The number of European troops 


*JP.A. ms. a$o. 

2 Ibid, ms. *37. 

3 l*or an account of the different plans of fortifications, see Catalogue 
dcs cartes, plans et projets d'etudes du depot des ancicnnes archives de 
i’lndr bv Major H. G. Tranche!!. 


MIN/STyjy 



PONDICHERRY 


<8L 


out to Pondicherry was far too inadequate, and because of 
hi(k of funds and arms little attempt could be made in India 
to raise and train up a large sepoy force to make up lor the 
deficiency in the European element. In the correspondence of 
the two successive Governors, Law and Bellecombc, who had 
charge of the Pondicherry Government from 1765 to 1778, we 
find repeated representations to Paris for permission and neces¬ 
sary funds to raise a large body of sepoy troops well in advance 
of the next outbreak of war. But both the authorities of the 
Company and, after the suppression of that body, the French 
Government were lamentably slow to appreciate its necessity, 
believing that the exigencies of a war in India could be met 
when it actually broke out bv the despatch of an expeditionary 
force from France and that there was no necessity of making 
preparations in advance. 

Writing two arid a half years after the restitution of 
Pondicherry, Law regretted that there were only “500 European 
soldiers, of whom at least 130 invalids, the majority being dis* 
abled for service, and 400 sepoys recruited last year who hardly 
know vet how to load their guns; it will require much before 
they can be put man for man on a footing of equality with 
those of foreigners. They have not even been organised in a 
manner that I would have liked, having been raised during my 
absence and with the greatest precipitation on account of the 
general discontent which the imprudence of \1. Boyelleau had 
caused here/’ 1 2 As regards arms Law gave an equally dismal 
picture: "We are very weak in artillery and musketry. Forty 


pieces of cannon, six to twenty-four pounders, of which several 
very bad and all very badly mounted, constitute all the defence 
of the place. The guns of our soldiers arc good, those of our 
sepo)s are very old. That is all our musketry. There is not a 
single spare gun in the arsenal so that we do not know how to 
arm the employees and the inhabitants’*. Much information is 
available about the Company’s military forces in India and of 
the expenses incurred on them from a detailed list drawn up 
in 1769 and preserved in the Pondicherry Archives. 1 The list 
was drawn up in all probability in view of the replacement of 


1 P.A. ms. 100. 

2 Ibid, ms. 135. 


miSTffy 



THF. FRENCH IN INWA 