


the site. 

At the time of leaving France Law de Lauriston was given 
an experienced engineer named Bourcet. In 1766 Bourcet sub¬ 
mitted his plan of fortifications, which, as he estimated, could 
be executed in two to three years’ time and at a very small 
tost, not more than three million livres (or twelve lakhs of 
rupees). His plan was based on the following considerations: 
(1) the reconstruction of the town bad already been completed, 
and it was necessary therefore to enclose the whole of it within 
the line of fortifications to be built; the enclosure of a large 
area was all the more necessary in order to provide a safe 
shelter to the workers engaged in the manufacture of coin 
modules for the trade of the French Company; (2) speed in 
construction was essentially necessary, since nobody knew how 


minis 



"tong the French would be left at peace either by the English 
or by the country Powers; and (3) both from the point of view 
ol speed as well as that of economy, the new fortifications should 
follow as far as possible the lines of the old, so that full use 
could he made of the old ditch surrounding the town and as 
rmwh of the glacis as remained, and even the materials of the 
new works could be largely taken from the ruins of the old. 

hut Bourcci. who had the full confidence of Law, was on 
dial account Opposed by the Conseil Suptrieur under the leader¬ 
ship of Novell eau during Law’s absence from Pondicherry, 
i he Con sal Superieur represented to the Company in Paris 
dial the execution of Bourcet’s project would require an expendi 
tm of sixteen million Hvres. This wide difference between 
the estimates of Bourcet and of the Conseil Superieur puzzled 
the authorities in France, and instead of sanctioning Bourcet'S 
plan they sent some new projects for the consideration of the 
Pondicherry Government. Thus much valuable time was im- 
luussaiilv lost and in a memoire widen at the end of 1767 Law 
noted with regret, “It will require at least two years to have 
an\ definite replies, and during this interval to what dangers 
mav not be exposed, specially with the handful of men and 
the small quantity of arms and ammunitions that we have?” 1 
In fact, as we shall notice later, it was the procrastinating polity 
ol the Paris uthoriiies which led to repeated delays and changes 
of plan, with the? result that even thirteen years after the restitu¬ 
tion of the place when the English began their attack in August 
1778, the defensive works had not yet l>ecri completed and the 
French were left to fill in the gaps with hasty and improvised 
constructions. 

In the mimoire referred to above, Law expressed his opinion 
that while the Conseil Superieur had greatly over-estimated the 
cost without taking into account that much of the materials 
would he taken from the old works. Bourcet on the other hand 
had slightly under estimated it and that the real cost would be 
in the neighbourhood of five million livres. Any wav. in 1768 
Bourcet’s plan was accepted and he started the work in i/bq. 
Fhc'ptan consisted of the construction of a high and wide wall, 
mostly earthwork for speed and economy without losing any 