


1 P.A. ms. too. 



PONDICHERRY 

five capacity for resistance, to lx? defended by bastions at 
regular intervals on three sides, north, west and south. The 
east was protected by the sea and the south by the river Arian- 
nmpom; and Bourcet provided in his plan for inundating the 
land outside the walls on the west and the north, to be con¬ 
nected with the liver and the sea, in order to provide greater 
security to the town, hi the course of the year 1769, apart 
from the wall of earthwork, Bourcet had constructed to a 
considerable height four bastions on the north, and one on 
the south. 

The work was in fact proceeding very rapidly when there 
came a sudden set-back. The opponents of Bonnet’s plan 
raised a clamour that the hastily constructed earthworks would 
be washed away by the rains and that the vast extent of the 
area of the fortifications would require a much larger garrison 
for defence than what Pondicherry could ever possibly have 
Added to this clamour was a personal quarrel between Bourcet 
and some members of the Conseilj and all these resulted in the 
sudden recall of Bourcet and his replacement by another 
engineer from France, named Desclaisons. This sudden change 
had the effect of undoing all the work that had been done 
before, for Desclaisons at once abandoned the plan of Bourcet 
and proceeded to erect fortifications in a more solid manner. 
He expressed contempt for the earthwork raised by Bourcet 
and started construction with brick and lime. Then again he 
‘was dissatisfied with the plan of the bastions, already constructed 
to a considerable height by Bourcet. and thought it necessary to 
pull them down before erecting new ones on his own lines. 
All these entailed a huge expenditure and what was more 
important required at least twenty years of peace, while both 
money and materials were lacking and Pondicherry ran a great 
risk in keeping itself exposed to external attacks for such a long 
period. Law', who was fully alive to the danger of the situation, 
made strong representations to Paris against Desclaisons and 
finally secured his recall in 1771. Thus the work was held up 
again till the return of Bourcet in 1775. 

After the recall of Desclaisons the matter was considered 
afresh by the Minister of Marine, dc Boynes. Finally, Bourcet 
was sent back to continue the work he had already started. 
It was not an easv task for him since some of his work 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


been undone by Dcstlaisons. Anyway, in 1775 he con 
strutted three bastions on the west and one on the south 


Further, he installed a battery to guard the eastern side. But 
the work, was again held up by the death of Bourcet at the end 
of 1776. Just before his death Bourcet drew up a detailed 
me moire, dated October 177b, relating to the fortifications of 
Pondicherry, which according to his desire was submitted by his 
brother to the new Governor, Bellccornbe. in January 1 777 * 1 
1 he brother of Bourcet submitted a memoire of his own also to 
Beileeombc at the same time. 3 In 1776 controversy had again 
been raised at Pondicherry and in France as to the utility of 
Bourcet’s plan of fortifications, and the two mdmoires were 
written with a view to justify the plan. They give us a detailed 
account of the defensive works already constructed. The con¬ 
troversy, however, went on for some time and little was done to 
continue the work of construction begun by Bourcet, until the 
storm apprehended by Law burst in July 1778. It was only 
when the English troops began to move against Pondicherry 
that Bellecomhe hurriedly called upon Dulac, the successor of 
Bourcet, to fill in the gaps in the line of fortifications. Bui it 
was then too late, and the fall of Pondicherry after a short 
siege may be attributed largely to the dilatory policy of the 
Paris authorities and their indecision and change of plan, 
although the French had sufficient time after 1765 to put their 
principal settlement in India in a proper state of defence. 3 