


1 loyage dans les msr& d’ Vlnde. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

everywhere and gardens laid out before private houses. 
One interesting point that ma\ be noticed in connection with 
the reconstruction of the town is that the temples and mosques 
that were re built were made of a strangely low height, because 
of the opposition of the Christian missionaries who did not 
like places of heathen worship towering above the other 
buildings. 

Together with reconstruction there was a rapid increase in 
the number of population. According to I.e Gentil, three 
years after the re-establishment of the trench at Pondicherry 
die European population numbered about 1.200, including the 
garrison, and the Indian population about 60,000. The prin¬ 
cipal reason for the great influx of Indian population during 
this period was the war in the Carnatic, which drove thousands 
of people from the neighbouring areas to find a secure shelter 
in the French settlement, Madras being regarded as insecure 
because of the victories of Haidar Ali against the English. 

II. Plans of fortifications. 

The re building of the town inevitably raised the problem 
of security from external attacks and thoughts had to be given 
to the question of fortifications. The question, when it began 
to be tackled seriously, was complicated by the fact that houses 
had been built on the old sites and the interior reconstruction 
of the town had been going on spontaneously without anv 
reference to the project of fortifications which might be adopted 
in future. It was this factor which forced the hands of the 
engineer entrusted with the erection of fortifications and made 
it necessary for him to lay down a project in conformity with 
the interior reconstruction which had been almost completed, 
and not solely in conformity with military requirements. 
Before the war the defence of Pondicherry was based principally 
on .1 pentagonal citadel, strong enough to resist a prolonged 
siege, with an outer wall round the whole tow’n. I he citadel 
had been completely demolished by the English, and after the 
w*ar the question arose whether to base the defence of the place 
on a new citadel, to be constructed either in the north or in 
the south, or to include the entire town within a continuous 
and high wall defended by bastions at regular intervals. Given 




PONDICHERRY 




the same cost a citadel could be built in a more solid manner 
than a long line of wall all round the town. Moreover, a 
citadel could be effectively defended by a small garrison, 
whereas an open town surrounded by a long line of fortifications 
would require a much larger number of troop. So the ques- 
tion of fortifications was largely dependent on the amount of 
money available and on the number of troops that could be 
sent from France. 

There was from the outset a difference of opinion between 
the advocates of two schools, one favouring the construction of 
a citadel and the other the inclusion of the entire town within 
a continuous line of fortifications. But the issue had to be 
decided by the practical necessity of circumstances, namely that 
the internal reconstruction had been nearly completed and any 
plan of defence must take within its sweep the whole of the 
newly-built town. There was another difference of opinion in 
connection with the project of fortifications. The traditionalists 
wanted, even if the old citadel could not be restored, to utilise 
as far as possible the old lines of outer fortifications; while their 
opponents wanted to start with a clean slate altogether, build* 
mg on an entirely new plan and not taking any account of the 
old works. Some even proposed to shift the town wholesale to 
the south, utilising the Cocoanut Island in the river Arian* 
coupora for the purpose. Here too the issue had to be decided 
by the necessity of circumstances, since the town had already 
been reconstructed and there was thus no question of changing 