

While Vergennes was trying to restore French influence 
and prestige, two other able ministers. Turgot and Malesherbes. 
were attempting to introduce financial and other internal re¬ 
forms, which, if successful. Would have perhaps averted the Revo- 


MINIS T fry 



^tuTion. i'urgoi wanted to suppress some of the glaring abuses 
and burdensome privileges and to make the nobility contribute 
to taxes in the same proportion as the third estate. He tveu 
proposed ro accustom the nation to the discussion of public 
interests through provincial assemblies. Malesherbes attempted 

hr abolition of the lethes de cachet, which arbitrarily disposed 
oi the liberty of citizens, and the reduction of the ruinous 
extravagance of the King’s Household. The attack of the two 
ministers on privileges and vested interests ltd to the growth 
of a formidable league in the Court against them. They 
could have survived this opposition, in which a leading part 
was taken by the Queen, if they had received a strong and deter¬ 
mined support from the King, but that could not be expected 
from a person like Louis XVI. Malesherbes, who realised this, 
resigned office in May 177b, while Turgot was dismissed two 
days later. 

Fortunately France found another able? minister in Necker, 
who held charge of Finance from October 177b to May 1781, 
f his Genevese banker had such a high reputation as a financier 
of talent and integrity that his name alone offered a sufficient 
guarantee to the capitalist class and earned the confidence of 
the lenders. Meeker continued in a modified way the pro¬ 
gramme of reforms initiated by Turgot. His policy was based 
on reducing expenses to a level with receipts, relying on taxation 
in ordinary times and taking recourse to loans onl> when 
circumstances imperatively demanded it, and instituting regular 
audit of accounts to facilitate loans by creating public confidence. 
Meeker’s management of the finances proved eminently successful 
and provided France with the resources necessary for the 
American War. But the opposition of the Court cabal and of 
some of his own colleagues in the government undermined his 
position with the King and led to his resignation in May 1781 
in the midst of the war. 

With the fall of Necker ended all hopes of reform. He was 
succeeded by Joly de Fleury and later by IVOrinesson, neither 
of whom had any financial ability and merely tried one exped¬ 
ient after another without any avail. Then came the man who 
completed the ruin, from which there was no recovery. Galon ne, 
a brilliant man with a light rnind and an audacious character, 
became the Minister of Finance in 1783 on the recommendation 

£ 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

of (he Court ladies. His policy was directly opposite to that 
of Necker. He aimed at increasing public confidence in the 
financial position of the State by an artificial show of prosperity 
and extravagant expenditure. To keep up this show he con¬ 
tracted loans in a reckless manner, and then at last when he 
had exhausted his credit he was forced to reveal the true 
position. He had to admit that in a few years the loans had 
risen to 1640 millions and that a deficit of 150 millions existed 
in the revenue. This frightful revelation excited a general cry, 
which led to the resignation of Calonne in 1787. 