

Calonnc had left the financial machine so hopelessly out 
of gear that it was impossible for anyone to set it right. For 
about a year Bricnne tried to save the situation by new taxation, 
which led to a conflict with the Parlement. of Paris (revived 
after the accession of Louis XVI) and raised the first demand 
for a States General. Bricnne ended by announcing a national 
bankruptcy in August 1788 and a temporary suspension of all 
State obligations. He was promptly dismissed and Louis XVI 
recalled Necker to the ministry, as the last expedient to meet a 
desperate situation. But then it was too late. The Ancien 
Regime had come to the brink of the abyss and was destined 
to disappear completely in a few months. 




MIN/Sr^ 


CHAPTER l?I 




PONDICHERRY ( 1765 * 1778 ) 

I Reconstruction after 1765. 

Following the Treaty of Paris, 1763, Pondicherry, which 
had been in English hands since the 16th January 1761, was 
restored to the French on the 11th April 1765 1 . T he old town, 
founded by Francois Martin in 1674 and embellished and raised 
to political importance by DuplciX, had been destroyed so 
systematically by the English after the capitulation of 1761 that 
when Law de Lauriston arrived from France in 1765 to take 
repossession of the place there was hardly a single house which 
remained intact, and it was difficult to recognise even the out¬ 
lines of the old town in the heaps of ruins which lay all around. 
I: was not only the walls, fortifications, offices and Governor s 
palace which had been demolished in an attempt to eliminate 
forever a dangerous political rival to the neighbouring English 
settlement of Madras, but even the houses belonging to private 
persons, Europeans and Indians alike, and churches were not 
spared from the general destruction. With the exception of 
two Hindu temples nothing remained to indicate the once 
flourishing and populous settlement 2 . 

Le Gentil, the French naturalist, who visited Pondicherry 
after its restitution compared the destruction of the place to 
that of Jerusalem in ancient times. The comparison was 

1 Curiously enough the records relating to the restitution of the prin- 
ripal settlement are not preserved in the Pondicherry Archives although 
then arc records relating to the restitution of the other settlements. 

2 It may be noted heie that Duplex also had not treated Madras 
much better in 1746. against which Voltaire wrote: 'This barbarism 
inflicted a good deal of suffering on innocent colonists without doing any 
good to the French'*. (Precis du SticU de. Louis XV; Oeuvres Computes. 
sol. XXII, p. 259) In 1758 Lally had ordered the destruction of Fort 
St. David and would have dealt with Madras too in the same wav if he 
had succeeded in capturing the place. It is better to recognise that the 
war between the English and the French was fought a oulrance , each side 
determined 10 eliminate the other permanently from the coast. 


!HE FRENCH IN INDIA 

rendered more apt by the wholesale depopulation of the plate. 
The principal officers, like l.ally, were taken captive to Eng 
land; some were lucky enough to escape and offer their services 
to Indian Princes like the Nizam and Haidar Ali; while of the 
other military personnel a large number accepted service under 
the Tnglish, in order to escape from the hardships of prison 
life, on condition that they would not be required to fight 
outside Bengal, thereby eliminating the possibility of their 
having to fight against France or her allies in India. Of these 
persons some remained faithful to the English and attained, 
like Claude Martin, high military ranks in the English service. 
But a large number, like Ren£ Madet, only looked for an 
opportunity to desert and offer thcii services to the different 
Princes of north India. Indeed for the next twenty-five years 
hundreds of French officers and soldiers were scattered over 
north India in the service of the Indian Princes. I hey were all 
the remnants of the army which had capitulated at Pondicherry 
in 1761. The civilian French population of Pondicherry took 
refuge for the most part in the friendly Danish settlement at 
Franquebar, as also in the Dutch settlements at Sadras, Porto 
Novo and Negapatam. There they remained for four years in 
the neighbourhood of Pondicherry, without any organisation 
and financial resources, and sustained only by the hope that 
peace would enable them to return to their old homes. 