

X. The Government of Louis XVI. 

The next reign began with a better augury and in the 
midst of high public expectations. “France expressed nothing 
but joy at being freed from the filthy old man who had for so 
long stood as the shame of the nation. Little was known about 
the new King, who had lived till then in seclusion, like his 
father before him; but it was believed that he did not resemble 
in any way his grandfather, and that was sufficient for the 
people”*. Louis XVI was a good and well-meaning prince and 
sincerely desired to abolish abuses in administration and to sec 
France restored to a position of glory and prestige. But his 
greatest weakness was indecision of will, which marred the 
prospects of reform and hastened the Revolution. Louis XVI 
made a good beginning by selecting able ministers, but he failed 
to give them that strong and consistent support without which 
they could not carry out any programme of reforms. Besides, 
being weak in mind he allowed himself to be dominated by his 
wife, Marie Antoinette, who interfered in the affairs of State 
much in the same way and with the same results as Madame 
de Pompadour or Madame du Barri in the reign of Louis XV. 

1 Bonnechos c—History of Franee, p. 470. 

3 Ibid, p. 471. 

* Martin— Hisioire de France, Vol. XVI, p. 310. 






IMF FRENCH jfN INDIA 


On his accession Louis XVI chose as his guide old Maure* 
pas, who in the preceding reign had been a victim to the hatred 
of Madame de Pompadour. Maurepas was noi a great man, 
but he had the sagacity to choose able ministers, like Turgot 
for Finance, Vergennes for Foreign Affairs, Malesherbes for the 
King’s Household and Saint-Germain for War. Vergennes, who 
retained charge of Foreign Affairs till his death in 1787, was an 
astute diplomat and knew well how to further the real interests 
ol France, without attempting the impracticable. His policy 
was in fact a continuation of that of Choiseul, to avenge the 
defeat at the hands of England and to recover the prestige 
which France had lost during the Seven Years' War. Like 
Choiseul, lie sought to weaken the Austrian connection and 
to strength* n the Spanish alliance. The revolt of the American 
colonists against the mother country gave Vergennes the oppor¬ 
tunity for a return match *idi England. His diplomatic 
ability is proved by the fact that during this war he carefully 
avoided all Continental entanglements, which had crippled 
French eflorts in the colonial struggle with England during 
the Seven Years’ War. He also succeeded in securing a com¬ 
plete diplomatic isolation of England in Europe. Although in 
the end France did not gain much material advantage from 
the American War, the foreign policy of Vergennes undoubtedly 
restored the reputation of French arms and the prestige of 
France in European diplomacy. 

Vergennes was ably seconded by the Minister of War, Saint- 
Gerniain and later Marquis de Sigur, and by the Minister of 
Marine and Colonies, de Sartine and later Castries. Naval 
construction, which had proceeded rapidly under Choiseul, was 
resumed on the eve of the Yrnerican War. and by 1780 the 
number of ships of the line had increased to 79. After the 
death of Vergennes, much of the result of his diplomacy, 
particularly French influence in Holland, was lost by the 
timidity and incompetence of his successor, Montmorin. France 
again sank into a position of little importance in European 
politics, as after the fall of Choiseul. 