

Thus when the English forces first came within sight of 
Pondicherry and encamped on the heights of P6nmbe (Red Hill) 
on the 8th August, the French had put themselves under a 
sufficient cover against any surprise attack and had increased 
their garrison to 988 Europeans and 1.153 sepoys, including 




1 P. A. ms. 307. 


minis**. 



PONDICHERRY 




i. 1 They al.so took care to lay in stocks of provisions 
as much as they could from the neighbouring areas, taking 
advantage of the month’s time that they got before the appear¬ 
ance of the English forces before Pondicherry, which cut off all 
further supplies. When the English began their attack, the 
French had sufficient troops, provisions, munitions and money 
to hold on for a lew months, till at least ihe expected reinforce¬ 


ments from the Isle of France arrived. 

Bellecombe was rather fortunate in that just at this moment 
of crisis for Pondicherry there was a small french naval squadron 
in Indian waters under the command of I :onjoly, recently 
arrived from the Isle of France. To the King’s ships under the 
command of Tronjoly Bellecombe added a few private vessels, 
which he acquired and armed for naval action. 1 hus the 
French had a respectable looking squadron, superior in fact to 
*he English naval forces in Indian waters at the time, both in 
men and in guns. The French squadron consisted of the 
Brillant (64), the Pourvoyeuse (40), the Sartine (24), the 
Lauriston (24) and the lirisson (26); while the English squadron 
under Sir Edward Vernon consisted of the RipOn (60), the 
Coventry (28), the Cormorant (14), the Seahorse (24) and the 
Valentine (24), the last two being Company’s vessels armed for 
war. For the French, therefore, the military prospect at the 
beginning of August was not altogether discouraging. I hey 
had the means to defend themselves on land, and on the sea 
they had even a slight superiority over the English. 

Everything, however, depended on the continued presence 
of their naval squadron in Indian waters. If the french could 
inflict a defeat, on the English at sea, it would not only ensure 
the safety of Pondicherry, but would even enable them to take 


1 European troops: 


Regiment of Pondicherry 

... 671 

Artillery 

... 163 

Dragons 

... 17 

Upper bourgeoisie 

... 5 6 

Lower bourgeoisie 

• 55 

Sailors and gunners 

26 


988 


Indian troops: 

Sepoys of the garrison 

... 428 

Sepoys from Karikal 

... 109 

New recruits 

... 236 

Sepoys of the Palli caste 

... 249 

Topasses (Infantry) 

66 

Negroes and Topas3es 

(artillery) 

... 65 

1.153 


(Labernadie —Le Vieux Pondichdry , p. 353.) 




misrfi). 



The offensive and attack some English possessions on the coast. 
Even if the English squadron could not be defeated, the mere 
presence of the French ships before Pondicherry would prevent 
the English from pressing their attack by land. The roads 
were difficult, anti the only way of transporting provisions and 
munitions for a close and prolonged investment of Pondicherry 
was by sea, and that route would he closed to the English as 
long as Tronjoly remained before Pondicherry, The key to the 
defence of Pondicherry, therefore, was the presence of Tronjoly's 
ships. The French could at least hold on till the arrival of 
reinforcements from the Isle of France. To strengthen the 
navy Bellecombe gave large quantities of munitions and 800 
men from the garrison to Tronjoly. Fhe latter was asked to 
attack the English fleet a out ranee and under no circumstances 
to copy the example of cFAch£, whose sudden departure from 
the coast had left Lally without any naval support and con¬ 
tributed to the defeat of the French in the previous war. 