


chapter, iv 


OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS ( 1765 - 1778 ) 
Chandernagore 
I. Condition in i~ 6 y. 

The settlement at Chandernagore was founded by Bourreau- 
Deslandes in 1690.' But it was not till ihc Governorship of 
Dupleix (1731-1741) that the place assumed any importance. It 
was Dupleix who enlarged and embellished the town and made 
it a great commercial centre. Chandernagore was captured by 
the English on the 84th March 1757 and was restored to the 

French on the 85th June 1765- Law dc Lauriston wcn * !° 
Bengal in person to take ovet the principal settlement and its 
subordinate factories, which had been under English occupation 
for eight years. During this interval the position of Chander¬ 
nagore had altered greatly. In the first place, the English had 
gained complete mastery over the province, reducing the French 
settlement to a mere commercial establishment with no political 
importance whatsoever; and even then its trading operations 
lav at the mercy of the English. In the second place, the lace 
of the town had changed. The old Fort d'Orleans had been 
destroyed, most of the large buildings were in rums, the streets 
were deserted, the population had dwindled from 60,000 in 
1757 to 24,000 in 1765 s , trade and commerce had disappeared 
and the citizens had sunk into sloth and lethargy. Visiting 
the place in 1774, Comte de Modave wrote in his Voyage du 
Bengale d Dilhi: “This town, formerly so flourishing, presents 
to the eye nothing but sad pictures of heaps of ruins and deserted 
s’reels, without buildings and without inhabitants. A sad and 
profound silence attests its present misery as much as it recalls 

' About the origin of Chandernagore, see S. P. Sen’s article Jarmans 
and Pnrawanas for the establishment of the French in Bengal (Indian 
Historical Records Commission Proceedings, 1946). 

2 Martineau —Etnt Politique de I’Inde en 7777 par Law de Lauriston, 

p. 29. 


miSTfty 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

memory of its eclipsed splendour. In these ruins the French 
are. what they are everywhere ordinarily, proud of their past 
opulence and consoling themselves in their present misery by 
the hope of a happier future, and on such a slender foundation 
suffering cheerfully their present troubles in the ever-flattering 
hope of sharing, before long, the immense wealth of their rivals 

.The settlement of Chandemagore is at present nothing 

hut a shadow of what it was twenty-five years ago. The stipula¬ 
tions of our last treaty with England do not leave any reasonable 
hope of seeing the situation change". 1 

By the terms of the Treaty of Paris, 1763, the French had 
regained their old trading rights and privileges in Bengal granted 
to them by the Parawanas of the local rulers. T he trade of 




Bengal was the most important branch of the commercial opera¬ 
tions of the French Company. The principal articles of trade 
were silk, cotton goods of many varieties, opium and saltpetre. 
As Law wrote in his me moire of 1767, 2 “Everybody knows that 
Bengal is the principal place for the commerce of the Company; 
it is even the only place which can procure sufficient profit to 
cover our expenses in India. This commerce should go up to 
lour ship-loads, each worth a million and a half livres at least. 
If the Company is ever obliged to give up Bengal, it must of 
necessity result in giving up everything, except perhaps its 
commerce in China”. But in spite of the trading rights of the 
French, recognised by the treaty of 1763. the English tried to 
use their political power to gain a monopoly of Bengal’s com 
mcrce and to oust other European competitors from the field; 
and from 1765 to 1778, when Chandemagore again fell into 
the hands of the English, the French made continuous protests 
without avail against the violation of their trading rights and 
privileges. As Law wrote in his memoire quoted above, "From 
the manner in which things are developing, it is much to be 
feared that it (the extinction of French trade in Bengal) will 
come very so n as a result of the conduct of the English. To 
that are directly leading their continuous vexations to our 
manufactures, the excessive demands of merchandise made by 