


1 I^abeinadie— L* FiVux Pvndichtry, p. 347. 


MINfSr/jy 



PONDICHKRRY 

Appointment of Bellecombe as Governor, i/ 77 - 



In January 1777 Law was succeeded by Bellecombe as 
Governor of Pondicherry. The new appointment coincided 
with a fresh vigour in French colonial policy. Throughout the 
period of Law's administration at Pondicherry the policy of the 
French Government was one of total indifference to the future 
of the Indian possessions. All the diplomatic mimoires of 
Law for the building up of an anti-English coalition of the 
Indian Powers were quietly shelved in Paris, and his repeated 
demands for men and money for the defence of Pondicherry 
and the other settlements were equally ignored. The French 
Government had fallen into a kind of stupor in the closing 
vears of the reign of Louis XV. from which it began to recover 
slowly only after the accession of Louis XVI. I he improvement 
became specially noticeable after de Sartim assumed charge of 
the Ministry of Marine and Colonies in 177(1. While on the on< 
hand measures were taken to improve the state of the navy, 
an essential pre-requisite for any colonial effort, on (he other 
the diplomatic mimoirts submitted to the Minister came to 
receive more and more attention, and for the first time the 
authorities evinced an earnestness to restore French influence 
in India. The War of American Independence came as a lucky 
opportunity for France to reopen the conflict with the English, 
without which nothing could be done to improve the French 
position in India. 

But the French Government did not move last enough to 
keep pace with the rapid drift of circumstances in Europe. L 
took such a long time in going through, slowly and cautiously, 
all the diplomatic and military projects submitted by officials, 
that when hostilities actually broke out in Europe in 177*. it 
had not yet come to any decision regarding the diplomatic and 
military actions to be taken in India. Not only had it not 
taken any step to establish a ring of alliances in India; what 
was still more unfortunate, it had even neglected to take the 
necessary precautions to meet a sudden ayack on the Indian 
possessions by improving their defences. 

The arrival of Bellecombe with two men -of-war and 



miSTQy 



W 



5 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


assurances of a vigorous action on the part of France raised 
high hopes in all the French settlements in India, but, as It 
actually turned out, when hostilities started all on a sudden in 
August 1778, the French were not even prepared to defend 
their own possessions. For this debacle no blame attaches to 
Bcllecombe, who did all that he could to urge upon the Govern 
merit in Paris the necessity of sending immediate reinforcements 
of men, money and materials to put the French possessions in 
India in a proper state of defence, and the need of taking active 
steps for the formation of alliances with important country 
Powers, like Haidar Ali and ihe Marathas. Anybody who takes 
the trouble of going through the mimoircs of Bellecombe will 
appreciate his political judgment and foresight and his earnest 
efforts to improve the French position in India. Although 
he. did not have any previous knowledge of the Indian political 
situation, he took little time to learn all the intricacies of the 
problem from his predecessor in office, Law dc Lauriston, whose 
presence at Pondicherry, even after laying down the reins of 
office, was of inestimable value to his successor. He purposely 
went, to Mah6 to meet Haidar Ali personally in order to smooth 
over the recent difficulties created by the imprudent actions of 
Duprat and Repcntigny and to establish cordial relations with 
him, preliminary to ;he conclusion of a solid political and 
military alliance. It was entirely due to the slowness of the 
Government in Paris to adopt a definite policy with respect to 
India and its failure to take prompt steps to improve the 
defences of the Indian possessions that when war broke out 
again rather suddenly in 1778, the French in India were l iken 
completely by surprise. No Indian Power moved to their 
assistance, and all their settlements fell into the hands of the 
English without any resistance, except Pondicherry which stood 
a siege for 77 days, 