Royal ArrSt of January 13, 177b declared a general anme*t> 
for all these deserters and efforts were made to give it due 
publicity in different parts of India. 2 But this declaration of 
amnesty produced little effect, and as the mr moires of Law 
testify, few of the Frenchmen in the service of the Indian 
Princes cared to avail themselves of this opportunity to rejoin 
the service of their nation. The thing was that in spite of tfj£ 
patriotic sentiments of many of them they did not like to give 
up their positions in the service of the Indian Princes* where 
they were perfectly happy, earning more money and enjoying 
more authority than what they could have expected in the 
French army at Pondicherry. 


IV. System of Civil Administration. 


In the administrative organisation a sharp dividing line 
was marked by the suppression of the Company and the estab¬ 
lishment of Royal Administration in 1770. Both before and aftei 
this date the system was defective and gave rise to numerous 
practical difficulties in the conduct of governmental affairs. 
The defects of the system of administration under the Company 
were brought out most clearly by Law in his rntmoire of 1767, 
The administration of all the French possessions in India was 
vested in a Conscil Superieur having its permanent seat at 


* P.A. ms. a 17. 

* Ibid, ms. *15. 

* Ibid, ms. 1G0. 



misr/fy 





rondichcrry since 1701. Prior to bat date the Cornett Supcrtcur 
had been established at Surat It was both an administrative 
as well as a judicial body. At the head of the Council was the 
Governor, appointed by the King, although responsible to the 
Company for the conduct of affairs in India. The number of 
members of the Council was not fixed. Like the Governor, all 
the members were appointed by the King. They did not all 
reside at Pondicherry but were posted in the different settle 
menu. At Chandernagore there were several such members and 
they had the exclusive right to form the local Council, headed 
by the Commandant. At other places, like Mah<^, Karikal. 
Yanam etc., only the Chief of the settlement was a member of 
the Comeil Suptrieur, the other members of the local Council 
being ordinary employees of the Company. All official com¬ 
munications from Paris were first received at Pondicherry and 
then forwarded to the settlements directly dependent on Pondi 
cherry, and these in turn sent them on to subordinate factories, 
where they existed, as in Bengal. 

The Governor was not endowed with am author its to 
override the Council. When Law came out to India in 1765. 
he came in the additional capacity of a Royal Commissar for 
taking possession o! the French settlements in India from the 
hands of the English, and so far as that special mission was 
concerned the instructions of the King gave him absolute author¬ 
ity. But later in his ordinary capacity of Governor and Presi 
dent of the Conseil Supdrieur he was hound by the decision 
of a majority of the Council and was not permitted to do any¬ 
thing on his own authority. This restriction was often vexa¬ 
tious. specially in dealing with the country Powers. Law sent 
repeated representations against it and wanted overriding 
authority with respect to certain matters. Another inconveni 
ence against which Law complained was dual responsibility,—to 
the Minister arid to the authorities of the Company. The 
Governor "must undoubtedly be in correspondence with rhe 
Minister and as a consequence in the case of receiving orders 
(from him) of which the Company may well have no knowledge 
at all and which may even be opposed to their intention, it 
is easy to see the embarrassment which results for him. This 
embarrassment does not arise from any uncertainty as to which 
to obey, the order of the Minister or that of the Company, but 