



PONDICHERRY 


1§L 


even that period of resistance was limited by them depleted 
stocks of munitions and provisions. Capsulation was only a 
question of time, unless Pondicherry could hold on till he 
setting i.i of the rainy season in October when the besieging 
forces would be compelled to withdraw. But, as it actual > 
turned out. eVten the weather was unfavourable to the I-rench. 
and the rains started much later than the usual time. 

Yet, in spite of the bleak prospect, the small french gamso . 
at Pondicherry put up a surprisingly stubborn resistance, " m 1 
won the unstinted admiration of the Png in , 

liero of the skirmishes outside the fortifications was Mac ec, 
was given a Captain’s commission by Bellecombe and p act 
charge of the small group of cavalry. Within the town bo 
Bellecombe and his predecessor in office. Law de Laurist 
showed great courage and untiring energy, mspuing the 
garrison to hold on at all costs and organising defence at evetv 
vulnerable point. In the course of his constant visits to the 
fortifications Bellecombe even received a bullet wound fro 
which, however, he quickly recovered. But by the middle of 
October munitions had run short, only three barrels of powdei 
remained, and further resistance was impossible. Bellecombe 
bitterlv regretted having given large quantities of munitions to 
Tronioly which a. this critical moment would have enabled the 
garrison to hold on for some time more. But men. regret could 
not change the military situation. The artillery had been for 
the most part silenced, several of the bastions were it, rums, 
the ramparts crumbling and the garrison completely worn down 


bv 77 days of continuous action 


:7 days or commw™ 

On the itth October Bellecombe resigned himself to the 

. _ r . - ^rvoicrin nr rfsl ihe 


inevitable and called a council of war, consisting of the 


Tntendant and senior civil and military officer,. The decision 
was unanimous, to stop further resistance and to capitu.ate on 
terms honourable to the nation. 1 he next a ^' 11 

and 17th October, were taken up by negotiations. On t c \ t 
ihe capitulation was signed. The terms were the most honour 
able that any garrison under similar circumstances could extort 
from the besiegers > The victors expressed their appreciation 


' P. A. ms. 309 (terms o£ capitulation). A plan of Pondicherry in 
1778 and an account of the siege will be found in Vibart s History of the 
Madras Engineers, pp. 130-155. 


rtiNisr^ 



of the c ourageous defence of Pondicherry in the following terms: 

I he brave defence made by Major General Bellecombe and 
his garrison deserves, with reason, all the marks of honour. 

I hat is why it is permitted to the garrison to march out through 
die Vilnoor gate with the honours of war; arriving on the glacis 
the men will pm down arms in bundles at ihe command of their 
own officers, and will also leave there the drums, cannons and 
mortars It is permitted to all officers in general to keep their 
arms, and on the special demand of General Bellecombe the 
Regiment of Pondicherry will keep its colours”. By the terms 
of capitulation all the French officers and men with their families 
and belongings were to be sent to the Isle of France. The 
I.nglish promised to take care of the wounded left behind and 
to preserve the right of private Frenchmen to live in the town 
and carry on trade and commerce. It is to be noted that the 
engagements were scrupulously observed by the English. On 
the afternoon of the i8th the Vilnoor gate was thrown open, 
the French garrison marched out and 6000 English troops 
entered and occupied the town. The English were so much 
surprised at the small number of the garrison, only 49^ 
European troops, that they suspected large numbers to be in 
hiding in private houses, and their suspicion was not dispelled 
<tll they had carried out extensive searches all over the town 
for die next few days. 