


WNlSTffy 



PONDICHERRY 


v%Jpp some means to defend himself before the Syndics and the 
Directors, to whom fie is responsible for his conduct, If the 
Minister happens to change he is left, without any support. 
1 his difficulty..... is not one of the least that M. Duplcix 
had to encounter/’ 


The Company was suppressed in 1770 and all its posses¬ 
sions in India were taken over by the King. For nearly three 
years the administrative system remained as before with only a 
few changes necessitated by the transfer of authority. But with 
the appointment of Foucault as Intendant and Commissaire- 
Ordonnateur and his arrival at Pondicherry in October 1773 
the administrative system underwent a complete change. The 
possessions in India were brought under the same form of 
government as existed in the other colonies of France. The 
executive power was divided into two hands, the Governor and 
the Intendant, each supreme in his own sphere and not depen 
dent on the other. The former was entrusted with political 
and military affairs. Relieved of administrative duties, his ^ol< 
concern was to deal with the country Powers The Intendant 
was entrusted with the whole civil administration, including 
finance, police, justice, shipping and commerce. Neither the 
Governor nor the Intendant was fettered in his sphere of action 
bv the majority opinion of the Comeil SupMeur, since that 
body wms deprived of all administrative power and converted 
into a purely judicial tribunal with the Intendant as the Presi¬ 
dent. The defects of this system of government and the com 
plications it gave rise to were stated in detail by Law in a 
lengthy mimoire dated January ai, 177b. 1 Law disclosed that 
soon after the transfer of authority in 1770 he had sent a proposal 
to France for the establishment of a small consultative committee 
in place of the old Comeil Superieur , with power to the 
Governor to override the decision of the majority if he thought 
it necessary. In 1773 he objected to the introduction of a 
colonial form of government in India, but his warning about 
the possible difficulties that might arise were not heeded in 
France and the change was effected in October of the same 
sear with the arrival of the first Intendant and Ordonnateur, 
Foucault. 


P.A. rm. ti$- 



In his mJmoire of 1776 Law criticised the new administrative 
system on several grounds. In the first place, the colonial form 
of government was wholly unsuitable to Indian possessions, 
since the circumstances in India were entirely different and it 
vas necessary for the government to deal with a large alien 
population and maintain political relations with the country 
Powers Secondly, the division of authority between the 
Governor and the Intendant . with little interconnection between 
them, was bound to lead to confusion, since many of the func¬ 
tions given to both were allied and could not be performed in 
isolation In case of a difference of opinion between the 
Governor and the Intendant there would be a complete dead¬ 
lock, which could be resolved only by a positive order from 
Paris, but that would take time and much harm might be 
caused during the interval. The danger would be specially great 
in a time of war, and military operations would be paralysed 
if the Governor had constantly to dispute with the Ordonnatnn 
for money and supplies. Thirdly, in the division of authority 
the Governor had been relegated for all practical purposes to a 
position of secondary importance. He was not given any share 
in the c ivil administration and had thus no control over the 
administrative personnel. AH branches of civil government, 
like justice, police, finance, shipping and commerce, were 
exclusively under the control of the Intendant. Even in the 
sphere of jurisdiction of the Governor the Intendant had 
effective power of control since finance was in his hands, and by 
simply refusing to supply money he could prevent the Governor 
from pursuing a policy in political and military affairs not liked 
by him. Lastly, the possible intention for the introduction of 
the administrative change was to increase the importance of 
the Governor in the eyes of the country Powers by giving him 
full authority in political and military affairs unfettered by any 
committee arid relieving him of the cares of ordinary 
administrative duties. But in reality the effect was just the 
opposite, as the country Powers were shrewd enough to detect 
the powerlessness of the Governor and the real importance of 
the Intendant, thus giving them full opportunity to exploit the 
division of authority to their own advantage. Law concluded 
his mtmoirc by stating, “the manner in which the machine is 
set up today does not make it possible in a country like this for 