


VIII. Siege of Pondicherry and Capitulation. 

The English forces under the command of Sir Hector 
Munro, encamped on the heights of P£rirnb£ (Red Hill), to the 
** Pondicherry, on the 8th August. They consisted of 
2100 Europeans, including artillery, no field-pieces, 10 battalions 
of sepoys, and 2 regiments of cavalry. The English General 
seil( a summons to Pondicherry to surrender, to which Belle- 
combe gave a spirited reply that he took the summons to be 

1 V N. Mininere ties Colonies: Cx— 15a, p. 293. 

2 \. \. -Ministtere lie | a Marine: ft-4, CL, p. tfkj. 


MINISr^ 



just u military convention and not indicating any hope in the 
mind of the English General that it would be accepted. It 
caused, in fact, not a little surprise to Munro, as he knew the 
weak state of Pondicherry’s defences and did not expect much 
resistance from the French In spite however of their over¬ 
whelming superiority in number, the English forces kept them 
selves at a respectful distance from the limits of Pondicherry 
as long as I ronjoly with his squadron remained before that 
place. I heir principal difficulty was that they could not bring 
up their supplies of provisions and munitions quickly on 
account of the bad condition of the roads. The quickest and 
the easiest route of transport was the sea, which was closed to 
them by the presence of Tronjoly’s squadron. 

The departure of Tronjoly from the coast gave the English 
their opportunity to bring up supplies by sea and to form a 
closer ring round Pondicherry. Their forces on the heights 
of leiimbtf immediately advanced and encamped near the limits 
of the town. The English squadron also, freed from all danger 
landed troops and supplies at Sadras and Cuddalore, to the 
north and south of Pondicherry. For want of a fleet the French 
remained only helpless spectators and could do nothing even to 
prevent the concentration of enemy troops on the banks of the 
Ariancoupom. In the north the English set up four batteries 
dose to the town to bombard the Bastion nord-ouest and the 
Bastion de Madras. In the first week of September the ring 
closed in upon Pondicherry. 1 he English set up batteries in 
the south and west as well, and their squadron threatened the 
sea-front protected by feeble and improvised works. On the 
8 th September began a vigorous cannonade on the town from 
thtce sides. Some of the bastions were badly shaken, particu¬ 
larly the Bastion de I'Hopital in the south-east, and several 
breaches were made in the walls. 

The position of the besieged was daily growing more pre¬ 
carious. They had not the means to prevent the landing of 
fresh troops and supplies close to the towm, and their garrison 
was much too inferior in number to make a determined sortie 
and drive out the enemy fort es from their positions. The only 
thing that they could do was to engage the besieging forces in 
surprise raids and skirmishes, and to resist the besiegers as 
long as possible from within their line of fortifications; but 