

Fronjolv encountered the English squadron not far from 
Pondicherry on the 10th August. The action was lively and 
lasted for two hours, but the result was indecisive. One of 
the French ships, the Sartine , was captured by the enemy, but 
on the whole the English suffered more damage to their ships 
and more casualties among their men than the French; and 
if the French squadron had been led by a more daring com¬ 
mander like de Suffren, he would have pursued the English and 
turned the indecisive action into a victory. But Tronjoly was 
too old and timid, and thought it prudent to retire to Pondi¬ 
cherry. There he landed the killed and the wounded, number¬ 
ing 88, and then fearing further encounters with the English 
fleet he decided to leave the coast and return to the Isle of 
France. Bellecombe assured him that he would not ask him 
for further action against the English fleet and implored him 
just to remain before Pondicherry under the protection of the 
coast batteries. But nothing could persuade Tronjoly to change 
his mind, and on the morning of the 21st he suddenly left 
Pondicherry with his ships without even the courtesy of leave- 
taking. 1 The people of Pondicherry could not believe at first 

1 For a different version of the naval action and an explanation of 
fhe conduct of Tronjoly see Admiral Sir Herbert Richmond —'The Navy 
m tndia, 1763-1783. pp. 82 84. 


PONDICHERRY 



<SL 


I ronjoly hail finally left the coast, and ir Was not till a 
lew days later that they realised that Tronjoly had copied the 
example of d'Ache in 1759. 

J he action of Tronjoly was. in fact, still more criminal 
than that of d’Acht 4 , since he even took away with him the 
huge quantities of munitions and the 800 men given to him by 
Bellecombe. If he had returned the munitions and the men. 
it would have considerably strengthened the defence of Pondi* 
cherry In his official report to the Minister about the incident 
Bellecombe vehemently complained against the conduct of 
1 ronjoly and bitterly regretted having given him, in full faith, 
munitions and men winch weakened the defence of the town. 1 2 
In another letter to the Minister, dated and January 1779". 
Bellecombe reported the arrival on the 16th November (1778) 
>f a frigate, the Subtile, sent by the Governor of the Isle of 
France with reinforcements for Pondicherry. But it was then 
too late, as Pondicherry had capitulated a month earlier. 
Bellecombe attributed the fall of Pondicherry entirely to the 
conduct of Tronjoly* If the latter had just remained on the 
coast without even fighting against the English fleet, it would 
have enabled Bellecombe to hold on till the arrival of reinforce¬ 
ments from the Jsle of France. Pondicherry could have been 
saved if the French ships had just remained on the coast till 
October, when the expected monsoon would have compelled 
the English to withdraw their forces. In fact, therefore, it was 
the sudden departure of Tronjoly which sealed the fate of 
Pondicherry. 