


miST/fy,^ 



two brothers, even twins, to work in concert, unless one of 
them is determined to pass over blindly whatever the other 
wishes.*' 


V. Economic Condi non. 

Let us turn next to the economic situation in the settlement. 
Pondicherry had one great advantage for trade and commerce, 
namely the roadstead, which was one of the best on the eastern 
coast, fhe principal articles of merchandise in this region for 
European trade weie cotton goods of various kinds. As Law 
stated in his mdnunre of 1767* in Normal times when there was 
no political disturbance in the surrounding area, and provided 
the English did not put any undue restrictions on French trade 
through the Nawab of the Carnatic, the French could procure 
goods for export worth two million livres from the neighbour- 
homi of Pondicherry, and if their other two settlements were 
included, namely Yanam and Masulipatam, the total export 
trade of the eastern coast could be valued at four million 
livres 1 . That was the maximum that the French export trade 
could amount to, but to reach it two essential conditions were 
required besides absence of political disturbances and freedom 
from interference by the English. 1 he first was that the French 
must he in a position to advance sufficient money to the weavers 
at least eight months earlier; and the second was that they 
must bring a large quantity of money from Europe, since the 
total value of the sale of their European goods on the eastern 
coast did not exceed one million livres just only a quarter of 
the value of their probable export trade. But because of the 
financial distress of the French Company after 1765 these two 
conditions were lacking and, as Law stated, for the remaining 
period of the Company's life the export trade was consequently 
limited to two million livres per year, and that also with the 
greatest difficulty. In France there vvas an impression that if 
the Company's commercial monopoly was abolished and the 
trade of India thrown open to private merchants, more capital 
would be attracted and there would be a great improvement 
in the trade between France and India. Accordingly the mono* 

i Roughly one rupee was equivalent to livres at the time 
F 


miSTffy 



territories passed into the hands of the Kin# and the trade of 
India was thrown open. 

But this measure far from improving the situation made 
u even worse. In the first year of the suppression of the Com¬ 
pany the value of the French trade at Pondicherry fell to half 
tue previous amount, although in the succeeding years it 
recovered to some extent. In fact, after 1770 followed a period 
of acute financial distress at Pondicherry, with no money even 
to pay the civil and military employees and to purchase provi 
sions for the inhabitants. One important reason was the 
defective system of collecting revenues. Under the Company’s 
administration all the sources of revenue like land, betel. 


tobacco, alcohol, customs both by land and <*ea etc. were farmed 
out to private persons, mostly Indians, and in some cases con¬ 
nected with the administrative officials including the Governor. 
Law stated in his mimoire of 1767 that the total revenue from 
ail sources amounted to 80.000 rupees or 200,000 litres just 
one fifth of the amount required to meet the current expendi¬ 
ture. After 1770 there was an increase in the yield of revenue, 
but the increase in expenditure was even greater. The pa\ 
inent of salaries was often in arrears, and even the construction 
of fortifications was held up for lack of funds. One important 
result of the financial distress at Pondicherry and of the decline 
in trade and commerce was the rapid exodus of the Indian 
population from the town. As we have seen, soon after the 
re-establish men t of the French at Pondicherry, the Indian 
population there rose to 60.000. According to Bourcet, the 
engineer, who took a careful statistics of population, cattle 
etc., towards the end of Law’s administration the number of 
Indian inhabitants declined to.27.000. As Mme l^bernadie has 
expressed: “Like rats leaving a sinking vessel the natives began 
to withdraw from a town which disappointed their hopes and 
which did not assure them either work or security." 1 