

A ll. Outbreak of mar and preparations for defence. 

It has been noticed already that there was a fresh vigour 
in French foreign policy with the accession of Louis XVI in 
contrast to the later years of the reign of Louis XV. The 



imSTffy 




American Independence was 
upon by France as a lucky opportunity to take revenge on her 
traditional colonial rival. She began to give secret help to the 
colonists from the beginning of their revolt against the mother 
country, and early in 1778 she formally recognised the inde¬ 
pendence of the Colonies and openly joined the war against 
England. 

The first rumours of the outbreak of war between England 
and France reached Pondicherry about the end of June 1778 
through letters arriving by way of Suez. Early in July Belle- 
combe, taken by surprise by these rumours, wrote to the Madras 
Government to ascertain the real position. The English reply 
was couched in vague terms, but Bellecornbe understood and 
at once started making hasty preparations to put the town in a 
proper state of defence. The task was difficult indeed, consider¬ 
ing the incomplete state of the fortifications and the inadequacy 
of troops and arms. Thanks to the constant change of plans 
and the negligence of the French Government to send money, 
in July 1778 Pondicherry was in a fully exposed condition. 
There were large gaps in the line of fortifications; the ditch 
intended to surround the town on the north and west had been 
dug in a haphazard manner with unequal depths, which at 
places did not go beyond just one foot; of the thirteen bastions 
planned to guard the three sides of the town, north, west and 
south, only five were in a tolerable state; and none of the four 
batteries to defend the eastern side was ready for action. The 
garrison consisted of 5G8 men of the Regiment of Pondicherry, 
153 men of the artillery, and 428 sepoys, with 141 pieces of 
cannon of all calibres. 1 They were wholly inadequate to defend 
the long line of fortifications extending to nearly five miles in 
circumference. Moreover, there were not even adequate stocks 
of provisions in the town to last a prolonged siege, although 
repeated warnings had been given earlier in numerous mtmoires 
to the French, Government to lay in stocks for one full year, 
since in case of a war with the English the whole of the Carnatic 
would become enemy territory and the food supplies to Pondi¬ 
cherry would at once be cut off. 

It was in this perilous condition that Bellecornbe received 

1 Labernadie —*JLe Vieux Pondichdry, p. 352. 



<§L 

looked 



imSTffy 


nil-: FRENCH IN INDl/v 

the reply of the Madras Government on the 13th July 1778, 
which, though vague, confirmed his suspicion about the state 
of war between the two nations, and he immediately set about 
making preparations for defence as best as he could. He called 
upon Olilac, me chief engineer to complete the fortification, 
interrupted after the death of Bourcet. Nearly 5,000 men were 
hastily collected and put on the work, and in the course of the 
month, by strenuous efforts, Dulac succeeded in filling up the 
gaps in the line, improving the bastions, digging the ditch in 
a regular way, and clearing the land outside the line of fortifica¬ 
tions up to a considerable distance. At the same time Belle* 
combe took prompt measures to increase the number of troops, 
both Eutopean and Indian. All the European citizens were armed 
and two new corps were raised, one of the higher bourgeoisie, 
of 56 men, and another of the lower bourgeoisie, of 55 men. 
Horses were purchased from private persons and a small corps 
of Dragons, numbering only 17* Wils organised and placed 
under the command of Madcc, who had left north India in 
disappointment and had been living at Pondicherry, waiting to 
return to France. There were also raised a corps of Topasses 
(of mixed Portuguese-Indian origin) for the artillery and 
another for the infantry. A sepoy force of 249 men was raised 
from the Palli caste and placed under the command of du Saus- 
soir. Sepoy troops were also recruited from other ranks, and 
we know from a record in the Pondicherry Archives that one 
Nalletambyrao presented himself with 150 men and was at 
once appointed by Bellecombe as captain of that company. 5 
Further, on the news of the danger to Pondicherry, de Boistel, 
the Chief at Karikal, evacuated that place and arrived with his 
small contingent of 1 2 European troops, 109 sepoys, 16 Topasses 
and a few pieces of cannon. 