

In the midst of these political turmoils the french settle¬ 
ment lay in a poorly defended state. It was bordered on the 
south and east by a chain of hills, where the French had built 
three small forts, demolished by the English in Vj6i. lo the 
north of Mahe, on the other side of the river, the French had 
built another fort on a hill overlooking the settlement. The 
territory belonged to the Nayar ruler of Kurangod. But this 
fori had also been equally destroyed, and in 1765 settle¬ 
ment stood completely exposed on three sides. Law wVote in 
1767, “We are not thinking at all of reconstructing these works 
on account of expense. It will soon be necessary, however, to 
decide either to quit Mah6 or to make this expense . The 
principal part of the settlement was limited to a small area a 
the month of the river, surrounded by a wall with a few 
batteries for defence. The garrison consisted of 120 french 
soldiers and about 150 sepoys and fopasses. There were 30 
pieces of cannon. About the defensive strength ol Mahe Law 
remarked, ‘T even believe that in a general way they (the 
citizens of Mah6) are better provided than we here (at Bondi 
cherry) in arms and munitions of all kinds; but that is not 
saying much, it does not prevent their feeling greatly troubled 
if a serious attack is made”. 2 

1 For a more detailed account of conditions in Malabar at this time 
see Madras District Gazetteers : Malabar and Anjetigo Districts, Vol. I, 
PP- 57 75 * also N. K. Sinha Haidar Ali , pp. 144*16$. 

2 P. A. ms. hm>. 



Law considered that neither for trade nor for defence was 
Mahe worth retaining, and in his me moire of 1767 he suggested 
two alternative places for transferring the settlement. One 
was Colachel in the kingdom of Travancore, close to Gape 
( omoritt, and the other was Karwar, a little to the south of 
Goa, original 11 y belonging to one of the petty Princes on the 
coast and annexed b> Haidar Ali to his own dominions. About 
the first Law wrote, “GoU&chte, two or three leagues from Cape 
Comorin, in the kingdom of Travancore, mid have been 
more suitable to our Company. It would be possible to have 
a trade there worth three million livres every year in pepper, 
white doth and other articles produced bn the Malabar Coast. 
The king of Travancore had invited us and had even pressed 
us to establish a settlement in his territory from the time ot 
Messieurs Dumas and Dupleix. I do not understand how this 
affair did not materialise. The English and the Dutch have 
established themselves in the kingdom of Travancore and 
theN are doing well there”. 1 About the second place, Karwar, 
Law stated that it offered great commercial as well as military 
advantages. “There is a little bay capable of accommodating 
thirteen or fourteen ships of the line and is equal to a port 
since vessels are in perfect safety there in all seasons Just 
near the month there is a small island which every ship entering 
the bay must pass by. A small fort may be constructed there. 
There is also a fairly large river falling into the bay, in which 
light vessels can enter.” Law did not think it impossible to 
secure the place from Haidar Ali “in spite of his inveterate 
hatred towards all Europeans; but for that it would be neces¬ 
sary to enter into an engagement with him, promising to help 
him on all occasions, and he is such a man that it would not 
be possible to elude the execution of the articles of a treaty 
with him.” It is interesting to notice here that in 1770 Law 
pursued his project further and asked Picot, Governor of MaM, 
to collect secretly all information about Karwar through the 