

1 For the French version of the capture of Chandernagore and flight 
of Chevalier, see the report by Hocquart, commandant of the forces 
at Chandernagore —B. N. F. Fr. (N.A) 9566, pp. 89**300. For the English 
version, see Forrest— Selections from Letters, Despatches etc.. Foreign 
Depart me it. Government of India, III, pp. 639^653; also C.R.O .—French 
in India Series, Vol. IV, Extract of the General Letter from Bengal, 17th 
August 177^ 

- About the arrest of Chevalier, see Elliot's letter to Hastings and 
the Calcutta Council in Bengal Past and Present, Vol. II, Part II, pp. 
4*ar-413; and Vol. IV for exchange of letters between Chevalier and the 
Calcutta Council. Sec also C .R O.— French in India Series, Vol. IV, Parole 
signed in Chevalier, 1st October 1778. 

■' P. \. ms 100 (Law’s mimoire of 1767)* 


miSTffy 



OTHER FRENCH SE'ITH-MEN I S 9 I 

■•Vi -v v ^^i. fl'irf y , 1 

- 

cured from other merchants Law wrote, “ I his method 
appears less costly than manufacturing being done by us. i he 
silk, it is true, is not as nicely wound or as equal, but this 
difference does not compensate for the expenses required by 
the re-establishment of the factory in the same condition in 
which it had been before". 1 According to his estimate in 1767, 
the French could procure from this region raw silk of various 
qualities worth $00,000 livres. 

Patna was an even more important centre of trade. ‘ It is 
from this province (Bihar) that saltpetre, opium and various 
kinds of white and printed cloth are procured. I t om this 
region are also procured borax which conn s from 1 ibet and the 
adjoining areas and even gold, because I remember that the 
Dutch chftfs were very much interested iin this branch of 
commerce ' 2 . The French had no house of their own at Patna, 
They had one rented house just outside the town as residence 
lor the Chief of their factory and another one to serve as ware¬ 
house for the goods coming from Europe, like cloth, lead, 
iron, copper etc. for which there was a good market at Patna, 
as also for the goods purchased in the province. Before the 
last war the French had a busy trade at Patna. Their purchases 
were worth a million livres and their sale of European goods 
amounted to two to three millions. But after 1765 their trade 
was seriously hampered by the English, who made use of their 
political power to establish a commercial monopoly. For the 
purchase of saltpetre the French were entirely dependent on 
the English, and their supplies of opium also were severely 
restricted by the pressure which the English put upon the 
producers. In fact, it was from the Patna factory that the 
largest number of complaints against English tyranny reached 
Chandernagore, and the dispute was intensified^)}’ the personal 
enmity between Carvalho, the Chief of the French factory, and 
Rumbold, his English counterpart. 

At Dacca the French had a large commercial house, which 
had been saved from destruction by the generosity of the agent 
of the English factory there. Dacca was an important centre 
of trade, its speciality being fine cloth, known as muslin, as 
also embroidery. After 1765 the French trade there was valued 