

G 


NIINIS^J, 



1113* I Kl- NCII IN INDIA 


<SL 


The principal subjects of complaint on the French side 
were: ill-treatment of French agents which sometimes went to 
the length of using physical violence; the establishment of an 
English monopoly over the trade in saltpetre, the French being 
made to depend for their supplies on the English; the subjection 
of French shipping to vexatious inspection by the English and 
of French goods in transit from and to the subordinate factories 
to the exactions of internal customs by the Nawab’s officers; 
the difficulties encountered by the French in getting regular sup¬ 
plies of silk a Kasimbazar, of opium in Bihar, and of fine cotton 
goods at Dacca, difficulties which they attributed, not without 
some reason, to the tyrannous control of the English over produ¬ 
cers and manufacturers, compelling them to sell to the English 
Company first and threatening them otherwise with dire con¬ 
sequences. 1 The French made vehement protests against these 
restrictions on their trade and commerce, but their protests 
were of no avail in the face of the determined policy of the 
English to keep the lucrative trade of Bengal a close monopoly 
for their Company and private merchants. It is interesting to 
note from the records of the period that attempts were made 
to secure a close alliance between the French and the Dutch 
t ;> protect their trading rights in Bengal against violation by 
the English, but they ultimately came to nothing. 2 


IV. Administration of Chevalier.: difficulties with the 

English. 


Evidently it required a more energetic and vigorous person 
than a septuagenarian like Renault de Saint-Germain to deal 
with the English, and so in July 1767 he was replaced bv Jean- 
Baptiste Chevalier. Renault de Saint-Germain was allowed to 
retain the honours and prerogatives of his office in recognition 
of his past services. He died at Chandernagore in 1777. Under 

About Anglo-French commercial disputes in Bengal horn 1765 to 1778, 
a large mass of records will be found in C.R.O .—French in India Series. 
Voi. VI, pp. 3-53 (claims of the French and arguments opposing them), 
pp. 133-240 (Proceedings of th< Supreme Government from 1773 to 177* 
concerning, disputes with the French'); Vol. VII- Disputes with the French, 
1773-1776; and Vol. IX, pp. 1-16. 

3 P, A. mss. 2420, 2431. 


MIN/Sr#^ 



O r UK.R FRK.NGH SK'I'Tl -KMKM ir» 


@L 


im-Baptistg Chevalier there was a brief revival of (he 
importance and commercial prosperity of Chandernagore. 
Politically, Chevalier belonged to the school of Law dt* 
Lauriston, but while Law changed his attitude, Chevalier 
believed even after 1765 that it was still possible for France to 
create a sphere of influence in north India by taking advantage 
of the disintegration of the Mughal Empire. The success of 
C hevalier’s administration at Chandernagore, at least in the 
earlier part, was due principally to the close personal relations 
he maintained with Verelst, the Governor, and other members 
of the Calcutta Council. It was because of this factor that 
recriminations about restraints on French trade in Bengal 
ceased for a time, and till the suspension of the privileges of 
the French Company at the end of 1769 Chandernagore became 
again a busy commercial centre.' Three or four ships came to 
Chandernagore annually with goods from Europe and returned 
with the merchandise of Bengal; and from Chandernagore ships 
were also sent to Mocha, the Persian Gulf, Pegu, Siam and 
Indo-China. With the revival of commercial prosperity there 
was a revival of the attractions of social life also at Chander¬ 
nagore. The small house at Gorelty. built by Dupleix as Country 
residence for the Governor/was transformed by Chevalier into 
a great palace, the architectural beauty of which was an object 
of admiration to all and where came every week-end the 
Governor and members of the Calcutta Council to escape from 
the worries of official duties. 