

1 be documents relating to the restitution of Mah6 and the negotia¬ 
tions preceding it are preserved in the Pondicherry Archives, mss. 4444 
44 5 * 


misrfy 



with the places where stood the fortification*, the Fort Make , 
the Fort St . George , the For/ Dauphin, the For/ Condi and the 
Grand Calaye with their dependencies as we possessed them at 
the beginning of the year 1749 - 1 

Mahe, like Karikal on the eastern coast, w r as situated on a 
river sufficiently deep for navigation by medium-sized vessels, 
but the sand-bar at the month rendered entry difficult. The 
principal article of commerce was pepper which grew' in abund¬ 
ance all along the coast. The other important, articles were 
cardamom and sandalwood, but the total value of the French 
trade was quite modest, not exceeding eight to nine hundred 
thousand livres a year in normal and peaceful times. 1 here 
was indeed scope for greater trade but lack of funds constituted 
a serious difficulty. Law in his memoire of i 7^7 considered the 
maintenance of the settlement at Maht£ to be uneconomical, 
since in exchange for the small amount of commerce carried on 
there the French had to incur a heavy expenditure on the 
maintenance of a large garrison, rendered necessary by the 
uncertainties of the political situation in the neighbouring areas 
requiring constant vigil and military preparedness. a In order 
to understand this observation of Law it is necessary to look 
at the political condition of the Malabar Coast at the time. 

About the middle of the i8 tli century the Malabar region 
was par elled out into a number of small principalities ruled 
by Nayars, a class of feudal aristocracy. In the immediate 
neighbourhood of the French settlement was the principality 
of Kadattanad, stretching from the river Mahe in the north to 
the Kotta in the south. To the north of the river Mah£ lay 
the two principalities of Kottayam and Kurangod, and furthe? 
north lay the principality of Kolattanad or Chirakkai, under 
the rule of the Kolattiri family who had originally held sway 
over the entire region. I o the south of Kadattanad were the 
principalities of Calicut and Cochin, equally feeble powers 
and weakened by many vears of internecine strife, which in fact 
had given the European nations, the Portuguese, the Dutch, 
the English and the French their, first foot-hold on the Malabar 
Coast. In the extreme south of the peninsula was the kingdom 
of Travaneore, which was rising in importance and power since 


1 P. A. ms. 1451. 


* Ibid, ms. too. 


MINIS 



the middle of the 18th century. In 1766, taking advantage of 
the enfeebled state of the Malabar principalities, Haidar Ali 
led an invading army and quickly overran the whole country 
from Chirakkal to Calicut. But in spite of his ruthless policy 
Haidar failed to subdue the Nayars completely. Down to 
1792, when the Malabar region passed under English control, 
there were chronic revolts against the rule of the Mysore Nawab, 
followed by brutal suppressions. It was these political turmoils, 
Haidar s invasion, rebellions of the Nayars and their suppres¬ 
sion, as also the internal feuds among the Malabar chiefs 
themselves which Law had in mind in 1767. 1 We shall notice 
later how the French settlement of Mahe was dragged into 
these conflicts by the forward policy of two successive Governors, 
Dupr'at and Repen tigny. 