


1 A. N,—Ministtere des Colonies: C-s, 256. 

2 J\ A. ms. 1 oc\ 



wnist^ 



OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


•<SL 


Company (going up to twenty million livres per year) 
anti the extent of their private trade which goes at least to 
equal that of the Company. These indicate sufficiently that 

their object is to force us to withdraw. To remedy 

his evil it is absolutely necessary for our Ministers to intervene 
in the matter. There must be the most peremptory orders to 
the Directors of the English Company, and given in a manner 
that neither they nor their employees in India could elude their 
execution”. 


The settlement of Chandernagore was small in area. Its 
normal revenue, from all sources, amounted to fifty to sixty 
thousand livres a year. By the treaty of 1763 the French were 
not allowed to maintain any troops or to construct fortifications, 
and the settlement was exposed to attack from any quarter. It 
lay totally defenceless and could be compelled to surrender at 
the first summons. Moreover, the town being situated far 
inland, the inhabitants had no means of escape in the event of 
a sudden war. That was why Law advised the authorities of 
the Company in his noire of 1767 spend as little as pos¬ 
sible on building constructions at Chandernagore, and to pass 
orders for the quick disposal of all articles of export and import 
without keeping them in stock for long. At the time of taking 
possession of the settlement Law tried to make the English 
agree to some relaxation of the treaty provisions with regard 
to troops and fortifications, but all that he could achieve was 
the consent of the English to the keeping of 25 French soldiers 
and 300 sepoys, commanded by 3 European officers, with 20 
pieces of cannon, only 6-pounders, in the interest of the security 
of French trade and commerce. He commented in his trufn:oire : 


“This small body of men together with about 100 Europeans 
in various situations that there are in the colony may be suffi* 
cient to shelter us from the attacks of brigands and marauders 

.in a time of trouble, but in case of a war what can be 

done? If we are not in a position to defend ourselves at 
Pondicherry, we are even in a much worse position in Bengal. 
The colony of Chandernagore, being situated so far inland, 
does not have even any door for escape. It follows necessarily 
that it must surrender to the enemy at the first summons . 


1 


WiNfsr^ 


THE FKKNCI1 IN INDIA 



<§L 


L a w's plan of making Chandernagore the principal 
French settlement in India. 


When Law went to Bengal to take possession of Chandcr- 
nagorc, he had, perhaps, an idea of making it the chief French 
settlement in India. Ihe conjecture is supported by the fact 
that he took with him to Chandernagore most of the members 
of the Gonseil Supcrieur at Pondicherry, leaving there only a 
small section which was to act on the orders and instructions 
from Chandernagore. It is also supported by the fact that 
Law knew Bengal much better than south India. He was the 
Chief of the French factory at Kasim bazar at the time of the 
English capture of Chandernagore in 1757, and during the 
course of his adventurous wandering after being forced to leave 
Kasimbazar he took service under Prince Ali Gauhar, later to 
become Emperor Shah Alam II anti acquired art intimate 
knowledge of men and politics in north India. When he 
returned to Bengal in 1765 he 1] dght have felt it necessary to 
keep a vigilant watch on north Indian politics, sc* as to take 
advantage of any opportunity to create a French sphere ol 
influence in the disintegrating Mughal Empire. Pondichem 
was far away and had no direct communication with north 
India. On the other hand, Chandernagore could serve as a 
convenient observation post for the French to watch develop¬ 
ments in north India and to maintain secret diplomatic relations 
with the Princes there. 