


1 P. A. ms. 100. 


* Ibid. 


mtSTffy 



TI 1 F. FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


Ttt five to six hundred thousand livres per year. “Under more 
favourable circumstances trade could be extended to the value 
of i,500,000 livres, but for that it is necessary to have money 
in hand always, so that the worker could be kept continually 
employed by 11s, without which he is at once engaged by 
others’ . 1 For a few years Dangercux, later to become Cbm 
rnandant at Chandernagore, was the Chief of the French factory 
at Dacca. He was replaced by an Indian agent, who in Nov cm 
her 1773 was publicly beaten by the orders of the English 
agent, Harwell, as the result of a private quarrel. Failing to 
get any redress from the English Government in Calcutta the 
French closed their factory at Dacca. 2 3 Further down Dacca and 
situated dose to the sea was another French factory at Jougdia 
(it had long since disappeared under water) not far from the 
English factory at Lakshmipur. The whole area was inhabited 
by weavers, "who manufacture very high quality doth called 
Ramans and Buff etas. Every year we procure both for the 
Company as well as for private persons goods worth 7 to 8 

hundred thousand livres. The English take three or 

four times more”. 1 

The fifth factory was at Balasore, an equally important 
centre of doth trade. “People manufacture there very beautiful 
and fine cloth named San as of Balasore, very suitable for 
making shirts, it is in my opinion the only Indian cloth 
which comes very close, from the point of view' of glaze and 
cleanness erf thread, to the beautiful Dutch linen. There is 
also a good quantity of iron in the country”. 4 The French 
had a fine house at Balasore which had been destroyed during 
the war. After 1765 the Company ceased to have any trading 
operation there, although private French merchants carried on 
some business. The factory at Balasore was maintained 
primarily for the safe transport of letters from Bengal to Pondi¬ 
cherry by the land route. 5 


1 Law’s mdnwirc of 1767—P. \. ms. joo. 

2 For the English version of the incident, sec Forrest — Selections from 
Letters, Despatches etc.. Foreign Department, Government of India. 
Vol. t. pp. 109-110 (Sec. Sel. Com. Fro. 20th June 1774) 

3 Law's memoire of 1767 . V, A. rns. 100. 

1 Ibid. 5 Ibid . 




miST/fy. 



I. Condition in 1765. 

The settlement of Mahe dated back to 17*1 when the 
French occupied the territory from the ruler of Kadattanad, 
one of the numerous petty states then dotting the Malabar 
Coast. The origin of this settlement has been traced in detail 
by Martirieau in his Les Origines de Mohr de Malabar. It is 
out of place here to sketch the history of Mahe during the 
troublesome days of Dupleix and Laily. Suffice it to note that 
it capitulated to the English on the 8th February 1761 and 
was not restored to the French till the 20th October 1765. 
In violation of the terms of capitulation the English had 
destroyed not only the forts but also most of the houses of the 
settlement, including those of private persons, and the act 
of pillage and destruction was completed by the ruler of 
Kadattanad to whom the English had handed over the settle¬ 
ment. In 1765 Law de Lauriston sent Captain Plusquellec to 
take possession of Mah£ from the agents of the English Com¬ 
pany at; Tellicherry, but although Plusquellec arrived in March 
various difficulties were raised and negotiations dragged on for 
nearly eight months before the place was restored to the 
French. 1 Plusquellec protested to the Tellicherry Council 
against the destruction of private property in violation of the 
terms of capitulation and demanded three lakhs of rupees as 
indemnity. Needless to say that it was rejected by the English, 
Plusquellec further demanded that the English should notify 
the ruler of Kadattanad, to whom they had handed over the 
settlement, about the restitution and should procure a formal 
declaration from him recognising the rights of the French over 
the territories restored. While agreeing to the first proposal, 
.he English rejected the second. Another point of difficulty 
was the demarcation of boundaries. Finally, after much 
wranglings, on the 20th October 1765 Plusquellec received 
possession of the settlement of Mah£ and its dependencies 