

Taking advantage of the close personal relations with the 
Calcutta Government Chevalier thought of improving the 
defences of Chandernagore by slightly twisting the meaning of 
certain provisions in the Treaty of Paris, 1763. Under this 
treaty the French were forbidden to construct any fortifications 
or other defensive works ai Chandernagore, bur for hygienic 
reasons they were allowed to dig a narrow ditch round the 
town for the drainage of water in the rainy season. Chevalier 
had hoped that by giving this ditch sufficient width and depth 
he could turn it into something useful for the defence of the 


1 The letters of ihc Syndics and Directors of the French Company to 
iho Council at Chandernagore during ihis period show the increased 
volume of French trade in Bengal (Gaiidart —Catalogue dc% Manuscrits , 
Vol. III). 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


town against any surprise attack. In spirit it was without 
doubt a violation of the treaty, but through his personal friend¬ 
ship he gained the consent of Verelst. the English Governor, 
and it was through the latter’s intervention that necessary 
permission was obtained from the Nawab. Accordingly, the 
work was undertaken at the beginning of 1768 and a Dutch 
engineer named Ogerdias was employed for the purpose. It is 
interesting to note that in his zeal for ensuring the defence 
of Chandernagore Chevalier did not inform the authorities of 
the Company in France about the construction of the canal 


until it was completed, and in a letter dated isth December 
1768 the Syndics and Directors of the Company expressed their 
disapproval of the conduct of Chevalier in spending so much 
money on the construction of the canal and particularly employ¬ 
ing a Dutch engineer for the purpose. 1 

While the work was in progress the English Council in 
Calcutta raised no objection, but suddenly in May 1769, taking 
advantage of the absence of Verelst from Calcutta, accused 
Chevalier of breach of faith. It was alleged that while Verelst 
had given his consent only to the digging of a small ditch for 
the drainage of rain water, the French had constructed a deep 
and wide canal as a purely defensive work in violation of the 
treaty of 1763. I he English Council sent Lt. Col. Campbell to 
inspect the work and the latter reported that the canal was 40 
to 50 feet wide and 10 to 12 feet deep, with an earthwork 
constituting a rampart 40 to 67 feet wide and 8 feet high. As 
another proof of bad faith, the English Council alleged that 
Chevalier had actually spent three lakhs of rupees on the 
project while the original estimate he submitted to Verelst was 
one lakh only. The breach of faith was all the more repre¬ 
hensible as the English, out of a feeling of mutual friendship, 
had consented of their own will to some relaxation of the 
treaty provisions regarding the maintenance of troops at 
Chandernagore. The Calcutta Council then sent a peremptory 
demand to Chandernagore to fill up the canal at once, and on 
the refusal of Chevalier the English sent troops and workers 