


1 P. A. ms. 2472. 





to demolish the rampart and fill up the canal. Chevalier and 
the Chanderriagore Council protested vehemently against what 
they considered to be a high-handed action on the part of the 
English, but the susceptibilities of the latter had been roused 
so much that they paid no heed to the French protests. 1 

After this incident the relations between the English and 
the French deteriorated again, and' the records of Chandemagore 
are full of complaints from the French agents in the subordinate 
factories against the high-handed actions of the employees of 
the English Company, fhe complaints mounted more and 
more till the capture of Chandemagore in 1778 on the outbreak 
of hostilities in Europe. Chevalier felt his position helpless 
against the growing tyranny oi the English, and from 1769 he 
wrote pressing letters to the Ministry in Paris to intervene 
and bring pressure on the English Company through the 
Government of London to respect the treat) provisions relating 
to French trading rights and privileges in Bengal. But the 
ellete Ministry during the later years of the reign of Louis XV 
did not take any action and did not even reply to Chevalier’s 
letters. Finding no hope of getting any relief from France, 
Chevalier turned to the Indian Princes for succour. Through 
his own agents, like du Jarday and Montvert, or through French 
military adventurers in the service of Indian Princes, like Gentil, 
Madec and Visage, he carried on intrigues in all the north 
Indian Darbars with a view to induce them to attack Bengal 
and to harry arid devastate the province so thoroughly that the 
English, deprived of their sources of revenue, could be compelled 
to come to terms. 

These diplomatic projects of Chevalier, which will be dealt 
with more fully in the next chapter, were cut short by the 
outbreak of war between France and England and the sudden 
capture of Chandemagore on July 10, 1778. Lt. Col. Dow, who 
was sent from Calcutta to seize the French settlement, was 
greatly disappointed at not being able to seize Chevalier, 
regarded by the English as their most, dangerous enemy, who 

1 P. A. mss. 2491, 2492, 2494, 2495. 



escaped from his house through the help of his wife. 1 Three 
weeks later, however, Chevalier was arrested at Cuttack and 
handed over by the Marat ha Governor of the place, Raja Ram 
Pandit, to the English envoy, Alexander Elliot, who was then 
on his way to Nagpur on a special diplomatic mission. It was 
an irony of fate that Chevalier was betrayed by the agent of 
an Indian Prince on whom he had counted so much in his 
diplomatic intrigues. He was later released on parole and 
permitted to return to France. 2 Let us now turn to the 
subordinate French factories in Bengal. 

V. Subordinate Factories . 

Dependent on the chief settlement ;*.t Chandernagore were 
five factories, at Kasirnbazar. Patna, Dacca, Jougdia and Bala sore, 
and a few marts, known as Aurangs, where French agents 
procured supplies from weavers. Kasirnbazar, situated very 
close to Murshidabad, the capital of Bengal, was the principal 
centre of silk trade. “It is from the neighbourhood of Kasim 
bazar, within a radius of twelve to fifteen leagues and even 
more, that people procure raw silk and an enormous quantity 
of silk goods of various kinds, the sale of which is in the hands 
of the English, the Dutch, the Armenians and the people of 
the country”. The French possessed a large village which 
yielded an annual revenue of 3506 livres. Before the last war 
they had a fine house with a large enclosure for the manufacture 
of raw silk, but it had been destroyed, and after 1765 they 
built onlv two godowns to stock the raw silk which they pro- 