

Anyway, if Law had any idea in his mind to make Chander¬ 
nagore the principal French settlement in India, he <oon 
abandoned it for two reasons. In the first place, he realised 
that the situation in Bengal and north India, as he knew it in 
1757, had changed completely. Ihe English had gained 
effective control of the country as far as Allahabad and had 
taken both the Mughal Emperor and the Nawab of Oudh under 
their protection. Thus there was little that French diplomacy 
could do in north India, specially when the Princes there proved 
so weak and undependable. On the other hand, under the 
existing circumstances the French would do better to turn to 
south India and enter into clo-e relations with the Marathas 
and Haidar Ali, the only two Indian Powers whose alliance 
would be worth having. It was the opinion expressed by Law 


mtSTQy 



OTHER FRENCH SKTIl.EMfcMS 


<§L 


in several o£ his mnnoires. In the second place, soon after 
Law had established the Conseil Supirieur at Chandernagore 
there started a conflict between that body and the remnant oi 


the Council still functioning at Pondicherry. I he latter, 
under the leadership of Boyelleau, the senionnost member of 
the Council, refused to recognise the authority of the Council 
at Chandernagore, and asserted that wherever the. Govemot 
might i!loose to reside for the time being, the Conseil Supirieut , 
under the terms of the Royal Edit of 1701, had its permanent 
seat at Pondicherry . 1 The conflict went to such a length that 
:<t. the beginning of 17 1’7 Law, together with the members of ihe 
Council established at Chandernagore, had to return to 
Pondicherry . 2 


HI. Administration of Renault de Saint-Germain. 


While leaving Chandernagore Law appointed Renault de 
Saint-Germain to take charge of the settlement. I he latter hail 
been occupying the same post in 1757 "hen Chandernagore 
was captured by the English. Renault de Saint-Germain 
remained in office only for a few months. He was an old man 
of seventy and lacked in firmness in dealing with the English 
on the question of the violation of French trading privileges 
recognised by the treaty of 1763. The English, in their bid to 
gain a monopoly of the Bengal trade, tried every means to 
evade the execution of the treaty provisions by putting new 
restrictions on French trade and commerce, either directly 
through their own agents or indirectly under the guise of the 
authority of the Nawab. I he French records of the time con¬ 
tain a large number of letters exchanged between the Councils 
of Chandernagore and Calcutta on this subject and a huge 
mass of complaints from French agents in the different sub¬ 
ordinate factories against the activities of the English agents 
or of the agents of the Nawab acting under English instigation . 4 


1 P \. mss. 2416, 2417. 

2 Ibid, mi. 109—Royal arr^t dated loth February 1769 finally settling 

the conflict. * Ibid. im*. 2420, to 2450. 

* Gaudart —Catalogue des man nscrits des Artaennes Archives de l I ndt 
Franftiiie, Vol. Ill (records of the different factories in Bengal from 1765 
10 1778). 