

» The Raja of Travancore had made the overture in 1741 in view of 
the threatened attack by the Dutch and their allies among the Malabar 
chiefs. But the victors of Colachel m August removed the danger and 
the plan ot an alliance with the French tell through. See Panikkar the 
Dutch in Malabar, p. Ch). 


Ml NIST#,, 



OTHER FRENCH SETTl.EMKNTS 


<8L 


rm of a French ship, the tphigenie, proceeding to Goa . 1 2 3 
Picoi did not favour the Karwar project because of its proxi¬ 
mity to Goa and of the huge cost it would entail. On the 
other hand, he proposed the capture of the Maratha port of 
Viziadroog. The Karwar project, however, lingered in the 
ninds of the French for some time more and we find it men¬ 
tioned again in a report by Tronjoly to BeMecombe in 177^ “ 
as also in the metnorre on Mah 6 by Martin in 1 7 ^ 4 * 


II. The aggressive policy of Duprat . 

Although the settlement at Malic was not very important 
either from the commercial or from the military point of view, 
the forward policy adopted by its two successive Governors, 
Duprat and de Repentigny, brought it into great prominence 
during the period under review and almost led to a war between 
the French and Haidar Ali. It is necessary therefore to go into 
some details of the history of the settlement during this period, 
since it took Haidar Ali a long time to forget the incidents 
and become reconciled to the French. After the restoration 01 
the settlement in 17G5 Picoi de la Motte was appointed 
Governor, and he remained in charge till 1773 and again from 
1775 till the capitulation of the place in March 1779- * here 

was nothing remarkable in the first part of his administration 
except the transfer of the settlement, like all the other Fiench 
possessions in India, to the King consequent on the suppression 
of the Company in 177°* During his absence on leave Duprat 
assumed charge .is Governor in November 1773. I he new 
Governor had an undue notion about the power and prestige 
of his country. On his own responsibility, and even in direct 
violation of the instructions from Pondicherry, he undertook 
the task of extending French political influence on the Malabar 
Coast, unmindful of the resources at his command and of the 
difficulties to be encountered. As he expressed himself in a 
me moire, “1 have never looked at things except in a great way. 

1 The instructions to the captain, his report on Karwar and Scot’s 
letter to Law on the subject are preserved in the Pondicherry Archives, 
mss. |454, 4455. 

2 P. A. ms. 251. 

3 Ibid, ms. 4536. 



umsTffy 



I have believed all through my life that a man can do what a 
man has done, and many have done great things". 1 The result 
of this kind of ambitious idea was that within a few months of 
his assumption of office he dragged the French into a serious 
conflict with Haidar Ali from which they could extricate them¬ 
selves only by a great loss of prestige. 

Duprat's ambition led him to imagine that he could turn 
the Zamorin of Calicut into a vassal Prince and utilise him for 
the extension of French political influence on the coast. It 
will be remembered that Haidar Ali had subjugated the territory 
of the Zamorin a few years back, but taking advantage of a 
temporary eclipse of Haidar’s power the Zamorin returned and 
installed himself at Calicut in 1773. Haidar Ali sent a 
formidable force under Srinivasa Rao against the Zamorin, who 
in his distress sought for military assistance from the French at 
MahC Duprat, without waiting for instructions from Pondi¬ 
cherry and without calculating the risks involved, at once agreed 
to give military help to the Zamorin. At (he beginning of 
1774 he landed at Calicut with too men and three pieces of 
cannon, taking with him a frigate, the BelU-Poule, which was 
at Mahe at the time. The French flag was hoisted on the citadel 
and the palace, and on the 12th January 1774 a treaty was 
concluded with the Zamorin, by which the latter placed his 
country under the protection of the King of France and granted 
to the French a complete monopoly of trade and the right to 
build forts wherever they liked. On their side the French 
guaranteed to protect him against all enemies. 