

With the outbreak of war between the English and the 
French in 1778 Mahe was again faced with a grave danger. 
I> had neither money nor troops to organise an effective defence. 
After the fall of Pondicherry in October 1778. Picot wrote 
frantic letters to Haidar Ali, begging hint ter take the Fiench 
settlement under his protection and to send money and troops 
for it defence. 2 For a time the fear of Haidar Ali deterred 
the English from attacking Mah*, the only surviving French 
settlement in India, but in March 1779 they sent a considerable 
force under Braithwaite and Mahe capitulated on the 19th on 
honourable terms. The garrison was accorded the honours of 
war and the English gave a solemn pledge not to destroy any 
public or private property, a pledge which they violated after¬ 
wards. Some time later when hostilities broke out between 
Haidar Ali and the English the former captured Mahe and laid 
siege to Tellicherry. But three years after his forces were driven 
out of Mahe and the English completed their work of destruc- 
tion begun in 1779. 




Calicut 


Subordinate to the settlement at Mahe was a small factory 
at Calicut. It was of no political consequence and its trade 
was of negligible amount. As Law wrote in 1787, “We have 
there only a simple employee who has nothing to do for t >rce- 
fourths of the year ". It was only for a very short period, in 
1774. that the Calicut factory came into some prominence 
because of the aggressive policy of Dnprat, which almost ec 

>)bi^ Z. ^uV'Ucr dated 3rd November i 77 ») :m(l .“*•' 45*6 (letter 
dated 21st January 1779)* 


HMSr/fy 



rm french in ixima 


<SL 


a war with Haidar Ali. After that unhappy episode the 
factory relapsed into complete unimportance as before. 

Surat 


Besides Mahe and Calicut the French had also another 
factory on the western coast, namely at Surat. During the 
period under review the Surat factory had no commercial 
importance whatsoever. It had, however, great historical 
interest because it was at Surat, then the greatest trading centre 
in the East, that Caron established the first French factory in 
India in i6fi8. 1 It was from Surat that French agents went to 
the Coromandel Coast and established factories, first at Masuli- 
patarn and later at Pondicherry; and down to the close of the 
17th century Surat retained its primacy as the principal French 
establishment in India. But with the development of Pondi¬ 
cherry under the able guidance of Francois Martin, Surat gradu- 
alh declined in importance, till in 1701 the transfer of the 
Conseil Souverain from Surat to Pondicherry made the latter 
the principal French establishment in India. But even before 
t.i.ii the Surat factory had lost its commercial importance and 
after the close of the 17th century its trading activities had 
totally stopped. It was due partly to the effects of the conti¬ 
nuous Anglo-French wars in the closing years of the 17th 
century, but principally to the fact that the French Company 
had contracted huge debts at Surat which it was unable to 
repay. But the factory was still maintained, even after 1759. 
when Surat passed under English control. 