

Once installed at Cannanore the Prince proceeded to 
increase his dominion by conquering the neighbouring ttrri 
lories. He overran Kottayam and threatened the Nayar ruler 
of Kurangod, whose territory lay to the north of the Mahe 
river. The Nayar of Kurangod, who had no force to oppose the 
invasion, lied away and took refuge at Mahe. Repentigny 
received him honourably and took him under hrench protec- 




H 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

he Prince of Chirakkal overran the territory of Kuran- 
g(?d and threatened to attack Mah£ with 4,1x10 men. Repentigny 
had only 300 men, including sepoys, to defend the place. But 
his courage did not fail him. Advancing with his handful of 
men he inflicted three severe defeats on the Prince of Chirakkal 
in February and March 1775, whereupon the latter retired to 
his own territory. In order, however, to avoid a future attack 
with larger forces Repentigny hastened to enter into negotia 
lions with the Prince of Chirakkal. The latter agreed to 
recognise the Nayar of Kurangod in return for a tribtite of 
80,000 rupees, and since the Kurangod ruler did not have 
any money Repentigny advanced him the amount, which was 
raised by loans from private persons at Mah£. Thus peace 
was concluded between the Prince of Chirakkal and the French, 
which upset the calculations of the English. 1 

IV. Make from J775 to iyyp. 

Picot returned from France and resumed office as Governor 
m December 1775. For the next two years nothing remarkable 
happened, and the French were left at peace w r ith their neigh¬ 
bours. There was no revival of ominercial dispute with the 
ruler of Kadattanad; the Prince of Chirakkal completely forgot 
his recent war with the French, and the Nayar of Kurangod, 
vho had been saved by the French, paid back his debt with 
total indifference. Even Haidar Ali seemed to have got over 
the affronts he had received from Duprat, although there always 
remained a lingering suspicion in his mind that the conduct of 
Ditprat showed what he could expect from the French if they 
ever got a secure footing in India. Anyway, at least outwardly 
he remained on friendly terms with the French and even agreed 
10 *he cession of a few villages on the northern side of the 
Mah£ river. Negotiations for this purpose which had been 
started by Picot were concluded by Bellecombe, Governor of 
Pondicherry, during his visit to Mahe at the beginning of 1778. 

1 B.xN.F.Fr. (N.A.) 936(3 —letter of Repentigny to the Minister, dated 
31st May 1775 (pp. 430-31). This volume and also 9215 contain the corres¬ 
pondence of Repentigny and Picot with the Minister in Paris giving a full 
account of French relations with the principalities on the Malabar Coast. 




NIINlSr^ 



OTHER FRENCH SRTTI.JEMENTS 


__his short stay at. Mahe Bellecombc also settled the 

question of repayment by the Nayar of Kurangod of the money 
advanced to him by the French while he had been attacked bv 
the Prince of Chirakkal. 27,000 rupees for the cxpey.se* of the 
war and 80,000 for paying the tribute demanded. By this 
settlement, concluded on the 16th April 1778’ the Nayar of 
Kurangod recognised the suzerain right of France and agreed 
to the' annexation of a part of his territory to Mahd. 1 