




the period Surat is invariably mentioned as a possible point of 
attack, next in importance only to Bombay. 


Although completely defenceless and having no commercial 
activity whatsoever, the factory at Surat had considerable poli¬ 
tical importance as a convenient observation point for the 
French to watch the conflict between the English and the Mara- 
thas and to take advantage of any setback to the English power. 
Surat could serve as a base for carrying on secret negotiations 
with the Marathas and also for supplying information about 
the defences of Bombay. The existence of a factory at Surat 
also kept open the route to Delhi from the western coast, neces¬ 
sary for establishing political relations with the northern 
Darbars. It was because of the importance of Surat that the 
French Government maintained a Consul there, who was also 
the Chief of the Company's factory. During the period under 
review Anquetil de Briancourt functioned as Consul and Chief 
of the factory. But he does not seem to have taken much 
interest in political matters, as may be gathered from the pau¬ 
city of reports sent hv him on the Auglo-Maratha conflict or 
relating to the negotiations with the Maratha Court carried on 
by Saint-Lubin. 1 Anyway, he remained in complete ignorance 
of the outbreak of war between the English and the French in 
1778, till he was arrested together with the other Frenchmen 
in the factory on the 3rd November. 13 

Karikal 

The French possessions at Karikal in the kingdom of 
Tanjore were more extensive in area than anywhere else, includ¬ 
ing even Pondicherry. But throughout the conflicts of the 18th 
century Karikal remained outside the theatre of military and 
political activities. Nor did it have much importance from 
the point of view of the Company's trade and commerce. 1 he 
fact was that the whole of the Kaveri delta, comprising the 
kingdom of Tanjore, was purely agricultural in economy, and 

t He did, however, send some reports to de Sartine, Minister of Marine 
and Colonies, relating to St. Lubin’s negotiations at Poona. One such 
packet, including St. Lubin’s letters, was intercepted by the English; 
C.R.O .—French in India Series, Vol. IV. 

sp. A. ms. 5067 letter of Anquetil giving details about his arrest. 


minis 



OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


§l 


ikal simply fulfilled the purpose for which it had been, 
founded by Dumas, namely to serve as the granary of Pondi¬ 
cherry. In this fertile region the Danes first established a 
settlement at Tranquebar in 1616, followed by the Dutch at 
Negapatam in 1660. The French also, at the invitation of the 
Raja of Tanjore, established themselves perhaps at. Kaveri 
patnam in 1688 but abandoned it twenty years later. It was 
in 1738-39 that taking advantage of the Raja’s need for money 
and Chanda Sahib’s successful war against Tanjore that the 
French came to acquire Karikal, the fort of Cardangery and a 
large number of villages in the neighbourhood, which were 
added from time to time as the Raja of Tanjore took .succes¬ 
sive loans from the French. They had to pay an annual tribute 
of 2,000 pagodas to the Raja, which was entirely remitted by a 
treaty concluded between him and Chanda Sahib in 1749. 