


Masulipatam 

The settlement at Masulipatam dated as early as 16G0 and 
was the second earliest French establishment in India after 
Surat. VVe need not go into the details of the vicissitudes of 
fortune of the Masulipatam settlement. Suffice it to remember 
that it came into great prominence during the succession dis¬ 
putes in the Deccan, when Muzaffar Jang ceded to France the 
town of Masulipatam and its neighbouring villages, yielding 
a revenue of four and a half lakhs of rupees. This possession 
was lost to them after the recall of Bussy from the Deccan, and 
when the French returned to their settlement in 1765, Masuli- 
patam had become an English town. 1 

The building of the French settlement at Masulipatam, 
together with a village named Francepeth about two miles to 
the north west of the town, was handed over bv the English to 

1 All the j Formans and Parawanas relating to the French settlement 
at Masulipatam arc preserved in the Pondicherry Archives, mss. 5158-5170. 


OTHER FRENCH SETI’I.EMKNTS 

ques Panon on the 6 th May 1765* 
restitution, preserved in the Pondicherry Archives, drl 
not mention any right of exemption to the French from customs 
duties , 1 * and although Panon claimed the same trading privileges 
for the French as they had in January • 19 > die English refused 
t„ recognise the rights derived from earlier Farrmn and 
Parawanas .* The settlement was administered in succession by 
Mangin. Louyer and Perichon till it again fell into the hands 
of the English in 1778- 

The settlement house was a small building, situated on 
the river about half a league from the sea. i here wcie no 
fortifications or troops, and the French, completely at the mercy 
of the English, bad to restrict their commercial operations within 
limits allowed by them. 1 he value of the French trade did not 
go beyond 100,000 livres per year. Law in his mernoire of 
1767 estimated that "in a period of equilibrium between the 
European Powers it would be possible to procure irom Masuli 
pa tain printed cloth of all kinds worth 7 to 8 hundred thousand 
livres every year.” To the English Masulipatam was an impor 
tant market for their goods from Europe, like cloth, lead, < oppci. 
iron, coral, etc., because of the communication they had with 
all the commercial centres in the interior of the Deccan, which 
the French did not have. 

As at Yanarn, the settlement at Masulipatam had a political 
apart from its commercial importance. It enabled the French 

10 open secret communications with Nizam Ali, the Subadai 

of the Deccan, a “sworn enemy of the English.* 

it is only for that reason that it is convenient for us always to 
have somebody in these quarters in order to know everything 
that happens and to take advantage of the circumstances when 

11 will be possible for us.” 3 


1 P. A. ms. 5171. 

s/fcid, mss. 5174 aw! 5175; also C.R.O.— French in India Series, Vol 
VI. pp. 115-127. 

3 P A. ms. 100. 


<SL 

1 he official docu 



m jac 
ment of 