



MWJSTfy, 


CHAPTER V 




DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS: CHEVALIER, MADEC, 
MODAVE AND GENTIL 

The two preceding chapters have dealt with the history 
of the French settlements in Lidia from 1765 to 1778 In the 
present and the two following ones we shall review the diplo¬ 
matic projects formed bv Frenchmen in India, including 
Governors and other officials as well as private adventurers in 
the service of the Indian Princes. There are in the Archives 
of Paris and Pondicherry hundreds of letters and memoires 
from Frenchmen in India dealing with such projects of diplo 
malic alliances and military operations. Many of them were 
no doubt absolutely chimerical; nevertheless in a detailed 
history of the French in India during this period it is neces¬ 
sary to notice how they felt, what they tried to achieve and the 
means they sought. Considering the amount of interest felt bv 
contemporary Frenchmen, it will not be out of place here to 
review the projects in some detail. For convenience of 
analysis, the various projects have been grouped into three 
sections: the first dealing with north India; the second dealing 
with the political memoires of two successive Governors of 
Pondicherry, Law de Lauriston and Bellecombe; and the third 
dealing with south India. In the first section we shall review 
the projects of Chevalier, Governor of Chandemagore, and of 
three military adventurers in the service of the Indian Princes, 
Madec, Modave and Gentil. 

Chevalier 

One of the most important persons who submitted projects 
to th French Government for diplomatic alliances and military 
operations in India was Jean Baptiste Chevalier, Governor of 
Chandemagore from 17G7 to 1778. T rained in the school of 
Law de Lauriston and possessing an intimate knowledge of 
north Indian politics, Chevalier was a most colourful personal¬ 
ity, with an optimism sometimes bordering on facile imaginative 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS- I 



ness and with a blind patriotism which on occasions brought 
on him ridicule even from his compatriots. He kept himself in 
constant touch with the Princes of north India and with the 
French military adventurers scattered all over the sub-continent, 
intrigued at every Darbar , and never doubted for a moment that 
it was possible for France even at that late hour to drive the 
English out of Bengal with the help of some of the Indian 
Princes. At an earlier period, when the English had not vet 
become (irmly entrenched In Bengal, an energetic man like 
Chevalier might have achieved much in furthering French 
political influence in north India. But, unfortunately for him 
and for his country, he came ten years too late, when the English 
had already established their firm grip on Bengal, Bihar and 
Oudh, and France had fallen into a strange state of lethargy 
in colonial matters as a result of the frustration of her earlier 
efforts. Under the circumstances all that Chevalier could do 
was to carry on secret pourparlers with the north Indian Princes 
for an alliance with Franca* and a combined attack on Bengal 
(just an alluring mirage), and to write frantic letters to the 
Government in Paris to send immediate and large-scale military 
assistance to these shadowy allies,—letters which down to the 
death of Louis XV did not receive even the scantiest attention 
in Paris and remained for the most part unanswered. As a 
consequence. Chevalier had to suffer the disappointment of 
ending his career as a mere intriguer, and although the English 
in Bengal considered him as their most dangerous enemy, to 
his own countrymen he remained a ridiculous figure who merely 
put forward fantastic projects. 