

it.but on the other hand, it being not possible to 

preserve the secret it may draw us into troubles with Muham¬ 
mad Ali Khan or rather with the English under his name”. 

Nor was anything done to fortify Karikal effectively cither 
by the Company or by the French Government which took over 
in 1770 in spite of the repeated advice of Law and Bellecombe 
in all their memoires . The small fort which the French had 




wmsr^ 



on the river before the war had been completely destroyed, 
and in 1765 the place was totally exposed. Law commented 
later, I do not see thai the Company has any intention of 
constructing the smallest work there.” Hie only defensive 
work built at Karikal alter its restitution was a small redoubt 
“which we have constructed in haste and where the small 
number of European residents can take refuge. It. can accom¬ 
modate at the most 40 men.” Not only were there no fortifica¬ 
tions, the garrison kept there was so inadequate in number as 
could offer little resistance to any surprise attack. There were 
$ officers, 30 European troops, 50 sepoys and five pieces of 
cannon, constituting all the artillery. “As regards the armoury, 
it is quite as brilliant as that of Pondicherry, sinev it contains 
nothing. The procrastination of the Company and of the 
French Government later resulted in the evacuation of the 
place on the <j.th August 1778 immediately after the news of 
the outbreak of war. 

Van am 

1 he settlement at Yanam dated from 1733, although it was 
abandoned for a few years before the time of Dupleix. It 
acquired considerable importance during the occupation of the 
Northern Sarkars by the French. After the treaty of 1763 
the settlement was handed over by the English to Jean Jacques 
Panon, authorised by Law, on the 15th May 1765. The official 
document relating to the transfer mentioned that the French 
were given back possession of the village of Yanam, the village 
of Cainpoupalam and the lands dependent on them “withexemp 
tion from all export and import duties”. 1 Soon after taking 
possession of the settlement Panon obtained a Patau ana from 
the ruler of Rajamundry granting the French full liberty of 
trade at Yanam. and another one from Nizam Ali calling upon 
the Zamindars of the Sarkar of Mustaphanagar not to hinder the 
commerce of the French. 2 Yanam was situated in the province 
of Pcttapur in the jurisdiction of the Raja of Rajamundry, a 

1 p A. ms. 5099. 

3 I hose and the earlier Patawanas are preserved in the Pondicherry 
Archives, mss. 3098. 5100. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


of the Subadar of the Deccan. The French had a modest 
building there, situated about a league from the sea, on a river 
in which only small vessels could enter. The establishment 
was very small, including Panon, the Chief, and four or five 
other employees. There were no fortifications or troops. 

The French trade at Yanam was not negligible. As Law 
stated in his mJmoire of 17(17, “It is from Yanaon that we get 
our best Guinees. It is possible to have a commerce here worth 
more than a million livres per year under circumstances more 
favourable than those in which we are placed now, but always 
by giving advances much earlier, what we have never been in a 
position to do. From this place are also procured teak wood, 
oils, rice and other grains both for men as well as for animals.” 
Apart from commerce Yanam had another importance, ‘the 
advantages which may be derived in a time of war from the 
alliances that we may conclude with several Rajas who sooner 
or later cannot fail to be dissatisfied with the English.” A 1 
though the English gained an effective control over the Sarkars, 
the settlement at Yanam enabled the French to enter into secret 
relations with the local chiefs. 