

After the Seven Years’ War Karikal and its dependent 
villages were restored by the English on the 18th. February 
1765. 1 Law de Lauriston took possession of Karikal first and 
established his administration there temporarily, as Pondicherry 
was in complete ruins. One great, point of controversy that 
arose at the time of the restitution of Karikal was about the 
annual tribute payable to the Raja of Tanjore, Law de Lauris- 
tou claiming that it had been remitted by the treaty of 1749 
and the English refusing to recognise that treaty. Law left 
soon after to take possession of Pondicherry, making over charge 
tp Fleurin. The settlement was successively administered by 
Le Comte, de Boistel, Hocquart, Dumirouet and Boistel again, 
till it was evacuated on the 9th August 1778 on the outbreak of 
war with the English. 

Karikal’s importance lay in the production of rice and it 
served as the granary of Pondicherry. But although the whole 
of Tanjore was extremely fertile, being intersected by many 
small rivers, in the French possessions agriculture suffered 
greatly and much of the lands remained uncultivated for lack 
of population. It was due principally, as Law pointed out in 
his memoire of 1767, to the religious policy of the French, which 
acted as a deterrent to attracting cultivators from the neighbour* 

1 The official documents relating to the restitution of Karikal are pre¬ 
served in the Pondicherry Archives mss. 5285 to 3289. 




THE IRENOH l\ INDIA 



<SL 


over-popu 1 ated areas, karikal, being very close to (lie sea 
and situated on a river in which even large vessels could enter 
throughout the year if the sand-bar at its mouth was cleared, 
offered great commercial advantages. “This settlement is 
necessary to the Company as much to help provisioning Pondi¬ 
cherry as for procuring cargoes for its ships. It is possible to 
draw from this place during a period of peace and by advancing 
money well in time diverse kinds of white and printed cloth, 
specially suitable for the commerce of the African coast, worth 
7 to 8 thousand livres.” The principal rivals of the French 
in this region were the Dutch at Negapatam; but although the 
English were not directly settled there, through their control 
over the Carnatic, of which Tunjore was a tributary state, the\ 
drew “much greater advantages than all the other nations.” 

Apart from commercial facilities. Karikal offered political 
advantages as well, in view of the not too friendly relations 
between the Raja of Tunjore and the English. As Law stated 

in his me moire of 1767, “Karikal.belonging to a 

Prince who perhaps cannot but be extremely jealous of the 
English power of which he finds himself a tributary vassal would 
make an establishment very suitable from the point of view 
of defence, specially if we had a fortified place there. It could 
serve as a general warehouse for all kinds of provisions and 
equipments necessary for a squadron.” Other advantages were 
that, “the roadstead is sufficiently good, the bar there is less 
strong than at Pondicherry, and besides there is this river in 
which loaded vessels can enter throughout the year, which is a 
great advantage.” It was not easy, however, to exploit the 
political advantages, since the English were as much masters of 
Tanjore as of the Carnatic. “We have a treaty with the king 
of Tanjore of nearly the same character as with Muhammad 
AH Khan. There is no question of any alliance, offensive or 
defensive. This Prince would not have been sorry to make 