

During the period under review an attempt was sought 
to be made to revive the trading activities of the Surat factory, 
Inn the main difficulty was the opposition of the Nawab and 
the local merchants of Surat, which arose from the capture of 
an Indian vessel by the French Admiral Comte d’Estaing in 
* 759 - As a reprisal the local authorities had ordered the cap¬ 
ture of any French vessel that might happen to touch at Surat. 

1 The Farinan of Enipcror Autangzcb, dated 11th August 1666. per 
mining the trench to establish a Factory at Surat, is preserved in the 
Pondicherry Archives, ms. 5057. For the early history of the Surat 

actory see S. P, Sen- The French in India: First Establishment amt 
Struggle, 


MIN/Sr^ 



Referring to this matter in his me moire of 17(57 Law wrote: 
This capture was made in violation of a French passport that 
we had given; that provides a rightful cause to the proprietors. 

It is absolutely necessary therefore to pay some compensation 

it we want to re-open this branch of commerce.", 

There were great commercial possibilities at Surat, “the key to 
the entire commerce of India through the facility of marketing 
goods from all parts of Hindusthan.” Law considered that 
Surat offered a very lucrative market “for our woollen cloth, a* 
thousand Objects of hardware, our Lyon doth, copper, and 
lead/' and cited the example of the English and the Dutch 
whose “annual sales are worth four to live million livres“. 
The principal commodity of Surat was cotton “which is sold 
in all parts of India for the manufacture of cloth ’. Among 
other articles of export were printed cloth, useful for the trade 
of the African coast, wheat and other provisions. 

The French had a modest house at Surat, outside the town 
proper, in a locality commonly known as the ‘French garden' 
which had been acquired by them from the time of their first 
establishment in India. They did not enjoy any independent 
status and had not even the right to hoist their flag over their 
factory building. There were neither troops nor fortifications 
of any kind to defend the factory. As Law stated in his 
me moire of 1767, “Surat is a place where we have no means to 
defend ourselves. If the English want to drive us out from 
there, a simple summons is sufficient’. But he believed that 
there was a good reason for the English to leave the French 
at peace, unless they suspected some intrigues on their part 
with the neighbouring country Powers. “As this place has 
always been regarded as neutral and as it is even to the interest 
of the English that it should be neutral so as to be able to make 
use of the name of the local people in carrying on trade in a 
time of war without any risk, it is to be believed that they will 
leave us at peace as long as they do not suspect any intrigue in 
these parts from us/’ But while expecting the English to pre¬ 
serve the neutral character of the place, Law stated in his 
niimoire that it was a vulnerable point of attack for the French, 
“in case our naval forces permit it and there is nothing better 
to do”. In fact, in most of the numerous French memoires of 