


MINI ST/f 



trade in pepper, cardamom and other spices over an area of 
three leagues along the coast, having the river of Mah£ as the 
only outlet. But as the French owed money to the king of 
Kadattanad and had not sufficient funds to buy all the produce 
of the country, for mans years they had relaxed their monopoly 
right and had allowed the king of Kadattanad to sell the 
surplus produce to the English at Tellicherr>. hi his anxiety 
to restore French prestige after the Calicut fiasco Duprat stub 
denly decided to enforce the 'treaty right of commercial mono¬ 
poly and refused to allow any relaxation. It meant total ruin 
for the king of Kadattanad, since the French while enforcing 
their treaty right were not in a position to buy all the produce 
themselves. He protested, but only in vain, and Duprat 
declared that all cargoes of pepper sold in violation of the 
French monopoly right would be confiscated, holding out a 
threat that a large number of troops would shortly arrive to 
enforce the treaty right. In a letter to the chief of Haidar AH’s 
fleet dated 12th March 1774 Duprat declared that, the French 
had a monopoly of trade in spices in the kingdom of Kadattanad 
and that if Haidar Ali wanted pepper he must buy it from the 
French at MahC Haidar Ali protested both in his name and 
in the name of his protege, the king of Kadattanad, and called 
upon Duprat to re establish freedom of trade. Without reply* 
ing to him direct, Duprat wrote to Srinivasa Rao on the 23rd 
April that the King of France was a much greater sovereign 
than the Nawab of Mysore and that he would under no circum¬ 
stances yield to the ruler of Kadattanad. The haughty tone 
of the letter was deliberate and meant to cover up the humilia¬ 
tion of the Calicut episode, and for the second time it brought 
the French on the verge of an armed conflict with Haidar Ali. 
It was only averted by the prompt action of Law who, as soon 
as ho came to know of Duprat’s indiscretion, recalled him and 
sent do Repentigny from Pondicherry to replace him. De 
Repentigny took over charge in September, and Duprat in 
indignation resigned his Colonel’s rank in the French army in 
order to take service under Nizam Ali. By an irony of fate he 
was arrested by Haidar’s men while passing through Mysore 
territory, and he would have been made to pay dear for his 
past imprudence but for the pressing intervention of Law which 
secured him his liberty. 




‘ G Qv $ 


OTHER FRENCH S3ETTCF.MENT.S 

III. Repcntigny and relations with the neighbouring 
Principalities. 

Repen tigriy’s first task as Governor was to remove the cause 
of conflict with Haidar by reversing the policy of Duprat and 
restoring the commercial status quo which had existed before 
Duprat s time. But although Repentigny was anxious to main¬ 
tain peaceful relations with his neighbours, particularly with 
Haidar Ali, he too soon got himself entangled in difficulties 
which might have produced serious consequences for the little 
French settlement. The young Prince of Chirakkal. heir to the 
throne, had been living at Tellicherry as a pensioner of the 
English since the conquest of the country by Haidar Ali in 
1766. The example of Duprat in relation to the Zamorin of 
Calicut raised an ambitious hope in the mind of Hodman, the 
English Chief of Tellicherry, of restoring the Prince of 
Chirakkal to his territory and extending English influence on 
the Malabar Coast through him. He was encouraged in this 
idea by the estrangement between the French and Haidar Ah 
caused by the imprudent policy of Duprat. So he stood as a 
mediator to establish peace between the Prince of Chirakkal 
and Haidar and to re instate the Prince in a part of his old 
territory as a vassal of Haidar. As a price of his mediation 
he got from the Prince the grant of a monopoly of all pepper 
in his future territory, to be sold to the English at half its 
normal value. The English sent an agent named Rodriguez 
Dominguez to Scringapatam in October 1774 with a lakh of 
rupees to win support for their scheme at the Court of Haidar. 
The mission succeeded, and the Prince of Chirakkal himself 
visited Scringapatam to pay homage to Jus suzerain. He came 
back in December 1774 and installed himself at Cannanore. 
Being an agent of the English and a vassal of Haidar, he was 
naturally hostile to the French at Mahe. 