

Duprat had embarked on a light-hearted adventure, but 
he had soon to give serious reflection to the consequences of 
his action when Srinivasa Rao, Haidar’s general, arrived with a 
large force. It was only for the wise patience of Srinivasa Rao 
that a conflict was avoided between the French and their tradi¬ 
tional ally, Haidar Ali, in which Duprat's handful of men 
could have offered little resistance. The Zamorin fled away 
from Calicut and the French also withdrew to Mah£ in February 
1774. The withdrawal was as humiliating as the adventure 
had been rash, and moreover it did not conciliate Haidar, 
since Duprat was more imprudent in his letters than in his 


1 B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.), 9366, p. 400. 


MINIS?*, 



OTHER FRENCH SETT! J-.MF NTS 


<SL 


is. Before Haidar s forces had arrived, Duprat had written 
to him that he had come 10 take possession of Calicut with a 
battleship and that he was expecting two more with 4,000 men 
as reinforcement. In a proud tone he advised Haidar that his 
interests would be better served by an alliance with a powerful 
nation like the French. After the capture of Calicut by Srini¬ 
vasa Rao, Duprat again wrote to Haidar telling him haughtily 
that he had withdrawn of his own will and not in fear of 
Haidar’s army. He also reminded Haidar of Ins obligation to 
the French for their past help. 

Duprat’s action and more so his letters created in the mind 


of Haidar a deep suspicion and animosity against the French, 
whom he had all along regarded as his allies. He was in 
regular and friendly correspondence with Law de Lauristori, 
Governor of Pondicherry, and even at the time of the Calicut 
incident he had in his service a French corps which received 
regular reinforcements from Pondicherry. Naturally, when Law 
made professions of friendship towards him and tried to draw 
him into a close alliance with France against the English, 
Haidar doubted his sincerity as he could not believe that 
Duprat could have behaved in the manner he did without 
definite instructions from Pondicherry The Calicut incident 
alienated Haidar from the French and rendered the diplomatic 
efforts of Law extremely difficult. It was not till four or five 
years later that Haidar was reconciled to his old allies. 1 

1'hc discomfiture at Calicut and the reprimand he received 
from Law did not put a stop to the imprudent conduct of 
Duprat, and he soon got the French entangled in another 
conflict with Haidar Ali. At the time of the first occupation 
of Mahi the French had acquired through treaties concluded 
with the king of Kadattanad in 1723 and 1727 a monopoly of 


1 B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.), 9366—Duprat*s letter to Law de Lauriston, dated 
29th January 1774, dealing with the treaty with the Zamorin of Calicut 
(pp. 190-191); Law's letter dated 21st February 1774, severely reprimand 
ing Duprat for the Calicut fiasco (pp. 200-203); a detailed rnemoire of 
Duprat, dated 14th February 1774, dealing with the negotiations with the 
Zamorin and reproducing all the letters exchanged between Duprat. and 
the Zamorin, Haidar Alb Russel who commanded the French corps undet 
Haidar, and Srinivasa Rao (pp. 400*423). The last is also to he found 
in the Pondicherry Archives, ms. 1465* 