

In the next letter, dated April 15, 1773/ Chevalier informed 
the Minister that he had received an envoy from the Emperor 
and the Marathas with solicitations to join the common cause. 
The envoy had also brought the treaty proposed by the 
Marathas, the terms of which appeared to Chevalier quite 
advantageous from the French point of view. The French 
would not be put to any expense for the 5,000 troops to be 
supplied, and in addition they would be granted, complete 


4 B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9366, pp. 148 157. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


rcedoin of trade throughout Hindu,sthan. If they joined the 
coalition as auxiliaries they might be given possession of Bengal 
in the same way as the English held it, provided they paid thirty 
lakhs of rupees annually to the Emperor and twenty-five lakhs 
to the Marathas. In short, Chevalier considered the treaty to 
he a satisfactory basis for effecting a political revolution in 
north India, absolutely necessary in the interest of French trade 
and commerce. But the crux of the difficulty lay, as Chevalier 
should have understood, in the financial distress of the 
Emperor; and in a letter dated October 3, 1773 1 Chevalier 
complained that while the Emperor repeatedly asked for French 
troops he made no move at all to advance money for the 
purpose. The political calculations of Chevalier Were totally 
upset by the sudden outbreak of dissension at Poona, and in 
a lerter dated February 2, 1774 2 he informed the Minister that 
the Maratha Chiefs had hurriedly returned to their capital, 
leaving the Emperor alone The Emperor’s envoy had gone 
back to Delhi, and no further move could be taken with respect 
to his proposal for French troops unless he advanced money to 
rover the expenses. Another loss to the French was the death 
of Janoji, but Chevalier maintained close relations with his 
successor Mudaji. 

The correspondence of Chevalier became less frequent 
during 1774-75, no doubt because of the repeated disappoint¬ 
ments he received from the Government in Paris since the first 
representation he made in 1769 for the despatch of a body of 
French troops to the assistance of the Indian Princes. In a 
letter dated January 23. 1775 Chevalier expressed his regret 
that the inactivity of the French had allowed the English to 
gain increasing predominance in the different Durbars, and if 
things continued like that, in a few years’ time the French 
would be turned out completely and England would rule over 
India like a despot. He then proposed that if nothing was 
going to be done to stop the progress of English power in 
India, it was better for the French to leave India at once with¬ 
out exposing themselves to further humiliation. 3 


1 B.N.V.Fr. (N.A.) 9366 pp. 158-166. 

2 lbid, pp. 192*196. 

3 Ibid, pp 233-236., 


mtSTQy 



It was towards the end of 1775 Madia: put forward 

his project for an alliance with the Mughal Emperor on the 
basis of the cession of the province of Tatta or Sind to France. 
For the next two and a half years the Tatta project held the 
attention of the French Government and of other persons who 
were interested in the matter of restoring I rench influence in 
India. There were two reasons for the I atta project to have 
received more consideration from the Government than the 
earlier plan of Chevalier The first was the change of adminis¬ 
tration, lethargic do Boynes being succeeded by the more entei* 
prising de Sartine at the Ministry of Marine and Colonies. 
The second was that the Tatta project was an improvement on 
Chevalier’s earlier plan and was less likely to rouse the suscep 
tibilities of the English since Tatta lay far ofl from the existing 
English possessions in India. It is not a little surprising that 
while making repeated representations to Paris for an alliance 
with the Emperor and for the despatch of a body of French 
troops to his assistance, an astute person like Chevalier did not 
think of a means by which the opposition of the English could 
he eliminated, and conceded to Madec the credit of a project 
which in essence was the same as his with one important im 
provement, namely a territorial cession to France in an area 
lying far off from the English possessions. Anyway, although 
Madec was the originator of the project, it was at once accepted 
by Chevalier with enthusiasm, and in fact without Chevalier s 
support Madecs plan would not have received any considera¬ 
tion in France. 