

In the preceding chapter we have seen how for some time 
after assuming charge of the French possessions in Bengal 
Chevalier tried to secure his national interests by a polk) of 
friendly and amicable relations with the English. He was i 
very pleasing and genial host, and his palace at Goretty, near 
Chandernagore . 1 was the rendezvous of most of the Calcutta 
celebrities of the time, including the Governor. For a time 
the policy of personal contact succeeded, but in 17% there was a 
sudden setback and the English grew increasingly jealous of 

1 Goretty was separated troin Chimdemagore by a small snip of terri¬ 
tory not belonging to the French. 


vwisr/fy 


IHE FRENCH IN INDIA 

ir. recovery of ihc French fac tories in Bengal. I he 
defensive canal round Chandernagore was forcibly filled up. 
and the English used their political power in the Province to 
obstruct French trade and commerce despite the provisions of 
the treaty of 176$. On several occasions they even went to the 
extreme and used physical violence against, the employees ol 
the French Company in the subordinate factories. They sub 
jected all French ships moving up the Ganges to a humiliating 
search and they put every difficulty they could in the way of 
the French procuring supplies of cotton goods, opium and salt 
petre, the principal articles of commerce in the Province. When 
repeated protests to Calcutta failed to secure respect for treaty 
provisions, Chevalier turned as a last, resort to the north Indian 
Princes and tried to form an anti-English coalition strengthen¬ 
ed by French troops. 

A connected account of Chevalier’s diplomatic intrigues in 
the different north Indian Darbars and the policy he wanted 
France to pursue in order to drive the English out of Bengal 
may be gathered from the large mass of letters he wrote to the 
Ministry in Paris from 1769 to 1778. 1 We may discern three 
distinct periods in hfs ideas about French intervention in Indian 
politics: the first from 1769 to the installation of Shah Alain 
on the Imperial throne at Delhi in 1 77 2 ^ second from i 77 2 

to the broaching of the Tatta project in 1774; and the third 
from 1775 to 1778. when all diplomatic projects were cut short 
by the sudden outbreak of war and the prompt capture ot 
Chandernagore b\ ihe English. In the first period Chevalier s 
policy was rather vague and not based on any definite line of 
action. He thought in a general way that the rapid expan 
sion of English power had so much antagonised the north 
Indian Princes that it was quite an easy task to combine all 
of them in a joint attack on Bengal, provided they were assured 
of French military and naval assistance. Chevalier did not 
think yet of any concrete alliance with one or two important 
Powers but wanted to gain thy co-operation of every possible 
ally,—the old Nawab family of Dacca, dispossessed of its rule 
over Bengal by Alivardi Khan: the existing Nawab of Mur- 
s hi da bad, a puppet of the English, but believed to be chafing 