


Basalat Jang, of Haidar Ali and of ti e numerous petty Princes 
all over the country refused to join the Imperial service merely 
for the uncertain prospect of extending French political influ¬ 
ence in north India. 

In the third period, from 1775 to 1778. Chevalier changed 
his plan to obviate the difficulty of English opposition. The 
new plan was based on a solid alliance with the Emperor and 
the cession of the province of Tatta or Sirnl to the French. 

I he French were to keep a large garrison in Tatta and lend a 
small corps of troops to the Emperor. In case of necessity the 
whole body of French troops st itioned in the newly acquired 
territory could move on to Delhi, effect a junction with the 
Imperial forces and swoop clown on Bengal. The advantage 
of this plan over the previous one was that since Tatta was 
situated far away from the English possessions in India, the 
English were not likely to oppose the landing of French troops 
there with the same vehemence with which they would oppose 
the sending of 5,000 French troops direct to Delhi. The plan, 
in fact, was conceived not by Chevalier but by Madec whom 
he had persuaded a few years back to give up the service of 
the Jats and join the Emperor. But once Madec had forwarded 
the plan, Chevalier took it up with great enthusiasm and sent 
urgent representations to the French Government to accept 
the terms of alliance proposed through Madec by the Emperor 
himself. Fortunately for him, there was a fresh vigour in 
French administration from 1776, and for the first time the 
representations of Chevalier received due attention in Paris. 
But even then the French Government moved very slowly, 
much valuable time was lost in weighing the pros and cons 
of the project, and when at last in 1778 it sent Col. Montigny 


MIN/Sr/jy 



to India to give a final report on the Tatta project, two essential 
requirements for its successful execution had disappeared. 
Chandernagore had fallen into the hands of the English, and 
Chevalier had been arrested. Madec also had left the Imperial 
service in disappointment at the lack of encouragement from 
France, and with his departure from Delhi the French lost 
whatever political influence they had there. Let us now see 
in more detail the diplomatic projects of Chevalier in their 
three distinct phases from his own letters to the Ministry in 
Paris. 

The first time that Chevalier drew the attention of the 
French Government to the political situation in north India and 
held out the prospect of an anti English coalition was in a 
letter to the Minister of Marine and Colonies, Due de Praslin, 
dated 10th January, 1769. 1 After complaining about the 
tyranny and constant vexation of the English in Bengal, 
Chevalier stated that the Nawab had been so completely under 
their control that all the letters he wrote to Murshidabad, the 
capital of Bengal, were sent, to Calcutta where the replies were 
drafted. But at the same time Chevalier felt that at heart the 
Nawab was friendly towards the French and was willing to 
secure their alliance to rid himself of the yoke of the English. 
“If there remain any credit and authority with him he would 
soon give us the most convincing proofs of his goodwill. Even 