




the e( 


1 B.N.F.Fr (N.A.) 9366. 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS' - 1 




under their control: Mir Kasim, the ex-Nawab of Bengal, who 
was making frantic efforts all over north India to gain military 
assistance for the re-conquest of the Province from the English; 
Shuja-ud daulah, the Nawab of Oudh, who, although an ally 
of the English after the treaty of 1765, was smarting under the 
humiliation of defeat; the Maratha ruler of Berar and Cuttack, 
Janoji, desirous of extending his power over Bengal, and the 
three Maratha Chiefs, Sindhia, Holkar and Visaji Krishna, wlio 
had been sent to north India with a formidable army to restore 
rhe lost Maratha influence in that region and who found their 
path barred by the expansion of English power during the 
interval of the eclipse of Maratha authority after iy6i. It is 
difficult to understand how Chevalier could have combined into 
even a loose coalition all these assorted elements having con¬ 
flicting interests and divided by sharp jealousies and suspicions. 
Anyway, he thought he could do it, provided only that France 
came out with an assurance of military and naval assistance 
to the Indian allies. One significant thing to notice is that 
during the first period he did not attach any political importance 
to the Mughal Emperor, Shah Alain, then living at Allahabad 
as a pensioner of the English, and did not want to include him 
in the ring of French allies. 

In the second period, from 1772 to 1774, Chevaliers policy 
took a more definite and concrete shape. He dropped the idea 
of a number of heterogeneous allies and concentrated on a 
solid alliance with the Mughal Emperor, Shah Alain, now 
installed at Delhi. He advocated a policy of strengthening the 
hands of the Emperor and enabling him to assert his authority 
over his former vassals, who had assumed virtual independence, 
by lending him 5,000 French troops and organising a latge sepoy 
force trained and armed in the European fashion. In that case 
the mere extension of the Emperor’s authority would mean 
an extension of French political influence in north India, and 
when the opportune moment would come, there could be 
launched a joint attack on Bengal by land and naval forces. 
Chevalier made repeated representations to the French Govern¬ 
ment to send immediately 5,000 troops to the assistance of the 
Emperor. But although he meant only to strengthen the hands 
of the Emperor and not to launch an immediate attack on 
Bengal, the French Government felt, and with good reason, 


WHiSTffy 



I IIF FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


;a i Ik despatch of 5,000 troops to Delhi, even as volunteers 
joining the Imperial service, would be at once regarded by 
the English as a casus belli. So the French Government, un¬ 
willing to re-open hostilities on the Indian issue, turned a deaf 
ear to the urgent representations of Chevalier. The latter 
next tried to achieve his purpose by collecting round the 
Emperor all the French military adventurers scattered in 
different parts of India. But while he succeeded in attaching 
Madec to the service of the Emperor with his whole contingent, 
the French troops in the service of the Nawab of Oudh, of 