


* R.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9:^66, pp. 10 24. 









mtsr/fy 



hatred against the English would draw these people to co¬ 
operation with us.Jhere is not a soul in Bengal who 

would not make any contribution to facilitate, through our 
medium, the total expulsion of the English. I hey are only 
waiting for a favourable occasion, and it is in the French that 
they put all their confidence’. 

Writing to the Controller-General of Finance on February 
2\, 1770,* Chevalier reiterated his view' that the Princes of 
India were ready to combine together and join with the French 
in an attempt to drive the English out of Bengal, 
restrains them and none has the courage to be the first to raise 
the standard of Liberty. They content themselves with sighs 
for the French and desire to see them declare themselves openly 

in order to rally round their standard at once.If ever 

we carry the war to this country, we shall find here as many 
allies as there are Princes”. 

In a letter dated January 6, 177 1, 3 addressed to the Minister 
of Marine, Chevalier again referred to the overtures he had 
received from the Marathas, Mir Kasim and the Emperor, and 
recommended the despatch of pooo troops from the Isle of 
France to be lent to these Powers. That would enable the 
French to fight as auxiliaries of the Indian Princes, although 
legally France and England remained at peace in Europe. The 
English could not object to this policy as they themselves had 
followed it in the past. “The Marathas know the superiority 
of Europeans to their own troops, and for that reason they 
desire to have a certain number of Europeans to oppose the 
English. As a result. Janoji, one of the principal Maratba 
Princes, with whom 1 have always been in contact and whose 
territories border on Bengal, has written to me to sound my 
intentions and to know if 1 would like to furnish him a corpv 
of seven to eight hundred men with arms and artillery, while 
offering to advance me all the expenses. This request has 
again been supported by three other Chiefs who command all 
the forces camped near Delhi, numbering 200,000 cavalry, and 
I have been assured that the Emperor himself would write to 
me to persuade me to agree to the request and to join our 

» B .N.i'.Fr. (N.A.) 9366. pp. « 5' s 9 

2 Ibid, pp. 77-104. 



VWSTk 



fortes to his by a treaty. He is not unaware of the large 
number of troops rhat we have in the Isle of France and seems 
to have based his expectations on that*'. To these overtures 
Chevalier had replied in an evasive manner, but in order to 
maintain close relations with the Powers for use in future he 
thought it necessary to send French agents to the various 
Darbars . Visage, a surgeon by profession and later to enter 
the service of Shuja*ud*daulah, was sent to Janoji and was 
further entrusted with letters for the other principal Maratha 
Chiefs as also for Mir Kasim. Another person, du Jarday, 
formerly an employee of ihe French East India Company at 
Pondicherry, was sent to Delhi in the guise of a Muslim. He 
was to meet the Emperor and the three Maratha Chiefs there 
and was to send information regarding their projects. Chevalier 
next referred to the ease with which French troops could be 
maintained in India at no cost to France. “It is easy to main¬ 
tain, without having to spend a sou, a thousand men under 
Janogy, an equal number under Kashim All, and about three 