

the Emperor .does not speak of the French except 

with respect and admiration. He regards them as being destined 
to be his liberators from captivity, and all the Princes of 
Indoustan have the same sentiment. There is not one among 
them who is not ready to employ his forces and his money in 
our favour as soon as he finds us declare against the English . 
Chevalier then suggested that if France ever thought of inter¬ 
vention in India, the best means of combining the Indian 
Princes against the English was to send an expeditionary force 
to Bengal. “It is at Chatigan that our troops should land; 
there would be no reason to fear the opposition of the English, 
as they would be fully occupied in defending their frontiers 
against the Marathas and other Princes who could be induced 
by us to draw them there and keep them engaged*’. 

1 B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9306, pp. 19. 

I 



mtsrfiy 



In a letter dated March 15, 1769 1 Chevalier gave a more 
detailed plan of operations in Bengal and showed the ease with 
which allies could be procured against the English. “The 
Muslim Government at Dacca is without force and is animated 
by hatred against the English. Therefore* far from offering 
any resistance it will surrender to us, specially if we take 
care to declare ourselves as liberators”. Once the French had 
captured Dacca, Chevalier recommended that they should 
liberate the descendants of Sarfaraz Khan, the old Nawab of 
Bengal. The house of Sarfaraz Khan was very popular, and 
although the Princes of the family could not render any material 
help, Chevalier believed that “it would be sufficient to put 
forward their names, and we shall draw from this phantom 
all the advantages that we may be in need of. We shall summon 

the Nawab of Moxoudabad to place himself on our side. 

The beginning would be made by proclaiming at Dacca the 

eldest son of Safrescan, named Aga Baba.He would 

then be recognised in all the parts of the Province lying to 

the cast of the Ganges.We would not leave at peace 

the part lying to the west unless the Nawab of Moxoudabad 
allies himself with us. From that moment the war would be 
finished quicklv, and we shall suddenly find ourselves having 

reached our goal.The Nawab would help us not with 

forces, because he does not have any, but with money, credit 

and influence.We can count on Sojadaolah. 

who is only waiting for the favourable moment to declare him¬ 
self on our side.W T e can equally count on the deposed 

Emperor; he docs not have any troops, but his name would 
always be of great weight in facilitating all our intrigues and 
our policy”. Chevalier then referred to the friendly overtures 
he had received from the Maratha ruler of Bcrar and Cuttack. 
“The Chief of the Marathas of Katek, sworn enemies of the 
English, had made overtures to me in writing and had proposed 
to leave us half of Bengal or an equivalent annual revenue il 
I would furnish him men and munitions for the conquest of 
Bengal. I have eluded the request by honest pretexts”. The 
other Princes of the country had also made offers of alliance to 
Chevalier. “Only the pleasure of being able to satisfy their 