

times the number under the Emperor.By this means 

we would acquire the alliance of all the Princes, their friend¬ 
ship, their protection, and in addition a part of their riches. 
Excellent officers could be employed under the different Princes 
for organising sepoys and training them in our exercises and 
manoeuvres”. 

In the second period, after the restoration of Shah Alam 
at Delhi, Chevalier’s policy took a more definite and concrete 
shape. An alliance with the Emperor and strengthening his 
authority by placing a body of French troops at his service 
became the corner-stone of his diplomacy. An alliance wit! 
the Emperor was all the more useful to France since he was 
supported by the Marathas, the strongest Power in India and 
the only one likely to have the courage to attack the English 
position in Bengal. So from the beginning of 1772 Chevalier 
made pressing representations to the Government in Paris to 
conclude an alliance with the Emperor and send 5,000 troops 
to his assistance. At the same time he also made frantic efforts 
to rally round the Emperor all the French military adventurers 
scattered in different parts of India. While he failed in the 
case of those who were in the sendee of Shuja-ud-dau 1 ah and 
Basal at Jang he succeeded in persuading Madec to give up the 



MIN/Sr^ 



service of the Jat Raja and join the Emperor even at a great 
personal loss. It is interesting to notice that while in his 
letters to the Minister Chevalier repeatedly stated that it was 
the Emperor who was asking for French military assistance, 
in his letters to Madec persuading him to join the Imperial 
service he wrote that his main purpose was ihat once in the 
confidence of the Emperor Madec could induce him to take in 
his service a body of French troops. 

In his first letter dated January 20, 1772, Chevalier urged 
Madec to join the service of the Emperor and to induce him 
to accept two to three thousand French troops from the army 
stationed in the Isle of France. 1 It was followed by a second 
one, dated July 34, 1772, in which Chevalier wrote that the 
Indian Princes were getting impatient of English tyranny and 
could be persuaded to welcome French troops as liberators. 
The person most wronged by the English was the Emperor, 
and Madec was to turn to him first and inform him that 
Chevalier could send to his assistance any number of French 
troops that he might want. Du Jar day, whom Chevalier had 
sent to the Emperor, was to give Madec full details of his 
diplomatic project. 2 In the third letter, dated August 16, 
1772, Chevalier again urged Madec to enter the Imperial service, 
get into the confidence of the Emperor and press upon him 
the utility of a corps of French troops. 3 Then came the most 
pressing call from Chevalier which finally decided Madec. 
“Leave the service of the Raja as quickly as you can and join 
the Emperor. Once near him, you will show him the necessity 
of augmenting your corps and how much it will be for his 
safety, and then it will be for him 10 supply the necessary 
funds/' 4 