

1 A.N.— Colonies: Scrie Noire, Vol. 34: see also Chevalier’s letter to 
the Minister, dated 15U1 December 1777. m connection with the mission 
of l)esblotti£res—B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9366, pp 189-290. 

* B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9366, pp. 289-290 




MIN ISTfy 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS ’—t 

of the project was removed by the departure of 
Madec from north ludia in 1777, in sore disappointment at the 
lack of response to his proposal. Madec bitterly complained 
to Chevalier for having received no letter from him since he 
first put forward his proposal in 1775. But. as will he evident 
from the correspondence of Chevalier given in the next section, 
it was not because of Chevalier’s negligence but because of 
circumstances over which he had no control that Madec did 
not receive any letter from him. In fact, Chevalier sent a 
personal agent named Montvert with letters for the Emperor 
and his Minister, and Montvert was instructed to work in 
accord with Madec and carry through negotiations with the 
Emperor. Montvert failed in his duty; he did not proceed to 
his destination and did not even inform Madec about the object 
of his mission. That was why Madec was kept completely in 
the dark till April 1777. when he received the first communica¬ 
tion from Chevalier, informing him of the favourable attitude 
of the French Government towards his Tatta project. 1 But it 
was then too late, Madec could not be shaken from his decision 
to quit north India; the Emperor had also changed his mind 
and negotiations had to be started afresh. 

The prospect of a successful execution of the Tatta pioject 
was finally removed by the outbreak of war between France 
and England and the sudden capture of Chandernagore on 
July 10, 1778. Lt Col. Dow, who was sent from Calcutta to 
seize the French settlement, was particularly instructed to arrest 
Chevalier, regarded by the English as their most dangerous 
enemy. But Chevalier escaped from his house through the 
help of his wife. Three weeks later, however, he was arrested 
at Cuttack by the Maratha Governor of the place and handed 
over to the English. It was an irony of fate that Chevalier was 
betrayed by the agent of an Indian Prince on whom he had 
counted so much in his diplomatic intrigues. He was later 
released on parole and permitted to return to Europe. Back 
in France at the end of 1779. Chevalier tried once more to 
persuade the Government to accept his views about the plan 
of military operations in India, but by that time he had fallen 
into political disgrace and lost all credit in Government circles. 

1 Bar hi Lr Nabob Rene Madec, p ail. 




executi 


mi mr/}y 



All his plans regarding diplomatic alliances and military 
operations in India were treated with contempt, and in spite 
of In's long experience in India and his intimate knowledge of 
the Indian political situation he was not even consulted when 
the French Government decided to send out an expeditionary 
iorcc under Btissy in i7$id One thing that rnay be said in 
conclusion about Chevalier is that whatever discredit he might 
have earned by his unrealistic approach to the Indian political 
situation, there cannot be any doubt about the sincerity of his 
patriotic fervour; and therefore the political disgrace into 
wdiich he fell after his return to France had everything tragic 
about it. 