

The first time that Chevalier definitely proposed the des 
patch of French troops to the assistance of the Emperor was in a 
letter to the Minister dated August 30, 1772. 5 After stating 
the change in the Indian political situation brought about by 
the restoration of the Emperor at Delhi with the help of the 

1 Barb£ — Le Nabob Rene Madec, p. 61. 

2 tbid > PP* 73*75* 

3 Ibid, pp. 78 80. 

* Ibid, pp. 82 83. 

* B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9366, p. 133. 


mtsrqy 


THF. FRENCH IN INDIA 




Marathas, Chevalier wrote that the Emperor had asked hint 
if he could procure a body ol 5,000 1' re rich troops fot his 
service. But, as we have seen already, the initiative really 
came from Chevalier himself. Anyway, the attitude of the 
Minister was extremely discouraging. He was entirely opposed 
to giving any provocation to the English 1 2 forming alliances 
with the country Powers. In a letter ( .ced September 29, 
1772 Chevalier expressed great surprise and resentment at this 
attitude and recommended, that the best course for the french 
was to quit India completely rather than show their humiliation 
and impotence to the country Powers. 

In spite of the rebuff, however, Chevalier did not remain 
inactive but pursued his old policy of forming diplomatic 
alliances with some of the country Powers in the hope of ulti 
timely being able to bring the French Government to his point 
of view. Through the efforts of his agent at Delhi, du Jarday. 
terms of alliance with the Maratha Chief Mahadaji Sindhia 
were drawn up. which were communicated by Chevalier to the 
Minister in his letter dated February to, >773 " teuns * n 

substance were: (t) in case of a war between the French and 
the English Sindhia was to declare himself an ally of France; 
(x) if there arrived a French expeditionary force in India 
Sindhia would join it with his forces; (3) the Marathas would 
conduct the French army if landed on the Orissa or Gujarat 
Coast, and would supply free of cost provisions and animals for 
transport; (4) if the English were driven out of Bengal the 
Peshwa was to get back all that legitimately belonged to lum; 
(5) the two parties would remain permanently allied; (6) the 
treaty must be ratified by their respective sovereigns. 

On February 28, 1773 Chevalier wrote a long letter to the 
Minister of Marine and Colonies, de Boynes, giving details of 
the political situation at Delhi and the results of his negotia 
tions, and reiterated once more his demand lor a body ol 
French troops for the assistance of the Emperor. 3 After narrat¬ 
ing the course of events which led to a dispute between the 
Emperor and his former allies, the Marathas. the sanguinan 


1 B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 0366, p. 136* 

2 Ibid, p. 137 

J Ibid, pp. 1^8*147. 



battle in the capital, and the severe treaty imposed by the 
Marathas, Chevalier wrote that even when the Emperor was 
forsaken by all, it was necessary for France to come to his help 
and strengthen his authority by lending him a body of troops. 
He was doing all that he could to persuade French military 
adventurers, scattered in different parts of the country, to join 
the Imperial service “1 have induced the French party under 
Basalat Jang, commanded by Zephir anc since his death by 
Gard£, to offer its services to the Fmperor. For this purpose 
I have sent sieur Mottereau to Delhi, where he is to negotiate 
this matter. It may be regarded as concluded if the Emperor 
agrees to pay the expenses both for the maintenance as well as 
for the transport of troops. They consist of 600 Europeans, 
well-armed and disciplined, 900 Topasses (of mixed European 
and Indian descent), 4,000 sepoys trained and armed in the 
European fashion and a train of 12 pieces of artillery". It 
may be noticed here that this plan of Chevalier never material¬ 
ised, and although the exact reason is not known it may be 
presumed that the fundamental difficulty lay in the financial 
distress of the Emperor. Chevalier went on narrating how by 
his persuasions Madec with his corps of 200 European and 
3,000 sepoys had abandoned the service of the Jat Raja and 
had joined the Emperor, how he acquired great influence and 
credit ai the Imperial Court, how he fought bravely against 
the Marathas in defence of the Emperor, and how after the 
battle he retained the confidence of the Emperor and at the 
same time earned the respect of the Marathas. Chevalier felt 
confident that if given marks of official recognition by the 
French Government, a patriotic and enterprising person like 
Madec could be of immense use in furthering national interests. 