

The full details of the Tatta project will be found in the 
next section relating to Madee’s diplomacy. Here wc need 
only indicate the broad outline of the plan and the efForts of 
Chevalier to put it into execution. I he basis of the project 
was the cession of the town and province of I atia to France 
by the Mughal Emperor in return for a solid alliance. That 
would give the French an opportunity to maintain a large body 
of troops in the ceded territory and a small corps in the direct 
Nervice of the Emperor to help him in establishing his authority 
over his recalcitrant vassals. When the opportune moment 
arrived, the entire lx>dy of French troops maintained in 1 atta 
could be moved on to Delhi, where they would be joined by 
the Imperial troops, and the combined forces could make a 



sudden attack on Bengal. In order to keep the matter a close 
secret the Emperor asked Madec to write to the French Govern 
inent direct without going through the official channel of 
Chevalier, but Madec realised that he did not have sufficient 
standing for carrying on negotiations independently. So from 
the beginning he approached Chevalier for his active support, 
and in fact it was the representations of Chevalier which were 
responsible for the serious consideration given to the f atta 
project in France. But things moved very slowly, and for the 
whole of 1776 and the early part of 1777 Chevalier did not 
receive any response from 1 'ranee. In a letter dated August n, 
1776 he urged the immediate necessity of accepting the Tatta 
proposal and warned the Government that the Emperor was 
losing courage and patience. 1 As late as kebruary * 7 // 
Chevalier remained without any hope. In a letter to Due de 
Ghoiseul, dated February 8, 1777 he wrote. “All that I write 
remain unanswered, which proves a very mortifying indifference 
towards me and a lack of confidence in my talents and capacity 

.1 wish that the arrival of Monsieur Law in France will 

make known how much important it is to take into the most 
serious consideration the question of India. 

It was only about the middle of 1777 that Chevalier received 
the first favourable response from Paris, and in a letter to the 
Minister, dated August 31. he wrote that as soon as he received 
definite orders he would send des Blot tieres on a reconnoitring 
voyage to Tatta.* But there was again a prolonged silence. 
Even as late as February 18, 177® we find Chevalier reg* ’tLing 
in a letter to the Minister the dilatory policy of the Govern 
meat and warning him that unless steps were taken promptly 
the French would be totally expelled from the country* l he 
thing was that after long deliberations the French Government 
decided at the end of 1777 to send out Col. Montigny to see 
things for himself and report on the feasibility of the Tatta 
project. In the meantime one essential factor for the success 

< B.N.F.Fr. (N.A.) 9366. pp. 275-279. 

» Ccnlil MHnoires sur l' Indousto ;• ou Empire Mogol, pp. 4*5‘4*”- 