

Madec finally left the camp of Sindhia in June 1773, and 
passing through the Jar country he reached the territory of the 
Raja of Gohad who received him warmly. But from there he 
was not allowed to proceed further bv the strong remonstrances 
of Chevalier. His presence at Delhi and his active collabora¬ 
tion formed the very foundation of the plan proposed by 
Chevalier to the Government in Paris, and hence Chevalier 
frantically tried to prevent Madec's departure. Ultimately 
Madec had to return to Sindhia’s camp, but he did not remain 
there long. As Sindhia moved towards Deccan on the outbreak 
of dissension at Poona, Madec was unwilling to go so far away 
from Delhi, the centre of Chevalier’s diplomacy. 1 hrough the 
good offices of Genril, a French military adventurer like him, 
he entered the service of Shuja-ud-daulah but had to leave 
immediately after under English pressure. However, Shuja-ud- 
daulah secured for Madec a profitable employment under Najaf 
Khan, the General of the Mughal Empire. In accordance with 
the prevailing system Madec was assigned a Jagir or landed 
estate, which lie was to administer and from the revenues of 
which he was to maintain his contingent. His headquarters was 
at Bari, not far from Agra. Thanks to his good administra¬ 
tion and sLrict care in financial matters he was able to secure a 
steadily increasing revenue, with which he could gradually 
enlarge his contingent and turn it into one of the best fight¬ 
ing units in India at the time. 2 

Writing to the Minister in January 1775 * Chevalier referred 
to Madec thus: ‘ We have at Delhi a Frenchman, Madec, who 


1 Barb £—Lt Nabob Rene Madec f p. 106-Madec’s letter to Chevalier 
defending his conduct. 2 Ibid, pp 111-116. 


whist^ 





deserves the .mention of our Government. He enjoys the 
greatest influence over the Emperor in whose service he is, at 
the head of an army of nearly 10,000 men, both infantry and 
Cavalry/' 1 * In fact, Chevalier, who had set his mind on the 
project of an alliance between France and the Mughal Emperor, 
had reason to feel happy at the increasing strength of Madec’s 
contingent and at his steadily rising influence at the Delhi 
Court, since Madec vvas intended to be the principal instrument 
for the execution of his plan. But from France he received 
no encouraging response whatsoever, and in 1775 he gave up 
all interest in his project in despair, until towards the very end 
of the year Madec’s arrangement with the Emperor about the 
cession of Tati a revived his hopes and renewed his old ent hu¬ 
siasm. On the other hand, since the beginning of 1775 Madec 
also lost interest in Chevalier's project, partly for lack of res 
pome from France and partly for the disappointment of not 
getting a King's Commission as Captain which had been pro¬ 
mised to him by Chevalier when the latter first induced him 
to join the Imperial service to further the interests of the 
nation. 3 However, the opening of the Tatta project brought 
Chevalier and Madec into close co-operation again. 