

1 Barbel/ Sabnb Rent \tadrc. pp. 155-158- 


J 


MIN IST/fy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


:ision to write to the King.” There is hardly any doubt 
that it refers to Modave. 

The proposal in essence was that the Emperor would cede 
the town and province of Tatta to France in exchange for a 
small body of French troops to be permanently employed in 
the Imperial service. The French would naturally make Tatta 
their principal establishment in the East, and keep a consi¬ 
derable number of troops then. That would enable the 
Emperor to expect French military help on a large scale in case 
of a war with the English. Tatta was far away from the Eng¬ 
lish possessions in India, and English susceptibilities were not 
likely to be roused by France sending a large body of troops 
for the occupation of that far-off province. Indeed, it was 
only through the possession of Tatta that France could render 
am considerable military help to the Emperor in times of 
necessity, as otherwise the despatch of a body of French troops 
to Delhi would have been regarded as a casus belli by the 
English. While the proposal was put forward, it was made 
clear that merely a grant from the Emperor would not put the 
French in occupation of the province; they would have to 
wrest it from those who were in actual possession, which the; 
could easily do with a few thousand men. The Emperor asked 
Madec to send the proposal to France giving all the necessary 
details, and he himself addressed a letter in general terms to 
the King of France and another one to the Governor of Pon¬ 
dicherry expressing full confidence in Madec. His chief minis¬ 
ter, Abdul Ahad Khan, also wrote a similar letter to the Fremh 
Minister, de Sartine. Unfortunately, these letters are lost and 
we know of thetn only from the correspondence of Madec, 
Modave and Chevalier. 

Before we turn to Madec’s letter to the French Minister, 
with its two accompanying memories giving full details about 
the Tatta project, it is interesting to examine the diplomacs 
of Shah Aiam in making the proposal. For more than three 
years he had been intriguing with Chevalier for a body of 
French troopsfland since France did not evince any interest 
in the matter he now* proposed to give her sufficient induce¬ 
ment by offering a remote territory which did not really belong 
to him and which had been torn away from the Mughal Empire 
by the Afghan rulers many years ago. If France accepted the 


miST/}y 


mp i.oma ric t'KojF.f;is-~i 


>:s 



offer; the Emperor would be in an advantageous position by 
holding the balance between the English in Bengal and the 
French in the lower Indus valley. It was a piece of subtle 
diplomacy by which the Emperor could improve his position 
without any cost whatsoever. 

Madec’s letter to the Minister, de Sartine, 1 began with an 
account of his own career, which was necessary because of his 
lack of official standing or social position in France. He next 
explained why he was sending the Emperors ptoposal ditcct 
and not through the more regular channel of Chevaliei or Law 
de Lauriston. It was because of the insistence of the Emperor 
himself, who was afraid that the secret might leak out to the 