

It was about the middle of 1775 that the Tatta project was 
first mooted, although the exact time cannot be ascertained. 
On this 'point there are two letters on which we can depend 
foi some indication, at least for forming a guess. The first is 
a letter from Modave to Moracin at Pondicherry, dated 19th 
October 1775, which he stated that the Mughal Emperor 
first made the proposal to him some time after his joining the 
Imperial service, i.e., some time after April 1775. 3 The second 
is Madec's letter to the Governor and Intendant of the Isle of 
France, dated 10th October 1775 in which Madec stated that 
the proposal was first made to him by the Emperor a few 
months back when he was at Delhi on a temporary visit. 4 As 
regards the first overture in the matter, both Madec and 
Modave agree that it came from the Emperor himself, who was 

1 A.N.—Min ; st£ie d( s Colonies: C-a. 140. 

3 Barlxi —Le Nabob Rend Madec, pp. 127-129. 

a P. A. rus. 283—Correspondence of Modave. 

4 Barb6. op. cit., pp. 158-159. 


miSTffy. 



anxious for an alliance with France, and in order to procure 
a body of French troops without giving any overt cause oi 
grievance to the English he made the offer of ceding the pro¬ 
vince of Tatta. But then the two differ as to which of them 
was first taken into confidence by the Emperor and asked to 
negotiate with the French Government. It was Madec who 
actually sent the proposal to the authorities in France, and in 
his letter (to be quoted later) to *he Minister, de Sartine, he 
stated that it was to him alone that the Emperor first broached 
the subject. Modave on the other hand, in the letter referred 
to above, claimed the credit of being the first person to he taken 
into confidence by he Emperor and asked to negotiate with 
the King of France. It was, as he stated, because of the great 
esteem in which he was held by both the Emperor and his 
chief minister, Abdul Ahad Khan, who considered him as the 
fittest instrument for negotiating with the French Government. 
But out of gratitude for Madec, who had helped him in getting 
employment under the Emperor, he asked the Emperor to con 
tact Madec for forwarding the proposal to France. It should 
be noticed here that the Emperor had no direct dealing with 
the Governor of Pondicherry, Law, although the latter had been 
in his service when he attacked Bihar as Prince Ali Gauhar; 
and although he was in communication with Chevalier in 
Bengal, he did not like to send his proposal to France through 
him lest it might leak out to the English who were dominant 
in Bengal. Emile Barte in his biography of Madec ridicules 
the claim of Modave to have taken any active part in the dis¬ 
cussions at the Delhi Court with regard to the Tatta project.’ 
It is interesting, however, to note Madec's letter to the Gover¬ 
nor and Intendant of the Isle of France, dated Agra, loth 
October 1775 (referred to above): "A few months back this 
monarch (the Emperor) expressed to me a great desire to enter 
into relations with the King (of France). I was not in a posi¬ 
tion to pursue the matter, having been obliged to return to 
my estates. Fortunately, there was at Delhi a person to whom 
I could entrust this task. In fact, the Emperor, who had esteem 
and respect for this person, did not make any difficulty in dis¬ 
closing to him all his plans. As a result the Emperor took the 