

Chevalier's first letter to Madec was dated 2nd April ^ 77 1 - 
Madec was exhorted to work as an agent of France md not 
merely as the chief of a private army, and he was assured of 
official recognition and reward for any service that he m.ght 
render to the nation. There was a long gap, and the second 
letter that Madec received was dated 20th January 1 77 s? * 2 ^ or 
the first time Chevalier asked him to join the service of the 

1 For an account of the early career of Madec, see BarW: Le Nabob 
Hen A Madec, pp. 1-44. 

2 Ibid, p. 61. 


UWlST/fy 



Mughal Emperor and to he ready to invade Bengal with the 
Imperial and Maratha forces. The third letter was dated 24th 
July 1772, in which Chevalier made a pressing request to Madcc 
to join the Imperial service immediately without caring for any 
personal sacrifice. He was also asked to confer with du Jarday, 
whom Chevalier was sending to the Delhi Court for negotia¬ 
tions. 1 

Madcc was placed in a difficult position by the march of 
the Imperial arms against the Jats. If he fought against the 
Emperor he would upset the diplomatic project of Chevalier; 
if on the other hand, he deserted the Jats and went over to 
the Emperor he would lose his arrears of salary amounting to 
two lakhs of rupees. But while he was secretly negotiating 
with the Emperor, he received another pressing letter from 
Chevalier: “Leave the service of thc’(Jat) Raja as early as you 

can and attach yourself to the Emperor.The thing is 

how to raise the Nation from its past misfortunes and to revive 
its glory and splendour. Begin then preparations for it, and I 
count very much on you for succeeding in an object as prais- 
worthy and as glorious’'." Madec gave his reactions in his 
Me moires in the following words: “I was too flattered that the 
Government believed me to be capable of deciding the fate 
of my Nation in India not to show him (Chevalier) on my 

side rny eagerness to support his views with all my efforts. 

At last th repeated solicitations of M. Chevalier and my love 
for rny country made me soon forget the debt due to me by the 
fats.” He at once concluded negotiations with the Emperor 
and passed into his service on a salary of Rs. 40,000 per month 
with a title of nobility. 3 

Thus out of patriotic: motives Madec left the Jats, sacrific¬ 
ing the arrears of salary due to him amounting to two lakhs of 
rupees, and in November 1772 entered the Imperial service. He 
remained there only for three months and suffered the loss of 
his entire camp during the Maratha attack on Delhi. But his 
personal reputation was enhanced by his stubborn defence and 
he was offered a very lucrative employment under Sindhia, the 

* Barb6-~£* Nabob Ruie Madec. pp. 73 * 75 * 

2 Ibid, pp. 82-8$. 

• IMd, PP- 33-84. 




MIN IST/ff, 


DIPLOMA nc PROJF< TS — f 



chief of the Maratha forces in north India. Although the offer 
was accepted, the repeated personal misfortunes and the lack 
of any response from the French Government to Chevalier's 
diplomatic project, which had inspired him to offer his services 
to the Mughal Emperor, so discouraged Madec that at the end 
of February 1773 he decided to quit India and return to France. 
He, however, tried to safeguard the interest of the nation and 
the success of Chevalier’s project by leaving his corps intact in 
Sindhia’s service under the command of Chevalier’s agent, du 
Jarday. 1 