


English if transmitted through (ihandernagore 01 Pondicherry- 
When Madec pleaded that he was not sufficiently well-known 
to the Government in France to be able to deal with such 
important political negotiations, the Emperor replied that he 
would remove the difficulty by writing to Law to inform the 
French Minister that lie had full confidence in Madec. 1 hen 


Madec narrated how during a temporary visit to Delhi a few 
months back he was called by the Emperor in secret and told 
the following: "I would like to know from yon if I may draw- 
some help and support from your nation. We are in general 
very little informed about the state of affairs in Europe. I 
am nor unaware, however, that the King of France is the 
greatest and the most powerful of the European Princes. But. 
I am afraid the events of the last war have made your nation 
lose interest in the affairs of India. I think so principally 
from the little effort it has made since the Peace to re-establish 


itself in its old possessions and to present itseh there on a 
respectable footing. Nevertheless, 1 would very much like it 
to think seriously of securing a solid ground there and of estab 
lishing dose relations with me. the English are, it is said, 
your natural enemies, and I have just grounds to consider them 
as mine too. If therefore I know the disposition of the King 
of France, I would propose things to him which would b( 
mutually useful to us. The French establishments, surrounded 
on all sides by English possessions, must remain in a state of 
mediocrity till the time when a new war will change the face 


i Barbe— Le Nabob Rent Madec, pp. 140047* 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

of things. It is nor there that I can help the French. But iJ 
the King would desire other possessions, I can cede them to 
him, which according to me would be extremely advantageous; 
and I ask you to write to France, conveying my ideas and 
also seeking to ascertain the intentions of the King". Madec 
represented that he did not have any official status in France 
for such an important mission, but the Emperor replied that 
in order to add weight to his proposals he would write a per¬ 
sonal letter to the King of France, worded in general terms and 
without going into details, but stating that he had entrusted 
Madec to make liis intentions known to the King. He actually 
handed over the letter to Madec, and Abdul Ahad Khan, the 
chief minister, also gave him a personal letter to the French 
Minister, de Sartine. 

Madec continued: "It is for you now to decide if the 
Nation can draw any advantage from the dispositions of the 
Emperor, but I must inform you of them. He proposes to 
cede to the King the town and Soubafi of Tatta-Bakar. It 
is a province situated at the mouth of the Scindi, towards 25 
degree of the northern latitude. The advantages of this cession 

have been given in a memoire attached to this letter. 

I must not conceal from you that the Emperor in deciding to 
make such an important cession was induced principally by 