

The original intention of Madec was to send his letters to 
France direct without the intermediary of Chevalier. It was 
partly because of the insistence of the Emperor on maintaining 
the closest secrecy and partly because of Madec s disappointment 
at not getting a King’s Commission promised by Chevalier. 
Anyway, he soon realised that in view of his lack of official 
status his proposal to the French Government had no chance 
of being even considered seriously unless suppoited by Chevalier, 
the accredited representative of France in Bengal and specially 
entrusted with dealing with the Mughal Emperor. So he com¬ 
municated his proposal to Chevalier in November 177J}, 1 and 
it was in fact due to Chevalier s active interest that the Tatta 
project received serious consideration in 1 ranee. How much 
Chevalier’s support to the proposal was useful will be evident 
from the following letter of Kerscao whom Madec had sent to 
carry his letters to the Isle of France, to be transmitted from 
there to Paris. “He (the Governor of the Isle of France) has 
sent your letter to the Minister; you are in very high favour 

.I did very well to have brought letters from Chevalier 

because it is on them that M. De Ternay (the Governor) based 


a Barb£-~/.* Nabob Rent! Madec, p. 135. 



Ml NlSTffy 



nimself in writing to the Minister”. 1 This is fully confirmed by 
the letter of the Governor and Intendant of the Isle of France 
to the Minister in Paris. “M. Chevalier, commandant of the 
French establishment in Bengal, must have informed you of the 
readiness of the Mogol Emperor to transfer the proprietorship of 

latta to the King. 1 he commandant must have added 

that the Mogol Emperor was induced to make this cession only 
by the consideration of iiis own interest and in the hope that 
he would be able to get for his service some French troops 
sent for the administration of Tatta. Nothing is more Appro¬ 
priate to confirm these dispositions of the Prince than the 
mimoire which we have the honour to forward to you herewith 
and which has been sent to us by one M. Madec, with whom 
M. Chevalier has been in correspondence for a long time.” 2 

Fortunately for Madec and Chevalier, there was a change 
in the attitude of the French Government in 1776. As the War 
of American Independence seemed imminent, the French Gov 
ernment for the first time began to give serious consideration to 
the various proposals for diplomatic and military interference in 
India. An interesting document in the Colonial Archives 
throws light on the favourable reception given to the Tatta 
project in France at the beginning of 1776. 3 It is entitled 
Secret Affairs: Picture of the political conditions in India on 
the 1st of March 1776”; and although unsigned it is perhaps 
the summary of an opinion presented to the King by the 
Minister, de Sartine. “The Mogol has made proposals to us by 
two different intermediaries, one by sieur Chevalier and the 
other by sieur Madec. Through Chevalier the Emperor asks 
for a corps of four to five thousand men to be sent to Delhi. 
TKrough Madec he offers to cede us his rights over Tatra and 