

his own personal interests.He hopes that the French 

established at Tatta-Bakar, will be either wholly or partially 
at his disposal and that he will make use of them to suppress 
the insolence of the great vassals of his Empire on one side, 
and on the other to show to the English a corps of French 
troops ready to oppose their ambitious claims*’. 

Attached to this letter were two memoires giving details 
about the project, one "on the town and province of Tatta- 
Bakar" and the other "on the present political state of affairs 
in Hindusthan". In the first memoire 1 Madec stated that the 
province of which Tatta was the capital included four Sarkars 
and fifty Parganas and had a revenue of twenty-four lakhs of 
rupees, equivalent to six million livres. The town, being 
situated on a large river and surrounded by a strong wall, offered 
great advantages for commerce as well as defence. The pro- 



1 Barbe —Lr Nabob Rene Madec, pp, 161-165. 



mtsTfy 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS —t 


vince also was easily defensible, being surrounded by forests, 
deserts and mountains, and the only access was either down 
the rive?’ from the north or up from the south. The river was 
navigable almost in its entire course i.e., four to five hundred 
leagues. Tatta could not he reached from the sea by large 
ships, but medium-sized vessels could move up with ease. The 
place had great commercial possibilities because of the rich 
hinterland, the Punjab, the famous products of which would 
be attracted there for export if a European settlement was 
established. Madec next pointed out that the grant of the 
Mughal Emperor did not mean an easy and immediate posses¬ 
sion for the French. “The fact is not concealed in this 
Mdrnuire that the Emperor in transferring to the King the 
proprietorship of this town and Sou bah only gives up his own 


rights without engaging himself to hand over to him imme¬ 
diate possession.” T he country was actually in the possession 
of the king of Kandahar and partly of the Sikhs. But it was 
not difficult to wrest it from their hands, since no opposition 
was to be expected from the people in general, and what little 
resistance there might be from the ruling classes could be met 
by M a few cannon shots". 

“The nature of things will make Tatta and its Soubah the 
principal establishment of the French nation in India. It is a 
country completely new to Europeans. It has not been in the 
least devastated by the long succession of wars and calamities 
which have afflicted the Empire for thirty years The Moham¬ 
medan Government is, by its very nature, extremely tyrannical 
and aggressive. Experience shows us that Indians accommodate 
themselves perfectly to European administration as soon as 

they are put under the yoke.For this operation to 

have complete success, it is necessary to employ a corps of 3,000 
troops which will suffice for taking possession of the place and 
maintaining order there". As regards the expenses of the 
military operation. Madec expected that they could be met 
from the revenue of the province and from the contributions 
to be levied on the neighbouring vassals of the Emperor. Since 
the Emperor had been prompted to make the cession by the 
hope of getting a body of French troops in his service, Madec 
suggested that out of the 3,000 men to be sent to Tatta a 
detachment of 1,000 should remain with the Emperor. Madec 