


THE TRENCH IN INDIA 

stressed the need of raising 12,000 sepoys, since effective 
military operations in India required a sepoy force at least 
four times larger than the European element. It was necessary 
therefore to send from France additional arms to equip this 
huge body of sepoy force and also a large artillery of the besi 
standard then known in India. If the Minister accepted the 
proposal regarding Tatta, Madec begged to be given the com 
mand of the detachment to remain in the service of the 
Emperor. '‘Besides a knowledge of affairs in general of this 
country and of the manner to deal with them, a perfect under¬ 
standing of the language is an advantage which requires a long 
time to acquire. My own troops, which the King can already 
consider as his own, will augment the forces of this detach¬ 
ment; and I dare assure him that being accustomed to the 
method of warfare practised in this country they will be very 
useful to His Majesty’s service”. 

In the second memoire Madec aimed at giving a picture of 
the political condition of the Mughal Empire at the time. 1 
“My object in this memoire is not to seek out the causes which 
have precipitated the Mughal Empire to fall into the condition 

of decadence and anarchy in which we find it today. 

I wish simply to describe its present condition and to give a 
correct and precise idea about the ambitious plans of the 
English**. Madec then narrated how alter the invasion of Nadir 
Shah the Emperor lost not only his prestige but also his rights 
of sovereignty. The land beyond the Indus passed under 
Afghan rule, and that between the Indus and Delhi, under the 
control of the Sikhs. The Rohillas and the Nawah of Oudh 
became virtually independent. The Jats, the Rajputs and the 
Marathas all carved out dominions at the expense of the 
Emperor. “The Emperor in the midst of so many diverse 
interests.can only play a very tragic role. Neverthe¬ 

less, if chance would place on the throne of the Mogol a young 
prince having vigour, courage and ambition, it is probable 
that he will quickly recover a part of his rights which his 
predecessors had lost.” 

Madec continued: “The Prince who occupies the throm 
todav appears to be as suitable as any other to carry through 

• Barbt -Lr Nabob Rene Madsc, pp. 170*176. 




then 




MIN ISTffy 



this great revolution. He attained .sovereign power at a mature 
ge. He has more understanding and knowledge of the world 
and of its affairs than what men like him generally have”. 
After referring to his adventures as a Prince, Madec wrote, 
“From the knowledge of his character that I have, 1 dare affirm 
that he would conduct himself in a different manner il he 
were assured against the fear of the English by an alliance 
with us”. He then stressed the necessity of preventing the 
Emperor from throwing himself into the arms of the English. 
“The English are working with great perseverance to change 
the views of the Emperor towards them ..... He will not 
decide that way until he is forced to do so as his last point of 
defence, I mean, when he will feel that he has no more help 
or hope from any quarter. That is the real spirit of the letter 
which he wrote to the King. It is important to examine fullv 
in France if it would suit the interests of His Majesty to abandon 
this Prince to his fate and to leave the ground free to the 
English”. 