

its dependencies.on condition that a corps of troops 

would be sent to him from Tatta. These two proposals accord 
perfectly with our existing diplomatic relations in India”. The 
author then observed that although the proposal sent by Madec 

1 Rarbc - -Lc Nabob Rene Madec, p. 161. 

* fbid, p. 160. 

3 Reproduced almost in full by Barb£, pp. 177-179. 



misr/t,. 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—I 



was not considered as seriously as that by 


Chevalier, 


<SL 

because 


Madec being a soldier of * fortune was regarded less reliable, 
his proposal was in fact even better. I he ultimate object of 
both the proposals was the same, namely to strengthen the 
position of the Emperor; bur. Madcc’s proposal was better for 
two reasons: first, the resentment of the English would he much 
less if the French troops were sent in the first instance to a 
distant place like Tatta than if they were sent direct to Delhi; 
and second, the possession of Tatta would give the French a 
safe base where reinforcements could be sent without any 
English opposition and where the French forces in north India 
could retire if military exigencies required the abandonment 


of Delhi. 


But while the French Government was considering the 


Tatta project in a leisurely fashion, things were changing fast 
in India. Madec suffered some military reverses whicn entailed 
heavy financial losses and a weakening of the strength of his 
corps. His relations with Najaf Khan, the General of the 
Emperor, became strained, culminating in his being deprived 
of his old Jagir in exchange for one much less lucrative, f hen 
for nearly eighteen months since he first forwarded the proposal 
about Tatta he did not receive any news cither from Chevaliei 
or from France, and he naturally concluded that there was little 
possibility of the proposal being accepted. 1 he sudden change 
in his fortune and the lack of response to his Tatta project 
decided Madec early in 1777 to leave north India and return to 
France bv way of Pondicherry. The thing was that soon after 
he wa informed by Madec about the I atta project, Chevaliei 
sent an agent named Montvert with letters for both Madec 
and the Emperor. Montvert was authorised to negotiate with 
the Emperor, in concert with Madec, for the grant of a Fat man 
ceding Tatta to France. It was Montvert's negligence which 
was responsible for Madec getting no news from C hevalier till 
April 1777. But the mischief had been done, Madec had made 
up his mind' to quit north India, and no amount of persuasion 
from Chevalier could dissuade him. He wrote to Chevalier 
that because of the long delay in accepting the olTer it was 
difficult to persuade the Emperor to renew it; and then leaving 
negotiations with the Emperor in the hands of the Raja of 
Gohad and Visage, entrusted with the command of the remnant 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


his corps in the Raja's service, he started for Pondicherry 
about the end of May 1777. 1 

The departure of Madec from north India dealt a severe 
blow to French diplomatic enterprises centring round the Court 
of Delhi. But before the news reached Paris the French Govern 
rnent had decided to send out Col. Montigny to India to report 
from first hand knowledge on the feasibility of undertaking the 
Tatta enterprise. Montigny was instructed to work in concert 
with Madec and to conclude negotiations with the Mughal 
Emperor. He arrived at Agra about, the middle of 1778, and 
there learnt for the first time that Madec had left. He, how 
ever, remained at the camp of Najaf Khan for some time, 
collected information about Tatta and ultimately wrote to the 
Minister that it was the most fantastic project that had ever 
been submitted to the Government.. It is not unlikely that if 
Madec had remained in north India, his mere presence would 
have changed things and Montigny might have been brought to 
a more favourable view about the Tatta project. 2 