

Madec 

Chevalier’s project centred on an alliance with the Mughal 
Emperor and the despatch of a large body of French troops to 
Delhi with the immediate object of re-establishing his authority 
over his vassals and the ultimate one of making a joint attack 
on Bengal. I he main difficulty of this project was that the 
despatch of a large body of French troops to Delhi was sure to 
be regarded by the English as a direct threat to their own 
position in Bengal. Objection on this ground was raised by 
both Law at Pondicherry and the Minister of Marine and Colo¬ 
nies. de Boynes, in Paris. A variation of Chevalier’s project 
was put forward by Madcc, one of the most famous French 
adventurers in the service of the Indian Princes. To be sure, 
Madec got his inspiration from Chevalier, but for whose 
patriotic exhortations he would probably have ended his career 
as a mere military adventurer and would not have taken any 
part in political negotiations. To be sure again, Madec’s pro¬ 
ject was essentially the same as Chevalier’s, namely strengthen¬ 
ing the authority of the Mughal Emperor with a large body 
of French troops, with the ultimate object of attacking the 
English in Bengal. The difference lay in that Madec tried to 
obviate the opposition of the English by securing from the 
Emperor a grant of the province of Tatta or Sind, situated far 
away from the English possessions in India, where the main 

1 B.N.F.Fr. (N A.) 9366, pp. 305.309. 


mtST/fy 



body of the French troops would be kept while a very small 
force would be maintained at Delhi in the direct service of 
the Emperor. English suspicion would be lulled into sleep, 
and when the favourable moment (or action would arrive, the 
entire French forces in the province of I atta could be taken to 
Delhi and employed in a large-scale invasion of Bengal from 
the north, while at the same time a 1 rench fleet moving up the 
Ganges would lay siege to Calcutta. I hus Madec s plan was 
calculated to take away the opposition of Law and dr Boynes 
to Chevalier's project. 

Ren6 Madec, like most of the French adventurers of the 
period, first came to India during the time of Dupleix and 
fought in the Carnatic wars. He was taken prisoner after the 
fall of Pondicherry in 1761. and gained his release by taking 
service under the English. He fought, on the side of the 
English against Mir Kasim at Rajmahal, but at heart he wanted 
an opportunity to escape and take to the career of a militan 
adventurer. He got his opportunity during the first mutiny in 
the English sepoy force on the eve of the battle of Buxar, 
escaped with some of his compatriots and took service under 
Shuja-ud-daulah, the Nawab of Oudh. He was wounded at 
the battle of Buxar and was later dismissed by Shuja-ud-daulah 
under English pressure. Madec then found employment first 
under Ghaziuddin Khan, son of the famous IVazir, and then 
under the Rohillas, and finally joined the Jats in 1767. 1 Ft 
was while in the service of the Jats that Madec came under the 
influence of Chevalier, who was thinking of strengthening the 
authority of the Mughal Emperor by the adhesion of the 
numerous French soldiers scattered in different parts of India. 