


1 P. A, ms. ux>. It is a lengthy document of 165 pages. 


MINlSr^ 


DIPLOMA 11 C PROJECTS—II 

a position to resume hostilities till six or seven years 
later. Second, the person who would command the expedi¬ 
tionary force should be given detailed instructions one year 
before the commencement of hostilities so that the french 
could be on the move well in advance of the formal declara¬ 
tion of war. “The English took us by surprise during the 

last war. It should be wished that they may be paid 

back in a similar fashion” 1 . The advance information was 
also necessary to secure the alliance of some of the country 
Powers. The political situation in India changed so swiftly 
that in making arrangements with the Indian Princes it was 
necessary to hx a definite date for the commencement of hosti¬ 
lities; and even if there be no declaration of war in Europe 
by that date, French troops must nevertheless appear as the 
auxiliaries of the Indian Princes. Third, positive orders and 
necessary funds must be sent at the earliest opportunity foi 
fortifying Pondicherry, Mah£ and Karikal, and for raising a 
sepo) force of two thousand men. to be organised in such a 
fashion that it could be quadrupled in an instant without 
augmenting the number of officers. It was also necessary lor 
the French to possess a port in India where their vessels could 
find shelter in all seasons and undergo repairs. The most 
suitable port for that purpose was Trinkomali, and an attempt 
could be made to secure from the Dutch the old French terri¬ 
tory in the Ba) of Trinkomali, with the right of erecting 
fortifications, but on the clear condition of refraining from 
communicating with the interior of the country or carrying 
on trade and comerce, so as not to injure the rights and 
interests of the Dutch. Finally, steps must be taken to put 
the Isles of France and Bourbon in a proper state of defence 
and to store there all the munitions and other equipments 
required for military operations in India. 

Law next stressed the need of having naval superiority 
in Indian waters. He admitted that the French could wage 
a purely maritime war, the object being to destroy the enemy’s 
trade and commerce, for which it would be sufficient to have 
about a dozen frigates cruising near the mouth of the Ganges, 
off Ceylon, along the Malabar Coast, at the entrance to 
the Red Sea and in the Persian Gulf. But for a wider kind 
of warfare, necessitating large-scale land operations in different 





I'HE FRENCH IN INDIA 



(St 

..fsJV 


of ihe country, the French must have an effective 
Iperiority. “F Fe, who will be master on the sea, will be so 

on land as well sooner or later. That is an incontestable axiom, 
at least so far as colonies are concerned". 

Regarding the plan of operations, Law indicated four 
points of attack,-—Calcutta, Madras, Masulipatam and Bombay. 
Of the four, he considered Calcutta as the most desirable for 
delivering the first surprise attack, since Bengal was the source 
of the English power in India, although he admitted that the 
opposition to l»e encountered there would be much greater 
than anywhere else. For a surprise attack on Calcutta the 
french would require fi.ooo European troops, 2,000 sepoys and 
about 2.000 marines. With these numbers it was reasonable 
to expect, success, although the English had about 4,000 
European troops and 25.000 well trained sepoys; but the main 
difficulty lay in piloting a large number of troopships from the 
mouth of the Ganges and that in secrecy. The next point 
of attack was Madras. Provided the French had naval supre 
niaey, an expeditionary force of 4,000 European troops, 4,000 
sepoys and 2,000 marines would be sufficient to compel the 
English, who had only 2.000 European troops and 12.000 
sepoys, to shut themselves up within the fort of Madras. It 
was likely that they would avoid any decisive engagement 
before the arrival of reinforcements from Bengal. So it the 
siege of Madras dragged on for a long time, the French would 
have 10 do two things: first, to secure the alliance of Haidar 
Ali who would overrun the whole of the Carnatic, and second, 
to send a few strong frigates to the mouth of the Ganges to 
intercept reinforcements from Bengal, ff, however, such con¬ 
siderable land forces be not available as would be required 
for an attack on Calcutta or Madras, the first blow could be 
delivered against Masulipatam. The capture of that place and 
the possession of the Northern Sarkars through an alliance 
with Nizam Ali would drive a wedge between the English 
possessions in Bengal and those on the Coromandel Coast. 
For success in this enterprise naval supremacy would be 
an essential requirement, to intercept reinforcements from 
Bengal to Madras. Land operations would require about 2,000 
European troops and an equal number of marines and of 
sepovs. provided the English could be kept engaged in the 