


MiN/sr^ 


diplomatic: project is -n 




Carnatic with the help of a southern Power. I he fourth point 
of attack was Bombay, which would provide the French with 
a good port for all seasons. The possession of Bombay would 
make it easy to capture Surat and all the small English factories 
on the Malabar Coast. For a successful attack on Bombay 
the French would require ai least 3,000 European troops, 


besides marines. 

Finally, Law urged the necessity of making an official 
declaration about the aims of the French policy in India, in 
the form of a manifesto to the different Indian Powers. It 
must be unequivocally stated that the French had no intention 
of carving out dominions in India, that they had come onl\ 
to liberate the Indian Princes from the yoke of the English, 
and that they would keep no more territories to themselves 
than what would be required to meet their expenses in India. 

We may next notice another memoire of Law entitled 
Observations sur Vit-at politique dc l hide, written in Feb¬ 
ruary 1777 and intended to enlighten Bellccombe, his successot 
as Governor of Pondicherry, on the political situation in India 
and the means required to revive French influence with the 
help of some of the Indian Powers. 1 In this memoire Law 
gave a detailed account of the position of the English in India, 
their military strength and their policy with respect to the: 
country Powers. He also discussed the strength of the prin¬ 
cipal Indian Powers and their mutual relations, always based 
on jealousy and suspicion. He drew a dear pic ure of the 
weak and defenceless condition of the French settlements, and 
then gave his views on how to build up an anti-English coali¬ 
tion among the country Powers. 

While discussing the policy of the English with respect 
to the country Powers. Law wrote that it was based on the 
principle of perpetuating the existing division and disunity 
among them in order to keep the English possessions safe 
from any combined attack. The only Indian Powers who gave 
some cause for anxiety to the English were Nizam Ali, his 
brother Basalat Jang, the Marathas of Poona and Haidar Ali. 
Although there was no direct clash of interests between the 
English and Nizam Ali, they kept a strict w r atch on his rela- 


1 P. A. ms. 238. It was published in 19 1 3, being edited by Mmtineau. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


ions with Haidar Ali and the Maiathas, Basal at Jang gave 
them some worry b) keeping in his service a party of French 
troops commanded by de Lai lee. With Haidar Ali, their 
former enemy, the English were for the time being on friendly 
terms, i bis rapprochement was the direct consequence of 
the arrogant conduct of the French Commandant of Mahc, 
Duprat and Repentigny, who had interfered in the quarrels 
of the neighbouring Princes and had not only gone against 
Haidar’s interests but had even threatened him with war. 1 
Although the actions of the two Chiefs were promptly dis¬ 
owned by the Pondicherry Government, they \ih a deep 
impression upon the mind of Haidar, who came ro look upon 
the French with increasing suspicion. The coolness between 
the French and Haidar was prompth exploited by the English 
at Bombay and I ellicherry, who tried to win over Haidar to 
their side and succeeded in obliterating the old bitterness of 
the first Anglo-Mvsore war. How far the English had won 
over Haidar was evident from their venturing on the first war 
with the Marathas tor the possession of Salsette and Bassein, 
which they would not have undertaken if they had not been 
sure about the friendly disposition of Haidar. In his bitter¬ 
ness against the French Haidar not only became reconciled 
with his old enemies, the English, but even approached the 
Dutch authorities at Cochin for a body of Dutch troops to 
replace the Frenchmen in his service, although ultimately the 
project did not materialise because of the refusal of the Batavia 
Government. Law considered it a very difficult task for the 
French to gain back the friendship of Haidar and to persuade 
him to enter into an anti-English coalition with the Marathas 
and Nizam Ali But at the same time he felt that Haidar's 
friendly relations with the English need not wonry the French 
very much, since in the ultimate analysis his policy would 
depend entirely <>n his own interest, and he would throw over 
the English the moment he would find that he had anything 
to gain by allying himself with the French. The fact was 
that "he is a soldier who thinks only of himself, who at heart 
detests Europeans of whatever nation they may be, who will 
nevertheless make use of them for his own interests because 