

Gentil returned to France in 1778 and was rewarded by 
the King with the rank of a Colonel. He spent the remaining 
years of his life in quiet and literary pursuits and died in 1799. 
Apart from the political interest of his long residence in Oudh, 
Gen ii has a claim to fame for another reason, perhaps more 
important. He was one of the earliest Europeans to attempt 
to make Indian civilisation and culture known to the West. 
He spent an enormous amount of money in purchasing Sans¬ 
krit, Bengali, Arabic and Persian manuscripts and presented 
them fo the King on his return to France. In fact, the begin¬ 
ning of Indological studies in France may be traced to the 
first collection of Indian manuscripts made by Gentil. For 
this reason alone Gentil deserves to be remembered in India 
more than any other Frenchman, more than Dupleix, Laily or 
Bussy, who played such an important part in the political 
history of the country. 2 


1 Gentil —Mi moires sur Vlndoustan ou Empire Mogoi, pp. 423-428. 

2 Apart from collecting manuscripts, Gentil was also the author of 
the following works: (1) Histone Numsmatiquc de t'Inde; (2) Histoire 
A b re gee de l'Empire Mogoi; (3) A hr cgee geographique de I'Inde ; (4) His- 
toite des radjahs de Vlndoustan. depiiis Barht jusqu’d Petaurah. 


I mST/ly 


CHAPTER VI 




DIPLOMATIC: PROJECTS: LAW DE LAURISTON 
AND BELLECOMBE 

I,AW DE LAUKISVON 

In the present chapter we shall notice the political views 
of two Governors of Pondicherry, Law de Lauriston (1765-1776) 
and Beilecombc (1777-1778). as expressed in their mimoin > 
and letters to the Minister. The 6rst official despatch of Law 
that may be reviewed is the Memoire sitr les diverse* Nations 
Ewoptennes ^ tab lies dans /’ Unde, written in 1767. 1 After 
giving a detailed account of the conditions of the various 
European settlements in India, including their administration, 
revenues, trade and commerce, military strength, and relations 
with com* try Powers, Law discussed at length the means 
required by the French io achieve equality in political influ¬ 
ence with the English. Although he admitted that no improve¬ 
ment in the French position in India could be made without 
another trial of strength with the English, he advocated a 
policy of maintaining peace for at least four vears in view ol 
the completely defenceless condition of the French settlements, 
which in their existing state could be easily captured by the 
English in less than a month from the declaration of war. 

o 

Nothing of course could be done to save Ghandernagore, but 
the four years of peace could be utilised by the French to 
strengthen the garrisons in the other settlements, particularly 
at Pondicherry, to train up a large sepoy force, to enter into 
solid agreements with some of the country Powers, and to 
draw up a detailed and clear-cut plan of military operations 
in India, 

I iw suggested the following measures for the period of 
peace. First, the French should try to create an impression 
among the English that thc\ were not much concerned about 
their lost possessions in India, and that in any case they were 