

1 lb A. ras. 5180. 

K 



is of Gentil and led to the total extinction of French 


I MF. FRENCH IN fNDIA 



influence in Oudh. 

Gentil first came out to India in 175 2 with a regiment 
of Infantry and distinguished himself in service under Dupleix, 
Bussy and Lally. After 1761, like many of his compatriots, 
he offered his services to the Indian Princes. He first attached 
himself to Mir Kasim, Nawab of Bengal, and took part in 
his light against the English. The most noteworthy event oi 
his career during this period was his attempt to save the 
English prisoner; at Patna, killed by Sombre under the orders 
of Mir Kasim. Soon after he took service under Shuja-ud- 
daulah and earned his confidence and espect. to such an extent 
that after the battle of Buxar he was chosen to carry on 
negotiations with the English. The successful conclusion of 
the negotiations increased the prestige and influence of Gentil. 
who became an intimate adviser of the Nawab and specially 
charged with re-organising and training the remnants of the 
army which the treaty with the English permitted the Nawab 
to maintain. The Nawab even expressed a desire to take 
in his service a corps of French troops, and Gentil, who was 
also anxious to increase the influence of his nation in Oudh 
as a counterpoise to the English domination of Bengal, succeeded 
in forming at once a small corps of 400 men, later increased 
to 600. by collecting the French deserters from English service. 
Madec, the most prominent of these deserters, was appointed 
sergeant-major of the French corps. It was Gentil s generosity 
which saved such a large number of his compatriots from 
starvation. Most of them, however, as Modave remarked in 
his Voyage da Bengal e d Delhi, were scoundrels and unfit for 
military service and they repaid Gentil with base ingratitude. 
According to Modave, far from increasing French influence 
in Oudh. they only brought discredit on their nation. How¬ 
ever, Gentil felt that the mere presence of these Frenchmen 
in his army would inspire confidence in the Nawab of Oudh 
in the willingness of France to offer him military assistance. 
He did not doubt the sincerity of Shuja-iul-danlah’s profession 
of friendship towards the French and believed that by gradual 
persuasion he would be able to conclude a treaty of alliance 
between the Nawab and the King of France. 

Gentil proceeded slowly and did not put forward any 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS— 



definite scheme of alliance 



But he kept himself in touch with 


the French Government and sent reports on the political situa¬ 


tion in Oudh. In a letter, dated January 17. * 77 ^* Boynes, 
the Minister of Marine and Colonies, thanked him for the zeal 
he showed in working for national interest. f know that 
you enjoy the complete confidence of Shuja-ud-daulah. Con¬ 
tinue to keep up the goodwill of the Nawab in favour of the 
nation, and lie assured that I shall procure? from His Majesty 


due recognition of your services" . 1 Modave in his f oya^t du 
Jiengale d Delhi narrates an interesting incident about this 
period. A private French merchant named Debraux came nom 
Ghandernagote to Fyzabad, then the c apital of Shuj t-tid daulah. 
H< had a meeting with Gentil and their conversation drifted 
to the possibility of an invasion of Bengal by the combined 
forces of the Nawab and the French, later he stole from 
Gentil's room a Parawana dealing with some commercial con¬ 
cessions granted by the Nawab to two Englishmen. 1 hen he 
hastily returned to France and posed as having been sent by 
the Nawab of Oudh to negotiate an alliance with France. W< 
produced the Parawana as the Nawab s letter of authority. 
When it was translated and appeared to contain only com¬ 
mercial details, he pretended that the letter was in code and 
ultimately succeeded in imposing upon the credulity of tin 
Minister. The Minister was favourably impressed and tried 
to pursue the matter further. Debraux was sent out to India 
as the Chief of the French factory at Patna, and Gentil was 
rewarded with the Cross of St. Louis. I he whole thing was 
done’ behind the back of Chevalier, who was taken completely 
bv surprise. Am way, even before Chevalier c ame to know 
about the matter it leaked out to the English, and it was 
strongly rumoured in Calcutta that Shuja-ud-daulah, acting 
on the advice of Gentil, had written to the King of France 
for a military alliance. Although this particular inciden of 
Debraux was a pure hoax, Shuja-ud-daulah was nevertheless 
inclined to come to an agreement with France for military 
assistance. In an interview with Modave he said that he wanted 
help from France but the main difficulty was that nothing was 
kept secret in the Government circles in Paris, and as an 