


^_“%l 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

ean troops. Modave replied that “there was a large 
number of discontented and ill-paid men here and there who 
would not fail to join me as soon as they caine to know that 
1 was in a position to receive them’’, but he added that he could 
render greater service than merely collecting a number of vaga¬ 
bonds. lie would “form a corps of sepoys, supported by a 
good artillery and led by white officers’’. He was then told 
tfi.it although the English and the French were at peace, he 
would be required to fight against the English if the Nawab 
broke with them, to which Modave replied that "from the 
moment J would be in his service his enemies would be mine”. 
Next the minister complained that while Nizam Ali had been 
trying for years to open a correspondence with Pondicherry and 
had even written to France, he had not received any response 
to his overtures. He asked if Modave could help in transmit 
ting a letter from Nizam Ali to the King of France and in 
getting a satisfactory reply, Modave replied that he “was not 
properly qualified to undertake a mission of that sort", but he 
pointed out that it would be irregular to address a letter directly 
to the King when there was at Pondicherry a General of the 
highest rank and depository of the authority and confidence 
of His Majesty", assuring the minister that the new Governor 
w.mld give a prompt and favourable reply. Modave wrote to 
Bcllecombe, “This conversation was in the form of an inter¬ 
rogation. All my replies were written down and stamped with 
my seal and later this report was sent to the Nawab, but I 
have not heard anything further about it”. He was left with 
an impression that if he had a corps of troops under him he 
would have been immediately offered employment by Nizam 
Ali. and that was why he implored Bellecontbe to give him a 
letter of recommendation and to induce Moracin to send him 
the guns he required. As regards the political attitude of 
Nizam Ali, Modave wrote, “It is certain that this Prince has a 
sentiment of affection and preference for the French nation, 
but the great power of the English on the Coromandel Coast, 
and, between you and me, the Tittle response he has found at 
Pondicherry have somewhat damped his goodwill”. 

From a note addressed to de LalWe, dated 10th July 1777, 
we learn that Bellccombe sent a letter to Modave for Nizam 
Ah dealing with the order of the King “to establish the old 




wnist^ 



diplomatic: proj Ecrrs —t 


f: 


correspondence and friendship which existed before between 
our nation and the Princes of the House of Nizaio-til-Muluk’*. 
But there is no document to show whether Modave presented 
the letter to Nizam Ali and with what result. All that is 
known is that Modave suddenly fell ill and retired to Masnli- 
patam where he died on the sand December r 777 * 1 


Gentil 


in connection with French diplomatic projects relating to 
north India we may notice the efforts of another eminent 
Frenchman of the period, Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gentil, who tried 
to create a sphere of influence for his nation through an alli¬ 
ance with the Nawab Wazir of Oudb. Io be sure, Gentil did 
not play the same important part as Chevalier or Madec, and 
his diplomatic efforts never took any definite shape. But even 
then he cannot be left out of any account of French diplomacy 
in India because of his long residence at the Court of Shuja- 
ud-daulah, nearly twelve years, his intimate friendship with 
the Nawab, and his efforts to increase French influence in that 
area by organising a corps of French troops and persuading 
the Nawab to turn to France to protect him against the aggres¬ 
sion of the English. Moreover, he was given an official status 
bv the Government in Paris as the accredited French Resident 
at the Court of the Nawab of Oudh, and was honoured with 
the Cross of St. Louis in recognition of his patriotic efforts. 
Although after 177a Chevalier did not place any trust in Shuja- 
nd-daulah, whom he regarded as having been completely won 
over by the English. Gentil. who was in closer contact and 
knew Shuja-ud-daulah better, believed that the Nawab’s sub¬ 
mission was not genuine, that at heart he wanted to regain 
his independence and lost territories, and that he was waiting 
only for the completion of administrative and military re* 
organisation before declaring himself openly against the English. 
Gentil wrote in his Memohes that shortly before his death 
Shuja-ud-daulah had told him that given a few years’ more 
time the English would be extirpated from Bengal. It was 
his unexpected death in January 1775 that upset the cakiila 