

In the letter to Bellecombe referred to above, Modave gave 
a brief account of the negotiations with the Mughal Emperor 
about the cession of Tatta to France. He wrote that after the 
terms of appointment had been settled he used to go ‘ to the 
Da-bar of the Minister (Abdul Ahad Khan) every day and three 

or four times a week to the audience of the Padcha . 

This Prince expressed to me a great desire to enter into corre¬ 
spondence with the King (of France). 1 believe, it came from 
a hope to secure some military help with which to impose 
his authority on his great vassals.I corne to this con¬ 

clusion because of the attempts which this Prince made on 
several occasions to open a correspondence with the King of 

England.As I felt myself greatly obliged to Madec, l 

wished to turn in his favour the desire which I saw in the Padcha 
to write to the King. I rnyself made the model of the letter. 1 
It was translated into Persian. The Minister of the Padcha 
wrote on his side to M. de Sartine. Madec gave an account to 
the Minister of the object of this letter and of affairs in Hindu- 
sthan in general. The Padcha had authorised him to offer to 
the King Paraivanas for the town of Tatfa-Bakar and of the 
the province of Sind”. Modave then continued that the 
despatch of the Emperor's letter to Chancier nagore, to be trans 
mitted from there to Paris, met with an accident in the Ganges. 
“The letter of the Padcha was so much spoilt that it was no 
longer presentable. The packet of Madec for M. Sartine 
did not suffer from this accident. The Minister must have 

1 The original draft is given in Modave's Voyage du Uengale il Delhi. 
A. N. Ministfcrc des Colonies: C 2, 256. 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


cceiyed it, but 1 do not know what conclusion he will draw 
from it in the absence of the letter of the Great Mogol to the 
King mentioned in the despatches. There were duplicates of 
all these documents i n the hands of Madec. I do not know if 
he has made any use of them, since l left Hindusthan a feu 
weeks after learning of the disaster to the packet”. 

In another letter, addressed to Moracin, Intcndant at 
Pondicherry, and dated 19th October 1775, Modave gave an 
account of the part he had played in the negotiations. "This 
negotiation which I had conducted at Delhi required, as you 
can well understand, some details to show its merit in France, 
ft is for this object that I have come to Agra where Madec 
resides. As a result, he has sent to the Minister a short account 
of his personal history, a detailed and well-thought-out account 
of the intentions and views of the Padtcha and a political 

sketch of the present state of the Mughal Empire.and 

he added to ii a md moire on the town and Sou bah of Tatta 
Bakar, with some observations on the advantages of this acquisi 
don and on the means not only to secure but also to extend 
them. That is the principal object of the account which 

M. Madec has rendered to the Court. I did not wish to be 