


1 Gentil-At ^moires sur l’ In dons tan ou Empire Mogpl, p. 423* 


mtSTffy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

he pointed out that the granting of the Cross of 
St. Louis to Gentil was known in Calcutta much earlier than 
at Chandernagorc. 1 

Although the Dehraux incident had no real importance, 
it had a profound effect on the English. Down to that time 
they had no objection to Gentil remaining in the service of 
Shuja-ud-daulah, although they brought pressure on the Nawab 
to dismiss some of the other Frenchmen, like Madec. But 
now they became suddenly aware of the possibility of the 
danger of an alliance between the Nawab and the French, and 
in order to eliminate such a danger they tried to persuade 
Shuja-ud-dauiah to dismiss Gentil as well. Shuja-ud-daulah 
was unwilling at first, and to the pressing demands of the 
English he replied, “1 am under great obligation to M. Gentil. 
Without him I would not have known you at all and would 
not have concluded any peace with you. He is very much 
attached to me and l shall be sorry to lose him. You see 
the reason why I take Frenchmen in im service; if I refuse 
his men, he would leave me. 1 herefore, 1 would rather break 
with you than send him ha* V’. 2 In fact, lar from dismissing 
him, Shuja-ud-daulah on the other hand increased his salary 
from 45,000 to 32,000 rupees a year. The English were, how¬ 
ever, persistent in their demand, and in a letter to the Minister, 
dated November 15, 1773, Gentil wrote that at the time of 
taking leave from Shuja-ud-daulah the Governor of Calcutta 
asked him to dismiss Gentil. adding that being a friend and 
at ally of the English it was not proper for the Nawab to 
keep a French officer under him. Shuja-ud-daulah at first gave 
his usual reply, but when pressed very strongly on the point 
hr ultimately agreed to dismiss Gentil as soon as he could 
find a suitable pretext. 3 But the sincerity of Shuja-ud-daulah 
is proved bv the fact that the pretext never came as long as 
he lived. It was only after his sudden death in January 1775 
that his weak successor, under the pressure of the English. 

1 Connected with the idea of an alliance between Fiance and Shuja-ud- 
daulah there is an interesting mdmoire in the Archives of the Colonial 
Ministrv (C-2. Vol. 117). written in 1770. It will be noticed in Chapter 
VII. 

- Centil — Me moires sue llndoustan ou Empire Mottol, pp. 272-275. 

3 BA F.Fr, (N.A.) 9566, pp. 462-466. 




WNlST/fy 



DIPLOMATIC PR< EJECTS —l 


<SL 


feed Gentil after nearly twelve years of loyal service. 
Gentil, if he had liked, could have taken service under the 
Emperor, Shah Aland, who offered him satisfactory terms. But 
he had a poor opinion about Shah Alain's abilities, and think¬ 
ing that his political design could not be furthered under such 
a timid and weak-minded ruler, he rejected the offer and 
returned to Chandernagore on his way back to France. He 
must have utilised his stay at Chandernagore by discussing 
with Chevalier the prospects of French intervention in north 
Indian politics, and the latter gave him a letter addressed 
to the ex-minister Choiseul. 1 