

named in it in order to leave him the credit for it and also 
not to bring misfortune on the affair. If it succeeds, 1 shall 
be well rewarded for my troubles by the advantage that the 
Nation may draw out of it”. 

Within a few months Modave had reason to feel dissatisfied 
with the service of the Emperor, who was profuse in his pro* 

mises bur had neither the means nor the will to fulfil them. 

He never received even half the salarv he was entitled to, and 
whenever he complained he was told that he should not worry 
about petty matters and that the Emperor had great schemes 
in his mind for him. In his distress he turned to Madec once 
more, who agreed to take him in his service. Modave stayed in 
Madecs camp for nearly five months, down to the siege of Dig. 
at the end of which finding his condition no better he decided 
to quit and asked Madec to settle his accounts Madec was in 
great financial embarrassment after his recent defeat at the 
hands of the Rohillas and could pay only a quarter of the sum 
due to Modave. But he told Modave that he was shortly 
going back to Europe and in compensation of his arrears of 



misT/ff 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—T 


<SL 


ary would give him a part of his army, one Infantry battalion 
with artillery. Modave accepted the ofTer and wrote to the 
Emperor that he was returning to his service with a well-armed 
and well trained force. He received letters of welcome from the 
Emperor and his minister. Abdul Ahad Khan, but as he was 
starting from Agra his arrangements were suddenly upset. 
Aumont, who had through the good offices of Modave been 
placed in charge of the administration of Madec's estates, now 
instigated Madee to take back the battalion he had given to 
Modave. Madec stopped Modave at Agra and demanded back 
his battalion on the ground that he had decided to postpone 
his departure from India on a recent communication from the 
Imperial Court (March 1775). Modave felt it useless to return 
to Delhi alone and decided to take the route to Hyderabad in 


the hope of getting employment under Nizam Ali. 

On his arrival at Hyderabad Modave got an opportunity 
to present himself to Nizam Ali, but met with disappointment 
because of the instigation of a noble of the Court who was a 
pensioner ol the Madras Government. He then wrote to 
de Lai lie. and having received an encouraging response from 
him he went to Adoni, where he was given an appointment by 
Basalat Jang on a monthly salary of 600 rupees. 

Modave regarded his service under Basalat Jang as purely 
temporary and hoped constantly to be able to find a better 
employment under Nizam Ali. He realised that the only way 
of attracting the notice of Nizam Ali was by organising a small 
corps of his own, well-armed and trained in the European 
fashion. His main difficulty was lack of money with which to 
procure arms. In a letter to Moracin, Intendant at Pondi¬ 
cherry, dated 1st May 1777, he begged to be supplied with Soo 
guns on credit, promising to repay the entire amount in 
eighteen months. He also entreated Bcllecombe, in a second 
letter of the same date, to send him a letter of recommendation 
to Nizam Ali, and gave him an account of an interesting inter¬ 
view he had with the chief minister a few days after his arrival 
at Hyderabad. The minister told him that in spite of the 
pressure of the English against employing any Irenchman in 
his army, Nizam Ati was willing to offer him an appointment 
if he could give him service in the manner he wanted; and in 
that connection the minister enquired if he could raise a corps 