

It is not the place here to pass any judgment on the Tatta 
project. Its advantages and the ease with which it could be 
executed were stated most dearly by Madec in his letters to 
the Minister noticed already. On the other hand, its difficulties 
and disadvantages were pointed out equally clearly by Law and 
Bellecombe in their mimoires, as we shall see in the next 
chapter. Where contemporaries like Chevalier and Madec on 
the one hand and Law and Bellecombe on the other, all equally 
competent and experienced in Indian affairs, differ so widely, 
it is difficult to pass anv judgment. But one thing may be 
said here in the light of the actual results of the French expedi¬ 
tion of 1782-83, and that is if instead of frittering away her 
resources on the Coromandel Coast France had attempted a 
landing at Tatta and a conquest of the province, she might 
have achieved some tangible success. She had for practically 
the whole period naval supremacy in Indian waters, and her 
land troops totalled the number demanded by Madec, namely 

1 Vor the exchange of correspondence between Chevalier and Madec, 
see Barb£--Le Nabob Rent Madec, pp. «10-217. 

2 It is interesting to note that many years later the plan of conquering 
Sind was revived under Napoleon Bonaparte—Archives ties Affaires Etran- 
v^res: Asie, Memories et Documents, Vol. IV. 


Mtsrtu 



L>! p r OMATIC PROJ ECIS —t 


<8L 


,_ men. With these resources she might have established 

her power in Sind, where there was little possibility of an active 
opposition by the English. Whether her conquest of Sind would 
have led to any further result, namely a solid alliance with the 
Mughal Emperor and an eventual attack on Bengal, may be 
regarded as doubtful; but even without that, the expedition 
would not. have been as barren of results as ii actually 
turned out. 

Mon Avr 


While nothing the projects of Chevalier and Madec for 
the establishment of French influence in north India and in 
the province of Tatta, it is worthwhile turning our attention 
to the correspondence of another noteworthy Frenchman of the 
period, Comte de Modave. 1 2 Modave no doubt came to India 
purely as a soldier of fortune, to seek service under one of the 
Indian Princes. But as a cultured, enlightened and patriotic 
Frenchman he could not altogether escape the natural desire to 
advance his national interest, although being primarily con¬ 
cerned with his own private gain; and that gives his corre¬ 
spondence not a negligible importance in connection with the 
French plans and projects of the period. 

Louis-Laurent Dolisy, Comte de Modave, first came to 
India in 1775. Before that he was for some time Governor of 
Madagascar and later turned into a planter. His plantation 
scheme brought him financial ruin, and it was in order to 
retrieve his fortune that he came to India in search of a military 
career under one of the Indian Princes. From Pondicherry 
he came to Bengal where he remained for eleven months, aos. 
of the time in Calcutta. He had thus an opportunity of seeing 
from close quarters the English military strength and system 
of civil administration. In a letter to Bellecombe, dated i>t 
May 1777/ he wrote that, contrary to the wishful thinking of 
many Frenchmen, the English position in Bengal w r as quite 