


1 His letters are preserved in the Pondicherry Archives (ms. 283) and 
form an important collection of original manuscripts there. One letter in 
particular, written to Bellecombe and dated 1st May i 777 > 15 °I the 
greatest importance as containing; a detailed narrative of his adventures 
in India. 

2 P. A. ms. 283. 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



:cure, bein based on two firm foundations, military strength 
and a benevolent civil administration. The English had 3,700 
European troops, divided into three Brigades stationed at 
Calcutta, Kasimbazar and Patna. There were 27,000 sepoys, 
divided into battalions and commanded by European officers. 
I here was a large and well-served artillery supporting each of 
the three Ini an try Brigades. “I have seen this military machine 
tnd I have examined it carefully. 1 can assure you that it 
is not to be slighted in any wav, and that being supported by 
the internal resources of the country and the fort of Calcutta 
it can be quite sufficient for defence”. He had also seen the 
fort, a plan of which, he believed, must have been sent to 
Bellecombe by Chevalier Who had taken it secretly from the 
office of Major Polier (also a Frenchman), the chief engineer 
of the fort. Modave had great praise for the English admini¬ 
stration in Bengal and particularly for Hastings, whose politi 
cal sagacity was responsible for making “the British Govern¬ 
ment loved”. Hastings had established law and order in 
the province, recognised the proprietary rights of landlords and 
attempted to combine the principles of English law with the 
laws and customs of the Hindus and Muslims. The interests 
of the natives were completely protected by law, and in fact 
sometimes the scale of justice turned so much in their favour 
that, as an Englishman complained to Modave, “it was difficult 
to get justice against a Bengali”. 

from Bengal Modave went to Lucknow in the hope of 
getting employment under Shuja-ud-daulah. There were 
many well-known Frenchmen in the service of the Nawab of 
Oudh at the time, like Gentil, Aumont and Visage. Through 
their efforts Modave succeeded in getting an appointment on a 
monthly salary of four thousand rupees. But immediately after, 
the sudden death of Shuja-ud-daulah in January 1775 upset all 
arrangements. The English put effective pressure upon his 
successor not to give any employment to Modave, and in fact 
all the Frenchmen in the service of the Nawab of Oudh were 
thrown out. Modave next thought of employment under the 
Emperor, Shah Alam, and wrote to Madec, who was then in the 
service of Najaf Khan and had great influence in the Imperial 
Court. He reached Delhi in April 1775 and through the good 
offices of Madec secured a profitable appointment in the Imperial 



service. He was given a salary of 2,500 rupees a month, besides 
an extra allowance for his personal retinue, After the terms 
had been settled Modave had his first audience with the 
Emperor, where he was received “with the .same solemnity which 
since then I have seen practised for an ambassador of Timur 
Shah, king of Kandahar". For his residence he was given the 
palace of Shayista Khan. A part of the troops under his com¬ 
mand was garrisoned there, the remainder being stationed in 
the fort to guard the person of the Emperor. I h( fort of 
Salimgarh and the whole of the Imperial artillery were also 
to have been placed under his control. 