

Law next dealt with the four points of attack against the 
English and the prospect of gaining allies among the country 
Powers. He stated that although in his memoire of 1767 he 
had expressed his preference for Bengal, and failing that the 
Coromandel Coast, as the first theatre of operations against the 
English, things had changed greatly since then, making it 


* P. A. nis. 321, 


Ml NlST/fy 



i>IPl OMATIC PROJECTS—If 


.(si. 


extremely difficult for the French to deliver their first attack 
in either of the two regions. Under the circumstances the first 
attack could be delivered either on the Orissa or on the Malabar 
Coast, of which the second was decidedly preferable. Law then 
discussed the advantages offered by the two regions. “The 
English not being in a strong position on the Orissa Coast, we 
can easily land there at several points and ally ourselves with 
the various Rajas who want nothing better than to throw off 
the yoke of the English. It is even possible, with the help of 
Nizam Ali, Viceroy of the Deccan, to whom really belong the 
four Sarkars. to seize the English possessions round Masulipa- 

tarn and to lay siege to the place.Vizagapatam may 

be captured without much trouble, thus cutting off the English 
communication between Bengal and the Coromandel Coast, 
specially if our naval squadron can defeat that of the enemy 
and achieve supremacy on the sea.” 

Law continued: “The safest theatre to begin our opera¬ 
tion* is undoubtedly the Malabar Coast, where we may have or? 
our side both the Marathas and Hyder Ali Khan who have 
been at war with the English for a long time. It is Bombay 
itself which should be attacked at the earliest possible moment 
or when the English least expect it. That place being captured, 
we shall have an excellent port for our vessels. Surat will fall 
automatically, and by the treaty which we shall be able to 
conclude with the Marathas and Hyder Ali Khan whose various 
ports will be open to us, all the small English settlements along 
the coast will be ours, and we shall thus open out for ourselves 
routes both to Delhi and to the Carnatic.” While expressing 
his preference for the Malabar Coast as the first point of attack. 
Law, however, observed that the principal objective of the 
French should always be Bengal, and all the earlier operations 
were to be regarded as merely preliminary steps to an attack 
on that province. Bengal was the source of the English power 
in India, and with its conquest English resistance in other parts 
of India would end automatically. If it were possible to attack 
Bengal first. Law would have advised that course, but since it 
would take a long time to collect all the resources necessary for 
such an enterprise, arms, men and allies, he advised the begin¬ 
ning of operations on the Malabar Coast as the first preliminary 
move. 




On the Malabar Coast the French should try to gain the 
alliance of both the Marathas and Haidar Ali. It was no doubt 
a difficult task because of the intense jealousy and suspicion 
between the two, but Law believed that “by means of skilfully 
conducted negotiations we shall succeed in conciliating the 
interests of Hyder Ali Khan with those of the Marathas, in 
uniting them by exposing all the wickedness of the English 
policy, and in engaging them to work in concert with us in 
order to reduce the power of that nation”. If the French 
secured the alliance of both, they could also expect to win over 
Nizam Ali to their side by promising the restitution of the 
Carnatic and the four Sarkars. If, however, the French had 
to choose between the Marathas and Haidar Ali, preference 
should be given to the former. “If we are with the Marathas, 
even without Hyder Ali Khan, Nizam Ali will still be with us; 
but if we have only Hyder Alt on our side and the Marathas 
against, Nizam Ali will also probably be against us, because 
the increasing power of Hyder Ali Khan disturbs him gn tly.” 