

correspondence with tie Lallee, who commanded the Swiss 
party in the service of Basalat Jang and was loyal to Trance. 
\t the Court of Muhammad Ali there was an official Wakil 
named Venkata Rao. who passed on every information of 
interest to the French. He was paid Rs. fio per month. Occa¬ 
sionally Law used to send BeyliC a member of the Pondicherry 
Council, to get full details about any interesting development. 
He also made use of two servants of Muhammad Ali, Shiva 
Rao, who for many years was paid an allowance of Rs. ,‘jo per 
month, and Khoja Hassan Khan, who was remunerated with 
annual presents. Both of them were useful agents for getting 
all the secrets of Muhammad All's Court. Before the capture 
of Tanjore by Muhammad Ali in * 773 » ^ a J a ,,set ' to ma * n 
tain a Wakil at Pondicherry whom the French also paid Rs. .45 
per month. But the practice was not resumed after the 
restoration of the Raja, and French relations with Tanjore were 
conducted through the Commandant of Karikal. I he only 
European agent employed was de Montvert, whom Law had 
permitted Chevalier to send to the Court of Delhi to conclude 
negotiations about the proposal of an alliance made by the 
Emperor. There was no regular paid agent at the Maratha 
Court at Poona, but there were two persons of great use to the 
French. One was Raza Ali, son of Chanda Sahib, their okl 
ally, who had a close relative at Pondicherry named Mir 
Mahmud Raza; and the other was Dada Rao. who was in the 
service of Muhammad Ali and a brother of Shiva Rao. 1 hesc 
two brothers were the sons of Naga Rao, who had been 
employed by Bussy on political missions. Naga Rao had died 
eight or nine years back in the service of Muhammad Ali. Law 
had intended to enter into negotiations with the Maratha Court 





through the channel of the two brothers, who were closely 
allied with Khoja Hassan Khan, and he had been waiting only 
for the formal orders of the Minister. The French had no 
regular agent at the various European settlements. It would 
have been useful no doubt, but lack of f unds stood in the 
way. However, the Diwan of Pondicherry used to carry on 
correspondence with persons at Madras under the pretext of 
commerce and could get in that way much valuable informa 
lion. Frequently sepoys in disguise were also utilised for the 
purpose, and Law recommended that his successor should try 
to find out men from the sepoys having talents for secret 
service. 

Lastly, we may notice Law’s Memoire MHilaire sur V hide' 
written in 1780, when two years after the outbreak of war the 
French Government was seriously contemplating for the first 
time the despatch of a strong expeditionary force to India, li 
was one of the many military mimoires submitted to the Gov¬ 
ernment at the request of the Minister of Marine and Colonies, 
who sought the opinion of persons having a detailed knowledge 
of Indian politics. The plan submitted by Law is interesting 
not only for its contents but alsp for the difference between its 
recommendations and the actual organisation and plan of 
operations of the expeditionary force sent to India shortly after. 
Law began his memoire bv stressing the immediate need of 
sending a strong expeditionary force to India in place of the 
existing policy of the French Government to concentrate 
entirely on ihc European and American theatres. There were 
two reasons; first, if England retained her position of supre¬ 
macy in India it would give her an undue dominance in the 
European political system, and second, England could never be 
defeated in Europe unless the steady flow of wealth from India 
could be stopped by a direct attack on her position there. 