

Law next referred to the forces required by the i ench 
for the Indian enterprise. The English had in India 8 ships 
of the line and 20 frigates, and their land forces consisted of 
about 10,000 Europeans and 60,000 sepoys. Against such a 
formidable enemy the French must have an army very strong 
in European element, since they would be lacking in the sepoy 
element which would take a long time to raise and train up. 
Law estimated that the French would require a naval force of 
12 ships of the line and an equal number of frigates and a 
land force of 12,000 Europeans and 2,000 African troops. A 
further reinforcement of 3,000 Europeans should also be kept 
ready in the Isle of France. Law then discussed at length the 
time and plan of operations. He wanted to take the English 
by surprise and capture Bombay at 1 time when their fleet 
would be absent from the western coast during the interval 
between two monsoons. He therefore advised that the expedh 
tion should start from France in December 1780, reaching the 
Cape of Good Hope in April 1781. From there the Supreme 
Commander was to send instructions to the Isle of France to 
despatch all available troops and ships to the Bay of St. 
Augustin in the island of Madagascar according to a pre¬ 
arranged plan. Then the fleet was to start from the Cape at 


miSTfiy 



ihe beginning of June 1781 and after being joined by the re 
inforcements at Madagascar, without stopping at the Isle of 
France, was to reach the Malabar Coast about the middle of 
August when the weather would begin to improve. Bombay 
could then be easily surprised and captured, particularly as the 
English fleet would he away from the western coast at the time, 
and nobody could expect that a French expeditionary force 
could come straight to India without stopping at the Isle of 
France for some time. The success of the enterprise, however, 
depended on the maintenance of complete secrecy. After 
capturing Bombay by surprise, the French should take the 
earliest opportunity to meet and destroy the English fleet, 
which would facilitate their further operations against Bengal 
and the Coromandel Coast. The first task of the Supreme 
Commander, after taking Bombay, was to gain the alliance of 
the Marathas, Haidar Ali and Nizam Ali, which would enable 
the French to attack the Carnatic and the English possessions 
on the Orissa Coast. At the same time in order to facilitate 
the invasion of Bengal, the principal object of the French enter¬ 
prise, negotiations must be started with the Mughal Emperor, 
the Nawab of Oudh, the Nagpur branch of the Marathas, and 
the influential Seths or bankers of Bengal. The actual time of 
the expedition to Bengal, either before or after the reduction 
of the English settlements on the Coromandel Coast, should be 
left to the discretion of the Supreme Commander, fo assure 
success, Bengal must be attacked simultaneously from three 
sides, north, west and south, in cooperation with the Indian 
allies. 