

Law concluded his meinnire with an account of the I reach 
partisan armies in the service of the different Indian Princes, 
with a view to dispel the prevailing notion in France that their 
number was cpjire considerable and that they could be all 
recalled and induced to join the expeditionary force lo be 
sent out to India. He stated that the total number of such 
Frenchmen was by the most favourable calculation not more 
than 800. In the service of Haidar AH there was a small cavalry 
force of 100 men, the majority being French, commanded by 
Russel who had succeeded Hugel after the latter s death. I he 
Commander and the three or four officers under him held 
King s commissions Law kept up a regular correspondence 






umisTffy 



ith Russel, but in secret, in order not to rouse the jealousy 
of lire English and of Muhammad Ali, Nawab of the Carnatic. 
Under cover of an affected indifference be used to send Russel 
additional men from Pondicherry from time to time to streng¬ 
then his corps. There was another small force, known as the 
Swiss party, in the service of Basalat Jang, commanded by 
dc l.allde who had served under Hussy. The corps consisted 


of three to four hundred men, belonging to different nation¬ 
alities, the majority being French. Unlike Russel s corps, de 
La tide's was not authorised by the French Government. At 
the beginning of Law’s administration the party was com¬ 
manded by Babel, commonly known as Zephir. 1 he latter 
had earned such military distinction that the English had 
asked the Pondicherry Government for his recall, to which 
l,aw had replied that Zephir arid his men were not under his 
orders. After the death of Zdphir the corps was commanded 
for a short while bv Garde, who was succeeded by de Lallee. 


As with Russel. Law kept up a secret correspondence with tie 
LaUde also. The men belonging to his corps were paid and 
treated bettor than those antler Russel, and there was also a 
greater measure of liberty and equality among them, which 
was the reason why more men at Pondicherry wanted to join 
de Lallce's corps in preference to Russel s. Law was doubtful 
about the extent to which France could derive any benefit 
from these two partisan armies in her hour of need, since 
there was little ground to believe that they could put effective 
pressure upon their masters to give full co-operation to i!:e 
French. He next referred 10 the two partisan armies in the 
north in the service of the Mughal Emperor, one under Madec 


and the other under Sombre. Matters force at the time was 
very weak in European element, only tso men. Sombre's 
force was much larger, but he was concerned only about his 
own advancement and could not be induced to take any risks 
for serving France There was another partisan leader named 
Rouveau in the service of the. ruler of kalpi. He had origin¬ 


ally belonged to Law's corps in the service of Prince Ali Gauhar 
and had later served under Zephir, Garde and dc Lallee. 


