

There is another memoitr of the same date, 4th June 1777. 
Supplement aux observations stir Veldt actuel dc VlndeS The 
object of this mthnoin was to specify the demands which the 
French could make upon the English for territorial and com 
mercial concessions in India if the latter wanted to avoid a 
war. Law stated that his previous mrmoires had amply 
demonstrated that the French could not expect to re-establish 
their position in India on a satisfactory footing except by 
employing military measures on a large scale or by impressing 
upon the English that they were in a position to do so. From 
the beginning of his administration he had made repeated 
representations to the Minister for the adoption of vigorous 
measures in India; but it was not till the appointment of Belle- 
combe that the French Government began to pay serious atten¬ 
tion to the in liter. Law stated “mam membires and observa 
tions have been submitted on India which may be of help in 
planning a line of action if it is a question of open war.” But 
he believed that even without going to the extremity of open 
hostility the French could improve their situation in India 
considerably by negotiation, if they were in a position to threaten 
the English with immediate and large-scale war. The English 
could not welcome a war in India since they stood to lose more, 

1 P. A. ms. 255; .tIso published by Martincau in Etat Politique dc 


l* tndc 


Ml NISTffy 


I>1 FI „OMATIC PRO J ECTI'S— II 



ibr 


and in order to avert hostilities they would be willing to make 
some concessions to the French. Negotiations for that purpose 
must be carried on in Europe, and not in India, by the Minis 
ters of the two countries, and a representative of the English 
East India Company must also be associated in order to prevent 
the employees of the Company in India from creating dilhcu! 
tics in the implementation of ihc treaty, as they had done on 
many occasions in the past. 

As regards the demands to be made, Law classified them 
into two categories, general and local. In the first category h< 
included the restitution of all the old rights and privileges 
granted to the French by the Formans and Parawanas of the 
Mughal Emperor and Provincial Governors, the right to 
establish trading stations anywhere in India and to export and 
import commodities without any restriction, the validity <l 
French Dastaks or commercial passports, and freedom of 
navigation in all the rivers. In the second category were m 
eluded, so far as Bengal was concerned, freedom of navigation 
in the Ganges, freedom of export and import, Ireedorn o 
trade in salt, opium and saltpetre, cession of a territory adjoin¬ 
ing Chandernagore and yielding a revenue of two lakhs of 
rupees, and right to maintain aoo European troops, 1,000 sepoys 
and 50 artillerymen with 40 pieces of cannon and to construct 
a canal round the town, the previous one completed in i 7 <’ s 
having been destroyed by the English. As regards the Orissa 
Coast, the French were to ask for complete liberty of trade at 
Vanam with some territorial concessions, exchange of then 
settlement at Masulipatam for a new one to be established at 
Motupalli or elsewhere, and restitution of the old settlement 
at Gan jam. On the Coromandel Coast the French were t<» 
demand the abolition of the customs houses at Pondicherry 
belonging to the Nawab of the Carnatic, the cession of a tern 
tory yielding a revenue of eight to nine lakhs of lupees a year 
and stretching along the coast from the river Markam or 
Allamparve in the north to Porto Novo in the south, that port 
inclusive, with a breadth of ten to fifteen leagues. Cuddalore 
would be included in that area, bringing an additional revenue 
of one lakh of rupees. At Karikal the French were to ask for 
the four Parganas which they formerly possessed, yielding an 
annual revenue of one lakh of rupees, together with complete 