

Such was the plan of military operations put forward by 
Law. We shall notice later the comments of Bellecombe, who 
did not share the optimism of Law, but agreed with him on 
two points,—hist, that the French must have naval superiority 
in Indian waters, and second that Bombay must be captured 
before beginning operations elsewhere. Here it will be in¬ 
teresting to note how the organisation and plan of operations 
cf the expeditionary force under Bussy differed from the scheme 
submitted by Law. In the first place. Law wanted the expedi¬ 
tionary force to reach India by August 1781, which would have 
given the French much longer time for military operations. As 
it was. the first instalment of the French force reached India 



Ml HIST*,, 



Till FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


TfTMarch 1782 and the resi in March 1785. just before the news 
of the armistice stopped ail hostilities. In the second place, 
Law envisaged an expedition on a much larger scale than 
actually sent under Hussy, (he French squadron under de 
Suffren was considerably weaker and the land force was only a 
quarter of what was proposed by Law. In the third place, Law 
recommended the operations to begin on the Malabar Coast, 
with the first blow being struck against Bombay, whereas the 


French in 1782-83 frittered away their efforts on the Coro¬ 
mandel Coast and no attempt was made to land troops on the 
western coast. Finally, while Law attached greater importance 
to an alliance with the Marathas than with Haidar Ali, the 
French in 1782-83 clung to their connection with the Mysore 
ruler, while the proposals of the Marathas were treated with 
undue caution and mistrust. 


Bellecombe 


We turn next to the political views of Belleconibe who 
succeeded Law as Governor of Pondicherry in January 1 7 / / * 
The first memoire of Belleconibe that we may notice is a repoit 
on the political situation in India, dated 24th January I 77 ®- 1 
It was his first general report to the Minister of Marine and 
Colonies since his assumption of office at Pondicherry. Belli' 
combe first dealt with the political situation in north India. 
He wrote that from the reports received from Chevalier in 
Bengal it appeared that the position of the Mughal Em per 01 
had improved considerably mainly due to the courage and 
ability of his general, Najaf Khan, an extraordinary man, as 
skilful in war as astute in diplomacy. le had a well-trained 
army including European partisan forces, and bis e&rliei sue 
cesses held out reasonable hopes for further expansion and 
consolidation of the Imperial authority. Beilecombe had also 
been informed that Asaf ud-daulah, the Nawab of Oudh, was 
tired of English control, but he doubted whether the Nawab 
would have the coinage to throw off the yoke of the English 
and ally himself with the Emperor. Another important power 
in the north was Raja of Gohad who was constantly extending 


1 F. A. im *89. 


miSTffy 



Ins dominion and had a cavalry of nearly fifty thousand. He 
had also purchased the remnant of Madec’s force under the 
command of Visage. He was pro French in sympathy and was 
in close alliance with Najaf Khan. 