


1 Sec Chapter 1 \ , section on Mah£. 


MIN ISTfiy 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—II 


nows their milirarv talents’. Hence the French also in 


their eagerness to gain his alliance must not think that they 
could control his policy with their troops in his service as the 
English controlled the policies of their Nawabs and Rajas. 

The Power about which the English had reason to feel 
most concerned was the Maratha Confederacy. II all the 
members who compose it are united and well cliiectcd, it a loin 
would suffice to destroy the English power because of the 
manner in which the Mara thus make war; burning and devas¬ 
tating the country, they would destroy the source of revenue 
and consequently deprive the English and their allies oi the 
means of maintaining their forces. I hat is the only Pov* ei, 
moreover, .sufficiently spread out to be able to attack the 
English in all their possessions at the same time, in Bengal 
as well as on the Coasts of Orissa. Coromandel and Malabar . 
But the English had succeeded in creating disunity among the 
Marathas, a situation which they had fully exploited m their 
recent war. 


Law next referred to the prevailing indifference in France 


to her Indian possessions. Ti here was a growing feeling that 
it was not necessary for the French to make any exertions for 
the destruction of the English power in India, which must 
fall one day by the sheer weight of its own expansion. People 
believed that there must rise an Indian genius one day, who, 
profiting bv the experience of European military technique 
and combining all the Indian Powers together, would succeed 
in driving out the English. Such an impression. Law con¬ 
sidered, was based on “the memory of an unfortunate ^var, feat 
of exposing oneself (to further losses) and spirit of economy”. 
The indifference was all the more regrettable since it was not 
impossible for the French to overthrow the Englis power with 
the help of a coalition of the Indian Princes. In fact, such 
a coalition together with the terms of an alliance with France 
had been proposed by the Marathas as early as 177*- 
Minister must have been informed about it and the whole 
circumstances must have been clearly explained to him by 
M. Beylie who reached France at the beginning of 1 77 a 
While not minimising the difficulty of forming a coalition of 
Indian Powers, Law did not think it insuperable. The pioject 
put forward by the Marathas in * 77 * ^ or an i since among 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



ein.selvcs, Nizam Ali, Basalat Jang and the French could be 
revived once move in spite of ihe events which had taken 
place since then, but the greatest problem was how to draw 
Haidar Ali also into the league. “To succeed in making a 


treaty of peace between him on one side and the Maruthas, 
Nizam Ali and Basalat Jang on the other would be a master¬ 
piece of diplomacy”. Law offered some suggestions for the 
successful formation of an anti-English coalition: to fix a 
definite time in advance for the arrival of French forces in 