




L 


mtSTfiy 



^freedom of navigation in the river. On the western coast the 
French were to ask lor liberty of trade at Surat and strict orders 
to the English authorities at fellicherry not to do anything 
which might injure the interests of the French at Mah£. 

We may next notice another interesting document, De 
mandes et. Questions faites d Af. Law par Af. de Bellecombe et 
Reponses de M. Law. 1 It contains .Law’s replies to a number 
of questions put to him by his successor in office, Bellecombe, 
regarding the administration and commerce of the French 
settlements in India and relations with the country Powers 
One would get here a precise summary of Law’s views about 
the existing condition of the French and the means by which 
it could be improved, which had already been expressed in 
numerous memories and letters. In reply to one of the ques¬ 
tions of Bellecombe about the Powers allied to the French, Law 
stated that there was no formal alliance with any country 
Power in view of the orders of the Government prohibiting anv 
interference in the internal quarrels of the Indian Princes or 
in a dispute between an Indian Prince and a European Power. 
Moreover, the political situation in India was so quickly shift¬ 
ing that it would serve little practical use to conclude a formal 
alliance long in advance, since the engagements contracted 
might be disowned when the occasion came. During the period 
of his administration Law had tried to cultivate friendly rela¬ 
tions with the important country Powers, including the Mughal 
Emperor. Ehey were all interested in a common objective, the 
destruction of the English power in India, but subordinated 
the collective interest to their mutual rivalries and jealousies. 
In the absence of a general combination of all the Powers, 
which was extremely difficult to achieve, the French must 
con lent themselves with forming alliances with some of them. 
Negotiations were already in progress with rhe Mughal Emperor. 
Haidar Ali and the Marathas, and talks could also be started 
with Nizam Ali and Basalat Jang. About the advantages and 
difficulties of such negotiations Law referred Bellecombe to his 
Observations stir Mat politique de VJnde. 

In reply to another question of Bellecombe Law gave full 

1 P* A. ms. s$6. The questions put by Bellecombe are dated 9th 
January 1777 and law’s replies are dated 31st March. 


MINlSr^ 



particulars about the agents, official and non official, main¬ 
tained by the Pondicherry Government at the Courts of the 
different Indian Princes as also in the various European settle¬ 
ments. At the Court of Haidar Ali there was a permanent 

i Vakil, a Brahmin named Krishna. The official representation 
was required both in the interest of the settlement at Mahd as 
well as in that of the French corps under Russel. I he Wakil 
was honest, intelligent and loyal and was paid Rs. too per 
month. There was no paid official agent at the Courts of 

Nizam Ali, and Basnlat Jang, but Law had kept up a regular 