There was lastly a small french force under Lanois in the 
service of the Raja of Travancore. Although the French 
Government had declared a general amnesty to all deserters 


misTfy 



who had taken service under Indian Princes, Law entertained 
the gravest doubt about how much it would succeed in making 
them quit their existing positions and rejoin the service of 
their nation. 

The next m&moire of Law that we may notice is the 
Reflexions sur la Proposition de faire passer 4,000 homines A 
Delhi et sur la Province de Tatla , dated ph June 1777'. In 
it he discussed the practicability of Chevalier's project,—an 
alliance with the Mughal Emperor, despatch of pnoo French 
troops to India, occupation of the province of Tatta and a 
joint attack on Bengal. He started by showing the impossibi¬ 
lity of sending 4,000 troops to Delhi with the ultimate intention 
of delivering a joint attack on Bengal without a previous 
alliance with some of the great Powers of India which were in 
a condition to facilitate the march ol the french army. 1 here 
were two reasons for it : first, the march of a French army to 
Delhi would inevitable lead to a war with the F.ngli h, and 
second, the appearance of 4,000 French troops to support the 
Emperor would at once unite all the vassals against him for 
fear of an attempt to restore the old Imperial authority over 
them. There might be some who would argue that even if the 
attack on Bengal did not materialise, the alliance with the 
Emperor and the despatch of 4.000 troops to India would at 
least enable the French to acquire the province of J atta. which 
from the commercial point of view would compensate them for 
their losses in other parts of India. But that was a wholly 
wrong impression, since Tatta did not produce any article 

which could be exported to Europe. 

Law then declared that for succes in the enterprise again# 
Bengal the essential prerequisite was an alliance with the 
Marathas, the most warlike nation in India and having the 
most extensive dominions. With their help the French could 
easily land troops on the Orissa Coast and attack Bengal cithci 
from the south or from the north-west. Even if it was neces¬ 
sary to send a body of troops to Delhi, the best and the shortest 
routes were those which passed through Maratha territories 
from the Malabar Coast. In any case, without an alliance with 
the Marathas the French could do nothing. The despatch of 

. Martincau EM Politique de Pled, m , 777 par Law de I.aurnton. 



THF FRENCH IN INDIA 



'A.mpys to Delhi without any reference to them would at once 
set them against the French and even throw them into the arms 
of the English. 

Lastly, Law declared that, the confident expectation of an 
easy success against the English entertained by Chevalier was 
entirely baseless and that the French must be prepared for a 
stiff resistance. Chevalier had underestimated the military 
strength of the English, who had in fact 10,000 European 
troops and ho,000 sepoys well-trained and disciplined. He had 
besides overlooked that an attack on Bengal would automati¬ 
cally lead to hostilities on the Malabar and Coromandel Coasts, 
where the French must have sufficient forces to oppose the 
English, Thus, as Law concluded, if an attempt Was to be 
made against the English. “It is necessary to employ large 
resources; small means will never be sufficient.” 