


India; to allot to each Power a particular region for military 
operations in order to avoid jealousy and dispute; to draw 
up a definite plan of division of territories among the Con¬ 
federates; and lastly to make a solemn declaration that the 
French had no intention of carving out a dominion for them¬ 
selves. except what was required to meet their military and 
administrative expenses. Finally, Law advised the necessity 
of winning the favour and support of the great Seths or bankers, 
who by virtue of their wealth wielded tremendous influence 
over all die governments in India and who were largely instru¬ 
mental in bringing about the revolution in Bengal in 1757. 

About the plan of operations. Law again discussed the 
relative advantages and disadvantages of four points of attack. 

_Calcutta, Madras, Masulipatam and Bombay. He advocated 

the concentration of all French forces in one theatre rathei 
than distributing them in small detachments in different part., 
of the country. As necessary preparations for the outbreak of 
hostilities he urged the need of fortifying Mah6, Yanam and 
karikal, besides Pondicherry, and suggested an important 
administrative change, namely the concentration of authority 
over all the French possessions to the east of the Cape of Good 
Hope in the hands of one Commandant-General with his seat 
in the Isle of France. The Commandant-General was to have 
a deputy under him, who would be responsible for maintaining 
relations with the Indian Powers and in times of war would 
have complete control over all military affairs. The Governor 
of Pondicherry was to be concerned with only routine* adminis¬ 
trative work, including trade and commerce, with control over 
the subordinate settlements. The subordination of the Indian 
settlements to the Isle of France was necessitated by the fact 
that the latter being an isolated post was better suited than 


MiN/sr^ 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS U 

Pondicherry to serve as a base for making secret military pre¬ 
parations without the knowledge of the English. 

Law next gave a comparison between the military resources 
of the English’and those of the French. The French did not 
possess a single base in India in a proper state of defence and 
the arsenal of Pondicherry did not have adequate munitions 
either for offence or for defence. It was difficult even to arm 
a small detachment of 400 persons for a campaign. Iheie 
were only 200 men in the artillery, 800 in the Regiment of 
Pondicherry of whom not more than 500 being fit for active 
service, and 200 sepoys with no experience of war. Law con¬ 
sidered that even in a time ol peace Pondicherry must have 
an artillery force of 400 men and a garrison of 2,000 Europeans 
and 2,000 sepoys, the latter being so organised as to be capable 
of being quadrupled in number on the outbreak of war. As 
against the meagre resources of the french, the English had 
‘{5,000 sepoys in Bengal, 20,000 on the Coromandel and 
Or: sa Coasts, and 15,000 on the Malabar Coast. They had 
about 10,000 European troops in all, 4,000 in Bengal, about 
the same number on the Coromandel and Orissa Coasts, and 
2.000 on the Malabar Coast. Besides, they possessed through 
out the country “fortified places, well-stocked with munitions 
of all kinds, and immense revenues which enabled them not 
only to augment their forces but also to cross us in our nego¬ 
tiations with the Indian Princes", it was all the more neces¬ 
sary' therefore that the French must make a good beginning, 
since the advantages of the English might be neutralised to 
some extent only by a brilliant success in the first attack. 