

prepare the ground, it is true.but what is the use of 

concluding a treaty without being assured of the power of 
fulfilling it?”. 

There is another mi moire of Bellecombe of the same date, 
j*4th January 1778, Observations sur les Cipayes. 1 In it he 
stressed the importance of a sepoy force in a wav with the 
English and the necessity of recruiting men long in advance of 
the outbreak of hostilities. I he second point of interest of the 
mimoire is that Bellecombe here gave his views as to whether 
the French should choose the Marathas or Haidar Ali if both 
of them could not be brought together into a coalition against 
the English. The third point of interest is that the mimoire 
contained a scathing criticism oi Saint Lubin, which w f as also a 
condemnation of the policy of the Minister of Marine and 
Colonies. Such outspoken comments from a Governor of 
Pondicherry are astonishing indeed. 

The mimoire began with a warning that in a plan of mili¬ 
tary operations in India that might be drawn up in France 


1 P. A. ms. 290. 




DIPl .OM A no PROJECTS—fl 



There was a great risk of neglecting a vital point through 
ignorance, namely, the necessity of raising a large body of 
sepoy troops, to be trained and disciplined in the European 
fashion, long in advance ol the outbreak of war. Bcllecombe 
stated that the necessity of having a large sepoy force arose 
simply from the fact that it would never be possible for the 
French to bring from Europe sufficient troops to be able to face 
the overwhelming nunlber of the English forces in India, which 
included about sixty thousand sepoys, besides those in the 
service of vassal Princes like Asaf ud-daulah and Muhammad 
Ali. People in France had no idea about the efficiency and 
fighting quality of the Indian sepoys, but in truth #< if the 
English win, it will be by the number and the valour of their 
sepoys.” Moreover, if the French had only European troops 
for their operations in India, it would be extremely difficult to 
make good any losses in their number. Bringing fresh troops 
from Europe would involve huge expense and waste of time, 
leaving aside the risk of transport. Thus the loss of 20 Euro¬ 
pean soldiers would be of much greater concern to the French 
than that of 500 sepoys to the English. 

Bellecombe then dealt with the second wrong impression 
in France that any number of sepoy troops could be raised in 
India within a month of the outbreak of war. He pointed 
out that the fate of the French operations in India would 
depend largely on the result of the first encounter. At the 
very start, therefore, the French must have an adequate force to 
oppose the enemy. That necessitated the raising of a sepoy 
force well in advance of the declaration of war, since it took a 
long time to get the right type of recruits and to train and 
discipline them in the European fashion. Bellecombe then 
suggested that immediate orders should be sent by the Minister 
to increase the existing sepoy force of 500 to at least 2,000. 
The force was to be organised in four Battalions of 500 each 
or better eight Battalions of 250, with an adequate number of 
European officers. The number of sepoys could then be 
quadrupled in a short while, as the new recruits in each Com¬ 
pany would be quick to learn from the old ones and there 
would be no sudden demand for European officers. 