

* Ibid, pp. 290*291. 


MINIS/*,, 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


ordeaux merchant named Laffonde, who was induced to freight 
a boat and equip it with merchandise for India and China in 
the hope of making a huge profit. Saint-Lubin christened 
the boat Le Sartine as a mark of flattery to the Minister. The 
merchandise taken at his suggestion consisted entirely of military 
stores, 15,000 muskets, all out of use, a small quantity of muni 
tions, uniforms for troops and a large number of buttons with 
the queer design engraved on them of the French fleur-de-lys 
encircled b) a crescent, which the inventive genius of Saint- 
Lubin considered appropriate for French soldiers serving as 
allies of the Marathas, Evidently the object of Sam-Lubin was 
to equip an army in India, while to Laffonde he held out an 
assurance that the goods could be sold at a high price to the 
Indian Princes. 

The letter of James Madjett to William Lewis, dated 
November 9, 1777, gives certain details about Saint-Lubin’s 
departure from France and his activities in India. 1 Saint-Lubin 
was accompanied by two Santy brothers, the elder of whom 
acted as his secretary, and one dc Corcelle, a young man of 
high connections to whom he had held out assurances of a 
good carter in India. He maintained a \t*il of secrecy over 


his departure* from France, but arriving at Chaiil on the 16th 
March 1777, he threw it off and openly assumed the airs of 
an Ambassador of the King of Franco. He insisted on a grand 
ceremonial reception by the Governor of the place, which was 
accorded to him. From Chaul he sent his secretary, de Santy, 
to Poona to announce his arrival and to arrange for his journc\ 
and reception at the Maratha capital. To keep up his prestige 
as *the accredited representative of the King of France, he 
demanded for his reception a large number of elephants, horses, 
camels, palanquins etc., and although his demands were not met 
in full, the Maratha Government did make a grand show to 
receive him. As the English representative at Poona. Mostyn, 
wrote to the Governor and Select Committee of Bombay, “l 
cannot help here observing the difference of his reception and 

mine on this occasion.Indeed in every respect they 

paid the greatest attention to the French*’. 1 


1 Forrest Selections . Maratha Series, pp, 291-296. 

1 Ibui, ,>p. aWt-ai*) (letter dated May 19, 1777). 




WNtSTfty 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—HI 


Saint-Lubin started from Chaul on the nth April, and 
travelling by way of Poona he reached Purandhar, where the 
Peshwa and the Ministers were for the time being, early in 


May. He was, however, kept waiting for a few days before 
being granted an audience, and it was not till the isth or t |tli 
of May that he was introduced to the Peshwa and his ministers. 
At the audience he presented as his credentials the letter of 
Louis XVI, addressed to the Peshwa, and that of de Sartine to 
Nana Phadnavis. 1 he activities of Saint-Lubin after this for mat 
affair are somewhat shrouded in mystery, and our principal 