


miSTfiy 



Bellecombc, Governor of Pondicherry, considered him as a 
mere unprincipled adventurer, who had for a time successfully 
imposed on the credulity of the Minister of Marine and 
Colonies, de Sartine. No one thought of him as anything but 
a successful knave, or attached the slightest importance to his 
negotiations with die Maratha Government. Bellecombe made 
a violent and sarcastic attack on him in a mimoire dated 24th 
January 1778, noticed already, even though he knew that Saint- 
Lubin enjoyed the favour of the Minister and had been sent 
out to India b> him. The contemporary estimate of Saint- 
Lubin's character is fully borne out by his own letters and 
narratives, preserved In the Archives of the French Colonial 
Ministry, dealing with his exploits in India at dilferent times, 
which in ridiculous self-exaltation surpass anything that may 
be conceived. It is true that most of the French adventurers 
in India in the second half of the 18th century were not remark¬ 
able for their integrity and moderation. Most of them were 
prone to exaggerate things, either out of self interest or prompted 
by an undue /cal for the national cause. But none of them 
distorted facts and gave out utterly false stories in the same 
manner as Saint-Lubin, 

Although we are not concerned with the details of the 
early career of Saint-Lubin, a brief notice is nevertheless neces¬ 
sary for a proper appreciation of the man. Saint-Lubin first 
carne to India as a medical assistant attached to the regiment 
of Lally. According to his own version, he devoted himself 
to the study of Indian languages in order to prepare himself 
for a diplomatic career, and in 1759 he was sent by Lally on a 
secret mission to Bengal. It is not known what exactly he did 
there, but in a letter written to the Minister, de Sartine, much 
later he claimed to have seized the plans of the fortifications of 
Calcutta and what was a rather amazing exploit, to have 
kidnapped the engineer, causing a long delay in the construc¬ 
tion of the fort. In 1763 we find him back in Paris, frequent/ 
mg the antechambers of ihe Minister and the Company’s offices. 
He succeeded in gaining the confidence of the authorities in 
France, and with official encouragement he returned to India 
in 1766 and entered the service of Haidar All. We do not 
know his exact position there, nor can v,e attach any importance 
to the claim he made in a letter to dc Sartine in 1775 that he 

M 


U\mST#y 


^ 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

‘Chief Engineer, Commander of the ai 
the six thousand sepoys constituting the Nawab s 
guard". He made equally fantastic claims about his exploits 
while in the service of Haidar Ali, taking a leading part in 
numerous battles, capturing towns and forts almost single 
handed, repulsing myriads of Maratha cavalry and initiating a 
plan of a general confederacy of Indian Powers against the 
English these exploits were however not known to anybody 
but himself. What is known is that he suddenly left Haidar 
Ali on the outbreak of wav with the English and, curiously 
enough, took up his residence at Madras. I he insinuation of 
Belleconibc may not be unfounded that, being an unprincipled 
opportunist, Saint-Lubin deserted his patron and offered his 
services to his enemy. Saint-Lubin however explained that his 
object was to help Haidar Ali by sowing dissension among the 
English at Madras. Anyway, after some time he suddenly 
vanished from the Indian scene and re appeared in Paris in > 77 °- 
Back in France, Saint-Lubin renewed his intrigues, always 
styling himself as the “ex-general of Haidar Ali and giving 
out pretentious stories about his initimate connection with the 
Maratha Raja. His tenacity and persuasive skill gained for 
him die confidence of the Minister, dc Sartine, a few yeais 
later. The time was opportune for him. With the outbreak 
of the War of American Independence France began to stir 
herself from the lethargy which had seized her during the 
later days of Louis XV, and for the first time the Government 
began to pay serious consideration to the numerous memoires 
and projects submitted since 1765 f° r re-establishment of 