

covertly as possible.hut 1 believe he has been led into 

an ostentatious display here, ruinous perhaps to the purpose he 
has been sent for, the better to impose himself on this Govern¬ 
ment, as a person of great importance, in hopes of attracting 
such presents as would make him perfectly easy on the event of 
public affairs”. 

About the outcome of his negotiations with the Maratha 
Government, we may notice here a letter from Saint-Lubin 
himself, written from Poona on July *6, 1777 and addressed to 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs in Paris, one of his patrons in 
the Government. “Monseigneur, kindly accept the homage 1 
am offering you of my first success in the career open to my 
zeal and activity. The mission to the Maratha Court with 
which His Majesty has honoured me has been fulfilled and all 
my hopes in this regard have been achieved. The treaty of 
alliance and commerce between the two Crowns has been signed 
and solemnised by oaths. The alliance has plated our estab* 




DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—III 

Tfshmerits under the protection of the foremost power of Hindu- 
sth in. The freedom of commerce, extended to our merchants 
through the whole extent of the Maratha dominion, is sheltered 
from the molestations from which they suffer in the rest of 
India; and the Maratha ports, open to our vessels in all seasons, 
assure them all the resources that can be expected from a war¬ 
like, maritime and commercial people who have made common 

cause with us.’V But although the letter speaks of only 

commercial advantages, from the English records it seems that 
there was at least a tacit, if not a formal, agreement about the 
cession of the port of Chaul and the fort of Rewadanda in 
return for the despatch of a body of French troops to the 
assistance of the Maratha Government. Indeed, it was not so 
much the commercial advantages as the political and military 
terms of the agreement which threw the English into a panic 
and induced them, more than anything else, to intervene in 
Maratha politics and overthrow the regime which was favour¬ 
able to the French alliance. 

As to the military terms of the agreement, some light is 
thrown by the intercepted letters of Saint-Lubin addressed to 
the Portuguese Governors of Goa and Daman. 2 It cannot be 
really ascertained whether the French Government had ever 
any intention of sending troops to India merely in response 
to the requests of Saint-Lubin, but the fact that the latter 
wrote to the Portuguese Governors to allow French troops to 
pass through their territories to the Maratha dominion suggests 
that Saint-Lubin had, either falsely or with some official 
encouragement from Paris, held out an assurance of French 
military assistance to the Maratha Government. Whether that 
military help was intended merely to bolster up the authority 
of Nana Phadnavis as against his former associates in the 
Government, who had broken away from him in March 1778, or 
for the general purpose of strengthening the resistance of the 
Marathas against English aggression, it is not relevant to discuss 
for our present purpose. What matters here is that Saint-Lubin 
and Nana Phadnavis appear to have entered into an agreement 