


source of evidence, namely Madjeu, could not throw much light 
on them, as he left Saint-Lubin soon after. However, it appears 
that the French adventurer moved with the Maratha Court to 
Poona, where he had several secret conferences with Nana 
Phadnavis, resulting in the drawing up of a treaty of alliance. 
The terms of the treaty cannot be definitely ascertained, but 
it appears from the various sources available to us that the 
principal basis of the agreement was the despatch of a body of 
French troops to the assistance of the Maratha Government in 
exchange for the cession of the port of Chaul and the fort of 
Rewadanda, complete freedom of trade for the French through¬ 
out the Maratha empire, and protection of the French settle¬ 
ments in India against any attack. 

In his letter to Lewis dated 9th November 1777, Madjeu 
stated that although he had parted company with Saint-Lubin 
in May, he received information that towards the end of June 
Saint-Lubin sent a circular to all the Frenchmen residing at 
Poona to meet at the house of Nana Phadnavis to be witnesses 
to the taking of oaths by the tw'o ministers relating to the 
treaty of perpetual alliance just concluded. He himself did not 
attend the ceremony, but he had “heard it repeatedly mentioned 
by different, gentlemen who were there that there was some 

written instrument.I have never been able to learn 

the particulars of the agreement with Nana, but 1 have heard 


1 Letter from James Madjeu to William Lewis, November 9. 1777 
(Forrest, pp. 291-296). But Mostyn writing to the Governor and Select 
Committee of Bombay on May 19, 1777, stated that Saint-Lubin had his 
audience on the 8th May (Forrest, pp. *88-290). It should be noticed that 
Madjctt was with Saint-Lubin at Purandhar and it was not till after the 
audience that he left him. 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


if general the basis of it was the sending out a body of troops 
to assist against the enemies of Nana”. Madjett continued that, 
about the beginning of August Saint-Lubin sent his secretary’s 
brother, Pascoal de Santy, to Surat with a packet for de Sartine 
and instructed the French Consul at Surat, Briancourt, to send 
hun to Europe as expeditiously as possible. Madjettt had also 
heard that Saint-Lubin sent very encouraging reports to France 
about the result of his negotiations with the Maratha Govern¬ 
ment, He then gave his general opinion about the character 
of Saint-Lubin and the bonafide of his diplomatic mission. 

He is a man capable of insinuating himself into the esteem 
and confidence of most men, of deceiving, misleading and betray¬ 
ing them .... but after the strictest scrutiny there has never 
yet been the least ground to doubt, that in consequence of 
overtures from hence, he has been sent out at least to examine 

the state of affairs here.How far this may be true I 

leave you to judge from the simple circumstances of Mons. Picot 
at Mahi and Mons. Briancourt at Surat having acknowledged 
him and answered his drafts. It is true that Mons. Bellecombe 
disowns him as Ambassador extraordinaire from the King of 
France, but still it seems he knew of his coming out. From 
the smallness of his appointment and no staff being sent out 
with him, it should seem that it was meant he should act as 