

French influence in India. Having wormed his way into the 
confidence of the Minister. Saint-Lubin gained access to these 
secret papers and utilised them to prepare a scheme of his own. 
The basis of his scheme was an alliance with the Marathas 
France was to send a body of troops to the assistance of the 
Poona Government, and in return she was to secure a port on 
the western coast, preferably Chaul, complete freedom of tiadc 
in the Maratha dominions and assurance of Maratha protection 
of her settlements in India against English attacks. In his 
scheme Saint-Lubin took good care to secure his own advance 
mem, and suggested that for its implementation he himself 
should be scut out as the accredited representative of the French 



and General of 


<SL 

tillery 


mtST/fy 



Government, with full control over the negotiations with the 
Poona Government. He succeeded in his efforts to such an 
extent that he secured his appointment as a special diplo¬ 
matic agent to the Court of Poona, quite independent of the 
control of the Pondicherry authorities; and although he was 
not accorded full official status, to prove his bonafide he was 
given a letter from Louis XVI addressed to the Pcshwa and 
another from the Minister, de Sartine, addressed to Nana 
Phadnavis. 

It cannot be definitely ascertained whether in sending Saint- 
Lubin on a special diplomatic mission the French Govern mem 
was influenced by some earlier overtures from Poona. James 
Madjett, a disgruntled member of Saint-Lubin’s entourage, 
writing to William Lewis, the English agent at Poona, in Nov 
ember 1777 stated, “Some overtures transmitted to the Court 
of France from India had first given rise to the step taken 
relative to an alliance with the Marathas*’. 1 It was perhaps 
not improbable, since Law also in his mhnoires referred several 
times to the overtures made by the Marathas in 1772. Madjett 
also gave some interesting details about the origin of Saint- 
Lubin's mission in his evidence to Mostyn, the English repre¬ 
sentative at Poona, in May 1777. 2 According to him it was 
the mimoites of Bussy which inspired Saint-Lubin and Dumas 
(for some time Governor of the Isle of France) to work out a 
plan of Franco-Maratha alliance, which received the approval of 
the Minister of Marine and Colonies. The original plan w r as 
that the two were to start together from France w ith 2,500 men. 
to be reinforced by 500 more from the Isle of France. But in 
the end Saint-Lubin, who was jealous of Dumas and wanteef to 
have full control of affairs for himself, represented to dc Sartine 
that before despatching troops to India he should be sent out 
first to study the political situation and to come to an agreement 
with the Maratha Government. The proposal was accepted and 
thus Saint-Lubin started alone for India. 

In order to keep his mission a close secret Saint-Lubin 
travelled in a private capacity. He successfully duped a 

1 Forrest — Selections from Letters, Despatches, etc. Bombay Secretariat, 
Maratha Series, pp. 291*296. 