

Bellecombe next referred to the internal dissensions among 
the Marathas, which were being fully exploited by the English. 
Although the latter had concluded peace in 1776, they were 
making fresh preparations for war, either to renew hostilities 
against the Marathas or in anticipation of a war with the 
French. Even in the latter case they were sure to attempt a 
change of Government at Poona in order to be free from any 
possible danger from that quarter. It might not be very diffi¬ 
cult for them, since besides the alliance with Raghoba they 
were in communication with the Maratha ruler of Nagpur as 
well as with Sindhia. Writing about Haidar, Bellecombe stated 
that he was steadily improving his position, partly by military 
sirengih and partly by diplomacy He had recently succeeded 
in breaking up the formidable coalition formed against him by 
the Marathas, Nizam Ali and Basalat Jang, and having detached 
the last two had inflicted a crushing defeat on the first. Belle 
combe believed that the English would try to exploit the enmity 
between the Marathas and Haidar Ali. If the attention of the 
Marathas could be diverted to an attack on Haidar’s territory 
and their forces kept occupied far off from Poona, the English 
could make a surprise move ancl capture the Maratha capital. 
By drawing the Marathas of Nagpur to their side they would 
be able to keep in check Nizam Ali and Basalat Jang. 

With regard to the Coromandel Coast, Bellecombe had 
received information that Madias was full of rumours about 
the imminence of a war with France. Military officers on leave 
were being recalled, new sepoys recruited and provisions hastily 
stored. The rumours had also reached the Orissa Coast. Some 
of the petty Rajas in the Northern Sarkars had written to 
Bellecombe and even sent Wakils to him, pledging their support 
to the French in case of a war with the English. About the 
situation in Bengal, Bellecombe had received letters from 
Chevalier that the English, apprehending an imminent out¬ 
break of war with France, were recalling all their troops from 
the north western frontier. The withdrawal of English troops 
would make it easier for the Emperor and Najaf Khan to free 


WHISTfiy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


from English domii (ion, specially if Asaf-ud-daulah 
joined them, and even to invade Bengal. But by themselves 
Indian Powers would never be able to defeat the English. A 


successful invasion of Bengal required a three-pronged attack 
by the Imperial forces, the Marathas of Berar and the French. 
While Xajaf Khan led an invading army from the north, a 
combined Franco-Maratha force was to penetrate through the 
west, while the principal French force was to move up the 
Ganges and attack from the south. The English were not 
unaware of such a danger, and in order to draw the Marathas 
of Berar to their side they had sent an agent for negotiation. 
On the French side too, Chevalier had been authorised to send 
a Wakil to counteract the persuasions of the English. Belle- 
combe had also authorised Chevalier to send a Wakil to the 
Emperor at Delhi, but, he observed with regret, it was useless 
to negotiate unless the French could show that they had 
adequate military forces to fulfil their engagements. Under the 
existing circumstances “the treaties that we may wish to con¬ 
clude with the Powers will only serve to make them realise 
more and more how little they could count on us. One may 