

Bellecombe had information that the Poona Government 
had considerable misgivings about the bonafides of Saint-Lubin. 
It was not in the least surprising, since the Marathas were not 
“unaware of the tricks of Saint-Lubin while he waf with the 
\ T abab Haidar Ali Khan and of his precipitate flight from his 
camp to go and serve the English”. The essential point for 
the success of a mission like that of Saint-Lubin was not only 
to unite the different. Mar at ha Chiefs subject to the Govern¬ 
ment of Poona but also to bring about a solid understanding 
among the Marathas of Poona, those of Berar, and Haidar 
Ali. But to work for such a coalition "it required another man 

than Saint-Lubin., to be guided in his operations by 

the Commandant-General of the nation, without whose inter¬ 
vention the country Powers cannot give their confidence to any 
person whatsoever, specially to a person like Saint-Lubin known 



minis ^ 



rn be an adventurer, on whose word or good faith no one can 


rely". 

I he third me moire of Bellecombe that we may notice is 
the Reftcrions sur le md moire de M. Law, dated 1781 1 It was 
written as a comment on Law’s Mimoire Militaire sur L’lndc 
of 1780. In his mimoire Law had submitted two plans of 
military operations in India, one on a larger scale, requiring 
15? men-of-war, 1* frigates, and 12,000 European troops; and 
another on a smaller scale, which was in essence the Tatta pro 
ject of Chevalier. Bellecombe wholly rejected the second plan, 
as diverting the attention of the French from what should he 
their real objective. "Our real interest is to establish ourselves 
solidly in India. The English have forced us out, and the 
honour of the nation requires our re-entry at least on a footing 
of equality with them and taking revenge for all the out 
rages they have committed. What would people think of us 
if they see us attempt to usurp the country of an Indian Prince 
in place of recovering the territory taken from us and of 
driving the English out of their own establishments? Would 
it not be a dishonourable confession of our own impotence?” 
As regards the larger plan. Bellecombe preferred it without 
sharing the unreserved optimism of Law. He was of opinion 
that military successes in India would be of no avail unless 
the French were equally successful in Europe and America. 

I he means demanded by Law, supposing that the Government 
can employ them, would never suffice to drive the English 

out of India.if we do not have in other parts of the 

world an absolute superiority over that Power”. If victory 
favoured the English in Europe and America, they could gain 
back their Indian possessions by the treaty of peace. Thus 
Bellecombe agreed to the despatch of a large expeditionary 
force to India only it the military situation in Europe and 
America permitted. 

For success in the Indian enterprise the beginning was 
most important, and Bellecombe therefore recommended that 
the first attack should be delivered with forces superior to 
those of the English. The destruction of the enemy fleet was 
an essential preliminary, which would enable the Freoeh to 