

Bcllecombe next discussed the difficulty of uniting Haidar 
Ali and the Maratbas in an anti-English coalition and the 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

of having to choose one of the two for an 
alliance. His opinion was that under the existing circumstan¬ 
ces an alliance with Haidar Ali should be preferred. He gave 
two reasons for his choice. First, Haidar All's troops were 
better trained and disciplined and therefore more dependable 
in action than those of the Marathas; and second, an alliance 
with. Haidar would at least create less difficulties for the French 
than an alliance with the Marathas. If the French chose 
Haidar, the Marathas would at least remain neutral and not 
join the English, since there were numerous causes of dispute 
between them. On the other hand, if the French allied them¬ 
selves with the Marathas, there vva every possibility of Haidar 
openly joining the English out of jealousy for the Marathas 
and fear of an increase in their power. It was not in the least 
difficult for Haidar to join the English, since for many years 
he had no cause of complaint against them, had even received 
valuable services from them and was therefore anxious to 
retain their friendship. Considering the matter from the 
opposite point of view. Bellecombc raised the question that if 
the French were to have one of the two Powers as their enemy, 
which one should they choose? Fie himself thought that in 
the existing state of affairs the enmity of Haidar Ali was more 
to be dreaded than that of the Marathas. It was not so live 
or six years earlier. Haidar Ali was then in a sorry state, while 
the Marathas stood as the leading Power in India. But since 
the outbreak of internal dissensions, the Maratha power had 
rapidly declined, while Haidar Ali was getting stronger every 
day. Another thing to be considered was that the French did 
not have to fear the enmity of the entire Maratha nation. The 
Marathas were so much divided among themselves that if the 
English secured the alliance of one party, the other party was 
sure to join the French. 

The third subject dealt with in the me moire was Saini- 
l.ubin's mission to Poona. Bellecombe passed severe strictures 
on Suint-Lubin s character and competence, calling him “an 
adept in intrigue and falsehood'*, who had successfully ex¬ 
ploited the credulity of the French nation" since his return 
from India in 1770. BcUecorobe knew his antecedents too 
well. He had entered the service of Haidar Ali in 1766, and 
had not only deserted him in 1767 on the outbreak of war with 




rmsr# y 



the English, but had even taken up his residence at Madras, 
where his activities were shady in character. On his return to 
France n 1770, he explained that he had gone to Madras to 
play upon the English and ruin them by intrigues and inter¬ 
nal dissensions. He imposed upon the credulity of the French 
Government and the public with so much success that he was 
granted a considerable pension and was regarded as the only 
person capable of creating a revolution in India. Bellecofttbe 
then bitterly observed, Today it is really our nation and the 
Ring’s Minister that he is playing upon; L give him that credit 
without however meaning to do so.” Saint-Lubin was given 
access to the official records at Versailles, and like a clever man 
he utilised all the memoires on India down to 1772. These 
mnnoires mostly recommended an alliance with the Marathas 
in preference to that with Haidar Ali; hut, as Bcllecornbe 
pointed out, Saint-Lubin was completely ignorant of the 
change that had come over since 1772 in the relative positions 
of the two Powers. Finally, Saint-Lubin submitted a nifrnoive 
of his own to the Minister. It was well received, because of 
the style of writing and of the omission of the difficulties to 
be encountered in its execution. Unfortunately for the French, 
although the political situation in India had changed com¬ 
pletely by 1776 and the Minister had been informed about 
all the developments, he ultimately accepted the plan of Saint- 
Lubin and decided to send him out to India to execute it. 