


1 P, A. ms. 3*3. 


Ml NISTffy, 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—fl 


<§L 


their troops to any point they liked. Beltecoinbc agreed 
with Law that the first attack should be delivered on Bombay, 
the possession of which would give the French a safe shelter fox 
heir ships in all seasons and a secure base for their future 
operations. As regards the strength of the expeditionary force, 
Bellecombe thought that it should start with ships and 
8,000 European troops. Such a force would not cost l 4 ranee 
much additional expense. She had already to maintain a con¬ 
siderable number of troops and ships in the Isle of 1 *ranee for 
fear of an attack by the English. But the best defence for the 
Isle of France was to carry the war to the centre of the English 
possessions in India. Thus all the troops, vessels and money 
t employed for the defence of the Isle of France could be diverted 
to the Indian expedition. The 3.000 troops maintained in 
that island, added to the 4,000 to be sent from France and the 
Regiment of Pondicherry, would make the total of 8*000 rc 
quired for the Indian expedition; and the major portion of the 
twelve to fifteen million livres spent in the island could be 
utilised for the same purpose. 


urnsT/f 


CHAIIEK VII 




DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS: SAIN L-LUBIN, MON TIG NV 
AND OTHERS 

In the present chapter we shall notice the diplomatic 
projects and activities of two agents sent to India by the 
Minister of Marine and Colonies on the eve of the outbreak of 
war between France and England in 1778. I he efforts of both 
the agents, Saint-Lubin and Montigny, were concentrated 
principally on forming an alliance with the Maratha Con¬ 
federacy, and although they did not bear fruit they are of deep 
interest, as showing the trend of French policy in India during 
the War of American Independence and the reactions it pro¬ 
duced on the southern Powers and the English. Besides the 
work of these two semi-offic ial agents, we shall also notice a lew 
anonymous inemoires, which will complete our review of French 
diplomatic projects between 1765 and 17^3 

Saint-Lubin 

The French diplomatic agent who gained the greatest 
notoriety in the eyes of the English, even more than Chevalier, 
was Pallcbot de Saint-Lubin, whose mission to Poona was 
viewed with great alarm by the Governments of Bombay and 
Calcutta. The extent of their panic is best illustrated by the 
large mass of documents relating to Saint-Lubin s activities 
preserved in the Bombay Archives and published by Forrest 
in his Selections from Letters Despatches etc., Bombay Secre¬ 
tariat , Maratha Series. It is rather surprising that the English, 
who were so much alarmed at Saint-Lubin s activities, felt 
little concern about Montigny, who remained at Poona for a 
longer period and whose diplomatic net was cast wider. It 
is all die more surprising, because Saint-Lubin was after all an 
impostor and could not have done any material damage to 
English interests in India. With the exception of Comte de 
Modave, who expressed a high opinion about Saint-Lubin, 
all the other contemporary Frenchmen in India, including 