

It is no doubt true that French intervention in the War of 
American Independence in 1778 gave some ground to the 
English to feel alarmed at the prospect of a Franco-Maratha 
alliance. But considering the character of Saint-Lubin and 
his antecedents, it can hardly he denied that in their panic 
about the safety of Bombay the English allowed themselves to 
he duped by hi n even more than the Ministers in Paris, 4 

Montignv 

About the diplomatic mission of Montigny, covering a 
period of nearly ten years, from 1778 to 1788, our principal 
source of information is his own voluminous correspondence 
preserved in the Pondicherry Archives. 4 Many interesting 
details are also available in a long and anonymous memoire 
preserved in the Biblioth&que Xationale, Paris—. Memoire et 
Reflixiom sur les negotiations Ae la cour de France ax’ec les 
Marathas, et particuliirernenl sur celle dont a Hi charge 

* Forrest Selections . Maratha Series, p. 32S. 

2 Ibid, pp. 328 331. 

3 ibid pp. $34-338. 

4 A critical account of Saint Lubm’s mission to Poona is to be found 
in iViblioihcque Nationalc M*. Fr. 12093. 

5 Mss. 5316 to 5364. 



misr/ir 



DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS—HI 


1C 


_ ^^Montigny . 1 Montigny’* diplomatic work in India may 

be divided into two periods, the first from 1778 to 1779, and 
the second from 1781 to 1788, when he left Poona to take up 
his new appointment as Commandant at Chandernagore. It 
will be remembered that in 177® a new vigour was noticeable 
in French colonial policy, particularly after the outbreak 0! 
the War of American Independence, which opened out a 
prospect of renewal of conflict with the old colonial rival. 
England. For the first time the French Government began to 
pay serious attention to the numerous mrmoires and projects 
for military intervention in India which had been submitted 


% 


since 


j765 and had been quickly shelved in the Ministerial 


archives. The project which attracted the attention of the 
Government most was the one sponsored by Madec and 
Chevalier in 1775. Its principal features were, as noticed 
already, an alliance with the Mughal Emperor, a conquest of 
the province of Tatta and a joint attack on Bengal when the 
opportune moment came. The Minister of Marine and 
Colonies, de Sartinc. approved of the project, but before accept¬ 
ing it merely at the suggestion of Madec and Chevalier, he felt 
it necessary to send an enterprising military officer to India to 
explore the practicability of the Tatta project and, in concert 
with Madec, to conclude negotiation with the Court of Delhi 
relating to the proposal of alliance made by the Emperor and 
Najaf Khan. Unlike Saim-Lubin. however, Montigny was 
required to keep in close contact with the Governor of I'ondi 
cherry and to follow his instructions. 

Montigny started from France early in > 777 . P ;issil ^ 
through Austria, Turkey and Egypt he reached Surat by a 

Portuguese boat about the middle of 1 77 s - *' ro '" Slir< ’' ’* 

wanted to go to Tatta according to his instructions, but contrary 