

Starting from Goa about the middle of October, Montigny 
reached Poona at the beginning of November. Giving his 
first impression about the political situation at the Maratha 
capital in a letter to Souillac dated 20th December, Montignv 
wrote that the coalition of the three southern Powers against 
the English had broken up, although friendship still subsisted 
between the Marathas and Haidar Ali. Hie English were 
trying to win over the Marathas against Haidar Ali by offering 
to give up all their recent conquests. Montigny feared that the 
offer had made such a favourable impression that the Poona 
Government would be* inclined to conclude an early peace. 
Nizam Ali also, alarmed at the successes of Haidar, was secretly 

1 P. A. ms. 5331. 

» B.N.F.Fr. 12093. 


MIN tSTfiy 



trying to conciliate the English. One principal grievance of 
the Marathas, as also or Ninon Ali, against the French was their 
preference for Haidar Ali. and Montigny had a good deal of 
difficulty to explain why the French had decided to start their 
military operations on the Coromandel Coast in concert with 
Haidar and not on the Malabar Coast, as proposed by the 
Marathas in the agreement with Saint-Lubin. Montigny tried 
to soothe the feelings of the Marathas lay saying that the French 
would begin operations on the Malabar Coast as soon as the 
principal expeditionary force would arrive. 1 

During the early months of 178s Montigny was in constant 
correspondence with Pivcron de Morlat, the french agent at 
the Court of Haidar. Their letters reveal the strenuous efforts 
they made to cement the friendly relations between the Mara¬ 
thas and Haidar Ali and to form a powerful coalition against 
the English in south India. It is interesting to notice, however, 
the difference in the viewpoints of the two French agents. 
Piveton de Morlat laid greater emphasis on an alliance with 
Haidar. “In the brilliant situation in which Aydei Aly Khan 
stands, master to-day of nearly the whole kingdom of the 
Carnatic and at the head of an army considered formidable in 

this country.I do not sec any Prince of India alliance 

with whom could be more suitable to us." a On the other 
hand, Montigny attached greater importance to an alliance 
with the Marathas, as noticed already. In his letter to Piveron 
he gave an account of the efforts he had made to prevent the 
Marathas from concluding peace with the English and forming 
an alliance with them against Haidar. He wrote that he had 
succeeded in preserving the friendly disposition of Nana Phad- 
navis towards the French, and in inducing him to break off 
talks with the English and to dismiss the English envoy who 
had come to Poona in January, by holding out assurances about 
the immediate arrival of a French expeditionary force. But 
he feared that all his diplomatic persuasions would be of no 
avail if then was an undue delay in the coming of the expedi¬ 
tionary force. In order to hasten it Nana Phadnavis even 
wanted to send a letter to Souillac through a Frenchman named 