

.He asked me several questions about the state of 

the arm) and navy in France, to which l replied in a 
manner calculated to make him form a favourable opinion 

.I believe, I can assure you that he is sincerely disposed 

towards our nation. His own interests drive him that way; but 
if the Prince does not receive any help from us, that may put 
the matter in doubt.” 1 2 

Montigny remained in the camp of Najaf Khan^till about 
the middle of 1779, when he proceeded to Poona in accordance 
with the instructions of Bcllecombed He passed thiough 
Hyderabad, where he stopped for a time at the camp of de 
Laltee, then in the service of Nizam Ali, having been dismissed 
earlier by Basalat fang. From there he wrote to Raudouin, 
Secretary to the Minister of Marine, in June 1779 * giving him 
an account of the impressions he had foimed about the attitude 
of the Mughal Court. He wrote that Najaf Khan was so much 
anxious for an alliance with France that he entrusted him with 
a letter for the Minister of Marine and even decided to send 
Pauli, who commanded the contingent of Sombre after the 
latter's death, on a diplomatic mission to Paris. Many of the 
leading personalities of the Darbar were also pro-French in 
sympathy. “Thcv are waiting for my return to this country 

with armed forces. I have up there a project . ..which 

is easy of execution immediately after landing troops in India. 
Without armed forces, however, none of the political and 
militan speculations will succeed”. At the same time Mon 
tignv held out a warning against putting much reliance on 
the various projects sent to Paris by French agents in India. 
“Do not make any arrangements regarding the Court of Delhi 

before I may have the honour of seeing you. Do not 

count on the Tatta affair, which is the most foolish project that 
has e\er been submitted to the Government." He wrote in con- 


1 P. A . ms. 5318. 

2 Ibid , ms. 5320. 






UWtST/fy 





tlusion, “i have a general plan about India, which my travels 
and observations have enabled me to make and which I am 
eager to submit to you; and 1 do not make an exaggerated 
assertion in telling yon that I am not afraid of discussing it in 
the presence of people most enlightened about this country.” 1 

Montigny reached Poona iti July 1779. He did not sta) 
long at the Maratha capital, being anxious to return to France 
to report on the state of affairs in north India and the prospect 
of an alliance with the Mughal Emperor. When he arrived at 
Poona, Montigny found the Marathas still Hushed with their 
recent victory over the English at Wargaon. Talks were in 
progress at Surat between their Wakil and Col. Goddard. He 
rightly guessed that there was little prospect of drawing the 
Marathas into an alliance with France until the result of the 
negotiations was known. At the same time there was a strong 
rumour about the despatch of a naval squadron by France, 
and Montigny expected that if it arrived in time the Marathas 
would break off negotiations with the English and enter into 
an alliance with the French. In a letter to de Lall6e he wrote, 
“If the English ask for peace with the Marathas it is possible 
to believe that they fear the arrival of the French, and as a 
measure of good policy they will not put themselves against 
two Powers.” 2 I11 the same letter he also wrote about the 
current alarm at Poona about the coming of Goddard. “Col. 
Goddard is expected here with two battalions; that is the 
rumour current throughout Poona; if that is true, you can 
take it that my stay here will be very short.” 