

The most pro-French leader in the Maratha Government 
was Nana Phadnavis, and the English realised that his removal 
from office was necessary to prevent a Franco-Maratha alliance, 
they were seeking a pretext to achieve their end, when in 
December 1777, by a stroke of extreme good fortune, they 
received secret overtures from some influential leaders of the 
Darbar, Sakharam Bapu and his associates, for English armed 
assistance for the overthrow of Nana Phadnavis. I he dis¬ 
gruntled leaders expressed their willingness to come to a settle¬ 
ment with the English proteg£, Raghoba, and to bring him 
back to Poona. The Bombay Government at onc.c seized the 
opportunity of intervention in Maratha politics, mainly because 


1 Forrest —Selections 
5 Ibid, pp. 188-190. 
5 Ibid, pp. 190“291. 


Maratha Series, p. 288. 








the removal of Nana Phadnavis was necessary to prevent an 
alliance dangerous to the English. 1 * 3 What is more important is 
that, unlike on the previous occasion when Bombay was 
censured by Calcutta for its policy of intervention in Maratha 
politics, it received (his time the full approval of the Supreme 
Government, mainly because of the necessity of averting the 
supposed French menace. The resolution of the Calcutta 
Council, dated February 2. 1778. permitted the Bombay Govern¬ 
ment to accept the overtures of the disgruntled Maratha 
Ministers with a view to destroy the pro-French element in the 
Poona administration. Among the terms of compensation to 
be demanded for military assistance was the exclusion of 
European settlements on any of the maritime coasts of the 
Maratha dominions without the previous consent of the 
Governor-General and Council.* 

Ai this juncture the English met with unexpected go<xl 
luck. On the sfith March 1778 Mostyn wrote to the Governor 
of Bombay, informing him about the sudden revolution at 
Poona, leading to the overthrow of Nana Phadnavis and the 
coming to power of Moroba. Sakharam and their associates who 
had sought English assistance before That made things easier 
for the English, because as long as Nana Phadnavis remained 
in power it was impossible for them to prevent a French occupa¬ 
tion of (.haul without being accused of open aggression. On 
this subject the Governor General and Council, writing to the 
Bombay Government on February 46, 1778, had expressed 
the opinion: “As we have no property, nor pretensions to 
property in the port of ( haul, we cannot authorise you to use 
any overt measure for preventing the French from forming an 
establishment at that place, however dangerous their neighbour¬ 
hood may be to your Presidency. This must be effected by 
other means, that is. by an appeal to that power which alone 
can give them the right of possession”. 4 At the same time 
the Governor-General and Council, writing to the Bombay 
Government on March 23, 1778, expressed the gravest anxiety 

1 Forrest —Selections . . . Maralha Scries, pp. 300-30* and 306 (Consul¬ 

tations—December 10, 1777 and January 19, 1778). 