

In another letter to de La! 16 e, dated 7th November 1779. 
Montigny wrote about his interview with Nana Phadnavis. 
“On the 28th October Nanafernis called for me and also M. 

Wamet.He appeared to me to be most anxious 

to know if M. de Saint-Lubin had been sent to the Maratha 
Court by order of the King. 1 replied to him that he could 
rest assured that I knew it to be so from the Minister. I 
thought that he would push things even further, but he 

stopped there..Between ourselves. I believe that he has 

made some arrangements with M. dc Saint-Lubin on which he 

1 P. A. ms. 53 * 5 * 

3 Ibid, nw. 53*8 (letter dated September 19, 1779). 




whists 



until time 


Shortly after Montigny left Poona, and early in January 
iy8o he started from Goa by a Portuguese ship for Europe. 
At the Maratha capital he had found himself in acute financial 
distress, and but for Warnet who lent him money for the 
expenses of his return journey, he would have been left com¬ 
pletely stranded. On his return to France, Montigny won 
due recognition for his services. He was promoted to the rank 
of Colonel and was made a Chevalier of St. Louis. 

It was only for a few months that Montigny remained in 
France, anti was soon sent out to India on a second mission. 
Towards the end of .780 the French Government had taken 
a definite decision to send an expeditionary force to India, and 
as a preliminary measure > *as felt accessary to prepare tie 
ground by diplomatic contacts with some of the Indian Powers. 
Since France had lost all her territorial possessions in India 
n was all the more necessary fo; her to gain the alliance of 
some important country Powers before the arrival of the 
expeditionary force. Montigny advocated an alliance with 
the Marathas. as the firs, step to the formation of a wider 
coalition which was to include the Mughal Emperor, Noam 
All and Haidar Ali. During his first mission to India he had 
formed the impression that the Maratha Confederacy consti¬ 
tuted the strongest and the most helpful ally that 1 ranee could 
have in India. As against the current opinion in I ranee which 
considered Haidar Ali as the most useful and effective ally 
against the English, Montigny held that a preference for the 
ruler of Mysore would alienate from France other Indian 
Powers, who despised him as an upstail and usurper an 
feared his aggressive designs On the other hand, an alliance 
with the Marathas, besides gaining for the French the cst 
fighting material in India and an opportunity for n»iUcaiy 
operations on the Malabar Coast, would also bring on their 
side Nizam Vli of Hyderabad who was then on the friendliest 
of terms with the Marathas Further, with the active help cm 
the Maratha Confederacy on their side, the French might with 


1 p, A. ms. 5330. 


mtSTfiy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


css difficulty be able to induce the Imperial Court at Delhi 
to take the risk of a joint attack on Bengal. Thus, as Mon¬ 
tigny calculated, French interests would be best served by 
attaching greater importance to an alliance with the Marathas. 