


1 B.N.F.Fr. mix,;,. Written in .784 n >'’ no " ‘!!LTTf 

of the failure of Montigny'* mission as also of the earner P 
Chevalier ami SaiM-Lubin to negotiate a Franco-Mat at ia 3 u i s 

* Ibid. It was also arranged .hat the Governor of Pondicherry *ouId 
be informed about his mission and ordered to pay hint 5,000 iv 
meet his expenses in India, but, as we shall sec later, no tnney m ^ 
lion was sent and Montigny found himself in great finance strai s T * 
arrival in India <P. A. ms. 5**0). He was left completely stranded partt- 
eularlv aPcr the capitulation of Pondicherry m October, 17, 


MINIS?#;, 



THE T RENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


rids prevented a landing at the mouth of the Indus, and so 
he proceeded to Agra, where he expected to meet Madec. He 
reached Agra on the ist August “after two months of the most 
painful jourm % y”, as he wrote to Bellecoinbe. 1 There he was 
disappointed to learn that Madec had left north India for 
Pondicherry about ten months earlier. He carried a letter 
from the Minister directing Madec to confer with him on the 
project of an alliance with the Mughal Emperor, with special 
reference to the occupation of Tatta. Matter's absence there 
fore upset his calculations. Montigny wrote several letters to 
him from Agra, begging him to return, but, as he feared, the 
letters were possibly intercepted by the English during the siege 
of Pondicherry. 2 At Agra Montigny met Visage, a lieutenan. 
of Madec. entrusted with continuing negotiations with the 
Imperial Court. Through the help of Visage he secured several 
interviews with Najaf Khan and had an opportunity of discus 
sing the project of alliance which formed the principal object 
of his mission. 

Montigm gave his impression to Bellecoinbe in a Letter 
dated October 1778. About the Tatta project, he observed that 
front the particulars he had received from reliable sources it 
appeared to be an indiscreet one. The province had been dis¬ 
membered from the Mughal Empire about thirty years ago and 
was in the occupation of Taimur Shah, Prince of Kandahar, 
who had in his service the best troops in Asia. From Visage 
he had learnt that a draft treaty of alliance had already been 
drawn up at the instance of Najaf Khan and a copy had been 
sent to Bellecoinbe for his approval. He then referred to his 
interview with Najaf Khan “the onh Prince with whom it was 
necessary to treat at this C ourt, having at his disposal all the 
forces and seals of the Empire.” “I told the Prince that 1 had 
been sent by the Minister to consult first with M. Madec on 
the subject of a memorandum which he had sent to the Couit 
and about which he (Najai Khan) knew; that afterwards I had 
been charged to declare on behalf of the Ministry that it was 
being seriously contemplated in France to send troops to this 
country; but that having learnt that he had entered into an 


1 P. A. ms. 5318. 
* Ibid, ms. 53*5- 


misTfy 



DIPLOMATIC PKOJ 1 C IS—HI 


<8L 


o emcnt with you, I had nothing more to say than that I 
would wait at his Court pending new orders. Me replied to 
me that he would keep his word which he had given, that he 
was ready to attack the* English if he was sent 800 soldiers and 
200 gunners, whom he undertook to maintain at his own cost 