

* Archives du Miniature dcs Affaires Etxang&res: Asie, M^moircs ef 
Documents, B ill—Indes Orientates, Chine, Cochin-Chine, 1660-177*, p. 451. 

Forrest Selections ..... Maratha Series, pp. 323*3*7. 






MINIS 


^ ‘ Go ^X 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

despatch of a body of French troops to Poona. In a 
letter to the Captain-General of Goa, dated 12th March 177ft. 
Saint-Lubin informed him that French ships and troops might 
he arriving shortly at Goa and requested him to allow the ships 
to reni,tin in the port and the troops to pass through Portuguese 
territory to the Maratha dominion. 1 He wrote a similar letter 
on the same day to the Governor of Daman.® On the 26th 
April 1778 he wrote another letter to the Captain-General at 
Goa. repeating his request to allow two French regiments to 
pass through Portuguese territory in order to assist the Ministers 
of the Maratha Darbar “to put a stop to the disorders resulting 
from the death of their sovereign”. Fo remove suspicion about 
his honafide. Saint-Lubin explained the reason of his quiet 
arrival at Poona without the customary marks of an Ambassador 
Extraordinary, and then stated that he was shortly going to 
send his secretary with a packet recently received from the 
Prime Minister of Portugal to disclose the whole affair to him 
in person. All these statements were perhaps a piece of the 
deceit and falsehood which characterised the whole career of 
Saint-Lubin, but it was only natural that the letters, when inter¬ 
cepted by the English, threw them into a fever of excitement 
and confirmed their previous suspicions about, the existence of 
a secret military agreement between the French and the 
Marathas. 

Much of the activities of Saint-Lubin at Poona came to 
be known to the English through his own indiscretion in 
antagonising members of his retinue to such an extent that 
they sought the protection of the English representative at 
the Maratha capital and gave out the whole story, or at least 
as much as w f as known to them. One of them was James 
Madjett, who left him in May 1777. and it was on his statements 
that the English based their information about the intrigues 
of Saint-Lubin. Another was de Coredle, who had been lured 
by Saint-Lubin to accompany him to India by the prospect of a 
good areer. He was alienated by Saint-Lubin’s haughty 
behaviour and also perhaps by the realisation that he had been 




1 Forrest —Selections . . . Maratha Series , p. 3*3. 
3 Ibid, p. 3*4. 

* Ibid, 3*5-317. 


DIPLOMATIC PROJECTS —T11 



duped. Saint-Lubin, who wanted to keep his negotiations at 
Poona secret even from men of his own entourage, suspected 
that Madjett and de Corcelle were sending adverse reports to 
France and giving out information to the English. On this 
ground their rooms were searched and their baggages pillaged, 
and Saint-Lubin even went to the extent of making an attempt 
on the life of de Corcelle. The two men then sought the pro¬ 
tection of the English representative at Poona, which furnished 
a cause of conflict between the English of Bombay and the 
Maratha Government. The Peshwa’s letter to the Governor of 
Bombay, dated January 27. 1778, accused the English repre¬ 
sentative at Poona of a breach of diplomatic etiquette in giving 
protection to two men of Saint-Lubin's party who were detected 
writing false reports to France. 1 ft is interesting to notice that 
the Supreme Government of Calcutta, in a letter to Mostyn, 
dated December 29, 1777, expressed strong disapproval of the 
policy of giving protection to the two Frenchmen, whose bona 
fides moreover were not above suspicion 3 The Captain of the 
Sartine , Coronet, and the Supercargo, Warnet, were also 
alienated from Saint-Lubin, whose dilatory policy prevented a 
quick disposal of the cargo of armaments and delayed the 
departure of the ship for China till the favourable season had 
passed. Coronet was thrown into prison by the Marathas on the 
accusation of Saint-Lubin and was set at liberty only after the 
revolution in the Poona Government in March i 77 ^- s He 
returned to Europe, but Wamet stayed on at Poona even after 
the departure of Saint-Lubin, looking after the disposal of the 
cargo of the Sartine and carrying on a lucrative business for 
himself. He was still at Poona when Montigny came on his 
second mission to India in 1781 and rendered him valuable 
help in his negotiations with the Maratha Government. 