

Montigny's arguments impressed the new Minister of 
Marine and Colonies, Marquis de Castries, who selected him 
for a second diplomatic mission to India. He was not, how 
ever, appointed an Ambassador, nor did he put forward any 
pretence on that score like Saint-Lubin. In a letter to Piveron 
de Morlat, the French agent it the Court of Haidar Ali, he 
wrote, “When you will do me the honour of writing again, 
you will oblige me. Sir, by not giving me the title of Ambassa¬ 
dor. I have not the ridiculous vanity to apply to myself a 
title which I do not have. The ranks which I hold from the 
King and the confidence with which the Minister honours me 
are quite sufficient for my amour-propre ." 1 Although Mon- 
tigny was sent particularly to the Court of Poona, his instruc¬ 
tions were couched in general terms and permitted him to 
carry on negotiations with other country Powers as well, with¬ 
out, however, any final authority to conclude treaties. He was 
placed under the control of the Governor of the Isle of France 
and was given a number of blank commissions to be distribut¬ 
ed at his discretion among the French officers in the service of 
the Indian Princes. 3 


Montigny started from France in March 1781, just a few 
days in advance of the departure of the naval squadron under 
de Suffren. On his way he stopped for a short period at the 
Cape of Good Hope. France had assumed responsibility for 
the defence of that Dutch colony and had decided to send 
troops under Conway escorted by de Suffren's naval squadron. 
Montigny had instructions from the Minister to wait at the 
Cape till the arrival of Conway, making note of the state of 
defences and drawing up a military map of the place. But at 
the polite insistence of the Dutch Governor, who assured him 
of full co operation with the French, he had to cut short his 
stay at the Cape. Leaving for Conway his observations on the 


* P. A. im. 5337. 

3 B.N.F.Fr, 12093. 





state of defences of the colony, Montigny started for the isle 
of France in June. 1 


In the meantime the political situation in India had taken 
a turn favourable to the French. Both Haidar Ali and the 
Marathas, then at war with the English, sought French military 
assistance. Haidar Ali entered into negotiations with Souillac, 
Governor of the Isle of France, through Piveron de Morlat, 
who had been formerly ProcureurGeneral at Pondicherry and 
since the fall of that place residing at the Mysore Darbar as 
French diplomatic agent. The Marathas also had decided to 
send an agent: named Zainul Abedin to the Isle of France to 
get the assistance of 2,000 French troops, offering to pay 60,000 
rupee- per month for their maintenance.* When Montigny 
arrived in the Isle of France, he found Souillac busy making 
preparations for sending an expeditionary force to the Coro¬ 
mandel Coast to co-operate with Haidar Ali. Although he 
would have liked to divert the expeditionary force to the 
Malabar Coast to assist the Marathas, it was too late to alter 
the arrangements already made. Montigny arrived at Goa in 
October 1781 and met there the agent of the Poona Govern¬ 
ment. Zainul Abedin, ready to start for the Isle of France with 
the proposal of military co-operation noticed above. He 
stopped the agent from proceeding further, with the assurance 
that he had been sent by the French Government to negotiate 
a treaty of alliance. 