

Saint-Lubin remained at Poona till July 1778. The abrupt 
end of his diplomatic mission was brought about by a revolu¬ 
tion in Maratha politics in March 1778, resulting in a tempo¬ 
rary eclipse of the power of Nana Phadnavis, and the extreme 
pressure that the English brought to bear upon the new Govern - 

1 Foircst —Selections . . . Maratha Series, p. 307. 

s Ibid , p. 308. 

* Ibid, pp. 310 312 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


to dismiss the French agent. SainNLubin had carried on 
bis negotiations principally with Nana Phadnavis, who 
dominated the Maratha Government till the revolution. The 
leaders of the new Government, Moroba, Sakharam and the rest, 
although ex-colleagues of the fallen Minister, did not share his 
extreme pro-French sympathies and were rather inclined to come 
to a settlement with the English at Bombay and their protege, 
Raghunath Rao. Before the revolution they had sought the 
armed assistance of the English to overthrow Nana Phadnavis, 
and the latter were happy to get in that way an opportunity 
to intervene in Maratha politics to secure their principal object, 
the dismissal of Saint-Lubin from Poona and the prevention of 
any FrancoMaratha alliance. After the revolution the new 
Government followed a wavering policy for some time with 
regard to the French, but ultimately the pressure from the 
English proved too strong and Saint Lubin was obliged to leave 
the Maratha capital in July. 

SaitU-Lubin was not the man to admit the failure of his 
diplomatic mission. In order to cover up the discredit of his 
sudden departure from Poona he gave out the story, quite in 
keeping with his past, that he was returning to Europe on 
another secret mission. This time he was being sent by some 
of the prominent Maratha leaders to hasten the despatch of 
French troops to India in accordance with the terms of the 
treaty concluded in 1777. Saint-Lubin starred from Daman by a 
Portuguese boat and travelled by way of the Red Sea and Suez. 
Back in France, he was besieged by his creditors, the principal 
being Laffonde who had freighted the ship, the Sartine; and 
unable to meet their demands he was thrown into the prison of 
Bastille, where he spent his time in writing mimoire after 
mimoite to clear himself of all accusations. Later he was 
transferred to the prison-asylum of Charenton, from where he 
escaped and took refuge at Treves, there he spent his remain¬ 
ing years as a wig-maker, perhaps a fitting climax in the career 
of one who had for the best part of his life successfully practised 
the profession of an impostor. 

As a successful impostor, Saint-Lubin had the distinction of 
counting among his victims not only the Ministers in France 
but also the English Governments of Bombay and Calcutta, 
who appeared icrriblv alarmed at his negotiations with the 





Maratha Government and made frantic efforts to get him out 
of Poona. There is a large mass of correspondence in the 
Bombay Archives concerning Saint-Lubin s activities, and it 
will be interesting to follow from these letters how the course 
of English policy towards the Maratha State was influenced by 
their fear of the French adventurer. The English representative 
at Poona, Mostyn, began to send alarming reports to Bombay 
from the moment of Saint-Lubin’s arrival. Thrown into a 
panic by such reports, the Governor and Council of Bombav 
wrote to the Governor-General and Council in Calcutta on 
May 10, 1777, expressing the fear that if through Saint-Lubin s 
intrigues the French succeeded in obtaining the port of Chaul 
or any other in the immediate neighbourhood, it would be 
harmful to English trade and commerce and dangerous to 
Bombay in a time of war . 1 Mostyn, in a letter dated May 19* 
informed the Bombay Council that the object of Saint-Lubin s 
mission appeared to be the cession of a port on the western 
coast to the French and permission to establish a factory at 
Poona. He continued that he had pointed out to the Maratha 
Durbar the ambitious nature of the French and had been 
assured by two influential members of the Government that no 
agreement would be concluded with the French which would 
he detrimental to the English. 2 He enclosed a report on Saint- 
Lubin’s mission based on the evidence of James Madjett. 3 