

3 (bid, pp. 309-310. 

3 (bid, pp, 310.312. 

4 Ibid , pp, 313 314 



misrfy 



at the prospec t of a Franco-Maratha alliance. V\ c regard the 
Marathas as the only native and the French as the only foieign 
power in the East Indies, capable of affecting the influence 
which the English nation had acquired in it. The former 
were prevented from giving us an immediate or effectual trouble 
bv internal distractions, and the inequality of their number to 
the effect of our discipline; the latter by their want of landed 
property or any alliance which might supply it. Art liancc 
formed between them would at once relieve all their mutual 
wants, and afford them all the requisites to dispute with us 
on equal terms the dominion of the East Indies 

After the revolution at Poona the Bombay Gon eminent, 
expected an immediate reversal of the policy of Nana Phadnavis 
with regard to the French and instructed its agent Mostyn, to 
secure the dismissal of Saint-Lubin and the severance of all 
connections with the French. Mostyn, however, reported from 
Poona what he considered to be a breach of faith on the pan of 
the new Government, 1 2 whereupon the Bombay Council expressed 
grave anxiety and urged the need of taking military measures. 
"Upon a review of our late advices from Poona, we bud too 
many instances of duplicity in the Darbar to let us doubt, but 
that they will mean to continue the same line of evasive conduct 
so long pursued by that Government. Mons. de SainoLubin 
is still permitted to remain at Poona, although his dismissal 
was the very first object of our instructions to Mostyn aftei 

the late change in the administration took place.I he 

Governor-General and Council must be desired to inform us 
what measures thee intend to pursue if the Darbar s a ns we i 
with respect to their connections with the l'rench should not 
prove satisfactory". 3 

It was from this anxiety to avert the French menace that 
arose the necessity of military intervention in Maratha affairs, 
with the restoration of Raghoba to power as a convenient 
pretext; and it was for the same reason that the proposal of 
the Bombay Government received the approval of the Governor- 


1 Forrest —Selections . . Maratha Scries, pp. 3 * 4 7 ' 

2 Ibid, pp. 3*2-3*3, 

3 lbtd, pp. 318*520. 



misr/ff. 



C.crural and Council in Calcutta. 1 On October is* the Bombay 
Government resolved to take immediate military action for 
conducting Raghoba to Poona, but the real object of the expedi¬ 
tion was to remove the French menace, as stated dearly in 
the minutes of Carnac and Mostyn a The principal reason for 
English military intervention in support of Raghoba is further 
brought out clearly l>v Article XV of the treaty concluded with 
him. “Raghunathrao Bajirao Pradhan hereby engages and 
agrees that no European settlements shall be allowed to be made 
on the maritime coasts or in any other part of the Maratha 
dominions without the consent of the Company or of their 
representatives being previously obtained, and that no manner 
oi intercourse or connection shall be maintained between the 
Maratha Government and the French nation”. 3 It is not 
relevant for our purpose to go beyond this treaty and deal with 
the resumption of AngloMaratha hostilities consequent on it. 