

The second document is, Memoire sur L*Empire Mogol.' 
It is undated, but while Bar be suggests that it might have 
been written in 1781 or 1782, from the contents it is clear that 
it must have been written some time after the conclusion of 
peace in 1783. The author gave a derailed account of the 
existing state of the Mughal Empire and the growth of the 
English power in Bengal and north India,' and then ho sug¬ 
gested a means of effecting a revolution in India. He did not 
refer to the Tatta project at all, but simply proposed that 
France should send a small corps of a thousand men to the 
help of the Emperor. The command should be given to 
Madec, than whom nobody knew India better. For the first 
few years the corps was only to help the Emperor in establish¬ 
ing his authority over his vassals. This was to be followed by 
the conclusion of an alliance between him and Asaf-ud daulah, 
the Nawab of Oudh, and a joint attack on Bengal. The author 
was very optimistic and did not see any difficulty in his way. 


1 Barb 4 ~Le Sabob Rent Madrr, pp. 199-209. 


MIN IST/fy 


CHAPTER VI!I 




FRENCH ACTIVITIES IN THE EAST ( 1779 - 1781 ) 

I. Failure to take advantage of English difficulties in India. 

We have seen in the preceding chapters how the French 
in India refused to recognise their defeat in the Seven Years’ 
War as final. T he memory of the earlier successes of Dupleix 
and Bussy was still fresh in their minds, while they attributed 
their later reverses merely to ill-luck and to he insufficiency 
of the resources at their command due to the indifference of 
the home Government. T he very nature of the treaty of 
iffy, which sought to reduce the French in India to absolute 
political impotence, inspired in them a determination to pre¬ 
pare the ground for a return match. From the morrow of theii 
defeat, all of them, either in official service or in the employ of 
tfie country Powers, were confident of a renewal of the conflict 
and looked forward to the day when it might be possible for 
them to strike against their adversaries under more favourable 
circumstances. The peace of 1763 was considered only as a 
breathing-space, to be utilised for making preparations for the 
inevitable renewal of the conflict,—by fortifying the settlements, 
strengthening the garrisons and building up alliances with 
some of the important country Powers. For more than a 
decade, from the re-occupation of their settlements in India in 
1765 to the outbreak of the next war in 1778, they drew up 
innumerable plans of diplomatic alliances and military opera¬ 
tions. some of which we have noticed in detail already. 

Till 1776. however, the enterprise and initiative of the 
French agents in India met with little response from the Gov¬ 
ernment *in Paris, and all the projects were quietly shelved in 
the ministerial archives. But with the outbreak of the War of 
American Independence there came about a change in the 
policy of the French Government. For the first time it began 
to stir itself from the lethargy which had seized it since the 
disasters of the Seven Years’ War. I he War of American 
Independence appeared as an opportunity to take revenge upon 