

1 P. A. ms. 533.1. 

* Ibid, ms. 333ft. 



MiNisr^ 



Chauvigny. The latter, however, went only up to Goa, from 
where he was recalled in March, on the news of the arrival of 
the naval squadron under dc Suffren. 

i he news of the arrival of a strong naval squadron under 
dc Suffren and of the landing of troops under Duchcmin re¬ 
inforced the diplomatic efforts of Montigny and induced the 
Maratha Government, to put. forward a conctete proposal of 
alliance with France. After two months of negotiations a 
draft treaty was finally drawn up in June 1782.' 1 he docu¬ 

ment bore the title "Agreements proposed by Srimat Raja Sri 
Madhu Rao \ a ray an Pant Pradhan to Louis XVf, King of 
France and Navarre”, and the preamble explained, 
agreements have been made with M. de Vlontigny, French 
Colonel, sent to the Court of Poona, who according to his 
instructions will subrni. them to M. Dnchemin, General of the 
French Army in India, so that he may decide regarding these 
agreements”. The treaty contained twenty-four articles, of 
which only the important ones need be noticed here. By the 
first article both parties agreed not to make separate peace 
with the English. “But if circumstances compel one of the 
two nations to conclude peace with the English, it will not do 
so without first informing its ally about it.’ The second 
article stated that on the arrival of the French forces in India 
the Maratha Government would place at their disposal the 
port of Chau I and the fort of Rewadanda. But all the troops 
and military stores were to be withdrawn as soon as the french 
conquered another port from the English. By the third article 
the Maratha Government promised to supply workmen and 
transport animals to the French army, and by the fourth it 
agreed to stand security to native bankers to advance eight 
lakhs of rupees to the French army for its subsistence during 
the first four months. The next five articles dealt with the 
division of territories to be conquered from the English. T he 
French were to retain Surat and Bombay with its dependencies 
and would also have the right to establish factories at Broach 
and Cambay but not to maintain troops there. All other 
conquests were to be handed over to the Marathas. Booties 


ip. A. ms. 5341. 



of all kinds were to be equally divided between the two allies. 
Article 19 stipulated that if the Marathas wanted to invade 
Bengal, rhe French must give them military assistance, and in 
return they would be given a suitable Jagir. Another interest¬ 
ing article was the seventeenth, which stated that the French 
must allow "free exercise of the religion of the Hindus'* in all 
the territories under their control. These were in brief the prin 
cipal provisions of the draft treaty of alliance proposed by the 
Poona Government. 

Writing to Duchemin about the draft treaty on the 30th 
June. Montigny expressed the opinion that the terms offered 
by the Marathas were the best that the French could expect 
under the circumstances. He strongly urged their immediate 
Acceptance and the despatch of naval and land forces to the 
Malabar Coast, without which the Marathas would not make 
any move at all. “The advantages which are presented to you 
on the Malabar Coast, the possession of the port and the island 
of Bombay, of the town and fortress of Surat, of factories at 
Broach and Cambay whic h the Marathas are offering us, cannot 
fail to draw' your attention and to incline yon unhesitatingly 
to conclude agreements with a Court whose alliance and 
support are so necessary to our interest in this part of the 
world.’’ He continued: "The English are so convinced of 
the truth of what I am submitting that they are making their 
best efforts to draw to their side this Power by offering all 
accommodation." Montigny felt strongly against relying too 
much on an alliance with Haidar who was disliked by all the 
southern Powers. "Their jealousy and resentment have been 
strengthened anew as they sec this ambitious soldier being 
supported and sustained by a French army”. He feared that 
the result of such a policy would be the formation of a strong 
coalition against Haidar which would be ruinous to French 
interests. The best course of action for the French was to 
form a solid alliance with the Marathas. "With that we check 
Nizam Ali and counterbalance the English forces by » diver 
sion, useful and effective for our projects on the Coromandel 
Coast.” Montigny concluded: "I am very happy for having 
been able, during the eight months that I have been living 
among the Marathas, to persuade them to reject the proposal 
of the English and to make the Regency desire to negotiate 