



misr/ty 



about the immediate conclusion of an alliance with the Mara¬ 
thas and starting operations on the Malabar Coast did not 
materialise. Bussy made no move at all to gain the co-opera¬ 
tion ol he Man thas and Nizam Ali, except writing a few letters 
which produced no effect whatsoever. Montigny’s hopes were 
finally destroyed by the sudden cessation of hostilities at the 
beginning of July, following news of the conclusion of peace 
in Europe. He was greatly disappointed at the unexpected 
turn of events, but he did not lose heart. He continued his 
diplomatic efforts to keep (he Marathas and Nizam Ali friendly 
towards the French, by assuring them that the peace just con¬ 
cluded in Europe was only a temporary arrangement and that 
immediately on the outbreak of the next war France would 
send another large expeditionary force to India. About the 
possibility of an alliance with the Marathas, he never despaired. 
In a letter to Bussy, dated 20th October 1783, he wrote that 
Nana Phadnavis had assured him again “that whether the war 
cominued or peace was made, the Regency had a most sincere 
desire to preserve the friendship of the French and to form 
an alliance with our nation; that he knew the perfidy of the 
English and did not rely on the faith of their promises; that 
they hud already deceived him fhree times and that he would 
gladly break with them if he could do it with safety, that is 
to say, in co-operation with our forces.” Monrigny continued 
that the Marat ha Government had decided to maintain a 
permanent 1 Vakil with Bussy and had selected a Brahmin 
named Gopal Rao for the purpose, who would shortly start 
with Maiarois, a French engineer whom Bussy had sent to 
Poona some time earlier. 1 In another letter, dated 14th Decem¬ 
ber, Montigny wrote, “I saw Nana Fernis and spoke to him 
about the treaty which lie had concluded with the English, a 
copy of which the Minister (of Marine) had sent you. He told 

nu .that it was quite true that being pressed by the 

Chiefs of the Regency and specially by the English, he had 

acquiesced in their peace proposals..that he had been 

compelled to conclude these agreements in order to gain time 
and to give time to the French to appear on the Malabar Coast 


1 P A ms. 5551. 




MIN IST^ 



I>l V LOMATIC PROJECTS — III 




The Prince charged me to tell you, my General, that 
his intention was always the same.... namely that if the 
French came in force on the Malabar Coast, he would join all 
the forces of the Regency with ours to destroy or drive away 
the English.” Montigny added that Nana Phadnavis appeared 
“convinced of the advantage which the Ma rath as could draw 
by gaining the friendship of the French, and he charged me to 
tell you again that nothing was dearer to his heart than form¬ 
ing a close alliance with our nation.” 1 

The diplomatic activities of Montigny in the next period 
till his recall from Poona in 1788 and his work of administra¬ 
tion at Chandernagore, from 1789 to 1791, will he dealt with 
in later chapters. In concluding this section a few remarks 
may be made about the feasibility of his project of a Franco 
Maratha alliance. In his reports to the Minister in Paris Bussy 
considered the project as wholly unreal, and without question 
ing the integrity of Montigny, as in the case of other French 
agents, he regarded the latter as having been duped by the 
Marathas. Bussy felt convinced that Nana Phadnavis was not 
sincere in his profession of friendship for the French. He had 
secretly made peace with the English at the very moment that, 
he was making proposals through Montigny for an alliance 
with France. It was on the same ground that Montigny had 
been criticised by the author of the Memoire et Reflexions 
sur les negotiations cle la Cour de France aver les Marathas 
etc . 7 It is no doubt open o speculation whether Nana Phad¬ 
navis would have plaved the game if the French had accepted 
his proposal of alliance in 1782. It is not unlikely that his 
negotiations with the French were not inspired by any sincer¬ 
ity of motive, but only to rouse the jealousy and fear of the 
English, so as to be able to wring out more favourable term? 
from them. This view may even seem to be supported by the 
protracted nature of the negotiations which led to the Treaty 
of Salbai, the treaty having been concluded in May 1782 but 
the exchange of ratifications being delayed till February 1783. 
But when we consider that Nana Phadnavis had no reason to 