

The first expectation of Montigny that the arrival of Bussy 
in hr Isle of France would be followed by speedy and decisive 
action did not materialise, and in two letters to Bussy, dated 
a*nd December 1782 and 16th February 1783*. he frantically 
urged the avoidance of further delay, which might ruin all 
prospects of building up an anti English coalition in India. 
In the tirst he wrote, “Time i< passing and the formidable ex¬ 
peditionary force, announced such a long time back, has not 

1 p A - ms 5545 - 

2 Ibid, ins. 5346. 

s I hi A, ms. 5345. 





WNISTffy 



appeared yet. Nana Fern is remains the only one i nflexible up 
to the present to the pressing solicitations of the English ant 
of several great Maratha Chiefs whose Wakils do not cease to 
intrigue in favour of our enemies.” He continued, ‘'Comman¬ 
der de SuHren has written to me on your behalf to induce the 
Marathas to make a move against Bombay in order to create 
a diversion to the attack which the English seem to have 
planned against Mysore. I am fully aware of the advantage 
which such a diversion will give to the position of Ayder Aly 
Khan; but this Power (the Marathas) will not move unless 
strongly supported by our forces, and but for the very imme¬ 
diate hope of being allied with the French and being supported 
by them it would have agreed to the English proposal a long 
time back.” Repeating once more that the four principal 
Powers of India were favourably disposed towards the French. 
Montigny wrote, "You can count on the Regency of Poona 

f .by concluding solid agreements with it at once and. 

may add, by giving it an assured promise to operate on t lie 
Malabar Coast during the next monsoon.” He hid also received 
encouraging letters from Hyderabad which confirmed that 
Nizam AH was willing to seek the alliance of the 1-tench and 
that he intended to send Aumont as his Wakil to Bussy as soon 
as the latter arrived in India. Finally, he had received a letter 
from the Emperor of Delhi, informing him “that he will not 
giant an audience to the English agent, whom the Council of 
Calcutta has sent to him, in the expectation that our foites 
will arrive in India soon.” In the second letter, written in 
February 1783, Montigny expressed great concern and dis¬ 
appointment at the delay in the arrival of Bussy. Although 
he was trying to keep the Indian Powers well disposed towaids 
the French, he feared that the situation might change com- 
pletelv if the French delayed too long in concluding alliances 
and starting effective military operations in India. About the 
Maratha Court in particular he wrote, "Nana Fernis yet appears 
to be holding firm against the machinations of the Englisii 
and their partisans, but it remains to be seen if he will keep 
all his promises to me. The death of Ayder Aly Khan 
and the enterprise and successes of the English against Mysore 
might easily change the face of things”. 

Bussy arrived at last in March 1783. but Montigny s hopes 