


WNlST/fy 


diplomatic: projects- -hi 




with us. 1 would be very much grieved to day if I saw the 
happiest occasion disappear by losing a Power so important for 
the success of our projects in India’ . 1 

The fears expressed by Montigny in the last line came out 
to be true and the project of a Franco Maratha alliance did not 
materialise. Two unforeseen difficulties appeared and inter¬ 
posed a long delay in the consideration of the proposals. First, 
news was received at Foona in August 1782 that Bussy had 
arrived in the Isle of France as the Supreme Commander of 
the French expeditionary force. The authority to take a deci 
sion on the Maratha proposals was then transferred to him 
from the hands of Duchemin. Second. Warner and Chauvigny, 
who were being sent to the Isle of franco with the Maratha 
proposals, met with an unfortunate accident on the way. I heir 
boat, the Lizard , was captured by the English in the neutral 
port of Tranqucbar in October." Chauvigny was taken priso 
ner, and although Warnet could escape with all the important 
documents, it was not till February * 7^3 that Bussy received 
the Maratha proposals on his arrival at Trinkomali. Even 
then Bussy did not come to a quick decision and tried to 
temporise as long as possible in order to keep the Marat has 
under a delusion. The thing was that, apart from the fact that 
Bussy did not consider the terms of the treaty to be quite 
favourable for the French, he had a positive distrust of the 
Marathas from the very beginning. He openly accused the 
Marathas of double-dealing, since while putting forward pro¬ 
posals for an alliance with the French they were at the same 
time, and quite unknown to Montigny, carrying on negotia¬ 
tions with the English. Thus in spite of the frantic appeals 
of Montigny to accept the Maratha proposals at once, Bussy 
simply marked time, until the suitable moment for action 
passed with the conclusion of peace between England and 
France. 

In a letter 10 Bussy, dated 26th August, Montigny wrote, 
*T handed over your letter to Nana Fernis, the Regent of this 
Court and I cannot express to you, my General, how much it 


* P. A. ms. 554*. 
3 Ibid, ms. 5545. 



MMST/ty 



has pleased this Prince. ‘The face of things is going to change* 
said he in a transport of joy, ‘this French General knows India 
very well, h was a friend of the great Nana*. He has repeated 
to me several times the passages in your letter in which you 
state that the King does not want to make conquests of terri¬ 
tories.. .but only to restore them (to the Indian Princes).” 
Montiv ay then urged the necessity of quick action and imme¬ 
diate acceptance of the Maratha proposals. “Everybody is very 
well-disposed at this Court, but it is time that you should arrive 

.The English are making the greatest efforts here to 

persuade the Regency to negotiate peace with them and to 

unite this Power with Nizam Ali against Haidar, our ally. 

1 am occupying myself unceasingly in counteracting the efforts 
of our enemies at the Darbar , and I have the positive promises 
of the Regem y that it will not negotiate with them if the agree¬ 
ments which it proposes to conclude with our nation are 
accepted.’’ 1 2 Montigny concluded by suggesting that the French 
should begin by capturing Surat, which would serve as a con¬ 
venient base of operations on the Malabar Coast and free the 
French from dependence on Maratha ports and territories* A 
few days later Montigny wrote to Aumont, a French officer in 
the service of Nizam Ali, announcing to him the arrival, of 
Bussy in the Isle of France and urging him to make all efforts 
to persuade Nizam Ali to ally himself with the French. He also 
wrote to Tahawar Jang, the chief minister of Hyderabad, and 
asked Aumont “to meet him and make him feel that now is 
ti e moment for a great revolution, the result of which will 
he very favourable to the Princes of India.” a 