



<SL 

able and loyal 
i, the Peshwa, 


1 P. A. ms. si\. 


HUHST/fy 



I>IPl.OMATIC PROJECTS-III 


•<§L 


muuerided that preparations for war should be completed 
within the next three or four years. These were to include 
the construction of solid fortifications at Pondicherry, storage 
of provisions for two years, training a sepoy force of 2.000, 
conclusion of alliances with the Marathas and Haidar Ali, cul¬ 
tivation of friendly relations with Basalat Jang who had a 
French corps in his service, and gaining the co-operation of 
Sombre and Madec who had large and welFtrained armies 
under their command and had great influence at the Imperial 
Court at Delhi. The author specially emphasised the need 
for an alliance with the Marathas, whose extensive dominions, 
bordering on English possessions all over India, and large 
cavalry force, swift, light arid very effective for ravaging the 
enemy territories, made them the most formidable foe to the 
English. In view of the importance of an alliance with the 
Marathas it was necessary for the French not merely to main¬ 
tain a permanent diplomatic agent at the Court of Poona but 
also to spend considerable sums of money to win over the 
principal ministers. The agent to be kept at the Court of 
Poona could also be entrusted with the maintenance of 
diplomatic relations with Nizam Ali and Basalat Jang With 
7,000 European troops, 2,000 sepoys and a naval squadron of 
20 vessels, the author felt confident of success if the command 
was entrusted to an able and experienced person like Bussy. 

We may notice a third anonymous memoire preserved in 
the Pondicherry Archives ,—Notes sur la situation des Anglais 
dans Vlndouslan. Although it is not dated, from the contents 
it appears that it must have been written in 1776, on the eve 
of the coming of Bellecomhe as Governor of Pondicherry. 1 The 
author began by exposing the falsehood of the notion enter¬ 
tained by most of his compatriots about the ease with which 
the English power in Bengal could be destroyed and the readi- 


1 P. A. ms. 233. In the Catalogue des Manuscrits des Ancienncs 
Archives de VInde Fvangaisc, Vo]. I, Gaudarr states that the mimoire was 
possibly drawn up by Law to enlighten his successor, Bellecornbe, on the 
political situation of the country. But there are two reasons to think that 
it was not written by Law; first, the views expressed here regarding the 
Tatta project are entirely opposed to the known views of Law on the 
subject (P. A. nr. 321); second, in this document the writer once uses 
the first person but just two lines later refers to Law in the third person. 


O 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



ness of the people to rise in revolt as soon as France declared 
wan On the other hand, the English administration in Bengal 
was both efficient and popular. “The people are treated well; 
businessmen have a prosperous trade and their wealth is 

assured.Justice is administered with a severe impartiality 

.and no precautions are omitted to establish the Eng¬ 
lish authority on a firm basis.” Turning to the possibility of 
gaining allies in north India, the author stated that Shuja-ud- 
daulah, the Nawab of Oudh, had been friendly towards the 
French, but his successor was a mere tool in the hands of the 
English. The Emperor, Shah Alam, and his ministers, Abdul 
Ahad Khan and Najaf Khan, were inclined in favour of the 
French, but there was a real apprehension of the Emperor 
ultimately throwing himself into the arms of the English 
because of the rapid expansion of English power and the little 
prospect of gaining an\ foreign help to stop it. 1 he only 
factors that prevented the Emperor from taking that step were, 
first, his experience of English hospitality at Allahabad, and 
second, his hope of gaining the alliance of France, negotiations 
for which had been already started through Madec. 