

1 A. N.—Ckdonics; C-sr, Vol. 117, M£iuoircs G£ri6raux. 

2 Archives du Ministere des Affaires Etrang£rc$ Asic: Mgmoircs ct 
Documents, Vol. Vil. 


nwtST/iy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 




independence. Nevertheless, ail the Indian Princes were still 
connected with the Empire, however nominally it might be, 
and an alliance witii the Emperor was the best means to estab¬ 
lish relations with them. Moreover, the principal object of 
the French was to destroy the English position in Bengal, and 
that was not possible except through an alliance with the 
Emperor and a joint invasion of Bengal from the north. The 
author suggested that Chevalier was the best person to be sent 
as Ambassador to the Imperial Court of Delhi for concluding 
a sol id alliance. He was a member of the nobility of the 
Mughal Empire and knew the country, its language and politics 
better than anybody else. 

The views expressed in the second document, Mernoire sur 
I'lnde,' were diametrically opposite. The author ridiculed all 
peculations about effecting a revolution in north India and 
driving the English out of Bengal by an alliance with the 
Mughal Emperor. Any scheme based on such an alliance was 
absolutely fantastic, since the Emperor was too timid and too 
weak in military strength to be able to give any effective help 
to the French. Moreover, if the French allied themselves with 
the Emperor, all the vassal Princes, alarmed at the possibility 
of a revival of the old Imperial authority over them, would 
;t once combine together and seek the help of the English to 
prevent such a development. Any attempt by the French to 
re-establish the disrupted Empire was sure to be resisted by all 
the vassal Princes combined. 

Finally, let us notice two other anonymous mimoires belong¬ 
ing to the Madec collection and quoted by Emile Barb£ in his 
Le Nabob Rent Madec. The first one is dated 10th June 1777 
and addressed to de Sartine, Minister of Marine and Colonies. 
The author of the mimoire was extremely optimistic about 
destroying the English power in India and did not take into 
account any difficulty lying in the way. He thought that an 
alliance between the Fiench and the Mughal Emperor would 
induce Asaf-ud-daulah, the Nawab of Oudh, to cast his lot with 
them and free himself from the yoke of the English. 1 heir 


1 Archives du Ministfcre <tc$ Affaires Etrangfcrcs—>Asie: Mewoires et 
Documents, Yol. VII. 

3 BartxS !—Le Nabob Rene Madec, pp. 181*188. 





combined forces would be sufficient to push the English as far 
back as Calcutta, and if at the same time France sent a strong 
expeditionary force with some ships to attack Calcutta, the Eng¬ 
lish would be compelled to surrender. The author did not 
think that France would have to incur any considerable expen¬ 
diture. since she could get financial help from her Indian allies. 
Therein lay the weakest point of his plan, since he had no 
valid reason to assume that the Indian Princes had both the 
money and the will to finance French military operations. 