

The author of the mi moire next referred to the Iatta 
project and dealt with the advantages that France could draw 
from the occupation of the province,—a large revenue and a 
prosperous trade. But apart from these advantages, the I atta 
project also furnished the only feasible method of operating a 
revolution in India. The English position in Bengal was too 
firmly entrenched to be challenged by a direct attack. ‘The 
English, solidly established in Bengal, masters of the Coroman¬ 
del and Orissa Coasts, in possession of Salsette, Broach and 
Surat, and without am rivalry with any European nation, arc 
about to seize the whole of Hindusthan. The only means by 
which we may effect a happy revolution is a double alliance 
with the Mogol and the Marathas through the cession of Tatta- 
Bakar.” After the occupation of Tatta a part of the French 
troops could be sent to Delhi., The first operation would be 
to re-establish the empire in its ancient splendour and there 
would afterwards be formed all the projects that might appear 
suitable.” Negotiations could then be started with the Mara* 
thas, Nizam AH, Basalat Jang, Haidar Ali and even Muhammad 
AH, Nawab of the Carnatic, 



mtSTfiy 



Next we may turn to a memoire, preserved in the Archives 
of the Colonial Ministry in Paris— L'fitat de la Nation Anglaise 
en Bengale et lc ProjeI d’Altaque de Calcutta .. 1 2 It is also 
anonymous and was written about the end of 1770. The 
author first gave an account of the military strength of the 
English in Bengal and the enormous territorial revenues they 
derived from the province. Next he sketched out a plan of 
attack on the English position in Bengal. It was based on 
simultaneous invasions from the north as well as from the 
south. Calcutta was to be attacked by 2,500 French and 2,000 
African troops. At the same time there was to be an invasion 
from the north by 1,400 French troops joined with the forces 
of Shuja-ud-daulah, Nawab of Oudh. A successful invasion 
of Bengal from both sides was possible with the help of a naval 
force' of three battleships, three frigates, seven transport vessels 
and one corvette. The execution of the plan depended on a 
solid alliance with the Nawab of Oudh, and the author of the 
memoire suggested that negotiations should be opened with 
him at once through Gentil. It was also necessary to gain the 
co-operation of some of the petty Rajas on the Orissa Coast to 
facilitate the landing of French troops and their passage to the 
territory of the Nawab of Oudh. The only importance of this 
document is that it furnishes an interesting variation of the 
later plan of Chevalier and Madec, which was based on the 
co-operation of the Emperor Shah Alain. It shows that before 
turning to the Emperor, art idea was entertained in some quar¬ 
ters of making an alliance with the Nawab of Oudh as the 
basis of French policy in India. 

Then wc notice two mdmoires , both anonymous, preserved 
in the Archives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Paris. 
The erst is, — Memoire sur la necessity d'entretenir un Ambus 
sadeur d la cour de Delhi dated October 15, 1781.* f he 
author stressed the importance of an alliance with the Mughal 
Emperor as the basis of French policy in India. No doubt the 
Empire had been disintegrated, the Emperor had been shorn 
of all real authority, and his vassals had assumed virtual 