


ip. A. ms. *340. 
2R.NF.Fr. 1*093. 




prefer the English to the French, that the terms of an alliance 
with France which he had proposed were most favourable from 
the Maratlui point of view, and that the success of the Allied 
Powers would have opened out to the Marathas a brilliant 
prospect of political aggrandisement, it is difficult to under¬ 
stand why, even as an opportunist, he would have held back 
at the last moment, if the French had quickly accepted his 
terms and had landed an effective force on the Malabar Coast. 

Miscej a.AMocs Projects 

Besides the more noteworthy persons whose diplomatic 
projects and plans of military operations we have noticed, there 
were many others of lesser importance who professed to take 
a keen interest in the revival of French influence in India and 
expressed their views in numerous md moires to the Minister 
of Marine and Colonies. Ihe Archives of Pondicherry and 
Paris contain hundreds of such mvmoires submitted between 
1 and 178;^ by non-official persons, many of whom preferred 
to remain anonymous. Their number is so large that it is 
impossible to make even the briefest reference to all of them; 
nor will it serve any useful purpose, since most of them do not 
contain anything new but merely repeat the views expressed 
in one or other of the projects we have noticed already. It 
wii) therefore be sufficient to pick out just a few of them by 
way of illustration and give only the briefest summary possible. 

W r e may take up first an anonymous memoire, Commerce 
a Colonies de Vf ^£-(1774-75), preserved in the Pondicherry 
Archives 1 . The author stated that there were two plans that 
could be adopted to destroy the English power in India. First 
was the plan suggested by Choiseul which could be adopted 
onh in the event of a war in Europe between England and 

P* A. ras. 201. It bears the original date 20th December 1774 but 
u\i- i>3gv were added at the end’ on 28th December *775, giving an 
account of ihc political developments in India during the intervening 
pevuxl. Ihe memoire deals mainly with the trade and commerce of the 
different European nations in India and it is only in the last few pages 
that the author discussed the question of how to destroy the English power 
in India. r 


mmsTfy 



1>1 PI,OMATIC PROJECTS—HI 


*SL 


Its basis was a swift and surprise attack on Bengal 
by an expeditionary force of live thousand men, aided by a 
strong naval squadron. But its defect was that it: could be put 
into execution only in a time of war, and even then its success 
was rather doubtful, since secrecy, the essence of the plan, 
could not possibly be maintained. The English, once they 
came to know of the French intentions, would have sufficient 
time to put their possessions in India in a proper state of 
defence, and in that case the few thousand French troops, tired 
by a long voyage and completely unfamiliar with the theatre 
of operations, could be repulsed with ease. I hus the net result 
would be an immediate conquest by the English of all the 
French possessions in India. 