

The second plan involved a long and complicated pro¬ 
gramme of preparations but. was more certain of execution. 
The author of the me.moirc observed, “In order to produce a 
revolution in Hindusthan it is necessary that the natives of the 
country should want it, that they should have both the desire 
and the ability to unite their efforts, and that they be aided 
and led by a European nation, which has gained their confi 
dence and friendship, by expert military knowledge, a large 
artillery and good troops/’ He then stated that the French 
had, by their military exploits and diplomatic ability during 
the time of Dupleix and Bossy, gained the admiration and 
friendship of the Indian Powers, but its effect would be evident 
only when the French could show sufficient military forces in 
their different settlements. As a preliminary measure, therefore, 
the French were to complete the fortifications of Pondicherry, 
maintain a garrison of 2,000 European troops and 1,000 sepoys 
and lay in stocks of provisions for at least a year. At the same 
time they were to maintain a large number of troops and ships 
in the Isle of France, ready to be sent out to India at the first 
signal of war. When these preliminary measure were taken, 


1 ChoiseuTs plan has not been included in our review since its 
principal objective was not the destruction of the English power in India 
but a direct invasion of England by taking advantage of a tempotary naval 
superiority in the Channel. In that plan the Indian expedition was to 
serve as a mere diversion in order to lure away a considerable part of the 
English navy from home waters. A broad outline of Choisetil s plan has 
been given in Chaptct II. 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

to maintain a number of 
diplomatic agents at the Courts of Haidar J 
Janoji Bhonsla, Shuja~ud-daulah and Emperor Shah Alain, in 
order to keep them friendly towards the French and ready to 
join them actively when the occasion arose. With the co¬ 
operation of the country Powers, success in war would be 
assmed if the French had an army of 10,000 men, supported 
by a squadron of six ships of the line and a number of frigates. 
I hr first attack should be delivered against Bombay as the 
best means of inducing the Maratbas to cooperate actively. 
While the expeditionary force from the Isle of France would 
be engaged against Bombay, the forces at Pondicherry in concert 
with Haidar Mi were to attack Madras. After the fall of 
Bombay, the Marathas and Shuja-ud-daulah were to invade 
Bengal from the north and attract the English forces to the 
frontier, while the French naval squadron would move up the 
Ganges and attack Calcutta. Further, an alliance with Nizam 
Mi Would enable the French to land troops on the Orissa 
C,0,1st and occupy the Northern Sarkars, since most of the 
English troops there were likely to be recalled for the defence 
of Calcutta and Madras. 

Another anonymous memoire preserved in the Pondicherry 
Archives that we may notice here is —hires sur Vlnde dans !e 
uipport de rival it e qu’ont nos fitablissements avec ceux des 
htglais, dated 1st October 1 775 - 1 h began with a discussion 
of the inequality between the position of the English and that 
of the French. The author then observed that there were two 
methods by which this inequality could be removed. The first 
was bv opening negotiations between London and Paris with 
a view to obtain additional territories round the French settle¬ 
ments, large enough to yield an adequate revenue to cover all 
expenses. The second was by a war with the English, the 
o’ r xt being not to make conquests but rather to restore the 
u rr Tories in English possession to their original owners, so that 
the English and the French would remain in India merely as 
commercial rivals, placed on an equal footing in relation to 
th< Indian Powers. I he author o‘ the mimoire was inclined 
u think that the second was the only feasible method, and he 