

It was no doubt a violation of international law to attack in a 
neutral port (Praya belonged to the Portuguese), but de Suffren 
had a bitter experience of the supposed sanctity of international 
law as he himself had been taken prisoner in 1757 when thc 
English attacked the French fleet in the neutral Portuguese port 
of Lagos. 

Thus calculating the advantages of the situation, de Sulnen 
instantly decided to deliver a surprise attacf. At half-past ten 
in the morning, leaving the transport vessels under thc prone 
lion of the frigate Fortune, he signalled to the rest of the fleet 
to follow in line formation. His own ship, the Heron, dashed 
forward and took up a position between two English ships, the 
Hero and the Monmouth, opening a terrific fire. 1 he Annilmt 
also tame up close, but the other three ships failed to render 
the co-operation which was expected of them. For more than 
an hour anti a hall the two French ships fought stubbornly 
against an enemy overwhelmingly superior in number. But 1.1 
the end considering the heavy damage and casualties in personnel 
that they had suffered in the unequal fight, the Anmbal having 
lost all her masts, and there being no hope of any assistance 
from the other three ships, de Suffren ordered withdrawal, and 
the Heron and the Annibal manoeuvred out of thc bay, conti¬ 
nuing their fire in defiance of the enemy. 

Although de Suffren was greatly disappointed at the outcome 
Of the action, for which the failure of the other three ships to 
execute orders was mainly responsible, he had achieved some 
tangible success. The English fleet had been so much crippled 
and thrown into confusion that when the French ships sailed 
out of the bay, it was not in a position to follow up and attack. 
At half-past three in the afternoon the English fleet sailed out 
of the bay, and made a move to give thc chase, but ii was soon 
stopped by 1 tic determined action of the French who stood 


mtST/fy 



THE FRENCH fN INDIA 


<SL 


Jpgs-. 

ready for the fight, ii was not (ill night that the Wench shij 
proceeded on their course southwards, and then with all the 
lights on, so as to draw the English fleet to a pursuit. But the 
hut had in fact sustained so much damage that Johnstone 
thought it prudent to re-enter and anchor in the bay for repairs 
to his ships, which took several days. The delay thus inflicted 
rendered the English expedition to the Cape useless, as 
de Suffren was able to land troops there earlier, and from that 
point of view the vigorous action at Praya had achieved success. 1 

De Suffren’s own sentiments about the action at Praya were 
expressed in two letters to Madame de Seillans. In the first, 
dated ajrd November 1781. he wrote: “I have some anxiety 
about the manner in which the affair of the Praya would be 
taken (in France). M. de Castries has written me a very 
kind letter, merely on the report of the English (about the 
incident), but when he will receive my letter he would be even 
more satisfied”. In the second letter, dated 5th December 1781, 
he wrote: “The Praya could and should have immortalised 
me; 1 missed or was made to miss a unique opportunity. With 
my five ships I could have dictated a peace, and that a glorious 
one. Your friend would have been worthy of you: Europe 
would have honoured him. But nothing doing; this combat is 
of the number of those which have decided nothing and which 
will be forgotten in the crowd. One may be blamed or praised 
according to affection, jealousy, caprice or chance”. 2 