

2 Wilks, op. cit. II, p. 35. 



to emb; 



TfU FRENCH IN INDIA 

ihe whole of the Carnatic, and Madras, which had an 
inadequate defence, was thrown into a panic. Souillac saw 
his chance and entered into negotiations with Haidar through 
Piveron de Morlat, formerly Procxirtur-G&niral at Pondicherry. 
J 1 trough . this French agent at the Court of the Mysore Prince 
Souillac proposed a treaty of alliance as the basis of joint 
operations against the English. By it the French engaged 
themselves to conquer the Carnatic and to drive the English 
out of south India. In return Haidar was to cede to them a 
territory with an annual revenue of two crores of rupees, 
besides the town of Madras and other English possessions in 
the south. Haidar was also to supply the cost of the expedi¬ 
tionary force at the rate of six lakhs of rupees for one thousand 
troops. 1 

While negotiations on this basis were in progress, Souillac 
decided to send out the fleet under the command of d’Orves 
with a regiment of troops on board to come to a definite under¬ 
standing with Haidar and to prepare the ground for large-scale 
military operations against the English in south India. The 
expedition sailed from che Isle of France on the 14th October 
1780. and appeared before the Coromandel Coast, off Cudda- 
lore. on the 25th January 1781. Had d’Orves been a man of 
even average imagination and enterprise he would have at once 
seized upon the splendid opportunity of destroying the English 
power in south India which presented itself on his arrival 
before the Coromandel Coast. 1 he small English licet under 
Admiral Hughes was then on the western coast; Madras was 
defended by only 500 European troops, and the army under 
Sir Eyre Coote, which had taken the field against Haidar, consti 
tuted the only English force in the south. On the news of 
Coote's march south about the middle of January, Haidar 
raised his sieges and concentrated his troops with a view to cut 
off communication between the English army and Madras. 
Coote moved slowly, strengthening the garrisons of the prin¬ 
cipal forts on the way. and suppressing a revolt of the citizens 
of Pondicherry, who had risen in arms and freed themselves 

1 Ma’.leson— Les. Demitres Lillies des F an^ais dans VInde et sur V 
Octcn I tulien, p. 6 ( Note du traducteur). 



overrun 



NIIN/Sr^ 



FRENCH ACTIVITIES IN THE EAST 


-twin the English yoke on the news of Haidar's victories in the 
Carnatic. From Pondicherry Coote proceeded south towards 
Cuddalore, while Haidar followed him in a parallel line to the 


west, thus cutting oil his supplies from the interior of the coun¬ 
try.* The only route open to the English for drawing supplies 
was the sea, which also was closed by the appearance of the 
French fleet under d'Orves. 

In February the position of the English arms before 
Cuddalore became highly critical, and the only means of ex¬ 
tricating itself from this difficulty was to draw Haidar to a 
pitched encounter. But Haidar was clever enough to see 
through the weakness of the English position. If he could hold 
on for some time avoiding a pitched battle, he could starve the 
English army to submission; and the destruction of this army 
meant the destruction of the only force which the English had 
in south India. The whole of the Carnatic and even Madras lay 
exposed to Haidar’s army.' Haidar requested d’Orves to co¬ 
operate with him at that opportune moment by landing the 
regiment of troops he had on board and by keeping the fleet 
on the coast. But d’Orves was not the man for the occasion, 
and rather mysteriously lie refused not only to land the troops 
but even to keep his fleet on the coast to cut oft the supplies 
of the English. The action of d’Orves amounted to a criminal 
neglect of national interests in much greater degree than that 
of d’Actofr (1759) or of Tronjoly (1778). Without running any 
risk whatsoever, by simply keeping watch before Cuddalore, 
he could have reduced to submission the only English army in 
the south. But he suddenly decided to leave on the 151I1 
February for the Isle of France, with an empty assurance to 
Haidar that he soon expected to return to the Coromandel 
Coast with more adequate forces. By this one step, bettaying 
timidity and selfishness, d’Orves at once cut off the negotiations 
which Souillac had entered into with Haidar, and was prin- 