

II. Negotiations between Souillac and Haidar broken off 
by the timidity of d'Orvcs. 

Let us notice very briefly the activities of the French 
during the critical years 1779 to 1781. We have seen in a 
previous chapter how Tronjoly in command of the small 
French fleet in Indian waters ignominously left Pondicherry to 
its fate in 1778 during the siege of that place and hastily with 
drew to the Isle of France. De la Brillane, Governor of the 
Isle of France, sent some help to Pondicherry in response to 
the urgent demands of Bellecombe, but it arrived too late, 
when the place had already capitulated to the English. He 
then contented himself by merely taking measures for the 
defence of the Isle and waited for reinforcements from France 


Ml HIST/fy 


• G o^ 


FRENCH ACTIVITIES IN THE EAST 

on further ventures in India. It was a critical 
period, and a de Suffren with a strong fleet could have changed 
the face of things. But instead of de Suffren, the French 
Government sent out in December 1778 the unimaginative 
d’Grves with four ships to secure the defence of the Isles of 
France and Bourbon and to prey upon English shipping in the 
East. After the arrival of d’Orves in 1779 I ronjoly had a 
fairly strong fleet under his command, with which he coulu base 
encountered the weaker English squadron under Admiral 
Hughes and could have saved Mah£. But instead of turning* 
to India he merely made some fruitless attempts to prey upon 
English shipping, and ultimately came back to anchor at I ort 
Louis, 

By this time Brillane had been succeeded as Governor of 
the Isie of France by a more energetic man, Souillac, who was 
determined to intervene in the war in south India, fortu¬ 
nately for him, early iti 17^0 he was sent further reinforcements 
from France, a few ships and 15 transport vessels carrying the 
regiment of Austrasie under the command of Duchemin de 
Cherineville. Another good fortune was that the indolent 
T ronjoly was succeeded by d’Orves (September 1782) in com¬ 
mand of the fleet, which now consisted of six ships of the line, 
a frigate and two corvettes. Souillac thought that the time 
had come for an active operation against the English in south 
India, where they had been reduced to great distress by two 
formidable enemies, the Marathas and Flaidar Ali. 1 he latter 
carried the war to the Carnatic to cut off the principal source 
of revenue of the English and commenced his operations with 
some striking victories. In September 178°* By a brilliant 
manoeuvre, he cut off and took prisoner at Perambalcom ail 
entire English detachment under Col. Baillie, consisting of 
3,720 men including 500 Europeans. 1 He next captured Arcot, 
the capital of the Carnatic, and laid siege to a number of forts 
at Am bur, Vellore, Wandiwash, Permacoil and Chingleput. 2 
It even seemed for a moment that Haidar would be able to 

Mallcson —Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas, 
p, 5. For details see Wilks —History of Mysoor , IT. pp. 21*26. 