

The appointment of de Suffrcn to the command of the 
squadron was due mainly to the recommendation of Comte 
d’Estaing to the Minister. Marquis <|e Castries, who in his 
order of appointment expressed high appreciation of de Suffren s 
merit. But nevertheless, it created a good deal of jealousy 
among other officers, sonic of whom were senior to him in 
service, and that was one of the reasons for the lack of co-opera¬ 
tion he received from many of his captains. Before sailing 
from Brest with his squadron de Suffren went to Versailles to 
take leave of the King, and there is an interesting anecdote 
about his visit. At the palace the usher had some difficulty 
in conducting de Suffren to the Royal audience through the 
great crowd of courtiers and hangers-on. and de Suffren 
remarked, “I thank you for the trouble that you are taking 
toclav, but you will set that on my return I shall be able to 
make my way myself It reflected clearly the confidence of 
de Suffrcn about the glories that he was going to wdn in the East. 

Although dc Suffren was elated at the prospect of winning 
fame, he felt disappointed that he was to have the official desig¬ 
nation of commander only till he reached the Isle of France, 
when he was to serve as second-in-command to the timid and 
incompetent d'Orvcs, although retaining the honours and 
prerogatives of a Chef d’escadre. He expressed his feelings 

1 Journal df Hard du HailU de Suffren dans I’lnde. \>. 5. 

7 Ron\ /> Railh de Suffren dans I'Inde, p. 65. 




miSTfiy 



'uTaletter from Brest on March 18. 1781 to Madame clc Seillans, 
his life-long friend and the object f)f his loyal devotion 1 2 . I 
atn going to India in command of a division of live battleships. 
M. le Marquis de Castries has given me the appointment with 
the best grace in the world and in a way very flattering to me; 
but he has not done what he should have; he has not made 
me Chef d'escadre, and 1 shall Ik- in command only till 
I join my senior already in India. In truth, there will be eleven 
ships, and the least happy circumstance may put me in charge 
of a good squadron and win me glory, that smoke for which 

we do so many things . In the Indian waters 1 shall 

have the honours and prerogatives of a Chef d’escadre; I have 
learnt it just at this moment. It is a secret which I have not 
divulged even to my relatives . 

For the success of the primary mission of de Suffren, namely 
to forestall Johnstone and land French troops at the (.ape of 
Good Hope, speed in completing preparations for the departure 
of the squadron was of the greatest importance, specially when 
it became known in France about the middle ol March that 
Johnstone had already started. The normal delay in fitting 
out a naval squadron in France was on this occasion cut short 
by the personal interest of the Minister, Marquis de Castries, 
who went to Brest in person to enthuse the sailois and hasten 
the departure of the ships. On March 15 a fast-moving frigate, 
the Fine, was sent olf in advance with Chcvreau, Intendant in 
the Isle of France, and Montigny, appointed to act as agent 
at the Court of Poona, to announce to the Dutch at the Cape 
and to Souillac in the Isle of France the departure of a naval 
squadron under de Suffren*. The frigate arrived in the Isle of 
France on July to, and enabled Souillac to make hasty prepara¬ 
tions for the despatch of an expeditionary force to India. 