

In the r8th century the tt dition of naval warfare had 
hardened into a rigid system of ‘fighting in line’. 1 Under this 
system the battleships proceeded in a single line one after 
another (from which originated the name of ‘ship of the line', 
indicating a battleship), and the other ships, frig,lies, corvettes 
etc., simply formed the retinue of the procession. I he line 
formed by the battleships was a rather closed one, only the 
length of a ship being the distance separating one from another, 
f was a sort of moving wall, and possessed in fact certain 
advantages—mutual help, order and proper surveillance. Mote 
over, this closed-line formation spared the necessity of having 
to fire from both sides of the deck at the same time, since the 
enemy fleet could be only on one side. It was of particular 
advantage to France (and that was the principal reason for its 
adoption there), because France could never get the requisite 
number of sailors to man her navy. Under the line system 

* In France it was Tourvilte who first developed a tradition which 
later turned into an unchangeable svstera under his successors. 


umrfty 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

^>(hc navy could do with a smaller number of men, since the 
ships had to lire from only one side of the deck at a time, and 
the closed formation of the line prevented the risk of any battle¬ 
ship being caught between two fires by the enemy. 

Another point to notice about the system is that the fleets 
in action moved in parallel lines at a respectable distance from 
each other. It was always a moving fight and the combatants 
never came within close quarters. Because of this method of 
lighting, the fleet in those days was not looked upon so much 
as an offensive weapon as an aid to land operations. It was 
employed not for the primary object of destroying the enemy 
'hips, but only for carrying troops, munitions and provisions 
to a particular point, or at most for assisting the army in siege 
operations. This use of the navy deserves to be noted, if one 
is to appreciate the departure from tradition made by dc SufFren. 
He gave a new offensive character to the navy, and raised it 
from its secondary position of being a mere aid to the army. 

De SufFren departed from the traditional system even more 
markedly in the new tactics of attack. Abandoning the principle 
oi; fighting in line, he adopted that of concentration of fire. 
General firing all along the line gave place to ‘attack in sections’. 
By proper manoeuvring he woul^d create a temporary inequality 
in the relative strength of the two fleets in action, and then 
keeping the test of the enemy fleet immobilised, he would take 
erne section between two fifes and concentrate his whole attack 
on it. T he thing is that, in the line formation, although there 
was no gap to allow an enemy ship to pass through ,and thus 
put one unit between two fires, such a gap always existed in 
the extreme rear. The last ships of the line could always 
double the rear of the enemy and thus put it betw r een two fires 
In this way, by doubling the rear of the enemy line and con¬ 
centrating the fire on a section of it, isolated from the rest, 
the whole fleet could be destroyed part by part. It was this 
method which dc SufFren invariably adopted as his fixed 
principle of attack, departing \yholly from the tradition of the 
rime and ushering in the era of modern naval warfare, for 
which the credit of originality is usually given to Nelson. 1 