

On March 2* de Suffren. who had taken for himself the 
Heros, a ship destined to justify the name in the fullest measure, 
started from Brest with his squadron in company with another 
division under Comte de Grasse proceeding to America. All 
the ships sailed together up to Madeira, where they parted 

1 t,eiter& of Bailli de Suffren, published by Ortolan in the Moniteur 
l r mver$et, 5th November 1859. 

2 Rou \ ~Le Bailli dc Suffren dans I'lnde, Pp- 65.66. 




NllN/Sr/f,, 


THE FRENCH in IN 01 A 



<§l 


company at the- beginning of April, the division under <lc Grasse 
proceeding towards west and that under de Suffren continuing 
its route to the Cape. While passing oil the island of Madeira 
on April 3, the French came to know front the local fishermen 
that an English fleet had preceded them a few days earlier ‘ 
It was evidently the fleet under Johnstone which had started 
from Spithead on March 13. It consisted of five ships of the 
line, the Hero (74). the Monmouth (64), the Isis (50), the Jupitei 
(50), and the Romney (50); three frigates, all with 32 guns, the 
Active, the Jnson and the Diana; and some lighter armed traits 
port vessels. There were 37 sails in all, with 2,000 troops on 
board. On April 11 the English fleet reached Santiago and 
entered the Hay of Praya. belonging to the Portuguese, to 
procure water and provisions. 3 


IV. Saval action at Porto Praya. 


|>e Suffren had instructions to proceed straight to the C:\pc 
of Good Hope, but when the fleet reached Santiago on April ih, 
one of the ships, the irthien, wanted to enter the Bay of Praya 
10 procure water. Although the presence of the English fleet 
there Was not known to the French, de Suffren thought it. 
prudent not to allow the ArtJsien to proceed alone and ordered 
the rest of the squadron to follow her into the bay. I he 
Ariisien, moving first, made the surprising discovery, and 
signalled the presence of 37 English ships in the bay. De 
Suffren at once made his decision to deliver a surprise attack 
and throw the enemy into confusion and disorder. 1 he decision 
was rather remarkable in that he had strict instructions to 
proceed straight to the Cape without any interruption of his 
course, and secondly that he had no authority to deliberately 
take the risk of an action against the slightly superior fleet of 
Johnstone. Indeed, if the result of the fight had turned out 
unfavourable to the French, de Suffren would certainly have 
been condemned by the Government for his rashness, because 
the traditional view of the navy's task was entirely different 
from what dc Suffren conceived it should be. On the other 


1 Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren d 4 jm V hide, p. 9. 

2 Ibid , pp. »$CtQ. 


wiwisr/fj. 



hand, de Suliven fell that the best way of saving the Cape was 
to cripple the English fleet by a surprise attack, and no bettet 
moment could be chosen for it than the occasion which pre¬ 
sented itself at Praya. The English ships lay anchored without 
any ordered formation and in an unsuspecting mood. As de 
Suffren surmised, a large part ol the crew must be ashore in 
search of water and provisions, which reduced the effective 
strength of the fleet and put it at a considerable disadvantage. 