


1 For an account of Cootc’s march see his letter dated 1st March 1781, 
Secret Select Committee Proceedings, Fort William, 57th April 17H1 
(Forrest -Selections from Letters, Despatches etc. Foreign Department, 
Goircrnmcnt of India, III, pp. 762*765) 

2 For the desperate position of the English see Willcv History 
of Mysoor, H. pp. 42 44. 


IHK FRENCH IN INDIA 

V responsible for the lack of sincere co-operation between 
Haidar and the French at a later period. 1 

Commenting on the conduct of d’Orves, Souillac wrote: 
"By this surprising obstinacy of M. d’Orves, about which l 
sent a report to the Minister at the time, we lost the occasion, 
never to come again, of becoming the absolute masters of the 
Coromandel Coast. This army of Cuddalore, consisting of 
fourteen thousand men of whom three to four thousand were 
Europeans, composed the entire English force in that part. 2 
Madras could not have defended itself, and the junction of our 
troops with those of Haidar Ali would have enabled us to con¬ 
quer Fanjore and Masulipatam with all its dependencies.” 3 A 
contemporary English writer remarked, “Had the French 
admiral left only two frigates to block up the road of Cudda¬ 
lore, consequences might have happened as fatal to the interests 
of Great Britain in the East Indies, as flowed in North America 
from the Convention of Saratoga.” 4 

1 he departure of d’Orves saved the English army at 
Cuddalore, but Haidar* left to his own resources, carried on the 
fight in as intrepid a fashion as before. Although defeated in 
a number of pitched battles, 5 his mobile forces carried fire and 
devastation all over the Carnatic, reducing the English to a 
helpless distress; and thus the military situation stood, when in 
March 178s a French expeditionary force under Duchemin was 

1 the action of d’Orves was justly condemned by Coote himself in 
the report of his campaign dated 1st March. “I need not take up your 
tiim with commenting on the conduct of the French Admiral, or describ¬ 
ing the injuries we must have suffered, and the risk we must have run, 
if he had acted with common spirit. I may with safety advance that we 
are cntirel) indebted to his irresolute behaviour for the little security we 
now enjoy on this coast. He drew Hyder from Arcot with strong assur¬ 
ance of support and when he came near, failed in the performance,”— 
Secret Select Committee Proceedings, Fort William: 27th April 1781 
(Forrest— Selections from Letters , Despatches etc., Foreign Department , 
Government of India , III, p. 765). 

I he real strength of the English army is given by Wilks —History 
of Mysoor, II, p. 36 (footnote): 8000 infantry, 800 cavalry, 62 pieces of 
artillery; the European troops numbered 1600. 

1 Roux — Le Bailli de Suffren dans VInie, p. 55. 

4 Mallcson — Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas, 
p. 9 (footnote). 

3 Wilke op, cit II, pp. 56-86. 




MIN IST/fy 



landed on the Coromandel Coast by de Sutfren to co-operate 
with Haidar against the English. At this point it is necessary 
o turn back to the beginning of 1781 and trace the course oi 
events connected with the despatch of an expeditionary force 
under de Suffren. 