


misT/t 


CHAPTER IX 




DE SUFFREN AND NAVAL AC I IONS IN INDIAN 
WATERS 

I. Early career of de Stiff ten, 

Pierre Andre de Suffren was born in Provence in July 1729,' 
and was the third son of the Marquis of Saint Gamut. We 
need not go into the details of his early career. From his 
boyhood he was prepared for a naval career, and in 1743 he 
joined the navy at the age of fourteen. The young Provencal, 
for whom the French Government had to create one dav an 
additional post of Vice-Admiral, started his career from the 
bottom of the ladder and rose step by step to the position of a 
commander. De Suffren had his first experience of naval 
combat in February 1743 on board the Solide in an action 
against the English fleet under Matthews, off loulom The 
next memorable naval action for him was in October 1747, 
when the English Admiral Hawke defeated a French fleet off 
Cape Fin is ter re and captured six French ships. Among the 
prisoners taken was dc Suffren himself, who remained in 
captivity till the conclusion of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle 
in 1748. On his return he joined the Order of Saint-Jean de 
Jerusalem and went to Malta, but he came back to France in 
*754 ° n the eve of the outbreak of the Seven Years* War. In 
1756 he took part in the French expedition against Port Mahon 
which achieved success, but next year he was again taken 
prisoner by the English when Boscawcn attacked the French 
Mediterranean fleet in the neutral Portuguese port of Lagos, 
t wo years later he obtained his release through an exchange 
of prisoners. The ability and courage of de Suffren won due 
recognition in France after the peace of 1763- In 1777, 011 the 
eve of the French intervention in the War of American Inde¬ 
pendence, he was given the first command of a battleship, the 

1 Roux— Lt Btixlli de Suffren dans l’ltide, p. 3. Malleson wrongly 
gives the date 1726 (Final French Struggles, p. 11). 


mtsTfy 



Fantasque. Next year he took part in the naval expedition to 
America under Comte d’Estaing and gave abundant proof of 
his dash and intrepidity. It was only a fitting reward to his 
past record that when in 1781 the French Government decided 
to send a naval squadron to the East, the choice of the Minister. 
Marquis de Castries, fell upon de Suffren to command it. 

II. De Suffren and new method Is of naval warfare. 

The Indian expedition, by giving de Suffren for the first 
time independent command of a fleet, enabled him to show 
his real genius and made him immortal in the annals of naval 
warfare. It was during the years 1781 to 1783 that he found 
himself in a position to apply his new tactics of naval combat, 
which differed entirely from the tradition followed till his time, 
and which later paved the way for the glories of Nelson. 
Indeed, this particular aspect of de Suffren’s genius deserves 
some special mention, for it is not very widely known that much 
of the credit generally given to the illustrious English Admiral 
of having introduced the modern method of naval warfare 
should go in reality to dc Suffren. 