


FRENCH ACTIVITIES IN THE EAST 

the traditional enemy of trance, and the Government in Lai is 
came to pay more serious attention to the numerous plans sub¬ 
mitted for the destruction of the English power in India. In 
1777 it even invited suggestions from men with experience of 
Indian affairs, including past heroes like Bussy. Hoping to 
take advantage of England’s preoccupations in America, the 
French Government planned to despatch an expeditionary force 
to India, and as a preliminary step it sent out diplomatic agents, 
like Montigny, to study the political situation in India at first 
hand and to build up a ring of alliances against the English. 
Nevertheless* the Government proceeded very slowly and cauti¬ 
ously while events were moving fast in Europe and America* 
with the result that when in 1778 France openly intervened in 
the war against England, not only had she not completed her 
preparations for the despatch of an expeditionary force to India, 
she had not even taken any material step to secure her posses¬ 
sions in India from a surprise attack by the English. By the 
end of 1778 all her possessions (except Mahe which capitulated 
early in the following year) fell into the hands of the English, 
and in 1779 France did not possess a single base in India where 
she could land troops. 

This setback diverted the attention of France for the next 
two years. Completely engrossed in the struggle in America, she 
made no effort to send an expeditionary force to India, to carry 
the war to a quarter which supplied the sinews of war to her 
enemy. Thus she lost the splendid opportunity which offered 
itself in 1779*80, when the English were fighting against the 
Marathas and Haidar Ali, with Nizam Ali of Hyderabad being 
the third potential enemy. Most unwisely she allowed two 
valuable years to pass without any action, except sending a few 
ships and some troops for the defence of the Isles of France 
and Bourbon, which in fact were never threatened b) the 
English. These ships lay idle at Port Louis, and the troops 
were badly affected bv the enervating climate of the Isles, 1 he 
English did not have any considerable naval force in Indian 
waters at the time, and the appearance of the few French ships 
would have produced a heartening psychological effect on the 
southern Powers engaged in hostilities against the English. 

It was not till 1781 that the French Government could 
make up its mind about the necessity of sending a joint naval 




nums^ 



and military expedition to India. 1 he first step was the 
despatch of a strong fleet in March 1781 under one of the ablest 
naval commanders that France ever produced, de Suffren. This 
was followed in December by the despatch of an expeditionary 
force to India under the command of the old hero, Bussy. But 
it was then too late. By the time do Suffren arrived in Indian 
uafers, the Marathas had virtually withdrawn from the war. 
ami although Haidar Ali ’.mis continuing his victorious cam¬ 
paigns in the Carnatic, the small number of the troops landed 
by de Suffren on the Coromandel Coast in 1782, the inaction 
of the commander, first Duchemin and then Hoffelize, and the 
news of the imminent arrival of Bussy with further reinforce¬ 
ments of troops and ships prevented any well-planned co¬ 
operation between the French and Haidar. Finally, adverse 
circumstances delayed Bussy too long on the way, and by the 
time he arrived in India the war had practically come to an 
end in America and Europe. Within three months, before 
Bussy could cake any forward move, news reached India about 
the conclusion of the preliminaries of peace in Europe. For 
the failure of the French to take advantage of the English 
difficulties in India during the critical years 1779 t0 1781, the 
blame attaches mainly to the Government in Paris, which 
concentrated all its attention on America as the principal 
theatre of operations against England, without any realisation 
of the importance of India. 