

* La \ arende -Suffreyi cl scs ennernis, pp. 105*120. For a more 
detailed discussion ot de Suffren’s originality see Comte Bouet-Willaumea— 
Rcitaillcs dc ter re cl dc mers. 




MIN ISTQy 



De SufTren put his strongest and best armed ships in the rear, 
and these were the ships employed in the real action, while the 
others simply kept the rest of the enemy line engaged and 
immobilised. 

As in the tactics of attack, in the strategy of war too SufFren 
was an innovator. In France the navy was looked upon simply 
as a watchdog of the army. Suffren first showed the importance 
of naval action in a colonial war. He held that a war must 
commence with direct naval action. That was to be the first 
offensive, which, if successful, would enable the employment of 
the land force effectively and with certainty of success. The 
credit due to Suffren for his originality of conception and 
execution is not lessened by the fact that in his operation in 
Indian waters from 1781 to 1783 he did not achieve complete 
success, which would have justified more demonstrably the 
soundness of his new methods, it should not be overlooked 
that his failure to achieve complete success was due to the fa< t 
that his ideas were too novel to be fully comprehended by his 
officers, many of whom, besides, were mortally jealous of him 
and denied him that co-operation which would have made his 
operations as glorious as those of Nelson. 

Ill Departure of de Suffren for India. 

We have seen already how from 1778 to 1780 the French 
Government concentrated all its attention on the American 
theatre of operations and neglected to take advantage of the 
English difficulties in India during that critical period. It was 
only after the replacement of de Sartine by dc Castries as 
Minister of Marine at the end of 1780 that things began 
to change, and the French Government came to realise the 
importance of sending an expeditionary force to India. I he 
first step taken was the despatch of a naval squadron under 
dc Suffren in March 1781, followed by the departure of the 
main expeditionary force under Bussy in December. I he 
decision to despatch a naval squadron under dc Suffren was 
taken not so much for the Indian expedition, but primarily 
to save the Dutch colony of the Cape of Good Hope from falling 
into the hands of the English. Holland had joined the war 
in December 1780, and early in 1781 it became known that 


p 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

intended to send an expeditionary force to 
("ape. At the request of the Dutch, France agreed to send troops 
to the Cape to save it from the intended attack. De Suffren’s 
mission was to transport these troops to the Cape in advance 
of the English Meet under Commodore Johnstone, carrying an 
expeditionary force under General Medows. After landing the 
troops at the Cape, de Suffren was to proceed to the Isle of 
France to reinforce the fleet, that lay there under the command 
of d'Orves. The French squadron consisted of live ships of the 
line, the 11 eras (74), the Annihal (74), the Vengeur (64), the 
■trtcsien (64), and the Sphinx (64), a frigate, the Fortune, and 
seven transport vessels, carrying troops belonging to the regi¬ 
ments of Austrasie and Pondicherry under the command of 
Conway. 1 