

1 Ibid, p. 45. s ibid, pp. 6061. 


MIN/Sr^ 



THE FRENCH I\ INDIA 


<SL 


tindei ihe command of Duchcniin, pending the arrival 
of Hussy, not a very happy choice, since Duchemin was a sailor 
and not a soldier. There were in the port under the command 
of d'Orves six ships of the line, three frigates, and a few corvettes; 
and this force was considerably strengthened by the arrival of 
de Suffren s five ships and a frigate, making a total of eighteen. 1 
Sou iliac, who had been in contact with Haidar Ali, decided to 
send out without any further delay the troops under Duchemin 
to the Coromandel Coast, as the first contingent of the French 
expeditionary force to India. Even the indolent d’Orves could 


not liiul any plea to postpone departure, after the considerable 
reinforcements brought by de Suffren. 

The decision of Sou iliac and d'Orves naturally dated 
de Suffren, who wanted some real action and not an idle life 
m the enervating climate of the Isle of France. It is interesting 
to notice here, front two letters to Madante de Seillans. his 
impressions about life in the Isle which he came thoroughly 
to detest, and fiis hopes and fears about the outcome of the 
expedition on which he was going to set out from Port Louis 
on December 7. In the first letter, dated 23rd November, he 
wrote; “We are going to India with large forces and we 
should expect success, but there arc innumerable reasons which 

make me fear that we may not achieve it. A spirit of 

independence and cupidity reigns here among the chiefs and 
tlicit subordinates, so that it is difficult to hope for anything 
good. I have the greatest desire to return and 1 have asked 
permission for it with all earnestness”. In the second letter, 
dated 5th December, he wrote: ' [ a m second-in-command of a 
beautiful squadron. Vf. d’Orves, who is its chief, shows me great 
consideration, but since he is so good as to be almost feeble. 


the confidence which he reposes in me is shared with the public. 
1 he little prospect that there is of achieving anything good 
with men of such character has made ine earnestly desire to 
return. I have received .1 warm welcome from the public here, 
but not the same reception from the sailors who have been 
here for five years without having done anything. This country 


1 Journal df ilord Hu Bailtt He Sufjrm dans I'Inde, p. I14, for a list 
oi the names of the ships, their artillery strength and the names of their 
captains. 


WNlST/ty 



effeminates people, with its large number of beautiful women. 
,n(l fife full of pleasures. The people here make money in 
commerce and that is much better than making wat. 


Our squadron is well-armed for achieving great things, but the 
qualities we shall lack are intelligence and self-confidence, which 
are rather rare among us. If wc cotne back from India without 
doing anything, my decision is made, rather to return to I* ranee 
than remain here in the port for six months. I serve to make 
war and not to make court to the ladies ol the Isle of 
France.” l 