

2 Roux —Le Hailli de Suff ren dans ITnde. p. 94. 


miST/ly 



reached on the 21 si. Here the squadron remained for more 
than a month, much to the chagrin of de Suffren, who wanted 
to take the earliest opportunity to meet the English fleet in a 
second action. But he was unavoidably detained at Porto Novo 
b\ tlie disembarkation of the troops, the negotiations with 
Haidar Ali which dragged on for a long time, and the difficulties 
of procuring provisions and other necessaries foi lack of money. 

On 1 he 35th February Piveron de Morlat arrived from 
Haidar's camp with a message of goodwill from the Prince, 
and in return two French officers, de Moissac and de Canaplc, 
were sent to Haidar to compliment him on behalf of de Suffren 
and Dtichemin and to come to an understanding for co-operation 
between the French and the Mysore ruler. 1 Haidar agreed to 
supply provisions for 3,000 men of the French army, and also 
to send 6,000 sepoys and a few regiments of cavalry for co-opeia 
tion with Duchemin's forces. 2 The disembarkation of troops 
was completed by March io, a but the greatest difficulty of 
de Suffren was lack of money to buy provisions and other neces¬ 
saries. The sale at Tranquebar of the prizes captured in Indian 
waters did not fetch an adequate amount, 4 and de Suffren had 
to put up with the constant grumblings of his captains, 
accustomed to the soft and easy life of the Isle of France. All 
that he could do was to write a pressing letter to Souillac on 
the 12th March asking for more men. money and munitions.* 

On the 23rd March the French squadron left Porto Novo 
and sailed south towards Ceylon in the hope of meeting the 
English fleet once more.® The prolonged stay of de Suffren 
at Porto Novo had given a much needed respite to the English 
fleet, which had gone to Trinkouaali after the action of February 
17 and after a brief sojourn had returned to Madras, there to 

i Journal dr Bord du Bailli de Suffren dans ilnde , p. un. 

a Roux —Let Bailli de Suffren duns Ilnde. pp. 94 95 ; also Sc!ea ^ c,el 
Committee Proceedings, Fort William, 1st April and mb J l,ru 1 , 
tellers of Fallofieid and Cooic to Macartney (Forrest: Selections from 
Letters , Despatches tic., foreign Department, Government of India, HI. 

pp, 854, 869). 

* Journal de Hard du liailli de Suffren dans I lnde, p. 105. 

* Ibid. p. tot. 

* Roux Le Bailti de Suffren dans I’lnde, p. 'J 1 ' 1 

» Journal dr Bord du Bailli dr Stiff ten dans 1 ‘Indr, pp. 104105 


TIIE FRENCH IN INDIA 

forced by iwo more ships, the Magnanimc (64) and tin 
Sultan (74). The French also received at the same time a 
reinforcement of one ship of the line, the Bizarre , and three 
frigates, the Pourvoyeuse^ the Bons-Awis and the Bellone. 1 

In spite of all difficulties and vexations de Sinfren was in 
high spirits and was looking forward to another encounter 
with the enemy. His confidence is lulls expressed in a letter 
written to Madame de Seillans on the 1st April, “The English 
have not appeared again since the combat of the 17th February 
1 am on the sea; I would very much like to give you good 
news shortly, hut for that it is necessary to meet and fight the 
English. I am in a superb position, commanding 1 2 ships of 