


V. The Cape saved. 

After withdrawing from the Bay of Praya the five French 
ships proceeded quietly on their route to the Cape, the convoy 
having been sent in advance under the protection of the frigate 
Fortune. So confident was de Suffren that the English were 
not in a position to give the chase that he undertook .large- 

1 For details of the action at Praya: A. N. -Ministtve de la Marine. 
ft*4. Vol. 198: Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren dam VInde, pp. 1*19; 
Fa Varende -Suffren el ses ennemis. pp, 149-160; Roux —Le Bailli dr 
Suffren dans Vlnde. pp. 69-76; Cast ex—La Manoeuvre, de la I*raya; Malle 
soil Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas, pp. 13-17* 
Admiral Richmond —The Navy in Ir.dia. 1763-1783, pp. 143-150. 

- Ortolan- Moniteur Universes (5th Novemhci 18?$). 


mtSTfiy 


J)K ST I I RtfN AND N AVAIL ACTIONS’ 




repairs to his ship on the high seas--a rather remarkable 
operation with an enemy fleet so close by. 1 On June 23 the 
French squadron reached the Cape and anchored in the Simon's 
Ray, where the injured were landed and sent to hospital, and 
the troops, consisting of the regiments of Austrasie and a part 
of the regiment of Pondicherry, under the command of Conway, 
disembarked for the protection of the Dutch settlement. 2 
Through the efforts of de Suffren and Conway necessary 
defensive works were hastily constructed, and within a fortnight 
the place was sufficiently ready to meet all attacks. It was not 
till 24th July, one month after ihe arrival of the French, that 
the English ships came in sight of the Cape, but it was then 
too late and they passed on and anchored in the Buy of 
Saldanha, from where they sailed off four days later. 3 

De Suffren had to prolong his stay at the Cape for a month 
more in order to complete the repairs to his ships, the Annibal 
particularly being in a miserable plight. On August 15 there 
arrived two frigates from the Isle of France, the Consolante 
and the Fine, the latter having been sent in advance from Brest 
to announce in the Isle of France the despatch of a squadron 
under de Suffren. Both Sou iliac and d’Orves wrote to 
de Suffren to come to the Isle of France at the earliest possible 
moment. 4 De Suffren accordingly left the Cape on August 28, 
and after a rather unhappy voyage the ships reached Port 
Louis on October 25 1 


VI. Arrival in the Isle of France: Souillacs preparations to 
send an expeditionary force to India . 


In the meantime Souillac, who had been informed of the 
decision of the French Government to send a strong expedi¬ 
tionary force to India under the command of Bussy, took prompt 
steps to raise additional forces in the Isles and to procure 
munitions and provisions for the assistance of the expedition. 
A man of great energy and patriotic zeal, he was soon able to 
raise a corps of 2.8B8 men, including Africans, which was 

1 Journal de Hard dti Itailli dr Suffren dans l'hide, p. 20. 

3 Ibid, p. 36. * 3 Ibid, pp. 40-41. 