

After a vigorous encounter for more than three hours, when 
night fell and the weather also became unfavourable, de Suffrcn, 
finding no hope of drawing the second division of the fleet into 
action, signalled to slop the combat. It came as a great relief 
to the English, who had suffered much greater losses than the 
French, and enabled Hughes to escape with his fleet front a 
position in which he faced sure and decisive defeat. Indeed. 
French historians have criticised de Suffrcn for not having 
pursued the English fleet, thereby missing an opportunity never 
to return, 1 But SuffrciVs explanation was clear,—-it was hardly 
prudent for him to continue the fight w ? ith half the squadron 
in an openly non-cooperative attitude. When the morning 
broke, the English ships had disappeared, having sailed off to 
the south. De Suffrcn called all the captains on board his 




1 Roux —lx Bailli dc Suffren dons Vtndr , 93 * 



~mip, where those who had been guilty of bad conduct in the 
previous day’s action apologised and promised to mend their 
ways in future, which, as later events showed, they never did. 1 


IX. Landing of troops at Porto Novo and departure 
of the fleet for Ceylon. 

On the 18th the French squadron sailed south for Pondi 
cherry, where de Suffren expected to get into contact with 
Haidar Ali ami enter into a formal agreement with him. But 
when it. appeared before that place on the 19th, Piveron de 
Mori at came on board the flagship to inform de Suffren that 
he had been sent by Haidar to ask him to proceed to Porto 
Novo and land the French troops there. 2 De Suffren once 
proposed to seize Negapatam, which with the other Dutch 
settlements in India had fallen into the hands of the English 
soon after Holland had entered the war in Europe. But 
Duchemin lacked courage, and his objection to the daring 
project led tie Suffren ro proceed to Porto \ T ovo, which was 

1 For details of th< na al action: \. N. Ministere de la Marine. 
B |. Vol. 207; Journal dr Hard du Bui lli dr Suffren dans Blade, pp. 95- 
9S; Roux — l.e Bailli de Suffren dans Vtnde , pp. 89-94; La Varende— 
Suffren et sex ennemis, pp. 187-301; Malleson Fowl French Struggles in 
India and on the Indian Seas, pp. 21 24; Admiral Richmond — The Navy 
in India, 17630783 pp. 191-302. 

I he English version is different, not so much about the details of 
the action as about its result. The English Admiral flattered himself 
that in spite of the decided inferiority of his fleet, he had succeeded in 
frustrating the French design of an attack on Madras (letter of Hughes 
to 1 he Governor-General and Council, dated 17th March). The Calcutta 
Council regarded the result of the naval action as a victory for the English 
and ordered "that a general discharge of the artillery in the garrison of 
Fort William he made tomorrow morning in commemoration of this 
event’". A letter of congratulation was also sent to Hughes in the follow¬ 
ing terms; “WT regard your action with the French fleet as the crisis 
of our fate In the Carnatic, and in the result of it we see that province 
relieved and preserved, and the permanency of British power in India 
firmly established*'—Secret Select Committee Proceedings. Fort William, 
1st April 1781 (Fori cst- Self tic s freon Letters, Despatches etc.. Foreign 
Department, Government of India, III, pp. 851-854). The same senti¬ 
ment of satisfaction i? expressed in the letter of the Madras Government 
to the Company (Love— Vestiges of Old Madras, III, pp. 259-260). 