



1 'table of the two squadrons: 
French 

Lt Vengeur (64)—Di Forbin 
LArtcsien (64)- Dc Maurvillc 
Le PetiTAnnibat (50)—De Gatles 
Le Sphinx (64) Du Chilleau 
Le Hews (74)—De Suffren 
VOrient {74)—Dc la Fallible 
Lc Brittant (64)—Dc St. Felix 
Le Sartre (64)—Dc Cillart 
L'Ajax (64)—Bouvet 
L'Arwibal (74)—Dc Tromelin 
L< Flamand (56)- -De Cuverville 
Le Bizarre (64)—l alandellc 


English 

The Exeter (65)—King 
The Sultan (74)—Watt 
The Eagle (64)-—Rcddcl 
The Burford (64)—Reiner 
The Monmouth (64)-—Alms 
The Superb (74>-~Hughc5 
The Monarca (74)—-Gell 
The Magnanime (64)—Wolseley 
The his (56)—Lurolry 
The Hero (74)*- Hawker 
The Worcester (64)—Wood 


Q 



terrific storm about siv in the evening. Both the English and 
the French had to devote all their energies against the forces 
of nature which threw the ships into such a state of confusion 
that the erstwhile enemies lay mixed up in a strange manner 
all night. When morning broke, neither side was in a position 
to renew the light, both being engaged in repairing the ships. 
In the previous day's action the two sides had suffered almost 
equal casualties, but the damage sustained by the Engli.-h 
slaps was heavier; and thus when on the. 19th April de Sulfren 
re formed his line in a new order anti came back to the attack, 
the English fleet taking shelter behind the island of Provcdicn 
refused to be drawn into a second action. Finding it impossible 
to draw the enemy out of his impregnable position, de Suffien 
proceeded towards the port of Batticaloa while the English 
fleet entered the port of Trinkomali. 1 

XI. De Suffien ordeted back to the Isle, of Frame: 
his refusal to leave Indian waters. 

In spite of the readiness of the French for a second action 
their position was far from happy, and on the itith April 
de Sulfren sent two boats to the Isle of France, with a pressing 
request to Sou iliac to send immediate reinforcements of men, 
munitions and natal equipments to (*alle in the south of 
Ceylon. 5 The French fleet reached Batticaloa on the goth April, 
the debt being caused by strong currents. De Sulfren was 
detained there for more than a month by the necessity of lcpait 
ing his ships, procuring provisions and munitions and recruiting 
men. During his forced sojourn at Batticaloa he received some 
ships with munitions and provisions sent from the Isle of France. 
At the same time the Pnlvdriseur brought him the duplicate of 

. tor details of the combat: A. N. —Min is tire tie la Marine. B-4. Vol. 
*07; Journal de Hard du Bailli de Suffren dam flnde, pp. .141*5: Roux ‘ 
lx fiailli de Suffren dans Vlnde. pp 99 -ip 6 : La Varende—Suffren et ses 
ennemi . pp. 205 *16; Malleson-FirwJ French Struggles in India and on 
the Indian Sees. pp. 25 *6; Admiral Richmond--The Navy :n India, 
/ 7 <Sj / 7 $ 1 , PP- 210-227; letter of Admiral Hughes dated 1st May, in Secret 
Select Com. Proc,, Ft. William, 23rd May 1782 (Forrest— Selections from 
i nters. Despatches, etc., Foreign Dept., Govt, of India. Ill pp. 865-865. 