

the line.1 now very much fear that M. de Castries 

may grant mv prayer to return which I had made to him, as 
nowhere else could I be employed in such a brilliant 
way.”. 2 

Second naval action (iatfi April), 

De Suffren guessed correctly that the enemy, unwilling to 
meet in a second action, was likely to take the route to 
Trinkomali for shelter, and so he directed the course of his 
squadron that way. On April 9 the English ships were sighted 
off the cast coast of Ceylon proceeding towards Trinkomali, 
and de Suffren at once ordered his ships to move fast and bar 
the way. On the 10th the Fine made a lucky capture of an 
English boat, carrying an agent who had been sent from Madras 
to persuade the king of Kandy to conclude a treaty. The 
papers seized showed that, the mission wa> a failure and that 
the king of Kandy had refused to have any relations with the 
English.' For two days Hughes tried to manoeuvre to avoid 
an action with the French, but on the 12th finding the route 
to Trinkomali barred he had no other option but to order his 
ships to form a battle line. The action started about midday, 
de Suffren leading the attack. The French had a superiority in 

1 Roux —Le Bailli de Suffren dans Finds, p. 95. 

a Ortolan —Moniteur Universel (5th November 1859). 

5 Journal de Bord dti Bailli de Suffren dans VInde , p 113; Roux, 
op. cit , p. 97 






miSTfiy 



DE SUFFKKN AND NAVAD AC HONS 


mum her of ships and of guns and oa upied a more advantage¬ 
ous position than the English. But, as on February 17, they 
failed to achieve any tangible success because of the old jealousy 
of some of the captains and their culpable negligence to follow 
orders . } 

When the action started, the front section of the French 
line remained inactive. Ihe I’mgeur and the Artiini kept 
themselves at a safe distance and practically took no part in 
the fight, disregarding the repeated orders of de Suffrcn. The 
same disregard of orders was shown by a part of the rear, 
formed by the? Severe, the Ajax and the Annihnl . Happily 
two ships of the rear, the Flamand and the Bizarre, came tip 
close to the English line and concentrated their fire on the 
Isis, the Hero and the Worcester. On the French side the brunt 
of the light fell on the centre, formed by the Petit AnnihaL the 
Sphinx , the Hires, the Orient and the Brillant. The French 
attack was so vigorous that the Monmouth was reduced to a 
miserable plight and was about to he captured when it was 
rescued by a brilliant manoeuvre by the Hero. On the other 
hand, the French flagship suffered so badly under the con¬ 
centrated fire of the enemy that at five in the afternoon when 
the Anisien failed to come up to its rescue in spite of repeated 
signals, de Suffren left his ship and passed on board the Ajax , 
which was then for the first time drawn into the conflict. 

By this time the two fleets had exactly reversed their posi¬ 
tions and the English ships began to approach the coast, when 
the combat was brought to a sudden close by the outbreak of a 