


La Sylphide (14)—de Troulin 
Le Diligent (to) Mace 
l.c Pulveriscur —Joycuse 
Transports: Le$ Boris Amis, 


VOriston, 

Les Ttois Amis, Le Brinon, 

Le Maurepas, Le Daliram. 

La Vi lie-Unique, La Sainte-Annc, 
Le Toscan, Le Hyder (Haidar's 


vessel) 


1 Journal de Hard du Bailli de Suffren dans Linde, pp. 80*82: Roux — Le 
Bailli de Suffren dans Linde, p. 85. There is a letter preserved from one 
of live prisoners taken on the Hannibal , David Philips, containing a 
report of the activities of the French till the beginning of April, when 
he escaped and reached Madras- Secret Select Committee Proceedings. 
Fori William. 29th April 1782 (Forrest— Selections from Letters, Despatches 
ett . foreign Department, Government of India . lit, pp. 860-862). 

- Journal de Herd du Bailli de Suffren dam Unde, p. 86. 

Ibid, p. 90. 


mtsrfty 



DE SUFFREN AM) NAVAf. ACTIONS 


the 4th February he assembled all the captains on his ship to 
devise the best method of attacking the English fleet if it lay 
anchored before Madras. 1 Unfortunately for de Suffren, the 
l*tench squadron lost several days in arriving before Madras, 
but for which it could have taken at a disadvantage the English 


fleet anchored there, before it had received some reinforcements 
on the 9th February. Strong winds and currents carried the 1 
French ships as far north as Pulieat, and on the return voyage 
also they were carried along southwards to Pondicherry, where 
on the 11th a high-ranking officer named de Canaple was 
sent ashore to inform Haidar about the arrival of the French 
expeditionary force. Then the wind having changed its course, 
the French proceeded north again and arrived before Madras 
on the 14th, 2 


VIII. First naval action in Indian waters 
(17th February ry82). 


The English fleet under Admiral Hughes, consisting of 
9 ships of the line and 2 frigates, lay anchored close to the 
shore within range of the fort battery. On the 15th the French 
ships approached nearer, within two shots from the English 
fleet; but with all his dash and intrepidity de Suffren had the 
clear judgment to realise that the English fleet was in too 
advantageous a position under the protection of the shore 
battery to be attacked. At eleven o’clock he called all the 
captains to his ship to ascertain their opinion about 
the best course to follow. He himself suggested that it: was 
dangerous to attack the English fleet in its position of vantage, 
and that it would he prudent to proceed south and land the 
troops on board. Ducheniin and all the captains were of the 
same opinion, except one, de Salvert, the young and daring 
captain of the frigate Fine, who urged that a spectacular begin¬ 
ning was necessary to create a favourable impression upon the 
potential allies of the French and that it was possible for the 
French squadron to pass between the coast and die English 


1 Journal dt r Bnrd du BniUi de Suffren dam I'Indr, p 86. 
- lbid f pp. 90-91. 


misty 



THF FRF.N'CH IN INDIA 