

! Rmi\ -/ Bailli dc Suffren flans VfnH*, P 


misTftf 



1)1 StJtlREN \N1) XAVV1. ACTIONS 


*8L 


^liF^ninisterial orders (the original having been sent by the 
Expedition which had been wrecked 01 the Coromandel Coast 
between Karikal and Franquebar some time before), calling up¬ 
on de Suffren to return to the Isle of France immediately to 
escort Hussy's expeditionary force to India. I hat put de Suffren 
in an extremely difficult situation, having to decide between 
obedience to the peremptory orders of the Minister and the sure 
destruction of the fleet under the timid leadership of the second- 
in-command, Tromelin, since the Fnglish licet, yet intact, was 
oniv at a short distance, in the port of i rinkonvuli. intimately 
he did what was required of him in the national interest. He 
refused to leave Indian waters and explained his reasons in 
a most convincing manner in a letter to Souillac, dated May i. 

“At Batticaloa. 1 found the Puhtcriseur which 

handed over to me the duplicate of the despatches sent by the 
corvette. Expedition. Let us pass over the regrets of the past 
and examine the present situation. I he intention of the King 
was that the squadron should return (to the Isle of France) in 
March and start back at the end of April, reinforced and 
repaired: that is no longer possible. Forty-five days for carry¬ 
ing the troops to Ceylon, forty for the voyage, forty-five lor 
repairs, thirty for the return voyage, in all tfio days. I hat 
would mean a loss of six months, and God alone knows what 
the enemies can undertake during that time. It would be 


wrongly interpreting the intentions of the King and of yours to 
undertake at the end of April what you had thought of at the 
end of February; and if after my repeated assurance not to 
leave the coast, and if after the certainty that you might arrive 
at from the news sent by the Boris Amis and the Chasseur dial 
the corvette had not arrived here \et, you had thought it too 
late and had sent the convoy already in response to nay repeated 
demands, what would 1 do in the Isle of Francer Moreover, 
if 1 quit the coast after my combats, M. Hughes, whom I had 
defeated on February 17 and April 12. would not fail to declare 
that I rnyself had been defeated." 

Happily for France, Souillac was clear-sighted enough to 


realise the position and he fullv endorsed the view’s of de Suffren 


in a letter to the Minister, dated 18th June. Justifying the 
decision of de Suffren not to leave Indian waters, he observed: 
“Consider, Monseigneur, the turn that affairs in India might 



mtSTfiy 



tttwi' taken during this long interval; Haidar Ali would have 
surely made peace with the English; all the other Indian Princes, 
who are watching the issue of the conflict to decide their policy. 


would have shown themselves more submissive than ever to a 
nation whom they do not love but fear; our troops on the 
mainland would have been faced with a grave danger and it 
would have been rather fortunate if they could have passed on 
to Ceylon, against which colony all the efforts of the English 
would have been directed, it may then be said that the bold 
policy which M. de Suffren has adopted has saved India and 
prepared the success of Vf. le Marquis de Bussy’V 