



ships. 1 But de Suffren thought it wise not to risk his ships 
between two fires and decided to follow the route to the south. 

About live in the afternoon the English ships were noticed 
raising anchor and moving out to the open, and although at 
first it appeared that they were proceeding to take up their 
former position of mchorage before the arrival of the French* 
squadron, the quick eye of de Suffren did not take long to 
detect that the intention of the English was to chase and 
capture the French transport vessels. He at once signalled to 
the convoy to get between the squadron and the coast, and 
ordered the Fine to watch the movements of the English fleet. 
But in the darkness of the night the Pourvoyeuse, which was 
in charge of the convoy, lost contact with the transports, and 
the Fine also tailed to keep watch on the English ships, which 
succeeded in getting in between the French squadron and the 
transports, it was not till about midday on the 16th that the 
French realised the position De Suffren ordered all the ships 
to follow' quickly and in the afternoon they came up within a 
league and a half of the English fleet. Admiral Hughes, seeing 
the French come up so close, ordered the chase to be abandoned 
and recalled his ships to form into line. This enabled all the 
French transports, except the Gris ton, to escape and proceed 
at full speed towards south 

All through the night of the liith and the morning of the 
17th the two fleets manoeuvred for position, and it was not till 
half-past three in the afternoon that they could join action. 3 

i Journal dr fiord flu Hailli de Suffren dans Tltide , p. 93 • 

- Ibid, pp. 93-95; Roux l.e Hailli dr Suffren dans l’Inde, pp. 88 89. 

a Table of the two squadrons; 


English 


French 


The Eagle (64) — Reddel 
The. Monmouth (64) — Alms 
The Worcester (64) — -Wood 
The Burfttrd (6.^ — Reiner 
The Superb (74)—Hughes 
/he Hero (74) — Hawker 
The his (54)—Lvnniey 
The Mon area (74V — Cell 
The Exeter (64) -King. 


l.e Heros (74)—de Suffren 
VOriern (74)-— 1.a RaUiere 
l.e Sphinx (64)- Du Chilleau 


Tc Vengeur (64) - De Forbin 


U Petit Annibal (50)—De Galles 


L Annibal (74)—De Tromelin 
Le Severe (64)—De Cilia i t 


L'ArUsien (64)—De Maurville 
I:Ajax (64)-—Bouvet 


Le Brillani (64)—De St. Felix 
Lc FJatnand (54)—Dc Cuverville 



miST/ty 


<g,\ 
f I 

y rn SI FT REN AM) NAVjjU. \< TIONS 

The French fleet had .1 decided superiority in the number of 
ships and of guns, and if all the captains had given their 
sincere co-operation to do Suffrcn. there is little doubt that th< 
English squadron would have been destroyed. But that 
opportunity, which would have changed the entire course of 
the war. was lost because of the jealousy of the captains and 
their deliberate and culpable negligence to follow orders. In 
the first place the action, which could have commenced much 
earlier in the day, was delayed till afternoon by the failure ot 
several ships to take up their positions promptly, in spite of 
the urgent signals from the H tv os. Secondly, when the Hero.s 
led the attack, directing its fire against the Exeter and later 
against the flagship of the English, the Superb, the other four 
ships of the French first division, the Orient , the Sphinx , the 
Fengeur and the Petit-Antiibal , followed the orders, and 
approaching the rearguard of the English within close range 
concentrated their attack on the Isis, the Monarca and the 
Exeter . But the entire second division, under the command 
of Tromdin, consisting of the Annibal , the Severe, the Artisien, 
the Ajax, the Brillant and the Flamand , remained completely 
inactive and at a long distance from the English, disregarding 
the orders of de Suffrcn to turn the enemy lint' and put it 
between two fires. The Ajax did in (act move out to join the 
fight but had to turn hack on the orders of 1 romclin. 