

These letters offer a sufficient explanation why during the 
whole course of the war de Suffren never left Indian waters 
for even a brief rest in the Isle of Fiance, as others had done 
in the past. Rather than returning to the enervating island, he 
went to Achin in north Sumatra to winter his ships, disregard¬ 
ing the wishes of many of his officers. The second complain! 
of de Suffren. about the feeble character of his chief, d'Orves. 
was removed by the timely death of the latter on the way to 
India, which gave de Suffren the opportunity he had wanted all 
along, to lead the squadron himself. But the third complaint 
of de Suffren, jealousy of the officers who had been long in the 
Isle of France, persisted till the end of the campaign and was 
largely responsible for his failure to achieve success in as full 
a measure as he could have expected. 

VII. Departure from the Isle of Frame and arrival in 
Indian waters. 


Preparations for fitting out the expeditionary force were 
completed in a month and a half, and on December 7 > > 7 ^' 
the French fleet, consisting of > t ships of the line, 3 frigates 
3 corvettes, a brulot and c, transport vessels carrying the troops 
under Duchemin sailed off from Port Louis. 1 The original 


1 Ortolan —Moniteur Universcl (5th November »# 59 )- 
a Journal de Hard du Itailli de Suffren dam Nnde <p. 65) gives the 


following list: 

L’Orient (74V-d’Orves (chef 
d’cscadre) 

U Hews (74Y de Suffren 


Le Bizarre (64)— de Lalandelle 
Le Vengcur (64)—de Forbin 

Le Sphinx (64)--du Ohilleau 

— Contd. 





THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



Mcstinatiou chosen was the Coromandel Coast, but d’Oives who 
had agreed to it at the instance of dc Suffren changed his mind 
during the voyage, in keeping witli his usual timidity, and 
altered the course towards Ceylon On January 22, the Hews 
made a lucky capture of an English ship, the Hannibal of 50 
guns, which was coming from St. Helena and proceeding towards 
Madras. 'The sailors were dispersed among the French ships, 
theii places being taken by Frenchmen,, and the name was 
changed to the Pelit-Annibal. I he captain gave out the 
information that 5 English ships with 800 troops on board were 
on their way to India. 1 

A few days later d’Oives, who had been in indifferent 
health for some time, fell seriously ill, and on the 3rd February 
his condition becoming very critical he handed over the com¬ 
mand to de Suffren.* Six days later, on February 9, d'Orves 
died,* a rather fortunate event for the French, which alone 
made possible the glorious naval actions during the next 
eighteen months. No sooner had dc Suffren assumed command 
than he ordered the course to be changed north, towards Madras. 
He wanted to begin his operations in India with a spectacular 
- demonstration, an attack on Madias itself if possible, and on 


— Could . 

l/Annibal (74) — dc Tromelin 
Lt f SMre (64) — dc Pall ie re 
Le Brilldnt (64)- dc Saint* Felix 
Le Flamand (64) dc Cuvexvillc 
L* Artesian (64) dc Maurville 
f.'Ajax (64) — dc Bouvet 
Im Be Hone (3s)— dc Cillart 
La Fine (46) -de Salvert 
La Pourvoycusc (40) dc GaUcs 
La Subtile (114) — dc Beaulieu 