


1 For details ot the action: A.\. Viittisthe dc la Marine, B-.j. 

Vol. xoy; Journal di Bard du Baillt dr Suffren, pp. 142-146; Roux-. 

I.e Bailtt dr Suffren dam l'hide , pp. 119-124; la Varend *' Suffren et ses 
rnnetnis, pp. *17-230; Mallcson- final French Struggles in India , pp. 35*39, 
Admiral Richmond l'he .Wiry m India, rjb\1781, pp. 236-247. 

For the English version see the report of Admiral Hughes; Secret 
Select Committee Proc., Ft. William, 8th August, 1782 (Forrest Selections 
from Letters, Despatches, etc,. Foreign Dept.. Govt, of India, III, 
pp H77-S81). The Supreme Govt, in Calcutta took it as an English 
vic tory and ordered that the guns of the fort be fired in commemoration 
of the vinon'*. 

- Journal df Bord du Hailli dr Suffren dans V Inde, p. 146; La 
Varende- Suffren rt ses ennemis, pp. 231-236; Roux Le Badli de Suffren 
dans VInde pp, 1*4126; letter of Admiral Hughes,—See. Set. Com. Proc., 
Ft. William. 8th August 1782 (Forrest—„s run from Letter, Dr .patches, 

etc.. Foreign Dept., III. p. 881). 


muisr/ff. 



Bui although de .Suffrcn liad thus explained oil (he strange 
action of the Severe, he was exasperated by the persistently bad 
conduct of some of his captains, which was mainly responsible 
for his failure to achieve the success against the English which 
he could have confidently expected. His patience had reached 
its breaking point, and immediately on reaching Cuddalore lu 
removed four captains front their posts, sending the three most 
guilty ones to France to stand their trial, and made a wholesale 
re-organisation in the command of the ships. 

Reporting to Souillac on the subject in a letter dated 31st 
July he wrote. “There arc three captains who have to be sent 
to France: (1) M de Cillart for having shamelessly brought 
down his (lag: (a) M. de Maurville (of the 1 rttsien) who on 
the 6th far from effacing had only aggravated the wrongs which 
he had committed 011 February 17, April 12 and June 5. 
(3) M lc Comte de Forbin (of the Vengeur) who far from mend¬ 
ing his bad conduct of April 12 bad conducted himself equally 
badly". Bouvet, the captain of the Ajax., was let off lightlv in 
view of his age. ailing health and past bravery, and was merely 
removed from his command. These actions, although drastic, 
were absolutely necessary to restore discipline among the officers 
and men of the squadron. 1 

XIV. De Suflrcn's return to Cuddalore and interview 
with Haidar Alt. 

Flic French squadron arrived at Cuddalore on the 8th July. 
On the 25th Haidar Ali with his whole army approached the 
place and encamped at a distance of two leagues to the norm. 
He had travelled a long way with the express purpose oi meet 
ing dc Suffrcn, whose glorious exploits had roused in hts mind 
a feeling of genuine admiration. On his arrival tlu French 
garrison at Cuddalore gave a salute of 21 guns and at the same 
time all the ships in the roadstead fired in honour of the august 
and brave ally. De Sulfren sent de Moissac to the Nawab's 
carnp to offer his compliments, and on the atith lw himself 