

Arriving on the Coromandel Coast, de Suffren learnt for 
the first time of the stiained relations between Duchemin and 
Haidar Ali and that made him more anxious than ever to 
conciliate by some bold action an ally whose whole-hearted 
co-operation was absolutely necessary for the success of French 

1 Journal de Hord du liailli de Suffren dam I'lnde, p. 132. 

* Ibid., p. 136. 

5 Ibid., pp. 13^*138. 

4 Hoax — Le Bailli de Suffren dans I’lnde, p. 11a. 


WNtSTffy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


il 


military operations in south India. I 'hat was why he sent 
de Moissae from Trantjuebar to Haidar’s camp on the toth 
June, with a proposal for his co-operation in making a surprise 
attack on Negapatam.' It may he remembered that he had this 
project in mind much earlier, hut had been prevented from 
attempting it only by the objections raised by iHichemin. Hr 
now came back to it, with the added confidence that Negapatam 
could not expect to be relieved by the English fleet, which was 
yet. lying anchored at I l inkomali. 

De Moissae returned from Haidar’s camp to Cuddalore on 
the atst and reported to de Sulfren the great admiration which 
the Mysore Prime felt for him. Haidar readily consented to 
<|e Sufi ten’s proposal of a surprise attack on Negapatam and 
placed ’.(km) troops at his disposal for the purpose. He 
expressed a great longing to meet de Sulfren, but would postpone 
the interview till after the latter’s return from Negapatam. 
At the same time he complained bitterly that the French array 
under Duchemin, while encamped at Vilnoor, had taken no 
part in his successful operations against the English, nor had 
given him any co-operation in the capture of the fortress of 
Permacoil. 1 As a proof of his friendship Haidar also sent latge 
quantities of provisions for the French squadron. 8 

In return for the friendly assistance, de Sulfren sent all the 
English prisoners on board to Haidar for custody, an affair 
which later led to bitter complaints on the part of the English. 
In fact, the responsibility for this must be largely attributed 
to the Madras Government which had refused till eatliei 
proposals of de Sulfren foi an exchange of prisoners. The 
evident intention oi the English was to embarrass the French by 
havin ,r to maintain a large number of prisoners on board, which 
would* constitute a heavy drain on their depleted stocks of 
provisions Moreover, the French did not have any territorial 
possession in India, where the large number of English prisoners 
could be kept in safe custody. I he only way that they could 
..ft out of their embarrassment, after the refusal of the English 
to an exchange of prisoners, was to transfer them to the custody 
of Haidar Ali. That was the reason given by the author ol the 

■ Journal de Bor «f du Bailli de Suffren dans VInde, p. 138. 

2 Ibid . p. i jo 


WNlST/fy 


ftK SUFFREN AM) NAVAL ACTIONS 



* 5 " 


Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren dans Unde , stating the 
opinion of the French Admiral himself. 1 2 It is interesting how¬ 
ever to note that in a letter to Souillac, dated June 2. 1782. 
de Suffren gave an altogether different reason: “It is more in 
order to increase his (Haidars) confidence in me than as a reply 
to the actions of Macartney, Hughes and Coote that I am 
entrusting the English prisoners to him”.' Anyway, although 
in transferring the prisoners to the custody of an ally de SuHren 
took every care to assure proper treatment to them, 3 it was his 
ignorance of Haidar’s methods of dealing with prisoners of war 
that led him to take the step, which not merely inflicted 
incredible sufferings on the prisoners but also created great 
diplomatic embarrassment for the French at a later period. 4 * 