

At the end of June de Suffren embarked 700 troops of the 
regiment of Austrasie under the command of d’Espinassy, with 
soo sepoys and siege materials, both to replace the disabled 
sailors as also to take part in the attack on Negapatam.® When 
preparations had been completed, the French came to learn 
that the Fnglish squadron had left Trinkomali and had anchored 
before Negapaiam on the 2nd July. 6 It was a great disappoint¬ 
ment to de Suffren, who had expected to take Negapaiam by 
surprise. He did no however abandon his project and decided 


1 Journal de Bord du Bailli dr. Suffren duns Unde , p. 140. 

2 Roux —Le Bailli de Suffren dam Unde, p. 11G. 

3 Journal dc Bord du Bailli de Suffren dam Unde, p. 140. 

* C.R.O., Yol. XII—Extract* uom the Proceedings of the Calcutta 
and Madras Councils relating to the conduct of Lhc French in delivering 
the Fnglish prisoners to Haidar All. Wilks has severely condemned the 
action of de Suffren. He, however, admits the difficult situation in which 
the latter was placed and the undue delay on the part of the English 
to reply to the French proposal of an exihangc of prisoners, which he 
explains as due to difficulty of communication and diffetcncc of opinion 
between Coote and the Madras Council. His charge against de Suffren 
is thus reduced to the latter not having waited sufficiently long for the 
English reply {History of Mysoor, II, pp. 152-153). William Hickey in 
his Memoirs, 1782 to 1790 (p. 59), states that he was told by de Suffren 
at Trinkomali in January 1783 that there were two reasons which led 
him to transfer the English prisoners to Haidar,—the silence of Macartney 
and the reply of Hughes, expressing his inability to accept the proposal 
of exchange. 

* Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren, pp. 140-141. 

* Ibid. 


THF. FRY.SCU IN INDIA 

on proceeding ro Negapatam and encountering the English fleet 
once more. His squadron was in a sorry plight after the two 
previous actions of February 17 and April 12, and on the eve 
of his departure from Cuddalore he wrote a pressing letter to 
Sou iliac for more men and money. 

“1 have embarked 700 Europeans and 800 sepoys; that is 
quite sufficient to attack the English and take Nega 

patam. I did not wish to embark a single person 

without the knowledge of the Nawab. I am leaving here on 
land 800 sick; send me men and money, with reinforcements 
everything will go well, but without them nothing can be done. 
Misers is so great here that even with merchandise it is difficult 

to procure money.(The Dutch of Batavia) sent me 

300,000 florins, out of which I have given 50,000 to the Dutch 
(of Ceylon) and 100.000 to the army: you see in what a state I 

am. it is a wonder that the squadron can carry on 

with so little money. I am starting to-morrow to attack 

them (the English); if I am lucky, 1 shall at once lay siege to 
Xegapatam”. 1 

XIII. Third naval action (6th July). 

The French squadron started from Cuddalore on the 3rd 
July, and on the 5th it noticed the English fleet anchored 
between Nagore and Negapatam. De Suffren gave orders to his 
ships to proceed in line of battle. I he French had a superiority 
in the number of ships as well as of guns and had every reason 
to face a third encounter with the enemy with confidence. 
But at three in the afternoon the Ajax lost its topmast and the 
mi/eu topmast by .1 violent wind and shower, and was forced to 
leave the line, giving its place to the Vengeur. Shortly after 
the English ships also, taking advantage of a change in the 
direction of the wind, sailed out to the open and approached 
within two shots from the French squadron. For the whole 
night the two fleets lay anchored, watching each other at a 
short distance, and early in the morning of the 6th they 
prepared for action. Great was the surprise of de Suffren when 