

1 Roux »--Lc Bail 1 1 de Suffren d*t*s l r fade, p. »t8 (letter dated 2nd 
July , 17$*). 









I>F. SUFFREN AND NAVAI. ACTIONS 

he learnt that th<' Ajax had not been able to complete its 
repairs yet, and he vvas stupefied when its captain, Bouvet 
wanted permission to take his ship to the nearest pou foi 
repairs. He sternly refused permission, but some time Liter 
when the French ships were manoeuvring for position before the 
signal for action was given, the Ajax quietly withdrew leaving 
de Suffren in a position of inferiority in guns to his enemy. 1 

J he action started about eleven o'clock. The English 
Admiral bad given orders to his ships, each one to engage a 
French vessel, the two sides being equal in number. I he 
cannonade was terrific and continued for two hours. On the 
French side the brunt of the attack was taken by the fUirnand 
fighting against the Hero and the Exeter, the Annibal against 
the his , the Swire against the Burford, the Brillant against the 
Sultan, the Herns against the Superb , and the Sphinx against 
the Monarca. But the Petit-Annibal , the Artisien and the 
I engeur remained content by firing from a long distance against 
the English rear, while the Bizarre and the Orient lay totally 
inactive Two hours of heavy cannonade inflicted severe 
damage on both sides, the Elamand and the Hero being com¬ 
pelled to leave »he scene of action. About one o’clock a sudden 
veering of the wind threw all the ships into the greatest con¬ 
fusion and distress, and stopped the combat. Hughes, whose 
(feet had sustained a damage at least equal to that of the trench, 




1 Table of the two squadrons: 
French 

Lc Flarnand (50)—Dc CuverviUe 
L*Annibal (74) — De Tromclin 
l c Severe (64)—De Ciilart 
Tc Brillant (64)- De St. Felix 
Lc Hfros (74)-—De Suffren 
De Moissac 

lx Sphinx (64)—Du Chilleau 
I>e Petit-Annibal (50) — De Galle^ 
VArti uen (64)- De Maurvillt 
tj* Yengeur (64)—De Forbin 
lx Biiarre (64) l alandellc 
VOrient (74)—La Paitlifcre 
Lc Diligent —Mac£ 
lei Fine —De Salvert 
Im Subtile —De Kermadic 
Lc Br&lat — De Joyeuse 


English 

The Hero (74}—Hawker 
The Exeter (64)—King 
The Isis (5G)—Lumley 
The Burford (74)—Reiner 
The Sultan (74)—Watt 
The Superb (74>—Hughes 

Maclellan 

The Monarca (74)—Gell 
The Worcester (64) — Wood 
The Monmouth (64)—Alms 
The Eagle (64)—Reddcl 
The Magnanime (64)—Wolselcy 
The Sea Horst 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


t the scene of action first and proceeded to anchor between 
Ncgapatam and Nagore, while de Suffren, who was also in no 
better position to renew the light, went to anchor before 
Karikal and next day proceeded towards Cuddalore, forced to 
abandon his project of attacking Negapatam.' 

An interesting incident in connection with the action of 
the (Hh July deserves mention here. The Seveie, engaged in a 
fight with the Sultan, was reduced to such distress that its 
captain, Cillart, thinking it useless to continue the fire, ordered 


the flag to be hauled down iri token of surrender, in spite of 
the fact that three other ships, the tnnibal, the Sphinx and the 
Hero.s stood close by. The Sultan also ceased fire; but imme¬ 
diately after the other officers of the Severe, defying the 
. authority of the captain, hoisted the flag anew and opened lire 
on the Sultan. The latter, not prepared for a renewal of the 
attack after surrender and badly damaged in the action, retired 
from the scene. Next day when the French ships were moving 
off to Cuddalore. Hughes made a demand to de Suffren for the 
surrender of the Severe, claiming his right by international rules 
of warfare. De Suffren who had not yet received the report of 
Cillart replied that the hauling down of the flag was just an 
accident, that the ship had no intention of surrendering, which 
was evident from the immediate renewal of tin* fight, and 
that even if it had surrendered it could have been re-captured 
easily by the three ships which stood close by 2 . 