

The bold determination of do Suffren, however, was not 
shared by many of his captains, who had been longing for a 
return to the life of indolence and pleasure in the Isle of France 
and now seized upon the opportunity presented by the 
ministerial orders. When they murmured in protest against the 
decision of dc Suffren to stay on in Indian waters, they were 
silenced by the brave words of their leader, ‘‘Rather to scuttle 
the squadron before the walls of Madras than to run away from 
Admiral Hughes. Let those who can conceive of such an 
ignpminous action come and tell me, and they will know my 
resolution”.* 


XII. Return to the Coromandel Coast—project oj an 
attack on Negapatam, 

On June 3 the French squadron sailed out of Batticaloa 
for the Coromandel Coast. The destination was Cuddalore, 
recently captured by Duchemin’s forces. Oil the 4th, as the 
French passed by Trinkomali, they noticed the English flee; 
still anchored there. 1 * 3 On* the 5th they arrived before Trauque- 
bar. where they anchored for two weeks in order to procure 
provisions and naval equipments. Here they met three Dutch 
boats sent from Batavia with money, munitions, provisions and 
naval equipment* for the French squadron. The boats had 

1 Roux Le Baitli de Suffren dam Linde, p. 109; Mallcson — Les Drr- 
uUres Julies des Francais dans !' /tide, etc,, p. 27 (the two letters have 
been reproduced in the translator's note). 

a Roux. op. cL, p. 110. 

3 Journal de fiord du BailL dc Suffren dam l' Jude, p. 15a. 



gone to the east coast of Ceylon where the French squadron 
was supposed to be. but at the sight of the English fleet at 
Trinkomali they bad diverted their course and had taken shelter 
at Tranquebar. 1 The French also received some quantities of 
provisions sent by Haidar. 2 * Their ships sailed from Tranquebar 
on the aoth June and on the same day anchored before 
Cuddalore. ‘ 

While at Tranquebar de Suffren had scut his trusted officer 
de Moissac to Haidar Ali’s camp near Cuddalore. Ft was neces¬ 
sary, in order to assuage the feelings of Haidar whose relations 
with the French army under Duchemin had cooled consider 
ably, because of a number of factors that will be analysed in 
the next chapter. In his deep disappointment at the conduct 
of the French army under Duchemin, the only thing that 
prevented Haidar from coming to terms with the English, who 
were earnestly seeking peace, was the news of the glorious 
exploits of de Suffren, which held out hopes in the heart of 
the Mysore ruler that he might yet achieve a crushing victory 
over the English in co-operation with the intrepid French 
Admiral. Indeed, although contemptuous of Duchemin, he 
expressed the greatest admiration for de Suffren. To Piveron 
de Morlat, the French agent at his Court, he expressed his 
sentiments thus: “Write to this extraordinary man that I have 
the greatest desire to see him. to embrace him and to express 
to him all my admiration for his heroic valour”. To his 
generals he said, “At last, the English have found a master. 
Here is the man who will help me in exterminating them. I 
hope that before two years have passed there will not be a 
single one of them left in India and they will not have even an 
inch of territory”. 4 