

The news of the reinforcements also revived in the mind 
of de Suffren a desire which he had cherished from the first, 
namely to capture Trinkonrili, the best port in Indian waters 
capable of accommodating even the largest fleet and protecting 
it against all attacks. Nobody knew better the difficulty of a 
fleet to carry on sustained operations in Indian waters without 
the possession of such a safe shelter to fall back upon in times 
of necessity. The news of the arrival of reinforcements under 
d* Ay mar decided de Suffren to attempt his long-cherished project 
and take Trinkomali by surprise. He knew’ that the Fnglish 
fleet was anchored before Madras, and although it had been 
reinforced bv two ships, the Sceptre (64) and the San-Carlos 
(44), it was not likely to suspect his design and proceed in time 
to the relief of Trinkomali. 

1 Journal dr Bind du Baillt dr Suffren dans Unde, p. 155. 


mtST/fy 


1>F SUM REN AM) WWI ACTIONS 

XVI, Capture of Trinhomali . 

Keeping his main project a complete secret and giving out 
that his intention was merely to go to Batticaloa to meet, the 
reinforcements under d’Aviuar, de Suffren started from Cud- 
tlalorc with his squadron on the ist August. He had, however, 
taken care to embark some troops and a company of gunners 
for the siege of Trinkomali 1 . On the t)th August the squadron 
arrived at Batticaloa and on the atst ii was joined by the ships 
despatched from the Isle of France under the command of 
d’Aymar. The troops (600 men belonging to the regiment of 
the Isle of France), munitions and provisions brought by 
d’Aymar were promptly distributed among the ships ot the 
squadron, and on the agrd de Suffren sailed for frinkomali. 2 
His determination to capture Trinkomali was strengthened by a 
letter from Bussy received at. Batticaloa, expressing regret that 
the French had not started their operations in Indian waters 
by seizing that valuable port, but there is no reason to think 
that he undertook the project merely at the suggestion of Bussy. 
An enterprising naval commander like de Suffren did not 
require the suggestion of anybody else to realise the value 
and importance of such a port as Trinkomali. 

On the *5tii the French squadron arrived before Trinkomali 
and anchored at the entrance to the bay. Some time later it 
moved further inside and anchored in the back hay to the 
north-west of the fort of Trinkomali both for the safety of 
the ships as well as for the protection of the landing operations. 
On the little isthmus there stood two forts, originally Dutch 
but captured by the English in 1780, the fort of Trinkomali 
in the north and that of Ostenburg in the south, with the town 
in the middle. In the evening dc Suffren sent an armed boat 
to explore the coast and find out a suitable place for landing. 
7lie spot selected was about a league to the north-west ol the 
fort of f rinkomali. exactly the same place where the English 
had landed for their attack on the f ort. De Suffren under¬ 
stood well that he must race against time, because there was 
no knowing when the English fleet would re-appear, compelling 