

At the sight of his old adversary Suffren at once prepared 
for action, but some of his captains, led by tie I romelin, second- 
in-command, tried to persuade him not to seek battle unneces¬ 
sarily. The French were, as they argued, in an advantageous 
position. They were in occupation of the forts and theif ships 
were safely lodged in the bay, where Hughes would not dare 
disturb them. Fresh reinforcements under Bussy would riot be 
long in coming, and till then it would he wiser for them to 
avoid an action which entailed the risk of a loss of all their 

1 Journal de Bord dv Baillt de Suffren dans I'lnde, p. 158. 

2 Maltese m - Final French Struggles in India, pp. 47 * 4 ^* 

R 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

advantages. In fact, however, the spirit which animated 
these officers wa k s not so honest, as might appear from their 
arguments. Jealousy of de Suffren, the fatigue of several succes¬ 
sive actions, a longing for the life of indolence and pleasure 
in the Isle of France, and principally the strong resentment at 
the disciplinary action taken by de Suffren after the combat of 
the 6th July, were the real motives which prompted the captains 
to dissuade de Suffren from another encounter with the English. 
On the insistence of the captains de Suffren merely agreed to 
put off his decision till he knew the exact strength of the English 
fleet When the Bell one, sent out to reconnoitre, reported that 
Hughes had only is ships of the line, de Suffren. turning to 
Ironiefin, observed in a firm voice, If the enemy had superior 
forces, I would have retired; against equal forces I would have 
great difficulty in restraining myself from a combat; against 
inferior forces there can be no hesitation; let us then fight and 
let the signal be given ’. 1 

There could not be any further argument; but the resent¬ 
ment felt by the recalcitrant captains cost de Suffren very dear 
in the action which followed. From the point of view' of 
national interest he had no doubt made the wisest decision in 
not losing this opportunity of destroying the English squadron, 
weaker in both the number of ships and of guns, before it was 
joined by the expected reinforcement under Bikerton. The 
destruction of the English fleet on this occasion would have 
placed south India at the mercy of the French and their ally, 
Haida Ali. It was an opportunity not to conic again, and in 
spite of all his past glories dc Suffren would have incurred 
severe condemnation if he had decided to miss it. On the 
other hand, he should have known from his past experience 
that success depended to a very large extent on the co-opera 
fion of all the captains, and he should have considered whether 
that co-operation would be forthcoming in view of the feeling 
of extreme resentment on the part of many of them. As it 
actually turned out, h was grossly betrayed by these officers, 
placing him for a moment in the gravest peril. 

On the morning of September 3, the French ships sailed 
out of the bay to meet the enemy fleet. Dc Suffren had ordered 