

I Journal dr fiord du Bailli dr Suffren dans l’ I tide, pp. 149-150; I-a 
Varende- Suffren rt ses ennemis. pp. *56-24*; Roux t* Bailli de Suffren 
darn Unde. pp. 127 128; Malleson - Final French Struggles m India, p. 59. 


MtN/sr^ 


THI IKENCH IN INDIA 



started for the interview with Haidar .VIi which had been desired 


so ardently on both sides. He was accompanied by some of 
the captains o! his squadron and a battalion of sepoys and made 
first for the amp of Duchemin at Manjakuppam to meet the 
General on his sick-bed. There he was joined by two chiefs •>; 
the Mysore artnv with a large escort of cavalry sent by Haidar 
Ali. 


From Manjakuppam de Sulfren made a ceremonial journey 
to the Nawab’s camp, where the whole body of Mysore troops 
presented arms. After a brief halt at the camp of Piveron 
de Morlat. in the evening he was taken to the Darhar of the 
Nawab who welcomed him with all the warmth of the heart 
of a warrior, fhe first meeting was taken up with an exchange 
of flattering compliments and rich presents, in keeping with the 
traditions of an Eastern Court. It may be noticed here that 
the presents offered b\ de SufFrcn to the Nawab did not cost the 
French anything. I hey had been captured on an English 
vessel some time before and had been intended for the Emperor 
of China. Io the regret of de SufFrcn th.it Haidar Ali had 
not approached the coast .sufficiently near to have a view of his 
squadron, the latter replied thai he had nothing more to desire 
after having seen the person who commanded it. and who com¬ 
manded it so gloriously. After the ceremonies of the first 
introduction were over, de Sulfren retired to the camp of Piveron 
de Morlat, where he spent the night, and next day he was 
invited to a banquet by the Nawab. Being a gourmand, he did 
full justice to the rich Indian food served, which embarrassed 
others who had accompanied him. At the end of the banquet 
he remained in secret conference with the Nawab for a long 
time and in the evening returned to his fleet. On the 28th 
he had his third meeting with Haidar, and next day he took 
his final leave of the Nawab to return to the coast. 

The prolonged talks of de Suffren with Haidar Ali had 
the effect of soothing the bitter feelings of the latter at the 
conduct of the French army under Duchemin and induced him 
to furnish supplies required for the army. The confidence which 
Haidar had in de Suffren, combined with the news brought 
by de Launay on the 28th July of the arrival of Bussy in the 
Isle of Frame with a strong expeditionary force, persuaded him 
further to remain on the eastern coast to cooperate more 


misr^ 



OF SUFFRJ N AM) NAN AI. At t IONS 


■<sl 


lively with the French forces, in spite of the fact that his 
presence was urgently required on the Malabar Coast threatened 
by an English force sent from Bombay, Thus from every point 
< >f view do Suffren \s personal interview with Haidar was 
eminently successful. That it did not lead to anv tangible 
military success was due to the lack of enterprise on the part 
of Hoffelize, who assumed command of the French army after 
the illness of Duchemin, and to the unfortunate turn of circum¬ 
stances which delayed the arrival of Biissv in India till some 
time after the death of Haidar. 1 * 3 