


XV. News of the arrival of Busty in the Isle of France and of 
the despatch of reinforcements under clAymar . 

Arriving at Cuddalore after the action of the 6rh July, 
de Suffren was confronted with immense difficulties. His ships 
had sustained heavy damages, and for want of materials and of 
a safe port it was difficult to undertake thorough repairs. The 
generosity of Haidar, no doubt, had supplied the squadron 
with provisions, but lack of funds and shortage of men and 
ships could not be solved except by fresh reinforcements from 
the Tsle of France. Indeed, so miserable was the plight of the 
squadron that none but the bravest heart could have faced the 
prospect of another encounter with the English fleet with 
equanimity. Writing to Sou iliac on July ‘30. de Suffren 
described his position thus: M l can assure you that it is not 
an easy affair to remain on the sea without money, without 
magazines, with a squadron very badly equipped in part, and 
after having sustained three battles; it is. I believe, a matter of 
good fortune, but I am at the end of my resources .* 

Happily for de Suffren, it was about this time that he 
received the first heartening news of the despatch of consider¬ 
able reinforcements from the Isle of France. While he was 


1 For an account of the meeting of de .Suffren with Haidar Ali: 
Journal dc Bord du Bailli de Suffren dans Vlnde, pp. ifP-ijS** ^ oux — 
le Bailli de Suffren dans Unde, pp. 131-1 ^5: Cunat -Hisloire du Bailli 
de Suffren, p. 190; Malleson— Final f rench Struggles in India, pp. 42-43; 

la Varcnde —Suffren et ses enneinis, pp. 1144-348. 

3 Roux. off. cit., p. 129. 


MINISr^ 



engaged in negotiations with Haidar there arrived at Cuddalore 
on the 28th }uiv cle Launay, Commistaire General of the arms 
of Hussy. It was from him that do Sulfren learnt about the 
arrival of Hussy in the Isle of France with two ships, the Saint- 
Michel (60) and the Illustre (74). a cutter, the Muird, and a 
few transports carrying troops. Immediately on his arrival 
Hussy had sent d< I.aunay by the Lczard to open negotiations 
with Haidar. Launay had landed at Galle in the south of 
Ceylon and journeyed overland to Jaffina. Crossing the narrow 
strait he took the land route to Tranquebar, from where he 
was carried to Cuddalore by a French frigate, the Bellone. 
De Launay informed de Suffren that arrangements had been 
made for the immediate despatch front the Isle of France of 
the lirst detachment of Hussy's expeditionary force under the 
command of d’Aymar, consisting of two ships of the line, the 
Saint-Michel and the lllustre, a frigate, the Consolante, and 
several transports carrying troops, provisions and munitions. 
D’Aymar had instructions to join de Suffren ai Batticaloa where 
the French stjuadron was believed to be at the time. 1 It was 
the happiest news that de Suffren could expect, and he at once 
set about making hasty preparations to proceed to Batticaloa to 
meet the reinforcements sent under d’Aymar. 