

1 Journal de Hind du Hailli de Suffren (Urns l'lttde, { 154. 

1 [hid., p. 160. 





him to lift iht’ siege and face another naval encounter, with 
doubtful prospects. At three o’clock on the morning of the 
26th there were landed 2,300 men, including 600 sepoys, 500 
marines and a few hundred Malayans, lent by the Dutch for 
the occasion, the rest belonging to the regiments of Austrasie 
and the Isle of France. It was not a little surprising that the 
English made no attempt to oppose the landing. In three days’ 
lime, ybth to 28th, thanks to the enthusiasm which the presence’ 
of dr Stiff ret) had inspired in his men, the French had raised 
three batteries, one to the west and two to the south west of 
the fort of Trinkomali, in spite of the incessant fire of the 
enemy. On the 29th the French batteries went into action 
and produced considerable effect on the walls of the fort. On 
the morning of the 30th dc Suffren summoned the Governor 
to surrender, and after brief negotiations the fort capitulated on 
honourable terms. The defending troops were to be allowed 
to come out with all the honours of war and were to be 
transported to Madras. 

The neighbouring fori of Ostenburg also capitulated on 
similar terms on the* 31st. The garrison in each of the forts 
numbered nearly 150 European troops and 300 sepoys. The) 
had sufficient munitions and provisions to stand a prolonged 
siege. What forced them to capitulate so early were, first, 
lack of water, and second, a belief that de Suffren must have 
won a decisive victory over the English fleet and was thus free 
to continue the siege indefinitely. They, therefore, hastened 
to capitulate, iri order to secure the best terms possible. On the 
other hand, the French also, apprehensive of a sudden rc-appear- 
ance of the English fleet, were anxious to get possession of the 
forts at the earliest possible moment and were willing to offer 
honourable terms of capitulation. On September 1 the English 
garrison embarked on the French ships, and de Suffren had just 
time to make arrangements for the occupation of the forts when 
next day the English fleet appeared before Trinkomali. 1 

1 For the capture of Trinkomali: A.N.— A # intslire de la Marine, 
B.-.j. Vols. 207 and 268; Journal dr Bord du Bailli dr Suffren dans 
I'Inde, pp. itii-i6t>: T.a Varcndc - Suffren et ses etmrmis, pp. 252-255; 
Roux — Lc Bailli de Suffren dans l hide, pp. 140 145; MaUcson — Final 
French Struggles in India , pp. 45-46; Wilks —History of Mhsoor . It, 
p. 1,16: \dmiral Richmond — The Nary in India, 176}-178), pp. 267-271. 


NlINlSr^ 





XVII. Fourth naval action (yd September). 

After the action of the 6th July the English fleet Jay 
anchored at Negapatam for a few days and then proceeded 
north to Madras where i» arrived on the 20th. Although it 
received there reinforcements of two ships, the Sceptre and 
the San-Carlos, it had sustained such a heavy damage in the 
action off Negapatam that it was compelled to remain at Madras 
for a considerable period for repairs. In the meantime Hughes 
was not without anxiety about the safety of I rinkomali, know¬ 
ing the intrepid character of his adversary, and he sent two 
ships, the Monmouth and the Sceptre, with troops and muni¬ 
tions for the defence of the forts there. On his way to 
Batticaloa from Cuddalore de Suffren had once thought of 
exploring the Bay of Trinkomali. but be was so preoccupied 
with an accident to his ship that he abandoned the idea and 
thus lost the opportunity of seizing the two English ships 
there. On the 11th August a French frigate, the Bellone, had a 
sharp encounter with an English frigate, the Coventry, not far 
from Batticaloa where the entire fleet of de Suffren lay 
anchored. 1 Although a weaker vessel, the Coventry could escape 
but not before noticing the presence of the French fleet at 
Batticaloa. Scenting mischief, it sailed hurriedly to Madras to 
give the information to Hughes, w j ho lost no time in proceeding 
to Trinkomali to protect it against a surprise attack. 2 But he 
arrived just forty-eight hours too late, only to see the French 
flag Hying over the forts and the fleet of de Suffren safely 
anchored in the bay. 