



THF, FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


ifidence of Haidar, which would have gone a long way in 
getting from him that wholehearted cooperation whic! the 
French had expected. Bui it should not be overlooked that 
JDuchetnin’s instruction was first to enter into a definite treaty 
of alliance with Haidar, the terms of which had been laid down 
by Souillac himself. According to these terms the French were 
to offer military assistance to Haidar and conquer the Carnatic 
for him, and in return Haidar was to bear all the expenses 
of the French army, besides allowing the French to retain a 
few- English towns, including Madras. 1 It was not unnatural 
therefore for Duchemin to try to get these terms accepted by 
Haidar first, before undertaking any military enterprise, it 
was in fact all the more necessary, since the problems facing him 
on landing. lack of funds, of provisions and of transports, 
could not be solved without such a definite treaty of alliance. 
On he other hand, Haidar was irritated at the insistence of 
Duchemin on the conclusion of a formal treaty before under 
taking anv military enterprise. The desertion of d'Orves in 1781 
had made him too distrustful of the French to he willing to 
enter into a formal treaty of alliance with them before having 
some concrete proof of their earnestness and courage. It was this 
fundamental difference which influenced the conduct of the 
French expeditionary force. While in order to obtain the ex¬ 
penses of military operations in India from Haidar the French 
tried to make out that they had come only to serve his interests, 
Haidar was shrewd enough to understand that they had come 


1 there is a detailed criticism of the terms by the Minister of Marine 
and Colonics in his letter to Souillac dated 10th April 1782. A. N.: 
Miitlst&rc des Colonies. C-a, Vol. 153, p. 148. Marquis de Castries did not 
like any pjemature agreement on the division of the spoils of victory and 
he particularly objected to the article by which the French were to acquire 
some additional territories to be conquered from the English. It was, he 
declared, going against the wishes of the King, who wanted the liberation 
ot the Indian Princes from the yoke of the English and not making any 
territorial conquests. It was necessary to avoid giving the impression to 
• he Indian Princes that the French only wanted to take the place of the 
English. Castries also did not like the peremptory demand made by 
Souillac to maintain the independence of the French army from the con¬ 
trol of the Mysore ruler. Such a tone betrayed distrust of Haidar and 
was bound to displease him. Finally, he did not favour the demand, as 
an essential condition of rlie treaty, for an advance of 24 lakhs of rupees 
by Haidar. 


rnisr^ 


• G %>\ 


THE FRENCH ARMV IN THE CARNATIC 

in their own interests as well, and must therefore give proof 
of their ability and enterprise before they should be given any 
assistance. Thar also explains the difference in his attitude 
towards de Suftren and Duchemin. 