

two in the afternoon that I could join him. My line having 

1 For details of the naval action: A.N.—MinisUrre de la Marine, 
It-4, Vole 207 and 268; Journal dc Bord du limiti de Suffren dans l' hide, 
pp. 166-178; La Varendc — Suffren el ses ennemis, pp. 2;,5-266; Roux— 
le Bailli de Suffren dam Vlndc , pp. 147-159; Malleson— Final french 
struggles in India , pp. 48-55; Admiral Richmond — The Navy in India, 
rjtyn&j, pp. 274-285; Letter of Hughes dated 8th Sept.-Sec. Sel. Com. 
Proc., Ft, William, 23rd Sept. (Forrest— Selections .... Foreign Dept., 

Ill, pp. S97-898). Hughes admitted that his ships had suffered very severe 
damages. 

- Malleson Final French Struggles in India , p. 55. Even the Cal * 
ta t^azetle admitted that de Suffren was very badly seconded. 

* R° ux Le Bailli de Suffren dans Unde, p. 156. 




MIN tS7Q y 



mi i *hi \c;h jn inuia 


<SL 


on nearly formed, I attacked and gave the signal (to mv 

ships) to approach (the enemy). Only the Hnos % the 

llhistre and the Ajax fought at. close quarters and in line. The 
others, without any regard to their posts and without making 
any manoeuvre, fired from a long distance, or it is better to 
sav outside the range of a cannon'*. 1 

Although the battle of Trinkomali met with ill-success, 
it had one tangible result. It virtually saved the French force 
at Cuddalore from the English army under Cootc advancing 
to lav siege to that place. If Hughes had joined Coote with 
his squadron in a perfect condition, the fate of Cuddalore 
would have been sealed. As it was. when Hughes returned to 
Madras with his badly damaged ships, the English Council was 
so panic-stricken and apprehensive of an attack on Madras itself, 
knowing the intrepid character of de Suffren, that it at once 
recalled Quote's forces for the defence of the city. De Suffren 
tame to know it from the Bellone , which had been sent to the 
Coromandel Coast immediately after the battle of Trinkomali. 2 
To Sou iliac he wrote on September ig, “For some days l was 
in the greatest anxiety; I knew that M. Coote was near Cudda¬ 
lore and I was not in a position to go to the relief of that 
place. The arrival of the Bellone, which brought me the news 

of the retreat of this general, has quietened my anxiety. 

The combat (of Trinkomali) has prevented his (Hughes) 
combination with Coote and has forced him to retire to 
Madras’*. 3 

One of the earliest tasks of dc Suffren after the battle of 
Trinkomali was to deal with the captains who had been guilty 
of deliberate bad conduct* But although he had every reason 
to take drastic steps, as he had done after the action of the 
Grh July, lie thought it prudent to deal leniently with them, 
and on the request of four of them, de Tromelin, Saint-Fclix, 
de Lalandelle and dc Galles. he granted them permission to 
return to the Isle of France. 4 In a letter dated September 
he reported the matter thus to Marquis de Castries. “Messrs. 


1 I a Varcude— Suffren el ses ennemis , pp. ^68-^69. 