


Ml NISTfiy 



THE FRJSNCH ARMY IN r 1 HE CARNATIC 



of a full understanding with an ally without whose co-opera¬ 
tion no military operation was possible. It is not of course 
the purpose of a historian to deliberately paint black as white, 
but it is undoubtedly his duty to analyse all the facts of a 
situation to arrive at. a correct appreciation of the causes of 
success or failure. 

The appointment of Duchemin to command the first expe¬ 
ditionary army in India was rather unfortunate, since he was 
a sailor and not a soldier, having no experience of land war¬ 
fare. His long stay in the Isle of France had accustomed him 
to a life of ease and comfort; his health was failing and unable 
to bear the strain of an active campaign. The first expedi¬ 
tionary force of less than 3,000 men, organised mainly by the 
initiative and efforts of Souillac, Governor of the Isle of France, 
and not by the French Government, was intended merely as 
a preliminary enterprise, to prepare the ground Cor the prin¬ 
cipal expeditionary force under Bussy which was expected to 
reach India by the,middle of 178s; and it was only as a tem¬ 
porary and stop-gap arrangement that Duchemin took the com¬ 
mand. That really determined Duchemin’s policy in India, 
a policy marked by a lack of that enterprise to be expected 
of the commander of an expeditionary force. As he under¬ 
stood it, his task was only to establish a solid base in India 
to facilitate the landing of the principal expeditionary force 
under Bussy, and to enter into a close alliance with Haidar 
Ali, so that the main force under Bussy could go into operation 
immediately after landing. Like most others, including Bussy, 
who submitted memoires to the French Government on the 
subject of military operations in India, Duchemin thought 
that if the French were to strike, they should strike with a 
large and effective force which could assure success. Opera¬ 
tion by a small force was considered useless for the main pur¬ 
pose in view, the destruction of the English power 'n India; 
and in keeping with the views generally held in France 
Duchemin was not inclined to undertake any large-scale enter¬ 
prise till the arrival of Bussy. expected by the middle of 1782. 


i Duchemin hail also positive instructions from Souillac ot to risk 
his small force in any major operation till the arrival of Bussy. ’Vour 
corps, Monsieur, will be so considerably reduced that it will not he at 


MINf Stfiy. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


is not for that general policy that Duchemin can be con¬ 
demned. He is to be condemned rather for his failure to 
realise the weakness of the English position in the Carnatic 
and to depart from the general policy at opportune moments 
to take advantage of the enemy’s distress. 

II. Landing of troops under Duchemin . 


It was on the 10th March 178* that the expeditionary 
force under Duchemin was landed at Porto Ntovo, the place 
having been selected at the wishes of Haidar Ali. The French 
force consisted of 2,868 men, belonging to the regiments of 
Austrasie and the Isle of France and to the legion of Lauzun. 1 
Prior to disembarkation and after the naval action off Madras, 
de Suffren had suggested to Duchemin a surprise attack on 
Negapatarn, but the latter objected and preferred to effect a 
landing under safer conditions. It will be remembered that 
long before the despatch of the expeditionary force from the 
Isle of France, Souillac had entered into communication with 
Haidar Ali through the French agent at his Court, Pivcron de 
Mortal, but all hopes of cementing an alliance were destroyed 
b\ the ignommous flight of d’Orves from the Coromandel Coast 
in 1781. leaving Haidar alone to fight with the English. From 
that time Haidar came tc entertain a deep distrust of the 
French, which coloured his future relations with that nation 
and prevented him from entering into a solid and whole¬ 
hearted alliance. 