


1 Journal dc Hard du Bnilli de Suffren, pp. 192 194; Roux— Lt Bailli 
dr Suffrrn dam Vlnde, pp. 165 166. 

1 Journal de fiord du Bailli de Suffren, p, 196. 

Ik expressed his feelings in a letter to Madame de Seiilans, dated 
;i«tb November (Ortolan— Moniteur Univcnel, 5th Nov. 1859). 



THE FRENCH IN iNOIA 


<SL 


7<J 

& 

tniing from Bengal.’ On the 8th January 178•>,, the squadron 
anchored off Ganjam, but though de Suffren had a definite 
intention of attacking the place, he had to give up the plan 
as the nature of the road made a landing extremely difficult 
without the assistance of light country boats 2 . Disappointed 
in their main objective, the French were successful in cap 
luring a number of vessels carrying provisions and merchan¬ 
dise. I he most important capture was an English frigate, the 
< oven tty , which was proceeding unsuspectingly and was seized 
on the nrh January. It was from the captain of this frigate 
that de Suffren came to know of the sudden death of Haidar 

Yli on the 7th December and of the uncertain prospect facing 
the allied Franco-Mysorean forces, Haidar’s son Tipu then being 
far away on the Malabar Coast 1 De Suffren at once decided 
to abandon his projects on the Orissa Coast and to return to 
Cuddalore to assure himself of the position of the French army 
and of tlie co-operation of Haidar's successor 4 . 

Leaving Ganjam on the 15th January, de Suffren arrived 
before Pondicherry on the yh February. There he learnt the 
details of the death of Haidar and of the conduct of the French 
army in assuring the peaceful succession of his sort, Tipu 5 . 
The squadron arrived before Cuddalore on the 6th and five 
days later started for Trinkomali. 6 On the 15th while the 
ships lay anchored at Porto Novo, Piveron de Morlat came to 
see de Suffren and informed him that the new Nawab, Lipin 
intended to return to the Malabar Coast at once to save his 
possessions from the invading army under Matthews. That 
would deprive the French army of the assistance of a valuable 
ally and put it in an extremely critical position on the Coro¬ 
mandel Coast. 1 he attempts of Hoffelize in command of the 
French army to persuade Tipu to stay on the eastern coast till 
the arrival of Bussy's expeditionary force had proved fruitless, 
as there was no knowing when Kussv would come. Piveron 


Journal de Bord <Tu Btulli de Suffren, pp. 199*01. 

; Roux-—/> Hailli de Suffren dan* Vlndc , p. 166. 

1 Journal de Bord du Haiilt de Suffren . pp. 208-211; Love— Vestiges 
of Old Madras, III, pp. 264 *66. 

1 Journal de Bird dtt Bailli de Stiffren, pp. 213*217. 

5 Ibid pp. 221*222. 

* Ibid., pp. 222 *23. 


MINIS T/fy 



was sent to de Suffren in the hope that having so much influ¬ 
ence over the father, he would be able to pievail upon the 
son to stay on the Coromandel Coast for some time more. De 
Suffren accordingly sent a letter to the Nawab through Piveron 
de Mori at. but, as we shall sec later, the uncertainty of Bussys 
arrival and the rapid successes of Matthew’s army ultimately 
compelled Tipu to leave for the Malabar Coast at the begin¬ 
ning of March.’ 