

When tie Suffren and Duchemin arrived at Porto Novo 
on the 2i5i February 1782. their first task was to resume the 
threads of negotiations with Haidar, who was campaigning 
victoriously in the Carnatic, and whose son, Tipu, had just 
won a striking success in Tanjore, capturing an English detach 

.ill ]>< >'-4ible 10 hazard large-scale operations, ’and further you will be 
ronfo -ming yourself to the intention of His Majesty, who desires that no 
risk be taken before the arrival of alt the forces that he has decided to 
vrnl out.’'—better of Souillac to Duchemin, dated 18th January 1782 
(H de Closets il'Errey—/Wri,y Chronologique de Vhistoire de Vfnde 
hancaist, p. 50). 

1 Roux /.<■ Baillt de Suffren duns VInde , p. 85; Journal de Bord 
dfi Bnilli de Suffren gives an inaccurate figure, 2500, p. 64. 


MINIS T Ry 


THE FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 

Braithwaite. 1 * Haidar on his side was glad at the 
prospect of the assistance of a French expeditionary force. So 
he hastened to send Phcron dc Morlai to welcome de Snffren 
and Duchemin at Porto Novo and ordered the Governor of 
Chidambaram to protect the disembarkation of French troops 
against any attacks by the English garrison of Cuddalore. 3 
After the visit of Ptveron tie Morlat on the 25th February two 
senior officers, de Moissac and <le Canaple, were sent on behalf 
of de Suffren and Duchemin to compliment the Nawab and 
to prepare the ground for opening negotiations.* I hey returned 
on the 7th March with an encouraging reply, and immediately 
after the French started the landing of troops, munitions and 
artillery. 4 As yet, however, no definite understanding had been 
reached about the nature and terms of co-operation between 
the two allies. After disembarkation French officers were again 
sent to Haidar’s camp to draw up the exact terms of alliance, 
but from the first the effect of Haidar's distrust of the French 
became apparent and he tried to evade the question of a formal 
alliance. Negotiations dragged on for a long time, and it was 
with deep regret that de Snffren left Porto Novo to seek the 
English fleet for a second encounter. 

III. Relations with Haidar ( March-July , 1^82). 

The early relations with Haidar Ali are so important for a 
correct appreciation of the difficulties and failings of Duchemin 
that it is worth while tracing their course in some detail. 
That will help us to determine how much the condemnation 
made b' Malleson and even by Bussy was really deserved, 
and how much it was due to a lack of understanding of the 
peculiarities of the situation in which Duchemin was placed. 
Not that Duchemin was a hero and failed only as a victim of 
circumstances. In fact, with more courage and intrepidity he 
could have obtained a few successes over the English at the 
beginning, and that would have evoked the admiration and 

1 Wilks History of Mysoor, II, p. 109. 

3 Journal de Bord du Iiailli de Suffren, ftp, 101-10a. 

a Ibid. 

4 Ibid. t p. 103. 




MIN/STyjj, 