

I he French squadron reached Aehin on the 2nd November. 2 
The author of the Journal de Bard du Bailli de Suffren dans 
l f hide wrote about tills place, 5 "Achen is an excellent port for 
wintering, as much for the safety of the ships as for the supply 
of provisions which arc in abundance there. Water is very 

easily procurable from the river.it is not necessary to 

go much high up to find sweet water. We have been permitted 
to buy wood from the Pulo Way'. Although food was 
extremely cheap, the writer did not like the place for its un¬ 
healthy climate. “The number of our sick has increased in 
place of diminishing". It was because the country was full of 
marshes and little streams and suffered innundations during 
rains. I he people were lather ferocious; and jealous of their 
women, "although not of a tempting beauty", they disliked the 

! Rous.- L.c Bailli de Suffren dans I'Inde, pp. 163-165; Love— Vestiges 
of Old Madras, III. pp. *61-26*. Love states that Bikerton's ships actu¬ 
ally joined the squadron ot Hughes before the latter lett the Coromandel 
Coast but that even then Hughes left foi Bombay disregarding the protests 
of the Madras Government. 

3 Journal de Bord du llailli de Suffren , p. 191. 

3 Ibid., pp. 199-200. 




MINIS?*,. 



!>!•: .SUFFKKN AND NAVAI. ACTIONS 


ision of foreigners. On arrival at Achin, de Suffren sent 
de Moissac to negotiate with the king for the supply of wood 
and provisions for the squadron. The lattei showed himself 


at first unwilling to render any help, having never seen such a 
large number of warships and being apprehensive of their real 
intentions. But de Suffren was extremely cautious and took 
care to avoid giving any cause of complaint to the king or to 
the people of the country, retaining the sick on board and not 
permitting his men to go ashore. The wise conduct of 
de Suffren reassured the king of his friendly intentions, and 
he agreed to supply the squadron with whatever the French 
wanted. 1 

On the 24th November there arrived from the Isle of 


France the Due de Chartres with munitions and provisions, 
and also with the news of the naval defeats in Europe and 
America and of the outbreak of an epidemic on hoard the 
ships brought by Peinier to the Isle of France which delayed 
Hussy's departure for India. 2 It was a most disheartening news 
for de .Suffren, with only eight ships and a few thousand men 
at Achin. and with no definite news about the time of Bussy’s 
coming to join him 3 . But he was not the man to yield himself 
to despair, and learning about the same time that Hughes had 
left for Bombay, he decided on taking advantage of the absence 
of the enemy fleet from the eastern coast to prey upon English 
merchant shipping and to attack Ganjarn and other English 
possessions on the Orissa Coast. 


\f\. Return from Achin and junction with Bussy's 
expeditionary force. 

After having repaired his ships as best as lie could, de 
Suffren left Achin on the 20th December and made for the Orissa 
Coast# detailing two fast-moving vessels, the Pelit-Annibat and 
the Helione , to the mouth of the Ganges'to intercept shipping 