

In spite of this powerful diversion by the Artesien , joined 
later by the BrillatU, the position of the French centre was 
extremely critical. At one moment the main mast of the Hiros 
fell broken, bringing down the flag. Furious at the '‘Hurrahs” 
of the English who took It as a sign of surrender, de Suffren 
thundered out to his men, “Bring all the flags on board and 
cover up my ship with them". The courage of the commander 
infused fresh enthusiasm in his men, and the Hiros started a 
terrific fire again, putting out of action the Burford, the Sultan 
and the Superb , till dc Suffren was informed that 1,800 shots 
had been fired altogether and that the munitions had been 
totally exhausted. In order to deceive the enemy the Hiros 
even kept on firing blank shots for some time. 

About half-past five the whole of the front section at last 
catne to the rescue of the centre and joined action. The tide 
now turned wholly in favour of the French. The English 
ships, already badly damaged in action, were now engaged 
bv the seven French ships of the front section, which had so 
long taken no part in the battle and were thus in a perfect 
condition. However, it was too late to assure any decisive 
result, and as night fell the combat stopped and the two 
squadrons drew apart. Taking advantage of the darkness of 


MINI ST/f 



me night, the English ships sailed away for Madras, and the 
French squadron, not in a position to pursue the enemy, 
remained at the scene of battle till (>th September, when it 
started back for Trinkomali. On the 7th one of the ships, the 
Orient , was wrecked at the entrance to the bay and the squadron 
was held up there for ten clays It was not till the 17th that 
the ships could anchor in the Bay of Trinkomali in their old 
position. 1 

The battle of Trinkomali showed in an even more glaring 
manner than before how much the French chances of success 
were ruined by jealousy on the part of some of the captains 
and by their flagrant disobedience to orders. The shameful con 
duct of these captains was so apparent as to call forth comments 
even among the English, who condemned these officers as 
“unworthy to serve so great a man". 2 Dc Suffren himself gave 
an account of the battle in a letter to Souillac, dated *grd 
September: “1 began the combat 15 against 12, as I had pur 
the Comolante also in the line. But what you will not believe 
is that there were only the Hrros, the 11 lustre and the Ajax 
which fought at close quarters. Vet all. yes all, had the greatest 
facility to approach, and you, who are a sailor, how can you 
be persuaded that having gained the head of the line anybody 
can fail to approach it, and that for vessels with good speed?" 3 
To the Minister of Marine also he wrote thus, "I have just 
missed an opportunity to destroy the English squadron. I had 
14 ships and the Comolante which 1 had put in the line. 
Admiral Hughes was escaping without a fight, or to put it better 

fleeing in an orderly manner. It was not till half-past 