

On the 16th the squadron started from Porto Novo and 
reached Trinkoinali on the 23rd. I hree days later there 
arrived a corvette, the Naiade, from the Isle of France with a 
letter from Bussy announcing his departure from there on the 
10th December. On the 1st March de Suffren sent de Moissac 
by the same corvette to the Coromandel Coast to inform 1 ipu 
of the imminent arrival of Bussy’s expeditionary force. 2 1 he 
expeditionary force had in fact gone to Achin in the expecta¬ 
tion of meeting de vSuffren there, and from Achin it came 
back to Trinkomali where it arrived on the 10th March. At 
long last de Suffren was relieved of his extreme anxiety, aim 
being joined by de Peinier’s division of three ships of the line 
and a frigate he could look forward with some equanimity 
to the prospect of an encounter with the combined English 
forces under Hughes and Bikerton, although yet superior to 
his own. 3 


’ Journal de Bord du llailli de Suffren, pp. 11*5-226. 
3 Ibid., pp. 230-231. 

- 1 Ibid., pp. 232-233. 


CHAPTER X 




THE FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 
I. The inactivity of the French army. 

In order to present a connected narrative we have carried 
the story of French naval operations in Indian waters rill the 
arrival of Bussy at Trinkoraali in March 1783, without making 
any mention of French military activities in south India since 
the landing of troops under Duchemin at Cuddalore in March 
1783. It is time, however, that we interrupt the course of 
the narrative of dc Suffren’s glorious exploits and trace the 
history of French military operations till the arrival of Bussy 
in India in March 1783. This story presents a striking con¬ 
trast to the one just narrated. While in the course of one 
year dc Suffiren had encountered the English fleet on four 
occasions, had captured Trinkomali, the finest port that a 
navy could have in Indian waters, and had raised the prestige 
of France in the eyes of thr Indian Powers to a point never 
before reached except during the time of Dupleix, the French 
army under Duchemin remained totally inactive for the whole 
period, taking little practical part in the military operations 
of Haidar Ali in the Carnatic, and the only tangible achieve¬ 
ment it could show was the capture of Cuddalore, defended 
by only a very small garrison. For this lack of enterprise and 
failure to take advantage of the English distress in the Carnatic, 
responsibility has been thrown largely on Duchemin by both 
English and French historians, who condemn him in the 
severest terms. Malleson has even gone to the length of stating 
categorically that any one of the three thousand troops Duche- 
min hail under him would have made a better general. 1 It 
will be our endeavour here to trace the course of events in 
.some detail to find out how much Duchemin really deserved 
this condemnation, and how much he was restricted by diffi¬ 
culties over which he had no control and by the initial lack 

1 Malleson— Fiuat French Struggle* in India, p. 20. 