

1 Roux —Le Bailii de Suffren dom If fide, pp, 148-149. 




MINIS/*,, 


OK SUFFREN AN1) NAVAL ACTIONS 




them to proceed in the line of battle and approach the enemy 
within dose range before opening fire. But due to tin deli¬ 
berate evil intentions of the captains the ships in the front and 
rear sections manoeuvred so clumsily that the line had not been 
properly formed even by two o’clock, when the French came 
up within the range of a cannon shot from the English fleet. 

) fie French had fifteen ships in the line, including the frigate 
Consolante, while the English had twelve. Due to bad 
manoeuvring two ships of the French centre, the Petit Annibal 
and the Sphinx, left their allotted positions and joined the five 
ships of the front section, while another, the Flavian d , left the 
centre and joined the rear section. On the other hand, the 
Ajax, belonging to the rear section, joined the centre. Thus 
the centre, with which de Suffrcn bore the brunt of the fight, 
consisted of only three ships, the Her os, the // lust re and the 
Ajax . 1 

De Suffren, who intended to light it pistol range, gave 
repeated signals to his ships to proceed at full speed and close 
up with the enemy fleet before opening (ire. Impatient at their 
slowness and clumsy rnanoeuvrings, he repeated the signal once 
more at half-past two, and in order to draw attention to the 
signal he fired a shot. His intention was completely misunder- 

1 Table of the two squadrons: — 


French 


English 


/ Artesian (64)- Dc St. Felix 
Le Severe (64) — Dc* Langle 
Le St. Michel (64) — D'Aymar 
L'Orient (74) —La Paillterc 
Le Jirillant (64) — Dc Kersauson 
Le Petit-Annibal (50)— De Gallcs 
Lc Sphinx (64)— Do Ghillcait 
fc Heros (74) De Suffrcn 
VtUmtre (74)—-Dc JBruycres 
Le Flamand (yo ) — Dc Salvert 
L'Ajnx (t>4)— Dc Beaumont 
La Comolante (40)— Dc P£an 
L'Annibal (74)— De Troraelin 
l Tengeur (64)-- Dr Guvcrvillc 
L Bizarre (64)— Latandcllo 
Ijo Fine (36) 

Ijc. HcUonr (36) 

Lm Fortune ( 18 ) 


The Exeter (O4)—King 
The Isis (56)—Lutnley 
The Hero (74)—Hawker 
The Sceptre (64)—Graves. 

The Burford (74}—R«Hncr 
The Sultan (74)—Watt 
The Superb (74)—Hughes 
The Monarc a (74)—Gelt 
The Eagle (64)—Reticle! 

T h e Magna n i rn elfisfr— -W ol sc Icy 
The Monmouth (64)—Alms 
The Worcester (54)—Wood 
The San Carlos (44) 

The Aclive (40) 

The Medea (38) 

The Coventry (a8) 

The Sea Horse (21) 

The Combustion (io) 


miSTfiy 



stood, and it was taken as a signal for fire all along the line. 
The French squadron was yet in a state of hopeless confusion. 
The Vengeur and the Consolante of the rear section were 
ordered to double the tail of the English line, but they failed 
to do so and concentrated their fire on the Worcester and the 
Monmouth, while the other three ships, the Flamand, the 
Annibal and the Bizarre, remained inactive. The five ships of 
the front section, reinforced by two others of the centre, the 
Petit-Annibal and the Sphinx , remained content by firing from a 
long distance. Titus de Suffren at the centre found himself 
in ,an unequal fight with only three ships, the Hiros, the 
lllustre and the Ajax. Mis signals to d’Aymar and Tromelin 
to come to his help were disobeyed and the unequal fight went 
on till about four o'clock. Then noticing that the French 
centre stood the risk of being surrounded by enemy ships, the 
Artisim stirred into activity and opened a terrific lire, which 
put out of action two ships of the English front, the his and 
the Hero , the Exeter having been obliged to withdraw earlier. 