

3 Journal de Hard du Bailli de Suffren dans l'Indr, p. 176. 

3 Roux — Le Batlli de Suffren dans i/nde, p. 159. 

* pp. 159-160; Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren dam Unde, 

p. 178; l/a Varendc, Off. Cit p. 267. 


misr/f,. 





fiTLalandelle, dc Tromelin, de Saint-Felix and dc Galles have 
asked permission to leave their ships. I have been too dissatis¬ 
fied with them not to grant the permission with pleasure. If 
I do not remove several others, it is only due to want of 
suitable persons to command their ships'. 1 2 


Will. Derision to winter at Achin. 


The French squadron remained at Trinkomali till the 1st 
October, when it sailed for Cuddalore with the intention ol 
wintering at Achin in north Sumatra, Trinkomali requiring 
considerable time and labour to be made suitable for the pur 
pose. Although the ships had been repaired as best as possible 
under the circumstances, de Suffren was faced with great dilh- 
cutties for lack of munitions, provisions and naval equipments, 
and on the day of his departure from Trinkomali lie wrote to 
Souillac: "I am going to the rendez-vou .> (Achin, where lie 

had asked Bussy to meet him); I do not know whether I shall 
be able to reacli the place; my position is most embarrassing 
Send me, at Trinkomali, as much munitions, provisions 

and naval equipments as you can . 

Starting from Trinkomali on the tst October, dc Sullren 
reached Cuddalore on the 4th On the way he learnt about 
the capture of a cutter, the Uzard, by the English in the neutial 
roadstead of Tranquebar. He suffered an even greater 1111s 
fortune when one of the ships of the squadron, the Bizane. 
was wrecked on the sand-bar just oil Cuddalore and could not 
be saved even with the best efforts. 3 I hese successive disasters 
grieved de Suffren all the more, as he learnt ahout the same time 
of the arrival at Bombay of Bikerton's squadron of six ships 
of the line. The junction of Bikerton with Hughes would 
make the fight grossly unequal, at least till the arrival of Bussy 
with reinforcements. De Suffren thus thought it prudent to 
leave the Coromandel Coast and to go to Achin in north 
Sumatra for wintering his ships, having already sent infoima 
tion to the Isle of France asking Bussy to proceed straight to 

1 La Varende — Suffren et sex ennemix , p. * 7 ° 

2 Roux — Le Bailli dc Suffren dans Vlndc. p. 160. 

1 lbid. t p. 16s; Journal dc Bord du Bailli de Suffren, pp. ifc 2 -i& 3 * 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

Aehin and join him there. But in order not to betray the 
weakness of his position he gave out that he was returning to 
rrinkoiuali to winter there, and to make the deception more 
real he* even took on board a lew officers and provisions for the 
garrisons of the forts there. 

De Suffren started from Cuddalore on the 15th October, 
just escaping a violent storm which caused great damage to 
the English fleet anchored before Madras. Hughes was com¬ 
pelled to leave the Coromandel Coast and he proceeded to 
Bombay for wintering there. Just four days after his departure 
'Biker ton arrived with his squadron, but not finding Hughes 
before Madras he returned to Bombay where the two squadrons 
joined in December. De Suffren was therefore rather lucky 
in escaping from the Coromandel Coast just in time, as he 
could have hardly saved himself against the much superior 
English fleet if Bikcrton had joined Hughes in time. The 
danger to de Suffren was all the more apparent in that the 
Dutch, who had eight warships at Batavia, made no move to 
come to the assistance of the French squadron.' 