

1 Journal de Bussy, p. 

2 Ibid., p, 107. 

3 Ibid., pp. ujy 114. 

4 Malle *©!*-,Let Demiirpt Luttes dfs Frau fait dam ilndt ct tur I’OcrSati 
inditn, p, 31 (translator's note). 




miST/ty 


THE FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 

for the removal of a large number of the principal 
officers. 1 It was a drastic action prompted by a belief about 
the bad conduc t of these,persons. But when de Launay arrived 
at the camp of Haidar at the end of July and had several 
interviews with him, he sent a report to hussy on the and 
August, in which he made little mention of the bad conduct 
of the French officers, and on the other hand gave a detailed 
account of the insincere and unfriendly attitude of Haidar. 
The officers were removed according to Bussy ’s orders, but 
Duchemin, who was lying seriously ill and had already resigned 
his command to Hoffelize, remained at Cuddalore as Lhe slate 
of his health did not permit him to go to Colombo as directed. 2 3 

Be Launay arrived at Cuddalore on the 28th July and had 
his first interview with the Nawab on the 31st. Shortly before 
that de Suffren had a meeting with Haidar, which because of 
the high esteem of the Mysore ruler for the brave Admiral 
improved for the time being his relations with the French 
army. Haidar complained to de Suffren about the refusal of 
Duchemin to co-operate with him against the English, justifying 
his own action in stopping money and provisions or the army; 
but de Suffren succeeded in persuading him to forget his past 
bitterness and to agree to continue supplies for the French 
army. It is doubtful, however, how much de Suffren would 
have succeeded in overcoming Haidar’s antipathy towards the 
French army, but for the timely arrival of de Launay bringing 
news of the imminent coming of Bussy with- a large expedi¬ 
tionary force. 

Dc Launay sent a detailed report to Bussy on the 2nd 
August about his interviews with Haidar, which revealed an 
attitude on the part of the Mysore ruler not very friendly 
towards the French. It was on the 31st July that de Launay 
had his first formal interview with Haidar Ali at ten o’clock 
in the evening. He was accompanied by two high-ranking 
officers, de Cossigny and d’Espinassy, and an escort of troops 
given to him by Hoffelize, who had taken the command of the 
army some time before owing to the illness of Duchemin. After 




1 Journal dc Bussy, pp. 38-40. 

3 Ibid., p. 101. 

3 I bid., pp. 140-147. 


mtsr/ty 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


to the Nawab. De Launay left the Durbar after having been 
given rich presents worth 3,000 rupees. He had expressed his 
unwillingness to accept money which Haidar had wanted to 


present him at first. 1 his incident, a customary thing in an 

Eastern Court, is interesting, as helping ns to understand the 
real nature of the extortions alleged to have been made by 
Duchemin, de Ghenneville and de Canaple. 

On August i de Launay had another meeting with the 
Nawab in the evening. He read out to Haidar an extract 
from the instructions of the King of France to Bussy, stating 
that the Carnatic should belong to Haidar. De Launay dec 
Pared further that he had been instructed by Bussy to write 
to the different Princes of India in consultation with Haidar, 
announcing Pussy’s imminent arrival, to which Haidar replied 
that he would indicate in a few days* time the allies to whom 
de Launay should write. Haidar showed greater interest about 
the time of Hussy’s arrival, and he urged de Launay to write 
to him to hasten his departure from the Isle of France. 