

About the condition of the French army after disembarka* 
lion at Porto Novo ami the course of negotiations with Haidar 
AH* there are two interesting letters, both dated 22 nd March 
1782, written by two soldiers, and also a mernoire by de Canaplc, 
who, along with de ChcrmeviJIe, had been sent by Duchemin 
to negotiate with Haidar. The first of these letters stated that 
the troops were landed at Porto Novo on the nth and were 
supplied with necessary provisions by Haidar. On the 19th 
Duchemin sent two envoys to the Nawab, de Chenncville 
(Duchemin'$ brother) and de Canaple. “Until their return we 
do not know what to do. However, we have made .1 depot 
at Chalembron for our own artillery, baggages and hospitals 

.Bader (Haidar) has his camp about ten leagues from 

Pondicherry. We are only waiting for transport to carry our 

things to the depot at Chalembron.Happily Tipousaeb, 

the son of the Nawab, arrived here at last on the 16th. He is 
encamped at three kosh from Porto Novo: as a result the 
depot will be protected if w r e make any movement”. The 
writer then referred to the state of indiscipline among the 
ranks and the mutual jealousy among the officers. Some sepoy 
troops were recruited and placed under die command of 
d’Houdeloi and Boissieux, but they were only a famished and 
Untrained rabble. From where shall we start our operations? 

It is said from Cuddalore. But it is better to say that one 
does not know what is to be done. The Nawab does not like 
any movement without his orders . We are waiting im¬ 

patiently for the return of our last ambassadors. In the mean¬ 
time the Nawab has sent provisions and a lakh of pagodas’*. 
After referring to an interview' between Tipu and Duchemin 
when the former enquired whether Bellecombe would be return¬ 
ing to India shortly, the writer stated. “1 report this incident 
to prove that M. Duchemin is believed here to have come only 
in temporary command of the army.** 1 * 

The second letter, written by a son to his father in the 

1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 107*111. 

S 







Ml HiSTfiy 



THK FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


of France, was similar. “The army was disembarked on 
the 10th of this month and the disembarkation of the artillery 
is in progress. Yesterday the siege artillery was dragged to 
Chalcmbron. the most convenient place for a depot”. The 
writer then referred in a most feeling way to the devastations 
of the neighbouring countryside made by Haidar's army. 
"MM de Chenneville, Piveron and Canaple started on the 18th 
for the camp of Haidar. Nobody knows the object of their 
mission. I believe that on their return we shall start on our 
march for capturing Cuddalore. This fort is commanded by 
a Lieutenant-Colonel and has a garrison of 60 or 80 white 
troops and some sepoys. It appears that from there we shall 
move to Tanjore to capture rhe few towns preserved by the 
English. .. The Nawab has sent a lakh of rupees merely 
on ihc receipt of the general. I do not know if he will continue 
his generosity”. The writer concluded by referring to the cam 
paign of mutual villification by some of the high-ranking 
officers. 1 