

1 Wilks — History of Mysoo r, II, p. 149. 



THE FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 


<§L 


_forcemeats to us. and that we were too weal, in view of 

the troops that we had lent to the squadron. " 1 2 In the same 
letter Hoffclize also wrote about the miserable condition of the 
army and the way it was treated by Haidar. 1 he Naivab 
does not. want to give any more money. He has supplied only 
live lakhs since our landing, and salaries are in arrears for five 
months. I am afraid that in the end he will refuse us even 
provisions. He considers as rather abnormal the expenses of 
the administration and of hospitals, anti he asks whether the 
white eat more than the black. 


An account of the plight of the army for lack of funds is 
also contained in anothei letter, dated 21st October, and 
written by Mottais tie Narbonne who was in charge ol the 
finances. Mottais wrote that if funds were not forthcoming 
immediately, desertions which had already begun would increase 
rapidly. The Nawab had stopped payment altogether, but 
Mottais had urged de SufTren who had great influence over him 
to write to him for money. Even if the letter had some effett. 
Mottais did not think that Haidar would pay more than a lakh 
or two, which would be wholly insufficient, and he therefore 
implored Souillac to send money as promptly as possible to 
enable the army to subsist till the arrival of Bussy, which could 
not be expected before the beginning ol 17d■ ’ 


VII. Death of Haidar— Relations of the French army with 
Tipu {December 1782 — March ij-S j). 


Fortunately for the French, they were left undisturbed by 
the English for a few months after the frustration of then 
projected attack on Guddalore in September. I he English 
army withdrew to Madras, and Sir Eyre Coote, who was in had 
health, returned to Bengal to spend the winter there, leaving 
the command to General Stuart. Operations in the Carnatic 
remained suspended till the beginning of the next ear. In 
the meantime Haidar died on the 7'h Hecember and was 
succeeded by his eldest son, Tipu. His death was caused by a 
malignant abscess on the neck which defied all medical ticat 


1 Journal dc Bussy, pp. 289-590. 

2 Ibid., pp. 290-292. 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

went. 1 Shortly before his death he had asked 
him some French doctors, and the latter sent Rochard. the chief 
phvsician. and Noel, the chief surgeon of the army. An imme¬ 
diate operation was deemed necessary, but Haidar postponed it 
for three clays to wait for the auspicious moment fixed by his 
astrologers. This loss of time proved fatal, and the operation, 
when made, was too late to save his life.' 

The news of Haidar’s death was kept a dose secret till the 
succession of his eldest son, Tipu, was assured. The latter was 
at the time engaged in campaigning on the Malabar Coast in 
the neighbourhood of Paniani against an English force under 
Col. Macleod.* There were ambitious chiefs in Haidar’s army 
who wanted to take advantage of the situation to divide the 
territories and riches of their dead master among themselves, 
even going to the length of seeking the help ot the English. 
Such a chaotic development, which would have injured beyond 
repair the prospect of the expected French expedition under 
Bussy. was prevented by the prompt and courageous action ol 
the small French contingent in Haidar's army led by Bouthcnot 
and t oulet. and by the rapid march of Hoffelize with his troops 
to the neighbourhood of Haidar’s camp. Thus it was through 
the efforts of the French that order was maintained in the late 
Nawab’s arms, and the ambitious chiefs were held in restraint 
,ill the arrival of Tipu and his quiet succession. 4 It was a 
repetition of an old incident, when Bussy in similar circum¬ 
stances had assured the succession of Salabat Jang to the ruler- 
ship of the Deccan. 