



mtsTfy 



would have asked his son to rake it for them on his wav to 
Porto Novo. Finally, the French envoys returned and Haidar 
sent one of his own agents, Benaji Pandit, to Duchemin with 
the apparent object of continuing the negotiations. 

In the meantime Cuddalore had surrendered to the French 
at the f«rsi summons (8th April). 1 But the place was found 
to be so unhealthy and diseases had taken such a heavy toll 
on the French troops that it was decided to encamp the army 
at Manjakuppam, four miles to the north of the town. The 
arrival of Benaji Pandit at Cuddalore did not lead to the 
conclusion of a treaty. The fundamental difference persisted 
about the amount of money to be paid for the salary of the 
troops. “The disproportion between our means and our claims 
daily increased by the reduction of our troops''. Another 
tricky question arose when Haidar demanded that Duchemin 
must agree to continue the war in India even though peace 
might be concluded in Europe between France and England. 
In his anxiety to hasten the conclusion of the treaty Duchemin 
agreed even to this astounding condition, with some mental 
reservation that he would wriggle himself out of the obliga* 
tion when the actual occasion arose. But the treaty was not 
concluded, and by his action Duchemin had merely played into 
the hands of Haidar and betrayed his incompetence at nego¬ 
tiations to the shrewd eye of the Nawab. In the meantime 
the army was reduced to great financial distress and murmurs 
of discontent increased daily. 

De Canaple then continued to give an account of the shabby 
treatment accorded by Haidar to Duchemin. From Cuddalore 
the French army moved to Vilnoor near Pondicherry and thence 
to Permacoil, to join Haidar w r ho was laying siege to that place. 
Haidar made no move to meet Duchemin, and the French army 
remained inactive and allowed Permacoil to be taken by the 
Mysore forces alone. After the fall of Permacoil on the 16th 
May. Haidar and the French marched towards Wandiwashr 
It was on the way to Wandiwash that Duchemin was able to 

1 For the capture of Cuddalore see Wilks —History of Mysoor , II, 
PP* * 33**341 love —Vestiges of Old Madras, III, p. *40 (letter from Fort 
St. George to the Company). The English garrison consisted of only 400 
sepoys and 5 European artillerymen. 

s Wilks, op. cii II, p. 154. 





meet Haidar for the first time. But far from suggesting con¬ 
certed efforts, Haidar asked Duchemin to withdraw his army 
back to its original camp near Pondicherry, as he had received 
information that Sir Eyre Coote was marching to the relief 
of Wandiwash. It was a disappointment to Duchemin, parti¬ 
cularly as it created the impression that the French fled away 
precipitately in the face of the English. I here was no alter¬ 
native, however, and the French fell back upon their original 
position near Pondicherry. Shortly after this retreat Haidar 
separated himself completely from the French. On the goth 
May he moved, without his allies, towards Arnee to forestall 
a surprise attack by Coote on his principal supply depot in 
the Carnatic. Nor did he seek the help of the French when 
after Coote's withdrawal to Madras in June he proceeded to 
lav siege to Vellore. The French were forced to remain 
inactive ail the while, in great financial distress, and with their 
commander, Duchemin, lying seriously ill. Relations with 
Haidar reached a breaking point, when the arrival of de Suffren 
in July and his interview with the Nawab improved matters 
to some extent. 