

ing -his letter to others, but he thought « 

it secret. Robillard concluded h.s letter thus. hese arc the 

things which Puchemin charged me to infonn you so that you 

£?£ your judgment on the criticisms which you must have 

heard against him .” 1 


% 


VI. Hoffelize taking command of the 1< remit army- Relations 
with Haidar (. July-Novcmber 17S2). 


ib v • ..;ti ■ «i ire ceded in command of the army by 

Duchemm was succeeneo w . . tr He 

fo.nie d’ Hoff el ire. Colonel of the Regiment of Austrasic. He 
was an abkr general, of cool and calculating temperament and 
I sober Judgment. But even he could do nothing to uuprove 
relations J widt Haidar, and the French army continuedo 
remain inactive at Cuddalore, without moneyed prov ^ ^ 
and with increasing discontent among q{ vdlore 

remembered that Haidar was engager m valiant French 

tllT ld-5 

- Cuddalore fill the 

de Launay. 1 hen on the news or o y i-s ddaT 

marched Bu^^had preceded him 

hastened back l - supplying provisions 

bv unexpectedly rap.d marches. *“» brf<)IC 

to the besieged garrison had withdrawn 
Haidar could arrive. The latter then ton.tnued the uege. 

directing operations from Arcol. 


Journal de Bussy. pp« S87-S89. 


Ml NlSTfy 



While he was thus engaged in the siege of Vellore and 
his .ton campaigning far south in Tanjore, the small French 
army at Cuddalore lay fully exposed to a surprise attack. Coote, 
desirous of taking advantage of the isolated position of the 
French, planned to make a rapid march along the coast and 
take Cuddalore by surprise before Haidar could come to its 
rescue. It was a brilliant stroke and would have surely sue 
ceeded, but for the news of the naval action off Frinkomali on 
the 3rd September and the heavy damage inflicted on the 
English fleet. Starting quietly from Madras, Coote hastened 
along the coastal route and on the 6th September encamped 
near Pondicherry, just a day’s march from Cuddalore. He 
expected the support of the fleet and waited for siege artillery 
to come up before proceeding further. But on the 11th he 
received the unexpected news that Trinkomali had been taken 
by the French and the English fleet had returned to Madras in 
a badly damaged condition. That at once compelled him to 
abandon his plan and hurry back to Madras to cover it against 
a surprise attack by Haidar’s forces. 1 There was, indeed, reason 
for grave anxiety about the safety of Madras. The fleet was 
badly damaged, the garrison inadequate in number, and the 
neighbouring countryside desolated by one of the worst famines 
recorded. If Coote’s communication with Madras could have 
been cut off, tin: fate of that city would have hung in the 
balance. Fortunately for the English, no combination was 
possible between Haidar and the [French. Hoffelizc indeed 
proposed to Haidar a combined attack on Coote, but it was 
declined, and thus one of the best opportunities was allowed 
to slip away. 

In a letter to Souillac dated 17th October 1782, Hoffelize 
wrote, ‘ I made every possible attempt, when the English had 
advanced against Cuddalore, to persuade the Nawab to take 
them by the rear, to order Tipu to join me and then to march 
in concert against the enemy. That movement would have 
compelled him to attack at a disadvantage or to lay down arms. 
But nothing could persuade the Nawab. I sent M. de Boissieux 
u him for that purpose, but. he told him repeatedly that he 
did not want to undertake any enterprise before the arrival of 