

Although Haidar had not shown himself very Fnendh 
towards the French, his sudden death was a material loss to 
them, since his successor. Tipu, was even less favourably in¬ 
clined. Nor did the latter inherit the military genius and 



<SL 

Hoffelize to send 


i Wilks History of Mysoor, U. p. 167. 
s Roux—J-** BatUi dr Suffrrn dons Unde, p. 171. 

3 Wilks. ot>. cit II. pp. 165166. 

4 Journal d Bord dn Bnilli dr Suffrrn dans Vlnde , pp. 2*1 *2* 


Roux* op cit . pp. 171-17*- , , _ 

Wilks however gives the entire credit of seeming the quiet succ s* 
sion of Tipu to two Hindu officers of Haidar, Poomea and Kishen Row, 
and minimises the part played bv the French -History of Mysoor, II, 
pp. 168*17*. 


MINISr^ 



I HI FRENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 2(iT 

ual acumen of his father. Piveron de Morlat, the French 
agent at the Court of Haidar, gives the following interesting 
impression about the difference between tne father and the son 
in a letter to de Suffren, dated 9th February 178*. ‘Although 
1 ipu Sultan seems desirous of following the projects of his 
father and of remaining an ally, he has neither the ability 
nor the genius, nor the military talents of th< late Nawab .. . . 
Haidar Ali Khan was the most extraordinary Prince that had 


ever appeared in \sia. He had formed his vast estates our of 
nothing by sheer force of arms. Bv his genius he was able to 
preserve them till the end, and when he died he was a terror 


to the whole of India and to the English nation.Tipu 

Sultan has suddenly inherited all these vast possessions, immense 
treasures and a large army which have made him very arrogant. 
Would to God he may know how to preserve these advantages 
so long as wc may have need of him! The late Nawab was. 
moreover, a sincere friend of the French; he had given con¬ 
vincing proofs of it till his last moments. He reposed great 
confidence in me and gave me publicly marks of his kindness 

everyday.Tipu Sultan knows well my relationship with 

the late Nawab and his good-will for me, so that he treats me 
w ith much honour and kindness; but when it comes to business, 
what a difference in genius, foresight, action and manner of 
government between him and the great man who is no more.” 1 

The death of Haidar and succession of Tipu was followed 
by a change in the course of the war in south India. 
Down to the end of 1782 it was Haidar who was always on the 
offensive. His original possessions were safe because of the 
preoccupation of the Bombay Government with the Maratha 
war, so that he was allowed to harry and devastate with 
impunity the rich province of the Carnatic and hit the English 
at their most vulnerable point. But from the end of 1782 
there came about a great change. The arrival of Bikerton with 
his squadron considerably strengthened the English fleet. The 
Maratha war was brought to an end and a definitive treaty 
concluded. The Bombay Government was thus left free to 
divert its energies to the Mysore war and to adopt the most 
effective plan of operations, namely to carry the war to the 