

The memoir? of de Canaple 2 gives a detailed account of 
French relations with Haidar from the landing of troops at 
Porto Novo in March to de Sulfrcirs meeting with the Mysore 
ruler in July. After the arrival of the French at Porto Novo 
in February, de Canaple and de Nfoissac were sent in company 
with Piveron de Mori at 10 the camp of Haidar. 1 hcv had 
instructions 'o recall to Haidar the past promises he had made 
to gain the military assistance of the French and to ask him to 
tonclude a definite treaty of alliance. Dc Canaple observed 
Lhat this insistence on a formal treaty before the commencement 
of military operations was indiscreet on the part of the French 
and was the fundamental source of all the later difficulties that 
beset them. "The Nawab replied to this address only in a 
vague way, assured M. de Piveron that he would furnish all the 
supplies required by the army, and added that such an im¬ 
portant treaty could not be concluded except between him and 
M Duchemin. He also gave orders to his Treasurer to send 

a lakh of rupees to the French army at Porto Novo. 

Next day he gave the French envoys leave to depart in a Darbai 


1 Joi: *nal dc Bossy, pp. m r.j. 
* Ibid,, pp. 114-125. 




mtSTQy 



j’HE T RENCH ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 


<SL 


ceremom where the I Vakils of the Mavatha Gouit and also of 
Nizam All were present. In order to impress these Wakils 
and to prevent their masters from entering into a treaty with 
the English. Haidar had previously prepared a speech to be 
delivered by the French envoys to the effect that the King of 
France had declared war on England to avenge the capture 
of Pondicherry and to free the Indian Powers from the yoke 
of the English. 

After the return of the French envoys, the troops, muni* 
tions and artillery were landed from the ships. Haiclai was 
anxious to see the French army commence operations imme¬ 
diately, but the disembarkation and the transport of gum 


along sandy roads naturally caused some delay, and in the 
meantime Duchemin sent two envoys again, his own hrothci 
de Chertneville and de Cana pie. to the camp of Haidar Ali 
“in order to conclude the treaty of alliance which his instruc¬ 
tions urged upon him peremptorily’, the envoys tried to 
persuade Duchemin to agree to some modifications of the terms, 
hut the latter replied that his instructions left him no discretion 
to alter them. Haidar Ali on his side felt irritated at the 1 rench 
General occupying himself with negotiations, when it was 
necessary to commence operations to take advantage of the 
consternation in the English army, and among the citizens of 
Madras. He made some indirect remarks on the subject to 
M. de Chenneville, who tried to make the Prince understand 
the necessity forcing Duchemin to that conduct. 

Negotiations were started between the French envoys and 
three Brahmin agents of the Durbar. Haidar agreed to all the 
French terms which related to the distribution of territories 
vet to be conquered, but when the question of the pay of the 
French arnn came up. he flatly refused to give more than a 
lakh of rupees per month for 3,000 Europeans and wanted 
an official list of all the officers and men together with their 
salaries. This demand amounted clearly to a suspicion of th( 
good faith of the French General, whose pretensions about the 
strength of the army and the expenses required lor it were not 
believed by Haidar. He expressed open derision for the French, 
and on being told that the latter intended u> inarch against 
Cuddalore, he simply remarked that it was an easy affair and 
that if he had known that the French wanted the plact he 