



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

Death of Duchemin—defence of his conduct. 

L'he letter of de Launay throws sufficient light on the 
relations between Haidar and the French army and explains 
the inactivity of the latter as against the general condemna 
tion of historians passed on Duchemin. In fact, the position 
of Duchemin was far from enviable. With barely 1,000 Euro 
pean troops fit for service, with no money and provisions, with 
the principal officers constantly quarrelling and intriguing, 
with no support or cooperation from Haidar, and finally with 
definite instructions from Souillac not to risk the small force 
in any encounter with the English before the arrival of Hussy, 
Duchemin could hardly be expected to work miracles and 
destroy the English power in south India. It was indeed for¬ 
tunate for Duchemin that he did not live long to suffer the 
distress of an intolerable situation, and soon death came to him 
as a relief. He had been lying seriously ill since June and 
breathed his last on the 12th August. 1 

There is an interesting letter from Duchemin’s secretary, 
Rohillard, to Souillac, dated 18th August.. Robillard wrote that 
on his death bed Duchemin had one regret only, that he had 
not been able to explain the difficulties of his position in detail 
to Souillac, and that was why he asked his secretary to corn 
irumicate his feelings to Souillac after his death. The first 
difficulty against which Duchemin had to contend was the 
spirit of jealousy and intrigue among his officers. The second 
difficulty was lack of money. Duchemin had been condemned 
by some for not having fortified Pondicherry in preparation 
for the arrival of Bussy. but none cared to enquire where the 
money was to come from for such an enterprise. Then again, 
he had been criticised for not having left the Coromandel Coast 
and gone to Trinkomali to secure a base there, but his critics 
overlooked the effect it would have produced on the future 
course of the war. Haidar would have concluded peace with 

1 Letter of MoiUvcrt from Cuddalore Journal de Bussy, p. 149; 
Journal de Bord du Builli de Suffren dans VInde, p. 174; Roux gives the 
date of Duchemin’s death as 13th September (JLc Baiili de Suffren dans 
Ctnde p p. 160) and Malleson repeats it ( Final French Struggles in India, 
p. 57). But the first two sources are obviously more reliable on this 
point. 





miSTQy 



THE french ARMY IN THE CARNATIC 


^English, and Bussy on his arrival would have found no 
landing base on the Coromandel Coast. Finally. Hudien 
2 reproached with timidity in keeping his army * 

Cuddalore, but what could he do in the face ol k h 

letter from Souillac, dated ,8th January ,78* V U ^ 
will be so much reduced m effective strength na 1 • 

he oossible to take the risk of any large-scale operations, and 
: ES&’-d. operations «, .HI be tonformtng .. the 

intern ion of Hi. wh. <’«*« "" "f 'eidel 

before the arrival of all the forces that u ha. Seel 

.,end. ’ Dud.emin could have justified h.s conduct by disc . 