

Thus in the memoir e of de Canaple we see another ver¬ 
sion of the conduct of the French army, different from the one 
usually given by historians, both English and French, who 
have condemned Duchemin rather severely for his timidity, 
his refusal to co-operate with Haidar and his failure to take 
advantage of the weakness of the English army before Wandi- 
wash, when the destruction of that army would have meant 
the end of the English power in south India. 1 De Canaple, 
being one of the envoys sent by Duchemin to negotiate with 
Haidar, may perhaps be accused of having given a rather one¬ 
sided picture with the intention of exculpating himself and his 
chief, Duchemin, of the charges of timidity and inaction, throw- 
ing the entire blame on Haidar for his refusal to accept the 
French terms and the co-operation offered by Duchemin. It 
is quite possible that de Canaple, being only human, tried to 
save the face of his countrymen by giving a somewhat coloured 
version of the relations with Haidar Ali. But, as w f e shall see 
later, even persons violently prejudiced against Duchemin and 

1 M a Meson f inal French Struggles in India, pp. 30-31. 


nil; FRKXCH IN INDIA 

failed to establish conclusively the charge of timidity 
a gainst them and. on the other hand agreed that the attitude 
ot Haidni towards the French wa- neither sincere nor friendly. 

When Hussy arrived in the Isle of France in June 1782, 
he received numerous reports about the bad conduct of Duche- 
miu and his officers. T here were two principal charges against 
hem. cupidity and inaction. About the first, Bussy wrote in 
his Journal : the cupidity shown by the principal officers, 
beginning with the Chief, must not only be displeasing to him 
(Haidar) but must also injure the interest of the army in rela 
non to a man like Haidar". 1 2 Again. 44 it will be difficult to 
make Haidar Ali forget the conduct of the General and of 
.jomc of the principal officers of our army, who by their shame 
ful cupidity have inspired in him the greatest distrust for the 
entile nation. Bussy stated that the opening of negotiations 
with (he french cost Haidar thirty thousand rupees paid to 
Duchemm, ten thousand to his brother do Chennevillc and 
two thousand to de Ganaple. 3 4 About the second charge, Bussy 
wrote to Marquis de Castries from the Isle of France, "You 
will be very much surprised to learn that the detachment 
landed under the command of Duchcmin has not fired a single 
shot and has left Haidar Ali to make his own campaigns with 
out offering him any troops. As a consequence, this Indian 
has conceived as much distrust of him as admiration for Mon. 
de Sufiren. and but for the latter and the news of my arrival 
in the isle of France Haidar Ali Khan would have long con 
eluded peace with the English."* 

IV. De Lannay sent by Hussy to negotiate with Haidar. 

Bussv was so furious at what he came to know about the 
conduct of the first expeditionary force that shortly after his 
arrival in the Isle of France lie sent de Launay as his personal 
agent to Haidar, with orders to Duchcmin to hand over the 
command to Uoffclize and return to Colombo. He sent similar 