

De Launay felt rather disappointed at the attitude of 
Haidar. “He seemed to me to be quite tired of the war, and 
the English were always in correspondence with him.”’ De 
Launay referred to a letter written by Sir Eyre Coote some time 
before with the object of detaching Haidar from his connection 
with the French, in which Cooie painted the French national 
character in the darkest colour. This letter was not without 
some effect on Haidar, as became evident when in a moment 


of anger, on the report of one of his men having been killed 
by a French soldier at Pondicherry, he read out Coote’s letter 
to Piveron de Morlat and observed bitterly that, he could nevei 


1 For she abortive negotiations started by Sir F.yre Coote see Secret 
Select Committee Proceeding, Fort William, 26th August (lonest 

Selections from Letters , Despatches etc.. Foreign Department , Government 
of Indio, III, pp. 885-895). 


WIN /STfo 



expect any good out of the French connection, and that the 
French were “a nation—frivolous, without character, and 
never keeping promises or faith when opposed to their interests . 
To de Lauiiay Haidar spoke in appreciative terns of the char¬ 
acter of Duchemin but referred to the army under him in the 
most derisive fashion. “What can be done with at most a 
thousand Europeans that you have at Cuddalere in a position 
to inarch, and even these hardly in a condition to make tapid 

inarches?. How can troops like them be opposed to those 

of the English who are always maintained in a perfect state 
and are able to march in one day what we could scarcely do in 
three?” Haidar definitely refused to plan any concerted mili¬ 
tary operations before the arrival of Bussy and urged de Launay 
repeatedly to write to Bussv to come as promptly as possible. 

In his report to Bussy de Launay described the miserable 
plight of the French army at Cuddalore, which lay entirely 
at the mercy of Haidar. The latter could at any moment 
reduce it to starvation by refusing to supply money or by 
leaving the Carnatic for the Malabar Coast, as he was actually 
contemplating, in which case the English could capture (,ud- 
dalore with ease. In a postscript de Launay referred to Haidar’s 
agent with the French army, Benaji Pandit, who had been in 
the pay of the English for fifteen years, and who was employed 
by Haidar deliberately to keep the door open for a compro¬ 
mise with the English. De Launay told, this agent that he 
strongly resented the disparaging remarks made by Haidar about 
French troops, and asked him to communicate it to his master. 
It produced some effect on Haidar, who invited de Launay to 
the Darbar next evening to meet three Maratha Wakils just 
arrived from Poona. At the Darbar he handed over a draft, 
on the model of which dc Launay was to write to Nana Phad- 
navis, and in order to impress the Maratha Wakils he asked 
de Launay to repeat all that he had said before about the 
intentions of the King of France with regard to Indian Princes 
and about the strength of the expeditionary force under Bussy. 
The Wakils expressed great admiration for Bussy, recalling 
his past exploits, and urged dc Launay to write to him to come 
without any loss of time. 