

IV. Departure f rom Paris'to arrival in ihe Isle of France . 

Let us now trace the course of events from the time of 
Bussy’s departure from France in November 1781 till his arrival 
ip India in March 1783. Fortunately for us, the task has 



bussy's expedition 

leen rendered quite easy by the existence of two most authentic 
sources, namely (he Journal de Bussy y published by Mart mean 
in 1932, and the voluminous correspondence of Bussy preserved 
in the Pondicherry Archives and forming one of the most 
important and complete collections of documents there. 1 The 
Journal is a detailed and precise diary of events from day to 
day, beginning from 13th November 1781 and ending on 31st 
March 1783. It was written in a style clear and direct, most 
characteristic of its author, who described the diary in the 
following terms while sending an extract from it to Marquis 
de Castries: “It is the depot of my actions, about which I must 
render account to the King, to his Minister and to the State. 
It is equally the depot of my thoughts, about which I do not 
have to render account in the same way, hut ir is a satisfaction 
for me to confide them to you.” 2 

Bussy left Paris on the 13th November 1781 and travelling 
via Bayonne and Madrid arrived at Cadiz, where he embarked 
on the Sami Michel ((>4) and started for India on the 4th January 
1782, accompanied hv the Illtistre (74) and a cutter, the Lizard 
(18). These ships were to have been joined at the island of 
Teneriffe in the Canaries by a second squadron under 
de Spulanges, escorting a large number of transport vessels, 
which had started from Brest on the tofh December. But the 
English fleet had kept a close watch on Brest, and on the 12th 
the French squadron was dispersed and forced back to port, 
13 or 14 of the transport ships being captured. 3 Unaware 
of this disaster, Bussy waited at Teneriffe for a few days, 11th 
to 16th January, and then started for the Cape of Good Hope, 
where he arrived on the 10th April. He remained there for 
nearly three weeks to make all necessary arrangements for the 
proper defence of the colony against any English attack and 
also to procure provisions. It will be remembered that France 
had already sent a body of troops under the command of Comte 
de Conway for the defence of the Cape. At the request of the 
Dutch Governor, Baron de Plettenberg, Bussy left 1,667 troops 


1 I*. A. mss. 3C9 to 398 (Bussy s letters before his arrival in India). 

2 Ibid, ms. 397 Bussy’s letter to Castries, 181I1 December 1781?. 

3 Soulanges once more started in AptiI 1782 but was again forced 
Iwk to Brest, 


lAINlSr^ 



there on the understanding that they would be sent to the 
Isle of France as soon as the immediate threat to th< colony 
was over. 1 


Ii was at the ( ape that Bussy came to know of the dispersal 
of the comoy which had started from Brest on the loth Decem¬ 
ber. ! wo of the ships belonging to this convoy, the Marquis 
dr Castries and the Xrptunc Royal, arrived at the Cape about 
the same time, carrying troops and munitions, which were 
landed, together with two detachments of the regiment of 
Modoc on board the Saint Michel and the Ulustre , foi the 
defence of the Dutch colony. In order to meet a deficiency in 
the mini her of the crew, the French took (5 Dutch sailors on 
condition of sending them hack from the Isle of France. 2 
On the 281I1 Bussy started from the Cape with his two ships, 
two transport vessels, and two Dutch vessels, the Indian and 
th Hnlavia, which also accompanied him to the Isle of France. 
Before his departure he wrote to the Dutch authorities at 
Batavia and in Ceylon, asking them for five million livres 
according to the Franco-Dutch arrangement made in Paris. He 
dso left detailed instruction* to the French agent at the Cape, 
Percheron, to make all necessary arrangements for the prompt 
departure for the Isle of France of the naval division under 
Peiuier which had started from Brest in February and was 
expected to arrive at t he Cape shortly/* 1 