


<* T*" • # •' v- 

1 \\ ilks- — Hit tor 1 > Mysoor, II, p. 178. Stuar{ proved to be an un¬ 
enterprising General. He failed to take advantage of tbc political tin- 
' ertainiv in itie enemy rarnp following the Midden death of Haidar. He 
d»d not begin to move til! January (1783) and then merely undertook the 
d< mi in non of the forts of Caranjoly and Wandiwash to prevent their 
falling into the hands of Ttpu. It was a most hasty action, specially at 
a lime when it wax quite apparent that the pressure on the Malabar 
fjiavt would inevitably draw Tipu out of the Carnatic. 

’ Journal de Russy, pp. 317-318. 

Macartney, Governor of Madras, gave a peace-feeler in February 
0783 ). There was an unofficial exchange of envoys, hut the negotia 

T 


Ml WSTffy 



No sooner had Fipu sent an advance party with a body of 
French troops to his western possessions than he began to show 
his determination to follow them himself with the rest of his 
army. It became increasingly difficult for the French to per 
suacle him to remain on the Coromandel Coast till the arrival 
of Bussy. Early in March de Launay came to Trinkomali to 
report the situation to de Suffren. 1 l)e Snffren at once sent de 
Moissac to Tipu to inform him of the imminence of Bossy's 
arrival and to persuade him to change his mind, but de Moissac 
could do nothing, as Fipu had already left the Coromandel 
Coast before he reached Cuddalore. Hoffeiize reported the 
matter to de Snffren in a letter dated Hth March.* He could 
not induce Fipu to change his mind, and all that lie could 
do was to get from him 4,000 sepoys and 8,000 cavalry to to 
operate with the French expeditionary force undei Bossy. Ht 
was told by Eipu that he had given orders to his officers to 
supply provisions and transports to the French army, but 
Hoffeiize doubled his sincerity and felt that the French could 
not expect anything from him. Deserted by 1 ipn all on a 
sudden and left with a small corps of 600 men, Hoffeiize with¬ 
drew in the direction of Cuddalore from the neighbourhood 
of Wandiwash, to wait there for the arrival of Bnss\. 


tion^ proved abortive (Wilks —History of Alysoor, II, pp« 254**55)* 
Macartney** move was strongly condemned by the Supreme Government 
in Calmtta—-Sec. Sol. Com. Proc., Fort William, nth March 1783 
(Forrest —f itters. Despatches etc. Foreign Department, Government of 
Indio, ill . pp. 9 *t* 9 *| 0 > 

1 Journal de Hussy, p. 316 (Be Suffren/s letter to Bossy, 9th March) 

2 lhid, pp. S 2 5'$* 6 ’ 


Ml NISTQy 


chapter xr 




B USSY’S EXPEDITION 
I, Hussy’s views on India : Af/t moire of ty-in* 

We have carried the story of French land and naval opera 
rions in India clown to the arrival of Hussy at Trinkomali in 
March 1783. At this point it is necessary to stop and turn 
back to trace the course of events since the first decision of 
the French Government to send an expeditionary force to India. 
It will be recalled that even before ihe outbreak of war between 
England and France in 1778, the French Government had 
started giving serious attention to the various cheines of dip 
lomatie alliances and military operations in India submitted 
by official and non-official agents. The new vigour in French 
policy, in contrast with the lethargy of the later days of Louis 
XV, became marked in 1777, when the Minister of Colonies, de 
Sartine, began to examine seriously the feasibility of putting 
into execution the plan submitted by Chevalier and Made* 
and actually sent out two agents to India, Saint-Lubin and 
Montigny, to see things at first hand and report. It was about 
this time that the Minister also sought the opinion of the old 
hero of the Deccan fame, Bussy, on the practicability of the 
various schemes submitted. The lengthy reply given by Bussy 
on that occasion constitutes an important historical document 
and is highly interesting, as giving us his detached and well- 
considered views on the possibility of restoring French influence 
in India long before he was called upon to assume command of 
an expeditionary force sent for the same purpose.' It is worth¬ 
while therefore to notice this reply of Bussy in some detail 
before taking up the actual story of the despatch of an expedi¬ 
tionary force to India under his supreme command towards 
the end of 1781. 