

A comparison between the tone of the two hicwoucs of 



MHtSTfty 



missy s F\rF.mnoN 


Sl 


7 ancl 17S1 is iignificant Although in both of them we 
notice a keen realisation of the immense difficulties that lav 
in the way of success, the tone in the second is dearly more 
diffident than in the first. Specially when the Minister made 
considerable reductions in the number of troops and in the 
amount of money demanded, it virtually took a wax all Hussy's 
enthusiasm for the project; and when he finally set out for 
India, he was actuated not so much b\ an expectation of win¬ 
ning glory as by a sense of duty and a spirit of lovallx to the 
king. Me undertook to lead the expedition with little enthu 
sias.ru and little confidence of success. 


Ilf. Royal Instructions to Bussy. 


Before we take up the actual story of Hussy's expedition 
from the time of his departure for India, it is nccessarv u> notice 
one more document of importance, nameh the Mnnoire of the 
King dated nth November 17X1. intended to serve as instruc¬ 
tions to Hussy, who was given the official designation of 
Lieutenant-General and Commander-in-Chief of dl the* land 
and naval forces beyond the Cape of Good Hope, 1 The 
mnnoire began with a statement of the reasons lor the despatch 
of the expeditionary force. "The formidable power which the 
English have created in India, the degree of strength which 
the riches they have acquired in that pan of the world have 
given them in Europe, and (mails the necessity of putting 
limits to the exclusive empire which that nation has specialh 
usurped in the Eastern waters, have determined the King to 
attack this power in the very centre of the empire it has 
created." 

The memoire next stated the desire of the King to con¬ 
centrate all authority in the hands of Hussy and to leave him 
absolute discretion in the conduct of operations. Division of 
power had led to evil consequences in the past, and in order 
to avoid them in future the King had decided "to place under 
the orders of sieur Marquis de Hussy all his possessions, his 
troops and his squadrons beyond the Gape of Good Hope. 
His Majesty leaves him full discretion in the matter of opera 


1 i*. A. ms. 330; .tiso B.N.F.Fi. (N.A.), 1)433 (p. 64). 



tions and of the arrangements to lie made; he will be free to 
employ the land and naval forces at his will and to direct them 
iri a manner which he may consider to be the most suitable for 
the interest and the glory of the armies of His Majesty. The 
knowledge which Marquis de Bussy has of the country and the 
state in which he may find India on his arrival will determine 
his operations; no fixed line of operations is laid down for him.” 

The object of the expedition was stated clearly in the 
imhnoire , as only liberating the Indian Princes from the 
yoke of the English and not making any territorial conquest. 
“Sieur Marquis de Bussy must have been informed that the' 
intention of the King is not to keep the conquests which his 
forces may make in India. He should make known this 
generous intention in advance, or at the time of disembarkation, 
and should declare to the Princes of the country that His 
Majesty will restore to the original owners tlie conquests which 
may be made from his enemies, and that his only object is to 
weaken the power of the English in India and to establish 
and preserve an equilibrium which will assure to these Princes 
the peaceful possession of their states. It is to he hoped that 
this demarche will induce the various riders to help the execu¬ 
tion of His Majesty’s views by creating diversions or by some 
other methods ” The memoire next referred to the amount of 
money and the number of troops given to Bussy for the expedi¬ 
tion. A sum of five million livres was paid in cash and an 
equal amount in bills drawn on the Dutch East India Company. 
Bussy w r as given 4,000 troops from France, to be reinforced by 
another 4,000 from the Isle of France, making a total of 8,000 
men. This number was considered adequate, since although 
the English had a much larger number of troops in India, the 
total number that they could concentrate at one particular 
place was not likely to exceed 4,000^ As against the sepoy 
force of the English, the French could expect assistance in 
men from the Marathas and Haidar Ali. 