

^ Bussy then repeated what he had stated in 1777, that the 
French must arrive' in India fully equipped for carrying on 
operations independent, of the help of any Indian Prince, as it 
was then only that their alliance would be eagerly sought by 
the country Powers. “The more humiliated we have been in 
this part of the world, the more indispensable is it that we 
should come back in a state sufficiently imposing to make our 
alliance desired by the Princes of the country, in place of having 
to turn to them ourselves or begging for financial help, specially 
during the earlier stages. It is necessary that we should appear 
as their protector in place of being their proteg6, since in the 
latter case we arc sure to be treated with contempt by nations 
who base their conduct, their confidence and their esteem 
entirely on fears or hopes.” As an instance ol what little 
financial assistance could be expected from Indian Primes, 
Bussy pointed out that Najaf Khan had written to Chevalier 
for an advance of 50 lakhs of rupees to commence operations 
against the English. The only two Powers who could afford to 
give financial help to the French were the Marathas and Haidar 
Ali. But “the former only took and never gave mom ..’ and 
if by accident Haidar agreed to supply money, the French must 
place themselves under his control and conduct their operations 
to suit his own interests. 

Bussy next gave his opinion about the object that France 
should sc?, before herself in undertaking the Indian enterprise. 
It was only to destroy the English power in India, and not to 
build up a territorial empire for herself. He expressed him* 
self in favour of returning the possessions to be conquered 
from the Engli h to their original rulers. “By such a policy, 
worthy of the generosity, greatness and sense of justice of the 


WNfS7ft. 


Tilt FRENCH IN INDIA 

wc shall win as iuntil as possible the gratitude and aftach- 
incnt ol tlu* Asiatics and we shall gain allies who mu\ i>c* able 
10 llc, P ,,s to achieve success under die present circumstances.” 
Hm while advocating the general principle ol retiirtiing all 
conquests to their original owners. Bussy urged ihe importance 
of t eta in ling some territorial possessions round each French 
settlement in India in ordet to procure sulhcicut revenue lor 
its administrative and military expenses. 

l*or success in the enterprise' Bussy lead demanded eight to 
lime th ousand troops and ten million livres net to meet the ex¬ 
penses alter his arrival in India, The number ol troops and the 
amount of money constituted the barest minimum. The 
English had the same number of European troops in India, 
besides 70,000 well-trained sepoy . an element which the French 
lacked entirely. Bussy also wanted at least equality in naval 
sUength with the English. 1 he Minister, however, decided 
on considerable reductions both in the number of troops and 
in the amount ol money. In his uttnionc Bussy gave his replies 
to the proposals oi the Minister, stating definitely that in view 
ol the reductions made, he could not guarantee any success, but 
could only assure the best possible utilisation of the wholly 
inadequate means given to him lor the Indian enterprise. The 
Minister proposed to give six to seven thousand men, naval 
superiority in Indian waters, and absolute authority to Bnssy 
beyond the Cape ol Good Mope. Half the sum demanded for 
the expenses of the operations in India would be paid in cash 
and 1 he other hall in bills drawn on the Dutch Company at 
Batavia. Bussv replied that after the reductions proposed by 
the Minister, it would no longer be possible to attack am ol 
(Ik three principal settlements of the English. Calcutta. Bombay 
and Madias. Can anybody with six to seven thousand men. 
without allies and without any base delude himself with the 
hope oi being able to capture places furnished with all kinds 
oi provisions and protected bv three thousand Europeans' and 
a large number of sepoys? Bussy did not like to fix any point 
ot attack or lay down any definite plan of operations in advance, 
and concluded his nuf moire bv stating that “all that can be 
promised is to make the best use possible of the means that 
the Government will be in a position to furnish. ’ 