

\noihei possible ally was his brother, Ba salat Jang, who 
had in liis service a well-disciplined French corps of three to 
four hundred men. “He is soliciting help from us. but in 
spite of his offers and promises he is in such financial distress 
that even more than his brother, Nizam Ali, far from being 
able to supply us money, he is in need of financial help from 
us.’ He wanted a body of French troops and in return he 
agreed to cede the Sarkar of Condavir to the French, but Bussv 
was of opinion that the possession of Condavir, near Mnsuli- 
patam under English control and 130 leagues from the Nawab’s 
principal territory, would be inconvenient for the French, 
Hussy, however, thought it proper to maintain friendly relations 
with Basalat Jang, who would at least be useful in supplying 
provisions and pack animals. But he was against the idea of 
maintaining small contingents with numerous Princes, who 
might be involved in hostilities among themselves. Moreover, 
in ease France was engaged in large-scale military operations in 
India, not much effective assistance could be expected from 
these small contingents in the service of the Indian Princes, 
and their union with the French expeditionary force would be 
positively harmful, in spreading the contagion of indiscipline 
and desertion. The French could expect some help front the 
N a walls of Cuddapah, Savanur, Bankapur and Kurnooi. I hr 
Pat bans of those regions constituted first-class lighting mate 
rial, and with money the French Could procure a few thousand 
horsemen from among them. 

About Haidar Ali, Bussv stated that he would have been 
the principal ally of the French “for his riches anil the position 
of hi* dominions, if reliance could have been placed on this 


miSTQy 



Mohammedan, who loves money more than anybody else, and 
thinks of nothing but his own interests, to which he is prepared 
to sacrifice everything.” However, it was necessary to keep 
him friendly, since he would be positively dangerous as an 
enemy. As regards Muhammad Ali, Nawab of the Carnatic, 
who was completely under the control of the English, it was 
quite possible through secret negotiations to win him over to 
i he French side by an assurance of restoring him to full sovei• 
cignty over the Carnatic. One great difficulty for the French in 
winning over Nizam Ali, Basalat Jang, Haidar Ali and Muham¬ 
mad Ali to their side was that all of them coveted the possession 
of the Carnatic, and it would be bad faith to promise the same 
thing to all. But through skilful negotiations it was not im¬ 
possible to find out some accommodation among them, specially 
if the French assured full support to the ambitions of the Inst 
three Princes in other directions. 

The Power whose alliance would be most valuable to the 
French was the Maratha Confederacy. “The Maratha nation 
to-day dominates the whole of the Mughal Empire. I had 
predicted this predominance as early as 1 753 * a * so 
decadence of the Mughals in the south of the peninsula, as may 
be ascertained clearly front my correspondence with Dupleix. 
Since then I advised preference for an alliance with the 
Marathas to that with Muslims. Such a policy deserves all the 
more attention on our part, since one of the principal chiefs of 
the Marathas is seeking our alliance and their own interests 
seem to accord well with ours. It is all the more import an > 
to attach the Marathas to us. since if they went against us it 
would bo difficult for us to procure all the supplies necessary 
for the success of our operations." Bussy was in favour ol an 
alliance with the Marathas only for political and military 
reasons and not commercial. The Marathas being a community 
of only warriors and cultivators, there was little scope for trade 
and commerce in their dominions. The principal interests of 
the Marathas, where they came in conflict with the English, 
were to free the Raja of .Tanjore, one of their race, from the 
yoke of the English, and to levy Chouth in the Carnatic, the 
Orissa Coast and in general in all the territories tinder English 
control. By giving definite assurances on these matters, the 
French could without much difficulty attach the Marathas to 