


Roux — Le bailli dr Suffrcti dam l‘I tide, j p. 168-16<*. 




miSTffy 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

IVTalabar possessions •( I ipu and thereby lorce. him out 
Carnatic to defend his own dominions. An expeditionary 
force under Matthews was landed at Rajainutidroog at the 
month of the Mirjy, and early in >7^3 it captured in quick 
succession nearly all the strongholds of the Mysore Nawab, 
Onore, Bednore Mangalore etc., encouraging all the disaffected 
elements to rise in revolt against the Nawab s rule.' 

The news of these startling reverses naturally alarmed 
Tipu and inclined him to leave die Carnatic ancl hasten to 
defend his own dominions. That, however, would have meant 
the extinction of the small French army at Cuddalore and the 
loss of the only landing base on the Coromandel Coast for the 
expeditionary force under Bussy expected to arrive shortly. It 
was therefore as much important to the French that. I ipn 
should remain on the Coromandel Coast till the arrival of 
H lISS y as it was to Tipu himself to hasten back to his own 
territories. We have seen already that when the French squa¬ 
dron lnv at Porto Novo on its return from Achin, 1 .veron tie 
Morlat came to meet de Suffren on the 15th February and asked 
him to write to Tipu to induce him to remain on the eastern 
coast till the arrival of Bussy. Tipu was to be tolcl not to feel 
extremely concerned over the temporary loss ol his western 
territories and he was to be assured full military help by the 
French to reconquer them after the arrival of Bussy s expedi¬ 
tionary force.’ De Suffren accordingly wrote a _ pressing letter 
to Tipu, but it couM hardly produce any efl in the face of 
the rapid successes of the Fnglish and the ui. rtamtv of the 
time of Bossy's arriv "* 

Shortly before he <>ok his dec; • '"ave the Coroman¬ 
del Coast. Tipu one, formed a project oi , -1 clung against 

Wandiwash and encountering the English army, under Stuart 
who had moved to that place to destroy its fortifications. But 
in spite of all the persuasions of Hoffclize to make a rapid 
match and draw the enemy, to an action, the slow movement 
of Tipu allowed Stuart sufficient time to withdraw from Wandi- 




t Wilks —Hnlory of Mysoor, II, pp. soo *09. 

2 Journal (if Nor,I r/u Hailii tic Suffren. p. 2*5. 


misTfy 



THE FRF.\Cl1 ARMY IN 1HF CARNATIC 


<SL 


;ilt«r completing his wort of destruction. 1 Commenting 
on this affair. Hoffeli/c wrote tode Suffren on February as. "I 
believed for a moment that the Na wall would take a deter¬ 
mined and vigorous resolution and that we would at last decide, 
at little Cost, the result of the campaign in this part of the 
country; hut the Nawab is absoiuteh worthless. He has not 
ibe least military conception, and all that I could do was to 
prevent his Might at the approach of the enemy. I be KngliMi 
on their side were very much embarrassed. It appeared mi from 
their destruction of Wand i wash and their withdrawal from the 
place,'’ 


In the same letter Hoffeli/c reported that shortlv after this 
incident I ipu took his decision to leave the Coromandel Coast 
lor his western possessions and on the 20th February sent hall 
the army in advance. He also pressed Hoffeli/c to lend bint 
a body of French troops, and the latter was obliged under the 
circumstances to give him (*>o men belonging to the regiment 
of the Isle of France under the command of de Cossigny. fhc 
French troops started on their march on the 23rd to join the 
advance party sent by Fipii. Hoffeiize was left with barely boo 
men, but he got an assurance from the Nawab that ho himself 
with the rest of his army would remain on the eastern roast 
till the arrival of Bussy. But Hoffeli/c felt sceptical about 
the value of the Nawab.s assurance. Tipu had decided to send 
PiYeron de Morlat to Trinkomali to hasten the arrival of 
Bttssy, but Hoffeli/c suspected that it was just a pretext to get 
Ptyeron out of u way, so as to be better, able to carry on 
negotiations wit ne English. The latter had made favourable 
proposals, whirl the Nawab had not kept concealed from 
Hoffelize.* 