

Bussy began his observations with a scathing criticism of 

1 B.N.F.Fr, 8985 —Reflexions de Bussy str I’Etat des Affaires dans 
Unde (also published in Mariineau’s Journal de Bussy, pp. 1551* 17a). 


• G <W 



the various schemes submitted for diplomatic alliances and 
mi!it.us operations in India. Most of the mtmoire.s and pro 
jet ts relating to our establishments in Asia, which have been 
presented to the Minister, have been dictated by ignorance. 
cupidiiN or the extreme need for some employment, no matter 
at what price. Onlv the advantages of a plan or of an evpedi 
tion are shown, without any mention of the difficulties, which 
are either overlooked or purposely concealed. Without an 
adequate knowledge of the true politics of Indians, of their 
diverse interests, and of their manners and customs, these 
people assume thorn to he similar to ours, and on that illusory 
basis they construct a system absolutely unreal. M As against 
the reckless optimism and contidence of the persons who had 
submitted schemes to the Minister, Hussy struck a note of 
warning, pointing out the immense difficulties that lay in the 
wav. “We must not cherish any illusion. The reestablish 
men! of our position in India is ver\ difficult, very expensive, 
and the result doubtful, if sufficient means are not employed, 
i n present this enterprise in any other light is to deceive the 
King and the Minister.” Most of the persons who had sub 
nutted plans claimed to speak from local experience, but their 
knowledge was confined to the geography of the various parts 
of India, which was much Icsn important than the knowledge 
“of the different interests of the \siatit Princes, the intrigues 
in their Dnrbai s or councils, their secret dissensions, then 
inconstantv, their ever-changing views and jhojects. their lavish 
but empty promises, then continuous wars and momentary 
treaties, the interests which divide or unite them, and the 
possibility or impossibility of moving them to action either in 
concert or separately." Hussy then .stated that for the gitid 
auce of the Minister he was giving a true account of the politi¬ 
cal conditions in India, based on his own knowledge of the 
various matters mentioned above. 

It was true that all the Primes of India were tired of 
English control and were anxious for an opportunity to shake 
off iheir yoke, but they would not make any move at all untd 
they saw. another European Power taking the Held against the 
common enemy with equal military strength. In the meantime 
the English were gradually expanding their power in north 
India. It seemed only a matter of time when they would he 


miST/fy 





'JBIe to reduce even the Mughal Fmpcror to the position of flic: 
Nawab ol the Carnatic, and that would email the virtual 
expulsion of the French from the country. In the Deccan the 
English had concluded a very favourable treaty with Ni/am Ali 
on the basis of the cession of the Northern Sarkars to them. 
Ni/am Ali was in too uneasy a position because of lack of 
money and constant fear of Marat ha aggression to be of much 
help to the French. The only way of bringing him to the side 
oi the French was to advance him money and assure him of 
the restoration of the Carnatic, which originally formed a part 
of his Viceroyaliv 