

When the expedition had been decided upon and Bussy 


mtsTfy 


-v\Rt ■ Go?-. 



had been invited to assume command, lie gave expression to 
his views, in a mSmoire. to the Minister, on the Indian political 
situation and on his poor chance of .success in view of the reduc¬ 
tion made by the Minister in the numbejr of troops and the 
amount of money demanded by him 1 Yl is worthwhile analy- 
iug this document to know the views of Hussy just on the eve 
of his departure from France. As in the rnemoire of 1777, 
Bussy again severely criticised the irresponsible persons who 
had represented to the Minister the ease with which the pro¬ 
jected Indian expedition could be brought to success. “I have 
always been surprised and sometimes made furious by the absurd 
iictions that had been submitted to the Minister both as 
regards the certainty of an easy success of an expedition 
undertaken with poor means, and as regards the assistance of 
every kind that could be expected from Asiatic Powers, consider¬ 
ing the promises made by these Indians, false and light-hearted 
people and friends of hyperbole, who give definite promises 
about everything, men, money etc., without having the capacity 
or frequently even the will to keep them. I have therefore no 
hesitation in stating that the only factors which have prompted 
these fanciful projects are ignorance, cupidity or the extreme 
need of getting employment, no matter at what price.” 

Hussy next compared the relative positions of the English 
and the French in India, in order to bring out dearly (lie 
difficulties (hat lay in the way of the successful execution of 
any of the projects. “The English possess there large territorial 
revenues, sonic very strong forts in all parts of the peninsula, 
fully provided with all things necessary, a large number of 

native troops, very well disciplined. The French arc 

destitute of everything, and the Powers whose alliance wc could 
have counted upon and who arc supposed to be at war with our 
enemies may be at peace with them today.” Hussy was refer- 
ring to the Marathas and Haidar AH. He then warned that 
not much help could be expected from the Dutch. ‘‘Vexed and 
humiliated by the English in India for a long time, they yet 
seem to prefer them to us.” The task before the commander of 
an expeditionary force was very heavy and onerous; it included 

1 ‘lhe tnetnoire has been published by Martineau as Preface to ihc 
Journal dc Bussy , pp. if9. 



Ml Nlsrfy 



bussy s Extern rioN 


<8L 


sislencc of the army, the formation of alliances, ihc prr 
vention of intrigues and treacheries quite common in the 
Indian Durban, the protection of the possessions of the 
Kuropcan allies, the planned and concerted conduct of naval 
and land operations so as lo conquer from the English their 
vast possessions and to assure a peace which would put both 
tlic nations on a footing „of equality in India, “ lo present 
this enterprise as easy and capable of being executed with 
feeble means is to deceive the King, ill Nation and the 
Ministers.” 