



BUSSV S EXPEDITION 295" 

tliciTside. 11 • c Marathas were divided into two sections, the 
principal group living near the Malabar Coast and the othci 
belonging to Berar and Cuttack, it was from the former that 
the French had received some overtures for an alliance, and 
Bussy advised the opening of immediate negotiations. The 
first thing to be done lo win over the Marathas was to give a 
solid assurance about the levying of Chouth in all the terri¬ 
tories to be conquered from the English. 

An alliance with the Marathas was absolutely necessary, 
since it would provide the French the most convenient point 
for starting their operations against the English. “Either in 
order to find a base of operations, Pondicherry being of no use 
for the purpose, or forced by other circumstances, it may so 
happen, it may even be more advantageous to begin our opera¬ 
tions on the Malabar Coast, by landing our forces in the neigh 
bourhood of Bombay so as to be able to be quickly joined by 

the Marathas of that region.Bombay could be 

captured from the English even before our junction with the 

Marathas. This success..would decide all the Powers 

in out favour, besides giving us an excellent base for our 

troops as well as for our fleet.From there our 

army will march with the Maratha allies towards the Coro 
mandel Coast, collecting on the way the contingents of several 
small chiefs, Muslim and Maratha, and specially of Basalat 
Jang. The whole will constitute a formidable army with which 
to invest Madras. Through a combined move our fleet will 
also arrive there at the same time, ft tnay be confidently 
expected that the investment of the town from all sides will 
assure us victory/' 

An alliance with the other group of Marathas, namely ol 
Berar and Cuttack, would also be of great use to France if she 
“accepted the offer, made by the Emperor of Delhi, of the 
occupation of Tatta. From there it would be easy (if the 
journey be at all practicable) to join our forces with those of 
the Emperor with the object of making a joint attack on 
the English (in Bengal) and putting them between our com¬ 
bined forces and those of the Marathas (of Berar and Cuttack)/* 
Bur about the feasibility of the Tatta project Bussy felt quite 
diffident. In the first place, the French would have to acquire 
the province of Tatta by force of arms, which would entail a 





MIN/STy^ 


• COi/- 



huge expenditure, since no revenue could be expected from the 
territory till the conquest was complete. In the second place, 
from Tatta about 1,000 French troops would be despanhed to 
Delhi to join the Emperor. But this number, reinforced b\ 
,000 sepovs as suggested by Made and Chevaliei, would be 
wholly inadequate in a war with the English. In the third 
place, the troops despatched to Delhi were likely to be 
employed in operations against the recalcitrant vassals ol the 
Emperor, who was more interested in consolidating his position 
round Delhi than in sending an expedition to distant Bengal. 
Bussv therefore suggested that France should ally herself with 
those Powers who would give her effective help to achieve a 
quick victory, rather than embark on an enterprise where 
success was so distant and uncertain. At the same time he 
advised that the offer of the Emperor should not be rejected 
straightway. On the other hand, the Emperor should be kept 
favourably inclined with an encouraging reply. 