

yfor success in the projected expedition to India, two things 
were of fundamental importance: first, diplomatic negotiations 
must precede military operations: and second, the French 
^expeditionary force must arrive in India in sufficient strength 
^ and with adequate money and munitions so as not to be 
dependent on the assistance of any Indian ally from the begin 
ning. <s/The more we have been humiliated in thi> part of the 
world, the more indispensable it is, if we come back here with 
die intention of re*cstablishing ourselves, to be in a position 
when mu alliance would be sought by others rather than us 
begging for their assistance; to be their protector instead of 

being their protege. It is infinitely better not to make 

am attempt than to do it in a half hearted way. As regards 
the details of military operations in India, Bussy did nut like to 
fix any definite plan in advance* “lit Asia the scene is so 
quick h changing that the interests of the Powers and the state 
of aha i s vary from dav to day. l ines operations must be 
guided by the actual circumstances at the lime*’ 

4 fu$$v ended his tnemoire with a warning that whether the 
v s English met with success or failure in north America, dies 
are sure to turn their attention to India and send stronger 
forces there in order to consolidate their position and to coni 
pen sate themselves either for the loss of their American colonies 



WiN/sr^ 



BUSSV 5 EXPEDITION 


§L 


the expenses jneutral in subjugating them: and that 
)v the end for ever of all out hopes of establishing mu 


position in India.” He therefore urged upon the Minister the 
luxessitA of seizing. »lit* opportunity offered b\ the American 
war and striking agaitist^Jthc English power in India without 
any loss of time. 


II. /bevvy A appointment to com mat hi the cxpetl it lotto n 
force: Ate moire of /7<Vr. 


We have noticed the views <>l Bossy, expressed in 1777. 
regarding the possibilities of French military operations in 
India and the factors necessary for success* It cannot be defi¬ 
nitely ascertained what impression Bussy's nuhnoirc produced 
on the Minister, and whether he had been tipped from that time 
to take the command of the expeditionary force proposed to 
be sent out to India. The thing was that although the french 
Government seemed to have been seriously contemplating the 
adoption of one or other of the various plans submitted lot 
military operations in India, nothing came out in a concrete 
form, and its policy continued to be vacillating nd half hearted. 

Milieu hostilities broke out between England and France earlv 
in 1778, not only had France taken no decision about the* 
despatch of an expeditionary force, even the ordinary precau¬ 
tions about the safety of her Indian possessions had been 
neglected, with the result that within a few months all ol them 
fell into the hands of the English, and the French did not 
have a single landing base in India. I hroughout 1770*80 
France concentrated alt her attention on tin American thcatir, 
and it was not till 1781 that she took the decision which she 
should have taken three years earlier, to send a strong expedi¬ 
tionary force to India. It was only natural that Hussy should 
have been invited to assume the command ol the expeditionary 
force, as none else in France could claim the same halo ol 
military success in India. No doubt he had grown too old and 
had been living in France for twenty years in virtual retire¬ 
ment, but nevertheless his very name was expected to appeal to 
the Indian Princes, whose alliance was necessary lor the success 
of the enterprise. 