


Vfll. Departure from the Isle of France. 


Fho epidemic of scurvy which had upset the plans of Bussy 
and had prolonged his stay in the Isle of France began to 
subside by the beginning of November, and from the middle 
of the month Bussy started making preparations for his 
departure. The disease had taken a heavy toll, and Bussy had 
at his disposal only 11,275 troops, including those who were still 
l)ing in hospital and not likely to be released for some time. 
In order to make up this deficiency he decided to take some men 
from the regiment of the Isle of France, whose place would 
be taken by the troops to be left behind in hospital. Thus 
die total number that Bussy could take with him remained 
'■*75 About a month was taken up by necessary preparations, 
and on the nth December Bussy gave his final instructions to 
Peinier for departure on the tSth. The destination laid down 


1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 228-231. 
- Ibid, pp. 237*238. 


&USSY*S EXPEDITION 

was Achin where de Suffren was expected to be wintering his 
ships, but in case Peimcr did not find dc Suffren\s squadron 
there he was to proceed to Trinkornaii. 1 Before finally embark 
ing on the Pendant on the 18th, Bussy left detailed instructions 
fur Souillac about sending the later convoys of troops that: 
might arrive in the Isle of France. 2 Although short of troops 
himself, Bussy did not like to withdraw the regiment of Pondi¬ 
cherry from the Cape of Good Hope, where it. was needed not 
so much for the defence of the colony as lot maintaining 
French influence at that strategic point, the Dutch authorities 
being rather lukewarm in their co-operation with the French. 

Bussy left the Isle of France without much hope or con 
fidence. He appeared quite diffident about the future and 
wrote in his journal : “At. last i am embarking today at five 
in the afternoon, a convalescent, and yet much weak, from a 
cruel illness lasting for more than five months, which on several 
occasions appeared to carry me to the grave. It is certain that 
placed in my situation most other persons would not have 
proceeded further. But the confidence with which the King 
has honoured ine, the favours which His Majesty has granted 
me, the noble dealings of the Ministers, and finally the 
importance which has been attached to the expedition entrusted 
to me have determined me to sacrifice the little health that I 
still retain and to start for India in spite of the paucity of my 

present resources. In fact nearly all the two thousand 

and two hundred men 1 am taking with me have suffered from 
a pestilential malady which has completely wasted their vitality. 
Most of them arc still convalescents; the voyage that I have 

to make is long.; the malady may develop again.; 

and when I shall arrive at my destination 1 shall find there a 
thousand men at the most, because in forming a guess from 
the various reports received.the troops under the com¬ 

mand of d’Hoffelize. without including those distributed among 
the ships of the squadron, may at best come up to this number. 
It should be noticed that these forces are far below the number 
stipulated in my instructions, which fixed the number of troops 
that I was to have at io,5(X); this being reduced by ship 