

1 journal dc Hussy t p. 105. 

2 Ibid, p. 106. 

! Ibid. pp. 140*147 (ihe letter has been noticed already). 




misT*), 



BUSSY S EXPEDITION 


<SL 


capture of Trinkomali and the fourth combat with the 
English fleet on the 3rd September. 1 The capture of ITinko- 
rnnli was no doubt extremely happy news, but de Suffrcn 
was in great need of further reinforcements, particularly in view 
of the imminence of Biker ton’s junction with Hughes. On the 
5th November there reached another letter from de Suffrcn to 
Sou iliac, informing him of his extremely critical position and 
of his imminent departure for Achin. where he expected to he 
joined by Bussy. 2 3 Early in December while Bussy was in the 
midst of preparations for departure from the Isle of France 
there arrived several letters from India, all written about the 
middle of October, from de Launay, Hoffelize, Mottais de 
Narbonne and a private Frenchman, describing the pitiable 
state of the French army at Cuddalore, without money, without 
provisions, and shabbily treated by Haidar Ali.‘ 

On the 7th November Bussy received a packet of letters 
from the Minister, Marquis de Castries, written between Decem¬ 
ber 1781 and June 1782. One of these, dated *6th February, 
communicated to him the substance of a plan of operations in 
India proposed by Chevalier to the Minister. Jt was the old 
plan of Chevalier, namely an attack on Bengal by French forces 
from the south and by the Imperial array under Najaf Khan 
from the north. Bengal was the vital centre of English power 
and prosperity, and once Bengal had fallen, Madras and Bombay 
could not resist very long. So Chevalier suggested that Busss 
should lead his expeditionary force straight to the mouth of 
the Ganges for an attack on Bengal. He took good care to 
make some provision for himself in the plan. In order to 
make a concerted attack on Bengal with the help of Najaf Khan, 
it was necessary to send a diplomatic agent to Delhi to conclude 
a treaty of alliance with the Emperor, and Chevalier considered 
himself as the most qualified person for such a mission in view 
of his title of Mughal nobility and his long experience in India. 
He was prepared to undertake the mission provided he was 
given a high official status to impress the Indian Princes. In 
sending the proposal of Chevalier to Bussy, the Minister 


1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 178-187. 

2 Ibid, p. 225. 

3 Ibid, pp. 289-294. 


misr/fy. 



THE FRENCH JN INDIA 


<SL 


plained dial lie did it only for the consideration ol Buss) 
and that he had not the 'lightest intention to impose any 
particular plan of operations on him. 

About the plan of Chevalier, Bussy wrote in his Journal 
that from the time of his departure from France he had given 
serious consideration to it, but it appeared to him as extremely 
difficult of execution. On his arrival in the Isle of France, 
he had written to Montigny to negotiate with the Imperial 
Coin: and had also charged do Launay to write to Najaf Khan. 
But there were insurmountable difficulties in the way of the 
execution of the plan. It was impossible lor the large ships 
ol the French squadron to move up the Ganges, nor did the 
French have country boats to transport their artillery front the 
mouth of the river. Secondly, the plan required a decided 
n.ual superiority for the French and mastery of the Coast of 
Oiissa for an easy transport of troops. Regarding the value 
of Chevalier s title of Mughal nobility, Bussy regarded it as 
entirely chimcrcial, and he was definitely of opinion that with¬ 
out an assistance of money and troops it was impossible lo 
induce Najaf Khan to co-operate with the French. 1 