

On the 7th July Bussy came to learn of the arrival of 
Peinicr’s convoy at the Cape of Good Hope on the jqth May. 
From there Peinier had sent a ship, the Naiade , in advance to 

1 Journal clc Hussy, pp. 49-52 (Views of Bubsy and Souillac .about pobt- 
poning B ussy’s departure for India). 




Nil UlSTftr 


THF FRENCH IV JNDrA 

the Isle of France to announce his intention of leaving the 
( * a P e about the beginning of July. The captain of the Naiade 
informed Bussy about the widespread outbreak of disease among 
•he soldiers and sailors, which compelled Pejnier to land 1,300 
sick persons at the Cape. It was a great disappointment for 
Hussv, who was waiting only for the arrival of Peinier’s convoy. 
A few days later he also learnt that the second convoy, which 
was to start from Brest in March, was expected at the Cape 
shortly, but since he had decided to leave the Isle of France 
immediately on the arrival of Peinier's convoy and had already 
sent instructions to de Suffren to meet him at Achin, he 
despatched a corvette, the Helene, to the Cape to conduct the 
second convoy straight to Achin. 1 On the 29th July there 
arrived about 1,500 uoops, of whom more than a thousand had 
to be sent straight to hospital. 2 * Peinier with the rest of the 
convoy arrived on the 15th September. The condition of the 
later arrivals was equally bad, and altogether about 1,800 men 
had to be kept in hospital. The disease among the troops 
uas mainly scurvy which broke our in an epidemic form and 
took a hesivy toll. It continued in an intense form till Novem¬ 
ber and completely upset all the plans of Bussy, who himself 
fell so seriously ill as to cause great anxiety about his life 4 
To add to his difficulty,, the Governor of the Cape refused to 
send back the French troops temporarily lent by Bussy for the 
defence of the colony. 5 

Thus in spite of die arrival of Peinier’s convoy. Bussy 
was compelled by the unfortunate turn of affairs to remain in 
virtual inactivity till the end of November, as it was obviously 
out of the question to lead an expedition to India with sick 
‘Old dying troops. However, the four months from August to 
November were not totally wasted. There was much to he 

1 Journal de Bussy , pp, 56-57. The second convoy under de Soulanges 
st01 ted from Brest; in April But was intercepted by Barrington and forced 
b.»*k to port. \o further attempt was made to send reinforcements to 
Bossy. 

* Ibid, p. 59. 

• P. A. ms. 390-— Bussy to Cnmvay, 25th September, 17Ki*. A much 
higher ntiniljer of ihe sick, 2.700, is given in the Journal de Buss y tinder 
date September 29 (p. 132). 

4 Journal dr Butty t f»6. 

IV A. ms. 3H2 — Bussy'* letter to Castries 9th July. 1762. 






hussy's expedition 



§L 


nc to reorganise the commissariat, to settle the question of 
pay and clothings ol: the officers and men, to procure provisions, 
and to look to other matters connected with fitting out an 
expeditionary force. In spite of his ill-health Bussv showed 
uncommon activity in tackling these various problems, and the 
pages of his Journal offer the best testimony to the sympathetic 
care and meticulous attention he paid to the minutest details. 
What is frequently overlooked behind the glory or the tragedy 
of a military expedition is the importance of this silent and 
patient work of preparation, which in reality should redound 
to the credit of a commander to the same extent as a brilliant 
victory in the field. Thus, although it is out of place here 
to go into the details of the administrative decisions and 
measures taken by Bussy, nobody who wants to form a correct 
appreciation of the qualities of Bussy as a general can overlook 
tlie pages of his Journal dealing with the little known work of 
preparation between August and November. 