

V. ] rural n the Isle of France Despatch of a personal 
^presentalive to Haidar and of reinforcements to 
de Stiff ren . 

Bussy arrived in the Isle of France on the 31st May. He 
had learnt, while at the Cape, of the despatch of the first 
expeditionary force to India under Duchemin. His original 
intention was to stav in the Isle of France onlv for a short 
while and to proceed to the actual theatre of operations without 
•u \ unnecessary delay. Flic news he received on his arrival in 

1 1 \ nis. 471 (Bnssy's letter to Castries, 17111 April 1782), ms, $73, 
(let 1* r to IMetwnhei!*, 18th April). 

* Driti. iik, (Bussy‘s truer to I'lettcnberg, 24th April, 1782). 

Journal dr Hussy, pp. 23*^5. 


miSTffy 



the Isle of France about India convinced him of the immediate 
necessity of his presence there. But unfortunately for him, 
his plan was totally upset by two unforeseen factors; first, his 
own serious* illness which at one time seemed to turn fatal; 
and second, the long delay in the arrival of troops transported 
by the convoy under Peinier and then the outbreak of disease 
among the troops, which sent more than half the number to 
hospital immediately on arrival. That was why, in spite of 
the urgency of the Indian situation and much against his will, 
Bussy was compelled to prolong his stay in the Isle of Frame 
till December. 

On his arrival in the Isle of France Bussy was informed 
by Sou iliac about the development of events in India since 
the despatch of the first expeditionary force,—the two naval 
combats engaged by de Suffren, the losses he had sustained and 
the immediate need in which he stood of reinforcements of 
men, money and munitions, the inactivity of the army under 
Duchemin, the greed of the officers and their mutual jealousies 
and intrigues, and finally the cold relations between Haidar 
Ali and the French expeditionary force. Souillac was in the 
midst of making preparations for sending reinforcements to 
de Suffren when Bussy arrived. While continuing that work, 
Bussy felt it necessary to take some immediate step to improve 
the political situation in India by announcing to the country 
Powers his imminent arrival with a formidable army, and 
specially by Hying to undo the bad impression created in the 
mind of Haidar by the conduct of the commander and other 
officers of the first expeditionary force. For that purpose he 
derided to send de Launay, the Gommissaire of the army, to 
India as his personal representative. De Launay’s instructions 
were to proceed to Galle in Ceylon to meet de Suffren, who 
was expected to he there, and from Ceylon to cross over to 
the mainland and go to the Court of Haidar Ali, where he 
was to reside till the arrival of Bussy. De Launay was also to 
open a correspondence with Montigny at Poona and with all 
the other French agents in the different courts with a view 
to put some fresh hope and courage in the minds of the Indian 
Princes. Bussy also sent orders through de Launay for a whole 
sale re-organisation of the French army at Cuddalore, recalling 
a number of officers, including Duchemin, whose bad conduct 