

1 Journal dc Bussy, pp. 295-296. 

2 Ibid, pp. 297-299. 







WiWsr^ 


THl FRENCH IN INDIA 



<§L 


recks 


s and by the necessity of garrisoning ihe Cape would 
h ive remained at 8,000 to 9,000. . . . My situation presents a 
prospect sufficient to discourage all others except me, but my 
zeal has not been destroyed by the major obstacles 1 had to 
surmount since the moment of njy departure from France, and 
I can see quite clearly, without, being frightened, all the other 

obstacles which remain for me to face.; the principal 

( ilc is to re-establish discipline among the troops, who are in 
India, on my arrival there and to bring them out of the shameful 
langour in which Messieurs Duchemin and d'Hoffelize have 

allowed them to remain.. /’ l Hussy also expressed his 

opinion about the inhabitants of the Isle of France and their 
“spirit of cupidity and rapine" and laid down certain broad 
principles about re-organising the administrative structure there. 

On the same day (18th December) Bussy also wrote two 
letter* to Marquis de Castries, sending him an extract from 
his Journal and giving him a detailed account of the course of 
events during his stay in the Isle of France, the news he had 
received from India and the prospect facing him there with 
3.000 troops in all and inadequate financial resources. 2 * 

Bussy finally left the Isle of France on the 18th, atid after 
a week s stay at the Isle of Bourbon, from the 19th to the 
26th/ started for Achin, the rendez t oils fixed for joining 
de Suffren’s squadron. The destination was reached about the 
end of February 1783, but Bussy was surprised at not finding 
de Suffren’s squadron there, nor could he get anv information 
about where it had gone to. On the 2nd March he called for 
the opinion of the naval officers, and all of them advised him 
to proceed immediately to Trinkomali. 4 Bussy accepted the 
advice and on the 10th March the French ships reached Trinko¬ 
mali, where they made the happy discovery of de Sulfren’s 
squadron. Bussy was given an enthusiastic reception by 
de Suffven, who came to meet him on board his ship, the 
Pendant* De Launay also, who had come to Trinkomali some 
time earlier in expectation of Ins arrival, met him and gave 


1 Journal dt' Busty* pp. 299-303. 

2 P. A. mss. 397 398. 

4 Journal dr Busty, pp. 3<>3'3ot». 

4 Ibid, pp. 310 314. 





litin a detailed account of the military situation on the 
Coromandel Coast. 


nussv's EXPEDITION 



IX. A nival in India, 


In view of the urgency of the situation in India Bussy 
thought it necessary to hurry the preparation for his departure 
and to proceed at once to the Coromandel Coast. It was not 
an easy affair because of the deplorable state of de Su[Iren's 
squadron. Many of the ships required thorough repairs, and 
the deficiency in the crew personnel amounted to 1,800 men. 
De Suffren himself declared that it was impossible to take out 
his fleet before October. But the situation brooked no delay, 
and it was decided to convoy Bussy’s expeditionary force by 
five ships of the line, which necessitated taking out all the men 
from the other seven ships. 1 Bussy’s original plan, before his 
.arrival at Trinkomali. was to land his troops between Karikal 
and Negapatam and to lay siege to the latter place. Negapatam 
would serve as a mpfe secure base than Cuddalore, and its 
possession would give the French communication with I anjore 
and Madura from where provisions could be procured. But 
Bussy had to change the plan when he learnt that the English, 
perhaps apprehensive of his imminent arrival on the Coromandel 
Coast, had destroyed the fortifications of that place as well as 
those of Wandiwash, Caranjoli and Vellore. 2 He was thus 
compelled to lead his expeditionary force to the only base which 
the French possessed in India, namely Cuddalore. 