

VII. News from India. 


During these months of forced stay in the Isle of France 
Bussy was continuously [receiving reports from India, from 
various sources, which caused him more and more anxiety, 
specially in view of his inability for the moment to do anything 
to improve the situation. About the middle of September he 
received letters from dc Suffren, Duchemin and de Launay. 1 
In his letter, dated Guddalore 30th July, de Suffren, while 
expressing delight at Bussy’s arrival in the isle of France, 
showed great concern at the uncertainty of the arrival of 
Peinicr's convoy, which necessarily imposed an unexpected delay 
in Bussy's coming to India. In the meantinie the unitary sit¬ 
uation in south India was rapicTly deteriorating for the French, 
and by the time that Bussy might arrive, de Suffren feared that 
it might not be possible for them to carry on operations on the 
Coromandel Coast. He had with great difficulty persuaded 
Haidar Alt to remain on the Coromandel Coast so long only 
on the assurance of the speedy arrival of Bussy with his expedi¬ 
tionary force, but now that Bussy’s coming was unavoidably 


1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 97-102. 


THT FRENCH IN INDIA 

it would be difficult to prevent Haidar from leaving 
the Carnatic and moving off to the Malabar Coast. In the 
absence of Haidar it would be impossible for the French to 
maintain themselves on the Coromandel Coast; since the 
Carnatic had been so thoroughly devastated that they could not 
expect to procure any provisions and transport cattle. In that 
case Bussn would have to land either in the region to the 
north of Madras which had not suffered any devastation, or 
on the Malabar Coast, where Haidar’s assistance would be 
available. Do Suffren then gave an account of his interview 
with Haidar and expressed his intention of wintering his fleet 
at Achin, where he asked Bussv to join him. 

Bussv naturally felt alarmed about the fate of the French 
expeditionary force in India, now reduced to Boo men only 
from the original number of nearly 3,000, if Haidar actually 
left the Carnatic, It Was obvious that this small force with 
artillery, munitions and other stores would fall into the hands 
of tin English, and it was an extremely difficult task to transport 
them safely to Ceylon, specially in view of the fact that the 
junction of Bikcrton with Hughes would give the English a 
decided naval superiority. All that Hussy could do for the 
moment was to send three ships from Peinier’s fleet (which had 
arrived on the 15th), the Pendant , the Argonaute and the Naiade, 
to reinforce de Suffren. 1 instructing him to allow a part of the 
French troops to accompany Haidar Ali if the latter decided to 
leave the Coromandel Coast, and the rest of the force with the 
heavy artillery*, munitions etc. was to be transported to Ceylon. 
The Dutch island was then to serve as the base of operations 
for the French. 2 

On the 19th October-Bussy received further letters from 
India. The letter from dc Launay, dated Cuddalore 2nd 
August, contained a detailed account of his negotiations with 
Haidar The various reports he received convinced Bussv all 
the more of the urgent necessity of his arrival in India to 
avert a further deterioration of the situation. On the 25th 
October Bussy came to know from de Suffren’s letter to Souillac 