


On the 1 Oth the French ships reached Porto Novo, which 
was selected as a more convenient place for landing troops Mian 
Ctiddalore. The smaller vessels, however, carrying provisions 
and munitions were sent to the latter place." ft was at Porto 
Novo that Hussy learnt, from a letter of Hofleli/e, that Tipu 
had already left for the Malabar Coast. He also learnt that 
Hughes was to start from Bombay with fifteen ships about the 
middle of February, ft was thus necessary for the French to 
complete their landing of troops, munitions and provisions as 
quickly as possible, and allow de Suffren to return at once with 
his ships to Trinkomali which lay exposed to an English attack. 
So the disembarkation of troops went on all through the night 
ol the ifith, and on the next day they marched to their camp at 
Manjakuppam near Ctiddalore. 4 By the 22nd the landing of 
munitions and provisions at Ctiddalore had also been completed, 
and immediately after de Suff ren returned with his ships to 
Trinkomali. He, however, assured Hussy that he would come 
out with his squadron to meet the English fleet if the latter 
attempted an attack on Cuddalore, which was a rather insecure 
military base.’ 

About his feelings on arrival in India, Hussy wrote in his 
Journal , “I am without allies, without provisions, without means 
of transport, and in a country devastated beyond imagination. 

I have only five millions to procure all these things as also to 
meet the other expenses necessary for an army; only the pay of 
the troops, apart from other normal expenses, will amount to 
nearly a million a month in spite of the reforms that 1 want 
to carry out.”® The letter of Falk, the Dutch Governor of 
Ceylon, showed clearly that no help was 10 be expected from 
that quarter. 7 The Danes of Tranquebar appeared definitely 
more favourable to the English, and they often violated the 

1 Journal de Buss y, pp. 324-385. 

2 Ibid, p. 325. 

3 Ibid, p. 327. 

4 Ibid, pp. 329 330. 

* Ibid, pp. 341-342. 

6 Ibid, p. 329. 

7 Ibid , p. 328. 


miST/fy 



code of conduct laid down for neutrals; 1 while the letters of 
Uoffeli/e convinced Hussy of the bad faith of l ipu and of 
the general he had left behind to assist the French, Sayyid 
Sahib, who refused to do anything to facilitate the landing of 
French troops and munitions. 2 

Bussy had at last arrived in India with his long-advertised 
expeditionary force, but what a bleak prospect was it that faced 
him,- with, inadequate troops and money, without any allies, 
without provisions and without even a secure base of operations! 


1 Journal dc Bmsy. p. 337. 

a Ibid, pp. 334*335 (letter dated 18th March 1783). 


imSTfiy 


chapter xn 




BUSSY’S RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 
I. Busty's views on alliance with some of the Indian Powers. 

The first task of Bussy on arrival in India was to get into 
contact with the country Powers whose alliance was necessary 
lor the success of the military operations against the English. 
It was all the more necessary, since Bussy had at his disposal 
wholly inadequate resources, only 3,000 European troops and 
five million 1 ivies which could carry him through for four or 
five months at the most. He found himself without any provi¬ 
sions, without any means of transport, and without any secure 
base even, Cuddalore being a fully exposed place hardly suitable 
for defence. It was obviously impossible foi the French to 
launch any large-scale, independent operations against the 
English possessions, unless the energies of the English were 
diverted by simultaneous attacks from other quarters. From 
the outset, therefore, they were dependent on the support and 
co-operation of some of the Indian Powers. It was a strange 
irony that Bussy should have arrived in India in such a Mate 
as to compel him to solicit the help of the country Powers, 
when he had stressed so strongly in his memo ires of 1777 and 
1781 the need of being independent of such assistance, at least 
during the early stage of the operations. As he argued then, 
a few initial successes won by the French with their own efforts 
would induce the country Powers to seek their alliance, in¬ 
stead of the French having to beg for their support. 