

The four principal Powers whose co-operation formed the 
basis of all the numerous projects submitted to the French 
Government since 171)3, with varying emphasis on one or 
other, were the Mughal Emperor, the Marathas, Nizam \li 
and Haidar AH. But, as we have seen already, in spite of all 
the intrigues and reports of the French agents at the various 
Darbars for more than a decade, no definite treaty of alliance 
had been concluded with any one of these Powers by the time 
the French Government despatched an expeditionary force 


MINIS rtf ^ 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


er Bussy at the end of 1781. The result was that when 
Hussy actually arrived in India in March 1783 to execute the 
ambitious project of overthrowing English domination, there 
was not a single country Power on whose co operation he could 
count. Bussy had to start practically from the beginning official 
negotiations with the country Powers, and a shrewd person 
like him must have realised that it was poor diplomacy to make 
overtures for an alliance and military co-operation after 
hostilities had already started. He could not indeed have 
expected much out of these negotiations, and in fact the letters 
which he wrote to the Indian Princes did not show any keen¬ 


ness of desire on his part to hasten negotiations for an alliance 
with any of them. His whole policy, as revealed by his letters 
and secret instructions to French agents at the different courts, 
was merely to hide time. 

One great source of embarrassment for Bussy in dealing 
with the Indian Princes was the adverse reaction created in 


the minds of most of them by the French having already com 
initted themselves in support of Haidar and his son Tipu, who 
were hated by every other Power as usurpers, ambitious to 
expand their dominions at the expense of their neighbours. 
As Bussy wrote in his Journal, “What will Nizam Alt, the son 
of Basalat Jang and the other Princes whom I am seeking to 
win over and who are all interested in the destruction of this 
Nawab (Tipu), think of the French detachment being associated 
with his army? Will dt not confirm their impression, as it 
must, that our intention is always to support the son of Haidar 
Ali Khan and that consequently they can put but little reliance 
on what I am telling them in my negotiations?” 1 It is quite 
true that French military support to Tipu proved highly 
embarrassing to Bussy in his dealings with the other Powers, 
bui it deserves to be noted that during his stay in the Isle of 
France he had authorised the support of a French detachment 
to Haidar if the latter left for the Malabar Coast. The thing 
was that however much it might alienate the other Powers, the 
necessity of the military situation compelled the French to seek 
the help of the Nawab of Mysore and to give him support in 
return. Their only base in India, Guddalore, lay within his 


1 Journal de Bussy, p. 


lrnsr/t). 



^riMiction and they were absolutely dependent on him for the 
supply of provisions and means of transport. That was why. 
of all the Indian Princes it: was to Haidar that Bussy thought 
it necessary to announce first his arrival in the Isle of France, 
and it was to him that he sent a personal envoy, do Launay. 
It was to Tipu first that he announced his arrival at TrinkomaU 
and sent two senior officers to convey his message. Even when 
he learnt that Tipu had suddenly left tor the Malabar Coast, 
virtually abandoning the French to shift for themselves, it was 
to him first that he announced his arrival in India. 