

u 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


was supposed to have alienated Haidar Ali. 1 2 De I.aunay started 
from the Isle of France on the 19th June by the cutter, LeznnL 
and wi 1 vc noticed already his arrival in India, his interview 
with Haidar Ali, and the reports he sent to Bussy from 
Cuddalore. 

While despatching de Launay mainly for diplomatic work, 
IHissy also felt it necessary to send some immediate reinforce* 
meats to de Suffrcn, who had sent frantic appeals for help to 
Sou iliac from Ceylon. He sent a squadron under d’Aymar, con¬ 
sisting of two ships of the line, the Sctint-Michel and the 
Illustre, two frigates, the Consvlante and the Fortune, and nine 
transport vessels carrying 700 troops, munitions and provisions. 
The squadron started from the Isle of Fiance on the 25th June, 
end its junction with de Suffren’s fleet has been noticed 
already. 3 

VI. Bussy's departure for India unavoidably held up. 

In spite of ill-health which began during his short stay 
at the Cape of Good Hope, the deplorable state of the French 
expeditionary force under Duchemin and the adverse effect it 
might produce on the country Powers had led Bussy to think 
seriously of proceeding to India in person with d’Aymar s 
squadron; and it was not till the last moment that he finally 
gave up the idea. The principal factor that induced him not 
to proceed to India at once was the delay in the arrival of 
Peinieis convoy. As he wrote in his Journal, “It is certain that 
if T had started from the Isle of France for India with only the 
two battleships that I had brought with me from Europe, Haidar 
Ali Khan, the Marathas and all the other Powers of Asia would 
have thought that there was nothing more to be expected from 
the French than the five or six hundred men that I would have 
been able to take with me, in spite of all the assurances that 1 
could give them that I was expecting considerable reinforce¬ 
ments ... . They would have believed on the contrary that 

1 Instructions to dc Launay in Journal dc Bussy, pp. 38-41. 

2 Journal de Bussy, p. 53; see also Uussy’s letter to Castries for a 
detailed report since his departure from the Cape o{ Good Hope, V. A. 

ms. 380. 


mtsTfy 


^ ' G0 W\ 

HUSSY’S EXPEDITION 

the six or seven hundred men with whom I would have arrived 
constituted the utmost efforts that we could make in Europe.” 
Bussy thought it prudent therefore merely “to announce 
promptly to the Prim es of Asia niv arrival in the Isle of France, 
where i was waiting for considerable reinforcements. By that 
means 1 would he able to preserve all the advantages that i 
expect to draw from the desire which they have always 
expressed for my return and from their hopes of being effectively 
helped.” 

Souillac also fully agreed with this view, and in a note 
to Bussy he wrote, “The essential point is to inspire confidence 
among the Princes of India; 1 have been announcing to them 
since three years hack the arrival of large forces from Europe. 
It was at the instance of Haidar Ali Khan, who was beginning 
to doubt the sincerity of my promises, that I sent hint the major 
part of the forces that f had in the Isle of France, representing 
it as merely the advance party (of the principal expedi¬ 
tionary force). This despatch has produced the: good effect 
of putting an end to the waverings of the Prince, who was 
beginning to be moved by the solicitations of the English. The 
question now is to preserve and to increase his confidence as 
well as that of the other Princes. That will come necessarily 
from the announcement made by Bussy himself that he has 
arrived in the Isle, from where he is preparing to start imme¬ 
diately with formidable resources.” Souillac warned that his 
arrival in India with inferior means would “lose all the credit 
attached to the name of M. de Bussy.' 1 he second factor 
which prevented Bussy from starting for India immediately 
was a violent attack of scum, w hich persisted for the next 
few months and at one time seemed almost to turn fatal. 1 
Bussy has been blamed unduly by some historians for having 
wasted valuable time in the Isle of France when his presence 
in India was urgently required, but the reasons stated above 
give sufficient excuse in his defence. 