

Immediately after his arrival at 1 rinkomali Bussy received 
the proposal of the Marat ha Government for a treaty of alli¬ 
ance, sent by Montigny through Warnet and Chauvigny. 3 
Although he did not fully approve of the terms proposed, he 
appreciated the diplomatic work done by Montigny to keep the 
Marathas and Nizam Ali friendly towards the French. In view 
of the alarming report brought by de Launay that 1 ipu, tired 

J Journal de Bussy , pp. 322*323' 

2 Ibid, pp. 319*320. 

Mi wilt l>e remembered that the boat hv which they were travelling, 
the lizard, was captured by the English at Tranquebar in violation of 
Danish neutrality. Chauvigny was taken prisoner, but Warnet could 
luckily escape with all the* important papers. 


MIN IST/fy 


THE FRENCH IN INWA 




of waiting for Bussy, was about to start to? the Malabar Coast, 
do Sufiren sent do Mois.sac immediately on B ussy's arrival at 
Trinkomali to announce the news to the Mysore ruler, bussv 
also sent two senior officers for the same purpose, Comte de la 


Marck and Marquis de la Rochethulon, with letters assuring 
Tipu of the same support from France as had been given to 
his father. 1 The two missions were, however, entirely fruitless, 
as Tipu had left the Coromandel Coast even before the arrival 
of de Moissac. 3 De la Marck and de la Rochethulon sent 
their letters to Tipu by messengers and waited at Cuddalore 
for Bussy. 

Bussy finally left Trinkomali on the 13th March with seven 
>lups of the line and nine fast transport vessels/ 1 As he started 
on the last lap of his journey to India, the prospect lying 
before him appeared absolutely bleak, and he wrote in his 
journal: “As regards our present situation 011 the Coromandel 
Coast, it is such that I would not have undertaken the task of 
the re-establishment of our nation after peace with such a small 
number of troops as had been given to me for waging war.” 
The French had no ally to count upon. Tipu Sultan was 
extremely lukewarm and undependable, and another potential 
ally, B isalat Jang, was dead, rumoured to have been poisoned 
by his brother, Nizam Ali. The Dutch were unfriendly, and 
in spite o< the best efforts of dc Launay the Dutch authorities 
at Batavia and in Ceylon refused to pay the five million livres 
stipulated in Paris, on the ground that they did not have an) 
money and, secondly, that they had already furnished immense 
supplies to de Sutfren’s squadron. The Dutch refusal to pay 
money was a. great blow to Bussy, who was left with only five 
million livres, not expected to carry him through for more than 
four or five months. Apart from the normal expenses of the 
army after his arrival in India, he had to meet heavy arrears 
of pay due to the troops under Hoffclizc. Bussy had thus very 
good reason to regret bitterly that the Minister had not accepted 


1 Journal dc Bussy, p. 331. 

3 ibid, pp. 325 326 (letter of Hoffclizc to de Suff mi, 8th March 1783). 
a Ibid, p. 319. 

* Ibid, p. 323. 



his advice to provide him with ten million livres in cash, as he 
had proposed in his mtmoire} 