



move .entirely on its own, or on the basis of some earlier over* 
hires made by Chevalier from ( handernagoie. 


After Saint“Lubin the contact between the French and the 
•Marathas was renewed by Montigny in 1779 during his short 
visit to Poona on his way back to France from Delhi. The 
next step taken was in 1781, when the Poona Government 
decided to send an agent named Zaitiul Abedin Khan to 
Souillac, Governor of the Isle of France, with some definite 
terms of alliance. The terms, not much different from those 
proposed through Montigny in 178*, required the French to 
land two thousand troops at Chaul. to capture Bombay and 
to co-operate with the Marathas in their operations against the 
English, in exchange for which they would get Bombay in full 
sovereignly and trading rights in the Maratha territories, 
besides al the expenses of the military expedition. 1 Zainui 
Abedin Khan however proceeded only up to Goa, where in 
October he met Montigny, just arrived from France on his way 
to Poona, having been sent by the French Government to 
negotiate a treaty of alliance with the Marathas. 

At Poona Montigny carried on prolonged talks, which 
resulted in the drawing up of articles for a treaty of alliance, 2 
The terms were similar to those proposed in 1781, except that 
the French were to land a force of 10,000 troops and were to 
get Surat in addition to Bombay. Bui they were to pay their 
own expenses, and neither party was to conclude peace without 
previous consultation with the other. This draft treaty was to 
have been submitted to Duchemin, the commander of the first 
French expeditionary force landed at Ciulclalore in March 
1782, but by the time it was completed news reached Montigm 
about the arrival of Bussy in the Isle of France. The Maratha 
proposals were therefore sent to Bussy through VVarnet and 
Ghauvigny. bur the boat b\ which they were travelling, the 
/ fzard, was captured by the English at Tranquebar. Chau 
viguy was taken prisoner, but Warnet could escape with all the 
papers, which were later sent to Trinkomali, where Bussy 
received them on His arrival in Match 1783. 

Bussy also received at the same time a pressing letter from 


1 Mari in eau —Bussy ct Unde Frattgaise, pp, 349-351. 

J tor details sec chapter VII, the section on Montigny, 


uMisr^y 



^tontigpy, urging him to accept the terms of the Manuhas at 
once to prevent their concluding peace with the English. But 
while appreciating the zeal and sincerity of the French agent 
at Poona. Bussy could not persuade himself to accept the draft 
treaty without, modifications to several of its articles, parti¬ 
cularly to that one which required the French to continue the 
war in India even after the conclusion of peace in Europe. 
What made him even less inclined to accept the treaty at once 
A’as the strange policy of the Poona Government. As Bussy 
came to know, the Marat has were carrying on negotiations for 
peace with the English at the same time that the proposals for 
an alliance with France were being drawn up. Bussy, how¬ 
ever, did not like to reject the terms altogether, but preferred 
to play for time. From Trtnkomali he sent the proposals to 
Paris for the consideration of the Minister . 1 Reaching Cudda- 
lore, he got fuller reports from Warner about the state of affairs 
at the Poona Court, and in order to gain time he at once wrote 
to Nana Phadnavis and Hari Pant Phadke, informing them of 
his arrival in India with the first batch of the expeditionary 
force, the second batch being expected shortly, and assuring 
them that he would proceed to the Malabar Coast to co-operate 
with the Maratha forces against the English as soon as he had 
brought the operations on the Coromandel Coast, already 
started, to a successful conclusion. At the same time he sent 
detailed instructions to Momigm about the com!act he was 
to follow at Poona, the main point being to play for time to 
prevent the conclusion of a definitive treaty of peace between 
the Marathas and the English. He also gave Montigny a 
frank picture of the state of his army and of the reasons which 
prevented him from going to the Malabar Coast, He. how¬ 
ever, expressed a definite hope of being able to go there after 
the arrival of reinforcements which he was expecting shortly. 