

Bussy also wrote to Piveron de Morlat, who was entrusted 
with handing over the letter to Tipu referred to above. He 
gave Piveron de Morlat a frank account of the condition of 
the expeditionary force, and stated that it would become 
positively hopeless if Piveron failed to persuade Tipu to send 
the supplies needed so badly. 3 In his Journal under date 26th 
March Bussy commented on the faithlessness of Tipu and of 
his agent, Mir Moidin Ali Khan. Tipu had informed him of 
having left thirty-five thousand troops for the assistance of the 
French, but in fact they numbered only twelve to fourteen 
thousand, and of the worst sort. Tipu had also written to him 
to ask Moidin Ali Khan for all the supplies he needed, but 
the latter had neither the means nor the will to procure them. 
"Look at these Asiatics! If they are to be believed, they have 
given the irtOst positive orders and they have provided every 

1 I*. A. ms. 496; also Journal dt- Hussy, pp. $49-350. 

- Journal, dr Hussy * p 330. 


BUSSV S RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 



g in abundance, but the object of all these emphatic and 
fine promises is only to deceive those who arc simple-minded 
enough u believe in them.” 1 

Bussy became even more convinced of the duplicity of 
f ipu and of the officer he had left behind to assist the French, 
Mo id in Ali Khan, commonly known as Sayyid Sahib, when four 
days later he received the news that the latter had suddenly 
decided, on a rather flimsy pretext, to separate himself from 
the French army under Hoffelize and to march off south with 
the entire body of Mysore troops. The news was communica¬ 
ted in a letter from Krishna Rao, Tipu’s agent at the French 
camp, to Rajappa Ayyar, the interpreter of Hoffelize. 51 The 
letter stated that Sayyid Sahib had asked Hoffelize to send a 
high-ranking officer to his camp to receive an important com¬ 
munication. De Villeneuve, commanding the regiment of 
Austrasie, was sent accordingly. Sayyid Sahib told him that 
an English detachment under Colonel Lang had started from 
Trichinopoly with ist battalions of sepoys, 1,000 European 
troops, and some forces supplied by the Poligars with a view 
to attack the fort of Karoor. The commander of the fort had 
ask 'd for immediate relief, which had decided Sayyid Sahib 
to march off at once with the entire army of the Nawab under 
his command. Sayyid Sahib also proposed that Hoffelize should 
accompany him with the French contingent. Bussy com 
mented on the margin of the letter, “This news is the const 
queuee of the secret instructions which Tipu has given to 
Sayyid Sahib to remain with him (HofFclize) only for a short 
while and then under some plausible pretext to cross the Ghats 
himself as well, because it is certain that Colonel Lang does 
not have more than 500 men under him, including three and 
a half quarters of the garrisons of Tanjore and Trichinopoly, 
and that he has taken with him only 4 battalions of bad sepoys 
and a few thousand Poiigar troops. The whole thing shows 
the bad faith of Tipu as also of the chiefs whom he has left 
with M. d Hoffelize.” The letter of Krishna Rao continued 
that de Villeneuve replied that he could not inarch south with 