

1 hus it appears that down to Tipu’s departure from the 
Coromandel Coast, both >ides had reasonable defence for their 
conduct. After the separation of the Mysore and French forces, 
the interests of the two parties became entirely different. For 
the time being Tipu had no concern with what happened in 
the Carnatic. Engaged in the west against the invaders of his 
territory , his supreme need was the assistance of the French 
lleet on the Malabar Coast, for which he solicited both Bussy 
<md de Surtreu. On the other hand, the French had little 
immediate concern with what happened on the Malabar Coast. 
It was impossible for them to send their fleet there, leaving 
Irinkomali and Cuddalore completely exposed to an attack by 
the combined fleets of Hughes and Bikerton, which had been 
reported to have started from Bombay in February and were 


MINIS Tf)y 


bossy's RELATIONS WISH INDIAN POWERS 


m 



expected on the eastern coast any moment. The French 
regarded the ( oromandel Coast as the principal theatre 
operations, and their supreme needs were,—a body of cavalry, 
provisions and transport for their artillery, for which Bussv 
wrote repeatedly to 1 ipu, without success. On this point it 
seems, after examining both sides of the picture, that 1 ipu 
would have acted more wisely and his interests would have 
been served better if he had offered some co-operation to the 
French, as he could have done without detriment to his opera¬ 
tions in the west. Large-scale operations by the French on the 
Coromandel Coast would have diverted the attention of the 
English to some extent and would have, perhaps, partly 
relieved the pressure in the west. As it was, the French army 
remained completely immobilised and could do nothing to 
relieve the pressure on f ipu, 

IV. Relations with the Maralhas. 

Next let us notice Hussy’s relations with the Marathas In 
his two previous memoir$s, discussed already, Hussy had laid 
emphasis on an alliance with the Marathas, who constituted 
the only Power capable of giving effective help to the French 
in their operations against the English. It may be recalled 
that a Franco-Marath a alliance was a pet project of all the 
persons who submitted schemes to the French Government, and 
in fact the Maratha Confederacy occupied such a dominating 
central position in India that without its active co-operation it 
was impossible for the French to expect success in any parr of 
the country,—in Sind or in Bengal, in the north or in the 
south. On their side, the Marathas, since the outbreak of 
hostilities with the English, had also evinced an interest in 
forming an alliance with France, the most ardent advocate of 
that policy in the Poona Government being Nana Phadnavis. 
It is difficult to ascertain which side took the initiative in 
opening negotiations. We know that the first time such nego¬ 
tiations were started was during the visit of Saint-Lubin in 
b ut if the evidence of one of the associates of Saiut- 
Lubin is to be believed, it appears that Saint-Lubin had been 
sent from France in response to an overture from Poona. But 
then we do not know whether the Poona Government took the 