

To Montigny Bussy sent certain instructions for his guid¬ 
ance, recommending a continuation of the old line ol conduct, 
to keep the Poona Government friendly till it was possible for 
Bussy to give his final decision with regard to the terms of 
alliance. Montigny was to emphasise the value to the Marathas 
of an alliance with France, and to stress the contrast between 
the aggressive actions of the English and the moderate and 
friendly policy of the French, backed by a superiority in naval 
and military strength. He was to keep a strict watch on every¬ 
thing that happened at the Poona Dm bar, particularly in rela¬ 
tion to the English and Tipu. He was also to do everything 
that “prudence and diplomacy allow under such circumstances 
to keep the Poona Government in the constant hope of receiv¬ 
ing military help from the French in the next season. He was 
to speak highly of the strength of the expeditionary force 
already landed and of that expected shortly, and to declare the 
firm determination of Bussy to go to the Malabar Coast unless 
prevented by physical incapacity. T he whole object was in 
one word to gain lime, which is the essential point, and to 

utilise it for.facilitating the modifications that 

1 cannot dispense with to the articles of the treaty proposed by 
the Regency, of which some are absolutely inadmissible.” 
Finally, Montigny was to remove, by offering suitable excuses, 
the misgivings caused to the Marathas by the landing ol ihe 

1 P. A. ms. 498 ; also Journal tie Busty, pp. ;)53‘354- 

2 P, A, ins. r,oo; also Journal dc Bussy, p. ^ r >4' 






THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


reach on the Coromandel Coast and their co operation with 
Tipii. 1 

While giving these detailed instructions to Montigny, 
hussy also sent him in secret code a picture of the real state 
of his expeditionary force and the reasons which prevented him 
from accepting the Maratha terms at once and going to the 
Malabar Coast. Hussy wrote that the army consisted of 3,500 
Europeans 3,000 to 4.000 Africans and 4,000 sepoys, not yet 
trained and disciplined, to which could be added 8,000 to 10.000 
men including cavalry and infantry left by l ipu K and on the 
sea the French had a squadron of \ \ ships of the line fit for 
service. He. was expecting in April or May the arrival of de 
Soulanges with 4 ships of the line and 4,000 troops. As against 
this strength, the English were reported to have not more than 
3,000 European troops and 20,000 sepoys in the north, the same 
number of men in the south and 15 ships of the line in good 
condition. It was likely that they would receive further re¬ 
inforcements soon. Hussy stated that it was no longer the ques¬ 
tion as to what he should have done, i.e., whether he should 


have commenced his operations on the Malabar Coast and that 
by the capture of Bombay. The fact that a small French con¬ 
tingent had already been landed on the Coromandel Coast and 
had been carrying on operations in concert with Haidar Ali, 
had obliged him to disembark his expeditionary force there. 
Then the death of Haidar, the absence of Tipu from the coast 
and the reduction of his troops prevented him from taking any 
immediate advance step with regard to beginning operations 
elsewhere. Moreover, before adopting any definite policy in 
that direction it was necessary to know the real intentions of 
die Maruthas and of Nizam Ali and the existing state of affairs 
in their Darhar w It resulted from these difficulties that how¬ 
ever much Hussy desired an alliance with the Marathas and 
Nizam Ali. he could not do anything for the time being without 
running the risk of being suddenly abandoned by 1 ipu, who 
might make his own terms with the English. He would be in 
a stronger position, however, to declare his policy openly after 
ihe arrival of de Soulanges with reinforcements. 4 