


1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 350-351. 

J P. A. ms. 197 (letter dated 28th March), 
on the 30th (Journal de Bussy , pp. 358*361). 


Bussy received the news 



Sayyid Sahib without ttussy’s order, and that it the Mysore 
contingent suddenly departed, it would leave the door open to 
the English to advance against Cuddalore. De Villeneuvc asked 
Sayyid Sahib to write to Bussy for instructions, but although 
Bussy was only 12 leagues away and a reply could have been 
received in a few hours, Sayyid Sahib replied that he had 
no time to lose and must start at once to save his master’s 
territory, 

Tipu, as we have seen, was most anxious to get the assist¬ 
ance of the French naval squadron in his operations against 
the English on the Malabar Coast. On the 30th March he 
wrote to de Suffren, recalling to him the assurance he had 
given to go to Mangalore with his squadron and asking him 
to come quickly, so that after the destruction of the English 
power on the Malabar Coast he could pass on to the Coro¬ 
mandel Coast and join with Bussy. 1 To Bussy’s letter of the 
26th March Tipu replied on the 2nd April, assuring him that 
he had given positive orders to his officers to supply everything 
needed by the French and asking him again to send de Suffren’s 
squadron to the Malabar Coast to assist him in operations 
against the English. 2 3 On the 30th April Bussy wrote to 1 ipu, 
confirming the conversation he had with Muhammad Usman, 
who had been sent to him by Tipu, and announcing the return 
of Piveron de Morlat to Tipu’s camp. Bussy added that if 
Tipu could not come to the Coromandel Coast, he should send 
eight to ten thousand cavalry and a large number ol transport 
cattle. He regretted that it was only the lack of means of 
transport for his artillery which had prevented him from fore 
stalling the English, who were advancing towards Cuddalore 
with land and naval forces/ i'his letter was sent through 
Piveron de Morlat, and a second letter in identical terms was 
sent through de Lallee who was also returning to Tipu’s camp. 4 * 

Tipu replied to Bussy on the 31st May. assuring him that 
he had sent orders to his officers to supply transport cattle, 
horses, and camels to the French. 6 Bussy wrote to 1 ipu again 

1 i\ A. ms. 503. 

2 Ibid, ms. 510. 

3 Ibid, ms. 517. 

4 Ibid, ms. 518. 

6 Ibid, ms. 527. 


MIN/Sr^ 



HUSSY s RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 


<SL 


ic 18th June, urging him to come to the Coromandel Coast 
without delay and to send in advance a large body of cavalry. 
He also informed Tipu that he had received through Muham¬ 
mad Usman a letter in Marathi which Tipu had desired him 
to address to the Poona Durbar and that he had done so with 
out making an) changes in it. 1 In the next letter, dated 2nd 
July, Buss) informed Tipu that he had received news of the 
conclusion of peace between France and England and that he 
was sending an agent to give hint all the details that ought to be 
communicated to an ally. Bussy advised Tipu to make peace 
with the English likewise, and offered his good offices for that 
purpose. 2 