

HE Examination of french Relations with Tipu. 

From this review of correspondence between Bussy and 
Tipu and from the observations made by Bussy in his Journal , 
one thing becomes clear, -that there was little spirit of friend¬ 
liness and cooperation on either side, a factor that was to a 
large extent responsible for the barren result of the French 
military operations. The thing was that, on his side Bussy 
never liked the idea of a close alliance with Haidar and Tipu. 
In his memoires of 1777 and 1781 as also in his Journal he used 
very strong language against them, calling them usurpers, 
brigands and tyrants, hated by all the Powers of India. The 
reports which he received from de Eaunay about Haidar’s 
treatment to the French army under Duchemin (and later 
under Hoffelize) and the sudden departure of Tipu from the 
Coromandel Coast, leaving the French absolutely unprovided, 
only confirmed the view's he had held previously that little 
reliance could be placed on the co-operation of the Nawab of 
Mysore. In spite of all that, he had to placate Tipu out of 
necessity for the supply of provisions and means of transport, 
which Tipu atone could provide and without whi(h the posi 
tion of the French army would be desperate. 

On their side, both Haidar and Tipu had strong distrust 
of the French. It had its origin from the cowardly desertion 


1 P. A. m 530-531. 
* Ibid , ms. 53a. 


MWlST/ty 



^ cl’Orves in 1781, at a moment when the co-operation of the 
French would have placed the English power in south India 
completely at the mercy of Haidar. Haidar could never forget 
that incident, which coloured all his later relations with the 
French. For more than a year after that he was left entirely 
to his own resources without any help from the French* and 
when finally a small French contingent was landed at Gudda- 
Joic under Duthemin, he naturally expressed unwillingness to 
furnish all the money and provisions required by it before it 
had given proof of its ability and enterprise in the field. It 
was quite legitimate for him to expect that since the French 
had come to fight a common enemy, as much for their as for 
his advantage, they must bear a part of the expenses of the 
operations without trying to shift the entire burden on their 
ally. Then again, Haidar waited for a long time for the much 
advertised coming of Bussy with a formidable expeditionary 
force, and the frustration of his hope naturally soured his rela¬ 
tions with the French. After Haidar’s death, 1 ipu also waited 
lor some time for the arrival of Bussy and did not ultimately 
leave the Coromandel Coast till he had received alarming 
reports of sweeping English successes in his territories on the 
Malabar Coast. The defence of his own possessions was more 
important to him than conquests in the Carnatic, and therefore 
his departure for the Malabar Coast was quite justifiable, nay 
imperative, in his own interest, however much the French 
might regard it as a base desertion unworthy of an ally. 