


1 Journal dr Bussy, pp. 339-340. 

2 P. A. ms. 487* 

J Ibid, ms. 49j; «dso Journal de Bussy t pp. 338*339. 



WHlSTffy 



BUSSYS RKLATIOXS WITH INDIAN POSNERS 


Sl 


the Carnatic. i ipu should give strict orders to his officers to 
supply provisions and means of transport to the French, 

In a letter bearing the same date (March sn) and presum¬ 
ably a reply to the earlier letter from Bussy, Fipu expressed 
satisfaction at. the arrival of Bussy with his expeditionary force, 
but stated that if he had arrived earlier their combined forces 
could have defeated the English and captured Madras. He 
then explained how the invasion of his territory by the English 
and their capture of Bednore and Mangalore had compelled him 
to leave the Coromandel Coast, but he had taken care to leave 
35,000 troops under the command of his brother Mir Moidin 
Ali Khan for the assistance of the French. He informed Bussy 
that in ten or twelve days’ time he would move against Bednore 
which he expected to capture, and that lie hoped to go to the 
Coromandel Coast within a month and a half and unite with 
the French expeditionary force. They would then be able to 
undertake concerted operations against the English. In the 
meantime he asked Bussy to send de Stiffren’s squadron to his 
assistance at Mangalore. On the margin of this letter Bussy 
wrote the following comment, “these thirty-five thousand men 
are really twelve or fourteen thousand bad cavalry and bad 
infantry, and even of these twelve or fourteen thousand men, 
three thousand left for Tanjorc about seven or eight days 
back.” 1 Evidently, Bussy could not rely on the good faith of his 
supposed ally. 

On the »6th Bussy replied to Tipu’s letter, explaining the 
reasons which had delayed his arrival in India. He had come 
with 4*000 troops, 5 ships of the line and 36 transport vessels, 
and in two months’ time he expected a further reinforcement 
of 4,000 troops. Bussy wrote that from Tipu’s letter he quite 
appreciated the compelling necessity which had made him 
leave for the Malabar Coast, and that he had communicated 
Tipu’s desire to de Suffren to go to Mangalore with his 
squadron. But he feared that the season was far too advanced 
to allow de Suffren to undertake a voyage to the Malabar Coast. 
He, however, assured Fipu that it was the intention of the 
King of France to give him all possible military assistance, 
without any thought of keeping to hiniself any of the con- 


1 1\ A. ms. 495. 


MINIS 



(jnests to be made in India. If Bussy “had found on arrival 
means of transport for my artillery, I would have at once 
marched against the English and laid siege to Trichinopolv, 
which I would have handed over to Mir Moidin Ali Khan, as 
being subject to the province of the Carnatic and consequently 
to him. the Nawab, whom l recognise in advance as the lord 
ol the Carnatic," Bussy continued that “in order to execute 
this project favourable to his (Tipu’s) interests it is necessary 
that he on his side should send me a large number of transport 
cattle and about too camels, on cash payment if necessary, to 
drag my artillery and mortars and to carry bombs, bullets 
and other munitions, and that he should also give orders 
to Mir Moidin Ali Khan to furnish me with all supplies of 
this kind that he may be able to procure." While asking him 
to return to the Coromandel Coast at the earliest possible 
moment, Bussy urged that pending his return he should semi 
him at once all the supplies he needed, since any delay would 
be detrimental to their joint interests. He reminded Tipu 
that he had landed at Cuddalore, and not at some point to the 
north of Madras, only to be able to give him military assist 
ante, and he referred once again to the support of a French 
contingent having been given to him by Hoffelize. 1 