


1 Journal de Uus*y, pp. 354-356. 
J Ibid, pp. 356 - 357 * 



HUS.SV'S Rl.J ATION'S WITH INDIAN l>OW I RS 


At the same time Warnec also wrote to Moutignv that it 
tvas the definite intention of hussy to go to the Malabar Coast 
at the earliest favourable opportunity and that nothing but: 
physical incapacity would make him give up the project. He 
added that he would be sent back to Footia immediately on 
the arrival of de Souhtnges, with authority for Montigm to 
conclude a treaty with the Marathas, and till that time Mon- 
ligiiy was to exercise all his prudence and skill to convince the 
Poona Government of the sincerity and earnestness of the 
french. Monr.igny was also to explore the possibility of con¬ 
cluding a wider pact her ween the French, t he Marathas and 
Nt/ain Ali, giving only vague assurances for the time being and 
without commuting himself to anything definite. 1 

Mut concludes the review of the diplomatic relations 
between Bossy and the Marathas, and nothing further was done 
lor the whole period till the news of the conclusion of peace 
in Europe. In the chapter dealing with Montignv’s diplomacy 
we have noticed the frantic letters written by the French agent 
at Poona to Bossy and the disappointment he suffered at the 
altitude of Bussy irr cold-shouldering the Marathas while there 
was yet a chance of drawing them to the side of the French. 


VI. Relations with Nizam Ali. 


Of all the Indian Powers Bussy had a special preference 
lor an alliance with the Nizam of Hyderabad, ft was only 
natural, because the Deccan was the scene of his early opera 
lions, which had won for him great reputation both as a soldier 
and as a diplomat. Secondly, Hyderabad still constituted an 
important Power, whose co-operation would be of immense 
value in operations against the English. Finally, Bussy could 
count on the support of Nizam Ali, whose life had once been 
saved and who had been rescued from prison by his personal 
intervention. Thus on his arrival at Guddalore Bussy wrote 
to Nizam Ali, to his principal minister, Nawjab Tahawar Jang, 
and to Aumoni, a French officer in his service, with a view to 
draw Hyderabad to the side of France and to induce that 
Power to begin operations against the English for the recovery 


1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 557 358. 


misruf, 


• Go ^X 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

Sarkars in their occupation. But situated 
rs he was, with an inadequate force and entirely dependent 
on Tipu for supplies of provisions and means of transport, 
Bussy could do little more than give just a vague assurance 
of French support. There was no concrete proposal of any 
military alliance or any plan of combined operations against 
the English. Under the circumstances he could not have surely 
expected that Ni/am Ali would take any rash action against a 
formidable Power like the English without any definite assur¬ 
ance of military support from the French. In fact, apart front 
the general instructions given to Montigny to explore the 
possibility of a Franco-Maratha-Hyderabad alliance, Bussv 
showed little anxiety or seriousness to draw’ Nizam Ali into a 
war with the English. Perhaps, he had hoped that after the 
arrival of the expected reinforcements and some initial French 
successes against the English, Nizam Ali would have better 
inducement to join the French openly, and in the meantime 
all that could be done was to keep him on friendly terms so as 
to prevent his joining the English against the French and Tipu. 