

It was quite easy for Bussy to lay down a line of conduct 
for Montigny, but: for the latter to follow it was an impossible 
task. As Montigny complained, how could he keep the Mara 
thas friendly towards the French and how could he prevent 
their concluding peace with the English, when they saw the 
french little inclined to accept their proposal of alliance, and 


1 journal de Bussy, p. 32 j. 



far from cooperating with them on the Malabar Coast giving 
full military support to their mortal enemy, 1 ipu Sultan? 
1 he Iran tic: letters of Montigny from Poona bring out clearly 
the embarrassing situation in which he was placed. One 
conclusion i v inescapable about Bussy’s diplomacy in relation 
to the Marathas. However much he might have stressed the 
importance of a Marat ha alliance in the past, on his arrival 
in India he showed little anxiety to draw the Marathas closer 
to the French. It is true that his hands were somewhat tied 
by the fact that the first French expeditionary force had been 
landed on the Coromandel Coast to cooperate with Haidar, 
which compelled him to select that region as his theatre of 
operations in India, but even then he could have done a little 
more to conciliate the Marathas than merely writing two letters 
and holding out vague promises to be redeemed at some distant 
and uncertain date. 

V. Hussy a Correspondence wit h the Maralha Darbar. 

Let us next notice Bussy’s letters to Nana Phadnavis and 
Hari Pant Phadke as well as his instructions to Montigny. In 
his letter dated March 28, 1783, Bussy informed Nana that he 
lud received Nana’s reply to the letter he had sent in August 
1782 through de Launay, in which Bussy had stated that the 
policy of the Ling of France in sending an expeditionary force 
to India was to drive the English out of the country and to 
restore all conquests to their original owners. Bussy then 
continued that he was extremely happy at the friendly disposi¬ 
tion of the Court of Poona and that he soon hoped to renew 
his M old connection with the family of Baji Rao.” Referring 
to the terms of alliance proposed through Montigny, Bussy 
wrote that he had duly received them from Warnet and that 
he w'as only waiting for the arrival of further reinforcements 
ol men and munitions before finalising “the arrangements 
which are to Cement a durable and indissoluble treaty of 
friendship between the French and the Marathas, which will 
be sent to him immediately through M. de Montigny”, in whom 
Nana should place the fullest confidence. Fie then expressed 
regret at not having been able to land on the Malabar Coast 


HUSSY'S RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 

his operations there and at being obliged to wait till 
the next favourable season before proceeding there. In the 
meantime he urged Nana to complete his military preparations 
and to keep the enemy engaged wherever he could . 1 2 In the 
letter to Hari Pant Phadke, written on the same date. Hussy 
thanked him for his friendly sentiments for the French and 
wrote that he was giving serious consideration to the terms ot 
alliance proposed by the Peshwa. He urged Phadke to use all 
his influence with the Peshtva to induce him to continut 
hostile operations against the English. He assured Phadke 
that he would proceed to the Malabar (.oast in the next f.tvour- 
able season and asked him to have full confidence in Montigny. 