

Referring to relations with Tipu, Bussy wrote in his Journal 
under date 21st March: “It (his letter to Tipu of the same 
date) shows how much I am still anxious to manage the Nawab 
although his departure from the coast has the appearance of 
desertion, judging from the little consideration he paid to the 
storage of provisions for us and to the supply of means of 
landing and other necessaries required by an army on march 

.I have begun the task of opening negotiations with 

the Marathas, the Subadar of the Deccan and other Princes, 
but always keeping Tipu in good humour, because it is impor¬ 
tant under the circumstances.” Bussy, however, was strongly 
opposed to any alliance with Haidar Ali or l ipu Sultan. 
“These two brigands or tyrants did never deserve, either by 
birth or by their conduct, the slightest consideration from His 
Majesty. Both of them are looked upon and treated by every¬ 
body in India as belonging to these two categories only. All 
the Princes of Asia and even the lowest of the outcastes view 
them with horror. In fact it was only by monstrous extortions 
that the father could achieve power, and it is by continuing 
the same methods that he and his son could maintain themselves 
in power till the present. This alliance (French connection 
with Haidar and Tipu) is one of the principal causes which 
have kept all the Princes of Asia at a distance from the French 
nation, reducing 11s for the moment to a dependence on those 
resources alone which Tipu Sultan would like to supply us. 
Since my arrival here I have come to realise more and more 
the little hope that may be entertained about this precarious 
Power, and everything confirms me that the only alliance which 
was suitable alike to the dignity of the King as to the interests 
of the nation was that with Nizam Ali, Subadar of the Deccan 


V 



MIN tST/fy 



I HF, FRENCH IN INDIA 


at. Prince desired nothing better than an alliance with us, 
but he complained that France had neglected him too much. I 
am trying to win him over again, without being able to say yet 
what will be the result of mv negotiations.” l 


II Correspondence between Hussy and Tipu. 


Let us now notice the correspondence that passed between 
Bossy and Tipu till the news of the conclusion of peace. 
B ussy’s first letter to Tipu was from Trinkomali, dated nth 
March. Tipu was still believed to be in the Carnatic. Bussy 
informed him of his arrival in Ceylon and wrote that he was 
sending two high-ranking officers, de la Marck and de la 
Rochethulon, to convey to him his compliments and to concert 
joint measures against the English. 2 We have seen already 
how the two envoys were disappointed on their arrival at 
Cuddalore. Tipu had already left for the Malabai Coast, and 
Pussy's letter was sent to him by messenger. Bussy sent a 
second letter to Tipu on the 21st, from Cuddalore. 3 He wrote 
that on his arrival at Trinkomali he had sent two principal 
officers of his army to convey to Tipu his condolence on the 
death of his father and to “renew to him all the assurances that 
de Launay had been charged to give to the late Nawab.” fie 
expressed deep regret at Tipu's absence from the Coromandel 
Coast “at a time when it was most necessary for us to combine”, 
and he implored Tipu to return to the Carnatic at the earliest 
possible moment. Bussy informed Tipu that he had arrived at 
Cuddalore with 4,000 troops and ihat he was shortly expecting 
a reinforcement of the same number. A Danish ship, lately 
arrived at Tranquebar, reported having seen this convoy at 
the Cape of Good Hope. Perhaps as a reminder of Tipu’s 
obligation to the French at the time of his succession, Bussy 
expressed satisfaction at the services rendered by Hoffelize in 
maintaining order in tihe Mysore army after the death of 
Haidar. Finally, Bussy requested that pending his return to 