


WMSTffy 



cavalry arm, which would have turned the scale in their 
favour, as will be noticed later, by stopping- the march of the 
English army on Cluddalore. Bussy realised the importance of 
an Indian infantry force to counteract the sepoy force of the 
English, and soon after his landing he passed orders for raising 
live sepoy battalions of i f <x)o each, to be trained and officered 
by Europeans, each sepoy battalion being attached to one of 
the five European regiments. 1 It was, however, hardly to be 
expected that the French would be allowed sufficient time to 
raise and train up an entirely new force, and when the English 
moved against Cuddalore Bussy had at his disposal just 2,000 
sepoys. 2 As regards European troops, Bussy had under him 
about 2,500 men, besides the first expeditionary force, now 
reduced to a bare few hundred. Against these numbers, as 
Bussy wrote in his report to the Minister, the English could 
put: into the held 3,000 European troops, 12,000 to 14,000 sepoys 
and 1,500 cavalry with 84 cannons of different calibres. They 
had, besides, 500 Europeans and 3,000 sepoys for the defence of 
Madras and a reserve of 150 Europeans and 1,000 sepoys at the 
Great Mount.* There was even more inequality in naval 
strength. I he junction of Bikerton’s squadron with that of 
Hughes had given the English 18 ships of the line, besides a 
Eirge number of frigates and transport vessels, all in perfect 
condition. The French had, on the other hand, only 15 ships 
of the line, some of them undergoing repairs at Trinkomali, 
and there was such a grave depletion in personnel that they 
could not face a naval action without a reinforcement of 1,800 
men, which it was impossible for Bussy to spare from his own 
force. 

f he third difficulty of Bussy arose from lack of money, 
provisions, and transport for artillery. Before starting from 
France Bussy had wanted to be supplied with a net amount of 
ten million livres to meet the expenses of his operations after 
his arrival in India. But the French Minister came to an under 

1 P. A. ms. 508. 

* Ibid., ms. 40s. 

Ibid. About the strength of the English army under Stuart, Wilks 
gives ihe following numbers: Europeans—2945; Sepoy*-n, M 5; the arrival 
of reinforcements from England increased the number of Europeans to 
MOO -History a f Mysoor, II, p. i8t. 


nwsrtiy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


cling with the delegates of the Dutch East India Company 
m Paris with regard to the defence of its possessions in the 
East, and in place of giving Bussy ten millions in cash he gave 
only half the amount in cash and the other half in bills drawn 
on the Dutch authorities at Batavia and in Ceylon. We have 
seen already how greatly disappointed Bussy was when on his 
arrival in India he learnt from de Launay about the refusal of 
the Dutch authorities to honour the bills. Bussy thus suddenly 
found his financial resources reduced to live million livres. 
which even at a most moderate calculation could carry him 
through for not more than five months. Moreover, even these 
meagre resources were saddled with previous liabilities, the 
obligations to meet the arrears of salary due to the troops under 
Duchemin (and later under Hoffelize) and to reimburse the 
advances made by de Sutfren to the army, in these embarras¬ 
sing circumstances all that Bussy could do was to take lvis 
officers into confidence and to pass orders for the payment of 
only a part of the salaries in cash and the rest in bonds to be 
honoured later. 1 It was a most unwise arrangement made by 
the Minister for financing an expeditionary force, to depend 
on the uncertain co-operation of an alls, and one can quite 
understand the deep chagrin that Bussy felt when he suddenly 
found the arrangement upset on his arrival in India. 