

Once having crossed the river, the English army inarched 
rapidly towards south-east, and turning the hill of Bandapollam 
took up its position on the 7th June to the south of Cuddalore, 
stretching in a line from the mouth of the Uppanar river to the 
eastern corner of the hill. It was a secure and advantageous 
position for the English. Their right flank was protected by 
the sea and they could feel secure of the support of their fleet, 
which anchored at the mouth of the river on the 8th and landed 

J Roux stales that Boissicux. Major d'Austrasic, told Bussy: “Just 
one* brigade will suffice. General, and rhe English will never return to 
Madras/’ Roux then comments, “The delay of the indolent Marquis 
saved the enemy from complete destruction." (Lc Bailli de Stiff ren dons 
I’lndc, p. 188). Malleson repeats the incident, evidently taking it from 
lou\. and blames Bussy for missing such an opportunity. He had 
arrived at a time of life when men no longer attack." (Final French 
Struggles in India, p. 65). 

2 P. A. ms. 402. 



towards 



NUM/Sty, 



The recently arrived troops of the Hanoverian regiment, pro¬ 
visions and munitions. Their left flank was also effectively 
covered bv a large grove of tall and leafy trees, which masked 
their movements from the enemy. On his side Hussy, as soon 
as he perceived the intention of the English to take up their 
position to the south of Cuddaiore, made a corresponding 
movement of his own army, which formed a parallel line, facing 
the English at a distance of eight to nine hundred yards. The 
French line stretched from an elevated ground near the sea to 
the south-eastern side of the hill of BandapoMam. Thus both 
the flanks were fairly well protected. In order to secure the 
right flank more effectively Buss) posted the sepoys of Sayyid 
Sahib on the sloping face of the Baiulapollam, To their left 
were placed 200 Europeans and 100 sepoys with 6 field-pieces 
under the command of Bcnth. The rest of the line, about a 
mile and a half in length, was occupied by the two Brigades 
of Austrasie and Acquitaine and d’Houdelot’s detachment of 
volunteers. The artillery was distributed in the following 
way: at the left were raised two batteries, one of four pieces of 
12-pounders and the other of four pieces of 8-pounders; to their 
right another battery of four pieces of 24-pounders, and at a 
short distance were placed 3 howitzers, the only ones that there 
were in the park; two more batteries of smaller pieces were 
set. tip at the left. Besides these, there was light artillery 
with each of the brigades, Bussy felt satisfied about the dis¬ 
position of the forces, and in his report to the Minister, dated 
qth September, he wrote, “The army in this position seemed to 
me to be quite capable of resisting the attacks of the enemies.” 1 

III. B ussy's efforts to lay in stocks of provisions. 

Before turning to the military operations, let us notice very 
briefly the efforts made by Bussy to lay in stocks of provisions 
in order to face a prolonged siege at Cuddaiore. We have 
already noticed his difficulties about procuring provisions due 