

In his letter to Nizam Ali. dated 28th March, Bussy 
informed him that he had received a copy of the letter written 
by him to Montigny at Poona and that he felt extremely happy 
to know his desire “to renew the old relations which have 
continued since such a long time back between France and the 
House of Ni/am-ul-mulk.” Bussv next confirmed what he had 
written in a letter sent through de Launay, announcing his 
arrival in the Isle of France, that he had been sent by the King 
of France with large forces to drive the English from India 
and to restore the Territories lost by the- Indian Princes. Fie 
had on arrival in India received reports about Nizam Alt's 
friendly feelings for the French from Montigny and Aumont, 
in whom he asked Nizam Ali to repose complete confidence. 
He knew Aurnont who had once served under him. Bussy 
then asked Nizam Ali not to listen to the proposals of the 
English, nor to give them any help. The instructions he had 
received from the King enjoined on him giving military help 
to Nizam Ali for the recovery of the four Northern Sarkars 
bom the hands of the English. He finally exhorted him to 
send his troops at once to recover the Sarkars or, failing that, 



four Northern 



Ml NIST/fy 



BUSSYS RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 


casi to prevent the English from drawing any money or 
provisions from there. 1 

Bussy wrote at the same time to Nawab Tahawar fang, 
the principal minister of Nizam Alt, expressing great satisfac 
tioti at the reports of Mon tig ny and Aumont about his attach¬ 
ment to the French nation. He urged Tahawar fang to pre¬ 
vail upon Nizam Ali not to listen to any proposals that might 
lx* made by the English and to assure him of French military 
support for the recovers of the four Sorchcm Sarkars. 2 To 
Aumont also Bussy wrote on the same date, acknowledging 
receipt of the letters he had sent by way of Poona and express 
ing deep satisfaction over the demarches he had made to win 
over Nizam Ali to the side of the French. Bussy informed 
Aumont of the contents of his letter to Nizam Ali and asked 
him to repeat the assurance contained in the Royal Instruc¬ 
tions about French military help being offered to all the Indian 
Princes for the recovery of their lost territories from the hands 
of the English, Aumont was to urge upon Nizam Ali not to 
listen to the proposals of the English, and as a mark of friend- 
1 ip for the French to give orders to the governors of all his 
provinces not to allow the English to draw any help from there. 
Bussy advised Aumont to proceed very cautiously and not to 
give any details till the real intentions of Nizam Ali were 
known. He was not to proceed too far about giving assurance 
of French military support without positive orders from Bussy. 
l or the time being he was merely to try to persuade Nizam Ali 
to take the field against the English on his own account for 
! he recovery of the four Northern Sarkars.'' 


VII. Rclalions with the Mughal Emperor. 