

Thus in place of consenting to a forward move, as the 


1 r.A. ms. 40 a. In this reorganisation Comte d’Hoffelize was ap¬ 
pointed secont in v. .muiand, the Brigade d’Acquitaine was placed under 
Comte de la Marck, and the Brigade d’Austrasie under Baron d’Albignac. 
Each of the Brigades was equipped with 8 field-pieces and d’Houdelot's 
detachment with 4. The artillery park at Cuddalore was placed under 
the command of Summnont. The composition of the two Brigades is 


THE WAR IK THE CARNATIC 

'TEnglish began to march towards Permacoil, Bussy ordered the 
advanced detachment to fall back on Vilnoor near Pondicherry, 
and to remain there purely as an observation post. The Eng¬ 
lish occupied Permacoil on the 9th May and set about repairing 
the fort and laying in stocks of provisions and munitions. As 
their intention to march on Guddalore became quite clear. 
Bussv wrote pressing letters to Sayyicl Sahib to rejoin him with 
his forces, numbering 10.000 men, including both cavalry and 
infantry. Fortunately for him, Sayyid Sahib responded to the 
summons and promptly came to Guddalore to join the trench. 
It was a great relief to Bussy who needed a cavalry force very 
badly. A small detachment of horse was promptly sent to the 
assistance of d’ Houdelot. 1 he reinforcement encouraged 

d'Houdelot once more to think of bold moves, and it was with 
great difficulty that Bussy could restrain his intrepidity and 
bring him to a realisation of the military situation. In a let-tea 
dated 24th May he had to warn d’Houdelot in the following 
terms: “You must not at all consider your detachment at the 
moment as the vanguard of the army, nor even as a lighting 
corps, but simply as an advanced post to collect information 
about the movements of the enemy and to withdraw the 

moment he begins to march on us. 

Otherwise. I shall not hesitate a moment to recall the whole 
force here, it being not possible to send you more men/ 1 

A few days later, on the news of the English advance towards 
Koliyanur, Bussy ordered d’Houdelot’s detachment to fall back 




given below: 

Brigade d’Acquituine Brigade d'Austrasie 

Sepoy battalion ol Ac- Sepoy battalion of 


quitaine 

450 men 

Royal Roussillon 

450 men 

Sepoy battalion of la 


Sepoy battalion of Aus- 


Maick 

400 men 

irasic 

450 men 

Second battalion of Ac- 


Second battalion of 


quitaine 

600 men 

Royal Roussillon 

9,00 men 

First battalion of la 


First battalion of Aus- 


Martk 

450 men 

trasie 

500 men 

Second battalion of la 


Second battalion of 


Martk 

*550 men 

Austrasie 

500 men 


2,25b men 


2,200 men 

1 Marline an Bussy 

ct Vlntle 

J'ranfaisc, pp. 35435$. 








THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


nnaiyar river, the last line of defence for Cuddalore. 1 
Bussy decided to hold this line against the enemy. He cons¬ 
true ted a battery of six pieces at the mouth of the Ponnaiyar 
and formed his troops in a line along the southern bank of the 
liver, keeping the contingent of Sayyid Sahib at the left. The 
river Ponnaivar served as a quite secure line of defence. 
Although if remained practically dry in the month of June, the 
sandy bed was sufficiently wide and the little stream of water 
passing through it sufficiently deep to make fording difficult for 
an army with artillery and baggages, specially if the other side 
was held securely by the enemy. The French right stretched 
towards the sea up to a point where the river was not at all 
fordable, and the left was protected by a high embankment, 
where Bussy placed an advanced post to watch the movements 
of the enemy. 