

fhcre remained the Emperor of Delhi as the only other 
Power with whom it was worthwhile for the French to nego¬ 
tiate. It may be recalled that long before the outbreak of war 
in Europe several projects centring round an alliance with the 
Emperor had been submitted to the Government in Paris, But 

1 l’< A. ms. 501; also Journal th Bussy, pp. 331-352. 

R A* nis. 199; also Journal de Bussy, p. 352. 

3 1 *' A. ms. 502; also Journal de Bussy, pp. 352-353. 

W 


misrfy 



Bussy, who did not know north India from personal experience 
and who was suspicious of the bonafides and veracity of 
Chevalier and Madec, appeared all through sceptical of the 
utility of an alliance with the Mughal Emperor. All his 
previous noire $ bring out clearly his attitude on this subject. 

He was thus never very eager to take up seriously negotiations 
with the Court of Delhi, and became even less so when on Ivis 
arrival at Cuddalore he learnt through Montigny’s letters of 
the death of Najaf Khan, the only strong man in that Court 
who could have given some little effective help to the French. 1 2 
So all that he thought necessary in the case of the Emperor 
was to send him a letter, couched in vague and general terms, 
through Montigny who was charged with maintaining diplo¬ 
matic relations with the Courts of Delhi and Hyderabad 
besides that of Poona. It was dated 17th April.* Bussy wrote 
to the Emperor that he had received a copy of the letter sent 
to Montigny, in which the Emperor had expressed his readiness 
to join the French to “destroy the English power in India." 
He then stated that he had been sent by the King of France 
wi lt 10,000 European troops and 20 warships to drive the 
English out of India and 10 reinstate the Indian Princes in 
their lost territories. He had already landed on the Coroman¬ 
del Coast and was shortly marching against the English. Fie 
begged the Emperor not to enter into any negotiations with 
the English and assured him of French military support in 
accordance with the instructions of the King. He hoped to 
send Montigny soon to the Court of Delhi to lay before him 
all the details, and he begged the Emperor to repose complete 
confidence in Montigny. For the rest, Bussy simply asked 
Montigny to inform him about developments at the Court of 
Delhi from time to time. 3 It may be noted that the outbreak 
of dissensions among the lieutenants of Najaf Khan for success¬ 
ion to his position completely destroyed what little prospect 
there might have been to induce the Court of Delhi to take 
a decided policy with regard to an alliance with France. 

1 Journal de Bussy, p. 340. 

2 A. ms. 514: N. A. Calendar of Persian Correspondence, VI, Nos. 
H 3 and 835, also see No. 832 (letters from Nawab Amirul Utnara of Ajcot 
to Mahdi Quli Khan) and No. 834 (letter of Montigny to the Emperor). 

3 Journal dc Bussy, p. 358 . 


CHAPTER Xltl 


THE WAR IN THE CARNATIC 
I. Difficulties facing Bussy. 

Having noticed Bussy’s diplomatic; ovei ures to the vai ions 
Indian Powers, let us next turn our attention to the military 
situation from March to the end of June, when news arrived 
about the conclusion oi? peace in Europe. Fortunately h>i tis, 
most authentic documents are available iri the reports sent by 
Bussy lo the Ministers, Marquis de Castries, Marquis de Segui 
and Cpmte cie Vergcnnes, 1 and in the letters exchanged between 
Bussy and de SuftVen. 2 ^ Hie situation facing Bussy on his 
arrival in India was bad enough to discourage any commandei 
of an expeditionary force, and in order to explain the ultimate 
lack of success of the French army it is hardly necessary to put 
undue emphasis on the old age and supposed timidity and 
indolence of Bussy, as Roux and. following him, Malleson have 
done. 