

1 P-A. ms. 399. 

2 The first two attempts to send a convoy under Soulanges in Decem¬ 
ber 1781 and April 17814 were frustrated by the English, as noticed already. 
Not discouraged, the Minister of Marine informed Bussv of his intention to 
make another attempt, but it was not actually done. 




mntsr#y. 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

Again he wrote: “Instead of following the 
counsel of Bailli de Suffren and of other experienced oflicers 
who had advised him to take the offensive in a daring way and 
to occupy die strong* position of Permacoil before General 
Stuart could seize it, Buss), resuming the old oriental practices, 
kept himself invisible in his camp like a rich Nawab. What 
a contrast in the eyes of our soldiers, between this indolent 
conduct of the Marquis and the indomitable activity of de 
Suffren, whom the Minister had very unwisely placed under 
ids orders, and specially the rapidity of action of Tipu Saeb, 
whose triumphs could not rouse among the French the spirit 
of emulation, gone to sleep for ever/'* 

Taking his inspiration from Roux, whose influence is 
unmistakable, Malieson wrote: “But the Bussy who returned 
to India in 1783 was no longer the hardy warrior who had 
electrified southern India in the years between 1754 and 1760; 
who had made of the Subadar of the Dekhan a French prefect, 
and whose capacity to dare had supplied the want of soldiers. 
If the Bussy of 1756, by his genius, his activity, his daring, his 
success, foreshadowed in some respects the illustrious warrior 
who just forty years later displayed the same qualities to 
conquer Italy, the Bussy of 1783, corrupted by wealth, ener¬ 
vated by luxury, and careful only of his ease, more resembled 
that scion of the House of Bourbon, once his sovereign, who 
consecrated all his hours to his mistresses, who left the nomina¬ 
tion of the generals of the armies of France to a de Pompadour 
and who banished a Choiseul on the requisition of a du Barry! 
IVussv, then, instead of acting with vigour, did nothing. He 
did not even show himself to his men. He kept himself, to 
borrow the language of one of his countrymen, ‘invisible in his 
tent like a rich Nabob*. Instructed by Colonel d’Offelize of 
the advance of the English, and informed by that officer that 
he pledged himself to maintain his force at Permacol, if he 
were but supported, Bussy not only refused, but abandoned 
every outlying fortification’ and fell back within Kadahir. 

1 Roux —Le Bailli de Suffren dans l* Inde, p. 177. 

2 Ibid., pp. 184-185. 

n Malieson —Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas . 
pp. G3-64. 




WNisr/f y 



Anybody who goes through the original records connected 
with Bnssy’s expedition cannot hut regard such sweeping obser¬ 
vations as unjustified and not based on facts. The only ex 
planation for such a dogmatic condemnation of Bussy is that 
Roux, the admiring biographer of de Suffren, deliberately 
painted Bussy black so that his own hero might shine all 
the more in contrast: and similarly Malleson, in his excessive 
zeal to do justice to the rivals of his own countrymen in India, 
sought to explain away their failure in 1783 by attributing* it 
wholly to the character and conduct of Bussy. 