

II. The English army marching on Cud dal ore. 

Till the end of March Bussy was left in the dark about 
the English plan of operations. He sent a spy to Madras on 
the 20th. who-returned on the 31st and reported that the Eng¬ 
lish army w r as encamped to the west of the Great Mount and 
consisted of 10,000 sepoys and a little over 2,000 European 
troops with 78 pieces of artillery and a large number of 
transports. The spy had visited the camp on the 2(ith and 
had heard it rumoured that the army was going to march on 
Citddalore. 4 It was not, however, till about the end of April 
that the English forces were ready to move. By that time 
their fleet, much strengthened by the junction of Bikerton and 
Hughes, had arrived at Madras, thus rendering possible com¬ 
bined operations against Cuddalore. There had also arrived 
some reinforcement of troops from England, and Sir Eyre Goote 
was again sent down from Bengal to assume command. Goote, 
however, met with a tragic end. His ship, the Resolution , was 
chased bv some French frigates, and the fear of being captured 
by the enemy gave him such a shock that he had a stroke and 
died immediately after landing at Madras. 1 2 I he command of 
the English army thus remained with Stuart. 

1 Journal de Bussy, pp. 361-362. The English army, when it started 
from Madras, numbered *,943 Europeans and 11,545 sepoys. It received 
a reinforcement later at CuddalOre which increased the number of 
Europeans to 3,500 (W iiks History of Mysoor, II. p. 181). 

2 Eorrest Selections from Letters, Despatches, etc., Foreign Dept. y 
Government of India, Ml, pp. 943-945; Love — Vestiges of Old Madras, 
III, pp. 247-348. 



MINISr^ 


('HE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


On the ^ist April Stuart began to move south. Proceed¬ 
ing slowly, he occupied Chinglepm, where he halted for a few 
days to replenish his stocks of provisions. It was, however, 
evident that his intention was to move next to Permacoil and 
occupy that strong position. The French had at the time a 
small detachment under d’Houdelot at Tindivanam, near 
Permacoil, as an advanced post for observing the movements of 
the English. D’Houdelot was an intrepid officer, and in order 
to forestall the English he begged lfussy to send him some 
reinforcement to occupy Permacoil. For his refusal to accept 
the advice of d’Houdelot, Pussy has been rather unjustly 
blamed by historians like Roux. But being in command of the 
operations. Bussv had to take stock of the resources at his dis¬ 
posal and to examine all the possibilities of the situation before 
taking any forward move, t he detachment under d’Houdelot 
consisted of 616 men only, 180 volunteers, 36 hussars and 400 
sepoys. The rest of the French forces Pussy had organised in 
two Brigades, the Brigade (I’Acquitaine, consisting of 1,400 
Europeans and 850 sepoys, and the Brigade d’Austrasie, con¬ 
sisting of 1,309 Europeans and 900 sepoys. 1 With such a small 
number of men at his disposal, would it have been wise on the 
part of Bussy to allow his advanced detachment to take a for¬ 
ward move and occupy Permacoil, far away from the base at 
Cuddalore? If, as seemed quite likely, the detachment had been 
cut off and destroyed by the English, it would have further re¬ 
duced the strength of the French army, and then ihe whole 
blame would have been thrown on Bussy. Linder the circuiri 
stances, it would have been unwise for a commander to divide 
the forces under him and send stray detachments to far distant 
forward positions. On the other hand, military expediency 
dictated that all the available forces should be concentrated at 
a particular place to offer stubborn resistance to an eneniv 
superior in number. 