

On the 2nd June the English army came up to the river 
and formed a line along the northern bank parallel to the 
French. But the quick eye of Stuart at once detected the 
impossibility of crossing the river at that point, and in order 


1 In order to follow the movements of the two armies the following 

description of the environs of Cuddalore will be found useful, the 

principal river in the area is the Ponnaiyar, rising in the State of Mysore 

and Mowing due cast across the South Arcot District. It falls into the 

S(, a about six miles north of the old Cuddalore town. It comes down 
n short floods which dry up again. During high floods the river spills 
over into the Malattar and from it into the Gadillam, which flows into 
the sea just south of Fort Sr. David. From Gadillam at the foot of 
tort St. David there stretches a backwater along the eastern face of the 
old Cuddalore town, flowing into the sea just south of the town, at the 
mouth <'> the Uppanar. West of the old Cuddalore town is a low hill, 
only about a hundred feet above the sea. known as the Bandapollam Hill. 

Its modern name is Mount Capper and is within the present Cuddalore 

municipality. Ir is a part of the same line of hills to which the Red 
Hills just west of Pondicherry belong. The Bandapollam Hilt figured many 
times in he wars of the eighteenth century. It may be recalled that after 
the capture of C uddalore by the French in April 1782 the place was found 
<0 unhealthy that the army was encamped outside the town, at a place 
called Manjakuppam. Manjakuppam is about four miles to the north 
of the old Cuddalore town, being separated from it by the river Gadillam. 

It is now within Cuddalore municipality and is the official centre of 

the town Madras District Gazetteers South Arcot . I, for details. The 
volume contains two maps, one of Cuddalore town and the other of the 
whole district). 


misffy 


THE WAR IN THE CARNATIC 

gft flank of the French he marched his army 
west anti encamped at Ycllapakkam, The French also made 
an analogous movement and cauu to rest their right flank on 
the Ponnaiyar river and to turn their left flank south-westwards 
to rest on the hill of Bandapollain in order to present a straight 
front to die enemy. The English suddenly moved further to 
the west, and without the French knowing it in time they 
crossed the river Gadiliam on the 6th June at eight in the 
morning. If the French had a body of good cavalry, they could 
have easily prevented the crossing and could have attacked the 
English army at an advantage. But they failed to make any 
use of this opportunity, not because, as Roux says, of the 
timidity of Bussy, 1 but because of the lack of co-operation on 
the part of Sayyid Sahib, who refused to supply any cavalry t;o 
intercept the English. Bussv explained his difficulties in his 
report to the Minister, dated 9th September. Ml only I had at 
my disposal 1,500. good cavalry I would have attacked it (the 
English army) at an advantage while crossing this river, but 
Sayyid Sultan Sahib was wholly opposed to moving his cavalry 
forward: the heat was excessive and it was impossible for our 
troops to arrive before midday at the spot where, if they could 
have arrived at nine o’clock, the rear guard of the enemy ran 
the risk of being cut off. ’ 2 