

Bussy suffered a similar disappointment with regard to 
provisions and transport for his artillery, for which he had 
counted entirely on the co-operation of the Nawab of Mysore. 
The Carnatic had been so thoroughly; devastated by Haidar 
that even with money it was impossible for the French to 
procure adequate provisions for the army, or means of trans¬ 
port for the artillery. Bussy wrote several pressing letters to 
T'ipu and the latter gave repeated assurances of having sent 
orders to his officers to supply all the requirements of the 
French army, But either because of the unfriendliness ol 
Savvid Sahib or because of secret instructions given by Tipu 
himself, as Bussy strongly suspec ted, the French were left with 
out any provisions and transports. In a letter to Castries, 
dated gist March, Buss\ wrote with regret, “We do not have 
even a single bullock to drag a mere one-pounder, and the chief 


v J'nirnal de Bussy , pp. 543-348. 


MWS Tf)y 



of the troops that the son of Haidar Alt had left to M. d'Hoffe- 
lize at the time of his departure has separated himself from 
d'Hoffelize under various pretexts; so that we are absolutely 
without any provisions and without any means to put the army 
on march.” 1 2 

In view of the difficulties recounted above,—the insecurity 
of the base., the inadequacy of military and naval strength, the 
lack of money, provisions and transport for artillery, and most 
of all the little prospect of getting any immediate co-operation 
from any Indian ally, Bussy had perforce to be on the defen 
sive for the time being* He was eager! \ expect ing the imminent 
arrival of reinforcements under Soulanges, which would double 
the army under his command and make the fleet at least equal 
to that of the English. 2 7 Ie therefore thought it prudent not 
to risk his small army in an) offensive operation against the 
English, which was further rendered impossible by lack oi 
transport for his artillery, but to follow a waiting game and 
stand on the defensive till the arrival of reinforcements which 
would enable him to take the held with confidence. Consi¬ 
dering the circumstances, an impartial historian cannot but 
approve, at least in a general way, the policy adopted by Bussy; 
and it. is rather surprising therefore to find Roux and, following 
him, Mallcson, both showing such great capacity for impartial 
judgment, condemning Bussy in the severest language possible 
for his timidity and lack of enterprise in adopting a defensive 
policy. 

Referring to Bussy, Roux wrote: ‘‘The old Governor of the 
Deccan, the military genius under Salabat, the illustrious 
lieutenant of Dupleix was now but an old mat), gouty and 
worried, ignorant of the new politics‘and of ihe real situation 
of the belligerent powers. His talents and his proverbial 
enterprise had been lost during a repose of 22 years in the midst 

of his immense riches.The 

vanity of this general.was bound u> have grave con¬ 

sequent* es which could not always be remedied by the genius 