

In the first place, the French lacked a secure base on the 
coast. Cuddalore was a rather unfortunate choice, and Duche- 
min would have done better, as suggested by de Suffren, to 
attempt the capture of Negapatam, which would have provided 
the French army with a more secure base. As it was, the 
French position was wholly indefensible against an attack by 
a superior force. Cuddalore was surrounded by a weak am 
low wall, which could be easily scaled. Ihere were thirteen or 
fourteen bastions, small and almost crumbling and situated at 
a great distance from one another. Nor was there veil an 
ordinary ditch round the place. 1 It was in such a defenceless 
base that the first expeditionary force had landed numcious 
pieces of heavy artillery and large quantities of munitions, a 

1 P. A. mss. 406 to 409. 

2 Ibid, mss. 582 to 634. 

^ Ibid, ms. 332— Notes sur Goudclour. 1782 (an anonymous account 
written for the informal ion of the French army for an aiiack on 
Cuddalore). 



WNIST/fy 



fact which Bussy regretted deeply. When during his stay in 
the Isle of France he heard of Haidar s intention to leave the 
Carnatic, his greatest anxiety was about the safety of the 
artillery and munitions stored at Cuddalore, and he at once 
sent out instructions to transfer them to Ceylon if Haidar really 
left the coast.' But nothing was done at the time, since Haidar 
did not actually leave; and when Bussy came, it was his con¬ 
cern about the fate of the small French contingent under 
Fluffelize and the safety of the artillery and munitions stored 
at Cuddalore which made him decide to land his expeditionary 
force there, and not at some*place to the north of Madras as 
he had originally contemplated. 2 In his detailed report to 
Castries on the military operations in India, while referring 
to the weakness of Cuddalore as a base, Bussy deeply regretted 
that the first expeditionary force had not followed the advice 
of de Suffren and seized the neighbouring temple of Chidam¬ 
baram, a “post infinitely better as a military base, very strong 
by itself, and capable of being further strengthened by all the 
extra works that one would have liked to add.” 3 

In the second place, Bussy found himself with forces wholly 
inadequate to carry on independent operations against the 
English. If Tipu had been in the Carnatic, the small French 
expeditionary force, joined with the Mysore army, could have 
taken the field against the English with boldness and some 
hope of success. But as it was, the French were left entirely 
to their own resources, and even the nominally large detach¬ 
ments of cavalry and infantry, left by Tipu under the command 
of 8ayyid Sahib for co-operation with the French, suddenly 
deserted them on a rather flimsy pretext and moved south. 
The defection of Sayyid Sahib deprived the French of a useful 

i Journal dr Bussy , p. 106. 

I*. A. ms. ‘599 (Bussy’s letter to Castries, 31st March 1783). 

■ / bid, ms. 402 (Bussy’s letter to Castries, 9th September 1783). It 
may be observed here that the French did perceive the importance of 
Chidambaram and did occupy it for some time but were ultimately thrown 
out on the orders of Haidar (Letter of David Philips, taken prisoner by 
the French — See. Sel. Corn. Proc., Fort William, 29th April, 1782; Forrest— 
Selections from Letters , Despatches etcForeign Department, III, pp. 860- 
\ forcible occupation of the temple would have at once broken 
off the alliance with Haidar and would have perhaps led to worse conse¬ 
quences. 