


x 



M WlST/fy 



be stopped. Bcuth was killed in action together with a large 
part of his men, and the rest fell back to the ground held by 
the Brigade d’Austrasie, which then moved forward and charged 
the enemy with bayonets. At the. same time, perceiving that 
practically the entire English army had concentrated against 
the right flank, Bussy ordered the first battalion of la March 
to move forward and charge. The two battalions of A r;.oo 
and the first battalion oi la Marck succeeded in ousm; S the 
enemy beyond the post originally held by Be nth, but a fit r an 
hour’s hard lighting they had to fall back on their piv vo ^ 
position. The tide of the battle would have jph a need if the 
French had just 3,000 cavalry to assist them, bid in ue of 
the pressing summons of Bussy, Sayyid Sahib ^ 1 encamped 

about five leagues from the place, remained 1 >i:aiiy tractive out 
of fear or treachery. About midday the Engiisn *captubed the 
post held by Benth. The rest of the day passed in mere 
exchange of lire, the troops on both sides were tired and worn 
out by the excessive heat, and when night fell the two armies 
went to rest on the field of battle. 

Even after the setback of the 13th Bussy had intended 
to renew the fight next morning. But he changed his mind 
for two reasons. He had lost a large number of transport cattle, 
the only means of manoeuvring his artillery, and the Indian 
keepers had fled away with the rest. Secondly, having suffered 
heavy casualties he could not afford to risk the remainder of the 
small army under him against a numerically superior enemy. 
So he thought it prudent to withdraw his forces to Cuddalore 
and stand a siege there. All through the night of 13th 
June the wounded were carried to the town and the artillery 
was also dragged off by troops, for want of transport cattle, with 
the exception of nine small pieces which had to be left behind. 
Early in the morning oF the 14th the entire arm) retired within 
the walls of Cuddalore. 

The action of the 13th had inflicted heavy casualties on 
both ides. There was a large-scale massacre and few prisoners 
were taken; on the English side only 6 officers and 35 men, 
and on the French side one officer and 10 men. Of the French 
forces the second battalion of Acquitaine had been entrusted 
with protecting the batteries on the left, and the second 
battalion of la Marck had been sent up to prevent an attempt 


Ml MSTfiy 



1'HK WAR IN THE CARNATK.: 


English sepoys to turn the right flank. The main brunt 
of the attack of the English forces, consisting of nearly 3,500 
Europeans and 11,500 sepoys, was thus borne by the two bat¬ 
talions of Austrasie, the second battalion of Royal Roussillon 
and the first battalion of la Marck, numbering in all 1,750 men. 
The French had 15 officers killed and 25 wounded, some of 
whom died subsequently. The losses on the English side, cal¬ 
culated from intercepted letters, numbered 64 officers and 2,000 
sepoys killed and wounded. 1 