

The iast few words give the real motive which ultimately 
decided de Sufi t en to go to Cuddalore. It was not so much 
the wishes of Bussy, who wrote to him again on the 5th June 
not to leave Trinkomali and risk his squadron except when the* 
army was in serious clanger, 4 as the pride of a naval commander 
to take up the challenge of the enemy. The English ships left 
Trinkomali on the 2nd June and sailed off north to Madras. 
On the 10th the French ships which had been sent to Cuddalore 
earlier returned to Trinkoniali. They had been chased by the 
English squadron on their way back, but they managed to 
escape. 5 Three days earlier, on the 7th, there arrived a small 
boat, the Dromadaire, which had accompanied Peinier’s division 
to the Coromandel Coast, bringing the news of the critical 

1 P. A. ins. 605; Journal de tiord du Bailli de Suffren dans VInde, 
pp. 250-251; Roux— Le Bailli de Suffren dans VInde, pp. 185 186. 

2 V, A. ms.606. 

3 Ibid., ins. 608. 

4 Ibid., ms. 610. 

5 Journal de hard du Bailli de Suffren dam VInde, p. 255. 




tmstfy 



position of the army at. Cuddalore, which was facing the prospect 
of a siege by the English land and naval forces. The news of 
this great crisis determined do Suffren all the more to move 
out of Trinkomali and fight the English squadron to relieve 
Cuddalore. De Suffren only waited for the return of the three 
ships under Eeinier, and as soon as they arrived on the 10th 
he called all the captains to a council of war, explained to them 
the critical position of the army, and informed them of his 
decision to leave at once for Cuddalore in spite of the decided 
inferiority of his navy. He spoke with great emotion about the 
sacred duty of saving the honour of the nation. His words 
evoked an enthusiastic: response from the captains, who replied 
in one voice that the squadron must move out at once to save 
the army at Cuddalore and that they were prepared to face the 
risk of an action with the English fleet. 1 

VI. De Suffren*s return to the Coromandel Coast. 

On the nth June the squadron, consisting of 15 ships of the 
line, 3 frigates and a br&lot, sailed out of Trinkomali. It will 
be remembered that in order to make up for the deficiency in 
manpower, all the frigates, with the exception of three, had 
to be disarmed and their personnel distributed among the other 
ships. Even then and even with the addition of sepoys and 
lascars, the total personnel of the squadron hardly came up to 
three fourth of the full complement. Many of the ships had 
not yet completed their repairs, and the Illustre and the Saint- 
Michel still leaked badly. It. was in this state that the French 
squadron moved out to fate an action with the English fleet, 
consisting of 18 ships of the line, all in perfect condition and 
having undergone thorough repairs at Bombay. 2 

On the 13th June the French came in sight of the English 
squadron, which lay anchored to the north of Porto Novo to 
assist the operations of the army under Stuart. At the sight 
of the approaching enemy squadron, Hughes, rightly consider 
ing that the principal object of the campaign was the capture 