


§L 


1 Journal dr Bord du Bailli de Suffren dam VInde, :>p. 246-248. 

2 /bid., pp. 247-248 

P. A. mss. 592. 595, 597 letters, dated 22nd April, 2nd and 4th May. 

4 Ibid., ms. 598. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


Asiatics.” f ie, however, informed de Suffren that he could not 
spare 1,560 men from his army and that all he could provide 
to replenish the deficiency in manpower of the squadron was 
the detachment of volunteers together with 500 to 600 sepoys. 1 
On the 11th de Suffren replied to Bussv that he was making 
preparations with as much speed as possible to start for Cudda¬ 
lore. He expected to leave I'rinkomali on the 22nd and reach 
Cuddalore on the 25th. 2 3 4 

The next two weeks were taken up by hasty preparations. 
Repairs to some of the ships were hurriedly completed, and in 
order to man the ships of the line 250 Europeans and 300 sepoys 
were drafted from the garrison at Trinkomali and all the fri¬ 
gates and fifties disarmed, with the exception of the Cttopatie , 
the Coventry and the boats which were to carry provisions and 
munitions. Even then the number did not come up to three- 
fourth of the total complement. 1 A few days later Bussy was 
joined by Sayyid Sahib, and feeling more secure he wrote to 
de Suffren on the ir 7 th May not to leave Trinkomali. From 
1 he movements of the English army and navy he suspected that 
behind their apparent intention of laying siege to Cuddalore 
was the real intention of luring de Suffren out of Trinkomali 
with his weak squadron and forcing a battle on him before the 
arrival of the expected reinforcements. “A combat with three 

ships less.would reduce us for the rest of the campaign 

to our land forces only and consequently to little possibility 
of operations.’ 1 

But apart from this letter, de Suffren’s departure for Cudda¬ 
lore was delayed by the sudden appearance of the English 
squadron before Trinkomali on the 24th. De Suffren had only 
10 ships under him fit for service, but he made a bold show 
and prepared for a combat. Next day the English ships sailed 
off towards Batticaloa. T he movements of the English squadron 
appeared mysterious and de Suffren suspected that the real 
intention was to attack Trinkomali as soon as he left for Cudda¬ 
lore. So he postponed his departure for the time being, but 

1 P. A. ms. 599. 

2 Ibid., ms. 601. 

3 Journal dr Bord <\n Bailli dr Suffren dans l’ftide, pp. 249-250. 

4 l*. A. ms. Go;. 


THE WAR JN THE CARNATIC 

advantage of the absence of the English squadron sent 
and artillery to Cuddalore by two transport vessels, 
the Fendant, the Cleopatre and the Coventry . He 
u also wrote to Bussy.to send him some men for the frigates. 1 2 
v Bossy replied on the 30th May, again asking de Suffren not to 
j leave Trinkomali, except only in the case of Cuddalore being- 
blockaded by the English army and navy. The preservation 
of the French squadron was of the greatest importance, and 
de Suffren was not to take any risk.* On the 31 si the English 
ships reappeared before Trinkomali and remained there for 
two days, as if with an intention to attack. De Suffren again 
made a bold show with the few ships he had with him, but he 
was filled with anxiety about the ships sent to Cuddalore. He 
managed to send a small boat to warn Peinier of the movements 
of the English fleet. He wrote to Bussy on the 1st June, inform¬ 
ing- him of the reappearance of the English ships before Trinko- 
mali. “If l had the Cendant, I would have moved out. As 
soon as it arrives, if you send me some men to provide for the 
defence of Trinkomali, I shall move out, because, besides the 
risk faced by the ships we are expecting back, it is painful to 
have to put up with the enemy’s challenge everyday/’ 3 