

It is interesting to note from the correspondence between 
Bussy and de Suffren the perfect understanding that existed 


between the two. On the night of the 16th June Bussy wrote to 
de Suffren giving him an account of the action of the 13th. 
The army was in a perilous state, shut up within Guddalore. 
“where we are sure to succumb physically sooner or later/' 
The only hope of deliverance was if de Suffren could win a 
naval victory and then take on board the sick and the wounded, 
which would enable Bussy' as a last resort to make a large-scale 
sortie and take the rear of the English line. “Otherwise there 
would be no other recourse for us but to embark and go to 


1 MaMeson Final French Struggles in India, pp. 68-69. 


mtsTfy 


' G °^ 



TUF WAR IN THE CARNATIC 



fmikoinali.’’ 1 2 3 On the 17th de Suffren replied to Bii^sy that in 
spite of the inferiority of his squadron in the number of ships 
and their condition as well as in personnel, he fully agreed 
that it was necessary to win a naval victory to save Cuddalore, 
and he requested hussy to send him as many men as ho could 
to replenish the deficiency in the personnel of the squadron* 8 
Bussy promptly offered 600 Europeans and 600 sepoys, explain¬ 
ing, “it is all that is possible for me to do unless l embark 
myself with the whole army and thus leave India altogether.” 5 
I'he troops were hurriedly embarked on the 181h June and de 
Suffren wrote to Bussy that with these reinforcements he could 
now hope for success. If he could defeat the English squadron, 
he would return to Cuddalore and give Bus&y all the assistance 
he could to meet the land forces of the enemy. If on 1 lie other 
hand he was defeated, and if after a heroic resistance the army 
was forced to capitulate, Bussy should demand, as the hist 
article of capitulation, to be transported to Trinkomali. As 
long as we have this place* we shall have some existence at least 
in Indian waters.” 4 

VII. The last naval action (2 olh June). 

After hurriedly embarking the additional men, the French 
ships sailed off on the 18th to draw the enemy fleet into action. 
But for two days the latter, which was manoeuvring to the 
south-east of Porto Novo, avoided an engagement. Hughes had 
two reasons for it. First, although his squadron was superior 
in number, it was badly deficient in personnel, having suffered 
the loss oi about 3,000 men by scurvy in a little over a month's 
time, and it lacked in supplies of fresh water also. 5 But the 
second and the more important reason was that he wanted to 
manoeuvre into a position from where he could attack the 
French squadron with the advantage of the wind in his favour. 
That was the reason why he left his anchorage before Cuddalore 

1 P.A. ms. On. 

2 Ibid., ms. 613. 

3 Ibid., ms. 614. 

* Ibid .> riiss. 615, 617. Fov an account of the squadron before. Gudda* 
tore, see also Journal de. Bord dir liailli de Suffren duns VInde, j>p. $63-267. 

5 Malieson Final French Struggles in India , p. 70. 