


tmsr/ty 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


on the i(itli, and why he repeatedly avoided an action with the 
French fleet on the 18th and the tydi, when the wind was in 
the enemy's favour. On the other hand, although 'he wind 
was in their favour, the French could not force a battle on the 
Fnglisb> whose superiority in number and speed enabled them 
to elude every time. 1 Hughes, however, got tired of fruitless 
manoeuvring*, and despairing of getting the advantage of the 
wind he at last prepared to aecept battle on the afternoon of 
the soth, relying on the advantage of the superiority of his fleet. 

It was rather late in the day, about half-past four in the 
afternoon, that the action was joined. It was the fifth and the 
last naval action fought by de Suffren in Indian waters. On 
this occasion his squadron was decidedly inferior to the enemy s 
in the number of ■ffiips and of guns, 15 ships of the line with 
1,008 guns -» against 18 ships ol the line with 120a guns of the 
English; but this disadvantage was amply made good in another 
way. After successive changes of command occasioned by past 
experience of insubordination and wilful neglect of duty, for 
the first time all the ships were now in charge of officers on 
whom de Suffren could put implicit reliance. For the first time 
all the captains were men who had given ample proofs of theii 
loyalty and devotion anti could be safely trusted to obey orders. 
Even the two old officers, de St. Felix and tin Chilleau. vied 
with each other in acts of heroism to efface the memory ot 
their past misconduct. Such an advantage of unstinted suppott 
and co-operation from his subordinates de Suffren had never 
enjoyed before, and it was a pity that he should have come to 
have it only during the last naval action he was destined to 
light in Indian waters.- an action which failed to be decisive, 
having commenced at the fag end of the day anil being teuni- 
nated by nightfall. 2 


1 Journal d< Hard dn Bailh de 

2 Table of the two squadrons: 

English 

the Defence (74) Newfthain 
The Is is (50}■—HoHaday 
The Active 

The Gibraltar (80}--Bikciron 
The Inflexible (f^p)—Che wind 
The Exeter ((4)—Smith 


Suffren duns Tlnde. pp. ^67-272. 

Trench 

Jr Sphinx (64V-Du Chilleau 
Jr Brillant (64V -Kersauson 
La Tine 

Le Fendant (74) — Render 
Jj Elam and (50)— de Salvert 
UAfax (64)—Mancelhhe 


miSTfiy 


I Hi* W AR IN TUt: CARNA l'IC 

the commencement of the action, the Flamand (50), 
belonging to the front, section, advanced close to the English 
line in an attempt to turn it. It was at once caught between 
two fires by the Exeter (64) and the Inflexible (64), and a 
torrent of shells poured upon it. The young and intrepid 
captain, de Salvert, was killed, but thanks to the courage and 
pluck of his able lieutenant, T rublet de Villcjcgu, the ship was 
able to extricate itself from its perilous position and rejoin the 
French line between the Fendant and the Ajax. In the centre 
of the line the Htiros (74), commanded by de Moissac, bowed 
itself worthy of the affection of d< Suftren. Aided by the 
IIlustre (74), it kept three enemy ships engaged, the Superb 
(74), the Momma (70) and the 'Burford (70), while the Argo¬ 
naute (74) and the Petit Annibal (50) fought against the Sultan 
(74) and the Africa (64). In the rear section the Yengeur (64) 
replied to the lire of the Mngnanime (64), and the Ilardi ((>4) 
resisted valiantly the attacks of the Bristol (5a) and the Mon- 
mouth (64) and forced them to keep at a respectful distance. 
In the front section the Fendant (74). after having put out of 
action the Inflexible ((>4), directed its attack against the Gibral¬ 
tar (80), while the Sphinx (64) engaged the Defence (74). About 
half-past live there broke out a serious Fire on the Fendant, 
which compelled Peinier to withdraw the ship for some time 
from the line of battle. The Gibraltar (80) at once dashed 
forward to capture the ship and to break the French line, but 
it was repulsed by the Flamand, an inferior ship with only 50 