

J he first anxiety of de Suffren after reaching Trinkomali 
was about the four ships which had been left behind to cruise 
off Madras and which were unaware of the coming of the English 
squadron. So on the nth he sent a fast-moving boat, the 
Naiadc, commanded by Villaret de Joyeuse, to warn the ships 
of the danger . 2 it was an extremely perilous mission, and 
de Joyeuse humorously observed whether de Suffren would give 
him. together with his instructions, letters of recommendation 
addressed to Lord Macartney and Sir Edward Hughes. The 
very next day the Naiade was chased by the Sceptre, and after a 
hard fight, lasting for more than five hours, the French ship 
surrendered. The heroic conduct of de Joyeuse so impressed 
the English that Hughes embraced him and remarked that he 
would willingly lose all his frigates at such a high price . 1 
Fortunately, however, the four ships under Peinier gave up their 

1 Journal d< Hard du Bailli dc Suffren dans Vlndt, p. *37. 

2 Ibid., pp. 344**45. 

Bussy to Suffren, May 2 (F. A, Jns. 595); also Roux— Lc Bat Hi dc 
Suffren dans Vlnde, pp. 180-181, 


MiN/sr*^ 



THE WAR IN THE CARNATIC 

, r . —. 

cruise off Madras on the 13th, missing the English convoy 
escorted by the Bristol which arrived on the 14th, and just 
escaping the fleet of Hughes which arrived on the 15th. The 
fendnnt was in fact chased by the enemy during the return 
voyage, but having superior speed it escaped and all the four 
ships reached Trinkomali safely on April 21/22. 1 

Early in May de Suffren sent the Coventry to Cuddalore for 
information about the army. It returned on the 11th with 
letters from Bussy, who wrote that the English army was already 
on the march towards ( uddalore and that their navy was 
expected to arrive before the place to lay a blockade. 2 Even 
before that, Bussy had written to de Suffren about the possibility 
of the French army being blockaded at. Cuddalore, and had 
asked cle Suffren to come to its relief with provisions and 
munitions, in spite of the numerical inferiority oi the French 
squadron to the English. 3 It was an extremely hazardous 
venture for de Suffren to face an action with the decidedly 
superior English fleet, but his courage and patriotism rose to 
the occasion at the news of the dangers threatening the army. 
He sent a letter by the Coventry on the 4th May, informing 
Bussy that in spite of the triple disadvantage in which his 
squadron stood, in respect of tonnage, number of ships and 
personnel, he would sail out of Trinkomali and face the English 
squadron if Cuddalore was attacked. He, however, asked Bussy 
to give him 1,500 men to replenish the deficiency in the per 
sonnel, of his squadron. 4 

Bussy replied by the same boat on the 6th May that in 
spite of the inferiority of his squadron to that of the enemy 
de Suffren must come to Cuddalore at once, and that if he 
delayed “the army will be really exposed to the gravest dangers. 
Therefore, Monsieur, you must come out as soon as possible 
with your 15 ships. Three principal factors compel me to 
give you this order,—lack of provisions, inadequacy of munitions 
arid the pernicious effect which your absence cannot fail to 
make on the minds of the enemies, of the allies, and of all the 