

IV. The engagement, of 13th June and the withdrawal of 
the French to Cuddalore . 

Let us now turn to the military operations before Gudda¬ 
iore, We have already seen how the two armies took up their 
positions to the south of Guddaiore on the 7th. On the 8th the 
English Heel arrived before the place and landed troops, provi¬ 
sions, munitions and siege artillery. The next four days were 
spent in preparations. The French constructed some entrench 
men is before their camp and also some breastworks to keep 
rheir artillery under cover. Bussy had also another anxiety, 
about the large number of the sick, who were in hospital 
at Manjakuppam and who had to be quickly removed to Cudda¬ 
lore for safety. 7 On the 12th the French prepared for action 
dud the second battalion of Acquitaine went up to occupy an 
advanced po ition, its left resting on the Fakir's tomb where a 
battery of four pieces of 12-pounders had been set up, and the 

1 i\ A. YDS, 592. 

2 Ibid*, ins. 595. 

* Ibid,, 111s. 599. 

4 Ibid., ins. {>04. 

h Ibid., mss. 602, 605 and tk$. 

6 Ibid., ms, 610. 

7 Writing to de Suffrcn on the 30th May, Bussy complained of the 
ravages of dysentery among his troops and stated ihat (too men were 
already in hospital (P.A. ms. 606). 


miST/fy 



right resting on another battery of six pieces. 1 he let* flank 
and the centre were held securely, but the real weak spot was 
on the right, It will be remembered that the right Hank rested 
on the slope of the Bandapollam hill, where Hussy had placed a 
body of Mysore sepoys under the charge of de Canaple, who 
thought that the post was quite secure and that the English 
would not be able to bring up their artillery there. Imme¬ 
diately to the left was the post occupied by Benth with 200 
Europeans and. 100 sepoys. 1 he English at once detected the 
weak spot. They concentrated their hre on the Mysore sepoys, 
who fled away precipitately, leaving the slope of the hill to 
be occupied by the English. The latter brought up their artil 
lory to the spot, during the night of 12th June. « rected two 
batteries and rushed up several columns of infantry t.o hold 
the post securely and to enable a concentration of attack on 
the post occupied by Benth. Bussy, as soon a> he came to 
know of the flight of the sepoys and the occupation of their 
post by the English, realised the danger of Benth’s position. 
He visited the post at four in the morning of the 13th and 
reinforced it with a part of the regiment of Austrasie, sending 
information at the same time to Sayyid Sahib to come up to 
the spot at once with the whole body of his cavalry. 

The English began their attack on Benth's position at 
day-break, and under cover of their newly raised batteries tried 
to send up several columns of European troops, which were, 
however, repulsed. Ihe trench had a fathei weak artillciy 
on the right flank, consisting of two 18-poundei and fom 8 
pounder pieces, but it kept up a steady fire and inflicted heavy 
casualties on the enemy. About eight o clock Bussy, realising 
that the English intended to concentrate their attack on the 
right flank, left only the second battalion of Acquitainc to hold 
the left and withdrew the two battalions of la Marck to the 
second line. The second battalion of la Marck was sent up to 
the right when it was noticed that several columns of English 
sepoys were making an attempt to turn the French line. 1 he 
sepoys withdrew at once on the arrival of the reinforcement 
There followed a heavy cannonade all along the line till half 
past nine, when the English began to advance in several columns 
to seize the advanced post ol Benth 1 hey 7 were received with a 
terrific artillery and musketry fire, but their advance could not 