

Having withdrawn within the walls of Cuddalorc, Bussy 
started making hasty constructions to put the place in a better 
state of defence. But it was an impossible task, and in the 
face of the combined operations of the English army and navy 
the French could have done little to defend the place. Their 
only salvation lay in the arrival of dc* SuffreiVs fleet, which 
could relieve the pressure on Cuddalorc by diverting the 
English squadron. Fortunately for them, at this critical hour, 
the intrepid sailor suddenly appeared before Cuddalore with 
his ships on the 15th to save the army once more from sure 
destruction. 


V. The trench fleet at TrinkomaJi. 


At this point it is necessary to retrace our steps and sec 
what de Saffron had been doing since his departure from Cudda 
lore in March after landing Bussy’s expeditionary force there. 
De Stitfren had to start back hastily from Cuddalorc on the 
23rd March, before even completing the disembarkation of 

' The account of the engagement is based mainly on Pussy’s rq>on 
!» the Minister, dated 9th -ScpL (P.A. ms. 402); A.V -Miftittfcrc dc la 
Marine, H 4 vol. 268 (combats soutenus par les troupes francais de 
Goudclour cn Join .783): and the letter of General Smart to the Madras 
Government, dated 15th June (Sec. Scl. Com. Proc, Port William. 3rd 
July, 1783: Forrest Selections from Letters, Despatches, etc. Foreign 
Dri>l" Govt . of Indite HE pp. 973*975)* Sce a,so Wilks— History of Mysoor, 
11, pp. 186-189. His comment 011 the result ot the action deserves to be 
quoted: “The retirement of the French on the same night, within the 
walls of Cuddalorc, evinced their sense of the operations of the day; 
but their being permitted during the night to draw off without molestation 
all their heavy guns from the exterior position, furnished equal evidence 
of the impression made on the English by a victory so dearly purchased. 


mtSTfiy 



artillery and munitions, for fear of meeting the reinforced 
English fleet expected to arrive on the coast any day. He, 
however, left Guddalore with only a part of the squadron, send¬ 
ing four ships, the Fend ant, the Saint-M ichel, the Cldopatre 
and t he Coventry, to cruise off Madras for two weeks in order to 
intercept a large convoy from Europe expected at Madras 
shortly , 1 The return voyage of dc Suffren to Trinkomali was 
unduly delayed by contrary winds, and it was not till 10th 
Apiil that he came within sight of the place. A frigate, the 
Bellone , which had been sent in advance to explore the approach 
to the bay, signalled the presence of ships. It was the 
English fleet returning from the western coast. In spite of.the 
superior number and the position of the English ships de Suffren 
took a bold decision to make a dash for the port, which he 
hoped to gain before the enemy could come up and bar the 
way. I lie daring move was successful, and in the evening the 
French ships quietly anchored at the entrance to the bay. 
Next clay they entered the port ol Trinkomali safely, and the 
only losses they suffered were two small transport vessels which 
fell into the hands of the enemy. 