

1 P. A. ms. 402. Wilks paid tribute to the French General in the 
following words: "Monsieur Bussy proceeded with the skill and rapid 
execution which distinguish his nation, in covering, with the most judi- 
<• oils field works, the position which he had assumed ."—(History of 
M y soar, II, p. 186). 


mtSTfiy 



THE WAR IN THE CARNAHtf 


tnAick of co-operation on the part of Sayyid Sahib, despite the 
assurances repeatedly given b\ ripu. There was a stock-taking 
on the i( 5 rh April of the provisions in the stores, the result of 
which was quite discouraging. 1 2 3 * 5 6 So as soon as Bussy c.unc to 
learn, about the end of April, that the English army had begun 
to move south, his first anxiety was to procure as much pro 
isions from Pondicherry as possible while that town still 


VAOtVSXJU? o M. ^ ^ £. 

remained free from English control and the communications 
between it and Cuddalore still remained open. T he measure 
created a good deal of dissatisfaction among the citizens 
of Pondicherry, who did not like to see their town denuded of 
its stocks, but it was removed by ail assurance from Bussy of 
returning equivalent quantities of provisions in future. At 
the same time the return ol Sayyid Sahib to Cuddalore facili¬ 
tated the augmentation of stocks. Bussy took every possible 
precaution to secure the safety of the stores and to prevent 
any communication between the Indian inhabitants of the town 
and the English. 9 

Bussy also wrote to de Suffren several letters during April 
arid May giving him information about the movements of the 
English army and asking him to send at least two months’ stock 
of provisions. 4 In a letter dated 10th April Bussy complained 
that not a grain of wheat or rice was allowed to enter Cuddalore 
by the Nawab’s men and he urged tie Suffren to send him 
provisions as quickly as he could. In reply to an earlier, letter 
of dc Suffren, in which the latter had written that the fleet 
was more in need of money than of rice,® Bussy wrote, “we 
have on the contrary more need of rice at the moment than of 
money/' In another letter, dated 22nd April, Bussy informed 
de Suffren that the English army was marching on Cuddalore 
and their fleet was also expected to arrive at the same time to 


1 1*. A. ms. 513. 

2 M irtineau —Bussy a l' hide Irangaisc, p. 354. 

3 Ibid., p. 355. 

1 The exchange of letters between Hussy and de Suffren (P* A. mss 
562-684) is very interesting and reveals a perfect understanding Ix'twcen 
the two over the common objective. It completely contradicts the sup¬ 
position of Roux about strained relations between them. 

5 P. A. ms. 586. 

6 Ibid., ms. 585. 


WtST/iy. 



lav a blockade before tlie place, against which he depended 
entirely on the co-operation of de Suffrcn, who could, by divert¬ 
ing the enemy fleet, enable supplies of provisions and munitions 
to reach Guddaiore. 1 Again on the 2nd May hussy wrote to 
tie Suffren about lack of provisions and munitions and urged 
him to come at once to prevent a blockade by the English fleet. 3 
He repeated the summons on the 6th May, 3 but on the 15th, 
being reassured by the arrival of Sayyid Sahib, he changed his 
mind and advised de Sufiren to remain at rrinkontali, 4 De 
Suffrcn on his side did all that he could to help the army at 
Cuddalore by sending large quantities of provisions, 1 and Bussy 
wrote to him on the 5th June that he had enough provisions 
and munitions to stand a prolonged siege. 0 