

1 Journal de Bord du Ba>Hi de Suffren dans Unde, pp. 254*555 
sec also Roux Le Hailli dr' Suffren (Urns I’Inde. pp. 190-191. 

2 Journal de liord du Bnitli de Suffren dans Vlnde, pp. 255-256. 


HWisr/iy 



oTCuddalore, moved his ships further to the north and anchored 
before that place. On the ? 4th, as the trench ships approached 
closer, de Suffren gave orders to form into battle line, himself 
passing on board the frigate, Cleopatra, in pursuance of a recent 
Roval Order that the commander of a fleet must be* on a frigate 
and nor. on a ship of the line during an action. The object 
was to ensure the safety of the commander, and the order u a . 
issued following the capture of Comte de Grasse in American 
waters. De Suffren positively disliked giving up his position in 
the front line of battle, but he had to obey the Royal Order. 

De Suffren had intended to draw the English squadron to 
an immediate action, but for two days he was prevented by 
contrary winds from getting closer to the enemy who lav quietly 
anchored before Cuddalore. It was not till the ibth June that 
the wind changed its direction and enabled the Frehch fleet 10 
approach the enemy ships at anchor. Perceiving the resolute 
determination of the French to join action, Hughes thought i‘ 
necessary to accept the challenge, and in order to get the 
advantage of the wind for his ships to hear down on the enemy, 
lie left the safe anchorage before Cuddalore and moved out to 
1 he open. But he was disappointed in his expectations; the 
wind did not favour his manoeuvres ; on the other hand, the 
French ships made a resolute dash for the coast, and in the 
evening quietly anchored at the same spot which had been 
abandoned by the English just a few hours earlier . 1 This 
brilliant manoeuvre, by which de Suffren dislodged a superior 
fleet from its advantageous position without firing a shot, has 
been justly admired by Malleson in the following terms: “It 
is impossible to speak in terms of too high commendation of 
this display of combined genius and daring. To be.it on the 
open sea a fleet of equal or of greater numbers is no doubt a 
splendid achievement; but it is an achievement in which the 
lower nature of man, that which i.s termed brute force, has a 
considerable share. But to gain all the effect of a victory with¬ 
out fighting, to dislodge an enemy superior in numbers from 
a position of vital importance without firing a shot— that 

1 Journal de Botd du Bailli de Suffren dans l'hide, pp. 257-263: 
Roux — Le Bailli de Suffren dan, Unde, pp. 193-193; Wilks— History of 
Alysoor, II, pp. 191-192. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


V ^leed is an exercise of the highest faculties of man’s higher 
nature, a feat of intellectual power not often bestowed, but 
generally combined, when given, with that strength of nerve 
which knows when and how to dare.” 1 

By sheer audacity de Suffren had gained his objective 
namely to dislodge, at least temporarily, the superior enemy 
tieet from its advantageous position before* Guddalore and to 
establish contact with the besieged army. Two results followed 
from this success. First, the English military operations were 
seriously dislocated by the disappearance of ihe fleet from the 
coast before completing the landing of provisions and muni¬ 
tions. Second, de Suffren could now expect to replenish the 
deficiency of his personnel by drawing men from the army for 
the time being; and with that, reinforcement he could face an 
action with the superior enemy fleet with more confidence. 
De Suffren clearly realised that of the two enemy forces threaten¬ 
ing Guddalore one had to be destroyed first before the other. 
If he landed men from the ships to reinforce the army to attack 
the enemy land forces, it would dangerously expose his squadron 
to an attack by Hughes. The better course was to draft some 
men from the army, and with this added strength to go out 
and destroy the English fleet first; and then the army could 
be rein forced by the men of the squadron to attack the English 
land forces under Stuart. Bussy also agreed with this view and 
willingly lent troop for the naval operations, so necessary for 
the safety of the army. 