^ 

] Ht t KENCII IN iNbtA 

Of an English frigate beating a Hag of truce and Commissioners 
deputed by^the Government of Madras to announce to M. 
Bussy the certain intelligence of the conclusion of peace 
between their respective nations in Europe; perfectly aware of 
the condition of the army before Cudclalore, the Commis¬ 
sioners were instructed to declare that they, wen charged with 
positive orders to that army to abstain from hostilities, whether 
M. Bussy should accede to an armistice 01 decline it/* 1 

Before concluding this chapter a brief notice may be taken 
of the views of Bussy oil the plan of the expedition, as ex¬ 
pressed in his official report to the Minister dated pth Septem¬ 
ber. Bugsy, as was only natural, deplored the lack of success 
o! the military operations, for which he blamed the unexpected 
course of events in India before his arrival and the misfortunes 
experienced in European waters preventing the sending of 
reinforcements in time. But nevertheless he considered the 
plan of the expedition “as the best conceived and the most 
wisely combined” one that he had ever seen issuing out of the 
office of a Minister during his fifty years of active service. This 
opinion evidently was meant to please the Minister and did 
not express the real conviction of Bussy. For in his me,moire 
to the Minister at the time of his appointment in 1781 he had 
stated that after the severe reductions made in the number of 
troops and the amount of money he had demanded he could 
not. hold himself responsible for the result of the expedition. 
Anyway, he concluded his report of the 9th September by stating 
that he had fulfilled some of the objects of the Government, in 
protecting the Cape of Good Hope against an English attack 
and in aiding de Suffrcn to capture Trinkomali. “I have done 
all that was humanly possible, with the small means at my 
disposal, to answer to the views of the Ministry and to the 
confidence of the King and of yourself”. 2 




1 Wilks —History of My sour, 11 , p. K)6> 

2 P.A. ms. 40 2 . 


mtST/fy. 


C HAETlfiR MV 




’ANGLO FRENCH NEGO I IA i IONS AND I HE LAS I 
DAYS OF BUSvSY 

I. The terms of Peace. 

The Preliminaries of Peace between England and France: 
were concluded in January and the definitive treaty in Septem¬ 
ber 1783. But the restitution of territories in India was held 
up by nearly two years, because of an unusual delay in sending 
official instructions about the procedure of executing the treaty. 
In the absence of official instructions the representatives of the 
two Powers in India put different interpretations on the terms 
of the treaty relating to the restitution of territories. that 
was what prolonged negotiations from July 1783 to January 
1785, when ultimately the treaty was put into effect, some time 
alter the death of Pussy. The negotiations were, however, 
happily marked by a spirit of cordiality and compromise on 
both sides, without any sacrifice of what they considered to be 
their vital interests. Before turning to the course of these pro- 
t acted negotiations, it is useful to notice briefly the terms of 
the pcac relating to the restitution of territories in India. 