Roux— Le Bar Hi dr Suffrrn darts I’ Indr, p. 201 

* Malleson Final French Struggles hi Indio, p. 74. 

Y 


MHtSTfty 


THE FRENCH r\ INDIA 

a before day-break. The party marched 
in three columns, Darnas leading the centre, de la Rochcthulon 
ibe left, and de la Horde the right. The enemy entrenchments 
were reached in time, but the attack was delivered by the 
central column rather prematurely. The enemy got fully 
warned and had time to offer resistance. I he central column 
consisted of sepoys and marines, not accustomed to the discip¬ 
line and order in an army. At the first sign of resistance by 
the enemy, Darnas found himself abandoned bv his men and 
was taken prisoner. I he other two columns were more fortu¬ 
nate and were able to effect a safe withdrawal. The column 
°f Rochcthulon, which had advanced farthest and had a good 
view of the works of entrenchment, had even some moral con¬ 
solation in being able to carry off .two enemy standards. Oh 
the French side two officers were killed, three wounded and 
several taken prisoners. I he casualties on the English side 
were heavier, the sepoys firing on their own men in the dark¬ 
ness and confusion. The sortie was apparently unsuccessful, 
but it had achieved one useful result. It led to the discovery 
that the enemy entrenchments were too strong to be taken by 
a frontal assault. The only way of delivering an attack on the 
enemy was to turn the line on its left, but it was an extremely 
hazardous venture because of the long distance and difficulty 
of the roads. 1 

IX Xc:u\s of the conclusion of pence in Europe. 

For the next four (lays both sides remained in comparative 
inactivity, excepting some occasional cannonades. Bussy, rca 
lining the impossibility of taking the enemy entrenchments by 
a frontal assault or of turning the left of the English line, 
thought it prudent to wait for some time more when he might 
get a better opportunity of attacking the English at an advan¬ 
tage. The army under Stuart was in great distress for lack of 
provisions. The presence of the French squadron had cut off 
communications with Tranquebar and Negapatam by sea, and 
the depredations of the cavalrv of Sayyid Sahib had equally cut 

1 For an account of the sortie; Hussy's letter to dc Suffren. June 25 
(P.A. ni>. fijrtf); journal dc Hard <iu llailli dc Suffren dans Unde, 
ifHo-Hi* Wilks -Histoix of A fxsoor, J[, j>. if)j. 




tver. an attack • jin 


uwtsrfy 



THE WAR IN Tin: CARNATIC 


3 




....'"communications with the north. The English were sure to 
raise t!io siege sooner or later, and then alter they had aban¬ 
doned their entrenched position, the French could attack them 
at an advantage. 1 Do Suffren had also received information 
on the 251I1 about the arrival in the Isle ot France of six Hutch 
ships and the Legion of Luxembourg.- With these reinforce¬ 
ments the French could expect to take the offensive with nnne 
confidence and better chance of success. But these hopes of 
taking the offensive were suddenly frustrated by the arrival 011 
the ac)tl» June of an English frigate, the Medea, carrying the 
news of the conclusion of peace in Europe. 