

In spite of these weighty reasons, however, two days inter¬ 
vened before the terms of the armistice could be (inally settled. 
Hostilities the sea were suspended from the ist July and 
on land from he 2nd. The question that presented some 
difficulty was how to include the French ally Tipu also in the 
arrangement. As the English Commissioners were not vested 
with sufficient competence to accept the terms proposed by 
Bussy. the latter sent on the 3rd two French Commissioners to 
Madras, de Launay and de Maurville, to settle with Macartney 
'he terms on which Tipu was to he invited to join the general 


1 P.A. ms« 40*. 


WNtSTfiy 



rHF W\K IN THE CARNATIC $T?~ 

paclhcationd 1 he course of the negotiations and the terms of 
the peace settlement will be discussed in the next Chapter. 

The extreme haste with which the Madras Government 
tame to announce the conclusion of peace in Europe and the 
eagerness it expressed for an immediate cessation of hostilities 
were rather significant commentaries on the military situation. 
Jfhe suspicion expressed by some was not perhaps altogether 
unfounded, that the English knew about the conclusion of 
peace even before their attack on the 15th, and that they had 
deliberately kept it secret from the French in the hope of being 
able to crown their military operations by some striking suc¬ 
cesses. Whatever truth there might have been in it. Hussy felt 
convinced, as he wrote in his report to the Minister dated 9th 
September, that the English move in announcing the conclu 
sion of peace in Europe “was a confession on their part that 
in the action of the 13th and in the sortie of the 25th as well 
as in the naval combat they had not achieved any decided 
advantage in spite of tin superiority of their forces; otherwise 
they would not have hesitated in keeping secret from us the 
news which they had received/’ 2 

That the military situation was definitely unfavourable for 
the English, to whom the news of peace came as a welcome 
relief, is borne out by the testimony of several English histo 
1 tails. Malleson in his usual impartial way writes, “The 
suspension of arms was most unfortunate for France. I he 
army of Stuart, before Kadalur, represented the last hope of 
the English in Southern India. It was reduced then by the 
want of supplies to the greatest extremities. An attack bv the 
French in force could have scarcely failed to annihilate it. 
With its destruction Madras and all Southern India would have- 
passed over to the French.” 3 Wilks also has expressed the same 
opinion. “The retreat of the English army, with the loss of its 
battering train and equipments, is the most favourable result 
that could possibly have been anticipated from a continuation 
of hostilities, and a crisis.was terminated bv the arrival 


’ H.A, mss. 639. 640; Journal dc B&rd du ftailli dr \ufjren dans 
Unde, pp. 283-28.1. 

2 P.A. ms. 40 a. 

3 Malleson — Final French Struggles in India, pp. 74*75 



WNISTffy. 


