


miSTffy 



THE WAR IN THE CARNATIC 


%L 


nil of the fight next morning. 'The English ships had put 
out their lights to cover their withdrawal and evade pursuit, 
while the French ships were gradually drifted by currents as 
iar north as Pondicherry. On the 21st at eleven in the morning 
the English ships were sighted to the south south east of the 
french, but they disappeared from view soon after. On the 
**nd at five in the morning the English ships were sighted 
again to the east-north-east of the French, in a most disordered 
state. De Suffren wanted to chase them and draw them to 
another action, but by the time preparations for the pursuit 


were ready,, the English ships, thanks to their superior speed, 
sailed off north and disappeared from view once more. De 
Suffren thought it fruitless to pursue an enemy who could 
always elude action by superior speed, and moreover he wa. 
anxious to return to Cuddalorc at the earliest possible moment 
in order to assist Bussy in driving off the English army under 
Stuart. 

Dc Suffren hastened to give an account of the naval combat 
in two letters to Bussy dated 21st June, in which he wrote: 
“In spite of our inferiority, the action is at. least doubtful if not 
to our advantage. As long as the squadron will have powder 
and guns I will not abandon you.” He also stated that contrary 
winds had prevented him from anchoring before Cuddalorc, 
but that he would return at the earliest opportunity. 1 Eussy 
replied on the 22nd, offering congratulations to dc Suffren, who 
was still before Pondicherry, and giving an account of the 
distress of the English army for lack of provisions after the 
departure of their squadron. 2 De Suffren thus thought it 
necessary to return to Cuddalorc at once and concert measures 
for dislodging the besieging enemy force before that place. He 
sailed from Pondicherry early in the morning of the 23rd and 
anchored before Cuddalorc at one o’clock in the afternoon. 
As he went ashore shortly after to meet Bussy, be was welcomed 
with a salute of 15 guns and with cries of “Vive lc Roi”, “Vive 
Suffren’ . by all the officers of the army who lined the coast 
and fought for the honour of carrying his palanquin. Bussy, 


1 P.A. mss. 620, 621. 
** Ibid., ms. 6 si. 



<N }* 6 ‘ G <W 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



•wHo was waiting to receive him on the steps of his office, greet¬ 
ed him affectionately and taking his hand introduced him to 
his officers in the most flattering terms; ‘Gentlemen, here is 
our saviour.” It was a proud tribute to the naval commander, 
who fully deserved it. 1 


VII. The, sortie of 2./(It June. 


Dc Stiffren had succeeded in driving off one cnenn from 
Cuddalore. There remained the other, the army under Stuart; 
to he dealt with. As we have seen, one of the principal reasons 
for cle Suffren's hasty return to Cuddalore in place of seeking 
another, more decisive, action against the English squadron, 
was to concert measures with Bussy for a large-scale attack on 
the besieging force before Cuddalore, and to dislodge it from 
there. The English army, iti spite of its nominal success on 
the 13th, was in great distress, as Bussy came to know from 
intercepted letters. The sudden disappearance of the squadron 
from the coast before completing the landing of provisions and 
munitions had completely dislocated the siege operations. 
Having suffered heavy losses in the action of the 13th and lack¬ 
ing provisions and munitions, Stuart could not venture any 
at ack on the French shut up within Cuddalore. Giving up 
the idea of an offensive, for the next few days he occupied 
himself merely with entrenching his position more strongly for 
defence. 2 The news of the poor state of the English army 
encouraged Bussy to think of a large-scale attack. Dc Suffren 
agreed with him, and in order to reinforce the army he con¬ 
sented to land 1,200 men of the squadron besides the troops 