

- Ibid., ms. |s?8~ Bussy to Castries, i*th June 1784. 





J he cessation of hostilities as between the English and the 
l iench presented no difficulty, as both sides welcomed it as a 
relief and, besides, thev were under the obligation to carry out 
the arrangement arrived at in Europe. But the question that 
presented a good deal of difficulty was to persuade Tipu to 
stop hostilities all on a sudden. It required all the diplomatic 
tact of Hussy to achieve the desired result, to establish a general 
pacification without making it appear that France had deserted 
her ally, which would have discredited her for ever in he eyes 
of all Indian Powers. On the one hand, it was difficult to 
persuade Tipu to stop hostilities at a time when he was expect 
ing Mangalore to fall. On the other, if Tipu refused to accede 
to the general pacification under Article ifi of the Preliminaries, 
the French would have to separate themselves from him, leaving 
him alone to bear the brum of an attack not merely by the 
English but also by the Marathas and Nizam Ali. There was 
provision for such a combined pressure on Tipu in the recent 
Anglo-Maratha treaty, and, besides, both the Indian Powers had 
their own grievances against the ruler of Mysore. Assailed by 
•such a combination, the fall of Tipu seemed inevitable, to be 
followed by a consolidation of English power in south India and 
the establishment of closer relationship between the English, 
the Marathas and Nizam Ali. It would have destroyed for¬ 
ever all French political ambitions in India, and that was wh> 
Busss was extremely anxious to persuade Tipu to join the 
general pacification. 

When the English Commissioners came to Cuddalorc on 
the goth June to arrange a cessation of hostilities wdth Bussy, 
they expressed their willingness to include 7 'ipu also iri the 
general pacification on condition that he released at once all the 
English prisoners in his hands. Hussy, in his anxiety to 
smoothen negotiations with Tipu and to draw him into the 
general pacification, opposed the condition suggested and pro 
posed that Tipu should be simply called upon to stop hostilities 
under Article ifi of the Preliminaries, leaving the question of 
the English prisoners to be settled by future negotiations. It 
was this difference of view w'hich prolonged the talks at Cudda- 
lore and ultimately decided Bussy to send two French agents 


TAWfSJyjy 


tilF FRENCH IN lNt>fA 

the matter with Macartney and the Madias G 
Fortunately, his viewpoint was accepted, thus making' h easier 
to arrange a cessation of arms between Tipu and the English. 

Biussy took the earliest opportunity to inform Tipu, in a 
letter dated 2nd July, of the conclusion ol peace 1 between 
England and France and to urge him likewise to make his peace 
with the English. He stated that he was sending a trusted 
person, Krishna Rao, to give him all the necessary details as 
to an ally ol France and to make him understand that his 
interests required the conclusion of peace with the English. 
“It seems to me that circumstances require that you should 