

1 For an account of the naval action of the 20th June and of events 
down to the return of c!e Suffren to Cuddalore on the 33rd: A.N.— 
MiriUterc dc ta Marine. B (, vol. 268. Journal dc Borcl du Bmlli fie 
Siiffren, pp. 275-279; Roux l.c Bailli dc Suffren dans l’lndc. pp. 194-200; 
Malleson Final Ftench. Struggles, in India, pp. 70-72; Richmond -The 
Navy in India. i-iyS]. pp. 355-375; letter of Hughes, dated 23rd June— 
Sec. Set. Com. Pro , Fort William, July 31 (Forrest Selections from 
Letters, Despatches, etc.. Foreign Dept., Ill, pp, 998-999). 

2 Bussy to dc Suffren, June 22—(P.A. ins. 622); Journal dc hard 
du Bailli dc Suffren dans VInde . pp. 279 280. 


m 


Ml NlSTQy 



vent to him on the i8th.' Prudence, however, dictated that 
before taking the risk of a large scale attack it was necessary 
to make a small scale sortie with picked men to find out the 
strength of the enemy entrenchments and to ascertain whether it 
would be feasible at all to take the enemy position by a frontal 
assault. Hussy called a conference of his officers on the 24th 
to decide about the plan of operations and invited the opinion 
of do Suffren as well. 2 

Regarding tin plan of making a small-scale sortie instead 
of delivering a large-scale frontal assault, both Roux and. 
following him as before, Malleson have passed severe strictures 
on Hussy and have suggested ;i sharp difference of opinion 
between him and de Suffren. Roux in his usual enthusiasm 
for his hero, de Suffren. states that he was sorelv disappointed 
at the lack of courage and initiative on the part of Bussy and 
retired to bis ship with a bitter observation, whether it was the 
intention of Bussy that he should take his ship ashore and 
fight the enemy there. Roux has poured ridicule on the small 
party sent out to make a sortie; he condemns Hussy for entrust 
ing the command to “a vile intriguer of recognised incapacity 
and considers the sortie to have been a total failure. Malleson 
also condemns Hussy for his timidity and suggests a sharp 
difference of opinion with de Suffren. 4 But neither in the 
Journal de Bord du Bailli de Sujjren nor in the letters ex 
changed between Hussy and de Suffren h there the slightest 
trace of any bitterness of feeling between the two men. Not 
is there any reason to suppose, if we examine the details from 
the letters of Bussy, that the plan of the sortie was either ill 
conceived or that it was absolutely fruitless. 

It was on the night of the 24th June that the sortie 
was made. The party consisted of 800 Kuropeans and 500 
sepovs. under the orders of Chevalier de Damas, officer in com¬ 
mand of the second battalion of Actjuuainc. I he plan was 
to march surreptitiously to the enemy entrenchments and to 

* The men were landed on the 24th, and it is interesting to note 
here that the author of the Journo! dr Haul du liailli d' Suffren dans 
VInde was appointed Aide-Major of the marines, p. 2K0. 

2 Bussy to de Suffren. June 24 (P.A. ms. 6at>). 

