

That brought hostilities in India to a sudden and abrupt 
dove, The* news of the conclusion of peace in Euterpe was 
conveyed in a letter from Hughes to tie Suffren, in which the 
former wrote that reports had reached Madras from Bombay 
on the 171I1 June that Preliminaries of Peace had been signed 
in Paris on the 20th January and ratified by France on the yth 
February. The news was confirmed by some private letters 
from Europe and also newspapers which had reached India by 
the overland route. The Madras Government had promptly 
sent a boat to inform Hughes about it, but since be had left 
Cuddalore by that time, it was not till his return to Madras 
cm the 25th that he came to know about it. I hus he took the 
earliest opportunity to send the news to de Suffren, togethet 
with copies of private letters and newspapers which contirmed 
it. and he proposed an immediate cessation of hostilities pend¬ 
ing the arrival of official orders from Europe. While expressing 
surprise that no official information had been received yet either 
from the Government or from the Court of Directors, Hughes 
stated that there were nevertheless sufficient grounds to believe 
that the news of the conclusion of peace was correct. Macart¬ 
ney, Governor of Madras, also wrote to the same effect to Bussy 
and sent two Commissioners, Sadleir and Staunton, by tin 
frigate Medea •o settle the terms of the armistice.* 


1 Bussy to Castries, September 9 ,ns - t° 2 )- 

- l)c Suffren to Bussy, June 95 (IVA. ms 630); Roux Lc. Bailli de 
Suffren dans I'lnde, ]>. 202. 

a Husny to Castries. Sept. 9 (P.A. ms. 402); Journal <le Bord dll Bailli 
dr Suffren , p. 282. Sad lei f was a member of the Madras Council and 
Si aunt on wa** Private Secretary t«> Macartney. 


M WSTfiy 



PHE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


On the morning of iht 30th de Suffren went ashotfe to 
inform Bussy of the sudden turn of affairs and to give him the 
letters of Hughes and Macartney. The two English Cotnmis 
sinners also landed in the afternoon to carry on talks with 
Bussy for a cessation of hostilities. Although the news of 
peace came to de Suffren as a complete surprise and upset his 
plans which he was hoping to execute after the arrival of the 
expected reinforcements, he strongly urged Bussy to agree to 
an immediate armistice, particularly in view of the poor state 
of the naval squadron. Many of the ships were badly leaking 
and required extensive repairs. The personnel, already defi¬ 
cient by a quarter of the full complement, had been further 
reduced by the naval action of the sbth, there being more than 
five hundred persons on board seriously wounded. Under the 
circumstances, de Suffren declared, he could not hold himself 
responsible for the result of another naval combat, and so he 
advised Buss) to accept an armistice without delay. On the 
side of Bussy also there were equally valid reasons to agree ro 
an immediate cessation of hostilities. As he wrote in his report 
to the Minister on the 9th September: “The peace. . of what¬ 
ever little advantage it might be for the future of India, never¬ 
theless came at a happy moment to save the honour of the 
nation. Casualties in action and disease were reducing our 
land and naval forces ro such an extent that our situation 
would have become extremely critical, the English receiving 
help from Europe while we could not hope for any." 1 