

The first news of the terms of the Preliminaries relating 
to India came in the shape of instructions from the Directors 
of the English Company to the Governor-General and Counc il 
in Calcutta, dated 6th March 1783..* Marquis de Castries also 
informed Bussy of the conclusion of Preliminaries in a letter 
dated 15th March and sent instructions couched in similar 
language as that used by the Directors of the English Company. 1 2 
The terms of the peace laid down a simple restitution of terri¬ 
tories as they stood’in 1776, a return to the status quo ante 
helium . By the 13th Article, Chandernagore and all the other 
French factories in Bengal and Orissa were to be restored iunnc 

1 P.A. ins. 486. 

2 Ibid., mss. 488, 489. The instructions of Castries reached Bussy in 
Sept- ir^s (ms. 411). 



THE TRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


ucl\ iiftcv the ratification of the definitive treaty. French 
subjects in Bengal were assured of security and freedom of 
trade as they had cnjo\ed before. The English consented to 
allow Chandernagore to be surrounded by a canal, and on their 
side the French agreed not to erect any fortifications or maintain 
a large number of troops at Chandernagore, keeping the place 
as a purely commercial settlement. Article 14 of the Prelimin¬ 
aries- stipulated for the restitution of Pondicherry, Karikal, Mah£ 
and the French factory at Surat immediately on the ratification 
of the definitive treaty. With Pondicherry were attached two 


new districts, Vilnoor and Bah our, and with Karikal the four 

maganons or groups of villages which the French possessed 

before the commencement of hostilities. The English bound 
themselves to employ their good offices to obtain a formal cession 
of these territories from the Nawab of the Carnatic and the 
Raja of Tanjorc. Article if) of the Preliminaries related to the 
allies of the two nations in India, who were to be invited to 
accede to the peace, the accession to be made within four 
month*. If Haidar Ali (whose death was not known in Europe 
at the time of the conclusion of the Preliminaries) refused to 
accede to the treaty, war would continue between him and the 
English, and France must recall the troops lent to him. In 

case Haidar opposed the withdrawal of French troops, the 

English would give them all necessary military assistance. It 
was also expressly stipulated that Pondicherry and Karikal 
were not to be restored to the French until their troops had 
been withdrawn from the camp ol Haidar Ali. The terms of 
the Preliminaries were included in toto in the definitive peace, 
concluded on September if. 1783. The Madras Government 
received instructions about the execution of the treaty early in 
March 1784, 1 hut the instructions of Castries did not reach 
Bussv till June.* 


1 1 \A. ^n>. 73a — Macartney to Hilssv, 91I1 March 1784. See also 

C.R.C ). Vhv Frriwh in India Scries. Vol, XIII (Circular letter from the 
Stcrct Committee 10 Bengal. Madras and Bombay, dated 9th Sept. 1783, 
with a postscript of 19th Sept, to keep watch on the future machinations 
of the French). 