

also work equally to make peace, and in this matter I promise 

you all the good offices I can offer. * With this letter he sent 
one from the English Commissioners, in which I ipu was invited 
to accede to the peace settlement and was informed that orders 
had been sent to the English officers to stop hostilities against 

him as soon as he agreed to do so on his side As a first proof 

of his desire to conclude peace, he was called upon to liberate 
all the English prisoners in his hands. 1 2 

It was only natural that f ipu should have at first appeared 
unwilling to slop hostilities, and he roundly accused the French 
of deserting an ally who had begun the war for their sake. 
But in spire of all his boastings that he would continue the 
war single-handed, he had the sense to realise that he had little 
chance of success without the assistance of the French contin¬ 
gent under Cossigny, which had been ordered by hussy to 
separate itself from Fipu’s forces under the terms of the 
armistice. Besides, Piveron dc Morlat, Cossigny and the chiefs 
of the European contingents in his service, dc Lai lee and 
Bouthenod, Used all their persuasions to make him accept the 
inevitable and conclude peace with the English, as otherwise 
lie ran the risk of being attacked by a combination of the 
English, the Marathas and Nizam AIL They also pointed out 
that far from accusing the French of desertion, he should feel 
grateful to them for having assured his succession on the sudden 
death of his father and for having protected his dominions oh 
the Malabar Coast from falling into the hands of the English. 



<SL 

>uncil. 


1 r. A. ms. 532. 

2 ibid. ms. 533. 


MIN/S 


<<& ‘ G <W 



TEwTiad also reason to Ice I grateful for the offer of Fiench good 
offices to secure favourable terms for him from the English. 
Finally, on the 2nd August an agreement for the cessation of 
hostilities was arrived at between Tipu and Major Campbell, 
commanding the English forces on the Malabar (oast, through 
the mediation of Piveron de Mortal, 1 At the suggestion of 
Bussy, Tipu sent about the? middle of September two Commis¬ 
sioners, Appaji Ram and Srinivasa Rao, to Madras to negotiate 
a definitive peace with the English. 

The question of peace with Tipu was of special importance 
to both the English and the French, as with it was connected 
the question of the English prisoners whom d Suffren had 
handed over to Haidar. It will be recalled that dc Suffren 
had proposed an exchange of prisoners, which was refused by 
the Governor of Madras. The latter had maintained his atti¬ 
tude even when warned by de Suffren that refusal would mean 
handing over the prisoners to the custody of Haidar Ali. Then 
on the 11th May 1783 Macartney wrote to Bussy proposing an 
e xchange of prisoners, including those vho had been handed 
over by de Suffren to the custody of Haidar Ali. 2 * * 5 Bussy replied 
on the 24th, agreeing to an exchange of prisoners but adding 
that since he had no authority over those handed over to Haidar 
Ali he could only request Tipu to return them/' Macartney 
wrote again on the 18th June that by the laws of warfare the 
prisoners taken by de Suffren belonged to France and that 
Tipu had no right to refuse to liberate them The Governor 
of Madras expressed his readiness to arrange an immediate 
exchange of prisoners if Bussy was prepared to include in the 
cartel those held in the custody of Tipu. 1 Matters rested at this 
point when aL the end of June the Madras Government inform¬ 
ed Bussy of the conclusion of peace in Europe. 