




The Worcester (64)—Hughes 
The Africa (64)—Macdonncl 
The Medea 

I tie Sultan (74)— Mitchell 
The Superb (74)— Hughes 
The Monarca (70)—Cell 
The Burford (70)—Reiner 
l he Sceptre (64)—Graves 
I hi Magnanime (64) —Mackenzie 
The Eagle (64)—Clarke 
The Hero (74)-— King 
The Bristol (50)—Ruraey 
The Monmouth (64) —Alms 
The Cumber la) ul (74)— Allen 


La ClSopatre (de Stiff ren) 

Lr Edit Annibal (50) - He Beaulieu 
L'Argonautc (74)—Dc Clavifcrcs 
Lc Hcros (74) — Moissac 
LAllustre (74)— Bruycres 
lc St. Michel (60) — De Beaumont 
Lc Vengeur (64) — Cuverviltc 
Lc Severe (64) — De Langlc 
VAnnibal (74)— D’Aytmi 
Le Hardi (64)— Kerhuc 
L’Artcsien (64)— De Vigncs 
La Consoiante (40) — Cosiebelle 
Le Coventry 


misT^ 



HIE FRENCH JN INDIA 

'guns. The Flamand kept up a stubborn cannonade and suc¬ 
ceeded in covering the Fendwnt, till the lire was put out, and 
compelling ;he Gibraltar to withdraw precipitately. 

While the battle was raging furiously all along the line 
for nearly two and a half hours, de Suffren was watching and 
giving orders from his frigate in the rear, the Clcopaire . It 
caused him great mortification not to be on board his ship, the 
Hiros, and in the thick of the battle, and nothing short of 
a peremptory Royal Order could have kept him away from the 
firing Vine. Even as it was, in his enthusiasm he risked his life 
several times and had to be respectfully reminded of the Royal 
Order by the captain of the frigate, dc Rosily, About seven in 
the evening darkness came to separate the two fleets and to put 
a stop to the dreadful cannonade. It must have come as a 
great relief to Hughes, who had failed to utilise his numerical 
superiority to turn the enemy line and who welcomed the 
approach of night as an opportunity to withdraw his fleet from 
the scene of battle. Even before the withdrawal there was a 
sensible diminution of fire from the English ships, and but for 
the rather abrupt stoppage, the combat might have been turned 
into one of the most decisive naval actions. Even as it was, the 
victory remained with the French, not merely in the technical 
sense, as stated by Malleson and Wilks, 1 that they had succeeded 
in driving off the English fleet from Guddalorc, but also in a 
more real sense, in that the English fleet had suffered such 
heavy damage that it deliberately eluded being drawn into 
another action which the French sought for the next two days, 
and ultimately withdrew to Madras. 

Ml through the night of the stoth June the French ships 
manoeuvred to remain in the neighbourhood of Cuddalare, 
fearing a return of the English fleet, and keeping ready for a 


> Malleson- Final French Struggles in India , p. 7 2 * Wilks —His tot y 
of Mysaor, If. p. 193. Th comment of Wilks on the result of the 
action may be quoted: “The English Admiral .... found the whole of 
his equipments so entirely crippled, his crews so lamentably reduced, and 
the want of water *0 extreme, that he deemed it indispensable to incur 
the mortification of bearing away for the roads of Madras, while Suffren 
wresting from his enemies the praise of superior address, and even the 
claim of victory, if victory belongs to him who attains his object, resumed 
his position in the anchorage of Cuddalore.” 