

The circumstances which led to this sudden move are not 
quite clear. Tipu was the first to write to Bussy complaining 
against the conduct of Cossigny, whom he accused of deliberate 
dishonesty and malversation. Cossigny on his side wrote to 
Bussy on the 10th October from Tellicherry, and also sent 




1 P. tm. 413. 


misr/fy 


Or 

ANGld-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 

an agent named Berneron to explain the whole circumstances. 
Cossigny\s version was that when Tipu found that no further 
help was to be expected from the French contingent, he began 
to inflict intolerable hardships and indignities on it in order to 
force it to leave the camp and thus relieve him of the burden 
of maintaining it. While not justifying Gossigny's conduct in 
suddenly leaving Tipu’s camp, Bussy did not believe Tipu’s 
accusation either. 1 Anyway, the rift was complete and there was 
no means of undoing it. Even de bailee and Boutlienod, who 
were directly in the service of Tipu, also wrote to Buss) for 
absorption in the French army, but Bussy could not do any 
thing for them because of financial difficulties. 

This incident made it even more embarrassing for Bussy 
to offer his good offices for negotiations between Tipu and the 
English. Bur he did all he could to give saner advice to f ipu, 
not so much for the sake ol the latter’s friendship as to main¬ 
tain the credit of France in the eyes of the Indian Powers, 
by giving the impression of not having deserted an ally. The 
English Commissioners left lor Mangalore about the middle of 
November, but although Tipu was impressed about the neces¬ 
sity of concluding peace, he kept s the negotiations protracted 
for a few months more in order to squeeze as much as possible 
from his conquests in the Carnatic, which had to be returned 
after the peace treaty. 2 Finally, on March n. 1784 a defini¬ 
tive peace treaty was concluded between Tipu and the English, 
which led to a restitution of territories and the release of the 
English prisoners handed over by de Suffren to Haidar. Thus 
one cause of anxiety for Bussy was removed. 3 

1 Bussy’s letter to Castries, 20th November 1783- (P. A. ms. 413); also 
Martineau —Bussy et Vinci c Fran false, pp. 385-386. 

2 Bussv to Castries, 6th January 1784 (P. A. ms. 417). 

3 For peace negotiations between Tipu and the English first at 
Madras and then at Mangalore see Wilks— History of Myoor, Vol. II, 
pp. 255*267. The treaty was signed on the 11th March. The Madras 
Government repo: ted it to the Supreme Government in Calcutta on the 
27th March, enclosing a copy of the treaty—Secret Select Committee Pro 
‘cedings. Fort William, 13th April 1784 (Forrest— Letters, Despatches etc,. 
Foreign Department , Government of India, Vol. Ill, p. 1069). In ordei 
to realise the danger in which Tipu stood after the cessation of Anglo 
French hostilities, it is interesting to notice that the Governor-General 
and Council in Calcutta strongly condemned the haste with which the 



rHF, t’RteNCH IN INblA 