

The question of Trinkomali broke up the negotiations at 
Pondicherry’ shortly after they were started, the English demand* 
ing an immediate restitution of the place and the French con- 


MMST/fy 



\N( . J O I RKNC 1 l NEGOTIATIONS 


*8L 


Tmg that they could not do it without specific orders from 
Paris. 1 On the 3rd May the English Commissioners wrote to 
the French delegates that they had received instructions from 
Madras to break off negotiations and return. 2 Only Darlymple 
remained, and in order to put pressure on the French to con 
dude negotiations at once Macartney threatened to hoist the 
English flag at Pondicherry*. Bussy found himself in great 
embarrassment. On the one hand he could not yield to the 
English demand about Trinkomali without official instructions 
from France, and on the other he was faced with acute financial 
difficulties which could be solved only by the restitution of 
territories. He wrote two frantic letters to Castries, dated 
1st and 51I1 May, giving an account of his financial difficulties 
and of the negotiations with the English, and hoping to be 
rescued from the embarrassing situation by the receipt of official 
instructions regarding the restitution of Trinkomali. 3 Although 
talks were suspended at Pondicherry at the beginning of May 
and the English delegates returned to Madras, all through the 
month correspondence went on between Bussy and Macartney 
to find out an avenue for the resumption of negotiations. 
Finally, Bussy agreed to hand over the port and the two forts 
at Trinkomali to the English if he did not receive contrary 
instructions from France by the beginning of July, and it was 
on this basis that Macartney agreed to resume negotiations 
and to send the English delegates again to Pondicherry. 4 * 

1 Negotiations were resumed early in June,^ but they were 
broken off again within a few days, after the arrival of a French 
frigate, the Precieuse, carrying the long-awaited instructions 
from Castries about the execution of the treaty. 6 According to 
these instructions the French were to hand over Trinkomali 
to the English, to be, re-transferred to the Dutch immediately 
after. Bussy at once communicated the instructions to the 
English delegates and also to Falk, the Dutch Governor of 


1 I*. A. mss. 763. 764 (Letters from the English to the French Com¬ 
missioners dated 23rd and 27th April 1784). 

2 Ibid , ms. 765. 

3 Ibid , mss. 4*6. 427. 

1 Ibid, mSvS. 74 »' 74 f>. 

Ibid, ms. 77 i. 

e Ibid, ms. 428. 



Ceylon But the English delegates refused to accept the pro 
posal of a simultaneous transfer of IYinkomali in the absence 
of Iresh instructions from Lout Ion. 1 * 3 * Negotiations were conse¬ 
quently broken off on the ist July. Bussy wrote to Macartney 
on the |th that although he had agreed to the immediate resti¬ 
tution of Trinkornali as the basis of the resumption of uegolia 
Lions in June, his hands were now tied by official instructions 
from Paris. If the English were unwilling to continue the talks 
on any other basis, he had to accept a second suspension of 
negotiations. He was however sending a frigate to fiance, and 
he invited Macartney to take the oportunity of sending an 
agent to Europe for further clarification of tlie disputed point.- 
Macartney replied on the 9th July, agreeing to suspend negotia¬ 
tions and to send an agent, Staunton, to Europe In the French 
frigate. 8 