


1787. He did not long survive the double disappointment 
spending the last days in comparative oblivion. The end came 
on the 8th December 1788. rather unexpectedly arid in circum¬ 
stances which have not been clearly explained b\ his bio¬ 
graphers. One thing however is certain. He did not die a 
natural death as the tradition of his house asserts, supported 
by some of his biographers. The evidence of Jal, the historio¬ 
grapher of the Navy is more credible that de Suftren was killed 
in a duel, but the cause of the duel is disputed b\ other bio 
graphers. Thus ended the career of one of the greatest naval 
commanders ever produced bv France. It is tempting to specu¬ 
late as to what would have happened if he had lived during the 
Revolutionary and Napoleonic daw He would have been at 
least a worthier antagonist of Nelson than Villeneuve, 


V. French good offices and higlo*Aiy$ore negotiations. 


We have already seen Bussy’s anxietv to persuade Tipu to 
stop hostilities, prompted by the fear that in case of a prolonga¬ 
tion of the war Tipu might be exposed to a combined attack 
by the English, the Marat has and Nizam Mi. and also that the 
French w mid be totally discredited in the eyes of the Indian 
Powers for having deserted an ally all on a sudden. It was 
mainly due to Bussy's elforts and the realisation of his own weak 
position, deprived of French help, that Tipu concluded an 
armistice early in August and decided to send two envoys to 
Madras to carry on negotiations for a definitive peace. In order 
to preserve the alliance and the credit of France in the eyes 
of the Indian Powers, Buss? was naturally desirous of taking 
part in the negotiations to secure the most favourable terms 
possible for Tipu. The latter also agreed, while intimating 
to Bussy the terms he wanted, to depend on his sagacity and 
wisdom to secure a favourable treaty: and it was decided that 


WHtSTfty 



rhr Mysore envoys to Madras would be accompanied by an 
accredited French representative. The English, oh the other 
hand, were extremely unwilling to allow French participation 
in the negotiations, hoping to be able to impose a severe treaty 
on Tipu. isolated from the French, or in case of a prolonga¬ 
tion of hostilities to crush him in concert with the Marathas 
and Nizam Mi. It was this difference which somewhat 
embittered the otherwise cordial relations between the English 
and the French. A further complication was introduced by 
the attitude of the Mysore envoys, who. cither on their own 
initiative or under secret instructions from Tipu as Bussy 
suspected, appeared unwilling to hold any communion with the 
French representative during the course of the negotiations. 
The situation was extremely delicate and required the utmost 
diplomatic fact and prudence on the part of Buss\. 

Let us now trace the course of events down to the con 
elusion of a definitive peace between Tipu and the English 
In reply to Bussy** letter intimating that Tipu had agreed to 
adhere to the Preliminaries under Article i6 and had decided 
to send two envoys to Madras for negotiations. Macartney wrote 
to Bussy on August 24 that he would be glad to receive the 
Mysore envoys and then added. Since happily there do not 
remain any other differences today than those between the 
Company and Tipu Sultan, only the agent of the Company and 
f ipu’s envoys will be sufficient to discuss and conclude these 
issues”. 1 In a despatch to Castries, dated 9th September. Bussy 
gave the reason for insisting on offering his good offices during 
negotiations between Tipu and the English, despite the rharac 
ter of the former and the unwillingness of the latter to set the 
French intervene. Bussy was doubtful if I ipu, left alone, 
would be able to secure favourable terms from the English. 
The ruler of Mysore was no doubt ' a man of bad faith, per¬ 
fidious like all Indians” and had inflicted great hardships on the 
French troops placed at his disposal, but, Bussy added, “despite 
all that, it is necessary for the French nation not to produce 
the impression of abandoning him under the present circum¬ 
stances; we may perhaps be in need of keeping him in hand 