

The negotiations, however, dragged on for several months, 
being punctuated by proposals, counter proposals and tempo¬ 
rary suspensions of talks. Both sides were willing to proceed 
to the immediate restitution of territories, but one insuperable 
difficulty stood in the way, namely the question of Trinko- 
mali. This place had originally belonged to the Dutch, from 
whom it was captured by the English, who in turn gave place 
to the French. The arrangement made by Bussy for the occupa 
tion of Trinkoinali divided responsibility between the Ircnch 
and the Dutch, the former controlling the port and the two 


forts and the latter being in charge of civil administration. 
Evidently sovereignty remained with France. Bussy had refused 
to transfer the place completely to the Dutch, as the laitei had 


1 P. A. ms. 723. 

2 [bid, mss. 729, 732. 

*’ [bid, ins. 733. 

4 [bid, mss. 734-739- 


MINISr^ 



wauled, and his intention was to try to keep Trinkomali to 
France at the end of the war. 


The strategic importance of Triukomali was fully realised 
by both the French and the English. At the outset of the talks 
t/ie English proposed that the restitution of Triukomali be 
taken up along with that of Pondicherry and other possessions, 
as stipulated in die treaty. Now, the Anglo-French peace treaty 
did not contain any specific provision regarding Trinkomali. 
J he preliminary treaty was signed before the news of the 
capture of 1 linkomali by de Suffren had reached Europe. Even 
the definitive treaty, concluded on the 3rd September, did not 
contain any specific reference to Trinkomali. But Article 19 
related to the restitution of territories captured by either side 
during the war and not specially mentioned in the treaty. This 
clause evidently covered Trinkomali, and the execution of the 
treaty demanded that the French should hand over the place 
to the English. Bn ihe Anglo-Dutch preliminary peace treaty 
Trinkomali was to be handed over by the English to the Dutch. 
There was thus no doubt about the ultimate settlement: the 
French were to return Trinkomali to the English, who in turn 
were to give it back to the Dutch. 

But the difficulty arose a.s to the time and procedure of 
restitution. The English were anxious to get back immediate 
possession of Trinkomali from the French, and they claimed 
not to re transfer the place to the Dutch before the conclu 
sion of a definitive treaty between England and Holland. They 
even refused to allow the Dutch to have any part in the 
discussions at Pondicherry regarding the restitution of territories. 
On the other hand, Bussv suspected, and with reason, that once 
in possession of Trinkomali the English would not give it back 
to the Dutch. So he wanted to postpone the question of 
Trinkomali till the conclusion of a definitive treaty between 
England and Holland, when the double transfer of the place, 
from the French to the English and from the English to the 
Dutch, would take place simultaneously. In the meantime he 
proposed to proceed to the restitution of other territories in 
India between the English and the French. 