

That sudden development solved the difficulty to .1 large 
extent and the cessation of hostilities was followed immediately 
b} an exchange of prisoners between de Suffren and Hughes and 
between Bussy and Stuart, without waiting for a settlement 

1 Wilks -History of Mysoot, II. pp. 2 17^220. 

2 1 J . A. ins, 685, 

s Ibid, ms. G86. 

1 Ibid , 111s. 687. 

5 Ibid t mss. 689-O91. 


mtstfiy. 



IHF FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


the question of the prisoners held in the custody of Tipu, 
Shortly after, the English prisoners held at Trinkomali and in 
the Isle of France were returned, as also the French prisoners 
held in Bengal and at Tanjore and Trichinopoly. There still 
remained, however, the question of the English prisoners handed 
over by dc Suffren to Haidar All. Macartney went on insisting 
that the French were under an obligation to procure their 
immediate release after the cessation of hostilities and that 
they could not put forward a pretext that they had no responsi¬ 
bility after the transfer of the prisoners to Haidar. He gave 
Bussy to understand that in case Tipu refused to return the 
prisoners it was his clear duty to join the English in bringing 
military pressure on him. Bussy obviously was faced with a 
rather delicate situation. On the one hand, under the rules 
of warfare he could not shirk responsibility for the prisoners 
taken by de Suffren and handed over, for whatever valid reason, 
to the custoch of Haidar. On the other, the French would be 
thoroughly discredited in the eyes of the Indian Powers if they 
joined with the English against their recent ally. The only 
solution to this difficult problem was the conclusion of peace 
between Tipu and the English, and this was one of the principal 
reasons for the extreme anxiety of Bussy to se< Tipu come to a 
settlement with the English. 


IH. Bussy m<nnrs to Pondicherry. 


\part from the question of the English prisoners held in 
the custody of Tipu, the relations between Bussy and Macartney 
were verv cordial and were inspired by a happy spirit of com¬ 
promise. We have already noticed the despatch of two French 
Commissioners to Madras to solve the differences between Bussy 
and the English Commissioners sent to Cuddalore regarding the 
conditions of the cessation of hostilities . 1 The mission of 
the French Commissioners was entirely successful, thanks to 
the compromising spirit of Macartney and ihe Madras Council . 2 
On July 40 Macartney wrote to Bussy that he had received 


1 P. A. mss. 692, 693. 
3 /bid., mss. 695-696. 


mtSTQy 


ANGLO-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 

news of the ratification of the Preliminaries by Fngl; 

Hussy wrote in reply on July r; that after the ratification of 
the Preliminaries, orders could be expected shortly from both 
the Governments for the restitution of territories. Pending the 
arrival of official orders, he asked permission to be allowed to 
take up his residence at Otxlgaret on the outskirts of Pondicherry 
for recouping 1 his health and to make some repair*, to the walls 
of Pondicherry to ensure the safety of the inhabitants against 
marauding bandits. In making the request he was careful to 
state that he had no intention of taking possession of Potidi 
cherry or hoisting the French flag there before the receipt of 
official Orders from the two Governments. 2 * The Madras Council 
appeared quite accommodating, and in a letter dated grd August 
Macartney informed Hussy that his request had been granted. 
Apart from the certainty that Pondicherry would ultimately 
be returned to the French, as Cuddalorc to the Fngjish. what 
induced the Madras Council to accede to Hussy’s request was 
his assurance that the French flag would not be hoisted at Pondi¬ 
cherry until the receipt of official orders from the two 
Governments. 