

P. A. ms. 4c jo. 

1 Ortolan Monileur Universal (51b November 1H59). 

- Journal dr tim'd du Jluilli dr Suffren duns I’lmk, p|>. ;yi6-»,07 (also 
.Suffren to Hussy. ,ih October. 1783 IN T ,,ls 0* 

u Ibul . p. 317. 


ANCLO-FRENCII NFCOTIATIONS 



Good Hope. 1 There also he received an equally flattering recep¬ 
tion. and in a letter to his friend Madame dc Scillans he wrote 
on the 28 th, “The Dutch have received me here as their libe¬ 
rator. . . . . But among the compliments which have flattered 
me most, there is nothing which has given me more pleasure 
than the esteem and consideration shown to me by the English 
who are here. 2 If M. d’Orves had not been dead he would 
have died of jealousy.* ' After a short stay de Suffren left the 
Gape of Good Hope on the grd January 1784 and reached 
Toulon on the 26th March.* 

De Stiff rein has occupied such a prominent place in our 
narrative that, although it is not strictly relevant foi our pur 
pose, it is worthwhile to give a brief account of his last days in 
France before taking up the course of our story. Back in 
France, de Stiffren enjoyed a brief period of honour and glory 
which few of his countrymen had ever achieved, and then passed 
into oblivion, ending his career in circumstances the mystery 
of which has not yet been indisputably unravelled. From 
Toulon de Suffren hastened to Versailles where he was acc laimed 
as a national hero by one and all. including the King, the Queen 
and the members of the Royal family. It would be out ol 
place here to narrate some of the interesting anecdotes in this 


connection given b-v Roux/* Suffice it to note that de Suffren 
was accorded a fitting recognition for his services by the creation 
of a fourth post of Vice-Admiral lot him alone on the iSth 
April. 1784. It was in his home province, Provence, that he 
received (he greatest ovation. 1 he Estates of Provence struck 
a medal in his honour with the inscription: I he Gape pro 

tected; Trinkomali captured; ( uddalorc delivered; India 
defended; six glorious combats." Flic States General of Holland 
also sent him a gold medal struck in his honour and a let.tet 
of compliments to mark their sense of gratitude for the services 
he had rendered. 


An enterprising man like de Suffren could not long remain 


1 Journal dr Bord dtt Bailii de Suffren. p. 

2 n refers to the English squadron under Commodore King (Roux—* 
lr Bailii dr Suffren, p. 206). 

s Ortolan— Mnniteur Universe! (jtli November 1850)* 

4 Journal dc Bord du Bailii de Sitffien, pp. yit) and y\<). 

•'RnilX- lr Bailii dr Suffren duns Blade, pp. 210*311. 



mtSTffy. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


c, and as war clouds again hovered over Europe during 
1780-87 he was anxious to see active service once more. He 
was greatly disappointed when th< prospect of war was removed 
by what he considered to be a weak-kneed police on the part 
rf France, which lie criticised bitterly in some of his letters to 
Maclaine de Seillans. He was even more disappointed when 
be did not get the rank of a Marshal for which he applied in 