

Shortly after, Hussy moved to Oulgaret, but when he sought 
permission for the French to assume the duty of maintaining 
law and order at Pondicherry, Macartney objected and replied 
that it could not be done before the official restitution. 4 In 
a letter dated 18th September Bussy sought permission to trans 
fer French troops and munitions from Cuddalore to Pondicherry, 
which was granted on the assurance that the French flag would 
not be hoisted at Pondicherry nor would the French assume any 
formal authority in the town before the official restitution.* 
Thus far Anglo-French relations were marked by a spirit of 
compromise and mutual understanding, but the cordiality dis¬ 
appeared over two issues, negotiations between the English and 
Tipu and restitution of Trinkomali. Before we proceed to 
discuss the difficulties connected with those two issues, let u* 

1 P. A. ms. 697. 

2 Ibid., ins. 698. 

• 5 Ibid., ms. 699. 

'Ibid., ms. 701 (Bussy to Macartney, 24th August) and ms. 705 
(Macartney to Bussy, 8th September). 

5 Ibid., mss. 705, 709. 




rnisr^ 



turn our attention for a while to the departure of tie Suffren 
from tlie scene of operations which had immortalised him in 
the history of naval warfare. 


IV. Re I urn af dr Suffren In France. 

For more than two months and a half after the cessation 
of hostilities early in Juh, de Snffren remained in uncertainty 
about the future movement of his squadron. He, however, 
expected that the squadron would be recalled to frame, and 
in August he took some of the ships to Trinkoinali for neces¬ 
sary repairs. 1 2 About the middle of September he went to 
Pondicherry, where Hussy had already moved, and there he was 
relieved of his anxiety by the arrival of Ministerial instructions 
relating to the execution of the Preliminaries.’ In a letter 
dated i(>lh March 1783 Marquis de Castries informed de Stiflren 
that since the English had decided to keep only five ships in 
Indian waters, he was to keep an equal number there under 
the command of Fcinier and send the rest back to France. He 
himself was permitted to return with his squadron. He was 
further informed that itt recognition of his services he had been 
promoted to the rank of Lieutcnafit-General. 3 It was highly 
flattering to de Suffren, and in a letter to his friend Madame 
de Seillans, dated and October 1783, he wrote : l am over¬ 
whelmed by the kindness of the Minister and that before the 
capture of Trinkoinali. which was not known till some time 
ifrer (the Minister’s letter of the iGth March).” 1 

In accordance with the instructions of the Minister 
de Suffren finally left Trinkoinali on the tith October with his 
squadron, keeping only live ships in Indian waters under the 
command of Peinier.’ De Suffren reached the Isle of France 
on the iath November and was given a magnificent reception 
which he fully deserved.* On the 39th he left for the Cape of 

1 journal d fiord du fiailli dr Suffren dans VJnde, p. 29 l - 

2 Ibid,, pp. 300-301. 