

’ P. A. ms. 700. 

X 


miSTQy 



for the future.” 1 On the i8ih September Bussy replied to 
Macartney's letter that since Tipu was considered an ally of 
the French within the scope of Article lb of the Preliminaries, 
the latter were entitled to offer their good offices during negotia¬ 
tions between him and the English. 2 

In offering his good offices Bussy experienced difficulty 
not only from the English but also from Tipu and 
his agent on the Coromandel Const, Sayyid Sahib, who 
despatched the Mysore envoys to Madras without previous 
intimation to the French- Bussy was naturally offended 
; ,nd wrote sharp letters to both i'ipu and Sayyid Sahib on 
the 18th September. In his letter to the former he recalled 
how France had organised a military expedition to India at 
the request of Haidar All Hie conclusion of peace in Europe 
had ended French military operations, and in response to 
Pussy’s appeal Tipu had agreed to a cessation of arms and 
to begin negotiations with the English for a definitive peace. 
But the attitude of Savyid Sahib was rather strange and open to 
suspicion. He deliberately delayed the departure of l ipu’s 
envoys to Madras, and finally sent them off without the know¬ 
ledge of Bussy, in violation of the previous arrangement by 
which they were to have been accompanied by a French agent. 
Bussv further added that he had written to Nizam Ali and 
the Marathas in the interest of Tipu. He requested I ipu to 
ask his agents to conduct themselves in a manner different 
from what they did: otherwise he would form the impression 
ihat the\ received secret instructions contrary to the spirit of 
the letters which Tipu had written to him. 3 4 In his letter to 
Sayyid Sahib Bussy complained against the sudden departure 
of l ipu\s agents for Madras, contrary to the prev ious arrange¬ 
ment that they were to be accompanied by a French agent and 
his interpreter/ 

Not to be baffled either by the dislike of the English or 
the uncooperative attitude of Sayyid Sahib. Bussy decided to 
semt ;t f rench agent to Madras separately to take part in the 

i 1\ A. ms. 403. 

3 fbia ms. 706. 

Ibid., ms. gp 

4 Ibid., ms. vi 1. 


WW/sr/fj, 



ANGLO-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 


3 ? 


<SL 


..^ 0 -..riations between the English and ripu. In a letter to 
Macartney, dated 24th September, he informed the Madras 
Governor that he was sending an experienced man named 
Martin to watch the course of the negotiations and to help 
the conclusion of a treaty lair and equitable to both sides. 
He further added that he was entitled to offer his good offices 
under Article id of the Preliminaries. 1 2 Martin and his inter¬ 
preter, Krishna Ran, accordingly left For Madras. Macartney, 
unwilling to have French interference in the negotiations but 
unable to prevent it directly, wrote to Bussy on the 25th 
October that Martin’s mission would have been more useful 
at the Durbar of ripu than at Madras, and that the good 
offices of the French were more urgently required for the 
release of the English prisoners in Tipu’s hands than for the 
negotiations for a peace treaty.* 