

Anglo-French negotiations joy the execution of the 
Peace Treaty : the question t>/ 7 r/nhouiah. 

Artglo-French negotiations for the execution of the peace 
treaty dragged on for nearly eighteen months, first because 
of ;i long delay in receiving news of the conclusion ol the 
definitive treaty, and second because of a sharp difference ot 
opinion over the question of the restitution of Trinkomali. 
As we have noticed already, relations between the French, and. 
the English were friendly and cordial down to the beginning 
of September 1783. In anticipation of the restitution of Pondi¬ 
cherry the French were allowed to move troops and munitions 
there and even to import provisions duty-free. Bussy> faced 
with acute financial difficulties, was anxious to get back pos¬ 
session of the French territories at the earliest possible oppor¬ 
tunity after the conclusion of the definitive treaty. In order 
to have the preliminary discussions completed beforehand, he 
wrote to the Madras Council on the 18th September, proposing 
the despatch of an English agent to Pondicherry to consider 
the problems relating to the restitution of territories pending 
the conclusion of the final treaty, 1 I he Madras Council 
accepted the proposal and early in November sent George I sac 
Hoissard to Pondicherry. On his ride, Bussy appointed Mon- 
ncron to carry on preliminary tjalLi for the restitution of 
territories. 3 

Madras Government had invited Tipu through ihe medium of Hussy to 
conclude peace. The move was characterised as at once impolitic and 
disgraceful." The Madras Government was given power merely to 
arrange a cessation of hostilities but not to conclude a definitive peace 
with Tipu. The restriction was, however, ignored and a treaty was con- 
. hided on the nth March, as noticed above. The Governor-General 
condemned the treaty for not including any reference to the Nawab of 
the Carnatic or to the Marathas, with whom the English had concluded 
in 1782 a treaty of alliance directed against the ruler of Mysore. The 
opposition of ihe Governor-General and Council to the treaty with Tipu 
was overborne by order from England.—Secret Select Committee Pro¬ 
ceedings. Eon Willliatn, 4th September 1783, 13th May and 13th July 
1784 (Forrest, Vol, III). 

U’. A. ms. 706. 

2 Ibid, mss. 710, 715, 716. 

3 Ibid, ins. 717. 





MIN ISTffy 


Anc; i o• r k n cat \ it;o l iations 




On tin: 29th December the Governor ol Madias sent 
instructions to Hoissard about the arrangements to be made 
for the execution of the treaty when concluded and informed 
Hussy that he was expecting shortly official confirmation of the 
signature of the definitive treaty. 1 2 * 4 O11 the vet February '1784) 
Macartney informed Hussy about the arrival of the Swallow, 
carrying official news of the signature of the definitive treaty, 
and he also sent him a ropy of the treaty early in March.” 
On his side Bussy had received no information from l ranee, 
and in the absence of official instructions it was difficult for him 
to proceed to the immediate execution of the treaty as the 
English wanted. He was, however, faced with an acute financial 
situation, and was thus anxious to get back possession of the 
old French territories in India at the earliest moment. So he 
wrote to Macartney on the ifith March that although he had 
received no instructions from his Government, h< was ready 
to proceed to the restitution of territories if the Madras Council 
thought it necessary. 1 Following this, towards the end of March 
the Madras Government, sent three Commissioners to Potidi* 
cherry, Floyer, Darlymple and Fallofield, to negotiate with their 
French opposite numbers, Monneron, Goutenceau and Moracin, 
about the execution of the treaty. 1 