

Martin’s mission, however, proved entirely fruitless 
During his stay at Madras for nearly a month he remained 
only a passive spectator and did not get. an opportunity even 
to meet Tipu’s agents. They were effectively guarded by the 
English, and besides they themselves appeared quite unwilling 
to establish any contact with Martin. On the latlci s tom- 
plaint Bussy wrote to Macartney on the 301I1 October, pro 
testing against the attitude of the English in preventing any 
contact between Martin and Tipu’s agents.* Macartney replied 
that, the English were in no way responsible lor it. I he 
instructions of the Nawab have undoubtedly guided the 
conduct of his Wakits”* Whatever it might have been, it was 
dearly useless for Martin to remain at Madras, and he returned 
10 Pondicherry early in November. 

At (he same time the scene of negotiations was also 
shifted from Madras to Mangalore. After some preliminary 
talks between the English representatives and Tipu’s agents, 
the latter were recalled and the Madras Government decided 
to send Sadleir and Staunton to Tipu’s camp to finalise nego¬ 
tiations.* In a letter to Castries, dated -<oth November, Bussy 


1 p. a. m». 708. 

2 ibid., ms. 712. 

Ibid., ms. 71 5. 

Ibid., ms. 719. 

s Ibid., ms. (Macartney 10 Hussy, and November 1783V 


MIN/Sr^ 


TffE FRENCH IN INDIA 

~ga\e an account of the course of negotiations between Tipu 
and the English. The latter, ‘‘seduced by the hope held out 
to him for a long time by the English to conclude a special 
treaty of alliance with him which would protect him from the 
Marat has under all circumstances”, showed himself determined 
to avoid French mediation. It was through this motive that 
J ipti had compelled de Cossigny to leave his camp with the 
French contingent, by ill treating him and refusing to supply 
money and provisions for his troops. That also explained 
why his agents avoided all contact with Martin at Madras, 
and why suddenly the scene of negotiations was shifted to 
Mangalore. Hussy however expressed satisfaction at the pros¬ 
pect of the conclusion of peace between Tipu and the English, 
although without the mediation of the French. 1 

It is necessary here to turn for a while to notice the open 
Tilt between I'ipu and Cossigny and the sudden departure 
of the latter from Mangalore with the French contingent, it 
will be recalled that when Tipu left for the Malabar Coast in 
March 178*5, he was given a French contingent of about 600 
men under the command of Cossigny. This contingent, 
together with those under de bailee and Bouthenod directly 
in I ipu’s service, had been largely responsible for Tipu*s sue* 
cesso against the English. At the time of the cessation of 
hostilities between the English and the French, Hussy sent 
orders to Cossigny to separate his contingent from the rest of 
1 ipu’s forces, but at the same time not to such a distance as 
would produce the impression that the French had suddenly 
deserted their ally. It was from this time that I ipu’s attitude 
towards Cossigny, which was never cordial, became definitely 
cold. The climax came towards the end of September (*783), 
when Cossigny suddenly left I ipu’s camp and took the route 
to I ellicherry without even having given any previous intima¬ 
tion to Bussy. 