

Finally, Hussy summed up his observations in the following 
words: “'There is not the slightest hope, based on reason, to 
have an establishment in any part of India with an area of 
land sufficient to meet its annual expenses. There is not the 
slightest hope to form any alliances from which we could draw 
the least advantage. There is not the slightest likelihood of 
being able to carry on in India a trade, free, secure and in¬ 
dependent. in conformity with the engagements of His Brit tank: 
Majesty contained in the definitive treaty. In the present situa 
tion of the nation or tfic future, as 1 foresee it, our commerce, 
claimed to be free, will always be dependent on the 

English. If the Ministry has neither the will nor the 

ability to make Pondicherry, before the outbreak of a fresh 
war, an impregnable place, as it is capable of being made, my 



mmsr/fy 





advice would be not to make more than the indispensabh 
expenses to reconstruct and pallisadc its ditches and to leave 
the other settlements also as they are.” fn fact, Bussv was so 
much dejected, thinking of the future of the French in India, 
that in the same letter he begged for permission to return to 
France. But he was destined not to see his counin any more, 
and breathed his last on the 7th January 1785 in the land where 
he had acquired his glory and reputation. 

IX. Death of Busty , 

Hussy's career came to an abrupt end on the 7th January 
1785. His death, though sudden, was not altogether unexpected. 
Although he was not too old, only sixty live at the time 
of his death, twenty years of inactivity and a life of ease and 
luxury had sapped his vitality. He had been keeping 
indifferent health even before leaving France. In the Isle of 
France he was taken seriously ill, which for a moment 
even seemed to turn fatal. Before he had fully recovered from 
that illness he started for India, where he passed through a very 
strenuous time which did not end even after the cessation of 
hostilities. It was to recoup his health that, he changed his 
seat from Cuddalore to Pondicherry in September 1783, but the 
strain of protracted negotiations and administrative worries and 
anxieties proved too much for him. He died suddenly of heart *n 
failure. There was a rumour that he had been poisoned, but 
it was absolutely baseless. 1 

Immediately after Bossy's death Coutenceau, the second-in- 
command, assumed authority pending orders from France. On 
the next day, 8th January, he wrote to Castries, informing niin 
of the death of Bussy and of his assumption of office temporarily, 
pending official instructions. 3 He added that he had also 
written about the event to the Governors of all the European 
nations in India and to all the Indian Princes with whom the 
French were in correspondence. Coutenceau further informed 
Castries that although he had been told by all the officers of 
Bussy that: the latter had been accorded the honours of a 

1 Martineau —Hussy et Unde Frangaisc, p. 427. 