

Thus for the second time negotiations were suspended 
and the restitution of territories was delayed till the end of 
January 1785, when official instructions were received in India 
about the signature of a definitive treaty between England and 
Holland, which stipulated for a double transfer of Trinkornali 
simultaneously. Bussy, however, did not live to see the final 
settlement. He died on the 7th January 1785, and the task of 
taking back possession of the French settlements in India fell 
upon his successor, Coutenceau. He had, however, by clever 
and patient diplomacy succeeded in foiling the English plan 
regarding Trinkornali. In spite of the acute financial diffi¬ 
culties facing him, he refused to he jostled into a surrender of 
Trinkornali. As he wrote to Castries, Segur and Yeigenncs in 
August 1784, he felt convinced that once in possession of Trinko- 
inali, the English had no intention of giving it back to the 
Dutch ’ The eagerness which the English showed to hurt) 
through negotiations, their insistence 011 treating the restitution 
of t rinkomali as the lirst and the most essential item in the 
execution of the treaty, and the large number of troops and 
huge quantities of munitions* which they planned to send to 

1 P. A. ms. 778. 

» Ibid , 111s. 74I). 

3 Ibid, ms. 747. 

» Ibid, mss. 430, 437, 440. 


MINISr^ 


v ^ e ■ Go k^X 

A Nr t o I'RV.NCH N$GO I r A I IONS 

Hnnkomali at the time of taking possession confirmed his 
suspicions. He was all the more convinced that the English 
would try to keep Trinkoxnali to themselves l>v the under-hand 
support which they gave to the king of Kandy in organising i 
revolt against Dutch rule. It. redounded to the credit of Bossy's 
diplomatic ability that lie saw through the English plan and 
succeeded in foiling it. 

VII. Bussy’s views on future French policy in India, 

Before we close the chapter and turn to the history of the 
French settlements in India from 1783 to 1793. it remains for 
us to discuss the political views of Bussy regarding relations 
with Indian Powers and the future of French possessions in 
India. These views were clearly expressed in some of the letters 
exchanged between him and the Minister, Marquis dc Castries, 
during 1783-84. 

Bussy felt greatly disappointed at the sudden conclusion of 
peace, the news of which reached India only three months 
after his arrival. In fact, peace had been concluded in Europe 
without any reference to the military situation in India and 
without any consideration of the effect it might produce on the 
Indian Powers. For years French agents had carried on propa¬ 
ganda at the various Darbars about the intention of France 
to form a ring of alliances in India and to send a formidable 
expeditionary force to destroy the English power. Many of 
the Indian Princes had entered into negotiations, formal and 
informal, for French military assistance against the English, 
and they had been persuaded by the exaggerated statements of 
the French agents to pitch their expectations at too high a 
point about the strength of the expeditionary force sent under 
Bussy, expectations which were confirmed by the naval actions 
of de Suffren. They had no idea about the military situation 
in Europe and America, and the sudden cessation of hostilities 
between the French and the English, almost immediately after 
the landing of Bussy\s expeditionary force, came to them as an 
unexpectedly disappointing setback. It only created in their 
minds an impression that little reliance could be placed in 
France as an ally. Moreover, the terms of the peace, by which 
France did not get any advantage at all, made them convinced 