


1 I 1 . A. ms. 491. 


MINIS r*y 



much in favour of the idea that in case Hussy approved of 
it, he gave him fxill authority to enter into negotiations with 
Haidar Alt at once for the cession of some territory contiguous 
to Mahe, provided he made no commitment in return, Which 
might lead to a rupture between England and France. He, 
however, relied on Hussy’s judgment and did not like to impose 
his will against the latter’s objections. 

Bussy replied to this letter on the 28th September 1783. 
discussing in detail his objections to the proposal. 1 The only 
disadvantage of Pondicherry was its proximity to Madras, which 
exposed it to a sudden attack. Karikal suffered from the same 
disadvantage after the cession of Ncgapatam to the English and 
the establishment of their hold over Tanjore and Trichinopoly. 
From that point of view the isolated situation of Mah£, far 
away from the English sphere of influence, offered an advantage. 
Hut Mah£ suffered from three serious disadvantages. First, the 
territory was too small and there was no scope for future e xpan¬ 
sion, being surrounded by the dominions of the potential allies 
of France. Second, in contrast with Pondicherry which could 
sene as the enireptit for the finest qualities of cloth, Mahe 
offered little commercial prospect, the neighbouring country¬ 
side producing only some spices. Another difficulty was that 
there was no suitable port, entry into the river being barred to 
large vessels. Third, the geographical situation of Mah£, touch¬ 
ing the borders of the dominions of Tipu and of the Marat has. 
would inevitably drag the French into the constant conflicts 
between the two Powers. “Nothing will ever destroy in the 
minds of the Marathas the hatred they have against the successor 
of Haidar.” It was true that Tipu ’‘will find his advantage in 
the establishment of the centre of French power on the Malabar 
Coast”, but Hussy asked, “should we expose ourselves to a rupture 
with England in defending this man of fortune?” He foresaw 
an imminent fall of the power of Tipu, and urged that like the 
English the French should also rely on their own strength and 
not on any possible assistance from an Indian ally. 

Bussy continued that whatever place might be selected for 
die principal French establishment in India, it was necessary to 
fortify it strongly and to maintain there a permanent garrison 


1 P. A. ms. 411. 


Ml HtST/fy 


ANCl.O-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 

of 1,800 European troops and 2,000 sepoys. If die French 
Government had the will and the means to make the necessary 
expenses for such an establishment, Pondicherry was the best 
place for defence, and incomparably better than Mahe where 
the hinterland was absolutely closed. On the other hand, if 
the Government thought that it could not afford such expenses, 
it was useless merely transferring the principal settlement from 
the Coromandel to the Malabar Coast. The only thing that 
could be done in that case was to leave Pondicherry without any 
fortifications, depending entirely on the goodwill of the English 
and treating the place merely as a commercial centre. 