

useless.he has been and will always be duped”. He 

“sends on his own authority and at great expense one French 
officer to the Court of Delhi and another to the Subadar of the 
Deccan, and gives promises and assurances with an incredible 
light heartedness which would have merely caused laughter if 
they had not also entailed dangerous consequences”. 1 Even 
Rousseau, the French Consul at Basra, wrote to the different 


1 I\ A. ms. 4x0. 


A NC U )-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 

of Asia that he enjoyed the confidence of the Minister, 
gave all sorts of promises and assurances and sent at!venturous 
agents to Indian Durbars. Bcaubrun, the French agent at Goa, 
had incurred a huge debt to finance this so-called diplomatic: 
work. Bussy thus considered it absolutely necessary to recall 
the French agents from the various Darbars to avoid further 
wastage of money. 

In place of the existing system Bussy wanted to concentrate 
all diplomatic work in India in the hands of the Governor of 
Pondicherry, who was to serve as the only channel of com 
munkation between the French Government and the Indian 
Princes. f o maintain contact with the different Darbars, the 
Governor of Pondicherry was to employ Brahmin Wakils accord¬ 
ing to the system of the country. These Wakils possessed diplo 
matic adroitness and finesse to an exceptional degree, and know- 
ing the languages and usages of the country they were better 
lined than any foreigner to get into the secrets of any Darbar. 
I'or normal diplomatic relations the English also employed 
Indian Wakils* It was true that these Wakils might be duped 
or that they might dupe the French Government, but even then 
Bussy considered the risks far less than if Frenchmen were 
employed as diplomatic agents. Moreover, the employment of 
Indian Wakils would certainly be preferable from the point of 
view of economy. 

Bussy objected with equal vehemence to keeping French 
troops in the service of the Indian Princes. After 1763 a large 
number of French troops got scattered all over India in search 
of career and fortune. They accepted service under various 
Princes, forming small European contingents. It had been 
thought by the French Government that these contingents would 
prove very useful to France in moulding the policies of the 
Indian Princes in case of a war between France and England, 
and the Pondicherry Government had given direct assistance and 
encouragement to the maintenance of these contingents. But 
Bussy was of the opinion that far from serving any useful 
national purpose, they were only discrediting France in the eyes 
of the Indian Powers. The French troops in the service of the 
Indian Princes were merely self-seekers and undisciplined 
bandits and had justly earned the contempt of their employers. 
As an illustration, Bussy cited the example of what was known 

AA 




mister 



as ihc Swiss contingent, commanded by de Bailee, in the service 
of Unsalat Jang. At the instance of the English, Basalat Jang 
dismissed the contingent at. a moment’s notice without even 
paying the arrears of salary. De Lidice then sought employ¬ 
ment first under Nizam Ali, then under the Marathas, and 
finally entered the service of Haidar Ali; but everywhere he 
was treated with ignominy, which impaired the prestige and 
reputation of the French nation. Bussv urged the immediate 
disavowal by France of any connection with the private contin¬ 
gents in the service of the Indian Princes, and he even opposed 
the idea of absorbing the troops in the French army, on the 
ground that they would spread indiscipline and demoralisation 
among the regulars. 