

3 1\ A. ms, 452. 




mtsTfy 



Marshal of France at all the places where he had landed during 
his voyage from France to India, he had searched all official 
papers and had found nothing to cor roborate that Bussy enjoyed 
that rank. So he had given instructions that the funeral honours 
to be accorded were to he in keeping with the official rank of 
Bussy. Although Coutenceau had justification for denying to 
Bussy the funeral honours of a Marshal, his dislike of his late 
chief had been very pronounced ail along, and that explains 
why Bussy was buried, like all others, in the cemctry attached 
to the Church of Notre Dame des Angcs at Pondicherry. In 
1787 the body was disinterred and placed in a tomb within the 
Church as a mark of special honour by the then Governor, 
Cossignv. In 1793, however, there was a re-transfer to the 
ccmctrv outside, as the result of a decision taken by the Revolu 
tionarv Colonial Assembly; and although Bussy's tomb still 
exists, it is rather doubtful as to where exactly his remains lie 
buried. A sad end for one who had earned a lasting fame in 
history! 1 

X. An estimate of IUissy. 

In the history of the French in India Bussy occupies a 
position only next to that of Dupleix. It w r as his military 
exploits, from the siege and capture of Jinji, considered im¬ 
pregnable at the time, till the secure establishment of a French 
protege as the ruler of the Deccan, which gradually expanded 
the horizon of the political ambition of Dupleix. There was no 
abler lieutenant of Dupleix than Bussy to carry out his ambi¬ 
tious projects. And yet the two men were entirely different 
in their temperaments and political ideas. Dupleix, a man of 
strong imagination and unbounded ambition, was alone respon 
sibie for laying the grand scheme of building a French empire 
in India. The credit for initiating the new colonial policy, 
which was adopted by other European nations after him, 
belonged entirely to Dupleix; Bussy, on the other hand, while 
serving as the instrument for carrying out that policy, was 
never in sympathy with it. His famous letter to Dupleix in 

1 Murtmeau —Hussy ti l’ Inde bran$ai$e, pp. 4*8-44* (about Hussy’s 
tomb). 


Ml NIST/fy 


ANGLO-FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 


4 



175^ from Hyderabad, wanting to be recalled to Pondicherry, 
was a sufficient proof that he neither shared nor comprehended 
the political views of Dupleix. 1 It was only out of a sense of 
discipline and obedience to his chief that he stuck to his post 
in the Deccan, much against his own liking. All his later 
mdmoires and letters, after the first phase of the Anglo-French 
conflict in India, indicate that he had little sympathy for the 
idea of building up an overseas empire. Fie assumed command 
of the expeditionary force to India in 1781 not with the object 
of reviving the policy of Dupleix, but only to embarrass England 
as far as possible during the War of American Independence. 
The pessimistic note in the mtmoires and letters of Bussy really 
sprang from this lack of sympathy for the cause of empire 
building. 