

Bussy criticised this policy, and in his reply, dated 28th 
September 1783, wrote that such a desertion of an ex-ally would 
thoroughly discredit the French in the eyes of the Indian Powers 
and would ruin all chances of forming an anti-English coalition 
in future. 3 It was in order to avoid that odium that, in spite 
of all the rebuffs he had received from Tipu Sultan and his 
agents, he still went on pressing his good offices for an equitable 
peace treaty between Tipu and the English. 




’ P. ms. 550. 

2 Ibid, mss. 489, 491. 
* Ibid, ms. 411. 



mtST/ty 



T'tL - 


Bus$\ iriecl his best to dispel the wrong impressions in 
France about lire policies of the Indian Princes created by the 
bdse and exaggerated statements of unscrupulous French agents 
at the different Day bars. He wrote two long letters to Castries 
lor the purpose, one dated 13 th. February 1 2 and the other 3rd 
March i/B-F** Fo the latter were attached two metnoires , the 
lust dealing with the state of the Mughal Empire and containing 
a detailed account of the military strength of the various 
Princes and chiefs in north India, and the second dealing with 
1 be history of the Marathn Confederacy and its policy towards 
I * nee. These are highly interesting documents and reveal a 
thorough grasp of the complications of the Indian political 
situation on the part of their author. 

In the letter dated 13th February Hussy stated that the 
main difficulty about the formation of an anti-English coalition 
in India was the acute jealousy of the Marathas against Haidar 
A 1 i. In fact, but for Haidar’s money the Marathas would have 
ended their conflict with the English much earlier and formed 
an offensive alliance with them against the ambitions ruler of 
Mysore. I hey ultimately did conclude a treaty with the 
English, which dearly indicated aggressive designs against 
Haidar. After the cessation of hostilities between the English 
and the French the Marathas wanted to attack Tipu, but con¬ 
sidering him as an ally of the French they sent a Wakil to 
Hussy to explain to him their motives and to justify their 
conduct. He had succeeded for the time being in persuading 
the Marathas not. to move against Tipu. He had done so f 
be cause although Tipu was faithless and unreliable, it was to 
the interest of the French to preserve concord and to bring 
together the Marathas. Nizam Ali and Tipu into an offensive 
alliance against the English, to come into operation on the 
outbreak of the next war between France and England. He 
had written to all the Powers on the subject, but although peace 
was preserved among them for ihe time being, he felt sceptical 
about the future. 

Bussy expressed himself very strongly about the method 
°f maintaining diplomatic relations with the Indian Powers. 


1 1 \ A. ITK. 420. 

2 ibid, ms, ^23. 


wuisr/fy 



AX’OLO-FRENCII nF.cotiatio ns 


<8L 


fife wanted to suppress outright the existing system ot keeping 
a large number of official and non-official agents at the different 
Durban, with no centralisation of Control, the activities of these 
agents remaining in most cases completely unknown to the 
Governor of Pondicherry. In place of Frenchmen he wanted 
to employ Indian WakUs, more conversant with the languages, 
manners and customs of the Darbars and better able to entei 
into their secrets. At the same time there was to be an absolute 
centralisation of control in the hands of the Governor of 
Pondicherry, who was to act as the only means of communica¬ 
tion between France and the Indian Princes. This change of 
system Bussy advocated on grounds of both efficiency and 
economy. 