

Bussy criticised the French agents at the various Durban 
in the most scathing terms possible, characterising them as a 
pack of unscrupulous self-seekers who circulated all sorts of 
false stories in France about the Indian political situation just 
to win the ear and the favour of the Minister. As he wrote 
in ins report to the Minister dated <>th September 1783, these 
agents “bad sent to Europe only absurd fables • • • bo,u 

of their personal interest or their imagination ’.' I he only 
exception he made was in the case of Montigny, hut even in the 
case of Montigny, while giving him full credit lor zeal and 
honesty, Bussy considered him as totally unfit for the son ol 
work entrusted to him. In fact, far from being able to know 
Lhe secrets of the Poona Durbar, lie had been successfully duped 
bv the Marathas. While he had believed in their assurances of 
friendship for France and was putting forward to Bussy then 
proposals for an alliance, he was totally unaware of the fact 
that they had already concluded a treaty with the English, 
envisaging an offensive alliance against Haidar Ali, the Fiench 
ally. It was Malarois, whom Bussy had sent to Poona to contact 
Montigny, who told him for the first time about the existence 
of the Anglo-Maratha treaty. 

As regards other Frenchmen, Bussy wrote, they were “just 
Saint-I.at.bins, not equally criminal to be true, yet as much to 

he condemned.for having deceived the ministers and 

the nation in all their reports. It is surprising that there was 


1 P. A, in s - 405. 



miSTffy 



not a single one among them who was sufficiently honest, suffi¬ 
ciently truthful and sufficiently wise to have ended the ir 
me moires or the reports they sent with this single expression: 
such is the state of things at the moment 1 am writing, but 
within fifteen days and very frequently before this mtmoire 
would reach the Ministry nothing of what l am writing will 
exist or can serve as a basis for any sort of operation, because in 
Asia nothing is stable and a fresh development may arise every 
day”. It will be remembered that Hussy used nearly the same 
words in his me moire of 1777, referring to the reports of the 
French agents at the various Indian Darbars . Much of Bussy’s 
criticism was undoubtedly justified, but one c annot help observ¬ 
ing that while condemning the reports of unscrupulous agents 
Bussy went to the other extreme of undue caution. In fact. 
Bus y had all along been sceptical about the practicability and 
value of forming alliances in India. 

It was not merely for efficiency but also for economy that 
Bussy wanted to recall the large number of Frenchmen who 
acted as agents at the various Darbars. In contrast to the 
uselessness of the work they did. they spent money freely and 
made demands on Bussy which put him to considerable 
embarrassment. Writing to Castries on the 13th February 1784. 
he stated that Piveron de Morlat, the agent at the Court of 
Haidar and Tipu, “made enormous expense which only one of 
our great embassies in Europe alone would have justified”. 
In contrast to this huge expenditure “his letters never con 
tained anything but vague and chimerical projects”. Piveron 
de Morlat, “without knowing the state of our finances draws 
letters of exchange on me and compromises with the greatest 
light-heart edness the subsistence of the troops and the credit of 
the Nation”. Montigny also made “expenses as considerable as 