

Btissy wrote to the Minister again on the same subject on 
the 4th August 1784 and sent him tndmoires written by two 
experienced persons, both opposing the idea of transferring the 
principal French establishment from Pondicherry to Mah£.‘ 
The greatest objection to Mah£ was the certainty of the French 
being drawn into the constant quarrels between Tipu and the 
Marathas. Bossy also discussed the question of transferring the 
centre of French power somewhere else. One suggestion was 
establishment on the coast of Burma, but Bussy considered it 
inadvisable and impracticable. Pegu was a land of permanent 
anarchy. Rangoon was suitable for a settlement, but to conquer 
and preserve it required large military forces which had to be 
permanently stationed there. What little was known about 
the Andaman and Nicobar islands did not suggest the feasibility 
of establishing a settlement there. Bussy dismissed the projects 
regarding these places as absolutely chimerical and stated that 
only two places deserved serious consideration to be the centre 
of French power in India. Trinkomali was ihe most desirable, 

• nd Bussy recommended the opening of negotiations with the 
Dutch for the cession of that place. Next to Trinkomali was 
Pondicherry, best suited for defence; but Bussy was definitely of 
the opinion that it would be sheer folly to rebuild Pondicherry 
for the third time as the principal establishment in India, if the 
French Government was not prepared to make the necessary 
expenses for its defence. 

In the same letter Bussy also gave his opinion about the 

1 P. A. m*. 430 (the two nithnoires were written by Martin and 
Lagren£e) 




ttifc t^RfcNcM in iNbrA 



<SL 


future of the French power in India, ft was in a way his last 
political testament, coining just five months before his death. 
It was a gloomy future that he foresaw, considering the state of 
affairs in India after the peace and the neglect with which 
France treated her Indian possessions. The English had gained 
such an accession of strength that the existence of the French 
possessions in India and even their peaceful trade and commerce 
depended entirely on the goodwill of the former. The peace 
had so thoroughly discredited France in the eyes of the Indian 
Powers that there was little hope of getting any allies in future, 
unless France purchased them with money, or by sending 
superior land and naval forces to India had achieved some 
initial large-scale successes over the English. About the policy 
to be pursued to redeem French position in India, hussy wrote: 
“Send here superior land and naval forces with a large amount 
of money for distribution. In that case you will be able to 
gain the attention of the Asiatic Princes. Win some successes, 
atul you will then be able to persuade them to take your side. 
I hat is the crux of the matter, specially for us who today do 
not have, nor expect to have, allies. Anything different that 
may be said to you on this subject will have originated from 
charlatanism which has kept the truth covered for such a long 
time”. As regards trading operations, they depended entirely 
on the political and military position of the French in India, 
and since it was not imposing, French trade would lie at the 
mercy of the English. 