

Bussy's scathing criticism was largely justified, as most of 
the Frenchmen in the service of the Indian Princes were just 
unscrupulous vagabonds, without any patriotic spirit or military 
talents sufficient to win the confidence and respect of their 
masters. But would he have modified his opinion about the 
utility of keeping Frenchmen in the service of the Indian 
Princes if he had lived on to see the achievements of de Boigne, 
Perron and Raymond? It is doubtful. These men had great 
talents and organising ability, had gained the complete con¬ 
fidence of their masters, and had earned their respect for the 
French name, hut from the purely national point of view they 
served and could have served but little useful purpose. They 
had organised armies and had won victories, but they could not 
have moulded the policies of their masters in the interest of 
their nation. The days of the young Bussv dominating the 
Deccan with his small contingent were over. 

VIIf. The question af shifting the centre of French power 
from Pondicherry to Mahe. 

In these political discussions about the future French poli<\ 
ii India one very interesting question arose,—whether in view 
of past experiences it would he preferable to transfer the centre 
of French power in India from Pondicherry to Mahe or else¬ 
where. The Minister of Colonies, Marquis de Castries, was 
very much in favour of such a transfer, while Hussy was entirely 
opposed to u. Castries first made the proposal in his letter 


mtSTfly 



dated 17th March 17S3. 1 He invited Bussy's opinion on the 
advisability of transferring the principal French establishment 
from the Coromandel Coast, where the English were strongly 
entrenched in power, to a convenient spot on the Malabar Coast, 
preferably Mahe. He gave the following objections to rebuild 
ing Pondicherry for the third time as the centre of French power 
in India. First, its proximity to Madras exposed it “to be 
invested in twenty four hours and to be besieged completely 
in ;i lew days' time", unless at least “it was turned into .1 strong¬ 
hold capable of resisting all attacks, frequently without any pre¬ 
vious warning or even declaration of: war as on the last occa¬ 
sion”. Second, the English had acquired such a dominating 
position on the Coromandel Coast that in case of war the French 
could not offer any prolonged resistance without the help of 
some country Powers. Pondicherry was too far away to receive 
speedy assistance from any ally. Third, for supplies of provi¬ 
sions and of raw materials for construction work, Pondicherry 
depended entirely on the Carnatic and ! anjore. 1 he Nawab 
of the Caranatic and the Raja of 1 anjore being under English 
domination, there was always (he risk of supplies being cut off 
at any moment. Fourth, the cession of Negapatam to the 
English closed all chances that there might have been of getting 
assistance from the Dutch. 

For these four reasons Castries favoured the transfer of 
the seat of French power in India from Pondicherry to some¬ 
where else. There remained two other places, Karikal and 
Mahe. Karikal suffered from the same disadvantages as Poncli 
c herry. On the other hand, Mah<£ seemed to be the most desir¬ 
able spot for the purpose, being situated at the borders of the 
dominions of the Marathas and of Haidar Ali, both potential 
allies of France in a war with England. One difficulty about 
Mahe was that the territory was too small and the conversion 
of the place into a military stronghold would require an enor¬ 
mous expense. But Castries hoped that the transfer of the 
principal French establishment to the Malabai Coast near his 
own dominion would offer such advantages 10 Haidar Ali that 
he would willingly agree to enlarge the French possession bv 
ceding some territory to the south of Mahe. Castries was so 