




misT/fy 



about her military weakness. Even after Wandiwash France 
had not lost credit in the eyes of the Indian Princes, many of 
whom eagerly sought her alliance after 1763. But the peace 
of 1783 thoroughly discredited her and made the Indian Powers 
distrustful both of her military strength and of her consistency 
as an ally. 

After the sudden conclusion of peace, Castries felt it neces¬ 
sary to offer some explanations to the Indian Powers about the 
abrupt change in French policy. In a letter dated 24th April 
1783 he asked Bussy to inform the Indian Princes that it was 
their vacillating policy and delay in joining the French in an 
all-out. effort against the English that was responsible for the 
unexpected end of the French expedition. The peace was how¬ 
ever not a permanent settlement but a mere temporary truce, 
and as an effective preparation for the next outbreak of hosti 
lities Castries advised Bussy to persuade the Marat has, Nizam 
AH and Haidar Ali (his death was not yet known in Europe) 
to form an alliance with France. 1 

On the 9th September 1783 Bussy addressed a long 
mthnoire to the Minister dealing with political relations with 
the Indian Powers, 2 as a supplement to the report on military 
operations bearing the same date. 3 He frankly observed that 
the sudden conclusion of peace had thoroughly compromised 
French honour and reputation in the eyes of the Indian Powers. 
It came just at the moment when many of the Princes had sent 
Wakils for negotiations, and they were totally disconcerted at 
rhe unexpected development even before the arrival of the 
Wakils at Cuddalorc. Bussy was convinced that after the con¬ 
clusion of peace, on terms which did not secure any advantage 
u> France whatsoever, it was extremely difficult to vindicate 
French prestige in future before Indian Powers, specially when 
:hev had been fed for the last fifteen years with all sorts of 
assurances and promises by unscrupulous French agents at 
their Durban. Personally Bussy thought that the plan of the 
expedition was sound and would have achieved success but for 
some unforeseen factors, hut it was difficult to persuade the 

1 P. A ms. 5 i 5 . 

a Ibid, ms. 403. 

a Ibid, ms. 40a. 


MIN ISTQy 


KSCLO- -FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS 

m _ . « * 
^Indian Powers to take the same view On the other hand, 

actual developments tended to show them the military superior¬ 
ity of the English, whose armed strength in India at the end 
of the war was much greater than at the beginning. 

Castries, as we have seen, regarded the peace as a mere 
truce and wanted Bussy to make diplomatic preparations for 
the next outbreak of hostilities. About the policy to be pursued 
with respect to the Indian Powers, although he preferred a 
general coalition, he was sceptical of the value of seeking the 
alliance of the ruler of Mysore, and urged Bussy to concentrate 
on cementing relations with the Marathas, who constituted the 
only Power in India capable of rendering effective help to the 
French. In a letter dated ist November 1783 he wrote. ‘The 
accounts which have been sent do not permit us to think that 
the son of Haidar Ali has retained the power of his father or 
has inherited his hatred against the English • ■ rhc 
Marathas have a consistency stronger and more suitable to 
operate a revolution in India. It is in this light that you should 
make all preparations for the next war and you should consider 
all other objects as subsidiary to it". 1 The adverse attitude of 
Castries towards the ruler of Mysore is also clear from his lette s 
of the 16th and 17th March 1783, in which he asked Bussy to 
leave the English and their allies free to take measures for the 
recovery of the territories conquered from them by Haidar Ali. 
He also informed Bussy about the conclusion of a special con¬ 
vention by which the English Company guaranteed military 
assistance to the French in case Haidar Ali opposed the return 
of the French troops placed at his disposal. 2 