

IV. i'he trading operations of the Company. 

Regarding the trading operations of the Company of 
Calonne, detailed information is available in the correspon¬ 
dence of the agents of the Company in India with the Adminis¬ 
trators in Paris, preserved in the Pondicherry Archives and 
published by Gaudart in 1931.‘ For the first five years, when 

1 V. A Reg is ires 11, 14 ( hwentaire des dfipiennes Archives de Vltule 
h 1 nncaise)', Gaudart-’ -CarresfjoHdancc des Agents a Pomtichery de In 
uoitvelte Cnmpngnte des hides nvec les Adnunistratenrs it Paris, 1788-180^. 


miST/fy 


RESTITUTION OF TERRITORIES 

joyed monopoly privilege, the direction of ns 
affairs in India was in the able hands of Moracin, Cornmissaire * 
G&nJral of the Marine and Ordonnatei.tr at Pondicherry. He 
had been living in India since 1765, and while serving as 
a Suite Official he also carried on private trade and amassed 
a considerable fortune. His trade connections had gained 
him high reputation at Madras and Calcutta. He was 
therefore the ablest man to direct the affairs of the Company 
in India, but it soon proved inconvenient to combine the func¬ 
tions of an administrator with ihose of a commercial agent. 
The interests of the Government and of the Company some- 
ttines appeared incompatible, and Moracin received many 
complaints from the Administrators in Paris of a sacrifice of 
the Company s interests. In September 1789 he resigned from 
the posts of Commissaire -(ren etal and Ordonnateur in order to 
free himself from administrative responsibilities and to be able 
to devote his whole attention to the affairs of the Company. 
But a few months later lie accepted another position which put 
him into great embarrassment in the discharge of his functions 
as the agent of a commercial organisation, wit!) a monopoly 
privilege which made it unpopular among the citizens of Pondi¬ 
cherry. On the 1st March 1790 he was elected President of the 
Committee set up by the citizens of Pondicherry on the news 
of the Revolution in Paris. The Committee demanded the 
abolition of the Company’s monopoly privilege, and Moracin, 
as President, had to support it, as he realised that opposition 
was wholly fruitless. Soon after, the French National Assembly 
decreed the abolition of the Company’s privilege and threw 
open the Eastern trade to all merchants, news of which reached 
India by an English boat which arrived in Calcutta in August. 

The credit of the Company, already somewhat impaired by 
the attacks of its adversaries, thus suffered a heavy blow. 
Moracin, finding himself in a difficult position, handed over his 
charge to a committee on the 1st February 1791, and on the 
iftth left for France, where he assumed the duties of an 
administrator of the private trading society which succeeded 
ihe old monopoly Company. In the meantime the Company 
appointed Simon Lagrenee de Mezieres as its Agent-General in 
India. The latter had also been resident in India for a long 
time and had been an employee of the old Compagnie des 