

On the tgth January the Madras Government nominated 
Moyer as its agent to hand over Pondicherry, with the two 
districts of Vilnoor and Bahour, to the French and to receive 
from them the possession of Cuddalore. 2 On his side, Couten- 
ceau appointed de Boistel to carry out the restitution of terri* 


1 P. A. ms. 455 (Coutenceau to Castries, 22nd January 1785). 

3 Ibid, ms. 804; also C.R.O.— The French in India Series, Vol. XII: 
Proceedings of Fort Si. George relating to the restitution of French terri¬ 
tories on the Coromandel Coast in consequence of the Treaty of 1783 


RESTITUTION OF TERRITORIES 

Pondicherry with its suburbs was restored to the 
French on the ist February, and the two districts of Vilnoer 
and Bahour on the loth. 2 A minor difficulty arose over the 
retention of the customs-posts of the Nawab of the Carnatic 
in these territories, but ultimately the French had to yield. 
The other French possessions in India were also restored soon 
after. On the 26th February de Boistel received possession of 
Karikal, with the territories belonging to it before the war, 
from Fallofield representing the Government of Madras. 1 lh< 
factory at Masulipatain and the village of Francepeth. situated 
about two miles to the north-west of the town were handed 
over to Le Forestier on the 16th March. I he settlement at 
Yanam was also restored about the same time. In Bengal 
Chandernagore arid its subordinate factories were restored to 
Dangereux, who had been sent there as commercial agent a few 
months earlier. 6 Marin received possession of Mahe on the 
15th August. 7 The factory at Surat was not handed ovei till 
1788. In that year de Bruix wa appointed French Consul ai 
Surat and in May he received possession of the factory house 
and the garden belonging to it.* 

IF Anglo-French Commercial Convention. 

Even after the restitution of territories disputes between 
the two nations continued till 1787 over the question of the 
commercial privileges of the French.* Hie question assumed 
special Importance because of the rapid expansion of English 

* r. A. im. 455. 

s Ibid, ms. 463. The Nawab of the Carnatic had objected to the 
cession of Vilnoor and Bahour; see bis letter to Macartney, dated 27th 
March 1784 and Macartney’s reply dated 1st April; C. R. O.— The French 
in India Series, Vol. VIII, pp. 411-425. 

3 P. A. ins. 476. 4 Ibid, ms. 3986. 

Ibid, ms. 5190. 

* C. R O. —The French in India Series, Vol. XII--Wilton’s Narra 
live of his Transactions with the French on the restoration of French 
possessions in Bengal in consequence of the treaty of 1783. 

1 P. A. ms. 4540. 

* Ibid, mss. 5073, 5074. 

»C. R. O .—The French in India Series, Vol. VI: Reports by Francis 
Russel Esq., Solicitor to the Rt. Hon’ble the Board of Commissioners for 




WNlSTt 



power in India between 17(13 and 1783, which nullified in effect 
tin coin mere ial privileges enjoyed by the French Company 
under the -Farmans and Para connas of the Indian rulers. The 
abolition of the French Company in 1769 and later the out¬ 
break 0! hostilities gave the English in Bengal an opportunity 
to establish a monopoly over sail, opium and saltpetre* the 
most lucrative branches of trade. After the conclusion ot 
peace in 1783. the English found themselves threatened with 
the prospect of losing their monopoly position and of having 
to share the trade of the country with the French on equal 
terms. Fhe three Articles of the definitive treaty, 13th, 1qt.l1 
; nd 15th, which re lated to the restitution of territories in India, 
also contained specific provisions assuring* complete freedom of 
commerce to all French subjects in India, trading either indivi¬ 
dually or collectively through a Company, and enjoyment of 
all commercial rights and privileges belonging to the old 
French Company. 1 Immediately after the conclusion of the 
Preliminaries the Directors of the English Company had sent 
detailed instructions to the Governor General and Council in 
Calcutta about the execution of the treaty provisions relating 
to trade and commerce. The Directors wrote, “You will assure 
to French subjects a trade, secure, free and independent, such 
as had been enjoyed by the last French Fast India Company, 
whether the said subjects carry on commerce individually or 