

The career of Bussy falls into two clearly marked divisions,— 
first, when as a young man and an able lieutenant of Duplcix he 
carried French arms as far as Aurangabad and brought the 
whole of the Deccan under temporary French domination; and 
second, when as an old man of 63, with a failing health and a 
legendary reputation, he arrived in India in command of an 
expeditionary force sent for the purpose not of building a 
French empire but of destroying the empire built by England, 
following the way that he and his former chief, Duplcix, had 
first indicated. Between these two divisions of his career lay a 
period of about twenty years in France, spent in inactivity 
luxury and comfort. In dealing with Bussy’s career in India 


WNtsr/ff, 



_ Anglo i r*;nch negotiations 

V X. •TT > ./ ^ 

\ iy 

v% 

^rnost historians have painted him as much in black in the 
second pail as in bright colours in the Inst. The only excep¬ 
tion is Marllucau, who has given a truer and a more dispassion¬ 
ate view of the whole career of Hussy. 

The thing is that in discussing the earlier phase of the 
life of Hussy the imagination of the historian is easily caught 
by spectacular deeds in war and diplomacy, the absence of 
which in the later phase has inclined him to a condemnation 
of the man for vanity, cowardice and muddle-hcadcdncss. 
I’hc: change in the Indian political situation, the seen estab 
lishment of English power, the difficulties and accidents which 
Hussy had to face, and the wholly inadequate resources and the 
little time he had for military operations in India,—these factors 
are almost completely overlooked; and the failure of the French 
expedition in 1782-83 is attributed, with scant justice, to the 
timidity and incapacity of the commander. Little notice is 
taken of the sustained and plodding work of army administra¬ 
tion, and little credit is given for the skilful diplomacy displayed 
by Hussy in delicate negotiations with the Dutch, Tipu Sultan 
and the English. While the events of 1782 83 do not entitle 
Hussy to be ranked as a great military hero, which he in fact 
never really was, nobody who takes the trouble of going through 
his voluminous correspondence, memoir es y Journal and other 
relevant documents connected with the French expedition to 
India can fail to discern the same patience, the same dogged 
tenacity against adverse circumstances, the same capacity for 
sustained work, and the same ta<t and diplomatic fmcs.se as lie 
had displayed during the earlier phase of his career. 


V 


Ml UlST/fy 


CHAPTER XV 



<SL 


mrrioN of territories and rfvivai 

OF FRENCH TRADE 


I. Restitution of territories. 

Although hostilities in India between the English and the 
French ceased in July 1783, it was not till nineteen months 
later that the restitution of territories took place in accordance 
with the terms of the peace treaty. We have seen already the 
cause of this delay, even after official news of the definitive 
peace had reached India in March 1784. Anglo-French nego¬ 
tiations for the execution of the treaty w r ere broken off in July 
1784, pending fresh instructions from London, Bussy, who 
in September *783 had taken up his residence at Oulgaret, in 
the country house built by Law de Lauriston, had expected an 
early restitution of territories and had shown great anxiety 10 
come to a compromise with the English over disputed points. 
Rut he was destined not to see the French flag fly again over 
Pondicherry. It was not till December 1784 that the Governor- 
General and Council in Calcutta received definite instructions 
from London about the procedure to he followed for the resti¬ 
tution of territories. V copy of the instructions sent from 
Calcutta reached Madras about the middle of January 1785, 
shortly after the death of Hussy. 1 It was Hussy’s interim succes¬ 
sor, Coutenceau, who had the good fortune to see the final 
execution of the peace treaty. 