


WNisr/f y 


FONt>lCHfcRft\ 

crsal of the policy pursued lor nearly half a ecutuiy; 
and the abruptness of the change made it all the more uiipopu 
la 1 among the inhabitants of Pondicherry' and of the other 
settlements, who accused the home Government of a betrayal 
of national interests, in giving up all political ambitions in 
India and leaving the settlements at the tender mercy of the 
English. It was this feeling of resentment at the policy of the 
home Government that was largely responsible for the outbreak 
of revolutions in the different settlements live years later. 

It. Succession of Governors. 

The history of Pondicherry, as indeed of the other French 
settlements in India from its restitution in 1785 to its capture 
by the English in 1793, falls into two clearly marked divisions, 
the first from 1785 to 1790, and the second from 1790 to 1,93. 
The interest of the first period lies in the efforts made by suc¬ 
cessive Governors to re-organise the administration in accord¬ 
ance with the strict economy measures prescribed by the home 
Government. In the second period interest is centred on the 
activities of the citizens of Pondicherry following the news of 
the Revolution in Paris. To a large extent it was the adminis¬ 
trative measures of the first period, rousing bitter resentment 
among the inhabitants of the colony, which influenced the 
course of events in the second. 

7 he period from 1785 to 1790 was marked by a rapid 
succession of Governors,—six in the course of live years. It 
was hardly conducive to administrative efficiency, and no Gov 
ernor remained in olfice for a sufficient length of time to devote 
himself to the urgent work of reconstruction and to carry out 
ameliorative measures. Ihc quick changes in office produced a 
feeling of political uncertainty, as each Governor, fearing un¬ 
popularity, tried to pass on to his successor the thankless task 
of executing the administrative reforms ordered by the Ministry 
in Paris. On the sudden death of Buss) in January 1785, 
Coutcnceau, next in command, assumed charge pending instruc¬ 
tions from Paris. He, however, remained in office only for a 
lew months and had just the time to take possession of the 
French settlements in India from the hands of the English. 
Even before the death of Bussy the Ministry had decided to 



nt f' r#'V 




nominate Sou iliac, Governor of the Isle of fiance, as hi> 
successoi while granting Hussy’s request for permission to return 
to franco. 1 Souillac arrived from the Isle of France in May 
1785, hut he remained at Pondicherry only for four months 
and a half. In October he left for the Isle of France 1 to take 
up his new post as Governor-General of all the French posses¬ 
sions in the East, in pursuance of an administrative reorgani¬ 
sation decided upon by the French Government in May 1785. 
Souillac had merely carried to Pondicherry the instructions ol 
the home Government about the economy measures to be 
introduced, but he did not get the time even to begin their 
execution. He left as his successor at Pondicherry Charpentier 
de Gossigny, who, it will be remembered, had been in command 
of the French detachment placed at the disposal of Tipu in 
178*5. Gossigny remained in office for nearly two years, but in 
order to avoid unpopularity he proceeded slowly in the execu 
tiou of the instructions of the Ministry. In September 1787 
he left Pondicherry to take up his new appointment as Gover¬ 
nor of the Isle of Bourbon. 