


III. The establishment of the Company of Cal on in: and its 
cafeer of misfort. um\ 


1 he conclusion of peace and restitution of tenitoties was 
followed by a sudden development of French trading activities 
in India, such as had not been seen for many years. I he last 
days of the Compagnie des Indcs had witnessed a steady decline 
<>! trade and commerce, and after its abolition in 17**9 French 
trade in India had dwindled almost to nothing. I he main 
factor responsible for the rapid expansion of French trading 
activities in India after the war was the establishment in 17^.% 
of a new Com pa gf lie des hides , commonly known as the Com¬ 
pany of Galonnc from the initiative taken by Calonne. the 
Control eiir-General. The Company was established by a Royal 
Irret dated 24th April 1785 , and another Arrit of the 15th May 
appointed twelve Administrators, of whom one, Moracin, was 
appointed Administrator-General in India. 5 It was granted a 
monopoly of trade in the F,ast for fifteen years. 1 he share 
capital, originally fixed at uo million livres, was later allowed 
to be increased to 40 millions by a Royal Arret dated -nst 
September 178b. 

The Company of Calonne, which started on such a large 
scale and with high hopes of being able to capture a substan¬ 
tial part of the Eastern trade, had a most unfortunate career. 
It was established at an inauspicious moment, just on the eve 
of the Revolution, which threw France into a long period of 
chaos and confusion. For the lust live years die Company 


1 V. A. ms. ioosj. 

2 About the history of French trading privilege* in India a connected 
account will he found in Caudart’s La Privilege* du Commerce Fran ( <,i> 
duns Vtnde. 

3 p. \. mss. 831. 836. 

kv> 





showed unusual vigour in pushing French trade in the Fast, 
investing a considerable amount of capital and reaping profits 
which fully justified its ventures. The very success of the new 
Company, however, proved its undoing, by rousing the jealousy 
of the other French merchants against its privilege of monopoly 
in a branch of trade which proved so lucrative. On the out¬ 
break of the Revolution the enemies of the Company carried 
their opposition to success in the National Assembly, which in 
April 1790 abolished its monopoly privilege and threw open 
the Eastern tr-de to all French merchants, f he sudden aboli¬ 
tion of its monopoly privilege, just five' years after its establish¬ 
ment. was a staggering blow to the Company. But it made a 
heroic struggle for survival, and for the next three years it 
carried on trading operations in tin East as a private organisa- 
tion, on a somewhat diminished scale but with profits which 
were as great as before. It roused the jealousy of its enemies 
once more, who in order to better achieve their object brought 
an accusation that the Company had placed large sums of 
money at the disposal of Louis XVI to organise a counter¬ 
revolution. Although entirely baseless, the charge was upheld 
bv the Convention, and In three successive decrees, dated 26th 
July and 8th October 1793 and 3rd September 1794, the Com- 
pain was totally abolished and its property confiscated. It was 
also forbidden for any trading society to assume the name of 
the Compagnie des [tides in future. I lie shareholders of the 
Company put up a stubborn light, brought up their case befoie 
even successive Government in France, and it was not till 187ft 
that the matter was finally closed. 