

1 V A. ms. 2664 (letter of the captain of tin* Esperarue ro Dangereux, 
si!i December 1 y8r } . and the latter's protest to the Calcutta Council). 

2 fhid, mss. 520.-;, 5207, 5212-5215, 5217, 52*9. 




I HI FRENCH |\ fNDIA 



<sl 


>jt;u to the approval of the English and French (Governments. 1 2 
I he English Government, however, disapproved of the Conven¬ 
tion, not because of its terms, which were adopted in a later 
agreement. but on the ground that the Governor General and 
Council in Calcutta had no right to conclude .< Convention 
with a foreign Power. Negotiations were resumed in Europe 
in 1787 between the two Governments, unci a new Convention 
was signed at Versailles on the 31st August with a view to 
remove all disputes in the execution of the provisions of the 
treaty of 1783 relating to French commercial rights and privi¬ 
leges." By the first Article of this Convention the English gave 
an assurance of freedom of trade to French subjects in the 
Carnatic, Madura, Tanjore, Northern Sarkais. Bengal, Bihar 
and Orissa. By the second Article the French right to import 
salt into Bengal was restricted to 200,000 maunds. The whole 
quantity was to be sold to the English Company at 120 rupees 
for 100 maunds. By tin third Article the English agreed to 
deliver to the French in Bengal .18,000 maunds of saltpetre and 
300 chests of opium at prices current before the last war. 
By the fourth Article French sovereignty was recognised over 
the settlement at Chandernagore and subordinate factories at 
Kasitnbazar, Dacca, Jougtlia, Balasore and Patna. By the next 
Article French commercial houses elsewhere in Bengal were 
placed under the laws of the country. 

In transmitting a copy of this Convention to Conway, 
Governor of Pondicherry, on the 241I1 November 1787, Comte 
de Montmorin, Minister of Marine and Colonies, expressed 
satisfaction at the termination of the long-standing disputes. 3 
He also sent a copy of a letter written bv the Directors of the 
English Company to Cornwallis on the subject of the Commer- 


1 l\ A ms. 904 (containing all the papers relating to the negotiations 
as well as the terms of the Convention finaly drawn up); also C. R. C.-~ 
rhe french in India Series. Vol. IX, pp. 1-58- Abstract of the advices 
from Bengal on the subject of carrying into execution the 13th article 
of the definitive treaty and restoring the French to their former trade 
and Establishments in that country with some remarks on the rights 
claimed bv the French and a copy of the Convention concluded by Colonel 
Cathcart and the French Governor-General at the Mauritius. 

2 Ibid, ms. 1002 (Copy of the treaty). 

3 Ibid, ms. 1031. 


misr^ 



While Mill claiming the right to impose 
and to control navigation in the Hooghly, 
directed not to exercise the right so as to avoid 
Further disputes with the French. 1 From 1 7^7 * 793 » when 

the French possessions in India again fell into the hands ol: 
i he English, their trade was freed from all restrictions and was 
plated on an equal footing with that of the English. 1 