




ompany en 


WHIST 


mi. FRI'NC H IN INDIA 

hides. He had, like Moracin, great ability and commercial 
experience. But he remained at his post only for a brief period. 
The new trading society, successor 10 the old monopoly Com¬ 
pany, wanted to reduce administrative costs by replacing salaries 
by a 3 per cent commission to its employees. At the same time 
the number of agencies was also reduced to four,—Pondicherry, 
Bengal (the agency had been shifted from Chandernagore to 
Calcutta on the outbreak of troubles in the french settlement), 
Mahe and Canton. At Pondicherry the direction of affairs was 
placed in the hands of a committee of three, Combemale, Blin 
dc Grincourt and Richardin. till the total suppression of the 
Company in 1 793 * 

During the lust five years, when the Company enjoyed 
monopoly privilege, the volume of its trade was quite consi¬ 
derable. Every year it sent out a large number of ships, and 
the cost of annual equipments averaged nearly 15 million livres. 
Lts trading operations extended from Canton to Mocha and 
Suez. Extension of trade to the latter region was of special 
importance, facilitating the establishment of a quickei postal 
service, by which, letters from Paris could reach India in less 
than three months in place of six or seven months by the other 
route, via the Cape, The principal articles of Eastern merchan¬ 
dise carried to Europe by the French ships included, besides the 
cotton manufactures of various types of the Coromandel Coast, 
saltpetre from Bengal, pepper from Mahe and coffee from 
Mocha, cowries, sandalwood, rattan-cane, raw' hide, senna, gum- 
arabic, incense, myrrh and ostrich feathers. I he Company 
sent out. to India both European merchandise as well as consi¬ 
derable sums in cash. For many years the French settlements 
in India had not seen such an influx of money as between 178b 
and 1790. Even then the agents of the Company had a difficult 
task in making all the purchases demanded from India, their 
value far exceeding the amount received in cash and merchan¬ 
dise, Money for the balance had to be found by drawing bills 
on the Company in Paris: Moracin’s credit and reputation 
stood so high at both Madras and Calcutta that his personal 
guarantee made the bills readily acceptable at those places. 
After 1789, however, on the news of the Revolution in Paris 
and of the persistent attacks on the monopoly privilege of the 




mtsT/fy 



Company, it became extremely difficult for Moracin to find 
ctedit, in India against bills drawn on die Company. 


just before the outbreak of the Revolution the Company 
had once thought of seeking from the Government all the rights 
and privileges regarding territorial administration in India 
which had been granted to the earlier Companies of Colbert 
and Law. At its request Moracin drew up an estimate of the 
revenues and expenses of the different French settlements in 
India. The revenues amounted to 1200,000 litres, and the 
expenses, as fixed by the home Government in 1789, to 700,000 
litres. Moracin wanted the balance of 500,000 livres to be 
spent on a programme of construction of defensive works in 
(he various settlements. 1 However, the idea fizzled out on the 
outbreak of the Revolution, and a few months later the Com 
pany lost even the single privilege which it enjoyed, namely 
monopoly of trade. 