

Popular ideas have always based the greatness of Bussy on 
his military genius. He stands out in popular imagination as 
a great conquering hero, who first showed the way how Indian 
Powers could be subjugated by a European nation with a 
mere handful of well-armed and disciplined troops. His other 
qualities have been almost wholly overshadowed by what are 
considered as brilliant military exploits,—the capture of Jinji. 
the daring march to Aurangabad at a distance of 900 miles from 
Pondicherry with a handful of French troops, his successful 
establishment of a French prot£g£ as the ruler of the Deccan 
against the opposition of internal as well as external enemies, 
and his securing the grant of a large territory which not only 
made the French army of occupation independent of the 
Hyderabad Government but even made it possible to linance 
French military operations in other parts of India. It is not 
difficult to understand the reason for this popular conception 
of the greatness of Bussy, for military exploits more readily 
capture the imagination of men than the less spectacular 
qualities of statesmanship, although more successful and of a 
more enduring value. 

In fact, however. Bussy s real claim to greatness rests not 
so much on his talents as a soldier as on his capacity as a 
shrewd diplomat and a wise and far-seeing statesman. The 
capture of Jinji was not in reality such a brilliant feat of arms 


1 Martineau —Bussy et I’lnde Franfaise, pp. 79*80. 


as is commonly supposed. Nor was the march across 900 miles 
to die northern limit of lire Deccan such an impossibly daring 
venture, when we consider the absolute- lack of resistance and 
the complete confidence with which he started about the over¬ 
whelming superiority of a small number of: European troops 
to badly armed and badly trained Indian hosts. In the French 
military tradition Bussy could hardly claim a position even in 
the second rank of men. 

What really distinguished Bussy and gave him the title to 
a permanent place in modern Indian history was his uncom¬ 
mon ability as a diplomat and a statesman. Most of his sue 
cesses were due to clever negotiations and tactful handling of 
delicate situations. In the Deccan enterprise his achievement 
was not the march to Aurangabad, but the preservation of poli¬ 
tical control over the country against stubborn and ill concealed 
opposition. He had a deep and penetrating eye, and possessed a 
perfect understanding of the Indian temperament. He was the 
first European who showed how a large part of India could be 
effectively held under European domination, not so much by 
force of arms as by a skilful management of the puppet ruler and 
the leading personalities of the Darbar and a combination of 
firmness with an apparent respect for the government, laws 
and usages of the country and obedience to the will of the ruler. 
Bussy’s work did not last long, but the example he set was 
readily copied by the English with more enduring success. 
The new chapter of Indian history, which saw the beginning 
arid the rapid expansion of English political domination in this 
country, owed much to the initiative and the methods of Bussy. 