

through a Company. We desire that you take 

measures in this respect as may convince them of our sincere 
intention to assure France die full effect of this article and to 
remove any occasion for dispute between the two countries/’ 2 

1 tie affairs of India on the claims of the French, Dutch, and Danes to 
exclusive privileges in fhe East Indies- (0 French claims to trading pri 
vileges in Bengal and arguments against them, pp. 3-53, (2) Sketch of 
French claims in consequence of the treaty of peace, 17H3, pp. 128-132; 
(3) Report on the monopolies in the trade of salt, opium and saltpetre, 
PP .375 4%; also Vol. XVII—Sketch of the Salt Trade in Bengal so far 
as iv necessary to explain the claims of the French to art exemption from 
additional import duties in that article of commerce (1787). 

* Ciaudart—-L« Privileges du Commerce Francois dans Vlndt, p. 8. 

~ l\ A. ms. 486; Circular l etter, dated 6th Match 1783, from the Court 
of Directors to their several Presidencies in India relating to the execu¬ 
tion of tlit* Treaty of 1783 (C. R, O. The French in India Series, Vol 
lx. pp. 7 <> %)• 



RESTITUTION OF TERRITORIES 

"— 

l!_^9Mfn spite of the clauses of the treaty and the instructions 
of the Directors of the English Company, numerous difficulties 
arose, particularly in-Bengal, in giving effect lo the provisions 
relating to French trade and commerce, the English were 
naturally unwilling to share trade with the French on equal 
terms in territories conquered by them, and virtually under 
their sovereignty, such as Bengal and Bihar, they raised all 
kinds of difficulties for French trading operations. Disputes 
and minor incidents of violence were of daily occurrence. 1 he 
most serious of these incidents in Bengal was the firing on a 
French corvette, the Esfmance, from the English fort a* Budge- 
Budge in December 1785. In violation of the time-honoured 
freedom of navigation in the Hooghly, respected by all the 
European nations from the beginning of their settlements in 
Bengal, the English had established a customs-post at Budge- 
Budge and claimed the right of inspecting all foreign ships 
going up the river. The captain of the Espirance refused to 
submit to such a demand, whereupon the English opened fire 
from their fort. 1 Dangereux, who was in charge of the 
Chandernagore settlement, protested to the Government in 
Calcutta against tilts and other daily violations of the trading 
rights of the French, without getting anv redress. At Vfasuli- 
patam also difficulties arose about the freedom of French trade. 
Le Forestier, the Chief of the French factory carried on an 
acrimonious correspondence with the English local authorities 
and later with the Government of Madras on the subject of 
the exemption from customs duties of all French exports and 
imports, and in the end he gained a favourable decision from 
the Madras Council recognising the rights of the trench. 2 

Disputes still went on. and in order to end them finally 
the Governor-General and Council in Calcutta decided in 1786 
to send Colonel Cathcart to the Isle of France to negotiate a 
Commercial Convention with Souillac, the French G >vernor- 
General. After a prolonged discussion of all the disputed points 
a Convention was agreed upon and signed on the 30th April, 