

1 he abolition of (he monopoly privilege of the Company 
brought about a sudden reduction in the volume of trade. The 
successor to the monopoly Company suppressed some of the 
agencies, those at Mocha and Yanam, 10 reduce the cost of 
establishment; and as the political situation in France deterio¬ 
rated there was a rapid fall in the demand for Eastern mer¬ 
chandise. The Company, however, carried on its trading 
operations, although on a diminished scale, down to the siege 
and capture of Pondicherry in August 1793. The terms of 
capitulation had assured property rights and liberty of trade 
to the citizens of Pondicherry, and the Company could have 
continued its commercial operations even after 1793. Blit the 
total suppression of the Company and the confiscation of its 
goods in France prevented the continuance of ; ts trade in India 
under the terms of capitulation. 


1 Gaudart —Cones pondance des Agents a Pondichety de la nouvelle 
C&mpagnie des Indes avec les Admimslrnteurs a Paris, pp. 33-49 (letter 
dated toth September 1789). 




CHAPTER XVI 




PONDICHERRY ( 1785 * 1793 ) 

L Pondicherry after the War. 

Pondicherry, after its restitution in 1785. was in a rathei 
sad plight, facing economic hardships and political uncertainty. 
Ihere was a general spirit of despair and frustration among 
the inhabitants. Their trade and commerce had been ruined 
completely during the war. Nor did the peace bring them any 
consolation. They had hoped for economic recovery after the 
war, but were rudcl) disappointed by the establishment of a 
new Company with a monopoly of the Eastern trade. Only 
the inland trade was left open to private merchants, but in 
view of the political situation in the country, it did not amount 
to much, and came to be virtually restricted to the sending of 
2 cm>, 000 maunds of salt to Bengal under the Commercial Con¬ 
vention of 1787. All hopes of a revival of the political status 
of Pondicherry were equally destroyed by the policy adopted by 
the home Government after the peace of 1783. the war had 
completely dislocated the finances of the French Government 
and had brought it to the verge of bankruptcy. The Govern¬ 
ment had thus little liking for colonial expansion; its primary 
concern was to make economies in administration. In this 
drive for economy even the ordinary requirements of defence 
of the Indian possessions were neglected. The Indian settle¬ 
ments were denuded of practically all European troops, muni¬ 
tions and other military stores belonging to Bossy's expedi¬ 
tionary force, and only a small number of sepoys were retained 
for the maintenance of law and order. Besides, all the French 
possessions in the East were grouped into one administration, 
under a Governor-General with his seat in the Isle of Franco. 

Thus all on a sudden Pondicherry lost its pride of place 
as a capital and found itself reduced to the status of a depen¬ 
dency. The policy of the French Government after 1783 was 
to retain the Indian possessions merely as commercial centres 
and not for any political or military objective. It was a com- 