

The Colonial Assembly, elected in July 1791, remained 
in power till December 1792, when it was replaced by a new 
organisation following the arrival of two Civil Commissioners, 
I.escallier and Durnorier, sent by the French National Assembly. 
For the most part: the Colonial Assembly worked in perfect 
accord with the Governor, and peace was preserved at Pon¬ 
dicherry. The period was marked by a few exciting events 
and patriotic demonstrations. On the 2nd August the new 
tri colour flag was hoisted in a great public ceremony. 4 On 
the 14th April 1792 was held another public ceremony, when 
before a gathering of all the citizens the decree of the National 
Vssembly concerning the organisation of St. Domingo as a 
model for all the colonies was read out. The meeting took 
an enthusiastic decision about the abolition of all titles of 
nobility and of the arms and honours pertaining to them 
On the 16th April there was another ceremony in com memo 
ration of the acceptance by the King of the new Constitution 
and an amnesty was declared for all guilty of violation of laws 
in connection with the revolutionary movement. Again on 
the 14th July the citizens of Pondicherry celebrated the anni¬ 
versary of the fall of the Bastille and the regeneration of the 
French Nation. They took an oath of loyalty to the Con¬ 
stitution, and there followed a military review and a grand 
patriotic feast. 


‘P A. mss. 1440. 1443, 1445, 1457. 

2 Ibid ,, mss. 1462-1464. 

Ibid., mss. 1475-1477. 1 Ibid., ms. 1453. 



lHk FRENC H IN INDIA 

f he first constructive work of the Colonial Assembly was 
the drawing up on the 3tel August 1791 of 29 articles to serve 
as the basis of a new constitution lor the French settlements 
in India. The constitution was practically the same as that 
drawn up by the General Assembly on the 5U1 July. One 
interesting feature was that the Colonial Assembly had to 
include four representatives of the Indian inhabitants when 
it discussed any matter concerning them. The Assembly was 
to be re-elected in full every two years. It was to meet once 
a week, on Thursdays, and its sittings were to be held in public. 1 
The next work of the Colonial Assembly was Lire re-organisa¬ 
tion of the Municipality on the 3rd September, electing the 
popular Comte de Civrac as Mayor and reducing the number 
of members to four. 2 * It. also elected two deputies from India 
for the new Legislative Assembly in Paris, choosing lor the 
purpose Moracin, who liad returned to France at the end of 
1790, and a Bordeaux merchant named Corbin, who had taken 
a leading part in the agitation for the abolition of the mono¬ 
poly privilege of the Company of Galomic. In September 1792 
the Colonial Assembly tried to impose the Civil Constitution 
of the Clergy on the priests, with the result that only two 
Capuchins and two Jesuits accepted it while the rest Id Pon 
dicherry and took refuge at Madras.* 1 

VTII. hrival of livo Civil Commissioners /row France: 
administrative and other reform > 