

In an important political despatch, dated 14th February 
1787, Castries outlined to Souiilac the policy of. the French 
•Government with respect to the Indian possessions. 1 I he 
administration of Pondicherry, Mahc, Karikal, Yanani and 
Chandernagore was to be retained by the King, while that of 
the other settlements and factories was to be transferred to 
the new Company of Galonnc. 1 here was absolutely no need 
of rebuilding the fortifications at Pondicherry. In the exist¬ 
ing state of affairs it would be sufficient to protect the town 
with a ditch and, if necessary, with some earth-works. 1 his 
directive of Castries put an end to the plan of defence con¬ 
struction at Pondicherry, a scheme of which was drawn up 
by the engineer, La Lustiere, in September i/^V* Lusti&re 
had taken in hand the construction of a military hospital, 

1 1 \A. ms. 859. 

2 Ibid.., 111s. 917. 

3 Ibid., ms. 859. 

1 Ibid., ms. 960. 

5 Ibid., ms. 887. 


mtsrffy 



Hbarfracks and arsenals, and the completion of the canal running 
through the town,, started under Law to divide the Indian 
from the European quarter. Re had travelled to Jaifmapatam 
in Ceylon for procuring materials of construction. 1 Bui his 
scheme had to he finally abandoned when Castries gave his 
second directive in June 1787 that he considered it quite 
sufficient to encircle the town with a sloping earthen wall 
‘ just to prevent desertion and to maintain order*’. 3 

In Vpril 1789 more stringent instructions were sent from 
frame with the object of making further economy in adminis¬ 
tration. 1 he total expenses of all the French possessions in 
India were fixed at 700,000 livres. and the sepoy force was to 
be further reduced to one battalion of 560 men only/ These 
orders Cionwav received at the time of his departure fqr the 
Ish of Fiance in October, and for their execution he left 
instructions to his successor, cle Fresne. 1 Conway’s .instruc¬ 
tions arc highly interesting, showing the object to be pursued 
In the administrators in the different settlements. They were 
to concern themselves with developing commerce, rendering 
prompt and impartial justice and augmenting revenues. Thus 
political objective was totally lost sight of. In the light of 
th< definite abandonment by France of her previous policy in 
India, the attempts to do honour to the heroes of the past 
appear rather curious. The remains of Bussy and Duchemin 
were reburied within the Capuchin Church and tombs were 
constructed for them befitting national heroes. For the first 
time the name of Dupleix was sought to be permanently 
preserved by giving it to one of the bastions of Pondicherry. 8 

IV. Revenues and expenses of the different settlements. 

A detailed account of the revenues and expenses of the 
different French settlements iti India is available in a letter 
Moment. dated 10th September 1789 and addressed to the 

1 l\ A. mss. 971, 978, 989. 

* /bid., ms. 987. 

3 Ibid , mss. 1133, 

1 Ibid., ms. 1162. 