





^ffoni ol (he Government House to express their deter munition 
fo lesist the execution of the Ministerial orders regarding the 
withdrawal of troops. Iltey also demanded the formation of 
a citizei militia and the handing over to them of the arsenal 
afid the powder magazine. I hat was the beginning of the 
revolution at Pondicherry. which, thanks to the tact of the 
Governor, cle Fresne, and the sobriety and wisdom of the lead¬ 
ing citizens, was kept within proper limits and did riot dege¬ 
nerate into lawlessness and anarchy as in France or even at 
Port Louis or Chandernagore. 

On the 26th February the citizens met again and decided 
to send a deputation to the Governor to present their demands. 

I he deputation consisted of. six persons and the demands pre¬ 
sented to the Governor were signed by 83 citizens,—a rather 
significant fact, showing that the origin of the movement was 
due to the energy of only a small part of the European popu¬ 
lation, no, to speak of the Indian inhabitants, who were left 
out completely. De Fresne had the coolness and sagacity to 
meet the novel situation and assured the citizens’ delegation 
ot his sympathy and support, thus avoiding a possibility of 
clash between the revolutionary elements and the established 
authorities. O i the 98th anonymous posters on the door of 
the (.hurch of Notre Dame des Anges invited all the citizens 
to meet next day in the house of a leading merchant, Bury de 
St. i ulgence. I he invitation met with a good response, and 
on 1 he 1 st March the citizens formed a General Assembly under 
the presidentship of Morticin, the Administrator of the new 
Compact lie das hides . in order to present the grievances of 
the French in India to the National Assembly in Paris. I)e 
bn sue accepted the situation with a good grace, and on the 
2nd March at; .1 solemn ceremony held at the Government 
House itself he administered to the members of the General 
Assembly the oath of loyalty to ‘the Nation, to His Majesty 
<md to the Laws It is interesting to notice here that the 
Fiend) citizens of Pondicherry were in no mood to cam the 
new Revolutionary principles of .‘equality* and ‘fraternity’ to 

1 tor an ac-vount of the beginning of the revolution at. F&ndicherry 
oinaiiu- , a Revolution et les Etablisserrients Franrais dans Vhide 
PP- * 4 - 30 . 






PONDICHERRY 


§L 


Ten logical conclusion by admitting the Indian inhabitants 
in the General Assembly. The latter were deliberately ex¬ 
cluded in spite of their desire to join the movement* From 
the beginning to the end the revolution in India was confined 
only to the ..French citizens and did not t ouch the Indian inhabi¬ 
tants, who merely looked on as curious spectator,)* 

Soon after the oath-taking ceremony the General Assembly 
proceeded to the election of a permanent Committee of 65 
members, to remain in office for eighteen months. The prin¬ 
cipal task of the Committee was to place before the National 
Assembly in Paris the wishes and grievances of the French 
citizens in India, in conformity with a decree of that Assembly 
inviting the opinion of each colony about the system of 
administration best suited to promote the welfare and pros¬ 
perity of its inhabitants, The first Committee actually re¬ 
mained in existence from March to September 1790. Entering 
into office on the 14th March, it proceeded at once* to the 
drawing up of six me moires for the National Assembly, on the 
model of the Cahiers drawn up on the eve of the meeting oF 
the States-Gcneral in France. The first of the memo ires dealt 
with the situation of the French in India before the arrival 
of the Bienvenue ; the second prayed for the privilege of send¬ 
ing two representatives from India to the National Assembly; 
the third was an exposition of the advantages of trade with 
India; the fourth demanded freedom of commerce; the fifth 
dealt with the necessity of political and military influence in 
India as a prerequisite to trade and commerce, and insisted 
on freeing Pondicherry from subordination to the Isle of 
Fiance and maintaining it as a strong and well-defended place; 
and the last discussed the question of forming alliances with 
some of the Indian Powers 1 The me moires were entrusted to 
Kerjean (a nephew of Dupleix), Dclarchc and Beylie, who 
started by the Royal Elizabeth at the end of March. On their 
arrival in France, Kerjean and Delarche delegated their powers 
to Monneron in accordance with the instructions of the Com¬ 
mittee. 