

Gossigny was succeeded as Governor of Pondicherry by 
Comte de Conway, who had been in command of the French 
troops at the Cape of Good Hope during the last war. Conway 
was in office for two years, and made himself thoroughly un¬ 
popular in trving to execute all at once the administrative 
changes and economy measures prescribed by the Ministry. 
The fact of his Irish origin added to the public: resentment and 
roused suspicion among the French in India, who still regarded 
the name of Lally, also of Irish origin, as synonymous with 
treachetv. The extent of the popular feeling against him is 
evident from the following remark of Bury de St. Fulgence* a 
prominent citizen and a wealthy merchant of Pondicherry: 
“ A man as restless, as violent and as wicked as our General is 

never lit to govern colonies. It is to be hoped that 

a second attack of apoplexy will rid us ol this man. - In 
October 1789 Conway left for the Isle of France to take up his 
new appointment as Governor-General, nominating de Fresno 

1 P.A? ms. 700. 

2 l ahcriiadic- - Im Revolution el /r> Etoblisscnients Eu/rtffl?< 

Vlfidfi p. 18. 


dam 



misT^ 



PQNDICHERRV 


<8L 


Governor of Pondicherry. To de Fresne was left the task 
of completing the execution of the instructions of the Ministry 
and particularly sending all the remaining European troops to 
he Isle of France, Leaving Pondicherry completely defenceless. 
I he ‘evacuation* of Pondicherry was, however, prevented by 
the arrival of the news of the Revolution in Paris and the 
combination of the citizens of the colony to oppose the with¬ 
drawal of troops. De Fresne proved to be a very capable 
administrator, and it was mainly due to his tact and sangfroid 
that the excesses of a popular revolution were averted at 
Pondicherry. 


Hi. .idministriltive re-oeganimtion and economy measures. 


Let us next turn our attention to the administrative 
reforms carried oui during the live years between the restitu¬ 
tion of Pondicherry and the Revolution. 1 he new regime was 
inaugurated by two Royal Ordinances granting an amnesty to 
all army deserters. 1 The first measure of administrative re¬ 
organisation was the establishment of a new Conseil Supericu) 
at Pondicherry by a Royal Mit of August 1781, which sup¬ 
pressed the old Conseil established in February 1776. 2 The 
new Conseil consisted of the Governor, the Intendant, the 
senior most administrative officer and a few merchants or dis¬ 
tinguished citizens nominated by the Governor. It was vested 
with both civil and criminal jurisdiction and also functioned 
ns a court of appeal for cases coming from the other settlements. 
The main difficulty in the working of tlie new Con ee was that 
the members were not paid any salary, and it was hard to find 
distinguished persons sufficiently public spirited to offer hono¬ 
rary services. The measure of economy ultimately proved a 
failure, and it was found necessary to create other paid posts 
for those nominated as members of the Conseil * Besides the 
Conseil Superieiir, there was established a Committee of Admin¬ 
istration by Conway soon after his assumption of office at 