

As regards expenses, drastic reductions were made for die 
sake of economy. In April 1789 the French Government sent 
instructions to Conway, newly appointed as Governor-General, 
to limit the expenses of the Indian settlements to 700,000 livres. 

I hat entailed, besides cuts in civil administration, the with¬ 
drawal of all European troops from India and the reduction 
of the sepoy force to 500 only. In his letter Moracin strong!v 
argued against such a policy, which would leave the French 
settlements in India defenceless not only against external attacks 
hut also against internal commotions. He urged the need of 
maintaining at least 500 European troops, including about 100 
men h artillery, and 1,200 sepoys, and he showed how it 
rould be done within the financial means of the French adminis¬ 
tration in India. The total revenues of the different settle¬ 
ments amounted to nearly 1.200,000 livres a year, which would 
he fully available for civil and military expenses if the income 
derived from the sale of opium, salt and saltpetre be not spent 




Nil Nisrqy 


POND! CHERRY 

~mrcharity. Since the home Government had fixed the total 
expenses at 700,000 livres, there Would be left a balance of 
500,000 livres, which could be utilised for the maintenance of 
500 European troops and the construction of some defence 
works at Pondicherry considered absolutely necessary. 

V. f he beginning of the Revolution. 

The five years following the restoration of territories in 
1785 were marked by the accummula ion of a series of griev¬ 
ances for the inhabitants of Pondicherry,—the deprivation of 
trading facilities by the establishment of a new monopoly Com¬ 
pany, the loss of the status of a capital for their town and its 
subordination to the Government of the Jsle of Prance, the 
drastic reductions in civil administration, the withdrawal ol 
practically all European troops and munitions, the refusal to 
construct defence works considered absolutely necessary in the 
light of past experience, and in short the general apathy and 
indifference of the home Government to the future of 1 he 
Indian possessions. Pondicherry was in a highly agitated 
frame of mind and required only a slight spark to start a 
conflagration. 

Since the beginning of 1790 news had been reaching 
through English sources about strange happenings in Prance 
following the meeting of the Siates-Gencnd. On the 22nd 
February 1790 thgre arrived a boat front the Isle of France, 
the Bicnvenue , carrying the orders of Conway to complete the 
withdrawal of European troops, artillery and munitions from 
Pondicherry, and also authentic news about the Revolution 
in Prance. The news of the Revolution was bewildering but 
nonetheless pleasing to the citizens, who attributed all their 
hardships since 1785 to the indifference and incompetence ol 
the Ministry of the old regime. What agitated them move was 
the move to take away the remaining 260 European soldiers 
and 30 artillerymen, leaving them completely defenceless at a 
time when war was going on between Tipu Sultan and the 
English and there seemed ever;, possibility of hostilities spread¬ 
ing to the borders of the French settlement. Excitement ran 
high, and following the example of Paris the citizens ol Pondi¬ 
cherry met in a General Assembly on the 25th February in 