


1 P,\. Reg. 50 ( hwcnicuK' des Anciennes Archives de Vlndr Frangaisc). 


cc 


Ml HIST/tf 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

The Revolution from April jygo to June *79/. 

After the departure of the delegates for France there fol¬ 
lowed a period of calm for about four months. The Com 
miitec of Representatives worked in accord with the Governor, 
who also adapted himself to the new situation with the best 
grace possible. Measures were taken to form a citizen militia, 1 
and in May some additional troops were sent to Pondicherry 
from the Isle of France to increase the number of the garrison 
to .joo. a —two steps which gave satisfaction to the revolutionary 
elements. During the interval there broke out a revolution 
at Chandernagore, which speedily degenerated into anarchy, 
as will be narrated later. The Committee of Representatives 
at Pondicherry under the influence of sober and steady people 
expressed condemnation of the lawless actions of the Chander¬ 
nagore revolutionaries, which brought it into conflict with the 
Committee of Representatives of the Isle of France. 3 In the 
Isle of France also extremists had gained control of the revo¬ 
lutionary movement, leading to differences with the established 
administrative authorities, so much so that towards the end of 
July the Governor-General Conway returned to France, leaving 
Cossigny as his successor. 4 

Although Pondicherry was free from the excesses which 
characterised the revolutionary movement at Chandernagore 
and the Isle of France, it was not altogether free from 
mischief-makers out to foment troubles. In June the Com¬ 
mittee of Representatives complained to d-e Fresno against 
these troublesome elements and demanded their expulsion.'* 
Matters came to head in August during discussions in the 
Committee about the formation of a municipal body for Pon¬ 
dicherry. there were sharp differences over the question of 
admitting Indians into that body, their cause having been 
espoused by the extremists just to gain power. In one of the 

1 P. A. ms. 

l Ibid ., ms. 11*46. 

■“ Ibid., mss. 1278, 1285 (Fetters from the Pondicherry Committee to 
tin Committee of the Isle of France, 22nd July and 17th August 1790). 

1 ins. 1279 (Letters from Conway to de Fresne, 25th July, *790). 

Ibid., 111s. 1260 (Extract from the Register of the Deliberations of 
the Representative Committee). 




M rnr Ry 



"exciting sittings of the Committee, held on the noth August, 
the latter were thoroughly worsted, thanks to the energy of 
t ie President, Comte de Givrac. Seven of them were con¬ 
demned as dangerous agitators and shipped hack to France.' 
These men pleaded their cause before the National Assembly 
in Paris, and ultimately in March 1792 obtained u decree 
acquitting them of the charge and permitting them to return 
to India. 

The menace of troublesome elements led the Committee 
of Representatives to convoke a General Assembly of citizens 
in September The latter proceeded to the setting up of a 
Municipality, electing a Mayor and five members. It also con¬ 
stituted a new permanent Committee of 27 members, inviting 
lor the first time representatives from the other French settle 
merits in India. 2 These measures restored peace at Pondichem 
for a few months, and the Governor, the Municipality and 
(he second Committee worked in perfect accord. In March 
1791 a letter was received from the deputies of the Pondicherry 
citizens in the National Assembly in Paris, containing the 
information that rhe National Assembly had accepted two re¬ 
presentatives from India and had decreed the abolition of the 
trading monopoly of the Calonne Company/ This recogni¬ 
tion by the National Assembly and the acceptance of one of 
the principal demands of the citizens of Pondicherry somewhat 
emboldened the second Committee. Assuming an exaggerated 
air of importance, it came into conflict with the Governor and 
the Municipality, and Pondicherry was again threatened with 
disorder and administrative dislocation. The situation, how¬ 
ever, was saved by convoking for the third time a General 
Assembly in June 1-791, which ended the authority of the Com¬ 
mittee. The latter, before passing out of existence, addressed 
an appeal to the citizens recalling the services it had rendered 
during the few months of its office/ 