


1 P. A. mss. 800, 822. 

2 Ibid, ins. 787. 

* Ibid, ms, 859 (letter from Min de Griucourt to Marin at Mahe, 
dated 8ih Oct. 1785, giving details ot the new administrative setup and 
its defects). 



lilt; FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


fdichcnw in 1787.* I he function of this Committee was to 
help the Governor in the administration of the different scute 
incuts in India. Conway also re-established in December 1787 
a Consultative Chamber, composed of Indian notables.'*’ This 
body had been first set up in January 1778 by an arret of the 
(louseil Super)cur. 

Ihe most important of the measures of administrative 
re-organisation decided upon for the sake of economy was the 
amalgamation, by a Royal Edit of May 1785, ol all the French 
possessions east of the Cape of Good Hope into one Govern¬ 
ment, The seat of the Governor General was to be Port Louis 
in the Isle of France. Under him were to be two Governors, 
one residing in the Isle of Bourbon and the other at Pondicherry. 
The Governor of Pondicherry was vested with administrative 
control over the other settlements in India, but their relation¬ 
ship with the Pondichcrrv authorities and with the Government 
of Port Louis was not very clear. While being subordinate to 
die Pondicherry authorities in matters of normal administration, 
they, particularly Chundernagore, had also the right of directly 
approaching the Government of Port Louis. Such a relation¬ 
ship was bound to lead to confusion, and in fact it was one ol 
the contributory causes to the disorders at Ghandernagore in 
1790. l he shifting of the capital from PonciicherD to Port 
Louis was of great political significance, indicating that France 
had definitely abandoned her ambitions in India. For it was 
obviously impossible to maintain close diplomatic relations 
with the Indian Powers and to plan military intervention front 
such a long distance as the Isle of France. The shifting ol the 
capital had its natural sequence in the withdrawal of all Euro¬ 
pean troops, munitions and other military stores to the Isle of 
France. Pondicherry was henceforth to stand as a defenceless 
city. ,1 mere commercial centre without an\ political significance. 

Considerable efforts were made by every successive Governor 
to reduce the cost of administration by abolishing many posts 
and lowering scales of salary. The number of clerks was 


1 P. X. ms. 1006 (containing the Proceedings of the Committee from 
17S7 to 17S9). 

3 Ibid., ms. logy. 


miSTffy 



reduced to eight and that of interpreters to two. 1 2 3 * 5 there i$ in 
the Pondicherry Archives a detailed account of the monthly 
expenditure of the Government muter different heads, drawn 
up in September 178!) I>y Moraciu, the Iniendant. I tie total 
amount fixed for Pondicherry by the home Government was 
228,000 livres. Even greater economy was introduced in the 
military department than in civil administration. Since Pori 
dicherry had ceased to be a capital and had lost its political 
importance altogether, there was no need to maintain troops 
there. All the European troops were ordered to be withdrawn 
to the Isle of France, only a sepoy force to be left a; Pondi¬ 
cherry, more for police duties than tor defence. Even the 
strength of this force was to be reduced to 2200 men, with seven 
European officers/ 1 It, was, however, found difficult to execute 
the order of withdrawing all European troops to the Isle of 
France, leaving Pondicherry completely defenceless, and there 
remained nearly three hundred of them in February 1790, 
when the Bienvenue carried the instructions of Conway for the 
completion of the ‘evacuation* of Pondicherry The opposition 
of the citizens and the political wisdom of dc Fresne prevented 
the execution of such a drastic order. 