

1 P. A. ms. 1299 (Letter from the General Assembly of Citizens at 
Pondicherry to the National Assembly of France, (3th Sept. 1790). 

- Ibid., ms. 1319. 

} Ibid., ins. 1290. 

4 Ibid., ms. 1399. for a detailed account of the work of the Com¬ 
mittee and the General Assembly from April 1790 to July 1791 see Regis- 
kTS 5° M (Inventaire des Anciermes 1 rc hives de VInde hrarupaise, 
Pondichdry ), 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


The Const it ution of July jjyx and the work of the 
Colonial Assembly (July r791—Sept. 1792). 


I he third General Assembly proceeded to the formation 
of a new organisation for all the French settlements in India. 
Meeting in the Capuchin Church on the 5th July 1.791* c 
adopted a project of constituting a Colonial Assembly of 21 
members, 15 for Pondicherry, 3 for Chandernagorc, and one 
each for Karikal, Yanain and MahG In each settlement all the 
French inhabitants, not below the age of 25 and having lived 
in India for at least two years, were to constitute a General 
Assembly for electing representatives to the Colonial Assembly. 
There was also provision for the election from each settlement 
of supplementary members to take the place of the regular 
ones in case of their temporary absence. The Colonial Assemb¬ 
ly was to be re-elected by half every year. Foreseeing the possi¬ 
bility of opposition on the part of some of the other settlements 
to join the Colonial Assembly, the Constitution fixed a time¬ 
limit for the election of their representatives. If within that 
period any settlement failed to elect its representative 
or representatives, the Colonial Assembly was to make 
up the number by taking more representatives from Pondi¬ 
cherry. The Colonial Assembly thus constituted was to exer¬ 
cise the legislative power delegated to each colony by the 
National Assembly by its decrees of 81 li and 28th March 1790. 
fhe executive power was to vest in the Governor, and the 
judiciary was kept as it was. It was also expressly stipulated 
that no taxes could be imposed without the consent of the 
Colonial \ssembly. 1 


The new Assembly was set up on the 6th July, with re¬ 
presentatives from Pondicherry alone. On the 11th it sent 
circular letters to the other settlements to send their repre¬ 
sentatives, 2 but only Karikal and Yatiam responded to the invi¬ 
tation. \Iah£ did not send any representative, and Chander¬ 
nagore, where extremists had gained control, Hatlv refused to 
recognise the authority of the Colonial Assembly and drew 
up a new constitution for itself with the support of the Assembly 


1 P. A. ms. 14'.>3 (Constitutional Dec ice of the General Assembly). 

2 Ibid, nis. 142b. 


mIIST/fy 



PONDICHERRY 


Sl 


he Isle of France. There started an acrimonious dispute 
between Pondicherry, Chandernagore and the Isle of France. 
The Colonial Assembly of Pondicherry protested against the 
intervention of the Isle of France in the affairs of Chander¬ 
nagore, denied its subordination to the Government of the Isle 
of France, and asserted that Pondicherry alone had authoritx 
over all the French settlements in India. 1 Finally, it sent its 
President. Fumeron, to Chandernagore on a conciliatory mission, 
which however proved a failure. 2 On the other hand, the 
Chandernagore Committee issued an appeal for insurrection to 
the Pondicherry garrison, which the latter rejected with 
contempt.® 