


X Pondicherry aftei Capitulation. 


So abrupt was the development of events that the three- 
member Commission authorised bv the Colonial Assembly to 
draw up a new constitution for the French settlements in 
India was in total ignorance of the capitulation till the last. 
The members were quietly deliberating on the clauses of the 
constitution, when the entry of the English troops into the 
town woke them up for the first time to the reality of the 
situation. The capitulation of Pondicherry was followed by a 
counter-revolution, and many of the officers and citizens threw 
up the tri-colour cockade and wore signs of mourning for the 
King. The English authorities gave permission to all French 

1 On the siege and tall of Pondicherry (here is a detailed ntimoire 
by Cherrnont (P. A. ms. 2195), which was drawn up to defend his con¬ 
duct against unfavourable comments made by his opponent including 
Lescallier. For the terms of capitulation see f abeinadie La Revolution 
ft les Etablissemcrifa Frangais dans I'lnde, pp. 160162. 


miSTfiy 




1 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


>rizens to leave the town and go wherever they liked. Only 
a few took advantage of this permission and left for the Isle of 
France, while the rest continued to live at Pondicherry, doubt- 
I'ss because of the uncertainty of the political situation in 
France* According to an English census taken in 179G there 
were 82*5 Europeans in the town, including women and 
child rend 

Pond i cherry was admin i $tered successively by Genera 1 
Braithwaite and Col. McLeod, and except for petty vexations 
like billetling of officers in private houses and occasional arrests 
of suspected persons, there was nothing to disturb the normal 
life of the place. The most sensational incident during the 
period of English occupation was in 1799, when on a suspicion 
that some people were plotting to leave Pondicherry and join 
1 ipu in his war with the English, there was a thorough search 
of all the private houses and a large number of French men, 
including some of the most prominent citizens, were arrested 
and thrown into prison.- 

Lescallier, one of the Civil Commissioners, taking advan 
tage of tin permission granted by the English, left Pondicherry 
in November 1793 for the Isle of France, from where in Octo 
her 179,4 he sent a detailed report to the National Convention 
in France on the events at Pondicherry leading up to the 
capitulation, and on the means to be adopted by France to 
destroy English power in India in co-operation with some of 
the country Powers. 1 2 3 Chermont continued to live at Pondi¬ 
cherry till his death in 1798. In order to dear himself of the 
charge ot cowardice and pusillanimity in agreeing to capitulate, 
he wrote a long and detailed mernoire on the siege and fall of 
Pondicherry. 4 He attributed the fall of Pondicherry not 
merely to the lack of fortifications and adequate troops, but 
also to the spirit of indiscipline and insubordination in the 
army engendered by the revolutionary movement, and the 
dissension between the civil and military authorities created 
bv the arrival of the two Civil Commissioners from France. He 
had from the beginning of his office as Governor realised the 