



OTHER FRENCH SI* I PI. ft ME NTS 

I hey established a monopoly over the trade in salt, 
opium and saltpetre, used their political power to obstruct 
French purchases in Bengal, and arrogated to themselves the 
right of inspecting every foreign hi p in the Hooghly* 
Numerous conflicts arose between the two nations, which did 
not cease till after the conclusion of a separate Commercial 
Convention in 1787. 

Dangereux was replaced in October 1787 by Mottet. His 
period of administration had achieved little in reviving French 
trade and commerce in Bengal, the principal task entrusted to 
him. Nor was Mottet, who remained as Commandant till the 
end of 1788, more successful in this respect. Mottet was 
succeeded by Montigny, who, it will be remembered, was till 
then the French Resident at the Court of Poona. Montigny’s 
appointment as Commandant at Chandernagore was due to he 
recommendation of Conway, Governor of Pondicherry, who 
had been impressed by his tact and ability, and considered him 
-s the most suitable person to take charge of the French 
settlement: in Bengal, then in a very miserable condition. 
Taking up the reins of . administration at Chandernagore, 
Montigny applied himself to three tasks,—reviving French trade 
and commerce in Bengal, effecting administrative reforms, and 
augmenting revenues. As a diplomatic agent he had given 
proof of his skill and ability, but as an administrator he proved 
far less competent. Although honest and well-meaning, he was 
hasty and ovetzcalous. In trying to execute his programme of 
reforms all at once, he rode roughshod over the opposition 
of the vested interests and naturally created a large number of 
enemies. In fact, it was his policy which was largely respon¬ 
sible for the outbreak of the revolution in 1790. 

When Montigny first took charge of Chandernagore at the 
end of 1788, the settlement was in a poor state. There is a 
vivid contemporary account left by a French military officer 
named Yvon who visited the place in 1789b The French 

1 He was the same person who, as will be noticed later, was sent 
to Chandernagore in 1791 as a Conciliation Commissioner. His account 
of Chandernagore in 1789, Notes mr lc ngale, is a lengthy document 
of more than 100 pages,—P. A. ms. 1142- It has been summarised by 
M. Bardet in an article “Chandernagore in 1789“ published in the 
‘Reim? Historique de Vtnde fmn$aise”, Vol. IV, Pt. II 




L>D 


misr^ 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


labitants, accustomed to depend on English doles during the 
period of occupation, were much too sunk in sloth and idleness 
to take any initiative in trade and commerce. Most of the 
houses were in ruins, and the few good ones were owned by 
foreigners, principally English. The town, which had been 
practically built by Dupleix and had once enjoyed political 
importance and commercial prosperity, wore a deserted appea¬ 
rance. 

In spite of this poor state, however, ( handernagore still 
constituted the economic centre of the French establishments 
in India. Territorial revenues constituted a small part of 
(heir total income, the major portion coining from the sale in 
Bengal of salt and opium. The Commercial Convention of 
1787 allotted to the French in Bengal 300 chests of opium, 
which were sold by auction in Calcutta and brought a substan¬ 
tial income to the Public treasury. Before Montigny’s time 
the trade in opium was in private hands, but he made it a State 
monopoly, which brought a profit of twelve to fifteen hundred 
thousand livres annually. The other important branch of trade 
wav salt. The Convention of 1787 allowed the French to 
import into Bengal 200,000 maunds of salt, which were bpughi 
bv the English in Calcutta at a fixed price, 120 rupees for 100 
maunds. It was made a State monopoly and permits were 
f -id. at the rate of 20 rupees for 120 maunds, to private mer¬ 
chants to import salt into Bengal. These permits were distri 
buted among the various French settlements in India on the 
basis of the number of European population in each. There 
was an office, first at: Chandernagore and later transferred to 
Calcutta, entrusted with the delivery of the imported salt to the 
English. The latter did not pay cash to individual merchants, 
but made over the entire price 10 the Government of Chander- 
nagorc, which in its turn distributed the amount among the 
permit holders, after deducting *]h% for meeting establishment 
charges and for providing relief to the poor in the various 
settlements. “'Thus the sale of permits of salt was a resource 
for 1 he State, die vile of salt brought an income to private 
persons, and in addition the percentage deducted from the total 
sale proceeds augmented a fund for the relief of the 