

Even the last hope of external help, some reinforcements 
from the Isle of France, was clashed to the ground by the 
end of July. On the 27th Chermont read before the war 

1 I\ A. ms. 2153. 

2 Ibid. ms. 2.140 ((.hermont to de Vigie, commanding French 
contingent in the service of Tipu, 4th July 1793) and ms. 2195 (Cher- 
mom’s report on the fall of Pondicherry). 


miST/fy. 



council letters from the Governor-General 'Malartic and Vice 
Admiral de Saint-Felix, which had been brought by a. frigate, 
the Gy bile}.. The frigate could come only up to Tranquebar, 
from where the letters were sent to Pondicherry by land. In 
place of the expected news of reinforcements, Pondicherry 
received a mere questionnaire as to how far the English in 
India were in a position to send an expedition against the 
Isle of France. The members of the war council were sadly 
disappointed at the neglect by the mother country and the 
indifference of the chiefs of the Isle of France. From a letter 
written after the fall of Pondicherry by the President of the 
interim Committee to which the Colonial Assembly had dele¬ 
gated its authority, it appears that the responsibility for leav¬ 
ing Pondicherrv to its fate belonged entirely to the Revolu¬ 
tionary Government of Paris and not to the chiefs oJ the 
Isle of France, 3 

In spite of the failure of the last hope of getting any 
external help, the war council remained fixed in its deter 
initiation to defend the place to the last. This strong attitude 
did not deceive the English, who undoubtedly came to know 
about the mission of the Cybele. At the beginning of August 
both General Braithwaite, commanding the English army,’ and 
Cornwallis, commanding the fleet summoned Pondicherry to 
surrender, to which Gherinom gave a heroic and dignified reply 
expressing his determination to resist. At a meeting of the 
Colonial Assembly held on the 3rd August Chermont's reply 
was acclaimed with cheers, and the citizens of Pondicherry set 
themselves to defend the town at all costs. Upon the refusal 
to surrender, the English opened bombardment of the place 
and advanced closer. Dc Phelines once suggested a sortie, but. 
in view of the overwhelming numerical superiority of the 
investing army the suggestion was considered inadvisable. 1 he 
English bombardment soon created a havoc, putting out of 
action ail the long-range guns of the French and destroying a 
large number of houses. The English attacked not merely with 
guns but also with propaganda. They dropped into the town a 
large number of leaflets, bearing the portrait of Louis XVI and 

1 1\ A. ms. 2164. 

2 Ibid., ms. 2190. 



WHlSTfiy. 




PONIflCHERRA 


scription, “I die innocent”, Journals giving news of the 
iding of the King, the treachery of Duniouriez and the 
civil war in the south and west of France were also thrown into 
the town to create dissension among the citizens. 

The enemy propaganda had its effect, but even more deci¬ 
sive was the military situation which rendered further resist¬ 
ance absolutely fruitless. On the 20th August Cherrnont called 
a meeting of the war council in which he advised immediate 
capitulation in order to avoid further destruction of the town. 
Two days later the Colonial Assembly and the Municipality 
also came round to the same opinion and authorised Cherrnont 
to open negotiations with the English. Cherrnont entrusted 
the task of negotiation to Touffreville, and after only a few 
hours’ discussion the terms of capitulation were drawn up and 
signed on the 23rd. The terms were as honourable as the 
French could expect under the circumstances. Pondicherry 
was to be handed over to the English, who gave an assurance 
to respect the personal liberty of the citizens and their rights 
of property, the soldiers were to surrender their arms and 
standards and were to be taken to Madras, from where they 
would fee sent back to Europe. 1 