


MIN tST Ry 


OTHER I RENCH SJETTl,1CMENTS 


m 




lu.‘ trade in salt was the only considerable source 
of income for the French settlements in India, and since 
Chandernagore was the centre of this trade the role of the 
Commandant there was more commercial than political. 

11- 7 he Administration of Montigny. 

Montigny set his mind to the task of restoring economic 
prosperity and carrying out administrative reforms. The estab¬ 
lishment of a State monopoly over the sale of opium produced 
an increased revenue, and the system of granting permits for 
die importation of salt was beneficial to both the State as well 
as private persons. Montigny cut down unnecessary expenses, 
increased grant to the hospital, and introduced a French pilot 
service for guiding vessels from the mouth of the Hooghly 
About the earlv period of his administration we have a report 
by Montigny himself, ‘The Present State of the French Settle¬ 
ments in Bengal”, dated 29th May 1789. 3 Monfigny’s zeal for 
reform was his undoing and raised for him a host of enemies. 
He was denounced by vested interests as a despot, ‘whose long 
residence at the Court of the Marathas had accustomed him to 
all the manoeuvres of an abject policy”, and who “believed that 
he could employ the same means for administering Chancier- 
nagore.” 3 Certain it is that Montigny proved less tactful at 
Chandernagore than at Poona. With more prudence and fore¬ 
sight !te might have been able to leave a peaceful administra¬ 
tion in Bengal. As it was, lie found fault with most of the 
higher officers and diw.ssed them one after another. He was 
emboldened in this course by the support he received from his 
patron, Conway, who had been appointed Governor-General in 
October 1789. 

Mottet, the ex-Commandant, had continued to remain at 
Chandernagore as Ordonnateur and President of the Provincial 
Tribunal. Montigny obtained an order from Conway for 
MottcPs return to Pondicherry. He then suppressed the office 

< l ab< rnadie- La Revolution r! hs EtablisscnienLs Frangais dans l’hide. 

' p. *07. 

2 P. A. ms. 2690. 

a Ibid, ins. 2712? (Griefs des Citoyrns, drawn up by die Revolutionary 
elements at Chandernagore, 19th June 1790). 



Ml HlST/fy 




rmtruKNCH in india 

of Qrddnnn/eur and assumed the powers of the President 
of the Tribunal himself. He dismissed the three Assessors of 
the Tribunal,' de Verinnes, Auvernais and Tingiet de Neuville, 
and filled their places with men of his own choice. Having 
thus gained complete control over the Tribunal, he turned 
against Richemont, the Proem-air, and Merrier (formerly 
secretary of de Suffren), the Registrar of the Court. They were 
accused of grave financial irregularities, arid Montigny obtained 
orders from Conway for their dismissal Mcrcier fled away 
from Chandernagore with the public funds left, in his custody. 
Richemont, who was to continue in office till the appointment 
of a successor by Conway, was accused of complicity in Merrier’s 
escape, brought for trial before the Tribunal and suspended 
from office, which was then given to one of the partisans of 
Montigny, de Bret cl, pending* the arrival of a permanent incum¬ 
bent. Montigny next turned to the Tribunal fot' Indians and 
drove out de Verinnes from the office of Zamitylar or President. 
The latter was compelled to resign, after accusations of grave 
irregularities had been brought against him. In a word, 
Montigny in bis zeal for reform moved too far and too fast, 
and soon there was ranged against him the major part of the 
population of Chandernagore. 1 