


1 I.abernadie —Le Vteux Pnndichery, p. ,408. 

2 Ibid., p 409. 

a P. A. ms. 1*200. 

4 Ibid., ms. 2195. 


miSTfiy 



PONDICHERRY 


.§L 


Sequences of the state of affairs, ami had warned the 
Minister of Marine that Pondicherry could not be defended in 
a war with the English. In April he had even asked lor pet 
mission from the Governor-General to retire. His personal 
opinion was to evacuate all troops and munitions from Pondi¬ 
cherry, since defence was absolutely out of the question, hut 
popular opinion, intoxicated with the news of the successes 
of the Republican arms in Europe, was vehemently opposed to 
it. He yielded to the wishes of the citizens in deciding to 
defend Pondicherry, only hoping that opinion might change, 
enabling him to end a meaningless resistance. 1 

The fall of Pondicherry in August 1793 practically dosed 
the long chapter of Anglo-French rivalry in India, which had 
begun since the time of Dupleix about half a century earlier. 
For ihe next twenty-three years the capital of French India 
remained under English occupation, and when it was finally 
restored in December 1816, the French came back under entirely 
changed circumstances. By the treaties of 1814 and 1815 
France definitely recognised English sovereignty in India, and 
received back her old possessions on the clear stipulations that 
-he was not 0 erect am fortifications in any of the settlements 
and not to maintain troops beyond the requirement of police 
duties. Thus Pondicherry in 181 (> was entirely different from 
what it was before the capitulation of 1793, the centre of 
French rivalry to the expansion of English power in India, and 
from the historical point of view it ceased lo have any special 
significance. 


1 Chermont expressed the same opinion in a letter to Larcher at 
Mah<k dated 27th November 1703. P. A. ms, 2194. 


CHAPTER Wll 


OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS ( 1785 - 1793 ) 

(ji\mii:kna( ore 
1 . Conditions during iySySg. 

Hie history of Chandcrnagorc after restitution, like that of 
Pondicherry. falls into two dearly marked divisions r ^~a period 
ol: administrative reforms from 1785 to 1789; followed by 
a period of revolution from 1789 to 1793. Also as in the 
ease of Pondicherry, the revolution came as the result of the 
policies and actions of the administration in the first period, 
which, however honest in intentions, caused widespread discon¬ 
tent. among the citizens There was this difference* however, 
that while at Pondicherry the revolution was kept within 
proper limits thanks to the tact of the Governor and the 
sobriety and moderation of the popular leaders, at Chander- 
nagorc the movement, being dominated by a few selfish men. 
soon degenerated into chaos and anarchy, which continued till 
the capture of the place by the English in 1793. 

Chandcrnagorc and the five subordinate factories at Patna, 
K a si inbazar, Dacca, Jougdia and Baktsore were restored to the 
French early in 1785. Dangercux, who had been sent to Ben 
gal in 1784 to look after French commercial interests there, was 
appointed as the first Commandant. Although Chaiulernagore 
had completely lost its political importance as a.result of the 
consolidation of the English power in Bengal, it had neverthe¬ 
less great commercial promise. The newly established Com¬ 
pany of Caionne took in hand an ambitious programme of 
developing the lucrative Bengal trade, taking advantage of 
Article 13 of the Treaty of Versailles (1783), which guaranteed 
to the french all their old trading rights and privileges. But, 
as we have noticed already, for two years the English put every 
obstacle in the way. Naturally anxious to monopolise all the 
trade of Bengal, they put their own interpretation on Article 
13 of the treaty, severely restricting French commercial 