



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


rocureur invalid. It was followed by further preparations for 
a popular revolt. Cockades of Liberty were distributed and 
Iresh invitations were issued to citizens to meet on the 3rd May 
to deliberate about, the “welfare and tranquility of the colony.’' 

I he General Assembly met on the morning of the 3rd. It 
was intended to put pressure on the Conseil Provincial, sclic- 
dtiled to meet a few hours later on the same day. The 
Assembly elected de Verinnes as President and Tinglet de 
Neuville as Secretary, both of them victims of Momigny‘s high 
handedness. A small committee was also elected, and Riche¬ 
mont found a place in it by unanimous voice. The meeting 
began with the taking of oath to “the Nation, the Law and the 
King’. Even Frimont, the commander of the army, and other 
military officers present took the oath. Richemont then rose 
to narrate the revolution at Pondicherry, and easily roused the 
selfish instincts of the citizens of Chandernagore to the cause 
of revolt by promising that they could procure from the 
National Assembly in Paris the entire benefit*accruing from the 
sale of opium and saltpetre, without having to share it with 
the citizens of other French settlements. While the Assembly 
was in session, a small deputation went to the Cornell Provin¬ 
cial with the petition of the 30th April. The petition was 
summarily rejected, whereupon the Assembly declared the 
Gonseil dissolved and elected a new one in its place, in which 
Richemont was restored to his old post of Procureur. The 
people then went in a procession, occupied the Council House 
and installed the new Tribunal. 

The revolution was in motion, and a summons was sent to 
Montigii) to appear before the Assembly, take the oath of 
loyalty to the Nation, and recognise the legality of the new 
order. At his own request he was given twenty-four hours to 
think over the matter. The Assembly met again on the 4th May 
to receive the reply of Montigny. The latter, intimidated bv the 
strength of the opposition, vacillated and tried to gain time by 
feigning illness. The Assembly sent a deputation with a 
peremptory summons to Montigny to appear in person and 
give his reply without delay. Montigny yielded and appeared 
before the Assembly, where he was presented with four 
demands: to recognise the legality of the Assembly, to approve 
all its past and future actions, to place the troops under its 


MNlSTffy 



OTHER TRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


Sl 


its wishes. Montigny wanted further time, which was brusquely 
refused. He hesitated for a time and then offered full sub¬ 
mission, accepting all ihe demands and taking the oath of 
loyalty to the Nation. There was at once a change in the 
atmosphere. Montigny was hailed as a patriotic leader, and 
the Assembly burst into shouts of “Long live the Nation, long 
live Montigny/’ 1 

There was an apparent reconciliation, and if Montigny had 
the tact and prudence of de Frcsne, Governor of Pondicherry, 
he could have kept the balance even between himself and the 
Assembly. But that was not to be. Montigny had no interi 
(ion of keeping his promise to the Assembly, and soon petty 
conflicts arose between him and the Committee appointed by 
the Assembly. The climax came on the Qth May, when the 
Committee made a demand that Montigny should inform the 
foreign Powers about the change in the administration of the 
colony. Montigny wavered and took time, bin when the 
Committee met again on the wth and pressed its demand, he 
flatly refused to recognise the legality of the Assembly and its 
Committee. Phis open defiance on the part of Montigny 
necessitated the calling of the Assembly on the 14th.* But 
Monti guy's courage failed him, and on the 13th evening he 
lied away secretly to Chinsurah with his family. When the 
Assembly met on the 14th the members learnt with surpiis< 
about his escape. Frimont, the commander of the troops, 
declared that Montigny had left a letter for him, stating that 
he was going to Chinsurah for a few days and asking him to 
maintain order in the colony. In the absence of the intended 
victim the only course left for the indignant Assembly was to 
vote for his dismissal, and Frimont was called upon to assume 
the functions of the Commandant. Frimont, a prudent man, 
declared that he could not accept the office from the hands of 
the Assembly, but he agreed to be in charge of the troops to 
maintain order in the colony under the direction of the 