minimum period of two years* residence. The list of active 
citizens at Pondicherry drawn up in November 179 2 included 
only 314 names. T hey were followed by the names ol 14 
Fopasses or men of mixed PortugViese-lrtdian origin, who were 
also made eligible as electors on the following conditions: 
being legitimately born of free parents; owning property worth 
500 rupees or paying a rent of 5 rupees per month; and being 
able to read and speak French. 1 

A new (Colonial Assembly was elected on the basis of these 
provisions in December 1792. It was the fourth and the last 
Assembly. Leaving to this body the task of drawing up a 
scheme of re-organisation of all the French settlements in India. 
Lescallier took in hand a number of reforms in the military 
economic and religious spheres. One interesting* measure of 
reform was the prohibition of slave-trade in pursuance of the 
King’s instructions to the Civil Commissioners dated 22nd 
February 179s. 2 With the help of the engineer, de Phelines, 
who had arrived in September, the debris of the olcl fort were 
cleared and the construction of the canal through the town 
continued. There was a new survey of the villages belonging 
to Pondicherry, and huts were built for the homeless pariahs. 

The assumption of virtualh all governmental functions 
by Lescallier relegated de Fresne, the Governor, to a secondary 
position The latter, disgusted at his diminished importance 
in the colony where he had been mainly responsible for the 
preservation of peace and order, and tired of the acrimonious 
correspondence he had to carry on with the Governor-General. 
Conway, Cossigny and Malartic in succession, over Chander 
nagore affairs, finally returned to France towards the end of 
January 1793- handing over charge to TouffreviUe, Comman¬ 
dant at Karikal . 3 In February arrived Chermont, appointed 
by Malartic as Governor of Bondicherry, and with him also 

1 The list of citizens [s 10 be found in P. A. ms. 1903- For details 
of the re-organisation and the work of the new Colonial Assembly see 
P. A. Registers 57.58 (Jnventaire dts Ancierwes Archives de I'Indc Fran¬ 
co ise , Pond i ch ery) . 

2 P. A. mss. 1633, 1861. 

3 Ibid., ms. 1909 (dispute between de Fresne and Lescallier) and ms, 
1951 (departure of de Fresne from Pondicherry). 


miSTfiy 


PONDICHERRY 



§L 


ihe other Civil Commissioner destined foi 


India. 

At the end of March the citizens of Pondicherry received 
with amazement, the news of the startling course of events in 
l 1 ranee,—-the treachery of the King, his suspension from office, 
the proclamation of a Republic, and the glory of Yalmy. They 
were seized with a delirium of patriotic and revolutionary 
exuberance, and on April i and 3 celebrated the dawn of a 
new era, with planting the tree of Liberty, illuminations, 
feasts and cries of "Vive hi Nation ”, "Vive la Republic/lie".' 
All the old forms and usages were discarded as Pondicherry 
parsed suddenly from the year 1793 to the second year of the 
Republic. The Revolutionary Calendar and even the Revo¬ 
lutionary method of salutation, with the hand being placed 
on the heart, were adopted all at once. Shortly after, the 
Colonial Assembly decreed the formation of a National Guard. 
Ihe delirium of revolutionary exuberance was, however, 
rudely shaken when towards the end of May alarming news 
began to reach Pondicherry about the outbreak of war 
between France and England. It suddenly woke up the revo- 
lutionaries to the danger in which thev stood in the defence¬ 
less condition of Pondicherry. The Colonial Assembly meet¬ 
ing* on the 26th decided to put off all pending business and 
to concentrate entirely on measures of defence in apprehension 
of an immediate attack. 