


> F01 the beginning of the revolution at Chandernagore see P. A. 
ins. 2C98 — Proceedings of the meetings of the General Assembly of citizens 
from 30th April ro 14th May 1790. 

2 Ibid, ms. :?t >97 -Extract from the Deliberations of tlie National 
Committee of citizens, 9th May, 1790. 


mtStffy 



Assembly. The proposal was accepted and the Assembly 
entrusted its own Committee with the functions of the Com¬ 
mandant, pending the arrival of a new incumbent;. 1 


IV. The course of I he Revolution (May to October 

The Revolution had triumphed, but there soon broke out. 
differences of opinion leading to large-scale desertions. As the 
administration passed into the hands of a clique moved by 
selfish interests and severely vindictive measures were taken 
against all those supposed to be adherents of Montigny, saner 
elements realised that they had been befooled by Richemont 
and others like him, and from the end of May most of them 
fled away to foreign settlements in order to escape from the 
new tyranny. The climax came when in June even the Presi¬ 
dent of the Committee, do Verinnes, and a member. Peonna, 
resigned from their offices and soon after retired to Seiariipore, 
where Montigny had Shifted from Chinsurah. There was a 
widespread alarm at Chandernagore that the French emigres 
under the leadership of Montigny were planning to capture 
the colony by force. 2 It is true that Montigny was planning in 
that direction and had secured some help from the English of 
Calcutta. The Governor-General, Cornwallis, had declared 
that he would treat with nobody else but Montigny as the 
representative of the French nation in Bengal. 3 But many of 
the deserters from Chandernagore had no intention of joining 
Montigny. Anyway, in terror of an attack by the partisans of 
Montigny, the Committee at Chandernagore decided to arm all 
citizens as a defensive measure. This led to another piquant 
situation, the withdrawal of Frimont with his troops on the 
34th June from Chandernagore to Goretty, the residence of the 
Commandant built by Chi valier, He was asked to explain 
liis conduct and summoned to return to Chandernagore. 
Frimont replied that he had withdrawn to Goretty on his own 

1 P. A. ms. $698- Proceedings of the meetings of the General Assembly 
of citizens. 

- Ibid. ms. 2699—letter from t| le Citizens’ Committee to Frimont, 23rd 
June, 1790- 

a Labernadie — La Revolution C f i es Ft ablisse merits Francis da us Vlnde, 
j). (quoting the letters of Cornwallis to de Fresne and Conway). 


mtsTfy 



OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


iSL 


rtative and not as an agent of Montigny. The withdrawal 
had been forced upon him by the action of the Committee in 
arming all citizens without consulting him, and that he did not 
recognise the authority of the Committee to summon him back 
to Chandernagore/ The Committee thereupon raised a volun 
leer militia and took all possible defensive measures against an 
attack by Montigny and his partisans. 

During his exile at Serarnpore Montigny wrote to de 
Fre.sne, Governor of Pondicherry, narrating the events at 
Chandernagore and accusing the Pondicherry Government of 
complicity, through the encouragement given to Richemont. 
On the other hand, the Assembly and the Committee at 
Chandernagore also wrote to Pondicherry, narrating events from 
their point of view. They sought the protection of the Pondi¬ 
cherry Government and wanted a new Commandant. 1 2 3 One 
thing became clear in this battle of recrimination., that Montigny 
must be removed from office if peace was to be restored at 
Chandernagore. The determination of the citizens of Chan¬ 
dernagore was clearly expressed in their letter to the Committee 
of citizens at Pondicherry dated 39th May: “Whatever mav 
happen, we would rather perish than return to the chains of 
despotism. France will avenge our death/’ 4 It seems that 
much of the excesses of the revolution at Chandernagore could 
have been averted if the Pondicherry Government had been 
authorised to send another person to replace Montigny soon 
after his flight from Chandernagore. But because of adminis¬ 
trative anomaly, the decision to remove Montigny from office 
had to be taken by the Governor-General, and it was not nil 
July that Conway gave up his protege under the pressure of 
the Assembly of Citizens of the Isle of France. 5 