

Added to this were two other sources of trouble.—-first, the 
administrative anomaly about the relationship between Chan* 
demagore and Pondicherry, and second, the outbreak of 
revolution at Pondicherry. The relationship between Pondi¬ 
cherry and Chandernagore was not quite clear. Although 
Chandernagore was under the supervision of Pondicherry, there 
was no effective controlling authority in the latter, and the 
Commandant of Chandernagore was directly dependent on the 
Governor-General in the Isle of France. Since Montigny was 
the nominee of Conway, the Governor-General, having replaced 
Moitet. a relation of de Fresne, Governor of Pondicherry, and 
since he showed little deference to the Pondicherry Govern¬ 
ment, being assured of Conway’s support, he was disliked by 
the Governor and the Conseil Supcrieur at Pondicherry. 
Secondly, the arrival of the Bienvenue in February 1790, with 

1 For a list of the charges against Montigny sec Gnrfs dcs Citoyens, 
P. A. ms. 5712. 




MiNisr^ 



OTHER FRENCH SF. ITl EMF.NTS 


___ if - vv,s °f ^ ie Revolution in France, was followed by an 
upheaval at Pondicherry, where the people in imitation of their 
brothers of the Metropolis sei up a General Assembly of citizens 
;md a National Committee to control the authority of the 
Governor. There was an exuberance of the spirit of liberty 
.uul democracy, and people scented tyranny everywhere. In the 
crusading temper of the General Assembly Montigny appeared 
to be a veritable despot, trampling over the rights and liberties 
of the citizens of Chanclernagore. 

After being suspended from office by the Conseil Provinc ial 
at (Jiandernagore, Richemont went, to Pondicherry early in 
1790 and took his case to the Conseil Superieur. This latter 
body, of which the members were not well-disposed towards 
Montigny, annulled the judgment of the Conseil Provincial and 
ordered for his restoration to the office of Procureur. Riche¬ 
mont also look his case before the General Assembly of 
citizens, where he was hailed as a martyr to the cause of liberty, 
and his complaints against Montigny were included in the list 
of grievances to be placed before the National Assembly in 
Paris. 




Hi. Beginning of the Revolution. 


Richemont fell fully avenged and returned to Chanderna- 
gore on the 28th April 1790. By ihe same boat by which he 
travelled there came from the Isle of France Villau des Rabincs, 
the new Procureur appointed by Conway. The arrival of 
Richemont started a general conflagration, helped by the tact 
lessness and indecision of Montigny. Finding that his title to 
the office of Procureur, derived from the decision of the Con¬ 
seil Superieur, was of no avail, when a new incumbent had 
been appointed by the Governor-General, Richemont tried to 
gain his ends by means of a popular revolt such as he had just 
witnessed at Pondicherry. On the 30th April he called a 
meeting of his adherents, giving it the name of General 
Assembly of citizens, although it was attended by only 
persons. Ihe issues placed before it were a Curious mixture 
of the personal grievances of Richemont and the interests of 
the citizens in general. A petition was drawn up, requesting 
the Conseil Provincial 10 declare the appointment of the new 