


IX. The last English attach and capitulation of 
Pondicherty . 

At the beginning of June, Cherinont received definite 
information that the English were preparing to march against 
Pondicherry. On the 7th he called a council of war, consisting 
of the two Civil Commissioners, two representatives of the 
C olonial Assembly, the Ordonnateur, the Mayor and the Com¬ 
mander of the National Guard. Hasty preparations were 
started to improve the defences of the town and to bring in 
provisions in anticipation of a siege. It was, however, an 
impossible task to hold out long against a serious attack. The 


1 P. A. mss. uosii. 2023, 2025. 


misr^ 



Mil*: 1 RfcNCtt IN INDIA 



Ttmifical ions were in ruins and nothing had been done since 
1785 to reconstruct them. All that the engineer, <Je Phcliucs, 
could do in the course pi a month and a half was to improvise 
lilling up tire gaps at some places. The garrison consisted of 
jyo men belonging to the regiment of Pondicherry, 80 belong¬ 
ing to the artillery, and 400 sepoys. It was augmented by 
150 men of the National Guard, whose ardent patriotism could 
not unfortunately make up for their total lack of military 
experience, a company of Dragons erf 25 men, newly raised 
specially for reconnoitring work, an artillery company of 50 
men recruited from sailors, another company of 50 recruited 
from Fopasses, and 450 sepoys newly levied. The artillery 
consisted of 140 pieces in all. of which only ii were of suffi¬ 
ciently long-distance calibre. There was a large stock of 
powder., but kept in such an exposed condition as to constitute a 
source of danger to the town in case of an enemy bombardment, 
flic munitions sent from the isle of France were inadequate 
lor a prolonged siege, and the shells were for the most part of 
different calibres from the guns used. There were sufficient 
provisions to last for three months, but the funds in the treasury 
were hardly adequate to meet the expenses for more than a 
month. Frantic efforts were made to replenish the treasury. 

I he patriotic zeal of the citizens succeeded in raising a con¬ 
siderable sum of money from voluntary contributions, and 
mail) of the Indian farmers of lands willingly advanced 
money to organise defence. 1 

Preparations ol other kinds also were made. In order to 
release every available person for military work the Municipal 
organisation practically suspended its functions, and the 
Colonial Assembly delegated its authority to a temporary com¬ 
mission of three. Women and children were sent out to 
1 ranquebar for safe shelter. To prevent treachery, the Colo¬ 
nial Assembly passed a decree on the 20th June prohibiting 
any bods from going out without the special permission of the 
Governor. 2 

1 Dmils of military preparations made arc contained in 1\ A. mss. 



Council of War) and ms, *195 (report by the Governor, Chermont, after 
the fall ol Pondicherry), 


1 P. A. ms. 3 i$ 2 . 


J?OM>iCHir.Rk\ 


On the 12th July the English army came within sight of 
PondicheiT) and encamped on the heights of Peri tube. On 
the 15th three English ships anchored before the place to 
complete its encirclement, The army consisted ol 24,000 men. 
including (>,000 Europeans, and had a powerful artillery. I he 
English had thus an overwhelming superiority in men and 
guns, and such was the exposed condition of Pondicherry that 
the town could have been taken by .a daring surprise attack. 
Bui the memory of the heroic resistance offered by Pondicherry 
on several occasions in the past made the English unduly 
cautious and induced them to lay a regular siege. On the 
same day that the English army encamped at Perimbe, Chcrmont 
issued a proclamation declaring Pondicherry to be in a state 
of siege. 1 Although he had no illusion about the precarious 
position of the settlement, his patriotic spirit and the enthu¬ 
siasm of the citizens inspired by the news of the victory of 
Valmy induced him to put up as good a show of resistance 
as was possible under the circumstances. There was no hope 
of getting assistance from any of the Indian Princes. Chcr¬ 
mont made vain appeals to Tipu and Nizam Ali for interven¬ 
tion, but neither of them even sent a reply. He wrote frantic 
letters to de Vigie and Raymond, commanding European con¬ 
tingents in the Mysore and Hyderabad armies, to induce their 
masters to send assistance to Pondicherry. But he was equally 
disappointed, since neither Tipu, who had received no help 
from the French in his recent war with the English, nor Nizam 
Ali was prepared to embroil himself with the English for the 
sake of a Power which had abandoned all pretensions to poli¬ 
tical importance in India and seemed destined to disappear 
altogether. 2 It was the logical result of the policy followed 
by the French Government with regard to Indian possessions 
since the conclusion Of peace in 1783. 