

Montigny, tired of his exile at Serarnpore and being 
encouraged by the withdrawal of Frimont to Gore tty, moved 


1 P. V. ms. 2699 —-letters from the Citizens' Committee to Frimout 
and from Frimont to the Committee, lxnh dated 24th June 1790. 

2 Ibid. mss. 2702, *738 (letters dated 27th May and 24th August 1790). 

3 Ibid , mss. 2703, 2712, 2723, -727, 2731, 2739 (letters dated 29th 
May, 19th June, 29th June, 1st July, 71I) July, 6th September, 1790). 

1 Ibid, ms. 2703. 

5 Ibid., ms. 2736. 


THE FRENCH 7N INDIA 




to that place on the 30th July and installed himself in the old 
chateau of the Commandant. He had collected a small parti¬ 
san army and had also obtained some pieces of cannon from 
the English. On his arrival at Goretty, Frimont withdrew 
and encamped outside the chateau, indicating that he had no 
intention of joining his former chief. Montigny set up the 
old administration at Goretty, and since the trade in salt was 
dependent on direct payment between the Calcutta Govern¬ 
ment and the Commandant of Chandernagore, he was able to 
stop the trade of his opponents, hoping thus to bring them 
back to their senses. On the other hand, the Committee at: 
Ghandernagore felt, alarmed at Montigny’s presence so close to 
the town and greatly concerned at the stoppage of the trade 
of the citizens. 

The situation could not be allowed to continue long. On 
the 1st. September news arrived at Chandernagore about the 
dismissal of Montigny by Conway under the pressure of the 
Assembly of the citizens in the I si ■ of France. There was great 
fo) and excitement in the town, and the Committee decided 
to take the initiative and attack Goretty. The citizens’ militia 
surrounded the chateau on the night of the 2nd September. 
\1 though Montigny had adequate forces to put up a stiff 
resistance, his dismissal by Con-wav had so overwhelmed him 
with grief that he surrendered himself without any opposition. 
Next morning Montigny and his partisans as well as Frimont 
and his troops were brought back to Chandernagore and kept 
in prison. An interesting incident followed. Cornwallis, a 
friend of Montigny, wanted to intervene to save him and his 
partisans from the tyranny of the Chandernagore Committee. 
A pretext for intervention was ready at hand. Goretty was 
separated from Chandernagore by a small strip of English 
territory, nul on the ground that the Chandernagore Com¬ 
mittee had violated English sovereignty by moving troops across 
this corridor without his previous consent, Cornwallis demand¬ 
ed the release of all prisoners captured at Goretty, and he tried 
to press his demand by surrounding the small colony with 2,000 
troops. 1 he Committee was adamant and declared that the 
least movement on the part of the English would be the signal 


WWSTfty. 



O i'H'KR FRENCH Sr. I 11 EMENTS 

killing all the prisoners, whereupon the English troops were 
iminediately wi t hdrawn. 1 

Montigny was interrogated for several days, but. he refused 
to answer the charges brought against him, not recognising the 
legality of the Committee. 2 3 The Committee finally decided, 
perhaps for fear of another English intervention, to send him 
to France for trial by the National Assembly. On the ist 
October Montigny and some of his adherents were put on 
board a small armed boat, the Chundernagor , renamed the 
Patriote to carry them to the mouth of the Hooghly, where a 
larger vessel was waiting to transport them to the Isle of France. 
On the 5th, while the boat was still in the Hooghly, an English 
officer, Major Apple) , came on board and demanded the surren¬ 
der of Montigny and his fellow prisoners. On the refusal of 
the captain, four English schooners attacked the French boat 
and compelled the surrender of the prisoners, who -ere then 
taken to Calcutta. Appley refused the boat to ) l further 