

• 1 abernadie -La Revolution rt les Etabiisse. merits FrangaU dans 
l'hide, pp. 249-250. t here is an anonymous memoire in the Pondicherry 
Archives (ms. 2783), La Revolution de Chandernagor on relation des 
troubles qui out lieu fives cell, colonic en 1790, giving a complete ana 
impartial narration of the course of events at Chandernagore during the 
early part of the Revolution there. 

2 r. V. mss 1279 -Conway to de Fresne, 25th July, * 79 n. 

:t /inl.y mss. 129th 1297 -Cossigny to de IVesne, September, 1790. 


mmsr/fy 


OTHER FRENCH «ETT1 .IvMENTb 

to send Mattel, who had previous experience 
of Chandernagore administration. 

Moltet started from Pondicherry at the end of September 
1790. According to his instructions, on arrival in Bengal he 
was to inform the Chandernagore Committee about the pro¬ 
visional nature of his appointment, pending the arrival of de 
Canaplc. He was to consider himself more as a conciliator 
than as an administrator. The principal object of his mission 
was to rc-esta blish ordered economy in the settlement, which 
had broken down completely since the Revolutionary Com¬ 
mittee came into power. There was in fact much to be done 
in this sphere, as Moitet himself found on bis arrival in Bengal. 
Trade and commerce had come to a standstill, hardly any vessel 
taking the risk of going up to Chandernagore for fear of 
pillage. Many of the private French merchants had fled away 
and taken refuge at foreign settlements like Chin surah, Seram- 
pore and Calcutta. Indians also had emigrated in large num¬ 
bers, and even those that remained had their goods transferred 
to safer custody in Calcutta. The Revolutionary Committee, 
regardless of the state of the treasury, indulged in an orgy of 
extravagance, spending in the course of 1790 nearly ten times 
the amount sanctioned under the old budget. Money for this 
extravagance was found by emptying the Government treasury 
and laying hands on the funds and goods of the Company. 1 
Extortions were also made from the Bengali inhabitants of 
Chandernagore under the euphemistic name of ‘forced loan . 

Mol tot arrived at Chandernagore on the 5th November 
1790 and was given a most humiliating reception. Immediately 
after his arrival he Mas led before the Committee “almost like 
a criminal*', as he wrote to de Fresne, and was subjected to a 
critical interrogation for several days on the object of his 
mission. The Committee finally decided to accept him as ihe 
head of the executive, but reducing his authority almost to 
nil. Till the drawing up of a new constitution for Ghanderna- 
gore, control over finance, police and justice was to remain in 
the hands of the Committee. Mottet was to have no relation 
with the Chiefs of the Danish and Dutch settlements in Bengal 
for the support they had given to Montigny, and from the 



decided 


1 V. A. ms, 2781 (Protest of the Company’s agents at Chandernagore). 



English Government of Calcutta he was to demand reparation 
for the outrage committed on the ship, Chandernagor. He 
was bound to execute the laws promulgated by the Committee, 
and only as a matter of grace he was allowed to correspond 
with the Governor of Pondicherry. Mottet was unwilling to 
accept such humiliating conditions, but fearing personal danger 
from a flat refusal, he merely sought an excuse to get out of 
Chandernagore. On the plea of having to settle the question 
of opium and salt with the English Government, he left 
Chandernagore early in December and took up his residence 
in Calcutta, from where he sent a detailed report, to de 
Fresne, 1 