

After the introduction of the new constitution Gautier 
returned to the Isle of France in December, leaving Yvon as 
Commandant at Chandernagore. Shortly after Richemont also 
left for the same destination t.o plead the cause of the citizens 
of Chandernagore against the tyranny of the Pondicherry 
Government. His mission was successful, and he returned to 
Bengal in June 1792. In the meantime Cossigny sent a formal 
order to de Fresne to recall Fumeron at once and not to inter¬ 
fere further in the affairs of Chandernagore, pending the 
arrival of Civil Commissioners from France, who were expected 
shortly. It was a rebuff for de Fresne, but he had nevertheless 
to obey the order of the Governor-General. I he departure of. 
Fumeron from Bengal was delayed by a few months on account 
of the death of Yvon, and of the replacement of Cossigny by 
Malar tic as Governor-General, which held out a hope that the 
Government of the Isle of France would give more discretion 
to the Pondicherry authorities in settling the affairs of Chan¬ 
dernagore. But that hope was also broken when Malartic 
wrote to de Fresne, asking him to recall Fumeron and to leave 
the affairs of Chandernagore in the same state in which they 
had remained during the time of Cossigny . 1 I o crown the 
discomfiture of de Fresne. Malartic appointed Gautier as Com¬ 
mandant at Chandernagore. Gautier was not, however, destined 
to return to Bengal. He arrived at Pondicherry with Lescallier, 
one of the Civil Commissioners, and remained there till the 
capture of the place by the English. Fumeron left Calcutta in 

1 F. A. ms. 1888 — de Fresne to Malartic, 31st October 1792. 



THE IUENCH IN INDIA 


V; 

tober 179^, and back a; Pondicherry he resumed his place 
as President of the Colonial Assembly. 

For six months more anarchv reigned at Chandernagore, 
and the emigres in Calcutta continued to live in destitution 
and poverty. Finally, all discords and enmities among the 
French in Bengal were set at. rest by the sudden arrest of all 
the cmgres in Calcutta and the capture of Chandernagorc by 
the English on the nth June 1793, following the arrival of 
news of the outbreak of war in Europe. There is no record 
to show what resistance was offered by the citizens of Chander- 
nagore,—perhaps none at all. 


<SL 


Mahe 


I. Condition of the Settlement after restitution. 

Mahe was restored to the French on the 15th August 1785. 1 
The place had suffered complete destruction at the hands of 
the English, in violation of the terms of capitulation of 1779. 
At ihe time of taking possession, Marin, who was appointed 
Commandant, wanted a detailed list of the damages caused 
during the period of occupation, but the English representa¬ 
tives refused to supply any. 2 On his own part he drew up a 
me moire for the information of the Pondicherry Government 
on the pillage and destruction committed since the capitulation. 3 
According to this report, iri 1779 the English had ravaged the 
settlement in a systematic way, pulling down the Government 
House and removing all the materials to Tellicherry, and 
destroying even the church and private dwellings. In Novem¬ 
ber 1780 they handed over the place to the ruler of Kadattanacl, 
who pillaged it once again. Shortly after, Mahe was captured 
by the forces of Mysore, who then laid siege to the neighbour 
ing English settlement of Tellicherry. In 1783 the tide turned 
again, the English drove out the Mysore troops and retook 
MaKC For the third time the place was given up to plunder 
and devastation. 