

1 P. A. mss. 881, 882, 901, 926, 4565. 4577, 4615, 4624. 

2 Ibid., ins. 1 

3 ibid, ins. 4555. 

4 Ibid., ms. 4634 (Tipu to Conway, May 20, 1789). 

5 Ibid., ms. 1199 (Observations of de Canaple on Tipu’s offer of ex 
change of territories). 


Ml HIST/fy 



Coast, specially gum-arabic and borax. 1 2 In 1789 he drew up 
another meinoire on the commercial possibilities of the place, 
but stated that they could not be realised unless France showed 
more interest in the development and security of the settlement 
than what she had done since 1765/ Two years of adminis 
nation, however, convinced him that there was little prospect 
of his being* able to develop Mah£ into a prosperous settle 
menu When the French Government had decided to withdraw 
troops from Pondicherry as an economy measure Mahe could 
expect little relief. In September 1789 de Canaple wrote to 
Conway, “For two years I have been a witness to the agony 
of this settlement; spare me from being a witness to the 
afflicting spectacle of her death". At his own request he was 
relieved of his office and permitted to return to Europe. 3 4 5 In 
April 179° left Mahe for the Isle of France. 1 His later 
career has been noticed already in connection with the history 
of Ch a nd ern a gore. 

II. /-<'• l filter and the beginning of the Revolution . 

De Canaple was succeeded provisionally by Le Tellier, who 
had been in command of the sepoy force. In the detailed 
instructions he left for his successor, de Canaple particularly 
recommended a cautious and prudent policy towards the Nawab 
of Mysore, avoidance of traffic in arms which might give the 
English a cause of grievance, and maintenance of peace and 
order in the settlement. 3 Le Tellier remained in office till 
October 1791. During his administration the old difficulties 
in relation to Lipu and the English persisted and became even 
more pronounced. During the Anglo-Mysore war the English 
seized the territories of the Nayar of Kurangod on the plea of 
their belonging to Tipu, although the French claimed them 
to be a part of their possessions. The English also searched 
and sometimes seized French ships navigating between Manga 
lore and Mahe on the plea of their carrying contraband goods. 

1 P. A. ms. 4571. 

2 Ibid., ms. 4652. 

3 Ibid., ms. n86. 

4 Ibid., ms. 4673. 

5 Ibid., ms. 4668 (instructions dated 10th April 1790). 


imSTffy 


onII R FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 

A prolonged correspondence followed between Le Tellier and 
Taylor, the Chief of the English settlement at Tellicherry, but 
the French failed to get any redress. 1 

Difficulties with Tipu and the English were not the only 
preoccupation of Le Tellier. The main interest of his period 
of administration was the beginning of the revolution at Mahe> 
following the example of the other French settlements in India. 
It is not known exactly how and when the revolution com¬ 
menced at Mahe. The first somewhat connected account about 
the beginning of the revolution there is to be found in Le 
Tdlier’s letter to de Fresne, Governor of Pondicherry, dated 
5th April 1791, from which it appears that the revolution 
started about six months earlier. 2 The maker of the revolu¬ 
tion was one Boyer, agent of the new Company, While the 
administration was languishing for want of money, Boyer had 
at his disposal large funds, part of which he utilised on his own 
account to win popularity among the citizens. The news of 
the revolution in Paris and in the Isle of France gave him an 
opportunity to come into prominence and seize power. From 
Le Tcllier’s letter to de Fresne, mentioned above, it appears 
that early in December 1790 the citizens of Mahe constituted 
a Colonial Assembly with Boyer as President. The approval 
of the Commandant was sought, but he was told plainly enough 
that his disapproval would not affect the decision of the 
citizens. The Conseil or court of justice was abolished and 
its place was taken by a committee set up by the Colonial 
Assembly, which also organised a National Guard, placed 
under the command of Menesse. The Committee arrogated 
to itself all the administrative functions, including control over 
finance and police. Le Tellier was a timid person, and having 
no definite instructions either from the Isle of France or from 
Pondicherry about the policy lie was to follow in the new 
< ircumstances. he gave way to every demand of the Colonial 
Assembly and its Committee. 