

until satisfaction had been given by ihe Chanel .. O ore Com¬ 
mittee for the violation of the Treaty of Versailles in moving 
troops to Gore tty without the permission of the English.* The 
Assembly of Citizens at Chandernagore sent a strong note of 
protest to Lord Cornwallis against his high-handed intervention 
in favour of Montigny and his partisans, to which no reply 


Montigny lived in Calcutta for four months and had the 
satisfaction of seeing his successor. Mot let . meeting with no 


1 On the capture of Goretty and the attempt of the Calcutta Govern¬ 
ment to rescue the prisoners see P. A. ms. 2739 (letter from the Citizens’ 
Committee at Chandernagore to the Citizens’ Committee at Pondicherry, 
hth September 1790) and Labernadie— Im Revolution et les Etablissements 
Franfais dans T'lnde , pp, 227-230. 

2 P. A. ms. 2765. 

3 Ibid, ms. 2777. 

‘ I bid, ms. 2778; see also ms. 2779 for a detailed account of the 
dispute with the Calcutta Government after the capture of Goretty, lead¬ 
ing to the attack on the C hander ndgvr (letter from the Citizens’ Com¬ 
mittee at Chandernagore to the Citizens’ Committee at Pondicherry, 10th. 
October 1790). C. R. O. -The Trench in India Series, Vol. XIII Com 
plaints against the conduct of the British Governments in India having- 
been made by the inhabitants of Chandernagore and transmitted to Europe 
for the consideration of the French National Assembly. 



ft) . [s' If* 

luck at Cha ndernagore and forced to take refuge in 
Calcutta soon after his arrival. On the. 10th February 1791 be 
left Calcutta, with a touching farewell message to his friends 
and adherents, assuring them that he would secure justice for 
all on his arrival in France. 1 

V. The Mission of Mattel. 

It has been noticed already that one of the principal diffi¬ 
culties in the way of a peaceful settlement at Chandernagore 
was the extreme unpopularity of Montigny and the inability of 
the Pondicherry Government to replace him by a more tactful 
officer without the sanction of the Governor-General. However, 
the recall of Montigny by Conway and its sequel made it 
possible for de Fresnje, Governor of Pondicherry, to deal with 
the problem of pacifying Chandernagore. The task was made 
even easier for him by the appointment of Cossigny as Gover¬ 
nor-General in August 1790? The latter was mild and con¬ 
ciliatory in temperament, and while informing tie Fresne of his 
assumption of office and of the appointment of de Canaple to 
succeed Montigny at Chandernagore, he stated that in all 
matters relating to the settlements in India he would depend 
on the advice of the Governor of Pondicherry, being the man 
on the spot. 3 Thus feeling that he would be allowed some 
freedom of action and fearing that it would take some time for 
de Canaple to reach Bengal, cle Frcsne decided to send a tactful 
and competent person immediately to pacify the troubles at 
Chandernagore. Moreover, the English Government in Cal¬ 
cutta had been pressing him to nominate an official represen¬ 
tative in Bengal with whom it could deal about the question 
of opium and salt. As an interim arrangement, therefore, de 