


1 P. A. mss. 1330, 1331, *782. 

2 Ibid, ms. 2787. 

3 Ibid , ms. 2788. 


“August. 1 After his death the Fnglish Government sealed up 
the office of the French administration in Calcutta, pending 
the arrival of a new Commandant. 

While Canaple lay dying, the Chandernagore Committee 
secretly sent a deputation, consisting of Longchamp and Ricard, 
to the Assembly of the isle of France to lay before that body 
its grievances against the Commandant. At the same time it 
addressed a fiery appeal to the Pondicherry garrison to revolt 
against the authority of de Fresnc and the reactionary Assembly 
of that place." The appeal had onl) the effect of widening 
the rift between Pondicherry and Chandernagore, but the 
deputation to the Isle of France produced far-reaching results, 
one of which was an open breach between Pondicherry and 
the Isle of France, both adopting contradictory polities to 
pacify troubles at Chandernagore. 

VII. Conflict between Pondicherry and the Isle of Prance, 
Despatch of two rival Missions, 

The Assembly ol the Isle of France had from the beginning 
of the troubles at Chandernagore supported the anti-Montigny 
revolutionary faction. As a result of the deputation of Long- 
champ and Ricard, it brought pressure on Cossigny to inter¬ 
vene in the affairs of Chandernagore, and in July 1791 the 
latter decided to recall de Canaple and to send two Concilia 
don Commissioners to Bengal, Gautier and Yvon The news 
of this decision reached Pondicherry at the beginning of 
August. De Fresne 00P it as a personal rebuff. He com¬ 
municated to the Pondicherry Assembly a full report on the 
Chandernagore situation, together with all the correspondence 
exchanged between him and the Governor-General on the sub¬ 
ject. 3 On the 7th August the Pondicherry Assembly passed a 
resolution protesting against the intervention of the Isle of 
France in the affairs of Chandernagore by sending a Concilia¬ 
tion Commission. Emboldened by the fact that the National 
Assembly in Paris had accepted its deputies as the accredited 
representatives of French India, it claimed that Pondicherry 


1 l\ A. ins. 2805. 

- ibid,, mss, 2800-2803. 


3 Ibid., mss. 1443, 1 445 - 


miSTfiy 


O IIIER f'KENCH SETI I EMJENTS 

no way subordinate to the Government of the Isle of 
Franee, and that it alone had full control over the other Indian 
settlements. 1 Finally, at the instance of the Assembly do Fresne 
decided to send its President, Fumeron, to Bengal, not as 
Comm and ant, for he had no power to make such an appoint¬ 
ment. but simply as an “agent to look after the interests of 
the nation/* Fumeron was to try to bring the Chandernagore 
Committee to reason and to-induce the citizens to elect repre¬ 
sentatives to the new Colonial Assembly at Pondicherry, failing 
which he was to convoke a meeting of the emigres to elect 
representatives for Chandernagore. 2 

The Conciliation Commissioners from the Isle of France 
reached Chandernagore on the 10th September, and two days 
later Fumeron arrived in Calcutta. Both the Commissioners 
and Fumeron had the same objective, to restore order at 
Chaudernagove; but their instructions were so entirely contra¬ 
dictory that no agreement was possible. Soon after their 
arrival in Bengal, Gautier and Yvon at Chandernagore and 
Fumeron in Calcutta entered into a lengthy correspondence, 
each side trying to convince the other of the reasonableness of 
its point of view. 3 The stand taken by the Conciliation Com¬ 
missioners was that the citizens of Chandernagore should be 
left alone to set up the system of administration they liked, and 
that the Pondicherry Government had no right to assert its 
control over Chandernagore against the will of its citizens and 
contrary to the policy of the Government of the Isle of France, 
which alone was responsible for the administration of all the 
French settlements in the East. Secondly, since opium was an 
article of Bengal, Chandernagore alone had the right to enjoy 
the benefit from its sale, but. as a matter of compromise it 
would be willing to sacrifice a small part of it for the other 
French settlements in India. Fumeron, on his side, denied the 
proposition that Pondicherry had no control over Chander¬ 
nagore, and on the other hand claimed that the Government 
of the Isle of France had no right to interfere in the affairs of 