

In January 7791 there broke out dissensions among the 
members of the Revolutionary Committee at Chandernagore. 
Those who were opposed to the growing tyranny of Richemont 
were accused of plotting to overthrow the existing regime, 
and sentenced to varying terms of imprisonment. 2 Most 
of the prisoners succeeded in escaping from Chanderna¬ 
gore. Mottet realised that the only way to stop the lawlessness 
and anarchy at. Chandernagore was to employ force, and he 
sought the permission of Cornwallis in Calcutta to move 
French troops through English territory. As a last attempt he 
sent an appeal 10 the Chandernagore Committee to bring it to 
reason, but, as could have been expected, the appeal was in 
vain. Shortly after, on the mh February, the newly appointed 
Commandant, de Canaple, arrived in Calcutta. Mottet was 
only happy to transfer to him the thankless task of pacifying 
Chandernagore, and himself returned to Pondicherry. 

VI. The failure of the new Commandant , de Canaple. 

De Canaple had been Commandant at Malic from Novem¬ 
ber 1787 to April 1790, and we shall see later the wise and 
efficient manner in which he guided the affairs of the settle- 

1 About Mottet’s mission in Bengal, full information is available in 
the collection of his correspondence during this period preserved in the 
Pondicherry Archives (ms. 1304). The collection also includes the instruc¬ 
tions given to Mottet by de Fresne and the letters of de Fresne to the 
Chandernagore Committee. 

a P. A. mss. 2784, 278C, 2791. 


Ml NIST/) 



menl before the outbreak of the revolutionary troubles the e. 
Returning to the Isle of France with the intention of going 
back to Europe, he was appointed by Cornvay Commandant 
of ('handernagore in July 1790. He started from the Isle oi 
France at the beginning ol September .1790 with two 'sets of 
instructions, one from Conway and the other from his successor, 
Cossigny, both of which enjoined on him the adoption of mild 
and conciliatory methods. Arriving at Pondicherry m Decern 
ber, tie Canaple asked for more detailed instructions from de 
Fresne, Accordingly, the latter gave him another set of ins¬ 
tructions, sending at the same time a copy to the Chander- 
nagore Committee, with an appeal to accept de Canaple with 
a good grace. 1 

In his instructions de Fresne made provision for the con¬ 
tingency of the new Commandant not being acceptable to the 
Chandernagore Committee. He was in that case to take up 
his residence in Calcutta, get himself recognised by Cornwallis 
and the Chiefs of the other foreign settlements as the accredited 
representative of France in Bengal, and to occupy himself with 
the sale of opium and salt. De Fresne’s apprehension turned 
out to be true. De Canaple arrived in Calcutta on the mli 
February 1791, and from there he sent a letter to the Chamler- 
nagore Committee together with a copy of the instructions he 
had received from de Fresne, explaining that in view of Mottefs 
experience he had thought it prudent not to proceed straight 
to Chandernagore without getting some definite assurances 
from the Committee. 2 The Committee in reply expressed 
surprise that having pledged his loyalty to the Revolution, 
Canaple should be afraid to come to Chandernagore, and it 
also felt indignant that he should ha\c brought instructions 
from the Governor of Pondicherry, whose authority ihe citizens 
of Chandernagore no longer recognised. 3 Canaple thereupon 
decided to remain in Calcutta, concerning himself with the 
sale of opium and salt. Towards the end of June he was struck 
with a mortal disease, to which he succumbed on the 5th 