

i 1>. V ms. 1457 —Deliberations of the Colonial Assembly, 7 th August 

J 7 Q1. 

- Ibid., mss. 146*, 1463 (Instructions given to Fumeron by the 
Colonial Assembly). 

3 Ibid., m$s. 2815. 2817, 2819. 

EE 




THE FRENCH IN IN IMA 




clernagorc. Secondly, he declared that granting auto/ 
Chandernagore under the existing circum,stances would 
amount to perpetuating a tyrannical regime which had driven 
out all the respectable citizens from the settlement. Thirdly, 
oil the question of opium he took his stand on a recent order 
of the Minister, allocating the income from the sale of that 
article to the general revenues of the French settlements in 
India, to be distributed by the Pondicherry Government. The 
controversy was finally put an end to by the decision of the 
Calcutta Government on the 5th October to recognise Fumeron 
as the official French representative in Bengal and to hand 
over to him the quantity of opium fixed by the Anglo-French 
Convention of 1787. 1 It was a signal, victory for Fumeron and 
the Pondicherry Government, since deprived of the revenue 
from the sale of opium the autonomy of Chandernagore was 
untenable. 


VIII. 7 he new Constitution and A ft a. 


Not to be baffled by the English recognition given to 
Fumeron, the Conciliation Commissioners and the Revolu¬ 
tionary Committee at Chandernagore proceeded to draw up a 
new constitution for the settlement. A general assembly of 
the citizens was held for the purpose on the 17th October, ft 
was not attended by the emigres, who as a mark of protest 
convoked another assembly in Calcutta a few days later. 2 On 
the flth November the General Assembly of Chandernagore 
drew up a new constitution, which was put into effect, forth¬ 
with. 3 Only it ' broad features ina\ be noticed here. Chander¬ 
nagore was declared completely free from the control of Pondi¬ 
cherry. There was to be a representative of the King, but the 
real powers were vested in a General Assembly, consisting of 
all the active citizens, i.e. of 25 years of age or over and 


1 P. A. mss. 28.21 (Calcutta Council to Fumeron, 51h October 1701) 
ami 38*3 (Fumeron to dc Fresnc, f 5 th October). 

2 Ibid, mss 2831, 2833, 2835, 2837. 

3 Ibid, ms. 2842 — Constitution Provisoire dc la colonic de Chanda 
nagor; also Reg. 92. Inventaiu • dcs Aneiennes Archives dc Vhide Frongaise, 
Pondich£ry: and Labernadie Im Revolution et les Eslablisse merits Frangois 
dam VInde, pp. 279-290. 


mtstfL 



OTHER FRENCH SET Tl.ElMENTS 


<SL 


om idled in the settlement. It was to elect an Assemble 
Administrative, which was to meet only once in three months, 
and a smaller body, the Directoire which was to be in charge 
of the administration during the intervals of the meetings of 
the Assemble*; Administrative . The General Assembly, which 
was to meet only once a year, was also to elect two judicial 
tribunals, one for Europeans and another for Indians. For 
the second tribunal also the judge was to be a Frenchman, but 
lie was to be assisted by some Indian Assessors, to be elected 
bv the Indian inhabitants. That, was the only crumb of 
‘equality and ‘fraternity’ thrown out to Indians. 