


1 P. A. ms. 4540. 

3 Ibid , ms. 4541 (declaration by Marin). 

3 Ibid, ms. 4547. 


MIN ISTfy 



Thus Mahd had suffered such thorough destruction that 
when the French retook possession in 1785 they had to start 
from the beginning in reconstructing their settlement from the 
ruins of the old. Yet, curiously enough, it was this place which 
the French Government had seriously proposed, after the end 
of the hostilities, to be turned into the principal establishment 
in India. We have already noticed the exchange of corres¬ 
pondence on this subject between Bussy and the Minister. 
Marin, who took possession of the settlement in August 1785, 
acted as Commandant till November 1787, when he was suc¬ 
ceeded in that office by de Can a pie/ himself remaining as 
Ordonnateur, De Canaple remained in office till April 1790, 
when he returned to the Isle of France, being succeeded as 
Commandant by Le Tellier. During the first five years all the 
energies of the administration were taken up by the work of 
reconstruction. The task was stupendous, and both money 
and materials were lacking. The revenue of Mahd was insuffi¬ 
cient even to meet the normal expenses of the settlement, and 
the acuteness of the financial difficulty is brought out clearly 
by the annual statements of income and expenditure and the 
correspondence on the subject between the authorities of Mah£ 
and the principal settlement preserved in the Pondicherry 
Archives. 1 Some relief was obtained by taking a loan of 
twenty thousand rupees from the agents of the new Company, 
de Court and de Boyer, which was utilised for the more pressing 
needs of reconstruction,—building a new Government House, 
a powder magazine, a prison and a church. 2 

Nothing, however, could be done to put the place in a 
tolerable state of defence, even against raids of bandits from 
neighbouring territories. There was no money to construct a 
vail or to restore the old earthen ditch which surrounded the 
settlement. The garrison was hardly adequate even to main¬ 
tain internal law and order. Besides a couple of European 
officers, it consisted of about forty sepoys and an equal number 

1 P. A. mss. 4535 (i Mdmoire of Menesse, giving an estimate of the 
expenses for the reconstruction of Mah6), 4545 (MJmcire of Marin), 4544. 
• 155 *» 4557 > 4599 - 4651 (annual statements of income and expenditure from 
1785 to 1789). 

- Ibid, mss. 4/554, 4561. 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


of Thevars, a low caste people of the locality. 1 * 3 4 The only time 
that flie citizens of Mah£ had some feeling of security was 
during the occasional visits of warships.- The Moplahs of the 
coast constituted a special source of danger, and they frequently 
took advantage of the exposed condition of the French settle 
mem to carry on their raids of depredation with impunity. 
One such incident took place just before the arrival of de 
Cana pie, when some Moplahs of Calicut seized the Nayar of 
Kuraugod, a vassal of France, from his residence at Mah6 
guarded by a detachment of sepoys, and carried him off to 
Calicut; where he was hanged by Tipu’s orders on a charge of 
having dishonoured a Moplah woman. :i About another Moplah 
incursion de Canaple wrote to Conway at Pondicherry in 
April 1789, when a band raided some villages belonging to the 
French, carried off twenty Hindu inhabitants, and converted 
them to the Islamic faith after the painful method of circumci¬ 
sion.* Nor were the Hindu Nayars of the neighbourhood less 
troublesome, and in his letters to Pondicherry de Canaple 
frequently complained of the vexations caused by them. 