

Apart from the worries caused by the raids of bandits, the 
Commandant at Mah6 had frequent troubles with the authori¬ 
ties of the neighbouring English settlement of Fellicherry, who 
adopted various methods to obstruct the trade of the French, 
and even occupied some territories transferred to them by the 
Nayar of Kurangod when he placed himself under their pro¬ 
tection. Repeated protests against the English pretensions 
proved of no avail, and the Commandant of Mahcj had tamely 
to submit to the situation, contenting himself with complaints 
to the Governor of Pondicherry. Nor were relations with 1 ipu, 
the nominal ally of France, any happier, and throughout, his 
period of office de Canaple had to complain frequently about 
the vevations caused by Tipu’s agents to the supply of goods 
and provisions to the French settlement. These agents often 
terrorised the people of the villages belonging to the French. 
Canaple wrote several times to Tipu, who assured him that. 

1 P. A. mss. 4556, 4695 (strength of the garrison in December 1787 
and October 1790). 

~ ibid ms. -i ;,97 (de Canaple to the Minister, 18th December 1788). 

3 Ibid., ms. 4555 (de Canaple to Conway, 8ih December 1787). 

4 Ibid., cos. 46*4. 


Ml UlSTffy 



orders had been sent to his agents not to give any trouble to 
the French. That, however, did not improve matters, and 
Canaple bad to write to the Governor of: Pondicherry to take 
up the question with Tipu. Conway also complained of the 
interception of goods and letters passing through Tipu’s 
territory but failed to get any redress. 1 Far from stopping the 
vexatious activities of his agents, Tipu complained to Conway 
against the Commandant of Mahe and wanted his recall. 2 It 
is rather curious that such were the relations of Tipu with tin* 
French at the very time that he was sending an embassy to Paris. 

One source of inconvenience for the French at Mahe was 
that the territories belonging to the settlement were not in 
one compact area. The settlement proper was small, about 
two miles in area. It had received some additional territory 
from the Nayar of Kurangod, but situated at some distance. 
Before the last war Bellecom.be> during his visit to MahG had 
secured for the French three villages from Haidar Ali. but. 
they were not contiguous to the original settlement When 
de Canaple first arrived at Mahe, he suggested to Conway to 
propose an exchange of territory with Tipu to make the French 
possessions more compact, which would free them to some 
extent from the vexations of Tipu’s agents. 3 In 1789 Tipu 
himself made a proposal to Conway to exchange the three 
villages given by his father for some other territory with an 
equal revenue. 4 The proposal, however, did not materialise 
for lack of agreement about the location of the territory to 
be given in exchange. 5 

When de Canaple first arrived at Mah£, he was full of 
hopes about turning it into a prosperous settlement and a 
flourishing centre of trade. Writing to Conway on the 20th 
February 1788, be referred to the great commercial advantages 
of Mah6 and pointed out that it could be turned into an 
important centre of trade not merely for the products of the 
Malabar Coast, mainly pepper, but also for those of the Arabian 