


ip. A. ms. 5190. 

2 /bid, ms. 5197 (Forestier to the English Council at Masulipatam, 
Sfoth May 1785). ms. 5199 (Foiestier to the Pondicherry Government, 3rd 
June). 

3 Ibid, mss. 5201, 5208. 5*09. 

4 Ibid, ms. 5191. 


WNtST/fy 


H IN INDIA 


/ene. 1 Not only that, even 
the English authorities began to levy customs duties on goods 
v k x.poi ted bj the French, and when Le Fores tier protested 
against it as a violation of the peace treaty, the Madras Gov¬ 
ernment conceded that only goods belonging to persons living 
within the factory would be exempt from customs duties but not 
those belonging to persons living outside. 2 It was in fact a 
part of the general Anglo-French dispute about the interpreta¬ 
tion of the commercial clauses of the peace treaty which we 
have noticed already. 


1 P A. ms. 5205 (Forestier to the English Council at Masulipatam.. 
i^th August, 785), ms. 5206 (English reply, 19th August), tns. 5*07 
(Forestier to Souillac at Pondicherry, 25th August). 

-Ibid., mss. 521**5214, 5217, 5218, 52*1 (letters exchanged between 
Forestier, Governor of Pondicherry and the English Council at Masuli- 
patam on French trading rights). 



tfj THE FRENC 

expressed their inability to im 


misr^ 


CHAPTER XVIII 



RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS (1785-1793) 

I. Change in French Policy. 

During the period under review French political ambitions 
in India and relations with the country Powers underwent a 
complete change from the earlier period. The Seven Years' 
War, in spite of the disasters it; had brought to the hopes and 
ambitions ot the French, had not damped their spirit altoge¬ 
ther.. They looked upon it merely as a temporary misadven¬ 
ture, and from the moment of their re-establishment in 1765 
they began to cherish once more the old dreams of the time of 
Dupleix, although in a somewhat changed form necessitated by 
the altered circumstances. During the thirteen years which 
elapsed before the outbreak of the next war in 1778, a large 
number of Frenchmen in India, including Governors and 
subordinate officials, diplomatic agents, military men and 
adventurers of fortune, showed feverish activity in laying down 
grandiose plans of alliance with the country Powers and mili¬ 
tary operations against the English. I hey flooded the Ministry 
of Marine and Colonies with memoires and letters. In France 
also the hope of reviving the lost position in India had not 
altogether disappeared, and from time to time the Government 
showed spasmodic interest in the various schemes submitted, 
an interest which increased with the approach of the War of 
American Independence. No doubt, many of the plans oi this 
period were absolutely fantastic, but they all bring out one 
thing clearly, that the old ambitions had nor died out com¬ 
pletely and that the French were thinking and planning in 
terms of a return match with the hope of being able to recap¬ 
ture their lost position. 

After 1783 the situation changed completely. During the 
next ten years, prior to the renewal of hostilities in 1793. the 
earlier political dreams faded away, and France evinced an 
increasing lack of interest in Indian affairs. The Peace Treaty 
of 1783 restored to the French all the territories and commer 