

II The Revolution and After (179/-9?). 

The European population, on die other band, proved 
more docile, and the news of the Revolution produced a milder 
effect at Karikal than at the other settlements. there was, no 
doubt, an attempt to set up a civic organisation based on the 
normal Revolutionary pattern, but there* was no disturbance 
Of the peace, and happy relations were maintained with the 
Commandant and the Pondicherry Government. The first 
news of the Revolution in Franca brought by the Bienveniu 
in February 1791 and the establishment of the lust Citizens 
Committee at Pondicherry did not produce even a ripple in 
the peaceful life at Karikal. It was only in April 1791 when 
the second Citizens’ Committee at Pondicherry sent a ciiculai 
letter to all the other French settlements in India, inviting 
them to nominate their representatives in the Committee from 
among its own members, that there was some excitement among 
the citizens of Karikal. Partly because of their opposition to 


a small group of Pondicherians monopolising all power 10 the 
exclusion of the people of the other settlements, partly 
because of the injustice which they felt had been done to them 
by the Pondicherry Government in the matter of the distri¬ 
bution of salt permits, the citizens of Karikal decided to set up 
a civic organisation of their own to protect, their interests. In 
May they established a municipality and elected Bom oust as 


1 l abtrmadie —La Revolution cl les Etablisscmcnts Frangats dans 
l’ltide, pp- 169-170. 

2 There is a compleec census of population in 1789 preserved in the 
Pondicherry Archives, ins. 4112. 


MiN/sr^ 



Mayor. The Pondicherry Committee objected to this move 
as illegal and sought to interfere in the internal affairs of 
Karikal. 1 Shortly after, the second Committee at Pondicherry 
was replaced by a Colonial Assembly intended to be representa¬ 
tive of all the French settlements in India. In July this new 
body also declared the municipal organisation at Karikal 
illegal and invited its citizens to elect a deputy for the Colonial 
Assembly at Pondicherry. The Karikalians then showed a 
more conciliatory attitude. On the 16th July they called a 
General Assembly of citizens, consisting of 17 persons only, 
which decided to abolish the municipality and to establish in 
its place a committee of three members. It also elected a 
deputy and an alternate for the Colonial Assembly ai Pon¬ 
dicherry. 2 

From that time all was quiet at Karikal. and its citizens 
willingly took directives from Pondicherry on every matter. 
In September they expressed their indignation over the “in¬ 
cendiary letter’' of the Chandernagore Committee, inciting the 
Pondicherry garrison to revolt . 3 In January 179 2 they sent a 
memoire to the Pondicherry Assembly on the needs of the 
settlement. They prayed for money to dig irrigation canals 
for the improvement of agriculture, to broaden the mouth of 
the river so as to allow the passage of larger vessels, and to 
construct a wall and a ditch round the town and maintain a 
garrison of 300 sepoys and 50 European troops in ordci to 
attract by its security wealthy merchants from outside. 1 hev 
added that the money spent on these improvements would in 
a short while be fully compensated by increased receipts on 
different heads. 4. There was no money, however, and the 
Pondicherry Assembly confined its reply to a mere expression 
of sympathy . 5 In July there was a rift between the priests 
and the citizens of Karikal over the question of the acceptance 