

Sonnerat carried on private trade, utilising for that purpose 
his official position as Commandant, which put the other mer¬ 
chants of the place at a disadvantage. In July 1790 two of the 
prominent merchants, Lc Canne and dc Mars, complained to 
de Frcsne and the first Committee at Pondicherry against 
Sonnerat for abusing his position for his private benefit and 
wanted his recall. 1 The complaint produced no effect, 3 and 
for some time all was quiet at Yanam. It was only in April 



! IV A. mss. 5102-5104 (Letters ot Le Canne and dc Mars to the Picsi 
dent o£ the Assembly at Pondicherry and to the Governor, 5th July 1790). 

2 Ibid., ms. 5105 (President ot the Pondicherry Assembly to de Mars, 
171I1 July). 


imiST/fy 


HE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


1791, on the receipt of the circular letter of the second Com¬ 
mittee at Pondicherry sent to all the settlements., that the 
citizens of Yanam thought, of Seizing the occasion to get rid of 
not so much a tyrannical administrator as a powerful commer¬ 
cial rival. They set. up a Colonial Assembly, elected a per 
rnanent Committee of three, and adopted a new Constitution 
for the settlement, by which the Commandant was divested of 
practically all his powers, which were transferred to the 
Assembly and its Committee. Sonnerat thought it prudent to 
yield before the storm and gave his consent r.o all the measures 
passed by the Assembly. Perhaps, he did it all the more 
willingly in order to be left free to devote his time to scientific 
studies. The Assembly was not content with merely taking 
away the powers of the Commandant; it decided to reduce his 
emoluments. Finally, it elected Danzas, a member of the: 
second Committee at Pondicherry, to represent Yanam on that 
body. 1 

The enthusiasm of the citizens of Yanam, however, met: 
with a sharp re bull from Pondicherry. Danzas, after consulta- 
lion with the President of the Pondicherry Committee, wrote 
to the citizens of Yanam pointing out the illegality of their 
actions in usurping all authority from the Commandant and 
asking them to convene another General Assembly to cancel 
their previous decisions and to represent their desires to the 
Pondicherry Committee. 2 3 The letter of Danzas created a 
division among the citizens. The minority dissociated them¬ 
selves from the earlier decisions and wanted to restore all 
authority to the Commandant, a while the majority wrote to lire 
Pondicherry Committee giving an account of the events of the 
past few months and defending their conduct. 4 In July the 
citizens of Yanam were invited to elect a representative to the 
newly set up Colonial. Assembly at Pondicherry. I hey elected 
Fermier as their deputy, but the difference between the majority 
and the minority continued and seemed impossible of solution. 


1 l*. A. ms. 5110 (documents relating to die Colonial Assembly at 
Yanam, April-Junc 1791). 

* Ibid., ms. 5108 (letter of Danzas, and February, 1791). 

3 Ibid., ms. 5112. 

* Ibid,, ms. 51 u. 