

Masulipatam 

Close to Yanam was the factory at Masulipatatn. 1 he 
French possessed there the factory proper within the town and 
a small village named Francepeth about two miles away. Little 
is known of the Masulipatam factory during die period under 
review, and the few records concerning it preserved in the 
Pondicherry Archives deal only with the first two years after 
its restoration to the French. The only possible explanation 
lor this is that at the end of 1787 the Masulipatam factory was 
transferred to the control of the newly established Company 
of Caloupe, and thus it ceased to have any official connection 
with the Pondicherry administration. In 1 77 8 the factory at 

1 p. a. mss. 5*45 (letteis from the President of the. Pondicherry 

Assembly to the Citizens of Yanam, 2nd and 15th April 1792) ms. f, 
(reply of the citizens of Yanam, r,th May). 

2 Ibid*, mss. 5147* 5 1 5°» 5*5 2 * 5 l 55‘5 l 57* 

s Ibid; ms. 5,53 (Proceedings of the Citizens’ Assembly. »5tl» April 
1793)- 


M1N/Sr^ 



OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


49 


§L 


Masulipatam together with the village of Francepeth liad fallen, 
like the other French possessions in India, into the hands of 
the English. During the period of occupation a part of the 
territory of the French factory was encroached upon by the 
English for the construction of a new Government House. 
This caused great embarrassment to the English after the peace 
treaty, by which all the French possessions in India had to be 
restored, and they had to agree to give to the Frenc h another 
suitable territory in place of the old. It was on the 161.I1 
March 1785 that Le Forestier retook possession of the factory 
and the village of Francepeth from the English. 1 Till about 
the end of the year correspondence went on between Lc 
Forestier and the English Council at Masulipatam about the 
proposed exchange of territory. Le Forestier took full advan¬ 
tage of the embarrassing position of the English in having 
constructed buildings on a territory which now legally belonged 
to the French. He thus refused to accept merely a territory 
of equal size but demanded in addition the value of the cons¬ 
tructions made by the English on French territory, which was 
estimated at 500 gold pagodas. 9 The demand had to be accept¬ 
ed by the English in order to get out of a difficult situation." 

In another matter, however, the French failed to get their 
demand accepted. The peace treaty had assured them the 
enjoyment of all their old trading rights and privileges, which 
so far as the Masulipatam factory was concerned included 
exemption from all duties on imports and exports. At the 
time of taking possession of the factory in March 1785, L< 
Forestier was assured by the English authorities that no diflS 
culty would be placed in the way of the freedom of French 
trade and commerce.* Yet, when some of the neighbouring 
Zamindars began to impose duties on goods meant for the 
French factory and Le Forestier appealed to the English audio 
rides to use their influence to stop such exactions, the latter 