

De Boistel was succeeded by de Mainville, who was replaced 
by Marguetiat in 1788. The principal preoccupation of the 
administration at this time was to increase cultivation, and the 
records of the settlement of this period, preserved in the Pondi¬ 
cherry Archives, contain interesting details about the method 
of cultivation, the distribution of the produce between the 
peasants and the Government, and the steps taken to encour- 

1 V. A. ms. 3074* 

2 Ibid., ms. 3986 (official document of restitution). 

3 Ibid. ms. ’,989 (correspondence between Courenceau. Governor of 
rondicherry. and Madras Government). 



age the extension of tillage. 1 Another preoccupation of the 


administration was to develop the industry of weaving and 
dyeing of cotton fabrics, for which purpose a large number 
of workers were invited from inland to settle in two villages, 
Soupayapouram and Cassaoudy. Besides agriculture and the 
manufacture of cotton goods, Karikal had also another economic 
importance. It was one of the two centres, Yanam being the 
other, for the manufacture of salt, the export of which to Bengal 
was practically the only avenue of trade open to the French 
in India and constituted an important source of income to 
the Government. 

In 1787 Karikal experienced a grave agrarian disturbance. 
Bellecombe had made a regulation in 1777 laying down an 
equitable distribution of the produce of agriculture between 
the tiller and the State. In 1787 the Indian farmer of lands 
Xaverimoutoupolle, sought to change the basis of distribution 
to the detriment of the cultivators, who in protest refused to 
till the lands and left French territory in a body. The total 
stoppage of cultivation in the villages of Karikal was too 
alarming for Pondicherry, and Conway, then Governor, prompt¬ 
ly sent de Fresne to Karikal to effect a satisfactory settlement 
with the cultivators. De Fresne succeeded in his mission and 
the cultivators returned to their fields early in 1788. 2 Shortly 
after there was a similar disturbance among the salt-worker 
also, who demanded an increase in their share of the produce, 
and the matter was satisfactorily settled by a regulation made 
by Conway in May 1788. fri 17<> 1 there was again a serious 
agrarian disturbance, which arose out of the grievances of the 
cultivators against the farmer of lands. It even assumed the 
nature of ail insurrection when the cultivators were joined 
bv the Visiadors or local constabulary and toll-collectors. Fhc 
Pondicherry Government had to intervene once more, and de 
Fresne sent <lc Touffreville with 100 European troops to restore 
order. De Touffreville was also appointed at the same time 
Commandant at Karikal. By a policy of severity combined 
with moderation he succeeded in putting down the insurrec - 


1 P, A. mss. 3988, 4050. 

2 Ibid., ius. 4042. 

3 Ibid., ms. 4049. 



Tin FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


in cl persuading die cultivators and the V/smdoKs (o 
return to their work* Peace was fully restored by April 1792.' 
These popular movements among the Indian inhabitants at 
Karikal were something new in the history of the French posses 
sions in India, and stood in marked contrast to the docility 
of the indigenous population in the older settlements. I he 
only probable explanation was the large number of the Indian 
population at Karikal and their being comparatively well off 
than the population in the other settlements. 1 2 