


OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


^ mm ;■ & 

Hie main point of dispute was control over police and justice. 
In August both parties joined in appealing to the Colonial 
Assembly at Pondicherry to send a Conciliation Commissioner. 
At the same time the majority decided to refer the question to 
the Indian inhabitants of Vanam, whether they would like to 
see the control over police and justice vested in the Committee 
or in the hands of the Commandant alone. It was something 
new in the whole history of the French in India, when the 
European citizens, failing to agree among themselves, decided 
to seek the opinion of the Indian inhabitants. The motive 
was, however, obvious, but the dispute could not be settled in 
that way, for both parties could collect a number of Indian 
inhabitants to support their points of view. 1 

In September there arrived two Conciliation Commission¬ 
ers from Pondicherry, Mery d’Arcy and La Faye, but till the 
middle of October they failed to bring about a compromise and 
were about to return, when on the 16th there took place an 
incident which gave a sudden turn to the situation. It aiose 
from the insulting conduct of a Frenchman to an influential 
Brahmin merchant of the place, who gathered four hundred 
men for retaliation. The small European population was in 
grave danger, and the two Conciliation Commissioners could 
with difficulty pacify the crowd by promising justice. The 
threat of a popular rising had the immediate effect of bringing 
the two contending parties together. The General Assembly 
met on the same day and decided unanimously to restore all 
powers to the Commandant to avoid further troubles with the 
Indian population. 2 From that time the citizens of Yanam 
gave up all interest in politics and went to the other extreme 
of abolishing the representation of the settlement in the 
Pondicherry Assembly. 3 All through 1792 they remained im¬ 
pervious to the appeals of the Pondicherry Assembly not to 
abolish their representation on that body and not to disinterest 

1 P. A. mss. 5115, 5116, 5119, 5121-5126 (letters from the Pondicherry 
Assembly. Proceedings of the Assembly at Yanam and the views of the 
Indian inhabitants. July-August 1791). 

2 Ibid. ms. 5130 (letter of the two Conciliation Commissioners to de 
Fresne, 16th October), ms. 5134 (Proceedings of the Citizens’ Assembly at 
Yanam, 16th October), ms. 5135 (Sonnerat to de Fresne, 17th October). 

3 Ibid, ms. 5139. 



themselves altogether from the administrative re-organisation 
of the different settlements. 1 


It was not till the beginning of 1793 that the citizens of 
Yanam decided to give up their attitude of indifference. Meet¬ 
ing in a Primary Assembly in January of that year, according to 
the procedure laid down by the Civil Commissioners, they 
elected their representative for the newly set up Assembly at 
Pondicherry. Resuming their interest in political affairs 
rather unwillingly because of the old rebuff from Pondicherry, 
they returned to their attack on Sonnerat and wrote to the 
Pondicherry Assembly for his recall'.* 1 At the beginning ol 
June the Pondicherry Assembly replied that although Sonnerat 
could not be recalled for want of more definite charges, he 
would be forbidden to engage in private trade and that the 
citizens of Yanam could take away from the Commandant the 
powers which they had willingly given in October 1791. Yanam 
at last got its opportunity to turn the tables on Pondicherry, 
but the outbreak of war soon after and the prompt seizure of 
the place by the English prevented the citizens from enjoying 
their sweet revenge. 