

1 Labernadie —La Revolution el les Etablissements Frangais dam I'lndc, 
pp. 170-171. 

2 P. A. mss. 4248, 4249, 4258 (Proceedings of the Citizens* Assembly. 
1 Gtli July and 18th September 1 79 1 )* 

3 Ibid, 4260. 

4 Ibid., ms. 4282 (Proceedings of the Citizens* Assembly, 20th Janu¬ 
ary 1792). 

5 Ibid., ms. 4297. 

FF 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


of the Constitulion of the Clergy, which was settled for the 
time being, but in 1793 it led to the withdrawal of the priests 
from the settlement. 1 In December 1792 Lescallier, who had 
come to Karikal to reorganise the settlement, invited the citi¬ 
zens to meet in a Primary Assembly to elect a deputy for the 
reconstituted Colonial Assembly at Pondicherry. The Kari- 
kalians elected Baissac, a merchant of Pondicherry, as their 
representative. 2 3 

In May 1793 Lescallier was again at Karikal, accompanied 
bv the other Civil Commissioner, Dumorier. The object of 
the visit was to investigate the charge brought by the Pondi¬ 
cherry Assembly against the Commandant of Karikal, Touffre- 
vilie, of putting difficulties in the way of supply of provisions 
to Pondicherry, which was beginning to feel alarmed at the 
prospect of a war with the English and was trying to lay in 
stock in time. The accusation was, however, found to be 
quite unjustified.* The end was approaching fast, in June 
the imminence of the war was no longer a matter of conjecture, 
and in order to strengthen the defences of Pondicherry by all 
available forces, Chermont, the Governor, sent an order to 
fouftrevillc to come to his assistance with the garrison at 
Karikal, leaving that settlement to the English. On the 19th 
June Touftreville evacuated Karikal with its small garrison, 
and immediately after William Mitchell, the English Resident 
at Nagore, took possession of the settlement. Thus, as in 1 77 ^» 
Karikal surrendered itself without a fight in the interest of 
Pondicherry. 


Yanam 


About Yanam there is nothing much to notice. The 
records relating to this settlement in the Pondicherry Archives 
are very meagre, and those that exist are nearly all of the 
Revolutionary period. On the whole the history of Yanam 

1 1 \ A. mss 4342, 4346, 4349 (Proceedings of the Citizens’ Assembly, 

July August *792). 

3 Ibid., ms. 4375 (letter of Lescallier, 23rd December), mss. 4377 M 379 
(Proceedings of the Citizens’ Assembly, 28111.29th December). 

3 Ibid., ms. 4409 (letter of the Civil Commissioners to the Colonial 
Assembly at Pondicherry, 6th May 1793), 


WIN IST/fy 



OTHER FRENCH SETTLEMENTS 


during the period under review was uneventful, except for a 
brie! interlude of excitement in 1791, when the handful of the 
French population there, only fifteen in number, tried to play 
the drama of the Revolution in their own way. Yanam was 
restored to the French in February 1785. Martin, who retook 
possession of the settlement from the English, was succeeded 
for short terms as Commandant by Mallendre and Bluter, but 
for the major part of the period the post was held by the famous 
traveller, scholar and scientist, Sonnerat, well-known for his 
three volumes of Voyage aux hides One a tales el en Chine. 
The task of the Commandant at Yanam was not very exacting 
since the place had no political importance whatsoever and its 
inhabitants wanted nothing better than to be left in peace to 
carry on their trading activities. Yanam had some commercial 
importance. It was, like Karikal; a centre for the manufacture 
of salt, and in fact Yanam salt constituted the major part of the 
quantity imported by the French into Bengal. Yanam was also 
an .important centre of cotton goods and supplied a large part 
of the return cargo of the French ships visiting India. The 
handful of French citizens at Yanam were fully occupied by 
these two lucrative branches of commerce and had no interest 
in political or administrative matters, which were left entirely 
to the Commandant. Thus the news of the Revolution and 
the formation of the first Committee at Pondicherry left the 
citizens of Yanam cold. It was commercial jealousy which 
gave rise to the first disturbance in the peaceful life of the 
settlement. 