

There started a dispute between the new Committee and 
the Commandant, which was ended by summoning another 
General Assembly on the 8th July.' Harangued by Larcher, 
the new Assembly took a decision to restore all authority to 
the administration and not to set up either a committee or a 
municipality, pending the arrival of the Civil Commissioners 
who had been sent out from France to reform the adminis- 


1 P. A. ms. 4820 (Larcher to Cornwallis, 24th October, 1791), ms. 
4822 (Larcher to Cornwallis, 1st November), ms. 4823 (Cornwallis to 
larcher, 3rd November), ms. 4824 (Cornwallis to Larcher, 5th November), 
ms. 4830 (Larcher to de Fresne, 18th November), ms. 4833 (a detailed 
account of the capture of the Rcsoluc by an officer on board), ms. 4849 
(Larcher to de Fresne, 20th January 179a). 

2 Ibid., mss. 4893, 1S94 (Proceedings of the Assembly, ,ph June, and 
of the new Committee, 25th June 1792). 

' Ibid., ms. 4897 (Larcher to Menesse, 28th June 1792). 

4 Ibid., ms. 4901. 


misty 



THL FRENCH IX INPIA 


<SL 


ive organisation in the different settlements. 1 This sudden 
turn in affairs took both the contending factions by surprise, 
who now complained against Larcher to the Governor of 
Pondicherry; Larcher tried to defend his conduct, 2 * but de 
Fresne felt that he had gone too far hi taking an active part 
in local politics. However, the situation was saved by a letter 
from Lescallier, one of the Civil Commissioners who had 
already arrived at Pondicherry, informing live citizens of Mahe 
of his intention to visit the settlement in October 1793- a That 
stopped all further troubles, and the General Assembly decided 
not to introduce any innovation till the arrival of the Civil 
Commissioner. In January 1793 Lai her could report to de 
Fresne that calm had been restored at YlahC 4 

Although faction-fighting had stopped, Mahe was faced 
with a new danger when news reached about the outbreak 
of war between England and France. On the 21 si June 
Larcher summoned a General Assembly to communicate the 
news to the citizens and to concert measures for the defence 
of the settlement against an impending attack by the English. 
He gave a frank account of the situation,—the old fortifica¬ 
tions completely destroyed, and the garrison consisting of 
88 sepoys with three European officers. Marin, the Ordonna- 
teu) , informed the Assembly about, the state of the treasury, 
containing only six thousand rupees, and about the inadequate 
stock of provisions. The Assembly set up a Political Com¬ 
mittee to decide how to meet the sudden danger. It met on 
the same date and came to the conclusion that defence was 
out of the question. It informed Larcher that the only thing 
that could be done was to capitulate on honourable terms, 
that would save the dignity of the nation and the interests of 
the citizens of Mahe.* Accordingly, when on the 13th July 
Col. Hartley, commanding the English forces on the Malabar 
Coast, sent a detachment of troops under Captain George 