

It was the financial embarrassment after 1783 , coupled 
with total indifference to political ambitions in India, that 
shaped French relations with the country Powers during the 
period under review. For some time after 1785 the French 
Government still wanted the maintenance of close diplomatic 
relations with the Indian Powers in order to build up an anti- 
English coalition for the next wav but enjoined on the local 
authorities in India the avoidance of any definite commitment. 
Successive Governors, like Souillac, Conway, Gossigny and de 
Freshe. and diplomatic agents, like Momigny and Godard, 
stressed the importance of maintaining close relations with the 
country Powers with a view to form an anti-English coalition, 
but the unwillingness of the French Government to enter into 
definite commitments or to go beyond verbal assurances of 
friendship and support was not conducive to inspiring confi 
donee among those whose alliance was sought. French officers 
in the service of the Indian Primes, like Aumont; Raymond, 
Piron, de Lallee and Vigie, repeatedly begged for troops and 



THK FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


in order to increase their contingents. They held out the 
assurance that it would increase French political influence over 


the country Powers, and 
authorities in India to 


would further enable the French 
draw upon the assistance of these 
national contingents in case of a war with the English. But 
in spite of the strongest recommendations of de Freshe; these 
prayers were rejected by the French Government, engrossed 
after 1789 in the immediate problems at home. 

Thus French relations with the country Powers between 
,: 7§$ and 1793 followed a course of drift, without any definite 
objective. The Deputies of the French Indian possessions in 
the National Assembly in Paris expressed regret at the indiffer¬ 
ence of the home Government to Indian affairs and urged a 
more vigorous policy for ensuring the safety of the possessions 
and for drawing closer relations with the country Powers. The 
representation went unheeded. In 1794, after the fall of all 
the French possessions in India, Lescallier, one of the Civil 
Commissioners, sent a detailed report to France on the Indian 
political situation and urged a more active policy to recover 
the lost position in the East. But that report was also shelved, 
and it was not. till after the Treaty of Amiens that, thanks to 
the imagination of the First Consul, France turned her atten¬ 
tion once more to the East. The revival of interest, however, 
proved to he short-lived and came to an end with the renewal 
of hostilities in Europe. 


II. The Despatch of Castries, outlining relations 
with Indian Powers. 

The policy which the French Government wanted to 
pursue in relation to the Indian Powers after 1785 was outlined 
in a despatch of Marechal de Castries, Minister of Marine, 
dated 14th February 1787. 1 It was written in reply to a report 
on the Indian political situation and the future of French 
possessions drawn up by Souiliac in* September 1785. In his 
despatch Castries declared that since the Mughal Emperor had 
ceased to count among the important Powers of India, it was 
useless for the French to maintain diplomatic relations with 