


1 V. A. ms. 960. 


MW$wr 



RELATIONS W mi INDIAN POWERS 


him and to keep an agent at his Darbar. It meant, in effect, that 
the French were not to concern themselves with north India 
any more, and signified a definite abandonment of the policy 
advocated by Chevalier and Madec before the last war for an 
alliance with the Emperor. As regards the Maratha ruler of 
Nagpur, whose co-operation Chevalier had sought to facilitate 
an attack on Bengal, Castries wrote that it would rto doubt be 
wise to cultivate friendly relations with the Bhonsla Raja, but 
at the same time it was necessary to observe strict circumspec¬ 
tion in dealing with him. He was so closely watched by the 
English that it would be unwise to reveal to him all the French 
plans. 

Castries also felt that it was useless to maintain close 
diplomatic relations with Hyderabad. Nizam Ali appeared to 
have definitely passed into the orbit of the English, and in any 
case he would not take any positive move in the interest of 
the French. So Castries suggested that Aumont, who had been 
.serving as French diplomatic agent at the Court of Nizam Ali, 
should be recalled, as also all the French military adventurers 
scattered throughout India. Castries continued that the Mara- 
ihas undoubtedly constituted the strongest Power in India, but 
not much co-operation could be expected from them. As he 
expressed, the Marathas "have so little interest to ally them¬ 
selves with us that they are not likely to take the measures that 
we may recommend to them.'’ Even then, the Minister felt, it 
would be necessar) to deal with them with tact and prudence, 
without however making great demarche to win them over. 
Montigny was to be replaced at Poona by a Brahmin Wak'd, 
not because he had proved inefficient, but because the appoint¬ 
ment of a Brahmin would be more in conformity with the 
usages of the country. 

There remained only one other Power, Mysore, which 
because of its persistent hostility towards the English appeared 
the natural ally of France. In order to win over Tipu it was 
necessary to convince him "about the desire we have to co¬ 
operate with him to prevent the English from remaining the 
masters of India.” .The special solicitude to win over I ipu 
was not to mean, however, that the French should take sides 
in internal politics and give help to Tipu against other country 
Powers. Castries clearly stated that the objective of French 


UWIST^ 



policy in India was to preserve peace among the country 
Powers, to keep them all united in one block, so that with the 
outbreak of the next war in Europe the French could attempt 
to turn them against the English. Under the existing cir 
cum:stances, however, as pointed out by Monti guy in his 
letter to Souillac iti November 1785, 1 such a plan was difficult 
of execution. It was impossible to preserve peace among 
Tipu, the Marather, and Nizam Ali and to keep them united, 
waiting for a far-off eventuality of a common war against the 
English. Finally, referring to Muhammad Ali, Nawab of the 
Carnatic, Castries approved of the reserve with which Souillac 
had received his overtures. The Nawab had, perhaps, found 
his position too galling, but his connection with the English 
was so effective that he would never be able to break it, unless 
the French achieved resounding military successes in India, 