

1 P. A. ms. 838. 

s Ibid., ms. 871. 


miSTfiy 



him, da fed 30th November 1785. 1 It was an important political 
despatch and deserves a somewhat detailed analysis. It dealt 
with three principal matters,—the causes of the conflict be¬ 
tween I ipu and the Marathas and Nizam Ali; the reasons 
which had compelled the Marathas to conclude peace with the 
English; and the difficulty of preserving a coalition of Indian 
Powers during a period of peace. 

Montigny wrote, “ I he object of the Regency in deputing 
me to you. Monsieur lc Vicomte, was to inform you on its 

behalf as also on behalf of Nizam Ali.of the just motives 

which had determined it to take up arms against 1 ipu 
and 0 give you at the same time a proof of its moderation and 
the special desire it has to agree to your views about the main¬ 
tenance of harmony among the Princes of India”. Montigny 
continued that when he came to know that Sotiillac would not 
come to the Malabar Coast,, he sent to Nana Phadnavis and 
Hari Pant Phadke some extracts from Sou iliac’s despatch of 
4th October, 4 ’the most appropriate to show to the Regency 
)our earnest desire to see the differences arisen between it and 
Tipu removed, as also the pressing exhortations you have made 
to that Nawab to unite himself with the Marathas on terms 
which may be reciprocally useful.” Regarding the fear of the 
Marathas that the French would give military help to Tipu 
against them, Montigny wrote: ”1 laid great stress on your inten¬ 
tion not to send any help to I ipu..; that the orders 

of the King had an express stipulation that the French were 
not to mix themselves up in the divisions which might arise 
among the Indian Princes, except only to re-establish peace and 
unity among them; that never at a moment of rupture between 
two Powers, whose alliance and support we sought, would we 
furnish means to one against the other.; that more¬ 

over the Regency ought to be assured that our relations with 
fipu were of a nature which could not be contradictory to those 
we were seeking to form with the Marathas.” 

Montigny hoped that the assurance given by Souillac would 
have a salutary effect on Nana Fhadnavis, but he feared that 
it Tipu did not desist from aggression, the Marathas and the 
Nizam would be forced to resort to arms against him. For 


1 P. A, 111s. 5356. 





RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 




the threatened conflict Montigny put the entire blame on Tipu. 

J he letter which Tipu Has written to you in the form of a 
manifesto to justify his enterprises against the place of Nar- 
gounde belonging to a friend and ally of the Regency, is only 

an attempt to colour the injustice of his conduct. 

Tipu is carrying to excess all the wicked qualities of his father 
without having many, nearly all, of his virtues. It is the 
opinion of the whole of India about this Nawab, and our 
nation will also know it, perhaps too late.” 

Montigny next referred to the main ground of French pro 
judico against the Marathas, namely their inactivity during the 
last Anglo-French struggle and conclusion of peace with the 
English at a time when they were making overtures to the 
French for an alliance. While condemning the policy of the 
Marathas and declaring that if they had looked far ahead and 
In id worked in the interest of India as a whole, there would 
have been a great revolution in the country against the English, 
Montigny admitted that there were very strong reasons to 
induce them to conclude peace. “I am quite convinced, Mon¬ 
sieur le Vicomte, that if the Marathas as also Nizam Ali had 
moved in their respective spheres against the English while we 
attacked the latter on the Coromandel Coast in concert with 
Haidar Ali, this general and combined attack would have 
created a great revolution and forced the English to fight on 
all fronts. I even think that India would have been able to 
recover her freedom completely if the French had had the time 
and the means to take Bombay or Madras before the arrival 
of the news of peace.” But, Montigny added, the inaction of 
the Marathas would "cause you less surprise when you notice 
that at this time the English had made the greatest sacrifice 
in their favour b\ restoring to them all the territories they had 