

He informed Montigny that he had already written to Nana 
in the same strain as Souillacs letter of October 1785, that 
“the English would one day take advantage of the disunion 
among the Princes of the country. If the Marathas, Nizam Ali 
and Tipu had been less concerned about their temporary 
interests, th v would have been able to keep their eyes Fixed 
on the increasing power of the English;*’ Gossigny knew that 
the English had sent an envoy named Mulct to Poona, but that 
they had not accepted the proposal made by Nana for joining 
the coalition against Tipu. He believed that the English were 
‘‘undoubtedly quite content with the injury the Princes of the 
country are inflicting on one another.” 2 

In order to pacify the conflict Gossigny sent a military 
officer named Godard on a special mission to Poona in August 
1786. Godard’s mission, however, proved fruitless, and in 
November he returned to Pondicherry, with a letter from Nana 
Phadnavis addressed to Souillac, presumably in reply to 
Souillars letter o! October 1783d In October Gossigny wrote 
to Montigny, urging him to exert lii.s diplomatic ability to the 
fullest extent to destroy the English plan of exploiting the 
division among the Indian Princes and 10 try to bring the latter 

1 r. A. ms. 871. 

2 I hid. ms. 894. 

a Ibid., ms. i. |8 (Gossigny to Montigny. 1st December 1786). 




misr^ 




RlXATtONS WriH UNIMAN POWERS 


against their common enemy. 1 In December 
Cossigny wrote to Montigny again, informing him that he had 
sent a letter to Nam Phadnavis ottering his good offices to bring 
about, peace between the Marathas and Tipu. 2 The Poona 
Government had earlier made overtures to Cossigny for French 
help through its Wahil at. Pondicherry named Gopai Rao. 
Cossigny repeated his offer to mediate. He wrote to Nana 
Phad navis again on January 5, 1787, urging him to conclude 
peace with Tipu. He stated that the English and the French 
had pledged themselves by the Treaty of Versailles not to give 
military help to any Indian Power. If, however, the English 
gave help to Nizam AH in his war against Tipu, France had 
adequate forces to compel them to respect the treaty condition ." 

In spite of the fact, that peace was condudcd in 1787, an 
event in which the part played by the French was not very 
evident, the Marathas were not much persuaded to believe in 
their professions of friendship, specially when shortly after they 
found Tipu sending an embassy to France to draw closer his 
relations with that country. Another cause of bitterness be 
tween the French and the Marathas arose from the depredations 
by Maratha pirates cm French shipping on the Malabar Coast, 
for which the French sent sharp warnings to the Poona Govern¬ 
ment, although the latter was not in reality directly responsible. 
One such notable incident was the capture of the Adelaide in 
1786. The captain of the ship, Dayot, a cousin of Madame 
Cossigny, and four other officers were held to ransom. Cossigny 
wrote to Montigny to demand compensation from the Poona 
Government for the outrage, and, in case of refusal, to warn 
Nana Phadnavis about the presence of six French warships in 
Indian waters. 1 The matter, however, dragged on for years 
before satisfaction could be obtained. 5 That the depredations 
of Maratha pirates continued becomes evident, from a letter 