


s. THE FRENCH M INDIA 

privileges which they had possessed in India before the 
outbreak of the war. Yet, they lost their old enthusiasm about 
the future of their position in India; and in place of the 
plethora of political and military projects of the earlier period, 
there was an increasing indifference to looking beyond the 
immediate prospect or thinking of anything but the immediate 
problems. In contrast to the earlier period, general memoires 
on the Indian situation and political and military projects 
became far too scanty. Not only did all enthusiasm for draw¬ 
ing up plans for the extension of political influence in India 
evaporate all on a sudden; there was little interest even in 
the consolidation and preservation of the existing possessions. 
This sudden change may be attributed to three factors. First 
was the frustration of the attempt made in 1781-83. France 
had put forward vigorous efforts to retrieve her lost position. 
She had sent a large expeditionary force under a brilliant hero 
of the past, and a strong navy in support under one of the 
ablest naval commanders she ever produced; but in the end she 
failed to achieve any tangible success. The second factor was 
the rapid extension of English power in India. In the recent 
wars with the Marathas and with Haidar and Tip'll thev had 
proved their worth in the field of battle as well as their ability 
in diplomacy. After 1783 there was little eagerness on the part 
of any Indian Power to challenge English domination. 

The third factor was the approaching collapse of the 
Anrien Regime , which diverted the attention of France from 
colonial ventures to concentrate entirely on the solution of 
internal problems. This is not the place to discuss in detail 
die causes that led to the fall of the Anrien Regime and 
ushered in a new ere in France and in Europe. It is sufficient 
to remember that the prospect of financial bankruptcy was one 
of the most important factors leading to the Revolution. The 
French financial system had been creaking for a long time under 
the weight of the thousand and one abuses associated with the 
Anrien Regime. Intervention in the War of American Inde¬ 
pendence had put the last straw on the camel's back, and. after 
1783 total collapse became not only inevitable but also immi¬ 
nent. This had its effect on Colonial policy. For a few years 
efforts were made to reduce expenditure on colonies in a vain 
attempt 10 save the existing financial structure. Thus it was 




RELATIONS' WITH fNTMAN POWERS 


that the management of the factories at Masulipatam, Calicut 
an:I Surat was transferred to the Company of Calonne, that the 
Indian possessions were grouped with the Isles of l 4 ranee and 
Bourbon into one Government, dial their administrative ex¬ 
penses were severely curtailed, and that orders were sent out for 
the withdrawal of all the French troops from India. 

In this drive for economy all political ambitions in India 
had to be sacrificed. But it was not merely the financial 
embarrassment of the Government which was responsible for 
the change of policy. Equally important was the fact that 
with the approach of the Revolution attention in France was 
concentrated entirely on internal reconstruction; for the time 
being secondary questions, like the future ol overseas colonies, 
were pushed out of: mind. With the outbreak of the Revolu¬ 
tionary War in Europe, France entered on a new phase of her 
history. She was fired with a new mission, and her gaze was 
Fixed on the Continent. The wonderful successes of her arms 
against the whole of monarchical Europe gave her a new 
intoxication, which took many years to pass off. It was only 
natural that she readily sacrificed her overseas possessions 
in order to be able to concentrate all her energies in the fulfil 
ment of her new mission in Europe. 