

After noticing the general polity advocated by the Minis 
ter, let us next trace in more detail French relations with the 
Marathas, Nizam Ali and Tipu Sultan during the period under 
review. 

III. Relations '.with the Marat has. 

At Poona, it will be remembered, Moritigny had been 
working as French diplomatic agent since 1781. We have 
noticed in detail the efforts he had made to bring about a 
Franco-Mar,ttha alliance and their ultimate failure. He still 
remained at his post after the conclusion of peace in 1783, but 
his task became increasingly difficult in the new circumstances. 
Bussy was strongly prejudiced against the Marathas, and his 
views seemed to have prevailed upon the Ministry at home# as 
would be evident from the outline of policy laid down in the 
despatch of Castries. Montigny, however, did not lose heart 
and persisted, down to his recall from Poona about the. middle 
of 1788, in trying to establish closer relations between the 
French and the Marathas. The main difficulty for him was the 
impression at Poona that the French were in alliance with 
Tipu. Montigny was hard put to it to convince the Marathas 
that ihe French had no intention of giving military help to 

% 


1 P- A. ms. 5356. 


miSTfty 



fipu in his aggressive designs against other country Powers, 
i he French did, in fact, observe strict neutrality during the 
;\;/r of .1785-87 between the Marat has and Nizam Ali on one 
side and Fipu on the other. The Governor of Pondicherry 
also offered his good offices for mediation and even sent a 
special envoy named Godard to Poona. But the policy of 
neutrality failed to create any favourable impression among the 
Marathas, who gradually drew away from the French; and after 
the recall of Montigny from Poona in 1788, Franco-Maratha 
relations virtually came to an end. 

Soon after his assumption of office as Governor of Pondi¬ 
cherry in May 1785, Sou iliac entered into correspondence with 
the two most important Maratha leaders, Sindhia and Nana 
Phadnavis. 'lo Sindhia, who had established his control over 
what remained of the Mughal Empire, Souillac wrote that be 
had been entrusted by the King of France to inform the 
Emperor of Delhi and the other Princes of India of his inten¬ 
tion to liberate them from the tyranny of the English and to 
restore their lost territories. Souillac expressed a hop, that 
when the suitable occasion would come, Sindhia would agree 
to work in concert with the French against their common 
enemy. 1 It was a vain hope, as Sindhia had already made a 
definite understanding with the English, and there' was little 
likelihood of his joining hands with the French. 

Souillac also wrote to Nana Phadnavis. with the object of 
removing the threatening conflict between the Marathas and 
Tipu and trying to bring them into an alliance beneficial to 
both. There had arisen serious causes of dispute, and since 
Souillac professed friendship for both parties, Nana Phadnavis 
sought to explain to him the Maratha grievances against Fipu 
and to justify the adoption of military measures unless Fipu 
gave up his aggressive designs. 1 ' On the rumour that Souillac: 
intended to pay a visit to the Malabar Coast towards the end 
of 1785, Nana Phadnavis also sent Montigny to Goa on a special 
mission to explain the Maratha views to him. Souillac did not 
ultimately go to the Malabar Coast, but the views of: the Poona 
Government were fully explained by Montigny in a letter to 