

Not much need be said here about the value of Montigny's 
diplomatic work at Poona. For years he. strove earnestly .Vo 
bring about a close alliance between the French and the 
Marathas, which, if it. had materialised, might have given a 
different shape to the later course of events. He had his critics, 
and Bussy roundly called him a dupe of the Poona Government; 
but even his bitterest critic admitted that he was not an adven 
turer of the type of Saint-Lubin, but had honesty of purpose 
and a genuine spirit of patriotism. 


IV. Relations with Nizam Ali. 


Although Montigny came to India in 1781 as the French 
representative accredited to the Poona Durbar , his mission also 
included maintenance of relations with Nizam Ali and the 
Mughal Emperor, and we have already noticed how be kept 
himself in touch with the Darbars of Delhi and Hyderabad. In 
1785 Aumont, 1 one of the French officers in the service of 
Nizam Ali, gained the confidence of Gossigny, Governor of 
Pondicherry, and was appointed by him special diplomatic 
agent it the Darbar of Hyderabad. He retained his post a an 
officer in the service of Nizam Ali, but received nonetheless a 
regular allowance from the Pondicherry Government for work 
ing as French agent at Hyderabad. Aumont seems to have 
gained some influence over Nizam Ali and Mushir ul Alulk, his 
Diwan. In 1787 he was sent to Pondicherry with the ostensible 
purpose of repairing the Nizam's jewels, but perhaps it covered 
some political object. 2 Anyway, in October 1787 we find 
Aumont writing from Pondicherry to Nizam Ali and to his 

1 For earlier career see Chapter V (sections on Madec and Modave). 

2 Bengal Secret and Separate Proceedings, ^91X1 October 1787 in 0 . R. O. 
—The French in India Series, Vol. XI, pp. 820-323—about Aumont’s visit 
to Pondicherry and exchange ol letters between Nizam Ali and de Cossigny, 
September 1787. 



uiwan, Mushir^ilMulk, that he would .return to Hyderabad as 
soon as repairs to the jewels had been completed, and Conway, 


THE FRENCH TN INDIA 



the new Governor of Pondicherry, had received news from 
Europe. 1 It may be recalled that in 1787 there were rumours 
of the possibility of a renewal of Anglo-French hostilities in 
Europe over the sudden turn of developments in Holland. We 
also find Aiunmit praying to the new Governor, Conway, for 
retention in the post of French Resident at the Court of Hvdcra 
bad, and begging him to pay the charges for repairs to the 
Nizam’s jewels as a friendly gesture. 2 3 

Conway, who succeeded Cossigny as Governor of Pondi¬ 
cherry in September 1787, wrote to Nizam All in October, 
assuring him of the continuance of the closest friendship that 
had always existed between France and the House of Nizam- 
ul-Mulk.* It is not known definitely how Conway received 
Aumont* s professions of loyalty and service to the nation. But 
from a letter written by Nizam AU to Conway some time later, 
it appears that the latter had a positive suspicion against 
Aumont and had written to Nizam Ali to keep strict watch on 
him. Conway had further expressed his intention to send 
somebody else shortly to work as French representative at 
Hyderabad. 4 There is no means of knowing why Aumont fell 
into the bad grace of Conway, nor does it appear that the 
Pondicherry Government actually appointed somebody else as 
official representative at Hyderabad. On the other hand, later 
contact between Pondicherry and Hyderabad was maintained 
through two other officers in the service of Nizam Ali, Raymond 
arid Piron, as we shall notice presently. 