

Monrigny concluded: “Nizam AH, although under nearly 
the same inquisition, will be less difficult to persuade. What¬ 
ever it may be, 1 consider it as very difficult to induce in 
advance, during a time of peace, the majority of the Princes of 
India to accept the project of a union such as might be turned 
into a general coalition against the common enemy. The fear 
which they have about the English power, the uncertainty of a 
rupture (between France and England), and the interval be¬ 
tween now and the outbreak of a new war suspend the effect 
A their resentment and restrain them to a state of the greatest 
circumspection. They promise, and will promise, to make 
common cause while we would come with impressive forces 
capable of operating on a large scale; but till then it will be 
very difficult to persuade them to make solid agreements with 
us. That is at least what. I have grounds to think, from the 
knowledge which I have been able to procure about the 
policies of the Durbars .” 

From 1785 to 1787 Franco-Mar at ha relations centred on 
the conflict between the Marathas and Tipu. Souiliac and, 
following him, Cossigny counselled patience and moderation to 
both sides in the interest of the final objective of keeping the 
Indian Powers united till the outbreak of the next Anglo- 
French war. But their efforts were in vain, and in December 
1785 the Marathas, in alliance with Nizam Ali, started hostili¬ 
ties against Tipu. Cossigny then tried to convince the Poona 
Government that the French were determined to observe strict 
neutrality and gave repeated assurances that they would not 
lend any military assistance to Tipu. He even offered his good 
offices to bring about a peace settlement and sent a special 
envoy named Godard for the purpose. But nothing could 
wholly dispel the misgivings of the Marathas, who still believed 
that the French looked upon Tipu with a special eye of favour. 
Since Tipu was their worst enemy, they gradually drew away 
from the French and walked into the orbit of the English, as 


<SL 

Hi : FRENCH rx I MM A 

became quite ev ident in 1790 when they entered into in often- 
sive mid detensive alliance with the English against Fipu. 

In December 1785 Cossignv wrote to Man a P had navis, 
informing him of his assumption of office as Governor of 
Pondicherry and acknowledging receipt of his letter to .Souillac 
in which he had explained the Maratha grievances against 
fipu. Gossigny advised a policy of moderation and compro¬ 
mise in the larger interest, and stated (what had become a stock 
expression in French diplomatic Correspondence with the conn 
try Powers) that it was the intention of the King of France to 
send another large expeditionary force to India on the next 
favourable occasion in order to liberate the country Powers 
from the yoke of the English. 1 On the news of the outbreak 
of war between the Marathas and Tipu, Gossigny expressed his 
deep concern in a letter to Montigny, dated 8th March 1.786. 