

conquered.and that they had added to these great 

advantages the abandonment of the person of Raghoba to the 

Regency of Poona.Whai more remained for the 

Marathas to desire? Nothing but the humiliation of the Nawal# 
(of Mysore), whose ambition and tyranny became formidable 
to them as also to the Souba (the Nizam), and most particularly 
because they knew him to be supported by a French army. 
Undoubtedly, it would have been desirable if the Marathas 
had sacrificed their own interests..to the greater one, the 


GG 






WNlSTfiy 


the Trench in inuia 

genera! libertion of India; but where i 
Asiatic Power which is capable of making such a sacrifice for 
distant prospects, for uncertain successes?” The increase of 
Haidar’s power, the defection of Nizam Ali from the coalition 
against the English, and the outbreak of dissensions among the 
Marat,ha Chiefs were very strong inducements for Nana Phad- 
navis to conclude peace with the English. 

Moutigny next referred to the general attitude of the 
Marathas in the matter of co-operating with the French against 
the English, as proposed by Souillac in his despatch, and the 
difficulty of maintaining a coalition of Indian Powers during 
a period of peace. He wrote, “Nana Phadnavis is always in 
the same disposition with respect to the English, whom he 
greatly detests. In fact, can he ever forget that they did every¬ 
thing possible in order to drive him from the important place 
he occupies?” But, he continued, the Poona Government 
would not entertain any fresh proposal of alliance with France 
until it had received a reply to the one made in 1782, and 
which, as Bussy had informed Nana, had been forwarded to 
the King of France for his approval. In view of this attitude 
Moutigny thought it to be “very difficult to induce the Mara 
thas to conclude a treaty concerning the general plan of union 
proposed in your last despatch, as also the special one of union 
between Sindhia and rhe Regency, particularly in the existing 
circumstances/’ 

Moutigny added that on Ins return to Poona he would 
make further overtures to the Maratha Government as proposed 
by Souillac. “As for the project of persuading the Regency 
to send a corps of army to Bengal by way of Katek in concert 
with the Raja of Nagpur and joined with our troops landed 
in that part, nothing could be more in the designs of the Court 
of Poona, because it itself had expressed the most earnest 
desire about such a move by Article 19 of the Treaty it had 

proposed in 1782 and to which no reply has yet been given. 

I may say that if the Marathas had already suggested this 
expedition in 1782, as it is well-known from their proposals, 
they are today in a better position than ever to execute this 
grand project because of the elevation of Sindhia to the gene¬ 
ralship of the Empire. The Raja of Nagpur will enter with 
difficulty into the arrangement, unless he is sure of a very 



<SL 

s that 


TAIN/sr^ 



imminent rupture between France and' England. He has much 
to fear from I he English by the proximity of his country of 
Katek to the possessions of the Company.” Moreover, he was 
so closely watched bv ' he Council of Calcutta that it was 
impossible to make the least move without the English being 
informed about it. 