


1 P. A. TlliS. 996. 

2 Vol. I, pp. 138-139. 

1 Roux U Bailli de Suffrrn dans VIndC , p. 228. For a detailed 
account of the embassy see Tantel -CAmbamd* de Tippoii Sahib a Paris. 
* P. A. ms. ^297. 


mtsr/fy 



Administrators of the Company to Tipu, , t .nd another letter, 
dated 10th October, which stated that at the request of die 
Ambassadors the Company had advanced money to them to 
recruit artisans in France to be taken to India. 1 The Ambassa¬ 
dors also secured the services of a French physician and a 
French surgeon, Willemet and Barrout. 2 The embassy re¬ 
turned to India about the middle of 1789. It may be men¬ 
tioned here that the proposed Commercial Convention did not 
materialise, and the French artisans who accompanied the 
Vrnbassadors to Mysore did not receive very good treatment 
either. Some time later the Governor of Pondicherry had to 
intercede in favour of these unfortunate men, and to protest 
to Tipu against the restrictions imposed on their freedom of 
communication with Pondicherry, in violation of the engage¬ 
ments entered into with them. 3 

While Tipu had expressed his desire to send an embassy 
to Paris, (he Flench also decided to maintain a regular diplo 
malic agent at his Darbar . During the last war Piveron de 
Morlat had worked as French agent, returning to France after 
the cessation of hostilities. In April 1787 Castries wrote to 
Cossigny at Pondicherry that Piveron de Morlat would be sent 
back to resume his post at Fipu’s Durban, and in September 
the Pondicherry Government appointed an army officer, named 
Desvaux, to work as French agent at Tipu’s Darbar, pending 
the arrival of Piveron de Morlat. 5 It does not appear, how¬ 
ever, that either of them did actually take up the appointment. 
In 1789 France appointed Comte de Macnamara, Commando 
of the naval squadron in Eastern waters, as a special envoy to 
Tipu. He came to Mahe in 1790 and had an interview with 
Tipu in April at the port of Chetuvayi. Nothing is known 
about the outcome of this interview, except that Tipu gave 

1 P, A. mss. 1089 (proposals of the Company), 1090, 109.1 (letters from 
the Directors of the Company to Tipu, dated 4th and 10th October'); also 
5 2 9 *k 

2 Ibid,, ms. 1097. 

3 Ibid, ms. 1115. 

* Ibid , ms. 977. 

5 Ibid, ms. 1006 (decisions of the Advisory Committee). 


mtSTfiy 



some rich presents for the King of France. 1 In a letter written 
in Nov ember 1790 to Marin at Mahe, Gossigny, while inform¬ 
ing him of the murder of Macnamara in the Isle of France as a 
result of revolutionary troubles there, expressed an apprehen¬ 
sion that if Tipu had submitted any political or military pro¬ 
posals to Macnamara for communication to the French Govern¬ 
ment, there was no means of knowing it after the tragic end 
of Mucnamara's career. 2 

About the end of 1788 Tipu sent to Pondicherry the 
officer in command of the French contingent in his service, de 
Lai lee, with some verbal proposals about drawing his relations 
closer to France. 3 There is, however, no record which throws 
any light on the nature of the proposals. In May 1789 Tipu 
wrote to Conway at Pondicherry, requesting him to end some 
naval officers who could give detailed information about Ceylon, 
Jeddah, Molucca, Borneo, China, France and England. 4 In 
July he wrote to Conway again, thanking him for having sent 
the naval officers he wanted and requesting him to send a 
printer with a printing machine/’ In June, on the rumour of 
the Dutch going to cede Cochin to the English. Tipu wrote to 
Conway that the French should try to purchase the place from 
the Dutch/ He was in fact prompted not so much by friend 
ship for the French as by the fear of another English establish¬ 
ment close to his territories. It was about this time that 
Tipu’s Ambassadors returned to Pondicherry with letters and 
presents from the King of France. Tipu thanked Conway for 
the splendid reception given to them in Paris and stated that 
he was eagerly waiting to meet the distinguished French noble 
who was coming with his Amahssaclors. 7 It might have referred 