

The matter was allowed to rest there for the time being, 
but, was taken up once more in June i 793 • before that de 
Frcsne had been succeeded by Chermont as Governor of Pon¬ 
dicherry,. The latter had written to Nizam Ali and Raymond, 
informing them of his assumption of offcc. In reply to that 
letter, Nizam Ali wrote on the ist June 1793, assuring Chermont 
of the continuance of his friendship for France, and expressing 
a fervent hope that his old request for arms and other military 
equipments, made to the previous Governor, would receive 
more favourable consideration from him. He added that he 
had entrusted Raymond to write in detail about the things 
needed, and hoped that it would be possible for Chermont to 
send them at the earliest opportunity. 3 4 5 On the same date 
Raymond also wrote to Chermont, renewing his request for 
arms and other equipments and assuring him that in case of 
need his contingent would be entirely at the disposal of France ’ 
]>v the time these letters reached Chermont, the condition 
of Pondicherry itself had become desperate on account of the 
outbreak of war with the English, and there could be no 
question of supplying arms to Hyderabad. On the 25th June 
Chermont wrote to Nizam Ali, informing him of the sudden 
change in the situation which prevented him from keeping his 
request for arms, having need of all the available resources for 
the defence of Pondicherry itself. He, however, assured Nizam 
Ali that he was expecting strong reinforcements from France, 
and on their arrival lie would be in a position to give a more 
tangible proof of his friendship for the Nizam/ It was, in 


1 P. A. ins. 55159. 2 Ibid, ms. 5360. 

3 Mardneau — Lettn \ cl Conventions des Gouvcrneurs dc Pondicherry, 

V- 398 . 

4 P. A. ms. 5362. 

5 Mardneau, op . ciL, p. 400. 


miSTfy 


HE NATION'S WITH INDIAN POWERS 

pious wish, and shortly alter Pondicherry capitu¬ 
lated to the English. 

V. Relations with Mysore. 

There was a general feeling among the French that the 
ruler of Mysore was their traditional, and in fact natural, ally 
in India, That impression originated from the time of Haidar's 
first co-operation with the French, while he was still an 
unknown soldier in the service of the Hindu ruler of Mysore. 
It was strengthened when Haidar came to power, his rise being 
to some extent due to the help tendered by the French, and 
more particularly to the military lessons he had learnt from 
them. After 1765 the factor that kept up the feeling of friend¬ 
ship between Haidar and the French was their common 
animosity towards the English As we have noticed already, 
nearly all the French nicmoives of the period dealing with 
military operations in India envisaged a close alliance and co¬ 
operation with Haidar. That alliance was, however, sought to 
be based on too fragile a foundation, and not on a real politi¬ 
cal understanding and unity of interests. While professing 
friendship and co-operation, each side was in reality anxious 
to make use of the other for its own advantage. While 
the French were principally concerned with the destruction of 
the English power and sought for that purpose the co-operation 
of the three southern Powers, the Marathas, Hyderabad and 
Mysore, which necessitated some check on the ambitions of the 
last, the ruler of Mysore was more concerned about the aggran¬ 
disement of his own power and was eager to utilise the friend 
ship of the French not merely against the English but also 
against the other two Indian Powers, the Marathas and Hydera 
bad. We have already noticed how during the war of 1779-83 
many fair chances of success were lost for the French anti 
Haidar because of lack of trust and co operation between them, 
which gradually deepened into bitter relations, scarcely con¬ 
cealed. Tipu was even less enthusiastic about the friendship 
of the French and less willing to conciliate their feelings than 
hi s father. What he wanted was not so much a general 
alliance with France as a corps of French troops in his service, 
to be retained as long as it suited his interests. 