

1 P. A. tns. 1.56*. Both Raymond and Piron had taken part, in the 
war, .-id fragments of the Journal of theii campaigns are preserved in 
the Pondicherry Archives (ms. 1569). 

2 Ibid., tns. 5255. About the engagement at Goorrunicondu see also 
Wilks— History of My soar, II, pp, 515-516. 

P. A. ms. 5256. 

4 It was in July; Wilks, op. cit., II, pp. 296 298. 


MWtSTffp 



REKA 1 IONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 


4 m the outbreak of war and occupy the Northern Sar 
kai>\ which would greatl) facilitate French operations on the 
Coromandel Coast. Nizam Ali could be drawn over to 'he 
side of the French by assuring him of protection from Tipu’s 
aggression, and Tipu being an ally, such a guarantee would 
not create any difficulty. The only condition that Nizam Ali 
would require for an alliance with the French was the restora¬ 
tion of the Northern Sarkars. Raymond concluded that consi¬ 
dering the existing political situation the French Government 
would do well in helping him to augment Ids corps, as desired 
by Nizam All. It would not cost the French any money; all 
that was required was to supply guns and enterprising officers, 
of whom there were many in the different settlements in India. 

De Fresno was favourably disposed towards the proposal 
of Raymond. While forwarding Raymond’s letter to the 
Minister of Marine on the 5th March 1791?, de Fresne expressed 
his high appreciation of the integrity and military qualities oi 
Raymond. He emphasised the assurance given by Raymond, 
to leave the service of Nizam AH and place his contingent at 
the disposal of the French Government immediately on the 
outbreak of a war with the English. He also confirmed the 
view of Raymond that Nizam Ali was well-disposed towards 
the French, and stated that the tremendous growth of English 
power after the victory over Tipu had made Nizam Ali all the 
more inclined towards the French. While recommending the 
acceptance of Raymond's proposal, de Fresne pointed out that 
it would not cause any embarrassment to the French Govern¬ 
ment and would not disturb peace with the English, since there 
was to be no direct negotiation with Nizam AH. Outwardly, 
the French Government would be merely permitting sale of 
arms to Raymond and allowing army officers to join his con¬ 
tingent. There were both plenty of arms at Pondicherry and 
a large number of men in the different settlements anxious to 
seek good careers in the service of the Indian Princes. 1 So 
favourably disposed was de Fresne to the idea of having a 
French contingent in the service of Nizam Ali that a few days 
later he recommended to the Minister the award of a Cross of 


§L 


P. A. ms. 1657. 


MW/sr^ 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


Louis to I’uon, who had come to Pondiehmy for nego¬ 
tiations. 

Raymond repeated his prayer for arms and Officers in tvvo 
letters to de Fresne, written from Seringa patani on March 6 . 
Hoping for a successful outcome of Piron’s mission, he wiotc 
that after the latter's return ite himself would go to Pondi 
cherry to negotiate-about more important affairs on behall ol 
Nizam AH. Raymond informed de Fresne of the conclusion 
of peace between Tipu and the allied Powers, and expressed 
great admiration for the courage and tenacity of the Mysore 
army. He defended himself against the charge of disloyalty, 
for fighting against Tipu, an ally of France, and lor taking in Iris 
employ deserters from the French contingent in I ipu s service 
commanded by de Vigif, after the latter’s defeat and capture 
before Seringapatam on the 8th February. Regarding the 
second charge, Raymond contended that the deserters had left 
Vigic’s contingent because of low salary and bad treatment; and 
regarding the first, he stated that the honour of a soldier and 
gratitude towards an employer had compelled him to take part 
in the war, but that he had seized every opportunity to urge 
upon Nizam Alt the necessity of concluding peace, and to im¬ 
press upon him the danger, that threatened his own power after 
the total destruction of Tipu. 1 On the 13th March Raymond 
wrote to de Fresne again, informing him about an interview 
he lvad with Nizam Ali. The latter was anxious to know the 
result of Piron’s mission. He proposed to Raymond to raise a 
second contingent and to procure additional arms for the pur¬ 
pose from Pondicherry. Raymond once more urged de Fresne 
to seize the groat opportunity for promoting national interests." 