

The apparent improvement of relations in 178b prepared 
the ground for the next, step, the despatch of an official embassy 
to Paris in 1787, That was in fact the first instance of sending 
a formal embassy by an Indian Prince to a European Power. 
The real object of the embassy is not quite clear. It seems, 
however, that, the intention was not so much to enter into a 
definite military alliance with France, which, Tipu must have 
known from past experience, could not be reached so-easily, but 
rather to impress upon his enemies in India, the English, the 
Marathas and Nizam Ali, that he was on terms of closest 
friendship with a strong European Power. If it had been his 
object to secure a definite military alliance with France, he 
would have surely prepared the ground by holding preliminary 
discussions with the Governor of Pondicherry or the Governor- 
General in the Isle of France. It does not appear from 
the correspondence of either Cossigny or Souillac that such 
discussions had been proposed by Tipu. Anyway, Tipu s 
embassy headed by one Muhammad Osman Khan started from 


1 p. A. ms. 878. 

2 Ibid, ms. 937. 

a ibid, ms. 941 (Cossigny to Marin at Malic, isi December 1786). 


WHisr/fy 



THE I RVACH IN INDIA 


<SL 


Mangalore, with a huge retinue and rich presents, by a trench 
corvette, the Aurore, towards the end of 1 7 ^ 7 - t’ievre Monne 
rpn, the captain of the ship, had special instructions from 
SouiUac to proceed straight to trance without stopping any¬ 
where on the way, and while approaching the French coast to 
hoist the flag of Tipu. 1 2 Michaud in his Histaire des Pfogrls 
cl de lit Chute de VEmpire de Mysore gives a brief account of 
the reception of the embassy in Paris and of the result of the 
mission.’ The King gave a public audience to the embassy on 
the >rd August 1788. Spectacular shows, banquets and other 
entertainments were* arranged in honour of the distinguished 
visitors, and even de Suffren held a reception at his residence. 

If the mission had any real political object, it proved 
to be entirely fruitless. The French Government, standing on 
the eve of the great storm which was to burst a tew months 
later, was not prepared to make any military commitments at 
the time. Bur the presence of Tipu’s embassy in Paris was 
sought to be utilised by the French Company for its own 
advantage. As early as 1785 Moracin, the Administrator in 
India of the newly established French Company, had submitted 
a me moire to Souillac on the possibilities of French trade with 
Mysore. 1 In 1788 the French Company sought to take advan¬ 
tage of the presence of Tipu’s embassy in Paris to propose a 
Commercial Convention, by which the Company would secure 
a monopoly of all exports from Tipu’s kingdom and of all 
imports of European goods, and in return it would supply to 
Tipu guns and other arms as well as French artisans that he 
might "require. The proposals, dated 4th October 1788, sub- 
milled to Tipu through his Ambassadors, staled that the 
French would purchase every year the entire produce of pepper 
of his territories and fixed quantities of sandalwood, cardamom, 
gum, elephant tusks, raw cotton, yarn and woven doth, and 
would supply in return all the guns and munitions of wat 
required by Tipu as well as other European goods. I ho pro¬ 
posals were accompanied by a letter of the same date from the 