

Raymond, who had fought in the French expeditionary 
force during the previous war and had joined the service of 
Nizam Ali in 1785. opened his first political contact with the 
Pondicherry Government towards the end of 1787. In a letter 
dated 1st December he introduced himself to Conway, then 
Governor of Pondicherry, giving an account of his earlier 
career and the strength of the contingent under his command. 
He pledged his loyalty to France and expressed his readiness 
to supply to the Pondicherry Government all news about 
Hyderabad. 2 For a time this did not lead to any important 
development. But from the end of 1791 the two French 
officers, Raymond and Piron, became actively engaged in nego¬ 
tiations with the Pondicherry Government for procuring troops 
and arms. It was at the instance of Nizam Ali, who was 
anxious to draw away from the English alliance, that Raymond 
entered into correspondence with the Governor of Pondicherry. 
Writing to de Fresne on the ^Qth December 1791, Raymond 
gave an account of the state of war against Tipu since the 
withdrawal of the English from Seringapatam in June and the 
unwillingness of the Marathas and Nizam Ali to continue the 
war any longer. T hey had become conscious of the dangers 
that eventually threatened them from the side of the English 
if Tipu was completely crushed, and they were thus anxious to 


1 For careers see Compton —European Military Adventurers of Hindus 
tan; Malleson -Final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas; 
Wesson— les Adventurien Frangais aux Itides, 

’ P. A. rus, 5352. 


misr^ 



conclude an early peace. Raymond stated that he was sending 
the letter through Pirori, who was going to Pondicherry on a 
special mission. 1 Piron’s departure for Pondicherry was held 
np ‘or a. few days, and taking advantage of this delay Raymond 
wrote a second letter to de Fvesne on the 3rd January 1792,. 
giving further news of the war and particularly of the defeat 
of the Nizam’s army before Goorttmconda, in which several 
French officers were taken prisoners. 2 * 

It Was on the 12th January 1793 that Raymond made his 
definite proposal to dc Fresnel He wrote that Nizam Ali had 
asked him to increase the number of troops under his com 
mand, to a strength sufficient to enable him to dispense with 
the contingent placed at his disposal by the English, and to 
seek the help of the Pondicherry Government for the purpose. 
Raymond urged de Fresne to consider the proposal as a great 
opportunity for the French nation, assuring him that “Nizam 
Ali has been attached to the French since his boyhood and 
that he will never be their enemy to help a Power whose ambi¬ 
tion has given him just ground for distrust.” At the moment 
lie had allied himself with the English against Tipu, but that 
was only for taking revenge on the ruler of Mysore for the 
capture and destruction of Adoni in 1786. 4 

Raymond then continued that if by supplying troops and 
guns France helped the formation of a contingent of 10,000 
men in the service of Nizam Ali, it would be as good as being 
at her own disposal. At the first signal from Pondicherry, it 
would move to any quarter indicated, possibly strengthened by 
additional troops lent by Nizam Ali. Raymond explained that, 
by his contract w ith Nizam Ali, he was the master of the troops 
under his command together with their arms and baggages, and 
was at liberty to dispose of them in any way he liked in case 
of a European war. He then outlined a plan of campaign for 
the next war with the English. His troops would move inline- 