

11 a 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

)d under review Tipif's relations with the 
French’ presented a striking contradiction. While on the one 
hand, he showed an eagerness for drawing closer to France, 
addressed several letters direct to Louis XVI with presents for 
him and Marie Antoinette, sent an embassy to Paris in 1787 
and proposed sending another in 1792, in his relations with 
the French in India he showed little eagerness to win their 
goodwill or even to avoid measures likely to alienate them. 
As we have noticed already, his agents gave repeated vexations 
to the French at xYlahe, and all the protests of the Commandant 
of Mahe and the Governor of Pondicherry proved of no avail, 
french goods and letters passing through Tipu’s territories 
were constantly intercepted, and the land communication be¬ 
tween Pondicherry and Malic was virtually cut off Obviously 
such dealings were not calculated to establish friendly relations. 

After the conclusion of peace in 1783, the policy of the 
French was to cultivate good relations with Tipu, Nizam Ali 
and the Marathas, and to try to keep them united for a future 
eventuality of war with the English. For that purpose it was 
necessary to eliminate all causes of friction among the three 
Powers and to preserve harmony by an appeal to their long¬ 
term interests. That policy, however, was frustrated when 
towards the end of 1785 war broke out between Tipu and a 
combination of the Marathas and Ni/am Ali. All the three 
Powers had expressed their views and explained their motives 
to the French Governor, Souillac, but the appeals of the latter 
could not prevent hostilities breaking out. All that the 
French could do was to make known to the contestants their 
neutrality in the conflict, but there persisted an impression 
among the enemies of Tipu that the French were really in 
sympathy with him. That impression arose from the existence 
of a French contingent in Tipu’s service, commanded by dc 
La l lee, and also from the outward anxiety shown by Tipu to 
draw closer his relations with France. 

Early In 1786 Tipu addressed a letter to Louis XVJ, 
expressing a fervent hope that the traditional friendship 
between Mysore and France would continue, in spite of all the 
efforts made by their enemies to destroy it. He bestowed high 
praise on Cossigny, Governor of Pondicherry, for his efforts to 
preserve friendly relations, wanted him not to be transferred 




During the pc 


Ml NtSTfiy 



relations with imhan powers 




^ondicherry, and even recommended him lor promotion 
to the rank of Ucutenant-General. 1 It may be recalled that 
after the conclusion of hostilities in 1783, Tipu had accused 
(his same Cossigny, then commanding the French troops placed 
at his disposal, of cheating and embezzlement and had sent 
charges against him to Bussy, who considered them to be 
unfounded. In 1780 Tipu had need of French goodwill, and 
that explained his change of attitude. In his letter to Louis 
XVI Tipn also announced the birth of a son and sent him 
presents, which included a gun manufactured in his own 
foundry. The eagerness of Tipn to maintain good relations 
with the French was also manifest by the orders he sent to his 
officers to stop giving troubles to the citizens of Malic 2 , and 
by the successful conclusion of the mission of Momierbn sent 
to his Day bar for the settlement of all outstanding disputes 
between him and the French, including the account of the 
advances made by him to the French expeditionary force before 
the arrival of Bussy.' 