

1 P. a. ms. 4671 (Macnamara to the Commandant of Mahe, 27th April 
fioni Chciuvayi), ms* 4673 (Commandant of Mah£ to the Governor 

of Pondicherry, joth May). Chctuvayi was a small port on the Malabai 
Coast, between Ponnani and Cochin (Madias District Gazetteers : Malabar 
and Anjntgo. p. 451). 

2 Ibid ms. 1323. 

a Ibid, ms. in? (Tipu to Conway, 14th Dec. 1788). 

4 Ibid , 111s. 1136, 

a Ibid, ms. 1143. 

* Ibid, ms. 1137. 

r ftf&rtin c’d\v~~het.tres et Conventions des Gouverncurs de Pondichery, 
pp. 401-402. 


mtsTfy 



to the Comte de Macnamara* Commander of the French Navy 
in Eastern waters, who escorted the Mysorean Ambassadors 
back to India, and was himself appointed a special envoy to 
Tipu. Or, it might have referred to the Comte de Civrac, who 
had resigned from the French army at the end of 1787 with a 
view to proceed to India and enter the service of Tipu Sultan. 
In giving this news to Conwaj at Pondicherry, the Minister, 
Comte de Montnioriri, mentioned particularly that Civrac was 
an important person and enjoyed the favours of the Queen 
and of the Princesse de LambaUe, 1 Civrac, however, ultima tel' 
changed his mind on arrival in India and remained at Pondi¬ 
cherry, where he tool; an important part in the events of the 
Revolutionary period. 

During his next war with the English and their allies, the 
Mnvathas and Nizam Ali, which started in 1790, Tipu turned 
to Pondicherry for troops to augment the European contingent 
in his service, commanded first by de Lall£e, and after his death 
in October 1790 by de Vigie So the news that orders had been 
sent from the Isle of France for the complete withdrawal of 
troops from Pondicherry, which, as we have noticed in a pre¬ 
vious chapter, brought about the first political upheaval in that 
settlement, came to Tipu as an unpleasant surprise, since the 
withdrawal of French troops from India would deprive him of 
the only means of augmenting his European contingent or of 
impressing his enemies by a show of friendship with the French. 
In May 1790 de la Satie, one of the French officers in Mysore 
service, wrote to de Fre&ne that Tipu had expressed surprise 
and indignation at the news of the withdrawal of troops from 
Pondicherry. Tipu had asked de la Salle to write to de Fresrie 
that if the measure had been forced upon the French by lack 
of money, they could have approached him, and he would have 
gladly made some contribution for the maintenance of troops 
at Pondicherry, since he felt that the ultimate effect of Live 
withdrawal of French troops from India would be to encourage 
the aggressive designs of the English. 2 In June de la Salle 
wrote to de Fresne once more that Tipu had asked him to 
convey his assurance of the protection of Pondicherry against 

1 P. A. ms. 1035 (loiter dated 2nd December 1787). 

2 Ibid, ms. 5300. 


mmsTffy 


’ Go *2\ 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

an English attack and to inform the Governor that he was 
shortly sending letters and presents for the King and Queen of 
France. 1 These letters and presents were sent shortly alter 
through one of the principal officers of Tipu, Zainul Abcdin, 
who was despatched on a special mission to Pondicherry. 2 The 
mission, as will be seen presently, related to getting some 
French troops from Pondicherry. 