


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


inn Princes, but he hoped that the National Assembly would 
pay more attention to India than the ministers of the old 
regime, who had lost for France the high esteem which India 
originally had for her Hoping a revival of French influence 
in India as a result of the Revolution, he wrote, “l am too old 
to see the return of the French to this brilliant theatre, but 1 
am nevertheless always optimistic, I console inysdf with the 
belief that a change of system will give France her original 
lustre,’' 1 

About the time that the English were trying to secure 
Guntoor from Nizam All, there was an informal overture from 
the latter to cede the district to the French, in exchange for a 
guarantee of protection against the English and Tipu. It may 
be remembered that in May 1788 Montigny was recalled from 
Poona, and on his way to Pondicherry he made a brief halt at 
Hyderabad. It was through Montigny that Nizam Ali made 
an informal and verbal proposal about the cession of Guntoor. 
Montigny reported it to Conway on his arrival at Pondicherry, 
and the matter was referred to the Advisory Committee, set up 
in 1787 to assist the Governor. In view of the existing situa¬ 
tion of the French, however, the Advisory Committee recoin-''' 
mended in September 1788 the adoption of a non-committal 
policy, and asked Conway to write a simple letter of compli¬ 
ments to Nizam Ali in reply to his proposal without under¬ 
taking any definite engagement. 2 No wonder that soon after 
Nizam Ali, in order to secure his territories from Tipu’s aggres¬ 
sion. ceded Guntoor to the English and entered into a close 
understanding with them. 

Baffled in his attempts to gain French protection or to 
secure the alliance of Tipu, for which overtures were made in 
1788”, Nizam Ali finally turned to the English and entered into 
an offensive and defensive alliance in July 1790. But although 
he joined the war against Tipu, he was not very happy about 
his connection with the English. During the progress of the 
war he realised that, the destruction of Tipu would merely 
increase the power of the English and enable them to subdue 

1 P. A. ms. ,-,*54 (letter dated 18th September 1790). 

2 Ibid., ms. 1006 (Proceedings of the Advisory Committee). 

{ Wilks —History of Alysaor, II, pp. 334-535. 



RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS r>VB 

5 ther states, including their allies. Thus towards the end 
of 1791 he turned once more to the French and tried to get 
from them European troops and arms in order to be indepen¬ 
dent of English military assistance for the protection of his 
territories, which had forced him into the war. Me had in his 
service a number of French officers, and it was through them 
that he opened overtures to Pondicherry. One of them was 
Raymond, who later acquired great reputation and influence 
in Hyderabad, somewhat recalling the days of hussy in the 
Deccan, Another notable person was Piron, who later suc¬ 
ceeded Raymond in command of his contingent after the 
latter’s death in 1798. 1 