

In spite of the dislike of Conway, Aumont, who went back 
to Hyderabad early in 1788, still continued to work for some 
time as intermediary between the Pondicherry Government arid 
the Darbar of Nizam Ali. In September 1788 while forward 
ing a letter from Nizam Ali to the French Governor, Aumont 
wrote that he still remained a good patriot and was always 
reach to place himself at the disposal of Conway to supply hint 

1 P. A. mss. 1008, 1019. 

2 Ibid., ms. 1017 (letter dated 20th October 1787). 

3 Ibid., n»ss. 1015, 1019. 

• Martineau Lettres et Conventions des Gouverneurs dc Pondichdry, 
PP* 339 - 3 - 1 °- 



RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 

vs of everything that happened at the Court of Hyderabad. 
He then gave an account of the arrival some time back of an 
English agent from Calcutta and of the grand reception accord¬ 
ed to him. 1 Although the object of the visit was kept a close 
.secret* Aumont could learn from reliable sources that it was 
to procure the cession of the Sarkar of Guntoor and to persuade 
Nizam Ali to join the English in a coalition against Tipu. 
Aumont thought that the mission had little chance of success. 
“The English would not succeed here as easily as among the 
Marathas. It is not that there is less greed for money here 
than among the Marathas. The real reason is that Mughal 
indolence lias no liking for the risks and fatigues of war. in 
contrast to the love for pillage among the Marathas, a nation 
of born brigands.” 2 Aumont's prediction was. however, totally 
falsified. Nizam Ali did cede Guntoor under English pressure 
and did join the war against Tipu two years later. 

Aumont was mortified at french inactivity to prevent 
Nizam Ali from entering into a close alliance with the English 
in 1790, which seemed to presage the loss of what little influence 
the French still had in Hyderabad. He gave expression to his 
feelings in a letter to de Fresne. Governor of Pondicherry, in 
September 1790 after getting news of the Revolution in France 
and the effect it had produced it Pondicherry He wrote that 
lie had received de Fresne s letter sent through one Bellevue, 
who had come to Hyderabad in search of employment. Fie 
doubted very much whether Bellevue would get any appoint¬ 
ment, since the situation in Hyderabad had changed completely 
for the French, and the Government was not anxious to increase 
the number of Frenchmen in its service. Indeed, if the Dixvan 
had had his own way, all the existing Frenchmen would have 
been dismissed, but. he was held in restraint, only by Nizam Ali 
who had still some liking for the French. Aumont continued 
that the English were trying to exploit the news of the Revolu¬ 
tion in France to discredit, that country in the eyes of the 


1 It referred to the mission of Captain Kennaway; see Forrest— Selec¬ 
tions from the State Papers of the Governors-General of India , Cornwallis, 
F PP- 35 - 36 . 

~ P. A. mss. r ; u>52 (Atimont’s account of the reception given to the 
English embassy by the Nizam), 5253 (Aumont: to Conway, 3rd September 
1788). 