

There is a gap in the correspondence of Raymond pre¬ 
served in the Pondicherry Archives, and it is not known defi¬ 
nitely what reply de Fresne gave to his prayer for men and 
arms, it appears, however, front some later correspondence 
that de Fresne was quite willing to accommodate Raymond in 
an indirect way. Desertions became, suddenly frequent among 
the men of the Pondicherry garrison, and in a letter written 
in June 1792 to the Governor-General, Cossigny, de Fresne 


* P. A. mss. 5302, 5303. 
2 Ibid, ms. 5304. 


misr^ 



RELATIONS Wall INDIAN POWERS 




that the desertions at Pondicherry were connected with 
the recruitment started by Raymond. 1 2 3 Piron returned to 
Hyderabad in July, after having made an arrangement, with de 
Fresne about the supply of arms and other equipments through 
Mercier, a wealthy private merchant, formerly a Government 
officer. 

In July 179a Raymond informed de Fresno about tin panic 
created in the Deccan by the sudden appearance of the power¬ 
ful Marat.ha chief, Sincllria, with a formidable army, as a result 
of which Nizam Ali had pressed his demand on Raymond to 
increase his corps immediately. Raymond stated that he had 
already recruited 3,000 sepoys and had sent 20,000 rupees to 
Mcrcier for arms and uniforms. He had authorised Mercier to 
procure them, if necessary, from Negapatam or Madras." In a 
letter dated 1st October Raymond informed de Fresne that at 
the demand of Nizam Ali he was raising another sepoy force 
of 5,000 men, and had sent 50,000 rupees through his adjutant, 
Chemith, to Mercier for procuring additional arms and uni¬ 
forms. He further stated that he was sending a letter from 
Nizam Ali relating to a long-cherished political project, about 
which he would write in detail later." Unfortunately, the 
letter of Nizam Ali is not preserved in the Pondicherry Archives. 
Perhaps, it. might have referred to the old project of an alliance, 
Raymond added that he had been authorised to go to Pondi¬ 
cherry and enter into negotiations as soon as Sindhia returned 


to north India. 

About this time Raymond received news from his agent at 
Pondicherry, Chemith, that de Fresne had changed his mind 
and was unwilling to supply arms according to the previous 
arrangement, out of suspicion about his intentions. In a letter 
dated 4th October, Raymond regretted that de Fresne’s ears 
had been poisoned by some persons, and declared dial he was 
prepared to go to Pondicherry and answer any charge that might 
have been brought against him. He wrote, “Would I have 
addressed you, my General, with so much confidence if I had 
wanted to deceive you?” Raymond added that his enemies 


1 P. A. ms, 1775. 

2 Ibid., ms. 5257. 

3 Ibid., 111s. 5258. 


WNlSTfty 



l HE FRENCH rN INDIA 


<SL 


aa done him a great injury, riot so much by stopping the 
supply of arms as by depriving him of the good opinion of de 
Fresnel Shortly after, Raymond received a letter from de 
Frcsne, explain mg the reason which prevented the latter from 
keeping his promise. It referred to the changed situation at 
Pondicherry and the coming of the Civil Commissioners from 
France. 1 2 Anyway, Raymond was satisfied with the explanation. 