

ii 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

settlements. If the French were to take the English by surprise 
in India, preparations for war could not be made either in 
the ports of France or in the Indian settlements, but only in 
the Isles of France and Bourbon, where secrecy could be main- 
rained. The distance of these Isles from India was long enough 
to elude vigilant watch by the English, and yet not too long to 
prevent them from being effective bases for launching an attack 
on India. “Situated about a month’s voyage from the coasts of 
India, the Isle of France could constitute an arsenal of the first 
order, on condition that it was equipped with all necessary 
materials and that troops and a naval squadron were sent there, 
not at the moment of the declaration of war but in a time of 
peace*’. 1 

But the possession of the Isles had disadvantages as well, 
as experience amply proved. If the Isles served as useful bases 
for French naval operations, by providing safe shelters their 
possession induced French Admirals to leave Indian waters 
on the first reverse or mere fear of defeat That was how d’Ache 
and Ironjoh had behaved. Not without reason did Sonnerat 
observe, “The Isle of France was and will always be fatal to the 
establishments that the French have in India”. 2 3 De Suffren 
understood the demoralising effect of the possession of the Isles, 
and never returned there during the whole course of the war. 
It is worth quoting another contemporary opinion on the value 
of the possession of the Isle of France. “The Isle of France 
is considered as a fortress which protects our Indian possessions. 
It is as if one considers Bordeaux as the citadel for the protec¬ 
tion of our American colonies”. 1 Abbe Raynal perhaps gave the 
most balanced view on the subject: “There is so necessary a 
connection between the Isle of France and Pondicherry, lhat 
those two possessions are entirely dependent on each other; 
for without the Isle of France, there .would be no protection 
for the settlements in India; and, without Pondicherry, the Isle 
of France would he exposed to the invasion of the English from 

1 Prenlout—Z///e de France sous Decaen , Preface, p. ix. 

3 Sonnerat —Voyage aux Indes Orientates ct d la Chine , Vol. II. p. 366. 

3 Bernardin de Saint-Pierre —Voyage d File de France, Vol. I, p. *93, 




Miwsr^ 


REVOUJTIONARY PRANCE AM) INDIA 

Asia as well as from Europe'" 1 How true the last part proved 
to be in 1810! 

The news of the Revolution in France produced reper¬ 
cussions in the Isles of France and Bourbon as in all the settle¬ 
ments in India, and everywhere small groups of Frenchmen 
played the drama of the Revolution, each in their own way. In 
the Isles of France and Bourbon the extremists carried the 
day, the assembly of citizens seized all power, the administrative 
system broke down, and there was complete disorder and con 
fusion. The Commander of the French squadron in the East, 
Comte de Macnamara, was killed in November 1790 by a 
turbulent mob. Shortly after, the Governor-General, Conway, 
resigned in disgust and was succeeded by Cossigny, Cossigny 
also had no better luck. He soon got tired of the troubles in 
the Isles and wanted to be recalled. He was succeeded in June 
1792 by Malartic. sent, from France. With the new Governor- 
General also came four Civil Commissioners, Lahoucher, 
Dumorier, Lescallier and Tirol, to organise administration in 
the different French possessions in the East on the lines of the 
new Constitution for colonies decreed by the Constituent 
Assembly. In 1793 the outbreak of war lost for the French 
all their settlements in India, and the Isles of France and 
Bourbon also were practically cut off from the mother country. 
The Revolutionary Government of Paris was much too occupied 
with its own problems to think of the two small colonies in the 
distant Indian Ocean. They were thus left to their own 
resources for self-preservation. 