

1 t\ A. mss. 524C), 5-47 (letters from the Dutch Governin' amt Coun¬ 
cillors at Colombo to dc Fresne, dated 18th March and 29th May 1792). 

2 Ibid, nls. 1787 (de Fresne to Cossigny, 28th June 1792), ms. 1791 (de 
Fresne to the Minister, 29th June). 

3 Ibid , ms. 2200. 


iMMsr/fy 


‘ Go ^>\ 

RELATIONS Wl'lil INDIAN POWERS 

' l^csc'iIIicr continued that since any successful operation 
in India against the English would depend entirely oh the 
support and co-operation of the country Powers, he had tried 
to establish close relations with them during his short stay at 
Pondicherry. In order to avoid the risks involved in commu¬ 
nicating through intermediaries and interpreters, he had learnt 
Hindusthani and Persian and could thus get into direct contact 
with the Indian Primes. He had corresponded with Tipu and 
had tried to give him a correct idea of the Revolution in 
France to counteract the propaganda of the English. .Lescallier 
reproduced the translation of a note handed over to him on 
the eve of his departure from India by an agent ol I ipu, as 
expressing the views of his master. Tipu was unwilling to 
enter into any alliance with France unless the latter guaranteed 
not to conclude peace without his concurrence. Evidently, it 
had reference to what he considered as letting down by France 
in 1783. Secondly, he wanted that the French expeditionary 
force to be sent to India was to be placed under his orders, 
and he explained, ‘’your Generals do not know the method of 
making war in India, although quite experienced in European 
warfare/’ 

Lescallier had also been in communication with the Raja 
of Tanjore, who was ready in July 1793 to make a concrete 
proposal about establishing closer relations with France. The 
talks had failed only because ol the sudden outbreak of war. 
He had further opened correspondence with the Princes of 
Madura and Ghirakkal to draw them closer to France, and had 
also carried on talks at Karikal with the secret embassy sent 
by the king of Kandy. Although he could not give an imme¬ 
diate decision in favour of the latter’s proposal, he got an 
assurance that the king of Kandy, who had originally thought 
of approaching the English failing to get any help from the 
French, would not start negotiations with any other foreign 
Power before eighteen months, by which time a definite reply 
was to be expected from France. When Lescallier started from 
Tranquebar in November 1795, he had an interview with the 
Ceylonese representative, who even proposed to go with him 
to the Isle of France to get an early decision from the autho¬ 
rities there, but later changed his mind thinking of the risks 
of the long voyage. 




THE 1K1 \C!l r.\ INDIA 



<SL 


Lescallier concluded that although he had no direct deal¬ 
ing with the other Princes, he felt, certain that all of them, 
including those outwardly allied with the English, would 
throw in their lot. with the French when the opportune 
moment came. Many of them had French contingents in their 
service, which could be of great help when the time for action 
arrived. Pending the return of the French to India, Lescallier 
had arranged a means of maintaining relations with the coun¬ 
try Powers, through a dispossessed Nawab who had expressed 
his readiness to carry on secret diplomatic work at the various 
Durbars. Lescallier also referred to the friendly overture^ he 
had received from Pegu and Cochin-China and the good com¬ 
mercial opportunities that France had in those countries. 