

On the 13th October 1790 de Vigie, a cousin of de Lai lie, 
wrote to de Fresne, informing him of his appointment by Tipu 
to succeed de La lice in command of the French contingent 
after the latter’s death in action at Darrapur on the 7th. Be 
Vigie assured de Fresne of his loyalty to his country, and 
promised to send him regular news about all developments in 
the kingdom of Mysore. 1 In December de Vigie sent one of 
his officers, named Pigeard, to Pondicherry with the object of 
getting 100 French troops for his contingent. His request was 
fortified by a letter from Tipu to de Fresne, appealing to the 
traditional friendship between him and the French, and asking 
for a reinforcement of 100 men for Vigie’s contingent. Tipu 
also enquired about the truth of the rumours prevalent about 
the imminence of a war between England and France. 1 To 
this letter de Fresne replied with an assurance that he would 
do his best to supply the troops wanted by Tipu, but since he 
could not do so on his own authority, lie was writing to the 
Governor-General, Gossigny, to send troops from the Isle of 
France. De Fresne also contradicted the rumour of an immi¬ 
nence of war between England and France, and concluded by 
expressing fervent hopes about a resounding victory for Tipu. 5 
On the fith January 1791 Tipu wrote to de Fresne, in reply to 
a previous request from the latter, that he had given peremp¬ 
tory orders to his army not to molest any of the French posses¬ 
sions during the course of the war with the English. Fie added 
that he was sending a letter for the King of France and another 

» I*. A. his. 1263. 

' Martineau- Lettrcs et Conv<'nfiotis des Gouvemcu'% de Pandichtfry, 

PP- 3 6 5-3&<k 

3 P. A. ms. 5301. 

* Martineau, op. cit p 364. 

3 Ibid** pp. 364-365. 





WIN tSTfy 


RELATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 


525 ! 



for the Governor-General. Cossigny. 1 De Fresne m reply 
thanked I ipa for the assurance of protection ol the French 
possessions and expressed hopes lor Iris victor) in the war.- 

Early in 1791 de Fresne made an attempt to end hostilities 
between Tipu and his enemies. The war had placed the 
French in a difficult position. Unable to do anything to help 
l ipti, they were not prepared to see the total destruction of 
his power., which would lose for them the support of a valuable 
ally in a future contingency. De Fresne was thus anxious to 
prevent a continuance of the war and thereby save as much as 
possible of Tipu's power. In January 1791, taking advantage 
of Tipu’s presence at Permacbil, not far from Pondicherry, he 
sent a trusted agent named Leger, with a letter urging Tipu to 
end hostilities in the interest of the common people to whom 
the war meant only misery and devastation and proposing to 
offer his good offices to bring about a satisfactory .settlement. 
In his reply to de Fresne, dated 25th January, Tipu appeared 
willing to accept the offer of French good offices and sent an 
officer, Abdul Nabi Khan, to Pondicherry to discuss the details.' 1 3 
It may be mentioned here that nothing came out of the French 
overtures to Tipu’s enemies, and the war dragged on for nearly 
a year more. Perhaps, cle Fresne was encouraged to offer his 
good offices by the hope of the defection of the Marathas and 
Nizam Ali from the English alliance. Anyway, in February, 
out of gratitude for his offer, Tipu sent cle Fresne a beautiful 
grey horse as a present. 4 He also sent letters and presents for 
the King and Queen of France, and in April proposed to send 
Leger on a special mission to Paris.’ ft was inspired by 
rumours of an outbreak of war between France and England. 