


» P. A. ins. 5305. 

2 Ibid., ms. 5306 (letter dated 16th February 1793). 

3 Ibid., ms. 5307 (same date as 5306). 

4 Ibid., ms. 2140. 


RE CATIONS WITH INDIAN POWERS 



VI. Relations with Minor Powers. 


It remains for us to notice very briefly French relations 
with some of the minor Powers. With the Nawab of the 
Carnatic the French continued to maintain diplomatic rela¬ 
tions, keeping a regular I 'Vakil at his Darbar, named Venkata 
Rao. 1 But these relations had no political significance what¬ 
soever, as the Nawab of the Carnatic had passed completely 
under English domination and had even taken up his residence 
at Madras, where he was closely watched by the English. French 
relations with the Nawab of the Carnatic during the period 
under review were confined to an occasional exchange of letters 
of compliments between the, Governor of Pondicherry and the 
Nawab Muhammad Ali Khan and his son; while the work of 
the French Wakil at the Nawabs Darbnr was merely to send 
news about Madras, including gossips and rumours, to the 
Government of Pondicherry. 2 3 

In 1788 Conway, the Governor of Pondicherry, received 
offers from the chiefs of Rarnnad and Madura ol cessions of 
territories in return for French military help in liberating the 
two principalities from the yoke of the Nawab of the Carnatic.’■ 
It was obviously impossible for the French to accept the pro¬ 
posals, which would have involved a war with the English. 

Early in 1792 there came a similar proposal from the king 
of Kandy in Ceylon. The latter, tired of Dutch domination, 
sent a secret embassy to Pondicherry, expressing friendship for¬ 
th c French and proposing to cede to them some territories on 
the coast which had been unjustly usurped by the Dutch in 
violation of their treaty with him. The motive was obvious, 
to escape from the rigid control of the Dutch by inviting 
another European nation into die island; and acceptance of 
the proposal by the French would have involved war with the 
Dutch, who claimed sovereignty over the whole island. It was 
not seriously entertained, and de Fresile gave a vague and 
evasive reply, containing merely empty sentiments of goodwill 


1 p. A. ms. 10*9 (Conway to the son of the Nawab of the Carnatic, 

23rd November 1787). 

3 Ibid., mss. 1025, 10£} 8> 1047-1049. 

Ibid., mss. 1063, 1113. 



for the king of k'tnciv. Some oi the letters of the members of 
the secret embassy were intercepted by the Dutch, who at once 
sent sharp protests to the Governor of Pondicherry and threa¬ 
tened to close all the ports of Ceylon to French shipping. 1 It 
led to some hitter correspondence between the Governments of 
Pondicherry and Colombo, and later dc Fresne sent a full 
report of the Whole episode to Cossigny, the Governor General, 
arid to the Minister in Paris. 2 

VII. Report of LexcaUia to the Xational Convention . 

We may conclude this chapter on French diplomatic rela¬ 
tions with the country Powers with a brief reference to the 
report on India dated 15th October 1794 drawn up by Lcscal- 
licr, one of the Civil Commissioners, for submission to the 
National Convention and the Executive Council in Paris. 1 It 
Was written from the Isle of France, where Lcscallier had gone 
after the fall of Pondicherry in 1793. Lcscallier prefaced the 
report as an account “of the interests of the French nation in 
India and of the means i have foreseen or prepared for the 
prosperity and glory of tlu Republic and for bringing about 
the fall of tlu odious colossus of the English power in these 
rich and vast regions." Fie started by asserting that in spite 
of the loss of all her possessions in India France could still 
revive her power and influence, if only she could make it clear 
to the Indians that she stood for the principles of justice and 
liberty, while the object of English policy was domination and 
conquest. I he French would in that case be invited by “men 
of all castes and all religions" as liberators, “as their unique 
hope”. Lcscallier did not envisage France to become a great 
territorial Power in India; on the other hand, lie wanted her 
to remain content with only a few possessions, “with the 
consent and goodwill of Indians”, the revenues of which would 
he just sufficient to meet the administrative and military 
expenses, 