

Under the Directory an attempt was made to draw the 
colonies closer to the mother country. In July 179b there 
arrived in the Isle of France twelve hundred troops under 
General Magallon and a small naval division. But the attempt 
to re-establish the authority of the mother country failed, 
because of the opposition of the Colonial Assembly to abide 
by the decree about the emancipation of slaves made by the 
Revolutionary Government of Paris. The economy of the two 
islands was dependent on slave labour. Besides, the emanci- 

1 Abb£ RaynaF .1 Philosophical and Political History of the Settle¬ 
ments and Trade of the Europeans in thc, East and West Indies (tr. by 
Justamond), II, p. 423. 



WNlSTfiy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


of slaves was considered dangerous for the security of 
(he small white population. Thus during the Directory regime 
the Isles of France and Bourbon continued to remain practically 
independent of the mother country. The situation changed 
under the Consulate, which modified the decree about the 
emancipation of slaves to suit the interests of the white popula 
lion of the two islands. It helped the re-establishment of the 
authority of the mother country over the islands, although the 
local assembly continued to function for a few years more, 
Malartic died in the Isle of France on the «8th July 1800 and 
was succeeded by Magallon, who retained office till the arrival 
of Dc :aen as Captain-General of all the French possessions in 
the East in August 1803. Decaen proved to be an able 
lieutenant of the First Consul, by whom he had been nominated. 
He promptly dissolved the Colonial Assembly., established a 
strong government, and by introducing a number of beneficial 
measures endeared himself to the people. 


11 . Freni h Frivaleers . 


During all this period the French of the two Isles were not 
indifferent to the great national struggle against the English. 
But distracted by revolutionary troubles and left without ade 
qitate military and naval resources for an expedition to India, 
they confined their efforts to < ommerce-raiding operations in 
Indian waters, which did not of course affect the dominating 
position held by the English in India, but nevertheless inflicted 
severe damage to their trade and commerce. They were not. 
however, inspired entirely, or even largely, by patriotic motives. 
The policy of commerce-raiding was imposed on them more h) 
the necessity of circumstances. They had to live, and being 
virtually cut off from the mother country till the Peace of 
Amiens, and not getting adequate help from her even after the 
Peace, they were forced to engage in privateering as the only 
means of survival. The prizes to be hoped for were enormous, 
since the English had obtained practically a monopoly of the 
Eastern trade during the war; while the risks involved for the 
French were nil. It was not possible for the English to maintain 
an adequate naval force in Indian waters to assure protection 
to all their merchantmen; and with ordinary daring and skill 