

In July 1792 de Fresnc wrote to the Minister of Marine 
on the subject, forwarding at the same time a letter from Tipu 
requesting him to supply some French troops to augment the 
contingent under de Vigie. He stated that the gai i.son at 
Pondicherry was too small to permit him to accede to the 
request, and moreover Frenchmen proceeding from Pondi¬ 
cherry to join Tipu were likely to be stopped by the English 
while passing through the intervening territory under their 
control. The only means of sending men and munitions to 
Tipu was through the port of Mangalore on the Malabar Coast, 
and de Fre ne stated that he was sending a copy of Tipu’s letter 
to the Governor-General in the Isle of France, from where it 
would be easier to send men direct to the Malabar Coast, De 
Fresne also informed the Minister that Tipu intended sending 
another embassy to France, and added, *'I had greatly con 
demned the move in 1787. It seems to me that nothing could 
be more embarrassing for us in Europe and injurious in India.’* 3 

Early in 1793 another appeal was made for some troops 
from Pondicherry to increase the French contingent in 

1 F. \. £) 1656 (letter dated 51 h March). 

2 ibid. , iris. *"1664. 

Ibid., ms. 1807 (letter dated 30th July 1792). 


misr/f 


TMK FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


ipu’s service. This time it was made by de Vigie himself in 
two letters, dated i6th February, addressed to de Fresne and 
the Civil Commissioners who had arrived at Pondicherry some 
time earlier. Before that the news of the establishment of a 
Republic in France had reached the French in Tipu’s service, 
and the latter decided to send a message fo the Civil Commis¬ 
sioners at Pondicherry, expressing jubilation attd professing 
loyalty to the country. 1 In forwarding the message to the Civil 
Commissioners, de Vigie sought their help to increase his con¬ 
tingent by 500 Frenchmen and 2,000 sepoys. He prayed that 
joo men be sent to him every vear from France and that the 
Pondicherry Government be authorised to supply him arms 
and other military equipments on cash payment. 2 To de 
Fresne de Vigie sent a copy of his,- letter and begged him to 
press his appeal for men and arms on the Civil Commissioners. 3 

The appeal, however, hardly got the time for serious con¬ 
sideration at Pondicherry or for transmission to France. Events 
were moving fast, and in June definite news reached India 
about the outbreak of war between England and Revolutionary 
Fiance. Pondicherry was in a poor state of defence, and it was 
now the turn of the French to seek assistance from Tipu. In 
a letter to de Vigie, dated 4th July, Ghermont, the new Gover¬ 
nor of Pondicherry, stated that he had already informed Tipu 
of the outbreak of war between the English and the French 
and had appealed to him to take advantage of the opportunity 
to break with the English and join in an alliance with the 
French. He urged de Vigie to use his influence with Tipu to 
persuade him to join the war. 4 Ghermont’s appeal to Tipu 
remained unanswered, as was only to be expected. Since 1785 
the French had remained aloof and had not given any support 
to Tipu in his wars. They had not even acceded to his request 
lor some French volunteers and arms, and it could hardly be 
expected that Tipu would allow himself to be lured to com¬ 
plete destruction in 1793 by a vain offer of alliance with France. 