


REVOLUTIONARY FRANCfe AND IM>lA 


it was always possible to surprise and capture richly-laden ships, 
i here was again no fear of retaliation in kind, since the French 
had no trade of their own. It is necessary to bear this aspect 
of the situation in mind, although it must be admitted that 
among the French privateers of the period there were men 
who showed extraordinary daring and adventurous spirit, even 
at moments of the gravest crisis and in the face of superior enemy 
forces. Their conduct was in keeping with the best naval tradi¬ 
tion in any country, and drew admiration even from thei 
adversaries. 

It is beyond the scope of the present work to give a detailed 
account of the deeds of the French privateers during the Revolu 
tionary and Napoleonic Wars. They lead almost like romance. 
Curious readers may turn to the interesting pages of the Les 
Corsaircs Frangais sous la Republique et UEmpire by Gallois, 
Robert Surcouf by Canat, and the Final French Struggles in 
India and on the Indian Seas by Malleson. The large majority 
of the French and Creole population of the two islands lived on 
privateering, and even soldiers and sailors of the navy often 
deserted and took to this more lucrative profession. Success 
was so certain that merchants and capitalists were always ready 
to furnish money and supplies for equipping boats for such 
purposes. The privateers generally employed small, light-armed 
and fast-sailing vessels, with just a small crew. Some of these 
boats were built in the Isles, and some were the very ships 
captured earlier. Among the most well-known of the privateers 
were: Robert Surcouf, Potier de la Houssaye, Perroud, 
Lem&rne, Malroux and Dutertre. The losses they indicted ran 
into millions of pounds, and the panic they created among 
English traders may be gathered from the pages of the Asiatic 
Annual Register of the period* 

The degree of success of the French privateers may be 
measured from the fact that from 1793 to 1797 the English 
lost 1800 ships more than the French. 1 This figure is of course 
to be viewed in the light of the fact that practically all the 
trade was then in English hands, while French shipping had 
been swept off the seas. Even then one cannot get: away from 

1 From the Lloyds Register, quoted by Malleson in Final French 
St niggles in India and on the Indian Seas , p 81 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


JSL 


Jonchision that the French, without any navy worth 
name, had succeeded in dealing a heavy blow on the enemy. 
This success was due mainly to the privateers, although after 
Amiens there was a small French naval squadron in Eastern 
waters under Linois and later under Hamelin, which also 
engaged in commerce-raiding operations. Between the naval 
officers and the privateers there was acute jealousy, the 
privateers magnifying their role and the naval officers treating 
them with undisguised contempt. 

The attitude of the privateers is best illustrated by the 
advice given bv Surcouf to the First Consul in 1803. On the 
resumption of hostilities the First Consul sought the opinion 
of the ‘King of Corsairs' about the policy by which the French 
navy could be so re-organised as to be able to cause the greatest 
injury to the English, Surcouf replied that under the existing 
circumstances privateering was the only kind of war possible 
and profitable for the French, and that their policy should be 
to avoid great battles with the English fleets, but instead to 
construct, and send out large numbers of frigates and light 
ships which would speedily ensure the total destruction of 
English commerce. 1 No doubt it was a novel suggestion, which 
promised at least a temporary success. But, be it said to the 
credit of the First Consul, he refused to tarnish the honoui 
of the nation by scrapping up the navy and confining French 
maritime efforts to the depredations of privateers, ft would 
have been unworthy of a great nation, with a glorious naval 
tradition built up by Tourville, Duguay-Trouin. Jean Bart, 
Forbin and de Suffren. 