

De Fresne took a keen interest in the progress of the war 
between Tipu and his enemies, kept himself fully informed of 
all the developments in the military situation in their minute 
details, and regularly sent long reports to the Minister in Paris 
and to the Governor-General in the Tsie of France. But what- 

1 Marfineau. Jetties el Conventions des Gouverneurs cle PondicMry , 

pp. 360-3^. 

2 Ibid ., p. 367. 

3 Ibid., p. 368. 

4 Ibid., p. 369. 

3 Ibid., pp. 370*572. 




ever might have been In's personal desire to do something to 
prevent a total destruction of Tipu’s power, his hands were 
tied not only by the lack of resources and internal troubles at 
Pondicherry but also by the instructions from the Ministry at 
home to preserve a strict neutrality in the war. It may he 
recalled that the outbreak of the war in India almost coincided 
with the beginning of the Revolution in France. Convulsed 
by such an unprecedented upheaval, which only increased in 
momentum as time passed, France had neither the means nor 
the will to interest herself in the fate of an Indian Power, 
however important it might be to her as an alls in a future 
war with England. 

In October 1791 the Minister of Marine wrote to de 
Frcsne, acknowledging receipt of his letters relating to the war 
in India. Although he feared that the power of Tipu might 
be totally crushed, he expressed satisfaction that de Frcsne had 
so far preserved strict neutrality in accordance with his instruc¬ 
tions. 1 Thus de Frcsne had merely to look on till Tipu was 
thoroughly worsted at Seringapatam in February 1792 and was 
Compelled to accept very drastic and humiliating terms of 
peace. In March de Frcsne informed Cossignv and the Minister 
of the conclusion of peace. In his letter to the former, after 
giving the terms of peace, de Fresne bitterly observed, “It is a 
peace shameful for a Prince who has all along been attached 
to our nation and whom we have not given any support 
whatsoever/’- In his letter to the Minister de Fresne gave a 
detailed account of the final action of the campaign before 
Serinagapatam and the humiliating terms of peace imposed on 
Tipu. He also made some interesting observations on the 
fighting quality of Indian troops and the admirable example 
of valour and tenacity given by Tipu’s army against adver 
saries overwhelmingly superior in number. About Tipu him¬ 
self, de Fresne remarked that he had more energy and deter¬ 
mination than real military talent. He had failed to utilise 
his resources to prevent the English front crossing the Ghats 
and carrying the war into his own territory. He had badly 

1 P. A. ms. 1501. 

- Ibid, ms. 1653 (letter dated and March). 


ftEJ.ATiONS WITH INDIAN fOWIRN 



guarded Bangalore and the organisation of the defences at 
Seringapatam had left much to be desired. 1 

Even after the crushing terms imposed upon Tipvi. de 
Fresnc felt that the French could yet do something to resusci¬ 
tate his power by supplying volunteers to augment the Euro 
pean contingent in his service. That assistance, combined with 
the expected defection of the Marathas and Ni/am Ali from the 
English alliance, gave out. some hope of a restoration of the old 
balance oj powe^ in south India So immediately after the 
Conclusion of peace, at the instance of de Fre.sne. Duplessis, the 
commander of the Pondicherry garrison, drew up a detailed 
scheme of raising a mixed contingent of 1800 men, 1200 
Indians and 600 Europeans, for taking service with Tipu. The 
scheme was intended to be v seru: to Paris for the approval of the 
Government through Leger, who, it will be remembered, had 
been desired by Tipu in 1791 to go on a special mission to 
France on his behalf. 2 