

That was in brief the report of Lescallier. It is hardly 
necessary to examine the reliability of the statements made 
and of the hopes held out, since the report of the Civil Com 
missioner was not given any importance whatsoever and pro¬ 
duced no reaction on the Government in Paris. For years 
France was to remain too busy with her difficulties and 
ambitions on the continent of Europe to think of her few 
lost possessions in India. 'The only interest of the report of 
Lescallier lies in the fact that through it we hear for the last 
time the voice of the old optimists, who during the period 
from 1763 to 1780 had flooded the Ministry of Marine and 
Colonies with all sorts of projects about .diplomatic: alliances 
and military operations in India, After this date that, voice 
became practically silent, with only a feeble revival during the 
days of the Consulate; and when the French came back to 
India in i8if> their old dreams had completely faded away. 


CHAPTER XIX 


REVOLUTIONARY FRANCK AND INDIA 
L f he Isles of trance and Bourbon. 

I he English had captured prompt iv all the French posses 
sions in India immediately on the outbreak of the Revolutionary 
War. But the French were not driven out altogether from the 
Fast. They retained for seventeen years more two outposts in 
the Indian Ocean, the Isles of France and Bourbon, which 
served them as bases for carrying' on the struggle against the 
English, by organising commerce-raiding expeditions, carrying 
on intrigues with Indian Princes, watching political develop¬ 
ments in India and making preparations for landing troops 
there when circumstances might turn favourable. Not that they 
really could do much, during Lhe seventeen years that thev 
retained possession of the Isles, to threaten the English position 
in India. But they inflicted severe damage to English trade, 
ana by their threats of military intervention kept the English 
authorities in India constantly on the qnbvive. In the end, 
however, these activities only helped the further expansion of 
English power in India and the elimination of the French totally 
from the East by the capture of the Isles of France and Bourbon. 

We have noticed already the administrative re organisation 
of the French possessions in the East on the eve of the Revolu¬ 
tion, by which the Indian settlements were united with the 
Isles of France and Bourbon into one government, under a 
Governor-General with his seat in the Isle of France. This was 
prompted by three motives : desire for economy in adniinistra 
don, realisation of the impossibility of executing ambitious poli¬ 
tical projects in India at the time, and rather exaggerated ideas 
about the strategic importance of the Isles for launching large- 
scale military and naval expeditions to India. The Isles of 
France and Bourbon, however, were set ill not regarded as 
important for themselves, but as only helping the realisation 
of French political ambitions in India better than the Indian 