

The operations of the daring privateers from the Isles of 
France and Bourbon during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic 
Wars had a striking success, but it was only temporary. It 
was never possible by this means to decide the couise of the 
Anglo-French conflict or to weaken in the slightest degree the 
dominant position held by the English in India. In the larger 
context the operations of the French privateers had only a 
nuisance value, which, but for the distractions of the Egyptian 
expedition and the second Anglo-Maratha war, would have 
been eliminated long before the final attack on the French 


1 Canal Robert Surcouf, p. *80. 


mmr/f 


REVO LI J T IONA R Y FRANCE AND INDIA 



Isles in 1810. It was the depredations of the privateers, rather 
than feeble French projects for an attack on India, which 
forced upon the English the necessity of capturing the Isles 
of France and Bourbon. 


III. French Adventurers in the Service of the Indian 
Princes. 


Although in 1793 the French lost all their possessions in 
India, to the English the French menace continued for ten 
years more, in a different form. We have noticed already that 
after the fall of Pondicherry in 1761 a large number of French¬ 
men found their way to the courts of different Indian Princes 
and took to the profession of military adventurers, selling their 
services to the highest bidders. Most of them were miserable 
wretches, as both Modave and Bussy testified, and brought no 
credit to their nation. Some of them had military talents and 
organising ability and served their masters well; only a few 
of them showed any inclination for advancing their national 
interests with the help of their military contingents and their 
influence over their masters. None of them, however, in the 
earlier period reached that position of eminence and power as 
was attained by their compatriots in the last decade of the 
18th century, the heyday of European military adventurers in 
India. By that time the superiority of European-trained and 
European-officered infantry battalions had been so decidedly 
proved that nearly all the Indian Princes sought to enlist Euro¬ 
pean military adventurers in their service for organising such 
forces. These adventurers were of all nationalities,—English, 
French, Dutch, German, Italian, etc., but the French were clearly 
more numerous than the others. They organised large infantry 
battalions with artillery, were assigned the revenue and adminis¬ 
tration of numerous districts, and acquired great influence in 
the counsels of their masters. The commanders of these armies 
became almost independent potentates, with their own estates, 
forts and arsenals, and even displaying their national colours. 
Naturally, when they were of the French nationality, they could 
not but be viewed with great alarm by the English. 

In the last decade of the 18th century French influence in 
this sense was rising in many of the important Durbars of India. 


mts 



f ipu had in his service ; French contingent commanded by 
de Lai lee, and after his death in action in 1790, by his cousin 
de Vigie. Bin it was neither numerous nor strong, and after 
;lu fall of Pondicherry in 1793 was deprived of the means of 
receiving regular reinforcements. T his contingent soon langu¬ 
ished and became a rabble, but: its Jacobinical enthusiasm 
became naturally a source of anxiety for the English. 