

Tipu’s envoys no doubt realised the danger of such a pro¬ 
ceeding. hut feeling perhaps that a greater danger threatened 
them if they failed to take back with them an adequate French 
force from the Isles, they agreed to it and even allowed the 
distribution of the leaflets containing Malartic’s proclamation 
from the very house in which they were lodged. The proclama¬ 
tion, however, did not have much effect, not even a hundred 





men enlisting for Tipu’s service. Among those who did were an 
army officer named Dubuc and a naval officer named Ghapuis 
who also posed to be vested with a political mission on behalf 
of the Government of the Isles. The open proclamation calling 
for volunteers was most indiscreet and served only to advertise 
to the world Tipu’s secret overtures to the French. The Isle 
of France was frequented by neutral vessels. Copies of the pro 
< lama lion reached Calcutta and London in June 1798. and that 
sealed the fate of Tipu. 

It is difficult to understand Malartic's conduct in the whole 
affair. Either we have to attribute to him lack of the com¬ 
monest political sense or we have to suppose that he was 
prompted mainly by a desire to impress the turbulent revolution 
ary elements, who held power in the Isles, by his patriotic 
fervour, and to divert their attention by giving them a cause 
which was both patriotic and financially profitable. One thing 
is certain, Malartic never really cared for what happened to 
Tipu. Although he despatched Tipu’s proposal to Paris by 
two frigates on the 5th February 1798, 1 and although he secured 
some volunteers for Tipu’s service, his real sentiments were 
expressed in a very rude letter to Tipu’s envoys, when they 
objected to the payment of high salaries to the volunteers 
as fixed by Malartic and wanted the terms to be settled by tipu. 
Malartic wrote to the envoys that Tipu could not expect officers 
and men on the same salaries as he had paid ten years earlier, 
nor could he expect the volunteers to go five hundred leagues 
and there to be informed about their salaries. Malartic 
brusquely declared that he had ordered the men not to dis 
embark at Mangalore until Tipu accepted the terms settled b' 
him. Then he added, “We have not at all sought for you; it 
is you who have come here to seek our help; therefore you must 
submit to the conditions that I propose”. 2 That was hardlv 
the language to be used about a Prince with whom an alliance 
was in contemplation. 

Tipu’s envoys started back from the Isle of France with the 

Michaud— Histoire des Progls et de la chute de Vempire de Mysore , 
I, pp. 290-291; letter from the governing authorities of the Isle of Frame 
to Tipu. 

2 {bid, pp. « 93'*94 


misr/ty 



Ql 


REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 

. X. •r *'' y/ ^ 

ltecrs on the 71I1 March 1798 and readied Mangalore on 
the stith April. Tipu must have been greatly disappointed at 
the result of his embassy. While he was expecting a large army, 
his envoys had brought less than a hundred volunteers and 
some letters from Malartic, the Governing Council in the Isle 
of France, Sercey commanding the French n$yal forces in the 
East, Magallon commanding the troops of the colony, Cossigny 
the ex-Governor-General and Descomber, the President of the 
Committee of Public Safety, all holding* out empty assurances 
of help at some unspecified date. Even at that stage Tipu could 
have saved the situation by sending back the volunteers and 
repudiating the embassy in order to set English suspicions at 
rest. If he had thought that his overtures to the French were 
not known to the English, he should have understood the signs 
of the coming storm from the war preparations started by the 
Madras and Bombay Governments in June 1798 immediately on 
receipt of the news of Tipu’s embassy in Calcutta. 