




WHISTfty 



REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE \M> INDIA 


hopes would be es idem from the fact that during these years 
Tipu had no contact either with France or even wnh the Isles of 
France and Bourbon, and had thus no means of knowing the 
real situation. 

Then in die early part of 1797 an accidental ship-wreck 
a; Mangalore of a privateering vessel front the Isle of France 
opened up a means of coin mu nit at ion between Tipu and the 
authorities of the French Isles. The port was then in the 
charge of Ghularn Ali, who had been a member of Tipu’s 
embassy to France and had thus some slight acquaintance with 
the French language. Ripaud, the unscrupulous French pri¬ 
vateer, introduced himself as second-in-command in the Isle 
of France and having been sent as an envoy to Tipu to concert 
measures of co-operation against the English. He also declared 
that there was in the Isle of France a large army ready to 
embark for India. Ripaud was taken to Seringapatam, where 
he was received with great honour and generosity by Tipu, 
despite the warning of some of his ministers not to take an 
unknown adventurer at his word. 

Perhaps, to pose all the better as a representative of the 
Revolutionary Government of France, Ripaud harangued the- 
men of the French contingent in Pipit's service on Revolution 
ary doctrines and ideals and established a Jacobin Club at 
Seringapatam. It had its first session on the 5th May. Ripaud 
opened it with a passionate discourse, proposing burning of 
all symbols of royalty and hoisting the tricolour flag. This 
discourse was well received, and every one swore to defend 
the Republican Constitution and to sacrifice life for the cause 
of Liberty. The men of the French contingent in Tipu’s service 
were so impressed by the patriotic fervour of Ripaud that they 
asked him to draw up a new set of laws to govern their corps 
in keeping with Revolutionary ideals and practice. I he code 
drawn up by Ripaud was based on the laws during the Reign 
of Terror in France, including the setting up of a Revolutionary 
Tribunal at Seringapatam. On the 15th May the French 
assembled again for the ceremony of hoisting the National Flag, 
which opened with a salvo of artillery. After the ceremony 
Ripaud. who designated himself as the "Representative of the 
French Nation at the Court of Prince Tipu’, and a few pro¬ 
minent members went to the parade ground where the ‘Citizen 



JJ 


• miST/fy. 


■ G °V\ 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

Prince’ was waiting for them. There was again a salvo of 
artillery to solemnise the mutual protestations of eternal friend¬ 
ship between Tipu and the French Republic, followed by the 
planting of the tree of Liberty. Ripaud made a discourse on 
the importance of the ceremony, and then asked every member 
of the Society to take an oath in the following terms, “Citizens, 
swear hatred to all Kings, except Tipoo Sultan the Victorious, 
and the Ally of the French Republic: war to Tyrants, love for 
our Country and for that of Citizen Tippoo’k 1 