

In fact, the new Governor-General Wellesley had made 
up his mind in June, 1 as soon as he got authentic news of Tipu’s 
overtures to the French, although it was not till November that 
he let Tipu know that he knew all about his embassy to the Isle 
of France. 2 This interval he employed for completing military 
and diplomatic preparations. It was not the Egyptian expedi¬ 
tion of Napoleon Bonaparte with its potential threat to India, 
authentic news of which reached Calcutta on the 18th October, 
that determined Wellesley to move against Tipu. His course 
of action had been decided much earlier, merely on the basis 
of Tipu's embassy to the Isle of France. Wellesley’s policy was 
clearly stated in a minute in the Secret Department, dated the 
12th August 1798. 3 “The act of Tippoo's ambassadors, ratified 
by himself, and accompanied by the landing of a French force 
in his country, is a public, unqualified, and unambiguous decla¬ 
ration of war.” 4 “That he has not yet received the 

1 Martin— Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 
Wellesley, I, p. 64 (Mornington to General Harris, 20th June 1798) and 
p. 240 (Governor-General in Council to the Governor in Council, Fort St. 
George, 20th June 1798). 

2 Ibid, pp. 326-328 (letter dated 8th November). 

* Ibid, pp. 159-208 

* Ibid, p, 172. 






THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


effectual succour which he has solicited, may be ascribed, either 
to the weakness of the Government of Mauritius, or to their 

want of zeal in his cause.but neither the measure oi 

his hostility, nor of our right to restrain it, nor of our danger 
from it. are to be estimated by the amount of the force which 
he has actually obtained.” 1 

In dealing with Tipu Wellesley displayed a consummate 
diplomatic ability Although he had made up his mind earlier, 
he never gave any hint to Tipu of his suspicion about his con 
duct till November, in order to draw the intended victim more 
securely into the net and to prevent Tipu from saving himself 
by a timely repudiation of his connections with the French. 
The time chosen for confronting Tipu with a disclosure of his 
overtures to the French was appropriate for his purpose, aftei 
the receipt of news of the Egyptian expedition of Napoleon 
Bonaparte and orders from London authorising Wellesley to 
take all precautionary measures. 2 He had now both the neces¬ 
sary authority to act and the reasonable hope that the presence 
of Napoleon Bonaparte in Egypt and the prospect of getting 
the expected help at last would prevent Tipu from repudiating 
his French connections and coming to terms with the English. 
It is difficult to say whether this was deliberately planned b> 
Wellesley. Facts however fit in nicely with that supposition. 

If it was the intention of Wellesley to lure I ipu to destruc¬ 
tion, the latter simply played into his hands. When in Novem¬ 
ber Wellesley wrote to Tipu, informing him of the french 
invasion of Egypt and the English naval victory at Aboukir.* 
and later announcing that he had full knowledge of 1 tpu s 
intrigues with the French/ Tipu was even then unwilling to 
throw up the French and receive an English envoy to settle the 
terms of a new treaty. For the next three months there was a 
fruitless exchange of correspondence between Seringapatam and 
Calcutta, the English trying to pin Tipu down to the vita 
derision, abandonment of the French connection or war, and 