

Nor w'ere the French-trained forces in the service of the 
Indian Princes quite so formidable by themselves as appeared 
in the imagination of contemporaries, and emphasized by Malle- 
son and others They were formidable as against the undisci¬ 
plined hordes of Pathans and Rajputs, but were no match to 
the English and their veteran sepoys. They had neither the 
number nor the resources to contest with the English for supre¬ 
macy in India. They had no cohesion in their ranks either, 
and showed up their real weakness at the first sign of danger. 
The ease with which a fully armed force of 14,000 men was 
disbanded at Hyderabad in 1798, the rapidity with which 
Perron’s army melted away in 1803. and the pusillanimity with 
which most of the French officers hastened to make terms with 
the English in an effort to secure their private fortunes show', 
despite the stiff resistance at Assaye and Las war i, the real nature 
of the French menace. Even less than the privateers in the 
Indian Ocean could the French adventurers in the service of 
1 he Indian Princes shake the foundation of the English power 
in India. 

IV. Tipu and the French. 

French military adventurers and their intrigues, far from 
shaking the foundation of the English power in India, only 
succeeded in strengthening it and completing the process of its 
expansion. But for the French-officered armies of the Nizain- 




' G Cw 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

and the Marathas, even Wellesley would not have thought it 
necessary to disturb the political relations with these two 
country Powers, leaving perhaps to time the extension of English 
control over them, helped by the process of their internal decay, 
already evident The treaty with the Nizam in 1798, the treaty 
with the Peshwa in 1802 and the second Anglo Maratha war 
were all necessitated by th< determination to remove the French 
menace. Nowhere, however, was the contribution of the French 
to the expansion of the English power in India better illustrated 
than in French relations with Tipu in the closing years of the 
18th century. It is difficult of course to determine what con¬ 
tributed more to the destruction of Tipu,—his own political 
folly, or the empty hopes held out by the French which lured 
him inio the trap laid by his enemies, the English. The rela¬ 
tions between the French and Tipu during this period revealed 
a blundering diplomacy on the part of both, Tipu inviting his 
own destruction, and the French helping the annihilation of a 
Power which could have given them a base of operations in India 
when they were really in a position to strike against the English. 

After the third Anglo-Mysore war (1790-92) which deprived 
Tipu of nearly half his territories and put the English in a 
more advantageous striking position than before, Tipu natur¬ 
ally nursed a grievance against the English and looked tor an 
opportunity to recover his territories with the help of the 
French, his traditional allies and at war with the English since 
1793. He had no knowledge, however, of the situation in 
Europe, the difficulties of the French in carrying the war to 
India or giving him any tangible help, and the anarchical con¬ 
ditions in the Isles of France and Bourbon, left to their fate 
by the mother country and not possessing resources even for 
self-defence. He had a small French contingent in his service, 
but the men of this contingent also were not better informed 
about the state of affairs in France. In order to acquire great 
influence in the counsels of the Mysore ruler they gave out 
exaggerated stories about the successes of French Revolutionary 
arms in Europe and the ability and readiness of France to give 
him substantial help against the English. For four years after 
the fall of Pondicherry in 1793 this propaganda did not lead 
to any definite result, except merely keeping alive Tipu’s hopes 
about getting French help some day. How unreal were these 