

Perron enjoyed undisputed power for about six years. But 
on the eve of the crisis which ended his career in 1803, he fen 
his position shaky and committed a political blunder which 
hastened that crisis. The instigation of his enemies lost him 
the confidence of his master, Daulat Rao Sindhia, and he lost 
his judgment in trying to be over-alert to preserve his own 
power. Thus, when towards the end of i8ox he received a 
summons from Daulat Rao Sindhia to send a part of his force 
10 the assistance of the Peshwa, driven out of Poona by Holkar, 


REVOLUTIONARY 1 ? RANC,E AND INDIA 

he saw in it a sinister move to deprive hint of his power, and 
delayed to obey the summons too long to prevent the Pcshwa 
from concluding the Treaty of Bassein with the English, which 
made the second Anglo-Maratha war inevitable. When the 
war broke out in 1803, Perron, deserted by many of his trusted 
French officers and anxious to preserve bis private fortunes, 
surrendered to General Lake without striking a blow. Perron's 
army simply melted away, and the bubble of the french menace 
burst at the (irst prick. Only at Assayc and Laswari did the 
European-trained battalions offer a stiff resistance, revealing to 
the English how difficult would have been their task if they bad 
allowed the Marathas more time to organise armies on the line- 
introduced by de Boigne, Perron and Dudrenec. Perron 
returned to Europe in 1805 and lived in quiet retirement on 
the immense fortunes he had amassed in India. 1 

It is not possible to give in a short compass an account 
of all the French adventurers of the period, nor is it necessan 
for our purpose, since their activities had little political import 
ance. Mention may be made of only a few others, hrimont, 
Pedron. Bourquin and Dudrenec. Frimont was the commander 
of the small French force at Chandemagore and was arrested 
during the Revolutionary troubles there. Released from deten¬ 
tion, he went to Delhi to seek employment and was appointed 
commander of a brigade by de Boigne. His death in 1795 
proved a lucky opportunity for Perron, who thus became secofld- 
in-command under de Boigne and succeeded hint after his 
retirement. Pedron. who had served under Madec, became t.h( 
commander of one of the brigades under de Boigne in 1795. 
Unlike Perron, Pedron resisted the English at Aligarh in 1803 
and was taken prisoner. Bourquin, like Perron, was a deserter 
front the French navy. After a chequered career he rose n be 
the trusted lieutenant of Perron, but on the eve of the outbreak 
of the Second Anglo-Maratha war he deserted his chief and 
went over to his enemies, in an attempt to supplant Perron iti 
command of Sindhia’s force in north India. Defeated by the 
English near Delhi, he surrendered to General Lake in 1803. 
Dudrenec was also a deserter from the French navy and had 

1 For the career of Perron, see Martineau Lc (retierctl Ftrron f gdne 
ruiiitimc ties armtrs du Grand Mogol . 




miSTffy 


^6 • G0(^ 


