THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

served under Madecv In 1791 he entered the service of Tnkoji 
Holkar, and his infantry battalions proved their worth at; the 
battle of Kardla in 1795. In 1801 driven by the hostility of 
Fukoji Hblkar’s successor, Jaswafit Rao, he went over to the 
latter’s enemy, Daulat Rao Sindhia. and was given the command 
of a brigade under Perron On the outbreak of the second 
Anglo-Maratha war, following the example of many other French 
officers, Dwdrenec surrendered to the English to save the remains 
of his private fortunes* 

; We have given a brief review of the principal French 
adventurers in the service of the Indian Princes in the last) 
decade of the 18 th century; Via lies on and, following him, 
several French? historians alsor have tried to emphasize the poli¬ 
tical importance of* their work; The have been pictured as 
agents of France, pursuing national interests,* and providing* k 
plausible hope for the establishment of French political influence 
over a large part of India. r Contemporary English opinion’also,' 
alarmed by the^ striking successes of; Trench arms m Europe 
and the intrepidity of Napoleon Bonaparte, magnified the threat 
to the English power iri India held out by the French-trained 
battalions in the service of the Indian Princes. The letters 
and. despatches of Wellesley’ show clearly the extent of his 
anxiety caused by the presence of large French armies’ in a 
position to co-operate with any expeditionary force that might 
be sent from France. The imposition of the treaty of subsi 
diary alliance on the Nizam iti 1798 and the second Anglo- 
Maratha war were both mainly prompted by the desire to 
eliminate the French menace. 

In truth, the menace was rather exaggerated and the poli¬ 
tical role of the French adventurers magnified beyond all pro¬ 
portions. The careers of these men clearly show that their sole 
objective was to amass- private fortunes as fast as they could, 
and then to return to Europe and live in enjoyment of their 
wealth. .Some of them could save in‘five to ten years’ time as 
much as a quartet to a half million pounds. A few of them 
demonstrated their Jacobinical leanings, but none of them had 
any definite political objective of establishing French power in 
India, either by their own resources or in co-operation with 
an expeditionary force that might be sent from France. There 
is nothing to show that these adventurers had any contact or 





Wl UlST/fy 



influence with the authorities of the Isle of France or with 
the Government of Paris. Down to the Peace of Amiens there 
was of course no question of France sending an expeditionary 
force to India. But the correspondence of Napoleon during 
the Egyptian expedition and the instructions of the Directory 
show how little w r as really known in France about the position 
and resources of the French adventurers in India. When 
Decaen was sent out to India in 1803 after the Treaty of Amiens, 
his instructions included just a vague suggestion about estab 
lishing in a surreptitious manner contact with Perron. I bus 
even before the destruction of the French forces in the service 
of the Indian Princes, it does not appear that the plans of the 
French Government relating to India depended to am very 
great extent on their co-operation. 