

Tipu, with an amazing political blindness, trusted in the 
bonaltdes of the French adventurer and decided to send an 
embassy to the Isle of France and from there to Paris, proposing 
an offensive and defensive alliance with France and seeking 
five to ten thousand French troops and twenty five to thirty 
thousand Africans. Some of his wise ministers had the courage 
ro warn him that the sending of the embassy could not be kept 
secret, and that its leakage would draw upon Tipu the immediate 
hostility of the English, with no possibility of getting any help 
from the French in time. But like' a drowning man catching 
at a straw, Tipu persisted in his determination. To carrv the 
envoys to the Isle of France Ripaud’s boat was purchased, and 
in order to keep the object of the mission a secret, the boat 
carried a cargo of black pepper for the Isle of France and the 
envoys embarked in the guise of merchants. The envoys were 
entrusted with letters for the Governor and the executive author¬ 
ities of the Isle of France as also for the Directory in Paris. 2 

Of the four pensons selected for the embassy onlv two, 
Hussain Ali and Shaikh Ibrahim, actually started for the Isle 
of France, accompanied bv a French watchmaker who had been 
living at Seringapatam and was appointed as an interpreter. 
They sailed from Mangalore on the 17th December x 797 * J ust 
before the party started, the conduct of Ripaud and his 
lieutenant, who absconded with money, created some suspicion 

1 For details about the Jacobin demonstrations, see Proces Verbal des 
seances du club des Jacobins forme A Seringapatam in Michaud's Histoire 
des Progrts et de la chiitc do Pempire dc Mysore, I pp. 251-276; a i & ° 
Cast on net des Fosses —La Revolution et les clubs dans Vlnde Frangaise . 

2 Michaud, op. cit. t I, Pieces Justifies tives—IV, pp. 277-291. 




REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 

of Tipu; but having proceeded so far he decided not 
to give up the idea of sending an embassy to the Isle of France. 
Ripaud was charged to take the envoys straight to their destina¬ 
tion. But as soon as the French corsair was on the sea he 
treated the envoys very harshly, took away all their papers by 
force to see if they contained anything against him, demanded 
money from them, and even threatened to proceed to the Bombay 
Coast instead of to the Isle of France. At last after a painful 
voyage the envoys reached their destination on the 19th January 
1798. That was the last they saw of Ripaud, with whom they 
had no further communication during their three months' stay 
in the Isle of France. 

Tipu had enjoined on his envoys the maintenance of the 
strictest secrecy about their mission, and if the French Governor 
General Malartic had the least political sense and consideration 
for the safety of the Indian Prince who sought his help, he 
should have avoided giving any publicity to it. As it was, in 
spite of the initial hesitation of the envoys. Malartic gave them 
a public and ceremonial reception, little caring to reflect how 
injurious it might prove to Tipu. The envoys had audience with 
the Governor-Genera 1 several times, in which the latter gave 
them all assurances of help. Malartic confessed to the envoys 
that they had been wrongly informed by Ripaud about the 
strength of the land and naval forces in the Isles of France and 
Bourbon and that it was not possible to send any large-scale help 
at once. But he added that he was expecting reinforcements 
from France, that he would send Tipu’s proposal to the Directory 
in Paris, and that in the meantime he could secure volunteers 
for Tipu' s service. For this purpose he issued a public pro¬ 
clamation in the two Isles, stating the object of Tipu’s embassy 
ar| d calling upon citizens to enlist in Tipu’s service, by which 
thev would be doing a great patriotic duty and at the same time 
earning high salaries. 