

More important was the force organised by Raymond in 
Hyderabad. We have noticed already Raymond’s correspond 
ence with the Governor of Pondicherry, asking for arms to 
equip his contingent and pledging loyally to the nation He 
started with a small infantry corps of 300 men, which was raised 
to 1500 at the time of the Confederate war against Tipu (1790 
1792). After the war Raymond was even allowed by the English 
to select arms from the arsenal at Madras. 1 Obviously he was 
still not regarded by the English as dangerous, although he 
raised new battalions and put in the field nearly eleven 
thousand men at the battle of Kardla in 1795. Raymond’s 
corps fought bravely against the superior force of the Mara- 
thas, and might have achieved victory hut for the pusillanimous 
flight of Nizam Ali and his peremptory orders to Raymond to 
retreat Anyway, after this battle Raymond’s advancement was 
quick. Disappointed at getting no help from the English. 
Nizam Ali ordered the dismissal of the two English battalions 
lent by the Company’s Government for his protection (counter¬ 
manded immediately after, because of the rebellion of his son. 
Alt Jah), and asked Raymond to increase his battalions, which 
at the time of Raymond’s death numbered about 14,000. For 
the maintenance of this large army Raymond was given a 
territorial assignment, yielding a revenue of 18 lakhs of rupees a 
year and including the district of Kurpa on the sea coast, which 
enabled him to communicate with the French and co-operate 
with any expeditionary force that France might have sent. 

Raymond was a remarkable man. and acquired great influ¬ 
ence at the Darbar of Nizam Ali. No better tribute could have 
been paid to him than that by Malleson: ‘ ; No adventurer in 
India ever stood higher than he did. He was brave, magnificent, 
generous, affable and vigilant.No European of mark 


Wilks —llistory of Mysoor, II, p. 62$. 



miSTffy. 


REVOl imONARV FRANCK AND INDIA 

who preceded him, no European of mark who followed him, 
in India, ever succeeded in gaining to such an extent, the love, 
the esteem, the admiration of the natives of the country”. 1 
But it is doubtful whether “the one dream of his life was to 
carry out,, by the means still open to him, the schemes of 
Dulpleix, of Lallv, and of Suffren”. 2 ft is true that all the 
officers in Raymond’s army were Frenchmen, fervent Jacobins 
like him, that they fought under the French flag and the Cap of 
Liberty was engraved on their buttons, and that Raymond 
sometimes corresponded with the French adventurers in Mysore 
as with those in Maratha service. But there is nothing to show 
that he had any deep-laid political project in his mind or that 
he had any connection with the Isle of France or with the 
Revolutionary Government of Paris. Fortunately for his repu 
tat ion, Raymond died on the 25th March 1798, six months 
before the sudden crisis which destroyed his army without a 
single shot being fired. 

Raymond was succeeded by his second-in-command, another 
remarkable French adventurer named Piron. He was an even 
more ardent Jacobin than Raymond and less tactful and pru¬ 
dent. He roused the susceptibilities of the English by sending 
to Sihdhia's General Perron, a silver tree with a Cap of Liberty 
as a souvenir and by his open profession of hostile intentions. 
Perhaps, even these moves, whatever their worth, would have 
been ignored by the English, if at the same time the French 
menace had not suddenly loomed very large by the disclosure 
of Tipu's intrigues with the French and the news of Bonaparte’s 
invasion of Egypt. The new Governor-General, Wellesley, 
decided to act before the danger clouds thickened. His first 
step was to impose a new treaty on the Nizam, requiring him 
to disband the entire force created by Raymond and to receive 
instead four additional English battalions. Nizam Ali signed 
the treaty on the 1st September 1798, partly under English 
pressure and partly for fear of the overgrowing power of Piron 
and his Trench officers. English troops were quickly moved 
in. and on the 22nd October 1798 the ‘French army’, as Wellesle^ 