

After the retirement of de Boigne his position was taken 
by Perron. This French adventurer has left some boasting 
remarks that he had driven de Boigne from Sindhia’s service 
by his intrigues. It is difficult to say how far that is true. 
l)e Boigne had personal reasons to retire to Europe with his 
immense fortunes, and, besides. Perron was in frequent friendly 
correspondence with de Boigne after the latter’s return to 
Europe. Perron first came out to India in 1780 as a common 
sailor. He deserted his ship to seek fortune in the service of 
an Indian Prince. It was not till 1789 that luck favoured him 
and he was given the command of the second brigade newly 

chief conhdant of Bonaparte; he is constantly at St. Cloud, I leave you 
to judge why and wherefore?’' (Martin -Despatches, Minutes and 
Correspondence of the Marquess Wellesley , III, p. 183). There is, how¬ 
ever, no definite basis for this statement. De Boigne’s biographer St. 
Cenis makes no reference to it. Finally, in Compton's European Military 
Adventurers of Hindustan (pp. 98-99) there is a letter from the grandson 
of de Boigne. refuting the story of de Boigne s connection with Napoleon, 


•% 

being 



MIN/Sr^ 



<SL 


IH FRENCH IN INDIA. 

v . 

raised by de Boigne. Perron soon distinguished himself in 
battle and wen the confidence of his chief by his courage, enter¬ 
prise and devotion to duty. In 1793 fie was sent with his 
brigade to accompany Mahadaji Sindhia to Poona. He fought 
bravely at the battle of Kardla in 1795 and won the favour of 
Daulat Rao Sindhia, who appointed him to the command of 
his army in north India after the retirement of de Boigne. 

Under Perron the army was increased by two more 
brigades, and at the same time the character of the force 
changed. Perron showed marked favour to French officers, 
increasing their number and appointing them to higher tanks 
in preference to officers of other nationalities, many of whom 
left in disgust. It has been suggested that Perron had a deep 
laid political plan, of creating a strong French army either to 
throw off the allegiance to Sindhia and establish French domina 
lion in north India or to cooperate with an expeditionary 
force that might be sent from France for the destruction of the 
English power in India. It is, however, difficult to say how 
far that supposition is well-founded. Whatever Perron’s posi¬ 
tion might have been with his five brigades, if he had any 
political foresight, he must have realised that the English could 
never allow the establishment of French political domination 
in north India, and that his own resources were hopelessly 
unequal in any fight with them. As for his connection with the 
French Government, it is doubtful how much about him was 
actually known in Paris. After the Peace of Amiens the First 
Consul's instructions to Decaen included establishing contact 
with Perron; hut when Perron returned to France in 1805, he 
was coldly received by the Emperor, was not consulted on any 
of the projects relating to India, and he spent his days in 
total seclusion from politics. 