

1 Malleson — final French Struggles in India and on the Indian Seas , 
p. 244. 

* Ibid . 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 



<SL 


ibed it, was surprised and disbanded without a shot being 
fired. The disbandment was rendered easier by the outbreak of 
a mutiny in Piron’s force, the men clamouring for arrears of 
pay and holding their officers in captivity, from which they were 
liberated by the timely arrival of the English troops, I he 
French officers were guaranteed security of life and property and 
taken to Chandemagore, from where they were to be sent to 
Europe. 

About the same time that Raymond started raising a 
European*trained infantry force for tiie Nizam, another able 
adventurer de Boigne, started organising a similar force for 
the Maratha Prince, Mahadaji Sindhia, who was making a bid 
for establishing his supremacy in north India. De Boigne was 
not a Frenchman but a Savoyard; the force he organised fought 
under the flag of Savoy, the White Cross; and the officers he 
appointed were taken front all nationalities, including English. 
But when he retired from Sindhia’s service in December 1795 
and the command was given to a Frenchman, Perron, French 
influence became decidedly predominant, and Sindhia’s infantry 
brigades became'as much a source of anxiety to the English as 
the force under Raymond arid Piron in Hyderabad. 

De Boigne’s whole career shows that he came out to India 
not to organise an anti-English force but only to seek fortune 
in trade or in the service of an Indian Prince. He started for 
India with letters of introduction from an English nobleman, 
Earl Percy, served for a time as an ensign in a regiment of the 
Madras Native Infantry, quitted the English service and yet 
won the patronage of the Governor-General Warren Hastings, 
entered the service of Sindhia with the help of the English 


Resident at his Durbar , Anderson, and with the consent of 
Warren Hastings, stipulated in his agreement with Sindhia 
that he would never be required to fight against the English, 
joined in very profitable trading operations in Oudh with the 
French deserter in English service, Claude Martin, and invested 
a large part of his private fortunes*in the English Company s 
papers. 1 


1 It was suggested later thai de Boigne went to Paris after the Treaty 
of Amiens and became the adviser of ihc First Consul about the means of 
reviving French influence in India. Wellesley wrote to General Lake on 
the 8th July 1803: M. Du Boigne (Scindiah's late general) is now the 


WNt$r/}y 


REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 

fust entered;the service ot : Sindhia in 1784, 
entrusted with raising two infantry battalions of 850 men each, 
equipped and trained in the European fashion, and was given 
a salary of one thousand rupees a month. 'Phis force proving 
its worth in establishing SindhiTs authority in north India, 
tie Boigne was asked in 1790 to raise it. to a corps d’armee of 
thirteen battalions of infantry with cavalry and artillery, arid 
later to three brigades of 18,000 regular infantry, 6,000 
irregulars, 2,000 irregular horse, 600 Afghan cavalry and 2,000 
guns. For the maintenance of this army, a vast area in die 
Doab, consisting of 52 di tricts and yielding a revenue of 
16 lakhs of rupees (later raised, to 22 lakhs of rupees), was 
assigned to de Boigne, which he administered as a virtually 
independent potentate. The fortress of Agra-was handed over 
to him to serve as his arsenal, and he fixed his headquarters at 
Aligarh. When Mahadaji Sindhia started for Poona in 1793, 
de Boigne was left practically as the ruler of north India. But 
the turn of Maratha politics after the sudden death of Mahadaji 
Sindhia in 1794 made him feel uneasy about the future, and 
it the end of 1795 he retired from Maratha service with the 
reluctant consent of Dauiat Rao Sindhia. Finally, he returned 
to Europe with enormous riches. 