

It is true that, in February 1799 Napoleon addressed a 
letter to Tipu, but his only object was to establish contact 
with Tipu and to know from him his actual situation. This 
letter, which was sent to the Sheriff of Mecca to be forwarded 
to Tipu, never reached the latter, but fell into the hands of 
the English at the port of Jidda. But it is so frequently cited 
as indicating Napoleon’s definite plan of proceeding to India 
from Egypt that it is worthwhile to reproduce it in full. 
Napoleon wrote to Tipu: ‘You must already have been 
informed of my arrival on the coast of the Red Sea with a 
large and invincible army, filled with a desire to deliver you 
from the iron yoke of England. I hasten to let you know rny 
desire that you send me, by way of Muscat or Mocha, news 
of the political situation in which you find yourself. I would 
further wish that you could send to Suez or to Cairo some 
intelligent person, possessing your confidence, with whom 1 
could confer ’. 1 That was all that Napoleon wrote. There 
was no proposal in this celebrated letter of a French expedi 
non to India. Napoleon promised nothing, but merely asked 
for information, preferably through a trusted agent of Tipu 
to be sent > Suez or Cairo. The study of the means by which 
his "invincible” army would contribute to the deliverance of 
Tipu from the iron yoke of England” was obviously to be 
postponed till the arrival of Tipu’s agent and was to be subject 
to the information that he would furnish. 

In truth, Napoleon’s Eastern projects centred round two 


Charles Roux —V A ngleterre et V expedition Fran false en Egypte, I, 


P 


WNlST/f), 



REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 


Sl 


Tns, an expedition to India and a conquest of the Turkish 
Empire. During his occupation of Egypt he had both these: 
project in mind. The existence of both at the same time shows 
that he had no precise plan of action. Both the projects were 
indeed mere figments of imagination, hut the dreams persisted 
throughout his life. In 1798-99 he perhaps thought more of 
the Turkish project, but in his reminiscences at St. Helena he 
became more enamoured of his Indian dream. The prisoner 
of St. Helena recollected a plan of operations far different 
from what was in the mind of the conqueror of Egypt. In 
recalling the past, he thought that his plan was to proceed 
overland (and not by the Red Sea) from Egypt to India, reach 
ing the Indus in four months, and that there was even a defi¬ 
nite time-table,—conquest of Egypt from July 1798 to October 
1799, and then march to India from November 1799 10 Febru¬ 
ary 1800. But it is interesting to note that in his reports to 
the Directory he made no mention of his projected invasion 
of India; and also that the Directory, if it had any plan at all, 
thought only of the Red Sea route. Finally, an expedition 
to India by any route entailed for Napoleon a long absence 
from Europe, which certainly was not in his contemplation at 
the time. All his letters from Cairo to his brother Joseph and 
to the Directory show that lie was very eager to return to 
France early. 1 