

ft was on the 15th February 1803 that Decaen received his 
instructions from the First Consul. He was advised to be very 
careful nor. to rouse the suspicions of the English, but to deal 
with them with tact and dissimulation. At the same time he 
was ro establish secret contacts with the Indian Princes and to 
lay down plans for any future war. He was also to try to secure 
a strong base in India, to whatever nation it might belong. 
Portuguese, Dutch or English. Bonaparte's instructions ended 
thus: ’‘The mission of the Captain General is at first one of 
observation.: but. the First Consul, being kept well-in¬ 

formed by him and satisfied with the scrupulous execution of 
the preceding observations, may make it possible for him to 
acquire one day that glory which keeps alive the memory of 
men for centuries*'.' As will be seen, the lirst Consul forgot 
this assurance later and ignored all appeals from Decaen for 
timely reinforcements Although Decaen was chosen by the 
First Consul, he started on his mission with an initial dis¬ 
advantage, the intense dislike of the Minister of Marine, Deeres. 
It was because of the opposition of Deeres that the naval force 
under Linois, sent with the expedition, was not placed under 
DecaenV control. There was increasing jealousy between 
Decaen and Linois, who enjoyed the support and confidence ol 
the Minister, and that contributed not a little to the failure 
of the French enterprise in the East. 

The expedition started from Brest on the 5th March 1803, 
The naval force consisted of one ship of the line, the Jean- 

1 Prentout — Vile dtt France Decaen, p. 15. 

2 Ibid., pp. 17-18. 

3 Ibid., p. 27. 


MiNisr^ 



THE LAST PHASE OF VVGLO-FRKNCH CONFLICT 


§L 


xques Rousseau , renamed Marengo: three frigates, the 
italante, the Belle-Poule and the Semillanle; and two transport 
vessels the Cdte-cl’Or and the Mari e-Fran foise. Decaen had 
under him a corps of 1,350 men, a large proportion being young 
officers intended to train up a sepoy force in India. I he English 
ambassador in Paris, Whitworth, promptly informed his Gov¬ 
ernment about the large number of officers being sent out. 
indicating an ulterior motive on the part of the French. 1 2 
There was also a corps of Africans recently arrived from Gua¬ 
deloupe. So anxious was the French Government to avoid 
giving any cause for suspicion to the English, that Leger, who 
had previously served at Poncliche nr) as Ordonnateur was 
appointed Prefet Colonial in preference to a nephew of Dupleix, 
who had been first selected. 

The Belle-Poule, which left, the main expeditionary force 
during the voyage and sailed separately, reached Pondicherry 
on the 15th June 1803, the other ships arriving on the 11th 
July* On the Belle-Poule were Decaen \s Adjutant, Binot, with 
150 men arid the Prdfet Colonial, Leger. Binot carried with 
him Decaen’s letter addressed to the Governor-General and to 
the Governor of Madras, authorising him to take possession of 
Pondicherry. But by the time of the arrival of the Belle-Poule 
at Pondicherry, there were already strong rumours of an 
imminent rupture between England and France, and so the 
English authorities in India decided to tactfully prolong negotia¬ 
tions with the French over the restoration of their territories 
till the receipt of more definite news from Europe. In fact, 
Wellesley never liked the Treaty of Amiens, providing for a 
restoration of French territories in India, and had expressed 
his misgivings about a possible return of the French in his 
letter to Dundas dated 28th February 1798 - The English 
Government also was in a wavering frame of mind. On the 
Vh May orders were sent out. for the restitution of territories; 
on the 17th October counter orders were sent, recommending 
delay;' and on the 16th November restitution was ordered 