

This courageous reply produced its effect, and the English 
agreed to permit Binot to send plenipotentiaries to Madras to 
settle the terms of capitulation with the Governor. Colonel 
Mainvielle and Captain Pariset were sent for the purpose. In 
the meantime Binot :00k advantage of the short respite to 


NUN/sr^ 



make preparations for resistance, and when that would no 
longer be tenable, he planned to move out of Pondicherry a* 
night, capture the English magazine at Vilno’or by surprise, 
and then march to Tanjore, where he expected a good recep¬ 
tion. On the 10th September an English ship, the Shermess , 
anchored before Pondicherry and landed more troops. On the 
same day the French plenipotentiaries returned from Madras, 
with a refusal from the Governor to Binot’s demand for repatria¬ 
tion. The English made a fresh summons lor surrender at 
discretion. Binot offered new terms of capitulation, hoping 
all the time that discussions would be prolonged till night, 
giving him an opportunity to execute his plan of retreating 
from Pondicherry arid marching to Tanjore. The terms lie 
proposed included according honours of war to the French and 
an assurance of their immediate repatriation to Europe. To 
his surprise the terms were accepted, and he had no more 
opportunity of putting his secret plan into execution. 1 On 
the 13th September the French detachment was taken to Madras, 
from where it was seni to the Cape of Good Hope. One of the 
officers, Delohr; went to the Isle of France to give an account 
of the capitulation to Decacn. Binot returned to Europe; he 
later distinguished himself in the battle of Austerlitz and died 
in action at Eylau. 

If. French Naval Activities in Indian Waters. 

The French expeditionary force, escaping from Pondicherry, 
reached the Isle of France on the 15th August. Towards the 
end of September the corvette Jierceau brought official news 
of the resumption of hostilities and also an order from the First 
Consul, nominating Decaen as Captain-General of the Isles of 
France and Bourbon. Decaen promptly informed Magallon 
of this order, took over office from him, dismissed the Colonial 
Assembly, and set up a strong administration such as the Isles 
had not seen since the outbreak of the Revolution. After 
consolidating his authority in the Isles, Decaen turned his atten¬ 
tion to the war against the English. With the small force at 
his disposal it was out of the question to undertake any enter- 


I' A. 111s. 2233—Binot’s letter to Dccacn, 21st October 1803. 


MiNisr^ 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


prise against India, but there was a sizable naval division under 
Linois which could be employed for preying upon the merchant 
shipping of the enemy, until the arrival of reinforcements from 
Europe would permit taking (he offensive against the English on 
a large scale. With one ship of the line and three frigates under 
Linois, it was possible for the French to inflict considerable 
damage to English trade and commene, as the success of the 
privateers earlier had proved. But the timidity of Linois and 
his quarrels with Decaen ruined all chances of success and 
rendered French naval activities in Indian waters of little real 
consequence. Decaen put the entire blame on Linois, and the 
latter, disgusted with Decaen s conduct, left for Europe without 
any authority towards the end of 1805, suffering the capture 
of his two ships by the English in March 1806. The naval 
division sent in *803 thus ceased to exist. 