

1 Prentout — L’lle de France sous Decacn , pp 9-10. 


i 


miST/fy 


THE LAST PHASE OF ANGLO-FRENCH CONFLICT 

relation to the French possessions in India, guaranteeing to the 
French their political and commercial rights, ft was an indirect 
effort to improve the French position in India. The British 
negotiators were, however, insistent on a mere return to tin 
status quo ante bellutn. The French yielded on the point, as 
they were anxious for peace and were not inclined to jeopardise 
negotiations on the Indian issue. 

Although the Treaty of Amiens did not answer to his 
expectations, the First Consul was not willing to give up all 
hopes about improving the French position in India. He was 
not inclined to take any rash step which would rouse English 
suspicions and endanger peace, but at the same time he wanted 
his agents to make secret military and diplomatic preparations 
in India which could b< utilised by the French on the next 
outbreak of war. f o him India was not sufficients important 
to be worth risking a war with England, but he felt that when 
* war would break out on other issues, the French in Podia 
should be in a position to strike an effective blow. He realised 
the danger of sending out to India a large force, which would 
at once rouse the suspicion of the English. He decided instead 
to nominate an enterprising General to take charge of the 
Indian possessions, and to give him a large number of voting 
officers, who would be abb to train up a considerable bods 
of sepoy force, for taking charge of the Indian possessions his 
choice fell on General Decaen, the young hero of the battle ol 
Hohenlinden. The importance attached to the Indian enter¬ 
prise by the First Consul was evident from the fact that he 
refused to give Decaen charge of tiie Isles of France and Bout 
bon as well, in order to make him devote his whole attention 
to India alone. 

But while the First Consul was enthusiastic about the 
Indian enterprise, there was a growing realisation in France 
about the futility of attempting a revival of french political 
influence in India. The Memoirc sur Vital Colonial de la 
France a Vepoque de la paix d’Amiens, written bv die ex 
Minister of Marine Forfait, clearly expressed the opinion that 
the French had no future in India and should realise that fact. 1 
His successor as Minister of Marine. Deeres, in his report dated 




1 Prentout--////« de France sous Deccan, p. 14. 



7th May 1802 expressed the same opinion and wanted a con 
centration of forces in the Isles of France and Bourbon, leaving 
the Indian posses, ions in their existing state. 1 Even Decaen, 
on receiving his appointment, drew up a md moire on the same 
lines as Deeres. 2 3 This general lack of enthusiasm perhaps 
explains why Decaen’s expedition did not start from France till 
twelve months after the signature of the Treaty of Amiens, with 
the result that it reached India when rumours of a resumption 
of hostilities had become current and the English prudently 
decided not to return the French possessions in India. 