

With the expeditionary force under Decaen and Linois 
came also Cavaignac as French Resident at the Court of the 
Imam of Muscat. The First Consul, since the Egyptian expedi¬ 
tion. entertained the idea of establishing French political influ 
cnee in the Persian Gulf (necessary for an eventual project on 
India) through the Imam. On the 14th September 1803, a 
few' days before the news of the resumption of hostilities was 


known in the Isle of France, Cavaignac started for Muscat on 
board the frigate Atalantc. By the time he arrived at Muscat 
on the 3rd October, news of the outbreak of war had reached 
there. Since the Egyptian expedition the English had also been 
trying to establish their influence in the region of the Persian 
Gulf. Thus when Cavaignac arrived, the Imam under English 
pressure refused to have any dealings with the French. 1 The 
French mission promptly returned to the Isle of France, from 
where Cavaignac w r ent back to Europe about the middle of 


1804. 

On the 8th October 1803 Linois sailed from Port Louis in 
the Isle of France with the remaining ships of his division,—the 
Marengo , the BellePoule, the Seniillante and the corvette 
Berreau, leaving instructions for the Atalanle to join him at 
Batavia after returning from Muscat. The French squadron 
was sent to Batavia to warn the Dutch of the resumption of 


Preutout— L'lle de France sous Decaen, pp. 336 3s 8 - 


miSTffy 



THF, LAST PHASE OF ANGI O-FRI NCH CONFLICT 


hostilities, to carr) orne reinforcements ol troops for them from 
the Isle of France, and also to secure the co-operation of their 
fleet for a combined action against the English, panic tlarly to 
capture the rich China convoy of the English Company expected 
to start from Canton in January 1804. Linois, however, on 
his way to Batavia attacked the English establishment at Ben 
coolen on the southern coast of Sumatra, capturing two vessels, 
burning a few others and inflicting considerable damage on the 
English. But this action was most unwise, since it warned 
the English of the presence of a hostile squadron in those 
waters, while secrecy was essential for the success of the main 
enterprise against the China convoy. On the 12th December 
the French squadron reached Batavia, found the Dutch in an 
uncooperative mood, and then sailed lor the Straits of Malacca 
to lie in wait there for the China convoy. On the 14th Febru 
ary 1804, while the French were off Pulo Aor, they sighted 27 
English vessels. It was rhe expected China convoy, proceeding 
unescorted and without any suspicion of danger. If Linois 
had not suddenly lost his judgment, he could easily have cap 
tured the entire convoy, with a cargo worth £200,000. Captain 
Dance, commanding the convoy, surprised by the presence of 
the French squadron, took recourse to a ruse which succeeded 
completely. He put up the blue flag of the Royal Navy (in 
stead of the red of the merchant marine) on three large ships 
to give the impression that the convoy was being escorted by 
ships of the line. Linois was fully deceived by this ruse and 
by the confidence with which the convoy steadily proceeded 
on its course. Believing that he was confronted by superior 
enemy forces, he precipitately fled away after a short exchange 
of fire. 1 This encounter was rightly celebrated by the English 
as a great victory'. Captain Dance was created a peer and given 
a sword of honour and a large sum of money. The English 
Company distributed £50,000 among the officers and men of the 
convoy. 