

As regards the second question, how far an attack on 
India was planned by the Directory as a sequel to the Egyptian 
expedition, the Directory did entertain such a project in a 
vague way. but never made any serious efforts to put into execu¬ 
tion the preliminary measures necessary for the success of the 
enterprise. The Directory had indeed decided to establish 
contact with Tipu and had selected Piveron, who had been at 
his Darbar before, for the mission. But while Piveron should 
have been sent long before the Egyptian expedition started 
from Toulon, the Directory decided to send him with that 
expedition. As things turned out, Piveron could not start 
even then. He sailed from Toulon on the 16th August 1798 
by a dispatch-boat the Celere, and then could not go beyond 

1 Charles-Roux —VAngletcm et rexpedition Fran^aise en Egypt *, I, 
HP l 75 ’i 79 


i 



THfc FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


Again, while the Egyptian expedition was decided 
upon, the Directory also took a decision to send orders to the 
isles of Eranee and Bourbon to despatch all frigates and trans¬ 
port vessels in the Isles to Suez, to reach there at the same 
time as the expeditionary force. But these orders probably 
never reached the Isles, and iri any case no French ship went 
to Suez. 1 2 On the other hand, from a letter written by Talley 
rand to Bonaparte, dated 4th November 1798, it would appear 
that the Directory had no definite plan about India, and had 
arranged nothing with Bonaparte when the expeditionary force 
sailed from ioulon. A treaty is proposed between Tipu 
Sultan and the Isle of France. The Directory is sending you 
a copy. As this document is not signed, the Directory is not 
certain what degree of trust could be reposed in the proposals 
contained therein. The Citizen Louis Monneron is starting 
with a double mission, in which he is more competent than any 
one else, to attach more closely the African colonies to the 
mother country and to follow up the treaty proposed in the 
name of Tipu. If then your eyes turn towards India, Citizen 
Monneron will not fail to help you greatly." 3 It was just a 
very vague invitation to Bonaparte to “turn his eyes towards 
India", without furnishing him with any means for doing so. 
Probably after Nelson’s victory, the Directory, unable either to 
send any help to Bonaparte or to extricate the expeditionary 
force from Egypt, fell back on the hope of Bonaparte’s pro 
ceeding to India. As regards Monneron’s mission to the Isle 
of France, it did not materialise after all. But even if Monneron 
had started, he could not have reached India in time to nego¬ 
tiate with Tipu; and even if he had reached in time, he could 
not have changed the course of events and saved Tipu. “What 
Tipu needed was not ari ambassador but effective help, and 
that effective help the Directory was not in a position to 
offer him.” 4 


1 Charles*Roux —UAngltterre et Vexpedition Francaise en Egypt*, L 

pp. 5*28. 

3 Ibid., p. 229. 

* Ibid., p. *46, The treaty referred* to was the proposal carried by 
Tipu'jj envoys to the Isle of France and forwarded from there by Maiartic 
in March, as noticed already. 