


1 r rent out —-Vile cle France sous Decaen, p. 29. 

2 Martin— Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 
Wellesley, I, p. 31. 

* Ibid, III, p. 7 *- 


MINIS 



again. 1 Wcllt'sicy, however, paid little heed to these orders, 
and thought only of the security of the English position iti 
India. He issued instructions to the authorities at Madras to 
receive the French well when they came to Pondicherry, to 
treat them with cordiality, but to delay the restitution of 
territories until he was in a position to send definite orders. 

That was how matters stood when the Belle-Povie anchored 
before Pondicherry. Legcr and Binot were received with every 
mark, of honour by the English Commissioner, Cullen, and the 
officer commanding the English forces at Pondicherry. J hey 
were requested to land with all their men and were provided 
with suitable accommodation in the town. On the 19th June 
when the French disembarked the officers were invited to a 
supper and a ball, and the English Commissioner even proposed 
a toast to the health of the First Consul. But with all these 
marks of cordiality, Binot was politely told by the English 
representatives that they had received no official instructions 
about the restitution of territories, that they would write to 
the Madras Government, and would hand over Pondicherry to 
the French as soon as orders came. P>inot sent Decaen’s letters 
to Madras. The Governor of Madras wrote to Wellesley on 
the 18th June about the arrival of the Belle Poule. Wellesley 
received it on the 4th July, but on the 6th July he received a 
letter from Castlereagh, dated 16th March, informing him about 
the imminence of a rupture with France, 2 So on the pdi July 
Wellesley wrote to the Governor of Madras not only not to carry 
out the restoration of territories, but also to keep the English 
forces ready to be able to take all the French troops landed 
at Pondicherry prisoners as soon as he sent orders to that effect 
or the Governor of Madras came to know from other sources 
about the outbreak of war. 3 

Binot remained quite unaware of these moves of the English, 
although his suspicions were roused by the arrival of nine 
English ships at Cuddalore early in. July, of which two came 
to anchor before Pondicherry when Decaen reached there with 

1 Martin— Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 

Wellesley, III, pp. 9 8 99 * 

2 Ibid, pp. 179181. 

3 Ibid, pp. 183-185. 




mi$TQy 


THE LAST PHASE OF ANGLO-FRENCH CONFLICT 

the rest of the French expeditionary force on the nth July. 
Decaen was greatly surprised at seeing the English flag still 
flying over Pondicherry and two English ships anchored before 
it. He was irritated at Binot’s conduct for not having pressed 
for the restitution of territories more strongly. Decaen at once 
sent the Belle-Poulc to Madras, with a letter calling upon the 
Governor to arrange for an immediate restoration of Pondi¬ 
cherry. He himself refused to land with his force as long as the 
English flag flew over the town. In the afternoon of the same 
day the Belier , coining straight from France, brought the infdJ 
niation about the imminence of war, with instructions to Decaen 
to proceed at once to the Isle of France. As it turned out, 
the timely arrival of the Belier saved the French expeditionary 
force from falling into the hands of the English. But Decaen 
was faced with a difficult situation. There were English ships 
before Pondicherry, and if the English also had received 
similar information they would certainly obstruct the departure 
of the French ships. An escape from Pondicherry in the dark 
ness of the night was just possible, provided the closest seercr\ 
could be maintained. It meant, however, leaving Binot and 
his men behind, since any attempt to re-embark the troops all 
on a sudden would rouse the suspicion of the English. Finally, 
the Belle-Poule, which had been sent to Madras, would have 
to be left behind, with the risk of its being captured by the 
English. 