


i Martin— Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 

» /*!(/., ' pp. 61-64. (Secret Committee of the Court of Directors to 
Mornington, 18th June 1798; received in Calcutta in September), 
a Ibid., pp. 3XI-3SX (letter dated 4th November). 

4 Ibid., pp. 3*6 3x8 (letter dated 8th November). 



tAiN/sr^ 



REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 


<8L 


about his overtures to the French, which did not deceive the 
English. Not till the very last did Tipu understand how 
earnest the English were about forcing the issue, or realise 
how imaginary were his hopes about French help. But when 
at last he woke up to the reality of the situation and agreed to 
accept an English envoy in February 1799, it was too late and 
the English armies were already on the march. The war which 
followed ended on the 4th May with the fall of Seringapatani 
and the death of Tipu in action 


V. The Egyptian Expedition and French Flans about India. 


If ihe embassy to the Isle of France started Tipu's mis 
fortune, it was completed by the Egyptian expedition of 
Napoleon Bonaparte. The advance of this daring general as 
far as Suez caused much greater alarm to the Governments of 
London and Calcutta than Malartic/s proclamation, and made 
it an urgent necessity to crush Tipu before the possible arrival 
of a French force in India. In spite of the naval victory of 
Nelson, in spite of the lack of transport vessels at Suez to carry 
a French army to the Malabar Coast, and in spite of the known 
difficulties of the overland route to India, English anxiety about 
the threat to India was not dispelled till the final expulsion 
of the French from Egypt in 1801. It is beyond the scope of 
the present work to give a detailed account of the Egyptian 
expedition under Napoleon Bonaparte. We are here concerned 
with how far it was intended to affect, or could have affected, 
India. So we shall confine ourselves to a discussion of three 
questions only. Mow far was the expedition undertaken with 
the immediate object of proceeding to India? How far was an 
attack on India planned by the Directory? Finally, how far 
was such an attack really feasible? 

As regards the first question, there is nothing to show that 
the expedition to Egypt was planned either by Napoleon Bona¬ 
parte or by the Directory with the immediate object of its 
proceeding to India. It is true that one of Napoleon's favourite 
dreams was a march to India, in imitation of the classical 
example. But when he set out from France or even when he 
occupied Egypt, he had no definite idea of proceeding to India 





tHF FRENCH rto INfil4 



<SL 


either by the Red Sea route from Suez or by the overland route. 
After his conquest of Egypt he proceeded to Suez, but his acti 
vines there show that his plan was based on a long occupation 
of the country. He aimed ai developing the Red Sea ports, 
attracting commerce and constructing ships. The measures he 
undertook in 1798-99 did not indicate any idea of an immediate 
maritime expedition to India, but only making preparations 
for it 011 the basis of a long occupation of Egypt. It is signi¬ 
ficant to notice his favourite expression in his letters to the 
Directory: "The Power which is mistress of Egypt must 
become, in the long run, the mistress of India as well”. 