

But all these considerations were nothing compared to the 
greater necessity of saving the expeditionary force from certain 
destruction by a timely escape from Pondicherry. Decaen 
decided to escape with the whole fleet the same night, as he 
feared that next day might be too late. He sent secret, informa¬ 
tion to all the men on board the ships about his decision, but 
not a word to those who were on land. He could not even 
afford to send any warning to his wife, who had landed in the 
afternoon to pay a visit to Madame Leger and who. fortunately 
for her husband, returned to the ship in time. Leger, who 
had accompanied her to the ship, decided to escape, leaving 
his family behind. Binot was to dine with the English Com¬ 
missioner that night. Instructions for him were left in a locked 
drawer, and it was just before the French ships sailed out that 
a man was sent ashore with the key of the drawer. Next 

KK 




UWlSTfiy 


' G <W 





morning Binot and his men were as much surprised a* the 
English at the sudden disappearance of the French ships. The 
English were naturally disappointed that their intended victim 
had escaped so quietly. They tried to capture the BeUe-Poule 
when it returned from Madras but the French ship eluded 
pursuit and proceeded to the Isle of France. The transport 
vessel Cdte-d’Or fell into the hands of the English, but was 
released on a strong protest from Binot, there being still no 
official news about the outbreak of war. On the 6th September, 
after official news of the war had reached Madras, the English 
seized another French transport vessel, the Marie-Frangoise, 
at. Negapatam. 

The instructions left by Oecaen for Binot were simply to 
the effect that if hostilities broke out, he was to try his best 
to secure an honourable capitulation. For nearly two months 
Binot found himself in an unenviable position, apparently at 
peace with the English and treated by them as before and yet 
expecting an attack at any moment. He secretly sent agents 
to the ruler of Tanjore and also to the Maratha chiefs then 
at war with the English. The activities of these agents will be 
noticed later. At last on the 6th September the crisis came. 
The Government of Madras. , immediately on receipt of the 
news of war, sent a detachment of infantry with a company oi 
artillery under Colonel Monypenny to join the two companies 
of sepoys stationed at Pondicherry. For Binot, with his 150 men, 
resistance was out of the question; and yet when summoned 
by Cullen and Monypenny to surrender at discretion, he 
adopted a spirited attitude. He protested that he had landed 
at Pondicherrv on the faith of a treaty, and that his detachment 
should be repatriated to the Isle of France at the earliest possible 
opportunity. When Monypenny threatened that if the French 
did not obev the summons to surrender at discretion, he would 
order his troops to march in and attack, Binot gave a dignified 
reply that in that case he would spare the English half the 
distance by advancing himself with his men. 