

4 Ibid. 


REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE AND INDIA 


As regards the third question, how far an attack on India 
was feasible, it is certainly not possible to give any definite 
answer. Perhaps, an attack by the land route was “nothing but 
a dream, a figment of imagination, an amusement of fancy ”. 1 
But an attack by way of the Red Sea was possibly not so unreal, 
if the French had been able to move swiftly and make use of 
the surprise factor, that often decides the fate of a campaign. 
It should be noted that the news of the French expedition to 
Egypt did not reach Calcutta before the middle of October 
1798, that till then the English fleet in the EasL had left the 
Red Sea ports completely unguarded, and that till the arrival 
of reinforcements at the beginning of 1799 the naval force 
under Rainier was extremely weak. When these things are con¬ 
sidered, it is perhaps not very unreasonable to think that if 
the French had come to an understanding with Tipu before the 
expedition started front France, and if all available ships in 
the Isles of France and Bourbon, including those of the pri 
vateers, had been sent to Suez, to reach there exactly at the 
same time as the French army under Bonaparte, at least a large 
part of the expeditionary force could have been transported from 
Suez to Mangalore in safety. What would have happened if a 
French force under Napoleon Bonaparte had been landed at 
Mangalore before the end of 1798 I s one of those “might-have- 
beens of history” which it is better to leave to speculation. 


! Charles Roux. UAnghterrr el l'expedition Fray.raise en Egypt'’. I. 

p 178. 


CHAPTER XX 


l HE LAST PHASE Of ANGLO-FRENCH CONFLICT 

I. French Hopes in India after the Treaty of Amiens. 

The Egyptian expedition of 1798 1801 had no sequel, but 
Napole on Bonaparte soon found an opportunity to turn his 
attention to India during the short-lived peace following the 
Treaty of Amiens. The Preliminaries of London, signed on 
the 1st October 1801, provided for the restoration to France 
and her allies of all their possessions and colonies occupied or 
conquered by the English in the course of the war, with the 
exception of Ceylon, belonging to the Dutch, It may be noted 
that following the establishment of French control over Holland, 
the English had promptly seized in 1795 all the Dutch posses¬ 
sions in India and Ceylon as also the Cape of Good Hope. 
Because of the strategic importance of Trinkomali they refused 
to return Ceylon ro the Dutch, although they raised no objec¬ 
tion to the return of the Cape, which was of even greater 
strategic importance, for which they had to repent later. 
Between the Preliminaries of London and the Treaty of 
Amiens, signed 011 the 25th March 1802, the First Consul made 
a few cautious approaches to find out the attitude of the English 
to the return of the French in India and their attempting to 
improve their position from what it had been before the war. 
During the stay of the English Plenipotentiary, Lord Cornwallis, 
in Paris, the First Consul expressed to him a desire to nego 
tiate with an Indian Prince for the cession of some additional 
territories to the French, to which Cornwallis replied quite 
plainly that it would be viewed with great displeasure by the 
English and might Ultimately lead to the breaking off of peace¬ 
ful relations between the two nations. 1 The matter was drop¬ 
ped. But during the negotiations leading to the Treaty of 
Amiens the French Plenipotentiary, Joseph Bonaparte, was 
instructed to press for some specific stipulations in the treaty in 