

From Pulo Aor Linois returned to Batavia and was joined 
by the Atalante there. Leaving the Belle-Pottle and the Atalante 
to prey upon English merchant shipping in the Bay of Bengal, 


3 Chevalier —Histoire de la Marine Frangaise sous le Consulate et 
l'Empire, pp. 596 298; Prentout —Vile de France sous Decaen, pp. 350-354. 


THE FRENCH IN INUIA 

started from Batavia on the 4th March with tbe Sernillanle 
and the Berceau and reached the Isle of France on the 1st April. 
Although during the cruise to Batavia and back Linois hart 
captured a few vessels, Decaen was indignant at. his timidity 
and his failure to capture the China convoy. There broke 
out a. violent quarrel between Decaen and Linois. Both of 
them sent reports to France Deeres the Minister of Marine, 
was inclined to shield his prot^gi, Linois, but the Emperor was 
furious. He wrote to Dccr&s* '‘All the naval expeditions which 
have been undertaken since 1 have been at the head of the 
Government have always failed because the Admirals see double 
and imagine, I do not know how. that one could make war 
without running any risk”. I11 another letter he wrote, “The 
least reproach that may he made to Admiral Linois is that he 
put too much prudence in the preservation of his ships. War¬ 
ships are not merchant vessels. It is honour that 1 would like 
to be preserved, and not a few pieces of wood and some men”.' 

The affair of Pulo \or had such a depressing effect 011 
Linois that he completely lost confidence in himself, and during 
the remainder of his slay in the East he did not go beyond a 
few infructuous cruises. He started on his second cruise on 
the 20th June 1804, with the Marengo, the italante and the 
Serrrillante , returning to the Isle of France on the 31st October. 
A few merchant vessels were captured, but the only remarkable 
event during this cruise was the encounter with an English 
man-of-war, the Centurion (60) in the road of Vizagapatam 
on the 18th September. Linois failed to make use of his oppor¬ 
tunities and to capture the English ship, which would have 
strengthened his fleet. 8 

Relations between Linois and Decaen became increasingly 
hitter, each sending complaints to the Minister against the other. 
On the 22nd VIay 1805 Linois left on his third cruise, with no 
intention of returning to the Isle of France any more. He had 
with him only the Marengo and the Belle-Poulc . The Semil- 
lante had been sent to the Philippines to inform the Spanish 

1 The two letters are quoted in Chevalier— Histoife de la Marine 
Franodise sous le Comulat et l*Empire, pp. 299-goo. 

a Chevalier, op. cit.. p. got: Prentout —L ite de France sous Decaen, 

[>• 3 6 3- 




Linois 


Ml H'STffy 





authorities there about the outbreak of war between England 
and Spain. The Atalante was undergoing repairs, and was to 
join Lirtois at the Cape of Good Hope at the end of September. 
On the 11 th July Linois captured a large vessel of the English 
Company, the Brunswick, off the Ceylonese coast, and then 
learning that the English had considerable forces in those waters, 
sailed for the Cape. On the way Linois met an English convoy 
of ten Company’s vessels, escorted by the Blenheim (74), off the 
east coast of Africa. After a short engagement with the Blen¬ 
heim , Linois thought it prudent to sail off to the Cape. There 
he was joined by the Atalante, but it was run aground in the 
False Bay, where the French ships had anchored, by a violent 
storm on the 3rd November. On the 10th November Linois 
left the Cape with his two ships to cruise off the western coast 
of Africa. Towards the end of January 1806, learning of the 
capture of the Cape by the English, he decided to return to 
France. On the 13th March the two French ships met an 
English fleet off the Canaries and were compelled to surrender 
after a brief encounter. 1 