

During his stay at Pondicherry Binot had entered into 
secret relations with some of the country Powers, and had 
set up an espionage organisation which lasted long after his 
departure from India. He received emissaries from the rulers 
of Travancore and Tanjore and from some of the Poligars of 
south India. A few days before his capitulation at Pondicherry 
he also received a Brahmin agent from Sindhia, who came to 
solicit the French to land an expeditionary force on the Malabar 
Coast, between Bombay and Goa, with a promise of assistance 
from the Marathas. Binot, on his side, sent an officer, Muller, 
on a secret mission to Sindhia’s Court, and another officer, 
Dufayel, to take up his residence at Tranquebar as French 
official agent and to send secret reports to Decaen from that 
neutral port. The first report that Binot sent to Decaen was 
through Delohr, who was sent to the Isle of France after the 
capitulation at Pondicherry. Delohr drew a very rosy picture, 
depicting the whole of India in revolt against the English and 
ready to welcome the French. On the basis of these repotts 
Decaen drew up a detailed plan of attack and sent it to the 
French Government. An expeditionary force was to land on the 
Malabar Coast, preferably at Chaul. It was then to capture 
either Bombay' or Goa, to secure a safe shelter for Fiench 
ships. To ensure the success of this operation, there was to be 
a simultaneous attack on the Orissa Coast and also a diversion 
in the Mediterranean to keep the English busy in Europe. 
Decaen felt confident of getting substantial help from the 
Marathas, and for the success of the enterprise wanted only 


WiNisr^ 



THE LAST PHASE OF vN'GLOFRENCU CONFLICT 


(si. 


thousand troops, six ships of the line, two flutes and four 
frigates. 1 

Muller had started on his mission to Sindhia’$ Court in 
July 1803. In addition to being a good painter, Muller was a 
linguist, speaking English, German and Italian with ease arid 
having some knowledge of Persian and Hindustani as well. 
With only a hundred rupees m. his pocket, all the money that 
Binot could give him, and his painting box, he went to Madras 
where he passed’off as a German painter. From there he started 
in August, and after an adventurous voyage he reached Calcutta 
at the end of September. His plan was to proceed to Lucknow 
and then to Perron’s headquarters at Aligarh. But. when he 
reached Calcutta lit heard the news of the defeat and destruc¬ 
tion of Perron s army. It was no use going to Sindhia’s camp, 
and besides, Muller had spent all his money. He gave him¬ 
self up as a French officer, was kept interned in Calcutta for 
a few years, and then sent back to France in 1807. Even in 
detention Muller kept on collecting information and communi¬ 
cating with other French agents at Chandernagore and Seram - 
pore. At the time of leaving India he could send to Decaen 
in the Isle of France a very detailed mdmoire oi\ the political 
situation in the country and the means required for the success 
of a French expedition. He submitted a similar menioire to 
Talleyrand also.* 