


LL 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


whom Napoleon, now anxious to create a diversion on the 
south-eastern frontier of Russia, had entered into negotiations. 

On the 4th May 1807, on the eve of the battle of Friedland, 
Napoleon concluded the Treaty of Finken&tein. He guaranteed 
the integrity of Persian territory, recognised Persia’s claim to 
Georgia, and engaged to secure the evacuation of Georgia by 
Russian troops. He also agreed to supply arms to Persia and 
to send a military mission to train up the Persian army. On 
his side, the Shah of Persia engaged to break off. relations w ith 
England and declare war on her. All Englishmen were to he 
expelled from Persia, and the Shah was to use his influence to 
secure the co-operation of the Afghan chiefs in an attack on 
India. Finally, he was to provide all help and facilities in his 
ports to a French naval squadron, 1 The treaty was based 
either on a deliberate diplomatic deception or on a refusal to 
recognise patent facts. Even before Friedland Napoleon was 
already thinking of peace and alliance with Russia, which, he 
should have known, would render that part of the Treaty of 
Finkenstein nugatory which alone was important to the Persians 
and only for which the Persians could be induced to break off 
relations with the English. When after long expectation the 
Persians found out that France had no intention of honouring 
her commitment in relation to Georgia, they welcomed the 
English mission under Sir Harford Jones and concluded a treat) 
with England. 

General Gardane, selected to head the mission to l eheran. 
was given detailed instructions by Napoleon about how he was 
to prepare the ground for an expedition against India. 3 I he 
expeditionary force of 20,000 troops might either proceed over¬ 
land from Aleppo or might be carried by ships round the Cape 
and landed at the entrance to the Persian Gulf. There they 
were to be joined by Persian troops, to be trained by Gardane’s 
officers. Gardane was to collect all information about the 
countries on the border of India, study all possible routes to 
the Indus, procure necessary supplies, and chalk out a plan of 
campaign. He was to communicate with the Marathas and 


1-Gardane —La Mission du General Gardane cn Verse, p. 71. 
« Correspondence de Napoldon 1 er f XV, 12563. 


misTfy 



THE LAST PHASE OF VMH.O-FnENUH CONFLICT 


Powers and find out the amount of help that 
could be expected in India, Gardane started from Warsaw 
on the 8th June, with a large staff of military officers, archaeo¬ 
logists anti geographers. The Persian envoy, Mirza Riza Khan, 
accompanied him. It was at Constantinople that Gardane got 
the news of the Treaty of Tilsit, which filled hirn with mis¬ 
givings about the prospects of his mission. He reached Teheran 
on the 4th December and was very well received by the Shah. 
The Treaty of Finkenstein was ratified. A military and a com¬ 
mercial convention were concluded, By the first the Shah was 
to purchase from France 20,000 muskets and was to place the 
island of Karrak at the disposal of the French. 