

With the exception of one frigate, the Semillante , the 
French naval division sent out in 1803 had disappeared. France, 
starting on a fresh career of European conquest, evinced little 
serious interest in Eastern projects and practically left Decaen to 
his fate in the Isle of France. From time to time the Emperor 
showed spasmodic interest, and even laid down grandiose plans 
of sending expeditions to India both by land and by sea. But 
his enthusiasm soon cooled down, as his attention was diverted 
by a fresh European crisis. After 1803 all the naval reinforce¬ 
ments sent to the East were five frigates, the CanonnUre and 
the Picmontaiu despatched in 1805, and the Caroline, the 
Manche and the Penns despatched in 1807. After the departure 
of Linois, the naval direction remained in the hands of Decaen, 
who constructed a few* small boats and purchased for the State 
some ships belonging to privateers, 10 strengthen the forces at 
his disposal for commerce-raiding operations. There was more 
vitality in these operations under Decaen’s direction than in 

1 Chevalier— His Loire de la Marine Frangaise sous le Consulat et 
l'Empire, pp. 303-306; Prentout —Vile de France sous Decaen, pp. 366. 

367- 


MINIS, 



the earlier period. Between 1805 and 1809 the French captured 
quite a large number of prizes in the Eastern waters and even 
displayed great, courage in a few encounters with superior 
enemy forces. It will be, however, a tedious narrative to at¬ 
tempt to give an account of their activities in detail, which 
really did not affect, much the main course of the war or even 
prevent the dosing in of the English ring round die French 
Isles. 

One instance of heroic conduct on the part of the French 
was the stubborn fight given by their frigate Psyche (an 
old privateering vessel converted into a frigate by Decaen) to 
the much stronger English frigate San Fiorenzo off Gan jam 
in the Bay of Bengal on the 14th February 1805. 1 The Psyche 
surrendered, but not before covering the French flag with glory. 
We have noticed that Linois had left the AUilante at the Cape, 
ft fell into the hands of the English, when they captured the 
place in January 1806. The Semiltante on its return from the 
Philippines was attacked without success by two English ships, 
the Sceptre (74) and the Cornwallis (40), in the road of St. Paul 
in the Isle of Bourbon on the nth November 1806. Later it 
went out on a cruise, captured several prizes, and being badly 
damaged in a fight with the English frigate Terpsichore (40) 
in February 1808 was scrapped and sold to private merchants. 
Of the frigates sent our in 1805, the Canonnitre reached the 
Isle of France at the beginning of 1806. Wanting to join the 
division under Linois, it started for the Cape, not knowing 
that the place had been captured by the English. On the way, 
off Natal, it had a sharp encounter with an English ship of the 
line, the Tremendous (74), on the 20th April. When he reached 
the Cape, Captain Bourayne of the Canonniere found the Dutch 
flag still flying. But as soon as he anchored in the Simon’s Bay, 
the Dutch flag was replaced by the English, and a heavy fire 
was opened on the French ship. It was, however, lucky enough 
to escape and return to the Isle of France. Not so fortunate 
was another French frigate, the Volontaire , which anchored 
unsuspectingly in the Table B;:y on the 4th March, and was 
then attacked and compelled to surrender. The two frigates, 