

Gardane’s mission was primarily military, to train up the 
Persian army and to draw up a plan of invading India, i wo 
of his officers, Verdier and Lamy, did very good work in train¬ 
ing up the troops under Prince Abbas Mirza, while another 
officer, Fabvier, was entrusted with establishing a foundry at 
Ispahan and casting cannons. Fabvier started work in Febru¬ 
ary 1808, and in five months he cast more than twenty cannons. 
Gardane also drew up a detailed plan of march to the Indus. 
If the land route was to be followed, the French force was to 
start from Aleppo in March, proceed to Bir on the Euphrates, 
and then to advance by way of Baghdad, Basra, Busliire, Shiraz 
and Yezd to Herat. But the road was bad for heavy artillery, 
and, besides, the English could land troops on the coast of the 
Persian Gulf. It was better to proceed from Baghdad to Urfa, 
Hamadan, Khorasan and Herat. By this route it would take 
seven to eight months from Aleppo to the Indus. If it was 


§L 


possible to cross the Black Sea and land at Trebizond, a part 
of the army could proceed via Erzerum, Van, Hamadan and 
Yezd to Herat, and another by the Taurus mountains, Teheran 
and Khorasan to Herat. The march from Trebizond to the 
Indus would take five to seven months. Herat would be an 
excellent point of concentration. From there the road to Kabul 
and Peshawar was easy. Gardane felt confident ot the assistance 
of the tribal people in the Indus region, of the Sikhs and of 
the chiefs of Sind. Success appeared to be certain, if simult¬ 
aneously with the invasion from the north Decaen could land 


WIN ISTff^ 


' Got **X 

IHT FRENCH IN INDIA 

1,500 Creoles near Bombay. 1 But the whole plan was based 
on unreal foundations. “It was nothing but a dream and a 
chimera, and the reason was simple. The French alliance gave 
to the King of Persia nothing of what he had hoped for, and 
did not even save him from Russian aggression. It soon ap¬ 
peared to him useless and odious, and before long Gardane 
found himself up against insurmountable difficulties ' 2 

These difficulties began to appear from the middle of 1808. 
At first the Shah of Persia, his chief minister, Mirra Shah, and 
Prince Abbas Mirra were favourably inclined to the French 
alliance, with the obligations it involved. In May 1808 the 
English mission from India under Malcolm was not received 
by the Persian Court. But it soon dawned on the Persians that 
the French had no intention of honouring their commitments 
in respect of Georgia, and then they naturally turned their 
backs on the French and looked to the English for assistance. 
Hostilities between Russia and Persia ceased in February 1808, 
but the Russian General wanted to impose on Teheran a treaty 
retaining Georgia to Russia. The Shah of Persia sought, the 
intervention of France and wanted Russo-Persian negotiations 
to be carried on in Paris. Pending the conclusion of the nego¬ 
tiations, there was to be a Cessation of hostilities for a year. 
But Russia refused to agree, and the French Government also 
was not inclined to offer mediation. Gardane was placed in a 
very embarrassing situation. The Persian Government lost 
patience in August 1808, and the chief minister, Mirza Shaft, 
addressed a memorandum to him in very plain language, com¬ 
plaining that while Persia was fulfilling the terms of the alliance, 
France was doing nothing to restrain Russia. The crisis came 
in September, when the Russian General threatened to resume 
hostilities unless Persia accepted Russian terms immediately. 
Persia again appealed to the French Government, but there 
was no favourable response from Paris, except empty professions 
of friendship which exasperated the Persians. Garclane was 
informed by his Government that the Treaty of Finkenstein did 
not guarantee the recovery of the possession of Georgia, and 