




MIN IST/fy 




tW LAST PHASE OF ANGLO-FRENCH CONFLICT 


tributed the success of the English to the treachery of Perron 
and Dudrenec. These two men, as also Piron who had married 
a daughter of Dudrenec, “were all at Chinsurah, three French 
men who have done more to injure ihe interests of France and 
to advance those of the English Company than the English 
themselves”. 1 2 3 Morenas still did not despair, but thought that 
there were good chances of success if Decaen came with a large 
force. 

We have noticed already that Binot had sent Dufayel to 
Tranquebar to reside there as French agent. Dufayel was 
later confirmed in his post by Decaen. with a large salary and 
instructions to subscribe to the Mud ms Gazette foi collecting 
information. Tranquebar, being a neutral settlement, was a 
convenient point of observation for the French. The English 
were quite aware of the use the French made of this oportunity. 
Wellesiey had complained to the Danish Governor Anker in 
January 1799, 2 and had sent an English agent to Tranquebar 
in December 1800 to watch French intrigues.* 5 After the Peace 
of Amiens English influence at Tranquebar became very strong 
As Morenas reported in 1805 during his second visit to Trahque 
bar, only the flag was Danish, everything else was under English 
control. 4 Finally, in 1807 after the declaration of war b\ 
Denmark following the English attack on the Danish fleet at 
Copenhagen, Tranquebar was captured by the English. The 
French lost their only place of shelter in India. During his 
stay at Tranquebar Dufayel carried on his espionage work and 
sent regular reports to Decaen, In .1804 Dufayel wrote that 
the situation in India was quite favourable for the French, 
and that if Decaen came with a force of 10,000 men he could 
land at Pulicat and easily capture Madras. Many of DufayePs 
letters were intercepted by the English and served onl\ to 
disclose to them the network of French intrigue. After the 


1 Premout— L’lU de France sous Decaen, pp. 385 386. 

2 Martin — Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 
Wellesley , V, pp. 36-40 (letter dater 18th January 1799). 

3 Ibid, II, pp. 418-419 (Wellesley to the Governor of Madras, ist 
December 1800). 

* Btsson —Les Aventuriers Francois aux hides (1775 p. *34- 

Prentout, op. cit., p. 388. 


misr/fy 




THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

capture of franquebar Dufay cl was arrested and sent back to 
France. 1 

From the moment of getting the earliest reports from 
India Decaen began to write pressing letters to the Minister 
and to the First Consul, outlining a plan of invasion and 
asking for adequate land and naval forces. In order to impress 
on the authorities in Paris the urgency of the situation he 
even sent successive emissaries to France. The first was his 
aide-de-camp, Barois, who arrived in France ori the 25th March 
1804.® Barois, however, found the First Consul too busy with 
preparations for an invasion of England to turn his attention 
to India. Next came Cavaignac who returned to Paris on the 
12th July after the failure of his mission to Muscat. He found 
the attitude of Decr&s with respect to Decaen’$ proposals very 
cold and that of Napoleon also nor. at all encouraging.* On 
the 8th September 1804 arrived a third emissary, Lefebvre. 
During his interview, Napoleon questioned him closely about 
the chances of success in India with so few men as asked for 
by Decaen, and expressed grave doubts about the sincerity of 
the Marathas. 4 Lefebvre drew up a detailed mimoire on the 
Indian project, which did not rouse much interest in Napoleon 
at the time. But from the beginning of 1805 there was a 
sudden change in Napoleon’s mind. In a letter to the Minister 
of Marine, Deeres, dated 16th January 1805, Napoleon sug¬ 
gested a plan of sending an expedition to India. Three 
squadrons, starting from Brest, Rochefort and Fermi, were to 
carry 20,000 French and 3,000 Spanish troops and they were 
to be joined by 3,000 from the Isles of France arid Bourbon ’ 
Deeres raised objections to the plan. When the fourth cmis 
sary from Decaen, his own brother Ren£ Decaen, arrived and 
met the Emperor in July, he found that Napoleon had by then 
completely abandoned the Indian project. The expedition to 
England was more important, and war-clouds were again gather- 