

1 Chevalier Histoire de la Marine Frangaise sous le Consult et 
C Empire, pp. 301 303: Prentout— L’lle dr: France sous Decaen, pp. $& 7 * 37 °- 


misr^ 



The last PttASfc oi- a xci.o- frEnch conflict ' yr ? 

tlierCqtoonni&re and the Piemoritai.se, which reached the Isle of 
France at the beginning of 1806 remained in service for about 
two years, the second being captured after an engagement with 
the English frigate San Fiorenzo off the south coast of Ceylon 
in March 1808, and the first being scrapped and sold to private 
merchants. In March arid April 1808 arrived two more frigates, 
the Manche and the Caroline, which also engaged in commerce- 
raiding operations. But by the beginning of 1809 French acti¬ 
vities were being gradually restricted by the tightening of the 
English blockade of the Isles and the strict watch maintained 
by the English on their ports. By 1810 the French were put 
on the defensive, and the inevitable crisis approached. 1 


Ill 


French Agents irt India and Decaen* s Project, of 
hwasion. 


The employment of all available ships in the hies for 
commerce-raiding operations Decaen considered as a purely 
temporary phase, the ultimate object being an invasion of 
India as soon as adequate reinforcements arrived from Europe 
From the moment of his arrival in the Isle of France Decaen 
started collecting information about the political situation in 
India, the possibility of landing an expeditionary force and the 
chances of securing allies among the country Powers. Both 
he and his Adjutant, Binot, at Pondicherry employed a number 
of secret agents for the purpose. But these agents could hardly 
go far. The situation in India had changed completely from 
the days of Chevalier and Madec, when the French could hope 
to establish a network of intrigues in the different. Darbars. 
Before 1803 all the Indian Powers had been destroyed, with the 
exception of the Marathas, and the Maratha Power was also on 
the point of extinction when Decaen arrived at Pondicherry, 
Events were moving fast, and the army of Perron in SindhiaVs 
service, on which Decaen had banked, had melted away 
months before Decaen sent emissaries from Port Louis to that 
French adventurer. The English were very much alert and 

1 For details of French naval activities after the departure of Linois, 
see Chevalier —Histoire de la Marine Frangahe sous le Consulat et l*Empire, 
PP 3 ° 7 ‘ 3 l 5 : ancl P^entout — Vile de France sous Decaen, pp. 496-505. 


mtSTfiy 



ZM .<> 


all the French secret agents were arrested. The reports that 
these agents sent to Decaen were mostly a ridiculous composi¬ 
tion of ignorance of the Indian situation and wishful thinking. 
The French agents were quite confident of large help from 
many of the Indian Princes, not knowing their real position 
and the paucity of their resources. Their letters were frequently 
intercepted by the English and served only to let the English 
know which of the country Powers had to be kept under close 
observation. One thing is certain. The intrigues of these 
French agents could not have caused any harm to the English, 
and any French attempt at invasion of India with a few thou¬ 
sand troops, based on these reports, would have ended in 
disaster. 