

After getting the encouraging reports of Delohr, in Novem¬ 
ber 1803 Decaen decided to send two emissaries, Courson and 
Durh6ne, to India to establish contact with Perron and through 
him to open negotiations with the Maratha Ptirxces for a com¬ 
bined attack on the English. Decaen did not know that 
Perron's army had already melted away and that Perron him 
self was at the time an English prisoner. The two officers, 
Courson and Durh6ne, were entrusted with letters for Perron, 
Sindhia and Holkar. To Sindhia and Holkar Decaen held 
out assurances of French armed assistance and the alliance of 
the French Republic. To Perron he wrote, urging him to 


1 Prentout — Vile de France sous Decaen, pp. 37^-379. 

3 Besson —Les Aventurieis Frdngais aux hides (1775-1820). pp. 23* 234 
(for caioer of Muller). 


WNiSTfty 


A* .-_ A.A 

THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

ihe Maratha Prince to remain favourably inclined 
toward* an alliance with France pending the despatch of French 
forces. He made a rather melodramatic appeal to Perron’s 
ambition and spirit of patriotism, by telling him how he could 
achieve immortality by cementing a Franco-Maratha alliance 
arid sending him a medal with an engraving of the First Consul’s 
image and a brhtet nominating him to the rank of ‘General of 
a Division in the Army of the French Republic’. 

The two French officers, accompanied by one Doublet who 
had been a merchant in India before, started from the Isle of 
France on the (jth November 1803 on 3 small boar, the Passe- 
Partout, captained by the noted privateer Dutertre. They 
reached the Malabar Coast early in January 1804 and landed at 
a point between Goa and Bombay. They had instructions to 
proceed inland in Indian guise, but before they could go far 
they were detected and examined by one of the local chiefs. 
Ultimately, they reached Poona and were handed over by the 
Maratha authorities to the English, who knew all about them, 
having seized their boat and being on the look out for the 
party which had landed. They were taken first ta Bombay 
and then to Calcutta, front where Courson and Durhdne were 
released in exchange shortly after. Dutertre was detained 
longer, foi his depredations on English trade and commerce. 
The net effect of the mission was to warn Wellesley of the 
plans of Decaen. 

Another agent of Decaen, Morenas, had slightly better 
luck. Starting from the Isle of France about the same time 
as Courson and Durhdne, Morenas reached the Danish settle* 
merit of Tranqutbar, where through the help of Dtifayel he 
secured a passage to Bengal. He stayed for a time at Chander 
nagore and then returned to the Isle of France. During his 
stay in Bengal he could contact Courson, Durhdne and Muller 
and could collect much information, which he sent on to 
Decaen with the help of Dufayel. • On the 2nd April 1804 
Morenas sent discouraging reports to Decaen. The English 
had won in the recent war with the Marathas. Perron had 
abandoned Sindhia and Bourquin had been defeated at Delhi. 
The Maratha Princes had concluded treaties with the English 
and sunk into the position of subsidiary allies. Morenas at- 