

1 P.A. ms. 5384 (Royal Instructions for Comte Dupuy, dated 9U1 May 1816). 


imsrQy 



trite and the L.iconic, and reached Pondicherry on the 27th 
September 1816. Comte Dupuy at once proceeded to Madras 
to settle with r.he Governor details of the procedure of restitu¬ 
tion of territories. The Government of Madras issued a pro¬ 
clamation on the 2 ist October, calling upon all English subjects 
to leave the territories to be returned to the French. 1 A second 
proclamation of the 18th November declared that Pondicherry 
and its dependencies had been restored to the French that day. 2 
Captain James Stuart Fraser was appointed as English Com¬ 
missioner at Pondicherry to settle any differences which might 
arise in connection with the restoration of territories. On the 
4th December Fraser issued a proclamation that the territories 
had been finally handed over to the French. 3 On the same day 
the French flag was hoisted at Pondicherry, and the French 
celebrated their return by a grand ceremony. It is interesting 
to note that in connection with the restitution of Pondicherry 
nothing was said on either side, unlike as in the case of the 
other settlements, about the exact, limits of the territories 
returned ro the French. 

The settlement of Chandernagore was restored on the 16th 
December 1816. 4 Denis Dayot, brother of Joseph Dayot took 
possession of the settlement from Gordon Forbes, representing 
the Governor-General. Along with the principal settlement, the 
French were also entitled under the terms of the treaties and 
conventions of 1814 and 1815 to take possession of the subor 
dinate factories at Kasimbazar, Dacca. Jougdia, Patna and 
Balasore. The French Government was af first inclined to 
attacTi some importance to their recovery, arid even sent out 
Chiefs to take charge of these minor trading posts. Bui when 
it appeared that the old buildings were completely in ruins 
and that the administrative costs would far exceed the profits 
from the small amount of trade that could be carried on there, 
the French abandoned the idea of taking possession of these 
factories. Only the factory at Balasore was occupied for a 
short period. 5 On the 14th January 1817 Comte de Beranger 
took possession of Karikal with all its dependencies from the 


1 P.A. ms. 5593. 
3 Ibid., ms. 5409. 
5 Ibid., ms. 6340. 


2 Ibid., ms. 5400. 
4 Ibid., ms. 6272. 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 




Collector of Tanjore, John Thackeray. 1 Mahe was restored to 
the French on the 22nd January 1817. The Captain of the 
Amphitrite, Philibert, took possession of the settlement from 
Vaughan, Collector of Malabar. In the case of this settlement 
only there was some dispute between the parties, the French 
claiming targe territories which ihey possessed in 1792, by virtue 
of the cessions made by Tipu and by the neighbouring Nayar 
Princes, and the English refusing to hand over anything more 
than the town of Mahe 3 . The factory at Calicut was restored 
on the 1st February 1819 and that at Surat, in June 1819. 
Finally, the. settlement of Yanani and the factory at Masuli- 
patatn were also returned to the French early in 1817. 