




rntsr^ 



From 1808 it became increasingly clear to the English that 
their ineffective blockade served no useful purpose. They must 
have a port of call near the French Isles, enabling them 
to maintain their blockade permanently. In the early part ol 
1809 Minto was authorised to send an expeditionary force to 
occupy the island of Rodriguez, about 300 miles to the east of 
the Isle of France, and from that base to maintain a*permanent 
blockade of the Isles of France and Bourbon. Accordingly, in 
May 1809 a small expedition of voo European troops and 200 
sepoys under Colonel Keating was despatched from Bombay by 
the warship the Belliqneux. Rodriguez was inhabited by only 
three Frenchmen and 70 to 80 slaves, engaged in growing 
vegetables for the needs of the larger islands. The English 
occupied Rodriguez on the 4th August without any opposition, 
and landed large quantities of ships’ stores and provisions. The 
island was converted into a depot for the refitting and revictual* 
ling of the blockading squadron. 

The occupation of Rodriguez did not at once make the 
blockade of the French Isles fully effective French ships could 
still sail in and out of the numerous ports in the islands, and, 
as the events of 1809-10 amply showed, they could still capture 
English vessels in Indian waters. But the occupation of Rodri¬ 
guez had one tangible result. The English could now maintain 
a permanent naval watch on the Isles, and ascertain the real 
state of the French defences by landing demonstrations on the 
coasts. It revealed to them, what they had vaguely suspected, 
the real weakness of the French. Encouraged by the informa¬ 
tion received, the English sent reinforcements to Rodriguez to 
make an attempt at landing in the Isle of Bourbon and to test 
the French defences. The plan was conceived by Commodore 
Rowley, in charge of the blockading naval squadron, and his 
able lieutenant Corbett, commanding the frigate Nereule, and 
was approved by Vice Admiral Bertie, commanding the English 
naval division at the Cape. On the 16th September 1809 an 
expeditionary force of 368 officers and men started from 
Rodriguez on board the Nereide, the Otter and a Company s 
cruiser the Wasp. These ships were joined on the 18th, off 
Port Louis in the Isle of France, by the Raisonable and the 
Sirius . The naval force was under the command of Rowley, 
while Keating was to lead the troops. 


THE LAST PHASE OF ANGlO-1 RfcXCH CONFLICT 



Early in the morning of the ^ ist the English detachment, 
raised to about six hundred men by the addition of sailors and 
marines, was disembarked to the south of Point de Galotte, 
about seven miles from St. Paul, the chief town on the western 
coast. The French commandant at St. Paul, Sainl-Mihiel was 
taken completely by surprise. The batteries defending the 
town were poorly manned, and no help could be expected in 
time from St. Denis, the capital, where General Bruslys. the 
Governor of the Island, had a very small force. Saint-Mihiel 
was so surprised by the English attack that he even forgot, 
until too late, to order the disembarkation of the no European 
troops on board the frigate Caroline , then anchored in the 
harbour. He, however, put up a very stubborn resistance till 
forced to capitulate. On the sand General Bruslys, when 
informed, disowned the capitulation, but immediately after, 
unnerved by the difficulties of the situation, he committed 
suicide. By the terms of the capitulation the English remained 
in possession of St. Paul for a few days and then started back 
for Rodriguez on the 2nd October, with all the captured public 
property of the town. They also took the French frigate, the 
Caroline, with her tw r o prizes, the Streatham and the Europe , 
and a few small trading vessels. 1 