

Wellesley was the first to conceive the project of sending an 
expeditionary force for the capture of Java and the French 
Isles. In 18oo, soon after the fall of Tipu, Wellesley organised 
a force for the ourpose from the armies of the three Presi¬ 
dencies. Trinkomali was chosen as the point of concentration 
for the force, and early in 1801 Major General David Baird 
was appointed to the command. But just at the moment the 
expedition was ready to start, it was diverted to Egypt to assist 
the army under Sir Ralph Abercromby, sent from England for 




mm? 


<5* ‘ e °SN 


the last phase of ANGLO -1 RtNCH conflict 

the expulsion of the French. 1 2 Then again in July 1803, even 
before the news of the resumption of hostilities had reached 
Calcutta, Wellesley proposed to Castlereagh the plan of an 
offensive against the French in the Indian Ocean. He wanted 
the capture of two strategic points, the Cape by an expedition 
from England, and the Isles of France and Bourbon by an 
expedition from India; 9 The plan, particularly the attempt 
on the French Isles, did not receive much favourable considera¬ 
tion from the Government in London. Wellesley also soon 
found himself completely preoccupied with the Maratha war, 
and all that he could do for the time being was to approve 
Admiral Rairiier’s action in sending a small naval force to 
establish a regular blockade of the Isles. This was useful not 
only for the security of commerce, but also for collecting infor¬ 
mation about French plans and preparations in the Isles. The 
blockade, however, did not prove very effective for lack >f any 
base near the Isles, and French privateers carried on their 
depredations as before. 

Wellesley left India in 1805. His two successors, Corn¬ 
wallis and Barlow, were much too occupied with arranging a 
political settlement after the Maratha war to pay any attention 
10 external matters. When Minto arrived in 1807, he took up 
once more Wellesley’s project. One part of the project, seizure 
of the Cape, had been effected already in January 1806 by an 
expeditionary force from England. There remained the capture 
of the French Isles and Java. But Minto had to wait for two 
years on account of the financial difficulties of the Company, 
the fear of disapproval by the British Cabinet of any action 
outside India, and the necessity of counteracting French intri¬ 
gues in Persia, Afghanistan and Sind. He could merely con¬ 
tinue the policy of a naval blockade of the Isles begun in 1804. 
The naval division sent to cruise off the islands was, however, 
too small to watch the numerous ports and prevent the ingress 
and egress of ships. Moreover, the cruise could last for only 
three months at a time, the nearest port facilities being avail¬ 
able only in India and, since January 1806, at the Cape. 

1 Martin- Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess 
Wellesley , II, pp. 440 450 (Wellesley to General Baird, 10th February 1801). 

2 Ibid, III, pp. 193*03 (Wellesley to Castlereagh, 55th July 1803). 