




miST/ly 



consequent necessity of sending veiuK'rccinenis for th.e protec¬ 
tion of Java as well. There followed a long delay in maturing 
plans, while the time for action was passing away. All through. 
July to December plans were drawn up and revised, but no 
help was actually sent. 1 It may be noticed here that even if 
Napoleon had wanted, it was not easy tor him to send large- 
scale reinforcements, as all the French ports had been practically 
sealed by the British navy. 

Thus Decaen was left to meet the approaching crisis with 
the resources actually at his disposal. Of the six frigates only 
one the Astree , was fit for service, the others requiring extern 
sive repairs. He had about 900 officers and men in the army, 
besides 300 marines and artillerymen and 800 men belonging 
to the National Guard. The total at his disposal was thus 
only 35,000, but even of this number a considerable part con¬ 
sisted of Irishmen (prisoners of war induced to join the. French 
service), on whose loyalty Decaen could not obviously count. 
There were no less than five suitable landing points on the 
coasts of the island. With his limited resources it was not 
possible for Decaen to arrange for a proper watch at all these 
points. 

The same event, union of Holland and France, which 
delayed the despatch of reinforcements from France, decided 
the British Government and the Government of Calcutta to 
expedite sending an expedition first against the Isle of France 
and then against Java. It was to he a joint effort by forces 
front India and the Cape. General Abercromby artel Vice- 
Admiral Bertie were to command the land and naval forces 
respectively There was no time to be lost, since it was feared 
that reinforcements might soon be arriving from France. As 
Minto wrote to his wife on the 19th September 1810. “It is of 
great consequence therefore, that we should he at Port Louis 
to receive such supplies from France, rather than Monsieur 
He Caen”. 2 We have noticed already how the chances of war 
had made General Abercromby a prisoner of the French and 
how he regained his freedom. A few days later Vice-Admiral 
Bertie arrived at St. Paul in the Nisus frigate. On the 14th 


1 prentout —Vile de France sous Decaen , pp. ,584-587. 

2 Countess of Minto —Lord Minto in India , p. 245* 


fill* LAST 1'f I ASK OF ANGLO 1 RK.VCU CON FLIC I 


o 



October he started with five ships to blockade Port I i mis. He 
arrived oft that port on the 19th. and leaving three ships there 
he started at once for Rodriguez in company with General 
Abercrornby. On the way he fell in with the naval squadron 
from India under Rear-Admiral Drury. Bertie and Aber- 
cromby reached Rodrigue/ on the 3rd November. The divi¬ 
sion from Bombay had already arrived, and that from Madras 
reached on the firh. On the 12th came the troops from the Isle 
of Bourbon, and on the 21st those from Bengal. Although the 
expected troops from the Cape had not vet arrived, Bertie and 
Abercrornby determined not to wait any longer, for fear of 
losing the favourable season. On the 22nd the expedition 
started from Rodriguez. It consisted of twenty-one' ships, 
besides transports, carrying 11,306 fighting men. 