

Early in the morning of the 29th November the English 
ships appeared oil the selected point of landing*, Grande 
Have, near the northeast extremity of the island and fifteen 
miles north of the capital, Port Louis. The English ships, 
anchored in the narrow passage between a small island known 
as Coin de Mir and the mainland. It was known to be a very 
risky place for ships, because of the reefs which barred the 
entrance; and Decaen never expected that the English would 
attempt a landing there, particularly because the troops would 
have to pass through an impenetrable jungle for five miles 
before reaching the high road leading to Port Louis. He had 
anticipated an English landing at a point nearer Port Louis, 
whence the march to the capital would be easier. Thus the 
English troops landed in the afternoon of the 29th, quite 

unnoticed and unsuspected by the defenders. It was not till 

tin v had crossed the dense forest and reached the high road 
late at night that Decaen realised that his calculations had 
gone wrong* Before he could do anything the English were 

already on the march towards the capital on the 30th. The 

French fought heroically, trying to obstruct the progress of the 
English army towards Port Louis. It was obviously impossible 
for Decaen with two thousand men to resist a force of more 
than eleven thousand. On the 1st. as the English appeared 
before Port Louis, the French force retired within the town. 
The English ships also had taken up positions in the harbour, 
ready to cannonade the town from the sea. Realising that 


WHlSTffy 



THE FRENCH IN INDIA 


<SL 


her resistance would only result in great suffering for the 
inhabitants of the town, Decaen sent a proposal for capitula¬ 
tion on the 2nd December, which was accepted on the 3rd 
with some modifications. The Isle of France was surrendered 
to the English, with all the ships in the harbours and all the 
public property. The French troops and crews of the ships 
were not to be treated as prisoners of war. They were to he 
transported to France with their arms and baggages by English 
ships. Decaen’s original demand that the French frigates were 
not to be surrendered and that the French troops were to be 
transported to Europe on these frigates w r as not accepted by 
the English. Even then, it must be admitted, General Aber- 
croinby gave the French much better terms than were war¬ 
ranted by the military situation. It was partly due to a 
soldier's admiration for a brilliant defence by a hopelessly small 
force, and partly due to a desire to bring hostilities to a speedy 
end. 


With the fall of the Isle of France disappeared the lasl 
vestige of French power in the East. That it was at all allowed 
to survive so long after the outbreak of the war in 1793 w r as 
due not to the strength of the French but to the hesitation and 
fears of the English to undertake an expedition against the Isles. 
As an English historian has observed, “Thus instantaneously 
disappeared the fancied strength of the Isle of France when 
once the vigour of British India emancipated itself from the 
visionary obstacles which the selfish fears of the British Cabinet 
had opposed, and the imperfect information of the Indian 
Government had encouraged .” 1 At the same time it is quite 
permissible for a French historian to regret that “on the 2nd 
December i8io, the sixth anniversary of the crowning of 
Napoleon, the Captain-General of the Isle of France found 
himself compelled, by the neglect, of the greatest Empire of the 
world, to surrender one of its most beautiful and important 
colonies’\* For Decacn, in particular, the date of the capitula¬ 
tion, 3rd December, was specially significant. It was the ninth 
anniversary of the battle of Hohcnlinden, the most glorious 
date in his military career. 