

The coinbat of Grand Port seemed a turning point for 
French fortunes. While of the English blockading squadron 
only one frigate remained, the Boadicea , the French now 
possessed seven frigates, including the Iphigenie captured from 
the English. Decaen was emboldened to think of taking the 
offensive. There were two plans before him,—to attack the 
island of Rodriguez which was the base of English operations 
and to intercept all ships proceeding to it; or to blockade the 




1 Prentout —Vile dd France sous Decaen, pp. 561*568. 

2 Ibid, pp. 568-569. 

3 Mill and Wilson History of Biitish India, Vol. VII, p. 333 * 


mtSlffy 


' eo C\ 

/ 

THE I, AST PHASE OF ANGI-O-FRENCH CONFLICT 

Isle of Bourbon to starve the English garrison into submission 
and to capture the last English frigate lying at St. Paul. Ulti¬ 
mately, the second plan was adopted. But in spite of a few 
initial naval successes, the French attempt failed, as the English, 
determined to launch an immediate attack on the Isle of 
France, sent large reinforcements from India, and the naval 
force under Vice-Admiral Bertie at the Cape also arrived to 
co-operate in the attack. On the 12th the French captured an 
English frigate, the Africaine, just arrived from England, but 
soon after abandoned her to Rowley, who tame up with the 
Boadicca, the Staunch and the Otter. On the 18th two French 
ships, the Venus and the Victor, captured an English frigate, 
the Ceylon , which had on board General Abercromby sent from 
India to assume command of the expedition against the Isle of 
France. But this unexpected success was nullified the same 
day, as Rowley followed in pursuit with his three ships, inflicted 
a defeat on the French, and compelled Hamelin to surrender. 

The second action of the 18th September ended the brief 
period of hope for the French. They had failed to make use 
of their temporary naval superiority. Early in October the 
arrival of Vice-Admiral Bertie in the frigate Slisus, indicating 
further reinforcements from the Gape, turned the scale definitely 
against the French. At the same time the French came to learn 
of large-scale troop concentrations in the island of Rodriguez, 
making it clear that the English were determined to launch an 
immediate attack on the Isle of France. The danger which 
Decaen had feared so long had actually come. With his few 
frigates and less than two thousand troops in all, he could 
hardly offer any resistance to a determined and large-scale 
invasion as planned by the English. At the end of 1809 Decaen 
had sent his aide-de-camp Barois again to warn the French 
Government of the desperate condition of the Isles and to urge 
the despatch of reinforcements. BarrJ reached France in 
February 1810, but met with total indifference from the Minister 
of Marine, Deeres. The Emperor too, busy with his marriage 
celebrations, had no time to think of a few distant colonies. It 
was not till June that Napoleon thought of sending some help 
to Decaen. He proposed to send 1500 troops and four or five 
frigates. But. before the reinforcements could be sent, the plan 
was upset by the union of Holland and France in July and the 