

1 p veil tout Ulle de France sons Dccaen, p. 54 ^- 

2 Counter of Minto Lord Minto in India, p* 243. 





THE LAST PHASE OF ANCI.O-FRFNCH CONFLICT 


different points on the 7th and 8th July. Colonel Saint 
Suzanne, Governor of the Isle, had under him jBo men in all, 
three-fourths being Creoles. He offered as stubborn a resistance 
as was possible under the circumstances, until forced to capi¬ 
tulate in the evening of the 8th. The island was made over 
to the English, with all the public property. The French 
troops surrendered as prisoners of war, to be transported to the 
Cape or to England. In appreciation of the brilliant defence 
the officers were allowed o keep their swords and military 
decorations. Saint-Suzanne was sent to the Isle of France on 
parole. 1 

Although the English knew about the poor state of the 
defences of the French Isles, the ease with which the Isle of 
Bourbon was captured exceeded their expectations and embol 
dened them to start the offensive immediately against the Isle 
of France also, even before news of the earlier success had 
reached Calcutta and orders had been received from there. The 
watch on the Isle of France was tightened by a naval division 
under Commodore Pym, consisting of the Nereide, the Siriits 
and the Staunch , and attempts were made to explore landing 
spots on the coast. Finally, on the 13th August a small con¬ 
tingent was landed in the Isle cle la Passe, about three miles 
from the mainland and commanding the entrance to the 
harbour of Grand Port, on the south-eastern coast of the Isle 
of France. The Isle de )a Passe was easily captured and a 
small garrison of 130 men was left there. On the 20th August, 
three French ships under Duperre, :he Bellone, the Minerve and 
the Vidor , w T ith two captured English vessels, the Windham and 
the Ceylon, returned to Grand Port. They proceeded unsus¬ 
pectingly as the Tricolour was flying from the fort in the Isle 
de la Passe and on a frigate lying off the island. But as soon 
as the French ships passed close to the island, they were fired 
upon from the fort and the frigate, both hoisting English 
colours. Duperr£ succeeded in reaching the port, with the 
loss of one prize, the Windham, captured by the English, and 
anchored in an advantageous position close to the shore and 
protected by coast battery. 

On the 23rd came four English frigates, the Sirius (Capt. 


1 Printout -If lie de France sous Decaen , p. 55U. 


THfc FRENCH IN INDIA 

the Nereid e (Gapt. Willoughby), the Iphigenia (Gapt. 
Lambert) and the Magicienne (Gapt. Curtis) to attack the French 
ships at anchor. For the French the position was desperate, 
but they decided to fight to save the honour of their Hag. 
Decat-n had just time to reinforce the crews of the ships with 
all the available seamen in the island and to strengthen the 
coast batteries. He also ordered the naval division under 
Hamelin at Port Louis, consisting of three frigates, the Astree , 
the Martche and the Venus, to proceed to Grand Port at once. 
But before Hamelin could arrive, the combat had started and 
the result practically decided. Two of the English frigates 
were sunk and one captured. The last remaining ship, the 
Pphigenia, and the garrison in the Isle de la Passe also sur¬ 
rendered on the arrival of Hamelin. The combat, which 
lasted from 23rd to 28th August, ended in a brilliant victory 
for the French. 1 2 With the exception of one frigate, the 
Boadicea, and two corvettes, the Staunch and the Otter, then 
lying at St. Paul in the Isle of Bourbon, the entire English 
blockading squadron had been annihilated. Sixteen hundred 
soldiers and sailors, including four Captains, Pym, Lambert, 
Willoughby and Curtis, had been taken prisoners. The Isle de 
la Passe had been recovered. Well might a French historian 
take pride in the achievement of his countrymen; 3 but there 
is much also in the explanation of an English historian that 
the English disasters were “ascribable to no deficiency of 
courage or conduct, but to an imperfect acquaintance with the 
scene of action, and the want of sufficiently experienced 
pilotage”. 3 