

1 Mill and Wilson —History of British India, Vol. VII, p. 342. 

2 Prentout— L/Tle de France sous Decaen, p. ( 5 10. 


597 



THE l.AST PHASE OV ANGl.O-l-RENCH CON I'Ll CT 


Decacii returned to Fiance on die and April 1811 and was 
coldly received by the Emperor. A commission of enquiry was 
appointed to examine the causes of the loss of the Isle of France, 
but in the end Oecaen was acquitted of all charges of negli 
gence. Napoleon tried to make light of the loss of the Isle of 
J ranee b\ putting in an official note in the Monileur. ft ex¬ 
plained that the capture of the Isles of France and Bourbon was 
no real loss for France. These colonies had cost. France 20 
millions every year, with which ten ships of the line could be 
constructed. The colonies could he recaptured later, after 
France had built up a strong navy in five years. In the mean¬ 
time the possession of the colonies would weaken England bs 
necessitating a dispersion of her troops.’ Well might an in 
dignant French historian ridicule this note as a childish con¬ 
solation. unworthy of a great man like Napoleon. 2 


‘ Fremont L'lle de France sous Decani, pp. G17-f»8 
2 Ibid., p. 618. 


MM 


CHAPTER XXI 




THE RETURN OF THE FRENCH 

In 1816 the French possessions in India were restored. The 
Peace Treaty of 30th May 1814 stipulated for the restitution 
of all the settlements and factories which France had possessed 
in India on the 1st January 1792. This was followed by a 
Commercial Convention, signed on the 7th March 1815. Before 
that, the Government of Louis XVIII had taken prompt mea¬ 
sures to take possession of the settlements in India. A grand- 
nephew' of Dupleix, General Joseph Desnos de Kerjean, was 
appointed to head the administration in India, and he reached 
Pondicherry on the 6th May 1815. But by that time the 
situation had changed by Napoleon’s return to France, and 
there could be no question of restitution of territories. Aftei 
the final defeat of Napoleon, the Peace Treaty of 20th Novem¬ 
ber 1815 again provided for the restoration of French posses* 
vsions in India, subject to the same conditions as laid down in 
the earlier treaty. The French were not to fortify any of tlieii 
settlements, nor to maintain troops beyond the requirements 
of police duty. They were also to recognise English sovereignty 
over the Indian possessions of the East India Company. On 
the same day w r as signed in London a Convention settling the 
details of the execution of the treaty and completing in a way 
the Commercial Convention of 7th March 1815. 

After the treaty of 20th November 1815 the French Gov¬ 
ernment made new arrangements for the administration of the 
Indian settlements. In place of the military type of govern¬ 
ment, headed by General Kerjean, which had been decided 
upon after the treaty of 1814, was substituted the old type of 
civil administration under a Governor and an Intendant. In 
April 18x6 Comte Dupur and Joseph Dayot were appointed 
Governor and Intendant respectively and also Royal Commis¬ 
sioners for taking possession of the settlements and factories in 
India. 1 Thev started from France in two frigates, the Amphi- 