

1 Driault -La Politique Orientate dc Napoleon : Sebastian » ci Gardane 
(1806-1808), pp. 318-319. 

2 Ibid, p. 320. 





THE LAST PHASE OF AttCLO-FRENCH CONFLICT 


that he was :o bring about a compromise between Russia and 
Persia without any embarrassing commitment for France. Tatter, 
after the outbreak of the Spanish War, Gardane was informed 
that France could not think of Persia at the moment and that 
he was to extricate himself from the difficulty of his situation 
as best as he could. 

Russo-Persiari hostilities were resumed in October 1808. In 
pursuance of ministerial instructions from Paris, far from giving 
any help to Persia, Gardane even withdrew the two French 
officers, Verdier and Lamy, attached to the army of Prince Abbas 
Mirza. That was the breaking point for Persian patience. On 
the 53rd November 1808 the Shah called Gardane to an audience 
and told him plainly that unless the French came to his assist 
ance by the end of January 1809, he would enter into negotia¬ 
tions with the English. Knowing the attitude of his own Gov¬ 
ernment, Gardane started preparations for his departure. After 
the landing of the English envoy, Sir Harford Jones, at Bandar 
Abbas, the Shah again called Gardane to an audience. Gardane 
could yet give no definite assurance on behalf of the French, 
and the audience ended in an unpleasant note. On February 
4, 1809 Jones was given permission to proceed to Teheran. 
On the 8th Gardane met the Shah and told him that he had 
decided to leave, keeping only two agents at Teheran for some 
time more. 1 

Gardane left Teheran on the 13th February. Fath Ali 
wrote a friendly letter to Napoleon on the 14th, making no 
mention of Gardane’s departure. Immediately after he entered 
into negotiations with the English envoy and concluded a treaty, 
providing the same assurance against Russian aggression which 
he had previously sought from the French. Strangely enough, 
Napoleon was angry at Gardane’s conduct. He wanted Gardane 
to remain at Teheran to observe developments, till at least he 
was driven out by the Shah. In a letter to the Shah Napoleon 
informed him that he had disgraced and dismissed Gardane 
from service for having left Teheran without permission, and 
that he would shortly send another ambassador. He also wrote 
that he appreciated the reasons which had induced the Shah 


1 They left Teheran in April 1809. 



tHK FUfcNOft IN INDIA 

to accept the English embassy. It may be noted here that the 
second ambassador from France was never sent, and Napoleon 
abandoned completely his Eastern projects. 

V. The Capture of the isles of France and Bourbon. 

The tangible result of the mission of General Gardane was 
to bring home to the English the importance of the land ap¬ 
proaches to India and the necessity of guarding them through 
treaties of alliance with the Sikh ruler of the Punjab, the Amirs 
of Sind and Afghanistan arid the Shah of Persia. English diplo¬ 
macy was successful in sealing off the entire region to any future 
French attempt at penetration. In 1809 the French retained 
only the Isles of France and Bourbon and the doubtful prospect 
of getting assistance from their Dutch allies in Java. The 
English soon undertook the expulsion of the French from their 
last possessions in the East. Not that there was any appre¬ 
hension of an attack from the French Isles, but their capture 
was necessary to put a stop to the activities of the privateers, 
who had inflicted so much damage to English trade and com¬ 
merce. In fact, the English could have easily taken the islands 
during the Revolutionary War or after the resumption of hosti¬ 
lities In 1803. The real state of the islands was not altogether 
unknown to them. It is rather surprising therefore that in 
spite of heavy losses at the hands of the French privateers, the 
English did not undertake the capture of the Isles till 1810. 
The main reasons were,—the preoccupations of the English 
with affairs in India and the unwillingness of the home Govern¬ 
ment to authorise the Company’s Government in India to 
undertake any expensive and distant expedition. 