

The activities of the English after the occupation of 
Rodriguez made Decaen realise that they were in earnest and 
ready for a final offensive against the Isles. Due to the in¬ 
difference of the home Government, he was left with hopelessly 
inadequate resources to offer any resistance if the English 
attacked. Ever since the capture of the Cape by the English 
Decaen had been sending frantic appeals to the Minister Decr&s 
for reinforcements. At the end of 1808 three frigates were sent 
from France, of which only one, the Vdnus, under Hamelin, 
leached the Isle of France in March 1809, the other two being 
captured by the English. In May 1809 arrived another frigate, 
the Bellone, commanded by Duperre. Affairs on the Continent 
diverted the attention of Napoleon, and no further help was 
sent to Decaen. Needing troops for the defence of the Isles, 
Decaen issued a proclamation in August 1809, calling upon 

iC. R. O .—The French in India Series, Vol. I (B. I.. P. VI, G): 
Letter from Colonel Keating about the capture of St. Paul 


THE FRENCH IN INDIA 

slave-holders to place a certain number of slaves at his disposal 
for recruitment irt the army. But this order had to be with¬ 
drawn because of the opposition of the European population, 
who feared a general rising of the staves it they were armed.' 

It is curious to note that although the French had a few 
ships which could have assisted in the defence of the Isles, they 
were sent out to distant parts on commerce-raiding expeditions, 
even in 1809-10 when the English intentions about an attack 
on the Isles were getting clear. Thus it was that during the 
English attack on Rodriguez and St. Paul, all the French ships, 
with the exception of the frigate Caroline, were absent, giving 
the English an easy opportunity to land troops. The French 
ships returned at the beginning of 1810, and although there 
was an obvious ground to fear a return of the English to the 
Isle of Bourbon, three of the ships, the Bellone, the Minerve 
and the Victor, under the command o'. I)upend, were again 
sent out on a commerce-raiding mission in March 1810, while 
two others, the Venus and the Manche, under the command of 
Hamel in. were sent to Port Louis for repairs. It was the very 
time when Minto, encouraged by the success of the raid on 
St. Paul, had decided to send reinforcements for a determined 
attack on the Isle of Bourbon, without waiting for orders from 
England. In M arch-April 1810 the English blockading squa¬ 
dron off the French Isles was reinforced by three ships from 
the Cape, the Iphigenia, the Magidenne and the Nereide, while 
Decaen received one new frigate from France, the Aside. 

It was in March 1810 that Minto decided on the expedition 
against the Isle of Bourbon. 3 As before, Keating and Rowley 
were to command the land and naval forces. Large reinforce¬ 
ments were sent from India, bringing the number of troops 
under Keating to 3,650 men, of whom nearly half were Euro¬ 
peans. Minto was confident of success, and <nt at the same 
time Earquh.tr to assume charge as Governor of the Isle. The 
English reinforcements reached Rodriguez towards the end of 
June. On the 3rd July the expedition started, the destination 
being St. Denis, the capital of the Isle of Bourbon. In spite 
of adverse weather the English effected landings at three 