

The French could at last return to India after nearly a 
quarter of a century. But they came back under circumstances 
altogether different from what had existed in 1792. By the 
clear stipulations of the treaties of 1814 and 1815, relating to 
fortifications and maintenance of troops, their settlements in 
fndia ceased to have any political importance whatsoever. The 
dreams of Dupleix completely faded away, as the French had 
to accept the new situation, in which there was not the least 
possibility of a political rivalry with the English. The French 
possessions in India were to remain as a few small, scattered 
and undefended territories, lying entirely at the mercy of the 
English'; It was, however, not only the military stipulations of 
the treaties of 1814 and 1815 which altered the position of the 
French. What was equally or perhaps more important was the 
change in the political situation in India during the interval 
from 1793 to 181b, brought about by the rapid expansion and 
consolidation of English power over almost the entire sub-con¬ 
tinent. The territories under direct English rule had increased 
beyond all recognition, and all the Indian Powers with whom 
the French had maintained diplomatic contacts before had been 
brought into the system of Subsidiary Alliance established by 
Wellesley. By the time the French came back to India in 
1816, the English position had become so firmly consolidated 
that not even the boldest optimist among the French could 
dream of shaking it. Indeed, it was only because the French 
realised this fact and agreed to accept their new situation as 


1 P. A. ms. 6349. 


2 Ibid., ms. 6636. 


mtSTfiy 





final that their few scattered and undefended possessions were 
allowed to survive till the end of the British rule in India. 
Again, it was the realisation of the futility of holding on to a 
few isolated pockets against the will of the new Government 
of independent India, inheriting the position, and treaty rights 
of the earlier Government, that led to the final departure of 
ihe French and the transfer of their possessions to the Indian 
Union. 

# # * 

With the return of the French in 1816 ends the long story 
of Anglo-French rivalry in India narrated in the preceding 
pages. If the task of the historian be merely to tell the story, 
nothing further need be said. But perhaps at this point a few 
observations on the historical importance of the subject matter 
of the story may not be wholly out of place and considered as 
an infliction on readers. The real importance of the Anglo- 
French rivalry in the 18th century lay in the new turn it gave to 
India's political destiny. Ihe prolonged struggle for power 
between two European nations was mainly instrumental hi 
bringing India into dose contact with the West, with all the 
consequences which followed from it. One of these conse¬ 
quences, the political domination of India by a European 
Power, had absorbed the attention of historians and politicians 
so much that other results of the contact, historically more 
significant and durable, were frequently overlooked. Perhaps, 
this was inevitable, as long as India remained under foreign 
political subjection. Now that the chapter of Western domi¬ 
nation, after all a very short one in the context of India’s long 
history, has come to a close, and both the nations who fought 
for supremacy in India have been forced by circumstances to 
leave the scene of their earlier conflict, it is possible for us to 
take a more balanced view of the results of India's contact with 
the West. That is why me time is now appropriate to re tell 
the story of Anglo-French rivalry in India, not as an isolated 
event, but as the starting point of that historical process through 
which India could become a part of the ONE WORLD. 