

## References

1 The assumption of pressure applied in imposing“Westernization” is realistic in terms of the historical record. It does not exclude the likelihood that a taste for“Westernization“ was subsequently developed and that some features of it (conspicuous consumption, for example) grew at a rate that exceeded the original intentions of the state.

2 This can be estimated on the assumption of, let us say, three males per gentry household, which would give us the following results, derived from Table 1: (image) (The rate of population growth of the gentry in the eighteenth century given in Table 1 indicates a family size of two to three males per family. The use of three males per gentry household does not determine the results of our analysis.)

3 Strumilin, S. G., Istoriia chernoi metallurgii v SSSR, I (Moscow, 1954) 273 Google Scholar; Indova, E. I., Krepostnoe khoziaistvo v nachale XIX veka (Moscow, 1955), pp. 30, 186–87 Google Scholar; Sivkov, K. V., Ocherki po istorii krepostnogo khoziaistva i krest'ianskogo dvizheniia v Rossii v pervoi polovine XIX veka (Moscow, 1951), p. 146. Google Scholar

4 Not all serfs paid money rent; many rendered labor services on the estate or paid rent in kind or were liable for a combination of the two. For our calculations we use the money rent as an approximation of the value of the other types of service. Depending upon the period, locality, and other conditions, the value of other types of rent fluctuated above or below the level of money rents.

5 For the portion of imported goods consumed by gentry and by nongentry we must rely on indirect evidence. The group closest to the gentry in terms of income was the upper merchant class, which presumably participated in the consumption of foreign goods if only for the status symbol thus provided. Some contemporary documents, however, clearly indicate a lag of the“import tastes” of merchants behind those of the upper gentry. In 1793 a government committee appointed to investigate the causes of the depreciation of the ruble on foreign exchanges and to recommend remedies included representatives of the Russian merchant class among those invited to testify. The merchants regarded most of the imported wines and foodstuffs, textiles, and leather goods as“luxuries” either totally superfluous or replaceable by satisfactory domestic products. Two merchants—Nikolai Rezvoi, head of the St. Petersburg merchant guilds, and Mikhail Samoilov, member of the first merchant guild, consisting of the richest merchants—listed in detail the imported commodities which, in their view, ought to be forbidden or restricted. Most revealing as a reflection of the consumer attitudes of the upper group of Russian merchants are the reasons given. The following is a composite selection from the catalogues submitted by the two men (the explanations were given by Samoilov): fine woolens (domestically produced, can do without them); beer and porter (a delicacy, a whim); fine linens; socks and stockings (some domestically produced, one can do without others); fresh fruit (a great deal domestically produced); wines and liquors (unnecessary); furs (domestic of good quality available); foreign tobacco (imported for fashion, not for quality and usefulness); cheeses (a delicacy, anyone can make it for himself); sweet vodkas (a whim); syrup (sufficient from domestic sugar refineries); coconuts, Greek nuts, etc. (a delicacy and bad for health); gloves (some domestically produced, one can do without others); exotic birds (for no good reason); blankets (can do without); macaroni (a delicacy); chocolate (a delicacy). Apparently keeping in mind that one ought not to deprive the gentry and rich merchants of all“luxuries,” Samoilov proposed“heavy import duties” for 33 additional commodities. See N. N. Firsov, Pravitel'stvo i obshchestvo v ikh otnosheniiakh k vneshnei torgovle Rossii v tsarstvovanie Ekateriny H-oi (Moscow, 1901-2), pp. 181-89.