

two words if more will do," and that that Mexican writer in one of his
works throws at the reader "every stereotype of hispanidad propaganda
 (Bulls, Virgins, Tangos, Gauchos, Don Quixote)," he gives voice to his read-
ers'verdict (most of them, I hazard to guess) on that exhibitionist writer.
"My Portuguese was the swallowed nasal Portuguese of Lisbon, and I was
utterly unprepared for the musicality, rhythm, and softness of Brazilian
speech:' he writes on the occasion of meeting his first Brazilian in his aca-
demic supervisor's office at Princeton. Until then his Brazil had been "en-
tirely phantasmogorical," he adds, the stuff of books and films. The
historian's trail, and the anxiety of the first probings of an alien world: they
come together for us in that episode. And we don't have to search for the
historian's pride in the world he had come to adopt in the Americas. It is
there in Maxwell's sense of exasperation with the "provincialism" of Eu-
rope. The Old World may have "discovered" and disrupted the New World,
but the latter remade the Old Continent, he reminds us. The educated
Europeans may have been fixated on classical literature and Renaissance
cosmology. But they did so, he adds, while "drinking their American-
produced coffee, smoking American-produced tobacco, binding their texts
between American leather hides, and enjoying the leisure that the divi-
dends from overseas investments made possible."
   At the heart of this book, its binding if you will, is of course Portugal's
imperial journey: it is the historian's beat and his pride. It was the Por-
tuguese, he reminds us, who linked the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean, who
mapped the coastline of Asia, and explored the African coastline from
Cape Verde in the West to the mouth of the Red Sea in the East. In one of
those mysterious spurts that enable a particular people to do stunning,
surprising feats, the Portuguese recast and revisioned the world. Their ad-
vantage, we learn, was less navigational than conceptual: their cartography
enabled them to arrive at a "new graphic conception of global space." The
Portuguese broke the monopoly of the trans-Saharan trade route between
West Africa and the southern shores of the Mediterranean. In less than two
decades after Vasco da Gama's voyage of discovery of 1497-1498, Portugal
had claimed a vast dominion: Brazil in 1500, Goa in 1510, Malacca in 1511,
Hormuz in 1515, and so on. Portugal aimed for the passageways of trade,
the "choke points" of international trade: Hormuz at the mouth of the Per-
sian Gulf, Mombassa and Mozambique, Malacca, the Azores, Macao at the
mouth of the Pearl River in China, Cape Verde. The Portuguese must have
intuited their own weakness. Portugal, Maxwell reminds us, was after all, a
"small country with a large empire." No wonder the Portuguese hugged the
coasts-and stayed aloof from the interior of the worlds they probed and
ventured into.
xiv • Foreword

    Weakness-and backwardness-stalked the imperial push. The neme-
sis was not far behind. In the span of a few decades after that remarkable
spurt, Portugal itself slipped under Castilian hegemony in 1580. A de-
ranged monarch had taken the country and its nobility on a quixotic cru-
sade into North Africa; the venture had issued in tragedy and the
decimation of the country's nobility. Philip II had offered a traumatized
Portugal rescue. But an absentee, semi-alien monarch would not do. Por-
tugal was to recover its independence in 1640, but the imperial thrust was
broken. There would be no Portuguese empire in the Orient. The very na-
tional epic of Portugal's voyages of discovery, The Lusiads, by the great poet
Luis Vaz de Camoes, published in 1572, was a lament for what might have
been. There was patriotism aplel1ty in Camoes, and there was national
pride, to be sure. The poet, who had spent seventeen of his adult years as a
sailor and soldier in Goa, Cochin, and Macao, praised Portugal's urge to
"discover the sun's very cradle in the East." But Camoes himself was a child
of disappointment. The trajectory of his country-the early success, then
the steady retreat from progress, and Castilian rule-brackets his life. He
was born the year Vasco da Gama died, in 1524; he died in 1580, right as his
country was slipping under the Castilian noose. Portugal succumbed to
despondency, and the sorrow is there in The Lusiads, and a knowledge of
the heartache that came with the imperial temptation. In Canto IV, a wise
old man comes to the shore to bid farewell to the voyagers and to weep for
his country, and for the sorrow that imperial appetite heaped upon her: