

                                                                            I       ^ /'G £JM /S
                                                                                {        i.     V m o de
                                                                                Unf *MJr° '-.■*££-1AX t w o
      Travels and                                                                                                                     D t l a , / ____________ * t S T B * L t *                   <?
                                                             Detail                 )         j
               Sojourns
KN TRAN CK   TO TH K   H A R B O R O F R IO
                              Foreword-Blame It on Rio
                  The Historical Vocation ofKenneth Maxwell


In one of his arresting and subtle works, Finding the Center (1984), V. S.
Naipaul writes of the promptings of his craft and offers a narrative of his
literary beginnings-a narrative intended to "admit the reader to the pro-
cess of writing." By now we know the themes and the methods of that
writer: the journey from his small birthplace in Trinidad to the metropoli-
tan center, the panic of arrival, the wanderlust that took him to distant
lands in a world beginning to shake off its colonial heritage. There was
glamour in the travel, and knowledge, the gathering together of the strands
of a man's life and background. In these pages by the gifted historian Ken-
neth Maxwell, we are «admitted" into the process of writing as well. A his-
torian of great talent, working at the peak of his powers, takes us into the
promptings of his own vocation. Piece by exquisite piece in this book, we
see the historian's method and the concerns that have been the driving pas-
sions of his life for four decades now: the peopling of the Americas, the
shaking up of continents, the spirit that took a «precocious" Portugal into
its imperial venture, the play between Portugal's extensive imperial reach
into Africa and Asia and the Americas, and the limits of its own demogra-
phy and abilities, the rise of Brazil and its tumultuous history.
    The direction of Professor Maxwell's journey reverses Naipaul's,
though. With the historian, it is the pushing outward of a child of the em-
pire, a young man at Cambridge venturing into the tropics. Born in 1941,
Maxwell belonged to a generation that was hanging on with its fingernails
to the old imperial order. On a «misty, cold, damp, and dreary East Anglian
evening," in an old picture palace that had reinvented itself as an «art the-



                                     xi
xii • Foreword

ater;' Maxwell had seen Marcel Camus's film Black Orpheus. It "could not
have been a greater revelation;' he writes. The ancient story set against the
tropical background, the color and the vibrancy of that background,
hooked him. "I determined immediately that Brazil, and above all, Rio de
Janeiro, was somewhere I had to go." He went there via Lisbon, and in that
great Luso-Brazilian world he was to find his material, and his range, and
they are on full display here. This "material" could have supplied great fic-
tion or travel writing: Maxwell himself, as these beautiful pieces demon-
strate, with their love of color, with their ability to conjure up a forlorn
colonial outpost on the South China Sea (Macao), or the teeming streets of
Brazil's cities, or the life and murder of a rubber tapper, a union activist, in
the hinterland of Brazil by a violent clan of ranchers, could have pulled it
off and produced that sort of literary work. But he is a historian of ideas,
and of social and economic life, and his insatiable, boundless curiosity in-
fuses this work with an energy and a life all its own.
    Edward Gibbon, as we learn from the late historian John Clive's loving
tribute to the reading and writing of history, Not by FactAlone (1989), once
called the historian's first person "the most disgusting of pronouns:' Gib-
bon was giving voice to an ambivalence, for the historian's "I" was there in
his work, in his footnotes, in the text itself, the writer's personality and atti-
tudes toward the subjects at hand. Macaulay, too, used his first person to
convey to his readers a sense of immediacy, of places seen and oral histories
he had collected. So did Tocqueville who had his own way of taking the
reader into his confidence, of letting the reader know what that liberal aris-
tocratic historian thought of revolutionary violence and pretensions, Clive
tells us. The narrator's "I" gives this work by Maxwell its unique place in
what this prolific historian has produced. We saw precious little (directly,
that is) of Maxwell when he produced his seminal biography of Portugal's
leading eighteenth-century statesman, Marques de Pombal, and his at-
tempt at a revolution from above, Pombal: Paradox of the Enlightenment
(1995). Nor would we have surmised much about the historian had we
read his definitive accounts of the Portuguese Revolution of 1974, or of the
political traffic between Portugal and Brazil in the second half of the eigh-
teenth century. This work is different: we are truly taken into the narrator's
confidence, admitted into the craft of writing. The personal pronoun is
never intrusive though. There is a kind of trust between historian and
reader, an illicit pact of sorts.
    We know and trust this historian: we are eager to travel with him to
Macao or the Amazon forests; we are eager for him to tell us about other
historians and chroniclers. We pick up his trail-and his likes and dislikes,
for that matter. When he writes that Carlos Fuentes is "never one to use
                                                             Foreword • xiii