

                                                                  FouadAjami
This page intentionally left blank
                                               Acknowledgments


First my thanks to Tomas Amorim who is a valued colleague at the Council
on Foreign Relations and as my research associate from 1999 to 2002 has
been instrumental to seeing this selection of essays prepared for publica-
tion. I am grateful to him for his care and attention to detail and for his pa-
tience with my endless reworkings of the texts. The Council has provided
me with a stimulating environment for work, and I appreciate the great
latitude they have allowed me over the years to pursue my interests in his-
tory as well as public policy. lowe much to its president, Leslie H. Gelb, for
his encouragement and support, and not least appointing me in 1995 as
first holder of the Nelson and David Rockefeller Chair. Peter Tarnoff and
Nicholas X. Rizopoulos invited me to join the Council in 1989, and for this
I am much in their debt. I have had the great privilege of working with fine
editors such as Bob Silvers of the New York Review of Books, James Chace
and Linda Wrigley of the World Policy Journal, Helder Macedo and Toni
Huberman of Portuguese Studies, and Steven Lagerfeld of the Wilson Quar-
terly, as well as Dauril Alden, Marcos Sa Correa, Flavio Pinheiro, Pedro
Doria, Adriano Schwartz, and Marcos Flaminio Peres. All held me to the
highest standards. It is a special pleasure to appear in the Routledge Series
New World in the Atlantic World, edited by Jack Greene and Amy Bushnell.
Both have been pioneers in the field of cross-cultural Atlantic studies, long
an orphan, but now at long last receiving due attention by their colleagues,
and they have always understood the interconnectedness of the Americas
and the value of comparative approaches to histories which remain too
often parochial and compartmentalized. I am especially grateful to Jack
since he has long kept me linked to the historical profession despite my


                                     xix
xx • Acknowledgments

wanderings (or, as Albert Hirschman calls it, «trespassing") between vari-
ous disciplinary fields. For this I am ever grateful. John Coatsworth, direc-
tor of the David Rockefeller Center at Harvard, and James Dunkerley,
director of the Institute of Latin American Studies at the University of
London, read the whole manuscript, and I was encouraged to go forth with
their support. And not least, my thanks to Fouad Ajami for his splendid if
undeserved foreword.

                                                        Kenneth Maxwell
                                                New York City, March 2003
                                                       Illustrations



All illustrations are from The Boy Travellers in South America: Adventures of
Two Youths in a Journey through Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay,
Argentine Republic, and Chili, with Descriptions ofPatagonia and Tierra del
Fuego, and Voyages upon the Amazon and La Plata Rivers, by Thomas W.
Knox (New York: Harper & Brothers, Franklin Square, 1886).
  Foreword-Entrance to the harbor of Rio
  Chapter I-Surveying under difficulties
  Chapter 2-Marching through the forest
  Chapter 3-Cacao
  Chapter 4-Buccaneers embarking on an expedition
  Chapter S-Bay of Panama, from the southeastern rampart
  Chapter 6-Ruins of church of San Domingo
  Chapter 7-View of Rio from Boa Vista
  Chapter 8-Statue of Pedro I
  Chapter 9-Pair of toucans and their nest
  Chapter 10-In the fields
  Chapter 11-A Brazilian forest, with characteristic mammalia
  Chapter 12-In the rainy season
  Chapter 13-Sedan chair
  Chapter 14-Scene on a coolie ship
  Chapter IS-Looking across the bridge
  Chapter 16-Rio de Janeiro: The aqueduct