

Quincy Adams both as secretary of state between 1817 and 1825 and as
president in the four crucial years that followed. Adams was bereft of trop-
ical romance. "He saw South Americans as irredeemably corrupted by the
Roman Catholic religion, Iberian tradition, and the tropical climate."
Brazil had to find its own mix of liberty and racial assimilation. Maxwell
allows Brazil its final flourish and vindication, a signature of its own on
this great quest: the seminal, great figure of its independence, Jose Bonifa-
cio, was a metallurgist. He aimed for a Brazilian race that would «amalga-
mate" all the diverse "metals" of Brazil, blend them into a common
national identity.

                                    ***

   Now a word about the "introducer's" personal pronoun. My knowledge
of the Americas is rather scant, of the Iberian world a bit better. My au-
thority for writing these brief pages of appreciation lowe to Kenneth
Maxwell's flattering and surprising invitation. I couldn't have declined the
honor, though undeserved. Circles are closed and connections are made in
these pages. It was at Princeton where Maxwell met his first Brazilian, as we
were told. It was there, on the same campus, a decade later, where I met
Professor Maxwell. We are roughly the same age; he had grabbed the colo-
nial drama of the time, Portugal's struggle with its last African colonies
and Portugal's struggle at home with its rebellious young officers who had
had their fill with imperial burden. It was with excitement that I can still
call up that I read his magnificent depiction of the Portuguese Revolution
of 1974, and my admiration of his craft has never ceased.
   My second claim is given me by the work itself. Maxwell writes of bro-
ken worlds and "hollow empires." A child and a chronicler of matters and
lands Islamic and Arab, I know something of that malady and of the trajec-
tory of civilizations that rise on impulse, draw on mysterious energy, and
then succumb to despondency. I may be unfamiliar with the settings of
Professor Maxwell's work, but the themes are innately, painfully, familiar.
The very first time I came upon fado music and songs, I understood not a
word, but I intuitively, readily, caught the themes and the mood-love and
loss and lament. I had no difficulty «entering" the haunting songs of the
great Amalia Rodrigues: we have her peer in the legendary Egyptian
woman singer Umm Kulthum, who must be reckoned the twentieth cen-
tury's greatest Arabic singer, and whose themes and tone were evocations
of loss and sorrow. The "fado" in the Portuguese fragments by Maxwell is
familiar to me in the same way. Of all of Maxwell's work, this work is
meant for the general reader (hence my casting) who wants to know about
                                                             Foreword • xvii

the history of chocolate, or the voyages of discovery that have remade our
world, or the true historical sociology of pirates and piracy.
    Our towering historians are few and far between. In the age of the 24/7
cable channels and the gabfest and the instant analysts, those historians are
sure to become rarer still. Attribution, rigor, fidelity to sources, once the as-
sumed tools and ways of the craft, are flung on the sidelines. Behold in
these pages this distinguished historian, the (younger) peer of Bernard
Lewis on Islam and C. Vann Woodward on Southern history and Arthur
Schlesinger on the American experience and David Landes on economic
history. In these pages we are in the hands of a guide who truly owns his
field, and roams its expanses with easy authority and a genuine wonder at
the ways of our world.