


                                       I
The route to Brazil, however, took me on a detour through Lisbon and
Princeton. I suppose it was typical of my generation that we did not see ed-
ucation as leading to anything in particular, or ever gave much thought to
the fact that at the end of it all we might need to get a job. So I graduated
from Cambridge in 1963 without any real sense of what I wanted to do. I
had traveled a lot as a student; by train from Berlin to Warsaw, Moscow,
and on to Leningrad, today once more known as St. Petersburg, a turn of
history which in 1961 seemed totally impossible. Later I took the sad rem-
nant of the Orient Express (by then basically a third-class carriage attached
at each frontier to other trains) as it made its way down the Rhine Valley
through Austria and the Balkans into Greece. I crossed the Mediterranean
to Crete and Cyprus by ship and worked on an Israeli kibbutz north of the
sea of Galilee. I spent a lazy marvelous summer in Florence where Harold
Acton, the last of the eccentric 1920s esthetes, took me around the haunts
                                                      First Encounters • 3

of Byron and his friends; and then in Normandy where my host had the
only Lagonda in the region in which we raced around shouting, "Vive de
Gaulle;' between the Basilica of Our Lady of Lisieux, the beaches and race-
tracks of Dauville, Camembert factories and illegal calvados stills where the
red-nosed proprietor would proudly display the helmets of the German
soldiers he had killed (he said) during the Allied Normandy landing.
    So to take a year off in Europe seemed a sensible thing to do when noth-
ing else very attractive beckoned. I went to Madrid for six months where I
lived just off the Puerta del Sol and attended lectures I barely understood
at the university, and then took the Lusitanian Express to Lisbon. I did
think travel should have a purpose, so mine was to learn the languages. I fi-
nanced my stay by writing articles for a regional English newspaper, the
 Western Morning News, on such topics as "Galicia: Spain's Forgotten Cor-
ner" and «Lisbon: City Built on an Earthquake's Ruins" and a comparison
of Spain and Portugal which came down to the fact that in Spain the
women were beautiful and men ugly whereas in Portugal the opposite was
true, and for these articles I received five guineas a time, enough then to
live in a modest pensao (boarding house) for a month.
    Unbeknownst to me, my tutor at Cambridge had written to the Gul-
benkian Foundation in Lisbon to say I was there, and I was called in one day
to see the head of the International Division, Dr. Ayala Monteiro. He said that
Gulbenkian would like to help me in my studies and I should submit a bud-
get to him. I did so by itemizing what I was actually spending. Ayala Mon-
teiro laughed uproariously on seeing it-no one could survive on such a sum
he said-and he wrote the budget for me. For the rest of my time in Lisbon, I
received a very welcome check each month from Gulbenkian. Lisbon was
then full of conscripted soldiers on their way to fight in Africa, and I found
the absence of Brazil from the discourse on colonies very odd. After all Brazil
had gained independence from Portugal over a century before, yet Brazil was
held up as the origin of the ideology of Luso-tropicalism by which the
Salazar regime sought to perpetuate its colonies in Africa, not liberate them.
   Of course my Brazil was still entirely phantasmogorical. I had yet to
meet a real Brazilian. England at the time offered very few prospects as far
as Latin American studies was concerned. The two or three British "Latin
Americanists" had not been to Latin America at all, and they had written
their books entirely based on the archives in London. They looked across
the Atlantic "by spyglass;' it was said. The best of them, John Parry, had
written a report for the government recommending a major investment in
the field but had then himself taken off immediately for Harvard. So I
looked at what the various American universities might offer, and came
across a marvelous book by Stanley Stein on the Brazilian coffee-produc-
ing town of Vassouras in the Paraiba Valley, a rich microstudy that de-
scribed intimately a whole community in transition. I applied to Princeton
4 • NakedTropics