




                                    xxi
UR   . I G U D 'R D1 FICUL 1 .•
                                                        CHAPTER             1
                                          First Encounters
                                                    "Brazil is not for beginners."
                                                      -Antonio Carlos Jobim




I do not remember exactly when I became conscious of Brazil, but I dis-
tinctly remember how and where. I was in my second or third year as an
undergraduate at Cambridge. At the time, diversions were limited. The
curriculum in history never seemed to get beyond the Tudors and Stuarts,
and I was heartily tired of them. The continent of Europe appeared rarely
in it; the Americas never. The wider world was pretty much limited to the
gaudy Indian and Chinese restaurants in town, which compensated for the
dreary food and very formal dining in the grand old sixteenth-century col-
lege hall. Life for a twenty-year-old at Cambridge was then still recogniz-
ably monastic. Undergraduates in the early sixties were required to dress in
academic gowns at all times, and toward the end of my period at Cam-
bridge in 1963 the dean of my college, the Reverend Doctor Bessant, mum-
bled his displeasure one evening, after the interminable Latin grace was
concluded and before we could sit down, that a young gentleman had been
observed dressed in workmen's clothes. This, the dean admonished us, was
a shocking offense to the decency at the college, which he hoped would not
be repeated. He was referring to the first appearance of blue jeans in that
hallowed place.
   The Indian restaurants in Cambridge were infamous for notes on the
tables which read: "plates only come with meals." At first sight it was an
odd statement of the obvious, but was intended to intimidate undergradu-
ates who might request four plates for one meal which they would then
share, not an economical outcome as far as the restaurant owner was con-
cerned. In Rio I learned that Brazilian students were well ahead in this
                                     1
2 • NakedTropics

game. They took care to strategically seat themselves toward the periphery
of an open-air cafe. After enjoying a churrasco (steak) and batatas fritas
(french fries) and several excellent chopes (draft beer), on a signal they
would all rise en masse and run away at great speed before the bill could be
presented. I am not sure that such guerrilla tactics would have worked in a
small town like Cambridge, though Cambridge did have its own form of
genteel robbery. Aspiring aristocrats at the time still believed it good form
to run up bills they had no intention of paying with the local haberdashers
and tailors. But like so much else of that epoch in Britain-the somewhat
threadbare tail end of an old world kept alive well beyond its useful life-
this was all for show. Unbeknownst to the debtors the merchants had ex-
tended credit in the full knowledge that fathers would eventually honor
their sons' debts, just as their own fathers had honored theirs with the
same tailors and haberdashers a generation before; thus the artifice of aris-
tocratic nonchalance and merchant thrift could both be safeguarded with-
out loss of face.
   The expedition to the "flicks» was the real highlight each week. We bicy-
cled out, gowns and all, to a vast barnlike and decrepit old picture palace
on the outskirts of town which had kept in business by reinventing itself as
an ((art theater." It was there I saw Marcel Camus's Black Orpheus. Set
against a spectacular tropical landscape, this ancient story erupted from
the screen magnificently with drama, color, and extraordinary music. At
least that is how it hit me at the time. On a misty, cold, damp, and dreary
East Anglian evening it could not have been a greater revelation. I deter-
mined immediately that Brazil, and above all Rio de Janeiro, was some-
where I had to go.