

        Oh craving of command! Oh vain Desire!
        Oh vainest vanity man miscalleth Fame!
        Oh fraudulent gust, so easy fanned to fire
        By breath of vulgar, aping Honour's name!
        What just and dreadful judgement deals
             thine ire,
        To seely souls who overlove thy claim!
        What deaths, what direful risks, what
             agonies
        Wherewith thou guerdonest them, thy
             fitting prize!

        What new disaster dost thou here design?
        What horror of our realm and race invent?
        What unheard dangers or what deaths
             condign,
        Veiled by some name that soundeth
             excellent?
                                                              Foreword • xv

         What bribe of gorgeous reign, and golden
            mine,
         Whose ready offer is so rarely meant?
         What fame hast promised them? What
            pride of story?
         What palms? What triumphs? What
            victorious glory?
    That sorrow and despondency of Portugal-and the urge for reform
and repair-are caught in Maxwell's pages. But that despondency that
until recent years hovered over Portugal, a steady shadow and companion,
did not travel to Brazil. The tropics worked their will here. Indeed, it is
doubtful, I would think, that a child of an empire in decline (Britain) of
Maxwell's temperament would have been hooked on another somber land.
There may have been troubles in Brazil, but the history was one of tumult
and possibilities. In that Luso-Brazilian encounter, the issue, the child of
the encounter, bounced with greater freedom, had less burden to carry
than the motherland. In its passage from colony to imperial center (the
monarchy had quit Portugal for Brazil in the wake of Napoleon Bona-
parte's armies' invasion of Portugal in 1807) to independent nationhood in
1822, Brazil charted its own course; Portugal had for all practical purposes
become a dependency of Brazil.
    A central theme of Brazil's history, and a theme that Maxwell handles
with amazing skill, concerns the tension between liberty and order in
Brazilian history. In a land where the whites constituted a distinct minor-
ity, the revolution that held the attention of the oligarchs and the elite of
the land was not the American Revolution in 1776 but the Haitian slave re-
volt. In Haiti's fire, in the success of its rebels, the Brazilian elite saw the
specter of its own undoing. There was fear of revolutionary «contagion"
and a recognition that a society that would give unfettered run to the idea
of «equality" in a land «ordered by racial as much as by social hierarchy"
would be torn asunder. Progress in this outwardly flamboyant land was
tethered to order.
    Nor was the American republic, for that matter, so keen on seeing its lib-
erty replicated in the South American landscape. In a characteristic bit of
homage to liberty's reach, Thomas Jefferson, in 1820, had written to a Por-
tuguese-born friend, Abbe Correa da Serra, in praise of a new world in the
Americas free of the curse of Europe's wars, of a day over the horizon when
the fleets of Brazil and the United States would ride together "as brethren
of the same family and pursuing the same object." Jefferson was in retire-
ment in Monticello then. As Maxwell reminds us, the decisive American
voice on the independent nations of South America belonged to John
xvi • Foreword