

where, it was never wise to say exactly what one was studying. Strangely I
returned that day to my hotel to find the honorary British consul waiting
to take me out for a drink. News about strangers spread quickly in those
days. He looked as if he had stepped out of a Graham Greene novel. I most
vividly remember his very bloodshot eyes and rumpled linen suit. But he
was more than gracious and wanted me very much to meet an Oxford stu-
dent in town, a John Russell-Wood. 2 But I never got to see Russell-Wood
either. Perhaps the honorary consul should have known that the last thing
most Englishmen want to do is to meet other Englishmen in tropical
places. But as Professor Azevedo apparently had no instructions for me,
and it seemed I was on my own, I made for Rio, which was where, ever
since seeing Black Orpheus on that misty night in Cambridge, I most
wanted to be.
   I arrived in Rio at the Santos Dumont Airport and asked the airline
clerk if he could recommend a hotel. He looked at several cards in his
pocket and sent me off to a hotel on Rua Riachuelo, up beyond the old
eighteenth-century aqueduct over which the ancient trams so prominently
featured in Black Orpheus rumbled to and fro, and beyond the jumble of
shops and houses that then crowded the area. The hotel seemed fine until I
tried to sleep that night, only to find myself attacked by bedbugs and dis-
turbed by prowling rats, while on the corner outside the local prostitutes
chatted noisily. So the next day, I took myself off to the British Embassy
and asked a somewhat bemused official if he had a better recommenda-
tion. He did; it was the «Grande Hotel of Copacabana" as the embassy
called it, in fact the apartment of one Maite Bertrand, situated on the street
beside the Copacabana Palace Hotel. Maite Bertrand had apparently at
some point in her long life helped the British in some way by hiding some-
thing or someone somewhere; it was never made clear where or when
(Shanghai was mentioned), but for this service she had earned the grati-
tude of the British diplomatic service, and any respectable person seeking a
respectable place to stay was directed by the embassy to Maite.
   Her apartment was on the top floor, it was close to the beach, and I
found it quite delightful. Maite ran a sort of informal pensao (boarding
house) with several long-term residents, among them an ancient Greek
who had fled from Alexandria when King Farouk was overthrown and
Gamal Abdel Nasser took over the Egyptian government, two somewhat
prim English lady teachers at the Cultura Inglesa (which was and remains a
redoubtable bastion of British language instruction), a mechanic for Air

2A. J. R. Russell-Wood was to become a prolific scholar on things Brazilian and
Luso-Brazilian. His most recent book is The Portuguese Empire, 1415-1808: A
World on the Move (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998).
8 • NakedTropics

France who supervised the maintenance of the Air France jet that came
through every other week on the round-trip between Paris and Santiago,
Chile, and the French pilots, who also stayed at regular intervals but dined
separately from us so as not to have to eat at the same table as the me-
chanic, or so he claimed vociferously each time when they were gone. The
Air France crowd, however, was Maite's bread and butter. She charged the
rest of us a very modest fee which for me included a small room with its
own external door, a bathroom, and dinner each evening. We ate as a group
unless Maite was entertaining her own friends, or the Air France pilots
were in town, in which case she had a special table set up for herself and her
guests by the window.