

good time at the beach. I was really not sure what if anything had been ex-
pected of me because in effect I had been dropped in Brazil without any
real orientation and with no one much concerned about what if anything I
did there. "But that was the whole point," he said, smiling. "We want to
hook people to Brazil. It is cheaper for us to throw you out with a sum-
mer's support to sink or swim, rather than to commit ourselves for three
years' dissertation work only to find you hate the country and cannot cope
with living there." It was a marvelous revelation, and it was a strategy that
had certainly worked with me. I did not sink. I had fallen in love. I was
hooked. More so perhaps than Charles Wagley realized, though he proba-
bly guessed, wise old man that he was. I could not wait to get back. 3




3The historian Istvan Jancs6 felt I had been disrespectful to Professor Thales de
Azevedo (1915-1995) and responded in a subsequent edition of Folha's MAIS!
where this chapter first appeared. See Istvan Jancs6, «0 professor Azevedo e as an-
dan<ras do jovem Maxwell" (Professor Azevedo and the journeys of young
Maxwell), Folha de sao Paulo (January 25,1998), MAIS!
This page intentionally left blank
CHI'   THllOCGH THE FORE T.
                                                                  CHAPTER             2
                                                iAdi6s Columbus!
             ((Plausible impossibilities should be preferred to unconvincing possibilities."
                                                                    -Aristotle, Poetics 24




Columbus was mugged on the way to his own party. The American quin-
centennial year of 1992 drew to a close with barely a mention of the Admi-
ral of the Ocean Sea and would-be "Viceroy of India." Even the advertising
agencies found him too hot a potato (the potato of course being one of Eu-
rope's more useful American acquisitions resulting from Spain's conquests
in the New World). By October Columbus had become what advertisers
dislike most, especially when they are promoting department store sales on
family holidays: he had become controversial.


                                           II
Kirkpatrick Sale made a preemptive strike against Columbus as a destruc-
tive colonizer in The Conquest ofParadise, and in spite of criticism of Sale
for tendentiousness, the wave of subsequent publications could not erase
the initial tone he had set. l The great birthday therefore passed with barely
a murmur of national celebration. Two multimillion-dollar movies about
                                        II
Columbus came and went, largely unattended. Carlos Fuentes presented
several hours of televised historical travelogue in Europe arid the Ameri-
cas, ending predictably at the U.S.-Mexican border, where he asserted (at
least culturally speaking) Mexico's claim to the lost northern territories, an

Kirkpatrick Sale, The Conquest of Paradise: Christopher Columbus and the
1
Columbian Legacy (New York: Knopf, 1990).