



                                          13
14 • NakedTropics

irredentism President Salinas must have found singularly ill timed as the
debate over NAFTA heated up.
   Fuentes's book The Buried Mirror, like much of its bibliography, in fact
appears firmly stuck in the 1960s. 2 His presence seemed intrusive in the
otherwise well-filmed and constructed television series with the same title,
which would have been much better had it made more use of the origina-
tor of the idea, Peggy Liss, a distinguished historian of Spain and Spanish
America and author of an excellent new biography of Columbus's sponsor,
Queen Isabella. Fuentes, never one to use two words if more will do, throws
in virtually every stereotype of hispanidad propaganda (Bulls, Virgins,
Tangos, Gauchos, Don Quixote) while adding little that is distinctive of his
own. Latin America, mired in disaster, is somehow to be "rescued by cul-
ture." His book looks attractive, as do parts of the television series in which
he appeared, and we are given good views of the crossing of the Andes by
San Martin, of the baroque churches of Mexico and Peru, and of paintings
by Velazquez and Goya. Such skillful and expensive packaging is not an un-
common characteristic of the quincentennial year, where the wine is often
less impressive than its container.
   The Spanish government had earlier set store by the quincentennial
(and had subsidized the Fuentes undertaking along with the many other
projects, books, and exhibitions in the quincentennial cause); but it virtu-
ally banished Columbus's name from the great Seville exposition as soon
as the organizers began to realize that Spain risked alienating Jews, Mus-
lims, and much of Latin America by too direct a celebration of Columbus's
accomplishments. As for the pope, in the arranging of his long-planned
visit to Hispaniola in commemoration of the evangelization of the New
World, some last-minute rescheduling was needed so that he might avoid
the controversy surrounding the inauguration of the giant "lighthouse"
constructed in Columbus's memory by the Dominican Republic's blind
president to illuminate the evening sky with an ethereal cross.
   What remains of this curious, diverse, and singularly unenlightening
year? The most curious thing about the mountain of books the quincen-
tennial produced is how little they tell us about the significance of what
Columbus did in his own time, and how little they reflect the rich scholar-
ship on Latin America of the past two decades. Some of the better books
published during the quincentennial year, like Anthony Grafton's New
Worlds, Ancient Texts, deal more with the intellectual imagining of Amer-



2Carlos Fuentes, The Buried Mirror: Reflections on Spain and the New World
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1992).
                                                   iAdi6s Columbusl • 15

ica than with its social reality.3 Grafton's book has in fact a much broader
scope than its quincentennial timing would imply, and Columbus himself
is disposed of in a few brief if instructive pages.
    Grafton's intention is to look at the long, convoluted, and contradictory
process by which European scholars absorbed and dealt with the experi-
ences forced on them by the existence of a New World unforeseen in the in-
tellectual tradition they had inherited. "Ancient texts did rise like revenants
around them," Professor Grafton writes in his epilogue,
    paradoxically providing the language and images that enabled them
    to explain away a fact unknown to the classical writers they revered.
    A potentially revolutionary discovery was given a noble name, a
    biblical pedigree, a place in existing geographies and ethnogra-
    phies; much of its sting was thus removed.
    Grafton follows the revisionist argument of J. H. Elliott's brilliant book
The Old World and the New, that the European discovery of the New World
had very little impact on European thought (or at least much less impact
than had been claimed by the Enlightenment).4 This is all very well so far
as it goes, but unlike Elliott, who never lost sight of the wider world,
Grafton takes a view that at times seems antiquarian, and tells us very little
about the real consequences for most people outside the print shop or the
academic cloister of Columbus's arrival in the Caribbean. Grafton says lit-
tle about the establishment of European hegemony over large parts of the
globe, which was the most lasting result of Columbus's stumbling into the
New World in 1492; and he gives no clear sense of the broader movement
of the European overseas expansion, of which the Columbus voyages were
part. Visitors to the 1992 New York Public Library exhibition which was
the occasion for Grafton's book hardly appreciated the vast shaking up of
the world that occurred as a result of the voyage of 1492, with conse-
quences that deeply affect the life of New York City today.