

ton travel agency-his real name strange as it may seem-was contracted
by the Columbia program to make my travel arrangements. He booked me
on a flight from Miami to Belem. Then I was to pick up a plane there for
Sao Luiz, Fortaleza, Natal, Recife, and Salvador da Bahia. Mr. Brazil appar-
ently knew little of Brazil, but his itinerary had the advantage of making
my first landfall in Brazil an Amazonian one; not that I got to see much of
Belem. I was, it turned out, the only international passenger to deplane at
Belem Airport on what was intended to be a refueling stop. The airport au-
thorities, or rather "the" authority, a sallow air force officer much put out
at having to deal with such unexpected business in the middle of the night
when no immigration or customs officials were present, decided I was "in
transit" and confined me to the airport until my connecting flight arrived
whenever that might be (no one seemed sure). So I settled down more or
less alone in what looked to me at the time like a large tin hanger in the
middle of the jungle.
   Daylight arrived coincidentally with a small rotund figure furiously mop-
ping his bald head with a large red handkerchief and carrying a battered suit-
case. He was not as I first thought a fellow traveler, but the concessionaire of
the airport newsstand. Very carefully and very very slowly he took out twelve
or so dog-eared foreign magazines (perhaps he had heard I was there and
they were intended for me) which he arranged with great delicacy as though
they were diamonds on his counter. This took him an hour at least before he
was satisfied. While I was there, which was most of that day, I saw no one so
much as look at them, so I assume he packed them all away again in their
suitcase that evening as carefully as he had unpacked them that morning.
   By midday at the far end of the terminal a shutter rolled up to reveal a
cafe. An enormous figure (in girth, that is, for certainly he was wide as he
was tall, chest puffed forward in self-importance, dressed in a white suit
and sporting a large white hat, and whose skin was the palest pink I had
ever seen) appeared from nowhere and made his way toward the cafe. Be-
hind him followed a diminutive Indian, head bowed, who was pulling a
two-handled trolley-type conveyance on which lay the smallest carpetbag I
had ever seen. Later on in Rio, I came across a picture by the early nine-
teenth-century artist Jean-Baptiste Debret with a scene that was strikingly
reminiscent. But the plane did arrive, a French-built Caravelle, an appro-
priate name I thought for a traveler to Brazil, and eventually with my entry
permit stamped into my passport, and now "officially" admitted into
Brazil, I was ushered onto it and up front as befitted the only international
passenger. As the Caravelle made its way around the Brazilian coastline, at
each stop a new crowd of passengers surged on board, and a new round of
drinks and meals was proffered-including to the pilots, I noted from my
front seat vantage point, who became, as I did, increasingly jolly as we ap-
proached our destination of Bahia.
6 • NakedTropics