


                                      II
And Rio? Well Rio was breathtaking to me. More than my mind and eyes
had anticipated. In those days the native cariocas sometimes made fun of
the wan Europeans standing spellbound before Rio's sheer natural majesty.
I surely must have been one such. I would walk early each morning from
one end of the Avenida Atlantica to the other and back along the Avenida
Nossa Senhora de Copacabana, stopping at the coffee stands for a cafezinho
(espresso-sized dark coffee) every few blocks, it seemed, joining the after-
noon sunbathers on the beach outside the Copacabana Hotel, taking the
funicular up the Sugar Loaf Mountain and to the top of Corcovado, and
eventually getting my identity card for the National Library and starting to
explore its books and archival holdings, while escaping across the road to
the weird and wonderful world of "Cinelandia" for a queijo quente (grilled
cheese sandwhich) and chope each lunchtime.
    Two of Maite's guests each week at the special table by the window were
a silver-haired Swiss businessman, probably somewhere in his early sixties,
and a very beautiful Brazilian student, Julio, who must have been about my
own age. I was more than intrigued by this couple, and I guess they must
have been fascinated, Julio certainly, by me. In any case, one evening after
dinner Maite invited me to stay for a coffee and cognac so that Julio could
then take me off to a movie in the neighborhood of Flamengo. I was not
prepared for the directness of Brazilian sexuality. The supposed condition-
ing of English boarding schools in such matters is much exaggerated. I was
entirely naive. Poor Julio must have thought he had made a terrible mis-
judgment, but we became the best of friends, never out of each other's
sight if we could help it, and while our relationship remained almost en-
tirely platonic, we fell deeply and obsessively in love.
    Julio was a student, though he never seemed to attend classes or study
that I could see. Ralph, the Swiss businessman, had a penthouse apartment
                                                      First Encounters • 9

at the far end of Copacabana at Posto 6 with panoramic views over the
beach and the Forte de Copacabana. And as Ralph spent much of the time
traveling, this became our base. Arpoador beach was a short distance. At
the corner of his block were the early studios of TV Globo, the doors open
so we could drop in to see the strange variety of shows that Globo then
broadcast. We went twice a week to join a escola de samba (samba school)
where after some hesitation and amid much hilarity I shed my inhibitions
and began to dance. We went out to sit quietly and reverently at Macumba
ceremonies. We dropped in at the Teatro Jovem where Francisco Pereira da
Silva's 0 Chao dos Penitentes (The penitents' ground) was playing and
drank beer at the cafe in Ipanema where Tom Jobim and various luminar-
ies of the Cinema Novo held court. I would go back to Maite's for dinner,
get a couple of hours' sleep, and then slip out at midnight so Julio and I
could spend the nights in the boates (night clubs) of Copacabana where
with grand political neutrality we would sip Cuba libres while listening to
"Hello Dolly," walking home along the Avenida Atlantica as the sun was
rising over the mouth of Guanabara Bay.
    A week before I was due to return to Princeton, all hell broke loose at
Maite Bertrand's. The Air France pilots, it turned out, had been using
Maite's as a safe house for smuggling something or other. The mechanic
had disappeared. Maite had been tipped off she was about to be raided.
Since her «Grande Hotel" was entirely unauthorized and she paid no taxes
on her earnings from her guests, we were all required to leave that very
evening. Fortunately the two prim English teachers at the Cultura Inglesa,
or at least one of them, had fallen in love with a Brazilian journalist and she
was finding Maite's quarters more restrictive than I had as a base for my
nocturnal wanderings. She had just taken an apartment overlooking
Leblon, and was happy to have me stay there over my few last days in Rio.
We never saw Maite again, or the old Greek, and we were strictly enjoined
not to go near the Copacabana Palace Hotel again until the crisis, whatever
the crisis was, wound down.
    I arrived in Princeton that September, brown as a berry and with some
work accomplished. I had not ceased to go to the National Library each day
despite my other perambulations, and had accumulated a formidable stack
of index cards full of notations. I was intending at the time to write a dis-
sertation on Brazilian decolonization in the early nineteenth century, an
idea inspired in part by my Lisbon sojourn. But academic work was not my
preeminent Brazilian experience of that first encounter. In early November
1965, the Columbia organizers of the training program called us up to
New York to report on our summer accomplishments. I was loath to be en-
tirely honest and said to Professor Charles Wagley, the director of the pro-
gram, that although I had indeed done some work, I had also had a very
10 • NakedTropics