

where Stanley Stein taught, and much to my delight was accepted with a
modest stipend. Stein was a marvelous tutor; he accepted few doctoral stu-
dents but gave them demanding attention. I was not of course then aware
of how peculiar a place Princeton was, with its mock English architecture
and odd self-contained provincialism, or fully aware of how lucky I was to
have landed fortuitously at a university where students mattered. I loved
the place and was only slightly disoriented by the bits of Oxford and Cam-
bridge Colleges which appeared juxtaposed in the wrong order.
    Stein called me in one day to meet my first Brazilian. It was Sergio Buar-
que de Holanda traveling with his teenage son; I assumed later on that it
must have been the young Chico, a radiantly beautiful youth who sat qui-
etly in the corner. l My Portuguese was the swallowed nasal Portuguese of
Lisbon, and I was utterly unprepared for the musicality, rhythm, and soft-
ness of Brazilian speech. I barely caught most of the pearls of wisdom the
great Sergio launched forth over the next two hours in Stanley Stein's office
that afternoon.
    Professor Stein recommended I apply without delay to the metropolitan
graduate training program which was administered by Columbia Univer-
sity. It would take me to Brazil for the long summer vacation. It seemed too
good to be true. I had only just stepped foot in the United States and here I
was being sent to Brazil with all expenses paid. Actually Columbia, I gath-
ered later, was only too glad to have someone from Princeton among the fif-
teen or so graduate students sent out to Latin America that summer because
the program was intended to be both interuniversity and interdisciplinary,
but in fact was dominated by Columbia anthropologists. So I suppose I was
a shoo-in, even if most Columbia students regarded Princeton as irre-
deemably snobbish, waspish, and worst of all "southern"-a code word for
racist, anti-Semitic, and such bad things. In fact when I first went up to Co-
lumbia and was asked where I was from and said Princeton, I was immedi-
ately ostracized. My Columbia classmates assumed my accent was affected. I
should have just said that I came from England and left it at that.
    The program had a Brazilian coordinator, the anthropologist Thales de
Azevedo in Bahia, and we were given very few coordinates, none at all in
fact that I can remember now. It was intimated that it might be a good idea
to check in with Professor Azevedo on our arrival. Mr. Brazil of the Prince-


ISergio Buarque de Holanda was one of Brazil's foremost historians. His works,
however, have still not been translated into English. See especially: Raizes do Brasil
(Rio de Janeiro: J. Olympia, 1936); Caminhos e fronteiras (Rio de Janeiro: J. Olym-
pia, 1957); and Visao do paraiso: os motivos edenicos no descobrimento e colonizafaO
do Brasil (Rio de Janeiro: J. Olympia, 1959). His then young son Chico Buarque
went on to be an early star of Brazilian pop music, or MPB (musica popular
brasileira). He remains a renowned figure in Brazilian music and is one of the
country's greatest singer-songwriters.
                                                       First Encounters • 5