

African gold mining. All this is clearly and beautifully laid out in The Times
Atlas ofWorld Exploration.
   With a prosperous seagoing link established between West Africa and
Lisbon, control of the offshore archipelagoes, of the Canary Islands, of
Madeira, and the Azores became the next and inevitable order of business.
Incorporating these Atlantic islands into the expanding network of com-
merce, initially as sources of water and supplies, coincided with the estab-
lishment of the seaborne routes between West Africa and Europe. But the
islands soon produced valuable return cargoes in their own right. The set-
tlement by Portugal of the uninhabited archipelagoes of Madeira (1420-
1425) and the Azores (1427-1439) and the gradual decimation and
enslavement by Spain of the Guanches-settlers probably of Berber ori-
gin-who inhabited the Canaries (1483-1500) were followed by the intro-
duction into the islands, by the early European settlers, of sugarcane from
the Mediterranean.
   The sugarcane from the Atlantic islands soon found ready markets from
the Baltic to the Italian port cities, and the wide distribution of Atlantic is-
land sugar in Europe dramatically brought down its price. Sugar con-
sumption was also apparently stimulated, for sugarcane production
expanded quickly in the Cape Verde archipelago and later, by 1490, to the
islands of Sao Tome e Principe in the Gulf of Guinea off the African coast.
The tropical soils and climate of Sao Tome e Principe in particular pro-
vided an ideal environment. African slave labor was soon imported from
the nearby mainland. 7
   The experience in Madeira, Porto Santo, and the Canaries was impor-
tant for other reasons. As Professor Alfred Crosby has shown in several
original and fascinating books, particularly Ecological Imperialism: The Bi-
ological Expansion ofEurope, 900-1900, the Europeans tried to make use of
the landscape, flora, and fauna. 8 Bartolomeu Perestrello, future father-in-
law of Columbus, set loose a female rabbit and her offspring in Porto
Santo, the latter born on the voyage from Europe. The rabbits reproduced
so rapidly as to "overspread the land, so that our men could sow nothing

7For the Atlantic islands, see Luis de Albuquerque and Alberto Vieira, The Archipel-
ago ofMadeira in the Fifteenth Century (Madeira: Centro de Estudos de Hist6ria do
Atlantica, 1984); Virginia Rau and Jorge de Macedo, a arucar da Madeira nos fins
do seculo XV: Problemas de produruo e comercio (Madeira: Junta-Geral do Distrito
Aut6nomo do Funchal, 1962); Felipe Fernandez-Armesto, Before Columbus: Explo-
ration and Colonization from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic, 1229-1492 (Phila-
delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1987); and Alberto Vieira, a comercio
inter-insular nos seculos XV e XVI: Madeira, Arores e Canarias (Madeira: Centro de
Estudos de Hist6ria do Atlantica, 1987).
8Alfred Crosby, Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe,
900-1900 (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986).
                                                      iAdi6s Columbusl • 19