

SFelipe Fernandez-Armesto, ed., The Times Atlas of World Exploration: 3,000 Years
of Exploring, Explorers, and Mapmaking (New York: HarperCollins Publishers,
1991).
                                                     iAdi6s Columbusl • 17

Columbus), thereby making it possible to sail into the Indian Ocean,
where he was able to draw upon Arab navigational experience to reach
Calicut in 1498 and return to Lisbon in 1499. The elliptical routes, and
hence the trajectory of all subsequent wind power navigation, were discov-
ered during a remarkably short period between 1492 and 1500.
   Skillful navigation meant very little in itself. The North Atlantic had been
crossed before 1492 by the Vikings, who had established colonies in Iceland
and Greenland. In the early fourteenth century, merchant adventurers from
Barcelona had gone at least as far as the Canary Islands. These achieve-
ments, however, had little long-term effect. What mattered was the ability to
take advantage of the opportunities oceanic exploration opened up and to
sustain them within a network of commerce and regular communications.
   The second great achievement of the fifteenth century was to make sail-
ing on the Atlantic routes profitable for many years to come. 6 The first
steps, again, had been taken by the Portuguese when they established the
maritime connection between Europe and the West African coast. Their
principal aim had been to tap the supply of African gold which had previ-
ously reached Europe by means of the camel caravans that provided a
trans-Saharan trade connection between West Africa and the southern
shore of the Mediterranean. Beginning in 1443, the Portuguese broke the
monopoly of the Saharan land route and established a string of trading
posts (their so-called feitorias) along the West African coast, at Argium,
then Sierra Leone, Cantor, and, eventually, in 1482, at the great fort of Sao
Jorge da Mina on the Gold Coast.
   By outflanking the long-established Arabic trans-Saharan trade con-
nections between Guinea and North Africa, the Portuguese succeeded in
capturing a part of the landborne commerce of West Africa for the new
European-dominated sea route. The caravel-a fast, small ship adapted by
the Portuguese from the Arab and Mediterranean vessels and used for voy-
ages to West Africa-effectively competed with camel caravans. The Por-
tuguese exchanged cloth, carpets, silks, brassware, and trinkets for gold,
slaves, and "grains of paradise" (malaguetta pepper), sometimes through
intermediaries or by direct bargaining at the fairs in the West African inte-
rior. Portuguese domination of the African coast, such as it was, remained
essentially commercial. They never became involved directly in West


6Fundamental to the reinterpretation of early Atlantic history are the three great
works by Pierre Chaunu, Vitorino Magalhaes Godinho, and Frederic Mauro;
Pierre Chaunu, Seville et l'Atlantique, 1504-1650, 12 vols. (Paris: SEVPEN,
1955-1960); Vitorino Magalhaes Godinho, L'economie de l'empire Portugais aux
XVe et XVle siecles (Paris: SEVPEN, 1969); and Frederic Mauro, Le Portugal et
I'Atlantique au XVlle siecle, 1570-1670; etude economique (Paris: SEVPEN, 1960).
18 • NakedTropics