

   I had no idea where in Salvador, capital of the state of Bahia, I might
stay, so I followed some passengers onto the Volkswagen kombi minivan
for the trip into the city, having decided I would go wherever they went
since presumably they knew where they were going if I did not. We seemed
to glide along the edge of a moonlit beach which stretched effortlessly into
a deep purple sea. Clumps of tall palm trees and the occasional small shack
stood at the beach's edge. Lovers sat together embracing and looking out at
the ocean. Perhaps I was drunk, but it was a magical arrival. We bumped
up a cobbled street into the city, and I followed my fellow passengers into
their hotel and checked in. The next morning I awoke in darkness and
made my way over to the windows and threw open the shutters. Below me
was an astonishing city, colonial church towers, yellow and green peeling
walls, squares bustling with people of all colors, and, just at that moment,
appearing on the far horizon of a great shining bay, small white sails, a few
of them at first, then it seemed hundreds, coming slowly toward me into
the port below.
   At lunch the waiters at the hotel seemed to think I was Portuguese and
insisted that I eat codfish. When I tried to protest by pointing out a picture
of the Beatles in the local newspaper and insisting they and not Camoes
were my fellow countrymen it got me nowhere; but when I asked for a
garoto (in Lisbon a coffee with milk, but also in Portuguese the word for a
boy) they knew at once where I was from, and said I should go next time to
the restaurant in the square down the block where such requests might be
more discreetly accommodated. I did in fact eat out after that, and my first
real Bahian shrimp was so spicy that I had to drink four large old-fash-
ioned Antarctica bottles of beer to get through it.
   Since I had come to Bahia to call on Professor Azevedo and find out
what it was I was supposed to do, I set out to visit him. I remember the
brightness of the day, the glorious colors of the foliage in the gardens along
the way and the odd little white painted moats around the plants to protect
them from insects. But my arrival caused great consternation. I was ush-
ered quickly into the kitchen where three large black ladies in white aprons
busied themselves with pots while eyeing me curiously. It was some years
before I realized how significant it was to be ushered into the kitchen. I as-
sumed this is where Brazilians always received their visitors.
    I suppose the metropolitan training program role was just another
emolument for Professor Azevedo unconnected to any duties, and that
students stood somewhere with household servants in the anthropological
order of things. I waited, but Professor Azevedo never received me. I think
it was this experience which led me later on very rarely to call on Brazilian
professors and instead get on with my own thing. I was used to this from
Portugal, and in any case, with the political police and informers every-
                                                       First Encounters • 7