


                                       II
A major point that was largely ignored in 1992, although it has been dem-
onstrated by a quarter century of historical research, is that the European
discovery of America in 1492 was not an isolated event. This is very well

3Anthony Grafton, with April Shelford and Nancy Siraisi, New Worlds, Ancient
Texts: The Power ofTradition and the Shock ofDiscovery (Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1992).
4J. H. (John Huxtable) Elliott, The Old World and the New, 1492-1650 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1970).
16 • NakedTropics

demonstrated in the excellent Times Atlas ofWorld Exploration, edited by a
group of scholars under the direction of Felipe Fernandez-Armesto. 5 The
voyage of Christopher Columbus was in many respects an offshoot of an
oceanic system of commerce and navigation which preceded and outlived
the epoch of Columbus; the speed and success with which Spanish rule
was imposed in the Caribbean and later on the mainland are in large part
explained by this broader process.
    It was the great innovation of the fifteenth-century mariners and entre-
preneurs, among whom the Portuguese were the most precocious, to learn
how the winds and currents of the Atlantic Ocean could be used to make
travel among the continents possible. They perfected navigational instru-
ments, in particular the astrolabe and the quadrant, which enabled them to
take accurate readings on the celestial bodies in order to find their latitude
when on the high seas.
    The Portuguese also made their audacious Atlantic explorations a prof-
itable enterprise. As with all great revolutions, the discovery of how the
ocean could be conquered by sail was a revolution of perception: the
recognition of patterns of nature which before had been only imperfectly
comprehended. For centuries European sailors had seen only the edges of
an oceanic world; in a mere two decades, they were able to discern its total-
ity. Hence, quite suddenly and with spectacular consequences, the Atlantic
Ocean, which for millennia had been the great divider between continents,
became the means of intercontinental contact, the pathway to new conti-
nents in the West and to empires in the East.
    The Atlantic commercial system evolved around two intersecting ellipses
of seaborne communications, one in the North Atlantic and the other in the
South Atlantic. The trajectory of each was governed by the prevailing winds
and ocean currents. These two Atlantic ellipses could finally be traced and
mastered because of the collective experience gained from the voyages of
oceanic exploration. Bartolomeu Dias in 1488, encountering contrary
winds and currents on the southwest African coast, had swung out in a wide
circle to round the Cape of Good Hope, thus demonstrating the possibility
of sailing from the Atlantic into the Indian Ocean. By reaching the greater
Antilles in 1492, Christopher Columbus showed the outbound and the in-
bound route between America and Europe.
    Five years later, Vasco da Gama, leaving Portugal in 1497, was the first to
trace the wide arc of wind systems of the South Atlantic (he was ninety-
three days out of sight of land compared with the thirty-three days of