

that was not destroyed by them." The settlers in fact were forced to retreat
to the larger island of Madeira nearby. They returned, but rabbits re-
mained a problem for crop growers, not to mention for the indigenous
plants and animals.
   Madeira and Porto Santo had been previously uninhabited by human
beings. The Canaries had not; and as Professor Crosby demonstrates, the
fate of the Guanches there also prefigured later experience. In particular,
the Europeans brought with them "their extended family of plants, ani-
mals, and microlife," as Crosby puts it. He observes, "Very few experiences
are as dangerous to a people's survival as the passage from isolation to
membership in the worldwide community that included European sailors,
soldiers, and settlers"-carriers of parasites and pathogens to which iso-
lated people would be susceptible. The experiences of the Atlantic islands
thus taught two lessons: that Europeans, and their plants and animals,
could do quite well in new lands; and the indigenous population, though
numerous and brave, could be conquered, and could indeed disappear, to
be replaced by laborers imported from Europe and Africa.
   The evolving Atlantic commercial and maritime complex was also
linked to a broader network. 9 The Portuguese, by developing the seaborne
route between Europe and West Africa, were establishing new connections
between known sources of supply for products such as sugar and existing
markets.
   Lisbon and Seville both benefited from the new oceanic commerce and
seaborne traffic. These ancient Atlantic port cities possessed long-standing
trading connections with the Muslim world, especially in North Africa, and
their traders had long been aware of the existence of West African spices
and gold. Their ports were favorably placed geographically for the mariners
using them to take advantage of the currents and winds for the run to the
Canary Islands, Madeira, and the African coast. Both Lisbon and Seville
were situated at the edge of fertile valleys, rich in olives, vines, and fruit,
with access to nearby salt pans, vital for the preservation of meat and fish.
   But, above all, Lisbon and Seville had attracted large colonies of Italian
traders who used both ports as way stations in their commercial dealings in
the Iberian Peninsula and as ports of call for their shipping between the East-
ern Mediterranean and northwestern Europe. Genoese merchants, in partic-
ular, contributed their commercial sophistication. They were skilled at bills

9S ee Charles Verlinden, The Beginnings ofModern Colonization (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cor-
nell University Press, 1970); Herman Van der Wee, The Growth ofthe Antwerp Mar-
ket and the European Economy, Fourteenth to Sixteenth Centuries, 3 vols. (The
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1963); and Ruth Pike, Enterprise and Adventure: The Ge-
noese in Seville and the Opening of the New World (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press, 1966).
20 • NakedTropics

of exchange and credit, and knew how to raise large amounts of capital
needed to deal with the risks and delays of long-range oceanic commerce.
    Between 1450 and 1500 the number of Genoese in Seville almost dou-
bled. Great Italian merchant banking families originally from Genoa, such
as the Spinoli, Grimaldi, and Centurioni, acted as contractors supplying
naval stores or, often, as dealers in regional agricultural products and im-
ported grain; they at once became involved in the new Atlantic Ocean
trades. In Lisbon, a major port of call for Genoese and Venetian galleys en
route for England and Flanders, Italian merchants such as Lomellini, Affai-
tati, Giraldi, and Marchione were bankers and moneylenders to the court
and its envoys; they too invested in the new Atlantic island sugar produc-
tion and in the slave trade. In association with the great south German
bankers, the Welsers and Fuggers, these experienced Italian entrepreneurs
supplied, through Antwerp, German silver and copper in return for olive
oil, wine, fruit, Setubal salt, and African spices and gold.
    Thus when within a very few years of one another Bartolomeu Dias
reached the Indian Ocean (1488), Christopher Columbus reached the An-
tilles (1492), and Vasco da Gama arrived on the coast of India (1498), they
did so against the background of a preexisting and thriving system of At-
lantic commerce. Based on sugar, slaves, and gold, it was firmly supported
by a strong if largely informal partnership between the Spaniards and Por-
tuguese who contributed their political and navigational skills and the
foremost Italian and German bankers and merchants who were able to
raise capital and sell the goods throughout Europe. Oceanic expansion at
the end of the fifteenth century therefore succeeded largely because Span-
ish and Portuguese oceanic commerce could feed into a receptive network
of European commerce; the two combined to stimulate and underwrite
further expansion.
    Once the Portuguese established trade with India after 1498, they also
found it profitable to pay for Asian spices with silver, which was valued
more highly in India than in Europe. In consequence, traders in south Ger-
man silver found Lisbon an even more attractive market. The south Ger-
man capitalists who controlled the production of Central European and
Hungarian precious metals took advantage of the possibilities for com-
mercial and financial expansion in the new overseas enterprises. The
Imhoff merchant banking family of Nuremberg doubled their profits be-
tween 1503 and 1508 while taking part in the Asian spice trade. The Fug-
gers and Welsers from Augsburg invested heavily in the Portuguese Indian
fleet of 1505 among other ventures. The vast fortunes of the participating
merchant capitalists had other consequences, for example, loans to states;
the dramatic expansion of commerce and the money market made
Antwerp an important source for short-term loans used by both Spain and
                                                 iAdi6s Columbus! • 21