

16Philip D. Curtin, The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census (Madison: University ofWis-
consin Press, 1969), 17-28,268.
17See J. D. Fage, A History ofWest Africa: An Introductory Survey (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1969),52-68; M. A. Havinden, "The History of Crop Cul-
tivation in West Africa, a Bibliographic Guide;' Economic History Review 23, 2d
series (1970): 532-553; Richard B. Sheridan, "Africa and the Caribbean in the At-
lantic Slave Trade," American Historical Review 77, no. 1 (February 1972): 15-35; F.
Guerra, "The Influence of Disease on Race, Logistics, and Colonization in the An-
tilles;' Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 69 (1966): 23-35.
28 • NakedTropics

   In the Caribbean islands as in the Canaries, the opposite was the case,
and the demographic collapse of the local population of Taino Indians
opened up land for the taking. Tainos ironically played a great role in the
distribution of food to tropical zones in the Eastern Hemisphere. Slave
traders carried the Tainos' principal crop, cassava, to sub-Saharan Africa.
And they also contributed many products to what Professor Crosby has
defined as the «Columbian exchange," including the sweet potato, bean,
squash, and peanut, fruits such as guava, marney, and pineapple, and rub-
ber and tobacco.
   The rise of sugar production and the slave trade in the islands of the
greater Antilles (Hispaniola, Cuba, Puerto Rico) placed them, together
with the Canary Islands, Madeira, Cape Verde, and Sao Tome, firmly
within a new commercial system stretching from the African coast to the
Atlantic. Economic organization throughout these various archipelagoes,
despite different chronologies of development, was remarkably similar. Al-
most always the distribution and marketing of sugar were in the hands of
the Italians, who also predominated as slave traders, often working
through Portuguese subcontractors. Production, on the other hand, was
invariably controlled by Spanish and Portuguese settlers, sometimes on a
small scale, as in Madeira. Often non-Iberian capital financed the sugar
mills, which required substantial investment in machinery and tools.
Transfer of expertise and skilled workers between sugar-producing regions
was common, from Sicily to Madeira, for example, or from the Canaries to
Hispaniola.
   The sugar technician was, in fact, among the more mobile and success-
ful artisans of this early Atlantic world, and was capable of accumulating
capital on his own behalf, for he received in most cases a percentage (often
one-tenth) of the sugar processed under his supervision. Sugar made an
ideal freight. In the Canary Islands, in the period from 1508 to 1510, its
value per pound was four to five times as much as the same quantity of
wheat. Freight costs were relatively low, some 4 to 6 percent of market
value as compared with 12 percent for wheat. It was therefore possible to
transport sugar advantageously across the Atlantic to a profitable market
in Europe. I8
   The connection between the sugar trade and the slave trade was a direct
one, and it turned out to be a compact of death. Most of the slaves sent to