


18Jose-Gentil da Silva, «Echanges et troc: l' exernple des Canaries au debut du XVI-
Ierne siecle;' Annales ESC 16e annee (1961), 1004-1011; Rau and Macedo, 0 ap1car
da Madeira, 20; Robert S. Lopez, «Market Expansion: The Case of Genoa;' Journal
of Economic History 24 (1954): 460-461; Chaunu, Seville et ['Atlantique 7, no. 1,
527; Pike, Enterprise and Adventure, 50.
                                                 iAdi6s Columbusl • 29

Hispaniola between 1530 and 1540 by Vazques, Forne and Vivaldo, a Ge-
noese company in Seville, were exchanged for sugar. Slaves, purchased in
Africa with European barter goods of low intrinsic value, fetched high
prices in the markets of the New World, where the price ofAfrican slaves in
Hispaniola rose from forty-five ducats to one hundred between 1528 and
1556. Human beings shipped as a commodity provided the slave traders
with a cargo of high value in relation to the space they took up. Slaves once
landed were highly perishable, and required constant replacement, since
they failed to reproduce themselves owing to the rigors of plantation labor,
the low proportion of women imported, and the lack of incentive to pro-
create in conditions of forced labor and captivity. The more prosperous the
sugar trade became, the higher were the death rates of slaves and the lower
the proportion of women imported. Just as lands had been made available
for sugar production in the first place by the extermination of the original
inhabitants, the death rate of the imported labor force helped to guarantee
the continuance of the slave trade, especially during the early years.
   The planter did not have a strong incentive to encourage reproduction
among slaves, for the return on investment of slaves was relatively rapid
(between two years and thirty months, the period also required to recoup
the purchase price of work animals such as oxen). The same capitalists who
financed the slave trade would also sell the sugar produced on the islands,
and insure the ships at staggering rates (under the terms of sea loans the
merchant bankers accepted the risk of safe arrival of 80 to 90 percent of
ships and 56 to 60 percent of the slaves on board); they would also sell to
the new colonies most of the basic foodstuffs, clothing, and domestic ani-
mals they needed. The main profits of the early years in fact seem to have
accrued more to the large foreign bankers than the Spanish or Portuguese
shipowners and settlers.
   The incorporation of Hispaniola into the Afro-Atlantic system was of
great importance for the future development of the Caribbean and of
many of the lowland coastal regions of the Americas. In their broad out-
lines the patterns established in the early years were to be repeated else-
where. First, there was the headlong greed in the unscrupulous search for
precious metals. Then there was the collapse of the indigenous population,
followed by the exhaustion of the mineral wealth and the introduction of
cash crops worked by slave labor imported from Africa. For three and one-
half centuries the experience of the first thirty years was reproduced, and
the resulting patterns of ethnic composition, economic possibilities, and
social structure, and deeply rooted attitudes of resentment and resigna-
tion, made the Americas what they are today. Here indeed was the "shock
of discovery," to use the title of Anthony Grafton's book, although the edu-
cated Europeans whose works he analyzed remained more concerned with
30 • NakedTropics