

20Luls de Matos, L'expansion Portugaise dans la litterature latine de la renaissance
(Lisbon: Funda<;ao Calouste Gulbenkian, Servi<;o de Educa<;ao, 1991).
21C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, "The Politics of the Discoveries," in Portugal-Brazil:
The Age ofAtlantic Discoveries (Lisbon: Bertrand Editora, 1990),264-267; Profes-
sor LUIS de Albuquerque outlined his reasons for dismissing the idea of the "School
of Sagres" in his "Portuguese Navigation: Its Historical Development;' in Circa
1492: Art in the Age ofExploration (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992),35-39.
22Valerie I. J. Flint, The Imaginative Landscape ofChristopher Columbus (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1992).
32 • NakedTropics

for these tasks than they were a century ago. The curious consequence of
the surge of interest in literary analysis in the quincentennial year has been
to revive a great deal of Columbus's most outrageous claims, and by doing
so give emphasis to a resilient medievalism that emphasizes the continu-
ities rather than the innovations of this period. Columbus, of course, paid
dearly for his misapprehension of the territories he reached. Las Casas later
complained bitterly that Amerigo Vespucci had stolen Columbus's prize.
But as Garry Wills points out in his preface to the Vespucci Letters from a
New World, "Columbus had named what he had reached-the Indies. It
was not a new name because he did not think he had found anything new.
And his misnomer stuck."23
    One also suspects that a closer examination of the Spanish background
might have unraveled some of the enigmas in Columbus's professions of
orthodoxy. As Peggy Liss shows in her readable and comprehensive Isabel
the Queen, this was the period in which the Inquisition was converted into
a terrifying organ of state power, the Muslim inhabitants of Malaga were
conquered, enslaved, and sold, the concept of"purity of blood" was used to
humiliate and destroy thousands, homosexuality was declared to be high
treason, and the Jews were expelled. 24
    The books of the quincentennial year have also demonstrated how nar-
row and self-contained much contemporary scholarship has become. Few
of these books appreciate how the Portuguese and the Spaniards acted on a
great leap of global geographical perception at the turn of the fifteenth
century. It was the translation of this new geographical perception of the
world into European commercial and military domination and, in the
Caribbean and elsewhere, racial hegemony, which set the pattern for the ex-
plosive "encounter of civilizations" that the quincentennial used as an in-
cantation but rarely examined.
    It is therefore worth recalling that precisely during the long hiatus while
the Catholic monarchs sought to confirm Columbus's claims to have
reached Asia, the Portuguese, in fact, reached India, and King Manuel of
Portugal (1495-1521) wrote in 1499 to inform his Castilian colleagues of
his claims to the "suzerainty and dominion of the navigation, and com-
merce, of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India."25 This was of course hyper-
bole-but it demonstrated that the Portuguese had done in fact what
Columbus claimed to have done-reach Asia by sea. And as Professor