

classical and Renaissance literature and cosmology. But it should be kept in
mind that they often did so while drinking their American-produced cof-
fee, smoking American-produced tobacco, binding their texts between
American leather hides, and enjoying the leisure that the dividends from
overseas investments made possible.
   V. S. Naipaul's comment in The Mimic Men almost a quarter of a cen-
tury still holds:

    It was my hope to give expression to the restlessness, the deep disor-
    der, which the great explorations, the overthrow in three continents
    of established social organizations, the unnatural bringing together
    of peoples who could achieve fulfillment only within the security of
    their own societies and the landscapes hymned by their ancestors, it
    was my hope to give partial expression to the restlessness which this
    great upheaval has brought about. The empires of our time were
    short-lived, but they have altered the world forever; their passing
    away is their least significant feature. It was my hope to sketch a
    subject which, fifty years hence, a great historian might pursue. For
    there is no such thing as history nowadays; there are only mani-
    festoes and antiquarian research; and on the subject of empire there
    is only the pamphleteering of churls. 19

The outpouring during the quincentennial year has only demonstrated
once again how right Naipaul was, and how the task he sketched out re-
mains to be done.



                                     V
Strangely missing among the books provoked by the quincentenary of the
first Columbian voyage is adequate recognition of the importance of
Spain's main competitors, the Portuguese. In this respect their absence
from Professor Grafton's book is striking and means he does not discuss
the experience of the first Europeans, mainly Portuguese, to explore
around the African coastline from Cape Verde in the West to the mouth of
the Red Sea in the East; and he does not describe how the Portuguese
linked the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean through a maritime route and
mapped virtually the whole coastline of Asia, including Japan. No Por-
tuguese book is discussed or even listed in Grafton's work-which is some-
thing like writing about the space age while ignoring the American space

19V. S. (Vidiadhar Surajprasad) Naipaul, The Mimic Men (New York: Macmillan,
1967).
                                                       iAdi6s Columbus! • 31

program. Luis de Matos's encyclopedic discussion of the impact of the Por-
tuguese on Renaissance literature at least deserved some notice here. 20
    Few historians in 1992 seemed to realize that while the Portuguese won
the race to the East, Columbus lost it-even ifhe was never to admit to the
fact; and the more bizarre and desperate his claims to have done so, the
more recourse he had to the biblical and phantasmagorical allusions schol-
ars like Professor Grafton take as confirming their arguments that surpris-
ingly little had changed in the thinking of Europeans about the rest of the
world.
    Curiously, the only mention of Portugal in New Worlds, Ancient Texts
concerns Prince Henry and the school for the study of geography and nav-
igation that he allegedly established at Sagres in southwest Portugal during
the early fifteenth century. The school's existence has long been dismissed
as a nineteenth-century myth but is a very enduring myth nevertheless. In
fact, Professor Charles Boxer, in his notes to the catalog of a 1990 exhibi-
tion at the New York Public Library, which is cited by Professor Grafton in
his bibliography, succinctly demolished it. 21 Younger Portuguese scholars
like Professor Alfredo Pinheiro Marques are especially irritated at the
myth's persistence since it ignores a long and subtle process by which
knowledge was in fact acquired. Despite the patient work of experts such
as the late professor Luis de Albuquerque, doyen of the Portuguese carto-
graphical historians, the myth was revived by Daniel Boorstin, just when
they thought it was finally buried, in The Discoverers; and it is now here
once more repeated, which only goes to prove Professor Grafton's point, I
suppose, that "text" outlives "experience."
   There is much to be said for detailed analysis of texts in their own right,
certainly by an erudite scholar like Professor Grafton. Valerie Flint's book
The Imaginative Landscape of Christopher Columbus is a good example of
how revealing that type of careful exegesis can be. 22 Through a meticulous
examination of Columbus's reading, annotations, and expressed religious
beliefs, Professor Flint very skillfully shows us "not the New World Colum-
bus found, but the Old World, which he carried with him in his head."
   But not all scholars today have Flint's and Grafton's skills. In fact, most
scholars today lack mastery of Greek and Latin and are less well prepared