

   By 1530, however, only thirty-eight years after the arrival of Columbus,
the original inhabitants of the islands had been reduced to a mere handful.
The ecological base of their existence had been severely disrupted. By the
third decade of the sixteenth century, the Indians of Jamaica and Puerto
Rico were almost extinct, and the Bahamas had none at all. The European
incursion into the Caribbean unquestionably had produced a holocaust
with few parallels in world history.
   The primary cause of the demographic catastrophe that befell the
Amerindians of the Caribbean islands was certainly virulent epidemic dis-
ease. Isolated as they were, the people of the islands had little capacity for
resisting imported diseases, even less so than the people of the Canary Is-
lands when the Spanish had arrived. The introduction of temperate and
tropical infections, including, probably, malaria, yellow fever, sleeping
sickness, yaws, bilharzia, influenza, typhus, smallpox, and plague, brought
havoc.
   But many of the diseases were no less lethal to Europeans and Africans,
and the catastrophe of the islands was compounded by other factors. The
pre-Columbian population maintained a fragile equilibrium in an envi-
ronment peculiarly rich in vegetable products, and without animals that
would compete with human beings for food. The Europeans not only in-
troduced disease, they also brought the first livestock, including cattle,
horses, pigs, and dogs, all of which increased with phenomenal rapidity.
The consequences for the Amerindians were disastrous. Feral hogs rooted
up the conucos and disrupted the base of the Indian food supply. A lethal
competition for food and land took place between the native population
and the newly introduced animals. The European animals won. Indian
plantings were replaced by pasture or reverted to forest land. The ecologi-
cal transformation of the islands, which occurred within little more than
half a century, contributed to the deep psychological shock that resulted
from the arrival of Europeans. The Amerindians' physical environment
was shattered.
   Harsh labor in the gold fields also contributed to the decline of the is-
land population. The crowded and unsanitary conditions of the mining
camps encouraged the rapid spread of disease. According to Bartolome de
las Casas, during the labor draft (demora), which lasted from six to eight
months, a quarter to one-third of the work gangs died. Many of the Indi-
ans in the camps suffered from malnutrition; although they were amply
supplied with starch in the form of cassava bread, they were unable to ac-
quire the necessary protein and fats, since hunting and fishing were pro-
hibited by the Spaniards, who feared the Indians would flee. Sauer argues
that the indiscriminate use of female workers in effect transformed the low
fertility of Indian women into de facto sterility. Certainly the population
                                                 iAdi6s Columbusl • 25

had little chance of reproducing itself. By 1514, on the royal estates of
Santo Domingo, where the working conditions of Indian workers were
probably better than elsewhere, there was not even an average of one child
to a couple. There was, however, a parallel process taking place: the census
of 1514 found 40 percent of the officially recognized wives of the Euro-
peans were Indian.
   The equanimity with which most Spaniards accepted the huge loss of
Indian lives did not result from mere callousness, though there was plenty
of that. Monstrous death rates were commonplace in Europe. Recovery
from the plague, which during the fourteenth century had killed at least 20
percent of the European population, had been painfully slow. Nor was the
behavior of the early adventurers and its consequences in devastation and
disease unprecedented. Many of the soldiers who went with Pedrarias
Davila to the Isthmus of Panama in 1514 were veterans of recent bar-
barous military campaigns in Italy, where they ravaged the countryside,
causing even the insensitive King Ferdinand of Aragon to complain about
their behavior.
   The loss of life among the Europeans in the Antilles was staggering as
well. Of the 2,500 colonists who arrived with Ovando in Hispaniola in
1502, 1,000 died within a short time. Without constant immigration, all
the early European settlements in the Americas would have suffered the
fate of the settlers who died after Columbus left them at La Navidad on
the northern shore of Hispaniola. Continuous immigration to maintain
the European population, let alone to achieve growth, was no less essential
for the early transatlantic colonies than it was for the urban populations in
Europe, where city death rates consistently surpassed birthrates and it was
only the inflow of rural immigrants that kept numbers from declining.
   Among the few voices raised to protest the extermination of the native
population of the Caribbean and the Panamanian isthmus, the Dominican
Antonio de Montesinos (1511), Bartolome de las Casas (1515), and Licen-
ciado Alonso Zuazo (1518) often proposed solutions no less destructive
than the situation they sought to remedy. The reforming Hieronymite
Fathers, governors of the Indies between 1518 and 1519, attempted to pre-
serve the remaining population by establishing pueblos (villages) of four
hundred to five hundred people, each with its own plantings and livestock,
only to find the newly concentrated Indians were immediately infected
with smallpox. It was fortunate for Europe that the New World did not ex-
port the virulent epidemic to Africa and Europe. The origin of syphilis,
long claimed to be a New World importation into Europe, is still unclear.
Grafton's book provides a lengthy description of the reaction to morbus
gallicus in sixteenth-century Europe, but next to nothing about the demo-
graphic collapse of the populations Columbus called «Indians."
26 • NakedTropics