

Portugal to support their expensive courts and pay for their even more
costly wars.
    Christopher Columbus himself was a very typical product of this early
Atlantic commercial system. Genoese by birth and an experienced sea-
man, he had worked as an agent for the Centurioni firm, which did busi-
ness in Spain and Portugal. Linked to the sugar interests of Madeira by his
first wife, he had also traded along the Guinea coast (ca. 1482-1485) and
gained much practical knowledge of Portuguese navigation and especially
the Atlantic wind system in the Portuguese-controlled Atlantic archipela-
goes. The vessels for his transatlantic crossing (like those of Vasco da
Gama for his Indian voyage) were filled with the cheap trinkets, beads,
and brass utensils used by the Portuguese in their West African trade. Re-
cent research shows that the approximately 1,300 Spanish ducats which
Columbus contributed to the venture (the Catholic monarchs con-
tributed about 3,000 ducats) were borrowed from Italian merchants, espe-
cially the Florentine Juanoto Berardi, a slave trader since 1486 who
remained a close associate of Columbus until his death in 1495. The in-
stinctive reaction of Columbus to the economic possibilities of the
Caribbean was conditioned by his previous experience. His obsession
with gold and slaves was not a personal foible; it was built into the system
of which he had long been a part.


                                    III
But if recent scholarship has helped to explain the setting within which
Columbus made his voyages, the second great contribution of the past two
decades has been to explain why Columbus's arrival in the Caribbean had
effects throughout the world. The European intrusion into the fringe of
the New World in 1492 had a devastating impact on the indigenous inhab-
itants quite unlike that arising from the simultaneous contacts between
Europeans and the populations of Africa and Asia. The Caribbean experi-
ence, moreover, was to prefigure the widespread death that took place else-
where in the Americas-most especially in the lowland tropical and
subtropical regions, but also in the highlands. Why did this happen?
   The early relations of Spaniards and native populations in the
Caribbean were dominated by the Spanish desire to extract gold. Unlike
the Portuguese in Africa, whose gold trade depended on African interme-
diaries, Columbus and his agents and successors found shallow gold de-
posits on several of the islands. To work the placer mines of Cibao and San
Cristobal in Hispaniola, and later the gold-rich streams of Puerto Rico
(1508), the Isthmus of Panama (1509), and the arroyos of the central
mountains of Cuba (1511), the Spaniards organized large gangs of
22 • NakedTropics

Amerindians. To secure European domination over the Caribbean popula-
tions and thus obtain the labor needed to exploit the gold deposits, they
quickly asserted direct control over the Indians' lives.
    By contrast, in Africa and Asia the European intruders rarely were able
to establish direct administration over the local population beyond a few
fortified enclaves. The methods used to draft labor in the Caribbean varied
and passed from the loose per capita tribute system devised by Columbus
himself and administered through the local Amerindian caciques (chief-
tains) to a period when Indian communities were given over to individual
Spaniards by Adelantado Bartolomeu Columbus, and then to the more
systematic mobilizing of labor imposed by Governor Nicolas de Ovando
(1502-1509). Governor Ovando linked the use of encomiendas (grants of
Indian labor) to the building of an economic base for the new villas
(towns) he intended to settle with Europeans; he wanted to provide a
source of income for their European vecinos (residents), who would either
hire out the Indians for use in the gold mines or directly exploit the Indian
labor themselves. The governor added an incentive to gold mining by low-
ering the share of the gold demanded by the Crown from one-half to one-
fifth. Nicolas de Ovando also acted with great brutality. Soon after his
arrival, the Higuey Indians rebelled to avenge the killing of one of their
chiefs by a Spanish attack dog. Irving Rouse describes the consequences:
    Ovando rounded up six or seven hundred of them, put them in a
    chief's bohio, or house, and had them knifed to death. He then or-
    dered the bodies to be dragged into the adjoining plaza and publicly
    counted. In the fall of 1503 he paid another formal visit to Xaragua,
    where he was well received by Chief Anacaona, whose brother Be-
    hecchio had died. She convened a meeting of some eighty district
    chiefs in her bohio, whereuponI Ovando ordered his soldiers to
    block the door and burn them alive. Anacaona herself was hanged
    in deference to her rank.
   Carl Sauer's brilliant pioneering book on the early Spanish Main, origi-
nally published in 1966 and reissued for the quicentennial, as well as the
work of the recent generation of demographic historians, showed that at
the time of the arrival of Columbus in 1492, the island of Hispaniola sup-
ported a very substantial native population. 10 There is a very heated debate
over the numbers, with low estimates in the 100,OOO-to-200,OOO range
(Angel Rosenblat) to figures as high as 8 million (Woodrow Borah and
Sherburne F. Cook). The consensus seems to point to a figure of over a mil-