

                                        IV
The ravages of disease in the Americas, especially in the Caribbean islands
and the lowland zones of the mainland, had a very direct, rapid, and per-
manent impact on the history of three continents. Catastrophe for some,
as always, brought profit and opportunities for others. The elimination of
the Caribbean island Indians left some of the best agricultural land in the
tropics without workers to farm it. Columbus had envisioned a profitable
slave trade in American Indians to supply "Castile, Portugal, Aragon, Italy,
Sicily, the islands of Portugal, and the Canaries," and as early as 1495 a
cargo of five hundred Indians had been sent to Seville. The extermination
of the Indians in the Antilles put an end to this prospect. Local entrepre-
neurs seeking replacements for the diminishing supply of local laborers
raided other Caribbean islands for Indian slaves and then captured the In-
dians who lived on the South American coast. But the supply of labor soon
proved insufficient to meet the demands, even on the island of Hispaniola.
By 1524 there were more slaves than Tainos, and by 1540 the former had al-
most completely replaced the latter.
   The suggestion of a different source of labor came ironically from the
"protectors" of the Indians. Both Licenciado Zuazo and Las Casas sug-
gested that African slaves could be substituted for Indian labor, and, except
for the temporary suspension of the African slave trade between 1516 and
1518 initiated by Cardinal Regent Cisneros, enslaved Africans were im-
ported to help exploit the economic potentialities of the New World from
the beginning of the sixteenth century onward.
   The expanding demand for African slaves coincided with a significant
shift of Portuguese interests in Africa. By the end of the first decade of the
sixteenth century, the village of Mpinda at the mouth of the Congo River
had developed into a major slave port, initially for the dispatch of slaves to
Lisbon and the Algarve. 14 Mpinda also exported slaves to Sao Tome. By the
1530s some four thousand to five thousand slaves per year were exported
from the Congo, and as the decade progressed an increasing number of
slaves were also obtained from the region near the mouth of the Kwanza in
Angola. ls By 1550, Lisbon had a slave population of almost ten thousand
out of a total urban population of one hundred thousand.
   Philip Curtin estimated that during the sixteenth century some 50,000
enslaved Africans were sent to Europe, some 25,000 to the Atlantic islands

14David Birmingham, Trade and Conflict in Angola: The Mbundu and Their Neigh-
bors under the Influence of the Portuguese, 1483-1790 (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1966),21-41.
15A. C. de C. M. Saunders, A Social History ofBlack Slaves and Freedmen in Portugal,
1441-1551 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982).
                                                      iAdi6s Columbusl • 27

of Cape Verde, Madeira, and the Canaries, and 100,000 to Sao Tome. I6 As
in the Portuguese-controlled islands in the Gulf of Guinea, the African
slaves were shipped in mainly to work in the sugarcane fields. (The gold of
Cibao and San Cristobal in Hispaniola had given out within twenty-five
years and that of Cuba and Puerto Rico in half that time.) Island-based en-
trepreneurs, among them lawyers, military functionaries, and agents of the
great Italian merchant families of Seville, turned quickly to sugar produc-
tion. By 1528 there were some twenty water-powered mills (ingenios) on
Hispaniola, mostly near the town of Santo Domingo, and in 1520 a Ge-
noese-financed mill was producing commercial sugar in Puerto Rico.
    It may seem illogical today that labor should have been transported
across the Atlantic from Africa to the Americas rather than used locally,
and that plantation economies did not arise in West Africa, which was ap-
parently closer to European markets. I? But linear distances in the sixteenth
century bore little relation to distances as measured by time and difficul-
ties of transport. The route from West Africa to Europe was, so far as the
time and difficulty of travel were concerned, no shorter than from the An-
tilles. Ships from West Africa were obliged to sail near the equator, catch
the southeast trade winds and westerly current and consequently join, at
the Azores, the same route as ships inbound from North and South Amer-
ica. In fact for a sailing ship the coast of South America below the equator
was often nearer to Europe in sailing time than the coast of Africa.
    In addition, the diseases of West Africa caused intolerable losses of Eu-
ropean lives, and made permanent settlement hazardous. Even in the early
nineteenth century, the death rates for British troops on the Gold Coast
ran as high as 668 per thousand each year. The tsetse fly prevented draft
animals and livestock from surviving in the West African tropical forest
zones. The West African coast, moreover, lacked safe anchorage except near
the mouth of the Niger River, which was dominated by Benin, the most
formidable of the West African states. Ships sailing on the West African
grain and ivory coasts had to anchor in open roadsteads, with little protec-
tion against the wind. Hence in Africa, the threat of disease worked in favor
of the native inhabitants and against the outsiders.