

23Luciano Formisano, ed., Letters from a New World: Amerigo Vespucci's Discovery of
America (New York: Marsilio, 1992).
24Peggy K. Liss, Isabel the Queen: Life and Times (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1992).
25C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825 (Lon-
don: Hutchinson, 1969),37.
                                                         iAdi6s Columbusl • 33

Alfredo Pinheiro Marques argues in Portugal and the Discovery ofAmerica,
it was no coincidence that Columbus was soon after recalled in chains from
his "Indies."26
    While Columbus and his travels cannot be fully explained without ref-
erence to the evolution of the fifteenth-century Atlantic system, their sig-
nificance is even less understandable if we do not also take account of the
global expansion by Europeans that took place early in the sixteenth cen-
tury within an extraordinary period of no more than fifteen years, in
which the Portuguese reached the Seychelles, Socotra, and the coast of
Arabia (1503), Ceylon and the Bay of Bengal (1509). In the Pacific they ex-
plored the coast of Southeast Asia and reached China in 1513. Contact
with Japan came during the 1540s. And even in the Americas, Portugal
claimed Brazil in 1500.
    Professor Marques provides an instructive comparison of the first im-
ages of the New World by juxtaposing two maps of the world as it was
known in the first years of the sixteenth century-the planisphere made by
the Spaniard Juan de la Cosa (ca. 1501-1506) from the Museu Naval in
Madrid, and the anonymous Portuguese planisphere of 1502 known as the
Cantino after the Italian agent who smuggled it out of Portugal, and which
comes from the Biblioteca Estense in Modena. Here the imprecise con-
tours of the Spanish map stand in striking contrast to the impressive accu-
racy of Portuguese cartography. And the Portuguese did not intend that
the point should be missed. With the famous embassy of Tristao da Cunha
to Pope Leo X in 1514, King Manuel planned to dazzle Rome with Portu-
gal's Asian exploits. Here, Angela Delaforce describes the spectacle:

     a theatrical display of figures dressed in exotic Indian and African
     costumes, Persian horses and the first living elephant seen there
     since antiquity was paraded on the streets of the eternal city [and]
     captured the popular and artistic imagination of Rome. 27


26Alfredo Pinheiro Marques, Portugal and the Discovery of America: Christopher
Columbus and the Portuguese (Lisbon: Portuguese State Mint, 1992).
27Angela Delaforce, "The Baixela da Victoria: Its Context and Iconography in the
Art of Portugal;' in Portugal's Silver Service: A Victory Gift to the Duke ofWellington,
ed. Angela Delaforce and James Yorke (London: Victoria and Albert Museum,
1992), 75-79. Essential background to the rich cultural connections between Flan-
ders, Italy, and Portugal during this period can be found in the two brilliant books
by Sylvie Deswarte: Les enluminures de fa Leitura Nova 1504-1552: Etude sur fa cul-
ture artistique au Portugal au temps de l'humanisme, preface by Andre Chastel
(Paris: Fundac;ao Calouste Gulbenkian, 1977) and II Perfetto Cortegiano: D. Miguel
da Silva (Rome: Bulzoni Editore, 1989). D. Miguel da Silva was Portuguese ambas-
sador to the Holy See, and it was to him that Baldassare Castiglione dedicated his
Cortegiano (Venice, 1528).
34 • NakedTropics