

lOCar! o. Sauer, The Early Spanish Main (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1992).
                                                   iAdi6s Columbusl • 23

lion while Las Casas's estimate of three and one-half million is within the
range of possibility. The various estimates are well summarized in the new
edition of William Denevan's The Native Population of the Americas in
1492, which contains contributions by Woodrow Borah and William
Sanders and others who have revolutionized demographic history.II The
latest archaeological evidence is clearly described in the Smithsonian Insti-
tution's Disease and Demography in the Americas. 12
   The Caribbean islands, unlike Europe, enjoyed a continuous growing
season. Indian agriculture, Sauer shows, was highly productive, depending
on root crops, which were planted in forest clearings that had been previ-
ously burned over and dug up with pointed flattened sticks. The Indians
constructed montones (earth mounds) that were knee-high and several feet
wide. This planted area, called a conuco, provided well-aerated soils, was ef-
fective against erosion, and could be used on hill slopes; the root crops
could be cultivated without greatly diminishing the fertility of the soil. In
the montones the Indians planted bitter yuca, the roots of which were
grated, drained of their poisonous juices, and baked into starchy unleav-
ened bread (cassava) capable of being stored for long periods without de-
teriorating. Maize, beans, and squash, planted in the same montones, were
grown from seed, and together with the abundant fish, salt, and turtles of
the coastal waters provided the diet of the indigenous islanders. Bartolome
de las Casas, who arrived during 1502 with Ovando's expedition, estimated
that twenty men working six hours a day for one month could plant suffi-
cient yuca to provide enough bread for three hundred people for two years.
   Irving Rouse's book The Tainos: Rise and Decline of the People Who
Greeted Columbus is a model of clarity and lightly worn erudition, and it
contains the best and most straightforward description of the four Colum-
bus voyages and their implications for the Amerindians I have seen. I3 In it
Rouse summarizes with great fairness the arguments for and against each
position he takes. Columbus had found large, permanent villages of Taino
Indians in Hispaniola and Puerto Rico, each governed by a chief, or
cacique, and each containing an average of two thousand people. Rouse
vividly describes their everyday life. The Spaniards were particularly
amazed by their ball games, which they played in specially constructed
courts using a bouncing ball made of rubber, whose elasticity the
Spaniards had never seen before.

llWilliam Denevan, The Native Population of the Americas in 1492 (Madison: Uni-
versity of Wisconsin Press, 1976).
12John W. Verano and Douglas H. Ubelaker, eds., Disease and Demography in the
Americas (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1992).
13Irving Rouse, The Tainos: Rise and Decline of the People Who Greeted Columbus
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992).
24 • NakedTropics