




In 1544 Dominican friars took a delegation of Maya nobles to visit Prince
Philip of Spain. Among the presents they brought to his courts, together
with various kinds of chilies, beans, sarsparilla, maize, liquidambar (a
plant of the witch hazel family), and two thousand quetzal feathers, their
most precious offering, were receptacles of beaten chocolate. This was, ac-
cording to Sophie Coe and Michael Coe, the first appearance of chocolate
in Europe. The future Philip II, however, seemed more concerned about
his visitors' nakedness than their gifts, and may not have been aware of the
historic event. 1
   The Coes return to the Mayas at the end of their story. Inhabitants of
the clouded, forested mountains and the fertile valleys bordering the Peten
lowlands, called Verapaz ("True Peace") by the Spaniards, the Kekchi Maya
people were for the Dominicans a striking example of how kindness and
understanding could bring greater rewards than violence. It was here, in
what is now Guatemala and southern Mexico, that Bartolome de las Casas
began his locally successful, but ultimately doomed, efforts to counter the
rapacious destruction he sawall around him in the ancient worlds the Eu-
ropeans had stumbled onto in 1492, with devastating consequences for the
indigenous populations.



lSophie D. Cae and Michael D. Cae, The True History of Chocolate (New York:
Thames and Hudson, 1996).


                                     37
38 • NakedTropics

                                        I
The title of the Coes' book is an allusion to The True History ofthe Conquest
ofMexico, completed in 1572 in Guatemala's capital by the old, poor, and
partially blind conquistador Bernal Diaz del Castillo, a warrior who
wished to get the facts straight, free from "lofty rhetoric;' about the fate of
the Aztecs. The Coes seek to do the same for chocolate and also to bring se-
riousness to the study of the history of food and drink. "Although food,
sex, and mortality are the three great givens of human existence;' they
note, "earlier generations of academics generally avoided these topics as
not quite respectable." This is not entirely true: Gilberto Freyre's trilogy on
Brazil is full of sex and accounts of exotic and erotic sugary delicacies of
one sort or another. 2 Nevertheless, what the Coes have achieved is to strip
away, as Bernal Diaz del Castillo tried to do, the myths and misunderstand-
ings, and to reconstruct from often very obscure sources, with some excit-
ing archaeological fieldwork and hieroglyphic deciphering, the remarkable
passage of chocolate from its origins in the lowland jungles of southern
Mexico to "Hershey's Kisses" and Cadbury's "chocolate box," and to
reestablish its genealogy over three millennia.
   Chocolate for nine-tenths of its long history was drunk, not eaten, and
only one-fifth of that history postdates the fall of the Aztec capital in 1521.
The dark brown, pleasantly bitter, chemically complex substance bears lit-
tle resemblance to the pulp-surrounded seeds of the cacao plants from
which it is produced. The European invaders had to name many of the
plants and plant derivatives, new to them, that they encountered in the
Western Hemisphere, and to fit them into their own schemes of classifica-
tion, as well as within the health theories of classical authors, who had been
totally unaware of the existence of the New World but whose ideas domi-
nated medicine until the eighteenth century.
   Chocolate was first used in Europe as a curative. The scientific name
given to the cacao tree in 1753 by Carl von Linne, more commonly known
as Linnaeus, in Latinized form, was based on the binomial system he in-
vented. As a chocolate lover, Linnaeus named the cacao tree Theobroma
cacao; the first part, the name of the genus to which the cacao belongs, he
took from the Greek meaning "food of the gods." The New World name
cacao he found barbaric, and put in the second place as the specific name.
Yet as the Coes demonstrate in fascinating detail, it is the word cacao that
provides the clue to the unraveling of chocolate's earliest history.