


                                      II
Yet the nineteenth century also saw chocolate go down-market. Chocolate
became a product worked on by chemists and promoted by billboards. No
longer a drink favored by gluttonous grand dukes, villainous Jesuits, and
notorious marquises with specialized tastes, it became the respectable
snack food of virtuous Quakers, of Royal Navy sailors weaned from grog,
and of the unromantic Swiss. The leap into the modern era came in 1828
when the Dutch chemist Coenraad Van Houten took out a patent on a pro-
cess for the manufacture of a new kind of powdered chocolate with a very
low fat content. He had developed a very efficient filtering process which
reduced the cocoa butter content, leaving a cake that could be pulverized
into a fine powder. This powder he treated with alkaline salts so that it
would mix well with water.
   Van Houten's defatting and alkalizing process made possible large-scale
manufacture of cheap chocolate in powdered or solid form. From then on,
                                                           Chocolate • 43

it was no longer necessary to stir and beat the heavy liquid to make a palat-
able drink, and the chocolate pot fell out of use. In Bristol, Joseph Fry &
Sons developed a method for casting chocolate into a mold and in 1849 ex-
hibited the first hard eating chocolate. Fry later became the sole supplier to
the Royal Navy. The Cadburys of Birmingham, using Van Houten's
method, introduced cocoa powder and the first "chocolate box." The
Rowntrees of York developed similar lines of merchandise. The Frys, Cad-
burys, and Rowntrees were all Quakers with a social conscience. Cadbury
and Rowntree developed model towns for their workers, whom they ex-
pected to be God-fearing and sober. The Frys refused to accept cacao from
Portuguese plantations on the island of Sao Tome, off the West African
coast, whose working conditions they regarded as unacceptable.
    In Switzerland, Henri Nestle invented a process for making powdered
milk by evaporation, and Daniel Peter used Nestle's powder to make milk
chocolate by drying out the moisture in the mix and replacing it with cacao
butter. Another Swiss, Rudolph Lindt, devised a machine to make choco-
late smoother, a process which became universal. And in Pennsylvania, a
pious Mennonite, Milton Snavely Hershey, the "Henry Ford of Chocolate
Makers," brought mass production to the chocolate business, constructing
around his factory his own chocolate kingdom and an oversized imitation
of George Washington's Mount Vernon to house himself. With Hershey,
everything was mechanized. By the 1980s, 25 million Hershey's Kisses, lit-
tle bite-sized, flat-bottomed drops of milk chocolate, dropped off Her-
shey's conveyor belts daily into their waiting boxes. Even the streetlights of
Hershey's "Chocolate Town" are in the shape of Kisses.
   Hard chocolate was an eminently respectable product-it was sold in
corner shops, not drinking houses, and advertised in campaigns that in-
vented the idea of"family values" by using wholesome little girls and neatly
dressed Victorian schoolboys to promote it. But there was a darker side.
Chocolate's profitability brought adulteration and, to counter it, the first
consumer protection legislation.
   Chocolate's popularity among the expanding middle classes in Europe
and North America also made for expanded opportunities for colonial en-
terprise overseas. In 1824 the Portuguese had transplanted forastero cut-
tings from Brazil to Sao Tome. By 1850, cacao cuttings were taken to
Equatorial Guinea. By 1900 Theobroma cacao reached Ghana, Nigeria, and
the Ivory Coast, and then went on to Sri Lanka, Java, Sumatra, and Ocea-
nia. By 1991, Africa was the source of 55 percent of the world's cacao; Mex-
ico' where chocolate was born and cacao originated, accounted for only 1.5
percent.
   Yet mass production and mass marketing have brought their own his-
torical antidote. While the criollo beans are now the source of a mere 2 per-
cent of the world cacao crop, the premier chocolatiers have returned to the
44 • NakedTropics