


2Gilberto Freyre, The Masters and the Slaves (Casa-Grande & Senzala): A Study in
the Development of Brazilian Civilization, trans. Samuel Putnam (New York:
Knopf, 1946); New World in the Tropics; The Culture of Modern Brazil (New York:
Knopf, 1959); and The Mansions and the Shanties: The Making of Modern Brazil,
trans. Harriet de Onis (New York: Knopf, 1963).
                                                          Chocolate • 39

    The cacao tree itself is a spindly shade tree. Exceedingly difficult to
grow, it will not bear fruit outside the region from 20 degrees north to 20
degrees south of the equator. Even then it will not grow in the tropical
highlands, where the temperature falls below 60 degrees Fahrenheit. It re-
quires year-round moisture. There are two major varieties of cacao tree:
the criollo, native to Central America, and the forastero, originally from
South America. The flavor and the aroma of the seeds of criollo are supe-
rior to the more hardy and now more widely cultivated forastero. Like
other tropical fruit trees, the cacao tree produces flowers from small nodes
on the trunk and on the larger branches. Europeans could not at first be-
lieve this, and their illustrations moved the cacao pods out to the smaller
branches, assuming the indigenous watercolorists whose work they were
engraving had not accurately observed the plants.
    In the damp, shaded depths of the tropical forest the five-petaled flow-
ers are pollinated by midges and, once pollinated, each flower produces a
large pod of thirty or so almond-shaped seeds, or "beans;' surrounded by a
sweet, juicy pulp. The cacao pods, which cannot open on their own, are
cracked in the wild by monkeys seeking the pulp. It was the pulp, the Coes
believe, that first attracted human beings as well. Once the pods are opened
and the pulp extracted, four steps are necessary to produce cacao "nibs;' or
kernels, which are ground into chocolate. Whatever the technology em-
ployed, from that of the earliest forest dwellers to the modern factory, the
steps are: first fermentation, then drying, roasting, and winnowing.
   The cacao plant was first domesticated by the Olmecs, the complex cul-
ture of the Mexican Gulf Coast, around 1500 B.C. The Maya took the word
"cacao" from these distant ancestors and, at some time between 400 B.C.
and 100 A.D., began using the word to mean, as it still does, the domesti-
cated Theobroma cacao. The Coes provide a brilliant excursion through the
pre-Conquest Mesoamerican city-states in the forests of northern Guate-
mala and southern Yucatan, with their towering temple pyramids of stucco
masonry, their palaces, stone relief carvings, and delicately painted and
carved ceramic vases. Archaeological evidence and some remarkable hi-
eroglyphic deciphering have brought to light the central role of the pro-
duction and consumption of chocolate in Maya society, and this
extraordinary detective work is beautifully described by the authors. From
a tomb in a medium-sized Maya city at Rio Azul in Guatemala, a trove of
the paraphernalia of chocolate consumption was discovered in 1984, in-
cluding a chocolate jar with a screw-on lid. Among the many fine illustra-
tions the Coes include in their book is a scene from an eighth-century A.D.
vase from the Nakbe area of north-central Peten, now in the Princeton
University Art Museum, depicting a Maya woman carefully pouring a dark
substance from a cylindrical jar into a larger one-the first known picture
of a chocolate drink being made.
40 • NakedTropics