

 late, a neologism derived from a Maya and Aztec mix, had a more re-
spectable sound. Philologists will doubtlessly argue over such derivations,
but it is an explanation that would have been much appreciated by the
Marquis de Sade, a chocoholic who became grotesquely obese during his
long captivity, when, denied other outlets, he spent his time overindulging
in all manner of chocolate delicacies, of which he was always demanding
more from his loyal and long-suffering wife. «I asked ... for a cake with
icing, but I want it to be chocolate:' he demanded in 1779, «and black in-
side from chocolate as the devil's ass is black from smoke. And the icing is
to be the same."
    Chocolate had become well established as an elite drink in Europe and
Spanish America by the mid-seventeenth century. In all cases the dried
chocolate mass in the form of cakes, rolls, or bricks was placed in hot water
in a special jug or chocolate pot fitted with a lid pursed in the middle to
hold the handle of the molinillo (swizzle stick) and beaten to produce a
froth. Initially, the Spaniards sipped their foamy chocolate the Mesoameri-
can way, from gourds or small open clay bowls called jicaras; but the
viceroy of Peru, the Marques de Mancera, in the 1640s was concerned
about the ladies-in-waiting at his reception spilling chocolate on their
court dresses. He had Lima silversmiths make up a plate or saucer with a
collarlike ring in the middle in which a small cup could sit without slip-
ping. This mancerina soon became ubiquitous, and was the progenitor of
the magnificent eighteenth-century Viennese porcelain cups and saucers
called trembleuses. At the French court the silver chocolatiere was intro-
duced with the lid adapted to hold a moussoir directly borrowed from
Spanish and Mesoamerican prototypes. The French added a straight angle
to the spout; because it unscrewed clockwise, the handle remained tight
while the liquid was poured in a counterclockwise motion.
    The profligate Cosimo de' Medici became addicted to chocolate on a
visit to Spain and on becoming Cosimo III, grand duke of Tuscany, was
one of the great chocoholics of all time. Francesco Redi (1626-1697), the
grand duke's renowned physician and apothecary, invented the novel per-
fume flavors introduced into chocolate for the Tuscan court, most fa-
mouslya delicate jasmine aroma. The jealously guarded secret formula for
this most baroque of chocolate drinks is printed by the Coes for those who
would like to re-create it, along with many other recipes and methods of
chocolate preparation scattered throughout their book.
    The Italians, in fact, were lyrical about chocolate. For Geronimo
Piperni: «Chocolate is a divine, celestial drink, the sweat of the stars, the
vital seed, divine nectar, the drink of the gods, panacea and universal med-
icine." Another Florentine, Marcello Malaspina (1689-1757), composed a
curious dithyramb called «Bacchus in Tuscany," set on the coast of
42 • NakedTropics

Guatemala, where shipwrecked Tuscans, finding themselves in a grove of
cacao trees, sing out:
                Che il CIOCCOLATTA d'ogni Beva eil Re.
                  [That chocolate is the king of drinks.]
   Chocolate, it was soon learned, could also effectively disguise poisons.
Horace Walpole's old friend, Sir Horace Mann, believed that Pope Clement
XIV, who had suppressed the Jesuits in 1773, had been poisoned by them.
The Jesuits were great drinkers and producers of chocolate. Their cacao
trade from the Amazon was one of their most profitable enterprises until
the Marques de Pombal expelled them from the region. The pope, Mann
told Walpole, persisted in drinking his chocolate despite fears of assassina-
tion and was slowly poisoned through his "dish of chocolate last Holy
Thursday at the Vatican."
   By the late eighteenth century, chocolate was indelibly associated with
decadence, aristocracy, and the Catholic Church, especially with the Je-
suits, all of which made it suspect to the philosophes, enlightened thinkers,
enterprising Protestant businessmen, and aspiring radical politicians who
preferred coffee. Nor had the technology employed in chocolate's prepara-
tion changed much since the time of the Olmecs, despite the invention of
better pots, nonslip saucers, and exotic aromas. The plate dedicated to
chocolate making in the Encyclopedie of Denis Diderot and Jean d'Alem-
bert shows a worker toasting cacao in a cauldron, another breaking them
in a heated mortar, and another grinding them on a heated surface-all
steps familiar to the Maya and the Aztecs. In this as in so much else, the En-
cyclopedie was a compendium of things past rather than of things to come.