

der of prisoners became so feared throughout the Caribbean that he began
to meet with far more determined opposition than most pirates. The mer-
chant ships, Exquemelin said, "fought until they could fight no more."
    As well they might, since the man from Olonne was merciless. It was
common practice for pirates to torture their prisoners, as Morgan's men
had done in Panama to obtain information. The favorite pirate torture was
"woolding," after the word for the binding of cords around a mast. Ex-
quemelin describes how slender cords were "twisted about [the] heads, till
 [the] eyes burst out of the skull." But l'Olonnais clearly enjoyed torturing
men as much as he did taking their valuables: "When l'Olonnais had a vic-
tim on the rack, if the wretch did not instantly answer his questions he
would hack the man to pieces with his cutlass and lick the blood from the
blade with this tongue, wishing it might have been the last Spaniard in the
world he had thus killed." Eventually l'Olonnais met with a suitably bizarre
fate, if we can believe Exquemelin's story that he was captured on the Gulf
of Darien, near Panama, by cannibals, hacked to pieces, and roasted limb
by limb.
    Together with Exquemelin's book, the other major source is Captain
Charles Johnson's 1724 General History of the Pirates. Since the early 1930s,
this book has been attributed to Daniel Defoe and is so listed in most library
catalogs. This attribution is retained by Jan Rogozinski in his comprehensive
encyclopedia Pirates!4 But Cordingly, following the research of P. N. Furbank
and L. R. Owens, claims that not a single piece of documentation links Defoe
to the General History. Unfortunately nothing much is known about the mys-
terious Captain Johnson, although his history is the origin of most later ac-
counts, film scripts, and myths about pirates; so even if Defoe is not the
author, the problem of distinguishing fact from fiction remains. In one noto-
rious case, however, that of Edward Teach, famous as Blackbeard, Cordingly
demonstrates convincingly that Johnson's description was close to the truth.
Lieutenant Maynard, who fought him to the death on the deck ofhis ship in
Ocracoke Inlet of Pamlico Sound, North Carolina, in November 1718, wrote
later of Captain Teach that he "went by the name of Blackbeard, because he
let his beard grow, and tied it up in black ribbons." According to Johnson,
Teach used these ribbons to twist his beard up into small tails about his ears,
and stuck lighted matches under his hat when ready for action, so that "his
eyes naturally looking fierce and wild, made him altogether such a figure, that
imagination cannot form an idea of a fury, from Hell, to look more frightful."


4Jan Rogozinski) Pirates! An A-Z Encyclopedia: Brigands, Buccaneers, and Privateers
in Fact) Fiction) and Legend (New York and Cambridge) Mass.: Da Capo) 1996). For
a recent and accessible edition see Manuel Schonhorn) ed.) A General History ofthe
Pyrates [attributed to Daniel Defoe] (New York: Dover Publications) 1999).
52 • NakedTropics