

   Cordingly concedes almost immediately that the popular conception of
how pirates dressed turns out to be surprisingly accurate. As other
mariners in this period did, they wore short blue jackets, a checkered shirt,
a pair of long canvass trousers or baggy petticoat breeches, and often a red
waistcoat and neckerchief. Pirates did indeed tie scarves or large handker-
chiefs around their heads (a sensible and practical protection from the rays
of the sun at sea or in the tropics); they slung several pistols on ribbons
around their shoulders (also a wise precaution, since flintlock pistols were
unreliable at sea and if one failed owing to a damp charge, a second or
third backup came in handy); they wielded cutlasses and their elected
chiefs were flamboyant and charismatic characters. The pirate captain
Bartholomew Roberts, known as "Black Bart," said to have captured four
hundred vessels, fought his last sea battle in 1722, clad "in a rich crimson
damask waistcoat and breeches, a red feather in his hat, a gold chain round
his neck, with a diamond cross hanging to it."
   But dress is one thing, behavior is another. The pirates we meet in Cord-
ingly's book are a bloodthirsty bunch, far from the grandees fallen on hard
times depicted by W. S. Gilbert and Sir Arthur Sullivan in their Pirates of
Penzance. The Boston Gazette in March 1726 gave a graphic description of
Philip Lyne, the notorious pirate who, when he was tried in Barbados, con-
fessed to killing thirty-seven masters of vessels and an unspecified number
of seamen; the commander walked to the trial
    with about 20 other pirates, with their black silk flag before
    them.... As they were much wounded, and no care taken in dress-
    ing, they were very offensive, and stunk as they went along, particu-
    larly Line the commander; he had one eye shot out, which with part
    of his nose, hung down on his face.
   "Pirate" was a very specific designation and the distinction between pi-
rate and privateer was an important one, at least in law if not in practice. A
"privateer" was an armed vessel, or the commander and crew of a vessel,
that was licensed to attack and seize the vessels of a hostile nation. The li-
cense took the form of a "letter of marque and reprisal." By the sixteenth
century, the licensing system provided all the European seafaring nations
with a cheap way of attacking enemy shipping in time of war. The letter of
marque was an impressive and ponderous legal document, and the priva-
teer captain was expected to keep a journal and hand over the ship and
goods he had seized to an admiralty court, where the sovereign took his
share (or her share in the case of Queen Elizabeth, who always displayed a
greedy interest in such divisions of spoils). The rest of the loot was divided
among the ship owners, captain, and crew. A "pirate," on the other hand,
was legally defined in England from the time of Henry VIII as someone
50 • NakedTropics

who robs and plunders on the sea; and the laws against piracy provided for
punishment for "felonies, robberies, and murders committed in any haven,
river, creek, or place where the Lord High Admiral had jurisdiction:'
    Pirates had different regional names. "Buccaneer" was used in the
Caribbean and along the Atlantic seaboard of the Americas. The term was
first applied to hunters in the woods and valleys of western Hispaniola
(today's Haiti) who lived off the herds of feral hogs and cattle, whose num-
bers rapidly increased after the first Spanish s~ttlers introduced them into
a land without natural predators. Mostly French frontiersmen, these
hunters cooked and dried strips of meat over open barbecues, a method
borrowed from the indigenous Arawak inhabitants. The word for this pro-
cess, boucaner (meaning to smoke-dry or cure), gave the men their name.
They dressed in leather and, with their knives and bloodstained appear-
ance, "looked and smelled like a man from a slaughterhouse:' according to
Cordingly. By the 1630s, the buccaneers were established on Tortuga, off
the north coast of what is now Haiti, and an ideal launching ground for at-
tacks on the merchant vessels using the windward passage between His-
paniola and Cuba. Here the buccaneers formed a loose confederation
calling itself the "Brethren of the Coast."
    Much of what is known of the Caribbean pirates of Harry Morgan's
time comes from Alexander Exquemelin's Buccaneers of America. He
claimed in his book to "give no stories taken on hearsay, but only those to
which I was eyewitness." Born in the French channel port of Honfleur, Ex-
quemelin had arrived on Tortuga about 1666 as an indentured servant. He
was sold to a barber-surgeon, learned his master's trade, and gained his
freedom. Being "naked and destitute of all human necessities," he wrote, "I
determined to enter into the wicked order of the pirates." For five years, he
served with the buccaneers under both Henry Morgan and Franc;ois
l'Olonnais, joined them in their raids out of Tortuga and Port Royal, and
was paid handsomely for his medical skills. He broke with Morgan after
the attack on Panama, in which he participated. Like many of the bucca-
neers, he believed that Morgan had cheated him. After the raid, Ex-
quemelin returned to Europe where, in Amsterdam, he published his
best-seller. He later returned to the Caribbean and in 1697 joined in the
combined French and buccaneer attack on Cartagena, again serving as a
surgeon to the pirates.
    Exquemelin's account of the activities of Fran<;ois l'Olonnais, born
Jean-David Nau in western France at Les Sables d'Olonne (hence his nick-
name, "the man from Olonne"), fully justified l'Olonnais's other designa-
tion: "Fleau des Espagnols:' or Flail of the Spaniards. A former indentured
servant like Exquemelin, he had joined the cattle hunters on Hispaniola
and then turned buccaneer. He was a psychopath whose torture and mur-
                                                      Pirate Democracy • 51