

1For a recent and accessible edition see Alexander o. Exquemelin, The Buccaneers
ofAmerica, trans. Alexis Brown (New York: Dover Publications, 2000).


                                        47
48 • NakedTropics

   The governor of Jamaica ordered a state funeral for Sir Harry. A solemn
service took place at St. Peter's Church, of which Morgan was a benefactor.
When the warships in the harbor honored the old villain with a twenty-one-
gun salute, the cannons of the merchant vessels answered with their own dis-
orderly but thunderous barrage. But in all this Henry Morgan was an
exception. Most of his fellow pirates had short careers, met early and nasty
ends, and died penniless, having lost their spoils in the taverns and brothels
of Port Royal, Jamaica's capital, and one of the Caribbean's great buccaneer
havens until it was destroyed by an earthquake in 1692, a suitable punish-
ment for its past crimes and misdemeanors, some argued at the time.



                                       II
One thing, however, seems certain: books about pirates tend to make more
money than did most pirates. The London Maritime Museum's 1992 exhi-
bition «Pirates: Fact and Fiction;' a show planned to last four months, re-
mained open for three years by popular demand. So it was not surprising
that a New York literary agent encouraged David Cordingly, one of the cu-
rators, to take up the theme of the exhibition in a book contrasting the fic-
tional image of pirates with historical reality. 2
    Cordingly concentrates principally on the great age of piracy between
the last half of the seventeenth and the early eighteenth centuries, essen-
tially the 1650s through 1725. For the «real world" of the pirates, he exam-
ined contemporary English language sources, principally the logbooks of
the Royal Navy vessels sent out against the pirates, reports from colonial
governors, and the depositions of captured pirates and their victims. He
also has much to say about the popular image of pirates based on three
centuries of ballads, melodramas, epic poems, films, and romantic novels,
as well as the two classics of pirate lore, Treasure Island (1883) by Robert
Louis Stevenson and Peter Pan (1904) by J. M. Barrie. He draws extensively,
as he acknowledges, on the work of the historians Robert Ritchie, Marcus
Rediker, Peter Earle, and Nicholas Rodger, each of whom, in different ways,
has revolutionized the study of everyday life at sea during this period. 3

2David Cordingly, Under the Black Flag: The Romance and the Reality ofLife among
the Pirates (New York: Random House, 1995).
3Robert C. Ritchie, Captain Kidd and the War against the Pirates (Cambridge: Har-
vard University Press, 1986); Marcus Rediker, Between the Devil and the Deep Blue
Sea: Merchant Seamen, Pirates and the Anglo-American Maritime World, 1700-
1750 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987); Peter Earle, The Sack of
Panama: Sir Henry Morgan's Adventures on the Spanish Main (New York: Viking,
1982); N. A. M. Rodger, The Wooden World: An Anatomy of the Georgian Navy
(London: Collins, 1986).
                                                   Pirate Democracy • 49