

   The Aztecs, too, were great chocolate drinkers. Chocolate was much fa-
vored by warriors as well as the nobility because the drink was, among its
other attributes, nonalcoholic, and the Aztecs, whatever else they may have
been, were notably abstemious. Cacao beans served as money as well as for
making chocolate and became objects of long-distance trade. Huge store-
houses of cacao beans were kept by the Aztec rulers.
   Columbus during his disastrous fourth voyage met with a huge Maya
dugout canoe in 1502 near the Bay Islands off the Honduran coast. With
typical alacrity, Columbus had the canoe seized and stripped of its trading
goods, including a cargo of "almonds" which, the Spaniards were very sur-
prised to see, the Maya traders valued highly. Also typically, Columbus did
not comprehend what he had seen. The inventor of the phrase "New
World," the Milanese chronicler Peter Martyr, knew better. He called cacao
beans "happie money ... which I call happy, because ... the bowelles of
the earth are not rent a sunder ... For this groweth upon trees."
   For the Aztecs, chocolate, which they called cacahuatI,was apparently a
cool drink prepared in much the same way the Maya did. The cacao beans
were crushed, pulverized, soaked, and steeped. Water was added sparingly,
followed by aeration, filtration, and straining. The liquid was then poured
back and forth from one vessel to another to produce a head of foam. All
pre-Conquest chocolate drinks were made by this method.
   By the late sixteenth century the bitter, usually unsweetened cold liquid
had become transformed in the early colonial kitchens where conquered
and conqueror met. In the same period cacao also met, again in the colo-
nial kitchen, a product of another domesticated crop. Sugar arrived by way
of the long process of continental and transoceanic transplantation that
brought sugarcane to the Americas-from Asia, through the Mediter-
ranean and the Atlantic islands, to Santo Domingo, and finally to the es-
tates established by the family of Hernan Cortes in colonial Mexico. The
Coes make too little, perhaps, of this momentous encounter between cacao
and sugar; but it was a mix that made chocolate sweet and hot.
   The Spanish conquerors suspected, perhaps hoped, that chocolate had
aphrodisiac properties. But this, according to the Coes, was a Spanish ob-
session, "as was the chronic constipation" caused by their diet of meat and
lard and few fresh vegetables. "The conquistadors searched for native Mex-
ican laxatives as avidly as they did for aphrodisiacs," the Coes observe.
   The authors' ingenious explanation for the transformation of the word
for the drink from cacahuatl to chocolate is not unrelated to these particu-
lar Spanish concerns. The Spaniards, the Coes suggest, were uncomfort-
able with a noun beginning with caca to describe the thick, dark-brown
drain they were increasingly appreciating. In Latin and most Romance lan-
guages caca, as in cacahuatl, is a vulgar word for feces. Chocolatl and choco-
                                                           Chocolate • 41