

variety of those beans once enjoyed by Maya nobles, Aztec warriors, and
European aristocrats. With this remarkable full circle the Coes bring their
book to conclusion. The Kekchi Maya of Belize, who first brought their
precious beans to Europe as a gift to Prince Philip four hundred and fifty
years ago, are today, through the good offices of the Fairtrade Foundation,
an organization established by Oxfam, once again producing cacao beans
in traditional three-acre forest plots where the Theobroma cacao is polli-
nated by midges safe from pesticides. From these cacao beans, Maya Gold,
a new, expensive, ecologically friendly chocolate bar, is produced by the
Green and Black's Company.
   I was visiting the U.K. while writing this piece and was pleased to find
that my brother-in-law stocked Maya Gold in his natural-foods store in
Tiverton, Devonshire. The town has a street called Gold and many old
schoolhouses, almshouses, and chantries built and endowed in the six-
teenth century by local merchants, some of whom engaged in overseas
trade and, on occasion, piracy (at least the Spanish considered it such). The
parish church of St. Peter bears on its outer walls some of the finest stone
carvings of the sixteenth-century armed merchant vessels in England,
commissioned by one of the town's richest merchant adventurers. Devon
privateers were the most notorious raiders along the Spanish Main. But
they did not always know that cacao beans were "happie money" and to the
Central Americans as good as gold. In 1579, after seizing a Spanish ship off
the Isthmus of Panama, they burned the whole cargo in frustrated anger,
thinking the cacao beans were sheep droppings placed there to deceive
them. Now the descendants of these sixteenth-century mariners are buy-
ing Maya Gold, which seems to me as delicious as the Coes say it is.
   Sophie Coe was a pioneer of culinary history, author of America's First
Cuisines. 3 She was struck down suddenly by incurable cancer while she was
working on her True Story of Chocolate. Michael Coe, her husband and a
distinguished Yale anthropologist, completed her work. The book was con-
ceived out of a fascination with chocolate, and completed out of the love
for a partner lost. Sophie Cae has given us, and Michael Coe has delivered
to us, a splendid treat.




3Sophie D. Coe, America's First Cuisines (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1994).
This page intentionally left blank
B U CC AN E ER S E M B A R K IN G   ON   AN   E X P E D IT IO N .
                                                                CHAPTER             4
                                             Pirate Democracy
                    ((They change their climate, not their soul, who rush across the sea."
                                                              -Horace, Epistles 1.11.27




The first books about pirates appeared surprisingly soon after the piracy
they described. The most successful of all the early pirates, Henry Morgan,
who sacked the Spanish colonial city of Panama in 1671, was portrayed as a
monster of depravity and cruelty in Alexander Exquemelin's best-selling
Buccaneers ofAmerica, first published in Dutch in 1678, and in English in
1684. 1 Morgan brought suit for defamation of character. He strongly ob-
jected to a passage which said that he had first gone to the V\Test Indies as an
indentured servant and argued that because the governor of Jamaica, Sir
Thomas Modyford, authorized his raids against the Spanish possessions,
he was not a pirate. The matter was settled out of court, and Morgan re-
ceived substantial damages.
   Recalled to London in order to placate the Spaniards, Morgan was soon
knighted by Charles II and later returned to Jamaica as lieutenant gover-
nor, where he acquired landed estates and over a hundred slaves. He died a
rich man. It was his gargantuan drinking bouts that did him in. «Palling
after into his old course of life and not taking any advice to the contrary,
his belly swelled so as not to be contained in his coat:' Hans Sloane, who
attended him, reported. Whereupon Morgan turned to an African shaman
who plastered him with mud and made him drink urine. «But he lan-
guished and, his cough augmenting, died soon after."