

    The most dramatic result of Portugal's voyages and the explorations of
Bartolomeu Dias, Diego Cao, Vasco da Gama, and Pedro Alvares Cabral
was not the territorial empire they tried to claim in Asia and Africa and the
Americas. By and large they lacked the resources for imperial dominance
and power. What they did do, however, was establish connections: when we
talk of relations among China, Japan, or India, or Europe for that matter,
we are really talking about contacts established on their peripheries. The
seventeenth-century Brazilian historian Father Vicente de Salvador
tellingly compared the Portuguese to crabs crawling along a coastline. And
if this was true of Brazil until well into the eighteenth century, it was even
more true of China or of Japan.
    With this first period of oceanic contact an entirely new way of viewing
the world emerged and the Portuguese were in large part responsible for it.
They established an oceanic dominion that linked strategically placed
trading posts in a worldwide imperial system.
    In this accomplishment, the rapid evolution of Portuguese cartography
during this period was particularly important; a new graphic conception
of global space gave the Portuguese, and later Europe, a decided advantage.
It permitted, for instance, a very rapid conversion of navigational knowl-
edge to strategic and commercial (one might say protoimperial) advan-
tage. The political and economic aspects of the Portuguese intrusion into
Asia and the subsequent vicissitudes of their presence there are well cap-
tured in Sanjay Subrahmanyam's fascinating The Portuguese Empire in
Asia. 28 Synthesizing a generation of research, his book is an indispensable
starting point for comprehending the Portuguese exploits both in Asia and
Europe. He casts new light, for example, on the ways in which the Por-
tuguese, by opening the oceanic routes, displaced the Venetians in import-
ing spices, especially pepper, into Europe.
    All the Portuguese outposts established while the Spaniards remained
largely confined to the Caribbean were located at key strategic connections
between seas and oceans, the key passageways for trade and naval control,
for example, Hormuz at the mouth of the Persian Gulf, Mombasa and
Mozambique at the Malagasy Strait, Malacca for the passage between the
Bay of Bengal and the South China Sea, the Azores on the sea routes back
from the North and South Atlantic to Europe, Macao at the mouth of the
Pearl River in China, and Cape Verde, which could monitor movements
across the Atlantic to the African coast. These places are still identified by
naval strategists as "choke points." Their importance for control of naviga-
tion had been known, of course, to those who had used them for centuries

28Sanjay Subrahmanyam, The Portuguese Empire in Asia 1500-1700: A Political and
Economic History (London: Longman, 1993).
                                                 iAdi6s Columbus! • 35

before the Portuguese arrived, but they had never before been seen as af-
fecting movements across the globe.
    With extraordinary rapidity at the beginning of the sixteenth century
the Portuguese turned their geographical knowledge into a global system.
Only at the mouth of the Red Sea, when they attempted to seize and hold
Aden, did they fail. What is surprising in view of this record is how long it
took Spaniards to reach Mexico, almost thirty years after Columbus's land-
fall in 1492. It was after all not until 1513 that Vasco Nufiez de Balboa
crossed the Isthmus of Panama to see the Pacific Ocean. And the first cir-
cumnavigation of the globe (which achieved of course what Columbus
had wanted to do-sail west to arrive in the East) was made possible when
Fernao de Magalhaes (Ferdinand Magellan), a Portuguese navigator in the
service of the Castilian Crown, set sail in 1519 to discover the straits that
now bear his name and crossed the Pacific to the Philippines, in the same
year in fact that Hernan Cortes arrived in Tenochtitlan.
    The capacity of the Portuguese to see the big picture is one of the more
remarkable perceptual innovations of the early sixteenth century. This was
a leap of imagination that Columbus, despite his great voyages, singularly
failed to make-at least in part because he had deluded himself, as, it
seems, he still deludes some historians.
C CAO.
                                                            CHAPTER           3
                                                           Chocolate
                                "Give me chastity and continence, but not just now."
                                                -Saint Augustine, Confessions 8.7