

lArthur Preston Whitaker, ed., Latin America and the Enlightenment (Ithaca, N.Y.:
'A
Cornell University Press, 1961). I am drawing in this section on my chapter, "The
Impact of the American Revolution on Spain and Portugal and Their Empires," in
The Blackwell Encyclopedia of the American Revolution, ed. Jack P. Greene and J. R.
Pole (Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell Reference, 1991),528-543.
                                             Hegemonies Old and New • 63

framework, or even within a colonialIor neocolonial context. The horizon-
tal dimension is, of course, the comparative one-but this is also some-
thing we still largely lack even for North America (with the possible
exceptions of Canada and the Caribbean). Despite the heroic efforts of
Jack Greene and J. R. Pole, most U.S. historians still seem locked within the
concept of the "singularity" of U.S. history. For Latin America the situation
is no less extreme. The Cambridge History ofLatin America (1984-), for ex-
ample, is almost totally devoid of comparative analysis, especially in its
colonial and early national volumes, a factor emphasized by the ease with
which the original volumes are now being subdivided and reissued as what
are essentially national histories. And a final caveat: According to a popular
textbook, Early Latin America, by James Lockhart and Stuart B. Schwartz
(Cambridge University Press, 1983), national independence is, in any case,
a shadow thing at best. As they put it, "It has been said often and truly that
the division between colonial and national periods is an artificial one, es-
pecially in the social, economic, and cultural domains where so much cur-
rent scholarly interest lies." But if this is true, the eighteenth century
becomes a mere blip on a very broad canvas. It is significant that Schwartz
and Lockhart have long been leading rejectionists of what they call "insti-
tutional history," by which they appear to mean essentially Atlantic history
and the history of European (,'Eurocentric") colonialism, including the
great works on Atlantic commerce and navigation written by their imme-
diate predecessors, such as C. H. Haring, Richard Pares, and Vincent
Harlow. Not all revisionists have taken this narrow view. Radical compara-
tivists like Susan Deeds and Edward Countryman see the political emanci-
pation from Europe as a critical transition, which at the very least requires
an inquiry into the place of North and South America within the process
of industrial, political, and social transformation that flowed from the cir-
cum-Atlantic upheavals of the late eighteenth century, of which the Amer-
ican Revolution was the most dramatic colonial manifestation. 2 The
question they raise is one Stanley and Barbara Stein raised some time ago,3
that is, why at independence did the histories of South and North America
diverge so dramatically; or to put it in Immanual Wallerstein's terms, how
was it that North America moved from the periphery to the core of the
world system, while Latin America remained peripheral?4