

clothes, took command of a pirate vessel in 1718 by challenging a captain
who had declined to attack a French frigate in the windward passage. Henry
Avery, also known as Long Ben, was a former Royal Navy midshipman who
took over the privateer Charles in 1694 in Spanish waters when her captain
was found wanting and was incapacitated by drink. Avery renamed the ship
Fancy and set sail (f)r Madagascar and the Red Sea where, lying in wait for
pilgrim ships outbound from India to Mecca, he captured and looted the
 Ganj-i-Sawai, the largest ship belonging to the great mogul of India, a raid
that earned each man a thousand pounds. Avery's feat was soon celebrated
on the London stage at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane in 1713 in a long-
running melodrama titled The Successful Pirate, which, Cordingly observes,
began a long line of pirate melodramas, later parodied in Gilbert and Sulli-
van's light opera. Avery himself died a pauper in the fishing port of Bide-
ford, in Devon, having been cheated out of his riches by local traders and
«not being worth as much as would buy a coffin."
   The crews of the pirate vessels often signed written articles. These set the
rules for behavior aboard the ship and for the distribution of plunder, and
established rates of compensation for injuries (600 pieces of eight for the loss
of the right arm, 500 for a left arm, 100 each for the loss of an eye or a finger).
Cheating fellow pirates brought severe retribution. Under the articles drawn
up by the men led by Bartholomew Roberts, defrauding the company was
punished by marooning-that is, by setting the offending sailor ashore on
some uninhabited cape or island. Where «robbery was only betwixt one an-
other;' after the "slitting of ears and nose of him that was guilty;' the offend-
ing pirate was left off in a region known to be inhabited. The articles of
Roberts's crew set the time for lights out at eight o'clock. After that hour
those "still ... inclined for drinking" had to go on the open deck.
   Pirate flags were red and black, emblazoned with skulls, bleeding hearts,
hourglasses, spears, cutlasses, and whole skeletons. By 1730, the skull and
crossbones on a black cloth had edged out other symbols and was adopted
by English, French, and Spanish pirates in the West Indies. Captain
Richard Hawkins, captured by pirates in 1724, described how they ((hoisted
Jolly Roger (for so they call their black ensign, in the middle of which is a
large white skeleton with a dart in one hand, striking a bleeding heart, and
in the other an hourglass). When they fight under Jolly Roger, they give
quarter, which they do not when they fight under the red or bloody flag."
   During the early eighteenth century, pirates were young men whose av-
erage age was twenty-seven. Many pirate captains refused to take on mar-
ried men. Edward Low of Boston was adamant that «he might have none
with him under the influence of such powerful attractives as a wife and
children, lest they should grow uneasy in his service...." Article Six of one
pirate code of conduct decreed «no boy or woman to be allowed amongst
56 • NakedTropics