

   The Mediterranean pirates of the Barbary Coast were called «corsairs"
and operated from Algiers, Tunis, Sale, and other North African ports
where the Muslim rulers issued them licenses to attack Christian shipping.
Using swift galleys powered by oars and sail, they attacked heavily laden,
slow-moving merchantmen; they looted the cargoes, captured the passen-
gers and crew, and held them for ransom or sold them into slavery. Since
he was licensed, the corsair was technically a privateer and the term was
used without a particular geographic designation in French, Italian, and
Portuguese, but in English it applied more restrictively to the Barbary
raiders. Piracy was business for the Barbary rulers, and the corsairs formed
a guild that tried to regulate it. Although the Barbary states justified their
actions as a form of religious warfare, many Christian renegades were
prominent in the corsair fleet.
   The Barbary corsairs thrived in the shifting and ambiguous maritime
zone between Ottoman and Spanish sea power in the Mediterranean.
Their bases were strategically placed to prey on the merchant ships using
the Strait of Gibraltar. They were most active between 1580 and the late
seventeenth century, and returned with increased firepower during the
long European wars between 1792 and 1815. «The depredations commit-
ted by the Algerine corsairs, on the commerce of the United States" pro-
vided the justification for a reluctant Congress in 1794 to approve the
construction of the frigates that marked the beginning of the permanent
navy. The United States fought a series of indecisive naval engagements
with the corsairs between 1801 and 1815, when the Barbary fleet was led by
the Glaswegian Peter Lisle, who had converted to Islam, taken the name of
Murat Reis, and married the daughter of the pasha of Tripoli. The phrase
in the U.S. Marine Corps anthem «to the shores of Tripoli" refers to the
seven marines who took part in a harrowing march across the Libyan
desert to capture Derna in 1805 on orders from President Thomas Jeffer-
son. Despite this victory, the United States was still obliged to pay a humil-
iating $60,000 ransom for the crew of the frigate Philadelphia, captured by
Peter Lisle when the vessel ran aground on a sandbar while trying to
mount a blockade of Tripoli harbor.
   The literary image of the Barbary pirates, like that of the buccaneers,
emerged with their increasing notoriety. Lord Byron's The Corsair told the
story in couplets of the proud and tyrannical pirate Conrad, who, Cord-
ingly observes, had «the vices of a Gothic villain with the ideals of the noble
outlaw." On its day of publication in 1814, The Corsair, which would later
inspire works by Verdi and Berlioz, sold 10,000 copies and went through
seven editions within a month. Ironically, in 1816, a mere two years later, a
combined British and Dutch fleet bombarded Algiers, virtually destroying
the real corsairs as a serious threat to merchant shipping. Cordingly uses
                                                     Pirate Democracy • 53