

2Susan Deeds and Edward Countryman, "Independence and Revolution in the
Americas," Radical History 27 (May 1983).
 'A rthur J.Preston
3Stanley            Whitaker,
              Stein and       ed.,
                        Barbara H.Latin America
                                   Stein, The   and the
                                              Colonial  Enlightenment
                                                       Heritage of Latin(Ithaca,
                                                                         America;N.Y.:
                                                                                   Es-
says on Economic Dependence in Perspective (New York: Oxford University Press,
1970).
4Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World System, 2 vols. (New York: Academic
Press, 1980).
64 • NakedTropics

   Currently there are two major interpretive frameworks for examining
the impact of the North Atlantic democratic revolution in Latin America.
First, there is the Robert Palmer-Jacques Godechot vision of an Atlantic-
based transformation, an essentially political and institutional view, which
sees mutual influence in political theory, constitutional experimentation,
and the politics of democratic incorporation. In this view, the Enlighten-
ment is a positive, benign, and causative influence, essentially a progressive
force. 5
   A second view is a more economic view-partly Marxian but also capa-
ble of incorporating much of classical liberalism; that is) it is a view that
sees a general crisis of the old colonial system which affects the British Em-
pire in the 1770s and the Spanish and Portuguese empires in the early
nineteenth century) all of which flows from the shift from commercial to
industrial capitalism. In this view) the intellectual contribution is minimal.
The revolutions in America) both North and South) represent a shift from
formal to informal domination, with the newly industrializing states of
Europe-especially Great Britain-replacing the decaying bureaucratic
and mercantilist empires of Spain and Portugal.
   Brazilian historians such as Fernando Novais have also been concerned
to place the late-eighteenth and early-nineteen-century experience of
Brazil within the context of a crisis of the old regime of the old colonial
system in the face of the Atlantic and Industrial revolutions. 6 Less work of
this nature has been done on Spanish America, although Tulio Halperin
has long focused on the economic and political complexities of the inde-
pendence period in the La Plata region and more broadly in Spanish
America.? And Nancy Farriss) in her brilliant book on the Maya, sees the
impact of the reformist protoliberal policies of the Spanish Bourbons as
marking the critical divide in the history of Meso-America. 8 Much of the
new economic history of late colonial Mexico is seeking some explanation
for the paradox of the coexisting boom and rising social tensions within

SR. R. (Robert Roswell) Palmer, The Age ofDemocratic Revolutions, 2 vols. (Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1959 and 1964); Jacques Godechot, Les Revolu-
tions, 1770-1799 (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1970) and L'Europe et
l'Amerique a l'epoque napoleonienne, 1800-1815 (Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1967).
6Fernando Novais, Portugal e Brasil na crise do antigo sistema colonial, 1777-1808
(Sao Paulo: Editora HUCITEC, 1979). Also see Emilia Viotti da Costa, "Introdu<;ao
ao estudo da emancipa<;ao politica do Brasil," in Brasil em perspectiva, ed. Carlos
Guilherme Mota (Sao Paulo: Difusao Europeia do Livro, 1969).
7Tulio Halperin Donghi, Reforma y disoluci6n de los imperios ibericos, 1750-1850
(Madrid: Alianza Editorial, 1985).
8Nancy Farriss, Maya Society under Colonial Rule: The Collective Enterprise of Sur-
vival (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984).
                                         Hegemonies Old and New • 65