

the most important of Spain's colonial holdings in the Western Hemi-
sphere. And we have the now substantial body of new writing on the Bour-
bon reforms in Spanish America with major contributions by John Lynch,
John Fisher, and David Brading. Yet, it seems to me that mainstream eco-
nomic historians remain skeptical about the significance of the Atlantic-
based commercial system to the onset of industrialization. The important
point about these disagreements is how "scatter shot" they are and to em-
phasize how very little explicit discussion we have had about the broader
context of some of the most critical elements in eighteenth-century At-
lantic history and their implications.
    Perhaps we would be better off speaking of process, which involves, in
part, a rethinking of the history of ideas within their social and economic
context-again, looking from the South, which is my basic perspective
here. For Latin America and the Iberian powers, this involves very much a
new look at the impact of the ideas of the Enlightenment, which for Spain
under Charles III (1759-1788) and Portugal during the predominance of
the Marques de Pombal (1750-1777) led to major reforms in the manage-
ment of colonial affairs. This was motivated in both cases by a decision to
fortify their colonial links, retake the benefits of Atlantic commerce from
their northern competitors, and reestablish their power and prosperity by
adapting the techniques they believed Britain and France, in particular,
had used to surpass them. These measures by Portugal and Spain in some
instances served also to preempt and in others to mitigate the impact of
the North American revolution, although neither Spanish nor Portuguese
America was able to avoid the consequences of the late-eighteenth-century
European upheavals. Second, however, it is important to look not only
from South to North but also from the North to South. The issue of revo-
lution as example and as potentiality, involving the creative articulation of
new institutional mechanisms of government was a central concern to
would-be anticolonialists in the late eighteenth century. In both Brazil
during the late 1780s and in Spanish America in the aftermath of the wars
of independence, the North American constitutional model proved attrac-
tive. Yet, thirdly, we are also dealing with colonial opposition to metropoli-
tan powers and it is this aspect, of course, the achievement of national
independence, where the ambiguity of the Iberian and Ibero-American
role in the Atlantic as a whole is most apparent. Spain was an important
component of the European alliance that helped the thirteen colonies in
North America escape from British rule. Many would-be Latin American
nationalists on the other hand saw Britain, the erstwhile colonial power, as
a potential ally against Spain for their own independence movements. Pro-
cess, therefore, is a critical element in the period because we are dealing
with a complex interaction between two aspects of the Enlightenment-its
66 • NakedTropics