

them. If any man were to be found seducing any of the latter sex, and car-
ried her to sea, disguised, he was to suffer death." The historian B. R. Burg
suggested some years ago that all-male pirate crews were often homosex-
ual. s Cordingly is not convinced (nor was Christopher Hill),6 though he is
less sure about the proclivities of the naval ship captains and their young
servants and cabin boys. He points to the case of Samuel Norman, which
he discovered among the papers of the High Court of Admiralty. Captain
Norman was being bathed by the fourteen-year-old Richard Mandervell
while his ship was anchored in Oporto, and "had the carnal use of him &
was then guilty of the crime commonly called buggery or sodomy & he
twice afterwards used the Informant in the same way...."
   Captain Norman's behavior, however, does not really get at the broader
question that Burg raised. Portuguese shopkeepers in Brazil, their sexual
activity in no way ~onstrained by the all-male companionship of a ship at
sea, were regularly investigated by the Inquisition for their pursuit of shop-
boys. Captain Norman, anchored off Oporto, could have gone ashore for
female companionship had he so desired. Rogozinski is more to the point
in Pirates! when he describes how buccaneers recognized a same-sex rela-
tionship called matelotage-comrades who were "mates," shared hard-
ships, fought side-by-side, and pooled possessions.? The pirate captain
Edmund Cook sailed for many years with an unnamed servant who was
captured and forced to confess that "his Master had oft times Buggered
him in England ... in Jamaica ... ; and once in these seas before Darien."
The confession apparently did not offend the rest of the crew. Bartholo-
mew Sharp returned to England in 1682 with a sixteen-year-old Spanish
boy captured in South America, and Captain George Shelvocke infuriated
his crew by promoting his cabin boy to first mate.
   There were cross-dressing female pirates, the most famous being Mary
Read and Anne Bonny, who sailed with Captain John "Calico Jack"
Rackam, out of New Providence in the Bahamas. At their trial for piracy in
1720, in the town of St. Jago de la Vega, today Jamaica's Spanish Town, one
of the witnesses against them, Dorothy Thomas, said: "Each of them had a
machet and pistol in their hands, and cursed and swore at the men, to mur-
der the deponent [i.e., Thomas]; and that they should kill her, to prevent
her coming against them; and the deponent further said, that the reason of
her knowing and believing them to be women then was by the largeness of
their breasts." Read and Bonny, "largeness of their breasts" notwithstand-

SB. R. (Barry Richard) Burg, Sodomy and the Perception ofEvil: English Sea Rovers
in the Seventeenth-Century Caribbean (New York: New York University Press,
1982).
6Christopher Hill, ((Jolly Rogers," New York Review ofBooks, May 12, 1983.
7Rogozinski, Pirates!, 217-218.
                                                    Pirate Democracy • 57

ing, had fallen in love, each thinking the other to be a man, or so they told
Calico Jack. Convicted of piracy, they were sentenced to death by hanging,
but were reprieved at the last moment when both were found to be preg-
nant. Calico Jack suffered the fate of many convicted of piracy. He was put
in an iron cage, hanged from a gibbet on Deadman's Cay, a small island
within sight of Port Royal now known as Rackam's Cay, and his corpse was
coated in tar to preserve it as a warning to others.
    The pirate crews were multinational and multiracial. Dutch smugglers
and pirates appeared in the Caribbean after Dutch traders were expelled
from the Iberian peninsula in 1598, and Dutch freelance marauders con-
tinued to attack ships in the West Indies into the early eighteenth century.
French privateers were active in the Caribbean in the early eighteenth cen-
tury, and Spanish coast guards often launched freelance attacks on the
English colonies. Cordingly finds that the pirates based on the island of
New Providence in the Bahamas between 1715 and 1725 were mostly Eng-
lish-speaking-35 percent of them were from England, 25 percent from
the American colonies, 20 percent from the West Indies, 10 percent Scots.
The rest were Swedes, Dutch, French, Spanish, and Portuguese. Among the
English, most came from London and the West Country.
   The crews of the pirate vessels often included black Africans. Cordingly
assumes that they were slaves and believes that however contemptuous the
white pirates might have been of the customs of their day, they were not
likely to accept blacks as equal partners. But this seems a hasty judgment.
African seamen had participated in the oceanic voyages of the Portuguese
for over two centuries before the buccaneers roamed the same seas. The
Japanese screen paintings depicting the arrival of the Portuguese carracks
in Nagasaki Bay in the sixteenth century show African sailors on the rig-
gings. That pirates stole and sold slaves as part of their booty in no way
precluded the participation of black pirates in the looting and selling of
human cargoes, any more than it prevented Africans from selling other
Africans into slavery.