

 of the Bahamas in 1718 at the request of the merchants of Bristol and Lon-
don, and proved to be one of the most effective scourges of the pirates.
Woodes Rogers, accompanied by the buccaneer William Dampier, had cap-
tured a Manila galleon in 1709, one of only two English privateers to do so,
 and circumnavigating the world, returned to London in 1711 with gold bul-
lion, precious stones, and silks valued at 800,000 English pounds. He had
also rescued the castaway sailor Alexander Selkirk, said to be the model for
Defoe's Robinson Crusoe (1719), from the Juan Fernandez Islands off the
coast of Chile. A poacher turned gamekeeper, Woodes Rogers sent out the
naval ships to capture Calico Jack, Anne Bonny, and Mary Read. The coat of
arms granted to the colony of Bahamas in 1728 summed up the new situa-
tion. It portrayed a Royal Navy warship with three more in the background,
and bears the motto Expulsis Piratis, Restituta Commercia (Pirates Expelled,
Commerce Restored). Woodes Rogers commissioned a family portrait from
the young William Hogarth in 1729. In it he sits comfortably in an armchair
before the Fort at Nassau, a globe by his side represents his voyage around
the world, his son holds open a map of New Providence Island, and in the
harbor a warship fires a salute. After the 1730s, pirates were best left to nov-
elists and playwrights. Commerce replaced plunder.
    Yet out of the rich mixture of fact and fiction of the early eighteenth
century, the pirate genre emerged in which the works of J. M. Barrie and
Robert Louis Stevenson were sold along with adventures of earnest ama-
teur sleuths and treasure hunters; where ancient sea chests were found to
have secret compartments, and ambiguous ink blots on old charts were
claimed to represent, at the same time, Pacific atolls, islets off the coast of
Indochina, or Gardiner's Island off Montauk. The early-eighteenth-cen-
tury pirate narratives, cleaned up a bit, of course, have been taken over by
Disney World and dozens of Hollywood B movies.
    I was delighted to find, the other day, my well-thumbed copy of Treasure
Island, a present from my father when I was seven. It brought back memo-
ries of summer rambles along the coastlines and bays of Devon and Corn-
wall. Doubtless with the intention of keeping me quiet, he used to promise
that around the corner of some profusely hedgerowed seaside lane, or be-
yond some bracken-clad headland, or at the edge of some rocky inlet or
cove, we would find the Admiral Benbow Inn. For boys growing up in the
west of England, Drake, Hawkins, Raleigh, and assorted sea dogs, freeboot-
ers, smugglers, and pirates, real or invented, were part of popular culture.
Cordingly has, to some degree, set out to clarify and debunk this rich imag-
ined heritage. So it was some relief to discover in his book, all these years
later, that even if the Admiral Benbow Inn did not exist, Admiral John Ben-
bow did. An opponent of pirates, Spaniards, and the French, he died hero-
ically of his wounds off Cartagena in 1702, after his right leg was smashed
by chain shot and he refused to leave the quarterdeck.
B Y 0   PA.   RO   TUE SOUTflE   TER   R MP RT.
                                                          CHAPTER            5
                      Hegemonies Old and New
                                             ((The universal monarchy of the Seas."
                                                            -Abbe Raynal, 1770