

the painting The Bombardment of Algiers by George Chambers from the
National Maritime Museum in London as the cover illustration of his
book, even though he has very little to say about the corsairs and criticizes
the moviemakers of Hollywood for putting their pirates into precisely the
sort of large, three-masted, heavily gunned vessels from a later phase of
warfare that were far removed from the smaller, swifter vessels preferred by
the buccaneers in the Caribbean.
    Robert Louis Stevenson was more accurate in Treasure Island with Long
John Silver's parrot, "Cap'n Flint;' as when Silver told Jack Hawkins that
the bird had been "at Madagascar, and at Malabar, and Surinam, and Prov-
idence, and Portobello. She was at the fishing up of the wrecked plate ships.
It's there she learned 'Pieces of Eight,' and little wonder; three hundred and
fifty thousand of'em, Hawkins!"
    "Pieces of eight" were the most famous coins associated with pirate lore.
These coins were eight reales-silver coins. Pieces of eight minted in Peru
and Mexico bore the Spanish coat of arms on one side and a design repre-
senting the pillars of Hercules on the other, symbolizing the limits of the
ancient world at the Straits of Gibraltar. To this design, by the eighteenth
century, two hemispheres were added in the space between the pillars, rep-
resenting the New and Old Worlds. The pieces of eight became so familiar
in oceanic commerce that the twin pillars eventually became the dollar
sign. (Gold coins were escudos and the famous doubloon was an eight-
escudo gold coin.)


                                       II
The ubiquity of Spanish silver and gold coins in pirate narratives was not ac-
cidental and helps to explain the historical and geographical background of
piracy, something largely missing from Cordingly's book. The early appear-
ance of French, English, and Dutch privateers in Caribbean waters was a re-
sponse by seafaring nations to Spanish claims of monopoly in the New World
and their exploitation of the silver mines in northern Mexico and the High
Andes. By the 1570s, Spanish-American silver fed the great demand in Eu-
rope and Asia for coinage, trade, and metal for the decorative arts; Spanish sil-
ver had a huge effect on Atlantic, and later Pacific, commerce and navigation.
   Word of the riches of the New World had spread fast. Only two years
after the fall of the Aztec capital in 1521, a French pirate, Jean Fleury, cap-
tured two Spanish caravels off Cape St. Vincent, Portugal, and stumbled
upon an astounding Aztec treasure plundered by Hernan Cortes: three
enormous chests of gold ingots, 500 pounds of gold dust, 680 pounds of
pearls, emeralds, topazes, golden masks set with gems, helmets, and feath-
ered cloaks. French privateers soon arrived in the Caribbean. Captain
54 • NakedTropics

Fran<;ois Ie Clerc, known as "Jambe de Bois" because of his wooden leg,
sacked Santiago de Cuba in 1554, and the English, in the formidable per-
sons of John Hawkins and Francis Drake, followed.
    By the late sixteenth century, in order to protect their ships from
raiders, the Spanish established a system of armed convoys between the
Caribbean and Europe. Mexican treasure was embarked at Vera Cruz,
while the silver from Peru was transported from Nombre de Dios, and later
Portobello, on the Isthmus of Panama. At Havana the galleons would ren-
dezvous and take on water and supplies for the voyage to Spain. The out-
bound fleets from Europe wintered in the well-fortified and sheltered
harbor of Cartagena on the northern coast of South America.
   The timing of pirate, privateer, and buccaneer attacks on these Spanish
ports and treasure fleets thus followed a logical strategy, one governed by
geography. French privateers seized and burned Cartagena and Havana in
1559. Sir Francis Drake attacked Nombre de Dios in 1572, and sacked
Cartagena in 1585. Spain went to great pains to make the defenses of these
harbors as near to being impregnable as was possible, as one can still see
from the ramparts of the port of Havana; but by concentrating its forces so
largely on protection of the treasure fleets, Spain virtually abandoned the
rest of the Caribbean to the freebooters, and the Dutch, French, and Eng-
lish soon filled this void.
   The cruising grounds of the buccaneers and the strategic location of
their lairs were largely determined by the shipping lanes of the Atlantic,
Caribbean, and Indian Oceans-the Bahamas were used to prey on Span-
ish ships that had left the treasure ports of the Isthmus of Panama and
Mexico and were en route to Europe; Tortuga was the place from which to
attack merchant ships inbound from Europe and Africa for Jamaica and
the Caribbean; and Madagascar was perfectly placed on the path of ships
trading in the Indian Ocean. There was also a seasonal pattern to the pirate
voyages. The winter months were spent in the Caribbean. In April or May,
the buccaneer might head north. Blackbeard was on the coast of Virginia
in October 1717. In 1718 he raided Charleston, South Carolina, blockaded
the harbor, and held the town to ransom. In the intervening winters, he
plundered ships off St. Kitts and in the Bay of Honduras. Pirates also scav-
enged off the coast of West Africa in search of gold, ivory, and slaves or
rounded the tip of South America as Drake had done to prey on Spanish
treasure ships in the Pacific.
   Cordingly provides some fresh insights into the rough democracy of pi-
rate life. On a pirate ship the captain was elected, and occasionally deposed,
by the votes of the majority of the crew. In most cases it was the crew, not
the captain, who decided the destination of pirate voyages and when to at-
tack. John Rackam, known also as Calico Jack because of his colorful
                                                      Pirate Democracy • 55