




If we look at the Atlantic in the eighteenth century, it seems to me that we
still lack a comprehensive view of what changed during this period,
where we should set its boundaries, and how we might interpret the
salient characteristics of the century. Perhaps, we have been both too
general and too specific, simultaneously seeking with the synthesizers to
explain too much and with the more specialized monographic literature
to explain too little.
    If we begin in the South, which is my own starting point, this is a frus-
trating situation. Because our historiography on the Ibero-American and
Afro-American Atlantic is still in a state of development, not to say under-
development, we are often forced to establish context and frameworks out
of thin air, to ask what must appear from the perspective of the more de-
veloped historiographers of the North Atlantic to be obvious, foolish, and
even naive questions. We are obliged, I think, to look at the "big picture" if
only to see if what happens in our sphere has any resonance elsewhere. I
will try to tackle two themes. The first relates very broadly to economic
chronologies within the Portuguese and Spanish Atlantic and whether
what we see here allows us to speak sensibly of an Atlantic system in the
eighteenth century, and what the dimension and limits of such a system
might be. The second theme relates more to geopolitics and questions of
empire or, if you will, of imperial hegemonies and the challenges that these
hegemonies faced as the century ended.



                                     61
62 • NakedTropics

                                        I
We are of course confined to some degree, as we must be in any historical
speculation, not only by our own research but by what our colleagues have
chosen to write about. And inasmuch as history writing since the Second
World War has tended to deemphasize the role of individuals, of institu-
tions, and of events-instead plotting the longer-term trends in economic
development and delineating social and economic structures-the recent
decades have seen an accumulation of more information about the first
theme, the economic aspects of the Portuguese and Spanish Atlantic sys-
tems, than about the second, the policies and politics of empire. While
much has been achieved by the emphasis on conjunctural economic analy-
sis and social history, it has unquestionably also led to the almost total ex-
elusion of detailed examinations of elites, institutions, and above all
intellectual life and politics and policy. Hence, today, if we look at the late
colonial period of the Spanish and Portuguese empires in America, we
tend to know more about slaves than their masters, more about the forced
Indian labor drafts of the Andes than the attitudes of Peruvian merchants
and bureaucrats in Lima, more about Mexican silver production than the
political role of mining entrepreneurs. The best book on the Enlighten-
ment in Latin America, for example, remains the collection of essays edited
by the late Arthur Whitaker in the early 1940s, twice reissued in the early
1960s but long since out of print. l
    The end of our period is also compromised by the consequences of
colonial emancipation in the sense that a relatively cohesive imperial past
is fragmented into a series of sometimes spurious national histories, and
we can no longer rely on the well-organized archives of the Indies in Seville
or of the overseas dominions in Lisbon to help reveal to us what hap-
pened-or at least what the record keepers thought happened. For the
western shores of the Atlantic we thus have a division of historical output
into two broad categories, one of which might be called the vertical dimen-
sion, the other the horizontal. By the vertical dimension I mean a form of
history writing confined by the geographical limits of what became, after
independence, national entities. National histories inevitably stress origi-
nality and uniqueness, rather than any common colonial background, and
are sometimes hostile to a point of view that would place the new nations
that emerged in the Americas within an international or comparative