

                                      III
Yet as the power of Spain declined and that of France and Britain rose, the
pirates began to be perceived in a very different manner; they were no
longer seen as potential allies in times of adversity, as the old privateers had
been, but as enemies of good commerce. How, Cordingly asks, was it that
the pirates acquired a heroic and relatively benign image? The answer lies
in early pirate literature in English, which often conflates the anti-Spanish
privateers of Elizabethan England with the predators of a later epoch.
Against the background of a powerful anti-Spanish and anti-Catholic tra-
dition, it is not surprising that the people who read pirate stories in the late
58 • NakedTropics

seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries displayed no great sympathy
for the Spanish victims. In any case, "singeing King Philip's beard," and
those of his successors, was seen as the patriotic duty of any good English-
man (or Welshman), pirate or privateer; and such was in essence Captain
Morgan's justification for his atrocities in Panama.
   Already by Morgan's later years, however, there was grumbling about his
unsuitability to hold official positions in Jamaica and, in many ways, he
was identified with the old Caribbean at a time when the prospects for
freelance plunder were rapidly diminishing. Sugarcane cultivation was
rapidly expanding in the West Indies as was sugar consumption in Britain,
and so too was the importation of slaves from Africa. The merchants and
the slave traders backed by powerful commercial and political interests in
London, Bristol, and Liverpool had little time for the buccaneers; and fol-
lowing the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713 the English obtained the formal right
(the asiento) to supply slaves to the Spanish American markets. By the
eighteenth century, the British were learning, as were the French, that it
was easier to subvert the Spanish Empire from within than to attack it on
the high seas. It was better to use the credits of London merchants to take
indirect control of Spanish American trade, and smuggle and barter along
the coasts of South and Central America than to loot and destroy potential
customers. And the pirates no longer confined their attacks to the Spanish.
As wealth and power shifted in the Atlantic shipping lanes, it was the Eng-
lish who became the object of pirate assaults.
   Around 1720, at the time of peak pirate activity in the Atlantic, the pi-
rates were thought to number about two thousand in all. Within a decade
they were reduced to fewer than two hundred. As soon as the British gov-
ernment decided to respond in force, the pirates stood little chance. The
Royal Navy in 1718 had sixty-seven ships of the line. Even the smallest of
these had fifty guns, equal in force to Blackbeard's Queen Anne's Revenge,
the largest pirate vessel. Changes in the law in 1700 made it possible there-
after to try to impose the death sentence in Vice-Admiralty Courts overseas.
One of the first cases took place in Boston in 1704, when John Quelch, after
plundering along the coast of Brazil, made the mistake of returning to the
port of Marblehead, where he had seized his vessel. Quelch and six of his
crew were sentenced to death. After a barrage of sermons from the Reverend
Cotton Mather, they were hanged on the shoreline by Hudson's Point.
   To comply with the jurisdiction of the lord high admiral, all such hang-
ings took place from gallows set up "within the flood marks;' since his au-
thority was held to extend up to the low-tide line. Between 1716 and 1726,
four hundred men were hanged for piracy by such courts around the At-
lantic seaboard, from Port Royal to Barbados, to New Providence, to Lon-
don, and from Boston to the Cape coast of West Africa. Captain Woodes
Rogers, a famous former privateer, was sent to New Providence as governor
                                                    Pirate Democracy • 59