

   The fundamental problem for Portugal, however, arose from the logic
of the Brazil-based Atlantic system within which Pombal had operated. In
the final analysis, Brazil would inevitably become the dominant partner
within the Portuguese-speaking empire. If the political constraints that
had governed the whole period from the 1660s to the end of the eighteenth
century also changed, that is, if for example Great Britain no longer saw it
in its own interest to protect Portugal from her continental neighbors,
then the British might opt for a direct relationship with the colony rather
than with the mother country.I8 Since the whole basis of Portugal's pros-
perity had been built on the manipulation of colonial monopolies, cash-
crop exports, colonial markets, and colonial gold, such a rupture would
bring fundamental change and would close an epoch. Ironically it was the
French seizure of Lisbon in 1807 that forced the effective political and eco-
nomic emancipation of Brazil in 1808 by neutralizing the power of those
in Portugal opposed to recognition of Brazil's central economic and politi-
cal role within the Luso-Brazilian Atlantic system, collapsing thereby the


18There had long been a clandestine direct trade between British merchants and
Brazil, especially involving the slave trade. The rolled tobacco of Bahia, most of it
from the Cachoeira and Mantiba regions, was the basic commodity of exchange on
the African coast, as necessary to other European slavers as to the Portuguese. [See
Jose da Silva Lisboa to Domingos Vandelli, Bahia, October 19, 1781, Anais da Bib-
lioteca Nacional, Rio de Janeiro (ABNRJJ, XXXII (1920),505; Jose Honorio Rod-
rigues, Brazil and Africa, trans. Richard A. Mazzara and Sam Hileman (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1965) and Pierre Verger, Flux et reflux de la traite des
negres entre Ie Golfe de Benin et Bahia de Todos os Santos, du XVlle au XIXe siecle
(Paris: La Haye, Mouton, 1968).] Some fifty vessels a year, corvettes and smaller
vessels, left Bahia for Africa, four-fifths of them for the Guine Coast and the
remainder for Angola. [See Luis dos Santos Vilhena, Recopilafiio de noticias
soteropolitanas e brasilicas . .. (1802),3 vols. (Bahia: Imprensa Official do Estado,
1922-1935).] European goods and gold dust came back to Bahia with the cargoes
of slaves. This clandestine commerce had outraged the secretary of state for over-
seas dominions, Martinho de Melo e Castro, as had the degree of control that the
merchants of Bahia exercised over the African commerce to the exclusion of met-
ropolitan merchants. ["Instruc<;ao para 0 Marques de Valen<;a, no qual informa a
respeito da referida devassa ... ," Bahia, February 4,1783, ibid., 529.] The contra-
band manufactures, however, did underprice those imported from the metropolis,
and restricted the market for metropolitan goods. [See Jose da Silva Lisboa to
Domingos Vandelli, Bahia, October 19, 1781, ibid., p. 505.] The profitable sub-
sidiary trade which accompanied the slave and tobacco commerce contributed to
the favorable balance Bahia enjoyed with the metropolis. Most of the capital ob-
tained was sunk into the purchase of more slaves. Melo e Castro held that the
working of the Bahian-African trade was the same as "according to the English,
French and Dutch a free trade by the ports of Africa between those nations and the
Portuguese dominion in Brazil without the intervention of the merchants of the
metropolis." ["Instruc<;ao para 0 Marques de Valen<;a," Martinho de Melo e Castro,
Queluz, September 10, 1779, ABNRJ, XXXII (1910),444.]
76 • NakedTropics