

absolutist form which involved a reformulation of imperial policy along
neomercantilist lines, as well as a reassertion of the rights of the state on
the one hand, as opposed to its more liberal form on the other, where the
Enlightenment provided a guide to experimentation with new forms of
governance and constitution making, defining thereby the rights of the in-
dividual within the process of decolonization. Both imply a de-linking of
previously set patterns and upsetting, changing, and resetting of the insti-
tutional context within which collectivities define themselves.


                                         II
How do the Portuguese and Spanish Atlantic fit into this picture? The case
of Portugal and Brazil is especially interesting, given the Atlantic focus of
their trade, Brazil's large slave population and consequent links to Africa,
and the interpenetration of the Luso-Atlantic system via Lisbon by the
British-dominated commercial system of the North Atlantic. But first it is
essential to establish the parameters of the system we are talking about-
for, if the eighteenth-century Luso-Atlantic commercial system is charac-
terized overwhelmingly by the rise of gold production in Brazil and its
subsequent fall, both cycles took place within a broader framework which
changed surprisingly little between the 1660s and 1807, the year of the
Napoleonic invasion of Portugal. Hence, we are here talking about what I
would call the long eighteenth century. Let me look briefly at the origins of
this long eighteenth century and explain why I take these origins back to
the 1660s.
    The Dutch assault on the Portuguese overseas possession during the
mid-seventeenth century had been transatlantic in scope. The Dutch were
well aware that control of the sugar-producing northeast of Brazil was use-
less to them unless they also controlled the source of slaves in Africa.
Hence, in 1641, the Dutch seized the slave supply port of Luanda, the capi-
tal of Portuguese Angola, the slave transshipment depot located on the off-
shore island of Sao Tome, as well as the sugar-prOducing Brazilian
captaincy of Pernambuco. These Dutch successes, however, were tempo-
rary. In 1648, an expeditionary force mounted by the Portuguese governor
of Rio de Janeiro retook Angola, and after a long and bitter guerrilla cam-
paign in Pernambuco the Dutch were expelled from Recife in 1654. 9
    The Portuguese victories in Africa and Brazil were not repeated in the
Orient. The 1650s, in fact, saw Portuguese power virtually eliminated in
Asia, or at least reduced to a shadow of what it had been in the sixteenth
century. The oceanic dimension of Portuguese imperial interest, therefore,

9C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, Salvador de Sa and the Struggle for Brazil and Angola,
1602-1680 (London: Athlone Press, 1952).
                                          Hegemonies Old and New • 67

 from the 1660s until the early nineteenth century came to be preeminently
 focused on the South Atlantic. As early as 1644, moreover, direct trade be-
tween Bahia and the West African coast had been authorized, Bahia ex-
 porting tobacco and importing slaves. These trading and commercial links
between South America and West Africa remained important well into the
nineteenth century, making Bahian merchants involved in African trade
wealthy and virtually independent of Lisbon.
    On the mainland of South America, the northern and southern fron-
tiers of the Portuguese dominions were also established, or, at least, the
claims to these frontiers were staked out in the seventeenth century. In
 1670, for instance, the bishopric of Rio de Janeiro was created, its jurisdic-
tion reaching in theory to the northern banks of the Rio de la Plata. In
 1680, the Portuguese established a "new colony" (Nova Colonia do Sacra-
 mento) opposite the Spanish port city of Buenos Aires. The reaction of the
Spaniards was rapid and Nova Colonia was seized after only a few months.
But, in 1681, the Portuguese reestablished and fortified the outpost. The
issue of the Portuguese presence on the Rio de la Plata caused continuous
friction with Spain. Despite several treaties, the problem was not resolved
and remained after the independence of both Spanish and Portuguese
America to complicate the relations between the successor states.
    In the far north, the Amazon frontier also remained subject to dis-
pute-in this case by France, which had in 1676 established a strategic
presence on the coast of South America in Cayenne. French interest in
Brazil, in fact, did not abate throughout the eighteenth century, despite the
fact that in 1712, following the War of Spanish Succession, France formally
renounced all claims to the left bank of the Amazon.
    In the late seventeenth century, therefore, the focus of Portugal's imper-
ial interest shifted decisively westward from the trading-post thassalocracy
of the Indian Ocean first established in the early sixteenth century to the
plantation-based colonies of the South Atlantic. The Afro-American At-
lantic commercial complex which had predated the Asian empire and
thrived even while overshadowed by the Asian spice trade now came fully
into its own. 10 Within the South Atlantic system itself, integrated by the tri-
angular interdependence of Lisbon, the slaving enclaves of the West and
Central African coast, and the expanding colonies of European and
African settlements in Portuguese America, imperial priorities were re-
ordered to favor support of Portugal's territorial empire in Brazil.
    Portuguese America in the 1650s was also very different from the collec-
tion of small coastal enclaves it had been sixty years before at the time of
the union of the crowns of Spain and Portugal. The development of a fleet