

and to 'develop a trade in cacao. The cattle frontier was also pushing inland,
opening up connections between the Sao Francisco river valley and the Sao
Paulo plateau. With paulista aid the long-lasting complex of fugitive slave
settlements known as Palmares in the backlands between Pernambuco and
Alagoas was destroyed. Since 1670 the Crown had also used the paulistas
extensively for systematic exploration of the interior, rewarding them with
the titles of nobility and membership in the chivalric military orders.
    The most dramatic and decisive consequence of Portuguese exploration
of the interior, however, was the discovery of gold. The search for precious
metals had of course brought many of the first Europeans to the Western
Hemisphere, and also provoked the most audacious explorations of the
vast interior of South and North America, and the Spanish had been well
rewarded for their early explorations. In the Caribbean within months of
Columbus's landfall, gold had been discovered. During the 1540s in the
barren mountains of the Andes, the Spaniards came upon a vast mountain
of silver at Potosi in present-day Bolivia, and in Mexico along the eastern
slope of the Sierra Madre they were no less successful in exploiting silver
ore. The Portuguese, on the other hand, were less fortunate. For almost two
hundred years after Portugal laid claims to the territory which became
known as Brazil, they had to make do with more prosaic products-first
Brazil wood used to produce red dye, then sugar, hides, cacao, and to-
bacco-worthy and valuable products all, but the precious metals the early
settlers hoped for eluded them. At the end of the seventeenth century,
however, half-Indian frontiersmen from the small inland settlement of Sao
Paulo struck it rich. Sao Paulo was a resource-poor community which
made its living by capturing and selling Indian slaves and raiding the pros-
perous Jesuit missions in Paraguay. The paulistas were ever on the lookout
for booty. In the 1690s, after years of searching, they eventually came
across rich deposits of alluvial gold in the streams along the flanks of the
mountain range of Espinha~o, which runs north-south between the pres-
ent-day cities of Duro Preto and Diamantina in the state of Minas Gerais
across the great interior plateau of Brazil. Three hundred and fifty miles
inland from the port city of Rio de Janeiro, the Mantiquira range marked
the watershed for the great north-flowing Sao Francisco River, as well as
for the tributaries which flowed south into the vast La Plata river basin. As
word spread, avid speculators used both river systems to reach the gold
field and within a decade of the paulistas' discovery, the first great gold
rush of modern history was in full swing. More than anything else, it was
gold that pushed Portuguese settlements deep into the interior of Brazil-
first to Minas Gerais, later to Goias and Mato Grosso-well beyond the
traditional sphere of Portuguese interest determined by the Treaty of
Tordesillas. The issue of the interior frontier hence became a matter of
acute concern to the courts of both Lisbon and Madrid.
                                          Hegemonies Old and New • 71