

15Kenneth R. Maxwell, Conflicts and Conspiracies: Brazil and Portugal, 1750-1808
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973).
16H. E. S. Fisher, The Portugal Trade: A Study of Anglo-Portuguese Commerce,
1700-1770 (London: Methuen, 1971). Also, Virgilio Noya Pinto, 0 ouro brasileiro e
o comercio anglo-portugues (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1979).
                                         Hegemonies Old and New • 73

and with Portugal's diminished stature and apparent backwardness on the
other, permeated the Portuguese intellectual milieu of the age.
   The most dramatic reformulation of Portugal's policy toward Brazil oc-
curred during the long period of rule by the Marques de Pombal, between
 1750 and 1777. Pombal himself took much from classic mercantilist theory
and practice in his policymaking; both from its British and its French or
Colbertian origins, but the use of the term mercantilism to describe Pom-
bal's policy is not entirely appropriate. Mercantilism, when defined nar-
rowly, as we know, describes a policy whereby trade is regulated, taxed, and
subsidized by the state to promote an influx of gold and silver-the objec-
tive of such state intervention being aimed more broadly at achieving a fa-
vorable balance of trade.
   Pombal's policy was at once limited and more focused than this. Its
objective was to use mercantilist techniques-monopoly companies, reg-
ulation, taxation, and subsidies-to facilitate capital accumulation by in-
dividual Portuguese merchants. This aid to individual Portuguese capitals
had wider objectives and consequences because it was part and parcel of a
scheme to fortify the nation's bargaining power within the Atlantic com-
mercial system. I7
   The problem for an enlightened Iberian economic nationalist, which is
perhaps a more accurate way to describe Pombal, was not so much to en-
courage the influx of precious metals; this was rarely a problem for Iberian
economic policymakers given the fact that Spain, Portugal, and their em-
pires were the principal source of the world's bullion supply in this period,
with gold from Brazil and silver from Peru and Mexico. The dilemma was
precisely the opposite; that is, policymakers needed to devise measures to
retain capital within their own economic system and at the same time to
multiply the positive and diminish the negative economic impact of being
producers of precious metals. The theory and practice of mercantilism
were, after all, the creation of bullion-starved northwestern Europe. The
application of the theory and practice of mercantilism in the bullion-rich
Iberian Peninsula was bound to be partial because the end of the policy
was fundamentally different from that sought by mercantilism's progeni-
tors. The Iberians aimed to retain bullion, the northwest Europeans aimed
to attract it.
   Pombal's methods reflected, in fact, the peculiarities of Portugal's posi-
tion within the Atlantic system, and the particular impact on Portuguese
entrepreneurship of the Brazilian gold boom of 1700-1760. Essentially, the