

   As the negotiations for a treaty to establish boundaries between Por-
tuguese and Spanish America progressed during the 1740s, it became gen-
erally accepted that clear topographical landmarks such as rivers and
mountains should serve to delineate frontiers. The Portuguese had two
major bargaining chips. First, they held Colonia do Sacramento on the
east bank of the Plate Estuary. Second, the westernmost Portuguese min-
ing region, in what is now Mato Grosso, had been integrated administra-
tively and economically with the northern Brazilian coast by means of a
fluvial transportation and communications route running along the Gua-
pore, Mamore, and Madeira Rivers in the western Amazonia basin. When
an agreement was finally reached, these rivers constituted the northwest-
ern border of Portuguese lands, much to the satisfaction of authorities in
Lisbon. 14
   It was within these broader geographical limits that the economic char-
acteristics of the long eighteenth-century Portuguese-Atlantic system need
to be seen. They were therefore, first and foremost, marked by the flow of
specie (gold and silver, the latter obtained from the contraband trade with
the Spanish) and the preeminence of colonial, mainly Brazilian, staples.
Second, the growth, decline, and revival of the manufacturing industry in
Portugal were inversely proportional to the rise and fall of gold production
in the Brazilian interior. That is to say, Portuguese domestic manufactur-
ing thrived prior to 1700 and again after 1777, but languished during the
golden age. This had major implications for the Portuguese foreign and
colonial policy. Portugal also remained throughout the eighteenth century
a chronic grain importer-from Northern Europe at the beginning of the
century and from North America, especially Virginia and the Carolinas,
toward the end. This fact during the 1780s and 1790s had a major impact
on the attitudes of the new North American republic, for example, marked
especially in the person of Thomas Jefferson, toward protonationalist re-
publican movements in Brazil. These attitudes were ambivalent at best
when Virginia's trade with Portugal was placed in the balance against sup-
port for nationalist movements for independence from Portugal of uncer-
tain origin in Portugal's vast South American territories.
   The third important characteristic of the long eighteenth century was
the British presence in Portugal and indirectly within its empire, protected
by treaties and exercising de facto extraterritorial rights and privileges
much on the pattern later imposed during the nineteenth century on
China. For example, the whole period from the late 1660s through 1807


14David M. Davidson, "How the Brazilian West Was Won," in Colonial Roots of
Modern Brazil, ed. Dauril Alden (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973),
61-106; J. R. (Jose Roberto) do Amaral Lapa, Economia colonial (Sao Paulo:
Editora Perspectiva, 1973).
72 • NakedTropics

was marked by the dominant-the Portuguese felt-domineering pres-
ence of influential British merchant communities established in Lisbon
and Oporto. The British merchants in Lisbon and Oporto were organized
within so-called factories, which were in effect legally recognized commer-
cial corporations, their privileges guaranteed by the Cromwellian treaty of
1657, reinforced by the Methuen Treaty of 1703. Through their entrepre-
neurial skills and access to capital, British merchants penetrated the whole
fabric of the metropolitan and colonial economy. IS
   The need for external political and military support was at the core of
the commercial concessions Portugal had made to the British and others in
the seventeenth century. This need remained a basic given throughout the
eighteenth century, setting the parameters within which Portuguese for-
eign and colonial policy had to be conducted. Political and military depen-
dency, however, did not mean there was no room for maneuver in the
national interest or options open to a skillful Portuguese nationalist to ex-
tract whatever benefits he could from the Anglo-Portuguese relationship.
In fact a central preoccupation of Portuguese economic thinkers and
diplomats throughout the eighteenth century had been precisely how to
achieve balance in what had become an unequal relationship but which in-
trinsically need not be so if a true reciprocity could be achieved. Nor did all
British economic thinkers see pure benefit in the series of treaties and tariff
privileges which governed Anglo-Portuguese commerce. The issue in fact
became, as the eighteenth century wore on, a central topic of debate
among the leading lights of the new science of political economy engaging
Adam Smith and later David Ricardo. 16
   The eighteenth-century Luso-Atlantic world, finally, was caught up in
the struggle between France and England, a struggle that increasingly
compromised Portugal. Lisbon tried to accommodate both, but by its very
Atlantic nature, and because of the central economic role of Brazil within
the Luso-Atlantic commercial system, Portugal was tied inextricably to
Britain and, although it always sought to remain neutral and thereby retain
the prosperous entrepot function of Lisbon for the reexport of colonial
products, it was very rarely able to maintain neutrality for long.
   The role of Brazil in Portuguese calculations and diplomacy, economic
and institutional, thus held much higher priority than did the colonial
weight of North America in British calculations. These preoccupations
with the development of the Portuguese Atlantic Empire on the one hand,