

17Kenneth Maxwell, Pombal: A Paradox of the Enlightenment (Cambridge and New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1995); and Francisco Jose Calazans Falcon, A
epoca pombalina: politica, econ6mica e monarquia ilustrada (Sao Paulo: Editora
Atica, 1982).
74 • NakedTropics

all-powerful minister, Pombal, placed the power of the state decisively on
one side of the conflict that had developed between Portuguese entrepre-
neurs as a consequence of the gold boom. He chose the large established
Portuguese and Brazilian merchants over their smaller competitors be-
cause he saw the small merchants as mere creatures or commission agents
of the foreigners. With support from the state he hoped the Portuguese
merchants would in time be able to challenge the foreigners at their own
game. His economic policy was a logical one in view of Portugal's position
within the eighteenth-century international trading system. It protected
mutually beneficial trade (such as the Portuguese wine trade), but it also
sought to develop a powerful national class of businessmen with the capi-
tal resources and the business skills to compete in the international and
Portuguese domestic markets with their foreign, especially British, com-
petitors. It was not an easy policy to pursue, at least overtly, because it was
essential to achieve this outcome without bringing into question the polit-
ical and military support that the treaties with Britain guaranteed and that
was essential if Spanish ambitions were to be kept at bay.
   At the same time in Brazil, in striking contrast to the Bourbon reform-
ers in Spanish America, Pombal sought to incorporate and co-opt the
Brazilian oligarchy. Portugal was, after all, a small country with a large em-
pire. It did not possess the resources of a Britain or France. It did not have
the military capabilities or the economic resources to force Brazil into a
subservient role. Indeed, as Pombal watched the British attempt to repress
the rebellious colonists in English-speaking North America during the
1770s, he was fortified in his belief that conciliation was a more effective
weapon against colonial uprising than military force.
   Portugal's colonial policy under Pombal in effect served to diffuse ten-
sions within the colonial nexus by preventing any polarization along colo-
nial versus metropolitan lines. The intervention of the Pombaline state had
almost always been sectoral; that is, it had swung state support behind one
side in a series of preexisting conflicts which themselves bridged the met-
ropolitan-colonial divide. Hence, Pombal supported the large entrepre-
neurs against their smaller competitors; he had aided the educational
reformers within the church such as the Oratorians, while destroying the
Jesuits and their colleagues; he had crushed powerful elements among the
old aristocracy while encouraging the access of businessmen to noble sta-
tus. The benefits and the displeasure of the Pombaline state, in other
words, helped and hindered both Brazilian and Portuguese, forging a se-
ries of alliances across the Atlantic, as well as counteralliances that linked
Portuguese and Brazilian interests at a variety of levels. Some of these re-
sults of policy were unintentional; but the conciliatory aspect of Pombal's
policy toward powerful Brazilian interests was entirely explicit.
                                              Hegemonies Old and New • 75