

had resulted as much from the actions of the inhabitants themselves and
their allies from Sao Paulo and Bahia within Brazil as from the interven-
tion by Lisbon. Indeed, the Pernambucans had been prepared at one point
to seek the support of the Catholic monarch of France when the aid of Por-
tugal for their cause had seemed problematical. The municipal councils
had raised money for defense. They subsequently instigated a vigorous op-
position to the monopoly of the Brazil company, and with the aid of the
Inquisition (which opposed the privileges granted to New Christian
bankers who had invested in the Brazil company) they succeeded in de-
stroying the company's monopolies in 1659. The fleet system which had
been imposed at the time of the company's establishment, however, was re-
tained and continued to operate under the administrative direction of a
new Lisbon-based board of commerce (junta do comercio). The Brazilian
municipal councils, however, were represented in Lisbon by procurators;
and the council of Bahia acquired the right in 1653 of sending two repre-
sentatives to the Cortes, Portugal's ancient parliamentary institution. This
was a privilege of some importance because the Cortes played a vital part
in the years following the restoration of Portuguese independence, meet-
ing eight times between 1641 and 1698. Peace with Spain in 1668 and the
treaties with the Dutch in 1661 and 1688 and with the English in 1654 and
1662 had been bought at considerable cost in terms of special privileges
granted to foreign merchants and indemnities paid, including the theoret-
ical right of British merchants to reside in Brazil, something which in prac-
tice was rigorously opposed. 13
   The weakness of Portugal undoubtedly contributed to the relative au-
tonomy of Brazilian institutions. Portugal was well aware of the need to
treat Brazilians with care and respect since Portugal's power to coerce obe-
dience was very limited. By the 1690s Brazilian sugar no longer dominated
world markets. It did not, however, disappear from circulation. Brazilian
white sugar was of high quality and remained an important export (and
for Lisbon reexport) item. The major positive impact of sugar's relative de-
cline in value was to stimulate diversification and give new incentive to ex-
ploration and expansion into the vast hinterland of South America.
Tobacco, for instance, became a key Brazilian export to both Portugal and
Africa; the quantity of tobacco sent to Portugal doubled between 1662 and
1672. Attempts were made to introduce cloves and cinnamon from Asia


l3Carl Hanson, Economy and Society in Baroque Portugal, 1668-1703 (Minneapo-
lis: University of Minnesota Press, 1981); also the classic works by C. R. (Charles
Ralph) Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825 (London: Hutchinson,
1969) and The Golden Age ofBrazil, 1695-1750: Growing Pains ofa Colonial Society
(Berkeley: Published in cooperation with the Sociedade de Estudos Hist6ricos
Dom Pedro Segundo, Rio de Janeiro, by the University of California Press, 1962).
70 • NakedTropics