

structure of the Luso-Atlantic system as it had existed since the 1660s and
replacing Lisbon as the required intermediary between South America and
Europe by direct access between Europe and the ports of Brazil. 19


                                         III
But what of the Spanish American Atlantic world? Here the eighteenth
century had seen three major processes at work. First, the old monopolistic
trading connection of Atlantic convoys of protected ships sailing on a reg-
ular pattern between the Caribbean and the monopoly port of Seville
(later Cadiz) had been superseded by a de facto diversification of trade.
Some of this diversification was illegal-but like the trade through Ja-
maica, this had become a substantial contribution to overall Atlantic com-
merce. After 1715, in fact, the old fleet system was clearly limiting the
growth of trade as economic and demographic expansion occurred
throughout Spanish America. Spain had also eventually permitted other
Spanish ports into Atlantic commerce, gradually ending the Cadiz monop-
oly between 1765 and 1789 and giving formal administrative recognition
to the peripheral coastal regions in South America away from the old high-
land Indian-populated core areas, where Spain's major bases in the West-
ern Hemisphere had been since the time of the Conquest. Thus, while
Lima and Mexico City remained important (Mexico still accounted for
half the population of Spanish America in this period), new regions also
developed, such as the Rio de la Plata, Caracas, and Cuba, which had previ-
ously been backwaters-good for provisions but producing very little else.
These regions all became major exporters in the late eighteenth century-
Buenos Aires, an exporter of salt beef, silver, hides, and grains; Caracas for
cacao and hides; Cuba, especially after the revolt in Haiti, a major center
for sugar and slaves.
   Second, starting at midcentury Spain had attempted to implement a se-
ries of major administrative, mercantile, and fiscal reforms aimed at the
enhancement of the power of the metropolis through the more efficient
exploitation of its colonies. 20 As in Portugal, there had been growing


19Jose Jobson de Andrade Arruda, a Brasil no comercio colonial (Sao Paulo: Atica,
1980); Joseph C. Miller, Way ofDeath: Merchant Capitalism and the Angolan Slave
Trade, 1730-1830 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988).
2°1 am drawing here on the work of Stanley J. Stein and Barbara H. Stein in "Con-
cept and Realities of Spanish Economic Growth, 1759-1789;' Historia Iberica I
(1973): 103-119, and also see their more recent work, Silver, Trade, and War: Spain
and America in the Making ofEarly Modern Europe (Baltimore and London: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2000). Also see Charles C. Noel, "Charles III of Spain," in
Enlightened Absolutism, ed. H. M. Scott (Basingstoke, Hampshire: Macmillan,
1990), 119-143.
                                          Hegemonies Old and New • 77

awareness in Spain that its role as a great power was severely undermined
by the failure to adapt to modern conditions; which in eighteenth-century
terms meant using the power of the state to increase revenues and impose a
more centralized administrative system. This preoccupation with national
regeneration during the first half of the eighteenth century was in the fore-
front of the minds of several high government officials who saw Spanish
America as the means for Spain to recuperate its position in Europe if
colonial resources could be more effectively utilized. The 1743 proposal of
Jose de Campillo, minister of finance, in which he called for a "New system
of economic administration for America" (Nuevo sistema de Gobierno
Econ6mico para fa America) encapsulated the intention to develop the em-
pire as a market for Spanish manufactures and as a source for raw materi-
als. Campillo wished to see a system of general inspectors (visitas
generales), the creation of intendancies on the French model, and the in-
troduction of "free trade" into colonial administration, by which they
meant the ending of the Andalusian monopoly and the opening of Spanish
American trade to all ports of Spain, as well as the creation of a more eco-
nomically integrated society within Spanish America by changing the way
in which the Indian communities within the New World were governed.
Campillo's proposals, however, were not published until 1789 under the
Bourbon monarch Charles III (1759-1788), whose reign became associ-
ated with the implementation of a series of far-reaching new governmental
measures for the administration of the vast Spanish territories in the New
World. The urgency of these reforms became more than ever evident after
the seizure of Havana by the British in 1762, during the Seven Years' War. 21
    Each major Spanish crisis in the eighteenth century had a colonial com-
ponent. Commercial competition between England and France for the
Spanish contract (asiento) to supply African slaves to Spain's colonies in
America had been a prominent issue in the War of the Spanish Succession.
At midcentury, the second crisis in 1759-1762 was precipitated by English
commercial expansion in India, Canada, and the Caribbean, gateway to
Spain's colonies in Middle America and northern South America. The
third crisis at the century's end came with conflict between England and
Napoleonic France in large measure over seapower and trade with Spain's
colonies. What defined these crises was Spain's monopoly of American sil-
ver production, its inability to develop a manufacturing industry to supply