

21John Robert Fisher, Commercial Relations between Spain and Spanish America in
the Era of Free Trade, 1778-1796 (Liverpool, U.K.: Centre for Latin-American
Studies, University of Liverpool, 1985); and Antonio Garcia-Baquero Gonzalez,
Cadiz y el Atlantico (1717-1778): el comercio colonial espanol bajo el monopolio
gaditano, 2 vols. (Sevilla: Escuela de Estudios Hispano-Americanos, Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas: Excelentisima Diputaci6n Provincial de
Cadiz, 1976).
78 • NakedTropics

its colonies, and the competition between two of the more developed Eu-
ropean economies over exploiting the Spanish Empire in America.
    To England and France, Spanish America represented, above all, a mar-
ket for manufactured goods and a source of silver essential for expanding
international trade and settling the imbalance of payments. At the end of
the War of Succession, however, the forms of British and French commer-
cial penetration in Spain diverged. Less developed commercially and in-
dustrially than the British, and linked to Spain as a wartime ally and tied by
the Bourbon dynasty, French merchants and shippers had to expand inside
the Spanish colonial trading system now centered on Cadiz. The Utrecht
settlement confirmed the concessions yielded by Madrid over the last half
of the seventeenth century to foreign resident merchants and shippers at
Cadiz. Such concessions included extraterritorial rights, the exemption of
firms and vessels from certain customs controls, and lower duties on im-
ports such as French linens and other select items. 22
    Over the decades of 1724-1778 there were on average about sixty major
French commercial houses established in Cadiz. Of the declared value of
the Cadiz merchants, moreover, the French merchants accounted for 43
percent, the Spanish merchants only 18 percent. Until 1789, the French re-
mained the largest foreign colony in Cadiz, always conspicuous and sensi-
tive, like the British factory in Lisbon, to any infringement of their treaty
rights. A significant percentage of the French textiles shipped to Cadiz
were reexported; and the sales of French linens, woolens, and silks at Cadiz
had important repercussions for employment and earnings in France's
textile-producing centers. 23 French industry also absorbed appreciable
quantities of Spanish primary exports-raw wool, soda ash, raw silk-
along with products from Mexico and Guatemala like cochineal and in-
digo dyes. As little as 10 percent of colonial cargoes consisted of Spanish
goods, with the balance made up by the production of Spain's French ally.
Sales to the Spanish colonies generated a counterflow of silver that fed into
the private banking system centered on Paris and Lyons, which was vital
for trade with India and China and for the deficit-plagued finances of the

22Lutgardo Garcia Fuentes, EI comercio espanol con America, 1650-1700 (Sevilla:
Escuela de Estudios Hispano-Americanos; Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, 1980); Miguel Artola, "America en el pensamiento espanol del siglo
XVII," Revista de indias XXIX ( 1969); and N. M. Sutherland, "The Origins of the 30
Years War and the Structure of European Politics;' English Historical Review CVII
(July 1992): 586-625.
23Carlos D. Malamud, "Espana, Francia y el comercio directo con el espacio peru-
ano, 1695-1730," "Cadiz y Saint Marlo;' in La economia espanola al final del antiquo
regime: comercio y colonias, III (Madrid: Alianza; Banco de Espana, 1982). Also, Al-
bert Girard, Le commerce franrais a Seville et a Cadix aux temps des Habsbourgs:
contribution a l'etude du commerce etranger en Espagne aux XVle et XVIle siecles
(Paris and Bordeaux: Feret & fils, 1932).
                                         Hegemonies Old and New • 79