

IOKenneth Maxwell, "Portugal, Europe, and the Origins of the Atlantic Commer-
cial System, 1415-1520," Portuguese Studies 8 (1992): 3-16.
68 • NakedTropics

system between Lisbon and Brazil in the immediate aftermath of Portu-
gal's independence from Spain, and the imposition of heavier customs du-
ties to support the construction of warships at midcentury as well as the
newly imposed monopoly of the Brazil company, proved advantageous to
the south of Brazil which had previously competed under serious disabili-
ties in terms of access to European markets with Bahia and Pernambuco.
The sugar ships from all the Brazilian regions now arrived at Lisbon to-
gether. The escort vessels left Rio de Janeiro toward the end of March and
picked up the sugar ships of Bahia in April, the fleet arriving at Lisbon dur-
ing early July or August.
    Between the mid-1640s and 1650, sugar prices were high in Europe, but
after that date the price of Brazilian sugar plummeted on the Amsterdam
market, falling constantly until the 1680s. The major cause was competi-
tion from the Caribbean. The Dutch, and later the British, were developing
their own sugar trade, and in the case of the British beginning to develop a
system of preferential tariffs to protect British markets for British-grown
Caribbean sugar. The response of the Brazilian sugar sector to this loss of
markets is very imperfectly understood, and little research has been done
on the second half of the seventeenth century. There are some indications
of attempts by Brazil mill owners to lower costs by vertically integrating
their enterprise. The Jesuit-managed Sergipe mill in Bahia, for instance,
which had relied entirely on sharecropping arrangements in the early years
of the century, was directly producing 60 percent of its own cane by the
1680s. Producers also managed to transfer some of their losses to salaried
employees whose wages suffered a substantial real decline over the second
half of the seventeenth century. I I
    The social and political consequences of the new economic situation
were significant. Planters and mill owners tended to lose their dominant
position in urban institutions. Certainly, merchants began to hold posi-
tions of importance in prestigious urban voluntary lay organizations, such
as the misericordia in the Brazilian port cities. And in the municipal gov-
ernment the old planter domination was challenged by the appointment of
a university-trained lawyer as presiding officer (juiz de fora) and the ap-
pearance (at least in Bahia in 1641) of representatives of the urban artisan
population, the "people's tribune" (juiz do pOVO).I2
    At the same time, the municipal councils in Brazil were acquiring added
importance in the broader imperial context. This autonomy was undoubt-
edly enhanced by the fact that the recovery of Pernambuco from the Dutch

IlStuart B. Schwartz, Sugar Plantations and the Formation of Brazilian Society:
Bahia, 1550-1835 (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985).
12A. J. R. Russell-Wood, Fidalgos and Philanthropists: The Santa Casa da Misericor-
dia ofBahia, 1550-1755 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968).
                                           Hegemonies Old and New • 69