

to the colonial dilemma that preserved the basic social organization, espe-
cially the system of slavery, but brought political emancipation from Eu-
rope. For an effective partnership they more often looked to Great Britain
and to trade: espousing "liberalism" in the sense of access to world com-
merce rather than liberalism in the sense of democratic government.
   For Latin America, especially for the areas where plantation economies
and African slavery predominated, it is essential, therefore, if we are seek-
ing to mark the end to the long eighteenth century, to look at the relation-
ship between the three revolutions of the late eighteenth century, the
American, the French, and the Haitian, and for Spanish America to look to
the vicissitudes of the eighteenth-century experience with reform and re-
bellion. From the perspective of the Americas at the time, the great slave
revolt of 1792 in French Saint-Domingue was a second "American" revolu-
tion that seemed no less important than the first. It brought to the fore-
front of elite consciousness fears and tensions inherent to plantation
systems throughout the New World. Within the empires of Spain and Por-
tugal, the Haitian revolt served both to stimulate a reapproximation be-
tween local oligarchs and the more progressive elements within the
metropolitan governments, as in the Portuguese-speaking empire, and, as
in Spanish America, to make it inevitable that the independence move-
ments, when eventually they came, would always find questions of race,
class, and social stability close to the surface. Whereas in the 1780s would-
be Latin American revolutionaries had found inspiration in George Wash-
ington, by the 1790s, they would recoil in fear before the example of
Toussaint L'Ouverture.
   The Haitian revolt also had a major impact on the attitudes of the gov-
ernments of Spain, France, and Britain toward independence movements
in the Americas. For Britain, in particular, Haiti brought great caution to
the encouragement of colonial rebellion if such revolts threatened to bring
about so much instability and violence as to destroy the very wealth which
had attracted British traders and merchants to the region in the first place.
Here, the British soon began to see the advantages of the Luso-Brazilian
solution to the dilemmas of the epoch of the Atlantic revolutions. As John
Barrow summarized the issue in 1806:

    Revolutions in states where each individual has some interest in
    their welfare are not effected without the most serious calamities.
    What, then, must be the consequences in a country where the num-
    ber of slaves exceeds the proprietors of the soil? In promoting revo-
    lutions, I trust England will never be concerned, being fully
    convinced that however much South America might gain by a quiet
88 • NakedTropics

    change of masters, she will be soon thrown back into a state of bar-
    barianism by revolutions. 36
From the early-nineteenth-century British perspective, the reasons for this
essentially conservative stance are not hard to discern. Hegemonic powers,
then as now, never like to see their interest challenged or their commercial
interests destroyed by radical and unpredictable change. The recently inde-
pendent North Americans were the first to see through such stratagems
and their implications for Spanish America and Brazil. The American
secretary of state, John Quincy Adams, writing on June 28, 1818, ably
summed up the British attitude toward the political emancipation of
South America when he wrote:
    The Revolutions in South America had opened a new world to her
    commerce, which the restoration of Spanish colonial domination
    would again close against her. Her Cabinet, therefore, devised a
    middle term, a compromise between legitimacy and traffic ... She
    admits all the pretension of legitimacy until they come in contact
    with her own interest, and then she becomes the patroness of liberal
    principle and colonial emancipation. 37
Only two months later the British envoy in Rio de Janeiro, Henry Cham-
berlain, in fact was writing secretly to Viscount Castlereagh (August 22,
1818) in terms which reflected Adam's supposition exactly:
    The political state of this part of the South American continent has
    become so changed by the establishment of the seat of the Por-
    tuguese Monarchy in the Brazils that a change in the system under
    which Spain formerly governed her colonies in the Plata is become
    necessary and unavoidable, even if they had remained faithful; they