




For the past two decades, historians-or many of them-have been down-
grading the role of events and of personalities. There has also been a ten-
dency to reject the history of ideas, or at least any easy cause-and-effect
interaction between ideas and the implementation of policy. On the posi-
tive side, however, we have witnessed the growth of a more international,
less Eurocentric, history. I say this at the outset, obvious as it may be, be-
cause we are dealing here very much with an event (the expulsion of the Je-
suits from Portugal and its empire in 1759); with a very dominant-not to
say domineering-personality (the Marques de Pombal, who in effect gov-
erned Portugal from 1750 to 1777); with ideas (especially in the case of the
Iberian monarchies, a reinvigorated and systematic thinking about the role
of the state in promoting economic development and in securing for itself
a monopoly over coercion, budgets, administration, and justice); and with
international history (in that I will be focusing on a very remote periphery
of the eighteenth-century world: the Amazon basin).
   This event: the Portuguese expulsion, this personality: Pombal, and this
periphery: the Amazon basin, however, provided the spark that set in mo-
tion a process throughout Catholic Europe that brought the Society of
Jesus down. In the aftermath, in Portugal, it was the Enlightenment that
provided a rationale, a justification, as well as the means to remedy some of
the damage done by the Jesuits' forced departure.


                                        91
92 • NakedTropics

   It is important to stress perhaps that this is where and when the expul-
sion began. We still tend to look out from the center to the edges-yet it
was at the very outer edges of the European world, where the Jesuits had al-
ways been most active, that the first decrees to suppress the Society of Jesus
were enforced. Why an action in Brazil found such resonance elsewhere is a
separate issue. Here I am interested in the spark. Why the Amazon? Why
Pombal?


                                          II
There were two distinct but interrelated aspects of the intellectual environ-
ment in eighteenth-century Portugal that influenced the way Pombal
thought about the problems confronting him as he took office in 1750;
each of them, in different ways, had an impact on the dispute with the
Jesuits. l First, there was the intense debate over fundamental questions
concerning philosophy and education. Second, a considerable body of
thought existed about various aspects of Portugal's political economy. The
stimulus for the former in Portugal, as elsewhere in Europe, was the intel-
lectual achievement of Descartes, Newton, and Locke. The most important
works to emerge from this intellectual school in Portugal included those of
de Martinho de Mendon<;a Pina e Proen<;a (b. 1693, d. 1743), who at-
tempted to adapt to Portugal some of Locke's theories, especially on edu-
cation; the writings of the New Christian2 Dr. Jacob de Castro Sarmento
(b. 1692, d. 1762), who introduced Newtonian ideas in Portugal; and the
works of Dr. Antonio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches (b. 1699, d. 1783), another
New Christian who had left Portugal in 1726, working thereafter in Eng-
land, Holland, Russia, and finally in France, where (from 1747 until his
death in 1783) he was a collaborator of the Encyclopedists and wrote on
medicine, pedagogy, and economics. 3 Most influential of them all was the
Oratorian Luis Antonio Verney (b. 1713, d. 1792), the author of 0 ver-
dadeiro metodo de estudar (The true method of education), published in