

mid-1790s. This rejection was partly due to the failure of the Nationalist
and Republican conspiracy in Minas Gerais during early 1789, but it was
due also to the counterinfluence of the French Revolution and most par-
ticularly the manifestation of the French Revolution in the Americas, the
great slave revolt in the French Antilles.
    The white Brazilian elite, slave owners and those opposed to slavery
alike, found by the 1790s that republicanism and democracy were concepts
too dangerous for experimentation within a society half slave, and where
blacks outnumbered whites two to one. The consequence was that those
who avidly and approvingly followed the events in North America before
 1790 turned away from the North American model and, encouraged by the
Portuguese government, which had learned its own lessons from the revolt
'of the thirteen colonies, embraced monarchy in the interest of preserving
the status quo against racial and social upheaval. A similar interaction be-
tween the chronology of revolutions and elite attitudes took place in all the
American states and ex-colonies where slavery was entrenched.
    In mainland Spanish America, independence followed from external
more than internal events: the collapse of the Bourbon monarchy in Spain
itself in the face of the Napoleon onslaught in 1808. Unlike Portugal, where
the French invasion brought about a denouement to the dilemmas of the
metropolitan-colonial relationship with the removal of the Portuguese
Court to Brazil and the de facto (later de jure) establishment of Rio de
Janeiro as the seat of a New World monarchy, in Spain the invasion in effect
cut Spanish America loose from the old metropolis for a critical six years
between 1808 and 1814, with major consequences for Spanish American
unity and stability. The successor Spanish American republics often took
shape within the new boundaries imposed by the eighteenth-century re-
formers, but they all faced massive problems of social cohesion and eco-
nomic and administrative dislocations. The conflicting pressure arising
from unequal economic growth within the Spanish Empire in America, the
ambiguities of an administrative reform that was in part an attempt to re-
spond to those changes, as well as the several social, ethnic, and racial ten-
sions that permeated the social makeup of Spanish America had all served
to limit the development of a broad-based anticolonial sentiment prior to
 1808 and fragmented the social bases of support for a nationalistic project
on the North American model, limiting thereby the potential impact of the
North American example. Again, as in the lowland tropical areas of the
Western Hemisphere, the example of the great slave revolt and consequent
bloody conflicts in Haiti reinforced the fears arising from the uprising in
Upper Peru in the early 1790s. Those who saw the North American model
as relevant tended after 1800 to see it as the conservative option, a solution
                                        Hegemonies Old and New • 87