

been better for the French if they had left Iberia alone when after the victo-
ries of Nelson they could not challenge British naval superiority in the At-
1antic Ocean. A factor incidentally the citizens of Liverpool well noted at
the time.



                                        IV
If the policies of neomercantilism in both Spain and Portugal were
thwarted, and thwarted be it noted where they succeeded as much as where
they failed, and if Enlightened Absolution proved incapable in the long
term of preventing the inexorable rise of the British commercial and naval
hegemony within the Atlantic system as a whole, what of the forces of pro-
tonationalism on the other side of the ocean-can we speak here of an age
of Democratic Revolution, as Robert Palmer proposed, or of an Atlantic
Revolution in the sense Jacques Godechot used the term? Or are we indeed
seeing a more economically based transformation from direct to indirect
dominion, from the old formal to the new informal empire of trade and
industrial power. The ferment of innovation and the difficulty of imple-
menting reform in the Americas had certainly revealed just how complex
Spanish American colonial society had become in the late eighteenth cen-
tury. It also demonstrated how difficult it would be in Spanish America for
a clear regional focus of protonationalistic sentiment to emerge, or for the
creation of a cohesive social base to support any rebellion against Spain.
Internal social, racial, and caste divisions permeated colonial society, and it
was very difficult anywhere in Spanish America for European Spaniards
living in the colonies, Creole magistrates, soldiers, and local businessmen
to come together in even the embryonic independence movement that had
briefly made the idea of an economically independent and Republican
Minas Gerais on the North American model so pertinent in Brazil in
1788-1789.
    The example of the American Revolution had been particularly impor-
tant in Brazil for reasons that lay in the coincidence of its anticolonial mes-
sage with the severe tension between Lisbon and major segments of the
local elite in the one area in Portugal's American territories that had the ca-
pacity to articulate as well as make effective an independent state, possess-
ing as it did in the 1780s adequate revenues, military forces, administrative
experience, and a close attention to international developments. That it
failed despite all these elements is an indication of how difficult the
achievement of colonial independence would be in Ibero-America. 32


32Maxwell, Conflicts and Conspiracies, especially 115-140.
84 • NakedTropics

   Movements of social protest did, of course, emerge in Spanish America,
and with much more violence, bloodshed, and disruption than ever oc-
curred in Brazil, where protonationalist movements, however articulate,
never got further than conspiracy in the eighteenth century. But the move-
ments of social protest in Spanish America were limited in their ideo-
logical content; they did not make the leap from protest against bad
government to an attack on the rule of Spain in America. The most signifi-
cant of these movements of protest and rebellion, the Comunero rebellion
in New Granada (present-day Colombia and Venezuela) in 1781 and the
Tupac Amaru rebellion in upper Peru (present-day Bolivia) in 1780-1781,
never projected themselves into an anticolonial struggle and both, espe-
cially the latter, served to terrify the Creole elites and make them acutely
aware of the risk of race and ethnic violence implicit in the complexity of
Spanish America's social makeup.
    Given the heterogeneity of Spanish America in the late eighteenth cen-
tury, the uneven impact of imperial reform, the diversification of the eco-
nomic system, and its reorientation toward the Atlantic trading system in
the new peripheral growth areas, such as Venezuela and the Rio de la Plata,
as well as the limited anticolonial sentiment apparent in the rebellions of
the 1780s, incipient nationalism was, when it emerged, more a characteris-
tic of disgruntled individuals than of the masses. The latter were, on the
whole, more preoccupied with immediate inequalities and exploitation
than with intraimperial injustices, and they felt more the oppression of the
local oligarchies than of the Crown in Madrid. The rebels in both Peru and
Venezuela, in fact, had looked to the Crown for redress of grievance. The
notion of independence from Spain, of a colonial emancipation from Eu-
rope, was hence confined to a very small number of the white Creole elite
and developed after the putative popular revolts of the early 1780s had
been repressed. These aspirations also were of a reformist rather than a
revolutionary nature, and while the institutional model of the new North
American nation was often an inspiration, in terms of overseas contacts
and hope of assistance it was Britain to which they looked rather than to
the United States. 33
    By the turn of the century, it is true that works by John Adams, George
Washington, and Thomas Jefferson were circulating in both Mexico and
South America, and key leaders of the Spanish American independence
movement, most notably Francisco de Miranda, visited the United States,
as did Simon Bolivar, who admired Washington. Miranda, however,
summed up the complex reaction of whites to the events of 1776 in North