

French state. Silver, in fact, continued to dominate the Spanish American
traffics: between 1717 and 1778 it composed 77.6 percent of the annual
value; and 75.4 percent of the value of the trade of New Spain. And this was
still a very substantial business comparatively speaking-the value of the
commerce of Spanish America being double that of the British West Indies
in the 1780s. 24
    English merchants were less important at Cadiz. They enjoyed other
channels of trade with Spain's American colonies, especially along Spain's
Caribbean coasts. Between Utrecht and the outbreak of war in 1739, the
British managed the slave supply contract (the asiento) at Havana, Vera-
cruz, Cartagena, and Buenos Aires, where along with African slaves they
introduced smuggled goods; from Jamaica the British developed an exten-
sive smugglers' network to Havana and Santiago on the island of Cuba, to
the Campeche and Belize coasts, and to New Spain's sole major Caribbean
port of Veracruz. Jamaica also served as both entrepot and naval base;
there British naval forces could threaten the French sugar islands and
Spanish American ports. This threat materialized, of course, in the war be-
ginning in 1757, when English forces took Canada and occupied first
Guadeloupe and later Martinique. 25
    The accession of Charles III offered an opportunity for Spain to reform
traditional attitudes. For France, which saw its colonial empire in India
and Canada collapse, and for Spain, unprepared to withstand English as-
saults upon its Caribbean trading zone alone, the accession of Charles III
was the opportunity at last to renew their dynastic alliance of mutual con-
venience. Charles III, and the key collaborator he brought from Naples, the
Marques de Esquilache, wished to diminish the pressure from French com-
mercial and manufacturing interests who had long enjoyed direct and in-
direct participation in Spain's transatlantic trading system, much as
Pombal sought to diminish British influence in Portugal. Yet, there was a
paradox to the Franco-Spanish diplomatic and military collaboration not
dissimilar to that within the Anglo-Portuguese alliance.
    Charles revived projects of economic reform outlined earlier by men
like Campillo. Charles and Esquilache's first actions were to terminate the
seventeenth-century tariff concessions hampering the development of do-
mestic industry; this was followed by standardizing tariffs and procedures
at all peninsular ports. Given the importance of colonial trade in Spain's
aggregate external exchanges, Madrid was, in effect, shifting much of the


24D. A. Brading, "Bourbon Spain and Its American Empire," in The Cambridge His-
tory of Latin America, ed. Leslie Bethell (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1984), I, 389-439.
25Dorothy Goebel, "British Trade to the Spanish Colonies, 1796-1823," American
Historical Review XLIII (1938): 288-320.
80 • NakedTropics

burden of customs revenue to colonial consumers. Charles's government
also attempted to reduce the illegal foreign share in Spain's colonial ex-
changes, in effect, attempting to increase Spain's participation and advan-
tage in colonial trade. And, in light of Franco-Spanish diplomatic and
defense collaboration symbolized in the family pact, Madrid expected
French manufacturing interests to tolerate Spanish protectionism de-
signed, as Madrid saw it, to make Spain's contribution in the joint contain-
ment of English commercial and naval power more effective.
   The impact of the new governmental measures within Spanish America
varied considerably from region to region. One immediate consequence
was that tensions were aggravated between European Spaniards and the
old Latin American white Creole oligarchies, which had for several cen-
turies, it should be remembered, found a political niche within local ad-
ministrations throughout the Americas. The Bourbon reforms, especially
the intendant system, were therefore first introduced in the regions where
the opposition of the old Creole oligarchies was less formidable; Cuba after
1764 and the Rio de la Plata after 1776. Only in 1784 was the system intro-
duced in Peru, and in 1786 in Mexico. The articulation of the new system
owed much to the reforming visitor general of New Spain (Mexico), Jose
de Galvez (1765-1771), who later became the long-term secretary for the
Indies (1776-1787). His objective in Mexico had encompassed the estab-
lishment of a tobacco monopoly (to raise revenue), the reorganization and
raising of the sales tax (the Alcabala), and the stimulation of silver produc-
tion (by lowering the price of mercury).26
    In practice, Spanish neomercantilism proved limited in its impact. State
intervention did not create an industrial base in textile manufactures, except
in Catalonia whose cotton mills were the product of private rather than state
initiatives. In the mid-1780s, the colonial trade expanded, but the increase in
colonial exchanges appears to have been based largely on the sustained surge
in Mexican silver mining and colonial staple exports, more shipping in low-
tonnage vessels, and Europe's insatiable appetite for silver and staples. 27