

33John Leddy Phelan, The People and the King: The Comunero Revolution in Colom-
bia, 1781 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1978).
                                           Hegemonies Old and New • 85

America and 1789 in France. "We have before our eyes two great exam-
ples," he wrote in 1799, "the American and the French Revolutions: let us
prudently imitate the first and carefully shun the second." After the revolt
in French Saint-Domingue (Haiti) in 1792, as in Brazil, property owners
throughout Spanish America became even more cautious, especially if
their property included African slaves. "I confess that as much as I desire
the liberty and independence of the New World:' Miranda observed, "I fear
anarchy and revolution even more."34
   The impact of the American Revolution would be confined mainly to
the peripheries in Spanish America. Very little impact can be discerned in
the two great core regions of Spanish dominion, Peru and Mexico. In many
respects, the North Americans, in terms of trade, influence, and contacts,
followed the sea-lanes, and their role was most significant with the
Caribbean and along the coastlines where they had long been involved in
the transatlantic commercial complex as purveyors of codfish, sugar,
slaves, grain, tobacco, and most recently cotton. But here it was the North
American commercial role within the Atlantic commercial system as a
whole that was decisive. The grain trade, in particular, found ready cus-
tomers in the Iberian Peninsula, among the colonial overlords of South
and Central America. And trade more than republican ideology would be
the watchword in the United States' dealings with both Spain and Portugal.
These powers, Spain in particular, had aided in a very substantial way the
attainment of American independence; it was a connection that made for
some caution when it came to aiding and abetting revolutionaries to the
south, at least until the Napoleonic period, when the United States gained
direct access to Spanish American ports and Spain to all intents and pur-
poses lost direct administrative control of its empire in America due to
British control of the sea-lanes.35
   In the case of Portugal and Brazil, it had become very evident that the
impact of the American Revolution in Brazil, which was a powerful influ-
ence before 1789, was nonetheless diluted and eventually rejected by the

34Peggy K. Liss, Atlantic Empires: The Networks of Trade and Revolution, 1713-1826
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983). Also see final chapter of
Bernard Bailyn, To Begin the World Anew: The Genius and Ambiguities of the Amer-
ican Founders (New York: Knopf, 2003) as well as Karen Racine, Francisco de Mi-
randa: A Transatlantic Life in the Age of Revolution (Wilmington, Del.: SR Books,
2003).
35John Lynch, The Spanish American Revolution, 1808-1826 (New York: Norton,
1973); The North American Role in the Spanish Imperial Economy, 1760-1819, ed.
Jacques Barbier and Allan Kuethe (Manchester [Greater Manchester] and Dover,
N.H., U.S.A.: Manchester University Press, 1984); also The Economics of Mexico
and Peru during the Late Colonial Period, 1700-1810, ed. Nils Jacobson and Hans-
Jiirgen Puhle (Berlin: Colloquium Verlag; Bibliotheca Ibero-Americana, 1986).
86 • NakedTropics