

26Allan Kuethe and Douglas Inglis, "Absolution and Enlightened Reform: Charles
III, the Establishment of the Alcabala and Commercial Reorganization in Cuba,"
Past and Present CIX (1985): 118-143; and Jacques Barbier, "Indies Revenues and
Naval Spending: The Cost of Colonialism for the Spanish Bourbons, 1763-1805;'
Jahrbuch fur Geschichte von Staat, Wirtschaft und Gessellschat Latinamerikas, XXI
(1984).
27Jacques Barbier, "Peninsula Finance and Colonial Trade: The Dilemma of
Charles IV's Spain," Journal of Latin American Studies XII (1980): 21-37; John
Fisher, "The Imperial Response to (Free Trade': Spanish Imports from Spanish
America, 1778-1796," Journal of Latin American Studies XVII (1985): 35-78; and
Antonio Garcia-Baquero Gonzalez, «Comercio colonial y producci6n industrial en
Catalonia a fines del siglo XVIII," Actas del I coloquio de hist6ria economica de Es-
pana (Barcelona: n.p., 1975),268-294.
                                         Hegemonies Old and New • 81

    Spain, Europe, and the East were still linked to American (now largely
Mexican) silver, and transforming a bullionist into a neomercantilist Span-
ish state was no easy process. The threat to the system from northwest Eu-
rope remained. The English manufacturers and merchants in preferring
their Caribbean outposts from which they participated directly (and ille-
gally) in Spanish colonial markets to the French method of participation
via Cadiz were, in effect, pointing to one of the basic flaws in the Spanish
neomercantilist project. The inability of the Spanish state to curb smug-
gling from English Caribbean ports, or from Dutch and French islands for
that matter, demonstrated clearly what the merchants well understood:
that multiple charges on goods within the formal Spanish trading sys-
tem-repeated duties, commissions, and insurance fees-all raised the
price of legal goods in Spanish America to levels that compensated for the
risks of smuggling.
    French textile manufacturers were also unable to provide the Spanish
colonial system with merchandise whose quantity, quality, and pricing was
competitive with other European goods. To protect their deteriorating
competitive position, the French defended traditional commercial privi-
leges in Spain's colonial trade. Yet it was precisely here that the French
manufacturers faced the competition of Spain itself which was trying to
reduce the privileged status of French merchants and goods in colonial
trade. The fundamental premise of mercantilism was economic competi-
tion, not cooperation. Thus, ironically, both French commercial agents
and their Spanish counterparts failed to observe that by the last third of the
eighteenth century both Spanish and French economic policies were being
bypassed by the rapid expansion of the international economy. English in-
dustrial development was generating products whose price and quality
would permit them to penetrate most mercantilist barriers.
   Neither Spaniards nor Frenchmen engaged in colonial trades with
Spanish America wanted to recognize that the age of mercantilism was
rapidly passing. Ironically, by the end of the eighteenth century, the British
had made this leap, and in their relationship with Portugal, no less; and
partly because of the comparative success of Pombal's policies, not because
of their failure; and it was France, or more precisely Napoleon, who forced
the issue to a denouement. Let me explain.
   Between 1785 and 1790 the balance of trade between Portugal and
Great Britain was brought almost to an equilibrium. From 1791 to 1795 for
the first time during the whole eighteenth century, Portuguese exports to
Britain showed a surplus over British exports to Portugal. From 1783, and
especially from 1788, there was rapid growth in Brazilian raw cotton reex-
ports from Portugal to Britain, and by the first decade of the nineteenth
century, about a quarter of Lancashire's cotton wool export came from
Brazil, especially Pernambuco and Maranhao. Robert Walpole, British
82 • NakedTropics