

protection to stimulate the issuance of longer credits by Portuguese mer-
chants so that via such a mechanism national merchant houses in Portugal
would be able to accumulate sufficient capital to compete more effectively
with British merchants in the colonial trade as a whole, and by extension in
Portugal proper. In this way the Pombaline state would contain and limit
the role of foreign participation in Luso-Atlantic commerce. And by strik-
ing at the itinerant traders he hoped to remove one key link between the
foreign merchants in Portugal and the Brazilian producers, and, in the case
of Amazonia, the Jesuits, whose trade in Amazon products he saw as com-
peting unfairly with that of Brazilian and Portuguese entrepreneurs whom
he wished to encourage. Pombal told Duke Silva Tarouca that his aim in es-
tablishing the Company of Grao Para and Maranhao was "to restore [to]
the merchant places of Portugal and Brazil the commissions of which they
were deprived, and which are the principle substance of commerce, and
the means by which there could be established the great merchant houses
which had been lacking in Portugal. ..."23 Pombal also urged his brother,
in private correspondence, to use «every possible pretext to separate the Je-
suits from the frontier and to break all communications between them and
the Jesuits of the Spanish dominions."24
    Pombal's monopoly company thus met objectives on several levels-not
all of them made explicit. The fundamental objective in the colonial trade
was to try to diminish the influence of the British, but the methods em-
ployed to achieve this aim were subtle, pragmatic, and enveloped in sub-
terfuge. The unavoidable problem with the British-Portuguese relationship
was that it was circumscribed by treaties which, for political and security
reasons, the Portuguese wanted to maintain. One way of taking action
against British influence, however, while avoiding open confrontation over
the terms of the treaties between the two countries, was to use a variety of
techniques in Portugal and within the colonial setting to shift concession-
ary economic advantages from foreigners to Portuguese merchant groups.
In this respect the choice of the Amazon to begin the process was a very
clever subterfuge. The British did not perceive the threat to their interests
until the end of the decade. In Vienna, Silva Tarouca, when informed of
Pombal's actions, much appreciated the idea. 25 These were precisely the
type of great new dispositions of which he approved, and surrounded by
the camouflage he recommended should always disguise them.


23 [Carvalho e Melo] to [Teles da Silva], no date (internal evidence suggests early
1756), in Anais, 419-420; author's translation.
24((Instruc;6es regias, publicas, e secretas para [Mendonc;a Furtado] ... ;' in Men-
donc;a, A Amazonia na era pombalina, 1, 26-31.
25 [Teles da Silva] to [Carvalho e Melo], November 3, 1759, in Anais, 348.
                                                               The Spark • 101