

events surrounding the attempted implementation of the Treaty of Madrid
fortified Pombal's conviction that the presence of the Jesuits in Portuguese
lands, strategically placed as the missions were throughout the border re-
gion, was an impediment to the realization of his designs for reestablishing
Portugal's power and prosperity and to protecting its frontiers by encour-
aging population growth through the incorporation of the Indians via
miscegenation and secularization into Portuguese colonial society. From
Vienna, Duke Silva Tarouca, reversing his earlier view on the desirability of
Jesuit cooperation, observed in February 1758:
    It was not evangelical spirit that armed with muskets eighty or a
    hundred thousand Indians, and erected an intermediate power
    from the River Plate to the Amazon, which one day could be fatal to
    the dominant powers of South America. 30
   The 1750s, therefore, marking the first decade of Pombal's preemi-
nence, had seen Portugal embark on an ambitious plan to reestablish some
measure of national control over the riches flowing into Lisbon from Por-
tugal's overseas dominions, Brazil most especially. To do this he adapted to
the peculiarities of the Portuguese position many of the techniques of eco-
nomic development he had seen deployed in London and Vienna, espe-
cially the use of state power to enhance national entrepreneurial skills and
the imposition of state monopolies to protect nascent national industry
and commerce. He had also been faced with implementing the Treaty of
Madrid, involving a major effort to delineate and survey the vast frontiers
of Brazil. In both cases the Jesuits provided major obstacles to his plans.
On the southern border, a military campaign had been needed to defeat
forces put into the field by the Jesuit missions. In the north of Brazil, the
Amazonian missions ran into a headlong conflict with Pombal's brother.
   In the midst of these accumulating struggles, the earthquake of 1755
struck Lisbon, propelling Pombal into virtual supreme power and opening
the way for a radical reconstruction of the city. Yet the disenchantment of
the old nobility with Pombal's policies was also growing. The Company of
Grao Para and Maranhao had used the allurement of ennoblement as an
incentive to invest. The company's statutes offered to nonnoble investors
certain exemptions and privileges that had previously been the exclusive
prerogative of the nobility and the magistracy, and admitted them to
membership in the military orders. 3 ! The exclusivist aristocracy was upset
at the exclusion from office and by the favors Pombal bestowed on the

3°[Teles da Silva] to [Carvalho e Melo], Vienna, 10 February 1758, and Vienna,
April 1, 1758, in Anais, 386-387, 395; author's translation.
31See Alvara of January 5, 1757, Colec<;ao Pombalina, Codex 456, fl. 138.
                                                                The Spark • 103

merchants and businessmen. In addition, small merchants and tavern
keepers were angry at being excluded by the new monopoly company
Pombal set up to protect the wine producers of the upper Douro Valley,
and these reactions combined to produce a series of violent riots and assas-
sination attempts to which Pombal reacted ferociously, not only against
the popular classes but also against the high nobility and the Jesuit order. 32
   The mesa do bem comum affair, the attack on contraband, and the regu-
lation of colonial commerce thereby forged an identity of interest between
the dispossessed itinerant interlopers, their English creditors, and the Je-
suits, and the favors bestowed on Pombal's collaborators produced an
identity of interests between those groups and the discontented nobles. For
the old aristocracy Pombal's merchant collaborators represented a potent
challenge to aristocratic privilege within the Portuguese social structure,
and the reaction to this state sponsoring social engineering was not slow in
developing.
   The crisis came to a head with the attempted regicide in 1758. King D.
Jose I was returning to the Palace of Belemafter an evening visit to his mis-
tress, the young wife of the marquis of Tavora, when his carriage was fired
upon. The king was wounded sufficiently seriously for his queen Dona
Mariana Vit6ria (b. 1718, d. 1781) to assume the regency (September 7,
1758) during his recuperation. There was official silence on the incident
until early December, when a substantial number of people were arrested
in a large dragnet operation, including a group of leading aristocrats. The
most prominent prisoners were leading members of the Tavora family, the
count of Atouguia, and the duke of Aveiro. The Duke D. Jose de Mascaren-
has, who was the most powerful noble in Portugal, excluding the royal
family, was president of the Supreme Court. The marquis of Tavora was a
former viceroy of India and commander of the cavalry. The count of
Atouguia headed the Palace Guard. 33
   The king established a Supreme Junta de Inconfidencia (December 9,
1758), presided over by the three secretaries of state and seven judges, but