

                                         III
This is not to say Pombal's intervention went unopposed. Far from it. The
promulgation of the Company of Grao Para and Maranhao's monopoly
privileges and Indian emancipation from mission tutelage provoked an
immediate response from the dispossessed traders and Jesuits. Both found
an organ for agitation in the mesa do bem comum, a rudimentary Lisbon
commercial association established in the late 1720s. 26 In the face of these
provocations, Pombal acted swiftly. He dissolved the commercial fraternity
of Espirito Santo as prejudicial to the royal service, common interest, and
commerce, and the offending deputies were condemned to penal banish-
ment. The confiscated papers of the mesa revealed the extent of Jesuit in-
volvement, and Pombal interpreted and dealt with the protest as if it were a
conspiratorial uprising against royal power. 27
   The creation of the Company of Grao Para and Maranhao thus had sev-
eral important and probably unintentional consequences. First, it linked
the attempts to assert national control over sections of the colonial trade to
wider geostrategic questions, arising from the implementation of the
Treaty of Madrid. Second, it brought Pombal, and no less importantly his
brother, into headlong conflict with the Jesuits because Grao Para and
Maranhao was a stronghold of Jesuit missionary activities and a region
with a history of bitter disputes between the Jesuits and the colonists.
   The Jesuit Indian missions on the southern frontier had in the mean-
time taken up arms do defend themselves and oppose the implementation
of the Treaty of Madrid, provoking a joint Spanish-Portuguese military
campaign against them. 28 The image of the militarized Indians under Je-
suit control opposing unilaterally the mandates of the Iberian monarchs
had a significant effect on the European mind. Voltaire, in Candide, por-
trays a sword-wielding Jesuit riding on horseback. 29 More significantly, the

26See J. (Joao) Lucio d'Azevedo, Novas eponaforas: estudos de hist6ria e literatura
(Lisbon: Livraria Chissica Editora, 1932), 54-56; and his 0 Marques de Pombal e a
sua epoca, 2d ed. (Lisbon: Seara Nova, 1922), 138-140.
27See [Carvalho e Melo] to [Mendon<;a Furtado], August 4, 1755, in Colec<;ao
Pombalina, Codex 626, fl. 90, and also in Mendon<;a, A Amazonia na era pom-
balina, 2, 784-788.
28There is a vast literature on the Guarani missions and their destruction: the best
starting point remains Magnus Morner, ed., The Expulsion of the Jesuits from Latin
America (New York: Knopf, 1965) and Magnus Morner, The Political and Economic
Activities in the La Plata Region: The Hapsburg Era (Stockholm: Victor Pettersons;
Institute of Ibero-American Studies, 1953). Also the discussion by John Hemming,
Amazon Frontier: The Defeat ofthe Brazilian Indians (Cambridge: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1987), 1-80, and his Red Gold: The Conquest of the Brazilian Indians
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1978),441-461.
29Voltaire, Candide, trans. and ed. Robert M. Adams (New York and London: W. W.
Norton & Co., 1966),30-31.
102 • NakedTropics