

Pombal was a key figure. D. Luis da Cunha, successively Portuguese ambas-
sador to the Dutch Republic and France, was the most formidable of these
thinkers and author of a comprehensive analysis of Portugal's weaknesses
and the means to remedy them. D. Luis was in many respects Pombal's
mentor. 6
    This debate focused on Portugal's location within the international sys-
tem and confronted directly both the constraints and the options with
which a small country like Portugal, part of Iberia but independent of
Spain, had to live. Central to these discussions was the problem of retain-
ing and exploiting the considerable overseas assets Portugal controlled in
Asia, Africa, and, above all, Brazil; and developing at the same time a mech-
anism to challenge English economic domination of Portugal and its vast
American colony without weakening the political and military alliance
with Britain, which Portugal needed to contain Spain.
    D. Luis da Cunha, in particular, had placed Portugal's problems in the
context of its relation to Spain, its dependence on-and economic ex-
ploitation by-England, and what he believed were Portugal's self-in-
flicted weaknesses in terms of the lack of population and spirit of
enterprise. This sad mental and economic condition he attributed to the
excess number of priests, the activity of the Inquisition, and the expulsion
and persecution of the Jews. He proposed the creation of monopolistic
commercial companies on the Dutch and English model.?
    Pombal also drew models from his interpretation of the experience of
other European countries. From 1739 until 1744, he had represented the
Portuguese king in London. For Pombal, the threat the British posed to
Portugal's vast and rich dominions in Brazil became a major preoccupa-
tion. It was essential, he believed, to understand the origins of Britain's
commercial and military superiority and of Portugal's economic and po-
litical weakness and military dependence. 8
    In London, Pombal, who had become a member of the Royal Society in
1740, set out to investigate the causes, techniques, and mechanisms of


6For Pombal's family connection see Joaquim Verissimo Serrao, 0 Marques de
Pombal: 0 homen, 0 diplomata e 0 estadista (Lisbon: Edi\ao Camara Municipal de
Lisboa, Oeiras e Pombal, 1982).
7See Pedro de Azevedo and Antonio Baiao, eds., Instrucfoes ineditas de D. Luis da
Cunha e Marco Antonio de Azevedo Coutinho (Coimbra: Universidade de Coimbra,
1930). For a detailed discussion of the intellectual sources of Pombal's ideas see
Francisco Jose Calazans Falcon, A epoca pombalina: politica, economia e monarquia
ilustrada (Sao Paulo: Editora Atica, 1982).
8The contents of Pombal's London library are catalogued in several codices in Lis-
bon's National Library. In particular see Colec\ao Pombalina, Codices 165, 167,
342, 343, Biblioteca Nacional, Lisbon. Also see Sebastiao Jose de Carvalho e Melo,
Escritos econ6micos de Londres, 1741-1746 (Lisbon: Biblioteca Nacional, 1986).
                                                                 The Spark • 95