

   The "very secret" letter to the Gomes Freire supplementing his general
instructions revealed the full extent of Pombal's aims and hopes for Por-
tuguese America and demonstrated how powerful the Viennese experience
and his discussions with Silva Tarouca were for Pombal. "As the power and
wealth of all countries consists principally in the number and multiplica-
tion of people that inhabit it:' he wrote, "this number and multiplication
of the people is most indispensable now on the frontiers of the Brazil for
their defense ..." As it was not "humanly possible" to provide the necessary
people from the metropolis and adjacent islands without converting them
"entirely into deserts," it was essential to abolish "all differences between
Indians and Portuguese," to attract the Indians from the Uruguay missions
and to encourage their marriage to Europeans. 16 The instructions to Men-
donc;a Furtado reflected similar objectives. In order to promote an increase
in population and to deepen its commitment to Portugal, Pombal recom-
mended that his brother emancipate the Indians from the control of the
missionaries, stimulate the migration and settlement of married couples
from the Azores, and greatly increase the commerce in African slaves to the
region. I7
   In practice, the implementation of these ideas, as far as the Indians were
concerned, meant the removal of the tutelage of the Jesuits and envisioned
their assimilation into-rather than separation from-Portuguese society
in Brazil. These ideas received warm commendation from Vienna: Duke
Silva Tarouca wrote to Pombal in 1752, "The kings of Portugal could come
to have an empire like China in Brazil [ ... ] Great care," he said, must be
taken to populate Brazil. "Moor, white, negro, mulatto, or mestizo, all will
serve, all are men, and are good if they are well governed." Above all, the
vast Amazon basin should be secured. "Population is everything, many
thousands of leagues of deserts serve for nothing...."18 The interests of
the state so defined, of course, collided with the most basic philosophical
tenet of the protectionist Indian policy of the Jesuits, and in effect placed
state policy on the side of the colonists with whom the Jesuits had always
struggled in their efforts to protect the Indians from exploitation.
   Drawing on Luis da Cunha's and Pombal's ideas about monopoly com-
panies, Pombal's brother soon after his arrival in Belem, the capital of Para


16"Carta Secretissima de [Carvalho e Melo] para Gomes Freire de Andrade, Lisboa,
September 21,1751," in Marcos Carneiro de Mendon~a, a Marques de Pombal eo
Brasil (Sao Paulo: Editora Nacional, 1950), 184; author's translation.
17«Instru~6es regias, publicas, e secretas para [Mendon~a Furtado] ... ," Lisbon,
May 31, 1751, in Mendon~a, A Amaz6nia na era pombalina, 1,26-31.
18[Teles da Silva] to [Carvalho de Melo], Vienna, August 12, 1752, in Anais,
323-329; author's translation.
                                                               The Spark • 99