

for foreign affairs in July 1750, therefore, he was inheriting a fait accompli,
some parts of which he did not approve.
   These inland frontier demarcations were of great sensitivity for the mis-
sionary orders, since the Jesuit missions in particular were strategically
placed deep in the continental interior between Spanish and Portuguese
territories as well as along the key river systems. The Jesuits had cooperated
with Spain in the 1740s, and the use of the Jesuits' Indian neophytes as
troops and labor was an indispensable part of Spanish plans to counter
Portuguese frontier expansion, Spanish strategy at this point merging with
the traditional goal of the Jesuits for a united, well-defended chain of mis-
sions throughout the interior of the South American subcontinent. 14 Por-
tugal's fears as to the loyalty of the Jesuits, therefore, were not unfounded.
   With the Treaty of Madrid the Portuguese ceded Colonia do Sacra-
mento and the land immediately to the north of the Rio de la Plata to
Spain in return for Spanish recognition of the western fluvial frontiers of
Brazil. This included the Uruguay River, which placed the seven Jesuit mis-
sions in the region, long under Spanish sovereignty, under that of Portugal.
The Madrid agreements called for the evacuation of the Jesuits and their
Indian neophytes from the Uruguayan missions, as well as over a million
head of cattle, and envisioned a survey of the line of demarcation between
Spanish and Portuguese America by two joint commissions. The governor
general of Brazil, Gomes Freire de Andrade, was appointed Portuguese
commissioner for the south. To the Amazon region in the north, Pombal
sent his own brother, Francisco Xavier de Mendon<;:a Furtado. 15

14The principal source on the Jesuits in Brazil remains Serafim Leite, Hist6ria da
Companhia de Jesus no Brasil, 10 vols. (Lisbon and Rio de Janeiro: Livraria Portu-
galia, 1938-1950), supplemented now by Alden, The Making of an Enterprise. For
the Amazon region still valuable is Joao Lucio de Azevedo, as Jesuitas no Grao-
Para, suas missoes e a colonizarao: bosquejo historico, com varios documentos inedi-
tos (Lisbon: T. Cardoso & irmao, 1901).
15Marcos Carneiro de Mendon~a, ed., A Amazonia na era pombalina: corresponden-
cia inedita do Governador e Capitao-General do Estado de Grao Para e Maranhao,
1751-1759, 3 vols. (Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Hist6rico e Geognifico Brasileiro,
1963). This comprehensive collection contains the official and private correspon-
dence between Pombal and his brother, the governor of Grao Para and Maranhao.
Padre Jose Caeiro (b. 1712, d. 1791) provides a counterpoint to the account in the
letters from Mendon~a Furtado to his brother Pombal, covering many of the same
events from a Jesuit perspective. For this intimate account of the expulsion from a
Jesuit contemporary, see the remarkably detailed «Sobre 0 Exilio das Provincias
Transmarinas da Assistencia Portuguesa da Companhia de Jesus," published by the
Academia Brasileira de Letras, Primeira publicarao apos 160 anos do manuscrito in-
edito de Jose Caeiro sobre os Jesuitas do Brasil e da India na perseguirao do Marques
de Pombal (seculo XVIII) (Bahia: Escola Tipografica Salesiana, 1936). For Portugal
proper see Padre Jose Caeiro, Hist6ria da expulsao da Companhia de Jesus da
Provincia de Portugal (sec. XVIII), 3 vols. (Lisbon: Editorial Verbo, 1991, 1995,
1999).
98 • NakedTropics