

British commercial and naval power. But England was not his only foreign
experience. From London, Pombal moved to Vienna. Here he was no less
observant, and became involved in a long, arduous, and frustrating negoti-
ation with the papacy on behalf of the Austrian government, in the course
of which he became the very intimate friend of Manuel Teles da Silva, a
Portuguese emigre of aristocratic lineage who had risen high within the
Austrian state. Manuel Teles da Silva, who had been created Duke Silva
Tarouca by the Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI in 1732, was president of
the Council of the Netherlands and of Italy and was a confidant of Empress
Maria Theresa. Pombal had married for a second til~e while in Vienna, a
successful and highly advantageous match with Maria Leonor Ernestina
Daun, by whom he eventually had five children. The Countess Daun was a
niece of Marshal Heinrich Richard Graf von Daun, the commander in
chief of the Austrian army. The Empress Maria Theresa took a special in-
terest in the union. The Portuguese envoy in Rome observed sourly that it
was this marriage which guaranteed Pombal the position of secretary of
state in Lisbon. And it was in fact the Austrian wife of Joao V, Maria Ana of
Austria, queen regent during Joao V's final illness, who recalled Pombal
from Vienna in 1749 to join the ministry in Lisbon. 9
   There exists an extraordinarily frank and intimate private correspon-
dence between Duke Silva Tarouca and Pombal, covering the first decade
after Pombal's assumption of office in Lisbon, which provides a uniquely
revealing discussion of Pombal's objectives and governmental measures.
Silva Tarouca, excited by Pombal's rise to power in Lisbon, wrote in 1750 to
congratulate his friend and to remind him of their conversations and
hopes for the future. "We are not slaves of fashion and foreign practices,"
Silva Tarouca told Pombal, "... but still less are we slaves of ancient habits

9See Maxwell, Pombal, 3-4. The negotiations with the Vatican were extremely vex-
ing for the future marques, though they served to cement his close relationship
with Silva Tarouca. His private correspondence with Lisbon was conducted via the
Jesuits who were intermediaries in the most sensitive state business, given their key
positions at the court of D. Joao V as confessors and de facto private secretaries
to the royal family. The correspondence with the Jesuits also reveals the mutual
antagonism between Pombal and the Portuguese minister in Rome and his con-
tinuing complaints about his lack of financial resources (also a theme of his
correspondence in London), as well as his dependence on the English for credit
lines (John Bristow of London and Lisbon). Later, when in power in Lisbon, Pom-
bal removed the Jesuits from their positions as confessors and restored to Por-
tuguese merchants the ability to sustain credit lines, both central planks of his
policy agenda. See Antonio Lopes, Marques de Pombal e a Companhia de Jesus, cor-
respondencia inedita ao longo de 115 cartas (Cascais: Principa, 1999), and Collecfao
dos neg6cios de Roma no Reino de EI-Rei Dom Jose, Ministerio do Marquez de Pom-
bal e Pontificados de Benedicto XIVe Clemente XIII, Parte I (1755-1760), Parte II
(1759-1769), Parte III (1769-1774), and Additamento a Parte III (1774-1775),
(Lisbon, 1874).
96 • NakedTropics