

his treatise on the natural law) was even at that time a firm supporter of the
contractual nature of government. The king) the young Gonzaga had writ-
ten) was a mandatory of the people) a minister of God) the end of whose
rule was the utility of the people. Gonzaga)s acrimonious dispute with the
government of Luis da Cunha Menezes of Minas) immortalized in his Car-
tas Chilenas, had centered on the dangers of arbitrary rule. His memorials
to court during the 1780s strongly emphasized the legal and moral re-
straints on the actions and power of the executive. 39
   The Minas plot was betrayed. With others) Gonzaga) Chiudio Manuel da
Costa) Alvarenga Peixoto) and the canon Luis Vieira were arrested. The ide-
ology of the Minas Conspiracy) however) influenced by the success of the
American Revolution and the impact in Brazil of the ideas of Raynal and
others had projected the movement into a much greater context. There
had been uprisings far more damaging in lives and property before. The
Vila Rica uprising of 1720) for example) was more dramatic in action and
more bloody than the nonevents of 1788-1789. But no previous plot had
possessed motivations so fundamentally anticolonial and so consciously
nationalistic. Members of an important segment of that group in society
on whom the metropolitan government most relied for the exercise of
power at the local level) in one of Brazil)s most important) populous) and
strategically placed captaincies) had dared to think that they might live
without Portugal. Inspired by the example of North America and by cur-
rent political theory) they had questioned what had been unquestioned.
The new mental climate was not something that could be concretely de-
fined) but it was obvious to all) and most especially to the agents of the
metropolitan government in Brazil. 40 Men in Minas had thought they
could be free) independent) and republican.

                                         II
The conspiracy in Minas Gerais had occurred at a special moment in time.
The plot was concerted before the French Revolution. But the arrests) the
trial, and the sentencing of those involved coincided with growing revolu-
tionary turmoil in Europe. Rumors of possible French invasion had been
bandied around among the conspirators) but they meant the France of the

39There is a vast bibliography on the Cartas Chilenas, their attribution, identifica-
tion of the characters, and so on. Hardly a literary scholar or historian in Portugal
or Brazil has not at some time discussed the work. I have relied heavily on Manuel
Rodrigues Lapa's masterly As "Cartas Chilenas," though it is unlikely that even this
profound and careful study will prove to be the definitive work.
40See, for example, the comments by Chancellor Vasconcellos Coutinho in his let-
ter to Martinho de Melo e Castro, Rio de Janeiro, July 30, 1791, AHU, Minas
Gerais, caixa 94.
118 • NakedTropics

Old Regime. The chronological relationship of the Minas Conspiracy to
the French Revolution is important. The Minas oligarchs had believed they
could control and manipulate the popular will. They had taken as their ex-
ample the American Revolution, where political readjustments had taken
place without social upheaval. But the example of the American patriots
had not prepared them for the events of the French Revolution, particu-
larly not for the spectacular repercussions of the French Revolution in the
Americas. The revolt of the slaves in the French sugar island of Saint-
Domingue during 1792 brought an awful awakening to those slaveowners
who had talked naively of republics and revolt while ignoring the social
and racial consequences of their words. The British scientist, traveler, and
writer John Barrow, who was in Rio de Janeiro during 1792, noted the
change "black power" had brought. "The secret spell that caused the Negro
to tremble in the presence of the white man is in a great degree dissolved,"
he wrote. "The supposed superiority by which a hundred of the former
were kept in awe and submission by one of the latter is no longer acknowl-
edged."41 Martinho de Melo e Castro recognized at once the threat the
Saint-Domingue revolt posed for Brazil. He warned the governors against
"the pernicious and perverse intent of the [Jacobin] clubs established in
France to propagate the abominable and destructive principles of liberty,
in order to effect by these means the fatal revolution." And he warned that
it was these abominable principles that caused "the fire of revolt and in-
surrection that made the slaves rise against their masters ... in'Santo
Domingo."42
   The innocuous Literary Society of Rio de Janeiro, with its dedication to
Raynal and Mably, and its alleged sympathy for the Minas conspirators,
was an obvious target for the nervous colonial administration. In 1794, its
members were arrested and subjected to prolonged interrogations. The so-
ciety, founded in 1785 by Luis de Vasconcellos e Sousa, the former viceroy,
had attempted to form a secret inner conclave where "good faith and se-
crecy might be maintained among the members." Democratically consti-
tuted, it was to discuss "philosophy in all its aspects." Among the papers
confiscated from Jacinto Jose da Silva, a graduate in medicine from Mont-
pellier, were two remarkable letters from a colleague, Manuel Jose de No-
vais de Almeida, which dramatically underlined the impact of the revolt in
Saint-Domingue on his contemporaries. In February 1791, Dr. Novais de