

the Jesuit order entirely. The European Catholic monarchs in Spain, then
France and Austria, were quick to follow Portugal's example in expelling
the Jesuits, but it is not at all clear that any of them would have acted, had
Portugal not acted first. It is here that the currents of Enlightenment
thought I outlined earlier conveniently provided justification for actions
that at the core, as we have seen, had more prosaic motivations.
V IE *   OF RIO FROM   BOA VISTA.
                                                              CHAPTER            7
                                     The Idea of
                       the LU50-Brazilian Empire
             «However much South America might gain from a quiet change ofmasters,
                     she will be thrown back into a state ofbarbarism by revolutions."
                                                             -Sir John Barrow, 1806




Between 1786 and 1808, critical changes occurred in the attitudes of
Brazilians and Portuguese which were to have profound repercussions on
the later development of Portuguese-speaking America. Internal and ex-
ternal influences combined and interacted to suggest a peculiarly Luso-
Brazilian solution to the problems of nationalism and colonialism,
republicanism and monarchy. This chapter attempts to delineate some of
these changes, to seek causes, and to explain results.

                                         I
During October 1786, Thomas Jefferson, the envoy of the United States in
France, received a letter from the ancient University of Montpellier signed
only with the pseudonym Vendek. The writer indicated that he had a mat-
ter of great consequence to communicate, but as he was a foreigner he
wished Jefferson to recommend a safe channel for correspondence. Jeffer-
son did so at once. In a second letter Vendek declared himself a Brazilian.
The slavery in which his country lay was "rendered each day more insup-
portable since the epoch of your glorious independence;' he wrote. Brazil-
ians had decided to follow the example of the North Americans, he
continued, to break the chains that bound them to Portugal and "relive
their liberty." To solicit the aid of the United States was the purpose of his

                                       109
110 • NakedTropics

visit to France. "Nature made us inhabitants of the same continent,"
Vendek told Jefferson, "and in consequence in some degree compatriots."!
   Vendek, Jose Joaquim Maia e Barbalho, who arranged a secret ren-
dezvous and met Thomas Jefferson near Nimes, was a native of Rio de
Janeiro. 2 He had entered the faculty of medicine at Montpellier in 1786,
having previously matriculated at the University of Coimbra in Portugal
where he studied mathematics. 3 Maia may have been commissioned by
merchants in Rio de Janeiro to enter into contact with the American
envoy.4 Probably he was one of a group of students who during the early
1780s had joined hands at Coimbra and vowed to work for the indepen-
dence of their homeland. 5 An accurate account of Jefferson's encouraging
but noncommittal response to Vendek reached Brazil via Domingos Vidal
Barbosa, another Brazilian stu,dent at Montpellier. 6
   Maia and Vidal Barbosa were not alone in their educational accom-
plishments or their political enthusiasms. Between the Marques de Pom-
bal's reform of the University of Coimbra in 1772 and 1785, three hundred
Brazilian-born students had matriculated there.? Others continued their
studies or went directly to the faculty of medicine at Montpellier, where fif-
teen Brazilian-born students matriculated between 1767 and 1793. 8 Vidal
Barbosa, a landowner from the captaincy of Minas Gerais, was an enthusi-