

surdite fut joint a l'exces d'horreur.)" The reaction elsewhere in Europe
was strong enough to prompt Pombal to print the sentence against Mala-
grida with a justification in French. 35 That the last individual burned at the
stake by the Portuguese authorities at the instigation of the Inquisition
should have been a priest and a member of an order that had been at the
very spearhead of the Counter-Reformation was heavy with symbolism
and served as a launching pad for Pombal's formidable promotion of state
propaganda in the anti-Jesuit cause. The Pombaline administration there-
after stimulated and subsidized throughout Europe a virulent campaign
against the order. Pombal himself was intimately involved in the writing
and formulation of the remarkable piece of propaganda known as the De-
durao chrono16gica e analitica. 36 The "Chronological and analytical deduc-
ti<;>n" divided the history of Portugal between the useful and the disastrous,
essentially linked to the influence of the Jesuits. It upheld a rigorous regal-
ist view concerning the Catholic Church in Portugal. Professor Samuel
Miller describes the work not unjustifiably as ((a monotonous repetition of
all the accusations ever leveled at the Jesuits by anyone at any time."3? The
history of the assault by the Portuguese and Spanish Crowns on the Jesuit
missions along the Uruguay River in South America during the late 1750s
was also encapsulated-and was for many years defined-by another piece
of state-supported and financed propaganda, the Relarao abreviada. 38
Published in Portuguese, Italian, French, German, and English in Amster-
dam, the Relariio abreviada was an account of the joint Portuguese and
Spanish military campaign against the Jesuit missions in what is now the
southern borderlands of Brazil. Some 20,000 copies are estimated to have
been distributed. It was a major weapon in the Europe-wide battle that led
to the suppression of the Jesuits by Pope Clement XIV in 1773. 39 As Franco

35Claude-Henri Freches, Voltaire, Malagrida et Pombal (Paris: Fundas:ao Calouste
Gulbenkian, 1969). Also see the comments on Malagrida in C. R. (Charles Ralph)
Boxer, Some Contemporary Reactions to the Lisbon Earthquake of 1755 (Lisbon:
Faculdade de Letras, Universidade de Lisboa, 1956) and Liste des personnes qui ont
ete condamnees al'act public de Poi, celebre dans Ie cloitre du convent des Dominiques
de Lisbonne Ie 20 septembre 1761 (Lisbon: 1761).
36Dedurao chronol6gica e analitica ... dada a luz pelo Doutor Joseph de Seabra da
Silva . .. em Lisboa, Anno de MDCCLXVII, 3 vols., original manuscript with anno-
tations and additions in handwriting of Pombal. Colecs:ao Pombalina, Codices
444-446. For discussion of the Dedurao chronol6gica see d'Azevedo, 0 Marques de
Pombal e a sua epoca, 290-291.
37Miller, Portugal and Rome, 187.
38First published in late 1756 and probably written mainly by Pombal, the full title
is: Relarao abreviada da Republica que os religiosos das Provincias de Portugal e Es-
panha estabeleceram nos Dominios Ultramarinos das duas Monarquias, e da guerra
que neles tern movido e sustentado contra os exercitos espanhois eportugueses (1758),
Biblioteca Nacional, Lisbon, Reservados 4.394.
39See discussion by Miller, Portugal and Rome, 53.
106 • NakedTropics