

Venturi has shown, Venice and Rome in particular specialized in printing
vivid accounts of the goings-on in Lisbon. 40
   The expulsion of the Jesuits left Portugal virtually bereft of teachers at
both secondary and university levels. Not surprisingly, the establishment
of a state-sponsored school system of secondary education and the reform
of the University of Coimbra drew directly on the recommendations of the
old enemies of the Jesuits, the Oratorians and Luis Antonio Verney, the lat-
ter by now a paid consultant to the Portuguese government. 41 Both of
these reforms were later to provide Pombal with his claim to being a pro-
ponent of an Enlightenment government. Both reforms were financed in
part by expropriated properties of Jesuits and aristocrats condemned for
regicide. 42
   Finally, let us return to the question posed earlier: Why Pombal, and
why the Amazon? The answer lies in five key points of conflict. First was
Pombal's plan for economic regeneration through the rational exploita-
tion of the colonies. Second, there was a geopolitical conflict over frontiers
and the security of the empire, in which the Guarani missions in particular
opposed Portugal's decisions by force of arms. Third, the attempted regi-
cide. Fourth, there was an ongoing conflict within the church over educa-
tion and regalism; this important schism enabled an attack on the Jesuits
to proceed under the cover of Catholic tradition, in which the leading anti-
Jesuit spokesmen were fellow churchmen. Fifth and finally, the situation
constituted a direct conflict between the Jesuit Order and a powerful and
ruthless minister who would not tolerate dissent, for whom raison d'etat
was supreme policy, and who did not hesitate to act when provoked.
   That these five causes served as a catalyst for the expulsion of the Jesuits
from Portugal owed much to the receptivity of European enlightened
opinion, Church politics, and the diplomatic acquiescence of the other Eu-
ropean Catholic monarchies. But European opinion alone would not nec-
essarily have been sufficient to bring about an act of expulsion, much less
lead to the momentous decision of Pope Clement XIV in 1773 to suppress

4°Franco Venturi, La Chiesa e la Repubblica dentro i loro limiti (1758-1774), vol. 2,
Settecento riformatore (5 vols.) (Turin: Giulo Einaudi Editore, 1969),21,27-29.
41Miller, Portugal and Rome, 51, 54.
42See R6mulo de Carvalho, Hist6ria da fundafu-o do Colegio Real dos Nobres de Lis-
boa, 1761-1772 (Coimbra: Atlantida; Universidade de Coimbra, 1959) and Fran-
cisco de Lemos, Relafu-o geral do estado da Universidade, 1777 (facsimile edition)
(Coimbra: Universidade de Coimbra, 1980); Luis de Bivar de Sousa Leao, Inven-
tario e sequestro da Casa de Aveiro em 1759 (Lisbon: Tribunal de Contos, 1952) and
Luis de Bivar de Sousa Leao, Inventario e sequestro das Casas de Tavora e Atouguia
em 1759 (Lisbon: Tribunal de Contos, 1954). For a fuller discussion of the conse-
quences of the expulsion of the Jesuits for the educational reforms of Pombal see
Maxwell, Pombal, especially 87-109.
                                                          The Spark • 107