

tion or agricultural production. And, like Vilhena, he believed slavery was
responsible for many of the ills of Brazilian society. 78
   The suggestion of slave emancipation was anathema to the planters. Az-
eredo Coutinho thought abolitionist sentiment sufficiently threatening to
warrant a blistering attack on "the insidious principles of the philosophic
sect." He asked what would happen to the agriculture of Brazil and in con-
sequence the commerce and prosperity of Portugal if slavery was abol-
ished. To Azeredo Coutinho "necessity has no law, because she is the origin
of all law;' and necessity clearly demanded the continuance of the slave
trade. "To those that accuse me of occupying myself with a study more
proper to a farmer or business man than to a Bishop, it is necessary to re-
member that before I was a Bishop I was, as I continue to be, a citizen
linked to the interest of the state." He attacked those who "in the depths of
their studies presume to give laws to the world without having dealt at first
hand with the people of whom they speak." The bishop's concern at the
growth of emancipationist sentiment was evidently justified, for his de-
fense of the slave trade was refused by the Lisbon Academy of Sciences, and
he was forced to publish a French edition in London. When he sought
again in 1806 to have his polemic published in Portugal, the Royal Board of
Censorship denied permission, on the ground that although slavery might
be tolerated in present circumstances, nothing should be said to make its
elimination even more difficult. 79
   No one was advocating immediate abolition, but a small group of men
was beginning to regard slavery as the source of social ills in Brazil, and was
starting to think in terms of an alternative model for Brazilian develop-
ment, in which European immigration and free laborers would replace
slavery. Vilhena's objections to slavery were not so much the result of"hu-
manitarian" sentiment as they were a practical response to the problem of
a society where the racial balance appeared to be dangerously unstable.
The question of slavery raised fundamental questions about the most
desirable course for Brazilian development. And during the 1790s that


78JOSe da Silva Lisboa to Domingos Vandelli, Bahia, October 18, 1781, ABNR],
XXXII ( 1910),502,505.
79Azeredo Coutinho, "Analise sabre a justi<;:a do comercio do resgate dos escravos
da costa d'Africa (1798)," in Obras economicas, 1794-1804, ed. Sergio Buarque de
Holanda (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1966), 175-185; Sonia Apare-
cida Siqueira, "A escravidao negra no pensamento do bispo Azeredo Coutinho,
contribui<;:ao ao estudo da mentalidade do ultimo inquisidor geral," I, RHSP,
XXVII (1963), 349-365; II, RHSP, XXVIII (1964), 141-198. D. Fernando Jose de
Portugal significantly also supported the views of the sugar planters with respect to
slavery; see D. Fernando to Martinho de Melo e Castro, Bahia, June 18, 1794,
RIHGB, LX (1897),155-157.
130 • NakedTropics