

question was beginning to divide enlightened men. Discussion about de-
velopment resulted in a striking paradox. Those who were the strongest
supporters of laissez faire when it meant removal of the regulatory func-
tions of the state were also most committed to the slave trade and slavery.
Those who supported government interference, particularly in the control
of prices and in the guarantee of sufficient supplies of subsistence food to
the population, were also most opposed to the slave trade and slavery. No-
vais de Almeida and Vilhena saw the slave population as enemies within,
and Jose da Silva Lisboa believed Brazil would not develop without the cre-
ation of a free labor force and the Europeanization or whitening of the
population. 80 Bishop Azeredo Coutinho saw slavery as essential to Brazil-
ian prosperity. Those who attacked laissez faire where it demanded the re-
moval of what they considered judicious government controls would be
most in favor of free international commerce, because free trade promised
to stimulate European immigration and offered the possibility of an al-
liance with Great Britain against the slave trade. Yet at the same time, be-
cause the solution to Brazil's problems by opponents of laissez faire was
based on fear of the racial composition of the Brazilian population, they
would be the least likely to take any initiative that might provoke the disas-
ter they foresaw and sought to avoid. The division was profound. Vilhena
attacked those "European ideas" he held responsible for creating the condi-
tions that led to the Bahian plot. Azeredo Coutinho attacked the "humani-
tarians" and «philosophers" whose utopian concepts threatened, in his
opinion, to destroy Brazilian prosperity.


                                       IV
Republicanism had been discredited by its abortive uprising in Minas
Gerais and later association with social and racial turmoil, and Brazilians
were in very basic disagreement over fundamental issues; thus there was
room for metropolitan initiatives. And for the white minority in Por-
tuguese America, the failure of the oligarchic movement in Minas Gerais
during 1789, and the threat from below revealed by the Bahian artisans in
1798, provided two powerful incentives for compromise with the metrop-
olis. Psychologically, the situation was propitious for accommodation. The
recognition of this fact by influential members of the Portuguese govern-
ment during the 1790s had profound impact on the future development of
Brazil. During 1788 Luis Pinto de Sousa Coutinho became Portugal's for-

80Jose da Silva Lisboa, Memoria dos beneficios politicos do governo de EI-Rei Nosso
Senhor D. loao VI (Rio de Janeiro: Na Impressao Regia, 1818), 2d ed. (Rio de
Janeiro: Impressa nas Oficinas do Arquivo Nacional, 1940), 160, 169-175.
                             The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 131

eign minister. 8 ! He was a man with firsthand knowledge of Brazilian con-
ditions, having distinguished himself as governor of Mato Grosso
(1769-1772) before succeeding Martinho de Melo e Castro as minister
plenipotentiary to the Court of St. James. 82 In Britain he had provided
William Robertson with information on South America for Robertson's
famous history, a service he had also provided for the Abbe Raynal some
years earlier. 83 Once back in Lisbon, Luis Pinto made contact with Brazil-
ian intellectuals, many of them students of Domingos Vandelli, an Italian
scholar brought to Portugal by Pombal as part of his program of educa-
tional reform. On May 31, 1790, Luis Pinto sent two young Brazilians and a
Portuguese colleague on a grand European tour of instruction at the ex-
pense of the Portuguese government. The Brazilians were Manuel Ferreira
da Camara and Jose Bonifacio de l\ndrada e Silva. The group was in-
structed to proceed to Paris and take courses there in physics and mineral-
ogy. Two years at Freiburg would be spent gaining "all practical
knowledge." Afterward the scholars were to visit the mines of Saxony, Bo-
hemia, and Hungary, and to return to Portugal by way of Scandinavia and
Great Britain. 84
   Manuel Ferreira da Camara, the leader of the expedition, had close links
with those caught up in the events of Minas Gerais. His elder brother, Jose
de Sa Betencourt, who graduated from Coimbra in 1787, was implicated
on several occasions during the judicial inquiry into the conspiracy, and
had fled from Minas by way of the backlands to Bahia. His uncle had been