


55"OS conspiradores que foram presos;' MHPB, III, 99-102; also see account by
Braz do Amaral, ibid., 96-97, and Affonso Ruy de Souza, A primeira revolufao so-
cial brasileira (1798) (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1942). Also see the
more recent study by Istvan Jancs6, Na Bahia, contra 0 Imperio: historia do ensaio
de sedifao de 1798 (Sao Paulo: HUCITEC-EDUFBA, 1996).
56"Denuncia ... que da ... Santa Anna," ADIB, I, 12.
57Vilhena, Cartas, I, 159; Carlos Guilherme Mota, "Mentalidade Ilustrada na colo-
nizacao Portuguesa: Luis dos Santos Vilherna," RHSP, no. 72 (1967): 405-416.
58Vilhena, Cartas, I, 128-129.
59Donald Campbell, London, August 14, 1804, Chatham Papers, Public Record Of-
fice, London (hereafter cited as PRO) 30/8/345 part 2, f. 223.
                          The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 123

neur Francisco Agostinho Gomes was denounced to the authorities in Lis-
bon. The governor of Bahia, D. Fernando Jose de Portugal, was instructed
to investigate these charges. 6o
    Gomes was an erudite and enlightened man with as fine a private library as
that which canon Luis Vieira had built up in Minas Gerais. Thomas Lindley,
who met him at the turn of the century, was singularly impressed. "In the
French I noticed Alembert's Encyclopedia, Buffon, and Lavoisier, among our
own authors he had chiefly selected natural history, political economy, travels
and philosophical works ... Robertson's America he particularly commended
and Smith's Wealth of Nations ..." Lindley also noted how Father Gomes
praised the works of Thomas Paine. 61 D. Fernando, however, found nothing
to incriminate Gomes. The ideas and organization of the Bahian conspiracy
were such, he wrote, "that no persons of consideration, or understanding, or
who had knowledge or enlightenment had entered...."62 With respect to the
priest, he pointed out to Lisbon that "the reading of English papers did not
make a man a Jacobin." Moreover, he found it highly improbable that any of
the principal people of the captaincy were implicated in the Bahian conspir-
acy. He had no indication of this implication among either the businessmen
or the men in public office, or the people of property, all of whom reacted
strongly when the seditious papers appeared. Those involved in the plot were
all of the lower class (classe ordinaria). "That which is always most dreaded in
colonies are the slaves, on account of their condition and because they com-
prise the greater number of the inhabitants;' he told Lisbon. "It is therefore
not natural for men employed and established in goods and property to join a
conspiracy which would result in awful consequences to themselves, being
exposed to assassination by their own slaves." He did not seek "to apologize
for the inhabitants of Bahia"; he wished "only to express his sentiments."63
    D. Fernando had made a vital distinction, and his comments stressed
the change which had occurred since 1792. The sugar planters and their
apologists desired "liberty," to be sure, and the more literate of them were
avid disciples of European thinkers; but the theories that appealed to them
articulated and provided justification for their own self-interest, and this