

Professor Luis dos Santos Vilhena condemned the great sugar producers
for their failure to plant sufficient manioc and warned that such an un-
thinking pursuit of their self-interest threatened famine. He firmly be-
lieved that plantation owners should be obliged to plant manioc, for there
was no other source of supply available. Vilhena held that "European
ideas" which had led to the removal of price controls on meat and manioc
were responsible for the shortage of subsistence food and for high prices.
Such ideas should only be applied in a place like Brazil after the most care-
ful attention had been paid to local factors. In Europe, one nation in time
of dearth might have recourse to its neighbors for added supplies, but mu-
tual dependence was impossible in South America, where food supplies
were inelastic. Vilhena saw a direct relationship between the removal of
price controls and «the ineffectual uprising and cruel massacre" projected
by the Bahian mulattoes in 1798. 70
   The «European ideas" Vilhena especially condemned were those of
Adam Smith and J. B. Say. Both economists were used by Joao Rodrigues de
Brito and Manuel Ferreira da Camara to document and justify their rejec-
tion of state interference to regulate production or control the prices of
commodities. Rodrigues de Brito and Ferreira da Camara had been con-
sulted over the state of agriculture in Bahia, and their responses were a
clear defense of the interests of the great sugar planters. Manuel Ferreira da
Camara, speaking as proprietor of the great sugar mill of Ponte, categori-
cally rejected all laws and regulations that restricted the liberty of the pro-
prietors. He was violently opposed to the Inspection House which
regulated the prices of sugar and tobacco, and also to the public granary
established by Governor D. Rodrigo Jose de Menezes in the city of Salvador
during 1785 in an attempt to provide regular food supplies at reasonable
prices to the population. These institutions, Ferreira da Camara claimed,
«had been set up out of the fantasy of those in government as obstacles to
the freedom of commerce." He attributed the granary «to a zeal more reli-
gious than practical. ..." He could conceive of nothing worse than that
commodities «should be sold for less than they cost to produce or trans-
port." He boasted that he had not «planted a single foot of manioc in order
not to fall into the absurdity of renouncing the best cultivation of the
country for the worst." Each «must be master to do what most benefits
him, and what benefits him is that which most benefits the state."71


7°Vilhena, Cartas, I, 128-129; I, 159; 11,445-448.
71Carta II, M[anuel] F[erreira] da C[amara], Cartas economica-politicas, sobre a
agricultura a commercio da Bahia . .. pelo Desembargador loao Rodrigues de Brito a
outros (Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional, 1821),80-85.
                           The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 127

    For Rodrigues de Brito, admissible direction in agricultural matters by
the government could be reduced to three points: "the granting of liberties,
facilities, and instruction." The proprietor should not be forced to plant
manioc. De Brito opposed "restrictions that prevented our farmers from
taking their goods to the places where they could obtain most value." He
argued in favor of the removal of the prohibitions against the commissarios
 volantes, the itinerant free traders outlawed by the Marques de Pombal
during the 1750s. He was strongly opposed to price fixing. Capitalist enter-
prise should be liberated in order to encourage entrepreneurs to partici-
pate in agricultural improvement, and the institutional and judicial
obstacles to investment should be removed. "Intolerable inconveniences
placed on the capitalist in the matters of debt collection and foreclosure
should be abolished;' he contended, and in particular "foreign investment
should be welcomed."72
    The apologists for the sugar planters were making a frontal attack on
the whole concept of state regulation and government interference in eco-
nomic matters. Yet the planters' demands were so closely related to their
own self-interest that they were also limited by them. Planters desiring
emancipation from government interference did not necessarily desire
emancipation from the colonial relationship with Portugal. To Ferreira da
Camara, Rodrigues de Brito, and Azeredo Coutinho, laissez faire was not
synonymous with free international commercial exchange. It was this basic
distinction that another disciple of Adam Smith, D. Fernando Jose de Por-
tugal, whose elimination of price controls in Bahia provoked Vilhena's
criticism, had evidently perceived in 1798. The sugar interests did not lead
the demand for free international commerce for one simple reason. Brazil-
ian sugar was sold in the continental European market, for which Lisbon
was a logical and necessary entrepot. Britain, the most likely candidate for
any free trade relationship outside the Luso-Brazilian commercial system,
placed prohibitive duties on the importation of Brazilian sugar, in the in-
terests of its own sugar colonies in the West Indies.
    The marriage in the writing of Azeredo Coutinho between his attack on
state interference and his restatement of the basic tenets of mercantilist
colonial policy was a perfect rationalization of the situation. He held up
the English Navigation Acts as "a pattern of imitation to all seafaring na-
tions." It was "in the true interests of both [metropolis and colony] that the
colony be permitted to carryon a direct trade with the mother country