

absolved by the court of inquiry (Alrada).46 Jose Alvares Maciel had re-
garded the presence of so large a percentage of blacks in the population as
a possible threat to the new republic, should the promise of their liberation
by the Portuguese induce them to oppose the native whites. Alvarenga
Peixoto recommended that the slaves be granted freedom, which would
make them the passionate defenders of the new state, committed to its sur-
vival. Maciel, however, pointed out that such a solution might be self-de-
feating, for proprietors would be left with no one to work the mines. The
conspirators appear to have reached a compromise solution whereby only
the native-born black and mulatto slaves would be freed in the interests of
the defense of the state. 47 The proposition was itself a startling one for
1789, but the conspirators seem to have underestimated the potential con-
sequences of their plans. They assumed the situation could be controlled
with ease, just as they assumed the uprising could be instigated, manipu-
lated, and controlled in their own interests.



                                         III
In the climate of opinion that followed the Saint-Domingue revolt, the dis-
covery of plans for an armed uprising by the mulatto artisans of Bahia dur-
ing 1798 had a very special impact by demonstrating what whites had
already begun to realize: that ideas of social equality propagated within a
society where a mere third of the population was white risked being inter-
preted in racial terms. The Bahian affair revealed the politicization of levels
of society barely concerned with the Minas conspiracy. The middle-aged
lawyers, magistrates, and clerics in Minas Gerais (most of them opulent,
members of racially exclusive sodalities, and slaveowners) contrasted
markedly with the young mulatto artisans, soldiers, sharecroppers, and
salaried schoolteachers implicated in the Bahian plot. Embittered and an-
ticlerical, the Bahian mulattoes were as opposed to rich Brazilians as to
Portuguese dominion. They welcomed social turmoil, proposed the over-
throw of existing structures, and sought an egalitarian and democratic so-
ciety where differences of race would be no impediment to employment
and social mobility. The pardo tailor Joao de Deus, who at the time of his
arrest possessed no more than eighty reis and eight children, proclaimed
that «All [Brazilians] would become Frenchmen, in order to live in equality

46The statement attributed to him was: "Estes branquinhos do Reino que nos
quirem tomar a terra cedo os havemos de deitar fora," Senten<;:a da AI<;:ada, Santos,
Inconfidencia Mineira, 607-617.
47"Perguntas feitas a Jose Alvares Maciel," Rio de Janeiro, November 26, 1789,
ADIM, IV, 398.
                             The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 121

and abundance. They would destroy the public officials, attack the monas-
teries, open the port ... and reduce all to an entire revolution, so that all
might be rich and taken out of poverty, and that the differences between
white, black and brown would be extinguished, and that all without dis-
crimination would be admitted to positions and occupations."48
    It was not the North American patriots who provided the example for
Joao de Deus and his colleagues. It was the sans-culottes. It was not the
constitutional niceties of the United States that inspired them. It was the
slogans of the Paris mob. Handwritten manifestoes appeared throughout
the city on August 12, 1798. 49 Addressed to the "Republican Bahian peo-
ple" in the name of the "supreme tribunal of Bahian democracy," the man-
ifestoes called for the extermination of the "detestable metropolitan yoke
of Portugal."50 Clergy who preached against popular liberty were threat-
ened. All citizens, especially mulattoes and blacks, were told that "all are
equal, there will be no differences, there will be freedom, equality and fra-
ternity."51 There was no equivocation over slavery. "All black and brown
slaves are to be free so that there will be no slavery whatsoever."52 The gov-
ernment would be "Democratic, free and independent."53 "The happy time
of our liberty is about to arrive, the time when all will be brothers, the time
when all will be equal."54