

ing 1798, D. Rodrigo formally presented his ideas to the Council of State of
Portugal. 109 He intended, he told the councillors, to "touch rapidly on the
political system that it is most convenient for the crown to embrace in
order to conserve its vast dominions, particularly those of America, that
are properly the base of the greatness of the throne...." D. Rodrigo as-
serted that "Portugal reduced to herself would within a very brief period
become a province of Spain:' He advised that the empire be regarded as
being composed "of provinces of the monarchy, all possessing the same
honors and privileges, all reunited with the same administration and all
contributing to the mutual and reciprocal defense of the monarchy." Brazil
should be divided into two centers of power, Rio de Janeiro in the south
and Para in the north. It was essential, he said, to "occupy our true natural
limits," and in particular the northern bank of the Rio de la Plata. The
choice of governors was important for the maintenance of justice and the
efficient administration of the royal exchequer; with higher salaries, he be-
lieved, governors would have less incentive to become embroiled in busi-
ness. Associations should be formed to exploit the mines more efficiently.
The number of high courts in Brazil should be increased, and the need for
appeal to Lisbon abolished. He proposed that taxation be reformed so that
it would "be productive but not fall heavily on the contributors." The tax
contract system would be abolished because it fell unequally and because
most of the money remained in the hands of the tax farmers. Duties on
slaves, iron, steel, copper, lead, gunpowder, and metropolitan manufac-
tures sent to the interior of Brazil would be removed. The royal fifth would
be reduced to a tenth, and the value of gold in Minas Gerais revalued to its
market price.
   The ideas of his Luso-Brazilian braintrust were very evident in the plan
for empire proposed by the secretary of state. And the urgency of imple-
mentation of the plan was increased by the Bahian episode. D. Rodrigo

109Discurso de D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho, document no. 4 (I) Carneiro de
Mendon~a, Intendente Camara, 277-299. This is from the Cole~ao Linhares, Bib-
lioteca Nacional do Rio de Janeiro, I, 29-13-16. Also in D. Rodrigo de Souza
Coutinho, Textos politicos, economicos e financeiros (1783-1811) in Colecfao de
obras classicas do pensamento economico portugues (XII in 2 vols.) (Lisbon: Banco
de Portugal, 1993) II, 47-66. The Portuguese historian Valentim Alexandre rejects
the view that the inconfidencias represented any generalized challenge to Por-
tuguese rule, nor does he accept that D. Rodrigo's plans in any way changed the
basic colonial regime. See in particular chapter two ('(Politica colonial e (incon-
fidencias''') in his Os Sentidos do Imperio: questao colonial na crise do antigo regime
portugues (Lisbon: Edi~6es Afrontamento, 1993), 77-89. On the sharp debate
among Portuguese and Brazilian historians over the economic relations between
Brazil and Portugal in the late eighteenth century and early nineteenth century,
within which Alexandre is a participant, see bibliographic essay in Kenneth
Maxwell, 0 Marques de Pombal (Lisbon: Editorial Presen~a, 2001), 207-208.
138 • NakedTropics