


85Carneiro de Mendonc;a, Intendente Camara, 9-10.
86Martinho de Melo e Castro acknowledged receipt of the first notice of the con-
spiracy i'n a letter to the Minas governor, the Visconde de Barbacena, dated March
9, 1790. A much-corrected minute of this dispatch in Melo e Castro's own hand
survives at the AHU, Minas Gerais, caixa 92. Ignacio Ferreira da Camara, a cousin
of Manuel Ferreira and Jose de Sa, had been a student at Montpellier, MHPB, VI
(1940),283.
87D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho, "Discurso sobre a verdadeira influencia das
minas dos metaes preciosos na industria das nac;oes que as possuem e especial-
mente da portuguesa," in Mem6rias econ6micas in Colecfao de obras classicas, I, vol.
1, 179-183; Marques do Funchal, "Certidao do baptismo de Dom Rodrigo de
Sousa Coutinho," 0 Conde de Linhares, Dom Domingos Ant6nio de Sousa Coutinho
(Lisbon: Typ. Bayard, 1908), 186. For information on D. Rodrigo's Minas connec-
tions, see Miguel Costa Filho, A cana de aflicar em Minas Gerais (Rio de Janeiro:
Instituto do Ac;ucar e do Alcool, 1963), 92, 97, and John Mawe, Travels in the Inte-
rior of Brazil (London: Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown,
1812),181-182.
                           The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 133

nies should not be monopolies but organizations which could mobilize
capital for rational exploitation. He suggested that mining colleges be set
up in Brazil to provide skilled mining engineers. 88 The papers of both D.
Rodrigo and Manuel Ferreira implied that the imposition of fiscal de-
mands on Minas Gerais had been wrong, and that what Minas Gerais
needed was not increased tax burdens but rational reform and modern
technology.

                                        v
When Melo e Castro died in March 1795, Luis Pinto took over as interim
secretary of state for the overseas dominions. 89 On May 27, 1795, he for-
warded to the Brazilian governors a circular which contained a startling
admission of past mistakes. "Defects in policy and fiscal restrictions had
until now held back the progress of Brazil," he wrote. ((Her Majesty, desir-
ing to calm her subjects as much as possible;' had made important deci-
sions. First, the salt gabelle would be abolished in Brazil. Second, the
mining and manufacture of iron would be encouraged, especially in Minas
and Sao Paulo. 90 Both measures promised to ameliorate two principal irri-
tants to the white minority in Brazil. And one of the few areas of agreement
between Luis dos Santos Vilhena and Bishop Azeredo Coutinho was oppo-
sition to the salt monopoly, due to its restrictive effect on the development
of salt meat production.
   To formulate programs and implement the reforms, Luis Pinto relin-
quished his temporary portfolio to D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho in
1796. 91 D. Rodrigo had impressive credentials. He had been a student at the
College of Nobles, established by Pombal to create a ((virtuous" nobility in
Portugal. 92 In 1779 he had visited France and observed what he described
as its ((parasitic and useless court" and its ((chaotic financial situation."93 In