

125For an account of the violence of the merchants' opinions see Robert Walpole to
Lord Grenville, Lisbon, September 9, 1795, Foreign Office 63/21.
126Mecenas Dourado, Hypolito da Costa, e 0 Correio Brasiliense, 2 vols. (Rio de
Janeiro: Ministerio da Guerra, 1957), 1,47-67; Carlos Rizzini, Hypolito da Costa eo
Correio Brasiliense (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1957),9, 13. Also see
Hipolito Jose da Costa, Correio Braziliense ou Armazem Literario (Edic;:ao Fac-sim-
ilar) (31 vols.) (Sao Paulo: Correio Braziliense; Imprensa Oficial do Estado,
2001-). The first volume contains essays by Barbosa Lima Sobrinho, Jose Mindlin,
Paulo Cabral de Araujo, Sergio Kobayashi, Alberto Dines, and Isabel Lustosa.
127Ibid., 12-13; also, "carta de Diogo Ignacio de Pina Manique em que trata sucin-
tamente dos serviyos prestados a tranquilidade publica combatendo os Jacobinos e
mayons," September 4, 1798, IHGB, latal77, doc., 8.
128D. Rodrigo told Manuel Ferreira, "I hope that you have that quality of obstinacy
necessary to overcome the obstacles of ignorance and those who oppose the public
wellbeing." Carneiro de Mendonya, Intendente Camara, 103.
129Ibid., 113-118, 491.
13°Alan K. Manchester, "The Transfer of the Portuguese Court to Rio de Janeiro;"
in Conflict and Continuity, ed. Keith and Edwards, 148-183, trans. as "A transferen-
cia da corte portuguesa para 0 Rio de Janeiro;" RIHGB, CCLXXVII (October-De-
cember, 1967), 3-44. Also see the recent book by Kirsten Schultz, Tropical
Versailles: Empire, Monarchy, and the Portuguese Royal Court in Rio de Janeiro,
1808-1821 (New York and London: Routledge, 2001).
142 • NakedTropics

fleet sailed from the Tagus with the Court of Portugal aboard, plans were
ready for the new situation. A vindicated D. Rodrigo was reappointed to
the government to implement the blueprint he and his associates had
drawn up during the 1790s.
   The fact that Dom Joao arrived in Brazil so well prepared was important
to the success of the establishment of monarchy in Portuguese America.
And the warm reception accorded the European Court in Brazil was also
important. Part of the reason for both the preparation and the cordial re-
ception lay in the course of events between 1789 and 1808. The timing of
the Minas Conspiracy and the Bahian plot, and the relationship between
the chronology of events in Brazil, the French Revolution, and the slave re-
volt in Saint-Domingue, caused a shift among white Brazilians from a flir-
tation with republicanism to an optimistic acceptance of monarchy.
Sympathetic ministers in the Portuguese government, especially during
the period of D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho's control of the Department
of Overseas Dominions between 1796 and 1800, encouraged many Brazil-
ians who might have been nationalists-indeed many who had been sym-
pathetic with the republican movement in Minas Gerais-to join in the
highest levels of policymaking. This collaboration between Brazilian intel-
lectuals and enlightened ministers produced an imperial idea, Luso-Brazil-
ian in inspiration, which moved beyond nationalism to a broader imperial
solution, and sought to defuse metropolitan-colonial tensions.
   The idea of Luso-Brazilian Empire possessed weaknesses. The circum-
stances which compelled influential Brazilians to seek an accommodation
during the 1790s were not permanent phenomena. Basic differences of
opinion existed on vital matters such as slavery. In addition, the opposition
in Portugal to the Luso-Brazilian concept was seriously underestimated,
and had been neutralized only by the French invasion. In 1808, moreover,
the viability and acceptability of the blueprints had yet to be tested. How
fundamental these weaknesses might be only the future would reveal. But
whatever the impact of the imperial idea itself, the Luso-Brazilian genera-
tion of the 1790s, which gave it shape, was to be extremely influential. D.
Rodrigo became the principal minister of the first new world monarchy.
Jose da Silva Lisboa was the ideologue of free trade. Manuel Ferreira da Ca-
mara became intendant of mines and his family was instrumental in secur-
ing Minas Gerais and Bahia for Dom Pedro I. Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e
Silva became the patriarch of Brazilian independence. And it is also note-
worthy that following 1789, in the Lisbon Academy of Sciences and in the
writing of private individuals, debates were opened on topics such as lais-
sez faire, slavery, and the slave trade, which were to dominate discussion of
Brazilian development for much of the nineteenth century.
                            The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 143