

   The plan to transfer the court to Brazil, espoused by D. Rodrigo in 1803,
was eminently acceptable to white Brazilians. Canon Luis Vieira da Silva
had considered the establishment of Rio de Janeiro as the seat of the Por-
tuguese monarchy the best possible solution to Brazil's problems in
1789. 121 Alvarenga Peixoto, in an ode to the queen in 1792, pleaded for her
to visit her American subjects. 122 One of the few points to emerge from the
investigation arising out of the seemingly trumped-up charges against
Captain Francisco de Paula Cavalcante and others in Pernambuco during
1801 was the evident concern in Brazil about what would happen if the
prince regent did not establish himself in America in the event of the loss
of Portugal. 123
   In 1789, important members of the Minas oligarchy had been prepared
to move in armed rebellion against the Portuguese Crown and to establish
an independent and republican government. After 1792 "men established
in goods and property," to use the words of D. Fernando Jose de Portugal,
were wary of republicanism. The slave revolt in the Caribbean frightened
slave owners throughout the Americas. The sugar boom in Brazil, in part a
result of the collapse of production in Saint-Domingue, brought with it
social and economic problems which in turn were partly responsible for
the proposed uprising of the mulatto artisans of Bahia. The Bahian mani-
festos of 1798 confirmed that the slogans of the French Revolution propa-
gated within a society like that of Portuguese America brought with them
the risks of racial upheaval, risks that the American Revolution, the inspi-
ration of the Minas conspirators, had not brought. After 1792 both the
great slave owners of the coastal plantations and the chastened Mineiros
were prepared for an accommodation with the metropolis. Even more
than the reforms and reorganization proposed by D. Rodrigo, the estab-
lishment of the monarchy in Brazil was a welcome and hopeful compro-
mise which offered political change without social disintegration.
   The Brazil plan was anathema to many in Portugal. Admiral Campbell
attributed the opposition to "the French, but also the Spanish influence,
and finally to a greater part of the nobility, who dread the idea of seeking
their fortunes in a new country while they can grasp at the shadow in their
own."124 The plan was unthinkable to Portuguese merchants and industri-
alists who, unlike D. Rodrigo with his extensive properties in Minas Gerais,

121Witness, Vicente Vieira da Mota, Vila Rica, June 22, 1789, ADIM, I, Ill.
122Lapa, Alvarenga Peixoto, lii-liii.
123"Devassa de 1801 em Pernambuco," ed. J. H. Rodrigues, DR, CX, 151. For some
comments on this so-called conspiracy see Cardozo, "Azeredo Coutinho;' in Con-
flict and Continuity, ed. Keith and Edwards, 84.
124Donald Campbell, London, August 14, 1804, Chatham Papers, PRO, 30/8/345
(2) f.224.
                            The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 141

had much to lose and nothing to gain by such a move. Nor was D. Ro-
drigo's distinction between reform and revolution appreciated by those
who saw subversion in all Enlightenment philosophy. Combating nation-
alism overseas, he had underestimated nationalism at home. His relega-
tions of Portugal to a secondary status in his federative scheme provoked
ferocious opposition. 125 The limitations of D. Rodrigo's influence were
made apparent by his failure to protect his protege, Hyp6lito da Costa,
from arrest and imprisonment for masonic activities on his return from
the United States, a visit D. Rodrigo himself had sponsored. 126 Jose
Joaquim Vieira Couto, brother of the scientist Jose Vieira Couto, who came
to Lisbon on behalf of the residents of the Diamond District, was also ar-
rested and imprisoned on the orders of the intendant of police, Pina
Manique. 127 Manuel Ferreira da Camara remained intendant of mines in
name only, and was forced to remain at his estate in Bahia waiting in vain
for instructions to proceed to Minas Gerais. 128 When, in late 1803, the
prince regent submitted the new mining legislation to ministers in the gov-
ernment regarded by D. Rodrigo as incompetent to judge the issue and op-
posed to his objectives, he found his position no longer tenable, and
resigned. 129 The setback was temporary. D. Rodrigo had accurately fore-
seen the course of events. In November 1807, the showdown between
Britain and France over Portugal took place. With a British fleet off Lisbon
and a French army marching across the frontier, the move to Brazil became
essential if the monarchy was to survive at all. 130 But when the Portuguese