

IlGeorge Canning to Sir Charles Stuart, London, March 14, 1825, in Webster, I,
262-272, citation from 265-266.
12Thomas Sumter Jr., U.S. Minister to the Portuguese Court in Brazil, to James
Monroe, Secretary of State, Rio de Janeiro, December 29, 1815, in William R. Man-
ning, ed., Diplomatic Correspondence of the United States concerning the Indepen-
dence of the Latin American Nations, (3 vols.) (New York: Oxford University Press;
1925-[1926]), II, 696-700.
156 • NakedTropics

     The Portuguese are beginning to lose the hope of the unique re-
     source and the only means of salvation that remains to them in
     midst of ruin which has almost consumed their dear homeland.
     The idea of the status of a colony to which Portugal in effect is re-
     duced, afflicts deeply all those citizens who still conserve a senti-
     ment of national dignity. Justice is administered from Brazil to the
     loyal people in Europe, that is to say at a vast distance ... with ex-
     cessive expense and delay ... [italics added] 13


                                     IV
But if the "anticolonial" revolution occurred in Oporto not in Rio de
Janeiro, the interesting questi.ons from the Brazilian perspective are:
Would the independence of Brazil have occurred at this time had not the
1820 liberal revolution in Oporto taken place and had not the Portuguese
parliamentary assembly, the Cortes, forced the king to return to Europe?
Was the antimonarchist sentiment within Brazil on its own strong enough
to have sustained a republican movement, such as those in North America
and in much of Spanish America which rejected both monarchy and Euro-
pean rule?
   These questions were not only theoretical-republicanism after all had
been the central ideological strand in the thinking of the Minas conspira-
tors in 1788-1789; the Bahian plotters in 1798, and in 1817 in Pernambuco
as well as again in the 1820s. The problem for Brazil was that all these re-
publican movements were, or at least could be interpreted as, regionalist
revolts against centralized authority and as a threat to the territorial in-
tegrity of Portuguese-speaking America. The centralized monarchical sys-
tem had established a very strong institutional presence in Brazil since
1808. In fact, it had instituted in Rio de Janeiro almost all of the founding
institutions, usually the task of a postcolonial government: a centralized
administration and bureaucracy; superior law courts; a public library and
an academy of fine arts; a school of medicine and law; a national press and
national bank; and a military academy. This government had negotiated
international treaties, sent envoys abroad and received envoys in return,
had married the heir presumptive of the head of state to an Austrian
princess, and had defeated a regionalist revolt and conducted an expan-
sionist war on the northern and southern frontiers. There was never a
question therefore of legitimacy. As George Canning told the British cabi-
net in November 1822: