


                                      II
We come to the study of the establishment of new nations out of old em-
pires with certain expectations and preconceptions. Primarily we are
thinking of political emancipation from colonial status; involved also are
assumptions about the democratization of internal politics, or at least
their liberalization; thus we expect a defeat of despotism and the emer-
gence of some sort of institutional formula to express the popular will, es-
sential for the legitimacy of any new state. Legitimacy, however, does not
depend on internal or domestic factors alone: foreign recognition of the
new national status is essential; as is, eventually, reconciliation with the
former colonial master (or at least a formal acceptance of separation), usu-
ally by means of an international treaty. Geopolitical questions are, there-
fore, inevitably involved as well as great power politics. The constellation
of external forces, their willingness to intervene or not intervene as the case
may be, is perhaps more important than at any other time in a nation's his-
tory. The new nation must also satisfy obligations internationally: contract
loans; engage in and finance trade; organize its economic and financial life;
sometimes pay indemnities or assume obligations to payoff colonial
debts.
   Thus, as at few other times in a nation's history, at the moment of inde-
pendence fundamental decisions of a founding nature are needed. These
can involve profound questions about the organization of the social and
economic sphere; continuity of property rights and claims; perhaps deci-
sions over the relationship between church and state; as well as institu-
tional decisions over constitutional structures, law courts, and public
administration; organizational questions over how to set up banks and
credit institutions; questions as to how to impose tariffs or negotiate com-
mercial treaties, and how to create a credible currency.
   It is the explicit nature of these challenges which makes such moments a
fascinating topic for historical investigations; for once we are not speculat-
                                        WhyWas Brazil Different? • 147

 ing about the connections between perceptions, ideas, and actions, but
watching the translation of ideas into institutional or social arrangements,
and constitutional frameworks. And in all this, as we look back from the
vantage point of a century and three quarters, we need to penetrate also
the thicket of "invented" national tradition which is an inevitable compo-
nent of any national consciousness.
    We tend to assume that all these changes are for the better. I mention
this only to indicate how subjective our view of national independence and
decolonization can be. Rarely, for example, do we see independence as a
"bad thing," as a regression, a triumph of "despotism" over "liberty," of
"slavery" over "freedom," of an "imposed" regime over a "representative"
one, of oligarchy over democracy, of reaction over liberalism. Yet the truth
is, that in the case of Brazil's independence, almost all these charges against
the new regime can be made; and indeed they were made at the time.
    Brazil was not alone in confronting such dilemmas. As independent na-
tions emerged in Latin America after three centuries of Iberian domina-
tion, the persistence of their colonial heritage was a preeminent issue.
Brazil, for example, was at the time of its independence from Portugal al-
ready 322 years old; and today its experience as a nation free from formal
European domination is still far shorter than its colonial life. Yet in Latin
America this "colonial persistence" was unlike that inherited by many of
the postcolonial states that emerged out of the European empires in Asia
and Africa during the mid-twentieth century. The impact of Spain and
Portugal within the Americas had been more disruptive, and hence more
permanent, than was the impact of the Europeans who imposed them-
selves, temporarily as it turned out to be, over other ancient societies from
the Middle East to China, where populations, religions, social structures,
and behavior patterns were never uprooted and destroyed as catastrophi-
cally as were those of the ancient civilizations of pre-Columbian America.
After the Second World War, particularly where there were no large-scale
white-settler populations to complicate the transition, Africans and Asians
achieved independence by negotiating the removal of, or by forcibly ex-
pelling, a handful of white soldiers, overseers, and administrators. In Latin
America, it was precisely the white soldiers, overseers, and administrators
who expelled the representatives of the Spanish or Portuguese Crown,
while continuing or usurping the overlordship of large nonwhite, or in-
digenous populations, or African slaves.
    Latin America is thus not fully comprehensible it seems to me if seen
only within the "Third World" context of the new nations which came into
existence as the French, British, and Dutch empires collapsed between
1945 and 1965. In this sense Brazil was indeed a "New World in the trop-
ics," as Gilberto Freyre once put it, a settler society that had become rooted
in the New World and where the population-whether of European,
148 • NakedTropics