

African, or indigenous origin-was sufficiently intertwined to be not eas-
ily resegregated. The extraordinary depth of the impact of Spanish and
Portuguese colonization in the Western Hemisphere was such that post-
colonial nation building became intrinsically an incestuous affair.



                                       II
In effect Brazil in the 1820s was negotiating its relationship to the outside
world within the heavy constraints imposed on it by history, geography,
and its colonial experience. Until recently, the interpretation of this critical
period has been strongly influenced by dependency theory. But depen-
dency theory tended to homogenize the Latin American experience into a
worldwide explanatory model. Strongly influenced by the African and
Asian decolonization movements of the twentieth century, this approach
often denied autonomy to the social, political, and economic forces at play
in the so-called peripheral regions. Above all, it discouraged an investiga-
tion of the process, causes, and dynamics of change, and it gave short shrift
to institutional innovations or ideas. This created an enormous impedi-
ment in understanding the case of colonial Latin America, the control of
which had been an essential component of the building of European world
domination in the first place, something John Parry, in his marvelous book
The Establishment ofthe European Hegemony, 1415-1715, demonstrated so
skillfully and succinctly. 2 Dependency theory, on the other hand, tended to
sublimate any investigation of how European preeminence was achieved,
and confined explanations of major systemic changes (the ending of feu-
dalism, the rise of capitalism, and so on) to the internal dynamics of Euro-
pean societies, an unconscious Eurocentrism which I must say in my view
still seems to dominate much economic history writing to this day.
    Brazilian scholars were much enamored of this theoretical construct,
and played an important role in its evolution. Emilia Viotti da Costa and
Fernando Novais, for example, both placed the emergence of Brazil as an
independent nation within the context of the shift from mercantile to in-
dustrial capitalism in Europe, and the consequent changes this provoked
in the international economic system. Historians who were not part of a
Marxist tradition also took a similar view: Robinson and Gallagher, for in-
stance, saw the independence of the Latin American nations as the classic
example of the shift from formal to informal imperialism. 3

2John H. Parry, The Establishment of the European Hegemony, 1415-1715; Trade
and Exploration in the Age ofthe Renaissance (New York: Harper & Row, 1961).
3R. H. Robinson and J. Gallagher, «The Imperialism of Free Trade," Economic His-
tory Review 1, 2d series (1953): 1-15.
                                        Why Was Brazil Different? • 149

    Yet British interests in Portugal and Brazil were not monolithic; two dis-
tinct lobbies in Britain had been engaged in the economic relations with
 Portugal in the century prior to Brazilian independence: the wine import
merchants and the woolen textile exporters, both of which had a very
strong interest in sustaining the old favorable tariff regimes and privileged
extraterritorial rights in Portugal which aided their enterprises and which
dated back to the mid-seventeenth century. On the other hand, the new
and aggressively expansionist Lancashire cotton textile manufacturers
were interested in free trade and until 1818 drew a large percentage of their
raw material from northeast Brazil, Pernambuco in particular. They had
no interest whatsoever in perpetuating Portugal's political and economic
dominion over Brazil, especially since Portugal had developed its own cot-
ton textile mills and retained Brazil as a privileged and closed market.
    It is important, therefore, not to overemphasize the power of purely
economic forces, or to assume the inevitability of these broader shifts. The
cotton textile interest in Britain and their lobbyists in Parliament certainly
believed that their comparative advantage would allow their products to
break through the old mercantilist tariff barriers of the Iberian powers, but
they were also keen to see these barriers removed by government interven-
tion. In this respect the continuity is notable in the mutually supporting
strands of commercial, military, and diplomatic pressure the British exer-
cised over Portugal and its overseas possessions. In the mid-seventeenth
century, the new Bragan<;a monarch had been extremely reluctant to agree
to the Cromwellian treaty in the 1640s which provided British recognition
for a country recently emancipated from Spanish domination in return for
major commercial concessions. It was the threat of Admiral Blake's guns in
the Tagus estuary that finally persuaded the king of Portugal to ratify the
accord on May I, 1656. The British fleet which escorted the Prince Regent
Dom Toao, his mad mother, Queen Maria, and the court to Brazil in 1807
was also riding at anchor off the Lisbon waterfront to intimidate as well as
to offer assistance. Had the Portuguese Court not left for Brazil as planned,
and instead succumbed to French demands that the royal family remain in
Lisbon, there was no doubt that the British would have bombarded Lisbon
as they had only recently bombarded Copenhagen and destroyed or seized
the Portuguese ships in the harbor. Admiral Sir Sidney Smith had clear in-
structions from London that on no account was the Portuguese fleet to be
allowed to fall to the French.
   The precociousness of these unequal treaties between Britain and Por-
tugal recalled for C. R. Boxer, that rare historian who knew both Portugal
and China intimately, the later unequal treaties of Nanking of the late
1840s, the heyday, it should be remembered, of the so-called age of free
trade imperialism and informal empire. Portugal had in this respect been a
150 • NakedTropics