

 for reform put forward by Jose Bonifacio, and on other in the enigmatic
 Dom Pedro, first emperor of Brazil after the break from Portugal. Bonifa-
cio was one of the most remarkable figures in any of the independence
 movements in the Americas-a man in scientific achievement who
matched and in some cases surpassed the remarkable generation of leaders
who had made the American Revolution. Closer in personality and fame to
a Franklin than to a provincial landlord like Thomas Jefferson, Bonifacio
was born and raised in Santos. He had been a brilliant student at the re-
formed University of Coimbra in Portugal and arrived in Paris in 1790 as a
postgraduate student supported by a grant from the Portuguese govern-
ment brokered by the secretary of the new Lisbon Academy of Sciences, the
Abbe Correa da Serra. He had witnessed the most turbulent stages of the
French Revolution in person and then continued his studies in Germany
and Scandinavia. During the French invasion of Portugal he had led the
students of Coimbra in guerrilla warfare behind the enemy's lines. He had
been a high government functionary, intendant of mines and metals; his
scientific papers had appeared in the most prestigious journals; he was a
corresponding member of Europe's great scientific bodies; and he went on
to succeed Correa da Serra as secretary of the Lisbon Academy of Sciences.
He was very much part of the remarkable late-eighteenth- and early-nine-
teenth-century circum-Atlantic community of scholars and political re-
formers. But his experience made him a firm believer in the role of the
state in the tradition of enlightened reformers in Southern and Eastern Eu-
rope; he saw order as the handmaiden of progress. He was a constitutional-
ist, but not a democrat; more Burkian than Jeffersonian.
    Dom Pedro was a populist, a classic man on horseback, the handsome
son of grotesquely ugly and dysfunctional parents, and heir to a dynasty so
inbred as to verge at times on lunacy. He was a temporary ruler who within a
decade had abdicated in order to return to Europe to fight a civil war in Por-
tugal against his brother to ensure that his daughter became queen ofPortu-
gal. Loyal father and chronic philanderer, savant and ignoramus, courageous
soldier and clumsy politician, Brazilian and Portuguese, heir and usurper, he
was a monarch too "liberal" for the Holy Alliance in Europe but too
"despotic" for many Brazilians, not least the would-be republicans of Per-
nambuco who rose up twice in a decade to repudiate him. His role as por-
trayed in Portuguese history is that of the upholder of "constitutionalism,"
an image totally incompatible with his image in Brazilian history, where he
was the ruler who rejected Brazil's first constitution as too liberal and exiled
Jose Bonifacio and his brothers, the leaders of the small minority of Brazil-
ians who wanted fundamental reform and who had provided the direction
during the most critical moments of the transition to independence.
    It is vital to recognize, therefore, that on September 7, 1822, when Dom
Pedro stopped at the banks of the Ipiranga River near Sao Paulo, suffering
154 • NakedTropics