

cially if these ran headlong into powerful vested interests combined with
strong nationalist sentiments. The British found this out the hard way in
Buenos Aires in 1806 when their intervention force had been ignomin-
iously defeated. This should also have been the lesson of the American
Revolution. And it was a lesson Napoleonic France discovered with
catastrophic consequences as a result of intervention in Haiti. In Brazil this
was especially the case in the matter of the slave trade. Despite treaty com-
mitments between Brazil and Britain to abolish the slave trade dating from
the 1810 treaty, the influence of landed and slave trading interests in Brazil
was strong enough to counteract over forty years of British gunboat diplo-
macy during the first half of the nineteenth century.4
    Here again the economic influence of Britain was often at cross-pur-
poses with Britain's political, diplomatic, and philanthropic initiatives. As
Sidney Mintz has argued, the Industrial Revolution in Britain (and in the
northern states of North America, for that matter) helped revive slavery
throughout the Americas by creating a vast new urban consumer market
for products such as coffee and sugar, as well as by creating the enormous
demand for raw cotton to supply the textile mills of both old and new Eng-
land. And it was not only merchants in Rio de Janeiro or Bahia who were
financing the illegal slave trade or the legal commerce in cotton, coffee, and
sugar that depended on slave labor. It was also the merchants of New York
and Baltimore, and London and Liverpool. And it was ships of the North
Americans that carried a large percentage of the slaves that were imported
illegally into the Brazilian Empire as late as the 1850s. 5 Henry Wise, u.S.
minister to Brazil, told Secretary John C. Calhoun in 1843: "without the
aid of our citizens and our flag, the African slave trade could not be carried
out [in Brazil] with success at all."6
    Ironically, the resistance to antislavery and abolitionist arguments in
Brazil was probably weaker in the independence period than at any time
before or after. In the south of the country, especially in Sao Paulo, a criti-
cal region in terms of organized political opposition to Lisbon in the
1820s, large-scale coffee production only developed after national inde-
pendence was achieved. In the decade 1821-1830 coffee accounted for a


4"Treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, between His Britannic Majesty and
His Royal Highness the Prince Regent of Portugal; signed at Rio de Janeiro, the
19th of February, 1810," in A. R. Walford, The British Factory in Lisbon & Its Closing
Stages Ensuing upon the Treaty of 1810 (Lisbon: Instituto Britanico em Portugal,
1940),163-184.
sSee Sidney W. Mintz, Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar in Modern History
(New York: Penguin Books, 1985).
6Robert H. Holden and Eric Zolov, ed., Latin America and the United States: A Doc-
umentary History (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 30.
152 • NakedTropics