

from a bout of diarrhea, and cried out it was to be "Independence or
Death", the young prince and heir apparent to the Portuguese throne was
exaggerating. The problem in September 1822 was certainly not "death,"
and only indirectly "independence." His pithy declaration was, and soon
became, very much part of a spurious myth of the origins of Brazilian na-
tionality. Yet the reality was that Brazil had been independent for all intents
and purposes since 1808; since December 16, 1815, Brazil had been a king-
dom coequal with Portugal. But John Quincy Adams, the u.S. secretary of
state, was not alone in quite misunderstanding the occasion and its signifi-
cance when he told Ceasar Rodney on his appointment as U.S. minister to
Buenos Aires that "in Brazil ... an empire probably as ephemeral as that of
Mexico at our door has taken the place of Portugal." What was really at
stake in 1822 was a question of monarchy, stability, continuity, and territo-
rial integrity. It was in these interests that Dom Pedro was preempting rev-
olution in 1822 at Ipiranga, not promoting it.
   The avoidance of revolution in Brazil in fact was also a paramount con-
cern in Europe. Henry Chamberlain, British minister in Rio de Janeiro in
1824, was ever concerned that the social turmoil under the surface in Brazil
and evident on the streets and in the constituent assembly in Rio would, as
he put it:

    excite ... such a flame ... as it might not be possible to control, and
    would perhaps end in the destruction of the imperial government
    and the division of the country into a variety of small independent
    republican states, wretched in themselves and the cause of
    wretchedness amongst their neighbours, such as we have witnessed
    in the Spanish American colonies in our neighbourhood. 9

   Portugal's major European allies-both Britain and the members of the
Holy Alliance-were quite clear on this point, as George Canning, the
British foreign secretary who had previously served as British envoy in Lis-
bon, wrote very succinctly in 1824:

    The only question is whether Brazil, independent of Portugal, shall
    be a monarchy or a Republic.... The conservation of monarchy in
    one part of America is an object of vital importance to the Old
    World. 10

9Henry Chamberlain to George Canning (secret), Rio de Janeiro, May 15,1824, in
Charles K. Webster, ed., Britain and the Independence ofLatin America, 1812-1830:
Select Documents from the Foreign Office Archives (2 vols.) (London and New York:
Oxford University Press, 1938), I, 240-241.
lOGeorge Canning to Henry Chamberlain (secret and confidential), London, Janu-
ary 9, 1824, in Webster, I, 236.
                                          WhyWas Brazil Different? • 155

The government in London, since the establishment of the Portuguese
Court in Rio in 1808, in fact had always made a clear distinction between
the circumstances of Brazil and Spanish America. Canning emphasized the
contrast between the Brazilian situation and that of Spanish America writ-
ing to Sir Charles Stuart in 1825:
    Let it be recollected that the difference between the relation of Por-
    tugal to Brazil and that of Spain to her Americas is in nothing more
    than this-that all the Spanish colonies have gained in despite of
    the mother country, but that Brazil has been raised to the state of a
    sister kingdom, instead of colonial dependency, by the repeated and
    advised acts of policy of the common sovereign of Portugal and
    Brazil. Up to the period of the emigration of the Royal Family to
    Brazil, Brazil was as strictly a colony as Mexico or Peru or Buenos
    Aires. From that period began a series of relaxations first, and after-
    wards of concessions of privileges, which gradually exalted the con-
    dition of Brazil and almost inverted its relations with Portugal so as
    to make, during the residence of His Most Faithful Majesty in
    Brazil, the mother country in fact a Dependency. I I
    Dom Joao, the prince regent, soon to be Dom Joao VI on the death of
his demented mother in 1816, had said as much to Thomas Sumter Jr., the
u.S. envoy in Rio de Janeiro in 1815, ((The times have been difficult but
now the independence of Brazil is fixed."12
    The important point about Brazil, therefore, is that it became economi-
cally and politically emancipated between 1808 and 1820 while acting as the
center of the Luso-Brazilian Empire. It became ((independent" in 1822 only
after the experience as an ((imperial center;' to which subjects of the Por-
tuguese monarchy in Europe, Africa, and Asia looked for leadership, had
failed. This unusual circumstance explains why in 1820 it was Portugal that
declared ((independence" from Brazil, and only afterward, in 1822, that Brazil
declared its ((independence" from Portugal. The ((Manifesto of the Por-
tuguese Nation to the sovereigns and peoples of Europe;' which was issued
by the rebels in Oporto in 1820, reads very much like other such declarations
of independence from colonial status and contained the same complaints;
the only difference was this manifesto came from rebels in a European city,
not rebels across the Atlantic in a colonial port city. It declared: