

mere 19 percent of total exports for Brazil, but over the next two decades
this share rose to well over 60 percent. The expansion of the coffee market
in Europe, and most especially in North America, led to a massive renewal
of slave imports into Rio de Janeiro and the expansion of slavery into the
Paraiba Valley and beyond into Sao Paulo. Economic historians have ar-
gued that the main reason for Brazil's slow overall economic development
in the nineteenth century lay precisely in the country's agricultural sector,
where low income and inelastic supply, intrinsic to slavery, constrained the
pace of development in the rest of the economy.?
   This was precisely what Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva, who more
than any individual helped shape the newly independent Brazilian state in
the 1820s, had foreseen when warning his contemporaries about the long-
term negative effects, for Brazil's future well-being, of the failure to deal
with the question of slavery or to promote agrarian reform or to integrate
the Indian population at the onset of national independence. This led to
his courageous but in the end hopeless appeals to his fellow Brazilians in
his manifesto in favor of abolition of slavery, his proposals for agrarian re-
form, and his plan for the "civilization of the wild Indians of Brazil," as he
put it, all written during 1822: ((Experience and reason demonstrate that
richness rules where there is liberty and justice, and not where lives captiv-
ity and corruption." Jose Bonifacio argued that ((If this evil persists we will
not grow. Gentlemen, continually our domestic enemies grow; and they
have nothing to lose; except above all to hope for a revolution such as that
of Santo Domingo." In other words, to hope for a new Haitian revolution
in Brazi1. 8


                                         III
The ambiguity of Brazil's passage from colony to imperial center to inde-
pendent nation is best exemplified on the one hand by the aborted plans

7Nathaniel H. Leff, Underdevelopment and Development in Brazil (2 vols.) (London
and Boston: Allen and Unwin, 1982), and Stephen Haber and Herbert S. Klein,
«The Economic Consequences of Brazilian Independence," in How Latin America
Fell Behind: Essays in the Economic Histories of Brazil and Mexico, 1800-1914, ed.
Stephen Haber (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997),243-259.
8«Apontamentos sabre as sesmarias do Brasil," in Obras cientificas, politicas, e soci-
ais de Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva (3 vols.) (Santos: Grupo de Trabalho Execu-
tivo das Homenagens ao Patriarca, 1964), II, 20-21; «Representas:ao a Assembleia
Geral Constituinte e Legislativa do Imperio do Brasil sobre a Escravatura:' por Jose
Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva. Typographie de Firmin Didot, 1825, in ibid., II,
115-158; «Apontamentos para a Civiliza~ao do Indios Bravos do Imperio do
Brasil," ibid., III, 103-114. See also Projetos para 0 Brasil, org. Miriam Dolhnikoff
(Sao Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 1998) and the commentary by Carlos Guil-
herme Mota in Introdufao ao Brasil, ed. Louren~o Dantas Mota (Sao Paulo:
SENAC, 1999), 77-95.
                                         Why Was Brazil Different? • 153