

   Pierre Chaunu entitled a discussion of the transition of Portuguese
America from colony to independent nation "Heureux Bresil."131 If Brazil
was indeed fortunate in its monarchical solution, in being spared the ago-
nies of nineteenth-century Spanish America, part of the cause must be
sought not in the Brazilians' lack of imagination, instruction, and enlight-
enment' or even in vague attributes of their national character, but in the
perspicacity of the generation of the 1790s, who brought reason to the
analysis of colonial problems and with optimistic faith projected a
grandiose concept of Luso-Brazilian Empire.




131Pierre Chaunu, L'Amerique et les Ameriques (Paris: A. Colin, 1964), 216. For a
succinct overview of this period also see Luiz Carlos Villalta, 1789-1808: 0 imperio
luso-brasileiro e os brasis (Virando Seculos, coord. Laura de Mello e Souza and Lilia
Moritz Schwarcz) (Sao Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2000).
ST A T C E OF P D
               EDRO   I.
                      I,
                                                             CHAPTER            8
                        WhyWas Brazil Different?
                                      The Contexts ofIndependence
                               ((The conservation ofmonarchy in one part ofAmerica
                                    is an object ofvital importance to the Old World."
                                                            -George Canning, 1824




Over recent decades surprisingly little scholarly work has been done on the
achievement of Brazilian independence. Even less attention has been de-
voted to the impact of the decolonization of Portugal's vast South Ameri-
can empire during the 1820s on Portugal itself. Portuguese historians still
sometimes write as if Brazil never existed-the most recent and most pres-
tigious history of Portugal in the eighteenth century, for example, barely
mentions Brazil, even though for most of that century 60 percent of the
state's revenues derived from Brazil-and Brazilian historians often ignore
the important transatlantic dimensions of Brazil's domestic political con-
flicts and economic constraints. l The period that runs from late 1807,
when the invasion of Portugal by General Jean-Andoche Junot forced the
Portuguese Court to take refuge in Brazil, up to 1825, when Portugal and
the major European powers recognized Brazil's independence, lacks even
the most rudimentary interpretative outline. Yet events on each side of the
Atlantic were intimately linked, and cannot be explained without an
understanding of their connectedness. Indeed, between 1815 and 1821
Portugal and Brazil were formally and institutionally part of a «United


ISee Antonio Manuel Hespanha, ed., 0 Antigo Regime, vol. 4, Historia de Portugal
(8 vols.), ed. Jose Mattoso (Lisboa: Editorial Estampa, 1997).


                                     145
146 • NakedTropics

Kingdom." The interpenetration of Brazilian and Portuguese politics and
economy was extensive, and remained so well into the mid-nineteenth
century.
   My objective is in a very preliminary way to take a fresh look at what
happened during these critical years in a comparative Atlantic context; to
suggest some of the theoretical and practical problems concerning the
study of the independence of Brazil; and to delineate some key aspects of
the international context of Brazilian independence. Finally, I will touch
on the social and economic history of this period where the greatest conti-
nuities between the colonial and national periods are claimed in the cur-
rent literature for Brazil, and the greatest discontinuities seen for Portugal.