

forerunner of a relationship which imposed severe conditionalities over
another nation's sovereignty without the direct exercise of sovereign
power. As with China at midcentury, the British did not always produce
what overseas customers wanted, and in these circumstances the British
rarely hesitated to impose trade by military and political power, or to seek
special concessions, even if this made them, as in the China trade, purvey-
ors of narcotics.
    The opening of the ports of Brazil in 1808 to the trade of "all friendly na-
tions" was the first action taken by the newly arrived Portuguese Court after
its escape from Lisbon. It was an action that ended over three centuries of
mercantilistic practice where Lisbon had been the obligatory entrep6t for
Brazilian colonial products. While this action had ideological motivations
to be sure, that is, it was justified in terms of the superiority of free trade
over protectionism, it was also an entirely pragmatic measure, made inevi-
table by the French determination to incorporate Portugal's ports within
the continental blockade against Britain. And as far as the British traders in
Brazil were concerned, many potential European competitors, not the least
of which, the French, were temporarily out of the picture. In these favorable
circumstances, the British merchants quickly saturated the consumer mar-
ket in Brazil, where the majority of the population was composed of slaves,
not a free population of middle-class consumers.
    Only two years later, not surprisingly, the British were agitating again
for special privileges. The Anglo-Brazilian Treaty of 1810 imposed on the
Portuguese higher tariffs in Brazil than it did on the British, an imposition
that dealt a severe blow to the already fragile chances of reconciling Portu-
gal to Brazil's new status as center of the monarchy. It is ironic to note that
the first and second partial editions ofAdam Smith's The Wealth ofNations
published in Brazil appeared in 1811 and 1812 in Rio de Janeiro and Bahia,
respectively, as if to remind the British (and certainly to remind the Brazil-
ians) that hegemonic powers do not always practice what they preach. In
effect, as in the mid-seventeenth century, Portugal and later Brazil were
obliged to balance the need for autonomy against the need for political and
military support, especially in their relations with Great Britain, the domi-
nant naval and economic power.
    But how far did these circumstances lead Brazil to sacrifice its own eco-
nomic prospects, and fall into a neocolonial relationship as the dependen-
tists argue? Or were those who had promoted the transfer of the seat of the
Portuguese government to Brazil in 1807 on the grounds that it would
make the Bragan<;:a regime less susceptible to European pressure right or
wrong in the light of subsequent experience?
    Commercial pressure from the British was certainly counterproductive
at times as far as Britain's broader political interests were concerned, espe-
                                            Why Was Brazil Different? • 151