

 Manisfeste de la Nation Portugaise aux Souverains e aux Peuples de l'Europe
13
(Oporto: 1820); author's personal collection.
                                        Why Was Brazil Different? • 157

    to refuse to recognize Brazil would not be, as it has hitherto been in
    the case of the Spanish colonies, an act merely negative. For we have
    with Brazil established relations, regulated commercial intercourse,
    and agencies if not actually political, affording channels of political
    correspondence. We cannot withdraw our consuls from Brazil. It is
    obvious that we must continue to cultivate the commercial rela-
    tions of that country. [emphasis in original] 14

   This would all be a critical heritage for the regime Dom Pedro was to
head as first emperor of Brazil, as well as contributing to his ability to pro-
tect his new empire from republican challenge. So the answer to these
questions is probably "no." In other words, the social base for radical
change was stronger and opposition to it weaker in Portugal in 1820 than
was the case in Brazil, and the reason for this is that in all ways continuity
was greater in Brazil than it was in Portugal during the first two decades of
the nineteenth century. Since 1808 Portugal had not only lost its role as the
seat of the monarchy, but it had been subject to invasion and devastating
warfare; it had mobilized a population against a common enemy; it had
seen its commerce and industry destroyed and its profitable colonial mar-
kets lost; and the British, forgetting the cardinal rule of "informal" empire,
had subjected a proud and nationalist population to the direct and insensi-
tive rule by a British general.
   In Brazil, moreover, threats to social order since the 1790s had been
strongly associated with republicanism and this, in moments of crisis,
tended to produce greater coalescence within the elite, especially among
property owners whose ownership of human property, moreover, was far
more widespread than was the ownership of land. Here the fear of conta-
gion from the Haitian slave revolt was ever present in their minds, and "lib-
erty," if it also implied "equality," was bound to raise fundamental
questions about a society ordered by racial as much as by social hierarchy.
We are, needless to say, talking in this context of "perceptions." I am not
implying that social conflicts can or should only be seen in terms of slav-
ery-obviously social structure and the interaction of class and race were
much more complex and multifaceted in Brazil than this. And it should
also be emphasized that the slave revolt in Haiti had dramatic impact not
only because the balance of social and racial tensions within Brazil and
elsewhere in the Americas made its example frightening to whites, but be-
cause of its intrinsic importance. The Haitian example was qualitatively of
much greater significance than previous slave rebellions. First, because it

14Canning's memorandum for the cabinet, November 15, 1822, in Webster, II,
393-398.
158 • NakedTropics