

    Slavery and industrial capitalism in fact proved highly compatible
within the nineteenth-century Atlantic system-industrial capitalism
thriving on slave-produced cotton and coffee no less than commercial cap-
italism had thrived on slave-produced sugar. In this context, reformers like
Jose Bonifacio were double victims. Not only did this economic system it-
self, both domestically and in its Atlantic dimensions, create conditions
hostile to his proposal for fundamental reform; he was also a victim of the
British policy, the overbearing pressure of which helped to undermine the
one administration with any real commitment to the ending of slavery and
slave trade. In secret conversations with Henry Chamberlain in April 1823,
Jose Bonifacio warned the British not to push too hard or too soon:

    You know how sincerely I detest the Slave Trade, how prejudicial I
    think it to the country, how very desirous I am for its total cessa-
    tion, but it cannot be done immediately. The people are not pre-
    pared for it and until this has been brought about, it would
    endanger the existence of the Government if attempted suddenly.
    This very abolition is one of the principle measures I wish to bring
    before the Assembly without delay, but it requires management,
    and cannot be hastened ...
       With regards to Colonies or the Coast ofAfrica, we want none, nor
    anywhere else. Brazil is quite large enough and productive enough
    for us, and we are content with what Providence has given us.
       I wish your cruisers would take every slave ship they fall in with
    at sea. I want to see no more of them, they are the gangrene of our
    prosperity. The population we want is a white one, and I soon hope
    to see arrive here from Europe in shoals the poor, the wretched, the
    industrious; here they will find plenty, with a fine climate; here they
    will be happy; such are the colonists we want. 27


                                     VII
To feed this Atlantic system and to sustain its economic organization of
production, however, one thing was clear: Brazil did not need Portugal.
The resentments and the financial and economic difficulties which led to
the Gporto revolution, the convocation of the Cortes in Lisbon in 1820,
and to the formulation of a liberal constitution arose in large part from the
loss of Portuguese privileges and monopolies in colonial trade; and once
assembled, the measures of the Cortes quickly reflected these imperatives.
Not only was Dom Joao VI forced to return to Lisbon, but the Cortes soon

27Henry Chamberlain to George Canning (secret), Rio de Janeiro, April 2, 1823, in
Webster, I, 222-223.
                                         WhyWas Brazil Different? • 167

legislated the end to many of the powers that he had granted to his eldest
son, Dom Pedro, who had been left in Rio as regent. Brazilians increasingly
saw the measures of the Cortes, strongly supported by the hated Por-
tuguese merchants and immigrants in Brazil, as an attempt at "recoloniza-
tion" which would turn back the clock on the thirteen years during which
Rio had been the center of government. It was against this background that
Dom Pedro defied the instructions of the Cortes to return to Europe, ac-
cepted the title "Perpetual Defender of Brazil" from the Municipal Council
of Rio de Janeiro in early 1822, and then, on September 7, 1822, made his
declaration of "independence" on the outskirts of Sao Paulo.
   The political emancipation of Brazil is thus a long and cumulative pro-
cess with much continuity retained along the way; 1808, 1816, 1822, even
1831 are all important moments in this gradual assertion of separation
and definition of nationhood. The path was not without its arduous mo-
ments to be sure. International recognition only came after long negotia-
tion in 1825 and the promise by Brazil to pay a large indemnity to
Portugal. War in the south broke out with renewed vigor along the frontier
in the Banda Oriental, and was not resolved until the end of the decade
with the establishment, under British auspices, of the independent buffer
state of Uruguay, establishing a southern boundary less ambitious than
that of either colony or united kingdom. Much internal military activity
both on land and by sea was necessary to bring about the adherence of
Bahia, as well as the far north. Pernambuco again tried to break away in
1824. Administratively, the country was not "Brazilianized" until the end
of Dom Pedro's short reign in 1831. And it was only in the 1840s that the
actions of the duke of Caxias (a man who was, ironically, the nephew by
marriage of the rich entrepreneur who had denounced the republican
Minas Conspiracy in 1789 to the royal authorities) brought to an end re-
gional separatist revolts. Yet by 1858, well into the long reign of Brazil's sec-
ond emperor, Dom Pedro II, the satisfaction with this outcome was well
summarized by Domingos Antonio Raiol in his 0 Brasil politico: "How dif-
ferent [we Brazilians are] from other people who inhabit the same South
American continent. When we rest, they fight. When we fraternize, they
quarrel. A government monarchic, hereditary, is without doubt a true
choice, which tames ambitions and because of stability forms a powerful
element of order and prosperity." 28
   In these circumstances, it is not surprising that every attempt to alter
the economic organization of labor failed. The alternative model for
Brazilian development, in which European immigration and free laborers