

17Richard Beale Davis, The Abbe Correa in America 1812-1820: The Contribution of
the Diplomat and the Natural Philosopher to the Foundations of Our National Life,
in Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, New Series, vol. 45, part 2
(1955). Reprinted with introduction by Gordon S. Wood and afterword by Leon
Bourdon (Providence, R.I.: Gavea Brown, 1993).
160 • NakedTropics

    their opinion necessary to keep down that excess of numbers. Here
    room is abundant, population scanty, and peace the necessary
    means for producing men, to whom the redundant soil is offering
    the means of life and happiness. The principals of society there and
    here are radically different, and I hope no American patriot will
    ever lose sight of the essential policy of interdicting in the seas and
    territories of both Americas, the ferocious and sanguinary contests
    of Europe. I wish to see this coalition begun. I am earnest for an
    agreement with the maritime powers of Europe, assigning them the
    task of keeping down the piracies of their seas and the cannibalisms
    of the African coasts, and to us, the suppression of the same enor-
    mities within our own seas, and for this purpose I should rejoice to
    see the fleets of Brazil and the United States riding together as
    brethren of the same family and pursuing the same object. IS

   Secretary of State John Quincy Adams was less sympathetic. And it was
he, not Monroe or Jefferson, who was to have the most influence over U.S.
foreign policy toward the newly independent nations of South America
both as secretary of state between 1817 and 1825 and as president from
1825 to 1829. John Quincy Adams saw the merits of separation from Eu-
rope, but did not think this implied any mutual identity between the
United States and the new nations to its south. He saw South Americans as
irredeemably corrupted by the Roman Catholic religion, Iberian tradition,
and the tropical climate. The U.S. commercial agent in Rio de Janeiro was
reporting to him that the Portuguese monarchy in Brazil had "degenerated
into complete effeminacy and voluptuousness. Hardly a worse state of so-
ciety can be supposed to exist anywhere, than this country. Where the cli-
mate also excites to every sort of depravation and delinquency." John
Quincy Adams, the dour New Englander from Massachusetts who de-
scribed himself as a man of "cold and austere" temperament, was not
amused by such an untidy and unpromising neighbor. (Such views I notice
are still popular in some quarters around Harvard Yard.) 19
   Adams reluctantly acquiesced in President Monroe's desire in mid-1822
to proceed with U.S. recognition of Mexico, Chile, the United Provinces of


18Thomas Jefferson to William Short, August 4, 1820, in Andrew A. Lipscomb and
Albert E. Bergh, eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, (20 vols.) (Washington,
D.C.: Thomas Jefferson Memorial Association, 1903-1904), XIV, 262-264.
19See Lars Schoultz, Beneath the United States: A History of u.s. Policy toward Latin
America (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998), 4-9, and Memoirs of John
Quincy Adams, Comprising Portions from His Diary from 1795 to 1848, ed. Charles
Francis Adams (12 vols.) (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott & Co., 1874-1877).
                                             Why Was Brazil Different? • 161