

Rio de la Plata, and the Brazilian Empire. But he wanted as little to do with
them as possible. He, like Jefferson, knew the Abbe Correa well, and
thought him a man of"extensive general literature, of profound science, of
brilliant wit, and of inexhaustible powers of conversation." But Adams also
found Correa "quick, sensitive, fractious, hasty and when excited obsti-
nate." He ridiculed the Abbe Correa's (and Thomas Jefferson's) suggestion
that Brazil and the United States create an ''American system." With the
disdain and arrogance that was also to characterize U.S. attitudes toward
Latin America for the next century, John Quincy Adams wrote: "As to an
American system we have it; we constitute the whole of it."20



                                        VI
In Brazil, however, the internal threat to stability and territorial integrity
was not only a question of unfounded or unrealized fears; such a threat
had come to fruition prior to 1822 in one very important test case, Per-
nambuco. The prices of sugar and cotton especially had reached an all-
time high during the Napoleonic wars, but with peace in 1815 both
suffered collapse. Pernambucan cotton especially faced massive competi-
tion in Europe from the United States. In 1817 the regionalist antagonisms
in Pernambuco toward the central government resurfaced, and this time
conspiracy broke into open revolt. Early in the year a republic was pro-
claimed in Recife and agents sent abroad to gain international recognition.
   The seventy-four-day Republic of Pernambuco revealed ambiguities
and divisions among the would-be opponents of the status quo no less
acute than among its adherents. The enthusiastic support from the great
proprietors and slaveholders and their hatred for the Portuguese mer-
chants were a predominant and unifying factor among the separatists. But
they could agree on little else. Fears and antagonisms were immediately
brought into the open by the "Organic Law" promulgated by the provi-
sional government as a draft constitution. The municipal councils of the
hinterland balked at two sections in the Organic Law in particular, one
promising religious toleration and the other "equality of rights." Inevitably
the latter raised the issue of slavery. The provisional government explained
that property, even that "most repugnant to the ideal of justice is sacred."
No less offensive to the great landowners was the mobilization of the povo,
small sharecroppers and squatters, the marginally employed free popula-
tion, and artisans, whose ideas, fraternization and occasional interracial


2°Cited by Schoultz, Beneath the United States, 10-11.
162 • NakedTropics

solidarity offended their sense of status and challenged their local author-
ity. Rent by internal factionalism, blockaded by sea, and with a land army
approaching from Bahia, Recife capitulated. 21
    There had been no response to Pernambuco's requests for international
recognition. The provisional government had expected support from the
United States and France-Jefferson's friend, the Abbe Correa, had worked
mightily in Washington to thwart Pernambuco's representatives and frus-
trate the merchants of Baltimore who were helping them-but it was
Britain that really mattered. 22 British influence over the central govern-
ment in Rio de Janeiro, however, offered much greater opportunities than
did the encouragement of separatist revolts. London had no strong mater-
ial interests at stake in Pernambuco by 1817, for raw cotton could be ob-
tained in great quantities from the United States and sugar from British
islands in the Caribbean. The provisional government of Recife had little
to offer that Britain had not gained in 1810. British policy too was strongly
influenced by the slave trade. Strong pressure by the British government in
1810 had forced Dom Joao to promise the gradual abolition of trade
"throughout the whole of his dominions." In 1815, the government in Rio
agreed to abandon the trade north of the equator. Neither commitment
was entirely satisfactory to Britain as the slave trade continued legally
below the equator between Portuguese territories in Africa and those in
South America. The separation Britain was less reluctant to support was
that between Brazil and the Portuguese enclaves in Africa. Until 1820 this
intraimperial trade was a question of internal Luso-Brazilian concern;
after 1825, however, this major obstacle to outright interference was re-
moved by the separation of Brazil and Portugal, and British insistence that
the African territories remain linked to Lisbon, not to Rio de Janeiro. Now
that they were independent and sovereign nations, the slave trade between
them and South America became internationalized and open to suppres-
sion by the British navy on the high seas.
    Yet even the British, who after all did not abolish slavery in their own
colonies until the mid-1830s, privately recognized the strength of slave-
owning interests in Brazil. Henry Chamberlain told George Canning: