

23Henry Chamberlain to George Canning, Rio de Janeiro, December 31,1823, in
Webster, I, 232-234, citation from 233.
164 • NakedTropics

    that a vigorous prosperity cannot exist, that our population is un-
    sound, and so fully are we persuaded of these truths that were it
    possible, we would at once abolish both. 24
   These objections to slavery were not, it must be emphasized, so much
the result of "humanitarian" or "philanthropic" sentiment, as they were in
Europe, but were more similar to the objections to slavery in the United
States in the same period, and were a response to the perception that the
racial balance of the population was potentially and dangerously unstable,
or would impede the growth of a nation on a European model. Those few
who urged eventual emancipation of the slaves, such as Jose Bonifacio, did
so not because of the humanity of slaves, but because they wished to see
Brazil Europeanized, not only in terms of aspirations, institutions, and na-
tional purpose, but also in terms of the composition of its population.
   But Bonifacio was in one important respect far more radical than were
his North American counterparts, and his attitude reflected a strong cur-
rent of thinking that had emerged in the eighteenth century, especially
during the long rule of the Marques de Pombal of which Bonifacio was
very much an heir. He was skeptical, and explicitly so, about the ability of a
society so heterogeneous as that of Brazil, where, as he put it, white propri-
etors, black slaves, and poor mestizos did not possess a sense of identity
that united them. On the contrary, as enemies among themselves, they
were more predisposed to conflict than to unity. It was therefore, he be-
lieved, necessary to homogenize the population, which signified eliminat-
ing slavery, integrating the Indians, encouraging miscegenation between
Indians and whites and between whites and blacks. He intended thereby
to create a Brazilian "race" composed of mestizos united by a common
national identity. As a metallurgist of some fame in Europe, he used a met-
allurgical analogy for what he envisioned: he sought, he wrote, to "amalga-
mate so many diverse metals, so that a homogeneous and compact whole
might emerge." Only in this manner would the «sloth and vices" of the
whites be eliminated, «we tyrannize the slaves and reduce them to brute
animals, and they inoculate us with their immortality and all their vices"
was the way he described it.
   We now know, of course, that Jefferson engaged in his own form of
clandestine amalgamation, but this was, as he might have said had he cho-
sen to acknowledge his relationship with Sally Hemings as he did with
the Englishwoman Maria Cosway in Paris, an affair of the «heart" not of
the «head." Bonifacio's was very much a policy of the head. But Bonifacio,
the protegee of Jefferson's friend, the Abbe Correa da Serra, was after all,

24Henry Chamberlain to George Canning (secret), Rio de Janeiro, April 2, 1823, in
Webster, I, 222-223.
                                           Why Was Brazil Different? • 165