

was successful, the only successful slave uprising in modern history. Sec-
ond, because Haiti sustained its independence-at vast cost to be sure-
but a fact which made Haiti the Western Hemisphere's second
independent nation after the United States. IS


                                       v
Yet again, Brazil presents ambiguities. One possible response to the per-
ceived threat from below was to eliminate slavery, encourage European im-
migration, and substitute free for slave labor. This is what Jose Bonifacio
wanted. But in Brazil the fear of slave revolt was not a sufficient argument
of itself to force the Brazilian power brokers to defy their immediate mate-
rial interests and embrace the reform of the system of production based on
slave labor. In fact, slavery had the opposite effect: it cemented a unity
around the defense of the institution. The paulista Diogo Antonio Feijo,
priest, fazendeiro, deputy to the Portuguese Cortes in Lisbon, member of
the General Assembly in Rio de Janeiro after Independence, minister of
justice and regent in the 1830s, put the case quite succinctly:

    Slavery which certainly brings many ills to civilization, also creates
    within Brazilians a sense of independence, of sovereignty, that the
    observer can also see in free men whatever their status, profession
    or fortune. 16

   In this, the parallels with the attitudes toward slavery of the Virginian
patriots who had played so large a role in the making of the United States
are striking, even if the Brazilians in the 1820s were constructing a new na-
tional state, in an international environment where reaction had tri-
umphed in Europe, and the consequences of slave revolution in the
Caribbean were more stark and menacing than anything North Americans
had to worry about in 1776. Jefferson in particular found much to admire
in the Brazilian experience. In 1821 Prince Metternich, much like Dr.
Henry Kissinger in the 1970s, believed strongly in the principle of counter-
revolutionary interventionism. Kissinger's predecessors as secretary of
state in the early nineteenth century thought just the opposite, shocked as
they had been by the experiences of the War of 1812 and the vulnerability
of the young republic to European attack it had revealed. Fearful that Met-
ternich's Holy Alliance intended to bring Spain's rebellious colonies in the

15See the important observations on this point by Eugene D. Genovese in his From
Rebellion to Revolution: Afro-American Slave Revolts in the Making ofthe New World
(New York: Vintage Books, 1981),92-98.
16Cited by Miriam Dolhnikoff, ''A Civilizac;ao Contra a Sociedade," Rumos 1, no. 3
(May-June 1999): 11-19.
                                          Why Was Brazil Different? • 159

New World back into the European fold after the Austrian army had sup-
pressed republican revolutions in Naples and the Piedmont, and France
had restored the execrable Bourbon Ferdinand VII to the throne in
Madrid, President Monroe in late 1823 announced his famous doctrine in
a message to the Congress and it would be the guiding principle of u.s.
policy in the Western Hemisphere for the rest of the century.
   But the Monroe Doctrine had been foreshadowed some years before in
conversations between Jefferson and the envoy of the court of Rio de
Janeiro in Washington, the Abbe Correa da Serra, and as originally con-
ceived it joined Brazil and the United States together in an ''American sys-
tem:' where the two nations would act collaboratively to keep Europe at
bay. Jefferson had sustained a long interest in Brazil since the time he was
u.s. envoy in Paris. In 1786 he had held a secret meeting in Nimes with a
young Brazilian revolutionary who went by the pseudonym Vendek, a stu-
dent from Rio de Janeiro who was then studying at the University of Mont-
pellier. Later, he had met the Abbe Correa while presiding officer of the
American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia. Correa da Serra, a bril-
liant Portuguese naturalist and founding secretary of the Lisbon Academy
of Sciences, had come to the United States in 1812 and was perceived as a
man of great learning and was avidly sought after by the leaders of the new
republic.!?
   The Abbe became a regular visitor to Monticello. In their discussions
there Jefferson and the Abbe Correa first traced their ''American system."
Jefferson wrote of the Abbe in 1820:
    From many conversations with him, I hope he sees and will pro-
    mote in his new situation [the Abbe had been recalled to Rio de
    Janeiro and Jefferson assumed he would become the minister of ex-
    ternal affairs] the advantages of a cordial fraternization among all
    the American nations, and the importance of their coalescing in an
    American system of policy, totally independent of and uncon-
    nected with that of Europe. The day is not distant, when we may
    formally require a meridian partition through the ocean which sep-
    arates the two Hemispheres, on the hither side of which no Euro-
    pean gun shall ever be heard, nor an American on the other; and
    when during the rage of the eternal wars of Europe, the lion and the
    lamb within our regions, shall lie down together in peace. The ex-
    cess of the population of Europe and want of room, render war, in