

During this period he published a series of critical works on bibliography
and historiography, developed a wide correspondence with leading Euro-
pean scientists and philosophers, and pursued his passion for scientific ex-
perimentation and botany.
    In 1790 the Abbe Corrc~a da Serra, as the secretary of the Lisbon Acad-
emy of Sciences, drew up the itinerary for three promising young scholars,
two young Brazilians and a Portuguese colleague, for a government-spon-
sored scientific tour of Europe, beginning in Paris. It was a remarkable ini-
tiative-if one thinks of Portugal in this period as being reactionary,
backward, and the bastion of obscurantism-for the Portuguese govern-
ment to send two young Brazilians to France at the very height of the
French Revolution. One of them, Dr. Manuel Ferreira da Camara, was re-
lated to a young natural scientist involved in a republican plot to throw off
Portuguese control in Brazil a year before in Minas Gerais, and another,
Dr. Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva, would succeed Correa da Serra as
secretary of the Lisbon Academy of Sciences and later become famous in
history as the ((patriarch" of Brazilian independence.
    But in 1795, in the face of the reaction against the French Revolution, the
situation again deteriorated in Portugal to the detriment of reformers such as
Correa da Serra. This time he fled to England via Gibraltar and remained in
London for a number ofyears. In 1796 he became a member of the Royal So-
ciety, as well as a member of the Linnaeus Society. By this time he was an in-
ternationally known botanist and was already well acquainted with the
leading scientists in England, most notably Sir Joseph Banks, president of the
Royal Society, with whom Correa da Serra conducted an important botanical
expedition to the Lincolnshire coast in England. Sir Joseph Banks had visited
Lisbon as a young man in the mid-1760s, as well as Rio de Janeiro in 1768
when he accompanied James Cook on his circumnavigation of the world. It
was at Banks's request that the Abbe helped smuggle a French natural scien-
tist, Peter Marie Auguste Broussonet, a Girodin who was escaping from the
terror of the French Revolution through Portugal. This temporarily seems to
have lost him the patronage of his old protector, the duke of Lafoes, who had
been appointed to the unlikely position of commander-in-chief of the Por-
tuguese army, though his interests lay more in the minutiae of soldiers' uni-
forms and the organization of their campsites than in the fighting battles.
    Lafoes liked to style himself the ((duke of Bragan<;a" while traveling out-
side Portugal, but William Beckford, the caustic English esthete then in
Lisbon, said that the ((duchess of Bragan<;a" would have been a more appro-
priate title. Beckford wrote in his diary:

    He is like an old lady of the bed chamber, as fiddle faddle and co-
    quettish and gossiping. He has got on rouge and patches, and
174 • NakedTropics

    though he is seventy years old, contrived to turn on his heel and to
    glide away with youthful agility. After lisping French with a most re-
    fined accent and complaining of the wind and the roads and the
    state of the architecture, he departed to mark the site for the en-
    campment of the cavalry.!