

with his distinguished reputation and achievements as a natural scientist,
the sort of natural philosopher Jefferson aspired to be. And over the ques-
tion of slavery it was the patriarch of American independence, Thomas Jef-
ferson, who equivocated, not the patriarch of Brazil's independence, Jose
Bonifacio. 25
    The ideologues of"free trade" in Brazil also took an essentially racist view.
Jose da Silva Lisboa, the Brazilian political economist who had urged the
opening of the Brazilian ports to the prince regent in 1808, argued in 1818
that the progress of Sao Paulo was due "to extraordinary preponderance
 [there] of the white race." Rio Grande do SuI, the granary of Brazil as he
called it, likewise had been colonized by "the Portuguese race, and not the
Ethiopian population." Taking the example of Madeira, he asserted that "ex-
perience had shown that once the supply of Africans has been cut off, the
race does not decrease and decline but becomes better and whiter ..." He
went on to ask: "Was the best area in America to be populated by the off-
spring ofAfrica or of Europe?" To avoid "the horrid spectacle of the catastro-
phe that reduced the Queen of the Antilles [Haiti, that is] to a Madagascar:'
Brazil should be prevented from becoming a "Negroland:' He wished to see
the cancer of slavery eliminated from the Rio de la Plata to the Amazon. 26
    The question of slavery thus raised fundamental questions about the
most desirable course for Brazilian development, questions as to the type
of society, state, legal system, and government Brazil as an independent
state would adopt. But what to do about slavery divided "enlightened"
men, and it consolidated the determination of those major commercial
and landed interests whose welfare depended on slavery to make sure that
the new structures of state power, as well as the new constitutional monar-
chy, remained firmly wedded to their interests.
    In sum, Brazilian intellectuals, traders, and patriots might espouse "lib-
eralism," but their zeal was strictly limited to a desire for access to markets,
protection of property, and guarantees that debts would be paid. And in
this centralism, monarchy and continuity were paramount. Brazil's "patri-
ots" were realists and they could move no further than their base of social
support. Those who did so, such as Jose Bonifacio, were soon jettisoned.

25William Howard Adams, Thomas Jefferson: The Paris Years (New Haven and Lon-
don: Yale University Press: 1997), 207-250; also John Chester Miller, The Wolf by
the Ears: Thomas Jefferson and Slavery (Charlottesville and London: University
Press of Virginia, 1991).
26JOSe da Silva Lisboa, Memoria dos beneficios politicos do governo de El-Rei Nosso
Senhor D. Joao VI (Rio de Janeiro: Na Impressao Regia, 1818), 2d. ed. (Rio de
Janeiro: Impressa nas Oficinas do Arquivo Nacional, 1940) 160-164. Also see Jose
da Silva Lisboa, Escritos economicos escolhidos (1804-1820) in Colecfao de obras
classicas do pensamento economico portugues (V in 2 vols.) (Lisbon: Banco de Por-
tugal, 1993).
166 • NakedTropics