

21JOSe Honorio Rodrigues) ed., Revolufao de 1817; Documentos Hist6ricos (9 vols.)
(Rio de Janeiro: Biblioteca Nacional) 1953-1955); Evaldo Cabral de Mello) Prei
Joaquim do Amor Divino Caneca (Colefao Formadores do Brasil) (Sao Paulo: Edi-
tora 34) 2001); Carlos Guilherme Mota) Nordeste (Sao Paulo: Editora Perspectiva)
1972); and Jose Honorio Rodrigues) Independencia, revolufaO e contrarevolufaO (5
vols.) (Rio de Janeiro: Livraria EAlves Editora) [1975-1976]).
22Leon Bourdon) Jose Correa de Serra: Ambassadeur du Royaume-unide Portugal et
Bresil a Washington 1816-1820 (Paris: Centro Cultural Portugues) Funda~ao
Calouste Gulbenkian) 1975).
                                        Why Was Brazil Different? • 163

    There are not ten persons in the whole Empire who consider the
    trade a crime, or who look at it in any other point of view than one
    of profit or loss, a mere mercantile speculation to be continued as
    long as it may be advantageous. 23

   Jose Bonifacio himself saw the Brazilian dilemma with great realism. He
told the British envoy Henry Chamberlain in April 1823:

    We are fully convinced of the impolicy of the slave trade ... but I
    must candidly state to you that the abolition cannot be immediate,
    and I will explain the two principal considerations by which we
    have been led to this determination. One is economical, the other
    political.
        The former is founded upon the absolute necessity for taking
    measures to secure an increase of white population previous to the
    abolition, that the ordinary cultivation of the country may go on,
    for otherwise upon the supply of Negroes ceasing, that cultivation
    would go backwards and be followed by great distress.... we shall
    lose no time in adopting measures for drawing European emigrants
    hither. As soon as these begin to produce this effect, the necessity
    for the African supply will gradually diminish, and I hope in a few
    years a stop will be put to it for ever....
       The latter consideration is founded upon political expediency as
    affecting the popularity, and perhaps even the stability, of the gov-
    ernment. The crisis and representations in the trade we might per-
    haps venture to encounter, but we cannot, without such a degree of
    risk as no man in their senses think of incurring, attempt at such a
    moment as the present to propose a measure that would indispose
    the whole of the population of the interior.... Almost the whole of
    our agriculture is performed by Negroes and slaves. The whites un-
    fortunately do very little work, and if the landed proprietors were to
    find their supply of laborers suddenly and wholly cut off, I leave you
    to judge the effect it would have upon these uninformed and unen-
    lightened class of people. Were the abolition to come upon them
    before they were prepared for it, the whole country would be con-
    vulsed from one end to the other, and there is no calculating the
    consequences to the Government or to the country itself.
       We know that as long as it is carried on and a state of slavery con-
    tinued in the country, that real sound industry cannot take root,