

28Domingos Antonio Raiol, 0 Brasil politico, dedicado ao Excelentissimo Senhor
Bernardo de Souza Franco, Ministro e Secretario dos Negocios da Fazenda, por
Domingos Antonio Raiol (Para: Typographia do Diario do Commercio, 1858).
168 • NakedTropics

would replace slavery, was not to be, at least as long as emperors ruled in Rio
de Janeiro, and as a consequence, the slave trade continued until midcen-
tury, slavery until the 1880s. Nor is it surprising that when slavery fell, the
monarchy fell with it; in part, at least, because with the emancipation of the
slaves the republican alternative to the monarchy had at long last also been
emancipated from the stigma of separatism and social upheava1. 29
   So I hope that by highlighting some of the multiple contexts within
which Brazil became an independent nation, I also may have gone some
way toward demonstrating why Brazil was different, and why it is high
time historians took a fresh look in a comparative framework at this fasci-
nating and complex transition.




29For a discussion of the interplay between centralism and regionalism, and be-
tween monarchy and republicanism from the perspective of Pernambuco, see
Evaldo Cabral de Mello, A ferida de Narciso. Ensaio de Hist6ria Regional (Sao Paulo:
Editora SENAC, 2001), especially 69-90.
This page intentionally left blank
P A IR OF T O U C A N S AND TH EIR NEST,
                                                           CHAPTER           9
                                           The Odd Couple
                                                Jefferson and the Abbe
                                 "The most learned man I have met in any country."
                                 -Thomas Jefferson on the Abbe Correa da Serra




The friendship between Thomas Jefferson and the Abbe Correa da Serra in-
volves an enigma, a mystery, and a remarkable historical coincidence. If you
visit Monticello, Jefferson's mountaintop mansion in Virginia, you will see
the grave of Jefferson, surmounted by the obelisk he designed. It is inscribed
with the epitaph he wrote for himself. Jefferson did not want to be remem-
bered for being president of the United States, or for being secretary of
state, or the u.S. ambassador in Paris on the eve of the French Revolution.
The three things he wished to see recorded on his obelisk are: first, that he
was the author of the Declaration of Independence; second, that he wrote
the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom; and, third, that he was the father
of the University of Virginia. These achievements of Jefferson's career of
which he was most proud help unravel the enigma, the mystery, and the co-
incidence that is involved in the relationship between these two men.



But who was the Abbe Correa da Serra? Jose Correa da Serra was born in
Portugal in 1750. His father was a physician who was forced to flee with his
family in the face of a pending action by the Inquisition. Young Correa da
Serra was six years old when the family moved to Naples where he later
studied with two very important figures of the Italian Enlightenment, the
Portuguese-born Luis Antonio Verney, who was the author of a widely