


                                    171
172 • NakedTropics

read treatise on educational reform, 0 verdadeiro metodo de estudar
(Naples, 1746) and the Abbe Antonio Genovesi, an Italian philosophe who
was interested in political economy and the reform of the church. Both
were disciples of the three towering figures Jefferson considered his own
intellectual progenitors-Locke, Newton, and Bacon~and whose por-
traits Jefferson displayed prominently at Monticello. Naples was a center of
the Southern European Enlightenment in this period, ruled by Charles of
Bourbon, the future Charles III of Spain, and the great reform minister
Bernard Tanucci.
   In the 1770s Correa da Serra moved to Rome to complete his education,
became a presbyter, and took holy orders. In Rome, he became acquainted
with the widely traveled Dom Joao Carlos de Bragan<ra, the second duke of
Laffies, grandson of King Pedro II of Portugal and his French mistress,
Madame Laverger. This relationship to the Portuguese royal family, legit-
imized by the king, placed the duke of Laffies too close to the legitimate
Bragan<ra line for comfort, which was the principal reason it made it pru-
dent for him to travel. But Laffies, who had known Correa da Serra's father
at the University of Coimbra, was a well-educated and scientifically
minded aristocrat and a member of the Royal Society of London.
   The period the young Correa da Serra spent in Rome was a critical one.
In 1773 the pope suppressed the Society of Jesus; a watershed event in the
eighteenth century for the European Catholic monarchies. The suppres-
sion of the Jesuits had been made possible by the aggressive campaign
against the Society of Jesus instigated in the first instance by the de facto
ruler of Portugal between 1750 and 1777, the Marques de Pombal. Luis
Antonio Verney, Correa da Serra's old mentor from Naples, became secre-
tary to the Portuguese Embassy at the Vatican, the nerve center of the Eu-
ropean-wide campaign against the Jesuits. The Abbe Correa da Serra
returned to Portugal in 1778, and under the duke of Laffies's patronage a
year later he became one of the founding members of the class of natural
sciences of the new Academy of Sciences of Lisbon, established by Queen
Maria I in 1779 and inaugurated in July 1780.
   Lisbon remained, at this time, one of Europe's greatest ports; enriched
by the flow of wealth from Brazil, Portugal's most important eighteenth-
century colony. In the immediate aftermath of the rule of the Marques de
Pombal, following the death of Dom Jose I in 1777, however, an intense
struggle between the reformers and traditionalists persisted in Portugal,
and the rise and fall of anti- and pro-Pombaline factions at court had im-
mediate impact on individuals like the Abbe Correa da Serra who were en-
lightenened reformers. Thus, in 1786 unfavorable conditions in Lisbon
again forced him to leave Portugal. But in 1790 Correa da Serra was back in
Lisbon and served as the secretary of the Academy of Sciences for six years.
                                                   The Odd Couple • 173