

    In 1801, however, the situation in Portugal changed again in favor of the
more liberal elements and Correa da Serra's close friend, Dom Rodrigo de
Sousa Coutinho, the godson of Pombal, became the foreign minister and
gave Correa da Serra a consular position in London intended to help him fi-
nancially since the Abbe Correa was always in chronic need of emoluments.
    While in London, Correa da Serra procured micrometers, theodolites,
achromatic telescopes, threshing machines, and "engines" for watering
gardens for the famous shops of James Ramsden. Thomas Jefferson, an-
other scientific experimenter, was buying his scientific instruments from
Ramsden in this same period. Many of the instruments Correa da Serra
bought make up part of the unique collection of eighteenth-century scien-
tific instruments owned by the University of Coimbra. Some of the instru-
ments Jefferson purchased in this same period are displayed today at
Monticello.
    Unfortunately, the Portuguese ambassador in London came from a
family of the aristocracy, the Ponte de Lima, that was most opposed to the
reform faction in Portugal, and he made Correa da Serra's life miserable,
despite the support of Dom Rodrigo. Finding his position in London in-
tolerable, Correa da Serra left for Paris where he lived from 1801 to 1811.
    In Paris, the Abbe Correa da Serra was very closely associated with the
Encyclopedists. Among his close friends and colleagues in Paris were An-
toine Laurent de Jussieu, professor of botany at the Museum of Natural
History; Baron Alexander von Humboldt; and Baron Cuvier (Georges
Leopole Chretien Frederic Dagobert), professor of natural history at the
College de France and titular professor at the Jardin des Plantes. Like
Thomas Jefferson before him, who while American ambassador had been
smitten by the beautiful Maria Cosway, the Abbe fell in love. The object of


lWilliam Beckford, The Journal of William Beckford in Portugal and Spain,
1787-1788, ed. Boyd Alexander (London: Hart-Davis, 1954), 172. The most com-
prehensive Portuguese account of the Abbe Correa da Serra's career remains Au-
gusto da Silva Carvalho, 0 Abade Correia da Serra (Lisbon: Academia das Ciencias
de Lisboa, 1948). For a brief introduction and catalogue of documents from Cor-
rea da Serra's archive see Michael Teague, ed., Abade Jose Correia da Serra, docu-
mentos do seu arquivo (1751-1795) (Lisbon: Funda<rao Luso-Americana para 0
Desenvolvimento, 1997).
                                                      The Odd Couple • 175

his amorous attention was a young French woman, Esther Delavigne, by
whom he had a son, Eduardo Jose, in 1803. 2
   But Correa da Serra again ran into trouble. During the second French in-
vasion of Portugal in 1811, Napoleon requested that Correa da Serra write a
justification of the French action. Correa da Serra refused, and unsur-
prisingly found himself once more on the road. This time he left Europe
altogether, taking passage on an American frigate, the famous USS Consti-
tution (which still exists to this day docked at the Boston harbor). He ar-
rived at Norfolk, Virginia, in the fatal year of 1812 when hostilities broke
out between the young North American republic and Great Britain, one
consequence of which was the humiliating capture by the British of the new
federal capital, Washington, and the burning of the presidential mansion.
   The Abbe Correa da Serra arrived in the United States well furnished
with letters of introduction to President James Madison and to former
President Thomas Jefferson, as well as to leading members of the American
Philosophical Society in Philadelphia. These letters were from some of the
leading figures of the European Enlightenment including Andre Thouin,
the conservator of the Jardin des Plantes in Paris, his friend Sir Joseph
Banks, the Marquis de Lafayette, Pierre Samuel du Pont, Alexander von
Humboldt, and Joel Barlow, American envoy in Paris.
   Correa da Serra's arrival in Washington, soon after the British had burnt
the fledgling federal capital, was inauspicious. During his first week his
coach turned over in a mud patch. He had little good to say about Wash-
ington thereafter. But in Philadelphia he found an extremely congenial
environment and immediately became a favorite of the American Philo-
sophical Society and its erudite members. Benjamin Franklin had presided
over the American Philosophical Society from 1769 until his death in 1790,
being eulogized by Correa da Serra before the Lisbon Academy of Sciences
in 1791. The society was "dedicated to the improvement of useful knowl-
edge more particularly what relates to this new world. It comprises the
whole circle of arts, sciences, and discoveries, especially in the natural
world." These were, of course, no less the objectives of Correa da Serra's