

dislike the Jewish community there that he left and went to Paris in order
to become a Christian again. There are extensive observations in his per-
sonal diary as to the merits and demerits of the two religions, none too
flattering to either. In this, Ribeiro Sanches was very much a child of the
Enlightenment, of course, but as a consequence he does not fit easily in
Portuguese historiography which sees him as a Jew, or Jewish historiogra-
phy which is uncomfortable with his religious ambiguity. The story of Cas-
tro Sarmento is not dissimilar; he left the Jewish community to marry an
Episcopalian. lo



                                     IV
What finally of the coincidence? It related to the second epitaph on Jeffer-
son's tomb, his pride in the Virginia statute for religious tolerance. One of
the more important Sephardic families in the United States was the Levy
family of Philadelphia and New York who, for the better part of a century,
owned Jefferson's Monticello estate. In 1834 Commodore Uriah Phillips
Levy USN bought Monticello, then in an advanced state of disrepair, and
in effect saved Monticello from disintegration and collapse. Jefferson had
died bankrupt in 1826. Monticello was at first bought by a private individ-
ual, but the house was vandalized. Commodore Levy, one of the more con-
troversial and flamboyant members of the United States Navy, was the first
Jew to hold a high rank in the service. Born in 1792, as a boy he fought in
the War of 1812 against the British and was later captured and imprisoned
for eight months in England. Despite six court martials, he rose to com-
mand the U.S. Mediterranean fleet. Levy was a reformer who argued for
the abolition of flogging in the U.S. Navy. He bequeathed Monticello to the
U.S. government in 1862, but during the Civil War the Confederacy seized
and sold the property. After the Civil War, years of litigation took place
until Uriah Levy's nephew retook possession in 1879. His family owned
Monticello until the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation purchased
the property in 1923.
    Looking back over the genealogical origins of the Levy family, one finds
listed the name of Dr. Antonio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches. Ribeiro Sanches's
uncle, a well-known doctor, had emigrated to Savannah, Georgia, in 1733,
leaving Portugal as a baptized Christian but fleeing the Inquisition. Once
in North America he remarried as a Jew and helped the then colony of
Georgia overcome a yellow fever epidemic. His son-in-law, David Mendez


lOOn the activities of Castro Sarmento in London see Edgar Samuel, The Jewish
Community in London (1656-1830) (London: The Jewish Museum, 1992), 10-11.
184 • NakedTropics

Machado, moved from Savannah to New York and became hazan [minis-
ter] of the Congregation Shearih Israel, the famous Spanish and Por-
tuguese synagogue which had been founded in 1654 by Portuguese Jews
fleeing from Recife after the fall of Dutch Brazil. His granddaughter, Re-
becca, married Michael Levy, whose son was Commodore Uriah Phillips
Levy, who bought and preserved Monticello. Rachel Phillips Levy, grand-
daughter of Ribeiro Sanches's uncle, is buried at Monticello and was thus
related by marriage to Ribeiro Sanches, the educational reformer and
mentor of the Abbe Correa da Serra, Thomas Jefferson's friend.
   So we have here a remarkable historical coincidence. Ribeiro Sanches,
one of the great scholars of the European Enlightenment, a Portuguese
"New Christian" whose ideas were used to reform the University of Coim-
bra, and one of the people who had promoted the notion of religious toler-
ation by the abolition of legal discrimination against people of Jewish
origin, was a mentor of Correa da Serra, who in turn was linked with Jef-
ferson at Monticello in discussions over the creation of the University of
Virginia. And in this circular historical way, this same remarkable Por-
tuguese "New Christian" was also linked to the very family that later saved
and preserved Jefferson's home for future generations.
   The Virginia statute for religious freedom is the second achievement
Thomas Jefferson wished to be remembered by and have inscribed on his
obelisk at Monticello. It is one of the great expressions of the Enlighten-
ment in America. The statute reads:
    No man shall be compelled to frequent or support any religious
    worship or ministry or shall otherwise suffer on account of his reli-
    gious opinions or beliefs, but all men shall be free to profess and by
    argument maintain their opinions in the matter of religion. 11
   Commodore Uriah Phillips Levy admired Jefferson precisely for what
he had done "to mold our republic in a form in which a man's religion does
not make him ineligible for political or governmental life:' It was for this
reason above all others that he wished to see Jefferson remembered, and his
hilltop mansion Monticello preserved for the American nation. 12
   I have called this connection between Correa da Serra and Levy a coin-
cidence. But there is one final question to ask: Why was the Abbe Correa da