

                                      II
 But how is it that a Catholic priest in the late eighteenth century should be-
come one of the closest friends of the sage of Monticello, a deist and Uni-
tarian who had little good to say about organized religion. This, of course,
is the enigma.
    So let me try to unravel this enigma to some degree. First, one has to re-
alize that there was an important strain in Portuguese intellectual life, gov-
ernment policy, and action in the eighteenth century that made it very
much a part of the fervor of change in Southern Europe exemplified by
Genovese and Verney. Three people stand out in this intellectual current:
Jacob de Castro Sarmento, Antonio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches, and, of course,
the great Luis Antonio Verney himself. These people were highly cos-
mopolitan; two of them were "New Christians"-"New Christians" in the
Portuguese context were the descendants of Jews who had been converted
forcibly or had claimed to be converted in the immediate aftermath of the
expulsions of the Jewish population from Spain in the late fifteenth cen-
tury. By the eighteenth century they were a community who existed in a
very conflictive world between their Judaic past, their Christian accep-
tances, and, in not a few cases, their Judaic future. They remained always
threatened by the Inquisition, and subjected in law to many disabilities be-
cause of their so-called impurity of blood.
    The "New Christians" were, therefore, a people who had a mixture of reli-
gious backgrounds, suffered persecution, and were often forced to leave their
own country if they had good family contacts or the luck to escape the Inqui-
sition's torture chambers and the fires of the auto-da-Fe. Yet they remained
throughout the centuries in Portugal important in two key areas-business
and medicine-and they were extremely internationally minded in their
thinking and family connections. Jacob de Castro Sarmento and Antonio
Nunes Ribeiro Sanches both became leading philosophes of the eighteenth
century. Yet, as with the Abbe Correa da Serra, you rarely see their names
mentioned when the Diderot encyclopedia is discussed, even though Ribeiro
Sanches was one of the contributors to the encyclopedia on medicine, par-
ticularly on issues of hygiene, and the Abbe Correa da Serra was commis-
sioned to write a report on the Lisbon earthquake and the reconstruction of
the city which arrived too late for inclusion.
    Ribeiro Sanches, like the Abbe Correa da Serra family later on, had been
forced by the Inquisition in the 1730s to leave Portugal. Fleeing to London,
during the 1740s he served as the personal physician of Jose Sebastiao Car-
valho e Melo, who later became the Marques de Pombal. Ribeiro Sanches
studied in Holland at Leiden University under one of the greatest medical
innovators and natural scientists of the eighteenth century, Hermann
178 • NakedTropics

Boerhaave. Castro Sarmento and Gerhard Van Swieten were also Boer-
haave students, as were several faculty members of the new College of
Medicine in Philadelphia. Van Swieten, a Roman Catholic Dutchman, was
to become reformer of the Austrian monarchy's educational and medical
systems. Van Swieten was the personal physician to the future Marques de
Pombal when he served as Portuguese envoy in Vienna and was also the
Empress Maria Teresa's personal physician.
   Ribeiro Sanches had left London for Vienna at Van Swieten's suggestion.
From Austria he traveled to Moscow where he was made responsible for
the health of the Russian armies fighting the Turks and the Tartars. He
wrote a series of important treatises at this time, one on venereal disease,
where he claimed that venereal disease did not come from America but was
of Asiatic origin. (Correa de Serra's French-born son, Eduardo Jose, also
became a doctor and wrote his thesis for the Faculty of Medicine in Paris
on venereal disease.) But Ribeiro Sanches's most important work was on
saunas and hygiene. He believed soldiers should bathe and he was im-
pressed by the Russian sauna and wanted to see the sauna introduced into
Western Europe. His book on the sauna or on the use of vapors to cleanse
the body was one of the best-sellers of the eighteenth century. In the late
1770s Ribeiro Sanches moved to Paris, and he collaborated with the
philosophes and many of his ideas entered into the great encyclopedia. So
we are not talking here about somebody who was marginal to the eigh-
teenth-century Enlightenment; Ribeiro Sanches was central to it and was
central to it as an exiled Portuguese «New Christian," with a fractured
background of persecution and of religion and cultural experience. 5
   What came out of this experience was an emphasis on educational re-
form and religious toleration, the desire to do away with forced categoriza-
tion of people. When Pombal, his former patient in London, took power in
Lisbon, Ribeiro Sanches was able to exercise considerable influence over
educational reform. In fact, both Castro Sarmento and Ribeiro Sanches
served as consultants to the Portuguese government during the late 1760s
through the 1770s and were involved in all the educational reforms that
took place in this period, particularly the founding of the College of No-
bles and the reform of the University of Coimbra.
   For the College of Nobles in Portugal, Ribeiro Sanches provided con-
crete position papers on how the curriculum should be developed, based
on his experience in Russia with the Russian Imperial Corps of Cadets. The
college was to have lectures on hygiene. It also had a physics laboratory.