

2Like Jefferson and his relationship with Sally Hemings, the Abbe apparently also
had secrets. Professor David Higgs came across a denunciation among the papers
of the Lisbon Inquisition (Cadernos do Nefando, no. 145, Arquivo Nacional Torre
do Tombo, Lisbon). These involved accusations of sodomy; according to the docu-
ments, the Abbe had four times made a "sin against nature" with Faustina, a
woman from the Prac;a das Flores. His most recent acts of sodomy, in 1792 and
1793, had been with "unknown persons in the darkness of night outdoors," and in
particular five or six times with a boy (mofo). See David Higgs, "Lisbon;' in Queer
Sites: Gay Urban Histories since 1600, ed. David Higgs (London and New York:
Routledge, 1999), 127.
176 • NakedTropics

Lisbon Academy of Sciences, whose activities focused equally on natural
history, with a strong interest in Brazil. Thomas Jefferson had been elected
one of the three vice presidents of the American Philosophical Society in
1791 and had been installed in Philadelphia as its president in 1797, on the
evening before his inauguration as vice president of the United States.
    The Abbe Correa da Serra's first visit with Jefferson was so mutually sat-
isfying to both men that he became a welcomed annual guest at Monticello
between 1813 and 1816. On the first floor at Monticello, across the hallway
from Jefferson's own suite, there are two bedrooms: one is the Madison
room and the other the Abbe Correa da Serra room. This room was set
aside for Correa da Serra and half a century later Jefferson's granddaughter
still called it the Abbe Correa room. This was where Abbe Correa da Serra
stayed when he visited Jefferson.
    Some of Jefferson's friends have left records of their reactions to the
Abbe at this time. One of the most interesting was from Francis Gilmore,
Correa's companion on an extensive expedition collecting botanical speci-
mens as well as social and natural historical information along the western
frontier. Gilmore traveled with the Abbe Correa da Serra back to Philadel-
phia from Monticello in 1813 and said of Correa,

    He is the most extraordinary man now living or who perhaps ever
    lived ... He has read, seen, understands, and remembers everything
    obtained in books, or to be learned from travel, observation, and
    the conversation of learned men. He is a member of every philo-
    sophical society in the world, and he knows every distinguished
    man living. 3

   Jefferson, himself had a very similar reaction to him, and his own de-
scription was equally flattering:

    Mr. Correa was a gentleman from Portugal of the first order of sci-
    ence, being without exception the most learned man I have met in
    any country. Modest, good humored, familiar, plain as a country
    farmer, he became the favorite of everyone with whom he becomes
    acquainted. He speaks English with ease. 4

3Prancis Gilmer to P. R. Gilmer, November 3, 1814, in Richard Beale Davis, The
Abbe Correa in America 1812-1820: The Contribution of the Diplomat and the Nat-
ural Philosopher to the Foundations of Our National Life, in Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society, New Series, vol. 45, part 2 (1955). Reprinted with
introduction by Gordon S. Wood and afterword by Leon Bourdon (Providence,
R.I.: Gavea Brown, 1993),43.
4Thomas Jefferson to John Milledge, September 22, 1815, cited in ibid., 46.
                                                    The Odd Couple • 177