

them was the foundation of the University ofVirginia, its curriculum, how
the faculty should be recruited, and how the botanical garden should be
organized. In 1820 Jefferson wrote:
    Mr. Correa's approbation of the plan of principles of our university
    flatters me more than that of all its other eulogists because no other
    could be put in a line with him in science and comprehensive scope
    ofmind. 9
    This passionate interest in educational reform clearly provides part of
an explanation of our enigma: the mutual interests of Correa da Serra and
Jefferson which focused on the establishment of the University of Virginia,
one of the three elements that Jefferson himself was most proud of in his
life's work, and the third of his achievements he instructed should be
carved on the obelisk over his tomb at Monticello.


                                      III
But what is the mystery? The mystery is why we do not know about this re-
markable story. Why is it that this very important friendship, and the mu-
tual interests that joined Correa da Serra and Jefferson in discussions
about subjects that were vital to Jefferson's sense of himself and what he
had achieved in life, are so little known. I think there are several possible
explanations; let me just give some of them. The first grows from our no-
tions of the Enlightenment, particularly in the North American and north-
west European context. We tend to think, and recent interpretations have
led us to believe, that the Enlightenment was an exclusively northwestern
European phenomenon, or if there was a Southern European influence in
eighteenth-century North America, it was derived from a much earlier pe-
riod. Yet curiously this misses the importance of contemporary influences,
contemporary to Jefferson that is, and which came directly from personal
engagement with men like the Abbe Correa da Serra. Thus, we know in the
historical literature much about the role of the Scottish Enlightenment, or
we tend to see the scientific revolution as a development confined to
Protestant Europe, at least in its scientific and experimental aspects; but we
lack any discussion or any awareness at all that the Enlightenment was a
much broader movement that was shaking up Catholic Europe as much as
it was Protestant Europe. I think that the first blockage therefore is the fog
of lingering prejudice about what was happening in Southern Europe in
general in the late eighteenth century.

9Thomas Jefferson to Correa da Serra, Monticello, October 24, [1820], in Davis,
The Abbe Correa in America, 181.
182 • NakedTropics

   But why is it Catholic historians have not dealt with this? I think there is
a very interesting reason here. The Abbe Correa da Serra was anticlerical
and he was anti-Jesuit; and he opposed the pretentions of the papal curia;
here was an elderly Portuguese Abbe who strongly advised Jefferson that it
was absolutely essential to preserve the separation of church and state in
Virginia and especially within his new state university. To understand this
position one has to go back and read what Antonio Genovesi and Antonio
Nunes Ribeiro Sanches were writing. Both were adamantly opposed to the
monarchical conception of the papacy, and they favored an episcopal as
opposed to papal domination of the Catholic Church. And they were fer-
vently opposed to the Jesuits. As we know the Jesuits, following their sup-
pression by the pope in 1773, were reestablished in the early nineteenth
century, and they regained a dominant role in Catholic education. This is
part of the explanation, I suspect, as to why we have very few Catholic his-
torians dealing with the Enlightenment fervor within the Catholic Church
in the eighteenth century with its very strong anti-Roman cast.
   A further reason lies in the course of u.S. history, especially the history
of the South following the Civil War. The state university was a southern
invention; the northern universities were still in the eighteenth century
and long dominated by religious denominations, exclusively in some cases,
and were, as the Abbe Correa da Serra told Jefferson, no more than "semi-
naries" in his view. Later of course it was these northern private universi-
ties which became most prestigious in the American system of higher
education, not the state universities. The University of Virginia itself did
not, in the nineteenth century, fulfill the high objectives Jefferson set for it,
though it did succeed in doing so in many ways in the twentieth century.
So the originality of Jefferson's educational reform was not much recog-
nized or appreciated until comparatively recently since most post-Civil
War northern historians could not conceive of an advanced educational
establishment embedded with Enlightenment thinking existing in the
South.
    The important role of the "New Christians" has also not been dealt with
adequately by Jewish historians, and here again the story is complicated.
Ribeiro Sanches, for example, went through a very complicated personal
engagement with his own religious persona. He was baptized and brought
up a Christian. It was only when he went to Lisbon at age thirteen or four-
teen that he was made aware that he came from a "New Christian" family;
and it was only then very slowly that he learned of what that meant in
terms of Jewish heritage. Being a brilliant young person, he then read
everything about Judaism that he could get his hands on, and he decided,
in fact, that he wanted to be a Jew. When in London, he was circumcised
and joined the Jewish community; but in only three years he grew to so
                                                  The Odd Couple • 183