

6Por more details on educational reforms in eighteenth-century Portugal see Ken-
neth Maxwell, Pombal, Paradox of the Enlightenment (Cambridge and New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1995), 13-15,92-109.
180 • NakedTropics

this be changed by the legislation of the state? He was doubtful as to the re-
sults. Nevertheless the attempt was made to remove the legal impediments;
the invidious distinction between "new" and "old" Christians was formally
abolished by Pombal in the 1770s. 7
    It should be noted that throughout this whole reform processes Brazil-
ians played a very important role. Of the Brazilians who came to the re-
formed University of Coimbra 65 percent worked in the new natural
sciences faculties, taking degrees and doctorates for the first time in nat-
ural sciences, and many of them went on to be very important figures in
the independence movement in Brazil-men such as Jose Bonifacio de An-
drada e Silva, one of the students whose scientific education in Europe was
sponsored by the Abbe Correa da Serra in 1790. Francisco de Lemos, a
Brazilian, was the reforming rector of the university placed in this position
by Pombal.
    The role of Brazilians in these developments is interesting because re-
form in imperial relationships seemed important to all these thinkers and
they tended-Ribeiro Sanches, Correa da Serra, and his great sponsor in
Portugal, Dom Rodrigo da Sousa Coutinho-to argue that Brazil would
eventually be the center of the Portuguese Empire. So it is no mere coinci-
dence that in 1816, when in Rio de Janeiro the United Kingdom of Portu-
gal, Brazil, and the Algarves was proclaimed, the Abbe Correa da Serra, by
then in Philadelphia, should be chosen to be the first ambassador to the
United States to represent the new South American-based monarchy.
    Out of this background we can begin, I think, to unravel our enigma
and begin to see some of the intellectual experiences that Jefferson would
find so interesting in Correa da Serra. Jefferson regarded broadly diffused
educational opportunity as the most important function of the state, and
while in Paris he wrote to George Wythe, under whom he had studied law
at the College of William and Mary in Virginia:
    I think by far the most important bill in our whole code, is that for
    the diffusion of knowledge among the people. No other sure founda-
    tion can be devised for the preservation of freedom and happiness. 8
   As we see from Jefferson's obelisk at Monticello and the correspondence
between Jefferson and Correa da Serra, one major interest that joined

7See Antonio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches, June 23, 1773, in "Journal," Bibliotheque de
la Faculte de Medecine, Paris, ms. 2015, folio 117-118. Also see Maria Helena Car-
valho dos Santos, "Ribeiro Sanches e a questao dos judeus" in RHDI/MdeP I,
117-142.
8Thomas Jefferson to George Wythe, Paris, August 13, 1786, in Andrew A. Lip-
scomb and Albert E. Bergh, eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, (20 vols.)
(Washington, D.C.: Thomas Jefferson Memorial Association, 1903-1904), V, 396.
                                                    The Odd Couple • 181