

slave-worked plantation in Newport, Rhode Island. Yale's first endowed li-
brary fund was named after Reverend Jared Eliot of Killingworth, a re-
forming agriculturist for whom slave labor was key.
    Moreover, when Yale did have a choice between graduates who held
high places within the political establishment of the country and who
took opposing views over slavery, it chose to honor a slave owner and
apologist of slavery. James Hillhouse, for instance, who served •for fifty
years as Yale's treasurer, was an outspoken antislavery leader as a U.S. sen-
ator. Hillhouse, as others in the North, hoped that slavery in the South
would wither away as it had in Connecticut. It did not, of course, spurred
in large part by the expansion of cotton plantations based on the inven-
tion of the cotton gin by another Yale graduate, Eli Whitney (Class of
1792). But Yale nowhere honors the abolitionist Hillhouse as it does John
C. Calhoun, Yale Class of 1804, a South Carolinian who benefited greatly
from the expansion of the world cotton market. Elected to Congress in
1811, Calhoun became secretary of war from 1817 to 1825; was elected
vice president of the United States serving under two presidents until
1832; became a senator and then secretary of state; and later was elected a
senator again. Calhoun was one of the most vociferous and successful de-
fenders of American slavery over his long and turbulent political career.
In the Senate Calhoun engineered passage of the gag rule that precluded
discussion of slavery and arranged the annexation of Texas as a slave state.
His defense of slavery led him to reject democracy itself. In a famous
speech in the U.S. Senate chamber in 1837, Calhoun argued ((concession
or compromise" over slavery «to be fatal." And he continued: « .•.. let me
not be understood as admitting, even by implication, that the exjsting re-
lations between the two races in the slaveholding states is an evil--far oth-
erwise; I hold it to be good." In 1930 Yale named one of its residential
colleges after him.
    As late as 1961 Yale also chose to honor another alumnus with a residen-
tial college: Samuel F. B. Morse, the inventor of the telegraph, b'ut a man
who was the North's most virulent defender of slavery. Slavery, he wrote,
was divinely ordained: «the greater declared object of the Savior's mission
to earth." Morse also regarded the Declaration of Independence as a «mix-
ture of truths, qualified truths and fallacious maxims." The special ter-
centennial edition of the Yale alumni magazine lists Morse as among the
top graduates from its entire 300-year history. The invention of the tele-
graph was no mean feat, and he doubtlessly deserves on this count to be
there; but as Dugdale, Fueser, and Castro Alves point out, the alumni mag-
azine nowhere mentions Morse's proslavery views, or his leadership of
proslavery societies during the Civil War, much less Morse's attack on Pres-
                         A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon • 191