

SSee David Williamse, "Antonio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches, eleve de Boerhaave et son
importance pour la Russie:' Janus: Revue internationale de l'histoire des sciences de
la medecine, de la pharmacie et de la technique, Supplements, VI (Leiden, 1966).
                                                     The Odd Couple • 179

Ribeiro Sanches in his Cartas sobre a educafiio da mocidade (Paris, 1759)
had recommended the value of physics in the educational curriculum as
well as the use of scientific apparatus so that the teachers could demon-
strate "by means of the use of these instruments that results were caused
not by miracles but through the effects of nature ... [and] ... the pupils
would see the proofs of what they were taught."
    The professor of experimental physics at the College of Nobles, Gio-
vanni Antonio dalla Bella, had arrived in 1766 from Italy and was responsi-
ble for the purchase of instruments, in part from England and in part by
commissioning instruments constructed in Portugal. The young prince
Dom Jose, heir apparent, had his own physics laboratory at the Royal
Palace of Ajuda in Lisbon. William Beckford, who met the prince a year be-
fore he tragically succumbed to smallpox, observed that the very first thing
the prince had spoken of was his physics laboratory. The writings of Cor-
rea da Serra's mentor, Antonio Genovesi, were cited in the statutes of the
college. The college included among its first pupils the sons of recently en-
nobled merchants, some of them said to be "New Christians."
    Later on in 1772, when the reform of the University of Coimbra took
place, the principal elements of that reform included the setting up of a
curriculum in natural sciences, anatomy, and hygiene and the formation of
chemistry and physics laboratories and an observatory. The reform aimed
to modernize the faculties of theology and canon law, to incorporate the
study of Portuguese sources into the curriculum of the faculty of law, to
thoroughly update the faculty of medicine by the return of the study of
anatomy through the dissection of corpses (previously prohibited in Por-
tugal for religious reasons), the study of hygiene "because it is easier to
conserve health than to recuperate it once lost," as well as to adopt William
Harvey's discoveries concerning the circulation of blood, Bernard Sieg-
fried Albinus's theories in anatomy, Hermann Boerhaave's in pathology,
and Gerhard Van Swieten's in pharmacology.6
   Pombal also attempted to do away with the invidious distinctions be-
tween "old" and "new" Christian and to bring, in effect, a more tolerant at-
titude within the country. Ribeiro Sanches, then in Paris, was consulted by
Pombal on this legislation. Ribeiro Sanches kept a day-by-day diary which
contains his personal reactions to the reforms under way in Portugal. He
was privately skeptical that legislation could counteract the prejudices of
centuries. Are the prejudices, he wrote, that people hold in their hearts
learned from their priests as children, learned in their confessionals; can