

who were not only slaveholders, but who beyond that were also ardent ad-
vocates of slavery. And how could Yale have chosen to honor them not dur-
ing the time of slavery but as late as the 1960s at the height of the struggle
for civil rights in the United States? Within a few days of the report's re-
lease, Dugdale, Fueser, and Castro Alves had received a full article, an edi-
torial comment, and an approving op-ed piece in the New York Times, an
extended note on the AP wires and CNN, and a chiding editorial in the
"Review and Outlook" section of the weekend Wall Street Journal which
complained they had "presented Yale with something that is less a scholarly
inquiry than a legal brief."
   The brochure Yale University put out for its tercentenary year summa-
rized Yale's official view on its relationship to slavery. Yale graduates, it
says, "have a long history of activism in the face of slavery and a modern
history of scholarship about it. Today the Gilder Lehrman Center for the
Study of Slavery, Resistance and Abolition, located at Yale, is the first of its
kind in the world." True as far as it goes, but as Dugdale, Fueser, and Cas-
tro Alves point out, Yale also helped in 1831 to stop the effort to expand
higher education to African Americans in New Haven, and in the twenti-
eth century chose to name most of its colleges after slave owners and
proslavery leaders.
   The three authors are active members ofYale's GESO, the Graduate Em-
ployees and Students Organization (Dugdale was the recent chair of the
group), which is an affiliate of the federation of hospital and university
employees union (HERE local 34). The GESO has been locked in a bitter
dispute with Yale over recognition of the right of graduate student instruc-
tors to unionize. Their report is published under the auspices of the New
Haven Amistad Committee, successor to the original Amistad Committee
based in New Haven. In February 1839, Portuguese slave traders had taken
a large group of Africans from Sierra Leone to Havana, violating the
treaties then in effect against the slave trade. Fifty-three Africans had been
purchased and put aboard the Cuban schooner Amistad for shipment. On
July 1, 1839, they seized the ship, killed the captain, and attempted to sail
back to Africa, arriving instead off Long Island where the schooner was
seized by a U.S. warship. The Africans were imprisoned in New Haven and
charged with murder. The cause was taken up by abolitionists, and the case
eventually went to the U.S. Supreme Court. In 1841 former President John
Quincy Adams argued the defendants' case, and the Court ruled in the
Africans' favor. Thirty-five eventually returned to Africa. The Amistad
Committee, formed in 1839 and supported by Yale students and faculty,
led the campaign to free the Amistad captives. The story was the subject of
a recent Steven Spielberg movie.
                         A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon • 189

    The challenge laid down to Yale is not only one to historical memory.
The authors of "Yale, Slavery and Abolition," in addition to choosing their
timing with care, have been equally selective in the institutions with which
they wish to associate their findings. In the process they have picked at
scabs over some of the most sensitive evasions that lie at the core of Amer-
ica's-not just Yale University's-benign historical view of itself.
    There is also something heroic about what these three postgraduate stu-
dents have done at such a critical moment in their careers. Because of the
incestuous structure of u.s. graduate education, they are indentured now
more than at any time to the good or ill will of their principal faculty advis-
ers. They are thereby vulnerable to the multiple and subtle retribution that
can be exacted in the future by the very cosseted professors whose
hypocrisy they have exposed by their research and whose comfortable
privileges their union challenges. Like all good scholars they have suc-
ceeded in turning over a long buried rock; yet even they underestimate all
the slimy creatures that may sally forth from sundry dark places when ex-
posed to the sunlight.
   What is it precisely that Dugdale, Fueser, and Castro Alves uncovered?
First they undermine conventional wisdom by showing that slavery was
not only a southern phenomenon. In fact, slavery underpinned many
facets of the economy in the North and in colonial New England, "from
household to the field, from the legal system to religious education." Prom-
inent New Englanders owned slaves, and many financial transactions at
some point depended on slavery. Emancipation in the North took place
gradually. The Connecticut emancipation law passed in 1784 envisioned a
gradual phase-out of slavery which would allow it to slowly disappear. No
slaves were immediately freed in 1784. The law provided for children born
to slaves to remain bonded while children, but to attain freedom on reach-
ing twenty-one years of age (at first the age was set at twenty-five). In 1774
there were 6,562 slaves in Connecticut, but by 1790 the number had fallen
to 2,759 and to 97 by 1820. There were none by 1850. Yet even as slavery
withered away in New England, many at Yale remained apologists for the
institution of slavery. Yale in fact graduated twice as many proslavery
clergy as its peer institutions.
   Second, they reveal that some of the critical financial endowments
which helped establish Yale University as a preeminent national institution
of higher education were slavery-based. Yale's first endowed professorship,
the Livingstonian Professorship of Divinity, was named for its benefactor,
Colonel Philip Livingston of New York, one of the most prominent slave
traders of the mid-eighteenth century. The first scholarship fund was
named after Bishop George Berkeley and funded by the income from his
190 • NakedTropics