

11See Merrill D. Peterson and Robert C. Vaughan, The Virginia Statute for Religious
Freedom: Its Evolution and Consequences in American History (Cambridge and New:
York: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
12See Melvin I. Urofsky, The Levy Family and Monticello, 1834-1923: Saving
Thomas Jefferson's House ([Charlottesville, Virg.]: Thomas Jefferson Foundation,
2001), and Marc Leepson, Saving Monticello: The Levy Family's Epic Quest to Rescue
the House that Jefferson Built (New York and London: Free Press, 2001).
                                                    The Odd Couple • 185

Serra so hated by the old aristocracy, the so-called Puritans of the old no-
bility in Portugal who defined their ((puritanism" as the absence of Jewish,
Moorish, or heretic blood? There is an odd note in Correa da Serra's biog-
raphy which needs to be mentioned here; Correa da Serra took his
mother's, not his father's, name. Process number 1911 of the Inquisition,
held in the Torre do Tombo in the Lisbon National Archives, is an investi-
gation to determine if Correa da Serra's family were ((New Christians" and
the probable cause of this father's flight to Naples. It is, therefore, not im-
possible that the old Abbe was more part of this complex clandestine his-
tory than we yet know. But this is a mystery awaiting to be unraveled.
IN THE FIELDS.
                                                        CHAPTER            10
                                     A Story of Slavery,
                                     Sex, and Mammon
                                                 "In all pride ofsupposed equality."
                                          -Middletown Gazette, Connecticut, 1831




Timing is everything in the news business, and the timing of three post-
graduate students at Yale University was perfect. Yale, the third-oldest U.s.
university, celebrated its tercentenary in the year 2001. On May 21 the cur-
rent occupant of the White House, George W. Bush, Yale Class of 1968, was
invited back to New Haven, Connecticut, for the commencement cere-
monies, where he extolled the merits of his fellow "c" students. And from
August 31 until September 7,2001, the predictably contentious United Na-
tions World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenopho-
bia, and Related Intolerance was to take place in South Africa.


                                     II
Against this background in mid-August 2001, Anthony Dugdale, J. J.
Fueser, and Jose Celso de Castro Alves released a remarkable polemic titled
"Yale, Slavery and Abolition." They IIalso launched a website. l Here their
work was made accessible to a wider audience. In lean prose and with solid
documentation they draw attention to some very inconvenient facts about
their university: How can the buildings of Yale's residential colleges, the
core of undergraduate life at the university, carry the names of Yale alumni

Ihttp://www.yaleslavery.org



                                    187
188 • NakedTropics