

   By 1814 Henry Obookiah was speaking publicly, translating the Bible,
and beginning a grammar dictionary on the Hawaiian language. Henry
Obookiah (or Opukaha'ia as he is now known in Hawaii) became famous
after his early death in 1818 from typhus fever at the age of twenty-six,
when Edwin Dwight published a small book titled Memoir of Henry
Obookiah, A Native of the Sandwich Islands, Who Died at Cornwall, Con-
necticut. This memoir comprising Obookiah's account of his life, feelings,
and philosophies inspired fourteen American missionaries to volunteer to
evangelize the Hawaiian Islands (or Sandwich Islands as they were then
known). Obookiah was buried at Cornwall where his tombstone but not
his body remains. He was, the inscription reads, "a worthy member [of the
Mission School] he was once an Idolater, and was designed for a Pagan
Priest; but by the grace of God and by the prayers of pious friends, he be-
came a Christian." In 1993 a group of his descendants claimed the body
which was returned to the big island of Hawaii and reinterred.
   Beginning with twelve pupils, the number of students at the Cornwall
Mission School tripled over the nine and a half years of its existence. Stu-
dents were of several races, including many Native Americans, so that the
school, the Reverend Starr said, was sometimes spoken of as "the Indian
School." But Starr also reports that "two marriages of Indians who had
been at the school, with white girls of the village, had produced great ex-
citement and are popularly said to be the cause of the breaking up of the
school ... it also aroused much unpleasant gossip about the people of
Cornwall." In fact, Starr tells us in a footnote, the editor of the Litchfield
Eagle had declared that the Cornwall girls were left alone at unreasonable
hours with the mission boys and were seen walking arm in arm with them.
   The real history is more complicated and tragic. Among the "Indian"
students at the Cornwall Mission School were two Cherokees: John Ridge
and "Buck" Oowatie (later known as Elias Boudinot). John was the son of
Major Ridge and Buck's father was Ridge's half-brother. Major Ridge led a
body of Cherokee Indians in alliance with the United States under the
command of General Andrew Jackson fighting against other Native Amer-
icans during the Creek War and first Seminole War, where he earned his
military title. Ridge's Cherokee name was "kah-nung-da-tle-ghe," the man
who walks on the mountaintop. He was a leader of the Cherokee nation
settled at Pine Log, in present-day Bartow County, Georgia, under the or-
ders of President George Washington. Here the Cherokees evolved an ex-
periment in acculturation merging U.S. and Cherokee traditions and
greatly prospering as settled farmers. John, Major Ridge's son, was edu-
cated by Moravian missionaries before being sent by the major to the
Cornwall Mission School as a paying pupil. Major Ridge was a man of sub-
stantial property; his estates contained 240 acres under cultivation, 1,142
                           A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon • 195