

    The location of a college of blacks here would be totally ruinous to
    the city.... whose certain effect will be to lower the town's public
    morals-to drive from our city its female schools-its throngs of
    summer visitors-and stop the vital stream to the city, the influx of
    young men to Yale College.

  The Connecticut Middletown Gazette agreed:

    [T]he support ofYale College and the numerous female seminaries,
    depends in no inconsiderable degree, on the character of the inhab-
    itants. Hitherto, New Haven has been distinguished.... But now, if
    the young ladies are to be elbowed at every corner by black colle-
    gians, and the students of Yale are to be met by them in all pride of
    supposed equality, the interest of the city, identified as it is with the
    prosperity of the institutions, will suffer material injury.

   Dugdale, Fueser, and Castro Alves cite these reports, but they do not fol-
low them up, which is a pity because therein lies a fascinating and revealing
adjunct to their story. The New Haven paper on the day of the town meet-
ing had made a recommendation:

    If it is necessary to have an African college in Connecticut, may the
    projectors of it, on mature consideration, conclude to locate it in
    the town of Cornwall. ... Cornwall possesses many advantages for
    such an institution, over other places; and it is not among the least
    of them, that the ladies of that town readily give themselves, better
    for worse, to the colored gentlemen.
                         A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon • 193

                                     II
I was struck by the reference to Cornwall, Connecticut. It is a remote place,
and must have been even more so during the early nineteenth century. The
township of Cornwall spreads over the higher elevations of the Litchfield
hills and the steep valley where the Housatonic River cuts sharply through
northwestern Connecticut. It is an upland landscape consisting of three
parallel valleys with wooded ridges between them. The ridges, not the val-
leys, were settled first. It is a rough broken country with clear streams and
little peaks. Today its small resident population is augmented by weekend
residents from New York City, including several celebrities-most recently
Whoopi Goldberg, the NBC news anchor Tom Brokaw, and the tennis
great Ivan Lendl among others. I have in my library a History ofCornwall, a
leather-bound volume published for private subscribers in 1926 by the
Reverend Edward Comfort Starr, who had for twenty-four years served as
pastor of the Cornwall congregational church and was a graduate of Yale
College and its theological seminary. I remembered reading something of
the story of the Cornwall missionary school and its misadventures, the
evident origin of the aspersions about the proclivities of the girls of Corn-
wall, to which the New Haven press and Yale worthies referred disparag-
ingly in 1831.
    The Reverend Starr's account provides the bare bones of the history of
the Foreign Mission School which opened in Cornwall in 1817 and closed
its doors in 1827. The school's origins were said to go back to 1810 when
Edwin Dwight, son of Yale's President Timothy Dwight, found a "dark
skinned youth on the college steps at Yale crying because he had no means
of getting an education." Edwin took the young man, a Hawaiian who New
England sailors had brought to America and called Henry Obookiah, to his
father. Partly inspired by Henry Obookiah, the clergy of Connecticut
turned to the American Board of Commissioners of Foreign Missions to
establish a school to train Obookiah and other Hawaiians as missionaries
for the Pacific Islands. Cornwall was chosen because it was "apart from the
temptations and distractions of the larger towns."
    Obookiah had a remarkable story. Born in 1792 in Ka'u at Ninole near
Punalu'u on the big island, he had survived the deaths of his parents, vic-
tims of warfare on the island. He was then schooled in the rituals of priest-
hood by his uncle at Hiki'au Heiau, where Captain Cook had been killed
two decades earlier in 1779. Taken aboard a New England ship in
Kealakakukua Bay, he and a young friend, Hopo'o, voyaged to the North
Pacific, later on to Macao and around the Cape of Good Hope to New
York. The two young Hawaiian boys then moved to New Haven to live with
the captain of the vessel that had taken them from Hawaii, where they met
Edwin Dwight.
194 • NakedTropics