

1Mark Collins, ed., The Last Rain Forests: A World Conservation Atlas (New York
and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990).
2Louise H. Emmons, Neotropical Rainforest Mammals: A Field Guide (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1990).
3Suzanna Hecht and Alexander Cockburn, The Fate of the Forest: Developers, De-
stroyers, and Defenders ofthe Amazon (London and New York: Verso, 1989).
                                         The Tragedy of the Amazon • 201

   Students discovered that whereas forests in the temperate zone draw
nutrients up from the soil, in tropical forests the nutrients derive from an
exchange within the living forest and are held in the tissues of living organ-
isms. The leathery leaves characteristic of the Amazon plant life conserve
nutrients as well as high levels of secondary chemicals, which make tropi-
cal leaves tough or poisonous to eat, deterring predators and also making
them a rich source of drugs. Latex, a substance that acts as a defensive
membrane for the Brazilian rubber tree, Hevea brasiliensis, is just such an
adaptation. The wild germ plasm of the forest includes cacao, palm hearts,
guarana, Brazil nuts, rubber, chicle, babassu oil, fish, manioc, cashews, and
coca. As Hecht and Cockburn observe, the global annual value ofAmazon-
ian natural products may exceed one hundred billion dollars a year. 4



                                         II
The assault on the tropical forests has a long history, and so does the his-
tory of human habitation in the forest. The year 2000 marked the fifth cen-
tury since the landfall on the Brazilian coast by the India-bound fleet of the
Portuguese explorer Pedro Alvares Cabral. It was a land "with great groves
of trees," according to the fleet's notary, Pero Vaz de Caminha, who de-
scribed it in a letter to the king of Portugal on May 1, 1500. 5 Of the lush At-
lantic coastal forest that so impressed the Europeans in 1500-a narrow
belt of rain forest some one hundred miles deep, which then ran along vir-
tually the whole coast of Brazil-no more than 4 percent remains today.
From among its flora, ironically, Brazil took its name from the pau-brasil
tree, which yielded a purple dye much in demand among sixteenth-cen-
tury European textile manufacturers, and which can scarcely be found in
the wild today. The Portuguese had called their new territory in South
America the "Land of the True Cross;' but this was soon forgotten and the
more prosaic name stuck-resonant as it was of the forest and of business.

4These figures were disputed by Roger Stone in a review of the Hecht and Cock-
burn book, "The Politics of Deforestation," Issues in Science and Technology (spring
1990): 77-78. He says, "The total value of Brazilian exports, including manufac-
tured goods, amounted to less than $34 billion in 1988." Hecht and Cockburn's fig-
ure, however, included coca, the main product exported (albeit clandestinely)
from the western Amazon basin. See exchange in "Pate of the Amazon," New York
Review of Books, June 13, 1991, which includes comments by Professor Jose
Goldemberg, then Brazilian secretary of science and technology.
sFull text in W. B. Greenlee, ed., The Voyage of Pedro Alvares Cabral to Brazil and
India from Contemporary Narratives, Hakluyt Series, No. 81 (1838),3-33. Cam-
inha's letter is reproduced in facsimile in the New York Public Library exhibition
catalog, Brazil-Portugal: The Age ofAtlantic Discovery (Milan and Lisbon: Editora
Bertrand and Franco Maria Ricci, 1990).
202 • NakedTropics