

required huge quantities of firewood to heat the cauldrons that processed
sugar, and the coastal forests were increasingly depleted. Forced into slave
labor, and lacking immunity to European and African diseases, the Indian
population died by the tens of thousands. Enslaved Africans were im-
ported to replace them, permanently transforming the ethnic composition
of the Portuguese coastal enclaves on the edge of the continent. 9
   As the Indian populations of the coastlines died out, Portuguese mis-
sionaries who had arrived to proselytize the native population moved in-
land to gain new converts. The Franciscans established Belem (Bethlehem)
at the mouth of the Amazon River in 1616, and after 1649, Jesuits,
Carmelites, and Mercedarians divided up the main tributaries of the river
between them. Throughout the colonial period royal governors, mer-
chants, and Portuguese colonists regularly sent upriver heavily armed
flotillas of canoes in search of slaves.
   The religious orders, especially the Jesuits, sought to protect the Indian
population from enslavement by organizing new communities of would-
be peasant farmers. Although these concentrations initially led to an even
more rapid spread of disease, the Jesuits in time were able to establish a
network of protected villages throughout the lower Amazon to comple-
ment the great missions they organized on the plains along the Uruguay
and Paraguay Rivers to the south. The struggle between the Jesuits and
others who sought to protect the Indians and the colonists who argued
that they should be integrated with the European communities, albeit as
lowly workers, is a long one in Amazonian history, and the arguments on
both sides were often well intentioned. The writings in defense of the Indi-
ans by the Jesuit polymath Antonio Vieira are among the most eloquent
works in the Portuguese language. Io The Marques de Pombal, King Jose's
chief minister between 1750 and 1777, who expelled the Jesuits from
Brazil, justified his actions in the language of the Enlightenment. (He
ended African slavery in Portugal itself.)
   As Hemming shows, the missions were eventually suppressed by jealous
officials of the monarchy abetted by the colonists' avarice. In the late seven-
teenth century, gold was discovered and prospectors flooded into the inte-
rior. The colonial government, suspicious of the loyalty of the Jesuit
missions that were strategically placed along the river systems, sent teams

9The African component in the formation of Brazilian society of course parallels
the story of the destruction of the Indians and is essential to any understanding of
Brazil. There is an excellent book by Joseph C. Miller, Way ofDeath: Merchant Cap-
italism and the Angolan Slave Trade, 1730-1830 (Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press, 1988), which provides a good introduction to this story.
lOPor Vieira, one of the most remarkable figures of the seventeenth century, see
Thomas M. Cohen, The Fire of Tongues: Antonio Vieira and the Missionary Church
in Brazil and Portugal (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998).
204 • NakedTropics