


                                      III
How sadly revealing it is that in opposing the "negro college" in 1831 the
good citizens of New Haven, with the support of the worthy faculty ofYale,
should have transformed the story of what was by all accounts two happy
marriages into gossip about "the ladies of town [Cornwall, who] readily
give themselves, better for worse, to the colored gentlemen." And how
banal is the reduction of the tragedy that befell the brightest students of
the Cornwall Mission School to a racist evocation of the danger of blacks
on the street in New Haven "elbowing" the young ladies of the seminaries
and discomforting the students at Yale College who would be confronted
with this assertion of "supposed equality."
   Yet this painful excursion into the underside of American history would
undoubtedly have appealed to Antonio de Castro Alves, the namesake of
one of the coauthors of the report on "Yale, Slavery and Abolition." Castro
Alves, the nineteenth-century Brazilian romantic poet from Bahia, heart of
Brazil's vibrant Afro-Brazilian culture, also lived a tragic life, was thwarted
in love, and died at the age of twenty-four from tuberculosis with only one
volume of his poetry published. Posthumously he became, and remains,
one of Brazil's most powerful antislavery voices, author of The Slaves (Os
Escravos, 1883), an oration from Africa imploring God's justice called
                         A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon • 197

Voices of Africa (Vozes d'Africa, 1880), and, above all, The Slave Ship (0
Navio Negreiro, 1880), a powerful portrayal of the horrors of the middle
passage. A disciple of Victor Hugo, he was a model for the late Brazilian
novelist Jorge Amado, who praised Castro Alves as a poet who saw Brazil
naked in all its contradictions and full of social and racial prejudices. Dug-
dale, Fueser, and Castro Alves have seen Yale naked, and we are all the wiser
for it.
A M U Z IL U * rORKXT WITH c iu iu c r a ts r ic MAMMAI I* .
                                                         CHAPTER            11
                      The Tragedy of the Amazon
                                                              "Order and Progress."
                                                         -Positivist inscription on
                                                               Brazil's national flag




Nineteen eighty-eight was the year of drought and fire in the Americas. It
was a year of growing public concern about global warming, with dire pro-
jections of melting ice caps and ozone depletion. It was a year of dramatic
images of the charred remnants of once majestic forests from the Rockies
to the Amazon basin. For the first time the destruction of the tropical rain
forest of Brazil became a major issue for North Americans and for people
concerned about the danger to the environment throughout the world.
But how did this vast ecological disaster occur? What can be done to deal
with its effects? Some answers to these questions are provided by the books
discussed in this chapter, each of which deals with some aspect of the
tragedy of the Amazon.