

of surveyors, soldiers, and administrators to establish Portugal's authority
over the land and establish frontiers. By the mid-eighteenth century they
thus had laid claims to tens of thousands of square miles of unexplored
territory. When Brazil gained its independence from Portugal in the 1820s,
the new nation inherited this "hollow frontier:' containing within it many
unknown Indian communities.
    During the nineteenth and twentieth centuries these hidden peoples
would slowly be «discovered." Natural scientists arrived to study the teem-
ing life of the forest. European anthropologists were sent to study living
societies but, more often than not, and certainly unintentionally, their con-
tacts with unknown groups of Indians helped to bring about their rapid
disintegration. The Indians were proselytized by Protestant fundamental-
ist missionaries who brought with them values regarded as simplistic and
ignorant by many in the societies they themselves came from. The Indians
were victimized by freelance miners, adventurers, and trappers, who were
seeking gold, booty, or natural forest products, such as Brazil nuts and rub-
ber. These pioneers were both fearful of the native forest dwellers and all
too willing to exploit or kill them.
    John Hemming has very little use for either the Christian missionaries
or the slavers, or for their modern counterparts. Amid the relentless de-
struction of the indigenous population, his heroes are those Indians who
were uncompromising in their opposition to the white man. In fact, he
sometimes implies that the only good white man is a dead white man.
There is a special poignancy and irony to this view. During an expedition
out of Cachimbo near the geographical center of Brazil in 1961, then a
crude airstrip in the forest, members of Kreen-Akrore tribe had ambushed
and killed Richard Mason, a young Englishman, among whose compan-
ions was John Hemming.
    But the killing of whites, when it occurred, never did, the Indians any
good. The whites always had more guns and more resources-an inex-
haustible supply. They also brought the invisible influenza and other
viruses that could cause mass destruction of the Indians. The fatal power
of such infection was something that the closed Indian societies never
comprehended when they came into contact with Europeans. Along the
river banks throughout Amazonia the Indian population was in large part
decimated, and often replaced by what Hemming calls «a growing prole-
tariat of semi-acculturated and discontented free Indians and mixed races
(caboclos)."
    In 1835, this population exploded in the most violent and revolutionary
of all nineteenth-century Brazilian rebellions, the Cabanagem revolt,
named after the migrants' cabana huts on the flood plains near Belem. Led
by priests, rubber workers, and mutinous soldiers, the revolt was a mass
                                         The Tragedy of the Amazon • 205

popular uprising of the caboclos and large numbers of Indians against
property owners and government officials. The rebellion was put down
with great ferocity. Some thirty thousand lives were lost, a fifth of the pop-
ulation of the region. The rise in world demand for rubber brought new
settlers and new international attention at the end of the century. The rub-
ber tappers pushed far up into the tributaries of the Amazon and toward
the border territory of Acre, which was also claimed by Bolivia and Peru. In
1903, after a series of revolts and plots, and much international intrigue,
Acre became part of Brazil.
   Brazilian rubber could not compete with the new plantations in Asia,
and the region once more sank back into relative obscurity, though not be-
fore more wild schemes and ambitions had been consumed by the jungle,
including the infamous and corruption-ridden construction of the
Madeira-Mamore railroad in the early part of the century and the failed at-
tempts at industrialized plantation agriculture by Henry Ford in the 1930s
and the billionaire Daniel K. Ludwig in the 1960s-all well-known tales of
greed, naivete, and ecological ignorance, which are described with verve by
Hecht and Cockburn and others in what is sure to be a new wave of travel-
ers' tales of horror and disaster provoked by the growing interest in the
Amazon. II A more realistic perspective was provided in the 1920s by Ken-
neth Grubb, a missionary who wrote, in a sad reflection of the destruction
of Indian communities, that it was possible to travel from Belem to Peru
    without seeing a distinctly tribal Indian. These rivers are silent
    today, except for the lap of the waters along some deserted beach,
    the hoarse cry of the parrots or the call of the inambu. The past has
    gone, with its people, in central Amazonia, leaving only that bitter
    sense of impotence, as of being present before a consuming confla-
    gration and the same time being powerless to assist. I2