

peach trees, 418 apple trees, a ferry, and a store. He also owned thirty black
slaves.
   At the mission school, both John Ridge and Buck Oowatie fell in love
with local girls. John met Sarah Bird Northrupt, the daughter of the stew-
ard of the Mission School, John P. Northrupt. In the face of strong opposi-
tion from Major Ridge as well as Sarah's parents, they eventually married
in 1824. Major Ridge had consulted the Moravian missionaries if "there
was anything in your Bible to prevent such a marriage." They assured him
there was not.
   John Ridge's cousin, Buck Oowatie, on his way from the Cherokee nation
in Georgia to the Cornwall Mission School had visited the former President
Thomas Jefferson at his residence Monticello in Virginia as well as James
Madison at his country house Montpelier. In Washington, D.C., Buck
Oowatie had also met Dr. Elias Boudinot, briefly president of the United
States under the Articles of Confederation and an early abolitionist and
philanthropist who believed the American Indians were descended from
one of the lost tribes of Israel. In appreciation of his support of the Chero-
kee nation, Buck took Boudinot's name as his own from then on. At Corn-
wall, the newly named Elias Boudinot fell in love with Harriet Gold,
daughter of Colonel Benjamin Gold, a scion of one of Cornwall's most em-
inent families. Elias and Harriet were married in 1826 despite the fact that
the pastor, Reverend Timothy Stone (honorary Yale M.A. 1804), refused to
officiate at the ceremony at the Cornwall congregational church, fearing his
congregation would eject him. Elias was burnt in effigy in the town. These
two interracial marriages led to the closing of the Mission School in 1827.
   Both John Ridge and Elias Boudinot were to playa key role in one of the
most somber chapters in American history. In 1830 the Indian Removal
Act, vigorously promoted by President Andrew Jackson, forced the expul-
sion of the Cherokee from their fertile lands in Georgia. 2 Under military
escort tens of thousands of tribesmen were marched west to barren terri-
tory in the present state of Oklahoma. Over a third died en route. This
shameful resettlement of 1838-1839 coincided ironically with the Amistad
affair. The state of Georgia distributed the lands of the Cherokees by mean
of a lottery. The disastrous trek of the Cherokees to Oklahoma from Geor-


2The Indian removals have not been a topic treated in much detail by American
historians, even Jacksonian scholars. In fact in Arthur Schlesinger's classic account
of Jacksonian democracy, The Age ofJackson (Boston: Little, Brown, 1945), the re-
movals received no mention whatsoever. For a discussion of these events by the
leading scholar in the field see Robert V. Remini, Andrew Jackson and His Indian
Wars (New York: Viking, 2001). For a more critical approach to Jackson see An-
drew Burnstein, The Passions ofAndrew Jackson (New York: Knopf, 2003).
196 • NakedTropics

gia became known in history as "the trail of tears." Major Ridge, his son
John, as well as Elias Boudinot, had all signed the Treaty of New Echota in
1835 which accepted the removal against the majority opinion of the
Cherokee.
   President Andrew Jackson was more responsible than most for the be-
trayal of the experiment of peaceful coexistence, alliance, and mutual re-
spect between the United States of America and the Cherokee Nation,
which Major Ridge had espoused and lived by. Pathetically, he called on his
former commander at his home in Tennessee on the way to Oklahoma. But
Ridge already knew that by signing the Treaty of New Echota he had also
signed his own death warrant. Within days he was assassinated by Chero-
kees who saw his continued trust in the white man as base treachery.
Within six months after the arrival of the Cherokee in Oklahoma, both
John Ridge and Elias Boudinot had also been brutally murdered by Chero-
kee braves. John Ridge's wife, Harriet, had died in 1836 on the eve of the re-
moval to Oklahoma and is buried in Calhoun, Georgia. Elias Boudinot's
wife, Sarah, survived his assassination, moving with her children to Fayet-
teville, Arkansas. Their eldest son went to California where he became a
newspaper editor and politician.