


                                        II
The Amazon is a vast region; not all of it is rain forest, nor is all of it Brazil-
ian. As it was legally defined in 1953, the Amazon region within Brazil in-
corporates about 60 percent of Brazil and includes savannah grasslands,
wetlands, and shrublands, as well as humid rain forests, all connected with
the Amazon River system, which contains one-fifth of the earth's fresh-
water supply. The river rises 17,000 feet in the Andes and flows some 4,000
miles until it reaches the Atlantic, yet as one follows it 3,000 miles inland
from the sea it rises only to 300 feet. The river's mouth is 200 miles wide,


                                       199
200 • NakedTropics

and for 1,000 miles upstream it remains seven miles wide; oceangoing lin-
ers can travel 2,000 miles up the river from the sea. The river and the rain
forest cover the heart of the subcontinent and encompass nine South
American countries. Seventeen of the Amazon's tributaries are more than
1,000 miles long, each longer than the Rhine.
   Brazil's Amazonian forest is the largest remaining tropical forest on
earth, and its natural life is the richest and most diverse in the world, con-
taining 20 percent of all higher plant life, the same proportion of bird
species, and 10 percent of the world's mammals. The tall trees produce a
dense overhead canopy, which keeps out all but a fraction of the sunlight.
Within the semidarkness thousands of species thrive, only a tiny number
of which are known or recorded by scientists. Each tree can support as
many as four hundred insect species. The rainy season's floods deposit al-
luvium along the river banks to form flood plains (varzeas), rich in palms,
fruits, turtles, fish, and aquatic birds. Naturalists have found five hundred
different plant species in one forest patch of the flooded plains. To the
south and east are forests filled with mahogany, tropical cypress, and
cherry wood trees. The westernmost tributary, the Araguaia, flows through
swampy grasslands and forests of mahogany, Brazil nut, and rubber
forests.
   A marvelously comprehensive introduction to the rain forest can be
found in the thoughtful and readable The Last Rain Forests: A World Con-
servation Atlas, edited by Mark Collins. l It provides maps of the present
distribution of forest worldwide and helps to place the Amazon in a global
context, while one can study some of the extraordinary fauna of the region
in the beautifully produced and illustrated Neotropical Rainforest Mam-
mals: A Field Guide, the first such broad regional guide ever produced. 2
   The paradox of this "rich realm of nature;' as the early Portuguese ad-
venturers called it, is that while the soils of much of the Amazon region are
extremely impoverished, they can still sustain more than 250 metric tons of
living material per acre. For many years no one could explain how they did
so. As Susanna Hecht and Alexander Cockburn point out in The Fate of the
Forest, a survey of the region and its crisis, the beginning of an answer came
in 1960, thanks to the cold war, when the u.S. Atomic Energy Commission
sought to find out what would happen to forests in the event of a nuclear
war, stimulating the first interdisciplinary study of the tropical forest. 3