

ident Abraham Lincoln as "the Fanatic on the Throne." Ten of Yale's twelve
residential colleges are named after prominent men in Yale's history; eight
owned slaves or preached in favor of slavery.
   The third story Dugdale, Fueser, and Castro Alves bring to light is the
fate of the attempt to establish a "negro college" in New Haven in 1831. The
project for a multiracial educational institution was promoted by two local
white men: Simeon Jocelyn, founding pastor of the African American
Congregation in New Haven, and Arthur Tappan, who purchased land for
the building and committed one thousand dollars to the fund-raising
drive. They were supported by the famous abolitionist William L. Garri-
son. The proposal met a stone wall of resistance from the town and Yale
College, led by the mayor of New Haven and prominent members of the
Yale faculty, including Yale's then one professor of law, four of the five prac-
ticing lawyers in New Haven, three judges, and the U:S. representative in
Congress.
   As one of the resolutions passed at the town meeting to protest the idea
stated bluntly:

    Yale College, the institutions for the education of females, and the
    other schools, already existing in this city, are important to the
    community and the general interests of science, and as such have
    been deservedly patronized by the public, and the establishment of
    a College in the same place to educate the colored population is in-
    compatible with the prosperity, if not the existence of the prl~sent
    institutions of learning, and will be destructive to the best int(~rests
    of the city....

   In New Haven, where town and gown rarely agreed on anything over
the centuries, on the question of the establishment of a black college there
was near unanimous sentiment. The vote at the town meeting opposing
the "negro college" was 700 to 4.
   The second resolution passed that day was no less revealing. It reads:

    [T]he propagation of sentiments favorable to the immediate eJnan-
    cipation of slaves in disregard of the civil institutions of the States
    in which they belong, and as an auxiliary thereto the contempora-
    neous founding of Colleges for educating colored people, is unwar-
    rantable and dangerous interference with the internal concerns of
    other States, and ought to be discouraged.

  The day after the resolution was passed a mob attacked Arthur lappan's
house. Simeon Jocelyn's home was also ransacked by a mob, and he was
192 • NakedTropics

forced to end his leadership of the African American church. But a few
years later both men were founders of the New Haven Amistad Committee
and prominent advocates of justice in the Amistad affair. Undoubtedly Yale
was concerned with the negative impact of the proposed "Black College"
on their university's fund-raising prospects, a concern clearly present in
the twentieth century as well. As the Boston Courier put it in 1831: «The
real objection to the [Black] College appears to have been the apprehen-
sion of giving offense to the Southern patrons of Yale." But mammon was
not all that was at stake here.
   The editorials and comments in the Connecticut newspapers in 1831
make it evident that the citizens of New Haven and the professors at Yale
were as much concerned about sex as they were with race; or more explo-
sively to their way of thinking, they were worried specifically about inter-
racial sex. The New Haven Connecticut Journal in an editorial argued
that: