


17David Cleary, Anatomy of the Amazon Gold Rush (Iowa City: University of Iowa
Press, 1990).
                                         The Tragedy of the Amazon • 211

year and had some 100,000 garimpeiros and traders who removed entire
hills with pickaxes and shovels.
    The gold prospectors do not cut down large tracks of forest or take up
large stretches of land as the ranchers do, but the ecological impact of their
activities can be devastating. The most insidious and lasting damage comes
from mercury, which is used to separate the gold from the ore, and poisons
both the environment and the garimpeiros. If the garimpeiros were, as
Cleary suggests, producing over a hundred metric tons of gold per annum
in the Brazilian Amazon during the 1980s, an equivalent amount of mer-
cury escaped into the atmosphere in the form of vapor as it was burned off
during the amalgamation process.
    In addition, mercury is often spilled into the ground and rivers near the
garimpo. Testing in the Madeira River found mercury levels in fish several
times higher than World Health Organization safety levels. Cleary takes a rel-
atively benign view of the garimpeiros, rightly saying that they are among the
few groups of poor rural Brazilians who have a chance to rise in the world.
But the invasion of 45,000 garimpeiros into the lands of the Yanomami in the
far north of Brazil is wreaking havoc among the indigenous population. I8
Lucio Flavio Pinto, a courageous Amazonian journalist whose paper, lornal
Pessoal (published since 1987), was almost alone in reporting in depth on
Amazonian politics and corruption, points out that small-scale mining is
sometimes carried on by extremely well financed operators. Pinto estimates
that there were 1,200 clandestine airstrips and at least 800 small airplanes to
get the gold out, while the gold business has allowed some local bosses to ex-
ercise almost medieval feudal domination over the districts. I9
    The Carajas iron project started as recently as 1967, when a helicopter
with engine trouble landed in a bare patch in the forest southwest of
Maraba. It was carrying several geologists who were astonished to find that
they were standing on the top of a hill made up of billions of tons of high-
grade iron are, bauxite, manganese, copper, nickel, and cassiterite. The
Brazilian government quickly took over the site and assigned the state-
owned mining company CVRD (Companhia Vale do Rio Dace) to develop
it. The Greater Carajas Project, as it became known, was granted control of
a region of some 900,000 square kilometers-the size of France and
Britain combined-and started an enormous concentrated effort to build
roads, a railway, dams, and a hydroelectric power plant.
    The Carajas program has four major components: the iron ore mine, a
highly mechanized open-pit mine that began operation in 1986; two alu-
minum plants, one in Belem, the other in Sao Luis, the capital of the state
of Maranhao; the Tucurui hydroelectric complex on the Tocantins River;