

   Many of the schemes for dams and reservoirs are particularly ill consid-
ered. The Balbina reservoir near Manaus, capital of the state of Amazonas,
covered an area of dense tropical forests and is, like almost all other Ama-
zonian basin reservoirs, extremely shallow; it therefore produces a low
level of energy per square kilometer flooded. Since no environmental im-
pact studies or land survey was made before the flooding, no one really
knows what potential mineral resources were submerged in the process.
No programs for saving animals were set up, nor was there provision made
for fish ladders at any of the dams. The deterioration of the quality of the
impounded water through decomposition and absorption of organic mat-
ter can lead to a lack of oxygen in the water, cause corrosion of the hy-
droelectric turbines, create a buildup of sulfuric acid, and help in the
proliferation of mosquitoes and the spread of intestinal diseases. Not sur-
prisingly, an epidemic of malaria broke out in the Amazon region, rising
from a reported 51,000 cases in 1970 to more than one million in 1990.
   Nowhere, moreover, have small projects been developed to provide
electricity to the rural populations. All the electrical power generated has
been for urban and industrial use, which only serves to increase migration
and to make more acute the crisis in producing food, which is largely
grown by the poor and vulnerable Amazon peasants. As the small farmers
and land-hungry migrants have faced the rapid concentration of land into
large holdings, society and the environment have been subject to damage
that Hall claims to be "unprecedented in Brazilian history."


                                    V
The end of military rule in 1985, if anything, speeded the process of eco-
logical depletion in the Amazon and intensified the growing confrontation
between large and small landowners. In 1986 it was estimated that 64 per-
cent of all conflicts over land in Brazil occurred in the Amazon. The Ama-
zon frontier also showed the highest incidence of murders involving more
than two victims.
   After 1985 the conflict in the Amazon changed. Powerful landed interests
became politically more aggressive, as the military, which had protected
them, retreated and the political system became more liberal. The economic
policy known as the Cruzado Plan of 1985-1986, which temporarily re-
duced speculative profits in the money markets, shifted investments to land
and property. The new civilian government also set up a ministry of agrar-
ian reform, and a program of land reform was announced.
   The proposed reform threatened to expropriate land that was not in use
and immediately caused more evictions and burning of forests as landown-
ers avidly began to open more pastures in order to prove the land was being
214 • NakedTropics

farmed. Peasants, too, occupied unused land on estates in the hope of ac-
quiring titles to it. Increasingly active workers' movements emerged during
the 1980s, organized by unions from the south and by the church. They
began to articulate peasant demands for land reform, while their members
harassed and in some cases killed landowners. At the same time a powerful
organization of landowners and ranchers, the Rural Democratic Union
(UDR), was formed to oppose even the mild proposals for land reform that
were put forward by the administration of President Jose Sarney. The
UDR's lobbying in Brasilia was highly successful, and the constitutional as-
sembly in 1988 voted down a proposal that would have allowed state expro-
priation of very large landholdings as part of a reform plan.
    Many saw the hand of the UDR behind the increasing sophistication
and violence of the ranchers' response to the rural workers' organizations,
as well as the rising number of assassinations of union leaders, church men
and women, and labor lawyers. Amnesty International's Brazil: Authorized
Violence in Rural Areas, a report first published in September 1988, tells the
story in grisly and horrifying detail. A steady increase in reported killings
of peasants in rural areas had occurred throughout Brazil, more than one
thousand between 1980 and 1986. Many of these killings were connected
with disputes over land, and were carried out by hired gunmen (pistoleiros)
employed by landowners; but there was also increasing participation by
state policemen.
    The failure to pursue serious investigations of these crimes was tanta-
mount to complicity in them, and Amnesty concluded that the pattern of
assassinations of workers' leaders was "so persistent that it facilitates fresh
killings and may amount to deliberate permissiveness toward them."
Amnesty could find only two cases in which hired gunmen were convicted
and sentenced for politically motivated killings and not a single case in
which those accused of commissioning the killing were brought to justice.
    The entire Amazon region was, in the words of Anthony Anderson, "in-
creasingly out of the control of the public sector."23 Whereas government
incentives and investment had once been a sine qua non for private activ-
ity, now ranchers, farmers, miners, loggers, and charcoal producers were
working on their own. Ranchers were opening their own roads. Private
gold mines were polluting the rivers. Settlements of new colonies were
spreading along the southern flank of the region and overwhelming the
frontier communities already in place.
    By 1987, in the Cachimbo region near the center of Brazil where the
Kreen-Akrore Indians had killed John Hemming's fellow explorer in 1961