

the ranch owners who received some $700 million in tax credits were never
seriously interested in producing beef-they acquired property only to
take advantage of the economic benefits. Once they received the tax cred-
its, they sold or abandoned the projects the credits were supposed to stim-
ulate, but not before these speculative enterprises caused extensive damage
to the environment.
    Businessmen from the south of Brazil, especially the Sao Paulo-based as-
sociation of Amazon businessmen, lobbied the central government in
Brasilia to subsidize cattle-ranching ventures, and in 1974 the government
set up the extensive Polamazonia program to encourage selective invest-
ment in production intended for export such as beef, timber, and minerals.
Subsidized rural credit was extended on very favorable terms (twenty-year
investment credit was made available at a nominal annual rate of 12 percent
to ranchers, for example). Because a land title was required to qualify for a
subsidy, Amazonia's sharecroppers, tenants, and squatters were, in effect, de-
nied access to this capital, which served to further concentrate wealth and
land ownership throughout the region. A destructive sequence was estab-
lished in the early 1970s which was to repeat itself throughout the Amazon
basin. Forest was cleared and opened up through the sweated labor of poor
migrants whose lands were later appropriated by large estates. The forests
cut down and burned for conversion to pasture during the dry season were
planted with African forage grains, which seldom provided more than two
to three years of good fodder. Phosphorous levels in the soil thereafter fell
dramatically, and the grasses were soon overtaken by shrubs and weeds.
    Overstocked, compacted, leached, and degraded, these lands will re-
quire at least one hundred years to recover. Since government credits had
been used by the proprietors to offset their expenses elsewhere in Brazil,
the absentee landowners were not greatly concerned by the waste of the
land. The small farmers in the meanwhile were forced to push on toward
new frontiers to the west-first to Rondonia, then in the 1980s to Acre and
Roraima. The pattern was one of settlement and then of the settlements'
failure, of land grabbing and violent protest against it, of the concentration
of ownership and ecological devastation.
    All of this is described in absorbing detail by Anthony Hall in his splen-
did book Developing Amazonia. Hall convincingly demonstrates that:
     the notion of Amazonia as a vast, fertile empty space ready to per-
     manently absorb the land-hungry masses from northeastern and
     southern Brazil is a myth. IS

 Anthony L. Hall, Developing Amazonia: Deforestation and Social Conflict in
15
Brazil's Carajas Programme (Manchester and New York: Manchester University
Press, 1989).
                                      The Tragedy of the Amazon • 209

   In his more journalistic book, Adrian Cowell, who in the early 1980s
was filming the onslaught of settlers, job seekers, entrepreneurs, and spec-
ulators in Rondonia for a British TV documentary unit, describes how he
became increasingly appalled by the scale and senselessness of this new
phase of Amazonian development:
    The History of Amazonia may have been littered with visionaries
    like Ford and Ludwig who fruitlessly tried to impose some dream
    or vision on the forest. But here was a government and a whole so-
    ciety marching into the forest with the manic zest of a lemming mi-
    gration, hypnotised by an obsession which was even more difficult
    than the lemmings' to understand. We seemed to have arrived at
    one of the frontier's dead-ends, where the forest mirrored the ab-
    surdity of the society confronting it. 16