




27Pearce Wright, Environmental Damage and Climatic Change (Oxford: Ditchley
Foundation Report No. D88/4).
I.. TUE   I Y   KA 0 \
                                                      CHAPTER            12
                                                Chico Mendes
                       "What crawling villain preaches abstinence and wraps himself
                          In fat oflambs? no more I follow, no more obedience pay!"
                                      -William Blake, America: A Prophecy, 1793




On December 22, 1988, Francisco «Chico" Mendes, a Brazilian union orga-
nizer, was murdered at his modest house in Xapuri, a remote rubber-trad-
ing outpost of five thousand people in the Brazilian border state of Acre.
Mendes was a plump, agreeable, talkative activist who had tried to protect
the livelihood of his fellow rubber tappers, which was threatened by the
destruction of the Amazonian rain forest and the encroaching cattle
ranches. To do so he had allied himself with prominent members of the in-
ternational environmental movement. He spoke the lingua franca of visit-
ing anthropologists from Berkeley and Paris, European TV producers, and
Washington environmental lobbyists. Mendes's aim had been to protect
the forest, by persuasion if possible, by force if need be. He wanted the
Brazilian government to promote «extractive reserves," a policy by which
ecologically desirable activities such as rubber tapping and nut collecting
could continue, but environmentally destructive forest clearance would be
prevented.
   Chico Mendes's assassins were gunmen of a particularly nasty ranching
clan, the Alves da Silvas. The Alves da Silva family was originally from the
state of Minas Gerais in south-central Brazil, and had moved during the
1960s to the southern Brazilian state of Parana. In the mid-1970s they
came to Acre, on Brazil's northwestern border with Bolivia and Peru. Each
move, it was revealed later, was occasioned by the need to escape arrest for
a previous murder.


                                    219
220 • NakedTropics

    The assassination of Chico Mendes was ordered by Darly Alves da Silva
and was carried out by Darci, his twenty-year-old son. An archetypal, old-
time backlands boss, Darly lived on a 10,000-acre ranch with his wife, three
mistresses, thirty children, and an assortment of cowboys who could have
come out of the Dirty Dozen. He perfectly fit the demonology of Amazon-
ian ecological destruction. The cattle ranchers were to a large extent
responsible for the vast clearing, burning, and degradation of the Amazon-
ian landscape that occurred throughout the 1980s in Brazil. Chico Mendes,
little known within Brazil, had become through his connections with for-
eign ecological experts one of the best known abroad of the new genera-
tion of grassroots peasant leaders to emerge during the twilight years of
the Brazilian military regime. Of the many such leaders who were selected
for assassination by hired guns of the large landowners, Mendes was one of
the few with influential friends abroad.
    Chico Mendes became as well known internationally as Pele and Carmen
Miranda, with the difference that he is seen as a martyr from the worlds of
the dark Brazilian forest and violent backlands, which seem to have special
glamour for North Americans and Europeans and none at all for Brazil-
ians. David Cleary, in his sober account of the Amazonian gold miners
(garimpeiros), notes that there is a long tradition where ((people could be
enticed into believing almost anything about Amazonia;'l and several of
the recent North American and European books about Mendes are very
much of this genre. Considered together, however, they provide a revealing
picture of Chico Mendes, the causes of his death, and his transformation
into an international ((ecology martyr."