

the Amazon basin comes from water that is condensed from within the
forest atmosphere itself, the scale of deforestation threatened to heavily re-
duce the region's rainfall. But it was the scale of the burning forest revealed
by the satellites that brought home to scientists that what was occurring in
Brazil was no longer only a Brazilian disaster, it was a real threat to the
global climate.
   The reason for this threat lay in the vital link in the carbon cycle be-
tween climate and forest. Carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight make wood
and release oxygen in a process of photosynthesis. In the opposite reaction,
wood decomposes or burns, producing energy and carbon dioxide. What
is important is the change in carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere.
Since carbon dioxide acts as a heat-trapping gas, it keeps the earth warmer
than it would normally be. The burning of the Brazilian forest dramati-
cally shifts the balance, changing from a situation where much carbon,
perhaps 150 tons, is retained in the total mass of living organisms or "bio-
mass," to a system where only a small amount of carbon, around fifteen
tons, is retained in grassland or pasture. It is because of this process, in
which the forest is transformed into grassland or pasture, that Brazil be-
comes dangerous globally for its release of carbon dioxide. 25
   How dangerous? Jose Goldemberg, a renowned Brazilian physicist and
former president of the University of Sao Paulo, estimated that the Ama-
zon fires approximated the level of the carbon dioxide emissions from all
of North America and exceeded that contributed by all of Western Eu-
rope. 26 Moist tropical forests contain approximately 35 percent of the
world's living terrestrial carbon pool, according to Anthony Anderson in
his introduction to the useful collection of essays by experts Alternatives to
Deforestation. The cautious estimate by World Resources is that deforesta-
tion is second only to fossil fuels as a human source of atmospheric carbon
dioxide, almost all of which comes from the tropics and overwhelmingly
from Brazil.
   The report Environmental Damage and Climatic Change by the Ditchley
Foundation, a body not exactly famous for its extremism, states without
hesitation that "global warming is ... the ultimate environmental threat."
New global measures of the surface temperature of the oceans, according
to the Ditchley report, show a rise of 0.1 degrees centigrade per year for the

25Foster Brown in "The Burning of Brazil: A Discussion with Foster Brown and Al-
berto Setzer," Camoes Center Quarterly 2, nos. 1 and 2 (spring and summer 1990):
20.
26Jose Goldemberg, ((A Amazonia e seu futuro," Folha de Sao Paulo, January 29,
1989, A3. However, Goldemberg, who became secretary of science and technology
in the Collor administration, gave much lower figures in a letter to the New York
Times (July 28, 1990).
                                       The Tragedy of the Amazon • 217

last eight years. This is a rate of 1.0 degrees centigrade per decade. An aver-
age global warming of 1.5 degrees centigrade would alter the climate be-
yond anything experienced by the planet in the past 10,000 years. 27
   There is a crude irony in this tragedy. The Brazilian politicians and mil-
itary strategists who planned and promoted the march to the west did so in
large part out of the desire to see Brazil make its mark on the world. They
succeeded in ways they never could have imagined. Brazil was indeed being
taken note of, but for causing a global environmental disaster. Out of the
vortex of fire, violence, and social and political conflict in the Amazon a
powerful human voice briefly but memorably emerged, that of Chico
Mendes.