


13Report by the World Resources Institute, World Resources, 1990-1991: A Guide to
the Global Environment (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990).
14Dennis J. Mahar, Government Policies and Deforestation in Brazil's Amazon Region
(Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 1989).
                                      The Tragedy of the Amazon • 207

up the resources of the backlands to development-a policy broadly sup-
ported at the time by most of the different groups that make up Brazilian
society. The idea of building a capital in the interior and of developing the
Amazon goes back at least as far as the eighteenth century. Hecht and
Cockburn do not make it sufficiently clear that the building of Brasilia and
the Brasflia-Belem highway marked the high point of the boom under
President Juscelino Kubitschek, a good democrat in his own fashion and a
politician who epitomized the expansionism and optimism, as well as the
pervasive corruption, of the fifties.
    The approach of Kubitschek to development during the mid-1950s had
very grave consequences which many authors fail to recognize, partly be-
cause they are excessively concerned with establishing continuity with the
exploitative Portuguese past. But Kubitschek and the military geostrate-
gists who took power after 1964, such as the eminence grise of the military
regime, General Golbery do Couto e Silva, did something radically new;
they pressed for a network of roads linking the northeast to the center and
south of the country to the Amazon basin. The credits and the special fa-
vors granted to southern businessmen were intended at first to encourage
them to invest in a region in which they saw few prospects for profit. But
the roads to the south undermined the assumption that had dominated all
previous thinking about the Amazon-the central importance of the
rivers. Now land routes were to have preference over riverine communica-
tion and forest clearance over forest extraction, and water was to be con-
sidered a source of energy and not of life.
    The dirt road to Belem was soon paved, and between 1960 and 1970
some 300,000 migrants went to seek their fortune along the highway. The
trans-Amazonian highway intended to link the northeast and Amazonia,
followed, as did the Cuiaba-Porto Velho highway in the states of Mato
Grosso and Rondonia. The most severe deforestation has been concen-
trated along these roads and the many roads that feed into them, a process
which is shown dramatically in the Oxford Conservation Atlas. The popu-
lation of Rondonia grew by over 21 percent per annum between 1970 and
1978. In Rondonia and Mato Grosso over one-fourth of the forest has dis-
appeared during the 1980s.
    As the huge road-building programs opened up the region, govern-
ment-sponsored projects to build new settlements attracted migrants from
Brazil's poverty-stricken northeast as well as from its southern states,
where extensive mechanization of agriculture and the spread of cash crops
such as soya were displacing thousands of smallholders. The military
regime encouraged cattle raising by providing special fiscal incentives, as
well as easy and subsidized credit to would-be ranchers, and extensive ben-
efits to businesses that invested in the region, exempting them from excise
duties and from corporate income taxes for ten to fifteen years. Many of
208 • NakedTropics