


                                     IV
The Amazon frontier soon reproduced the large landowning (latifundia)
pattern of the northeast and south of Brazil. In 1985, 30 percent of rural
properties in Brazil were less than two hectares, yet they occupied only 0.1
percent of farmland; 1.9 percent of properties of over a thousand hectares
occupied 57 percent of the agricultural land. The largest 152 Amazonian
estates occupied 40 million hectares, equal to the total area of cultivated
land in Brazil. These estates, moreover, do not create many jobs, since lum-
bering and cattle ranching require few employees.
   At the same time the exploration of the Amazon lands created a vast
army of landless, temporary wage laborers who migrate to the urban cen-
ters and take jobs as seasonal workers or try to make a living as indepen-
dent prospectors for gold (garimpeiros). Small farmers still produce 80
percent of the basic food crops and provide 82 percent of jobs in the east-
ern Amazon, but the concentration of landownership between 1985 and
1988 has caused the output of such basic staples as beans and cassava to fall
by 8 percent and 14 percent, respectively.
   In the eastern Amazon, and especially in the Araguaia-Tocantins region,
the expansion of settlement and ranching followed the highway, and was
accompanied by violent struggles over land. Until the 1950s, the economy
was based on the harvest of Brazil nuts (castanhas) and other forest prod-
ucts, and controlled by a few powerful families, who shipped the nuts
north to Belem. Between 1969 and 1975 the Maoist offshoot of the Brazil-
ian Communist Party established a guerrilla campaign in the region which

16Adrian Cowell, The Decade ofDestruction: The Crusade to Save the Amazon Rain
Forest (New York: H. Holt, 1990).
210 • NakedTropics

fought sporadically with the Brazilian army. The guerrillas were eventually
suppressed by thousands of troops.
    Two other major factors came into play here, each no less dangerous to
the ecology-one set in motion by mining for iron ore and the other by
gold. These processes of mineral extraction and their ecological and social
consequences are the subject of Anthony Hall's Developing Amazonia,
which examines the vast complex for mining iron ore and other minerals
called the Carajas project, and of David Cleary in his Anatomy of the Ama-
zon Gold Rush. 17 Both books, like Adrian Cowell's Decade of Destruction,
have the great advantage of avoiding the hyperbole that characterizes so
much writing about Brazil. Cowell has chosen, as he did in his television
documentaries, to follow the lives of ordinary people in the hope that these
case histories will help to explain the larger story. The three books taken
together re-create the fascinating history of the struggle in the Amazon as
it affects people in their everyday lives.
    Amazonian iron and gold could hardly have produced two more differ-
ent kinds of organizations. Carajas is a huge state enterprise, regional in
scope, mainly concerned with producing iron for export. To carryon the
mining it has been provided with dams, hydroelectric power, railroads,
and port facilities, and it has the benefit of large capital infusions from na-
tional and international investors. Prospecting for gold, by contrast, is gen-
erally an independent and uncontrolled activity, called garimpagem in
Brazil, which is carried on by small entrepreneurs and adventurers. The
large mining companies are implacable enemies of freelance prospectors,
who are continually penetrating company-held territory to set up their
clandestine mining operations.
    Only a small portion of the gold is sold to the state, and accurate pro-
duction figures, as always in the Amazon, are impossible to come by. Cleary
estimates that there are hundreds of thousands of garimpeiros. The gold
they produce was estimated in the late 1980s to be worth over one billion
dollars annually. Gold mining technology is cheap, and it is easy to run, the
most complex machinery needed being a small internal combustion en-
gine. According to Cleary, in 1987 mining professionals estimated that the
garimposwere producing around 120 metric tons of gold annually-which
could place Brazil third among world gold producers, behind only South
Africa and Russia-an amount equal to the great nineteenth-century gold
rushes. The most dramatic garimpo was the one found in 1979" at Serra
Pelada, about ninety kilometers from the city of Maraba in the south of
Para. At its peak in 1983, Serra Pelada produced one metric ton of gold a