


                                        III
The decimation of the Amazonian Indians, leaving a population of no
more than 200,000 today, is only part of the story of the destruction of the

11 The best book on these topics, much mined though rarely acknowledged, is that
by Warren Dean, Brazil and the Struggle for Rubber: A Study in Environmental His-
tory (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987). For a discus-
sion of the new, or rather the revived, genre of Amazonian tales see Stephen Milk's
reviews in the TLS, December 7-13, 1990, which examine Anthony Smith's Explor-
ers of the Amazon (London and New York: Viking, 1990), Dennison Berwick's
Amazon (London: Hutchinson, 1990), and Stephan Nugent's Big Mouth (Great
Britain: Fourth Estate, 1990).
12Cited by John Hemming in Amazon Frontier, 246.
206 • NakedTropics

rain forest. Just as destruction of the forest itself brings with it the destruc-
tion of millions of unrecorded plants and creatures, so the destruction of
the Amazon Indians destroys knowledge of the forest acquired over mil-
lennia. What is new since the 1980s is the scale of encroachment in the last
redoubt of the Amazon's native people.
    World Resources, 1990-1991: A Guide to the Global Environment, a mar-
velously comprehensive, well-produced handbook, cautiously estimates
the yearly loss of tropical rain forest in Brazil to be somewhere between 1.7
and 8 million hectares. I3 The disparity between the figures demonstrates
how tentative most calculations remain and how urgent the need for more
research is. The World Resources experts believe that some 7 percent of the
forested area has already been lost. Dennis J. Mahar, in his World Bank
study Government Policies and Deforestation in Brazil's Amazon Region, es-
timates on the basis of Landsat satellite images that the figure is as high as
12 percent. I4 Both would agree, however, that if the present rate of clearing
continues, 15 percent of all plant life in the Latin American rain forest
would become extinct by the year 2000. While accurate figures are difficult
to come by, Mahar argues that "because pasture has clearly been the pre-
dominant form of agricultural land use in the region, cattle ranching
would appear to be the leading proximate cause of deforestation." Small
farming activity has also increased, but farm plots are often sold or aban-
doned after only a few years of use. These areas are then converted to pas-
ture or quickly invaded by secondary growth. Logging has also contributed
to deforestation.
    Hecht and Cockburn blame the generals who ran Brazil between 1964
and 1985 for the destruction of the rain forest. The generals must be held
responsible for what occurred during these two decades, but like virtually
all political explanations based on a single cause, this one is too simple and
it may seem to imply that the solutions are simple as well, which, unfortu-
nately, is not the case. In fact, the great push to the interior was under way
well before the military coup of 1964; and, not surprisingly, it continued
unabated after the military retreated to the barracks in 1985. The inaugu-
ration of the new capital, Brasilia, in 1960, and the coincidental opening of
two arterial roads into the forest-the two-thousand-mile dirt highway
moving north between the new capital and Belem at the mouth of the
Amazon and the beginning of the Brasilia-Porto Velho road moving
west~were the events that it1 many respects set the contemporary disaster
in motion. Both enterprises were part of a government policy of opening