

23 Anthony B. Anderson, ed., Alternatives to Deforestation: Steps toward Sustainable
Use ofthe Amazon Rain Forest (New York: Columbia University Press, 1990).
                                       The Tragedy of the Amazon • 215

and where in 1968 Adrian Cowell had filmed his The Tribe That Hides from
Man, not a single Kreen-Akrore remained. Nor did most of the forest.
During the 1970s two roads had joined up at Cachimbo, and hordes of
prospectors had found gold in the Peixoto Azevedo River. The Kreen-
Akrore had been forced from their forest redoubt by an epidemic of flu and
were starving to death. With the tribe facing extinction, a handful of sur-
vivors were flown to the relative protection of the Xingu National park in
Mato Grosso. The region where the vast forest had stood was now popu-
lated by the cattle of ranchers and land speculators, some living in colo-
nists' towns close to the river. Cachimbo itself is a huge military base, used
to test rocket technology that was later sold to Saddam Hussein, and it was
revealed in 1990 to have housed a deep pit intended for the underground
testing of nuclear weapons.
    The burning seasons-whether for clearing farmland, ranch land, or
charcoal burning or for mining operations-was now affecting a great arc
from Acre and Rondonia along the western, southern, and eastern fringes
of the Amazon rain forest. The global impact of this transformation in the
Amazon and the effects of burning became dramatically evident in the
mid-1980s, when satellite imaging revealed to scientists for the first time
the monumental scale of the fires. In 1987 the dry season was unusually
long, and as a result the forest fires in Amazonia were exceptionally intense
and widespread. On August 24, 1987, Brazil's Institute for Space Research
(INPE) detected 6,800 fires just in the states of Mato Grosso and a small
portion of southern Para and eastern Rondonia. Smoke from the Amazon
fires lasted until December and forced the closing of most of the region's
airports.
    The fires in the Amazon are entirely man-made; they are not to be com-
pared, for example, with the raging fires that strike in the American West.
For trees to burn in the wet tropical forest they need to be felled and left for
two or three months to dry. They are then ignited usually by people who
want to clear the land, sometimes simply in the hope of selling it. That fire
does not spread naturally in this region is central to the surveillance efforts
of the Brazilian space institute, which began using meteorological satellites
to provide four images each day of the Amazon region. Using high-resolu-
tion satellite imagery, one can obtain a good map of areas burned, pin-
pointing particular properties. 24
    At the peak of the burning season, from the end of August until early
September, this space imaging revealed as many as eight thousand separate
fires in a single day throughout the region. Since at least half the rainfall in

24Alberto Setzer, Camoes Center Quarterly 2, nos. 1 and 2 (spring and summer
1990): 22-24. Also in Veja, July 5, 1989, 104.
216 • NakedTropics