

                                     III
By the mid-1980s Mendes had developed links with an international net-
work of sympathizers, some of whom could provide financial support for
the rubber tappers' cause. He became particularly close to the British aca-
demic Tony Gross, who had been working for Oxfam in Brazil since 1980. 5
    In 1981 Oxfam began supporting the education programs in Xapuri
run by the workers' union and aimed at bringing literacy to families in the
interior of the municipality. By 1983 two producer cooperatives had been
founded, located at two of the five schools then in existence. The coopera-
tives were supported by funds from the church's land commission. The Xa-
puri union, headed by Mendes, broke with the Brasileia union, which was
then close to the party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB),
the successor of the MDB, and which was working with the government's
rubber agency to establish small rubber-processing plants to encourage
production and improve the quality of processed rubber. In Xapuri,
Mendes, who opposed cooperation with state agencies, remained affiliated
with the Workers' Party. In effect, Oxfam and Mendes had chosen to sup-
port the more radical of the two opposition parties to the military regime.
    Augusta Dwyer describes the differences as being between "those who
want a social democratic society, such as Sweden, and those who want
democratic socialism, a true workers' state. Chico belonged to this second
group." The split in Acre, however, reflected the wider split then occurring
nationally, leading in 1983 to the formation of an independent union orga-
nization (CUT), closely associated with the worker's party.
    Tony Gross, who was now responsible for all Oxfam Amazon projects,
also introduced Mary Allegretti to environmental activists in Washington. In
1985 Adrian Cowell, a British documentary producer, had, like many others
concerned with the headlong destruction of the rain forest, turned his atten-
tion to Acre, where the frontier expansion which had devastated Rondonia
was now threatening. For Chico Mendes, whom Cowell soon discovered, the
connections with Gross, Allegretti, and Cowell were fateful ones.
    Adrian Cowell was an award-winning filmmaker who had been visiting
Amazonia since the late 1950s and had watched with growing resentment
and exasperation the senseless destruction of the Amazon rain forest and
its indigenous inhabitants. In the early 1980s he became a close friend of
the Brazilian agronomist Jose Lutzenberger, long an outspoken critic of
Brazil's development projects in the Amazon region and active promoter
of the international Gaia movement to protect the world's ecology. Cowell
became convinced of the need to stem the tide of destruction caused in


STony Gross, Fight for the Forest: Chico Mendes in His Own Words (London:
Monthly Review Press, 1992).
                                                    Chico Mendes • 227

large part by what he considered "phony finance:' especially the credits,
grants, and loans that had financed the conversion of forest to grasslands
and allowed the road system to be pushed into the rain forest. He there-
fore, he writes, "turned towards the ultimate source of much of that fi-
nance-one of the world's controlling economic institutions-the World
Bank."
   In 1984, while making a film in Washington, D.C., Cowell met Bruce
Rich, an environmental lobbyist leading the campaign against the banks
that were financing Brazilian development, and a leading member of the
Natural Resources Defense Council. It was Cowell who suggested to Bruce
Rich that Jose Lutzenberger be invited to testify in Washington before the
Congressional Subcommittee on Natural Resources. A year later, in 1985,
at a strategy meeting in the United States, Cowell argued:
    [M]ost previous environmental campaigns, against whaling, for in-
    stance, had been about issues that could be decided in the First
    World. But as tropical forests were in the Third World, everything
    depended on political decisions in those countries.
   At this meeting Cowell also met Stephen Schwartzman, a trained an-
thropologist who had worked with the Kreen-Akrore, the Indians whom
Cowell had first filmed in the 1960s and whose remaining numbers had
been subsequently relocated in Xingu Park. The American Beldon and
Threshold Foundations later financed a visit by Schwartzman to Brazil to
solicit Brazilian help in developing a campaign to oppose the activities of
the banks. Cowell had doubts that the tropical forest campaign would be as
successful as the one on whaling. "Tropical forests may be more important
to the world," he said, "but they're less emotive, less cuddly than whales."
Chico Mendes, however, was eminently "cuddly."
   In 1985, Cowell and his colleagues were planning an offensive to make
the fate of the tropical forests a major concern of the multinational lending
institutions based in Washington with which U.S. influence was para-
mount. At the same time, in Brasilia, the capital of Brazil, the rubber tap-
pers' first national meeting came up with the central idea of the
movement, that of "extractive reserves," the oxymoron combining the idea
of preserving the forest while exploiting its products, such as latex and
tropical nuts. "The extractive reserve is a form of land reform," Chico
Mendes told Augusta Dwyer when she visited him in Xapuri in 1988. "The
Brazilian government would be pressured to expropriate the rubber estates
and designate them extractive reserves. The land would become the prop-
erty of the nation with the rubber tappers holding the title to use it." The
idea of "extractive reserves" could be appealing to an international audi-
ence, as Cowell immediately realized. It was at the Brasilia meeting, ac-
cording to Revkin, that Cowell turned his attention to the one man among
228 • NakedTropics