

the arrival of an airplane belonging to the leader of the local ranchers' or-
ganization (UDR), Joao Branco, who was accompanied by two unknown
men. Fearing the worst, he wrote at the time:
    I do not wish flowers at my burying, because I know they will go
    and root them up in the forest. I hope only that my death will serve
    to put an end to the impunity of the hired gunmen under the pro-
    tection of the Federal Police ... I go to Xapuri to a meeting with
    death. I am not a fatalist, only a realist. I have already denounced
    who wishes to kill me and no measures whatsoever have been or
    will be taken ... [The delegate of the Federal Police] has canceled
    my permission to carry a gun, with the allegation that I have links
    to a «communizing" organization. It is the Ford Foundation of the
    United States, if you can believe it!?
   On December 22 he was shot in the back doorway of his house in Xapuri.



                                       V
Fixing the blame for the assassination of Chico Mendes should have been
easy. The Alves da Silvas had threatened to kill Mendes in an anunciado, as
the Brazilians call the chilling warning given to the victim-to-be. Mendes
had exposed the plans of the landowners for his assassination in a letter to
the Federal Police chief in Acre, Mauro Sposito, and the state governor on
October 28, 1988. He had telexed the governor and the head of the Federal
Police in Brasilia, Romeu Tuma, on November 29. On December 5 he had
again warned Tuma, as well as President Sarney. Yet it took two years for
the trial in the Mendes case to begin.
   At the trial, Darci Alves da Silva unexpectedly confessed (he had done so
earlier, but then retracted his statement). Many believe he confessed in
order to protect his father. With the Brazilian government under interna-
tional scrutiny, Darci and his father were found guilty and sentenced to
nineteen years in prison. Out of almost two thousand rural assassinations
the Mendes case was the first in Brazil in which the gunmen and their
sponsors were tried, let alone convicted. The result, however, satisfied none
of the interest groups that are in conflict over the future of the rain forest,
each of which has its own, often confused, vision of the future.
   The books by Revkin, Shoumatoff, and Souza, none of whom knew
Mendes, are each in their different ways part of this confusion. s All three

7Zuenir Ventura, "0 Acre de Chico Mendes," ]ornal do Brasil, July 5, 1989, 8.
8Revkin, The Burning Season; Alex Shoumatoff, The World Is Burning (Boston: Lit-
tle, Brown, 1990); Marcio Souza, a Empate contra Chico Mendes (Sao Paulo: Marco
Zero, 1990).
232 • NakedTropics

books contain long summaries of recent history, but it is a history that is
largely irrelevant to the story of Chico Mendes and seems for the most part
culled from the same newspaper clippings and texts (or text in the case of
Warren Dean's environmental history of rubber, which is extensively
mined by several of these authors).9
   Mr. Shoumatoff calls the events following Chico Mendes's death an
"ecofarce." An "eco-cash-in" would be a better word. The Francisco
"Chico" Mendes Foundation received nine offers for movie rights, four of
them over $1 million, according to Alan U. Schwartz, the lawyer for the
foundation, which is a coalition of environmentalists, rubber tappers, and
family members in Acre. IO Among the competitors for film rights were
Robert Redford and Twentieth Century Fox, with Stephen Spielberg as di-
rector; Ted Turner of Turner Broadcasting System; HBO and Harmony
Gold Productions; Warner Brothers; David Puttnam and Chris Menges;
Goldcrest Company, with Costa-Gavras as director; and JN Film, a Brazil-
ian company. According to Hecht and Cockburn, "Stephen Schwartzman
spent a fair amount of the past few months [of 1989] in both the United
States and Brazil seeking to broker a Hollywood contract for a movie about
Chico Mendes and the rubber tappers that on the terms of at least one bid
could net him $100,000 in consultant's fees."l1
   In addition, Little, Brown publishers reportedly paid a vast figure ad-
vance for the book by Shoumatoff, who had written a piece on Chico
Mendes for Vanity Fair, which he hoped Redford would make into a film.
The Paris publishers PIon, part of the French Group Presses de la Cite, out-
bid two American houses for the book by Marcio Souza, who had the co-
operation of Mendes's widow, Ilzamar, in return for PIon's agreement to
donate the royalties to the Mendes Foundation, of which she is president.
Houghton Mifflin signed on Revkin, a senior editor of Discover magazine.
Almost all the other books discussed here, it should be noted, are dedicated
to Chico Mendes.
   Shoumatoff takes a more skeptical approach than Revkin to the various
parties engaged in the Acre drama. There are moments of high comedy,
however, in his breathless and self-indulgent account of his Amazonian ad-
ventures, though he recounts them in all seriousness. He visited the forest
with a young writer and Green Party activist called Julio Cesar from Rio de
Janeiro, who had never before visited Amazonia and arrived with silk paja-