

2Augusta Dwyer, Into the Amazon: The Struggle for the Rain Forest (San Francisco:
Sierra Club Books, 1990).
222 • NakedTropics

   Thus, as the rubber trade diminished, the tappers gained by default a
certain degree of independence, but their livelihood also became highly
dependent on the government, which imposed tariffs and taxes to keep the
price of cheaper imported rubber high. This was the same government
that was simultaneously handing out easy credit and tax write-offs to
southern businessmen if they invested in Amazonia cattle ranching. But
despite a falloff in rubber production (in the municipality of Xapuri, for
instance, where 1,250 tons of rubber were produced in 1971, only 403 tons
were produced in 1981), Acre remained Brazil's largest producer of natural
rubber. In 1980 some 23,000 families were still directly dependent on tap-
ping native rubber trees for their livelihood. 3


                                        II
Born poor in one of the most remote and backward parts of Brazil, Chico
Mendes was illiterate until he was twenty years old. His grandfather had
migrated from Ceara in the northeast of Brazil to Acre in the 1920s and
settled near Xapuri. Mendes grew up in the forest, working as a rubber tap-
per from the age of nine. His family lived in a modest hut in a forest clear-
ing at the center of a clover leaf of forest trails used by the rubber tappers.
Each trail gave access to between one hundred and two hundred rubber
trees over an area of seven hundred or so acres, forming part of a large tract
of forest, or seringal. These estates were owned by well-to-do businessmen
in the town of Manaus, a thousand miles downriver.
   In 1962, when he was eighteen, Chico Mendes met Euclides Fernandes
Tavora, a Communist and former army lieutenant hiding out in the fron-
tier jungle. Their relations remain obscure, but there seems no doubt that
Tavora taught Chico to read and write. He also introduced Mendes, ac-
cording to Andrew Revkin in The Burning Season, to ((the basic tenets of
Marxism," giving the young rubber tapper a "mastery of the vocabulary of
socialism and communism."4 In 1965, Tavora, who settled in the district
for a time with a local woman, disappeared as mysteriously as he had ar-
rived, but he had given Mendes a sense of the larger world that existed be-
yond the forest. Mendes himself later recalled:

3The best short introduction to the social and economic history ofAcre is provided
by Keith Bakx in "The Shanty Town, Final Stage of Development? The Case of
Acre," in The Future of the Amazon, ed. David Goodman and Anthony Hall (New
York: St. Martin's Press, 1990),49-69.
4Andrew Revkin, The Burning Season: The Murder of Chico Mendes and the Fight
for the Amazon Rain Forest (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1990). For further discus-
sion on Euclides Tavora see "Was Tavora There?" New York Review of Books, No-
vember 7, 1991, which includes responses from Augusta Dwyer and Laura
Renshaw, Grants Manager for Oxfam America, as well as research by historian
Peter Beattie in the Brazilian military archives.
                                                     Chico Mendes • 223