

the tappers who seemed smart enough, cool enough, and honest enough to
take the tappers' message out of the forest and straight to the boardrooms
of the banks and the halls of Congress, both in and out of Brazil. That man
was Chico Mendes.
   Cowell, Revkin observes, "never liked to think that he was meddling in
things. He did not want to transform the movement, only to give it a
louder voice." Cowell's friend, Mary Allegretti, persuaded Mendes to mod-
ify his message. Instead of the "old calls for social justice, workers' rights,
and agrarian reform-standard issues of the political left ... ," he would
now call for the preservation of the Amazon. Allegretti and Cowell were
now, according to Revkin, "in the middle of a three-year relationship."
It was during this period that they introduced Mendes to ecological and
international aid agencies in Washington, with the help of Stephen
Schwartzman. Their objective was to force the international lending agen-
cies, especially the World Bank and the Inter-American Development
Bank, both highly dependent on u.S. financing and under attack by Rea-
gan administration ideologues, to make environmental concerns central to
their leading policy decisions.
   There was a ready target at hand. By 1986 the road through Acre was
being paved with Inter-American Development Bank funding. Allegretti
and Schwartzman agreed that the time had come for an assault on the
banks that were financing Brazilian roads and commitments in ranching.
Through Cowell, Allegretti learned that Mendes, who was campaigning
now on the Workers' Party ticket for a seat in the state legislature, had in-
cluded attacks on the road paving in his campaign speeches. This had not
made him very popular with local voters (he lost resoundingly), but it pro-
vided a golden opportunity for the environmental cause. ''Allegretti and
Cowell concluded;' according to Revkin, "that Mendes would be much
more effective if he left local politics behind, came out of the forest ... and
directed his criticism directly at the bank." It made for a cynical marriage
of convenience.
   The u.S. Treasury under Reagan was looking, as Schwartzman put it, for a
"bludgeon with which to beat" the Inter-American Development bank,
which the administration saw as epitomizing the evils of foreign aid. The en-
vironmental movement, or more precisely Chico Mendes, would provide the
weapons. As Hecht and Cockburn observe in the Fate of the Forest, among
the charitable foundations and environmental groups aiding the rubber tap-
pers, "many of their constituents might have been horrified at the idea that
their organizations were supporting radical unionizing efforts."6


6Suzanna Hecht and Alexander Cockburn, The Fate of the Forest: Developers, De-
stroyers and Defenders ofthe Amazon (London and New York: Verso, 1989).
                                                     Chico Mendes • 229

   In March 1987, Mendes set off on a trip to Miami to attend a meeting of
the Inter-American Development Bank. Schwartzman and Cowell met
him at the airport and took him to the Intercontinental Hotel. "Here we
were at one of those classic meetings where everyone is saying, 'Let's have
fresh raspberries, sip champagne, and talk about the poor.'" This, accord-
ing to Revkin, was how Jim Bond, special assistant to Senator Robert W.
Kasten Jr. (Republican of Wisconsin), described the scene when Chico
Mendes arrived among the bankers at cocktail hour.
   After introducing Mendes to the bankers in Miami, Schwartzman and
Cowell took him to Washington, where he was introduced to Senator Kas-
ten, who had time to shake his hand and comment: "I can promise you that
our subcommittee is going to continue to put pressure on the [bank] to
withhold funds-to cut off all funds possibly-if they are not more coop-
erative." As Revkin observes, it was the unlikeliest of alliances, a staunch
conservative from a state of rolling pastures and cows and a Marxist forest
dweller whose worst enemies were cattlemen.