

                                     IV
The circulation of Mendes's proposal for "extractive reserves" at the First
National Rubber Tappers' Congress in Brasilia in 1985 occurred at a criti-
cal moment. That year Brazil returned to civilian rule. But the birth of the
"new republic," as it was optimistically called, was difficult. The civilian
elected by the Congress to the presidency, Tancredo Neves, an oldtime but
highly skilled politician from the opposition, died on the eve on his inau-
guration and the vice president, Jose Sarney, inherited the position. Sarney
was from Maranhao, the state on the edge of the Amazon basin which pro-
vided one of the key outlets for the great mineral discoveries of Carajas.
The state capital, Sao Luis, was the terminal of the new Carajas railroad.
Sarney had headed the political party that supported the military regime.
The power in the congress, however, lay with the eclectic PMDB, and after
1988 the PMDB also won twenty-two out of the twenty-three Brazilian
governorships. A new plan for agrarian reform put forward by the Sarney
government was eventually abandoned under intense lobbying by the large
landholders, but the threat of potential expropriations was sufficient to in-
crease conflicts throughout rural Brazil, especially in the Amazon, where
both landowners and landless sought to establish title. The church and the
rural union represented the peasants in this struggle, and against them
were the landowners organized throughout Brazil under the banner of the
UDR. Acre did not escape the conflict.
   Darly Alves da Silva had moved to Acre in 1974. His ranch was not large
by Acre standards. In fact, Darly's herd was so small that many supposed he
had other work-smuggling goods across the Bolivian border and killing
230 • NakedTropics

by contract. He was one of a notoriously violent family whose members
had left a trail of murder behind them in Minas Gerais and Parana. The
Alves da Silva clan and Chico Mendes came into conflict over the last large
section of rain forest left in Xapuri County, the Seringal Cachoeira. It in-
cluded the rubber tapping estate on which Mendes had grown up, and
which was now owned by four Sao Paulo businessmen who wanted it
cleared so that they could develop the land for ranching.
   A report circulated in Acre that the four businessmen had agreed to sell
the land to the Alves da Silva family, but only if the Alves da Silvas would
clear the tappers out of the forest. This deal was probably concluded in
early 1986. Darly first tried to buy the tappers out, offering them five hun-
dred acres of land that he said he would not touch. When they turned him
down he used hired workers to drive them out by force but was met with
an empate. He then tried legal action to enforce his title to holdings he had
bought from a disgruntled tapper who did not like the union, but the
union members occupied the land to prevent the transfer. Meanwhile, on a
visit to Parana where Allegretti had established a Center for Amazonian
Studies, Mendes was told by members of the Pastoral Commission that
there were warrants out for Darly Alves da Silva's arrest, and he used his
contacts in the Acre region's newspaper to publicize the government's
charges about the violent past of the Alves da Silva family. Darly's effort to
take over the land failed. He eventually accepted a settlement from the fed-
eral agrarian reform office; the government expropriated the land, and
paid him well for his title to it.
   Worried by the union's successes, the ranchers made an effort to buy
Mendes off. Although virtually penniless, he proudly rejected them. "We
have all the money and all the guns. Your movement is like mosquitoes
against a jaguar," Revkin quotes one of the ranchers saying. «But you don't
have the people:' Mendes replied.
   After his unsuccessful political campaign, Mendes was almost entirely
dependent on foreign financial support. The Gaia Foundation, of which
Jose Lutzenberger was a key Brazilian member, provided several hundred
dollars a month to cover his expenses until the Washington-based Ashoka
Foundation took over. Mary Allegretti, Steven Schwartzman, and Adrian
Cowell contributed $500 to buy Mendes and his family a house in Xapuri.
The Canadian government contributed a jeep and the Ford Foundation fi-
nanced travel and administrative expenses for the National Council of
Rubber Tappers, of which Mendes was a member. A Ford Foundation offi-
cer introduced Augusta Dwyer to Chico Mendes at an elegant Swiss restau-
rant in Rio de Janeiro.
   But back in Acre, the threats and violence against the tappers' union in-
tensified throughout 1988. In June, a local union organizer and Workers'
Party candidate was killed. On December 5, 1988, Chico Mendes noticed
                                                       Chico Mendes • 231