

 neous resistance. With church and union support, Mendes helped found in
 1977 the Xapuri Rural Workers' Union, of which he later became president.
    As the situation grew more tense, a small coterie of activist Brazilian in-
tellectuals, social scientists, and journalists appeared in Acre. Mary Alle-
gretti, an anthropologist from Parana who came to Acre to study the
rubber tappers of the upper Taranaca River in the late 1970s, became a
close friend and adviser to Mendes. Elson Martins set up in Rio Branco a
lively alternative newspaper, Varadouro. Between 1978 and 1981 it pro-
vided a forum for people whose views were previously unheard. At the end
of the 1970s Chico Mendes, through contacts at the new federal university
of Acre, established clandestine links with the Communist Party of Brazil
 (PCdoB), a Maoist splinter party that had taken China as its ideological
model and was shifting its allegiance to Albania.
   Important changes were also taking place nationally. The intrigues of
the secret services began to threaten the military hierarchy itself and the
generals found themselves confronted by growing pressure for change
within society which they could no longer contain by force alone. Pressure
from the church, unions, and other sectors of civil society, in an alliance
not dissimilar to those forming in Acre, forced the regime to begin a slow
process of liberalization. In 1979 the constraining and artificial two-party
system was abandoned and amnesty was declared for both those accused
by the military regime of political crimes and those accused of gross
human rights violations. The new powerful union movement in the south,
led by the metalworkers of Sao Paulo, whose chairman was Luiz Inacio da
Silva, known as Lula, used the occasion to launch a new Workers' Party
(PT): the first grassroots political movement to emerge in Brazilian history
and a striking innovation in a country where political parties, including
those on the populist left, were organized from the top down.
   The conflict between union and ranchers in Acre, however, had by 1980
become increasingly ugly. Wilson Pinheiro, a union leader in Brasileia, a
town on Acre's border with Bolivia, was gunned down in his union's hall.
Pinheiro had befriended Chico Mendes and given him advice, and many
assumed that Mendes, who was traveling at the time, was also a target. The
enraged rubber tappers took the law into their own hands and shot to
death a rancher they suspected of being involved in the union leader's
death. The reaction of the Brazilian authorities to the death of the rancher
was rapid. Here was a case where "justice moved instantly," Chico Mendes
told Augusta Dwyer with heavy irony. "Twenty-four hours later dozens of
tappers were rounded up, tortured, their fingernails pulled out." Mendes
himself was charged under the national security law in Manaus. He re-
treated into the forest. In 1981 he was captured and brought before a mili-
tary tribunal in Manaus, where he was defended by lawyers from Lula's
Workers' Party. The charges were dropped in 1984.
226 • NakedTropics