

noted ominously, "we face new and strange plans of nations that in the past
invaded, occupied, or threatened to take over the Amazon from the Brazil-
ians. Could it be that the wolves of the past not only changed their fleece
but their own natures and became harmless lambs?"12
    "Chico Mendes, like many other popular leaders, learned to read as an
adult;' Mr. Souza concludes condescendingly, "and did not have a sophisti-
cated formal education. For this reason it is not strange that he did not de-
velop any work of theoretical investigation, no coherent project beyond
that of practical necessity." But Chico Mendes himself said that "the strate-
gic center of the movement, in terms of communications and information,
is the Institute of Amazon Studies, where Mary Allegretti, Paulo Chiesa
and other friends work ..." Perhaps because he was writing a screenplay
about Chico Mendes, Mr. Souza excluded or dismissed a great deal that did
not fit his story line, for example, the entire notion of"extractive reserves,"
the central element of the rubber workers' demands after 1985, and the di-
rect cause of Chico Mendes's murder. From his book we can imagine a
Marcio Souza-Warner Brothers film in which Gross, Schwartzman, Cow-
ell, Allegretti, et al. are portrayed as so many sinister agents of ecoimperial-
ism. They are not, and Mr. Souza should have known better.


                                      VI
Unlike Revkin, Shoumatoff, and Souza, Adrian Cowell knew Mendes well
and in fact followed him around Brazil and the United States, filming his
activities off and on over the two-year period prior to his assassination.
Cowell is also as much a part of the story of Chico Mendes as he is recorder
of it, yet he is very reticent in his discussion of Mendes's political views
(though less reticent in claiming credit for his promotion of Mendes and
his efforts to obtain for Mendes his two international awards). Only Hecht
and Cockburn's book deals seriously with his ideas and only Augusta
Dwyer in an account of her travels in Amazonia adequately evokes his
qualities of tenacity and stubbornness or the degree to which these quali-
ties contributed to his almost inevitable martyrdom.
    Many inconsistencies in all these accounts remain unresolved. No one
seems to have bothered to check the military records or otherwise tried to
find the truth of Mendes's claims about the past of Euclides Tavora, the
former Communist and army lieutenant who befriended him when he was
young. Tavora told Chico Mendes that he had been part of the Prestes Col-


12Parliamentary Investigation Committee for the Amazon, statement of Joao Alves
Filho, Minister of the Interior, Department of Communications Publication No.
27/89, Brasilia, April 19, 1989, especially 16-17.
                                                      Chico Mendes • 235

umn, the insurgent forces led by the Communist Luis Carlos Prestes in
1923 on a three-year, eight-thousand-mile odyssey through the interior of
Brazil. But Tavora's participation seems unlikely, since he would have been
far too young at the time. When Shoumatoff interviewed Prestes shortly
before his death, the Communist leader, then ninety-one, said he had
never heard of Euclides Tavora.
    It is also odd that Tavora should have been living clandestinely in 1962-
the Brazilian military coup was two years later and although the Commu-
nist Party was illegal at the time (between 1947 and 1985) the Goulart
regime was perceived to be sympathetic to the left (this after all was the jus-
tification put forward by the military for its overthrow). Chico Mendes, ac-
cording to Cowell, also said he had met Che Guevara on his way to Bolivia,
but no one else reports this claim. A former wife and daughter also turned
up after Mendes's death to lay claim to the Mendes legacy, much to the sur-
prise of Mendes's ecological colleagues from North America.
    The most perplexing aspect about Chico Mendes was his relationship
with Mauro Sposito, the head of the Federal Police in Acre. The Federal Po-
lice is one of the few police organizations in Brazil that are perceived to
be fairly honest. (It was for this reason that President Collor appointed
Romeu Tuma, head of the Federal Police, to be the chief Brazilian tax col-
lector.) When criticized for his lack of response to the threats against
Mendes, Sposito published a letter in A Gazeta of Rio Branco saying that
Chico Mendes was a police informer-an accusation that no one apart
from Augusta Dwyer, who categorically dismisses the idea, seems to want
even to consider. In view of extensive surveillance to which the left was
subjected by the Brazilian secret services, it seems unlikely that the Brazil-
ian authorities would not know whether this was true. Mauro Sposito in
1991 was serving as chief assistant to the head of the Federal Police in
Brasilia.
    It is, in any case, impossible to find a clear and consistent account of
Mendes's political career in any of these books. That Mendes was a "forest
ecologist" is an image rejected by Hecht and Cockburn, who see Mendes as
"an extremely radical political militant" who had at the core of his pro-
gram a demand "for popular control of the means of production and dis-
tribution of forest commodities, along with the provision of financial
credits to producers rather than middlemen." It is obviously no accident
that Chico Mendes called his daughter Elenira, "in homage to another
Elenira, a young woman of courage who gave up her life in an attempt to
liberate the Brazilian people:' as Marcio Souza put it in his book. Elenira
Rezende de Souza Nazareth was a Maoist guerrilla from the PCdoB, the
splinter Communist Party of Brazil, with which Mendes had been clandes-
tinely affiliated in the late 1970s, and she was killed in the Tocantins-
Araguaia combat zone in 1972. She was ((famous for her marksmanship,"
236 • NakedTropics