

    [Tavora] gave me a lot of advice about how to organize in the trade
    union movement ... Despite the defeats, humiliations, and mas-
    sacres, the roots of the movement were always there, he said. The
    plants would always germinate again sooner or later, however much
    they were attacked.

    Chico Mendes moved to Xapuri in 1971. He had learned enough from
Euclides to teach for a year in the literacy campaign sponsored by the mili-
tary regime, and he worked as a salesman in the shop of Guilherme Zaire, a
local warehouse owner and rubber trader of Syrian origin. In 1975 Mendes
took advantage of classes in union organizing set up by a representative of
the state-sponsored Brazilian Confederation of Agricultural Workers
(CONTAG). The rubber tappers, faced with the expansion of ranching and
the transfer of titles to the forest where they worked, in 1976 devised an in-
creasingly successful method of resistance, the empate. The empate was an
organized showdown between the rubber tappers and the workers sent in
by the ranching interests to cut down the forest. The unions claimed this
was legal under the Brazilian civil code, which allows a person "to maintain
or reinstate his claim through his own force, provided he does so immedi-
ately." The empate was not a form of Ghandhian passive resistance, but, as
Cowell's TV documentaries (if not his book), Revkin's photographs, and,
in particular, Dwyer's account make clear, it used tactics of pressure and
persuasion. Dwyer describes it as:

    In many respects, a show of class force, a large group of people,
    often including entire families, descending on the ill-paid workers
    who were slaving away to destroy the forest. Their empate was first
    an attempt to bring these fellow workers around to the other side,
    to make them understand that they were taking the food from the
    mouths of their comrades. It was also a statement, one that said to
    everyone: "You will have to kill us to get us out of here."

   The problem with this strategy was that the right to defend land by force
was also claimed by the rich landowners. In the general atmosphere of law-
lessness that permeated the frontier, it is hardly surprising that the larger
proprietors, reacting to the empates, turned increasingly to gunmen to de-
fend their claims.
   Political changes in the south of Brazil were also beginning to affect
Acre during the 1970s. Brazil's military regime had maintained control
partly through secret services that repressed or infiltrated dissident move-
ments, but the regime had always been an odd hybrid that never aban-
doned the formalities of elections. In 1965 an artificial two-party system
had been imposed after the coup. Ironically, the military thereby created an
instrument for expressing antimilitary sentiment. To vote for the catchall
224 • NakedTropics

opposition group called the Brazilian Democratic Movement (MDB) was
to register dissatisfaction with the military regime. Chico Mendes had run
as a candidate for the MDB in the 1977 municipal election in Xapuri.
Sponsored by his then employer, the Syrian rubber trader Guilherme
Zaire, Mendes was elected with two other men who also worked for Zaire.
    He was not, however, particularly successful as a member of the munic-
ipal council. The chamber would empty when he launched into long, radi-
cal speeches, which even his opposition colleagues in MDB found
tiresome. Chico Mendes found his period on the municipal council a disil-
lusioning experience, but he justified his participation as well as his union
work as being consistent with the lessons Tavora had taught him. Tavora
had told him, Chico Mendes said, that "Lenin always said you shouldn't
stay out of a union just because it is yellow. You must join it and use your
ideas and strengthen the movement."
    During the late 1970s, however, several elements came together to help
the increasingly desperate cause of the rubber tappers. The church, long a
bastion of landed interests, began to accept new, mainly foreign priests,
who were followers of liberation theology and had experience in organiz-
ing grassroots community groups. The regime's repressive methods, in-
cluding widespread use of torture, extensive surveillance and intimidation,
and the restriction of political rights, and the forced exile of many political
figures, had brought the Catholic Church squarely into the political and
social struggle.
    The church moved into the rural regions on two fronts, both of which
were important to union organizing in Acre. The radical priests helped to
establish grassroots communities committed to mutual assistance and po-
litical activism. By the early 1990s there were 80,000 of these CEBs ( Comu-
nidades Eclesiais de Base) in Brazil. The Catholic Church also set up
pastoral land commissions in 1975 and soon found them in the forefront
of the struggle for peasant rights. These organizations, intended to moni-
tor land conflicts and encourage priests and lay workers to help the peas-
ants defend their rights, became more radical as they found themselves
caught up in deadly day-to-day conflict. One of the best known of the
priests who became involved is Dom Pedro Casaldaliga, the bishop of Sao
Felix de Araguaia. A Catalan with long missionary experience in the Ama-
zon, Dom Pedro still refuses to baptize the children of some ranchers or
say mass on their land. «It made no sense to go out and denounce these
people for the killing of peasants and then celebrate mass in their build-
ings," he told Augusta Dwyer. «It would be like celebrating mass in a salon
of the International Monetary Fund ... or the UDR."
    The rural workers' unions in the south also sent organizers to the new
frontier who provided training, helped in union organizing, and provided
legal support for what had previously been mainly isolated and sponta-
                                                      Chico Mendes • 225