




Acre, the backwoods region where Chico Mendes lived, suffered heavily
from the violence and destruction that swept through Amazonia in the
1980s. Once claimed by Bolivia, the region was incorporated into Brazil in
1903 during the rubber boom. In the 1940s, when the United States sought
to maintain a supply of rubber after the Japanese takeover of Southeast
Asia, a ((war for rubber" was declared by the government of President
Getulio Vargas. Poor peasants were mobilized in the drought-plagued
northeast of Brazil and sent west into the Amazon forest to tap Acre's rub-
ber trees. But after the emergency was over, Acre once again became a re-
mote, thinly populated federal territory, accessible almost exclusively by
river from Manaus and Belem.


1David Cleary) Anatomy of the Brazilian Gold Rush (Iowa City: University of Iowa
Press) 1990)) 203.
                                                        Chico Mendes • 221

    The territory became a state in 1962. As elsewhere in Amazonia, a new
highway, extending from the state of Rondonia in 1971, broke Acre's isola-
tion from the center and south of Brazil, though the road from Rondonia
remained little more than a dirt track through the forest, passable only for
a few months of the year. Nevertheless, in the inexorable Brazilian process
of settlement, land grabbing, ranching, and social conflict soon followed.
The new state government, having high hopes for ranching, encouraged
private investment inland, promoting Acre as a potential corridor to the
Pacific-five hundred miles to the west with the Andes standing in be-
tween and no roads yet constructed.
    This, however, was for the future-or so the government's publicists
promised. One-third of the land in Acre changed hands from 1971 to 1977,
much of it with forged titles. Land prices along the highway rose 2,000 per-
cent. Financial groups from the south of Brazil bought out rubber estates
and sought to evict the tappers, leading to violent fights. With the exten-
sion of another highway from the state capital, Rio Branco, to Brasileia on
the Bolivian border, Xapuri, a sleepy port halfway between the two towns,
became the new cattle frontier. Between 1970 and 1984, the number of cat-
tle in Xapuri County rose from 7,000 to 52,000 head. Augusta Dwyer, a
Canadian freelance writer whose book is among the best written and most
evocative of these books on the Amazon, visited Chico Mendes some
months before his assassination when he told her that:
    From 1970 until 1975 or 1976 all our comrades who lived along the
    margin of the road to Brasileia were expelled using the most violent
    means possible. Their shacks were burned down, gunmen would
    show up on their land, their animals were killed. 2
   Many of these dispossessed rubber tappers, some 10,000 according to
the Catholic Church's land commission, crossed the frontier into Bolivia.
Others migrated to the capital, Rio Branco, whose population rose from
36,000 in 1970 to 92,000 in 1980.
   In the new economic situation brought about by the highway and the
increase in cattle ranching, the bosses who had controlled the rubber trade
and held the tappers in virtual bondage through debt found their profits
declining so drastically that they were only too glad to sell off their rubber
estates to the ranchers. As elsewhere in Amazonia, the new roads to the
south and east broke the old riverine trading and business connections,
opening up the region to the aggressive intervention of powerful economic
interests from the industrial heartland of Brazil, especially Sao Paulo. The
rubber tappers were left to look after themselves as best they could.