


9Warren Dean, Brazil and the Struggle for Rubber: A Study in Environmental History
(Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
lOEdwin McDowell, (~fter Amazon Slaying, Deals Abound;' New York Times, July
10, 1989, D6.
11Susanna Hecht and Alexander Cockburn in "Letters;' The Nation, September 18,
1989,292.
                                                     Chico Mendes • 233

 mas. Shoumatoff had hired Cesar to protect him from the police and the
 ranchers, as well as Brazilian leftists, all of whom he feared "may not have
liked" his Vanity Fair article. Together they met Mendes's uncle Joaquim
and his wife, Cecelia, "a radiant old couple;' and Shoumatoff came across a
 rambling reflection written by Chico on a napkin that turned up after his
death extolling "World Socialist Revolution." Oddly, the same napkin re-
flection was reproduced by Hecht and Cockburn in The Nation during
their quarrel with Stephen Schwartzman over Schwartzman's tendency to
suppress, as Hecht and Cockburn saw it, the rubber worker's radicalism.
The napkin is now to be found in a small circular glass frame under a pho-
tograph of Chico Mendes on his grave in Xapuri.
    Andrew Revkin's heroes are the anthropologist and activist Mary Alle-
gretti (Mr. Revkin's translator was Ms. Allegretti's brother), the British
filmmaker Adrian Cowell ("without Cowell Chico Mendes would likely
have remained a small-time labor leader in the Amazonion backwater of
Xapuri"), Tony Gross, the Oxfam representative, and Stephen Schwartz-
man, the anthropologist and Washington environmental lobbyist. This is
the cast of characters of the environmental cause that Mr. Shoumatoff
treats with suspicion. Mr. Souza makes them villains of his piece, though
he never condescends to name them directly.
    Both Revkin and Shoumatoff use many Portuguese words, presumably
to create an aura of authenticity. In Marcio Souza's 0 Empate contra Chico
Mendes, this device is turned on its head. His only reference in English is to
"a misteriosa Environmental Defense Fund-EDF." This sinister, foreign-
sounding EDF, as well as Mary Allegretti's "Instituto de Estudos Amazoni-
cos (lEA)," which, Souza darkly hints, has its "headquarters in the faraway
state of Parana," are all, he says, "very good at capturing funds for environ-
mental projects" but they "interfere with the struggle and organization of
the workers ... using funds from abroad to attack and divide the Workers'
Party, the unions, and the Church." Mr. Souza believes that Chico Mendes's
death, and "his mystification as Green leader and an ecologist, who defends
little plants and butterflies, brought confusion and uncertainty to the
movement." The colonizing mentality, he says ominously, appears "in
many disguises."
    Mr. Souza's left-wing rhetoric sounds surprisingly like that of the para-
noid right in Brazil. The former Brazilian minister of the interior, Joao
Alves Filho, in his testimony before the parliamentary investigation com-
mittee for the Amazon in its hearings in April 1988 following the interna-
tional outcry over Chico Mendes's death, provided a thirty-nine page
statement, later published in English, which contains a listing of every for-
eigner who ever set foot in, looked at, touched, conspired against, wrote
about, or worked in the Amazon from the first arrival of the Spaniards and
Portuguese in the sixteenth century until 1989. "Nowadays;' the minister
234 • NakedTropics