

as a considerable surprise to former President Jimmy Carter and Patricia
Derian, Carter's assistant secretary of state for human rights, who success-
fully brought pressure on the Brazilian military regime to release political
prisoners.
   Equally odd is a passage in Shoumatoff's book quoting Robert Redford,
who bought the film rights to Shoumatoff's article on Mendes in Vanity
Fair, to the effect that Redford "wanted to play the bad guy, the ruthless
American manager of a multinational project." If so, he has the wrong
screenplay and would be better off speaking to Anthony Hall. In fact, the
ecological and social crisis in Brazil was caused by some of the same factors
that led to the ecological disasters in Russia and Eastern Europe: failed
overcentralized planning, rigidly organized management, private greed
and special privileges, corrupt and ineffective justice at the grass roots, as
well as permeating, callous disregard by the rich for the poor. In some ways
the Amazon might have been better off if the multinationals had been
more heavily involved. International companies are vulnerable to pressure
from environmental activists for some of the same reasons that the World
Bank and Inter-American Bank are vulnerable. Brazilian corporations, es-
pecially state companies, are less subject to such pressure and because of
the vast sums at stake from their involvement in road, railroad, and dam
building and in mining are notoriously involved in the corruption of polit-
ical decision making.
   The central point about the crisis in the Amazon is that it is a story
where the heroes and the villains are Brazilians; the struggle is a Brazilian
struggle, and it will be resolved, if it is to be resolved, by Brazilians. The key
question about the members of the Alves da Silva family who killed Chico
Mendes is not whether they were the assassins; it is whether they were
hired to do the job and by whom. If there was indeed an "authorized" con-
tract to kill Chico Mendes, then it was probably his efforts to block funds
for the Acre roadway that caused it. This was an action that affected large
interests, the hope of the eventual linkup to the Pacific, the value of tens of
thousands of acres accumulated as speculative investments. As Philip
Fearnside, an ecologist and longtime resident in Amazonia, has pointed
out, "Whenever a road is built or improved in Amazonia, the value of
nearby land immediately multiplies by as much as a factor of 10, if not
more."16 Understandably, some of those who hoped to benefit from the
new highway were among those who dismissed Mendes's death as a "per-
sonal matter:' a local dispute in which neither large interests nor outsiders
were involved. As Acre UDR president Joao Branco said, "Darly was backed
into a corner; like a trapped animal. He had no choice but to kill Chico."

16Philip M. Fearnside, «A Prescription for Slowing Deforestation in Amazonia,"
The Environment 31, no. 4 (May 1989): 18.
238 • NakedTropics

This in effect was the opinion of the court that convicted the Alves da Sil-
vas in December 1990.
    Zuenir Ventura, one of Brazil's best journalists, visited the only witness
to have heard the Alves da Silva family talk of plans to kill Mendes, a boy
named Genesio, then thirteen years old, who was virtually unprotected
when Ventura found him, although supposedly under police protection.
((It seemed to me:' Ventura concluded, ((that Xapuri was like the town in
the movie Mississippi Burning but without the resources of the FBI, and a
crazy idea occurred to me: why, instead of bringing in two environmental-
ists, not bring instead the two Federal agents?"1? Ventura in fact took upon
himself the protection of the child until the trial took place. Genesio's evi-
dence was crucial to the guilty verdict.