

they retained a resilient pluralistic religious and cultural presence at the
core of Brazilian society, but one barely recognized in the corridors of elite
power until very recently. Sao Paulo elected its first black mayor, Celso
Pitta, in 1996, and President Cardoso brought Edson Arantes do Nasci-
mento, the great Brazilian soccer star universally known as Pele, into his
cabinet as minister of sport. The secretary of social welfare in the govern-
ment of Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva which took office in January 2003,
Benedita da Silva, is an African Brazilian born in a Rio favela (shanty-
town). As more Afro-Brazilians have moved into the middle class, black
faces have also appeared more regularly in advertisements and the press.
    Brazil's rediscovery of history challenges above all the peculiar legacy
that has since the eighteenth century allowed the country's rulers to graft
the imperative of authoritarianism onto their vision of the future. It was
this mind-set that made the French positivists so attractive to the military
officers who overthrew the monarchy in 1889, and to the generals who
seized control in 1964. It is perfectly summed up in the motto emblazoned
across Brazil's national flag: Ordem e Progresso (Order and Progress). De-
mocracy in Brazil has all too often been seen as the enemy of progress, the
harbinger of anarchy, disunion, and backwardness. That, it seems clear,
will no longer do.
    Brazil's transformation grows in part out of its recent prosperity. When
I first came to Rio de Janeiro as a student in the mid-1960s, the country
was still largely rural, with short life expectancy, large families, low per
capita income, and a high illiteracy rate. By the 1990s, Brazil, with a popu-
lation of more than 160 million, had become one of the world's largest
economies, with a per capita income of more than $5,000. Family size
dropped dramatically, from 6 children per family in the 1970s to 2.5 in the
mid-1990s. It had become a largely urban country. Brazil's two million cars
in 1970 increased in number to twenty-six million, its TV sets from four
million to thirty-one million. Infant mortality decreased from 118 per
1,000 in 1970 to 17 per 1,000, and illiteracy greatly diminished.
    The Brazilian states of Sao Paulo and Rio Grande do SuI, if they stood
alone, would be numbered among the richest forty-five nations on earth.
The economy of Rio Grande do SuI, the southernmost state, abutting Ar-
gentina and Uruguay, was built on European immigration and cattle. The
state of Sao Paulo has a gross national product larger than Argentina's, and
Sao Paulo City is a megalopolis with a population of 15 million and a vi-
brant financial, cultural, and business life; the state-supported university
of Sao Paulo is a world-class institution. Like several of Brazil's larger
cities, Sao Paulo has a lively press; dailies such as the Folha de Sao Paulo, the
grand old Estado de Sao Paulo, the business-oriented Gazeta Mercantil and
the new Valor Econ6mico are as articulate, critical, and influential as any
                                                   TheTwo Brazils • 247