


                                      VII
Marcio Souza is right, however, when he insists on the need to see the
Amazonia crisis in its wider Brazilian political and social setting. The in-
ternational attention that Chico Mendes case has received grew in part
from the links he had forged with the environmentalists. But the Chico
Mendes story also leaped to international attention because his death coin-
cided with the vast holocaust of 1988 throughout the Amazon basin, where
the brutal burning season was graphically pictured by satellite photogra-
phyat a time when the Northern Hemisphere was also experiencing forest
fires on an unprecedented scale. The outcry brought results. The Brazilian
government cut back on the credits that had fueled the vast conversion to
pasture, and began to use the satellite images provided by the Brazilian In-
stitute for Space Research (INPE) to pinpoint fires and find those shown to
be burning illegally.
    But these were palliatives. The forestry patrols had a handful of heli-
copters and aircraft, whereas the ranchers and garimpeiros had hundreds.
Still it was a beginning. In 1989 Brazil held its first popular election for the
presidency in almost thirty years and the campaign pitted the leader of the
Workers' Party, Lula, against a young governor of the northeastern state of
Alagoas, Fernando Collor de Mello. Lula, backed by an alliance of unions,
church-based communities, and intellectuals, came close to victory, but he
was defeated in the second round by Collor. The leader of the UDR, the
ranchers organization, had come in in tenth place, with fewer votes than
the candidate of the Brazilian Communist Party.
    During his presidential campaign, Collor dismissed the ecological com-
plaints against Brazil as outside interference, but on his European tour be-
fore his inauguration he was shocked by the depth and anger of world

17Ventura, ibid.
                                                         Chico Mendes • 239

opinion on the question of the Amazon-criticism he ran into every-
where, including a public rebuke from Prince Charles two days before his
visit to London. The ending of government loans and tax credits dimin-
ished the burn off, and climatic consideration may also have improved the
situation since there seem to have been fewer fires after 1988. The figures
from the Brazilian Institute for Space Research (INPE) in 1991 showed a
25 percent drop in burning in the period of July to September 1990 in
comparison with the same period in 1989, though the diminution has
been less impressive in Acre and in Rondonia, where the number of fires
actually increased. 18
    Collor then appointed the most outspoken and famous of Brazil's
ecological activists, Jose Lutzenberger, to be the secretary of state for the
environment. He also appointed another outspoken critic of Brazil's devel-
opment policies, the rector of the University of Sao Paulo, the Brazilian
physicist Jose Goldemberg, to become secretary of science and technology.
In this position, Goldemberg sent shock waves through the military estab-
lishment by publicly acknowledging Brazil's nuclear program and opening
up to the press the deep pits at Cachimbo in the central Amazon, pits in-
tended for testing nuclear weapons. These moves prompted Adrian Cow-
ell, Lutzenberger's good friend and promoter, to proclaim the 1990s to be
"the decade of the environment in Brazil.» Cowell's television series The
Decade ofDestruction, which was shown in Europe and North America in
1990, concluded on a very optimistic note portraying Collor as a born-
again hero of the environment. 19
    In 1992 Brazil hosted the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development. This gave some incentive to environmental good behav-
ior. But the decline in the rate of forest destruction may also be a result of a
general economic downturn in Brazil. The Brazilian government was then
in the midst of bitter negotiations with private banks over Brazil's vast for-
eign debt, and the favorable comments on the environment from Brazilian
officials who a year before were attacking the environmentalists as foreign
mercenaries might have been part of a deliberate policy to seek allies in the
attempt to reach a more favorable settlement with foreign creditors.
    There is a danger in romanticizing the idea of extractive reserves and
the power of an alliance of "forest people.» The market for Brazilian forest-
extracted rubber now depends entirely on government price supports.