

according to Revkin, who heard that "she invariably killed her target with a
rifle shot between the eyes." 13
    Chico Mendes's son was named Sandino after the Nicaraguan guerrilla
leader. Alex Shoumatoff was apparently shocked to realize that Chico
Mendes was no "Albert Schweitzer, which is how the Environmental De-
fense Fund ... tried to portray him in one of their fund-raising letters ..."
but a "revolutionary, a warrior ... In the United States ... Mendes would
have been considered a pinko tree hugger and a radical labor leader." His
philosophy, according to Hecht and Cockburn, "had the concrete elements
of a socialist ecology-the only ecology that can save the Amazon and its
inhabitants."
    Andrew Revkin is the writer most taken by the idea of "extractive re-
serves;' and he depends mainly on Mary Allegretti, Adrian Cowell, and
Stephen Schwartzman for his information. Marcio Souza has only con-
tempt for what he calls "extractives;' which he dismisses as a product of the
"colonizing arrogance of those who say they are the defenders of the Ama-
zon forest but pollute and destroy the environment in Alaska or corrode
the forests of Europe with acid rain." Yet here, too, the rhetoric is mislead-
ing. Souza sees the hand of the multinationals behind these disasters. So do
Hecht and Cockburn. But as the Belem-based journalist Lucio Flavio Pinto
points out, the recent history of American multinational investment in the
economy of the Amazon is much more an example of the retreat of u.S.
enterprise before the new economic power of Europe and, most especially,
Japan. 14 Anthony Hall, in his excellent book Developing Amazonia, which I
discussed in the previous chapter, argues that the foreign and especially the
U.S. role in the Amazon economy has not been decisive. 1s
    The emphasis of such writers as Hecht and Cockburn on the multina-
tionals, not to mention the American government, seems somewhat mis-
placed when one considers the scale of the disasters the Brazilians create
on their own. Hecht and Cockburn are so anxious to find American vil-
lains that they misidentify the former State Department official (and cur-
rently my colleague at the Council on Foreign Relations) Richard Murphy
as the American diplomat allegedly present at the interrogation of a politi-
cal prisoner who had been tortured in Recife in 1968. Ambassador Mur-
phy, in fact, has never set foot in Brazil. Hecht and Cockburn also claim
that "U.S. support for the generals remained constant;' but this will come

13Elenira Nazareth was killed after her capture by the army. See Elio Gaspari, A Di-
tadura Escancarada, vol. 2 of As Ilusoes Armadas (Sao Paulo: Companhia das
Letras, 2002). Gaspari provides a detailed account of this conflict.
14Jornal Pessoal, No. 64, July 1990.
15Anthony L. Hall, Developing Amazonia: Deforestation and Social Conflict in
Brazil's Carajds Programme (Manchester and New York: Manchester University
Press, 1989).
                                                        Chico Mendes • 237