

quality newspaper in Europe or North America. Brazil also boasts one of
the world's most successful television networks, TV Globo, and one of its
most aggressive publishing empires, Editora Abril, proprietor of the mass-
circulation newsweekly Veja, which reaches more than four million read-
ers, all of them full-fledged members of the emerging global consumer
order.


                                     II
A large segment of the population, perhaps 40 million people, however, re-
mains in poverty, with incomes below $50 a month. Brazil's income dis-
parities are among the worst in the world. The most impoverished 20
percent of Brazilians receive a mere 2 percent of the national wealth, while
the richest 20 percent receive 60 percent. Festering shantytowns surround
the large urban centers, and Rio's favelas are especially notorious for crime
and violence. This is the Brazil of half-starved children playing outside
makeshift shacks in dusty northeastern villages and smudge-faced urchins
knocked out by glue sniffing, huddled together under benches in Sao
Paulo's principal downtown squares. But extreme poverty is now concen-
trated in the semiarid northeast of Brazil, where drought and disease have
long been curses of biblical dimensions. Both were greatly aggravated in
1998 by the effects of El Nino. Brazilians are proud to call themselves a
racial as well as a political democracy, and are irritated when scholars and
activists point out that poverty is disproportionately concentrated among
the Afro-Brazilian population. In fact, whites on average earn two and a
half times as much as blacks. As veteran Brazil watcher Ronald Schneider
notes, out of 14,000 priests, 378 bishops and archbishops, and seven cardi-
nals, the Brazilian Catholic Church has only 200 nonwhite priests. Similar
disproportions can be seen in Brazil's diplomatic service and military offi-
cer corps.
   Nevertheless, the poor did see their lives improve during most of the
1990s, with large numbers of people moving up from the bottom ranks of
society into the emerging middle class. The credit for this change belongs
to Cardoso's Real Plan, introduced in 1994 while he was finance minister
under President Itamar Franco. Confronted with economic chaos and
feverish inflation, Cardoso created a new currency, the real, linked to the
u.S. dollar, with its value pegged to permit only minimal depreciation. In-
flation plunged from more than 2,000 percent annually to single digits,
with instant tonic effects felt throughout the country.
   As the currency stabilized, Brazilians had money to spend for refrigera-
tors, televisions, and clothing. Analysts looking at consumer trends over
the first six years of the Real Plan reckoned that some 19 million people
248 • NakedTropics

moved from basic subsistence into the lower level of the Brazilian middle
class, which by the year 2000 embraced some 58 million people. Those who
remained poor benefited as well, finding more money in their pockets for
meat, chicken, eggs, corn, and beans. Their income increased by 30 percent
during 1995-1996 alone. In earlier decades, poverty pushed millions of
Brazilians from the hinterlands into Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro and out
into the frontier on the western fringes of the Amazon basin. During the
1990s, prosperity allowed many of the smaller cities in the interior of
Brazil to flourish, attracting some five million mostly middle-class people
searching for a better quality of life.
   The spread of prosperity and population over the face of Brazil has
made it both a more homogenous and a more complex society. For four
and a half centuries, most of Brazil's population remained around key sea-
ports close to the zones where sugar, cotton, cacao, coffee, and other major
export commodities are grown. Brazil's first historian, Friar Vicente do
Salvador, writing in 1627, said that the Portuguese settlers and their
African slaves "scratched at the seacoast like crabs." The first Europeans to
penetrate the vast interior were intrepid missionaries, explorers, and ruth-
less Portuguese frontiersmen traveling up the Amazon River and the tribu-
taries that run south into the La Plata basin. This huge geographical area,
larger than the contiguous United States, remained for centuries a hollow
frontier, incorporating vast unexplored territories and many thousands of
indigenous peoples unknown to the Portuguese governors and viceroys
who ruled until 1808, or to the Portuguese monarchs who held court in
Rio de Janeiro between 1808 and 1821, or to the Brazilian emperors Pedro
I and Pedro II, who succeeded them after the declaration of Brazil's inde-
pendence from Portugal in 1822, or to the generals and civilian politicians
who established the United States of Brazil in 1889.
   Yet slowly and inexorably the hollow frontier was filled in, as cattle
ranchers moved inland from the coast and squatters established them-
selves between the plantation-dominated littoral and the backlands. These
independent-minded mixed-race families lived largely outside the juridi-
cal formulas that elsewhere defined and contained both Portuguese mas-
ters and African slaves, but they helped root Brazilian society in the
Brazilian landscape.
   In the eighteenth century, the first great modern gold rush brought Eu-
ropean settlers, slaves, and, belatedly, government, into the mountainous
interior of what is today the state of Minas Gerais. Today the spectacular
churches and mountain towns they constructed are among Brazil's most
precious colonial heritage; here the magnificently carved figures of the
Apostles by the crippled mulatto sculptor Aleijadinho stand as marvels of
this age of extravagance and piety. In the nineteenth century, large-scale
                                                     TheTwo Brazils • 249