

splendid baroque churches and eighteenth-century townhouses have been
magnificently restored; old forts and ruins of Jesuit missions along the
southern frontier have become popular tourist attractions. But these
buildings are artifacts of the traditional Brazilian history, while the past
that Brazil is rediscovering is replete with contradictions.
     Brazil's transition to national independence in 1822, unlike that of its
Spanish American neighbors, preserved great continuity in institutions-
the military, the law, and administration. It was led, after all, by the eldest
son of the Portuguese monarch, who promptly named himself Emperor
Pedro I. Portuguese-speaking America, unlike its Spanish-speaking neigh-
bors, also avoided fragmentation into numerous new republics. Indepen-
dent Brazil emerged as a monarchy with its huge territory intact. The state
.as it developed was, as a consequence, highly centralizing, and the national
mythology it spawned depicted the country as a product almost exclusively
of the coastal Portuguese and the imperial inheritance.
    But today Brazilians are learning a new history. It brings into focus the
unruly Brazil of the escaped slaves who held out for decades in the backlands
of what is today the state of Alagoas against the Portuguese in the seven-
teenth century; the bloody uprisings in the Amazon, Pernambuco, and the
southern borderlands of Rio Grande do SuI against the Brazilian Empire in
the early nineteenth century; and the extraordinary messianic communities
of the semiarid interior of Bahia brutally suppressed a century ago and im-
mortalized by the great Brazilian essayist Euclides da Cunha in his Rebellion
in the Backlands, and more recently by the Peruvian novelist Mario Vargas
Llosa in his War at the End ofthe World. The historian Laura de Mello e Sousa
calls this the Brazil of the "unclassified ones"-the majority of the Brazilian
population, neither white nor black, neither slave master nor slave in origin,
not landowners but squatters and smallholders, not only Portuguese but
Italians, Germans, Japanese, Arabs, and Jews, as well as mestizos, mulattos,
Indians, and Africans, not only bankers but small entrepreneurs and shop-
keepers, not just bishops but African orixas and Pentecostal pastors.
    The recognition of the "unclassified ones" has been accompanied by the
emergence of movements among the landless, the indigenous peoples, in-
dustrial workers, Protestants, and others. African Brazilians are perhaps
the most important group now finding a political voice.! For centuries,


1Racial self-definition is a complex matter in Brazil, where a very wide range of
racial categories between black and white has traditionally been recognized. The
count of "African Brazilians" varies from a high of 120 million, using a U.S. defini-
tion that includes all persons with some degree of African ancestry, to Brazil's offi-
cial 1991 census estimate, which listed only 7 million blacks (pretos) and classified
62 million Brazilians as browns (pardos). Essentially in stark contrast to the tradi-
tional U.S. classification, being black in Brazil means having no white ancestors.
Brazil was the foremost recipient of African slaves in the Western Hemisphere.
246 • NakedTropics