

described how cheap life remained in the Brazilian backlands. 24 The warn-
ings of Amnesty preceded by three months Chico Mendes's assassination.
The Americas Watch report's publication in January 1991 coincided with
the killing of a union leader whose life Americas Watch had specifically
warned was in danger.
   Ironically, the road Mendes opposed has now been rerouted through
Xapuri and Brasileia and on to the Peruvian frontier, much to the delight
of the rubber tappers who control much of the land in the region and hope
to benefit from it. And Mendes's widow has used some of the money she
received for the film rights to The Chico Mendes Story to buy a small ranch,
notwithstanding the criticism of ranching and its ecological effects by
Mendes and his environmentalist allies. 25 It is here, regrettably, that the
mystification of the Mendes case, the view that the situation has improved
as a result of his martyrdom, and the sordid squabbles over the Mendes
legacy create a smoke screen that obstructs rather than encourages any res-
olution of the incalculable disaster that is unfolding inexorably in the
Amazon. 26




24Rural Violence in Brazil: January 1991, An Americas Watch Report (New York:
Human Rights Watch, 1991).
25Jan Rocha, "Mendes and His Murderers;' TLS, January 11, 1991,7. See also "A
vida nova de Ilzamar" in Veja, December 12, 1990, 34.
26In the government of Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva which took office on January 1,
2003, Marina Silva, who was co-founder with Chico Mendes of the CUT affiliate in
Acre, became minister of the environment.
SKDAN CHAIR
                                                       CHAPTER            13
                                              The Two Brazils
                                   "We progress at night when the politicians sleep."
                                                                -Brazilian saying




As 1998 began, Brazilians were full of confidence that their country was
poised to surge into the twenty-first century, that perhaps it was finally on
the road to becoming the great power many had long imagined it would
be. In 1994, Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a former
Marxist professor of sociology turned neoliberal reformer, had master-
minded a sweeping currency reform-the Real Plan-which joined other
liberalizing measures and thrust Brazil, with the world's eighth-largest
economy, into the forefront of the global trend toward open markets and
free trade. Not only were Brazilians prospering but their decade-old de-
mocracy had found solid footing. Later in 1994, Cardoso was rewarded for
his efforts as finance minister with the presidency, becoming Brazil's sec-
ond directly elected civilian chief executive since the military surrendered
power in 1985.


                                     II
Then came the global economic crisis, beginning with the currency col-
lapses in Southeast Asia in 1997, escalating with the Russian defaults in Au-
gust 1998, and landing with a crash on Brazil shortly after. Having failed,
despite its many other successes, to get its fiscal house in order, Brazil
found itself dangerously dependent on infusions of foreign capital to fi-
nance its trade and government deficits, struggling to stay afloat even as
nervous investors fled with their dollars.