

coffee bean plantations were developed in Sao Paulo and Parana in the
south, reviving the demand for African slaves. After the abolition of slavery
in 1888, immigrant laborers poured in from Italy and southern Germany,
joined in the 1920s by newcomers from Japan. By the early twentieth cen-
tury, a cotton textile industry was established in Sao Paulo, augmented in
the 1960s by steel and automobile industries, creating an industrial urban
working class and a powerful business elite.
    Both civilian and military rulers saw the development of the interior as
the means to Brazil's future greatness. In the late 1950s, President Juscelino
Kubitschek forced through the extraordinary plans for the futuristic new
capital and federal district of Brasilia, set down like a spaceship on the
largely uninhabited high plateau of Goiania in the center-west of the coun-
try. Modernistic bowls, towers, and upturned cups contained the Congress
and its functionaries, dwarfed against a backdrop of enormous sky and red
earth. Soon thereafter, the generals who ousted Kubitschek's successor,
President Joao Goulart, and established one of Latin America's longest-
lived military regimes (1964-1985) embarked on a series of grandiose
schemes to develop the Amazon. Ignoring the established river-based life-
lines, they drove roads straight through the tropical rain forest and built
huge dams to tame the Amazon's tributaries and flood the river plains,
often with disastrous ecological consequences. The highways brought with
them economic exploitation and its predictable companions, greedy spec-
ulators and corrupt and callous bureaucrats, as well as a plague of infec-
tious diseases. The forced contact with the outside world was disastrous for
the remaining 250,000 Brazilian Indians, the majority living in the Ama-
zon forests. The long-isolated Yanomami were hard hit with malaria as
10,000 prospectors invaded their territory in the late 1980s.
   The military regime also poured money into the expansion of higher
education, substituting more pragmatic American approaches for the old
French-influenced disciplines that had produced Cardoso and other schol-
ars. But this only created a new generation enamored of democracy as well
as technology. Purging and exiling Cardoso (who was seen as a dangerous
Marxist despite the fact that he was the son and grandson of generals) and
other professors from the University of Sao Paulo and other major institu-
tions also had paradoxical consequences. It provoked u.S. foundations,
notably the Ford Foundation, to invest heavily in a parallel system of pri-
vate research centers in Brazil that would later provide a haven and politi-
cal base for the democratic opposition.
   Meanwhile, the exiles were welcomed on American campuses. Cardoso,
who lived in Chile, and later in France, became a visiting professor at the Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, and Stanford University, and spent two years at
the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, working closely
250 • NakedTropics