


                                    243
244 • NakedTropics

   President Cardoso, who won a second term in October of 1998 in the
midst of the crisis, was forced to take drastic measures to cut government
spending, increase taxes, and reduce indebtedness. In return, Brazil won a
$41.5 billion bailout orchestrated by the International Monetary Fund
(IMF)-and the guarantee of more painful measures to come, as well as a
recession that promises to be long and deep. Cardoso, who was, in his
Marxist days, a high priest of dependency theory-the notion that the de-
veloped capitalist nations would forever hold the less developed econo-
mies in thrall-must have wondered if he had been so wrong after all.
   Yet Brazil's decade of political and economic success changed the coun-
try in certain irreversible ways. And the changes will, paradoxically, com-
plicate its recovery. Prosperity, the opening up of political life, and the
expansion of educational opportunities brought with them a deeper polit-
ical engagement by the population, and the emergence of unions, political
parties, and a variety of grassroots organizations. To a degree that is un-
precedented in the country's history, Brazilians found their political voice,
and they began to rethink what it means to be Brazilian.
   IMF-mandated policies thus risk bringing about headlong confrontation
between the Brazil of bankers and businessmen and a new Brazil of political
and social activism. One thing is certain: the Brazilian government can no
longer rule by dictate or from the top down, whatever it promises the IMF.
   How successfully these two Brazils work out their collective future will
be one of the most dramatic stories of the first decade of the twenty-first
century, and not only for Brazil. Failure in this South American giant will
profoundly affect the reforms under way throughout Latin America as well
as the assumptions on which the new international economic order has
been founded. It is precisely for this reason that then u.S. Treasury Secre-
tary Robert Rubin declared that Brazil is "too big to be allowed to fail."
   Brazil for many foreigners is still the land of the bossa nova and "The Girl
from Ipanema:' but Brazilians themselves are becoming irritated with their
country's willful folkloric self-image as forever young, bronzed, and beach
bound, oblivious to the past and giddily committed to a future as ephemeral
as the country's torrid telenovelas. Antonio Carlos Jobim, author of that
great lyrical celebration of Ipanema beach and the graceful passing beauty
of its denizens, once said that Brazil is "not for beginners." And he was right.
   Brazilians still want to have fun, to be sure, and no one is proposing the
abolition of Carnival. Yet as Brazil has embraced democracy, bringing new
voices into the political and social arenas, Brazilians are beginning to rec-
ognize that getting to the future involves understanding the past.
   This new concern with history is reflected in the recent vogue for restor-
ing colonial architecture-some of the most extraordinary examples in the
Americas-which was once allowed to rot or was simply swept away to
make room for modern buildings. In Bahia and Sao Luis in Maranhao,
                                                         TheTwo Brazils • 245