




Fifty miles across the Pearl River estuary from Hong Kong lies the ancient
city of Macao. First settled by the Portuguese in the 1550s, it was handed
back to China on December 20, 1999. This tiny European enclave on the
South China Sea played a small and long-forgotten role in U.S. history; on
July 3, 1844, the first Chinese-American treaty, known as the Treaty of
Wang Xia, was negotiated and signed here. In 1997 the Chinese made
much of the fact that their recuperation of sovereignty over Hong Kong
marked the final abrogation of the 1842 Chinese-British Treaty of Nanjing,
whereby China had ceded Hong Kong to Queen Victoria "in perpetuity"
and was forced to pay $12 million for having "obliged" the British to wage
war on them, as well as compensation to the tune of an additional $6 mil-
lion for the cost of the opium seized from British merchants and destroyed
by the Chinese authorities-the original casus belli of the "Opium War."
   In contrast, the Treaty of Wang Xia was not punitive; and the United
States-with its own anticolonial past strongly in mind-acquired the
same "most favored nation" status in China that the British enjoyed, not by
force of arms but by convincing the Chinese that it sought no unfair ad-
vantage and, above all, did not seek territory.
   In July 1844, Caleb Cushing, a congressman from Massachusetts and a
forceful advocate for the China trade merchants of his state, and the Impe-
rial commissioner Qiying met at the old Temple of Kun lam, which today

                                     257
258 • NakedTropics

faces onto a busy avenue toward the center of the small peninsula on which
Macao stands. At that time, the temple lay within the Chinese village of
Wang Xia, just outside the seventeenth-century walls of Macao city but
well inside the territory controlled by the Portuguese. Kun lam, as she is
known in Macao, is the Buddhist Kwan Yin, Goddess of Mercy and Queen
of Heaven. The image of the goddess, dressed in the robes of a Chinese
bride, is set above the altar table in the smoky inner third chamber of the
temple, where, on a side wall, a long glass case contains the gold lacquer
figures of eighteen Chinese wise men, including Marco Polo-whose stat-
uette has bulging round eyes, a largish nose, and a small curly beard in-
tended to denote his European origin. Beyond the temple's maze of shrines
lies a garden with a round stone table, four simple granite stools, and a
plaque written in Chinese that mark the spot where the treaty of "peace,
amity, and commerce" was signed by Caleb Cushing and Qiying.
    The Treaty of Wang Xia gave American cargo ships access to the five
Chinese treaty ports, only recently forced open to foreigners as a result of
the Opium War, and it also gave Americans the right to construct hospitals,
churches, and cemeteries in China, a privilege the missionaries who served
as Caleb Cushing's translators in Macao were especially anxious to obtain.
The Imperial commissioner Qiying had been China's representative at the
acrimonious Nanjing negotiations, and his large entourage of soldiers, ser-
vants, officials, and advisers was lodged at the Temple of Kun lam during
the negotiations with Cushing.
    The Treaty of Wang Xia, which governed the American relationship
with China until 1905, committed the United States and China "to a per-
fect reciprocity" and was concluded with the utmost cordiality in less than
two weeks. As Qiying wrote to Cushing when inviting him to take "fruit
and tea" at the temple of Kun lam: "This conduct is vastly different from
that of the English taking and keeping possession of Hong Kong...." 1
    The British officials based in Hong Kong had implied that the Chinese
could not be trusted to police their own agreement since it was insinuated
in London that they had signed one document with the British, but then
published a different version for the use of their own customs officials.
Cushing thought it "a harsh construction to suspect the Chinese of such an
act." The problem, he thought, had more to do with the "want of care on the
part of the English translators." Daniel Webster, the U.S. secretary of state,
had given Cushing careful instructions: "You are a messenger of peace, sent
by the greatest power of America to the greatest empire in Asia to offer re-