

    The Portuguese arrived in the Pearl River estuary as early as 1513, al-
though Macao itself was not settled by them until 1557. The initiative for
its founding came from the merchants of Malacca, seized by Afonso de Al-
buquerque in 1511, giving the Portuguese a stronghold on the critical sea
passage between the South China Sea and the Bay of Bengal. Initially,
Macao's prosperity rested on its strategic location on the trade route from
Goa through Malacca to Japan. No less important was access to Guang-
zhou, the great outlet for South China silk, porcelain, and lacquerware, a
three-to-five-day voyage some eighty miles up the Pearl River from Macao.
    Climatic conditions were also important for Macao. As the Northern
Hemisphere tilts on its axis toward the sun in the early spring, the Asia
landmass warms and the rising heated air creates a low-pressure zone,
drawing the cooler, denser air from the ocean, creating the southern mon-
soon, which blows up the Indian Ocean and eastward and northward along
the China coast. In the autumn the process is reversed. For centuries,
seaborne traders took advantage of the monsoons, moving north and east
to arrive off the southern coast of China in the spring and summer and de-
parting for South and Southeast Asia in the winter. The Canton fairs of
January and June were held to coincide with the monsoons.
    The Portuguese, who saw Macao always from the seaward end of the
peninsula, named it after the seaward-facing temple of A Ma. The Chinese,
looking out to the peninsula from the mainland, named the narrow sand
spit and the hills of the peninsula beyond after the stem and bud of a lotus
flower. The Chinese found the Portuguese both peculiar and fearsome.
"They are white and black," one Chinese observer noted. "The faces are
pink, and their hair is all white. Even the young appear as white as snow."
The Chinese were impressed by the European's "beaklike noses, deep-set
green eyes, piercing and unblinking like a cat's." The African slaves the Por-
tuguese brought with them the Chinese claimed were "generally similar to
humans." The Chinese believed that the Portuguese were cannibals, kid-
napped children, and were quic~y roused to anger and violence, at which
time they ceased to be human and became wild animals. 4 The Chinese also
had a healthy respect for Portuguese firepower and fighting ability, and
wanted to confine them to a remote place where they could be observed,
monitored, and, if need be, learned from. The technological wonders and
curiosities to be observed in Macao especially intrigued the Chinese. One
Chinese observer found a "particularly obscene device:' the inflatable
naked woman made of leather and silk some Portuguese travelers carried
with them in a case to be taken to bed when needed.

4There was truth to the charges of kidnapping. See C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, Fi-
dalgos in the Far East, 1550-1770 (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1948),223.
                                                                   Macao • 261