

IOYoshitomo Okamoto, The Namban Art ofJapan (New York and Tokyo: Weather-
hill and Heibonsha, 1972). See also Luiz Carlos Lisboa and Mara Rubia Arakaki,
Namban (Sao Paulo: Alian~a Cultural Brasil-Japao, 1993).
IIC. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, Portuguese Society in the Tropics: The Municipal
Councils of Goa, Macao, Bahia, and Luanda 1510-1600 (Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, 1965).
12For these events, see Boxer, Fidalgos in the Far East, 72-92; and Jonathan Israel,
The Dutch Republic and the Hispanic World, 1606-1661 (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1982), 119-120.
264 • NakedTropics

sent a delegation to plead with the Japanese to reverse their prohibition. As
a final warning that they meant what they said, the Japanese executed
sixty-one of the delegates; only the servants were spared to relay the mes-
sage back to Macao.
   Portugal's assertion of its own sovereignty in the revolution against
Spanish rule in 1640 also meant that Macao's lucrative trade with Manila
collapsed. In China, the Manchus had overthrown the Ming dynasty and
were consolidating their power. With Manila and Japan gone, the Macao
merchants no longer had the silver with which to finance their trade. "We
are living proof of the fable of Midas who died of very hunger at a table of
golden dishes," wrote one Macao merchant, Joao Marques Moreira, in
1644. "Such is happening to us now, for having seen our tables replete with
gold, silver, diamonds, rubies, pearls and seed pearls, we are dying by
inches."13 The Jesuit priest Gabriel de Magalhaes drew an equally discour-
aging lesson. "Can God forget the piety of such a city," he wrote to the
Macao Senate from Peking in 1656. "Where is the refuge and sanctuary of
religion but in this city, which is gloriously called after the name of God.
Can God forget his promises? He hath promised tribulations and a hun-
dredfold for the suffering of his saints; and a hundredfold will He pay."14
   After 1640, Macao turned to Indochina, Macassar, and Timor, and
many of its merchants became commission agents for Cantonese business-
men who continued to trade with the Japanese in Chinese junks. In fact,
Macanese merchants were often front men, or compradores, for wealthy
Chinese merchants and slipped easily into the role of intermediaries sell-
ing their names to both Chinese and Europeans to allow them to do busi-
ness through Macao.

                                       II
It was during the period of economic decline and isolation, however, that
the "Macanese" acquired a distinct identity. This identity was reflected, in
part, in their ethnic makeup through racial intermarriage or concubinage
between European men and Malay, Indian, Japanese, and Chinese women.
A Creole Macao patois developed, a mixture of Portuguese and Chinese
with Malay words and phrases, which facilitated communication between
Europeans and Chinese merchants and shopkeepers as the Macanese be-
came important intermediaries to both Chinese and Europeans. Macao's
domestic architecture and decoration reflected this eclectic mix, with large
roomy houses built around Chinese-styled central courts, shuttered Euro-
pean windows on upper stories, with doors opening onto an interior space