

 the end of 1998-Cardoso found his popular support waning. He self-
 consciously steered away from the heady rhetoric of populism, avoided
demagoguery, and preferred persuasion and compromise to executive
decree, but his resolve was increasingly tested as his term in office drew to
a close.
    Lula lost the 1998 election in part because he chose to attack the Real
Plan. But the 1998 elections also saw the emergence of middle-class Work-
ers' Party leaders who spoke a language closer to that of the new social
democrats of Europe, consciously avoiding the radical rhetoric of the shop
floor. These Workers' Party representatives in Congress provided solid op-
position to Cardoso's IMF-inspired policies over the course of his second
term. The center-left political allies within Cardoso's own political family
were alienated by his orthodox economic retrenchment, which cut deeply
into the social programs Brazil so desperately needs. The president also
found less support from powerful governors, especially since they were
forced to bear the brunt of the budget cuts. Particularly troublesome was
the newly elected governor of the important state of Minas Gerais, former
president Itamar Franco, under whom, as finance minister, Cardoso imple-
mented the Real Plan. The erratic Franco was still deeply resentful that
Cardoso and not he got all the credit. In fact it was his repudiation of the
debt of Minas Gerais with the federal government that provoked a major
crisis in Brazil's international financing and the devaluation of the Real
that shook Brazil in early 1999. 4 Nor will the protests of landless rural
workers go away. Stedile in particular made no secret of his desire to "finish
off the neoliberal model." Over the course of his second term the MST laid
siege to the family rural estate of President Cardoso several times, going so
far on one occasion as to invade the main house itself.
    It is ironic that in the charged international economic climate in which
Fernando Henrique Cardoso began his second term as president in 1999,
the protection of the Real Plan, by plunging Brazil into recession, posed the
greatest threat to the benefits it brought to many Brazilians. Yet posing one
of the greatest challenges to the IMF-mandated program to satisfy the inter-
national markets are groups and forces within Brazil that barely existed
before political and economic liberalization began in the early 1990s. The
travails of the Brazilian economy-no matter where they lead-should not
obscure the significant success story the rise of these new voices represents.




4S ee Kenneth Maxwell, «Brazil in Meltdown," World Policy Journal (Spring 1999),
25-33.
SCENE ON A COOLIE SHIP.
                                                        CHAPTER             14
                                                                     Macao
                                                                Shadow Land
                         "Wishing to speak ill oftheir adversary, the Chinese will say:
                                'He's a man who makes a habit ofgoing to Macao.' "
                                                -Father Matteo Ricci, Peking, 1605