

migrant agricultural workers, the illiterate, slum dwellers, all people the tra-
ditionalleft believed it was impossible to organize, stimulated by Brazil's
total failure for centuries to break the power of the great latifundios and
bring about any meaningful land distribution. Less than 1 percent of farms,
all over five hundred acres in dimension, account for 40 percent of all occu-
pied farmlands in Brazil. The movement was also energized by the expul-
sion of many smallholders from their plots, especially in Rio Grande do SuI,
Parana, and Santa Catarina, by the mechanization of large-scale soya and
wheat production in the 1980s. The MST is now the largest and best-orga-
nized social movement in Latin America, with successful cooperatives, a
website, and extensive international contacts. Its members often take the
law into their own hands, invading properties and setting up squatter settle-
ments, sacking warehouses to obtain food, and challenging landowners. Al-
most as often they provoke violent reactions from Jazendeiros (large
landowners), local police, and hired gunmen. 3
    What the MST seeks is access to land and the breakup of the large es-
tates, many of which remain undeveloped and unproductive, or are held
for tax purposes or to draw government subsidies. Its ideology is an eclec-
tic mix of revolutionary socialism and Catholic activism, as befits an orga-
nization built in large part by itinerant priests. Its most prominent leader is
an economist named Joao Pedro Stedile, who did postgraduate work in
Mexico and takes inspiration from the Mexican Zapatistas. He argues that
the Brazilian elite is too "subservient to foreign interests"-an obvious
swipe at the IMF and the forces of global capitalism as well as the former
dependentista, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, while he was lodged in the fu-
turistic presidential palace in Brasilia.
    Finally there is the Brazilian environmental movement, composed of
some 800 organizations stirred into being by the uncontrolled destruction
of the Amazon rain forest, ecological disasters in the grotesquely polluted
chemical complex at Cubatao in Sao Paulo state, and rampant encroach-
ment on the remnants of the once-lush Atlantic forests.
    In 1998 forest fires in the Amazon region, aggravated by the impact of £1
Nino, were the worst on record, but the Cardoso administration did little
to respond until the extent of the catastrophe became difficult to hide. The
devastating drought in the northeast, another predictable consequence of
£1 Nino, also received scant attention until famished peasants organized by
the MST raided warehouses and occupied bank agencies and police sta-
tions. This finally caught the attention of the indifferent bureaucrats in the
surreal world of Brasilia, preoccupied with the purchase of expensive Ori-
ental carpets for their offices so that "foreign visitors could be more ele-

30 n the MST see Bernardo Mancano Fernandes, A formarao do MST no Brasil
(Petr6polis, R.I.: Editora Vozes, 2000).
                                                     TheTwo Brazils • 253