

gantly received;' as a spokesman for the minister of communication ex-
plained to the New York Times. Not surprisingly, all these movements strike
a raw chord with the "owners of power," as the brilliant Brazilian lawyer
and social critic Raymundo Faoro so aptly put it. Owing to the overseas
support the environmental movement receives, the Brazilian military
views it as a pawn of foreign interests, part of a thinly disguised effort by
the United States to take the Amazon away from Brazil. The military intel-
ligence network closely monitors the activities of the MST, and President
Cardoso's ministers often dismissed the movement as "enemies of moder-
nity." It was similar attitudes that a hundred years ago led to the repression
and slaughter in the backlands so brilliantly immortalized by Euclides da
Cunha and Mario Vargas Llosa.
    The great twentieth-century Brazilian historian Sergio Buarque de
Holanda defined a Brazilian as a "cordial" individual, and Brazilians are
people of great and infectious charm. But where politics and social con-
flicts meet, their country can be a very violent place. It has many martyrs to
prove it, among them Chico Mendes, gunned down in 1988 by cattle
ranchers threatened by his rubber tappers' movement. More than a thou-
sand labor leaders and grassroots peasant activists have been assassinated
in Brazil since the mid-1980s. In much of the country the murderers of ac-
tivists act with impunity. In November 1998, Miguel Pereira de Melo, the
crusading Brazilian photojournalist, was killed by gunmen. He had re-
corded the 1996 massacre of landless peasants by military police and was
about to testify at the trial of those officers.


                                      IV
The subtler obstacles to pluralism may prove the hardest to overcome. Re-
form will require changing an oligarchic style of politics and an entrenched
bureaucracy that have both skillfully deflected challenges for centuries. In-
deed, the deals made to bring about the transition from military to civilian
rule during the 1980s guaranteed the persistence in power of many old-line
politicians, including preeminently the powerful Bahia political boss, for-
mer state governor and president of the Senate, Antonio Carlos Magalhaes.
ACM, as he is universally known, is a gregarious, tough, and single-minded
political operator who proudly professes his admiration for Napoleon.
Through most of the Cardoso administration he was as influential as ever, a
pivotal figure in the coalition that supported Cardoso-an odd but very
Brazilian twist of fate since Cardoso was precisely the sort of upper-class in-
tellectual that Antonio Carlos Magalhaes and other power brokers under
the military regimes of the past most distrusted.
   The bosses and bureaucrats have plenty to protect. The welfare and
pension system, for example, does virtually nothing for the poorer workers
254 • NakedTropics

but vastly benefits state functionaries. In 1996, Brazil had twenty-nine
four-star generals on active duty and 5,000 people drawing generous pen-
sion checks at the four-star level, including far-flung relatives of dead and
retired officers.
   Brazil's formal political structure also makes reform excruciatingly dif-
ficult. It has twenty-seven state governors and more than 5,500 municipal
mayors (prefeitos), many of whom have run up massive deficits which by
tradition the federal government is expected to cover. The 1988 constitu-
tion obliges the central government to transfer a large share of tax revenues
to the state governments and municipalities but without a commensurate
shift of responsibility for government programs. The idea was to devolve
power and encourage democracy. The result was to strengthen parochial
interests and the local political bosses. These problems were aggravated by
the Real Plan's success, since, during the years of high inflation, govern-
ment deficits had miraculously disappeared as delayed payments wiped
out obligations. But after 1994 such flimflams no longer worked, as money
retained its value. The opening of the economy and the stabilization of the
currency had some perverse effects as well. Many industrial workers were
displaced as imports flooded the consumer market. Not only did the ser-
vice sector expand, but many industrial workers were forced into the infor-
mal sector. Subsequently, unemployment increased dramatically.
   Cardoso hoped to pass a half-dozen ambitious reform measures during
his first term-from cutting public payrolls to rewriting tax laws-and,
not surprisingly, all fell victim to constant dilution and delays. His major
success, altering the constitution to allow for his own reelection, was
bought at the high cost of also allowing state and local political bosses to
run for reelection. They promptly opened the spending spigots to ensure
victory at the polls, swelling public-sector debt to more than $300 billion
in early 1998 and leaving Brazil pitifully vulnerable when the international
crisis hit.
   President Cardoso found it difficult to sustain the momentum of re-
form in his second term. Arrayed against him were the old corporatist in-
terests, eager to protect the past and their own privileges, as well as the
newly assertive groups such as the MST, which opposed Cardoso's policies.
   Cardoso's popularity, though great enough to have reelected him with a
clear majority in the October 1998 presidential election, was based almost
entirely on the success of the Real Plan. He saw himself as a man of the cen-
ter-left, an adherent of the new "third way" of Bill Clinton and Tony Blair,
but was perceived by the public as being a political leader decisively of the
center-right, the friend of bankers, industrialists, civil servants, and politi-
cians rather than workers and the landless. As the realities of IMF-imposed
austerity begin to hit home-Brazil's economy was already shrinking by
                                                      TheTwo Brazils • 255