

    Chinese dislike and suspicion of Westerners remained strong through-
out the Ming period and beyond. The Italian-born Jesuit Matteo Ricci,
who had entered China in 1582, writing to the general of the Jesuit Order
Claudio Acquaviva, noted that those wishing to speak ill of their adver-
saries say, "He's a man who makes a habit of going to Macao."5 To keep out
such influences, in 1573 the Chinese district magistrate ordered the con-
struction of a barrier gate surmounted by a small gatehouse at the mid-
point of the sand spit between the Macao peninsula and the mainland.
Here Chinese troops were stationed to control the flow of people and
goods across the border. 6
   When, in 1684, after a period of prohibition, China resumed foreign
trade contacts, Macao was incorporated in China's system of port control,
and in 1688, the Chinese established a customs office (hoppo) in Macao.
Chinese bureaucratic oversight was increased in the eighteenth century,
when the Portuguese-Macanese fleet was strictly limited to twenty-five
vessels. In 1736, a local mandarinate was established, and at midcentury
the district magistrate moved his residence to the Chinese village of Wang
Xia within the Macao peninsula itself.? In effect, Macao lived under an
overlapping mixed Portuguese-Chinese jurisdiction, and the Portuguese
paid tribute to the Chinese emperor for the right to reside there.
   The link with Lisbon was always tenuous. The distance between Portu-
gal and Macao by sea was immense, a voyage of some 10,000 to 15,000
miles that began south and west across the Atlantic to Brazil, then east to
the Cape of Good Hope and north to Madagascar, across the Indian Ocean
to the Malabar Coast, on from Goa, Cochin, and Calicut and around India
to the Coromandel Coast and Malacca, and from there past Java and the
Malay Peninsula to Macao. Macao lived by commerce, and it was pivotal to
the trade network between Japan, South China, and Southeast Asia and
India. From the 1550s until the 1640s, it became prosperous on the silks
exported from China to Japan and the silver brought back from Japan in
payment. Silver was also used to purchase exports in Macao and Canton
for reexport to Southeast Asia, India, and Europe.


sJonathan D. Spence, The Memory Palace of Matteo Ricci (New York: Viking Pen-
guin, 1984), 193.
6The district or county office was the lowest level in the Chinese imperial bureau-
cracy. The major responsibility of this low-level bureaucrat in Macao was to make
sure that the Portuguese paid their annual rent and customs duties to the Chinese
imperial authorities. See Jonathan Porter, Macau: The Imaginary City (Boulder,
Colo.: Westview, 1996). Porter's is by far the best recent book on Macao in English.
7Angela Guimaraes, Uma relafiio especial: Macau e as relafoes luso-chinesas,
1780-1844 (Lisbon: Edi<;ao Centro de Investiga<;6es e Estudos de Sociologia,
1996.)
262 • NakedTropics

   Macao's prosperity depended in the early years on an inter-Asian com-
merce where the Portuguese had established themselves as intermediaries,
partly because of their superior gunpower but also because of the political
decision of the Chinese not to take part in overseas commerce and mar-
itime exploration, despite the success of their voyages into the Indian
Ocean in the preceding century.8 Goa, the administrative heart of all the
Portuguese settlements from East Africa to Japan, was at the western end of
this interoceanic commercial system. Every two or three years, the "Japan
ship" set out from Goa carrying cotton cloth from India, glassware, silver,
ivory, Spanish velvet and scarlet cloth, olives, olive oil, and wine. At
Malacca, pepper, cloves, and aromatic woods were taken on for sale in
Japan and China.
   At Macao, the carrack remained sometimes for up to a year before mak-
ing for Nagasaki with white silk, red silk, porcelain, musk, white and black
sugar, and other precious commodities. The Japanese called these vessels
Kuro-fune, or "black ships;' a name revived for Commodore Perry's vessels
three centuries later. Beginning in 1571, a prosperous if unauthorized
trade between Manila and Macao was financed by the silver flowing across
the Pacific from the mines of Peru and Mexico.
   The Portuguese administration of Macao reflected this seasonal,
oceanic, and inter-Asian trade. Executive authority was held not by a Por-
tuguese resident official but by the captain-major who commanded the
Japan-bound carrack, and he was only in Macao while en route to India or
awaiting the monsoon for the onward voyage to Japan. The "Great Ship of
the Amacon;' as the English called it, was an enormous vessel of 1,600 tons
or more, the largest in the world at the time; only the Manila galleon that
plied the Pacific between the Philippines and Acapulco was comparable. 9
The illustrious figure of the captain major is depicted in the Japanese
Namban-byobu screens of the period, where he is often shown sitting on a
folding chair on the ship's deck, surrounded by cases of trade goods, or he
is seen arriving on land in Japan with his retinue, accompanied by black