

IThe Sino-American Treaty and documents can be found in Hunter Miller, ed.,
Treaties and Other International Acts of the United States ofAmerica, 4 (Washing-
ton, D.C.: GPO, 1934),647-662.
                                                                  Macao • 259

spect and good will and to establish the means of friendly intercourse." It is
a pity that no senior u.s. public official in recent decades has taken the short
helicopter flight to Macao across the Pearl River estuary from Hong Kong
and stopped by at the Kun lam Temple. It would do no harm at all to think
back to the Treaty ofWang Xia once in a while, or to the goodwill the United
States could once count on, in its less bellicose days.


                                        II
The territory of Macao today consists of a tiny, densely populated penin-
sula of just over two square miles and two islands: Taipa, of 2.2 square
miles, and Coloane, of 3 square miles. Its population is about 430,000, of
which 97 percent are Chinese. Lisbon had wanted the transfer of Macao to
China to take place in 2007 and mark the four hundred and fiftieth an-
niversary of their settlement on the south China coast, but the Chinese
wished to have the matter settled before the end of the millennium. 2 The
British mandarins of Whitehall, who could not come to terms with the fact
that the Portuguese flag would fly over Macao longer than the Union Jack
flew over Hong Kong, and smarting from accusations that they blundered
in their reading of Chinese intentions and "lost" Hong Kong prematurely,
were quick to claim that the Portuguese had sold out to the Chinese long
ago. 3 Sir Percy Craddock, former British ambassador to Beijing and adviser
to Margaret Thatcher on China policy while she was prime minister, called
Portuguese authority in Macao "a ghostly sham." The Portuguese in
Macao, however, have been long used to such snootiness from the British,
who often forget that they arrived in China as drug dealers, not democrats.
The British inhabitants of Hong Kong in the 1850s called Macao "an un-
recognized and unpermitted, but unchallenged squatting, on an undefined
portion of Chinese territory."
   In many ways they were right. Lisbon was always very far away and the
Chinese very close at hand. Yet Macao had been most convenient to the
British for the century before their own forceful annexation of Hong Kong.
Prior to that date, the Chinese denied foreign merchants the right to re-
main year-round at the great trading city of Guangzhou (Canton), and
Macao was absolutely essential to British merchants, or to any other Euro-
pean or American merchants for that matter, if they wanted an entrep6t
from which to sell Indian opium and purchase Chinese tea. The ambiguity
of Macao's status suited all parties.

2S ee Geoffrey C. Gunn, Encountering Macau: A Portuguese City-State on the Periph-
ery of China, 1557-1999 (Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 1996).
3"Did Britain's Diplomats Blunder?" Economist, May 17,1997,47-48.
260 • NakedTropics