


8For a discussion of the seven great Chinese voyages of the Grand Eunuch Zheng
He between 1405 and 1433, see K. N. Chaudhuri, Trade and Civilization in the In-
dian Ocean: An Economic History from the Rise ofIslam to 1750 (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1985), especially 34-62.
9C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer's The Great Ship of the Amacon: Annals ofMacao and
the Old Japan Trade, 1555-1640 (Lisbon: Centro de Estudos Hist6ricos Ultramari-
nos, 1963) is one of the great works on the Portuguese in Asia and is still unsur-
passed for its pithy detail and original research. More recently, the Indian historian
Sanjay Subrahmanyam has written an excellent overview, The Portuguese Empire in
Asia, 1500-1700: A Political and Economic History (London and New York: Long-
man, 1993).
                                                                   Macao • 263

slaves and acrobats, Arabian steeds, cages of hawks, peacocks and tigers, to
be greeted by black-garbed Jesuits. 10
   To govern in the absence of the captain major, the citizens of Macao
formed an elected body, the Senado de Camara, in 1586. This included a
chief judge, a secretary, and a procurador, whose job was to represent the
city government with the Chinese authorities, which recognized his right
to do so. The Macao Senate thus became the first representative institution
established in Asia, occasionally removing Portuguese officials it disap-
proved of, and by running the day-to-day operations of the city. 11
   The impressive building of the Loyal Senate still dominates the colon-
naded central square of Macao. The walls of its council chamber are hung
with the portraits of the senators who have held office since the sixteenth
century; they have recently been joined by a portrait of Ho Yin, the rich
Chinese senator who ran the Chinese Chamber of Commerce in Macao
and was the unofficial link between the Chinese in Macao and Beijing in
the 1960s and 1970s. His son Edmund Ho Hau Wah became the first chief
executive of Macao when the enclave returned to China.
   The threats to Macao for most of its history came less from the Chinese,
in fact, than from other Europeans, especially the Dutch. The Jesuits built
the first fortification on the Monte, the central strong point of the penin-
sula; and the Jesuits as well as the fortress helped defend Macao from a
naval assault by the Dutch in 1622, when they laid siege to the city with
thirteen men-of-war carrying a force of 1,300 men. A large cannon
mounted on the Sao Paulo Church and manned by Father Jeronimo Rho, a
Jesuit of Italian origin and a mathematician, fired a shot that landed di-
rectly on the Dutch magazine. It was John the Baptist Day, and he was
promptly dubbed patron saint of the city. It was claimed that the African
slaves in Macao took the reference to John the Baptist too literally and to
celebrate the feast beheaded the unfortunate Dutch captives. I2
   In 1641, however, a key link in the trade chain that underpinned the
city's prosperity was broken when Malacca fell to the Dutch. Even more
catastrophic for Macao was the expulsion of the Portuguese from Japan in
1639, and the end of the profitable Japan commerce. The Senate of Macao