

with that wise and brilliant pragmatist, the veteran economist and proponent
of reform by "muddling through;' Albert o. Hirschman. When he returned to
Brazil in 1970, Cardoso, like many of the other upper-middle-class exiles of
his generation, had become thoroughly cosmopolitan, skeptical of Marxism,
well connected in the wider world, and thoroughly knowledgeable about the
workings of the u.s. political and economic systems.


                                      III
Momentous changes were also taking place at the grass roots within Brazil.
Throughout the late 1970s and early 1980s, trade unions that had been
founded in the 1930s during the dictatorship of Getulio Vargas on an Ital-
ian fascist model as syndicates dependent on the state shook off govern-
ment control. Most formidable was the metalworkers' union in Sao Paulo.
The unions nourished the emergence of a new Workers' Party (PT) in 1980
and a National Trade Union Confederation (CUT) in 1983. Together they
provided a base for the charismatic Luiz Inacio da Silva, popularly known
as Lula, who rose through union ranks from the shop floor and awakened
hopes that he would become a Brazilian Lech Walesa. Lula ran three times
unsuccessfully for the presidency, but in 2002 made a historic break-
through, and by 61 percent of the popular vote, a full 22.5 percentage
points more than the government candidate, former health minister Jose
Serra, was decisively elected Brazil's leader. 2
   The Workers' Party thrives in the industrialized south of Brazil, and by
the 1998 election had gained control of the important governorship of Rio
Grande do SuI with the election of PT candidate Olivio Dutra. But the or-
ganization of workers was not restricted to the industrial zones. Threat-
ened by the encroachment of cattle ranchers and loggers, rubber tappers
on the Amazon frontier began to mobilize in the 1980s to protect their
livelihood. Like the metalworkers in Sao Paulo, these poor workmen pro-
duced a formidable grassroots leader from among their ranks, Chico
Mendes. His rubber tappers' organization linked up with Brazilian social
activists and international environmental groups to pressure the Brazilian
government for recognition of their grievances and to carve out ecological
reserves to protect the forests on which their way of life depended. They
also developed critical networks of international supporters in Europe and
the United States who were able to pressure international lending agencies
such as the Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank to in-
corporate ecological concerns into their decisions about loans to Brazil.

2S ee Kenneth Maxwell, "Brazil: Lula's Prospects," New York Review of Books, De-
cember 5, 2002. For the early years of the PT see Margaret E. Keck, The Workers'
Party and Democratization in Brazil (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992).
                                                    TheTwo Brazils • 251

    The indigenous communities, facing a life-and-death struggle for sur-
vival as the outside world pressed in on their remaining refuges in the
Amazon basin, also found a voice during the 1980s. With the support of
international organizations such as the Cambridge, Massachusetts-based
Cultural Survival, tribes such as the Kayap6 and Xavante pressed for recog-
nition and protection against the freelance gold prospectors who were in-
vading their forests and polluting their rivers with deadly mercury. A
Xavante chief, Mario Juruna, was elected federal deputy in 1983, and Ail-
ton Krenak became well known in Brasilia and among the international
human rights networks.
    While the hierarchy of the Catholic Church was divided on its approach
to political activism, grassroots clergy strongly influenced by liberation
theology provided organizational support to Brazil's many new reform
movements. Protestant fundamentalists have also emerged as a force in the
Brazilian social and religious landscape. Small, impeccable, white Pente-
costal meeting houses now dot the landscape. The Universal Church of the
Kingdom of God, founded in 1977 by a Pentecostal pastor, Edir Macedo,
claims more than 3.5 million members and receives more than $700 mil-
lion in annual donations. It owns Brazil's third-largest TV network and
thirty radio stations. As it is often said in Brazil: "Catholics opted for the
poor; the poor opted for the evangelicals."
    Many Protestant converts come from the lower levels of the new urban
middle class. Protestant evangelicals practice a faith of personal salvation
and promote a frugal lifestyle emphasizing thrift and family. They are seen
as a conservative force; at the local level, however, their organizations have
quickly shifted to municipal activism, seeking improved water supplies
and better services, which has propelled them increasingly into politics.
The evangelical caucus in the Brazilian Congress had reached thirty-five by
1998, and an evangelical bishop in Rio de Janeiro, Carlos Rodrigues, has
consistently received a huge vote in congressional elections. The former
governor of the state of Rio de Janeiro and presidential candidate in 2002,
Anthony Garotinho, is also an evangelical. Responding to the evangelical
challenge, the Catholic Church in Brazil is now encouraging a powerful
charismatic movement that is galvanizing many of the faithful in Brazil's
cities. The charismatics, like the evangelicals, place a strong emphasis on
family values, but they, like the Catholic hierarchy, are also critical of the
harshness of Brazil's capitalist system.
    Most threatening to Brazil's political elite and to its large rurallandown-
ers in particular has been the emergence of a powerful rural movement of
the landless. Founded in Rio Grande do SuI in the mid-1980s, the Movi-
mento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Movement of Landless Rural
Workers, MST) now has some five hundred thousand members, including
all sorts of people from the margins of Brazilian society: the unemployed,
252 • NakedTropics