

decided, in effect, that to convince the Chinese of Christianity's validity, it
was necessary to impress the educated elite, to dazzle them with the Jesuits'
own education and skills. In order to do so, the Jesuits must learn the lan-
guage and traditions of China.
    Michele Ruggieri was the first new recruit under this dispensation to ar-
rive in Macao, via Goa in 1578, but he encountered enormous difficulty
himself in mastering Chinese and requested that Matteo Ricci be sent from
Goa to join him in Macao. Ricci was to be much more successful and went
on to establish, in 1601, the Jesuit mission in Peking. Here his skill and
what Ricci called his cosette, bits and pieces, metallic spheres, sundials,
prisms, and, above all, clocks, were much appreciated. Ricci and his follow-
ers attempted to show that the moral doctrine of Confucius in no way con-
flicted with Christian morality, and that the ritual observances were purely
secular. The remarkable Cologne-born Johann Adam Schall von Bell,
who arrived in Macao in 1619 in response to Ricci's call for true scien-
tists to meet the Chinese demand for competent mathematicians and as-
tronomers, succeeded brilliantly in fulfilling Valignano's surmise that
scholars more than mendicants would win the way to Peking. He studied
Chinese in Macao and helped defend the city from the Dutch in 1622; a
year later he was in Peking and accurately predicted the lunar eclipse with
great impact on the court, beginning an extraordinary career. He eventu-
ally became the first director of the Imperial Astronomical Bureau under
the Manchus, from 1644 to 1655, and was permitted to build a mission
compound and church close to the imperial palace, a place, to the surprise
of the Chinese hosts, the Portuguese president Jorge Sampaio sought out
during a visit to Beijing in 1998. The Peking Jesuits dressed and behaved
like Confucian literati, but they also brought ingenious gadgets and clever
maps, which allowed them to survive the transition from Ming to Qing dy-
nasties, providing protection for the Christian mission in China and ob-
structing other Europeans in their attempts to reach the Chinese court.
    The Jesuits, despite their dominant role, were not the first Catholic
order in China, nor were they the only order in Macao. The Augustinians,
Dominicans, and Franciscans had little love for the Jesuits, or for each
other. In 1613, Jesuits and Dominicans and their respective partisans
fought pitched battles in the streets with guns and swords, much to the
consternation of the Chinese authorities, who put the Canton armed
forces on alert and banned food sales to the Portuguese. 19 It was not the
Chinese who in the end undermined the Jesuits' position in China and
made impossible the continuation of their experiment in cultural adapta-


19The Macao Senate had to calm the Chinese with a lengthy memorial explaining
that no anti-Chinese plot was involved in the fracas.
                                                                  Macao • 271