

13Boxer; Great Ship from Amacon, 19.
14Ibid.
                                                                 Macao • 265

graced with carved, painted columns, ornate railings, interior lanterns, and
shrines. Macao's houses were painted yellow, green, and pink, soon faded
by the sun and stained with mildew from the subtropical rain. IS
    In the eighteenth century, English, and other European merchants who
were engaged in the Canton trade, prohibited from living permanently in
Canton by the Chinese, established year-long residences and trading com-
panies along the beautiful semicircular bay of Macao's Praia Grande.
Among the most important of their establishments was the headquarters
of the English East India Company, whose directors occupied a house close
to the Cam6es Grotto, which is now the offices of the Orient Foundation.
Through an archway still boasting the East India Company name stands
Macao's Protestant church and a leafy Protestant cemetery, where the
gifted painter of the South China coast George Chinnery (1774-1852) is
buried, as well as many young New England seamen, their names recorded
on simple headstones "raised by their messmates."16
   Opium was first imported to China from India for medical uses, princi-
pally to relieve pain and dysentery. But the traffic in opium escalated expo-
nentially after the English East India Company's tea monopoly was
abolished in the 1830s, and the tea market in Britain expanded by 40 per-
cent. The Chinese tried unsuccessfully to prevent the imports of opium,
provoking the aggressive intervention of British gunboats to protect
opium traders. Prosperity returned to Macao's waterfront, crowded now
with opium-laden vessels, its warehouses full of disguised crates awaiting
transshipment upriver to Canton.
   The founding of Hong Kong, however, struck at Macao's prosperity no
less than had the loss of Malacca and the destruction of the Portuguese
presence in Japan two centuries before. Macao was no longer needed to
house merchants engaged in the commerce of Canton. Macao's shallow,
easily silted harbor was no competition for Hong Kong's deepwater an-
chorage on the other side of the Pearl estuary. Macao's merchants thus
turned to less savory enterprises, creating an underworld specializing in
drugs, slavery, and prostitution. From the 1850s to the 1870s, the notorious
"coolie trade" to Peru and Cuba flourished in Macao; the conditions under

15The most accessible Chinese text on this period is the report by two officials,
Tcheong-u-Lam and Ian-kuong-Iam, Ou Mun Kei-Leok: monografia de Macau,
trans. Luis Gons:alves (Macao: Imprensa Nacional, 1950). Boxer reproduced the re-
markable illustrations of Chinese and Portuguese inhabitants of Macao contained
in the original manuscript in his Fidalgos in the Far East.
16This period has been skillfully evoked in the romanticized histories of Austin
Coates's City ofBroken Promises (Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1967) and
A Macao Narrative (Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1975). For the opium
trade, see Martin Booth, Opium: A History (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1998),
103-137.
266 • NakedTropics