

Portuguese-based Sol Estoril group. He is the head of the Shun Tak ship-
ping company, which dominates the transportation routes between Hong
Kong and Macao. There are very few enterprises or developments in
Macao in which Stanley Ho is not a major participant.
    Ho, now in his late seventies, was born in Hong Kong to a well-to-do
Eurasian family and educated at the University of Hong Kong. He made his
fortune during the Japanese occupation. Macao, as a Portuguese territory,
retained its neutrality during the Second World War and became a refuge
for many from Hong Kong. Ho developed a profitable trade between
Japan, Macao, and occupied Hong Kong. After the Communist takeover of
China and during the Korean War, he supplied the Chinese with gold and
airplanes and other embargoed materials.
    It is sometimes said of Stanley Ho's role that Macau it is the only place
in the world where a «casino king" owns his own colony. As one might ex-
pect, the Macao casino king is not himself a gambler; he does «not have the
patience for it:' he says. Stanley Ho and the Portuguese governor open the
gambling season on the eve of the Chinese New Year. Ho arrives in his
green Rolls Royce and the governor in a black Mercedes Benz to place the
first stakes at the roulette table at Ho's flagship, the «Casino Lisboa."
    The final years of Portuguese administration saw increasing gang vio-
lence around the edges of Ho's empire. He stepped up security and hired
Gurkhas demobilized by the British in Hong Kong to provide protection.
The triads, Chinese secret societies and criminal brotherhoods, have
played a key role in the Chinese underworld for centuries and are at war
again in Macao, with two Hong Kong-based gangs, the 14K and the Wo On
Lok (the latter through its Macao affiliate, the Shui Fong) pitted against
each other. These triad organizations are believed to number about
400,000 members worldwide, from corporate executives to street corner
thugs. 22
    The upsurge of gang-related shootings, knifings, arson, and bombings
in Macao is also partly attributed to the drying up of illegal shakedowns
from the construction business in the territory. The speculative property
boom in Macao, fueled by hot money flowing in from China in the early
1990s, burst after China clamped down in an attempt to cool off its econ-
omy. Property values in Macao collapsed, leaving more than thirty thou-
sand apartments, or a quarter of the total housing stock, empty and
unsold. Clampdowns on the triads in China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong
forced them to shift their operations to Macao.
    The triads are not subtle when they go to war. One of the first victims,
the general manager of the Macao Holiday Inn, Gerhard Kropp, tried to

22S outh China Morning Post, May 12, 1997.
                                                                Macao • 275

keep prostitutes and their pimps out of his lobby. He was ambushed at his
home by three assailants who hacked at him with knives and choppers. He
nearly lost three fingers and left for a new posting. «Choppings," an assault
with a cleaver, are the triads' favorite means to settle scores. The triads then
took their war to the elegant Praia Grande Avenue. Most blatant was a
pointblank and deadly fusillade unleashed by two motorcyclists brandish-
ing 7.62-mm Chinese military issue semiautomatic pistols, who ambushed
a car carrying a former officer of the Hong Kong police and a bodyguard of
the 14K's leader.
    The killings were believed to be in retaliation for the murder on Macao's
Taipa Island of a rich businessman and Kong Lik triad member from Hong
Kong who was a shareholder in one of the enclave's franchised VIP gam-
bling rooms and a gambling-tour operator for wealthy clients from Indo-
nesia, Hong Kong, and Thailand. 23 Breaking a long unwritten convention
against attacking senior government officials and expatriate Portuguese,
the gangs then attempted to murder the chief of Macao's gambling secre-
tariat, who was shot twice in the head and, despite a remarkable recovery,
was called back to Lisbon for his own safety.
    Macao's lone prodemocrat legislator, Antonio Ng Kuok-cheong, says po-
lice corruption and triad membership by officers have caused the crisis. He
blames the casino regulations that allow individuals to operate VIP rooms
for high rollers. 24 After several police raids on suspected triad safehouses
failed, the director of the judiciary police, Antonio Marques Baptista, con-
fiscated his officers' mobile phones and pagers and immediately met with a
striking success. He now never leaves his office without a bodyguard, and
his car is flanked by armed motorcycle outriders. A very nervous Macao
public was not reassured by Baptista's statement that for law-abiding men,
women, and children "the streets were safe because these attacks were car-
ried out by professional killers who never miss their targets."25
    The question of what constitutes a threat to «public order" has serious
political implications. Recurrent claims in the press that the «situation is
out of control" can provide an excuse for more Chinese intervention. Arti-
cle 18 of the Basic Law provides that: «In the event that the standing com-
mittee of the national People's Congress decides to declare a state of war or,
by reason of turmoil within the Macao Special Administrative Region,
which endangers national unity and is beyond the control of the govern-
ment of the region, decides that the region is in a state of emergency, the