

which the rural Chinese were transported as indentured workers to the
New World were as bad as those of the recently suppressed African slave
trade. Poverty and instability at home, and economic opportunities over-
seas, led to increasing mainland emigration to the Philippines, Cochin
China, Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia, as well as to Hawaii, the United
States, Canada, and South Africa. Most of the emigrants came from the
coastal districts of the Canton delta, which made Macao, more porous
than Hong Kong, an important conduit for remittances of the overseas
Chinese to their families at home.
   The political consequences followed quickly as well. The establishment
of Hong Kong inspired the Portuguese to seek a similar status for Macao.
Until the 1840s, the dual sovereignty exercised over Macao was of mutual
convenience to China and Portugal. But this balance of power was to
change dramatically. Encouraged by the example of the British, an aggres-
sive Portuguese governor, Joao Ferreira do Amaral, was determined to imi-
tate them. He imposed taxes on the Chinese fishermen, expelled the
Chinese customs agents, suspended the annual tribute payments to the
Chinese emperor, and took control of the barrier gate that had always been
under Chinese control.
   The Chinese reacted with fury. Governor Amaral, while inspecting the
new construction of the gate, was pulled from his horse and assassinated,
his head and left hand chopped off and taken back to China. When the
Chinese sent additional forces to garrison their fort outside Macao, a
young Macanese lieutenant, Mesquita by name, set out with thirty-six
Macanese soldiers and routed them. He became an instant hero to Macao's
residents, and his statue was raised in the square outside the Loyal Senate,
where it stood until it was destroyed by Maoist student rioters in 1966. But
the avenue that today cuts through what was once the old Chinese village
of Wang Xia still bears his name, and Governor Amaral is commemorated
by the road leading up to the old barrier gate, and did so at least until De-
cember 20,1999.
   The Chinese returned Governor Amaral's head and hand in 1850, and
his remains were later shipped to Lisbon to be buried in the curiously
named Cemiterio dos Prazeres (cemetery of the pleasures) in that city. But
symbols remain potent in this world of shadow play. Governor Amaral's
statue in Macao was removed in 1991 and sent back to Lisbon at the insis-
tence of the director of Beijing's Office of Hong Kong and Macao Affairs.


                                     III
In the sixteenth century, the Portuguese named Macao the "City of God in
China." Later on, they added the phrase, «There Is No Other More Loyal;'
                                                              Macao • 267

in recognition, it is said, of Macao's support of Portuguese independence
from Spain in 1640 despite the fact it was threatened by Spanish troops
from Manila, a city with which it enjoyed a profitable commerce. In fact,
the title was given in the early nineteenth century, when Macao resisted
British attempts to "protect" it from the French by sending in an occupa-
tion force during the Napoleonic Wars. The Portuguese were wont to name
their overseas settlements in such a grandiloquent manner, but such names
rarely stuck in popular usage. "Macao" is a bastardization of a Chinese
name, and referred to the bay of the goddess A Ma (A-Ma-Gao). Her tem-
ple, the oldest in Macao, faces out at the seaward end of the peninsula. It is
set tight against the rocks of the steep hillside, as a Chinese temple usually
is to placate the dragon who lived in such places. A Ma is holy to fishermen
and is daily thronged with worshipers, unlike Macao's largely empty
Catholic churches.
    I was in Macao at the time of the A Ma festival, and all day long the tem-
ple was filled with the endless staccato concussion of firecrackers, to which
the sampans and high-decked Pearl River fishing junks responded as they
rounded the headland on their way to and from Macao's inner harbor,
turning their prows toward the temple and paying a noisy obsequiousness
to the goddess. A modern maritime museum, built on landfill in front of
the temple gate, and where both Chinese and Portuguese navigational ex-
ploits are celebrated, was closed for the day in homage to a more ancient
presence, entirely hidden behind the intricate bamboo latticework and col-
orful banners of a traveling Chinese opera.
    At times, Macao certainly was the "City of God in China," home to
many zealous Jesuits and saints-to-be. The Spanish-born Francis Xavier
died on the nearby island of Shangchuan, awaiting the call to Peking that
never came, and the chapel named after him on Coloane Island contains
part of the left arm of the saint as well as the venerated bones of Viet-
namese and Japanese Christian martyrs. By the seventeenth century, it was
claimed that Macao had more convents and monasteries than Vatican City.
Speculative landfills and high-rise buildings have today almost obliterated
the old Macao of fortresses and churches, a skyline recorded by George
Chinnery in the nineteenth century, and which had remained largely un-
changed from the mid-seventeenth century until the late 1980s.
    In the eighteenth century, this remarkable cityscape often reminded
sailors arriving from the seaward side of the Macao peninsula of the bay of
Naples. Some part of this atmosphere still remains toward the end of the
Praia Grande, where the grand old Bela Vista Hotel, scene of much intrigue
over the decades, still sits high on the hillside. The Bela Vista, much to the
dismay of many, became the Portuguese consulate after Macao returned to
China. This area of Macao, with its curving seaside boulevard and old
268 • NakedTropics