

tion pioneered by Valignano; it was contention within the Catholic Church
over the question of how far the church should go in accommodating Chi-
nese traditions. The bitter controversy over Chinese rites was eventually
resolved against the Jesuits by papal decree in 1742. The Jesuit Order was
itself expelled by the Portuguese from its overseas possessions in 1759
(1762 in Macao) and suppressed by the papacy in the 1770s. 20 The vast
riches the Jesuits were supposed to have hoarded in secret tunnels between
their church and the Monte were never found; but old myths die hard, and
the archaeologists accompanying the building of a new historical museum
to present Macao's history beyond 1999 told me they are again searching
for these hidden chambers.
    Portugal suppressed the monastic orders in the 1830s, converting the
monasteries and convents to other uses. When in 1835 fire destroyed the
old Jesuit college, which once housed one of the great Western centers of
Chinese scholarship, it was no longer a place of worship but the kitchen for
the local garrison. In the narrow street that leads from the base of the steps
at Sao Paulo toward the grotto garden I noticed a shop window overflow-
ing with porcelain statuary. Here many small fat Chinese buddhas were
lined up beside several "mothers of heaven" or "Our Lady of Fatima;' fairly
interchangeable in these parts apparently depending on the season, as well
as miniature Red Guards raising a flag much in the style of the u.S.
Marines at Iwo Jima, and Mao holding up his little book, even Joseph
Stalin looking much as I remember seeing him in Moscow some weeks be-
fore he was removed from the Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square. In the end,
it seems most things can be commercialized.
    By the early nineteenth century, Macao had become a home base for
earnest Protestant missionaries, many of them Americans, doing good
works and building hospitals and anxious to proselytize the Chinese
masses. They were of course deeply suspicious of their Catholic hosts-a
suspicion returned in good measure by Macao's numerous Catholic
priests. The bishop of Macao's enormous palace, now empty, sits atop the
hill on the landward side of the Penha peninsula, of which the A Ma Tem-
ple marks the seaward end, just where the Chinese dragon might have been
supposed to live.
    The current bishop of Macao, Dom Domingos Lam, the first Chinese to
head the diocese since its founding in 1576, is turning the palace into a
university business and management school, and prefers to live elsewhere.

200n the expulsion of the Jesuits from Portugal and its empire, see Kenneth
Maxwell, Pombal, Paradox of the Enlightenment (Cambridge and New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1995), 71-86; on the Jesuits within the Portuguese Empire,
see Dauril Alden, The Making of an Enterprise: The Society ofJesus in Portugal, Its
Empire and Beyond (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996).
272 • NakedTropics

Bishop Lam is a small, chain-smoking, energetic cleric. His door «is open
to all comers;' he told me when I called on him at his office next to the
cathedral in downtown Macao. He is a great enthusiast for the World Wide
Web and its potential for his work in Macao, as well as for communication
beyond it.
    There are fewer than twenty thousand Catholics in Macao today, but the
church's role is much more important than these numbers suggest. Over
forty thousand children, for example, are enrolled in Catholic private
schools. He «never talks politics;' the bishop told me. «We do what we have
to do regardless, and I don't much worry if people like it or not; they can
draw their own conclusions." His position is a sensitive one given what he
calls «the bad relationship between the Chinese government and the Vati-
can." In an elliptical way, the bishop was saying something very important
about Macao: look at actions and not words.
    The Catholic schools and religious expression are both explicitly pro-
tected in Macao's Basic Law (Article 34), to which China formally commit-
ted itself in 1993. The Basic Law became the constitution of Macao after
December 1999. The status of the enclave is that of a «special administra-
tive region" (SAR) of China like Hong Kong, under the formula invented
by the late Deng Xiaoping of «one country, two systems." It is an arrange-
ment intended, as with Hong Kong, to leave the territory to run its own in-
ternal affairs while preserving its special Sino-European character and
capitalist system. 21
    Yet even before the ink was dry on the Basic Law, doubts emerged as to
how much autonomy this particular special administrative region would
have. Bishop Lam's commitment to establishing a new interuniversity insti-
tute with a school of business and management in collaboration with Por-
tugal's Catholic University quickly became subject to intense pressure from
Beijing, which made it clear that China will not accept an institution subject
to the control of a «foreign state;' by which China means the Vatican.
    Bishop Lam made no direct reference to this dispute in his conversation
with me, but he did make a point of handing me the brochure for the uni-
versity institute and its planned curriculum, as well as calling up on his
computer and printing out for me a listing of the Christian missions sup-
ported by his bishopric, including the construction in 1992 of a church at
Ta-huang, the largest church built in the Pearl River delta region in the past
fifty years. Given the historical role of Macao in Christian missionary en-