

Chinese men bring their caged birds each morning to chirp and warble. It
is fortunate that less than 2 percent of Macao's population can read Por-
tuguese, hence few can understand Camoes's somewhat disparaging refer-
ence in his second verse about the "terras viciosas de Africa e de Asia." The
oratory for St. Martin, built in 1580 by Michele Ruggieri as a center for
Chinese and Japanese converts, also housed the school where he, and then
Matteo Ricci, could learn Chinese. The Jesuit college founded in 1594 sub-
sequently developed Chinese studies, Latin, mathematics, and music, and,
eventually, with its printing press and extensive library, became one of the
great centers of Chinese studies in Asia.
    The famous church of Sao Paulo itself was financed by the city of
Macao, from which the Jesuits had obtained a fixed share of profits from
the Japan trades. A Chinese narrative of the seventeenth century described
the "Mother of Heaven" on the altar as a goddess who "wears curious
cloths and a veil made of glass beads; her hair appears lifelike." I was struck
by the relative simplicity of the Catholic churches in Macao, almost Cal-
vinist in their lack of ornamentation and strikingly plain in comparison to
the baroque effervescence of churches in Brazil or Spanish America of the
same period. But having visited the incense-laden interior of the temple of
Kun lam, this made more sense, as did the seventeenth-century Chinese
references to the virgin set above the altar of Sao Paulo.
   The great facade of Sao Paulo, still one of Macao's most prominent
landmarks, reflects the vision of its Chinese and Japanese craftsmen. A
broad flight of steps leads up to the front of the church where the facade
rises in four tiers; the second containing the four Jesuit saints, with Loyola
and Francis Xavier at the center; a dragon and a Portuguese great ship in
full sail are on the third tier, to the left and right of which are admonitions
in Chinese; on the fourth is Jesus and the instruments of the crucification,
and at the top a bronze dove between the sun and the moon. The steps of
Sao Paulo are usually thronged with Japanese tourists amazed at the work
of their seventeenth-century ancestors. To the extreme left of the facade
are two stone slabs that once held the flags indicating that the Jesuits were
granted the rank of mandarin by the Chinese emperor.
   Francis Xavier had failed in his attempt to enter China. But Alessandro
Valignano, Father Visitor of the order in the East Indies, while spending ten
months in Macao on his return from Japan, developed a new and far more
effective strategy to "open the rock:' as he put it. I8 He found the Chinese,
with "their love of learning, their neat dress, their delicate eating habits,
their banning of weapons in public places, the shyness of their women,
their good government:' in every way superior to the Japanese. Valignano

I80n Valignano, see Spence, Memory Palace of Matteo Ricci, 40-41. For the Jesuits
in Macao and China, see also Porter, Macau, 104-116.
270 • NakedTropics