

30Por this period in Portugal, see Kenneth Maxwell, The Making ofa Portuguese De-
mocracy (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
278 • NakedTropics

Portuguese in Macao avoid at all costs the disasters that followed their
withdrawals in Africa and East Timor, and that if the Portuguese politi-
cians and functionaries have notoriously sticky fingers, then the Por-
tuguese military at least will withdraw with honor.
   Macao's formal institutional structure, where the Portuguese presence
in Macao is most pronounced, has many of the trappings of a Western so-
ciety: law courts, an elected legislature, formal protection of free speech
and assembly. Most of these rights in Macao preceded the liberalization in
Hong Kong and were a direct consequence of the Portuguese Revolution of
1974, which provided the constitutional means on the Portuguese side for
reexamining sovereignty and reforming Macao's institutions. In 1976,
wide autonomy was granted to Macao by the new democratic Portugal
under an "organic statute" that established a wide range of civil rights and
set up the Macao Legislative Assembly. Election to the legislature was by
means of a restricted franchise with only one-third of the seats open to di-
rect election. (The remaining representatives were either indirectly elected
by professional and neighborhood organizations or appointed by the Por-
tuguese governor.) Nevertheless, the Portuguese residents and a minority
of the Chinese population have participated in direct elections in Macao
since 1976.
   The Macao legislature was no rubber stamp. In the early years, the
Macanese legislators, who had centuries of experience bucking the author-
ity of Portuguese governors through their domination of the Loyal Senate,
became so outspoken in their opposition to the executive that a governor
dissolved the legislative assembly and called new elections in 1984. The
system of proportional representation used in Macao as in Portugal also
helped to assure a voice for the small liberal minority in Macao, which has
consistently obtained at least one of the directly elected seats since the as-
sembly was first instituted. In the hotly contested 1996 election, for exam-
ple, one seat went to a prodemocracy candidate. The eight indirectly
elected members of the assembly come from the traditional probusiness,
pro-China sector.
    Beijing did not object to direct elections in Macao as it had in Hong
Kong, and the legislature continued in office through the transfer of sover-
eignty in 1999 until 2001, unlike that of Hong Kong, which was dissolved
at the time of the handover. Since 1992, Macao has had its own court of
final appeal.
   The Basic Law also includes some significant concessions on China's
part; there is no restriction on foreign passport holders taking important
posts in the administration after 1999, except those of chief executive and
chief justice, a reassurance to the large number of Macao Chinese who
qualify for Portuguese passports. The 10,000 Macanese Eurasians retain
                                                                   Macao • 279