

2IThe Basic Law is printed in full in Steve Shipp, Macau, China: A Political History
of the Portuguese Colony's Transition to Chinese Rule (Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland,
1997), 143-171. There is also a good description of the negotiations and legal
background in R. D. Cremer, ed., Macau: City of Commerce and Culture, 2d ed.
(Hong Kong: API Press, 1991), especially 261-353.
                                                               Macao • 273

deavors in the Far East and China, how the Beijing Communists deal with
this part of Macao's heritage will be a vital indication of their willingness
to abide by other protections embedded in Macao's Basic Law.
   The bishop's resistance to attempts to manipulate him provoked some
criticism on the Portuguese side too. A number of Portuguese officials find
him "very Chinese," tending to place "community values over individual
values." My own sense of the bishop is that he is a man of great personal
strength and conviction, and that he will be a key player at one of the most
sensitive points of potential confrontation in the coming years. Bishop Lam
walked me past the faded portraits of his predecessors as I left his residence.
They stretch back four centuries. But as the great Jesuit polymath Antonio
Vieira noted in the 1640s: "The preachers took the Gospel and the mer-
chants took the preachers." Macao's raison d'etre after all was commerce,
and it remains so: only the commodities have changed over the centuries.


                                      IV
Macao, despite its godly aspirations, was no less often a city of sin, a nether
zone of concubines and prostitutes, an opaque shadow world of shady
deals and opium dens, well known for its corruption. One shocked visitor
in the 1930s saw Macao as the playground of the "riffraff of the world, the
drunken shipmasters; the flotsam of the sea; the derelicts, and more
shameless, beautiful, savage women than any part of the world." W. H.
Auden in a memorable phrase called it "a weed from Catholic Europe."
   This is the Macao thousands of eager Hong Kong residents hope for as
they crowd aboard the jet hydrofoils that rush back and forth across the
Pearl River estuary between the two cities. Owned by Macao's casino king,
Stanley Ho, these speedy vessels bring gamblers to the Hotel Lisboa and the
casino "VIP rooms," where they rub shoulders with Communist cadres
from the mainland, dropping their ill-gotten gains at the card tables. Six
million visitors cross to Macao each year; 80 percent of them are Hong
Kong Chinese, most of whom head straight for the gambling. The rich
pickings of Macao's casinos are swiftly reinvested in China, Europe, and
New York, in Hong Kong enterprises, and Lisbon real estate, as well as in
payoffs to Chinese party officials, local administrators, and Portuguese bu-
reaucrats, and in campaign contributions to Portuguese politicians-and
in 1996, it seems, to U.S. politicians as well-who can provide favors. The
casinos provide over 60 percent of Macao government revenues.
   Stanley Ho has held the gaming monopoly since 1962 through his
Macao Tourism and Entertainment Corporation (STDM) in which he
holds a 25 percent personal stake, although his gambling monopoly was
due to expire in 2001. Ho's net value was placed in 1992 at well over a bil-
lion dollars and his gambling interests now extend to Europe through the
274 • NakedTropics