

shade trees and the remaining musty nineteenth-century palaces of the
great Macao merchants of that time, recalls the Urca district under the
Sugar Loaf Mountain in Rio de Janeiro, or the port of Cannes in the 1950s.
Here motorized rickshaws ply their trade, neatly uniformed Chinese chil-
dren play happily in the gardens outside the Matteo Ricci School, and
Macao's old folks quietly exercise each morning before the sticky subtropi-
cal heat rises with the sun.
   The Praia Grande was traditionally the "European" or «Christian" quar-
ter of Macao. The Chinese quarter layover the hill, around the inner har-
bor, and beyond the old city wall. To reach the inner harbor from the Praia
Grande is a brief walk past Government House, up past the empty Saint
Joseph's Seminary, which holds in its cluttered rooms the paintings of the
Christian martyrs crucified by the Japanese in 1596, past a remarkable
square onto which faces the colonnaded facade of the oldest European
Theater in China, and beyond a quiet stucco building that houses a mag-
nificent Chinese library, bequeathed to Macao by a Hong Kong Chinese ty-
coon in gratitude for Macao's role in harboring his family and many other
Hong Kong residents during the Japanese occupation of the British colony.
   The inner harbor lies below, a bustling commercial and industrial wa-
terfront with old warehouses, a gaudy floating casino, long sidewalks
under arches onto which face a jumble of narrow open entranceways
housing the occasional dark interior of a Buddhist temple, metal work-
shop, food store, and fish shop, peopled by straggling bleary-eyed gamblers
and worn-out prostitutes on their way home, and busy shoppers and old
men chatting. The inner harbor itself is crowded with craft of all sizes and
shapes, and at a very short distance beyond is China proper.
   The cornerstone of Macao's most famous Jesuit Church of Sao Paulo
was laid in 1601. Only its facade now stands at the top of its wide staircase
beside the great seventeenth-century fortress of the Monte, also built by
the Jesuits and a critical bastion for the defense of Macao. The first Jesuits
settled permanently in Macao in 1563. By the end of the 1570s, a spacious
residence had been constructed between the Monte and the hilly garden
within which lies the grotto named after the Portuguese epic poet Luis de
Cam6es, who mayor may not have lived in Macao (the two leading histori-
ans of Macao, Father Manuel Teixeira and Charles R. Boxer, vigorously dis-
agreed on the subject).l? The garden is still a beautiful place, and a bust of
Cam6es, under which are carved the first three verses of the first canto of
The Lusiads, now sits within the grotto. Here, under the shade trees, old

17For a discussion on Charles R. Boxer (1904-2000) see chapter 15. Father Teixeira
(1924-) left Macau in May 2001; see Father Manuel Teixeira and Jose Hermano
Saraiva, Camoes Was in Macau, Portuguese/Chinese bilingual edition (Macau:
Macau Foundation; International Institute of Macau, 2001).
                                                                 Macao • 269