


23Ibid.,ApriI19,1997.
24Reuters World Service, May 12, 1997.
25S outh China Morning Post, April 19, 1997; and Foreign Broadcast Information
Service (FBIS), Chi-92-082, April 27, 1997.
276 • NakedTropics

central people's government may issue an order applying relevant national
laws in the region."26
    As the owner of a furniture store near the landmark facade of the old
Sao Paulo Church told Peter Stein of the Wall Street Journal: "]f Macao's
police can't solve the problem, China will."27 The Xinhua News Agency,
China's official mouthpiece, has urged tougher measures and asserted that
the Guandong authorities will help if need be. 2s
    Given the multiple layers of motivation on all sides in Macao it is worth
noting that the professional hit men brought in from China by the triads-
and who slip back across the border in ten minutes on foot or by boat
across the narrow inner harbor-are believed to be members of the Chi-
nese security forces. All the recent hits have been carried out with People's
Army-issue firearms. The struggle over ownership of the new Grandview
Hotel on Taipa Island involved the Anran Company owned by the Chinese
Ministry of State Security, which is also believed to be trying to obtain a
slice of the casino monopoly.29
    Indeed, almost on cue, before the Portuguese could bring in sophisti-
cated eavesdropping devices, the bigwigs of the local Chinese community,
together with Stanley Ho and the representative of the Chinese central
government in Macao, the head of the Xinhua News Agency, acted with the
authorities across the border in Guandong Province to cut triad money-
laundering sources and bring the warring factions to an agreement. The
Beijing government has used the argument of public order to justify the
stationing of army troops in Macao after its retrocession to China on De-
cember 20, 1999.

                                       v
The last Portuguese governor of Macao, General Vasco Rocha Vieira,
whom I met at the pink-and-white colonial-style Government House
(which houses both his office and the Macao legislature), told me that he
believes the English press in Hong Kong has greatly exaggerated the prob-
lem of gang violence in Macao and that the streets of Macao are among the
safest in the world. Statistically, he may be right. I was certainly able to walk
anywhere in Macao. But gang-related mayhem has a life of its own. Gory
pictures of murdered hoodlums have already badly dented Macao's vital
tourist business. The number of gamblers visiting Macao from Hong

26Shipp, Macau, China, 146.
27 Wall Street Journal, May 6, 1997.
28FBIS, Chi-93-139, May 19,1997, A6.
29FBIS, Chi-92-127, daily report, May 7,1997; FBIS, Chi-97-128, May 8,1997; and
Far Eastern Economic Review, September 26, 1996, 30.
                                                                 Macao • 277

Kong, who are big spenders and are vital to Macao's prosperity, has fallen
precipitously since gang violence first broke out. And Macao's competitors
for Hong Kong dollars in the gambling business have been quick to take
note of its troubles. Hong Kong's shrewd business leaders not only have re-
cently signed a deal with Disney for a vast new theme park, but also have
been visiting Las Vegas and dropping hints that Hong Kong might estab-
lish its own casino. Like the loss of the Japan trade in the seventeenth cen-
tury, or the establishment of Hong Kong in the nineteenth century, such a
move would be a disaster for Macao, and Stanley Ho has been quick to
condemn the idea.
    General Rocha Vieira is a quiet but determined individual. He believed,
as the Portuguese who dealt with Macao generally did, that it is essential to
work with the Chinese and not against them. They see this as the best way,
as the general told me, "of making possible a continuing and effective pres-
ence of European culture in this important Chinese region." He was a gen-
eral without troops. The last Portuguese military units withdrew from
Macao at the end of 1975. After the fall of the dictatorship in Lisbon in
1974, the Macao governorship became a revolving door for Portuguese
politicians, and the instability of the governments in Lisbon in the early
years of the new democracy did not help Portuguese credibility or enable
Portugal to become a serious player in the real power games in Macao.
   The dominant role played in Lisbon by the pro-Moscow Portuguese
Communist Party between 1974 and 1976 was also viewed with great sus-
picion by Beijing. General Rocha Vieira, however, came with impeccable
credentials in that respect. Not only had he served in Macao in the 1970s,
but he played a critical role in Lisbon during the anti-communist coup of
November 1975, which in effect sent the Portuguese Communists packing.
   His head of security in Macao, Brigadier Manuel Monge, an early mem-
ber of the armed forces movement that overthrew the right-wing regime in
Portugal in 1974, like General Rocha Vieira, had also fallen afoul of the
Portuguese Communists. While the democratic credentials of both these
military officers are impeccable, more important from Beijing's perspec-
tive was the fact that both had opposed the Moscow-inspired power grab
in Lisbon. 30
   In Macao, General Rocha Vieira, who was appointed governor in 1991,
brought both stability and integrity to an office that had been severely
tainted previously by accusations of corruption. Universally and unsolic-
itedly, people I spoke with in Macao testified to his honesty. But I also
detected in General Rocha Vieira a sense of determination that the