

today have left their boats and live in city apartments. In the past there was
a strong Fukanese component, but now 50 percent of the Chinese in
Macao are of rural Guandongese origin. These longtime residents have not
lived under the Communist regime and retain many of the practices of an
Old China, long destroyed on the mainland by war and revolution. Many
hold Portuguese passports. The leadership of the Chinese community rests
principally in this group, families with more than two generations of resi-
dence in Macao, influential in the world of business and the secret soci-
eties. They are extremely conservative socially and pro-Beijing politically.
Their children, often educated overseas, tend to be English-speaking, are
strongly influenced by developments in Hong Kong, and are more liberal
than their parents.
    About 40 percent of the Chinese population of Macao are more recent
immigrants, many having come clandestinely from the mainland since the
1980s. There is a smaller but important group that came from the Chinese
diaspora, returning to Macao from Southeast Asia in the 1960s. These tend
to be middle-class people with a high level of education.
    Several significant figures in Macao arrived from China after 1979, in-
cluding intellectuals as well as underworld figures and a contingent of Chi-
nese from Southeast Asia. Some had played key roles in Beijing in the past,
and now hold important positions in Macao's financial and intellectual cir-
cles. One of the most prominent of these is the multilingual Gary Ngai,
from a Chinese family that spent five generations in the former Dutch East
Indies and, later, Indonesia. Formerly a close confidant of Deng and his per-
sonal translator, he was until recently vice president of Macao's Cultural In-
stitute and then became executive director of the Sino-Latin Foundation.
    The Eurasian population of the city, known as the "Macanese;' is a
tightly knit group numbering until recently between 10,000 and 15,000;
but extensive out-migration means that today the Macanese dispersed
throughout the world probably equal or surpass the number of Macanese
at home. The Macanese community integrates genetic elements from
across Asia, its ancestors including principally Malays, Japanese, Indians,
Timorese, Chinese, and Koreans as well as Portuguese. In the local Can-
tonese argot they are referred to as "sons and daughters of the soil," that is,
people "born in the land" and not "foreigners" to the Chinese, as the Por-
tuguese were and remain. Macanese culture was a rich Creole mix, and
they spoke and wrote in a local patois. The Loyal Senate, Macao's de facto
government during much of its first three centuries, was dominated by
elected Macanese representatives. The Macanese also dominated the mid-
dle levels of the colonial administration and were important in the mer-
chant and legal communities.
    The Maoist riots of 1966 were a profound shock to this group. The
Macanese had always identified themselves with the ruling Portuguese,
                                                                  Macao • 283