

access to the civil service, where they have traditionally sought official ca-
reers' and over a quarter of Chinese residents of Macao hold Portuguese,
hence EU, passports. Both China and Portugal are aware that if they mis-
handle the transfer, Macao could easily lose much of its Eurasian and
Macao-born Chinese and end up as an empty shell and suburb of the Chi-
nese border city of Zhuhai.
   Portuguese authority in Macao, however, was essentially broken in
1966, when the balance of power in Macao between the Portuguese and
Chinese shifted dramatically during the turmoil unleashed by the Cultural
Revolution. Maoist militants rioted in Macao's streets, and the Portuguese
governor, after some initial armed clashes, capitulated to their demands,
which included the closing of the offices of the Nationalist Kuomintang in
Macao and the ending of Macao's use as an exit point for dissidents fleeing
China. The Portuguese governor was obliged to sign the agreement in the
office of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce under a huge portrait of Mao
Zedong, with Ho Yin presiding. But Beijing did not want the Portuguese
facade destroyed. It was useful to the Chinese Communists to preserve a
place where the appearance of separation from the regime could provide a
gray area for deals and contacts, a place with enough ambiguity to permit
a degree of separation and plausible deniability.
   To the surprise of the Salazar regime, China did not seek to expel the Por-
tuguese administration from Macao in 1966; and when in the mid-1970s the
Portuguese twice tried to give Macao back to China, the offer was politely re-
fused, with Ho Yin telling the Portuguese that the time was not ripe. 3!
   But this in many ways was the traditional use the Chinese had made of the
Portuguese enclave. Professor Fok Kai Cheong, an American-trained histo-
rian at the University of Macao, calls this arrangement the "Macao Formula;'
a type of implicit acquiescence in each other's claims to overlapping areas of
sovereignty.32 Premier Antonio de Oliveira Salazar's wily foreign minister,
Franco Nogueira, said that after 1967 the Portuguese in Macao remained as
"a caretaker of a condominium under foreign supervision."33
   In effect, the modus vivendi after the Maoist riots reestablished the old
de facto system of overlapping authority, with the head of the Xinhua


31China thus demanded that the United Nations exclude Macao from the list of
territories «under colonial rule." As far as China was concerned, Macao was «part of
China" and a domestic question. The Portuguese acquiesced in this definition and
described Macao thereafter as «a Chinese territory under Portuguese administra-
tion."
32Fok Kai Cheong, Estudos sobre a instalatriio dos portugueses em Macau (Lisbon
and Macao: Gradiva, 1996).
33Franco Nogueira, Salazar: estudo biografico, 6 vols. (Coimbra: Athintida Editora,
1977), III, 393.
280 • NakedTropics

News Agency representing the interests of the central government, much
as the local mandarins had done prior to the 1840s, which the historian
Charles R. Boxer called a matter of ((give and take." And while it has been
true from the sixteenth century onward that China could disrupt Macao's
food supply at any moment and impose its will by force, China never
sought to do so.
   Unlike the other ancient Portuguese enclaves in Asia, Goa, invaded by
India in 1961, and East Timor, bloodily annexed by Indonesia in 1975, in
the case of Macao the Chinese chose stealth. As the director of the Xinhua
News Agency's Hong Kong branch said, quoting Sun Tzu's The Art of War,
('defeating the enemy without going to war is the utmost success."34 The
Chinese waited for the moment that suited them.