

40u.S. Senate, Final Report of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, Investigation
ofIllegal or Improper Activities in Connection with 1996 Federal Election Campaigns,
together with additional and minority views, March 10, 1998. 10Sth Cong., 2d sess.
(Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1998),2497-2904,5270-5413; and u.S. House of Repre-
sentatives, Report of the Select Committee, u.S. National Security and Military/
Commercial Concerns with the People's Republic of China, 10Sth Cong., 2d sess.
(Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1999). The most comprehensive discussion on Yah Lin
"Charlie" Trie's role as a direct source or solicitor of the second-largest volume of
contributions returned by the Democratic National Committee is to be found in
the testimony of Jerry Campane, special agent, Senate Governmental Affairs Cam-
paign Finance Investigation, on July 29, 1998. This testimony was not in the six-
volume Senate committee report, but is available through the Federal Document
Clearing House. Charlie Trie was charged by the Justice Department's Campaign
Finance Task Force. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to eighteen months of
home detention, three years' probation, and a $5,000 fine (Wall Street Journal, No-
vember 10, 1999). Ron Brown's tragic death in a plane accident on April 3, 1996,
the obsessive attention devoted to President Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky
and the consequent impeachment battle, powerful business interests who wanted
deals with the Chinese government, as well as the general lack of enthusiasm of key
politicians on both parties in the Senate and House of Representatives for any close
scrutiny of campaign contributions, combined to blunt the investigations of the
Chinese money connection in the 1996 election, and Macao's central role in the
scandal. In this, as in so much else, Clinton was lucky.
41 Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Report: Macau, April 27, 1998.
286 • NakedTropics

trial of Wan Kuok-koi, alias "Broken Tooth," alleged head of the 14K triad
in Macao, ended (to the surprise of many in Macao) in his conviction on
November 23, barely a month before the handover ceremonies were sched-
uled to occur. The Macao court found Wan guilty of being a member of a
triad group, loan sharking, illegal gambling, and interfering with a local
telecommunications network, and sentenced him to fifteen years. Two
days later, a former police officer and gang member was also sentenced and
jailed. Wan's mistake was to have emerged too blatantly from the shadows,
boasting about his gangland prowess in newspaper interviews. He was ar-
rested while attending a gangster movie called Casino, purportedly based
on his life history, which he had financed. And in a risky challenge to the
soon-to-be sovereign power, a well-known pro-China Macao legislator
had been attacked and wounded leaving the offices of the Xinhua News
Agency, no less.
    But these last-minute tidy-ups cannot disguise the fragility of the legal
system and the administration, where language and procedure are incom-
prehensible to 90 percent of the population, where laws have only recently
been hastily and often badly translated into Chinese, and where a supreme
court only created in 1993 has judges with less than a year's experience in
charge. The University of Macao only graduated its first class of lawyers in
the mid-1990s, and locally trained magistrates have little practical court
experience. Despite the hoopla, the sprucing up and repainting of public
buildings, and the construction of new museums, the fact remains that
after almost four and a half centuries in Macao, the Portuguese had spent
only the past half decade preparing Chinese officials to assume the critical
bureaucratic roles that would assure not only the continuation of Por-
tuguese institutions in Macao but also, and more important, help guaran-
tee that the statutory rights that legally protect Macao's special status
within China after the handover are respected and upheld.
    I asked a Hong Kong Chinese tycoon I had breakfast with what he
thought about all this. He replied elliptically. In Shanghai, he said, where
he was born, the police were also totally, irretrievably corrupt, so the army
had invited them to a banquet. Then, while they were eating and drinking,
the army set up sand bags and machine guns, and when the police were al-
lowed out, mowed them all down. It was not an encouraging answer.