

about the activities of the neighboring special economic zone of Zhuhai.
This relationship has turned extremely competitive-«malignant and vi-
cious" is how Gary Ngai describes it-and has led to a failure to collaborate
on waste disposal, delays in a proposed Macao-Canton rail and highway
connection, the construction of duplicative international airports, and
even to Zhuhai's preemption of Macao's famous grand prix auto race with
a grand prix of its own held a week earlier. There are now two grandiose
schemes afoot to construct duplicative bridges across the Pearl River estu-
ary. And Macao has also become aware that its income from gambling
would be greatly diminished if China or Hong Kong were to permit casi-
nos. Should this occur, Macao could face a fatal blow to its prosperity.
    As Gary Ngai told me, turning Macao from «a city of gambling to a city
of culture is the best way for Macao to survive in the future, turning it from
a shadow of Hong Kong in tourism to a dragon head of cultural tourism in
the Pearl River delta." Macao's business leaders have come to realize that it
is in their own interest to persuade Beijing that Macao has a special role to
play precisely because of its unique European-Chinese mix, and they have
started to aggressively develop links to the European Community as well as
the Portuguese-speaking world. 45 Preserving the «City of God in China"
has thus by a strange historical reversal now fallen to the Chinese of
Macao, rather than to the Portuguese. The local Chinese elite's own power
and influence rest to a considerable degree in persuading Beijing that cul-
tural preservation in this case is an asset to China and in convincing the
local «nationalists" that this heritage is not «colonial trash" to be thrown
overboard.
    Gary Ngai, along with Professor Fok and other scholars from Macao and
Portugal, have formed a new Sino-Latin Foundation. «It is precisely Macao's
history and cultural identity which distinguished it from Hong Kong and
other Chinese coastal cities, a Sino-Latin identity; formed over four cen-
turies of its existence;' is the way Ngai puts it. Funds have been provided by
Stanley Ho and local entrepreneurs who launched the foundation with the
blessing of the Portuguese governor and the head of the Xinhua News
Agency. It is not an ignoble effort among the triad wars and the real estate
deals and the shadowy world of espionage and money laundering.
    One can only wish them luck, recalling of course the admonition of
Bishop Lam that nothing in Macao is ever what it appears to be, and the
shrewd observation of that wise old historian Charles Boxer that it is es-

45For the economic situation at the time of the transition, see International Mone-
tary Fund, Public Information Notice No. 99140, May 7, 1999; Article IV Consulta-
tion held in 1998 with Portugal-Macau.
                                                            Macao • 289

sential to remember, for better or worse, that "in Macao, if anywhere, East
and West did meet."46 So it is not inappropriate that at this tiny, ambigu-
ous, and opaque spot, the great adventure that took Europe more than 500
years ago to Asia in search of the riches of Cathay ended, just before the
end of the millennium as the Chinese had wanted, and very much on their
terms.