

IDauril Alden, Charles R. Boxer, An Uncommon Life: Soldier, Historian, Teacher,
Collector, Traveller (Lisbon: Fundas:ao Oriente, 2001).
                                               Heroes and Traitors • 293

    To generations of historians of the Portuguese-speaking world C. R.
Boxer was a true colossus. His highly original, pithy, and path-breaking
books, monographs, and articles flowed forth with seeming effortlessness.
Boxer's works covered the history of early European intrusions into Japan
and China during the sixteenth century, and splendid accounts of the opu-
lence and decline of Goa, seat of Portugal's empire in Asia. In over 350
publications, all of the highest order of scholarship, Boxer wrote on six-
teenth-century naval warfare in the Persian Gulf, the tribulations of the
maritime trading route between Europe and Asia, a sparkling overview of
Brazil during the eighteenth century in the age of gold strikes and frontier
expansion, magnificent syntheses of both Dutch and Portuguese colonial
history, race relations, and social mores, as well as many pioneering com-
parative studies of local municipal institutions in Asia, Africa, and South
America. Famously in the 1960s at the height of Portugal's colonial wars in
Africa, he took on the "Luso-tropicalist" propaganda of the Salazar dicta-
torship by unraveling its roots in Gilberto Freyre's assertion of Portuguese
colonial nonracialism and was thoroughly vilified for it by the regime and
its apologists.
    In my view Boxer's magnificent account of the career of Salvador Cor-
reia de Sa Benevides (1602-1686) is one of his very best books. This "no-
table old stickler," as Sir Robert Southwell called Salvador de Sa in a letter
to Lord Arlington in 1667, played a decisive role in the titanic seventeenth-
century struggle between the Iberian powers and the Dutch for hegemony
in the South Atlantic. The inscription for his now lost tomb at the Lisbon
convent of the bare-footed Carmelites praised Salvador de Sa as "the Re-
storer of the Faith of CHRIST in the Kingdom of Angola, Congo,
Benguela, Sao Tome and conqueror of the Dutch." As Boxer demonstrated,
to this accolade should have been added the savior of Portuguese-speaking
Brazil.
    Remarkably, Boxer had only formally entered academic life when mid-
dle-aged. Without a university degree, but on the strength of his outstand-
ing scholarship, he was appointed in 1947 to the prestigious chair at King's
College, London, named in honor of the great Portuguese poet Luis de
Cam6es, author of The Lusiads. He got the job at King's College, he said,
because there was no real competition: "it's like the duckbilled platypus.
I'm the only one of my kind."
    Boxer's attainments were so intimidating that when I wrote to him from
Lisbon in 1963 to ask how one should prepare for the field I was then
thinking of entering, he almost stopped me in my tracks. The basic qualifi-
cations, he said, for anyone studying the Portuguese empire were a combi-
nation of languages that encompassed Dutch and French and Italian on
the European side, in addition to Portuguese and Spanish, and for studying
Asia, Japanese and Chinese at the minimum and the paleographic skills to
294 • NakedTropics