

                                    VIII
Macao, in addition to the rich veneer of an old Europe, also retains much
of traditional China, isolated as it has been from the turmoil that devas-
tated China over the past century. Many ancient religious practices survive
in Macao, where hardly a street or corner or niche does not house a small
                                                                  Macao • 287

shrine, candle, incense stick, or offering to a rich diversity of dieties. A wide
range of religious and civil groupings have long lived there in mutual toler-
ance. Partly as a consequence, the population of Macao is not as apolitical
as it appears. After the Tiananmen Square bloodbath in 1989, over 150,000
people-a very significant proportion of Macao's population of half a mil-
lion-protested, in an unprecedented rebuke to Beijing.
    The 1996 legislative elections saw workers in the tourist and gambling
sectors organize politically and join forces with the prodemocracy repre-
sentative, Antonio Ng Kuok-cheong, in complaining of vote buying by the
big business interests. Workers in manufacturing jobs also complained that
the powerful pro-Beijing union confederation was more interested in poli-
tics than in workers' rights and wages. 42 Macao human rights activists
complain that procedural changes may vitiate any guarantees of judicial
independence guaranteed by the Basic Law because of new rules limiting
tenure of judges to three years (they had lifetime tenure under the Por-
tuguese system) and the dominant role of the government in the selection
of magistrates and judges. 43
    Legislation to create a press council galvanized the usually self-censor-
ing press into vociferous protest. The president of the Macao Journalists
Club complained that the government proposal was ((very dangerous" and
that any press watchdog body should be ((a genuinely independent body
which protects press freedom. Macao is a very small community, interper-
sonal relations are very close and it is very difficult to find someone who is
totally independent, free of influence and unaffected by the people around
h ·1m."44
    Macao's Chinese and Macanese intellectuals are also beginning to real-
ize that Macao's special blend of Asia and Europe risks being engulfed by
the burgeoning economic growth of the Pearl River delta and the self-in-
terested philistinism of the odd coalition of capitalist magnates, Commu-
nist Party commissars, and short-term Portuguese bureaucrats who
together have set the agenda in construction and real estate in recent years.
An important motivation behind the cultivation of the Chinese central au-
thorities in Beijing by Macao's Chinese leaders and their belated embrace
of Macao's rich Sino-Portuguese cultural history is their growing anxiety


42Lo Shiu-hing, "Comparative Political Systems: The Cases of Hong Kong and
Macau," Journal of Contemporary Asia 25, no. 2 (1995): 254-271, and his "Aspects
of Political Development in Macao," China Quarterly, no. 120 (December 1989):
837-851.
43These questions are discussed in detail in u.S. Department of State, Macau Coun-
try Report on Human Rights Practices for 1996, released January 30, 1997.
44Asian Wall Street Journal Weekly, September 23, 1996.
288 • NakedTropics