


38Hong Kong Sing Tao Jim Pao (in Chinese), FBIS, Chi-96-236, daily report, De-
cember 5, 1996, A16 (translated text). The veil that closely covers the role of Macao
and its money in domestic Portuguese politics was partially lifted by the ((tell all,"
or at least part of the ((all," in a remarkable book by Rui Mateus, the former confi-
dant, translator, and political bagman for Mario Soares. Mateus was caught up in
allegations of corruption in the contracting of Macao's new international airport,
and former President Soares quickly dumped him; as a result, Mateus's book re-
veals a good deal of the seamy side of Portuguese politics, including the extraordi-
nary tale of the murky proposed deals over the use of Macao as a base for a
television franchise aimed at the Hong Kong market and southern China, involv-
ing Soares and, at various stages, the late Robert Maxwell, Rupert Murdoch, and
Stanley Ho. See Rui Mateus, Contos proibidos: mem6rias de um PS desconbecido
(Lisbon: Dom Quixote, 1996). Soares, when asked about the Mateus book, said
that he ((had not read it.... He did not wish to disturb himself or waste time use-
lessly." See Maria Joao Avillez, Soares, democracia (Lisbon: Publico, 1996), 272.
Martin Booth in his book Opium, A History (New York: St Martin's Press, 1998)
pointed out how convenient gambling casinos can be for money laundering-or,
as he writes, for ((money cleaning facilities." According to Booth up to $2 billion
may be laundered monthly through Macao (see 336-337). This seemed a very high
dollar figure to me; but when I asked a former high-level u.S. government official
who was directly involved in international narcotics control, she said this was en-
tirely plausible.
39New York Times, October 19, 1998.
                                                                    Macao • 285

Cushing did in the late 1840s, when Macao was last on the White House's
agenda at the time of the Treaty of Wang Xia. 40
    Macao was also the front for the purchase for $20 million by a local
company (Chong Lot, incorporated in Macao for a mere $125,000 at a
nonexistent address on the Praia Grande) of a partially built Ukrainian
67,000-ton aircraft carrier. Vasyl Hureyev, Ukraine's industry minister, said
it was to be used as "a discotheque." Other reports said it would be used as a
floating casino. The problem no one noticed was that Macao cannot har-
bor deepwater ships. One of the central reasons Hong Kong boomed after
it was founded in the 1840s, and Macao did not, is that Macao is situated
on the side of the Pearl River estuary that silts up. In a very peculiar com-
ment, Portuguese Prime Minister Antonio Guterres, who visited Macao in
April 1998, said that Macao's crime rate "compared favorably to the
Ukraine's;' a remark even the Chinese government found complacent in
the extreme, and told him so privately in Beijing a few days later. 41
    Rui Afonso, a Macao lawyer and former member of the legislature, took
a much more sober view, saying that the security situation in Macao was
desperate, that a culture of private justice by execution had emerged, and
that the Portuguese had lost the stamina to rule.
    But the gangs went too far when they embarrassed both the Portuguese
and the Chinese in the run-up to the December handover, which each side
wanted to look as smooth as possible. The sensational and much-delayed