




46Boxer, Fidalgos in the Far East, 288.
LOOKI G AeROS   THE BRInG •
                                                     CHAPTER           15
                                     Heroes and Traitors
                                                   "Home is where I hang my hat."
                                           -Charles Boxer, Cam6es Center, 1989




Heroes come cheap these days. The word is bandied around so promiscu-
ously for high-priced sports stars and short-lived celebrities that when a
real hero appears he or she makes people uncomfortable. The 2000 U.S.
presidential election saw a real hero enter the competition-Senator John
McCain-not a popular figure among his fellow senators but a truly excep-
tional man who survived long years of solitary confinement and torture as
a POW in Vietnam to emerge as a leading advocate of reconciliation with
his former tormentors. Charles R. Boxer was such a man, both a victim and
an admirer of the Japanese, and resented, like Senator McCain, by some of
his former colleagues for his magnanimity. But if heroes come cheap, so do
accusations of treachery. This is the rub of the C. R. Boxer affaire, a concoc-
tion of old resentments, gossip, and jealousies from a lost colonial world
served up now to impinge the reputation of a truly remarkable and com-
plex individual.



«Charles Boxer was a fine soldier and a brilliant historian. But ... was he
also a traitor whose information prolonged the Second World War?" So
began the headline of an article in the British newspaper The Guardian on
February 24, 2001, by Hywel Williams. In his article Williams asserts that
Boxer «may" have been a "traitor" who betrayed «... his fellow officers in a
Japanese-run POW camp in Hong Kong in a way that undermined the en-
tire British intelligence system in south east Asia." Boxer, Williams goes on,

                                     291
292 • NakedTropics

was "a globalist intellectual before his time" whose work "framed the as-
sumptions of the post-colonial and anti-western elites in Brazil, west
Africa and Japan, where he was read, translated and feted."
    Williams claims that Boxer had fallen "under the spell of the Japanese
cultural style, its combination of intellectual-aesthetic refinement and
power politics." It was, he continues, just like "the Philby-Burgess-
Maclean-Blunt generation of English intellectuals [who] embraced Marx-
ist communism in Soviet form." Boxer, he says, like "other members of his
[social] class had found another country and another cause in the east."
After the war "collaborators everywhere got off lightly." Boxer's case, writes
Williams, could be "a spectacular example of wartime temptation."
    These were dramatic charges against one of the twentieth century's
greatest historians, coming in one of Britain's most respected newspapers.
Once known as the Manchester Guardian, this newspaper since its found-
ing in 1821 has been Britain's strongest liberal voice, independent, non-
conformist, and a stalwart champion of unpopular causes. It is the one
British newspaper I have read diligently over the years, and I have long ad-
mired its writing and reporting. Its pioneering Manchester Guardian
Weekly incorporates selections from Le Monde and the Washington Post.
    Charles R. Boxer died in 2000 at the age of ninety-six. This protects the
newspaper from the risk of a charge of libel. In its March la, 200 1, edition
The Guardian published a detailed refutation of Williams's accusations
against Boxer by the American historian Dauril Alden. Fortuitously, Alden
had just finished a biography of Boxer. l Professor Alden is a meticulous
scholar of the old school for whom solid documentation is the core of
historical scholarship. His detailed rebuttal of Williams's charges against
Boxer can be read on The Guardian's website, www.guardianunlimited.co.uk,
where the newspaper originally posted Williams's attack.
    Curiously, however, the Williams article itself was removed from the
website archive. Such stealth in cyberspace is despicable-if The Guardian
is ashamed of what it published in the first place, it should say so. It is hard
to understand the lapse of editorial judgment that led The Guardian to
lend its pages to such a scurrilous attack, filled with innuendo, inaccura-
cies, and undocumented aspersion on the honor of the most honorable of
men. And it in no way relieves The Guardian from the moral obligation to
apologize to Boxer's family and its readers for this grotesque breach of its
own high journalistic standards. One assumes that under English libel law
if any of the individuals attacked in the Hywel Williams article were still
alive, The Guardian would be facing the probability of funding several aca-
demic chairs in Portuguese imperial history named in Boxer's memory.