



                                      VI
The largely European superstructure of Macao is embedded in a politics
and society rooted in a complex network of powerful interconnecting Chi-
nese clans whose collaboration is essential if anything is to be done at all in
Macao. These Chinese networks of individuals and business interests are
closely tied to the mainland and to Beijing. The Nam Kwong trading com-
pany was China's official political and economic representative in Macao
for thirty-five years until 1984, when these functions were split into politi-
cal and trading arms, with the Xinhua News Agency and its Macao head
becoming China's spokesman and unofficial representative in the territory.
Today, China is the leading investor in Macao, with two hundred compa-
nies in the territory controlling 50 percent of finance and insurance and 70
percent of the tourism business. 35
   Overlapping memberships in Chinese and Portuguese institutions is
typical of Macao, as is the continuity within the leadership of the Macao
Chinese community. The venerable Macao Chinese Chamber of Com-
merce, founded in 1912, became the central mediator between Portugal
and China between 1949 and 1979. From 1950 until his death in 1983, its
chairman and the undisputed leader of the Macao Chinese was the afore-
mentioned Ho Yin, a very rich businessman with interests in hotels, restau-
rants, banks, buses, and utility companies. Two-thirds of the Chinese
members of the legislative assembly are also members of the Board of Di-
rectors of the Chamber of Commerce. The current chairman is also a


34FBIS, Chi-97-086, daily report, May 2, 1997, All. C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer,
"Dares-e-tomares nas rela<;6es luso-chinesas durante os secules XVII e XVIII
atraves de Macau;' Boletim do Arquivo Hist6rico de Macau 1 (January 1981): 3-13.
35 Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Report: Macau, May 13, 1997.
                                                              Macao • 281

 member of the standing committee of the National People's Congress in
 Beijing.
    Ho Yin's son, Edmund Ho Hau Wah, the then forty-four-year-old exec-
 utive director and general manager of the Tai Fung Bank, half of which is
owned by the Bank of China, became chief executive of the Macao SAR
after the Chinese takeover in December 1999. The Tai Fung Bank is the sec-
ond-largest bank in the territory and Edmund Ho is chairman of the
Banking Association and was a member of the Basic Law drafting commit-
tee and of the Sino-Portuguese Joint Liaison Group. He was then also vice
chairman of the All China Federation of Industry and Commerce.
    I met with Edmund Ho-who is Canadian educated-in his wood-pan-
eled third-floor office at the Tai Fung Bank, which sits off Macao's busy Cen-
tral Avenue. His major concern, he said, is how Macao positions itself for the
challenges of the new century by diversifying its economic base to enable it
to sustain a real autonomy, especially from the neighboring Chinese main-
land development areas. He sees a need for urgently enhancing technical and
scientific education and believes the city is too small to be viable.
    Macao's per capita income, at $15,010 in 1995, was the fifth-highest in
Asia, after Japan, Brunei, Hong Kong, and Singapore, and higher than Tai-
wan and South Korea. But like Hong Kong, its manufacturing industry is
crossing the border to find cheaper labor. When I met with Edmund Ho, he
had just returned from Brazil, where he had accompanied Governor Rocha
Vieira on a mission to promote Macao as a bridge to China for Brazilian
businesses.
    The Chinese print media in Macao tends to follow the Beijing line,
under the ever-watchful eye of the Xinhua News Agency. The lively Por-
tuguese language press has a small circulation and is focused on the in-
ternecine intrigues of Portuguese politics, something the Chinese find
entirely impenetrable and confusing, with the Portuguese endlessly and
needlessly complicating their own lives. Several Macao Chinese leaders
told me they find Portuguese politics as obscure as those of the old men of
the Central Committee in Beijing. The local television station, TDM, is
50.5 percent owned by the government and by Stanley Ho's STDM, the
Nam Kwong Group, and Edmund Ho. The electronic media in Macao take
a more independent line than the Chinese print media, but the Por-
tuguese-language station tends to broadcast the metropolitan news pro-
gram of no special interest to most of the residents of Macao, who cannot
understand the language, let alone the content. Much of the population
watches the Hong Kong English-language and Cantonese-language sta-
tions, and many have access to international cable and satellite television
services.
    The Chinese population of Macao is of quite diverse origins. Tanka boat
people constitute the oldest elements of the population, though most
282 • NakedTropics