

and their sense of betrayal at Portugal's capitulation to Chinese demands
was profound. The Macanese had formerly distanced themselves from
Chinese elites in Macao in everything except business; after 1966 this
changed, especially with respect to marriage patterns, religion, and poli-
tics. 36 The estrangement of the Macanese from the Portuguese was also ag-
gravated by the fact that Macao's bureaucracy became more, not less,
"colonial" in the 1980s, its higher ranks filled with short-term Portuguese
expatriate appointees whom the Macanese deeply resent. Unlike Hong
Kong where expatriate British officials made up a very small percentage of
the civil service prior to the handover, in Macao the Portuguese participa-
tion increased as the end neared and with an inevitable consequence: the
Portuguese administration became more isolated from Macao's daily reali-
ties and more dependent on the collaboration of the long-entrenched
leadership of the Chinese community.3? Gary Ngai calls these officials the
"full stops," individuals who have no real interest in the future of Macao
but a great deal of interest in enriching themselves at Macao's expense.



                                       VII
But in an economy fueled by vast flows of cash, by casinos and sex; with in-
stitutions isolated by language and procedure from the vast majority of the
population; where for centuries intermediaries provided the contacts,
bribes, and special knowledge that produced results; an ambiguous place
where the wheels could be greased by kickbacks or favors, where money
could be laundered and commodities as well as people slipped in and out
without great supervision; where entrepreneurs lived by providing what
was prohibited elsewhere in their neighborhood-it is hardly surprising
that Macao, like other free cities with multiple and overlapping sovereign-
ties, should be a place ready-made for espionage and fund transfers for the
broader but clandestine political purposes of the great powers that chose
to keep Macao the way it is in the first place.
   So when Ron Brown, the late U.S. secretary of commerce, held a private
dinner party at the Hong Kong Island Shangri-La Hotel in October 1995,
to which "a Macao property businessman and his wife, a Macao banker
and legislative councilor, a Macao entertainment magnate and members of
several illustrious Hong Kong families" were invited, they were met by Yah


36There is an excellent account of the Macanese in "The Macanese: Anthropology,
History, Ethnology," Review ofCulture (Instituto Cultural de Macau), no. 20,1994.
37For a forceful analysis of the problem of corruption in Macao, see Lo Shiu-hing,
"Bureaucratic Corruption and Its Control in Macao," Asian Journal of Public Ad-
ministration 15 (June 1993): 32-58.
284 • NakedTropics

Lin Trie, a Chinese American, co-owner of a Chinese restaurant a few
blocks from the Arkansas State Capitol and a favorite watering hole of Bill
Clinton while governor, and Trie's partner Antonio Pan, a former executive
of the Lippo Group, and Ernest Green, a Clinton crony and Arkansas fund-
raiser for the Democratic Party. The guests quickly got the message. After
all, they were well used to similar requests from Portuguese presidential
candidates. 38 Brown himself, of course, had been the party's chief fund-
raiser before his appointment as secretary of commerce. In early 1996, de-
spite State Department objections, new rules permitting the export of
high-speed computers to Chinese companies went into effect. According
to a comprehensive investigative report by Jeff Gerth and Eric Schmitt in
the New York Times in 1998, "the Central Intelligence Agency and other
Federal agencies concluded that at least some of those computers [were]
being used by the Chinese military...."39
    "Charlie" Trie was to become a central if illusive figure in the inconclu-
sive Senate investigation of campaign abuses, the House Select Commit-
tee's report on Chinese ((theft of nuclear secrets;' as well as a federal
prosecution and conviction, all related to laundered Chinese contributions
to the 1996 presidential campaign. And most of these contributions were
laundered through Macao. Charlie Trie visited the White House twenty-
three times, at least, between 1993 and 1996, taking with him several casino
barons from Macao-more times to be sure than Congressman Caleb