

3"Boxer on Boxer: A Conversation;' Camoes Center Quarterly I, no. 2 (June 1989):
11-22.
                                               Heroes andTraitors • 299

transmissions between prisoners of war held at the Argyle Street camp in
Kowloon for British officers and the British Army Aid (BAAG) operating
out of Chongqing, former capital of Sichuan Province and the base of
Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist army. The discovery of the "transmitter" by
the Japanese in July 1943, Hywel Williams implies, was a result of Boxer's
treachery. Only a handful of officers knew of the transmitter at the time, he
claims, and all were executed except Boxer.
   Professor Alden takes apart these charges systematically in his March
10,2001, refutation of Hywel Williams's article. As Alden proves, far from
being responsible for «prolonging" World War II, Boxer was the one who
warned that «there could be no greater error than to assume, as is so often
done, that Japan's military is too bogged down in China to prevent it being
turned against us ..." It was the British War Office and Foreign Office that
ignored and underestimated this threat. As Alden also points out, Boxer
was shot in the back by a sniper trying to rally leaderless troops against the
invasion. At the Argyle Street camp in Kowloon the control of information
became critical to morale as the tides of war shifted against the Japanese.
For a time this news was accessible through a secret shortwave radio re-
ceiver (not transmitter). After the Japanese found it, Boxer and others were
arrested, interrogated, and condemned to hard labor. Alden quotes Ralph
Goodwin, a camp escapee who wrote that Boxer's prison companions
«never ceased to marvel at [his] amazing fortitude and calmness of spirit."
   After the war Boxer declined a decoration from the British government
(an MBE-Member of the British Empire) since he said he «had done noth-
ing to deserve the honor." Later in 1975 he declined an honor a second
time, a Commander of the British Empire (CBE). There was, he said, no
empire left to be a Commander of. Boxer himself rarely, if ever, spoke of his
imprisonment; nor did he want to write an autobiography. To have experi-
enced torture, he told a colleague, was to «share the experience of many
helpless people in the past." Colleagues looking at his personal files found
his folders empty. «Ever the intelligence officer" was the reaction of a long-
time colleague at King's College. When pressed on this period during the
Cam6es Center interview in 1989 and asked if he was surprised or appre-
hensive when Hong Kong fell, he said,
    No, I knew the Japanese and I saw clearly that would happen to us. I
    knew damned well that if they treated their own people badly why
    should they treat us better. The Japanese army's discipline was very
    severe, even when they made the slightest mistake. We had seen all
    this in Japan and I had no illusions.
   Emily Hahn was less reticent about the events in Hong Kong during the
Japanese occupation. Her voluminous writings and correspondence give a
300 • NakedTropics