

   But I suppose all of this just reflects the passing of time and nostalgic re-
membrances of things past. Today more Brazilians after all live in a context
that is more urban than rural, more international than national. Carnival
is more marginal than ever from the life of those who can afford to con-
sume culture and who are more distant and fearful of the underclass than
that time long ago when the romanticized and populist interpretations of
the culture brokers who once frequented the cafes of the Zona SuI of Rio
de Janeiro held sway. I was struck by this very forcibly the afternoon I went
to see Orfeu off the Avenida Paulista, and again while on my way to the air-
port later that evening, stuck in interminable traffic with the taxi driver
warning me to hide my bag to avoid the attention of thieves.
   The night before, a Chilean who had married a Brazilian and lived in
Brazil many years said in passing that the real Gotham City was not in
Manhattan but here in Sao Paulo. I could not get this marvelous insight
out of my head, looking up at the odd 1950s style antennae on top the sky-
scrapers, the deeply sunken highways and buttressed overpasses, the un-
derilluminated public streetlights, the cars skimming past the red stoplight
to avoid the armed gunmen at the intersections, the screaming sirens, the
ugly stucco churches wedged between the gray housing blocks, and the
raucous neon-lit brothels and the aggressive pimps banging on the car
windows along the Rua Augusta. What Brazil really needed as the twenti-
eth century ended was a Fellini who would set the Greek tragedy down in
the realm of Batman. Where Orfeu would be trapped in an interminable
bus ride from the periphery of the city, Euridice would be taking tickets at
the air-conditioned theater off the Avenida Paulista, and the gunman
would be lurking in Hades behind a concrete support for the highway
above waiting to press his revolver against the closed window, thinking of
                                                                     Orfeu • 309

crack not sex, and whose life would end far too early to see any sparkling
ocean in the distance.
   But I had after all missed the beginning of the movie, so perhaps I
missed the whole point. This is an old story for a foreigner to Brazil, and
especially for historians. At the best of times, they can only see fragments
of a mosaic, sometimes they can make sense of it; more often they cannot.
So I plead guilty to being unduly influenced by my early Orfeu, and cer-
tainly I do not regret it. Unfortunately, these days I do not think under-
graduates at Cambridge even go out to see exotic foreign films, let alone in
old movie palaces on cold winter nights. So I doubt they have the opportu-
nity to be inspired as I was to set out on a long trek south to see for myself
what the movie screen promised. Perhaps like the mythological Orfeu (the
original, that is, not the version of Camus or Diegues) I should not have
looked back to see if Euridice was following. l