

circles. Boxer, who was working with British military intelligence, had in
1939 married Ursula Tulloch. Hywel Williams, in his article in The
Guardian, claims Tulloch, known as the "most beautiful woman" in Hong
Kong, was also one of the most promiscuous. Her ambition, Williams as-
serts, "was to sleep her way through the entire intelligence community in
the far east." A marvelous English euphemism the word "sleep" in this con-
text. Sleep was presumably the last thing, Williams implies, that Ursula
Tulloch, Boxer, or anyone else was thinking of when they went to bed in
Hong Kong. Boxer and Tulloch were the colony's prime "swingers,"
Williams asserts.
    Alf Bennett, one of Boxer's old friends, arrived in Hong Kong in 1939 to
join the Far East Intelligence Bureau and after the headquarters was moved
to Singapore later that year, remained in Hong Kong and worked in adja-
cent offices to Boxer and saw him every day. Alf Bennett was kind enough
to share with me his reaction to The Guardian article. He says that "what-
ever the author wished to convey by 'swingers: not a word of that time, this
is complete nonsense." Boxer was a hard drinker and enjoyed a good party,
but as Alf Bennett says, "Charles was soon back to his books to write an
erudite article."
    Ursula Tulloch was also evacuated from Hong Kong to Singapore. It had
been assumed, inaccurately as it turned out, that Singapore would be safer
from attack by the Japanese and was in any case impregnable. When this
confidence proved disastrously misplaced, she managed to escape when
Singapore fell to the Japanese in 1942, making her way to Ceylon (now Sri
Lanka) where she chose to stay working as a cryptographer. In 1947, after
divorce from Boxer, she married 1. A. R. Peebles, a journalist at the London
Sunday Times and a well-known sportsman. Following Peebles's death she
married again. Ursula Tulloch, of course, like Charles Boxer and Emily
Hahn, is no longer around to refute Williams's assertions. She died in 1996
at the age of eighty-six.
    Boxer had met Hahn first in Shanghai, startled when first greeted at
the offices of Sinmay's magazine by "an enormous ape ... wearing a red
cap ..." This was Emily Hahn's companion, the gibbon "Mr. Mills." Boxer
told her he too was a writer, of "historical works, very dull." But he had
been given to understand that Emily and Sinmay"were actors in one of the
great love stories of the world, so naturally I didn't want to intrude." Hahn
found Boxer a "brilliant, amusing, mad man, who had insisted on talking
to me about the latest Chungking politics, of which I knew nothing, and
harping on the approaching dissolution of the British Empire." After Hahn
congratulated him on his marriage he said, "It always happens when one
lives in Hong Kong. One either becomes a hopeless drunkard or one mar-
ries. I did both."
                                               Heroes andTraitors • 297

   When Emily Hahn came to Hong Kong with Sinmay, "the Major," as she
invariably called Boxer, took the direct approach. At a dinner he overheard
Hahn say she could not have children. Well, Boxer told her, I do not believe
that, let's see, and the child can be my heir. The subsequent birth of Carola
in November 1941 took place six weeks before the Japanese surprise attack
on Pearl Harbor. The Japanese assault on Hong Kong itself came shortly
thereafter. After holding out for sixteen days, the British surrendered on
Christmas Day 1941, the centenary of the British annexation of Hong
Kong island from the Chinese Empire during the Anglo-Chinese Opium
War of 1839-1842. Boxer, who had rejected two Japanese demands for sur-
render on behalf of the British governor, had been severely wounded.
   The task of conveying the formal rendition of Hong Kong to the Japan-
ese thereby fell to his friend Alf Bennett, a Japanese-speaker who had also
served in Japan. He was very unhappy to have been handed this unpleasant
duty. But Emily Hahn gave a notable description of Alf Bennett in 1940:
    Alf was an RAF officer, at once deliberately comic and knowingly
    glamorous. He had an incredible mustache, curled at the ends like
    Father's in the Clarence Day play. He had high blood pressure and a
    growling voice; he roared, and drank, and knew poetry, and fancied
    himself a picturesque figure, as he was. Picturesque and privileged.
    Everybody knew Alf, and women were wistful about him, but a little
    afraid.
   Boxer himself had no doubt about the outcome of the war, even as he
lay gravely wounded in the hospital as Hong Kong fell. "In the end they
can't win. I don't see how they can, do you? Against America, and England,
and Holland and China. We must try to survive, that's all."