


                                     III
Boxer came from a family with a long military tradition, and was born in
1904 on the Isle of Wight. He was educated at Wellington College, named
after the Duke of Wellington, victor over Napoleon at Waterloo, and at the
Royal Military Academy at Sandhurst. He was commissioned into the Lin-
conshire Regiment as a lieutenant in 1923. Boxer's father, who also served
in the Linconshire Regiment, had been killed at Ypres in 1915. His was a
typically heroic and needless death, as were so many on the dreadful killing
fields of the Western Front in World War I. Seriously wounded while serv-
ing with General Kitchener in Egypt. Boxer's father had, however, insisted
on returning to active duty when the world war broke out. At Ypres he had
led his men up out of the trenches into withering machine-gun fire,
propped up on his walking stick and resting on the elbow of his batman.
298 • NakedTropics

   Following language and intelligence training, Charles Boxer was sec-
onded to the Japanese army in 1930 for three years as part of an exchange
of Japanese and English officers. He was assigned to the 38 Infantry in
Nara. "Usually in armies the smart people were in the cavalry, but in Japan
the cavalry was regarded as a lot more stupid and upper class and not
nearly as good as the infantry:' Boxer said in 1989 in an interview we re-
corded at the Cam6es Center at Columbia University. Boxer enjoyed Japan:
"When you are young and lusty as an eagle and with a lot of money you
do." He took up the Japanese fencing called kendo-"Everyone does it
now, but in 1930 all the foreigners did jujitsu. I was the first one to do
kendo." Boxer explained, "I was very pro-Japanese anyway and the older
generation was still very pro-British ... it was a man's country and if you
learned Japanese, which I did, you were fine." Not that women were absent
from Boxer's Japanese life. His housekeeper concubine was a northerner
from Kakoadati on the island of Kakkaido. "There was no secret about it.
She had been someone else's concubine before and was very reliable."3
   It was in Japan that he expanded his interest in Portuguese imperial his-
tory, concentrating his attention on the first disastrous experiment of Eu-
ropean incursion into Japan and its catastrophic ending when Tokugawa
closed off the country to outside influence in the 1640s. The Japanese liter-
ally crucified hundreds of Christian missionaries and converts and for
good measure executed a delegation of anxious envoys sent out from the
Portuguese China enclave of Macao in order to make it entirely clear to the
European outsiders that they meant what they said. This was the subject of
Boxer's book The Christian Century in Japan, 1549-1650 (1951).
   Boxer returned to London for a two-year posting from 1935-1936 to
the military intelligence section of the War Office. Here, he told us in 1989,
"I had something to do with Anthony Blunt or Anthony Burgess-one of
those traitors who was in the Foreign Office because we had to liase with
each other over the phone." I am glad Mr. Hywel Williams did not see this
reference to the notorious Soviet moles within the British establishment-
it would undoubtedly have provided more grist to his conspiratorial mill.
In midwinter 1937 Boxer was sent to Hong Kong, traveling by way of the
Trans-Siberian Railroad, Manchuria, Korea, Japan, and Shanghai. In Hong
Kong he worked with the Far East Combined Bureau, a military intelli-
gence unit, and traveled widely in China on his spy missions as well as re-
turning several times to Japan.
   The center of Hywel Williams's charge of collaboration against Boxer
focuses on the period of the Japanese occupation of Hong Kong and secret