



                                   305
306 • NakedTropics

   As I arrived, the spectacular Rio backdrop was still there on the screen,
and very occasionally, almost apologetically, the old music in the back-
ground. But the scene I happened in upon was more Lethal Weapon than
Vinicius de Moraes. A flabby, terrified middle-aged white man, sur-
rounded by a largely nonwhite crowd, was about to have his head blown
off. It was. His body was subsequently dumped over the edge of the morro
(slum), into a festering rubbish dump. I have no idea what the poor man
had done. Raped a little girl? Cheated on a drug deal? Was he a stand-in
that represented the Brazilian establishment, indifferent as ever to the
plight of the favelas, unless reminded, violently, that this is where millions
of Brazilians live out their daily lives, and not only during Carnival, and
most without "a room with a view"?
   Brazilian movie critics never seemed to have much liked the rendition
by Camus. It is too ((exotic tourism" as the phrase goes. But foreigners
should be forgiven for enjoying it. In 1962, I certainly took Black Orpheus
for what I saw on the screen: the fantasy, the cityscape, the magnificent set-
ting, and the human grace and musicality. But I also subsequently had the
suspicion that what many middle-class Brazilians objected to about Orfeu
was precisely the fact that it was not Orfeu do Carnaval as it was entitled in
Brazil (based on the original 1956 play Orfeu da Conceifao by Vinicius de
Moraes), but very much Black Orpheus, and that their unconscious reac-
tion was much like the Bahian police in the 1900s who would confiscate
the cameras of European photographers in Salvador when they were seen
taking pictures of nonwhites. This was not the Brazil foreigners were sup-
posed to see, much less propagate abroad by means of images. It repre-
sented after all that «archaic" Brazil, so deeply embarrassing to Brazilians
enamored by the idea of ((progress:' as in many ways it still does in some il-
lustrious circles who should know better.
   Some of the music, grace, and fantasy survive in the new version of
Orfeu. But I was struck by the Americanization, (or is it the ((global-
ization"?) of Brazilian popular culture over the past thirty years-Toni
Garrido's dreadlocks more Afro-Caribbean than Afro-Brazilian; the Pente-
costal pastor replacing the ritual of macumba; in place of the rattling bon-
des crossing atop of Rio's eighteenth-century aqueduct, shining subway
cars full of revelers that could just as well have been rumbling under New
York's Eighth Avenue, transporting back uptown from Greenwich Village
the bejeweled and extravagantly attired denizens of the ((Wigstock Parade:'
the annual extravaganza of New York drag queens and transvestites. The
Carnival sequences were more flamboyant and spectacular and costly than
before, but curiously self-contained within the concrete shell of the samb6-
drama (samba stadium); the rich spectators more voyeurs than partici-
                                                                Orfeu • 307