

richly detailed account of these years. Her book, China to Me, published in
1944 while Boxer was still held in a POW camp in Hong Kong, dealt explic-
itly with the whole cast of characters-Japanese, British, Chinese, and
American-Hahn met in this period. Her activities and subterfuges, nego-
tiations and hardships, and her relationship with Boxer was shared with
the over seven hundred thousand readers who bought her best-seller. The
"collaboration" Hywel Williams imputes to Boxer and Hahn was no mys-
teryat all, nor did it involve betrayal by any stretch of the imagination.
    In fact it was Hahn's identification papers, showing her to have a Chi-
nese husband, Sinmay, that saved her. And with the connivance of the
Japanese consul in Hong Kong, Mr. Shiroshici Kimura, who knew Boxer
and Hahn before the war. Hahn registered their exchange in China to Me:
    "You know I'm an American. Everyone knows that. I have an Amer-
    ican passport; you know that too:'
       ((I know."
       "According to American law this Chinese marriage does not
    make me Chinese."
       "According to Japanese law," he said, "it does."
       "And you know that's Boxer's baby, don't you?"
       "Of course. Your-uh-private life does not alter the law. You
    will not be interned, Miss Hahn. Indeed, you cannot be interned.
    We are ejecting all Chinese subjects from the internment camps."
   One of Williams's more bizarre inaccuracies is his "charge" that Hahn
was a "feminist and a communist sympathizer;' doubtless intended to rein-
force his innuendoes that Boxer was like the Soviet moles within the
British establishment, a man with the proclivities for treachery because of
his relationship with such a woman. Ironically this McCarthy-like smear,
and in The Guardian no less, parallels the suspicions of u.S. military intel-
ligence when Hahn eventually got back to New York with Carola in De-
cember 1943, and was interrogated by eight panels of military intelligence
officials and the FBI. Why had she not been interned? Had she been a
Japanese spy? Why had she fraternized with such high-ranking Japanese
officers? Why had she received "favors" from the Japanese?
   Hahn kept replying:
    the comparative freedom I had got out of the lie was important. It
    was not only that the very idea of being herded behind barbed wire
    was revolting. Outside, I was able to carry food and medicine to the
    military camp where Carola's father was incarcerated. We all did,
    every week, a draggle-tailed group of women whose men were
    locked up. Chinese women, and Swiss and French and Danish and
    Eurasian and Russian, and me.
                                                Heroes andTraitors • 301

   Hahn was without question a women ahead of her time in very many
ways, but she scoffed at the idea of being a feminist: "[F]eminists belong to
clubs. They collect money for causes. I wish feminists well but I've never
wanted to be one." She was too much the individualist for such collective
causes, and as the late William Maxwell of The New Yorker pointed out,
though it hardly needed emphasis for anyone who read what she wrote
over the years: she liked men. She was also no leftist, far from it: during the
increasingly bitter divisions in the United States over China during the late
1940s she spoke up for the Nationalists of Chiang Kai-shek and criticized
the Communist propaganda many Americans she claimed had "fallen for."
She dismissed as "stay at home experts" those American leftists and liberals
who supported the Chinese Communists. In fact it is probably precisely
because she was not a feminist nor a leftist in the fashionable New York
manner that even today Emily Hahn is not recognized as the amazing and
very American original that she undoubtedly was.
   Boxer also trespassed beyond the narrow bounds of British colonial eti-
quette and ingrained racism. As Hahn had written about Shanghai,
    The British were not aware of the Chinese as a people. Oh I don't
    mean the British didn't see the Chinese. They did. They mentioned
    them often as peasants, dwellers in the picturesque villages we saw
    when we went houseboating or shooting. They spoke of them as
    servants, quaint and lovable.... The British community, however,
    reserved its social life for itself and those among the Caucasian
    groups that could be considered suitably upper class.
   Boxer and Hahn were just the opposite. They moved in multiracial cir-
cles. Hahn had a Chinese lover. And she was an American. All these ele-
ments upset and obsessed and disgusted British Hong Kong. And the
resentments have evidently not diminished over the years. It is doubtless
from these poisoned roots that the tittle-tattle and gossip arose, which
landed up on the pages of The Guardian. As Hahn notes at one point in
China to Me, ((Nobody English thought of inviting Chinese people to (in-
formal parties.'" Boxer had no tolerance for racism, Portuguese or British.
A Japanese interrogator at the fall of Hong Kong paid him an unwitting
tribute when he told Hahn, ((Everybody say British bad; Boxer okay. No
proud."