

be able to read archival documents in as many of these languages as possi-
ble from 1500 on. A strong foundation in the classics was advisable as well,
as was a thorough knowledge of the religious literature and theological
controversies within the Catholic Church, and between Catholics and
Protestants since the Restoration. He said this not to boast: he had no tol-
erance for pretension. He was only reciting some part of skills he possessed
himself and used so effectively to do his work. Boxer despite his eminence
was extraordinarily generous with his time and advice to those of us with
lesser attainments.


                                       II
Although it was well known that Boxer had been a soldier until his forties,
there was another Boxer about whom we-or at least I-knew very little.
This was Boxer the spy and Boxer the lover. Father Manuel Teixeira, the
veteran Portuguese priest who is Macao's premier historian, once asked
Boxer about his religion. It was well known that as a prisoner of war of the
Japanese for almost four years in Hong Kong and later Canton (Guang-
zhou to the Chinese), he had rejected the Bible in preference for the com-
plete works of Shakespeare, a decision that troubled the redoubtable old
priest, with whom Boxer had long retained a friendly rivalry. Boxer, whose
penchant for bawdy jokes and barrack-room doggerel was notorious, an-
swered: I am an Episcopalian from the waist up and a Mormon from the
waist down. In the case of the Mormons, he was evidently thinking of
polygamy and not the Salt Lake City Tabernacle Choir. Boxer's Hong Kong
affair with the American journalist Emily Hahn was one of the twentieth
century's most publicized romances. For seventy years Hahn, known to her
friends and family as "Mickey," was one of The New Yorker's most prolific
contributors. Like Boxer, her literary output was astounding-52 books
and hundreds of articles, short stories, and poems. Their wartime affair in
Hong Kong was fully laid out by Hahn herself in the best-seller China to
Me: A Partial Autobiography. 2 She predeceased Charles Boxer in 1997 at the
age of ninety-two.
   To many who had followed her adventures over the years, Emily Hahn
was the star and Charles Boxer was the handsome military bit player. Her
U.S. obituaries hardly mentioned him or his achievements as a scholar. For
Emily Hahn's public Charles Boxer was forever the British major from
Hong Kong who became her lover, father of her children, and then her

2Emily Hahn, China to Me, A Partial Autobiography (New York: Doubleday, Doran,
1944). Also see Emily Hahn, No Hurry to Get Home: The Memoir of the New Yorker
Writer Whose Unconventional Life and Adventures Spanned the Twentieth Century
(Seattle: Seal Press, 2000) and Ken Cuthbertson, Nobody Said Not to Go: The Life,
Loves, and Adventures afEmily Hahn (New York: Faber and Faber, 1998).
                                                Heroes and Traitors • 295

husband for over fifty years. Boxer and Hahn settled down at his country
seat in Dorset in the late 1940s, but Hahn was ill suited to the role of chate-
laine in a drafty English manor during the pinched conditions of the post-
war British countryside. Her all-too-accurate commentary on British
mores and foibles in England to Me published in 1949 was not appreciated
by her adopted countrymen. After 1950 her marriage to Boxer became a
transatlantic commute. Hahn avoided taxes in Britain by brief sojourns,
while Boxer, after a stint at Yale University, when in the United States
checked into the Yale Club on Vanderbilt Avenue behind Grand Central
Station in New York City.
    Emily Hahn was born of Jewish-German ancestry in St. Louis, Missouri,
in 1905. In 1926 she earned the first degree in mining engineer awarded to
a woman by the University of Wisconsin. During the early 1920s she had
driven across America in a Model T Ford dressed as a boy and settled
briefly in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Her letters to friends in Chicago, where
her family had moved, provided the material sent to but initially rejected
by The New Yorker. She worked as a screenwriter in the early days of Holly-
wood, took graduate studies in geology at Columbia University in New
York, and had her first New Yorker piece published in 1929. When a Cali-
fornia love affair went wrong, she took off in 1930 for Africa, settled
among the pigmies in the Belgium Congo and became attached to gib-
bons. At least one of these slender-bodied long-armed arboreal apes there-
after accompanied her everywhere perched on her shoulder.
    In 1935 she stopped off for a few days at Shanghai. "It had become clear
to me from the first day in China that I was going to stay forever," she wrote
later. In China she met the Soong sisters. The eldest was wed to Dr. W. H.
Kung, a wealthy Shanghai banker and China's prime minister in the late
1930s. Another Soong sister had married Sun Yat-sen, founder of the Chi-
nese republic, still revered by both Nationalists and Communists as the
founder of modern China. The third sister married Chiang Kai-shek, the
Nationalist leader.
   Hahn wrote the stories of these remarkable women in her book The Soong
Sisters, published in 1941. In Shanghai Hahn had a long affair with one of
China's leading intellectuals and poets, Zau Sinmay, and became an opium
addict. She was a friend of such luminaries of the Shanghai scene as Sir Victor
Sassoon and C. V. Starr, publisher of the American Shanghai Evening Post and
Mercury and backer of Sinmay's abortive attempts to establish a bilingual lit-
erary journal. She met the young Communist insurgent leaders Mao Zedong
and Zhou Enlai. All the while she was filing reports for The New Yorker as its
China correspondent, recording in vivid autobiographical detail life in China
against a background of civil war and revolution and the Japanese invasion.
   When Emily Hahn became Charles Boxer's lover in Hong Kong in 1940
he was already "an old Asian hand," as the saying went in British colonial
296 • NakedTropics