

                                     IV
I asked Boxer in 1989 about how the British Army had reacted to his schol-
arly interest. "Provided you hunted and had a horse and that kind of thing
then you were regarded as more or less all right;' he replied. "Whether you
took any interest in history didn't matter at all. If you were interested in
302 • NakedTropics

Portuguese or Dutch that was regarded as mildly eccentric, but as long as
you hunted and had a horse those were the main things." In Hong Kong
hunting was not enough. His Japanese connections were also no mystery:
this was precisely the reason for his intelligence posting to Hong Kong in
the first place. His Japanese regiment had in fact been one of those which
seized Hong Kong from the British in 1941. The Japanese knew Boxer and
he knew them, and he used this understanding to help his fellow prisoners
surVIve.
   Unlike Blunt, Burgess, and the Soviet moles, Boxer was no cynic. His
closest friends saw him as a stoic. In his personal copy of the Meditations of
Marcus Aurelius he had marked the passage on what it is to die, how"...
he can conceive of it not otherwise, than as a work of nature, and he that
fears any work of nature, is a very child." And this stoicism sustained him
through the ordeal of over three years in captivity, torture, and solitary
confinement. Was he afraid, we asked in 1989. "No, there was no reason to
be afraid. It was part of life. I feel sorry that a lot of people who died never
lived to see the end of the war. My friends never lived to see this, because
they were shot and killed. I was one of the lucky ones." Boxer was no trai-
tor, nor in his own mind was he a hero. He was, as his friend Professor Peter
Marshall of King's College called him, a person of"granite integrity." When
offered decorations he rejected them. But a title Charles Boxer might just
have accepted was the one he liked to quote about Salvador Correa de Sa.
For whatever else Boxer mayor may not have been, he was undoubtedly
like his seventeenth-century Luso-Brazilian hero: "a notable old stickler." A
stickler is defined in my dictionary as a tenacious and persistent person in
search of the truth. This is something once upon a time the Manchester
Guardian also used to be.
This page intentionally left blank
TH E   AQUKDUCT.
                                                      CHAPTER             16
                                                                      Orfeu
                                            "Rio de Janeiro/My joy and my delight!
                                   By day I have no water/By night I have no light."
                                                 -Anonymous Samba lyric, 1965




I first saw Black Orpheus (1959) by Marcel Camus in the early 1960s in a
crowded and cold old movie palace on the outskirts of Cambridge, Eng-
land. It was a dull and dismal winter evening and I was barely twenty years
old: so I suppose I was ripe for romance; the more exotic and erotic the
better, even if on celluloid. It was powerful enough to make me determined
to set out to see Brazil for myself.
    The new Orfeu (1999) directed by Carlos (aka "Caca") Diegues I saw in
Sao Paulo, in a rush, on a hot afternoon. The nearly empty theater off the
Avenida Paulista was shiny and new with an electronic entrance gate I had
great difficulty navigating until assisted by a sleepy attendant-and the air
was conditioned to English chilliness. I got there late and the film had
begun, so I missed the beginning.
    Euridice was the wife of Orfeu, the legendary Thracian poet and musi-
cian who could cast charms and spells by his singing and who was permit-
ted by Pluto to follow her out of Hades provided that he refrain from
looking back at her. Orfeu did, and Euridice was doomed to return. But the
new resilient Orfeu of the cinema has little to do with this Greek prove-
nance, set as his story now is within a Western Roman Catholic festival, his
music and its spell rooted in samba, speaking Portuguese with Brazilian
inventiveness, and located in a favela close to the sky, high up above the
sweeping arcs of Rio's beaches.