

pants, separated and packaged and commercialized well away from the ac-
tion, and totally protected from the streets where Carnival once predomi-
nantly took place, even in my time in the midsixties. Was Caca Diegues's
telescopic gunsight view of the desfile, the setup for the would-be assassi-
nation of Orfeu, intended to demonstrate this? Or is Carnival now mainly
for TV only?
    I had in the mid-1960s been dropped off along the Vidigal road and
climbed up some steep steps in the hillside to a small enchanting chacara
(country cottage) where a Swedish couple working for the UN lived. As the
dusk gathered, far away in the distance between the leafy canopy of the
mata Atlantica lay the twinkling lights of Leblon, and below a sparkling
purple-hewed South Atlantic Ocean. When I was in Rio a few days before I
saw the new Orfeu, the main sewer pipe from the favela (shanty-town) that
now covered the hillside had broken and was spewing sludge into the
ocean from much the same location we had looked down over Rio that
evening thirty-five years ago. It seemed that this was just the spot Diegues
had set the most grotesque and memorable image of his film, the Hades
where the drug gangs threw the bodies of their victims, and where the de-
tritus of the globalized favela rotted, and the body of Euridice fell so deco-
rously on a tree limb.
    Not that violence and greed did not lurk behind the facade in the 1960s
anymore than it does today. I heard afterward that my hosts of that evening
were hounded out of their bucolic paradise some year or so later by the
hired pistoleiros (gunmen) of a Brazilian politican who wanted the land,
and were hurriedly flown thoroughly terrified back to Stockholm for their
own safety. It was a pity. They were sweet, good-hearted people who only
wanted to change the world for the better, and Brazil was the worse off for
losing their contribution. It would be sad to think they had been moved out
so rudely to provide space for a rubbish dump and a broken sewage pipe.
   With its concrete blockhouses and narrow Moorish alleys and steep
winding staircases and small open squares the Rio favela in Diegues's film
looks much like old Lisbon of the Alfama; an ironic historical throwback to
emerge just as Brazil's cultural bureaucrats, or should I say servidores
publicos (public servants) as they are so inappropriately called, ensconced
within their sanitized office blocks on the high plateau in Brasilia, squabbled
over how to spend the public money on a suitable celebration of Cabral's
accidental stopoff at Porto Seguro on his way to India in 1500.
    But these "jump cuts" permeated my reaction to Diegues's Orfeu. Poor
Cabral and his Portuguese companions were shocked at the nakedness of
the people they encountered on the Brazilian beach, and even more by
their lack of self-consciousness about it-their lack of "shame" as they put
308 • NakedTropics

it. I was struck by how overdressed all the characters in the new Orfeu had
become-poor Euridice must have sweltered, swaddled in what looked
like a discarded wedding gown, or the traficante Lucinho and his bizarre
woolen hat with his affected mannerisms, more Chicago in winter than
Rio in summertime. Even Orfeu was decked out in an American gigolo un-
dershirt and baggy pants-though we did get to see his naked bottom
briefly. This was not a very sexy movie despite the fact that sex or at least
unrequited love was what the story was all about. There was no spark to
this tragic triangle, and the life came more from the minor characters (the
marvelous Mary Sheila as the traficante Be Happy-how more American
can you get than that-and Isabella Fillards as Mira) than from the princi-
pals, who seemed self-absorbed and narcissistic, more in love with them-
selves than each other.