

rose and said—I do not rise, Sir, to trouble the House with any discussion at present; the subject is indeed well deserving the attention of the House; but the more proper period for discussing it will be when the different topics enlarged upon by the right hon. gent, to-night shall be brought forward in the shape of bills,. when I shall take an opportunity of delivering my sentiments more at large. To this address I concur in common with the. House, and all those who recollect with pleasure the cordiality and zeal of the militia of this country, who set to those of Ireland an example which has excited their emulation, and which they now, so much to their honour, imitate: this is a subject on which there can be no difference of opinion, but in which we must all feel equal delight, I do not think this an oc- 1081 casion on which it is necessary to enter at all into any discussion of the very interesting and important topics with which the right hon. gent, prefaced his motion for this address. I beg leave to say, that having expressed myself, in the course of the subject now under our discussion, dissatisfied, in many respects, as to the state of the military defence, and not being able to relieve my mind upon the whole of that subject, I must repeat that I retain the same sentiments still. I will, however, freely own, that I am, in many respects, satisfied with what I have heard to-night; I must, however, declare also, that whenever I have ventured to trouble the House upon this subject, I never differed from the right hon. gent, in one proposition which his speech to-night proved, namely, that as far as numbers go, there is no subject of blame to be attached any where; it has never been contested by me, that the numbers raised in the course of the present war are not abundantly sufficient to meet any view which any reasonable person can entertain of the necessity for our defence. How far, in the raising such numbers, merit is to be allowed to his Majesty's government—how much they have done to procure the proper means to improve such numbers, and render them efficient by discipline—how much encouragement has been held out to some descriptions of persons composing a part of those numbers—how far ministers have proceeded to give to the country the benefit it might have had in proportion to such numbers raised by active exertions and prudent policy, are questions which are not necessarily to be mixed in this debate. I shall not introduce any topics of that nature at present; whatever share govt. may have had in producing these numbers of men for the general defence of the country, the arduous, the zeal, and the energy of the country, is manifested more than even the numbers can convey; and this affords to us the best pledge for our security in the hour of attack, and consciousness of invincible strength in the hour of danger; a security, indeed, against any danger by which this country may be threatened, and an assurance of triumph very any difficulty with which we may have to contend. But there is another point which cannot be cured by zeal, and that is, whether the energy of the persons thus raised has been well directed? Whether they have been brought forward and 1082 improved in discipline, so as to render their natural force most serviceable, and made most available to the security of their country? That is a point involving matters which it may be extremely interesting and highly important to discuss hereafter at a convenient opportunity; but I will not introduce these topics into discussion, to embarrass the subject of the present day; I shall leave them to subsequent occasions, of which there will be many when the bills come before us: but while I say I feel some satisfaction from what I heard to-night from the right hon. gent., I mean that my satisfaction arises chiefly from the amount of our force called into activity for our service, and the zeal and energy which the country has manifested for that purpose. In no part of the country do I apprehend any deficiency in zeal and energy; and with the magnitude of our force, in a collective sense, I am satisfied.—On none of these points have I any anxiety; but on the subject of rightly improving such force by discipline, and rendering it more and more efficient for its purpose, have I day after day expressed my anxiety in this House; and this is the great point on which I wish the public may never have reason to regret that more has not been done early in the case. Upon that matter I only throw out this as a hint, for at present I shall say no more upon it; neither will I enter minutely into other matters at this moment. I would just observe in passing, that with respect to the militia, I am of opinion, care should be taken that it be not made use of in a way that may impede the progress of the regular army, or any other disciplined force; and unless I shall see Occasion to change my opinion, I shall have to state more at large my sentiments upon this subject hereafter, and to submit* that under the present circumstances of the country, it will be desirable, as vacancies shall occur, that they shall be filled up in a different mode than has been hitherto adopted: and if they are raised by ballot as formerly, yet that they shall soon be put in a state in which, when trained, they may be at liberty to enlist as much as they choose, as men do from the militia, and also from the army of reserve, into the regular service. I enter as strongly as the right hon. gent, himself can do into the propriety of preventing as much as possible the competition of the services, that of raisin" men for the militia and the 1083 army of reserve, interfering with the recruiting of the regular army. I enter also into the spirit, and feel the absolute necessity of a measure that may crush the abominable practice of crimping. I wish very much to see some measure adopted, to relieve the country from the great. Weight and pressure of those high and enormous bounties, which now have been too long given for men in the militia and the army of reserve, which has, in addition to this evil, another of considerable magnitude attached to it, that of temptation to desertion; but I doubt very much whether you will not prevent a great deal of progress in the service, if you do riot only allow persons from all services to enlist as they choose into the regular service, but also supply the vacancy in some manner like that which is now done in the army of reserve, and rendering that ii species of vehicle, by which to convey men who are trained and disciplined into the regular service. I throw this out as a. mere hint for consideration, before the progress of the army of reserve is suspended. The right hon. gent. has not entered into any derail of the mode by which he means to raise the men: if lie can raise as many new regiments and battalions as may be wanted, by direct recruiting at moderate bounties, without having the circumstance of undue grants in consequence of I shall be glad. If there be reasonable hopes of such a plan, I should wish it to be tried, and should most heartily wish it success. I do not say how fur it may or may not be advantageous to the country to adopt a total suspension of the army of reserve for a while; but I am strongly of opinion, that with a view to the successful augmentation of the army, and the keeping it up effectually in time of war, it must be done by some measure that has at least the effect of keeping down bounties, and that can never be accomplished until the present competition in the services shall have been abolished. I think, however, that you cannot have the mini with the same promptness, nor under the same discipline, without a measure somewhat partaking of the character of your army of reserve, and that will operate in different prirts of the counties more; directly than any other. Some regulations with regard to substitutes, and to confine the bounties within a moderate compass, will, I believe, be found more effectual than any 1084 other mode. I think, however, that to supply the army in this way, will be found a more effectual mode than that of the ordinary progress of recruiting for the army in the first instance; for I have been told by many men of experience, and I have found by my own, that men, as, indeed, it is natural we should expect, without experience, are more ready to enter into that species of service which is limited in extent and duration, which is the nature of the army of reserve, than into that of a general service, which has no limits of time or place. This we all experienced in the course of the last war iii the militia. We have already found in this war, that men have been ready to enter into the army of reserve, independent of the bounty, on account of the service being limited in point of time; and we have found, that when men come together, and after they have acquired military habits, they take inclinations from each other, and are tempted by a natural spirit of courage and emulation among their comrades, to extend their services, and upon which they manifest a desire of going into the regular army, and therefore, believe that as a matter of permanent policy, as well as that of a temporary purpose, or immediate effort, you will find it prudent, instead of giving up the system of the army of reserve, to retain something of its principle, and indeed I collected from the speech we have just heard, it was not the intention of the right hon. gent, to give it up altogether, but only to suspend the provisions of it for a while. I should rather think it better to shape the plan of the army of reserve differently from what it is at present, and to attach it afterwards, as much as you may, to the regular force, by uniting it, by means of moderate bounties, to the different battalions, as second regiments or battalions; for by this mode you will have all the advantages of local attachments, which men have, and the willingness they have to go together in almost every service: this will, in a considerable degree, be always the case where men are raised by districts, instead of being collected by a plan of general and indiscriminate recruiting; and the deficiency may be sup phed by fresh ballot. I do not know whether I have not branched out further than was necessary to express my perfect acquiescence in the present address, reserving, as I do, the perfect and entire freedom 1085 to speak on the different measures when I they come before the House; I have not stated these sentiments or opinions in opposition to the motion now before the House, but I thought it necessary to throw out these ideas, lest it should be supposed, by my silence, that I had altered my opinion in-some respects, in eon-sequence of my seeming to acquiesce in all that has been stated by the right hon. gent. On the contrary, from what I have faced now, I trust it appears to the House, that nothing which I have taken the liberty, on many former occasions, to recommend in our military system, has been in the least degree altered by any proposition which I have heard to-night.