---
source_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1804/mar/28/irish-militia-offer-bill"
final_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1804/mar/28/irish-militia-offer-bill"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "44d077d90b1b0fca7bc86f1773edd436fede6b66d295fa9611057252ca5e88d0"
title: "IRISH MILITIA OFFER BILL.\u2014 (Hansard, 28 March 1804)"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

IRISH MILITIA OFFER BILL.— (Hansard, 28 March 1804)

# IRISH MILITIA OFFER BILL.—

HC Deb 28 March 1804 vol 1 cc1072-98 1072

moved the consideration of his Majesty's message, relative to the offers made by several regiments of Irish militia to extend their services to this country.

said, he did, not 1073 mean to oppose the motion; but this was a subject of very great importance at any time, and more so at the present; it was a subject that was likely to involve principles that must naturally excite the jealousy of those who were attached to the constitution. He would not take up more of the time of the House at present, as he did not know what measures ministers meant to found upon this message; but he could not help expressing the jealousy he felt upon the subject.

said, that it gentlemen had any objections to state to this measure, they ought to state them at once; but if they did not know what the measures to be proposed were, it would be as well to wait till they did, before they expressed their objections.—The order of the day was then read, and the Speaker having read his Majesty's Message,

rose, and addressed the House to the following effect.—Sir; in calling the attention of the House to the message of his Majesty, which has been just read, I conceive that there can exist very little doubt of the general concurrence of the House in carrying to the foot of the Throne their unanimous expressions of joy and satisfaction at the communication which has been made, and of this additional proof of the zeal and loyalty of the Irish militia. I should conceive, Sir, that there can hardly be any person in the House who can rind any difficulty in expressing his concurrence and warm approbation at this generous and spontaneous return on the part of the militia of Ireland, for an equally generous and spontaneous effort which was made on a former occasion by the militia of England, who offered their services to go to Ireland, at a time when that country was in a state of considerable danger. But, as his Majesty's message applies only to a part of the measures that are under the consideration of govt. for augmenting the disposeable part of our military force, I hope shall be excused if I advert shortly to other subjects which form a part of that general plan. Before I proceed to state those points, I think it may be material to recall the recollection of the House to the present state of our military force, because although it has been stated on former occasions in a general way, yet it has never been slated in that distinct and detailed manner which was necessary to make a proper impression upon the House. After having stated the 1074 present state of our military force, I shall take a short comparative view of our military force at two former periods, viz. in Oct. 1801, when the preliminaries of the peace were signed, and in April 1803, immediately after his Majesty's message. The total of the regular force on the 1st of this month, including cavalry, infantry, and militia; amounted to 252,841 men; this body consisted in round numbers of 20,324 regular cavalry, 133,200 regular infantry, and 99,257 militia. The number of the artillery at the same period amounted to 14,202 men, making altogether the actual state of our force on the 1st of this month 207,043 men. Now, with respect to the comparative view which I proposed to take of our force at two former periods; on the 1st of Oct. 1801, the effective strength of the army amounted to 266,800 men; the artillery to 12,287, making together above 7.9,000 men; consequently, taking the whole of our force together, and comparing them at those two periods, viz. Oct. 1801, and March 1804, it will be found that our force, now that we have only been engaged about 10 months in war, is within 13 or 14,000 men of the amount of the army, at the close of a war which lasted nine years. The number of cavalry in Oct. 1801, was 26,350; but it should be recollected, that the cavalry is a force that cannot be raised so quickly as infantry, and that the number of our cavalry was thought at that time by many gent, to be greater than was necessary.—I have now, Sir, stated very shortly-, but very accurately, the comparative strength of our military force at the two periods to which I have alluded, and having done so, I will leave it to the fair and unprejudiced determination of any man, whether there are any grounds for those charges which some gent, are so constantly in the habit of throwing out, of the want of exertion on the part of his Majesty's ministers, and of the neglect of the military force of the country.—Now, Sir, with regard to our force in April, 1803, immediately previous to the rupture with France: it amounted at that time in G. Britain and Ireland to 124,843 men. Now, Sir, I will state the distribution of our force at the two periods to which I have alluded. I The total of force in G. Britain and Ireland in Oct. 1801, including militia, was; 170,426 men; in April, 1803, 124,843, and in March, 1804, 199,993 men; which 1075 is near 30,000 men more in G. Britain and Ireland than there was at the close of the last war, and near 60,000 men more than there was in April last, immediately before the commencement of the war.—But there is another view in which I wish the House to consider this subject, that is to say, the difference of the numbers of the regular troops at the different periods. By regular troops, I do not mean only troops disposable for foreign service. The number of regular troops in Ireland in Oct. 18O1, was 12,220 men; at present there are in Ireland 28,870 regular infantry, which form 30 battalions of as fine and as well-disciplined troops as this country ever possessed. It may be said that tin: danger in the former war was not so great as that with which we were now threatened, but I will venture to say that there were many periods of the last war, and particularly at the time of the Northern confederacy, when the danger was greater I will not say than it is now, because we are fully prepared, but was greater than it was some months ago. Without occupying the House longer upon this subject, may venture to say, that as far as the defence of this country is concerned, particularly if the number of volunteers is considered, it requires no extraordinary decree of courage not to feel much alarm at any threatened attack of the the enemy. That no degree of exertion has been wanting on the part of the executive govt. is, I think, clearly proved, if the number of men be considered that have been raised during the present war. The total number of men raised for the public service, for the regulars, militia, army of reserve, and seamen, since the commencement of the war, is 192, 606 men; and it ought also to be recollected, that this force was raised at a time when provisions were cheap, when the manufactures were flourishing, and, consequently, when there were not such strong inducements to men to enter into the army or navy. When all these circumstances are taken into consideration, let any man judge whether ministers have or have not made any exertions. I take no credit to myself and by colleagues for these exertions, because m making them, we have only done our duty. But I wish to have this point considered as established, that as far as relates to our defensive force, there is no reason to repine at what has been done.—This point, being established with regard to our defensive force, the next question is, whe- 1076 ther we have a sufficient offensive and disposeable force? I am of opinion that we ought, not to confine ourselves to mere measures of defence, but that we ought to look forward to what may happen in the course of the war. Suppose, in some happy day, the continent of Europe should endeavour to rescue itself from that yoke of iron bondage in which it is placed, and which has levelled kings and governments in the dust; it must be admitted that it would be desirable that this country should avail itself of such an opportunity it it occurred; but even if it should not, this country by itself may have an opportunity of reclining the enemy to reason, of convincing him that we are more powerful than lie supposes us to be, and that we are more than able to contend single-handed against him. Upon these grounds, I think it would be adviseable to augment our disposeablc force, and such an augmentation had been determined upon by his Majesty's govt.; it had not yet been put into execution, knit it was ready to be done to such an extent as might be deemed proper. The augmentation which had been already ordered, extended to the cavalry and to the foot guards; the increase in the cavalry was about 3500, and the foot guards above 2000. In addition to this, it is proposed to raise 8 new regiments of 1000 men each, and 10 new battalions of 1000 men also each, to be added to 10 of the strongest of the old regiments: and this augmentation was to be connected with an augmentation which was to be made to the foreign troops in our service. It is perfectly well known, that there was in the last war, a very large body of foreign troops in our service: and it must be equally obvious that there are greater difficulties in recruiting that species of force now, than there was in the last war. The foreign troops now in our service he would take at 8000 men; and in addition to tins WHS to be considered the levies now making in our American and West Indian possession, which I should estimate at 4000 men. If the louse should concur in the propriety of this addition to our regular force, then the next question to be considered is, 1st, by what direct medium you can effect and encourage that augmentation; and, to what collateral means you can use in the attainment of that object. With regard to the 1st of these points, I hope that the House will not be dissatisfied with me if I do not propose any radical change in the construction of 1077 the army, if I do not now enter into the consideration of the question, whether it would or would not he right to introduce the principle of limited service into our army? I by no means wish to contend, that this is not a question very well deserving of consideration; it is one which I have considered, and upon which I have formed my opinion, and whenever the subject is fairly taken up, I have no objection to state it, but I am sure it is a subject which the House would not listen to, unless it had been previously considered by the military part of the administration. It is a subject that not only requires great consideration, but even, if it should be adopted, requires a great deal of time to carry into effect. It has been adopted in the Austrian service, that is to say, the principle was adopted immediately after the treaty of Luneville, but it was determined that it should not take effect till 1804. But I am sure I need not state the material difference that subsists between the Austrian service and ours; the Troops of Austria are all concentrated within herown continental dominions, and are not spread, as the troops of G. Britain necessarily are. Over distant continental possessions. With regard, then, to the direct means that we ought to adopt for encouraging and effecting this augmentation, my opinion is, after the best, consideration I can give; the subject, that the best way would be 1o remove all competition with the recruiting service, and to put a stop to all great bounties, which were not only a great grievance, by obstructing the recruiting service, but encouraged desertion. This may be considered as a great adm