

—Sir; as there will be a considerable interval between the present period, and the final discussion of the subject now before the House, I shall not be under the necessity of detaining the Mouse so long as I otherwise should, perhaps, feel it my ditty to do; but it is necessary for me to observe, that although the right hon. gent, has gone into the whole measure at once, on a general statement of the matter which he is hereafter to propose, which may therefore be hereafter discussed; yet those who feel like myself, must be anxious not to appear to assent to all he states, and therefore I shall say 41 few words on the subject of the message from his Majesty, and the address proposed by the right hon. gent. There cannot be the least hesitation to assent to the first, and, indeed, what may be called the formal part of the address to his Majesty, which returns thanks to his Majesty for his gracious communication; as little objection can there be made to the acknowledgment of the zeal of the militia of Ireland, or of the people of that country in the common cause; but it remains for me and for those who think with me to say, that we are not prepared to adopt measures to carry into execution any particular plan, until we have had an opportunity of considering what that plan is. The first and leading objection I have to accepting the present offer of the Irish militia is, an objection to the principle of the thing, that is, because by it. a body of men assembled for efficient military purposes, are to go beyond the terms of their original service. I do not say that no condition of things can do away this objection, because there may be a condition things which will do away all objections 1086 of whatever kind; but I say, that condition of things does not exist at this moment: and an objection it always will remain, let the condition of things be what it may; and the only question is, whether such a condition exists as to overrule that objection. I am of opinion, that in the present case, that condition has no such force at the present moment. I felt this objection strongly at the time the English militia made their offer to go to Ireland; and however useful, and perhaps decisive, that measure was upon the occasion to which it was applied, certainly that measure was not carried into effect without producing the inconveniences which I have alluded to, and which I took the liberty of stating at that time. I am confirmed, instead of being shaken, in the opinion I then entertained upon that subject; for, indeed, the taking such a service as this, although offered, is nothing more than that which may, in some degree, be called a departure from good faith: it is not a breach of good faith, but it is a sort of misprision of good faith; for although the leading part of such a service as this may be voluntary, and the offer spontaneous, yet, as to the remainder, it may be absolutely compulsory. If a part of a large military body make the offer, how is the remainder to refuse it? You do not seem to know the possible, nor seem very clearly to see the probable, consequences of such measures as these, for there are many evils attending them: one of these evils, besides the point which partakes of the nature of a breach of faith, is this; it has a very dangerous effect upon military discipline, especially upon such a force as that of a militia force; and, to illustrate this, I should like to ask gent, who went to Ireland with our militia, what passed as they were going there with their regiments; whether they did not hear some things that were utterly subversive of discipline? I would ask, whether the acceptance of such a service is not a species of suspension of discipline? Tutting yourself into a situation to ask a favour of a military body of men (for a favour this is) cannot be said to be free from danger. It may be said, that this is only renewing what I formerly said: that may be true, and yet the observation may not have lost its force because it happens to have been an old one, and the object may be as good now as if it had never been before made; besides, I do 1087 not see that Ireland is less in danger than G. Britain. When you say you let loose a part of your disposeable force in this country, that is to say, that you have so far a power to employ as you please, the regular force which you could not otherwise detach, you must remember, that precisely to the same amount you must make fast your force in Ireland. I have by these measures pretty good testimony of the propriety of the opinions I have formerly given on these points. This asking favour where you ought only to command, this begging of them will have a bad effect; it will introduce among our military bodies a species of saturnalia which may be extremely dangerous; for which reasons, although I agree in the first part of the address, as I have stated already, yet I dissent from the latter part of it. I would really say no more for the present purpose, than that we should take the matter into our consideration, for I think we ought to reserve to ourselves the mode in which we shall proceed, at least until we have had some time to deliberate upon it, for we should not consider the question as a mere transfer of force from the one country to the other; but this question involves a consideration of increasing the militia force of Ireland, a force which is not raised, as in this country, by ballot; and this goes, like many other measures to which I and some others have been constantly objecting, to the prejudice of increasing the regular army, and in that view it is particularly objectionable to me. Many of the propositions of the right hon. gent, to-night I cannot oppose, without giving up a great number of opinions I have delivered on various former occasions in his House, and in which opinions I have been every day more and more convinced, as the subjects have been presented to my mind; Such as that of the propriety of putting an end to the competition of the services by which bounties have been increased; the taking the matter of recruiting entirely into the hands of govt., instead of leaving individuals to 'vie with each other, and creating an expense so enormous and so burthensome. These and some other points stated to-night by the right hon. gent, are what I have stated several times, and a great while ago in this House. These, it seems, are now to be adopted, though then it seemed they were not mature, and were therefore rejected. It 1088 seems as if reason to his Majesty's ministers was like fruit, not fit to eat in less than twelve mouths, for it is now that distance, of time since they were offered; but at last they have been thought fit for the table of the right hon. gent, and so they have been to-night accordingly served up. Upon one point I would ask for information, whether the new regiments are to be raised by recurring to the old and ruinous system of recruiting for rank, and if so, whether ministers can hope for any power of legislation in such a case that will prevent a competition which must be most injurious in its effects? As to the point of the duration of the service in the regular army, I do not blame the right hon. gent, for not alluding to it sooner, for he had no measure that had a bearing upon it sooner: upon that subject I retain the opinion I have often delivered in this House. In a word, I agree with the right hon. gent, as to the propriety of reducing the enormous bounties we have so long heard of, and they cannot be reduced without taking away the competition which has produced them. I agree with the right hon. gent, also in the propriety of govt. taking the whole of the recruiting system into its own hands. I agree too, that the first part of the address ought to be voted, namely, thanks to his Majesty for his gracious communication, and an acknowledgment of the zeal of the people of Ireland: but there I think the address ought to stop for the present. I am not, without much further consideration, prepared to say yes to the remainder of the address, which will tie down this House to every thing but the mere detail of a system, the principles of which I do not approve, and for the consideration of which this House has not had time enough, and, therefore, I shall move, by way of amendment to this address, to leave out all the latter part of it, for the purpose of inserting the words, "and that we shall take the same into our most serious consideration,"—The question being put,