ission on the part of Ministers, and as an acknowledgment of the justice of the reasoning which some gent, have always made use of. But I cannot consider the question in that point of view, I think the measures adopted by ministers last year were right, but the question is, whether these measures are necessary now? But, if I am right in my opinion, that this competition ought, to be stopped the next, question is, whence does this competition arise? It arose from the militia and from the army of reserve. With regard to the militia, the competition certainly was very great last year, because the whole militia was to be raised; but now the militia was very nearly complete, for there did not want to complete the English militia 5000 men, and the Irish was complete within 150. The 5000 mew necessary to complete the militia, will 1078 not, I am sure, be considered as forming any thing like a competition with the army in a country of such extent as this, and containing such a number of fighting men as we know by the official returns it contains; such a competition is hardly worth noticing. We then come to the army of reserve. Though I still maintain my opinion, that the army of reserve bills were salutary and useful, yet now as they have, in a great measure., had the effect which was expected from them, it becomes necessary to consider whether their operation should be any longer continued. The bill to which I allude passed on the 6'th of July last; on the 20th of Aug. there were raised under that bill 15,903 men; on the 24th of Sept. they amounted to 94,701; and in the month of Nov. last to 25,48.9 men. I will ask any man in this House to tell me, by what other means a similar body of men could have been raised in so short a time? The total number of men in G. Britain and Ireland, raised under the army of reserve bill, was men, of whom no less than 10,6'"lG had entered for general service into the regiments of the line. During the time these men were raising, I admit that the recruiting for the army has not increased; but, on the other hand, I contend it has not diminished, notwithstanding all this competition. I am also ready to admit, that for the last 2 or 3 months, the army of reserve has scarcely maintained itself; that is to say, the number of recruits have been fully balanced by the number of deserters; for I am sorry to say, that the practice of desertion has got to a very great pitch in the neighbourhood of the metropolis; and this has been very much increased by the very high bounties that have been given, and at the same time the practice of crimping has increased. In order to remedy these evils, I would propose, as the most effectual means to attain that object, not to repeal the army of reserve bills, but to suspend them for a limited time; and with regard to those counties which have not furnished their regular quota of men, I would propose that they should pay a pecuniary compensation according to the number of men they were deficient. This cannot be considered as unjust, because those counties are now subject to very heavy fines for not having completed their number of men. This is one of the measures which I mean to propose, and I think the army of reserve bills should be postponed in 1079 Ireland, as well as in G. Britain. If the House should think proper to adopt this proposition, it would have the immediate effect of destroying all competition, and consequently of reducing the great bounties. It would also, I think, put an end to the practice of crimping, and prevent desertion. With regard to the other means which I propose to adopt, it is now not necessary to enter into any detail upon the subject: by the plan I have proposed, the whole recruiting service will be thrown into the hands of the army, and in that case they will have an opportunity of regulating the bounties. With regard to bounties, it is the opinion of the most experienced officers I have conversed with, that these high Mollies are by no means essay; it is sufficient if they are liberal, but the great point is, that they should be fixed and certain; it is now proposed that they should not exceed 10 guineas. This certainly is a mere military question, and it is upon the opinion of the most experienced military men that I have conversed with, that I have formed my own. I think also, that some means should be taken to recruit the army of reserve out of those who are not fit for foreign service, or who do not choose to engage for it. With regard to the collateral means; the first is that which is recommended in the King's message; for by bringing over 10,000 of the Irish militia to tills country, it will enable us to set at liberty 10,000 of Our troops, and to render them disposable for foreign service. But in order to prevent any defalcation in the Irish establishment, I mean to propose that the Irish militia, which now only consists of 18,000 men, should be carried to the point at which they were last war, that is to say, 28,000 men. I should therefore propose, in the first instance, to move for an address to his Majesty, in the terms to Which I alluded in the commencement of my speech: I should then move for leave to bring in a bill, to enable his Majesty to accept this offer of service from the Irish militia; next, I should propose to bring in a bill for augmenting the Irish militia; and, lastly, I should propose to bring in a bill for suspending the army of reserve bill for one year. I am not aware that there is any thing more with which it is necessary for me to trouble the House, except only upon one point which I omitted to mention before, but which ought by no means to be lost sight of, I mean the 1080 state of the volunteer force. By the latest returns I have seen, after critical inspection, the number of men, effectual and present, was, of cavalry 27,000, artillery 4000, and infantry 300,000; these were not men upon paper, but effective and present. The cavalry were all, of course, completely armed, the infantry in all the maritime countries were also armed, as were the greater part of those in the interior counties. I think I can venture to say, that of the volunteer infantry 250,000 are completely armed, and, from the great exertions that are making, I am sure the remainder will in a very short time have their muskets; and, incase of any sudden emergency, they might be armed with pikes;, great numbers of which have been issued out. Whatever gents, may say of this volunteer force, I contend that a large proportion of them are as well disciplined as the militia were at the commencement of the last war; and it would be but candid, if gents, when they spoke of the volunteers, would recollect that they were in a very different state from that in which they were 5 or 6 months ago; but it has been the constant fashion to represent them as if they were no farther advanced in discipline than they were when they were first embodied. In addition to this force, there are 25,000 sea fencibles, who would, I have no doubt, prove themselves of the greatest service, if ever the enemy should make an attempt at invading this country with their boasted flotilla.—The right hon. gent, concluded with moving the address. The address having been read from the Chair,