

(May-June) Spanish insurrection ; opening-up of new trans. (Sept.) Closing of French-Dutch frontier

1807 (Jan.) ' First ' (Whig) Order in Council

1808 (Apr.) Bayonne decree against America marine markets to Great Britain

1809 (Mar.) American Non-intercourse Act Diminished vigilance along North Sea coast (Apr.) New (formally milder) Order in Council (Jan.-July) British occupation of French colonies (July) French Schonbrunn decree ; new customs cordon in (Oct.) Peace of Vienna ; Trieste in French hands

(Mar.) Rambouillet decree against America 
(Mar.-July) Incorporation of Holland with the French Empire 
(May) Freedom of American trade 
(July) French licence decree 
(July-Aug.) Outbreak of grave crisis in Great Britain and France 
(Aug.) Trianon tariff 
(Oct.) Fontainebleau decree 
(Dec.) Incorporation of the North Sea coast with the French 
(Dec.) Rupture between France and Russia (new Russian tariff) 

western Germany

1810 (Jan.) French prize decree

Fictitious revocation of French Continental decrees 
Great British mercantile fleet in the Baltic 
Empire 
Rest of French colonial empire lost 

Continuation of crisis in Great Britain and France

1811 (Mar.) American Non-importation Act xvi CHRONOLOGICAJL TABLE

1812 (Feb.) Abatement of British crisis 
(June) Revocation of British Orders in Council as against 
America 
British-American war 
(June-Nov.) Napoleon’s Russian campaign 
1818 (Jan.) Insurrections in Hamburg and Grand Duchy of Berg 
1818 (Apr.) Abdication of Napoleon 

Wars of Liberation Revocation of Continental decrees

.

168948

THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM AN ECONOMIC INTERPRETATION

B

INTRODUCTION 
HISTORY has rightly been called of old rnagistra vitae, which 
function is incompatible with that of aneilla J;dei or even 
ancith piefatis. The' fact is that historical research can offer 
us knowledge only by bringing forward its conclusions quite 
irrespective of their value as a support for any practical aims, 
howsoever lofty. The endeavours which have been going on 
all over the world in recent years to transform scientific work 
into a species of propaganda with a great show of learning, are 
related not only to the conditions of the moment, but also to 
the deeper spiritual influences which themselves have done 
much to bring those conditions about. They are in this way 
easy to explain ; but their tendency to endanger and to create 
indifference for true research is not lessened thereby. 
In the present inquiry I have pursued, to the best of my 
humble ability, a purely scientific aim, in the meaning of the 
term that has just been indicated. I have not sought to take 
sides in the struggles that are barely finished, but only to make 
use of the experiences of former times, in combination with 
the experiences of to-day, in order thereby to make room for 
a better understanding of the entire course of developments. 
As a matter of fact, it is difficult to imagine a task within the 
sphere of economic history which is more worth while taking 
up just now than a consideration of the last great commercial 
blockade. As will appear from the following account, both the 
resemblances and the differences of the Napoleonic wars with 
respect to the recent World War are instructive in the hlghest 
degree. But it can scarcely be expected that the matter will 
be treated in a purely objective manner, that is to say, exclu 
sively on the basis of its own inherent conditions, by those who, 
metaphorically speaking, have been in the midst of the conflict ; 
for the possibilities of utilizing the lessons of the past as a spear 
to cast at the joints of the enemy with the laudable purpose of 
B2 
4 THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
the warrior to wound and kill-to adapt the words of Victor 
Rydberg--are here, quite naturally, legion. 
An even approximately exhaustive treatment of the Con 
tinental System, however, lies beyond what has here been 
attempted. Neither time nor strength was available for so 
much. It was intended that the following survey should be, 
first and foremost, economic in character ; and the aim of 
objective treatment was thereby considerably simplified. For 
economy, as is well known, simply means housekeeping-the 
directing of outward means to a given end. The moral content 
of the means in themselves, and still more the expediency of the 
end in itself, fall outside the confines of economic research. 
All examination of the one or of the other will therefore be 
avoided. Instead of this, we will have before us two objects : 
first, the purely historical one of determining how the means 
and the end came into being ; secondly, the economic one of 
inquiring into the suitability of the means for their task and 
the effects of the policy in general. 
More clearly stated, there are three principal questions to 
be examined : 
1. In what economic ideas did the Continental System 
2. What was its actual economic bearing ? 
3. In what manner did it correspond to its aim ? 
The first of these three questions is very richly illustrated, 
from a purely external point of view, in the literature already 
existing on the Continental System; for the third there is 
likewise abundant, though not completely worked-up, material ; 
the second, however, seems to have suffered from the fact that 
no economist, so far as is known, has yet subjected it to scien 
tific treatment. On all three questions, and especially on the 
last two, a clearer light is thrown by comparison with the recent 
blockade. 
A French student of Napoleonic times, M. Marcel Dunan, 
has declared in an engrossing and very subjectively written 
bibliography of the Continental System (1913), that the time 