

10 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTE&f we must point especially to one feature of the mercantilist point of view whence it sprang, namely, to what we may call its static conception of economic life. If, for instance,,we refer to one of the most clear-headed and consistent of the mercan tilist statesmen, namely, Colbert, we learn from many of his writings that he conceived the industry, trade, shipping, and bullion resources of the world as quantities given once for all, which, therefore, could not be appreciably increased or decreased by human activity. Under such a conception it is obvious that there can be but one conclusion, viz., that the economic pros perity of a country depends on its power to deprive its com petitors of their shares of the given quantity, and not on its power to increase the total quantity. That is to say, only at the expense of others can a country be rich.1 It is not difficult to understand to what kind of economic policy such a conception would naturally lead. It led to the policy of commercial war ; and without any great exaggeration we may say with the well-known German economic historian, Professor Schmoller, that the trade policy of former times consisted of an unbroken series of commercial blockades.2

1 Lettrea, instructions et m6moire.s de Colbert (Paris, 1861-73), vol. II, p. cclxvii ; vol. VI, pp. 2646,269 ; vol. M, p. 239 ; et a2. As this side of mercantilist opinion does not appear to be at all generally understood, we may give a somewhat full quotation from Colbert's Dissertation sur la question : quelle des deux alliances, de France ou de Hdlande, peut eatre plus avantageuse d I'Angleterre (March, l669), where the point of view is brought out with all the incisive logic of which Colbert was master : ' Eon peut avancer certainement que le commerce de toute l'Europe se fait avec le nombre de 20,OOO vaisseaux de toute grandeur ; et l'on demeurera facilement d'accord que ce nombre ne peut estre augment&, d'autant que les peuples sont toujours bgaux dam tous les Estats, et que la consommation est pareillement toujours bgale.' Finding that one of England's chief considerations in deciding for or against an alliance muat be the increase of her shipping, he goes on to say : ' Cette augmenta tion ne put provenir que par la dbcouverte de quelque nouveau commerce jusqu'8 phent inconnu, ou par la diminution du nombre des vaisseaux de quelqu'une des autres nations. La dbcouverte de quelque nouveau commerce est fort incertaine, et il n'est pas permis de raisonner sur une chose si casuelle, ou, pour mieux dire, si oertaine qu'elle n'errivera p. , . . 11 faut donc que ce soit par la diminution du nombre des vaisseaux de quelqu'une des autres nations.' Lettrea, &c., vol. VI, pp. 264-5. Cf. Sombart, Der maZerne Kapitaliemw (2nd ed., Munich and Leipzig, 1917), vol. E, p. 918. e Schmoller, Umrisse und Untersuchungen zur Verfassungs-, Verwaltungs- und Wirtschafttsgeschichte (Leipzig, 1898), p. 95.

FOREWORD 11 This, then, was the body of ideas in which the Continental System originated, in so far as commercial wars, in the current view of that time, were bound to seem economically profitable to an extent that can scarcely be appreciated by any tolerably clear-minded person of to-day. All this, however, does not explain of what the benefit and profit of commercial war, on the one hand, and the injury and loss on the other, were supposed to consist. But on this point, too, the mercantilist conception gave all the guidance necessary. Profit was supposed to consist in the augmentation of exports, in forcing the goods of one’s own country on other countries ; loss, in allowing other countries to force goods on one’s own country. Industry, trade, navigation, that is, economic activity in general, were in a way regarded as ends in themselves. The goods that were their fruits, so to speak, were to be exported so far as possible, if they belonged to one’s own country, and to be kept out so far as possible, if they belonged to other countries. The verdict of the balance of trade-including, however, the balance of payments for freightage, &c.-deter mined the result. Modern economists are far more familiar with this trend of thought than they are with the static con ception of things. Even in our own day ‘ the natural man’ reasons in this way ; and this reasoning, so far as one can see, is substantially a fruit of the ideas contributed to history during the mercantilist period.1 All this ”makes clear, not only the existence, but also the tendency, of commercial wars. Their object was necessarily to force the greatest possible amount of one’s own goods into the enemy’s country, and, so far as possible, to prevent the enemy from introducing goods into one’s own country. Inasmuch ‘ as this, precisely because of the conception indicated, was the object of trade policy even in time of peace, the transition from peace to war was very easily effected; and for that reason This subject is obviously too comprehensive for incidental treatment in this connexion. What the writer has in mind is the signal reversal from the rnedimval eagerness to keep goods within reach to the opposite eagerness to dispose of goods which has been the predominant trait both of mercantilist and of popular present day opinion.