---
source_url: "https://oll-resources.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/oll3/store/titles/327/0142_Bk.pdf"
final_url: "https://oll-resources.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/oll3/store/titles/327/0142_Bk.pdf"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "71fb22a68f4819ac03447468434e7f94a028eda6a420fbb11f6b93f62613f503"
title: "Carnegie Endowment for International Peace"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

Publications of the

Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Division of Economics and History John Bates Clark, Director

### THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM

An Economic Interpretation

BY

ELI F. HECKSCHER, D.PHIL. Professor of Political Economy at the University College of Commerce, Stockholm Fellow of the Royal Economic Society, London '

EDITED BY

HARALD WESTERGAARD Professor of Political Science in the University of Copenhagen

OXFORD: AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

London, Edinburgh, New York, Toronto, Melbourqe, Cape Town, Born@ HUMPHREY MILFORD 192% A0

, ",' ~ ., *-, . <.9>..

, -TED IN ENQLAND AT THE OXBOBD UMVEBSITY PEE=

 ... ... ,. , ~ ..* ..: ,' ' ' * * - - * i :f ,.-; *..a: 
: :. : . . ... ,,.a:;::: . . ... _. * ... I . r 
 ... ... ... ... ... ',;*. :: : 
1 

EDITOR'S PREFACE

THE author of the present inquiry into the Continental System during the beginning of the last century is known as one of the most promineni political economists in Scandinavia and as a thorough investigator of the history of commerce. tlve resdrches concerning the economy of the World War.

3 Ff other things he has done very useful work by his sugges-> ; When the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace : pubmes the book, the obvious explanation is that the Con tinen'tal blockade in many ways throws light on the economic blockade among the belligerent powers involved by the World War. haye such far-reaching effects as those of the World War already appears from the great difference in dimensions, and from the fact that the separate nations at that time were far more independent of each other economically than they are At the present time with its extraordinary degree of international division of labour. But the author further shows how powerless the governments were at that time compared with those of the present day in the face of attempts at breaking the blockade, and to how slight an extent the measures were supported by the populations themselves. These great changes in the con ditions of ower and in the general view are highly interesting from a sociological point of view. But even if Napoleon had been in possession of sufficient power his own policy shows to how slight an extent a real international blockade was aimed at by the Continental System.

t That he Napoleonic Continental System could by no means

s

HARALD WESTERGAARD.

. :

AUTHOR'S PREFACE

FOR the aim and character of this short study the reader 
is referred to the Introduction and the Bibliographical Note. 
A few words may be added, however, as to the conditions 
under which it was written. 
The dook represents a sort of synthesis of earlier studies of 
the mercantile system and its outgrowths, on the one side, 
and the result of extensive theoretical and practical work 
private, academic, and government-in the field of present 
day war economics, on the other. In its original form it was 
written very rapidly durk the winter of 1917-18, under 
strong pressure of other work, and was presented to my history 
teacher, Professor Harald Hjarne, on the seventieth anniversary 
of his birth, at the beginning of 'May 1918. Probably the 
atmosphere of a rather strict blockade in a neutral country 
will be found to pervade it as a more or less natural consequence 
of the time of its production. 
When the Carnegie Endowment for Internatioml Peace, 
through its representative for Scandinavia, my esteemed 
colleague, Professor Harald Westergaard, proposed that I should 
treat the subject for its series, I overhauled my earlier text, 
changing its outward arrangement in several respects and 
making a number of additions, partly based on new materials. 
As before, however, I was restricted to suchinformationas was 
to be found in my own country, and consequently I cannot 
hope to have escaped error altogether, especially as the field 
is very large and some of my sources not above suspicion. 
But what I hope is that the leading ideas of the book, that is, 
the interpretation of the Continental System, will prove 
substantially correct. 
As the book appears in an English translation, it may be 