

originate ?

INTRODUCTION 5 has not yet come for general surveys of this gigantic undertaking, because, according to his view, we do not yet know either its causes, its roots, its applications, or its effects. Absolute certainty, however, is not given to man ; and even though it is undoubtedly true that many years of research must elapse before positive judgment can be passed on certain important points-as will, indeed, appear from what follows-the agree ment in the results of the different investigations is so surpris ingly great that even now it seems possible to say a,great deal without much danger of error. Otherwise, one may wait in vain for investigations on all the necessary points, if no efforts have been made beforehand to summarize the conclusions already reached. In a supplement to this exposition the most important materials for a more detailed study of the Continental System have been brought together for the benefit of those who may feel impelled to push deeper into this fertile and interesting field of inquiry.

PART I

* ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL i

'SYSTEM

FOREWORD

THE Continental System is a unique measure to which a country resorts for the purpose of crushing a political enemy by economic means and at the same time building up its own commercial and industrial prosperity to an extent previously undreamt of. The will to injure one’s enemy and to benefit one’s own country is, therefore, a matter to be taken for granted beforehand, and consequently does not require much elucida tion. That wil is seldom lacking in the life of nations, least of all when they are at war, and was-evidently bound to attain an unusual intensity in a statesman of the character of Napoleon, who throughout his career renounced all moral traditions and made self-assertion his loftiest lodestar. What we have here to investigate and elucidate, therefore, is not mainly these simple aims of policy, but rather, if one may put it so, the means to those ends ; or, to express it more clearly, what friends and foes conceive to be gain and loss in the sphere of economics, that is, what kind of economic changes they regard as beneficial and as detrimental. These matters are very far from self evident even at the present time, although they have been the subject of protracted scientific treatment ; and they were obviously still less self-evident a hundred years ago. If we wish to understand the nature of the Continental System, there fore, we must first consider the body of ideas whence it pro ceeded; and if we wish to understand its effects, we must further consider those ideas with reference to their true economic connexions. Only in that way, too, can we form a clear idea of the similarities and dissimilarities of the Continental System with respect to the blockade policy pursued during the recent World War; for the aim to injure the enemy and benefit the home country is to be taken for granted as much in our own time as it was in the time of Napoleon. In order to form a correct understanding of the antecedent conditions of the Continental System, in the meaning just given,