

,I I

29 & 30 Char. 11, c. 1, a. 70. 
1 W. & M., c. 34, a. 1. 

2 1 James 11, cc. 3 & 5.

COMMERCIAL POLICY 15 
these measures, the main object of which was to prevent French 
products from competing with domestic products in the English 
market. Later on, France, which as a rule seems to have been 
somewhat slower to act, proceeded to adopt similar measures, 
especially after the outbreak of the new war in 1701. Thus 
when Adam Smith, who among other things was a Scottish 
commissioner of customs, entered into a detailed discussion of 
Anglo-French trade policy in the third edition of his famous 
work more than eighty years afterwards, he felt justified in 
stating that, quite apart from the multitude of import pro 
hibitions, especially on all kinds of textiles, the majority of the 
French imports before the outbreak of the new war in 1778, 
were assessed by the British customs to the extent of at least 
15 per cent. of the value,of the goods involved, and that, as 
a rule, this was equivalent to a formal prohibition.1 
SMUGGLING 
Such, then, was the nature of commercial policy in the 
eighteenth century, in so far as it is revealed in the customs 
regulations of that time. But no idea of the economic con 
ditions of former days could be more erroneous than that 
which is conveyed by the content of such prohibitions and 
restrictions. The regulations, as a matter of fact, constitute 
merely an expression of what the holders of power wished to see 
realized, and accordingly may be said to illustrate, primarily, 
nothing more than the economic views of the time. As regards 
the actual situation, we may safely assume that it was quite 
different from what the authorities had in view, since otherwise 
the regulations would not have been necessary ; and if we find 
them repeated at short intervals, as is usually the case, we may 
further assume that this was due to the fact that they were not 
complied with. In point of fact, the only exceptions to this 

statutes of the Realm, vol. v, pp. 862 et seq. ; vol. VI, pp. 98 et aeq., et al. Mey, The Tory Origin of Free Trade Policy, in Surveys Historic and Ecmmnic (London, 1900), pp. 277 et seq. ; Levassew, Les trait& de commerce entre la France et l'dngleterre, in Reme d'dwmie pditigue (1901), vol. xv, pp. 964 et seq. ; A&m Smith, The W'ealth of Natims (Cannan ed., London, la), vol. I, pp. 432, 437-8.

16 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
principle are certain codifications of an already established 
system of law. These often express a phase that has already 
passed, it is true, but they nevertheless always have something 
to correspond to them in the world of realities, which is by no 
means the case with the innumerable ordinances of the regulative 1 
or creative type. 
In the sphere of trade policy it is well known that smuggling 
played a very important r61e. We do not know, for obvious 
reasons, the exact extent to which it was carried on, but there 
can be no doubt that it was ,of frequent and widespread occur 
rence, According to contemporary opinion, indeed, it was 
almost as extensive as legitimate trade; and Adam Smith calcu 
lated that the commercial intercourse between Great Britain 
and France, which was exceptionally hampered by the customs 
regulations, was even principally carried on by smugglers. 
Thus it hardly entered people’s minds that the prohibited 
foreign goods should be really unobtainable in the countries 
concerned. After the Peace of Versailles in 1783, for instance, 
everything English came into fashion in France, and prohibited 
goods were imported in great quantities, in spite of the fact that 
the French customs officials, according to the French economic 
historian, Emile Levasseur, carried their strictness so far as to 
seize the wearing apparel of travellers and hold it pending their 
departure from the country. I 
LICENCES i 
But it was not due entirely to the demands of economic life 
that recourse was had to this very radical and illegal practice, 
which in many cases was not only tolerated, but actually 
facilitated by the authorities themselves. This was usually 
accomplished by means of a system of licences, which assumed 
larger or smaller dimensions, according to circumstances, but 
which were almost always of importance. This licence system, 
therefore, must almost always be taken into account as an ever 
present means of circumventing the nominally valid ordinances. 
The licences undoubtedly often originated in favouritism, 
COMMERCIAL POLICY 17 
bribery, and similar forms of corruption ; but not infrequently 
their origin lay deeper. Partly they were intended to satisfy 
the insatiable demands of trade, which made themselves felt 
either within or in opposition to the law, and which, accordingly, 
it was often considered best to satisfy silently beforehand ; but 
partly also, and at least as often, they arose from the constant 
need of money on the part of the government. This latter 
consideration gave rise to what one might call fiscalism, that 
is, to the tendency to change a policy with a certain economic 
aim-whether rightly or wrongly conceived-under the pretext 
of bringing revenue into the coffers of the state. On this rock 
a great deal of the economic policy of the mercantilist period, 
to say nothing of that of earlier mediaeval times, had suffered 
shipwreck ; and this, too, was to be of fundamental importance 
in relation to the Continental System. As a characteristic 
example of the combined effect of smuggling and the licence 
system, it may be mentioned that in the last decade of the 
seventeenth century there were discovered in England traces 
of a great conspiracy organized to facilitate the importation of 
prohibited French silks under false or stolen labels of the kind 
prescribed to indicate the fact that the goods involved had 
either been imported under licence or else had been manufac 
tured within the country.1 
The actual intercourse between two countries thus followed 
a course which diverged considerably from that laid out by their 
professed policies. But if this was always the case at times of 
more or less state interference in the economic domain, it was 
especially the case in the eighteenth century. During that period, 
in fact, the old policy was exposed to undermining currents 
flowing from two different quarters, namely, from the general 
transformation in all conditions of production which had 
received the nowise exaggerated name of Industrial Revolution, 
on the one side, and from the new social philosophy which was 
slowly paving the way for economic liberalism, on the other. 
Both of these factors were destined gradually to put an end to 
W. R. Scott, The Cmtitution and Finance of English, Bwttish, and Irish Joint. 
8bCk &wpanie8 (Cambridge, 1911), vol. m, pp. 80 e4 8q. 
1569.43 C 