

1 Chaptal, De E'industrie frunpise (Paris, 1819), vol. I, p. xvi ; Levasseur, Histoire des classes ouwi2res et de l'industrie en France de 1789 ci 1870 (Paris, 1903). vol. I, p. 405. Schmidt, La d6but.s de l'industrie cotonnikre en France, 1760-1806, in Revue d'histoire bommique etsociale (Paris, 1914), vol. vq, pp. 26 etsep. ; Ballot, Les prtts aux manufactzcres, in Revue des dtudes napoldondennes (Paris, 1912), vol. II, p. 45.

COMMERCIAL POLICY 23 
i we find a muslin manufacturer from Versailles (1190), as well as 
a silk manufacturer from Lyons (1791), stating that the develop- 
; ment of French industry, after the difficulties of the first years, ,a had increased apace under the stimulus of British competition, 
and that in many cases French manufacturers had succeeded 
in imitating and, by means of cheaper labour, in actually under 
selling their British competitors. This may or may not be 
a more faithful picture of the actual situation than that created 
by the innumerable complaints ; but at all events it seems only 
natural that a more lively intercourse with Great Britain should 
have facilitated the spread of new ideas and inventions. But 
to this, as to other things, there applies a truth which is far too 
often overlooked, namely, that the economic policy of a country 
is not determined by actual economic conditions but by the 
popular ideas concerning those conditions-which is manifestly 
quite another matter. 
The commercial policy of the Revolution, therefore, very 
soon returned to the traditions established before 1786. Of 
recent investigators we may refer especially to M. Albert Sorel, 
who in his monumental work, L’Europe et la rbvolution frangaise 
(1885-1904), seeks with exhaustive, though somewhat exhaust 
ing, persistence to maintain and emphasize the consistency of 
French policy before and after the Revolution. In nearly all 
the departments of foreign policy he represents the French 
revolutionaries of different shades as unconscious successors of 
Richelieu, Mazarin, and Louis XIV, and as equally unconscious 
predecessors of Napoleon, whose ideas and measures are there 
fore also represented as almost entirely in line with the tradi 
tional policy of France. Sorel has undoubtedly exaggerated the 
predestination of this development, as Professor Hjarne has 
pointed out in his noteworthy book, Revohtionen och Napoleon 
(Stockholm, 1911) ; and in general it is undoubtedly true that 
the deepest conception does not consist in representing the same 
dramatis personae as constantly reappearing in different cos 
tumes. But in the economic sphere-which does not stand out 
very much in Sorel’s work, with its marked bias in favour of 
foreign policy-the connexion with the past is very strongly 
emphasized. As is well known, the men of the Revolution 
derived their strongest impressions from Rousseau, and, so far 
as one Can see, they were very little impressed either by physio 
cracy or by British liberalism. Consequently they stood, 
unconsciously, but almost entirely, under the all-pervading 
influence of the old economic conception. Thus it was almost 
in the nature of things that the Eden Treaty not only should be 
treated as an isolated episode, but should positively hasten a 
return to the old system-especially inasmuch as the commercial 
reconciliation with Great Britain was the work of none other 
than the discredited and despised ancien rkgime. 
Naturally enough, however, it was the general political 
situation which was chiefly responsible for the return to the 
policy of commercial war ; and consequently some few years 
elapsed before the change was made. In 1791 the Constituent 
Assembly adopted a new tariff, which, after great protectionist 
preparations, ultimately came to offer only a very moderate 
amount of actual protection. France and Great Britain were 
then at peace, and both were respecting the Eden Treaty. But 
the new tendency was even then asserting itself in France, 
not only in the form of recurring complaints against British 
Competition, but also in the form of an actual raising of the 
customs rates on woollens and other textile goods manufactured 
in the Duchy of Berg-the even then flourishing textile region 
on the eastern side of the Rhine, which was destined to play 
an important part in the history of the Continental System. 
In justification of these measures, whereby the importation of 
textiles into France from the east was cut off, there was asserted 
the need of ' alleviating the detrimental effects ' of the Anglo 
French treaty of 1786.l 
Great Britain, under Pitt's leadership, had as long as possible 
stood aloof from the struggle against the French Revolution. 
But toward the end of 1792 the relations between the two 
countries bwame very strained. Great Britain held up cargoes 
bound for French ports, whereupon France retaliated by 