

Levrtseeur, Histoire dm CEassm ouwi2rea, &e., de 1789 ci 1870, vol. I, pp. 38 I et 8eg. ; Schmidt, Le Grand-duche' de Bcrg, 1806-1813 (Paris, 1908), pp. 326-7. i

COMMERCIAL POLICY 25 denouncing the Eden Treaty. This was shortly after the beginning of 1793 ; and on February 1 of that year, less than two weeks after the execution of Louis XVI, war actually broke out. This precipitated both countries into a policy of economic strangulation which was destined to last for more than twenty years and soon to leave all its predecessors far behind. Under the Revolution, and to a certain extent under Napoleon as well, this policy had two very closely interwoven sides, which, how ever, must be kept separate for the present. One side consists of the blockade measures and the generally rude treatment of maritime intercourse, in which Great Britain decidedly led the way, but was very closely followed by France ; and the other side consists of the compulsory measures that were adopted specifically in the sphere of commercial policy. The latter measures were of real importance only on the French side, as a matter of fact, since similar measures on the British side would have been meaningless for the reason that French goods could hardly have reached England without English co-opera tion. It is the latter policy which we will first consider,

RENEWAL OF ANGLO-FRENCH COMMERCIAL WAR (1793-1799) On March 1, 1793, only a month after the outbreak of war, the measures of prohibition began, and within a few months the Convention had passed almost all the laws that were possible along that line. The first law of this kind passed by the Conven tion, which also annulled all treaties previously entered into with enemy countries, prohibited indiscriminately the importa tion of a large number of textile, metal, and earthenware goods which were regarded as normally coming from England-it was, of course, the home manufacturers of these articles who had especially complained of British competition-but did not restrict the prohibition to goods coming from any specified country. With respect to all goods not expressly exempted, however, it was stipulated that evidence should be furnished that they did not come from an enemy country. This rendered necessary the use of certificates of origin for certain goods, even

26 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM though they were indispensable to French consumers and could not be obtained from neutral countries (especially sugar). TWO or three months later (May 19), accordingly, such goods had to be exempted. But the whole of this first law was a mild warning in comparison with the outbreak of fury, harmonizing com pletely with the spirit of the Reign of Terror, which on October 9 of the same year (Vendkmiaire 18, year 11) appeared in the form of a law bearing the title : Loi qui proscrit du sol de la rkpublique toutes les marchandises fahipukes ou malzufacturkes dans les pays soumis au gouvernement britannique. Its express application to Great Britain, one of the enemies of France, is in itself significant, the whole law, as its title indicates, being a straightforward proposal to persecute all British goods in the most drastic manner. It imposed on every holder of British goods the obligation to declare them and hand them over to the authorities, and provided that any customs official who allowed such goods to enter the country would be liable to I twenty years’ imprisonment in irons ; and the same punishment was assigned to any person who imported, sold, or bought them. But even this was not enough. The law further provided that anybody who wore or used British goods was to be regarded as I suspect and to be punished as such in accordance with the notorious loi des suspects ; that is to say, he might be arrested and imprisoned at any time. All posters or notices couched in English and referring to stocks of British goods or containing British trade marks or appellations, as also all newspapers announcing the sale of British goods, were ‘ proscribed ’ ; and the punishment in this case also was twenty years’ imprison ment in irons. After the crisis of Thermidor and the fall of Robespierre early in 1795, the legislators again retraced their steps to some extent by shghtly lowering the duties on non-British goods. This did not last long, however, since they were raised again by the Directory at the close of the following year. On the whole it may be said that the rule of the Directory, from the autumn of 1795 to the autumn of 1799, marked a return to the policy of the Reign of Terror, though in a somewhat modified form,