

EVIDENCE OF JAMES STEPHEN IN ‘ WAR IN DISGUISE ’ But this held good, not only of the privateering fleet, but also of the Royal Navy itself, in which captures formed a source of income to commanders and crew that was of the greatest importance in stimulating their willingness and zeal, How deeply rooted this opinion still was only a hundred years ago is best illustrated by a book of that time which perhaps, on the whole, gives a clearer notion of the pre-conditions of the policy of blockade than any other, namely, James Stephen’s War in Lydi~ Wahlstrom, Sverige och England under revolutionskrigena &jar (Stock

See p. 94. 
Manning, Commentaries on the Law of Nations (London, 1839), p. 117. 

holm, 1917), pp. 192-3 ; Parliamentary History, vol. XXXII, pp. 235-6.

1569.43 D

34! ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
Dbguise ; or, the Frauds of the Neutral Flags, which was 
published the same day as the battle of Trafalgar (October 91, 
1805) and within four months appeared in three British and 
two American editions. 
The importance of this book-which, significantly enough, 
was republished during the recent World War as a contributory 
aid to the solution of its problems-will appear in several 
places later on, and a few words about its author, therefore, 
seem in order. James Stephen, father of Sir James Stephen 
(nicknamed ' Mr. Over-Secretary Stephen ') and grandfather 
of Sir James Fitzjames Stephen and Sir Leslie Stephen, was 
a barrister practising in the Prize Appeal Court of the Privy 
Council, the highest prize court in England. Both in this 
capacity and earlier as a lawyer in the West Indies, he had 
acquired an intimate knowledge of the conditions of trade 
during the long naval war, as well as of the application of the 
principles of law to them. Thus not only was he thoroughly 
familiar with matters in this department, but he was also 
far from representing any extreme jingo view. This is perhaps 
best shown by the fact that, like his brother-in-law, William 
Wilberforce, the great emancipator of the slaves, he was a 
decidedly religious person, belonging to the Clapham Sect, and 
devoted a large part of his life to the struggle for the abolition 
of negro slavery. This fact gives his utterances on captures 
their proper background. He dwells long on the injustice 
which would be inflicted on ' our gallant and meritorious 
fellow subjects, the naval captors,' when they were compelled 
to see valuable cargoes, ' their lawful game,' passing con 
tinually under their sterns. ' It is painful to reflect,' he says, 
' that these brave men lose the ancient fruits of distant service, 
while enduring more than its ordinary hardships.' His account 
of the importance of capture as an inducement for seamen may 
be quoted in extenso : 
Let us give full credit to our gallant officers, for that disinterested 
patriotism, and that love of glory, which ought to be the main springs 
of military character, and which they certainly possess in a most 
eminent degree. But it would be romantic and absurd, to suppose that 