

COMMERCIAL POLICY 87 throughout the entire economic domain. As a sign of welcome to Lord Malmesbury, who visited Paris to negotiate peace, there was accordingly passed on October 31,1796 (Brumaire 10, year V), a law prohibiting the importation and sale of British , goods on an even larger scale than that established by the laws of 1793, inasmuch as the prohibition was extended to cover goods that were derived, not only from British industry, but also from British trade. And at the same time there was adopted-so far as is known for the &st time, but certainly not for the last time-the somewhat clumsy expedient of declaring certain groups of goods to be British, quite irrespective of their real origin. Even such goods as were brought into the country from captured or stranded vessels were not allowed to remain there, but had to be promptly re-exported. The resemblance between this and the above-mentioned regulations of the seventeenth century is unusually striking. Moreover, nearly all the regulations of the year 1793 were renewed in substance, although the provision concerning certificates of origin had again to be limited after a few months. Only in regard to penalties was there a very considerable modification. Among the goods which were always to be regarded as British was refined sugar ; but now again, as in 1793, its exclusion proved to be impossible, and the smuggling to which it gave rise finally resulted, in 1799, in the prohibition being replaced by a high customs duty. Evidence of the extent to which French legislators thought it possible to carry the persecution of everything British is furnished by the fact that the importation of Geneva watches was prohibited on the ground that they contained a small amount of steel presumed to be of British origin. Another link in the policy of commercial war was formed by the Navigation Act, which was brought forward with great oratorical fanfare and was passed by the Convention on September 21, 1793, the anniversary of the overthrow of the monarchy. In exact imitation of the famous corner-stone of English maritime policy, the Navigation Act of the Common wealth of 1651, and also of earlier French ordinances, it forbade foreign vessels to import any products other than those of their

28 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
own country or to carry on coasting trade in France. Moreover, 
by a supplementary law of October 18 (Vendkmiaire 27, year 11), 
all foreign vessels were saddled with dues about ten times as 
high as those imposed on French vessels. There is a close 
analogy between these measures and those that were adopted 
during the seventeenth and early part of the'eighteenth cen 
turies. The latter were directed chiefly against the principal 
carrying country of the time, the Netherlands ; and in the 
same manner the law of the Convention was directed against 
the new commercial nation, Great Britain. Perfde Albion came 
to occupy the same position in the popular imagination as its 
predecessor, only it was regarded as still more dangerous owing 
to the great development of its industries and political power. 
All these trade laws of the Revolution manifestly had the 
same double character as their forerunners of the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries ; that is to say, they were intended to 
injure Great Britain by excluding her goods and vessels, and at 
the same time to serve as an ultra-protectionist measure calcu 
lated to benefit French industries. According to the official 
statement, the Directory's law of 1796 was designed to 'give 
new life to trade, restore manufactures, and re-establish the 
workshops ', and, on the other hand, ' to deprive our enemies of 
their most important resource in waging war against us ' and 
compel them to make peace. In complete analogy with this, 
BarBre, the trumpeter in ordinary of the Convention, speaking 
in the name of the Committee of Public Safety, had justified the 
Navigation Act partly on the ground that ' Carthage would 
thereby be destroyed '-' let us decree a solemn Navigation 
Act,' he said, ' and the isle of shopkeepers will be ruined '"and 
partly on the ground that France would thereby multiply her 
industries, stimulate the consumption of domestic products, 
create her own ship-building yards, build up a flourishing 
mercantile marine, &c., &c. This, so to speak, dualistic 
character the Continental System was destined to retain but 
at the same time to lead to an irremediable self-contradiction. 
Naturally it is true of the commercial blockades of the 
Revolution, as of those of earlier times, that they were not even 