

18 ANTECEDENTS OF THE COAWINENTAL SYSTEM the old economic order ; but in the long run it was the change in the conditions of production that may be said to have exerted the greater influence. In spite of that, however, a dixect influence on commercial policy came from the new social philosophy. Curiously enough, this mpulse originated in France, where the new ideas were very far from being common property, as the following development should show very clearly. But just as Turgot, in his capacity of minister of finance under the autocratic King Louis XVI, succeeded in 1776 in carrying through a quite revolutionary reform of internal industrial legislation-a reform which by no means had any favourable public opinion behind it-so one of his pupils, as foreign minister, succeeded ten years later in bringing about a change in external trade policy, just because there was no representative assembly to oppose his measures.

ANGLO-FRENCH COMMERCIAL TREATY OF 1786 (EDEN TREATY) The author of this departure from the century-old com mercial policy was the Comte de Vergennes. He was puelque peu disciple des philosophes, and it was especially because of the physiocratic views he shared with certain politically influential circles in France that he was able to accomplish his purpose. For as physiocracy attached foremost importance to agricul ture, it was only natural that French statesmen were able to create substantial facilities for the importation of the industrial products which England was eager to sell, in return for facili ties for the exportation of the agricultural products which she was no less eager to buy. Vergennes, undoubtedly of set purpose, neglected to find out the opinion of French industrial circles ; and there is no doubt that this was later on one of the starting points of the disapproval of his work. In England the efforts to establish better trade connexions between the two countries met with great sympathy, and that, too, precisely among those elements of the population which had brought to naught the commercial treaty of 1713. As was shown by a far reaching inquiry conducted in Great Britain, the representatives

COMMERCIAL POLICY 19 
of almost all industries were eager for increased sales in the 
French market, especially because of their desire to make up 
for the loss which they believed themselves-incorrectly, as 
a matter of fact-to have sustained through the cutting off of 
the American market by the secession of the colonies ; and 
with very few exceptions they scoffed at the idea of danger 
arising from French competition in the home market. The 
British statesmen were naturally much impressed by this 
attitude, but at the same time they were by no means unin 
fluenced by the views of the economic theorists. 
It was in England that the new ideas, which had gradually 
gained more and more predominance in both countries in the 
course of the eighteenth century, received their for all time 
classical synthesis in Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations 
(1776), which riddled with criticism the unreasonableness and 
inconsistency of the old system that existed on paper, especially 
in the form it assumed in the commercial relations between 
Great Britain and France. Adam Smith’s thesis was that 
‘ a nation that would enrich itself by foreign trade is certainly 
most likely to do so when its neighbours are all rich, industrious, 
and commercial nations ’, inasmuch as the international 
exchange of goods was thereby rendered all the more profitable. 
The applicability of this to France is apparent, and of special 
interest is the comparison drawn between the trade with the 
large and near-by French market, on the one hand, which 
permitted a turnover of business capital several times a year, 
and the boasted and until then in every way favoured trade 
with the thinly populated and remote North American colonies, 
on the other, where the return from invested capital was not 
made until after the lapse of several years. Through the 
American War of Independence this comparison received an 
appositeness which Adam Smith himself certainly did not 
foresee.’ 
There can be no doubt that Adam Smith’s book exerted 
great influence on William Pitt, who was the leading states 
man of Great Britain from 1783. According to a famous 
1 Adam Smith, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 458 et seq. 
0 2 
BO ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENI'AL SYSTEM 
anecdote, Smith once arrived at a dinner somewhat later than 
the other guests, who rose to receive him. He begged them to 
remain seated, whereupon Pitt remarked that it was only right I 
for them to rise, since they were all his pupils. While this 
anecdote is perhaps just as little deserving of unqualified belief 
as are other similar anecdotes, yet one may place implicit 
confidence in a statement which Pitt is authentically credited 
with having made in Parliament after the death of Adam Smith, 
namely, that he (Smith) had offered the world the best solution 
of all economic and commercial questi0ns.l 
The result of these new forces was the Anglo-French com 
mercial treaty of 1786 (often called the Eden Treaty, after the 
name of its English negotiator), which put an end to the hundred 
years' commercial war between the two western powers. 
During the negotiations Pitt had stood firmly on his ground, 
with the result that in the final settlement the British forced 
compliance with practically all their demands, while the French 
allowed nearly all theirs to drop. Customs duties were lowered t all along the line, usually down to 10 or 15 per cent, of the value t 
of the goods, and prohibitions on imports were abolished. On 
the other hand, almost the only British industry which was still 
uneasy about French competition, namely, the silk industry, had 
its demands respected to the extent of nothing less than a total 
prohibition on the importation of French silks into England. 
But it was soon to prove that this somewhat belated breach 
with the century-old restrictive policy had no support in French 
public opinion, least of all in industrial circles. Indeed, one mag 
go so far as to say that it was precisely this departure from the 
tradition of commercialwar that led to a renewal of the old policy 
after the French Revolution. The Eden Treaty, which was 
On this and what follows, cf. Rose, William Pitt and the National Revival 
(London, 1911), pp. 183 et sq., 322 et sep. ; Salomon, William Pitt der jiingere (Leipzig 
and Berlin, 1906), ~01.1, pt. II, pp. 205 et sep. ; Levasseur, Histoire dea c h 5 a mvridreo et 
de l'inawrtrie en France avant 1789 (Paris, 1901), vol. II, pp. 546 et seq. ; Levasseur, 
Histoire du commerce de la France (Paris, 1911), vol. I, pp. 535 et seq., 542 et seq. ; 
elso, Histoirede France (Lavisse ed., Paris, 1910), vol. IX, pt. I, pp. 221 et seq. On the 
situation just after the Eden Treaty, cf. Schmidt, La crise wdustrielle de 1788 ea 
France, in Revue Historique (Paris, 1908), vol. 97, pp. 78 et sep. The work of F. Dumas, 
Etude sur le traitk de commerce de 1786 (Paris,. 1904), was not accessible. 