

32 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM the home country only in so far as the blockade impeded the foreign sale of the enemy’s own goods. This peculiar and important but usually overlooked inconsistency can be ex plained only by the fact that the practice of blockade arose in the pre-mercantilist period. But with the development and spread of mercantilist ideas the practice necessarily had to reshape itself ; and this, in fact, was what actually happened. !l%e result was twofold. In the first place, blockade measures were employed to accomplish other purposes than those formally intended ; and, in the second place, the regula tions existing on paper were annulled, either by exceptions or by deliberate laxity in their enforcement, to such an extent as to create an order of things quite different from that which was officially prescribed.

FUNCTION OF CAPTURE AT SEA 
First, then, we have to consider the employment of blockade 
measures for purposes other than those formerly intended. Here 
primary importance attaches to the fact that seizures or cap 
tures may be said to have been ends in themselves. To some 
extent this appears even in the relative importance of the 
paper blockade as compared with the effective blockade ; for 
the former gave much greater chances of capture but, at the 
same time, was a far less safe means of preventing intercourse 
with the enemy. Moreover, two of the most important methods 
of blockade are largely explained when we come to consider 
the importance of captures-namely, the arbitrary extension 
of the idea of contraband and the persistent refusal of Great 
Britain to acknowledge the proposition that ‘ free ships make 
free goods ’ or that ‘ the flag covers the cargo ’, which implies 
that enemy goods are immune from capture on neutral vessels. 
The object of this encouragement of captures for their own 
sake was scarcely in any notable number of cases what one 
would nowadays be most inclined to expect, that is, the pro 
curement of goods for one’s own use in this convenient manner. 
It is true that Pitt, according to a statement of the then Swedish 

MARITIME BLOCKADE 33 envoy in London, Lars von Engestrom-a statement, however, which is not confirmed by the brief parliamentary reports referred in the House of Commons on November 3, 1795, to seizures of corn cargoes bound for French ports as a means of overcoming the exceptional shortage of foodstuffs in England ; 1 and there is also a later utterance of Napoleon to the same effect.2 But these cases would seem to be almost unique, as one might expect beforehand in view of the fact that the object of the seizures was not, as a rule, to acquire goods, but rather to dispose of them. An explanation must be found elsewhere, namely, in the fact that captures were a means of encourage ment to the captors themselves ; and to this point there was ascribed the greatest importance. To begin with, it applied to the great horde of privateers, who were regarded as forming a very important augmentation to the fighting forces of the country, but who manifestly could not embark on that career except with some prospect of profit. In a highly characteristic manner a well-known English international jurist, William Manning, towards the middle of the nineteenth century ex plained the benefit of these privateers on Iaissez-faire lines. ‘ They increase the naval force of a state,’ he said, ‘ by causing vessels to be equipped from private cupidity, which a minister might not be able to obtain by general taxation without much difficulty ’?