

COMMERCIAL POLICY 29 approximately maintained ; the result was that smuggling Once more became one of the principal means of Anglo-French intercourse. Notwithstanding the law of 1796, the practice seems to have grown up of importing British and other pro hibited goods on a large scale as captured goods. Disordered as every department of the public administration was, one can not doubt that the authorities merely winked at all this ; and besides they were often obliged to mitigate the laws, as we have already seen, in order to ensure some observance of them. An example of this was given by the Navigation Act, which was introduced with such high-sounding words and a month later repealed for the most part by a number of supplementary regulations providing that certain raw materials and enemy goods might be imported in time of war by neutral vessels ; shortly afterwards such vessels also received the right to carry on coasting trade.l Lois et acta du gouvernement (Paris, 180i), vol. VI, pp. 434-5 ; vol. M, pp. 83, 409-10, 4694,492 et seq. ; Bulletin des lois de la rdpublique fraquise, 2d ser., bull. 86, no. 825 ; bull. 105, no. 1002 ; Le Moniteur, Sept. 23 and 24, 1793 ; Oot. 21, 1796 ; Levasseur, Histoire des classes ouvridres, &c., de 1789 b 1870, vol. I, pp. 38 et seq., I 87 et seq., 260 ; Sorel, L'Europe et la rivolzction franphe (Paris, 1893), vol. m, pp. 476-7 ; 1-01. V, pp. 116, 124 ; Schmidt, Le Grand-duehd de Berg, pp. 326 et seq. ; Chapuisat, Le commerce et l'industrie L? Gendve pendant la domination fraqiae, 1796-1813 (Geneva and Paris, 1908), Bnnexe XIV; Rose, N'illiam Pitt and the Great Var (London, 1911), pp, 103-4 ; Kiesselbach, Die Continentalsperre in &rer oX.onomisch-poZitischen Bedeutung (Stuttgart and Tubingen, 1850), pp. 55-6.

MARITIME BLOCKADE 
IT has already been intimated that, parallel with the com 
mercial blockade, which came principally from the French side, 
there was taking place, mainly on the British side, a systematic 
persecution of trade with enemy countries, and that both of 
these lines of development came to be united in the Continental 
System, Seemingly and on paper these two lines of policy were 
not only separate, but also, in part, absolutely conflicting ; 
this, in fact, has led many observers astray. But if we consider 
the policy of the maritime blockade with reference to its actual 
application, as opposed to its outward form, we find that its 
character, in spite of all inconsistencies and lack of precision, 
easily reveals as merely an outcome of the mercantilist com 
mercial policy. In this way, consequently, the aim of the 
commercial war of a hundred years ago was altogether unlike 
that pursued in the recent World War. On this point, however, 
scarcely any of the usual accounts give us clear information, 
The majority of them take the policy of blockade as a more or 
less self-evident matter without inquiring into its aims. The 
only writer who, so far as I know, has embarked on a deeper 
analysis is the foremost naval historian of our time, the late 
Admiral Mahan of the United States Navy, who has undoubtedly 
cast much light on the history of the Continental System in his 
books, The IlzJEuence of Sea Power upon the F,rench Revolution. 
and Empire (1893), and Sea Poze,er in its Relations to the War of 
1812 (1905). In general, however, it may be said that Admiral 
Mahan is too much concerned with sea-power in itself to devote 
sufficient attention to its connexion with economic policy and 
economic activity, which after all have also a non-naval side. 
In the external system of the maritime blockade the actual 
blocking of the enemy’s ports and coasts unquestionably forms 
MARITIME BLOCKADE 81 
the central point. Characteristic of the system, however, 
was the practice adopted by Great Britain of establishing a so 
called ' paper blockade ', that is to say, of declaring in a state 
of blockade long stretches of coast which she could not or would 
not effectively blockade by means of sufficient naval forces, and 
on the strength of this declaration capturing neutral vessels 
bound for well-nigh any enemy port. This practice received its 
most extreme statement in an obiter dictum attributed to the 
British Admiralty Judge, Sir James Marriott, who in 1780, 
during the war with Fraace and Spain, the European allies 
of the American colonies, declared that the ports of those 
countries were ipso facto blockaded by virtue of their geo 
graphic position.1 It was perhaps chiefly to this central point 
in the naval policy of Great Britain that the neutrals demurred. 
The demand that the blockade should be effectual, that is to 
say, that it should apply only to places which were so well 
guarded that vessels could not reach them without imminent 
danger of capture, consequently played an important r81e 
among the five celebrated points enunciated in 1778 by the 
Danish statesman, A. P. Bernstorff, and used as the foundation 
of the unusually successful Swedo-Dano-Russian Armed Neu 
trality of 1780. 
MERCANTILIST IMPORT OF THE BLOCKADE 
The blockade undoubtedly had its root in the idea of siege, 
as the Swedish international jurist, Dr. Nils Soderqvist, has 
pointed out ; and like the siege, accordingly, it aimed in prin 
ciple at a real cutting-off of the enemy's territory, especially 
as regards the exclusion of supplies. Here, therefore, the 
external contrast with the mercantilist commercial policy is 
very marked; for the latter, as we have seen, aimed to en 
courage the forcing of goods upon the enemy and would 
consequently have regarded a consistent application of the 
blockade principle as a direct advantage to the enemy country 
in so far as its supplies were crippled, and as an advantage to 
1 Soderqvist, Le blww maritime (Stockholm, 1908), pp. 44-5. 