

London, 1882), vol. IV, p. 157.

1 Lecky, History of Englancz in t k Eighteenth Century (original library edition,

MARITIME BLOCKADE 37 It is therefore indisputable, as the neutrals complained and as Stephen himself admits, that British vessels were allowed to trade with France, while neutral vessels were overhauled and seized.1 In full accord with this and with mercantilist trade policy, it was sought fist and foremost to cut off all kinds of exports from the enemy to the neutrals, especially if they com peted with those of the home country. In complete contrast with the efforts of the recent war, the endeavours of that time were aimed, on the one side, at getting rid of the excess of export goods in the home country and, on the other side, at preventing the enemy from selling his products. This was in part due to the fact that apprehensions were always felt of low prices on these goods in the home country and also of high prices in the enemy country. On the one side, therefore, the whole of Stephen’s account is permeated by anxiety lest the price of British colonial goods should decline as a result of their being kept out of the continental markets by French and Spanish colonial goods. In previous wars, according to his view, the British home market, ‘relieved by a copious exportation from temporary repletions,’ gave them (the colonies), ‘ in its large and ever-advancing prices, some indemnity for the evils of the war,’ while at that time, according to his statements, the prices were sinking on the Continent in consequence of the importation of goods from the enemy’s colonies. On the other hand, he is dominated by dislike of the idea that the same neutral trade should provide access to America of the textile and iron goods of the Continent in competition with those of Great Britain herself. What troubled him, therefore, was not that the Con tinent should get colonial goods, but that it should get them , from the enemy colonies, which, like the mother country itself, should be cut off from exports, he thought, but not from imports. Finally, therefore, all this implies that no cutting-off of imports to the enemy could come into the line of the policy pursued. It denotes merely an effort to place those imports under the control of the naval power itself, so that the country

1876), vol. I, p. 231 ; Stephen, op, cit., p. 170.

Holm, Danmurk-Norges udenrigake Historie fra 1791 til 1807 (Copenhagen,

38 AN’I’ECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
might thereby give preference, so far as possible, to its own 
products and those of its colonies, and also so that it might take 
over trade and navigation with the enemy mainland. The 
latter consideration, however, took a secondary place, as Great 
Britain often had need of neutral shipping to supplement her 
own overworked mercantile marine ; and it is especially note 
worthy that the neutrals’ supply of the enemy’s (e. g., the 
French) market with the belligerent’s (e. g., Britain’s) own 
products was an all but self-evident matter, against which 
there was really no objection to raise from a British point of 
view. Manifestly, such a blockade policy diverged funda 
mentally from that of the recent World War. 
The only substantial exception to this general tendency 
and even that a very partial one-concerned import goods of 
purely military importance, that is too say, military supplies, 
naval stores, and sometimes, at least in principle, foodstuffs for 
the enemy’s fighting forces on land and sea. These items were 
emphasized by Pitt, for instance, in the great speech which he 
delivered before the House of Commons on February 2, 1801, 
immediately before his retirement, in defence of the policy 
of maritime blockade that he had introduced. In the actual 
execution of the policy, however, it is difficult to find any 
marked traces of this ; and, significantly enough, it was coolly 
stated in Parliament, in 1812, that the clothing of the French 
army came from Yorkshire, and that ‘ not only the accoutre 
ments, but the ornaments of Marshal Soult and his army ’ 
came from Birmingham. The reservation was made, however, 
that they had not been ordered directly by the French govern 
ment ! 
It may be remarked in passing that Edward 111, four and 
a half centuries earlier, had already given licences for the 
exportation of corn to the enemy, though the ruling thought at 
that time was that of procuring revenue for the Crown.2 
1 Stephen, op. cit., pp. 60 et seq., 90, 196, et al. ; Emory Johnson and others, 
History of the Domestic and Foreign Commerce of the United States (Washington, 
1915), vol. II, p. 23 ; Parliamentary History, vol. xxxv, p. 916 ; Hansard’s Parlia 
mentary Debates, vol. xxm, pp. 8, 423. 
2 Brodnitz, Englide Wirtsckzf&geschidte (Jena, 1918), vol. I, p. 140. 