

MARITIME BLOCKADE 35

they do not feel the value of that additional encouragement, which his 
l\lajesty and the legislature hold out to them, in giving them the benefit 
of the captures they make. What else is to enable the veteran naval 
officer, to enjoy in the evening of his life, the comforts of an easy 
income ; the father to provide for his children ; or the husband for an 
affectionate wife, who, from the risques he runs in the service of his 
country, is peculiarly likely to survive him ? By what other means, 
can a victorious admiral, when raised, as a reward of his illustrious 
actions, to civil and hereditary honours, hope to support his well 
earned rank, and provide for an ennobled posterity ? . . . It is from 
the enemies of his country, therefore, that he hopes to wrest the means 
of comfortably sustaining those honours, which he has gained at their 
expence. 
As to the common seamen and mariners, the natural motives 
of dislike to the naval service, are in their breasts far more effectually 
combated by the hope of prize money, than by all the other induce 
ments that are or can be proposed to them. The nautical character 
is peculiarly of a kind to be influenced by such dazzling, but preca,rious 
pr0spects.l 

ATTACKS ON ENEMY EXPORTS, NOT IMPORTS

With this encouragement of captures for their own sake, however, there was undoubtedly coupled a desire to cut down the enemy’s trade. But this desire, too, has to be conceived in a strictly mercantilist spirit. To inflict military injury on the enemy, either directly or indirectly, was not-at least not to any notable extent-the object of the interference with his trade. On the contrary, the primary object was that of waging com mercial war against him, i. e., of depriving him of a source of gain, or, in other words, beating him off the field ; and, parallel with this, it was aimed to extend a country’s own trade-which could be done, and was constantly attempted, at the expense, not only of the enemy country, but also of neutral countries. This brought it about that the establishment of a blockade dealt the latter a much harder blow than is the case at the present time. The intention was to prevent them from receiving any profit either from the enemy country or from other countries, and so far as possible to expel them, as well as the enemy, from

London, 1917), pp. 106-7.

1 Stephen, War in Disguise: or, the Frauds of the Neutral Flags (Pigott, ed., D2

36 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM sources of gain which had previously been open to them. It is perhaps not altogether clear whether considerations of this nature influenced some of the measures of the recent blockade. But however that may be, it is true that such a policy has no con nexion'whatsoever with the blockade of the enemy as such, but may be pursued, as actually happened a hundred years ago, purely as an end in itself. The objection to the proposition that 'free ships make free goods' was rooted in this object much more than in the inclination to encourage captures for their own sake ; for as goods belonging to subjects of enemy countries were liable to seizure on neutral vessels, the neutrals were prevented from taking over the traffic which the enemy himself had been able to carry on before he was driven from the sea, as the British historian Lecky has well observed.1 And this was still more the case with the fourth of the great disputed questions concerning the law of war at sea, namely, that of commerce nouveau, or, in British terminology, the rule of 1756, the wording of which, as elaborated by British jurists, was that ' a neutral has no right to deliver a belligerent from the pressure of his enemy's hostilities, by trading with his colonies in time of war in a way that was prohibited in time of peace.' "his prin ciple prevented the neutrals from pushing their way either into the enemy's coasting trade or-and this was more important into what might be regarded as a special form of coasting trade, namely, trade with the enemy's colonies. In time of peace both of these were jealously guarded preserves of the trade and navi gation of the home country ; but in time of war the belligerent power that was debarred from the sea willingly turned them over to neutrals with the double object of maintaining the traffic and of preventing it from falling into the hands of the enemy. The characteristic difference between the policy of that time and the policy of to-day is that, when the masters of the sea a century ago tried to prevent neutrals from carrying on a certain kind of trade, their object was not to kill that trade altogether, as is the case nowadays, but to seize it for themselves.