

1 Stephen, War in Disguise, pp. 39, 70 et seq., 169, et al. ; Rose, vice president of the Board of Trade in the House of Commons, March 3,1812, Hansard, vol. XXI, p. 1122 ; Mahan, Influence of 8ea Power upon the French Revolution and Empire, 1793-1812 (London, 1893), vol. 11, pp. 252 note, 309 ; The Laws of England (Halsbury ed., London, 1 W7), 8.8. Aliens, vol. I, pp. 311 -12 ; Wahlstrom, op. cit., pp. 62-3. In this connexion it may not be irrelevant to refer as a parallel to a well-known passage in the Pickwick Papers (oh. 40) : ‘What, am I to understand that these men earn a livelihood by waiting about here to perjure themselves before the judges of the land, at the rate of half a crown tt crime ! ’ exclaimed Mr. Pickwick, quite aghast at the disclosure. ‘Why, I don’t know exactly about perjury, my dear sir,’ replied the little gentleman. ‘ Harsh word, my dear sir, very harsh word indeed ! It’s a legal fiction, my dear sir, nothing more.’

MARITIME BLOCKADE

BRITISH MEASURES (1793-1802) The measures adopted at the beginning of the maritime blockade in 1793 exhibit marked resemblances to the corre sponding measures adopted during the recent World War, and are therefore of especial interest and importance. As early as February 14, that is to say, a fortnight after the outbreak of the war, Great Britain authorized the capture of all vessels and goods belonging to France ; and in the following month she proceeded to work. On April 4 she proclaimed all her most advanced principles concerning the law of war at sea, and on June 8 she introduced the most famous of her measures, namely, the instructions of 1793, whereby fleet commanders and priva teers mere authorized ‘ to stop and detain all vessels loaded wholly or in part with corn, flour, or meal, bound to any port in France or any port occupied by the armies of France ’, with the understanding that the British government would purchase the cargo with the proper allowances for freight, called ‘pre-emption’. This measure took the formof a plan to starve out France. Count Axel von Fersen, the chivalrous young Swedish nobleman who, as is well known, was one of the most active allies of the French imigris, had emphasized this, as early as April 29, in a letter addressed to the Regent of Sweden, Charles Duke of Soderman land ; and in a notification of the measure addressed to the Baltic powers, especially one to Denmark in July, Great Britain justified her June instructions in a manner very similar to that in which the policy of starving out Germany was justified during the recent war. The notification declared that the war was being conducted in a manner contrary to the principles of inter national law, that France had no recognized government, and that the corn trade had been taken over by the French authori ties themselves, that is to say, had become an act of the enemy’s own government ; and, finally, the blockade against imports was represented purely as an important means of forcing the enemy to make peace. Lars von Ehgestrom hit the mark in describing the tendencies of that time-as also those of the