

MARITIME BLOCKADE 41

were liable to confiscation by both the belligerent parties for the act, 
but that the field of commerce was preoccupied, and the markets glutted 
by the importations under neutral flags. 
But would I advise a toleration of these new ' modes of relieving the 
hostile colonies ' ? Its toleration would not be necessary. Even your 
own hostilities would not be able to overcome the expansive force of 
your own commerce, when delivered from the unnatural and ruinous 
competition, of its present privileged enemies. You might often capture 
the carriers of it and condemn their cargoes ; but the effect would 
chiefly be to raise the price upon the enemy, and the difference would 
go into the purses of your [prize-taking] seamen. The prize goods 
themselves, would find their way from your colonies into the hostile 
territories.1 

It would be difficult to find a more typical example of the capacity to ' make the best of both worlds '. The legal principle of prohibiting trade with the enemy was constantly maintained, while at the same time full provision was made for exports above all to the enemy, which according to the deeply rooted ideas of the time was of vital interest to the country. The same combination of incompatible views is revealed in almost every utterance that has come down from that time ; and when the wil existed, it was not difficult to find means for its realization. One of these means was the system of licences, of which Stephen says that ' papal dispensations were not more easily obtained in the days of Luther '. Another means was the system called ' neutralization,' whereby vessels and cargoes that in reality belonged to one or another of the belligerents were declared on sworn-that is to say, perjured-evidence, to belong to neutrals. These tactics-which, however, were sometimes turned against the belligerents themselves, and in such cases were combated both by the law courts and by the supporters of the official policy-were employed on a strictly business basis, commonly with a commission of 1-2 per cent. for the firm that handled the transaction. Especially Emden, in East Friesland, which belonged to Prussia and was consequently neutral, was a centre for transactions of this nature, and there were loud complaints against British marine insurance firms which bound themselves,

1 Stephen, War in Disguise, p. 168.

42 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
against a special premium of 1 per cent., not to urge the legally 
valid plea against the enemy origin of the cargoes, which by law 
always involved the invalidity of the insurance. Besides this, 
moreover, there always remained the possibility of winking at 
an illegal practice which there was no intention of preventing ; 
and it is characteristic of the situation that in the year 1794 
Swedish captains openly declared to the British customs 
officers that their vessels were bound for a French port. 
Trading with the enemy also appears as a fairly self-evident 
practice in nearly all accounts of the commercial conditions 
then prevailing. This is revealed, for instance, by the British 
trade statistics themselves, which show that the share of the 
enemy countries, France and the Netherlands (northern and 
southern), in the total exports of Great Britain declined only 
from 15 to 13 per cent. in the years 1792-1800. This, too, is 
conclusive evidence in support of Stephen’s proposition as to 
the impossibility of war measures adopted by Great Britain to 
the end of overcoming the expansive force of her own trade.l 
Following this hasty sketch of the general character of the 
maritime blockade policy of that time, it seems expedient to 
show in a more concrete form the development of those measures 
during the years from the intervention of Great Britain in the 
revolutionary wars in 1793 down to the Peace of Amiens in 1803. 
It contains, indeed, a good deal which may be of value, not only 
in throwing light on the general situation at that time, but also 
in furnishing a background for what was to come later. 