

MARITIME BLOCKADE 39 COLONIAL TRADE The colonial trade, which at that time was conducted in all countries on the lines of the Old Colonial System, deserves special attention in this connexion. The fundamental idea of that system was that the mother country and the colonies should constitute an economic whole, with a strict division of labour between them, so that the mother country alone supplied the colonies with the industrial products and other things they needed, and in exchange received alone, or practically alone, the raw materials, precious metals, foodstuffs, and stimulants that the colonies produced, all with national vessels and through national merchants. In this case, therefore, not only were exports to the colonies regarded as economically profitable to the mother country, but the same also held good of imports from the colonies. Accordingly, it was considered a great triumph if a country succeeded, by means of the maritime blockade, in conveying the products of enemy colonies also to its own shores, and at the same time in preventing those pro ducts from competing with the products of their own colonies on the mainland of Europe, A great many, not to say the majority, of the controversies that arose in those days regarding the matter of the commercial blockade, especially in Great Britain and America, turned precisely on the question of colonial trade, which also quantitatively played a surprisingly great part in the total commercial intercourse of the sea-trading countries, especially through the re-exportation of colonial goods that arose out of it. Thus, according to the so-called ' official values ' in the statistics of trade, the British exports of foreign goods (which means substantially colonial goods) rose uninterruptedly in the course of the revolutionary wars from 21 per cent. of the total in 1792 to 3f4. per cent. in 1800. Like wise, the French re-exportation to Europe of goods from the West Indies immediat.ely before the Revolution was greater than the whole of French exportation of domestic staple pro ducts of the textile and liquor industries, On the other hand, the transit trade of the United States in French, Spanish, and

e0 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM British West Indian products increased prodigiously during the same period, representing in 1806 a value of no less than $60,000,000, or one and a half times the value of the exports of the domestic goods of the United States.l

TRADING WITH THE ENEMY

Such, then, were the purposes that the policy of blockade 
was intended to serve. But as has already been mentioned, the 
curious thing about its practical application did not lie ex 
clusively in this alteration of its objects, but also in the fact 
that the policy actually pursued was in reality quite diKerent 
from that which held good on paper. To some extent this was 
true of the measures that pertained strictly to the law of war at 
sea, especially to blockades ; but to a still greater extent it was 
true of trading with the enemy. The prohibition of this was 
regarded, especially in Great Britain, as an indispensable prin 
ciple of international law and was therefore rigorously main 
tained on paper ; and this notion was also strengthened by the 
desire of every country to mark the moral gulf that should 
separate its own subjects from the enemy, or, as the phrase ran, 
‘ to prevent treasonable and improper intercourse ’.2 But there 
was not the slightest idea of carrying out this fundamental 
principle in practice. With almost grotesque force the contrast 
between theory and practice is brought out in one passage in 
Stephen’s book in which he discusses the objection that might 
be raised against his pleadings in favour of measures against 
neutral trade, namely, that they would plunge Great Britain 
into war with the then neutrals and thereby impede her exports. 
He goes on to say : 
Is it asked, ‘ Who would afterwards carry our manufactures to 
market ? ’ I answer, ‘ Our allies, our fellow subjects, our old and new 
enemies themselves.’ In the last war (1778-1788”when Spain and 
Great Britain were enemies) nothing prevented the supplying of Spanish 
America with British manufactures, in British bottoms, even when they 
1 Haneard, vol. IX, app., col. xv ; Levaasem, Histoire dea classes ouwi2res, &c., 
avant 1789, vol. II, p. 654 note ; Johnson and others, op. cit., vol. II, p. 20. 
e Stephen in the House of Commons, Mar. 3,1812, Hansard, voL XXI, p. 1136. 