

VI, pp. 743-4; Biisch, OP. cit., chs. VEI-IX 6 Holm, OP. tit., pol. I, pp. 69, 1754,195,

CHAPTER I11 
CONTINENTAL BLOCKADE 
THE Continental System originated, therefore, on the one 
side, in a blockade that followed the general lines of mercantilist 
trade policy, especially on the part of France, and, on the ather 
side, in a maritime blockade dominated by the same ideas 
which proceeded from Great Britain but was imitated in still 
more intensified forms by France, where, owing to the British 
mastery of the seas, it acquired the character of a self-blockade. 
To complete the antecedent conditions of the Continental 
System, consequently, there is only one feature lacking; but 
it is the feature which has given the policy itself its name, that 
is, the combination of the European countries to the exclusion 
of Great Britain, which, supposing that the same conditions 
held good as before, means a common self-blockade of the 
Continent as against Great Britain. 
This feature did not become significant until the time of 
Napoleon, for until then the external means of exercising power, 
as well as the great political personality it demanded, were 
still lacking ; but recent Napoleonic research has taken great 
pains to demonstrate that it was significant even during the 
preceding period. From the beginning of history the corn 
munity of nations has always looked upon commercial countries 
with a certain jealousy and suspicion ; and in this respect, as 
has already been said,lperJide Albion inherited the feeling which 
had once been fostered against its rival, the United Netherlands, 
This feeling was further intensified by theunpalatable experiences 
of both enemies and neutrals during the incessant wars, on 
account of Great Britain’s ruthlessly applied methods of naval 
warfare, There is nothing surprising, therefore, in the fact that 
plans were formed for the exclusion of Great Britain, What is 
remarkable, on the contrary, is the fact that nobody, so far as 
is known, has yet succeeded in showing the existence of any 
See p. 32. 
E2 
52 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
such plans other than those emanating directly or indirectly 
from French sources. Examples of this kind have a great 
interest of their own ; but they are too patent to call for any 
detailed investigation. 
As early as 174'7 we know that proposals were brought 
forward in the French Bureau de Commerce to unite France, 
the Hanse Towns, Prussia, and the Scandinavian powers for the 
purpose of crushing the maritime power of Great Britain 
probably a mere incident in the long-standing Anglo-French 
duel.1 But it was not until after and in consequence of the 
outbreak of war between Great Britain and France in 1793 that 
this tendency acquired any lasting significance. The attitude 
took one or another of two forms, according to circumstances : 
either all the continental countries were regarded as commer 
cially dependent on England, and therefore as necessary 
objectives in the military and economic war waged by the 
French republic against its foremost enemy ; or else, contrari 
wise, they all had the same interest in crushing the power of 
England and were thus the natural allies of France. 
The attitude appears in the first of these two forms in a 
great speech which the Girondist naval officer, Kersaint, 
delivered in the Convention on January 1, 1793-that is to say, 
before the outbreak of war-and in which he exhorted his 
countrymen, with the usual revolutionary eloquence, to face 
the struggle with the whole world. In his opinion, France alone 
had her own industry and wealth, while Spain, Portugal, 
Holland, and the Italian republics worked largely with British 
capital and British goods. The New World and Asia, he said, 
were likewise economically dependent on Great Britain ; nay, 
even the trade of Denmark (Le., Norway), Sweden, and Russia 
in naval stores was made possible by the co-operation of British 
capitalists. ' One cannot find on the face of the globe,' he 
declared, ' any lucrative branch of trade which has not been 
exploited to the profit of that essentially shop-keeping people.' 
In consequence of this, he argued, the injuries inflicted on ,the 
states of the Continent fell finally on Great Britain, for whose 
Schmidt, LC Gad-dwhL de Berg, p. 418. 