

CONTINENTAL BLOCKADE 57 foreign minister, wrote in a memorandum intended for the Russian government that there could be no doubt as to the intention of the Directory to seize the coast of the North Sea as far as the mouth of the Elbe, as its plans were known to be to isolate England, separate her from the Continent and exclude her shipping from the ports of the Mediterranean, the Atlantic and the North Sea. About the same time the American minister in London reported-incorrectly at the time, it is true, but evidently in accord with current rumours-that France had demanded the cessation of trade between the Hanse Towns and England and, its demand having been refused, had recalled its minister there.1 The Baltic Sea was also to be closed to the British in 1795 by playing Sweden and Denmark against Russia, which for the moment was on friendly terms with Great Britain. But the most characteristic example of all these forerunners to the policy of Napoleon can be found in the instructions (cited by Sorel) to the French envoy at The Hague, dated Fructidor 6 and 7, year I11 (August 234, 1795). This deserves to be cited verbatim : The alliance with Holland offers the most important result of all, namely, to exclude the British from the Continent, to shut them out in war time from Bayonne to north of Friesland and from access to the Baltic end North Seas. The trade with the interior of Germany will then return to its natural channels. . . . Deprived of these immense markets, harassed by revolts and internal disturbances which will be the consequence, England will have great embarmsments with her colonial and Asiatic goods. These goods, being unsaleable, will fall to low prices, and the English will find themselves vanquished by excess (vuincus pur tubondunce), just as they had wished to vanquish the French by shortage.

In this utterance the familiar policy of strangling exports finds clear expression, and its agreement with the whole of Napoleon’s motives for the Continental System is very striking.

1 Preuasen und Frankreich von 1795 bis 1807, in Publieationen aua den K. Preussiscken Staatsarchiven, VI11 (Bailleu ed., Leipzig, 1881), vol. I, p. 113 ; Mahan, Injluence of Sea Power, tc., vol. II, pp. 2476. Admiral Mahan, however, appears to believe in the truth of this altogether unfounded rumour, for the facts of which of. Wohlwill, Neuere Ceschic&e, to., pp. 161, 188-9.

58 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM An excellent parallel, for instance, is exhibited by the boastful survey that was laid before the Corps Zkgishtif in 1807.l But this process of thought must also be examined in connexion with the views of the French revolutionaries, afterwards taken over by Napoleon, as to the implications and foundations of the economic strength of Great Britain ; and the instructions of 1795 thus form a convenient transition to that instructive chapter.

1 See infra, p. 74.

ECONOMIC POSITION OF GREAT BRITAIN ‘ THE Causes of the Rise and Decline of Cities, Countries, and Republics,’ Die Ursachen des Auf und Abn,ehmens der Stddt, Lander und Republicken-to quote the title of a book by the German mercantilist, Johann Joachim Becher-have always formed, and still form, a very obscure chapter in conomic history, and one which has been far from fully elucidated by economic inquiry. During the period with which we are now concerned the stability of the position of England as the lead ing maritime and colonial nation, after the relative decline of the Netherlands, formed a constant source of speculation and doubt, It was perhaps natural that this mistrust was most prevalent in French circles, and particularly among the French revolutionaries ; for to those who had been trained in the school of Rousseau it was necessarily quite obvious that an organization so completely detached from the land was un natural and, therefore, not durable-all the more so for the reason that physiocracy, so far as its influence was to be taken into account at all, might also lead to the same conclusions. The hollowness of the English economic system is also the burden of the often quoted official speech in which Brissot, the leader of the Girondists, on January 12, 1793, laid before the National Convention the whole argument in favour of a war with England, in terms which were to be re-embodied in the final declaration of war. ‘ We must tear asunder,’ he declared, ‘ the veil that envelops the imposing colossus of England. . . . When the well-informed observer regards this imposing scaffold of English greatness, he is able to penetrate to its internal - vacuity, . . . Say, then, if it will not be an easy matter to over turn a power whose colossal stature betrays its weakness and calls for its overthrow.’ 1 t Le Yonitew, Jan. 16,1793.