

44 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
World War-when he wrote that the struggle ‘ had passed into 
a kind of political war of religion ’. 
A genuine blockade of the importation of foodstuffs into 
France might therefore have been expected, that is, a ‘ starving 
out scheme ’ similar to that of the World War. In a way such 
a plan might even have been made to harmonize fairly well with 
the continental economic policy of that time, at least until the 
French Revolution ; for as a matter of fact, the prevailing note 
on the subject of foodstuffs continued to be the pre-mercantilist 
tendency to prevent exports, rather than the mercantilist one 
to encourage domestic production by hampering imports and 
facilitating exports. As has been already mentioned, however, 
Pitt’s justification for the seizures was not based on this notion, 
but on Britain’s own quite temporary need of foodstuffs 
according to Lars von Engestrom’s statement ; 1 and evidence 
of how deeply rooted the notion of the inexpediency of pre 
venting imports to the enemy was is furnished by the fact that 
the ensuing developments did not at all follow along the lines 
which were indicated in the first measures. Only fourteen 
months afterwards, on August 18, 1794, the previously cited 
article in the June instructions of 1793 was repealed, and this 
meant that the importation of corn into France was again 
permitted. It is true that in the following April a new attempt 
was made to put the instructions of 1793 into force, but this 
was done chiefly with the object of forcing the United States 
into a ratification of the celebrated Jay Treaty of 17%. “hat, 
however, wound up the whole of this episode, so that through 
out the entire period of the twenty years that still remained 
before Europe obtained a lasting peace, not a single attempt at 
starving out France was made, so far as we know, nor were 
there any further efforts to stop her imports on the part of the 
power that had the command of the sea. Against only one small 
country, Norway, did Great Britain occasionally make use of 
her ability to prevent the introduction of supplies, for reasons 
which will be discussed in due time. 
In contrast with these sporadic attempts to prevent importa 
1 See p. 33. 

MARITIME BLOCKADE 45 tion into France, the regulation of the trade with the French and Spanish colonies continued throughout the war, that is, until the Peace of Amiens in 180.2; and this became the starting point of the events that were to take place during the period of the Continental System proper. Here, too, there was a certain amount of wavering on the part of Great Britain, but the general principles were maintained with a consistency wholly different from that shown in the other case. A beginning was made with the celebrated instructions of November 6, 1793, which aroused the particular animosity of the neutrals, especi ally the United States, for the reason that they prescribed the capture of all vessels carrying the products of the French colonies or conveying supplies to them. Shortly afterwards, however, these draconic orders were revoked as a concession to the United States, and their place was taken by the new instructions of January 8, 1794. These restricted the order concerning capture to vessels proceeding directly from the West Indian colonies of the enemy to a European port ; and this, in turn, opened up the possibility of a so-called ' circuitous voyage ' via some neutral extra-European port, that is to say, primarily an American port, but also possibly a Danish or Swedish colonial port. Nevertheless, it was provided that the products of enemy colonies should have become neutral property in order to be loaded, and that blockade-running vessels, as well as vessels conveying naval stores or munitions of war to the enemy colonies, would be liable to capture. These regula tions were further modified by the new instructions of January, 1798, which both abolished the requirement that the colonial goods should have become neutral property and also, and above all, permitted direct traffic to a European port, that is, a port belonging to the British Empire or to the home land of the neutral vessel. This stipulation in favour of a British port is of especial interest in that it furnishes evidence of the British design to attract to Great Britain the trade even in the products of enemy colonies. As Admiral Mahan has rightly remarked, it was an outcome of the effort characteristic of the old colonial system to create in the home country a staple or entrepdt for colonial goods. In point of fact, the instructions of 1798