

CONTINENTAL BLOCKADE 53 benefit that economic life was carried on, a view which Napoleon was afterwards destined to push to the extreme. Asia, Portugal, and Spain were regarded by Kersaint as the most important markets for British industry, and they were to be closed to Great Britain by being opened to the rest of the world ; Lisbon and Brazil were to be assailed ; support was to be given to the old adversary of the British in India, Tippoo Sahib, &c.l Thus Kersaint not only passed over the United States, the undiminished importance of which for British trade does not appear to have been fully recognized in France, but also dis regarded Germany and the European mainland proper, as distinguished from the coastal and peninsular fringes referred to above. As a rule, however, Germany was a factor of con siderable importance in these fforts. To begin with, the prohibition of 1796 against British goods was extended in March, 1798, to the left shore of the Rhine, which was then united with the French republic ; and this prohibition was applied with a strictness which, in an account of the situation written in 1798 and ascribed to Napoleon, was alleged to presage (tbaucher) the Continental System.2 For the rest, it was mainly a matter of paper pr,ojects and pious wishes, not of effective measures, and the majority of them concerned the German North Sea littoral. Here, as a rule, it was the other side of the policy that was turned outwards, that is, the common interests of all the continental states against Great Britain. A writer of German birth, Ch. Theremin, who was later to serve Napoleon in various posts in Germany, published in Paris in the year I11 (17944) a pamphlet with the significant title Intkrdts des puissances continentales rehtivement d t’dngleterre, in which the afterwards well-known doctrine of the natural and inevitable conflict between Great Britain and the Continent was developed at length, and the hostility of the other continental states to France was shown consequently to be contrary to their

Le Noniteur, Jan. 3, 1793 ; Sorel, 01). cit., vol. 111, pp. 244-5. Cornmentairea de NapoZdon ler (Paris, 1867), vol. 111, p. 413. As the eesay is not included in the Correspondance, the authorship of the Emperor does not appear to be above doubt.

54 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM own best interests. A year or two later, at the beginning of the Congress of Raskdt in 1797, plans were made to bar the mouths of the Elbe and the Weser to the British ; apd at the same time it was proposed, in a paper now preserved in the archives of the French Foreign Office, that Hanover and Hamburg should be transformed into a republic allied with France, which after wards was to be joined with the great North German rivers by an extensive system of canals. Aside from its strategical advantages, it was thought that this would establish a commer cial combination which would lead to increased sales for French goods and to an embargo on British industrial products. In the same year (1797) this project called forth a refutation published by an anonymous German ' citizen of the world ', who turned out to be a true prophet in his exposition of the futility of all efforts to shut out the British. In his opinion, which subsequent experience was destined fully to confirm, the Brit,ish, under the protection of Heligoland, would divert their trade to Tonning in Holstein and thereby ruin Hamburg and Bremen. He also .reminded his readers that the pro hibitory measures of the French republic against British goods had so far led to nothing more than an immense system of smuggling. It was precisely Hamburg that was the central point of the early French efforts to exclude England. The French envoy there, Reinhard, the son of a Swabian clergyman, spoke as early as 1196 of the necessity of preventing the importation of British goods, the exclusion of which from the French market alone he considered at that time sufficient to ruin England. At the beginning of 1798, however, shortly before his removal to Tuscany, Reinhard-chiefly, it is true, in order to protect the Hanse Towns, the prosperity of which he had several reasons to promote-emphasized the necessity of combining all the continental states in such a policy of exclusion. That object would be attained through the active co-operation of Denmark and Prussia with the passive support of Russia ; but that would not be possible so long as only the Hanse Towns took part, for in that case the goods might come in across