

46 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
remained in force until the termination of the revolutionary 
wars in 1802.1 
In comparison with the treatment of neutral shipping in the 
recent war, these orders do not present a very strict appearance ; 
for at the present time the belligerent that is dominant on the 
seas tries to cut off practically every sort of neutral intercourse 
with the enemy over such waters as it commands and even, to 
some extent, over other waters. But one must not overlook 
the fact that privateering, which it was in many ways almost 
impossible to distinguish from piracy pure and simple, and 
even the private interests of the crews of war-ships in effecting 
captures, brought about an arbitrariness and a brutality in the 
treatment of maritime commerce which is unknown to-day. 
This has been copiously illustrated by the recently deceased 
Danish istorian, Professor Edvard Holm, whose account 
undeniably gives one the impression that the trials and troubles 
of neutral trade, even during the first years of the revolutionary 
wars, in practice exceeded even those of the present time, even 
though its chances of profit, as far as we can judge, were greater. 
Nevertheless, the acts of the belligerents during those first years 
were almost deeds of mercy in comparison with what was to 
come ; and the new departure was the work of the new French 
policy. Like most of the measures of the French revolutionary 
governments, the measures against maritime trade were marked 
by a combination of violence and impotence ; but they were 
so far explicable because the British application of the laws of 
war at sea rendered French navigation all but impossible. As 
usual, the principal sufferers in the end were the neutrals, and 
this time the measures of violence against them were carried 
to the most extreme limit that had yet been reached. 
1 Martens, Recweil des principux truitia (2d ed., Gottingen, 1826), vol. v, pp. 596- 
604; Annual Register, 1793, State Papers, pp. 176 et seq.; Stephen, op. cit., p. 175note, 
18 et seq., 33 ; Holm, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 106-15, 171 et seq. ; Mahan, op. cit., vol. 11. 
pp. 233 et seq. ; also, Sea Power in its Relations to the War of 2822 (London, 1905), 
vol. I, pp. 27, 89-90,93; WahlstrGm, op. cit., pp. 10 et seq., 62-3, 99,126; Bassett, The 
Federalist System, 2789-2802, in T?be American Nation : A History (New York and 
London, 1906), vol. II, pp. 122-3, I29 ; Klinckowstrom, Le Cmte de Fersen et la 
wur de Frunce (Stockholm, 1878), vol. E, p. 419; Lars von Engestrom, Minnen 
och anteckningar (Stockholm, 1876), vol. I, pp. 235 et aeq. 
MARITIME BLOCKADE 47 
FRENCH MEASURES (1793-1799) 
At first the measures of France had been considerably milder 
than those of Great Britain ; and this was natural enough in 
view of the fact that France stood in great need of the help of 
neutrals. By a law passed on May 9, 1793-that is to say, 
before the British instructions of June 8, but after the declara 
tion of April 4-the Convention ordered that all neutral vessels 
conveying foodstuffs to an enemy port or carrying goods be 
longing to the enemy should be captured and conducted into 
a French port. Such vessels were to be fair prizes, and their 
cargoes were to be purchased on behalf of France. But the 
French purchase regulations themselves were more favourable 
to the neutrals than the corresponding British ones ; and at 
the same time it was declared, in the same way as afterwards 
under Napoleon, that the orders would be abolished as soon as 
the enemy on his part granted the unrestricted importation of 
foodstuffs into France. 
At first the practice, too, was milder on the French side. 
Gradually, however, French policy turned completely around ; 
and it was not long before the new tendency acquired official 
form. On July 2, 1796 (Messidor 14, year IV), the Directory 
categorically declared in an ordinance of only a few lines that 
British methods were to be applied against the neutrals in every 
respect. The culmination, however, was reached in the notori 
ous law of January 18, 1798 (Niv6se 29, year VI), which laid 
down that the nationality of a vessel should be determined by 
its cargo, so that if any vessel was carrying goods of any kind 
coming from England or its possessions, no matter who was the 
owner, this fact alone should justify the confiscation, not only of 
these goods, but also of the vessel itself and its entire cargo, 
Moreover, any vessel that had touched at a British port was 
forbidden to put in at any French port ; and earlier it had 
already been made a practice to seize vessels bound for a 
British port. 
It would have been difficult to go farther ; and this time 
actions were not milder, but still more violent, than words. 