

443 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM From the two years or so during which the law of Niv6se was in force come all the wildest examples of high-handed procedure on the part of belhgerents on the seas. It was especially Scandi navian vessels that were exposed to this reign of terror, while the only important neutral power besides Sweden and Denmark and Norway, namely, the United States, began what was practically a privateering war against France without any formal declaration of war. The French law came into force without any preliminary warning, so that vessels which had sailed without knowledge of its provisions fell helplessly into the hands of captors ; and once seized, their chances of escape were very small indeed. With the importance that British industry had now acquired, in fact, it was almost impossible for a vessel to sail without having on board some article of British origin ; and it was not at all necessary that these articles should constitute its cargo, in the strict sense of the term, to seal its fate. A woollen blanket on the skipper’s berth, a few sacks of British coal for the ship’s stove, British earthenware used by the crew, the British metal buttons of the skipper’s coat, etc., were sufficient to lead to confiscation. Indeed, the old Hamburg economist Biisch gives us in one of his last works, that bearing the exquisite title of Ueber das Bestreben. der Volker neuerer Zeit, einader in ihrem Seehandel recht wehe zu thun (1800), such an example as this : Once when a French captor, quite exceptionally, did not succeed in finding anything British on board a captured vessel, two of the sailors were bribed to disclose the alleged fact that the skipper had had a pair of English boots which he had thrown overboard on the approach, of the captor ; and that, says Biisch, was enough to . bring about the confiscation of the carg0.l In a suit against five Danish East Indian vessels bearing rich products obviously of Danish origin, the captors succeeded in having the cargoes condemned on the ground that Lascars included in the crews were British subjects ; and in other cases vessels and cargoes were condemned on the ground that the former had been built in a British shipyard and had been bought after the outbreak Biisch, StZmmtZiche Schriflen iiber die Harutlung (Hamburg, 1825), POL V, pp. 278-9.

MARITIME BLOCKADE 49 
of the war-in spite of the fact that the vessel was a French 
prize and had been sold to its then Danish owner by the 
French captor. 
Justice was indeed a parody. Those who acted as judges 
were ordinarily the consuls in the most important haunts of the 
privateers, with whom they often acted in collusion; nay, 
some of them were themselves ex-privateers or even still corn 
mercially interested in the captures-an example which one of 
Xapoleon’s governors was destined to follow in the fullness of 
time.1 The abuses increased to such an extent that they corn 
pletely outgrew the control of the weak government of the 
Directory. On one occasion, for example, Reubell, one of the 
members of the Directory, informed the Danish minister in 
Paris that a French prize court had condemned and caused to 
be sold for the benefit of the captor, a Swedish vessel with 
a cargo destined for the French government itself. Moreover, 
the privateers worked into each other’s hands in various ways. 
Thus one of them might rob a neutral vessel of its ship’s papers 
in order that another might seize it with impunity ; for without 
papers its condemnation was certain. 
What is peculiar in the policy of the Directory, and at the 
same time significant for the ensuing developments, is the fact 
that it had the effect of a French self-blockade. It is indeed 
manifest, as Admiral Mahan points out, that the power which 
was excluded from the sea was the one which really had need 
of the neutrals for the procurement of its supplies, and which, 
therefore, from a purely material point ofview at least, had the 
most to lose by a course of violent action against them. ‘ Every 
blow against a neutral,’ he says, ‘ was really, even though not 
seemingly, a blow for Great Britain.’ During the period of 
scarcely two years in which the law of Niv6se was in force, it 
practically did away with t at neutral trade and navigation with 
France which was to some extent independent of Great Britain. 
Neutral vessels, in fact, did not venture there, so that even 
during the year 1798 their coasting trade in France declined by 
Cmreepondmce de Napolh zer (Paris, 1858-l869), no. 18,491 (Feb. 8, 
1812). 
1560.43 E 
50 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
two-thirds and their foreign trade with the same country by 
one-fourth. Moreover, the obstacles that French captures 
placed in the way of free navigation brought it about that 
neutrals in general were pushed back ; and this, of course, was 
an advantage to Great Britain, which was enabled by her 
command of the sea to protect her trading vessels by means of 
convoys. The latter obstacle in the way of neutral shipping 
was of less importance than the former, however, because 
the two neutral Scandinavian states also fitted out convoys in 
common on the basis of the League of Armed Neutrality of 
1794. This had excellent commercial results, at least for 
Denmark, but the French policy caused it to be of very little 
benefit to France. Nor did the latter country receive any 
compensations whatever for its own shipping, for according to 
the Directory's own declaration, in 1799, the British blockade 
had been maintained so strictly that not a single vessel was 
sailing the seas under a French flag. 
It was therefore quite natural that Napoleon, as early as 
December, 1799, that is, shortly after his accession to power, 
should repeal, or cause to be repealed, the law of Niviise and 
revive the more moderate regulations of 1778 (law of Frimaire 
23 and ordinance of Frimaire 29, year VIII) ; and at the 
beginning of the following year he did away with some of the 
worst abuses in the administration of prize-court justice by 
instituting a Supreme Prize Court in Paris. In principle, how 
ever, his later policy was to be a faithful reflection of that of the 
Directory, as will be shown in due course.1 
Lois" et actes, &c., vol. M, pp. 52-3 ; Bulldin des lois, &c., 2d ser., bull. 178, 
no. 1,678; bulL 235, no. 2,118; Martens, op. cit., 2d ed., vol. v, pp. 388-9, 398-9; vol. 
222 et seq., 232-50, 258, 266-7, 307, 313; Mahan, Influence of 8ea Power, &c., 
vol. II, pp. 219-20, 243 et seq., 255 et seq. ; Bassett, op. cit., pp. 220-21. For the 
whole of this part of the subject, cf. also Soderqvist, op. cit., pp. 18-49; Report 
of the Fourth Special Committee of the Swedish Becond Chamber for 1902, no. 8, pp. 
54-61 ; The Armed Nevtralitie-s of 1780 and 1800, edited by James Brown Scott 
(Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Division of International Law. 
New York, 1918) ; Hugo Larsson, Xveriges deltagande i den viipnade neutraliteten, 
1800-1801 (Lund, 1888) ; Chon, Guataf IV Adolf och den europeiska &ken under 
Napoleon (Stockholm, 1913). 