

CONTINENTAL BLOCKADE 55 
Holstein, that is to say, from the Danish side, through Altona, 
which was quite close to Hamburg. 
About the time of Reinhard's departure, in 1798, there 
arrived in Hamburg an emissary from the Directory's Minister 
of Police charged withhe mission of combining the many French 
republicans there in the adoption of measures against British 
trade. This agitator, a well-known Jacobin named Ldonard 
Bourdon, aroused the horror of the Hamburg city fathers by 
assembling his fellow countrymen and exhorting them to 
boycott British goods and also to act as spies upon the com 
mercial activities of Great Britain. Moreover, the draconic 
French prohibitions on the importation of British goods, to 
which wehave alreadyreferred,lhad effect outside the boundaries 
of France. Thus Reinhard speaks of the consternation that 
the prohibitions of 1796 aroused in the Hanse Towns, which 
had been wont to supply France with those goods.2 
The importance, for the general policy of the French revolu 
tionary governments, of all of these plans for the exclusion of 
Great Britain from the European Continent, forms, as one may 
easily surmise, a principal theme in Sorel's book.3 He seeks 
to show that the French programme of foreign policy-the 
' natural frontiers ' (the Atlantic Ocean, the Rhine, the Alps, 
and the Pyrenees)-necessarily involved a recognition of these 
conquests on the part of all other powers, and that the acquies 
cence of Great Britain could not be enforced except by attacks 
on her trade ; and that this, in its turn, could be effected only 
by a continental blockade, ' a. formidable and hyperbolical 
measure, out of all proportion to the object that necessitates 
it, but nevertheless the only one that can be adopted '. One 

See pp. 31-32. Zeyaa, Die Entstehung der Handelshmmern und die Industrie am Niederrhein wiihwnd der franz6sischen Herrschafi (Leipzig, 1907), p. 94 ; Schmidt,, Le Grand dmhd de Berg, pp. 339 et seq. ; ServiBres, L'Allemagne franpise aou8 Napoldon Ier (Paris, 1904), pp. 128-9; Wohlwill, Neuere Geachichte der Freien und Hansestadt Hamburg in8beaondere von 1789 bis 1815, in Allgemeine Staaten-GeschicMe (Got.ha, 1914), Abt. m, Werk x, pp. 181 et seq., 197, 202 note 2 ; also, Franleredch und Norddeutschland vm 1795 bis 1800, in HistoriscAe Zei&hrifl(1883), pp. 824-5. 3 Sorel, op. cit., POI. IV (1892), pp. 176, 183, 213, 266 et aeq., 359, 387 et aeq., 392, 464 ; vol. v (1903), p. 102.

56 ANTF,CEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
need not accept the logic of this argument as irrefutable-the 
point about the imperative necessity of British recognition of 
the new conquests seems particularly weak-to admit that 
such thoughts must have occupied the minds of the French 
politicians who, under various names, guided the destinies of 
fiance during the six or seven years that intervened between 
the outbreak of war in 1793 and Bonaparte's definitive accession 
to power in 1799. There can be no doubt, therefore, that 
notions of that character had lain at the foundation of the 
majority of the legislative measures previously treated. Thus 
Lecouteulx, the representative who in 1796 reported to the 
Conseil des Anciens upon the legislative proposal for the ex 
clusion of British goods, justified the measure on the ground 
that the flags of France and her allies floated from Emden to 
Trieste, and that almost all the ports on the coasts of the 
European ocean were closed to Great Britain. Consequently, 
he concluded, ' we must put an end to the voluntary sub 
sidies which consumers of British goods are paying to that 
country '.l 
With regard to foreign policy proper, Sore1 has brought 
forward a multitude of examples bearing witness to the same 
tendency, some of the more significant of which may be men 
tioned here. Thus about 1794 Caillard, a French diplomatist, 
proposed that the Continent should be closed by a series of 
alliances. ' From the Tagus to the Elbe,' he declared, ' there 
is no point on the mainland where the British should be allowed 
to set foot.' In 17'95 efforts were made to hand Portugal over 
to Spain, in order thereby ' to deprive England of one of her 
most valuable provinces ' ; and the closing of the continental 
ports was now to affect the whole coastline from Gibraltar to the 
island of Texel, outside the Zuider Zee. The same tendencies, 
moreover, determined French policy with regard to Naples and 
Belgium. In the early part of 1797 Haugwitz, the Prussian 
1 Le Noniteur, Nov. 4, 1796; Mahan, Influence of Sea Power, tc., vol. II, 
pp. 248 et seq. Dupont de Nemours combated the proposal, as might have been 
expected of an orthodox economist ; but when the President announced that the 
motion of Lecouteulx had been carried another member exclaimed : ' Nous sommes 
sauvb ! ' Le Honiteur, Nov. 6 (Brumaire 16). 