

It now remains to be seen how this policy was put into execution, and what effects it involved.

Correapondance, no. 12,187; Ballot, loc. cit., vol. 11, pp. 48-9; Mollien, op. cit., vol. 111, pp. 19-25 ; Chaptal, Mea souvenirs, &kc., p. 285 ; Correspondance, no. 13,063.

##### PART I1 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM

CHAPTER I

COMMERCIAL WAR BEFORE THE BERLIN DECREE MILITARY WAR (1799-1802) As everybody knows, the accession of Napoleon to power at the close of 1799 did not lead to general peace, certainly not to peace with Great Britain; and the tendencies which have been described above consequently continued on both sides. The principal novelty was an increased activity on the part of the neutrals, resulting in the organization of the League of Armed Neutrality in December, 1800, between Sweden, Denmark, and Russia, with Prussia as a somewhat reluctant fourth party. It was based on the same principles as the Armed Neutrality of 1780, but with further guaranties against capture under blockade, in the form of a provision for previous warning on the part of the war-ships on guard, and also of a prohibition against the searching of trading vessels under convoy, The impulse had been given by the fact that the Scandinavian convoys had been continued even after France had annulled the law of Nivase in December 1799, as has already been mentioned; and consequently it is apparent that the new League was directed mainly against Great Britain, The consequence of this was a succession of encounters with British war-ships ; and in September 1800 Great Britain was guilty of an act of unusually flagrant aggression, when British privateers just outside the port of Barcelona seized a Swedish vessel and, under the protection of its neutral flag, succeeded in capturing the Spanish ships lying there at anchor, The League of the Neutrals thus became an extremely welcome moral and political support for Napoleon against Great Britain ; and some of his earlier utterances concerning the cutting-off of the Continent from England are due to its

78 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
short career. For instance, we have his pronouncement to his 
assistant, Roederer (December 1800), as to the necessity of 
' blockading the English on their island ' and ' turning to their 
confusion that insular position which causes their insolence, 
their wealth, and their supremacy '.l Napoleon already posed 
as a champion of the freedom of the seas, and in a treaty with 
the United States, signed in 1800 and ratified in 1801, he laid 
down the same principles as had been championed by the 
Armed Neutrality. But, as is well known, the Armed Neutrality 
came to an end after some few months with the murder of the 
Czar Paul I and the Battle of the Baltic, in March and April 
1801 ; and the only result of the action of the neutrals was 
an Anglo-Russian navigation convention (June 5/17 of the 
same year), with the belated and somewhat reluctant adhesion 
of Denmark and Sweden. By this convention Great Britain 
succeeded in establishing the principle that free ships should 
not make free goods, and that war-ships, but not privateers, 
should be allowed to search convoyed trading vessels, in return 
for the abandonment, in theory, of the paper blockade and for 
restrictions in the definition of contraband, which was further 
limited by an agreement with Sweden in 1803. Napoleon, 
however, followed up his plans of cutting off England in other 
quarters by means of what the English historian, Dr. Rose, 
making use of an expression of Napoleon himself, has called 
his ' coast system ', that is to say, the adoption of the French 
policy of the 'nineties of excluding Great Britain from access 
to the mainland by making himself master of its coasts in 
some form or other. After Austria had concluded formal peace 
at Lun&ville, in February 1801, therefore, first Naples and the 
Papal States, and later on in the year Great Britain's own 
ally, Portugal, had to acquiesce in the closing of their ports 
to the British. 
This phase of the blockade policy came to an end fairly 
Sorel, L'Europe et la rkvolution franpise, POI. VI, pp. 22-3 ; Holm, Danmark 
Norges Histurie fra den store nordish Kriys Slutning til Rigernes Adskillelse, 1720- 
1814 (Copenhagen, 1912), POI. M, pt. I, pp. 42-3. Cf. also de Watteville, Souvenirs 
d'un downier du Premier Empire (Boucher de Perthes), in Revue Sapolionienne 
(N.S., Rome, 1908), vol. 11, p. 71. 
COMMERCIAL WAR BEFORE BERLIN DECREE 79 
soon, however, owing to the fact that peace was at length 
concluded between Great Britain and France, namely, the 
preliminaries of London, in October 1801, and the formal Peace 
of Amiens, in March 1802. 
PEACE OF AMIENS (1802) 
But the Peace of Amiens turned out to be merely a brief 
and feverish pause in the world struggle ; and all modern in 
vestigators would seem to agree that a principal cause, not to 
say the principal cause, of its short duration was the continua 
tion of the commercial war after the close of the military war, 
which, we may remark in passing, is a significant experience 
for those who wish to form a picture of the future of Europe 
after the recent great trial of strength. Napoleon, on the 
whole, adhered to his old policy of prohibitions, acting under 
the pressure of the French industrialists, who, according to 
Mollien, had never been as bent on protection as then. Con 
fiscations continued under the old prohibitory laws of the 
Revolution ; and these tendencies were the more unwelcome 
to Great Britain because Napoleon, during the short period of 
peace, extended or maintained his power over great non 
French regions, including Holland, Switzerland, and Piedmont. 
The efforts made by Great Britain to bring about a renewal 
of the Eden Treaty were doomed beforehand to fail, since 
nothing was further from Napoleon’s thoughts. In 1806, when 
peace with Great Britain was again under discussion, he is 
said to have declared in the Conseil d’Etat that within forty 
eight hours after its conclusion he intended ‘ to proscribe foreign 
goods and promulgate a French navigation act which should 
close the ports for all non-French vessels. . . . Even coal and 
English milords would be compelled to land under the French 
flag.’ 
As regards the question of the influence of Rench policy 
on the economic position of Great Britain during the peace 
interval, the idea has pread, on the great authority of 
Dr. Rose, that the peace meant a change for the worse ; but 
this, as far as one can judge, is a mistake. During the year 
80 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
1809 the export figures show a rise on all points, especially 
for the value of domestic goods and for the re-exports of foreign 
and colonial goods, which rose by 15 and 23 per cent., respec 
tively, as compared with the year before ; and at the same 
time a lively, though somewhat speculative, trade with North 
and South America began. But in 1803 a great relapse occurred 
all along the line, the figures for which fall not only below 
those for 180.2, .but also below those for the last years of the 
w e ; and it is conceivable that one might have seen in this 
an effect of the French restrictions and the increased possi 
bilit.y of competition from other countries, which in certain 
quarters had been expected to be a consequence of the restored 
freedom of the seas.1 
In any case the result of the politico-economic strain 
as of various purely political matters which have nothing to 
do with our problem-was the outbreak of war as early as 
May 1803 ; the trial of strength between Great Britain and 
France was now to proceed without interruption until Napoleon's 
fall, and in its course to give rise to the most unlimited develop 
ment of the ideas which we have previously traced.2 
1 The value of British exports in the years 1801-3 is shown by the following 
figures taken from Porter, The Progress of the Nation, p. 356. 
~ _ _ _ _ 
United Kingdom 1 Droduce and manufacture I colonial merchandise Foreign and 
Year 1 Real values I Official values Official values I 
1801 