

60 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
This representation of ‘ perfidious Albion ’ as a colossus 
with feet of clay is of frequent occurrence, whether it signifies 
merely what people wished or what they actually believed, or 
what is most likely-something betwixt and between. In 
Napoleon, too, it was based on a general economic conception, 
namely, that a country’s trade is of slight value in comparison 
with its industry and agriculture ; and this could not fail to 
react on his conception of the strength of the foremost com 
mercial nation. The well-known French chemist, Jean Antoine 
Chaptal, Minister of the Interior under the Consulate, and 
afterwards closely connected with the industrial policy of the 
Empire, describes in his memoirs Napoleon’s dislike of mer 
chants, who only exchanged goods, he said, while manufacturers 
produced them, and who with a turnover of a million gave 
employment to only two or three assistants, while manufac 
turers with the same turnover supported five or six hundred 
families, And that Chaptal is here correctly reporting Napo 
leon’s conception-which, in that case, would not greatly 
diverge from that which is still popular-seems all the more 
probable when one considers the perfect coolness with which 
the Emperor from the very first prophesied that the Continental 
System would ruin, under his direct or indirect rule, such 
commercial towns as Lyons, Amsterdam, and Rotterdam.] 
BRITISH NATIONAL DEBT 
But the belief in the instability of the position of Great 
Britain arose not only from general economic conceptions of 
this nature, but also from numerous actual conditions and 
developments which could not but denote the beginnings of 
economic decay. It cannot be sufficiently emphasized how long 
people had believed they had seen signs of this. One of the 
most important of these signs was the rapid increase in the 
British national debt during the time with which we.are con 
cerned-especially when considered in the light of the generally 
Chap&& Hes eouve?oirs Sur Napozdon (Paris, 1893, but written shortly after 
1815), pp. 274-9 ; Lettres inkGtes de Nupolion ler (Leoestre ed., Paris, 189?), 
no. 134. 

ECONOMIC POSITION OF GREAT BRITAIN 61 current notion that such a development must inevitably lead to national bankruptcy. The economic literature of England herself during the eighteenth century is full of Kassandra-like prophecies as to the impending ruin of the state owing to the augmentation of its liabilities. In fact, Lord Macaulay says in a well-known passage that, with the exception of Burke, no author since the founding of the English debt had perceived the security which the general economic development of the country provided against these dangers. Especially interesting in this connexion is Adam Smith’s gloomy representation of the state of affairs, the view of the European national debts presented in the Wealth of Notiom being throughout remarkably pessimistic for so optimistic a writer. In Adam Smith’s opinion, the funded debts ‘ will in the long run probably ruin all the great nations of Europe ’, as they had already steadily weakened them. And even though he believes that England, owing to her better system of taxation, is in a better position than most countries to stand the strain, he warns his readers ‘ not even to be too confident that she could support, without great distress, a burden a little greater than what has already been laid upon her ’. When this was written, in 1775, the funded British debt was $124,000,000, and the war with the American colonies, which intervened between the first and third editions of the Wealth of Nutions, served nearly to double that amount. When Great Britain plunged into the revolutionary wars at the beginning of 1793, in fact, her national debt amounted to ~230,000,000. Afterwards the war was financed to such an extent by means of loans that the funded debt for Great Britain and Ireland at the time of the Peace of Amiens, in 1808, had risen.to what was, for the conditions of that time, the truly astounding sum of ~50’7,000,000-a fpre the significance of which is perhaps best made clear when one reflects that the funded debt of England at the outbreak of the World War in 1914 amounted to no more than ~587,000,000. Under these circumstances Adam Smith’s warning could not fail to make an impression ; and indeed we find it employed as a main weapon against Great Britain in