

82 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
between the Elbe and the Ems was annulled on September 25, 
1806. Of course, these wobbling measures could not fail to 
hit the towns of North Germany especially very hard ; and 
their paper-blockade nature kept alive the unpopularity of 
British poli.cy in naval warfare.l 
Napoleon, on his part, had caused many thousands of 
Englishmen travelling in France to be arrested immediately 
after the outbreak of war, and shortly afterwards had extended 
this method of belligerency to Holland as well ; and he now 
proceeded to more comprehensive measures in two different 
directions. The first WBS the exclusion of England from all 
connexion with the mainland, especially with the North Sea 
coast. For this purpose he occupied Hanover, which, as is 
well known, belonged to the British royal house, and from 
there he extended his repressive measures to the great centres 
of maritime trade, Hamburg and Bremen. His general, Mortier, 
received orders to seize all British ships, goods, and sailors 
that were to be found there. And although this measure 
failed, the French largely made themselves masters of British 
trade to these points, both in general by the occupation of 
Hanover, and in particular by the seizure of the little Hamburg 
district of Ritzebuttel, which included its outport, Cuxhaven, 
at the mouth of the Elbe. The first of the above-mentioned 
British declarations of blockade formed the answer to this ; 
and the independence of the Hanse Towns was consequently 
subjected to new blows from both antagonists. In October 
1804, for instance, Napoleon simply kidnapped the British 
envoy from Hamburg, that is to say, from neutral soil. More 
over, in the beginning of 1804 a double action was taken against 
the influx of British goods farther south. The imports through 
Emden, in Prussian East Friesland, up the Ems to the great 
market of Frankfurt-am-Main were barred by the occupation of 
the town of Meppen on the Ems ; and at the same time large 
quantities of British goods were confiscated in the vassal state 
of Holland. In May 1805, Napoleon resolved to intervene 
G. F. & C. Martens, Nouveau recueil de traitks (Gottingen, 1817), vol. I, pp. 
433-9; Smart, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 70-1 ; Stephen, War in Dia3uiac, p. 31. 

COMMERCIAL WAR BEFORE BERLIN DECREE 83 against British goods in Holland by causing French patrols to confiscate them along the Dutch side of the frontier. This led the Dutch legislature, in order to prevent such high-handed procedure in the future, to pass a law prohibiting all intercourse with Great Britain, to order the confiscation of all vessels that came from there, to prohibit the importation of British goods, and also to declare certain kinds of goods to be ipso facto British, and finally to lay down a line of demarption within ,.y which the storing of goods was forbidden. These measures undeniably in many respects presage the events of the follow ing year. Nevertheless, in the matter of the Continental blockade all these things bore the mark of mere skirmishes. Meanwhile, however, Napoleen had also taken up a second line, which demands greater attention, because this side of his policy was pursued to its final goal during the first years after the out break of war. The second line was confined, in the main, within the limits of French jurisdiction ; and its object was, to close the French market to British industrial products, and at times to colonial goods of British origin,