

See p. 62. (Dec. 19, 1813), Bcc.

2 Correa.pondam, nos. 9,929 (Mar. 5, 1806), 14,413 (Oct. 25, 1808), 21,020 1588.43 B

66 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM

EXPORTS AND WAR ON THE CONTINENT

In this respect, too, Kersaint’s previously cited speech of 
January 1, 1793, is significant, as was pointed out as far back 
as 1850 by the first historian of the Continental System, Kiessel 
bach, and has been emphasized in our own time by the English 
historian, Dr. J. Holland Rose. ‘ The credit of England ’, says 
Kersaint, ‘rests on fictitious riches. The real riches of that 
people are scattered everywhere and essentially mobile. On 
her own soil the national wealth of England is to be found almost 
exclusively in her Bank, and the whole of that structure is 
supported by the prodigious activity of her maritime com 
merce.’ With such an idea it was evidently easy to arrive at 
the thought of ruining the whole credit system of England by 
an attack on her trade. The same line of thought-the depen 
dence of the credit system on foreign trade-is followed more 
completely in several papers of French authorship referred to 
by Kiesselbach and made the subject of an interesting in 
vestigation by Miss Cunningham. The writer was a Chevalier 
De Guer (or Deguer), who had gone to England as a Royalist 
hnign? and had there made a special study of the British system 
of finance. He is of especial interest in this connexion, for the 
reason that Napoleon, in a letter of 1803, expresses great 
satisfaction with his work, and desires from him a more detailed 
account of the position of British finances. On the whole, he 
regarded that system as well worthy of imitation, even as 
regards the circulation of bank-notes, but at the same time he 
believed that it had certain weak points. He brought out his 
results, for the enlightenment of his countrymen, especially in 
a paper entitled Essai sur le crddit commercial comme mqen de 
circulation, which was originally printed in Hamburg in 1801, 
but was afterwards reprinted in France, and also in other 
articles, one of which Napoleon caused to be inserted in his 
official organ, Le Moniteur, for 1803. 
The discussions in question were connected especially with 
the questions of the gold reserve of the Bank of England and the 
British rates of exchange ; and these connexions are of great 
ECONOMIC POSITION OF GREAT BRITAIN 67 
interest here. As every one knows, Great Britain supported 
the struggle of the Continental powers against France by means 
+ of subsidies of varying magnitude. From the beginning of the 
revolutionary wars down to the Peace of Amiens in 1802, the 
sum total of these subsidies, according to the official statement, 
amounted to about $14,300,000, including one loan of $4,600,000 
to the Roman Emperor in 1’795. The total amount of extra 
ordinary payments on the Continent, however, was much larger 
than that, exceeding ~41,000,000 for the three years 1194-6 
alone. The ability of Great Britain to continue these subsidies 
during the later phase of the Napoleonic wars, supplemented 
by her ability to maintain her own troops on the mainland, was 
manifestly one of the points in the economic position of Great 
Britain which, politically speaking, was bound to take a fore 
most place in the eyes of the French statesmen. It was impor 
tant, therefore, to see how strong the connexion of those sub 
sidies was with the British system of credit.l 
In this respect, also, Adam Smith’s representation of the 
case is highly illuminative. In his famous criticism of the mer 
cantile system as he conceived it, he is led to discuss the 
question-which is also well known in connexion with the 
recent war-as to the importance of gold reserves for carrying 
on war and consequently also as to their necessity for British 
payments on the Continent. He thus gets an opportunity to 
show that the expenses of war are defrayed ‘ not with gold and 
silver, but with consumable goods ’, and that these goods may 
be acquired by exporting from the belligerent country some 
Rose, Nupoleon and British Commerce (1893), reprinted in Napoleonic &diu 
(London, 1904), p. 167; also in his chapter on ‘The Continental System ’ in Th 
Cambridge Modern History (Cambridge, 1906), vol. IX, p. 363 ; Corresdnce, 
no. 6,611 ; Kieaselbach, op. cit., oh. III; Miss Cunningham, op. cit., oh. IV; Porter, 
The Pr~ress of the Nation (new ed., London, 1851), sec. IV, oh. IV, p. 507 (on the 
basis of a return to the British Parliament in 1815) ; Tooke, A Hktury of Prices 
Jrom 1793 to 1837 (London, 1838), vol. I, pp. 208-9 ; Hawtrey, The Bank Re&ri&n 
of 1797 in the Economic Journal (1918), vol. XWI, pp. 52 et seq., rept. in Currency 
and Credit (London, 1919). oh. XVI. The figures of Mr. Hawtrey (p. 56) a p e with 
those of Tooke, if they are taken to include the loan to the Emperor, though they are 
said to exclude it. The total of Tooke (€42,174,556) is wrong by one million, aocord 
ing to his own figures. I hare followed him with the necessary correction, not having 
had access to the Purlialnentary Paper from which he secured his data. 
F2 
68 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
part either of ' its accumulated gold and silver ', . or of ' the 
annual produce of its manufactures ', or of ' its annual rude 
produce '. After a clear discussion of the first of these alterna 
tives, he lays it down that ' the enormous expense of the late 
war (Seven Years War) must have been chiefly defrayed, not 
by the exportation of gold and silver, but by that of British 
commodities of some kind or other ' ; and he makes the weighty 
observation that, as a consequence of this, the exports of Great 
Britain had been unusually great during the war, without 
yielding any corresponding imports in return. But in so far as 
payment for the continental war was effected by means of 
precious metals, ' the money of the great mercantile republic,' 
those metals must also have been purchased with British 
export goods, since neither the accumulated bullion reserves 
nor the annual production of gold and silver was anything like 
sufficient to cover the huge sums in question. In general, there 
fore, he concludes that it is the exports of England that enable 
her to wage war on the Continent, and chiefly the exports of finer 
and more fully manufactured industrial articles, which are able 
to bear high transportation charges. ' A country whose industry 
produces a great annual surplus of such manufactures, which 
are usually exported to foreign countries, may carry on for 
many years a very expensive foreign war, without exporting 
any considerable quantity of gold and silver, or even having any 
such quantity to export.' Adam Smith also describes how this 
works out in practice. The government arranges with a mer 
chant to remit the necessary supplies to the theatre of war, and 
the merchant, in order to establish a claim there, sends out 
goods either to that country or to another country where he 
can buy a draft on the f0rmer.l 
To what extent this in itself absolutely conclusive state 
ment-the capacity of which to throw light on the Continental 
System has not, to my knowledge, been observed-rightly leads 
to the conclusion that the exports of Great Britain were a 
necessary pre-condition for her capacity to carry on a war 
against France on the mainland, is a question which must be 
1 Adam Smith, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 407-11. 
ECONOMIC POSITION OF GREAT BRITAIN 69 
entirely reserved for later discussi0n.l The only thing it is 
. necessary to point out here is- how very obvious such a conse 
quence must have seemed. In De Guer’s writings, as sum 
marized by Miss Cunningham, that conclusion is reached without 
reference to Adam Smith, it is true, perhaps without his being 
known and, in any case, .without any of his lucidity of thought. 
De Guer pbints out that, when war was waged in Westphalia or 
the Netherlands a hundred years earlier, as in Marlborough’s 
ti.me, England had no difficulty either in providing her own 
troops with what they required or in paying subsidies, for she 
could send goods there and thereby obtain balances to her credit 
on the spot. But as the Belgian ports had now been closed, 
and the theatre of war had also been moved to the Upper Rhine 
and the Danube, great credit difficulties had arisen in the paying 
of subsidies. Thus De Guer’s way of putting things might 
inspire still greater hopes than that‘of Adam Smith as to the 
difficulty of maintaining the continental war if the exports of 
the subsidizing power were cut off from the Continent. Indeed, 
the French Ziittdmteur seems to have simplified the problem to 
the extent of having left out ofaccount what is called ‘ triangular 
trade ’, which means that the exports to one country are used 
in order to buy drafts on, Le., to pay debts to, another country. 
With such a conception the mere closing of the Continent might 
seem sufficient for the purpose, even if British trade as a whole 
were left undisturbed. 
In his practical conclusions De Guer approaches the view 
that Adam Smith undertook to controvert. When England 
cannot pay subsidies by exporting goods abroad, the conse 
quences, in De Guer’s opinion, will be one or the other of the 
following : either she must export gold ; and with the great 
circulation of paper currency within the country, as contrasted 
with the small increase of its supplies of metallic currency, this 
exposes all the note-issuing banks to the danger of collapse ; 
or, on the other hand, she must neglect to export precious 
metals ; and as she has not sufficiently large balances to her 
credit on the Continent to correspond with her payment of 
See pt. IV, ch. IV. 
70 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
subsidies, the rates of exchange will then go against her to such 
an extent as to be ruinous to her trade. As usual, external 
phenomena, more or less correctly conceived, here affected the 
train of thought. There had been a heavy decline in the metallic 
reserves of the Bank of England (almost down to ;Ii1,000,000) 
which had led to its suspending payments in February 1797 ; 
and the attention excited by this event seems to have over 
shadowed the fact that the reserves only the next year rose 
again to ;Ii6,500,000, or even $7,000,000, and that during the 
following years, despite considerable fluctuations, they never 
again went down to the point where they were at the time of 
the suspension of payments. The British rates of exchange, 
especially on Hamburg, had fluctuated violently, and had been 
particularly ' unfavourable ' to England, as has already been 
partially hinted,l in the years 1794 and 1800-1801 ; and this was 
popularly connected with the great payments on the Continent, 
which undoubtedly coincided to some extent in time with these 
phenomena.2 De Guer's view was consequently very easily 
explained ; to what extent it was correct, is a question which 
does not appertain to this stage of our inquiry. 
What does concern us here, on the other hand, is the excel 
lent basis for an attack on British exports created by such 
a theory. On the one hand, the conception of the rates of 
exchange and the supplies of precious metals, as effects of the 
balance of payment abroad, and, on the other hand, the con 
ception of the general solvency of Great Britain as dependent 
on the bullion reserves of the banks, had carried people forward 
(or back) to a justification of the old mercantilist trade policy 
on a much stronger basis than before. For the commercial policy 
of the mercantile system also built on the doctrine of the 
balance of trade, on the 'danger of ' insufficient weight in the 
scales of trade '; but in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, 
unlike the Napoleonic period, there had been no system of 
note circulation with a metallic covering which might be 
assumed to be ruined by an unfavourable balance of payments. 
1 see p. 42. 
