

For the following account reference may be made, not only to the worh

2-

previously cited, viz., those by Mahan, Roloff, Levasseur, Holm, Stephen (the I

BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES 101 COLONIAL CARRYING TRADE The central point in the colonial trade at this time was formed by the West Indies, especially in their capacity as sugar producers ; and among these the French and Spanish islands, especially Haiti and Cuba, were distinctly superior to the British islands, Jamaica, and the rest. The trade to the West Indian possessions of Napoleon and his Spanish ally, therefore, was regarded almost as the great prize of maritime commerce, which was sought after by the neutrals with the eager support of the European mother countries so long as they were powerless on the sea, while Great Britain wished to make ‘use of her power to win this prize for herself. It is true that the foremost colony of all, Haiti, or, more correctly, its western or French third, St. Domingue, had suffered immensely from the many negro insurrections ever since the first years of the revolutionary wars ; but sufficient was left to arouse the desire for gain. Furthermore, the remaining French colonies Guadeloupe and Martinique in the West Indies, Guiana on the South American continent, Isle-de-France (now known as Mauritius) and Rkunion and Senegal in Africa-were somewhat less damaged by the course of events during the war, while the Spanish possessions seem, on the evidence of outside witnesses, not to have suffered seriously. The country which lay handy to seize the trade with all these territories-which trade was jealously guarded in peace time-was clearly the United States. The latter had just begun its independent political existence and was seeking ways which might lead them away from the exclusive economic connexion with Great Britain that had been created and maintained during the colonial period. In this way there arose a triangular trade which was highly impor tant for the Atlantic states of the American Union. Vessels quotation on p. 107 comes from his pp. 81-2), Johnson (from whom is taken the table on p. 103), and Martens, as well as to the Statutes at Large of the United KZ~dom and Hansard‘s Parliamentary Debates, but also to J. B. McMaster’s chapter in the Cambridge Yodern History (Cambridge, 1903), vol. M, pp. 323 et sq., and Charming, The Jeffersonian 8ystm, 1801-1812, in The American Nation: A History (New York and London, 1906), vol. XI, chs. 13-15. The quotation from McMeeter on p. 104 is taken from his History of the People of the United States, vol. m, p. 225 (ap. Johnson, op. cit., vol. II, p. 28).

t f

10% ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM

proceeded with corn and timber to the French and Spanish West 
Indies, took on colonial goods there, especially sugar and coffee, 
which they conveyed to the European Continent, after which 
they returned, principally in ballast, but partly also with 
European industrial products. The balance of assets which 
the American merchants thus obtained on the Continent was 
used to liquidate the country's balance of liabilities to Great 
Britain for its textiles and iron goods, which continued to 
dominate the American market ; but a considerable part of it 
was also re-exported to the rest of America, chiefly the French 
and Spanish West Indies themselves. 
The whole of this trade was in conflict with the ' rule of 
1756 ',I and, therefore, could not be tolerated in principle by 
Great Britain. But as the rule was interpreted during the 
revolutionary wars proper by the great legal authority, the 
British Judge of Admiralty, Sir William Scott, afterwards 
Lord Stowell-still to-day the great name in the sphere of the 
law of war at sea-it offered various possibilities to the neutrals, 
and particularly to Americans. Especially in the famous case 
of the iTmmanueZ (1799) he elaborated the idea, on the one hand, 
that the neutrals could make no claim whatever to trade with 
enemy colonies during war, because those colonies, owing to 
the Old Colonial System, had been as inaccessible to them 
before the war as if they had been situated in the moon, and 
had been thrown open to trade only through the British naval 
victories. But, on the other hand, he also emphasized the fact 
that these prohibitions on trade in the products of enemy 
colonies held good only so long as those products had not 
formed part of a neutral country's stock of goods ; and this he 
developed further in the case of the Polly in the following year, 
to the effect that the evidence of such a ' neutralization ' should 
consist in the unloading of the goods in a neutral port and there 
passing them through the customs. Such a demand for what 
was called a ' broken voyage ' was not difficult to fulfil, so much 
the less because the geographical position of the West Indies 
made it possible, with very little loss of time, for a vessel to put 
in at an American mainland port, especially Charleston, South 
See p. 36. 