

"HE RERLIN DECREE , 89 in the heart and to attack her alliances at the same time as her continental intrigues. But the idea that peace with the different powers would have as a necessary pre-condition the closing of all the ports of the mainland to the British was evidently very widespread, as can be seen from a contemporary utterance of French industrialists. And, indeed, even before the issue of the decree we find Napoleon, both in one of his army bulletins (October $3) and in a letter to his brother Joseph (November 16), speaking of the continental blockade as a matter of course. At the same time as this last letter, another letter was addressed to the commander of North Germany, Marshal Mortier, instruct ing him to close the Elbe ' hermetically ', to confiscate all English goods, and even to arrest the English and Russian consuls at Hamburg.1 In every respect, therefore, the Berlin decree stands out as a culmination of earlier thoughts and measures, dthough, despite all this, it had the effect of a bomb, thanks to Napoleon's masterly capacity as a stage manager.

PREAMBLE 
Like most of the measures of both parties, the Berlin decree 
purported to be a measure of reprisal rendered necessary by 
numerous aggressions of the adversary ; but its regulations 
were nevertheless solemnly proclaimed as embodying ' the 
fundamental principles of the Empire ', until England disavowed 
her false pretensions. In content the regulations, as is usual 
in French ordinances, are very clear, at least at first sight, 
although they were gradually to prove, intentionally or un 
intentionally, rather ambiguous. The preamble states : (1) that 
England does not acknowledge international law ; (2) that she 
treats all enemy subjects as enemies (this is directed against 
her legislation against alien enemies); (3) that she extends 
the right of capture to merchant vessels and merchandise 
and private property; (4) that she extends the blockade to 

bel, op. cit., vol. W, pp. 55, 104, 114; memorial printed in Tarle, 'Konti. neMmja blokada (Mosoow, 1913), vol. I, p. 706; Correswm, nos. 11,064, 11,271, 11,267, 11,283 (Berlin decree).

90 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM unfortified places (a reproach which forms a reminiscence of the siege character of a blockade) and to places where she has not a single ship of war ; (5) that she uses the right of blockade with no other object than that of hampering intercourse between peoples and building up her own trade and industry on the ruin6 of the trade and industry of the Continent; (6) that trade ih English goods involves complicity in her plans ; (7) that her proceedings have benefited her at the expense of everybody else ; (8) and, consequently, that retaliation is justifiable. It is further stated, therefore, that the Emperor intends to use her methods against her, and accordingly that the regulations will remain permanently in force until England has acknowledged that the law of war is the same by land and by sea and cannot be extended to private property and unarmed individuals, and that blockade shall be restricted to fortified places guarded by sufficient forces.