

I \ \

THE BERLIN DECREE 97 . troops likewise occupied Breaen and the W2er down to its mouth. Meanwhile, L&k had been taken by force as early as November 6, after Blucher had thrown himself into the town with his Prussian troops. Acting in accordance with his in structions, Mortier immediately ordered in Hamburg a state ment to be made out of all money and goods arising from trade connexions with England. And in a magniloquent diplomatic note to the, Senate of Hamburg, Napoleon’s notorious ex secretary and then minister there, Bourrienne, a few days later (November 24) gave as a motive of the measure the Emperor’s feeling of obligation ‘ to seek to safeguard the Continent against themisfortunes withwhich it is threatened’throughthemachina tions of England, inasmuch as a large number of the inhabitants of Hamburg were notoriously devoted to England ; and at the same time he emphasized the regulations of the Berlin decree. By an ordinance of December 2, and by letter after letter, Napoleon laid down, modified and intensified the customs cordon which was to be created along the entire North Sea coast and the river Elbe as far as Travemunde by a large military force operating in conjunction with the customs staff.l

Vogel, op. cit., pp. 4 et seq. ; Tarle, Deutsch-franzdsische Wirtschaftsbeziahungen zur napoleonischen Zeit, in Schmollers Jahrbuch fur Gesetzgebung (1914), vol. xxxvm,

p. 679; Schafer, Bremen und die Kontinentalsperre, in Hansische Geschichtsbkitter (1914), vol. xx, p. 414 et seq. ; Levasseur, Histoire du commerce de la France, v01. 11, I p. 19; Nshan, ZnjZuence of Sea Power, &c., vol. II, p. 251 ; Johnson and others, b History of the Domestic and Foreign Commerce, &e., vol. 11, pp. 20 et seq,

1669.43 H

CHAPTER I11

BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES AND FRENCH RETORT

POSSIBLE LINES OF BRITISH POLICY

THE immediate question, after the bomb which Napoleon 
had exploded, was what attitude Great Britain would assume 
toward the new blow directed against the very foundation of 
her trade and industry. We are confronted here with one of the 
points in the history of the Continental System which both at 
that time and later have been most often misunderstood. 
Napoleon’s intention was to strangle British trade with the 
Continent. The most natural counterblow of Great Britain 
in resisting this attempt at strangulation, and one in strict 
accord with the conceptions of those times, was to maintain the 
connexion with the Continent in every conceivable way. Nor 
is there any doubt that this wa in reality the main line of action 
pursued by her, that is to say, chiefly by the British merchants 
and manufacturers. Consequently, the main economic conflict 
lay between the French measures of self-blockade and the 
British endeavours to break through that blockade. But the 
efforts of the British public authorities along this positive line, 
which was in reality the decisive one, were very much restricted 
by natural causes, over and above the extremely important 
fundamental condition created by the supremacy of the British 
fleet at sea. And with the usual inclination of mankind in the 
sphere of economics to attach too great importance to state’ 
measures and very little importance to the work of economic 
machinery itself, the main stress has been laid on obvious but 
in reality subordinate matters. It is by no means intended to. 
follow the same cour6e in this book ; but what, from a deeper 
point of view, were the decisive matters on the British side do 
not belong-for reasons at which we have just hinted-to the 
external course of the Continental System and must therefore 
be left over for a later treatment. 
It is true that one might regard one British measure as 
a positive counterblow, that is, an effort to compel the enemy, t 