

pp. 12930.

THE BERLIN DECREE EXECUTION

95

Napoleon immediately proceeded to carry the Berlin decree 
into execution over as large a part of the Continent as possible. 
With significant openness one article incorporated in the decree 
itself (Article 10) instructed the French foreign- minister to 
communicate it to the governments of Spain, Naples, Holland, 
and Etruria-all vassal states-and to the other allies of France ; 
and a letter of the same day from the Emperor to Talleyrand 
prescribes practically the same course. But the decree was to 
have its first political effects in the Hanse Towns, where, as we 
know, the foundation had been laid long beforehand, and where 
what were really executive measures had been ordered before 
the publication of the decree. 
The Hanse Towns, and especially Hamburg, were perhaps 
of all places in Europe the most decisive points for the success 
or failure of thecontinental System. During the last years of thir 
ancien riggime the flourishing French trade in goods from the 
French West Indies hhd chiefly gone to the Hanse Towns, where 
the French colonial goods had largely squeezed out their com 
petitors, so’that the Hanse Towns during these years absolutely 
came first among all EurTean countries in the export trade of 
France. But the revolutionary wars put a sudden stop to all 
this, and that, too, not only for France, but also for Holland, 
which was occupied by the French. This was undoubtedly due 
in part to the fact that the policy of the Directory against the 
neutrals prevented them fro& ma.intaining the trade relations 
now that France could no longer maintain them herself. It was 
now that Great Britain came to the fore as by far the most 
important purveyor of colonial goods and industrial products 
to the Hanse Towns, and through them not only to the whole 
of Germany, but also to great parts of the rest of the Continent. 
At the same time Great Britain, on her part, had good use for 
the corn and other agricultural produce which were foremost 
among North German exports through Bremen. It is true that 
the statistics of the period must be used with great caution, 
and the figures from different sources, even official ones, are 

96 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
often irreconcilable. In this case, however, the general tendency 
is unmistakable, and some data may therefore be given. In 
1789 only 49 vessels of 7,250 tons in all went to England from \ Hamburg and Bremen ; but in 1800 there were 500 vessels '\ 
of 72,900 tons in all. That is to say, the traffic increased ten 
times over. The value of British exports there is said to have 
risen between 1792 and 1800 from $2,200,000 to $13,500,000 ; in i fact, the British minister at Hamburg stated in 1807 that during 
the twelve preceding years the exports of colonial produce, East 
India goods, and British manufactures to the Hanse Towns 
amounted to an average of $1O,OOO,OOO-a figure the significance 
of which is shown by the fact that the entire British exports in 
1807 were estimated at only a little more than $50,000,000. 
Alongside this trade with Great Britain, however, there 
arose in the 'nineties an extremely lively, sometimes highly 
speculative, commercial intercourse between the Hanse Towns 
and the United States, which during that period sold more 
goods to Germany than to the entire British Empire. So long 
as the trade could be carried on without any great amount of 
British interference, it must have been far more favourable for 
France and her allies than the British trade, inasmuch as the 
American trade consisted, on the one side, of the importation 
of the products of the French and Spanish West Indies, and, on 
the other, in the exportation of German industrial products, 
which even managed to compete successfully with British 
goods in the United States. But it was one of Napoleon's 
deeply-rooted ideas, and one which was soon to assume the 
solemn form of the decrees, that nearly all textile goods and 
some sorts of colonial goods were in reality English, howsoever 
they might be disguised, and that all goods of maritime trade 
were at least ' suspect '. Consequently, he felt that almost 
the entire maritime trade of the Hanse Towns was a vital 
English interest ; and this was certainly the case, at least to 
a large, if not to a predominant, extent. 
As early as November 19, 1806, two days before the issue 
of the Berlin decree, therefore, Marshal Mortier seized Hamburg 
without further ado ; and two days later (November 21) French 