

‘ / I i

BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES 99 by economic or other pressure, to revoke his self-blockade decree. In form, indeed, this is what was attempted, inasmuch as all measures on both sides were represented as acts of reprisal, that is to say, as being caused by the aggressions of the enemy and as being intended to lead him into better ways. In the English official language the declared object was ‘to restrain the violence of the enemy and to retort upon him the evils ofi his own injustice ’, as it was expressed in the Order in Council) of January 7, 1807. And undoubtedly these declarations were in many cases seriously meant. But if such pressure was to be exerted in the sphere of economics, it almost necessarily had to take the opposite form to penetrating into the continental market: it had to be an effectual (;.e., import-preventing) blockade of the Continent. And this, as we well know, was just what people would not think of doing, for it would have implied, as was indeed said in Parliament, ‘ that France had shut the door against our commerce and that we had bolted it.’ AI though this idea came up time and again, everything else contributed to put these positive counter-measures aside : Napoleon’s obstinacy, which held out small hopes of any change in his tactics ; the slight prospects of giving any appreciable strength to such pressure; and the direct disadvantages thereof for Great Britain’s own industrial life. As before, therefore, nothing more was possible than a mere gesture, which was contradicted by every detail of actual trade life, But by the side not only of attempting to break through the blockade, but also of placing obstacles in the way of imports with the object of bringing economic pressure to bear, there was a third, a negative line, namely, to try to injure the trade of France and her allies in the same way as Napoleon had sought to injure that of Great Britain. In other words, it was intended to cut off their exports, and in that way, according to the then prevailing view, to undermine the possibility of their’ economic prosperity, just as Napoleon intended to do as regards England. It was ‘ the policy of commercial rivalry ’, as distinct from the policy of retaliation, to use Canning’s expression. The expreesion WEE cited by Perceval in the House of Commons, Fob. 5, 1808. Haneard, vol. x, p. 328.

H2

100 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
This could not create direct pressure, such as would compel the 
annulling of a self-blockade ; but its purpose, here as on the 
opposite side, would have been a slow weakening of the enemy 
financially and economically. This third line, however, clearly 
led to measures quite different from those of the second line, 
that is to say, not to a cutting-off of the supplies of the Continent, 1 
but to an attack on the trade of the Continent, and especially 
on its exports. 
This third line was, of course, quite in accordance with the 
general tendency we know, and to that extent had possibilities 
quite different from those of the second line. But the actual 
conditions strictly limited this third line too, in a way even 
more strictly than the former, simply because England’s . 
fourteen-year-old supremacy on the sea had not left much of 
the independent maritime trade with the Continent ; and even 
during peace time, moreover, that trade had had nothing like the ~ 
same importance for the continental states as British trade had 
for Great Britain. With these three lines, however, the possi 
bilities of state counter-measures were all but exhausted. From 
this it follows that the political measures of Great Britain 
against Napoleon’s Continental decree were not, as a whole, of 
primary importance for the issue of the economic trial of 
strength. In order to make the connexion clear, however, we 
must enter into a somewhat detailed study of the nature of 
British policy ; and this is in every respect so peculiar and 
casts so much light on the driving forces, that such an in 
vestigation well repays itself, even apart from the international 
consequences of the British measures and reaction of these 
consequences on the economic conflict itself. 
What was possible and remained to be done by means of 
state measures on the part of Great Britain had chiefly to do 
with colonial trade, and especially with the part played by the 
neutrals in that trade. In order that this may be comprehen 
sible, however, it is neces,sary to turn back a little and glance at 
the connexion between the mainland of Europe and the colonies, 
especially the West Indies, during the war period down to 1807.l 