

COMMERCIAL WAR BEFORE BERLIN DECREE 85 further strengthened the protection of French industry. The foundation was laid in the Customs Tariff of 1805, which sub stantially raised the duties on colonial goods and cotton goods (PluviGse 17, year XIII-February 6, 1805), and the culmina tion was reached in two decrees issued in the early part of 1806 (February 2% and March 4). These decrees, which were incorporated in the great protectionist codification of the customs laws of the Empire on April 30 of the same year, developed tendencies in two directions. On the one side, there was an enormous increase in the customs rates on colonial goods, with substantially less distinction-in certain cases none at all-between French goods and foreign goods. This was manifestly connected with the fact that Napoleon, after the battle of Trafalgar, largely lost the power of communication with his colonies and had to take into account the fact that the colonial trade would fall more and more into the hands of the British. By way of example, we may observe that, while the customs rates on both brown sugar and coffee, as well as on cocoa, in 1802 and 1803 had been 50 and 75 francs per 100 kilograms for French and foreign goods, respectively, they now increased to 80 and 100 francs, respectively, for sugar, and to 75 and 100 francs, respectively, at first, and to 125 and 150 francs, respectively, later on, for coffee; for cocoa they increased at first to 95 and 120 francs and afterwards to 175 and ROO francs, respectively. Thus the rates amounted to three and a half times as much as they had been three years before. But all this was a trifle compared with the most striking rise of all in the customs rates, namely, on an industrial raw material of such fundamental importance as cotton, Having previously paid 1 to 3 francs per 100 kilograms, it was burdened in 1806 with a duty of no less than 60 francs, which, at a low estimate, was 10 per cent, of the value, though it is true that 50 francs were allowed as a drawback on exports of cotton manufactures. Most revolutionary of all seemed the simultaneous prohibition of the importation of cotton cloths, , calicoes, and muslins in February 1806 ; and the, prohibition was extended in April to certain other kinds of cotton cloth

86 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
as well. Yet at this time cotton had already become an absolute 
necessity.. In later years, at St. Helena, Napoleon made out that 
the Conseil d’lhzt had shrunk from this project, but that he had 
forced his will through by quoting the authority of Oberkampf, 
the leading man in the French textile industry. Naturally, 
Napoleon had no difficulty in getting his support of a policy 
that protected his own particular industry. At the same time 
the importation of cotton twist (JilBs pour m2ches) was 
forbidden ; the customs duty on yarn was raised, especially 
for the lower numbers, i. e., the coarser qualities ; and it was 
publicly stated that this article also would have been prohibited 
altogether if it had been thought possible to spin sufficiently 
high numbers in France.l 
Southern Europe came under the same r6gime as early as 
1806. In Italy, during that year, Napoleon pursued a policy 
which was intermediate between the earlier and the later French 
method. Thus in the Kingdom of Italy (North Italy), of which 
Napoleon was king, a number of articles, especially textile 
goods, were declared, in accordance with earlier examples, 
to be eo ipso British, and were consequently prohibited when 
they did not come from France-a declaration which in reality 
was directed principally against the continental rivals of France. 
On the other hand, in the Kingdom of Naples, which was ruled 
by Joseph Bonaparte, only really British goods were prohibited ; 
but in addition all British property was seized. In the same 
year Switzerland was suddenly obliged to pass a law which, 
under severe penalties, prohibited all importation of British 
manufactures except cotton yarn. This was an act of retribution 
because Swiss merchants, in the weeks just prior to the transfer 
of the principality of Neuchfitel to France, had been importing 
colonial goods and manufactures there and afterwards had been 
daring enough to complain when they were all confiscated by 
Napoleon. 
By these measures Napoleon felt that he had effectively 