

FRENCH CUSTOMS POLICY I As a link in his general colonial pdicy, which in the main, 4 1 Napoleon had already in 1802, during the year .of ,peace, fixed a a customs tariff on colonial goods in such a way that the duties i were 50 per cent. higher for almost all specified goods, and I 100 per cent. higher for unspecified goods, imported from

i scrupulously followed the lines of the Old Colonial System,

foreign colonies than on goods imported from French colonies (Thermidor 3, year X-July 22, 1802). In the new customs statute, which became a law immediately before the outbreak of war in 1803, this arrangement was kept practically unchanged; but a high duty (8 francs per kg.) was estabiished on .cotton goods, which, of course, was aimed at the British textile in dustry (FlorCal 8, year XI-April 28, 1803). The outbreak 3 of war immediately revived the old line of pure prohibition, 02

€+I! ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM well known from the days of the Convention and the Directory, against everything British (Messidor 1-June 20). Colonial goods and industrial products coming directly or indirectly from Great Britain or its colonies were to be confiscated, and neutral vessels had to furnish detailed French consular certificates showing that the goods were of innocent origin. Nevertheless, the characteristic concession was made that the master of a ship who, ‘through forgetfulness of forms or in consequence of change of destination ’, failed to provide himself with such certificates, might nevertheless be allowed to dis charge his cargo on condition that he took French goods of corresponding value in return freight-an idea which Napoleon was destined to develop strongly in his later policy. In the new customs statute of the following year, the principle of prohibition was retained. On the one side, it is true, it was made milder, among other things by conceding the right to import certain classes of goods in vessels clearing from ports that had no French commercial representative ; but, on the other hand, it was made more strict by a further prohibition with a very wide range, namely, that vessels which had cleared from, or had unnecessarily put in at, a British port should not be admitted to French ports (VentBse 22, year XII-March 13, 1804). This last regulation anticipated the great Berlin decree, which may be looked upon as the origin of the Continental System proper. Nevertheless one may safely assume that the whole of this system of differentiation, with special prohibitions against British goods and vessels coming from Great Britain, was calculated to prove as impracticable at this time as it had in the preceding decade. Napoleon, therefore, quietly fell back on a policy of general prohibition which was not directed specifically against Great Britain, but struck at all non-French goods alike. In reality those measures which affected industrial products were felt most severely, not by Great Britain, but by her continental competitors, especially those in the then Duchy of Berg, or what is now the Ruhr district east of the Rhine. This was not the intended result, it is true, but it