

106 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM continued to be French property, while the instructions of 1’798 allowed even direct intercourse with Europe provided a call was made at a European port belonging to Great Britain or the home country of the vessel. The instructions of 1803 introduced a certain modification of this, in that, curiously enough, a British port is no longer approved but only a port in the vessel’s home country ; and it is further laid down that the gopds must belong to a citizen of the same country. Especially during the first years after the new outbreak of war in 1803 the treatment of the neutrals, both Americans and Danes, was unusually mild and their shipping was little disturbed. The number of captured vessels incorporated with the British merchant fleet was also smaller in the years 1803-6 than it was in the preceding or following years.l The ‘ neutralization ’ of enemy property resulting from the trade war itself, as well as from Sir William Scott’s exposition of the law, assumed enormous proportions ; and Stephen’s book is full of characteristic and well-documented examples of the extent to which the regulations were evaded. These evasions, the number of which was legion, aimed at showing both that the trip was really (bona $de) begun in a neutral (American) port and that the goods were neutral property. With the former object new ship’s papers were procured in an American port, sometimes, indeed, a new crew ; in fact, there were occasions when two vessels exchanged cargoes so that they might both truthfully say that the cargo had been taken aboard in a neutral port. Moreover, separate insurances were taken for each trip, and the’ import duty was paid in the fictitious manner previ ously indicated.2 With regard to the neutral ownership of the cargoes, the most grotesque situations arose. In this connexion an extract from Stephen’s account, which is supported by references to the different legal cases, is well worth quoting : 1 According to Porter (op. cit., p. 396), the number of ships captured and in corporated with the British mercantile fleet was as follows : Year Ships Year Ships 1 Year Ships Year Ships r i 1802 2,779 2,827 11-1804 1805 ~ 2,533 ,I :Nli 1 2,764 /1”~~~~ ~-1 3,903 1803 2,286 1 3,899 2,520 1806 4,023 2 See ante, p. 103. 3,222

BRITISH COUPlrTER-MEASURES 107

Merchants who, immediately prior to the last war, were scarcely known, even in the obscure seaport towns at which they resided, have suddenly started up as sole owners of great numbers of ships, and sole proprietors of rich cargoes, which it would have alarmed the wealthiest merchants of Europe to hazard at once on the chance of a market, even in peaceable times. A man who, at the breaking out of the war, was a petty shoemaker in a small town of East Friesland, had, at one time, a hundred and fifty vessels navigating as his property, under Prussian colours . , . The cargoes of no less than five East Indians, all composed of the rich exports of Batavia, together with three of the ships, were contemporary purchases, on speculation, of a single house at Providence in Rhode Island, and were all bound, as asserted, to that American port ; where, it is scarcely necessary to add, no demand for their cargoes existed. . . . Single ships have been found returning with bullion on board, to the value of from a hundred to a hundred and fifty t,housand Spanish dollars, besides valuable cargoes of other colonial exports. Yet even these daring adventurers have been eclipsed. One neutral house has boldly contracted for all the merchandize of the Dutch East India Company at Batavia, amounting in value to no less than one million seven hundred thousand pounds sterling.