

f 1

45 Geo. 111, cc. 34 & 57 ; 46 Geo. 111, c. 111. See ade, p. 81. 3 Mahan, InfEuence of Sea Power, &e., vol. II, pp. 269-70; alao, Sea Power in its Relations, &c., vol. I, p. 108.

BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES 109 
‘ rule of 1756 ’, even irrespective of the question whether any 
blockade had been ordered, and consequently it could not be 
regarded as annulled by the fact that the blockade had been 
made less strict on certain stretches. 
Both in Great Britain herself and also in America and on 
the Continent of Europe, indeed, these different British measures 
during the years 1805 and 1806, especially the new exposition 
of the law in the prize courts, were regarded as serious blows 
against the neutral carrying trade. But the A.merican trade 
statistics given above do not point to this. On the contrary, 
they show a higher figure for exports of colonial goods during 
1806 than during the year before or after; and the figures 
relating to captures do not show any considerable rise until the 
following year. It is possible, therefore, that in reality the 
application of the measures was such as Mahan has laid down. 
In any case: it may surely be considered clear that during 1806 
Great Britain did not get rid of the neutral trade of which she 
disapproved or put an end to the advantages which, from a 
British point of view, this trade afforded to the enemy part of 
the Continent. 
Then, at the close of the year, came Napoleon’s Continental 
decree. Owing to the enormous emphasis with which it was 
proclaimed, as well as to the measures by which it was followed, 
this gave a tangible occasion for the discussion of new measures 
chiefly against the neutrals. The ministry which came to power 
in Great Britain after Pitt’s death in January 1806, was under 
the leadership of Lord Grenville, who had for many years been 
Pitt’s foreign secretary and fellow worker ; and for the reason 
that it embraced many of the most gifted politicians in the 
country, it is known in history as the ‘ Ministry of All the 
Talents ’. The foreign secretary at the start was Fox, the most 
Francophile of all British statesmen, and, after his death in the 
middle of September, the future leader of the Whig Party, the 
then Lord Howick, but better known under his later title of 
Earl Grey. This government was not inclined toward forcible 
measures ; and the only British statesman after Pitt’s death 
See ante, p. 103. 

110 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM who was to some extent equal to Napoleon, but who did not belong to the Talents Ministry, namely, George Canning, some what later said disparagingly that the Grenville measures against the Berlin decree ' partook of all the bad qualities of 1 half-measures '.I

FIRST ORDER IN COUNCIL (JANUARY 7, 1807) ' 8 However, Lord Howick's governmental measure turned out to be the first step in the British counteraction which was to occupy the thoughts of the whole world during the following five years. Like its successors, it assumed the form of a measure 1 by the King in Council, without the co-operation of Parliament, and it was therefore, from the point of view of public law, an Order in Council. Hence, this term became afterwards in the popular mind almost a proper name for regulations of this kind. The first Order in Council was issued on January 7, 1807, or a month and a half after the Berlin decree.2 As a measure of reprisal against the Berlin decree and with the reference, previously q~oted,~ to the necessity of ' restraining the violence of the enemy and to retort upon him the evils of his own in justice ', trade between enemy ports was entirely forbidden, and also trade between other ports at which the Berlin decree prevented English ships from calling. The members of the Grenville government afterwards maintained that this was only an application of the ' rule of 1756 ', which included a prohibition of coasting trade along the territory of the enemy. But if that had been the case, there would have been no use of asserting an intention of reprisal ; and the opponents of the government e. g., Lord Eldon, the Lord Chancellor in the following Ministry also observed that the order went outside the alleged principle, in that it prohibited, for instance, trade between French and Spanish ports. Trade between the enemy mother country and