

Hansard, vol. x, pp. 482-3 ; vol. m, p. 774. 
The reader is here referred to the text of the Orders in Council in app. 1. 
See app. i, no. v. 

*

I2

116 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
trade in their products is prohibited. Every vessel trading to 
those countries shall be fair prize, as well as its cargo and all 
goods coming from there. 
But immediately following these draconic regulations are 
exceptions which entirely nullify the rule and make possible the 
very trade so rigorously prohibited. Out of alleged regard for 
the neutrals, in fact, itis declared that they shall still be allowed 
to provide themselves with colonial goods for their own con 
sumption and even to carry on ‘ such trade with His Majesty’s 
enemies as shall be carried on directly with the ports of His 
Majesty’s dominions or of his allies ’. And in this the true 
fundamental principle has found expression. Ignoring details, 
we may say that the real principal regulations, as distinct 
from the apparent ones, consists in permitting both direct trade 
between the home country of a neutral vessel and enemy 
colonies and also direct trade between the European British 
port and enemy ports. What is prohibited in the first place, 
therefore, is direct intercourse between the enemy colonies and 
their mother countries. But further, in the main, all direct 
intercourse between the enemy countries and other ports is 
prohibited, except when the ‘ other ports ’ are either European 
British ports or ports in the vessel’s own country. That is to 
say, intercourse is also prohibited between enemy ports and 
neutral ports elsewhere than in the home country of the neutral 
vessels. 
Thus the regulations left the intercourse of the neutrals, 
principally the Americans, with the enemy West Indian colonies 
so far undisturbed. But by preventing the American vessels 
from conveying the products of those colonies direct to any port 
on the European mainland, neutral or enemy, the Orders in 
Council practically cut them off from almost the whole trade 
with the enemy colonies, except in so far as they were willing 
to put in at a British port ; for the intercourse which was still 
allowed between the enemy colonies and the United States it elf 
was of no very great importance, the Union’s requirements of 
West Indian products being quite insignificant. Consequently, 
we can not deny the existence of a certain amount of consistency 

BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES 117 in these measures, despite their seeming aimlessness ; and this showed itself in a number of details. The principal thing in all respects was the obligatory call at a British port. The intention of this regulation was presum ably, above all, to raise the prices on the products of the enemy colonies and the enemy parts of the European mainland in all ports where they might compete with goods of Great Britain or her colonies.' For this purpose it was laid down that both goods of enemy destination and goods of enemy origin, as well as goods which had been loaded in an enemy port, should be discharged on the arrival of the vessel at a British port. The only exceptions were corn, flour, and other unmanufactured natural produce brought direct from the producing country, where there was no competition with British goods, and where it was thought possible, without inconvenience, to show a cer tain consideration for the exportation by the United States of their own products, as opposed to their e-exportation of colonial goods. The whole of this exception, however, furnishes very significant evidence of the long distance that Great Britain had travelled from the temporary plan of 1793 to starve out the Continent. When the goods were afterwards to be exported again, the majority of the foreign goods, but not the British colonial goods, nor the actual products of neutral countries just mentioned, were subjected to customs dues; and in complete accordance with the aim of the whole measure these duties attained a con siderable height : for instance, for coffee, 28s. per cwt. ; for brown sugar, '10s. ; and for white sugar, 14s. At the prices then current these rates would seem to have corresponded to at least 20 or 30 per cent, of the value.* What this meant for goods that had been brought under British control only by military pressure, appears from such a detail as the fact that a special provision in the most important 1 Cf., for instance, the utterances of Lord Bathurst, the president of the Board of Trade, and Lord Hawkeabury (afterwards Lord Liverpol), the home swretarg; in the House of Lords, Feb. 15, 1808 (Hansard, vol. x, pp. 471, 485). * The figures relating to prices wil be found in Tooke, A Histmy of Prk, $c., 701. II, pp. 398,414.