

(war) 1800 ~ I (peace) 1 8 G T Sugar (Ibs.) 1,122,000 35,000,000 82,000,000 ' 20,000,000 74,000,000

Coffee (lbs.) 1 2,137,000 1 62,000,000 47,000,000 ~ 10,000,000 1 48,000,000 It may also be of interest to form a more graphic picture of this trade than can be given by figures. A sketch by the American historian, Professor McMaster, gives a mere summary of the abundant data, based on proceedings in prize-court cases as found in Stephen's book to which we have so often had occasion to refer : The merchant flag of every belligerent, save England, disappeared from the sea. France and Holland absolutely ceased to trade under their flags. Spain for a while continued to transport her specie and her bullion in her own ships, protected by her men-of-war. But this, too, she soon gave up, and by 1806 the dollars of Mexico and the ingots of Peru were brought to her shores in American bottoms. It was under our (the American) flag that the gum t.rade was carried on with Senegal, that, the sugar trade was carried on with Cuba, that coffee was exported from Caracas, and hides and indigo from South America.' From Vera Cruz, from Cartagena, from La Plata, from the French colonies in the Antilles, from Cayenne, from Dutch Guiana, from the isles of Mauritius and RCunion, from Batavia and Manila, great fleets of American merchantmen sailed to the United States, there to neutralize the voyage and then go on to Europe. They filled the warehouses at Cadiz and Antwerp to overflowing. They glutted the markets of Emden, Lisbon, Hamburg and Copenhagen with the produce of the West Indies and the fabrics of the East, and, bringing back the products of the looms and forges of Germany to the new world, drove out the manufactures of Yorkshire, Manchester and Birmingham.

BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES 
It was not to be expected that the British would look upon 
this development with approval. It took from them the trade 
with the enemy colonies, conveyed the products of these 
colonies to the enemy mother countries or gave them profitable 
sales in neutral markets, and consequently subjected the goods 
of the British colonies to an unwelcome competition on the 
Continent and at the same time created a market in America 
for the industrial products of the Continent which competed 
with those of Great Britain herself. Moreover, the shipping 
of the neutrals was considered to cause an enviable activity in 
the enemy ports ; and, finally, it was considered to increase 
Napoleon’s military power by relieving him of the necessity of 
providing convoys, which would have been necessary if the 
connexions had been provided by the French mercantile marine, 
and also by freeing him from the cares of supplying his colonies. 
These last matters implied a situation which the British would 
certainly have deprecated for their own part and which was 
also anything but welcome to Xapoleon himself ; but the other 
aspects of the situation involved many things which were -+ 
bound to tempt Great Britain to interfere, 5 
However, the British measures against the colonial trade 
of the Americans were comparatively mild for several years 
after the draconic law of November 6, 1793, regarding the 
confiscation of all vessels carrying products of the French 
colonies or conveying supplies to them had been revoked 
within two months. The absence of consistently maintained 
blockade declarations against the enemy colonies is especially 
striking. The instructions of 1194, 1798, and 1803, which we 
have previously mentioned,l aimed mainly at preventing only 
direct intercourse between the enemy mother countries and their 
colonies, and also, in the case of that of 1798, at drawing the 
trade through British ports. Beyond that, they wished to 
tolerate trade only in ‘free goods ’, that is to say, goods which 
had passed into neutral hands. Thus the instructions of 1794 
forbade direct intercourse between the port of an enemy colony 
and a European port, as well as trade in products which 
See a&, pp. 45 and 81. 