

above 1 as the

a

' criticism third line of ' the January

of policy, namely,Jhgt 
regulations he , OM comes 
t m t he regards as two possible expedients for meeting the 
Berlin decree. The one would be ' to exclude certain necessary 
commerce ' from the territory of the enemy. But if this leads 
us to expect a plea for an effective blockade, we are immediately 
1 See ante, p. 99. 
BRITISH COUlT’I’ER-MEASURES 113 
disabused; for it refers to the importation of French and 
Spanish colonial goods into France, with the object of at least 
making them dearer and thm strengthening the competitive 
power of the British goods. The alternative expedient, and 
the one which was to acquire practical importance, consists in 
the previously treated ‘ third line ’, namely, to turn the measures 
of France against herself by the order ‘ that no goods should be 
carried to France except they first touched at a British port. 
They might be forced to be entered at the custom-house and 
a certain entry fee imposed, which would contribute to enhance 
the price and give a better sale in the foreign market to your 
own commodities,’ It is scarcely necessary to point out how 
faithfully the previously traced economic tendency of maritime 
blockade is here expressed, with sales on the enemy market as 
a self-evident aim. The second of these concrete proposals is 
somewhat influenced by the instructions of 1798, which in their 
turn stand in a certain connexion with the entrep6d or ‘ old 
colonial ’ system. 
Perceval’s contribution to the discussion became of great 
practical importance owing to the fact that some few weeks 
later, in March 1807, the Grenville ministry resigned and was 
succeeded by a government with the Duke of Portland as 
a figurehead prime minister, Canning as foreign secretary, and 
Perceval himself as chancellor of the exchequer. The minister 
of finance soon found occasion to take up afresh the question 
of measures against the Berlin decree, and that occasion arose 
in the West Indian interest, which to some extent had also lain. 
behind Stephen’s action. A West Indian petition which had 
been presented to the House of Commons as early as February 
had been referred to a select committee, whose report was 
ordered to be printed in August. The report strongly empha 
sized the American trade between the enemy colonies and 
Europe as the cause of the fall in the price of sugar, and this 
was stated to have gone so far that it no longer covered even 
the expenses of cultivation except on the largest estates in the 
British West Indies. In the debate on this report Perceval 
promised a prompt treatment of the question. We may regard 
1689.43 I 

114 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM as a first step toward the fulfilment of this promise an Order in Council which was issued only a few days afterwards (August 19), whereby vessels sailing under thc flags of Mecklenburg, Olden burg, Papenburg, or Kniphausen were declared lawful prize if they touched at an enemy port unless they were going from or coming to a British port. As the colours of these somewhat dubious North German principalities were commonly used as neutral flags in the more risky cases, this measure implies a fist application of the new principle to a part of the pretended neutral trade.l