

118 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM of the statutes had to concede to the owner of the goods the right to allow them to be destroyed in port without duty.1 But besides t.his there were also certain restrictions in the right to ’ re-export these goods at all, still without the slightest intention of cutting off the enemy’s supplies, although it often might seem so, but only in the interests of commercial rivalry. The greatest relaxations, therefore, curious as it may seem, were made in the permission to export to European ports, inasmuch as everything might go there, even enemy property (to be distinguished, of course, from commodities of enemy origin) ; this was otherwise excluded from all toleration by reason of the

British denial of the rule that ‘ free ships make free goods ’. The reason, of course, was that British statesmen, as usual, wished to force upon a reluctant enemy goods via England. All British and East Indian commodities and captured goods were allowed to go to enemy colonies ; and foreign goods imported to England might go there by a licence which would . always still furt-her increase their price ; while, finally, other places, chiefly, of course, the British colonies, might not, without special licence, receive six kinds of goods that played a special part in the colonial trade, namely, sugar, coffee, wine, brandy, snuff, and cotton.2 But there were two commodities concerning which there arose a very vehement struggle, namely, raw cotton and cinchona bark, usually called Jesuit’s bark. The former was naturally of the greatest importance in the continental industry that competed with the British, while the latter, as is well known, was a p2ce de TBsistance in the older pharmacopeia in all febrile maladies. After having originally thought of imposing an export duty on these goods too, the British government decided to prohibit their export. Here, at least, where an actual

1 48 Geo. III, c. 26, 8. 16 (the Principal ‘ Orders in Council Act ’). Cf. Lord Emkine in the How of Lords, Mar. 8, 1808 (Hansard, vol. x, pp. g6-7). 8 This seems to the writer to be the only possible interpretation of the most obaure of all the ordinances, namely, the Order in Council of Nov. 26, 1807 (printed as no. IX in app. I), which is clearly the one alluded to by Grenville in his utterrrsce previously cited (pp. 114-16), compared with the Order in Council of the same day (printed as no. x).

BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES 119 prohibition of export was created, one would expect to meet with an aim at the actual blockade of the Continent, which the opposition indeed often assumed, more or less bona &de, to be the real object of this measure. But, as a matter of fact, nothing was further from the thoughts of the government. Perceval, who in his capacity of chancellor of the exchequer introduced the bills on this subject, justified the prohibition on cinchona bark, it is true, by alleging that the greatest difficulties had already revealed t.hemselves on the Continent, especially in Napoleon’s armies, through the scarcity of medica ments, as was indeed shown by the fact that the price had increased sevenfold. But he went on immediately to say : ‘ The object of the prohibition in this instance was that it might ultimately be the means of introducing other articles into the Continent.’ For these reasons the laws themselves authorized licences from the prohibitions, as Perceval again emphasized, in order to prevail on the enemy to receive British goods, ‘ There would be no difficulty,’ he said, ‘in obtaining any quantity of this article, the moment the enemy took off his prohibition from the importation of other articles,’ 1 Thus the competition point of view was the deciding factor all along the line, But it remained to regulate the control by seeing that the vessels went as a matter of fact to the British ports ; and the regulations on this subject wereamong those that attracted the greatest attention, although they are not of equal interest in principle. The commanders of British war-ships and privateers were instructed, before the new regulations became known, to warn vessels on the way to enemy or other forbidden ports, and also to order them to make their way to specially named ports. Vessels on their way to an American port which was not in their own country were to go to Halifax in Nova Scotia (which was also used for similar purposes during the recent war) or to a West Indian free port ; vessels south of the Equator were to go to Ceylon, to St. Helena or the Cape of Good Hope ; and 1 House of Commons, Feb. 22 and 24, Mar. 16, 1808 (Haneard, vol x, pp. 695-8, 728, 1168) ; 48 Geo. 111, cc. 29, 33, 34.