

ORDERS IN COUNCIL (NOVEMBER 11-DECEMBER 18, 1807) 
The decisive step, however, was taken by three Orders in 
Council of November 11,1807, supplemented by one of Novem 
ber 18, five of November 25, and one of December 18 ; and to 
these there were afterwards added further new ones, so that in 
the end the number of them amounted to no less than twenty 
four. It is this system of ordinances, and especially the funda 
mental ordinance of November 11, that formed the foundation 
of British policy during the following period-in form, it is true, 
only until the spring of 1809, but in reality until the collapse of 
the Continental System. It is also these, and not the January 
ordinance, that are usually meant when reference is made to 
the Orders in Council. They were further supplemented in the 
spring of 1808 by no fewer than six less important statutes 
governing such points of the system as could not be put into 
execution without the consent of Parliament.2 
It is truly anything but easy to explain the purport of this 
far-reaching complex of regulations. The Orders in Council, in 
particular, are marvels of obscurity and rambling. We find the 
same matter scattered over several ordinances, which seemed 

1 Lord Brougham, Life and Times of, written by himeif (2d ed., London, 187l), vol. II, pp. 5, 7; Bpeeche-9 of (Edinburgh, 1838), vol. I, p. 404 ; Stephen, pp. 620 -66 ; vol. IX, pp. 85-101, 1152 -3 ; app. pp. lxxxi et seq. ; Porter, op. cit.,

war in Dieguiee, &C., pp. 38 et Sq., 110 et 8q., 163 et seq., 171 ; Hansard, VOl. Ym, 
p. 379. 
48 Cleo. 111, cc. 26, 28, 29, 33, 34 end 37. 

BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES ,115 absolutely to contradict one another, of the same day or with only a few days’ interval. This incomprehensibility not only holds good for the people of later generations, but also for the people of that time ; and the fogginess of the regulations was a standing butt for the jeers of the opposition. Thus, Lord Grenville declared his belief that the very persons who drafted them had scarcely understood their content; and he also alleged that four points in the same ordinance contained four contradictions, and that he was not a little proud of having been able to understand the connexion at 1ast.l The often confused and mutually conflicting explanations of the ministers did not, as a rule, help to clear matters ; and owing to the total lack of all special investigations, especially as to their connexion with general legislation regarding shipping and the colonies, certain points at the present time are not easy to interpretn2 But this does not apply to the general line of thought, which is quite clear ; and the pretended object of the measures can be distinguished without any considerable difficulty from their real objects. The fundamental idea is to be found practically in the germ as early as Perceval’s speech in February. Seldom, however, has the contrast between the policy officially proclaimed and the policy actually pursued stood out in a more striking way than in the chief of the three Orders in Council of November 11, the one which can properly be called @e ?2-3 After a declaration that the January ordinance had not attained its object, either of compelling the enemy to revoke his measure or of inducing the neutrals to take action to the same effect, this ordinance simply proceeds to copy the most important points of the Berlin decree, Thus not only all enemy countries with their colonies, but also all-places from which the British flag is excluded (this last point has nothing corresponding to it in the blockade declaration of the Berlin decree), are declared to be subject to the same rule as if they were really blockaded in the strictest manner ; and, further, all