

2 All these Orders in Council of 1807 are printed in Hansard, vol. x, pp. 12648; but as some of them are nut redly acceesible outside of Great Britain, and a8 they are, moreover, very often incorrectly summarized, they are reproduced in app. I from Hansard.

t i

Hansard, vol. IX, p. 687 (June 30, 1807).

3 See ante, p. 99.

BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES 111

her colonies was forbidden as a matter of course, but this 
implied nothing new. On the other hand, as regards coasting 
trade proper, it was more difficult to get at than any other part 
of the enemy’s shipping, a point to which the domestic opponents 
of the government did not fail to call attention. On March 17, 
1807, in a communication to J. G. Rist, the Danish chargk 
d’aJgPniTeS at London at the time, Lord Howick amplified this 
further by declaring that there was no objection to neutral 
vessels carrying cargo to an enemy port, thence going in ballast 
to another port, and then carrying cargo from this last port to 
the home country. It was just the flourishing Danish Mediter 
ranean trade that was hit by the new law ; but apart from that 
the importance of the measure can not be regarded as great, 
except that to a certain extent it compromised the Whig Party 
with regard to the justifiability of measures of reprisal, and so 
far rendered difficult their position with regard to the more 
comprehensive measures of their successors in the same 
direction.’ 
It was quite natural, therefore, that those who were in 
favour of more forcible measures on the part of the government, 
either against Napoleon or against the neutrals, were not 
satisfied with the January order. In this connexion we have 
first to think of Stephen and his supporters, who, according to 
the later evidence of his opponent, Brougham, constitut,ed the 
great majority. It is true that Stephen’s book had appeared 
as far back as the autumn of 1805, or more than a year before 
the issue of the Berlin decree ; but there is nothing to indicate 
that either the man or his book had exerted any influence on 
the January order. The positive demands of Stephen are not 
quite clear, it is true ; but in any case they can not be regarded 
as having been satisfied by the measure of the Grenviue ministry, 
In many passages in his book Stephen assumes a negative 
attitude toward the thought of using the war as a pretext for 
1 Lord Eldon in the House of Lords, Feb. 15, 1808 (Hansard, vol. x, p. 475) ; 
Peroeval in the Home of Commons, Feb. 4, 1807 (Hansard, vol. m, p. 629). Lord 
Howick’s declaration is given in Hansard, vol. x, pp. 402 ef, seq. &vald, Badrag 
le’l Oplysning om Danmk-Norgea Handd og Skibsfart, 1800-1807, in Hkh&k 
Tidsskrift, VI11 (1917), vol. VI, pp. 409,433-4. 

112 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM commercial advantages, which he calls ' a morbid excess of sensibility to immediate commercial profit ' ; and as a warning example to his countrymen he mentions the action of the Dutch, during a siege, of selling powder to the enemy, whereby, he says, they ' preferred their trade to their political safety '. In accordance with this? he adopts for the most part a purely naval standpoint and urges that the neutrals, with very few exceptions, should be entirely prevented from dealing with enemy countries and in enemy goods, and especially with enemy colonies. In that way the enemy would be compelled to carry on his trade himself and to fetter his naval forces by convoying trading vessels and protecting his colonies and providing them with supplies ; and by all these things the desired possibility of captures would also be secured to its fullest extent. Along side all of this, however, we also find hints that more directly anticipate the following course of development, namely, that the goods of the enemy colonies might be conveyed to the British market and there taxed to such an extent as to prevent them from competing with those of the British colonies. Stephen was closely connected with the English Tory politician, Spencer Perceval, who as prime minister was in company with Stephen at the time of his assassination by a lunatic in 181% ; and it was from Perceval that there came the first positive criticism of the January regulations, wiz., in the House of Commons on February 4, 1807. In his speech, too, we have the first complete explanation of the motives that lay behind the definitive Orders in Council ; and to judge by the speech it would seem that the detailed framing of those orders was due less to Stephen than to Perceval. The latter clearly takes his stand, from the very first, on what we have designated rivalry. After