

All this led, in the spring of 1805, to an alteration in the practice of the British law courts, which considerably damaged the possibilities of the American carrying trade. The highest British prize court, the Prize Appeal Court of the Privy Council, in the famous case of the ship Baez with its cargo from Barce lona to Salem, Massachusetts, and thence to Havana, declared both the vessel and the cargo forfeited, despite the facthat the latter had been unloaded and passed through the custom-house in the usual way in the Americm port (May 22). This precedent was immediately followed by two others in the AdmGalty Court, whereby the intention of eluding the regulations was declared to be decisive as against the external criteria. At the same time the British' went a more direct way to the end of obtaining control over the American colonies of the enemy, namely, by passing a series of laws which were promulgated in April and June 1805, and in July 1806. These were intended to encourage the importation of the products of those colonies either direct to England by licence or to the British West Indies, either to sixteen free ports established there or, with somewhat

k. 1

108 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
less liberty and on the basis of a licence, to other islands, with 
a somewhat varying right to be forwarded to the British home 
Icountry. At the same time permission was given to send 
a return cargo from the British to the foreign colonies. To the 
sixteen free ports importation might be made in small vessels 
of any nationality whatsoever, that is to say, even of enemy 
nationality.1 
This new application of the law as regards ‘ circuitous 
voyages ’ aroused a great deal of feeling in t,he United States, 
and in April 1806, led to an American counter-measure ; and 
at the same time there were issued the British blockade declara 
tions concerning the North Sea coast and the English Channel 
on which we have previously touched.* The most important 
of these in all respects was the blockade which was proclaimed 
on May 16, 1806, on the initiative of the then British foreign 
secretary, the celebrated Whig politician, Charles James Fox. 
This created a strictly blockaded region between Ostend and 
the mouth of the Seine-that is to say, practically Havre-and 
also two less strictly blockaded regions to the north and to the 
south thereof-from Ostend to the Elbe and from the mouth 
of the Seine to Brest, respectively. Neutral vessels were 
conceded the right to call at the ports on the last two stretches, 
on condition that their goods were not contraband of war and 
did not belong to enemy subjects, and on the further condition 
that they had not been loaded in an enemy port and were not, 
to begin with, bound to such a port. 
Like most of the British blockade regulations, this was very 
obscure ; and it is not known to me how it was applied during 
the remainder of the year. Mahan’s view that it liberated 
neutrals from the obligation laid down in the Esses case, honestly 
to import the goods of the enemy colonies before they were again 
exported to Europe, i: not very satisfactory as an interpretation 
of the law ; 3 for the condition was absolutely binding by the 