

1 Cf. also, Mahan, Sea Power in its Relatiom, ko. ; Charming, op. cit., vol. XII. pp. 216 et seq. ; Roloff, op. cit., p. 207; Lord Grenville in the House of Lords, Feb. 17, 1809, and Whitbread in the House of Commons, Mar. 6, 1809 (Hansard, vol. XII, pp. 780, 1167) ; Tooke, q. cit., vol. II, p. 391 (table) ;. Daniels, American Cotton Trade with Liverpool under the Embargo and Non-intercourse Acta, in American Historical Review (1915-16). vol. xu, pp. 278, 280 ; Sear3, British Industry and the American Embargo, in Quarterly Journal of Economh, (1919-20), vol. XXXIV, pp. 88 & Sq. cf. also, VOl. XXXV, 1920-21, pp. 345 & Sq.).

POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES 135 disastrous consequences that its Orders in Council had hrtd by giving rise to the Embargo Act, which had cut off both the supply of raw materials from the United States and, above all, the possibility of sales there. In accordance with the good old British parliamentary custom, they made the government responsible for all the maladies of the body politic, while the government, also in the usual stereotyped fashion, pictured the situation in as favourable a light as possible and ascribed the undeniable difficulties to other causes. Any inquiry of scientific value, however, must consider the course of economic development as a whole, and for this reason the question of the effects of the Continental System on the belligerents has been held over for separate treatment in the fourth part of this work. In any case, the difficulties accruing to Great Britain in con sequence of the Embargo Act were not of such consequence as to lead its government in 1808 either to rescind the Orders in Council or even in the least degree to modify their application. On the contrary, Canning, as foreign secretary, conducted the almost continuous exchange of notes with an ironic superiority and a diplomatic skill which were calculated to irritate more and more the American government with its clumsier methods.1 BAYONNE DECREE (APRIL 17, 1808) I The American law had, if possible, still ess effect, in the direction intended, on Napoleon’s measures. Decrhs’s original uncertainty as to the scope of the Berlin decree had inspired the American government with what it somewhat vaguely called an assurance that the measures would not be applied against the United States ; and this curious position was maintained by the Americans in the exchange of notes with Great Britain even after the Milan decree and its application should have definitely dissipated all such hopes. Like Great Britain, France was constantly capturing American vessels ; 1 The most important debates on this subject were in the House of Lo& on Mar. 8,1808, and Feb. 17,1809, and in the House of Commons on Mar, 6, 1809. For the diplomatic correspondence, cf. Hansard, vol. XLI, pp. 241 et sep. ; vol. m, app. ; vol. XIV, pp. 881 et wq. ; vol. xm, app.

136 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM and in so doing she behaved, if possible, in a still more violent manner than her adversary, especially by confiscating vessels simply and solely because they had been subjected to examina tion by British cruisers, a thing which they codd not possibly have escaped. This interpretation was carried to such an extent, and with such disregard of actual conditions, that in 1808, for instance, an American brig' was declared lawful prize because of the British examination, despite the fact that, immediately after the examination, it had endeavoured to flee from the British cruiser into the port of Bilbao, which belonged to Napoleon's ally, Spain, and had thus done its best to show its desire to stand well with the continental powers. As a matter of fact, Napoleon was so little inclined to except the United States from his proposition that neutrals did not exist, that with his usual ability to draw unexpected logical conclusions he managed to find in this very Embargo Act a justification for seizing all American vessels that arrived at French or ' allied ' ports. In a letter addressed to his minister of finance, Gaudin, on April 17, 1808, he declared, in fact, that, as the government of the United States had laid an embargo on its vessels and resolved not to carry on foreign trade during the war, ' it is evident that all the vessels that say they come from America really come from England and that their papers are fictitious ' ; and consequently all American vessels that came to the ports of France, Holland, the Hanse Towns or Italy were to be seized.l This was the Bayonne decree, and was all that the United States got out of France by the Embargo Act.