

POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES 129 alteration made in this respect by the &st British Order in Council of January, 1807, owing to its restricted range. Accord ingly, during the greater part of the year 1801 American trade and shipping continued not merely to flourish, but even to grow, as is shown by the table previously printed.1 In reality, the year 1807 marked the high-water mark of the trade and navigation of the United States for a very long time to come. But the turning-point was to be reached before the close of the year. The beginning was made with the authentic interpretation of t.he law which Napoleon, as the sole final authority, gave to his Berlin decree, whereby it came to apply also to the sea. Then followed the new British Orders in Council of Kovember and Napoleon’s Milan decree of December.

EMBARGO ACT (DECEMBER 22, 1807) 
All this set going the great American series of counter- , 
measures, which also, so far as they concerned Great Britain, 
were affected by the latest act of aggression, the so-called 
‘Chesapeake Affair’ of June, 1807. A British man-of-war re 
quested to be allowed to search the American frigate Chesapeake 
with the object of recapturing some alleged deserters from the 
British navy ; and when the request was refused, as a matter 
of course, the British vessel opened fire, captured the American 
man-of-war, and took away four of the crew. To this was 
added the American annoyance at the British practice of im 
pressing for naval service sailors on American trading vessels 
on the pretext that, having been born before the American 
states became independent, they were British subjects ; and 
this, combined with the Chesapeake Affair, gave rise to a very 
pretty diplomatic conflict. 
But what gave the principal impulse to the American cam 
measures of Great Britain, but rather those of France, that is 
to say, the new adaptation of the Berlin decree, which brought 
it about that a stranded American vessel, the Horizon, had that 

- mercial, or rather anti-commercial, intervention was not the -

See ante, p. 103. 1589.43 ( E

130 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM part of its cargo which’was of British origin declared fair prize. However, the new Orders in Council were known in the United States (in fact, thongh not officially) when on December $22, 1807, Congress and the President enacted the Embargo Act,l which is one of the most interesting legislative products of the period. As has already been indicated, it was a self blockade of the purest water, but, unlike Napoleon’s, an open and direct one. An embargo was laid on all vessels lying in American ports and bound for foreign ports. The only ex-. ceptions were foreign vessels, which were allowed to depw< after being informed of the enactment of the law ; and-vessels in the American coasting trade were to give security that the cargo should be discharged in an American port. Alrhost at the7 same time the Non-importation Act, passed in the previous year against British goods, was put into force and excluded importation in foreign bottoms from the only power that was in a position to carry on trade by sea. ‘Cinder the pressure of the unreasonable procedure of both the combatants, the American government thus sought to cut off at a blow the abnormally large t,rade and shipping that the United States had until then enjoyed. In principle the policy was impartial, inasmuch as it was intended, on the one hand, to deprive Great Britain of American cotton and grain, as well of sales on the American markets, and, on the other hand, to put an end to the colonial trade from which France and Spain and their colonies derived equal advantages, and also to the importation of the industrial products of the European Continent into America. Although the measure was thus indisputably two sided, the simultaneous enforcement of th.e one-sided Non importation Act gave the policy the appearance of being directed distinctly against Great Britain. That country, indeed, had touched on a particularly tender point by imposing duties on the goods which compulsorily passed through its territories, inasnpch as both the United States and the British opposition put it on a level with the taxation of American trade which in the preceding generation had given the final 1 United! States Statutes at Large, vol. n, p. 461.