

POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES 139

FREEDOM OF TRADE (1810-11) The Non-intercourse Act now also had to be dropped. Its place was taken on May 1, 1810, by a third law,l which was intended to give the belligerents a period of grace within which they might amend their ways, but at the same time to play out the one who did so against his still obdurate antagonist. It was laid do- that, if either of the two countries, Great Britain and France, rescinded her regulations before March 3, 1811, but the other country did not follow the example within three months, the President might by proclamation put into force against the latter country the principal provisions of the Non-intercourse Act. For the moment, therefore, trade was free with all countries and consequently grew apace during the year 1810. However, this did not hold good of the colonial carrying trade, which had largely dropped out of American hands, not only, or perhaps not even principally, because of the Continental decrees and the Orders in Council, but also in consequence of the military events themselves, in that at first the insurrection in Spain in 1808 and afterwards the capture of the French colonies in 1809-10, put the British themselves in a position to take over the trade in almost anything that could be called colonial goods. The trade that did grow apace, therefore, was especially imports and also all trade in the products of the United States, chiefly the sale of raw cotton to Great Britain and of grain to the combatants in the Iberian peninsula ; but this is of comparatively little interest from our present point of view,

REVOCATION OF CONTINENTAL DECREES (1810-12) 
These two American laws of 1809 and 1810 gave Napoleon 
an opportunity for a diplomatic game of hide and seek, the like 
of which has seldom been seen, and which completely. fogged 
the Americans and finally led to the attainment of his object 
by making inevitable a breach between Great Britain and the 
1 United Stah Statutes at Large, POI. n, p. 606. 

140 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM United States. At first he took no notice of the Non-intercourse Act and pretended that he did not know of it, although a note to his minister of the interior, dated December 21, 1809, speaks of it in plain terms ; and three weeks later a letter to his foreign secretary, Champagny, shows that he desired a settle ment with America, But about a year after the American law was passed he suddenly proceeded to a measure of reprisal, the Rambouillet decree, dated March 23, 1810, but not published until about the middle of May. The least remarkable thing about this decree is that, on the ground of the Non-intercourse Act, it was ordered that all American vessels should be seized and sold for the benefit of Napoleon’s caisse d’nrnortissement, although this was going a good deal farther than his earlier measures, which had not explicitly involved confiscation. What made this particular measure especially ruthless, was another feature, that it was given retroactive force as far back as the date on which the American law came into force, May 20, 1809. Thus it made Napoleon master of a number of vessels and cargoes (according to an American estimate, 100 vessels with cargoes representing a value of $lO,OOO,OOO), which, suspecting no evil, had gone to the ports of France or her allies. But shortly afterwards, when the Emperor learned of the American law of 1810, he immediately saw in it a possibility for a most bewildering diplomatic action, namely, by means of an apparent concession concerning the Continental decrees, to drive the United States into putting the law into force against Great Britain. In a more than usually characteristic letter to Cham pagny (July 31,1810) he rejects the idea of rescinding the Berlin and Milan decrees-which, he says, ‘ would cause disturbance and not fulfil my object,’-and simply charges Champagny to inform the American envoy in a diplomatic note that he might feel assured that the decrees would not be enforced after November 1, and that he should regard them as revoked. ‘ This method,’ he says with calm effrontery, ‘ seems to me to be more in accordance with my dignity and with the seriousness of the case.’ Two days later Napoleon sent a draft for such a note, which Champagny forwarded practically unaltered to