

NON-INTERCOURSE ACT (MARCH 1, 1809) 
The hopelessness of the struggle against the disregard of the 
law by the Americans themselves finally led the President and 
Congress to give it up, and that, too, shortly after the passing 
of the Enforcement Act in January, 1809. The fact is that this 
law gave rise to disturbances and to a &ill greater feeling of 
irritation in the shipping states, so much the more so as the 
1 Correspondance, no. 13,763. 
POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES 137 
insurrection in Spain in the late summer of 1808 seemed to open 
up new and bright prospects to American trade. The result 
was a new and famous law, the Non-intercourse Act, passed on 
March 1,1809.1 That law repealed the Embargo Act as a com 
plete all-round self-blockade, and limited the embargo so as to 
make it apply only to the two sets of belligerents, Great Britain 
and France ; but by way of compensation it was made, if 
possible, still more strict against them. Over and above the 
prohibition of American trade and shipping contained in the 
Embargo Act, which remained in force with regard to those two 
countries, all British and French vessels, all goods shipped from 
Great Britain and France, and all goods produced there, were 
now forbidden to enter American ports as from May 20, 1809. 
The substitution of the two-sided prohibition for the one-sided 
Non-importation Act, which was exclusively directed against 
Great Britain, gave a really consistent expression to an impartial 
policy of reprisals. The intention was to provide an outlet for 
American trade which could make the measure feasible without 
blunting the edge of its task as a measure of reprisal; and it 
was thus, practically speaking, a rationalization ofthe Embargo 
Act. But it was obvious beforehand that any control of its 
observance must be more difficult than ever when once American 
vessels obtained the right to sail to Europe, The character of 
the law as a means of exerting pressure was further marked by 
the fact that the President was authorized to announce by pro 
clamation when either of the two belligerents revokedoramended 
its laws to such an extent that they no longer violated the 
trade of the United States ; after which event commercial inter 
course with the country of that belligerent was to be renewed. 
The natural result was a considerable recovery in American 
foreign trade, in the &st place with the more or less neutral 
places, such as the Hanse Towns, Altona, and especially Tanning 
in Schleswig and probably Gothenburg. The trade with England 
continued to go chiefly to Canada and Nova Scotia, and also, 
especially for cotton, wia Amelia Island in the St. Mary’s River 
and thence to Europe in British bottoms, which could not be 
United States tYtututes at Large, vol. II, p. 528. 
138 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
regarded as attractive from an American standpoint. Cotton 
went also via Lisbon, Cadiz, the Azores or other permitted ports, 
while persons who had no reputation to lose made shipments 
direct to Liverpool. But the need of the goods was so small, 
comparatively, in Great Britain, that the increased prices which 
were a consequence of the roundabout journey and the difficulties 
of transportation lowered profits for the American exp0rters.l 
But while the economic effects continued to arouse discord, 
the political effects seemed, though somewhat late, to promise 
the results expected from a policy of reprisals. Madison, who 
had succeeded Jefferson as President three days after the 
passing of the Non-intercourse Act, was rejoiced to receive an 
English proposal for a settlement, which rapidly attained an 
apparent result. In reality, to be sure, Canning’s conditions 
for an agreement were entirely unacceptable by the American 
government. But the British minister at Washington, Erskine, 
son of the Lord Chancellor in the ‘ All the Talents ’ ministry, 
went in his zeal for a settlement quite beyond his instructions 
and promised on behalf of his government the rescinding of the 
Orders in Council as against the United States from June 10, 
1809. On this, Madison, in accordance with the authority given 
him in the Non-intercourse Act, announced this concession on 
the part of Great Britain in a proclamation which suspended 
the American act from the same day. An immense movement 
immediately began in all American ports, where six hundred 
vessels lay ready to sail on the appointed day ; and during the 
week June 16-23, Liverpool received more American cotton 
than it had received throughout the entire year of 1807. At 
this point, however, it was found that the British government 
disavowed its minister, and the President was compelled to 
revoke his proclamation. The new British envoy who succeeded 
Erskine came immediately into sharp conflict with the American 
government and was recalled ; after which all prospects of an 
immediate settlement in this quarter were again blighted. 
Vogel, op. cit., p. 36 ; Rubin, 1807-1814, Stwlier til K0benhmns og DanmarL 
i%torie (Copenhagen, 1892), pp. 381-2 ; Bergwall, Historisk under dtteZ8e om staden 
cftilhebmgs betydligaste varu-atskeppningar (Gothenburg, 1820), p. 9 note ; Daniels, 
loc. cit., p. 281. 