

126 ORIGIN AMI EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM at that time almost the only remaining neutral power-toward this blow directed by both the belligerents mainly against neutral trade. The highly instructive development of the American attitude toward the Continental System went on alongside the development of European affairs down to the practical collapse of the system in 181.2. It will form the subject of the next chapter.

POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES AMERICAN POSITIOY THE policy of the United States during the period of the Continental System is an example of the type which, in the course of an economic war to the knife, seeks to maintain neutrality to the uttermost and to take all the consequences of that attitude, without, it is true, the support of either external military power or an efficient internal administration,' Down to the close of 1807 this policy brought with it a unique de velopment of American shipping and foreign trade, especially the carrying trade, But when the commercial war became more intense in 1807, it made a complete right-about-face and led to the second great self-blockade caused by the Continental System; and finally, when this became quite untenable, it drove the American Union into the very war which its leading men had done everything in their power to avert, The desire of the American statesmen for neutrality scarcely calls for any detailed explanation. The sympathies of the popylation were strongly divided between the combatants. Anglophiles predominated among the Federalists, who later developed into the Republican Party, while Francophiles pre dominated among the opposite party, the Republicans, later known as Democrats. The Federalists dominated the com mercial and sea-faring states of New England, while the main support of their antagonists lay in the agricultural states of the South. The latter party tended to get the upper hand, strongly supported, as it was, by President Jefferson in 1801-9, and 1 The best survey of American developments in this field is to be found in Mahan, Xeu Power in ita Relations, kc., vol. I, ch. IV. Diplomatic correspondence and other relevant matter is to be found in Hanaard, a6 well as in The iWUte0 at Large ofthe United SMe0 of Ameriiccc.

128 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM again by President Madison in 1809-17, partly because of political tradition dating from the time when France co operated in the American War of Independence, and partly because the conflicts of a neutral sea-faring nation must always be keenest with that combatant who commands the sea. The remarkable thing about the situation is that it was precisely those economic interests and those parts of the country for the defence of which the campaign of neutrality was carried to extremes, that were its most zealous opponents and did their utmost to prevent its efficaey. Nor did they hesitate to follow the same tactics even during the war to which the policy of neutrality led, just because the measures of neutrality had necessarily to be directed against the few remnants of inter national intercourse that the belligerents had left undisturbed. Both in this respect and in other respects the neutrals of our day have had something to learn from American developments. The increased severity in the British treatment of neutrals, as we know, went back especially to the new interpretation of ' broken voyages ' in the Essert! case in the summer of 1805, and in April, 1806, it had occasioned the American counter-measure in the form of the Non-importation Act,l which prohibited the importation, both from England and from other countries, of most of the main groups of Britishindustrialproducts, excluding, however, cotton goods. But the American law did not enter into force until November 15, and was suspended at the close of the year, so that it turned out to be nothing more than a threat. The Berlin decree of November 21, 1806, immediately led the American envoy in Paris to address an inquiry to the French minister of the marine, Vice Admiral Decrds, as to the interpretation of the new law at sea. In the absence of the Emperor the answer was favourable,2 and consequently there was no immediate occasion for uneasiness on the part of America. On the contrary, there were complaints in England that the Americans were making common cause with Napoleon in order to supply France with the industrial products that she was otherwise wont to obtain from England. Nor was any great 1 Undted Statea 8tatute.a at Large, vol. n, p. 379. 2 See ante, p. 91.