

POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES 133 
loading of vessels ; and the right of the customs officials to 
refuse permission was extended to the right of ordering the 
discharge, in suspected cases, of goods already loaded, and also 
to take goods from vessels into their custody ; and the surety 
deposited was raised to six times the value of the goods. Finally, 
the right to sail to foreign countries for American property was 
annulled. 
These convulsive regulations give a kind of negative to the 
actual circumstances, which would seem to have been character 
ized by even more systematic transgressions of the law than 
generally occurred during that exceptionally lawless period. 
In Passamaquoddy Bay, on the borders of British North 
America, and on the St. Mary’s River, which formed the boundary 
toward the still Spanish Florida, there were collected whole 
flotillas of American vessels, which, under the pretence of sea 
damage, put in with flour and fish at the ports of Nova Scotia 
and of the West Indian Islands, and gave the skippers’ need of 
money to pay for repairs as an excuse that the cargoes had been 
sold there, This transfer of trade outside the territories of the 
Union went to the north, west, and south. Korthward seven 
hundred sledges went back and forth between Montreal in 
Canada and the boundary of the State of Vermont ; and at 
the same time great quantities of potash were imported into 
Quebec. That city and Halifax in Nova Scotia had halcyon 
days, the former having more shipping than the whole of the 
United States ; and the British governor of Kova Scotia 
declared that the Embargo Act was ‘well calculated to promote 
the true interests of His Majesty’s American colonies ’, which, 
to say the least, was not its intention, In the West Indies, it is 
true, there appeared at first a serious shortage of foodstuffs and 
timber, accompanied by a great rise in prices ; and the French 
islands never egained their former prosperity. But many 
circumstances contributed to this ; and in the British West 
Indies the prices of grain sank again rapidly, and a number 
of American vessels went there, as also to Havana, where on one 
occasion, in 1808, there lay nearly a hundred at one time. On 
the cotton market at Charleston, where the law had evidently 

1% ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM been effective in 1808, an agent stated that it had been broken every week since December of that year and January of 1809. Of course the right to sail for American property abroad was particularly abused, and was therefore finally cancelled. Five hundred and ninety vessels are said to have left under this pretext, and as a rule they stayed away, like the American tonnage which happened to be outside the limits of the United States when the law was passed, and which took very good care not to come again under their jurisdiction. On the other hand, of course, those vessels which remained at home in obedience to the law remained largely without employment. Admiral Mahan supposes that those that remained in the states were in the majority, although, on the other hand, the complaints about the sufferings that the law was alleged to cause gained in volume from the desire to make party capital out of the matter. That part of the trade which, as far as one can judge, was hit hardest was the export of raw materials to Europe, especially the export of raw cotton from the Southern States to England. Thus Liverpool received only 25,926 bags in 1808 as compared with 146,756 bags, or nearly six times as much, in 180'7. Even that part of the British importation of raw materials which was not directly dependent on American supplies showed a great decline in 1808. This was presumably due to the general shortage of shipping that was a consequence of the withdrawal from traffic of a fairly large part of the second largest mercantile fleet in the wor1d.l In spite of the immense extent to which the law was dis regarded, therefore, it would be an exaggeration to call the Embargo Act ineffective as a means of giving trouble to the belligerents. During the years 1808 and 1809 the British opposition never wearied of holding up to the government the