

POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES 141 the representative of the United States (August 5). The foreign secretary there says that he is authorized to declare that the Berlin and Milan decrees are revoked and that they cease to be enforced after November 1, ' it being understood, of course, that in consequence of this declaration the English must rescind their Orders in Council and renounce the new blockade prin ciples that they had wished to establish, or else that the United States, in accordance with the law of which you have informed me, should make their rights respected by the English '. This note was inserted in Le Moniteur a few days later, and toward the end of the year it was followed by a letter from the minister of finance to the director general of customs, written by the Emperor's order, to the effect that the decrees 'should not be applied to American vessels ; and this, too, was inserted in the official newspaper of France.1 One can not be surprised, it is true, that the American statesmen and diplomats were at the &st blush highly de lighted with the French declaration of August and, on the strength of it, immediately requested a corresponding con cession on the part of Great Britain. Nevertheless, the very form in which the ' fundamental principle ' of the French Empire-the laws around which the whole of European politics had revolved for well-nigh four years-was revoked was so far peculiar that it might reasonably be expected to super induce scepticism. And it proved almost immediately that the Continental decrees were applied just the same as before, not only in general, but also against American vessels. When this was pointed out to him, Napoleon declared that it was really due to the fact that the vessels had disobeyed his port regulations and not the international rules contained in the Berlin and Milan decrees. But in reality the fact of the matter was that the only vessels which were liberated were those which had not disobeyed the Continental decrees; and with regard CorresMme, nos. 16,080,16,127,16,384,16,736,16,743; Bulletindeolois, &c., 4th sei-., bull. 286, no. 5,402. Memoirs and Correspondence of Lord Ti'&esley (Pearoe ed., London, 1846), vol. III, pp. 116-17, 134 (here, too, can be found the correspon. dence of 1810-11 between Wellesley, in his capacity as British foreign secretary, and the American minister in London) ; Le Moniteur, Aug. 9 and Dec. 25, 1810.

142 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM to those which had disobeyed them, no change took place except that they were not, it is true, condemned to confiscation but were nevertheless detained by the French authorities. None the less, Napoleon did accord a limited amount of con sideration to the trade and shipping of the United States in the autumn of 1810, inasmuch as he issued a number of licences to American vessels that wished to import into France certain American colonial goods, with French consular certificates written in cipher in order to provide security that the British should not appear in the guise of Americans. He also reduced to one quarter the enormous customs dues that the Trianon tariff of August 5, 1810, had imposed upon colonial goods when the importation had been directly effected by American vessels. A contributory motive behind this measure was the necessity of being able to appeal to the support of the United States in the pressure which Napoleon was now bringing to bear, though in vain, on Emperor Alexander of Russia in order to keep that country within the Continental System. But none of these things altered the fact that the system itself remained un changed.l However, the American statesmen had already bound them selves to regard Champagny’s August note as a genuine and already effective revocation and therefore were placed in an extremely awkward position when compelled to maintain this standpoint in their negotiations with the British. For they were at the same time exerting all their powers of persuasion to induce the French to make the revocation a reality. As the putting into force of the American law of 1810 was made de pendent on the willingness of the one or the other of the belligerents to rescind his laws, there consequently arose a difficulty in applying the law against Great Britain, which had not taken any conciliatory steps ; and it was therefore con sidered necessary, on March 2, 1811, to pass a new law which,