

120 ORIGIN AXD EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
vessels on their way to Europe, either to Gibraltar or to Malta 
or to any port in the British Isles. 
In addition to all this, finally, there were pure measures of 
reprisal, framed according to their French counterparts. 
Trading vessels were to remain enemy property and to be 
confiscated as such, even if they were sold to neutrals ; and 
what was the most unreasonable of all the regulations, the mere 
possession of a French certificate of origin as to the non-British e 
nationality of the cargo was to involve the confiscation of both 
ship and cargo. On the other hand, since the lack of such 
certificates involved capture on the part of the French, a neutral 
vessel, at least if it did not sail under British convoy, had, 
according to this last regulation, no alternative between break 
ing the orders of one power or the other, with the consequent 
risk of capture from one side or the other, provided, it is well 
to remark, that they wished to act openly and honestly, which 
therefore was practically impossible. The only effect of all this 
was the establishment of a system of double ship’s papers, 
which gradually attained an immense scope ; and thus in reality 
the consequence was that the laws of both sides were broken. 
In this multiplicity of regulations-which, however, have 
not by any means been fully reproduced here-the most 
prominent thing of all is the obligation to call at a British port, 
with the possibilities thereby created of controlling and render 
ing dearer enemy products; especially enemy colonial goods. 
In the course of time, too, the British ministers managed to 
find a comparatively clear expression of their ways of thinking 
in this respect. This was especially the case in almost identical 
utterances made in the spring of 181% by three of the ministers. 
As formulated by Lord Bathurst, the president of the Board of 
Trade, that is to say, minister of commerce, it ran as follows : 
‘ France by her decrees had resolved to abolish all trade with 
England : England said, in return, that France should then 
have no trade but with England.’ 1 This, of course, did away 

House of Lords, Feb. 28,1812. Hansard, pol. XXI, p. 1053. Almost to the same effect, cf. Rose, vice president of the Board of Trade, in the Home of Commons, Mar. 3,1812, and Perceval on the same day and Apr. 17, 1812. Hansard, pol. XXI,

BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES 121 
with the idea of blockade as such, and the licensing system 
took its place in the seat of honour, partly through the ‘ proviso ’ 
regulations of the ordinances themselves and partly through 
the licences expressly permitted in them. 
This, however, was far from clear to everybody ; nor was 
it approved by all to whom it was clear. Some of the home 
critics of the British government, somewhat later including 
Canning, who was a member of the government when the 
ordinances were issued but had to leave it in 1809, considered 
that they ought to be true to their alleged purpose of making 
the enemy feel the consequences of his own injustice and to that 
end cut off his supplies.’ But more numerous were those 
attacks of the opposition which blamed the government for its 
advertised intention, doing so under the unfounded assumption 
that it was sincere. These critics dwelt on the impossibility 
of starving out the Continent, the small extent to which a 
shortage of certain articles of luxury was felt, the encourage 
ment to new branches of production and the invention of 
substitutes which such a blockade might introduce into the 
Continent, and all the consequent injury to British industry and 
British colonies. In point of fact, however, all this criticism 
did not apply to the Orders in Council as they worked and as 
they were intended to work, but to Napoleon’s Continental 
System. To that extent, therefore, it implied a recognition of 
the appositeness of that system, which was certainly not the 
intention of the critics, The real character of the government 
policy did not, however, escape criticism altogether, as when 
Lord Grenville in one of his first discussions on the Orders in 
Council, in the House of Lords on February 15, 1808, declared 
that : ‘ This principle of forcing trade into our markets would 
have disgraced the darkest ages of monopoly.’ On the whole, 
however, it may be said that the criticism, usually very much em 
bittered, missed the true point of the policy of the government.8 
pp. 1120, 1163; vol. XXII, p, 434. Cf. also, Lord Wellesley’s utterance in 1811 
(see below, p. 208). 1 See ante, p. 99. 
e The following are a few examples : Fiat standpoint : Canning in the House 
of Commons, Mar. 3, 1812 (Haward, vol. XXI. p. 1147); Lord Sidmouth, the 
former and far from eminent prime minister under the name of Addington, in the 
122 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM 
TERRITORIAL EXPANSION OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM (1807) 
In order to make the connexion clear, the British counter 
measures to the Berlin decree have been followed to the close 
of the year 1807, and even somewhat beyond. But on the 
Continent the year 1807 had been rich in tremendous events 
with far-reaching consequences for the Continental System. 
At Tilsit Napoleon had prevailed upon Russia to join the great 
policy of reprisals in the event of her failure to mediate a peace 
between Great Britain and France ; and naturally enough she 
failed. The bombardment of Copenhagen-Canning’s act of 
violence against Denmark, which, as we know,l was quite 
superfluous-had thrown that country entirely into the hands 
of Napoleon and made its ruler, the Crown Prince Frederick, 
who shortly afterwards ascended the throne as Frederick VI, 
one of his few sincere allies. Meanwhile, Napoleon’s own 
aggression against Port.uga1 had put an end to the independence 
of that country after the royal family had fled to Brazil. The 
remaining states of Europe were either more or less purely 
subsidiary states to France, or at leastohad been so recently 
vanquished by Napoleon that they could not contemplate 
resisting the introduction of the Berlin decree. To the former 
category belonged the kingdarns of Italy (North Italy), Holland, 
and Naples, the Confederation of the Rhine, and in the main (for 
the present) Spain ; to the latter, Prussia and Austria. Besides 
these, the kingdom of Etruria (Tuscany) was reduced to sub 
mission by military occupation and the other Italian territories 
House of Lords, Feb. 17, 1809, and Feb. 28, 1812 (Hansard, vol. XII, pp. 791-2 ; 
vol. XXI, p. 1071). Second standpoint : Lord AuckLand, president of the Board of 
Trade in ‘ All the Talents ’ and in his time the eponymous negotiator of the Eden 
Treaty, in the House of Lords, Feb. 15, 1808 (Hanstard, vol. x, p. 468) ; Lord Henry 
Petty, chancellor of the exchequer in ‘ AU the Talents’ and afterwards Lord 
Lensdome, in the House of Commons, Feb. 18, 1808 (Hansard, vol. x, p. 682) ; 
Whitbrad, one of the principal speakers of the Opposition, in the House of Corn 
mons, Mar. 6, 1809 (Hansard, vol. XII, pp. 1167-8). Third standpoint: Lord 
Grenville, as above (Hansard, vol. x, p. 483). Cf. the more perspicacious criticism 
of Lord Grey, formerly Lord Howick, in the House of Lords, June 13, 1810 (Han 
srtrd, vol. XM, pp. 546 et-eeq). 
For the Scandinaman investigations the reader is referred to the leading 
authority on Danish history in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, 
Professor Edvsrd Holm, Dannaccrk-Norgea Hietorie fm 1720 til 1814, vol. w. 
BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES 123 
by suitable pressure. Even Turkey bound herself to exclude 
British goods. In this connexion it was especially important 
that the great emporium of Leghorn was closed to the trade of 
England by the overthrow of the independence of Etruria, 
At the close of 1807, therefore, there was only one European 
state that openly refused to become a party to the Continental 
System ; and that state was Sweden, the sole ally of Great 
Britain. Against her, accordingly, Russia, at the instigation 
of Napoleon, made the attack which was to end with the 
conquest of Finland and the deposition of Gustavus IV 
Adolphus. Thus during its very first year the Continental 
System attained a territorial range which far transcended even 
the boldest plans that had been formulated in the minds of its 
author’s predecessors under the Convention and Directory, 
when they spoke of a blockade from the Tagus to the Elbe or 
from Gibraltar to Texel. 
FIRST MILAN DECREE (Nov. 23, 1807) 
At the same time Napoleon had laboured further at the 
internal structure of the system in forms which, in the main, 
belong to part 111. After regulating in greater detail the treat 
ment of British vessels and goods on the especially exposed 
coast-line of North Germany, he gave to certain provisions 
which applied to that coast validity for his own empire through 
the first Milan decree (hovember 23, 1807). This contained 
detailed regulations concerning the manner in which it was to 
be determined that vessels had called at a British port, concern 
ing the confiscation of vessels and cargoes in this case (not 
merely their expulsion, as was prescribed in the Berlin decree), 
and concerning the certificates of origin previously mentioned 
touching the non-British provenience of goods. 
SECOND MILAN DECREE (DEc. 17, 1807) 
It was during his stay in the kingdom of Italy that Napoleon 
was informed of the British Orders in Council of November 11 ; 
and he seems to have been seized by a violent fit of anger, 