

POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES 131 
impulse to the Declaration of Independence by ' the old 
thirteen '.* 
President Jefferson's motive seems to have been partly the 
bias of the plantation owners, emphasized by his physiocratic 
tendency toward regarding agriculture as the highest work of 
man and his grave distrust of everything which departed 
from agriculture. To begin with, at least, he undoubtedly 
considered, as the American historian, Channing, says, ' that 
to put an end to, let us say, three quarters of the commerce 
of t€ie United States would be a blessing, albeit somewhat 
in disguise '.z But evidently this, like most of the measures 
of the different powers in the commercial war, was also 
a measure.of reprisal, an endeavour to compel the embittered 
belligerents to be reasonable. In fact, unlike the majority of 
their own measures, it was a sincere attempt in that direction. 
It seems also as if the Embargo Act was a means of saving the 
great American merchant fleet, the largest next to that of 
Great Britain, from the extinction which must otherwise have 
been the almost necessary consequence of the Berlin and Milan 
decrees and of the Orders in Council. Thus, €or instance, 
a' large ship-owner in Maryland stated that of fifteen vessels 
which he had dispatched during the bare four months between 
September 1 and the enactment of the Embargo Act, only three 
had arrived at their destination, while two had been capt,ured 
by the French and the Spaniards, one had been seized at 
Hamburg, and nine had been taken to England. 
However, it is rather an academic question what the effect 
of the Embargo Act would have been had it been obeyed, for 
nothing was further from reality. It makes an almost moving 
impression to see how one supplementary law after another, 
each more detailed and more draconic than t,he other, seeks 
to stop up the holes in the original law, which was very sum 
mary ; but it has seldom been shown more distinctly that 
a constant succession of new laws on the same subject means 

p. 714.

1 Cf. Lord Grenville in the House of Lords, Feb. 17, 1809. &mard, vol. XII, 
= charming, w. cit., Pol. XII, p. 201-2. 
K2 

132 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM a constant disobedience to the provisions of the law. As early as January 9, 1808, special enactments were made as to the security that coasting and fishing vessels would have to give, and it was declared that the exceptions made in the Embargo Act in favour of public armed vessels did not apply to priva teers (chapter 8). On March 12, in the same year, foreign vessels also were required to give security to the extent of four times the value of vessel and cargo, or twice as much as for native vessels, that they would not sail to foreign ports ; and for fishing vessels, a declaration was imposed under oath as to whether any of the catch had been sold during the trip. At the Same time, however, the President was authorized, very im prudently, to grant vessels the right to go in ballast to foreign ports in order to fetch from there the property of American citizens, on giving a pledge to return with that property, and not to carry on any other trade, etc. (chapter 33). Still more forceful was the intervention a month and a half later by a law of April 25, which both forbade all loading of vessels except under the control of the authorities, and also in general terms forbade any vessel to depart, without the special per mission of the President, to any United States port or district which was adjacent to foreign territory ; and the customs staff was charged to take under their care any suspiciously large stocks of goods in such border regions. Further, the law gave to naval and customs vessels the right of search and authorized the customs staff, pending the President’s decision, to detain vessels suspected of intending to break the law, and so on (chapter 66). Finally, on January 9,1809, there was passed an Enforcement Act,l which summoned all the weak public powers of the Union to compel obedience to the law. Thus the Presi dent was authorized to employ the fighting forces of the United States by land and sea and to hire the imposing number of thirty vessels for the purpose. At the same time all the previous laws were made more severe. Vehicles were also subjected to the embargo, in order to prevent the law from being circum vented by land routes ; permission had to be obtained for the United States Statutes at Large, vol. rr, p. 606.