

TREATMENT OF CONFISCATED GOODS 159 competent observer, Johann Georg Rist, the German-born representative in Hamburg of France's intimate ally, Denmark, writes in his memoirs, compiled in the years 1816 to 1881, that no one among the merchants, peasants or officials, or even among the scholars, believed in any plans for the good of Europe, but only in the desire to line French pockets. It was commonly held that no justice was to be expected, but merely arbitrariness and the basest motives, all marked by high words, threats, and deception. And with regard to the last phase of the system (from 1810 onward) almost exactly the same words fall from Mollien, who was Napoleon's good and faithful servant, though a man of strong and independent judgment. He says that ' this pretended system . . . deprived of every vestige of political prestige, has only proved itself in the eyes of everybody to be the most pernicious and false of fiscal inventions '.l It was precisely fiscalism, the bane of so many systems of commer cial policy, which thereby got a footing from the very beginning in the imposing and soaring plan and threw radical difficulties in the way of its execution. This was all the more the case for the reason that Napoleon's assumption that everything was sold on credit was so far from being correct that it was the very reverse of the truth. Ap parently the demand that prevailed on the Continent for British and colonial goods made it possible for them to be sold practically always for cash ; consequently it was the continental buyers who were the chief sufferers. And even when that was not the case, one finds the continental buyers, e. g., not only Hamburg merchants, but importers all over Germany and Holland generally-according to the evidence& 1807 of their British creditors themselves-displaying an extraordinary zeal in the regular payment of their debts.2 J. G. Rist, Ldenserinnerungen (Poel ed., Gotha, 1880), vol. n, pp. 29-30; Mollien, Ndmodra, &c., vol. 11, p 462. Cf. Louie Bonaparte to his brother Jerome, Oct. 15, 1808, in Duboecq, Louzs Bonapzrte en Hollande, d'aprPs sea lettres (Parie, 1911), no. 186. Mollien, op. cit., vol. n, p. 461 ; Konig, op. cit., pp. 180-1 ; Mahan, Znflwence Of Sea Power, &c., vol. II, p. 306 ; Tarle, Kontinmtai'naja blokzda, vol. I, pp. 287, 361, 384; Tarle, Deutsch-franziisieche WirtschajMeziehu?qen, h. cit., pp. 679-80, 718.

160 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
Consequently there was little or no likelihood that the 
British would tire of supplying the Continent with goods. On 
the contrary, the inner history of the Continental System came 
to consist essentially in the embittered and uninterrupted 
struggles against the endless stream of British goods. 
This difficulty with which Napoleon was confronted with 
regard to the very structure of the blockade was further com 
plicated by the difficulty of getting honest and zealous persons 
to assist him in putting it into execution. It was almost 
impossible to obtain such assistants among his allies and their 
organs ; and consequently one of the most amply justified 
views in the historical literature of the present time is the 
explanation that the incessant extension of the empire along 
the coast of Eutope was due to the Emperor’s need of direct 
control, with a view to the observance of the Continental 
System. Of the innumerable examples of this we may mention 
two, one Swedish and one Prussian. In August 1811, when 
Sweden was nominally at war with Great Britain, Axel Pontus 
von Rosen, the Governor of Gothenburg, informed the minister 
of state, von Engestrom, that for once in a way he had caused 
to be confiscated ten oxen intended for Admiral Saumaree’s 
English fleet, which lay off Vinga, and added : ‘ I entreat that 
this be put in the papers, so that I, wretched that I am, may for 
once wear the nimbus of Continental zeal in the annals of Europe. 
Saumarez was informed beforehand, so that he will not be 
annoyed.’ During the winter of 1811-12 a systematic import 
of forbidden colonial goods by the state itself went on in 
Prussia through a special commissioner for the minister of 
finance, Privy Councillor von Heydebreck; and at the same 
time Hardenberg, the leading minister, wrote to that very man 
and requested the strictest inquiry into the smuggling.l 
But the fact that the situation was untenable when the 
application of the system lay in such hands must by no means 
be interpreted to mean that the difficulties were overcome so 