

Von Rosen to von Engestrom, Aug. 7, 1811, in Ahnfelt, Ur rSven8ku hfvete och arietokratiens lif (Stockholm, 1882), vol. v, p. 269 ; Peez and Dehn, Englands ?‘orim78ch&!. Bus der Zeit der KontineWperre (Leipzig, 1912), p. 268.

TREATMENT OF CONFISCATED GOODS 161 soon as Napoleon was able to set his own administrators to the task. The general weakness of authority in those days, in comparison with the present day, was perhaps best expressed in the lack of will and capacity on the part of subordinate organs to follow out the intentions of the heads of the state, and that, too, even under such an almost superhumanly equipped ruler as Napoleon. The fiscal methods-to use a fine-sounding expression-which Napoleon employed in his own interest were often turned by his subordinates against him, or at least against his policy ; and his altogether unabashed endeavour to turn these abuses to his own account never failed to divert the Continental System still further from its task. In these respects the difference is inconsiderable between the various organs which were more or less completely employed for the purposes of the blockade policy, viz., the large detachments of troops along the coast and their naval coadjutors in ports and estuaries, the customs staff and border police, and finally the local administration in the territories belonging to the Empire and the French legation staffs and consuls in vassal states and occupied territories.

1568.48 Y

RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) EXECUTION OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE IN order to form a concrete notion of the manner in which the Continental System worked, one may properly begin by following the general lines of its development, even though the constant efforts and hindrances exhibit a certain monotony, which, however, is broken in 1810 by what constitutes a change in principle. Our account in the first place concerns the coasts of the North Sea and the Baltic and the parts of the mainland that lie behind them, Germany and Holland, which played the principal parts in the policy, and in which, more over, that policy is best known. The Continental System, being an almost unbroken con tinuation of the previous policy, led to the peculiar effect that the seizures of British goods began before the actual issue of the Berlin decree-in Leipzig, Frankfurt-am-Main, Meppen, which was important for trade up the Ems, Holland, Switzer land, &c. But it was in the Hanse Towns that the centre of gravity lay, and the military cordon in particular was during this first phase (the close of 1806) mainly limited to the North Sea coast from Emden, in East Friesland, which was just at that time ceded to Holland, to Hamburg, with the salient along the boundary of Holstein, at that time belonging to Denmark, as far as Travemiinde, the outport of Lubeck on the Baltic.

NAPOLEON’S ORDERS IN DECEMBER 1806

The best idea of the apparatus which was set going can be obtained from the letters which Napoleon wrote on Decem ber 2 and 3 to Marshal Mortier in Hamburg, to the police and navy ministers, and to his brother, King Louis of Holland,