

RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 165 and from the simultaneously issued proclamation (December 2) as to the blockade in the northeast. In the first of the letters Mortier received orders to occupy Vegesack on the Weser, north of Bremen, in order to complete the blockade of that river. King Louis was to place batteries on the left bank of the river, in order to have a cross fire from corresponding batteries at Bremerlehe on the eastern shore. In the mouth of the Elbe a redoubt and a battery were to be erected on an island in the river immediately opposite Stade, so that no vessel could pass without being, examined, and no English goods could come in through Altona, Hamburg, or any other place ; and in all three Hanse Towns French troops were to be stationed to stop English letters. A brigadier general was to be stationed in Stade, and another in the outport, Cuxhaven; and in addition to this, two cordons-one from Hamburg to Travemunde along the frontier of Holstein, and another along the left bank of the Elbe as far as a point just opposite Ham burg-were to be placed under the command of yet a third brigadier general. As regards troops, the greater part of General Dumonceau’s division, two Italian regiments and a third of the Dutch cavalry, were to be used for these purposes ; and at the same time the minister of the marine received orders to send a post captain with two ensigns and forty sailors to equip some sloops in Stade. The customs authorities received orders to send five hundred (according to the proclamation, three hundred) customs officials under a director of customs and two inspectors of customs, These were the ‘ green coats ’, and in point of fact they arrived before the close of the year and soon drew upon themselves the bitter enmity of the population, Finally, Marshal Moncey was to have at his disposal one hundred gendarmes for distribution along the barrier. On that very same day (December 2) Napoleon wrote a second letter to Mortier with a renewed exhortation to set up a good battery at Stade ; and above all things he was to prevent all communication between Hamburg and Altona, to confiscate on the Elbe all vessels with potash, coal, and all other goods coming from England, and to detain all letters M2

1M INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
from England. In these very fist orders, however, the 
difficulty emerged of obtaining honest executors of the measures. 
The naval minister received a special reminder to send ' un 
bribable ' officers ; and from the very beginning an effort was 
made to interest the soldiers themselves in the effectivity of the 
blockade by the regulation that they should have the benefit 
of all confiscations of goods which should try to pass. But in 
several of the letters, especially that to Fouchh, the minister 
of police, Napoleon says that he has received complaints-in 
reality only too well founded-about his consul in Hamburg, 
LachevardiBre, who ' seems.to steal with impunity '.l 
In Hamburg there still survived the continental establish 
ment of the Merchant Adventurers' Company, the most notable 
English trading company of an older type (the ' Regulated 
Company '), though it no longer played any considerable part. 
In order to save this for the English, the Senate of Hamburg 
purchased the whole establishment, called ' The Merchant 
Adventurers' Court ', and presented it to the members, who 
became citizens of Hamburg besides and in this way escaped 
imprisonment, so far as they did not escape by flight. The 
main thing, however, was the seizure of the English stocks of 
goods, which Napoleon, after various negotiations, fixed at 
the somewhat high figure of 17,000,000 francs for Hamburg 
and 2,000,000 francs for Lubeck ; meanwhile Bremen, by 
delaying the operation for a whole year, managed to smuggle 
away the greater part of the goods there and had to account 
for only 377,000 francs. In Leipzig, whose Fair still constituted 
by far the most important market in Central Europe,specially 
for manufactured goods to and from all points of the compass, 
the stocktaking gave a value of 9,150,000 francs, which was 
redeemed for 6,000,000 francs. Things went in the same way 
elsewhere. 
In Great Britain the publication of the Berlin decree 
caused, according to evidence given before a parliamentary 
committee, a cessation of exports to the Continent during the 
chwqmdance, nos. 11,355 ; 11,356 ; 11,363 ; 11,378; 11,383 ; Proclama 
tion of Dm. 2, 1806, printed in Konig, q, cit., Anlage 2. 