

THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM IN EUROPE (1808-1812) 151 
ruthlessly through the continental self-blockade with all avail 
able means. 
In Great Britain, however, in the course of 1809 expression 
was given to the prevailing belief in the relaxation of the 
pressure by a new Order in Council of April 26, which limited 
the blockade so as to include Holland as far as the Ems, France, 
with her colonies and the possessions dependent thereon, and 
North Italy as far as Pesaro and Orbitello, approximately 
including Tuscany, the old Etruria.l The Orders in Council of 
November 11, 1807, were declared to be cancelled; but in 
reality their policy was continued without any change by the 
manner in which licences were granted. But a general optimism 
diffused itself in England during the course of 1809, thanks to 
the expansion of the colonial trade. 
THE CONVULSIONS OF 1810 
The year 1810, on the other hand, was to be a year of heavy 
ordeals for both the ‘ mighty opposites ’, and that, too, both 
politically and economically. Sweden, which had resisted the 
Continental System longer than any other mainland state, was 
compelled as early as January to bind herself by the Treaty of 
Paris to exclude British vessels and commodities, except salt 
a merely verbal profession of no very great importance, it is 
true, as Admiral Saumarez with his British squadron main 
tained friendly intercourse with the country without a break, 
even after Sweden had been compelled, in November, to declare 
war on Great Britain. Consequently, a far greater change was 
effected by events on the North Sea coast, in that Napoleon 
became more and more convinced of the impossibility of com 
pelling obedience to the self-blockade beyond the limits of his 
own direct authority. For this reason there followed in rapid 
succession, first, in March, the acquisition of southern Holland 
as far as the River Waal, then the incorporation of the whole of 
Holland in July, after Napoleon’s brother Louis had abdicated 
and fled from the country, and finally, in December, the further 
&fartens, Nwwu ~ecpleiz, &c., VOL I, p. 483. 

152 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM annexation of the Hanse Towns, the coast of Hanover, which had formerly been assigned to the kingdom of Westphalia, the Ems department of the Grand Duchy of Berg, Lauenburg, and, after some hesitation, Oldenburg. The result of all this was that, at the turn of the year 1810-11, France extended along the whole of the North Sea coast and the Holstein border up to the Baltic at the mouth of the Trave. At the same time measures were being taken along the south coast of the Baltic by constantly more violent menaces against its three owners, that is, Prussia, helpless but bitterly hostile to Napoleon, Mecklenburg, and Sweden, as the possessor of Swedish Pomerania. It was precisely in the Baltic, however, that there happened before the close of the year an altogether revolutionary event, the strongest possible external blow against the structure that was geographically almost completed, z&., the apostasy of Russia, This occurrence had many causes, but the opposition between the two Emperors became visible when the Emperor Alexander declined Napoleon’s request in the autumn of 1810 to confiscate a large flotilla of commercial vessels trading in the Baltic under different neutral flags ; and the final emancipation was marked by the famous customs ukase which Alexander issued on the last day of the year (December 19/31). In this document a clause about the destruction of prohibited goods was renewed after an interval of thirteen years, undoubtedly in imitation of Napoleon’s own measures, to be mentioned presently. Nothing could have been more welcome to the French Emperor, if this had applied only to British goods ; but now the clause worked exactly in the opposite direction. For some important imports, foremost among them wines, had to arrive by sea in order to be legal ; and as French produce could come only by land, the blow struck at France herself. True, British goods were excluded, ipso facto, as coming from an enemy country. At the same time, however, American vessels were accorded preferential treatment ; and as they were the disguise principally used by British shipping, the whole 4 measure was rightly regarded by Napoleon as an informal