

Napoleon to Eugene, Viceroy of Italy, Sept.. 19, 1810, and to Champagny, Dec. 13,1810 (Cwrespondance, nos. 16,930,17,206) ; decree of Nov. 1, 1810 (Bulletin dm lo&, &e., 4th ser., bull. 324, no. 6,067; Martens, Nouveuu recueil, &c., vol. I, pp. 527-8).

POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES 143 
irrespective of this question of interpretation, put the pre 
viously mentioned parts of the Non-intercourse Act into force 
again as against Great Britain. This was the Non-importation 
Act of 1811.1 Curiously enough, this law seems to have been 
very effective, so that the old methods of evading the prohibi 
tion on trade by shipping cargo via Amelia Island in Canada 
were but little used. Cotton ltccumulated more and more in 
Charleston in the course of 1811 ; and in the autumn no quota 
tions could be published because there were no buyers. The 
whole situation was very peculiar from a commercial point of 
view, inasmuch as the claims of the cotton exporters on England 
could not be satisfied directly, in the natural manner, by the 
importation of British goods, since all such imports were now 
forbidden. Probably the triangular trade through other 
countries also offered great difficulties, for we find the cotton 
broker in Charleston whose reports Mr. Daniels has edited 
complaining of the fact that drafts on England were unsaleable, 
thanks to the new Non-importation Act ; and similar com 
plaints were registered on the British side in a petition from 
the cotton importing town of Liverpool.2 
However, it now became more necessary than ever for the 
Americans to convince the British of the genuineness of the 
French revocation ; and this offered greater and greater 
difficulties, especially in the face of Napoleon’s own utterances. 
In two great speeches delivered in March, 1811, one to deputies 
from the Hanse Towns and another to deputies from the French 
Chambers of Commerce (the second of which was not published 
officially, but was circulated in different versions), he repeated 
his old phrase about the Berlin and Milan decrees as the funda 
mental laws of the Empire, whose validity was coextensive 
with that of the Orders in Council. In the second of the speeches, 
it is true, he declared himself prepared to receive the Americans 
in French ports, on condition that they should uphold the same 
principles as he did ; and if they could not compel England to 
respect them, that they should declare war on that country. 
United dtatea 8tatutea at Large, vol. II, p. 651. 
House of Commons, Apr. 27, 1812 (Hanserd, vol. xu, p. 1081). 

144 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM But manifestly this implied something quite different from the idea that the decrees had been abolished as far back as the November of the previous year. Napoleon expressed himself in a still more unqualified manner in an unpublished message to his Conseil d’administratim du commerce (April 29, 1811), after the passing of the American law of 1811. Inasmuch as that law forbade American vessels to go to England, it followed, he thought, in accordance with his old way of thinking, that a vessel which nevertheless went there was not American at all but English ; and on this hypothesis one could quite well say that the Berlin and Milan decrees were revoked, at least so far as the United States were concerned !