

RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 183 gates of entry for the importation of goods ; and the Baltic coast came to be the centre of trade to such an extent that the Jierante, the Jewish traders of Eastern Europe, went to Konigsberg and Riga, instead of Leipzig, in order to cover their requirements of British manufactures. Finally, great quantities of British yarn came to Trieste and Fiume before the Austro French war, and even after its close, from the repurchased parce1s.l

REES-BREMEN BARRIER (SCHONBRUNN DECREE OF 
JULY 18, 1809) 
Obviously this development did not escape the notice of 
Napoleon. On the contrary, he was kept informed by a veritable 
army of spies as to what was happening both within and with 
out his empire, and it is clear that he did not wish to let it go 
on without taking steps to stop it. He did not even delay his 
counter-measures until the close of the Austrian campaign, 
but limited them in the main to the attempt to isolate Holland, 
which in his eyes was the most serious breach of all in the 
system. At the same time as he renewed, as has been mentioned 
above, the closing of the frontier against France,2 he suddenly 
ordered, by the decree of Schonbrunn on July 18,1809, a corre 
sponding closing of the frontier on the side of Germany and 
caused this to become operative at once without even informing 
the ' protected ' princes in the Confederation of the Rhine who 
were affected by the blockade, &x., his brother Jerome, King 
of Westphalia, and the Grand Duke of Berg. The smuggled 
goods were considered ,by the French director-general of customs, 
Collin de Sussy, to go direct up the Rhine and the Ems, and 
then to go by land through the Grand Duchy of Berg, practically 
corresponding to the Ruhr district, to the whole Confederation 
1 Lettres iddites, nos. 476, 477, 527, 555 ; Duboscq, op. cit., nos. 209, 220, 277 ; 
Sohmidt, Le Grand-duchd de Berg, pp. 348 et 8eq. ; Wellealey, Ym'r8 and Corre 
8"e, vol. m, p. 196; Prytz, Krmbgish antechingar drande GWeborg 
(Uothenburg, 1898), p. 95 ; Bergwall, op. cit., table 3 ; Channing, op. cat., vol. a, 
p. 263 ; Tarle, Kontinental'naja btobda, vol. I, p. 486. 
8 See ante, p. 181. 

l€% INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING of the Rhine. At the close of July, French customs officers were moved into the country, forming a chain from Bremen through Osnabruck down to the Rhine at Rees close to the Dutch frontier, which was thereby cut off from connexions eastward. This cordon was made threefold, consisting of troops, gendarmes and customs officers. According to one statement, one of the lines went along the Dutch frontier from Varel, near the beach of Jade, to Emmerich on the Rhine immediately north of Rees. The violence with which the whole thing was carried out, however, caused great confusion. The local authorities refused to assist the customs officers and protested against their movements ; the gendarmes were at times positively hostile to them ; and to crown all, the customs officials were sometimes corrupt, so that the blockade of the non-French part of the Continent still continued to be practically a failure on well-nigh all points. The unbroken severity of the action that Napoleon followed in Holland, especially by the incorporation of the region south of the Waal in March 1810, seems not to have borne any great fruit either. At any rate, as late as May of the same year King Louis wrote sourly to Marshal Oudinot, Duke of Reggio : ' I have received the letter in which you inform me that smuggling is going on to a great extent on the coast of my kingdom. Like you, I believe that it goes on wherever there are coasts, in Germany as in Holland, and even in France.' The complete annexation of Holland in July created a new situation here, but at the same time it made the barrier between Holland and Germany somewhat purposeless. During the first half of the year 1810, therefore, the situation was not greatly changed. Frankfurt, in particular, could rejoice in an entirely undiminished trade in colonial goods, which came in through the ports of. the North Sea and the Baltic, and were conveyed thence to northern Ita.ly, southern France, and even to Holland and eastern France. The then minister of Prussia in this capital of the Confederation of the Rhine actually declared at the beginning of the year that the town had never before played such a part in the trade of