

1 It should be remarked once for all that the British commercial ststistios are 
not only highly uncertain in themselves, but also show inexplicable variations in 
different sources. But the relative changea, as a rule, exhibit a considerably better 
agreement than the absolute numbers, and map therefore be assumed to deserve 
greater confidence than the latter. For the absolute figures, Bee pod, p. 245. 
See ante, p. 61. 

RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 173 In fact, there are considerably less than one would have expected from the diminished importation of British industrial productso the German market.

TRANSMARINE MARKETS (1808) It was important for Napoleon, accordingly, to attain during 1808 a more effective application of the measures of the pre ceding year, Great Britain also now encountered various new difficulties ; but the peculiar thing about them is that they had no direct connexion with Napoleon’s proceedings, but at the most with the British Orders in Council-a fact which the British opposition, as in duty bound, did not fail to point out. The truth is that they were chiefly caused by the American Embargo Act, partly through the diminished importation of American goods, and partly through the great diminution of tonnage, as explained in part 11, chapter IV. Accordingly, the result for Great Britain was a diminished importation of, and raised prices on, raw materials, which in reality did not at all correspond to Napoleon’s wishes that prices should be low in England and high on the Continent. The imports of raw cotton sank by 42 per cent., of American cotton to Liverpool by no less than 82 per cent., of wool by 80 per cent., of flax by 39 per cent., of hemp by 66 per cent., of tallow by 60 per cent., &c. Naturally enough, under these circumstances, the price of the most important kinds of raw cotton, for instance, in creased in the course of the spring and summer 100 per cent. or more. Especially striking, too, was the rise in prices on goods from Scandinavia and from the Baltic countries in general : timber, hemp, flax, tallow, bristles, tar, but above all linseed, the price of which, at least according to Lord Gren ville’s statement in the House ofLords, rose more than tenfold. The shortage of raw cotton reacted on the spinning industry, which did not fail to complain of its distress by a whole series of petitions to Parliament, wherein special emphasis was laid on the consequences of the breach with America. According to undisputed statements made by the opposition speakers in

174 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
the beginning of the following year, for instance, the poor 
law burdens in Manchester doubled in the course of 1808 ; 
only nine mills were running full time, thirty-one had been 
running half time, and forty-four had entirely suspended 
operations.1 
Many of these complaints, however, referred to the first 
months of the year. The rise in prices, on the contrary, 
was partly due to speculation, which began in the latter part of 
the year and in many respects quite revolutionized the situa 
tion. The year 1808, as it went on, came to be dominated in 
fact by one of the great events in the history of the Continental 
System-the Spanish uprising. But the direct economic 
significance of this movement was not primarily what Napoleon 
once stated, namely, that it gave to England a ' considerable 
amount of sales on the Iberian peninsula '.2 What a limited 
part this matter played can be most easily perceived from the 
following export figures taken from the British trade statistics 
(' real values '). 