

RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 171 
any great scarcity of raw’cotton, especially owing to imports 
through the Mediterranean ports of Lisbon, Leghorn, and 
Trieste. The fmt of these, however, disappeared through the 
conquest of Portugal in the autumn of 1807, and the second 
through the occupation of Etruria at the close of the year. 
But Holland remained as an important gap, which became the 
more serious from Napoleon’s point of view after he had, 
in the second Milan decree of December 1807, passed to the 
view that there were no such things as neutrals ; and con 
sequently he could no longer tolerate the American.shipping in 
Dutch ports. At the turn of the year 1807-8, it ietrue, British 
industrial products did not seem to enter as easily as before ; 
but it was soon to prove that Napoleon had underestimated 
the strength of two forces which were constantly to rise up , 
against his plans, ziz., smuggling and the opening-up of new 
commercial routes. 
Finally, if we regard the process of development from a 
British standpoint, we have the evidence, already cited,l of the 
witnesses before a parliamentary committee that Napoleon’s 
many counter-measures in the late summer and autumn caused 
a sudden stagnation in trade with the Continent. The marine 
insurance premiums, which at the time of the issue of the 
Berlin decree had risen from 6 to 10 per cent., but had then 
declined to 4 per cent., were stated to have reached such amounts 
as 15, 20, and 30 per cent. before the middle of October 1807. 
In sixty-five cases during September and October vessels that 
had taken in cargo for the Continent had requested permission 
to discharge them again. If we look at the statistical material 
available to throw light on the matter, we can establish in 
a comparatively exact way the effects of the Continental 
blockade during 1807. It is especially noteworthy that the 
great exports of cotton goods show almost absolutely un 
altered figures ($9,708,000, as against $9,754,000 in 1806 and 
an average of only ;E7,34,000 in the years 1801-5, all according 
to the ‘ official values ’, which are based upon unchanged unit 
prices from year to year) ; nor do the far less important exports 
1 See ante, p. la. 

172 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING of yarn show any great decline ($60R,000 in 1807, as against $736,000 in 1806 and an average of $666,000 in the years 18014). The probably less reliable figures for total exports show a somewhat more marked but nevertheless insignificant decline, namely, in relation to the year 1806 (8.1 per cent. according to the ' official values ' and only 6.4 per cent. according to ' real values ', which are also affected by changes in price). On the other hand, we can see from these statistics that the sales on the Continent were much more limited, namely, by nearly 33 per cent., according to ' real values ' in ' the north of Europe, including France ' ; and probably the exports of manufactured goods to those markets declined more than exports as a whole. This result agrees very well with what might have been expected under the restrictive measures of the last quarter of the year.1 Next we have to consider colonial goods, which were intended to ' conquer England by excess '.2 The trade statistics do not show any decrease of exports at all, but rather a sbght increase ; and not even the sales to the Continent are notably diminished. But one can see from the tables in Tooke's History of Prices that the price of coffee and sugar declined slightly in the autumn of 1807. Possibly one may point to a slightly greater dislocation in one single department, namely, in the imports of Baltic goods ; and the fact is that this applies to the Baltic trade in general, evidently in consequence of the breach with Russia and Prussia, rather than through the Continental System proper. Hemp and more especially tallow, both from Russia, show a rise in prices in the course of the year, and timber from Memel exhibits violent fluctuations from the middle of 1806. But all this is a trifle ; and during 1807 there are, broadly speaking, no traces of any substantial result of the policy as regards Great Britain's foreign trade as a whole.