

RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 167 and increased guaranties were provided in various ways that unlawful goods should not be permitted to escape examination. In doing this Napoleon fell back on the old and very clumsy expedient of declaring large main groups of goods to be eo ipso British when they did not come from France, that is to say, the majority of textile goods, (except certain ones imported by the Danish East Asiatic Company), cutlery and hardware, glass, pottery, and lump sugar ; and for the colonial goods detailed certificates of origin were required from the French commercial agents in the exporting port. As regards the question as to whether a vessel had put in at an English port, a searching examination was prescribed of the captain and the sailors separately, and the arrest of such of them as should give false information, after which they should be set free only after the payment of a heavy fine (6,000 francs for the captain and 500 francs for each sailor). All such vessels were to be confiscated, while the Berlin decree merely prescribed their expulsion. The latter of these two decrees, that concerning certificates of origin, the examination of the crews, and the confiscation of the vessels, was given practically unaltered validity for the whole Empire through what is called the first Milan decree, issued ten days later (November 23). Within barely a month, as we have seen,l there followed the answer to the Orders in Council, the great second Milan decree, which marks the end of Napoleon’s measures bearing on the Con tinental System in 1807. On the heels of all this, immediately after the beginning of the new year (,January 11, 1808) there came the so-called Tuileries decree, which sought to induce the crews and passengers of vessels to reveal any call in an English port by promising one-third of the value of the vessel and cargo as a reward. In September 1807, Napoleon, with his customary ruthlessness, had intervened in Holland and, to the despair of his brother Louis, had calmly caused his gendarmes to convey to France from that nominally independent kingdom a citken of Breda and a citizen of Bergen-op-Zoom on the suspicion of smuggling.

1 See ante, p. 123.

168 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
At the same time, thanks to Canning’s almost Napoleonic 
contempt for the independence of neutrals, Napoleon received 
valuable assistance in the blockade orthe North Sea coast in 
consequence of the bombardment of Copenhagen in the begin 
ning of September aird the breach between Denmark and Great 
Britain. As a matter of fact, Schleswig-Holstein, during the 
whole of the preceding period, had been a serious obstacle in the 
way of Napoleon’s measures south of the Elbe. When the Elbe 
and the Weser were barred, Tonningin particular, but also Husum 
on the west coast of Schleswig, had largely replaced the Hanse 
Towns during the years 1803-6 as importers of English and 
colonial goods ; and their trade had flourished like plants in 
a forcing-house. All attempts to prevent the passing of goods 
to the south from Holstein territory through the town of 
Altona, which was practically continuous with Hamburg (all 
nah), met with almost insuperable difficulties, all the more 
as the local Holstein authorities never failed to certify the 
neutral origin of the goods. It was, therefore, of very great 
importance that the ruler of Denmark, the Crown Prince 
Frederick, embittered through the conduct of Great Britain, 
placed himself at the service of the Continental System, with 
almost unique loyalty, and as early as September 1807 ordered 
the seizure of all forbidden goods in Holstein. Almost alone 
among the allies of Napoleon, he repudiated the idea of feigning, 
adherence to the system while the real intention was to allow 
intercourse with Great Britain. His was not the principle 
auaviter in re, fortiter in modo, to quote a modern historian. 
It is true that the British, on their side, made a counter-move 
which was to have far-reaching consequences in the opposite 
direction, in that, simultaneously with the attack on Copen 
hagen, they occupied the Danish possession of Heligoland ; 
but the effects of this did not immediately show themselves.1 