

RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 165 months of December 1806, and of January and February 1807, with a rise in the marine insurance premiums. But the absence of captures on the basis of the decree, which, as we have seen before, was at first regarded as not applying to the sea, after that put new life into commercial intercourse ; and an Order in Council of February 18, with instructions for the commanders of vessels, granted unrestricted traffic for the vessels and goods of the Hanse Towns and the rest of that part of North Germany which was occupied by the French ; and this safeguarded intercourse with them.l During the whole of the first six months of 1807, indeed, the Continental self-blockade may be said to have been practi cally ineffective, at least in North Germany. The systematic dishonesty of Napoleon's tools gave rise to regular orgies during this time, especially with the help of the new commander in-chief in Hamburg, Marshal Brune, whom Napoleon, with unusually good reason, branded as an 'undaunted robber '. According to the report of de Tournon, who was sent there especially to investigate, Brune's instructions themselves to the customs staff were calculated to encourage smuggling; but that was the case to a very much greater extent with the application of the instructions. When vessels came up the Elbe, they were allowed, in absolute defiance of the instruc tions quoted above, to continue their journey past Stade, with only one single person from the barrier control on board, usually an ignorant seaman, while the customs officials them selves were consistently kept at a distance. The bill of lading was examined by a sub-officer of the navy ; and the inspection which it was the duty of Consul Lachevardibe to carry out, was handed over by him to a Hamburg broker, who had the greatest possible interest in letting everything pass. On the basis of the entirely uncontrolled investigation of this person, 1 For this and what follow concerning the Hanee Towns, of. Wohlwill, N w e GesdicMe, &c., pp. 339 et seq. ; Ser%%res, L'Allemugne. franp&e, &c., pp. 98 et 8eq. ; Vogel, Die Haweskidie, %c., loc. cit., pp. 18 et 8e4. ; Schifer, Brema und die Ken tinentaleperre, lot. cit., pp. 416 et seq. Ab0 Konig, op. cit., pp. 179 et 8q., 356 et aeq. ; Staphen in the Home of Commons, Mar. 6, 1809 (Hansard, vol. xm, app. pp. xxxiii et 8eq.) ; Order in &unci1 of Feb. 18, 1807 (Hansard, vol. x, pp. 129 et seq.).

166 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
the consul afterwards issued a certificate as to the non-English 
origin of the goods ; and fabricated Holstein certificates of 
origin were always available to bolster up the certificate. At 
the close of May 1807, Brune went a step farther and removed 
the always relatively zealous customs officials from the Ham 
burg-Travemiinde frontier line and the Elbe line from Harburg 
(immediately opposite Hamburg) to Stade, replacing them by 
gendarmes. Consequently, during the five and a half months 
down to the beginning of August there arrived in Hamburg, 
without impediment, 1,475 vessels with cargoes estimated at 
590,000 tons, including the most notoriously English goods, 
such as coal. According to the investigator just mentioned, 
Hamburg was chock full of English and colonial goods, which 
were sold as openly as in London, and not a single seizure 
had occurred. This would also seem to have been the time at 
which Bourrienne, Napoleon’s envoy in Hamburg-according 
to his own story, which is in this case confirmed from English 
sources-obtained cloth and leather from England in order to 
be in a position to supply Napoleon’s own army with the 
uniform coats, vests, caps, and shoes which he had to procure.1 
The farce of Brune’s conduct in Hamburg, however, was 
too much for Napoleon, who removed him in the latter half of 
July and appointed Bernadotte as his successor. This appoint 
ment manifestly brought with it a stricter enforcement of the 
law, although the new and well-meaning despot that the 
Hamburgers thereby got proved rather costly to the town ; 
nor did he entirely escape more or less unproven accusations 
of corruptibility, both from Napoleon and also, later on, from 
the Senate of Hamburg.2 Above all, however, after the re 
moval of Brune, Napoleon regulated the blockade. by means 
of two new decrees of August 6 and November 13,1807. These 
placed the right of seizing English goods into the hands of the 
customs staff, which was strengthened at the same time, while 
the troops were placed at the disposal of the customs officials 
Bourneme, dldntoirea BUT NapoUon, &c. (Paris, 1829), vol. M, pp. 291 et sq. 
2 Lettres iditea de Naplion ler (Lecestre ea.), nos. 523 (Sept. 12, 1809), 823 
(June 13, 1811), 826 (June 22, 1811) ; Servidres, op. cit., p. 124 ; Wohlwill, Neuere 
Geachichde, &e., p. 300. 