

RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 185 Europe nor been so full of colonial goods ; and the trade seems further to have increased in the course of the summer. As regards Leipzig, to be sure, it was stated before and during the Easter Fair in 1810 that the imports through the North Sea ports, especially of English yarn, had practically ceased. But to make up for this, the transfer of the trade to the Baltic ports was now definitive, helped with the best of good-will by Prussia, and also by Sweden and Mecklenburg, to circumvent the Continental System in every conceivable way, and, for that matter, with useful help from the corrupt French consuls in the ports. Konigsberg above all, but to a great extent the other towns on the south coast of the Baltic-Rostock, Stralsund, Stettin, Memel, and even Riga-now took the place of the Hanse Towns and the Dutch ports ; and there began a unique importation of American cotton, which attained its highest level during the summer. The whole of the Confederation of the Rhine, Austria, Switzerland, and even France, were pro vided from there at a time when spinning mills were spring ing up on the Continent like mushrooms from the ground. At the Michaelmas Fair in 1810 the value of the supplies of colonial goods in Leipzig was estimated at 65,500,000 francs ; and although only a sixth part remained in the town, all cellars, vaults, and storehouses were full to overflowing, chiefly with cotton, but also with coffee, sugar, and indigo.1

D’IVERNOIS’S EPIGRAM 
Naturally enough, people in England, especially in govern 
ment circles, took a very optimistic view of the situation. The 
new Order in Council of April 1809, however modest was its 
modification of the paper blockade, is an evidence of this fact. 
Reasons are found for it in ‘ different events and changes which 
have occurred in the relations between Great Britain and the 
territories of other powers ’, which meant, of course, the Iberian 

Correqondunce, nos. 16,470, 16,713 ; Duboscq, op. cit., no. 290 ; Schmidt, op. cit., pp. 3503 ; Konig, op. cit., pp. 225 et sq., 230-1, 238 et sq., 241-2 ; Derm Btadter, Das Urossherzogtum Frankfurt (Frankfurt-am-Main, 1901), pp. 311-12.

186 INTERNAL HISTORY AND VC‘ORIUNG 
peninsula. In February 1809, Lord Liverpool, formerly Lord 
Hawkesbury, who was home secretary at the time, spoke in the 
House of Lords about ‘ the flourishing state of commerce ’ ; and 
as late as May 1810, the British budget debate was marked 
entirely by a feeling of booming trade and prosperity, so that 
even on the side of the opposition Huskisson considered that 
the country was in a happy state of development. Especially 
seductive was the roseate description given by Perceval as 
chancellor of the exchequer ; and Rose, the vice-president of 
the Board of Trade, said that he was unable, to be sure, to 
explain how it could be so, ‘ but somehow it appeared, that 
from, the industry and ingenuity of our merchants every pro 
hibitory measure of Bonaparte’s had utterly failed of its object. 
In fact, our trade, instead of being limited by it, had rather 
been extended, in spite of the hostile proceedings of the enemy.’ 
The same idea was expressed with a touch of G/~PLP in a con 
temporary epigram placed on the title-page of a pamphlet 
by Sir Francis d’Ivernois, a Swiss naturalized in England, 
entitled Efets du blocus continental : 
Votre blocus ne bloque point, 
et gdce A votre heureuse adresse 
ceux que vous affamez sans cesse 
ne pCriront que d’embonpoint.1 
Hansard, v01. XII, pp. 801 ; vol. XVI, p. 1043 et sq ; d’Ivernois, Effete du 
blocus continental sur le commerce, lea jinancea et la prospirite’ dea Ides Britanniques 
(London, 1809 : dated July 24) ; Servikres, op. cit., p. 131 note. 