

176 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
British government speakers as evidence that the Orders in 
Council had not injured the exports of the country, but had 
only caused 8 transition to direct trade with the former markets 
instead of sales to the North Americans as intermediaries. The 
mouthpieces of the opposition, however, maintained, and with 
more reason, that this new trade was really a new conquest 
brought about by the Spanish uprising and consequently no 
result of the destruction of trade with the United States by 
the Orders in Council. 
BRITISH SPECULATION IN SOUTH AMERICA 
The new outlet for sales which thus seemed to offer itself 
gave rise to a violent speculation with all the distinctive 
characteristics of a boom-general optimism, great sales, 
industrial activity, and rising prices in the articles of specula 
tion. As early as 1806 Sir Home Popham, the second in 
command of a naval expedition, had made of his own accord 
an attack on the mouth of the Plata and had taken Buenos 
Aires, upon which he sent home eight wagon-loads of silver 
accompanied by a boastful circular addressed to the manu 
facturing towns of England together with a list of all the goods 
that could find a ready sale in his conquest ; but as ill luck 
would have it, Buenos &res had to be evacuated before the 
goods had yet arrived. Now that access to those markets was 
secured, merchants were attracted, by the memory of the hope 
aroused by Popham’s circulars and the loads of silver, into 
incredibly bold ventures in the way of exports. McCulloch, the 
political economist, describes the frenzy, after a contemporary 
source, as follows : 
We are informed by Mr. Mawe, an intelligent traveller resident at 
Rio Janeim, at the period in question, that more Manchester goods 
were sent out in the course of a few weeks than had been consumed in 
the twenty years preceding ; and the quantity of English goods of all 
sorts poured into the city was so very great, that warehouses could not. be 
provided sufficient to contain them, and that the most valuable merchan 
dise was actually exposed for whole weeks on the beach to the weather, 
and to every sort of depredation. But the folly and ignorance of those 

RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 177 who had crowded into this speculation was still more strikingly evinced in the selection of the articles sent to South America. . . , Some specula tors actually went so far as to send skates to Rio Janeir0.l

The ha1 consequences of these speculations could not be 
advantageous, but for the time being the situation seemed 
flourishing, The total exports during 1808 exhibit approxi 
mately unaltered figures, but the exports of cotton goods rose 
by 29 per cent,, irrespective of the change in price. But this 
did not hold good of Central and Northern Europe, where the 
British trade statistics indicate a very heavy decline for both 
British goods (from &5,090,000 to $2,160,000)/and colonial 
goods (from 335,730,000 to $3,270,000). This, however, is 
largely counterbalanced by a corresponding rise in exports to 
the Mediterranean countries ; and other information points 
to considerably larger exports to the north of Europe, as shall 
be shown shortly.* 
If we examine the position on the mainland and especially 
in Germany somewhat more closely, we find the gres.test change 
in 1808 to be a unique rise in the price of raw cotton and 
a shortage in the supplies, which were obtained mainly from 
the sale of captured cargoes. At the Michaelmas Fair in Leipzig 
the price of Brazilian cotton (Pernambuco) rose 223 per cent. 
above the normal ; and, as before, this was especially felt in 
France, where the textile industry in Nantes was enabled by 
government loans to go over from cotton to wool, As Great 
Britain herself suffered from a shortage of raw cotton, this can 
only in part be ascribed to the Continental self-blockade. With 
regard to its efficaciousness, Napoleon was able to record an 
advance in one quarter, namely, in Switzerland, where the 
smuggling of British goods ceased after 1808 ; but Holland, 
which was far more important from this point of view, was still 
a tender spot. It is true that King Louis, as early as January, 
McCulloch, Principles of PoZiticaZEGonomy (London, 1830), 2d. ed. p. 330; Smart,, 
Eco~~omic Annals, &c., vol. I, pp. 122-3, 184. Cf. speech in the House of Commons, 
June 16, 1812 (Hansard, vol. xxm, p. 503) ; Louis Simond, Journal of a Tour and 
Residence in &eat Britain during the yenra 1810 and 1811, by a French Travellet 
(New York, 1815), vol. I, p. 242 (under date of Aug. 1, 1810). 
p8f, p. 179. 
1569.43 N 