

178 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING did something to bring about an effective barring of the coast ; but the smuggling went on so openly that, according to the evidence of Louis himself, the shops of Leyden displayed with out disguise quantities of British manufactures. By decree of September 16, 1808, Napoleon, who a little earlier had asserted that there were people who had pocketed 20,000,000 francs through smuggling in Holland, had recourse in violent indigna tion to themeasure ofclosing the frontier of France to all colonial goods from Holland. This seems to have had a certain effect, as one can see from the fact that the imports of British yarn and British manufactures, which last had already been in significant, to Leipzig through Holland ceased entirely at this time. A month later (October $23, 1808) there was issued an extremely draconic Dutch decree as to the closing of the ports. This decree was so OutrS that it bears every mark of applying the principle smviter in re, fortiter in modo : all exports were prohibited until further notice ; no commercial vessels, domestic or foreign, might put in at any Dutch ports, under any pretext, on pain of being fired at ; fishing vessels were to return to their port of departure, but were to be confiscated on the least sign of intercourse with the enemy, &c.l

NEW TRADE ROUTES VIA HELIGOLAND AND SWEDEN (1808)

The effect of this, however, was a new change in the channels followed by trade. To begin with, Heligoland now showed its immense importance as an emporium or base for the smuggling of British goods into north Germany. In 1808, according to Rist’s dispatches, Great Britain expended &500,O00 in building a port, fortifications and warehouses on the little island covering about 150 acres. A number (stated to be 200) of British merchants and representatives of commercial houses settled there and formed a special chamber of commerce ; and this peculiar centre of trade was jestingly called ‘ Little London ’.

De Cbrenville, op. cit., p. 309 ; Duboscq, op. cit., no8. 117, 118, 126, 146, 158, 159,180,167,178,189, 190 ; and pp. 47 et seq. ; Corrmwnee, no. 13,781. Dutch Ordinances : Martem, Nouveau recueit, &e., vol. I, pp. U8-9, 474-5.

RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 179 
According to the statements of the British merchants them 
selves, during three and a half months (August-November 1808) 
nearly 120 vessels discharged their cargoes there, and the 
yearly imports were estimated-though, to judge by the com 
mercial statistics, this estimate was almost certainly too high 
at ;E8,000,000, or nearly a sixth of the total exports of Great 
Britain for 1808 (E50,000,000). It is not surprising, therefore, 
that great quantities of goods had to lie exposed to wind and 
weather, and that there was scarcely standing room on the 
island, The difficulty consisted, of course, in smuggling the 
goods into the mainland afterwards ; but the Continental 
blockade had again been weakened by the fact that in the 
beginning of the year Napoleon had been obliged to evacuate 
Oldenburg out of regard to his Russian ally, who was related 
to the Duke of Oldenburg. It is difficult to determine from 
accessible sources what routes the goods afterwards followed. 
From Bremen a certain amount reached Leipzig for the Easter 
Fair, but after that nothing ; and both the shipping of Ham 
burg and the trade of Bremen had, according to their own 
sources, almost ceased to exist. But there were many possi 
bilities left, especially through Holstein, where the population 
and the officials alike did their best to neutralize the loyalty 
of the Danish government to the system. They succeeded 
admirably, and it is certain that there are no symptoms at all 
of decline in the traffic via Heligoland. 
During 1808, moreover, Sweden had begun to serve as 
a storing place for British goods, The Swedish trade statistics 
had previously shown an excess of exports during the century, 
especially as regards Great Britain ; but during 1808 there was 
a complete reversal, so much so that the imports from there 
amounted to 6,650,000 riksdder, as against exports amounting 
to 2,610,000 riksdaler. It was colonial goods that went this 
way, for the most part through Gothenburg, the position of 
which as one of the foci of the commerce of the world had, to 
judge by its export statistics, been coming into view even in 
the previous year. Imports more than doubled in one year, 
\mat were for the circumstances of the time very considerable 
N2 
180 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
quantities of sugar and coffee (!2,900,000 Ib. and 1,300,000 lb., 
respectively) were exported from there in 1808 ; and when 
Admiral Saumarez was in the town, in May, he wrote to 
his son : ' Gothenburg is a place of great trade at this time ; 
at least 1,800 sail of vessels of different nations are in the 
port.' From there the goods tried to find their way into 
Germany through the South Baltic p0rts.l 
Thus Napoleon was still far from his goal, and the Spanish 
rising in particular was to carry him farther and farther away. 
As early as October 1,1808, his brother Louis-who was always 
pessimistic, it is true-wrote to the eldest of the brothers, 
Joseph Bonaparte, the newly created King of Spain : ' Far 
from settling down, matters get more and more tangled, and 
perhaps I speak too much as a Dutchman, but I find something 
revolutionary in the way in which war is made on commerce 
it seems to me that they never will attain the object that they 
have set before them '. At the same time as Spain and Portugal, 
he thinks, South America and Mexico have thrown themselves 
open to the English ; ' and for a chimerical system the whole 
Continent is losing its trade and shipping, while that of England 
grows prodigiously '.2 
DIMINISHED VIGILANCE DURING THE AUSTRIAN CAMPAIGN 
(1809) 
This line of development was especially marked in 1809 
when Napoleon's campaign against Austria and the Spanish 
uprising also made heavy demands on him and his troops, 
while trade under a neutral, that is to say, American flag, again 
became possible through the Non-intercourse Act, bringing it 
about that the importation of raw materials into Great Britain 
1 Fisher, Studies in Napoleonic Statemnanship : Germany (Oxford, 1903), pp. 338 et 
6eq. ; Rubin, 1807-1814, &o., pp. 3834; Chon, Sveriges Historia intill tjuSoncm.de seUe.? 
(Stockholm, 1910), vol. IX : A, pp. 26-7; Bergwd, Hietoriek underfiittebe, kc., 
p. 48 (table) ; Mernoire and Correqondence of Admiral Lord de Saumnrez (Ross 
ed., London, 1838), vol. II, p. 105 ; Ahnfelt, op. cit., vol. V. p. 225 ; Ramm, Niit 
Qateborg var frihmn (Gothenburg, 1900), p. 3. 
Duboscq, op. cit., no. 182. 
RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 181 
again became normal and the possibilities of smuggling into 
the Continent grew greatly. Great Britain could also now 
rejoice in the highest prosperity in the new trade she acquired 
through the Spanish uprising, as is most plainly shown by the 
tables given above.1 The British exports of cotton goods show 
a unique rise : manufactured goods from S12,500,000 to 
~18,400,000 and yarn from S470,OOO to ~1,020,000 (‘ official 
values ’, that is to say, irrespective of changes in prices). The 
former thus underwent an increase of nearly 50 per cent., and 
the latter of more than 100 per cent., as compared with the 
in themselves high figures of 1808. 
This was not solely an effect of the possession of new 
markets. On the contrary, all our sources are agreed in attribut 
ing it to the diminished watchfulness on the North Sea, where 
the self-blockade was alleged-with some exaggeration, it is 
true-to have in reality ceased ; and it was considered that 
trade was being carried on almost as in time of peace. This is 
made visible, indeed, by a rise in the figures for British exports 
to North Europe from S2,160,000 to S5,700,000 for British 
goods, and from S3,270,000 to no less than S8,870,000 for 
colonial goods. With a zeal that infallibly reminds us of the 
saying, ‘ When the cat’s away the mice will play,’ all Napoleon’s 
tools on the North Sea coast took advantage of his absence in 
Austria to relax the bonds and to let in vessels, especially those 
under the American flag. As early as the middle of March 1809, 
King Louis of Holland declared to the Emperor that his country 
was ‘ physically unable to endure the closing of the ports ’ in 
combination with the closing of the Franco-Dutch frontier 
ordered by Napoleon in the previous September ; and accord 
ingly he made certain relaxations in the blockade by sea at 
the close of the month. When Napoleon, at the beginning 
of June, rescinded his September decree, his brother embraced 
the opportunity to rescind the order prohibiting American 
vessels to put in at Dutch ports. This caused Napoleon to put 
the barring of the frontier in force again in the middle of July; 
but not only the showers of abuse which Napoleon poured over 
1 See. ante, p. 174. 
182 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
his unhappy brother, but also his brother's correspondence with 
the Dutch ministers, show distinctly enough how smuggling was 
going on in Holland itself throughout the entire year. 
Farther to the north smuggling through Oldenburg continued 
into the following year. A sudden fall in the price of cotton 
yarn in northern Germany was caused in February 1809, by 
the large stocks that the Manchester manufacturers had laid 
up in Heligoland ; and as an example of the scope of the traffic 
which was carried on from that island, it may be mentioned, 
on the authority of the statements of the Heligoland mer 
chants, that sixty-six vessels and seventy smaller boats were 
able, during nineteen days in June 1809, to land on the coast 
goods to the value of several hundred thousand pounds. Ac 
cording to French reports, the guards along the Elbe and the 
Weser, too, were now reduced to a few untrustworthy Dutch 
soldiers and gendarmes under the command of a drunken officer. 
If we cross to Schleswig-Holstein territory, we find there the 
same phenomenon, namely, a huge expansion of the colonial 
trade. What is called the second Tonning period, which is 
marked by these American visits, began in June 1809, and 
lasted to the end of the year. The traffic all along the line was 
formally facilitated by the British goveriment by means of 
the new Order in Council of April 26, which restricted the 
declaration of blockade in the north to the River Ems, at least 
in so far as the German North Sea coast was not reckoned as 
a dependency of France, which, of course, is just what it actually 
was. In reality, however, this meant comparatively little, 
inasmuch as the old regulations were in practice applied by the 
issue of the British government Kcences, which shipping was 
scarcely able to do without. 
At the sa.me time English trade was being transferred to 
Gothenburg and the Baltic ports. In Gothenburg the British 
set up, in 1809, special warehouses and stores on Foto im 
mediately opposite the entrance to the harbour. The re 
exports of raw sugar almost trebled, while the exports of coffee, 
like the shipping of the port in general, more than doubled. 
The Prussian and the Pomeranian ports now became regular 