

200 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING restricted to prize goods was in reality of no importance. It is true that Napoleon declared, in a letter to Eugene, that all colonial goods which had not been captured or seized should remain excluded ; but according to Thiers, express orders were given in the correspondence of the Customs Department that this should not be strictly observed-and there can be no doubt about the practical extension of the concession to all colonial goods.1 As regards the customs rates, the principle, as has been said already, was that they should correspond to the costs of smug gling. When Holland was incorporated with France on July 9, 1810, it was laid down, in approximate conformity with the above-mentioned law of January, that the large stocks of colonial goods in that country should be admitted to the empire on payment of a duty which in the decree of incorporation was fixed at 50 per cent. of the value, but which, according to a somewhat later declaration, was to be 40 or 50 per cent., accord ing to the time of the declaration. This principle was applied not only to France, but also to all the vassal states, which now became the object of the same merciless pressure with regard to the new system as they had formerly been with regard to the Continental decrees and which, as a rule, formally submitted at least as obediently as then. But to make assurance doubly sure, every stock of colonial goods which was as much as four days' journey from the French frontier was to be re-. garded as intended to injure France, and was therefore to be subjected to examination by French troops ; in fact, French troops were actually employed for the purpose. In order that the right degree of pressure should be attained, it was the in tention that the new order should be carried through simul taneously over the whole Continent, so that there would be no country to which the goods could fly in order to escape these heavy burdens ; consequently Eugene at least received orders to keep the new instructions secret for the present. Principally

Law of Jan. 12, 1912 (Bulletin h lois, kc., 4th .eer., bull. 260, no. 6,122); Letters to Eugene of Aug. 6 and Sept. 19,1810 (Cwrmpondance, nos. 16,767,16,930) ; Tbiers, Histoire dzc coneulat, &c., bk. X X X ~ , vol. XII, p. 186 note.

FISCALISM 201 out of regard for the captors, but not exclusively in their favour, it was conceded that the duty might be paid in kind, that is to say, by means of a corresponding part of the goods which were to come in, and also in promissory notes ; and without this concession it is certain that in many cases such large amounts could not have been gathered in. Every holder of colonial goods was bound to declare them, so that, as Thiers expresses it, the whole was taken in any attempt at barratry and half in case of honest declaration.

Trialton Tarifl (August 5, 1810) 
The whole of this arrangement has taken its name from the 
Trianon tariff of August 5, 1810, which is one of the funda 
mental laws of the new system. This does not provide for 
customs duties based on a percentage of the values, but laid 
down specific duties by weight (per 100 kilograms) on the 
different kinds of colonial goods. Duties of 4d and 50 per cent. 
still seem to have been applied, however, for prize goods and 
goods imported by licence, respectively. How high these rates 
were may perhaps be more clearly set forth by comparing with 
the highest rates of duty, namely, those on goods from non 
French colonies, in the tariff of 1806, to which reference has 
already been made; and yet the 1806 duties had already 
formed 'the corner-stone of a whole series of rises in customs 
duties. The duties at different dates are tabulated in appendix 
ii, which will perhaps afford the clearest view of the amount 
of the increase. The most violent was the rate on raw cotton, 
which as late as 1804 was assessed at only one franc per 100 
kilograms, In 1806 this rate was raised to not less than sixty 
francs, notwithstanding that raw cotton had become the 
foundation of a main department in the new industrial de 
velopment which began under the Empire. These rates, how 
ever, dwindle into insignificance when compared with what 
was now enacted. According to the Trianon tariff, South 
American and longstapled Georgia cotton had to pay 800 
francs ; Levantine cotton, if imported by sea, 400 francs, and 