

1 98 INJXRNAL HISTORY AND WORKING a competition with the smugglers. This was to be arranged in such a way that in some form or other the importation of the hitherto forbidden goods was to be permitted, but only on payment of a duty that exactly corresponded to an amount which, as we have seen, the smuggling business had previously cost. In that ,case no more goods would come into the country than had been the case beforehand, but the profit would fall to the state instead of to the smugg1ers.l Such a device could not fail to appeal to Napoleon with his cynical sense of reality for everything that had to do with means ; but what he shut his eyes to till the last was the great extent to which this means damaged his great end. As a matter of fact, this meant that fiscalism had definitively gotten the upper hand over the Continental System, at least in one-half of its range. The object was no longer to exclude goods, but to make an income by receiving them instead ; and no sophistry in the world could make the latter compatible with the fotmer. But we cannot maintain that Napoleon in this respect con sciously acted in opposition to his objects. His line of thought was as inconsistent as that which is still constantly found outside the circle of professional economists, in which the fact is ignored that the more prohibitive or protectionistic a customs tariff, the less it brings in, and consequently that that part of a customs duty which keeps goods out brings in no money to the treasury. This duality of conception in Napoleon finds a very typical expression in a letter addressed to his brother Jerome, King of Westphalia, on October 3, 1810, in which he first points out how advantageous the new system would be for this young prodigal by bringing him in a larger income ; and after that he goes on to say : ' It will also be a great advantage in othei respects, since the continental customers of the English mer chants will not be able to pay for them (the goods), and the consumption of colonial goods, which will be rendered dear in this way, will be diminished. They will thus be exposed to

Darmstiidter, Das &osslmmgturn Trankfurt, p. 308 note 3. Cf. Peroeval in the House of Commons in the Debate on the Budget, 1810. Hansard, vol. XM, p. 1056. See also Schmidt, Le Grand-ducU de Berg, pp. 358-9.

FISCALISM 199 
attack and at the same time driven out of the continent.’ The 
representatives of Napoleon used the same language in de 
pendent countries.1 So far, therefore, the reshaping of the 
Continental System aimed at no real increase in its efficacy, 
but rather at the reverse, inasmuch as Napoleon acquired 
a direct interest in the admission of goods into the country. 
On paper, however, no departure from the principles of the 
Continental System was ever acknowledged, inasmuch as the 
Berlin and Milan decrees were retained unchanged to the last ; 
and Napoleon zealously impressed on his stepson Eugene, the 
Viceroy of Italy, the necessity of not letting the goods in ‘ to 
the detriment of the blockade ’, But in his inexhaustible supply 
of expedients Napoleon found a simple means of circumventing 
his own system in fact, namely, by granting exceptions from 
the prohibition on import in the matter of captured goods. 
Prize Decree (January 12, 1810) 
By a law issued at the very beginning of the year 1810 (Jan 
uary la), it was laid down that goods the importation of which 
was forbidden (with the exception of certain kinds of cotton 
fabrics and hosiery) might be introduced into the country on 
payment of a customs duty of 48 per cent. when ~ e y came 
from prizes captured from the enemy by war vessels or licensed 
privateers. This was called ‘ permitted origin ’ (wigines per 
mises). But the exception here established with regard to 
cotton goods was developed still further in the course of the 
year; and in this process Napoleon skilfully took advantage 
of the different feeling that prevailed on the Continent with 
regard to colonial goods and English industrial products. In 
accordance with this, the new system involved a relentless 
prohibition of British goods, but made concessions with regard 
to colonial goods, which were admitted on payment of huge 
duties, So far as the system in this form could be enforced, 
Napoleon contrived at least not to favour British industry, 
but only British trade. That he exception was in form 
1 Comeqmdance, no. 16,983 ; de CBrenville, op, cit., pp. 331-2. 