

202 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING if passing through the custom-houses on the Rhine, WOO francs ; other cotton, except Neapolitan, 600 francs. This classification was evidently intended to hit hardest the goods which were most dependent on English imports. We have already men tioned the fact that all goods from French (Dutch) colonies, with the corresponding vessels, were free, and that the direct imports by American vessels only paid one quarter of the amount, a matter which in reality meant nothing, as the British blockade prevented all such direct imports. Indigo was raised from 15 francs (1803) to 900 francs, after which (in January, 1813) there followed a new rise to 1,100 francs ; cloves from 3 francs (1806) to 600 francs ; tea from 3 francs (besides, in certain cases, 10 per cent. of the value) to 600 francs for green tea and 150 francs for ot,her kinds ; coffee and cocoa from 150 francs and ROO francs, respectively (1806), to 400 francs and 1,000 francs ; while h e cinnamon, cochineal and nutmeg, which had not been specified in the older tariffs, all paid 2,000 francs per 100 kilograms. Some thirty new headings were added to the tariff by a supplementary schedule of September 27 of the same year.

Fontainebleau Decree (October 18, 1810) 
But as a new road was now in reality opened for the legiti 
mate importation of colonial goods, it was important for 
Napoleon not only to strike still harder at the illicit importation 
of those goods, but also to make the sale of British industrial 
products impossible. It is this idea which lies at the bottom 
of the immense increase in the rigour of the customs laws which 
is marked by the Fontainebleau decree of October 18,1810, the 
last of the great laws in this department. Both the penalties 
now introduced and the treatment of the goods themselves 
involved a reversion to the most violent methods of the pro 
hibitive system. First as regards the prohibited goods, that is 
to say, manufactured products, the smuggling leaders of 
different grades were punished with ten years’ penal servitude 
and branding, while the lower-grade tools might under extenu 
ating circumstances get off with a milder kind of punishment 

FISCALISM 203 (peiws correctionnelles) and 5 to 10 years' police supervision. The smuggling of the goods specified on the tariff, that is to say, colonial goods, involved as much as four years' penal servitude, while ' simple smuggling,' that is, smuggling ' without any agreement or obligation of a kind to form an undertaking or insurance,' did not lead to penal servitude. The regulations as regards the treatment of the goods were carried to still greater lengths than the punishment for smug glers. As regards colonial goods the penalty was limited, as before, to confiscation, the goods to be sold by auction every six months ; but with regard to prohibited goods Napoleon now went to the extreme and ordered that they should be publicly burned or otherwise destroyed after a list had been made of them with prices attached. Here Napoleon was follow ing precedents which were to be found in English legislation of the seventeenth century, and which was repeated as late as the beginning of the reign of George 111.1 For the whole of this draconic legislation there were erected special customs courts (cows prtv6tales des douams), the operations of which have stood out to later generations as the culmination of the oppres sion involved in the Continental System.2