

196 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING regards Bourrienne, Napoleon is alleged to have said that he (Bourrienne) would have been able to find a silver mine in the garden of the Tuileries if he had been left alone there ; and at the beginning of 1811 the Emperor calculated that his former secretary had made seven or eight million francs at Hamburg. The Emperor’s letters are full of embittered outbursts against his corruption, which seems to have been carried on quite systematically with the connivance of sub-agents of different sorts, and which finally led, first to his being prohibited to sign certificates of origin, and then to his being removed from office. But these are only isolated examples of things that occurred everywhere.l Rist, who, like the purely Hamburg;-an writers, fully confirms the French statements as to the corruptibility of Bourrienne and his associates, does not represent the conduct of his Holstein compatriots in any better light. Moreover, passing to another country, we are informed that in Geneva eighty customs offi cials had to be dismissed in seven months for complicity in malversation ; and from the Rhine frontier we have further information that the director of customs and his relations directly helped the illicit trade in the smuggling centre of . Strassburg, and that the customs lieutenants on the Rhine lived on bribes when they had no British pension. However oppressive a corrupt administration may be to the population, yet the bribery system would scarcely have led Napoleon to change his policy, if the whole thing had been limited to exactions above those allowed by laws and ordi nances. From the standpoint of the Continental System, how ever, the unfortunate thing was that at least as much, and probably more, could be gained by facilitating or actually encouraging-always for a consideration-precisely the traffic which the Continental System aimed to annihilate by every possible means. For such illegalities on the part of the officials the people were willing to pay munificently, and they were, if

1 Besides the above-cited passages, cf. especially Napoleon’s letters of Sept. 2, 11, and Dec. 18,1810, and of Jan. 1 and Sept. 3,1811. Currapondance, nos. 16,859, 16,891, 17,225, 17,257, 18,111.

SMUGGLING AND CORRUPTION 197 anything, somewhat more amiably disposed than before toward their foreign rulers. One of the very few persons who from the beginning to the end really made the resolute execution of the Continental System the lodestar of all his conduct, namely, Narshal Davout, Prince of Eckmiihl, the last French Governor General of Hamburg-an ever reliable sword in the Emperor’s hand, and, as far as one can see? a man of the same type as the German generals who during the recent war governed occupied territories-for that very reason brought upon himself perhaps a stronger hate than any of Napoleon’s other tools ; and among the inhabitants of Hamburg he passed under the name of Marshal ‘ Wuth ’ (Fury).

FISCALISM 
But it was not enough that the Continental System was 
rendered illusory by the ever-present smuggling, which was 
constantly assisted sub rosa by the corruptibility of the officials. 
That smuggling involved another disadvantage in that Napo 
leon at the same time lost for himself and for France the benefits 
which an openly conducted traffic of the same scope would have 
brought with it. This was primarily a matter which concerned 
the finances of the state ; and such a development could not 
fail to irritate the Emperor, who, of course, always had diffi 
culties in obtaining sufficient revenue, especially as he would 
not openly have recourse to loans. The customs receipts which 
a system of imports that were allowed, but made subject to 
duties, would have yielded, and even, under the former and 
milder rhgime, had actually yielded, now fell into the hands of 
the smugglers and dishonest officials. The customs receipts of 
France herself, which in 1806 had been 51,200,000 francs and 
in 1807 had even risen to 60,600,000 francs, declined in 1808 to 
less than one-third of that amount, or 18,600,000 francs ; and 
in 1809 they declined still further to the insignificant sum of 
11,600,000 francs. The powerful head of the French customs 
system, Collin de Sussy, and also Montalivet, who was some 
what later home secretary, then conceived the characteristic 
idea that the state might be able to enter into what was literally 