

1% INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING alone, a figure, of course, which can make no higher claims than those of Mollien to express anything more than a general notion of the enormous scope of the smuggling.

Commercial Organization of Smuggling 
Of special importance is the organized, or, to express it 
better, the commercial, character of the smuggling. In Naples 
an economic writer, Galanti, spoke of it as ‘ a useful trade, 
inasmuch as it prevents the ruin of the state ’ ; and in various 
places Napoleon’s organs complain that it is regarded as a quite 
honourable occupation. Smuggling had also quite lost the char 
acter of managing by chance to break through the customs 
barrier on the chance of profit. It was based on definite busi 
ness practices, with fixed commissions that varied with the 
degree of certainty surrounding a successful result or the diffi 
culties in the way of getting through to different places or with 
different goods. In Strassburg there were ‘ insurers ’ of different 
grades, the chief of which charged a commission of from 44) to 
50 per cent. ; in 1809 it was considered that the expenses of 
passing the frontier of France were, as a rule, 30 per cent., while 
the above-mentioned new customs line between Rees and 
Bremen could be broken through for 6 or 8 per cent. ; and at 
about the same rate it was possible to smuggle any commodity 
whatever from Holstein into Hamburg. A convincing im 
pression of the business-like character of the smuggling is 
also given by Napoleon’s Fontainebleau decree (October 18, 
1810), where a careful distinction is drawn between leaders or 
undertakers-in Adam Smith’s sense-(entreprelzeurs), insurers 
(assureurs), shareholders (intkressks), managers of the practical 
work (chefs de bade, directeurs et conducteurs de rdunions de 
fraudeurs), and finally ‘ ordinary bearers ’ (simpbs p~rteurs), 
in which we b d a complete hierarchy ranging downwards 
from the directors of the smuggling enterprises through the 
capitalists and officials to the unskilled workers. 
But there was a marked difference with regard to the ease 
with which the different kinds of goods could be smuggled. 

SMUGGLING AND CORRUPTION 195 British industrial products, it is true, came in on a large scale, though, to judge by a statement from Leipzig, principally yarn ; but their entrance was resisted by the different governments even in most of the vassal states of France, because they wished to exclude British manufactures on protectionist grounds. The situation was quite different with regard to colonial goods. In this respect all people, from the crowned ruler down to the day labourer, were of one mind and thought in their desire to break the iron band of the Continental System ; and the smuggling of these goods accordingly met with nothing but assistance and support.

OFFICIAL CORRUPTION 
But the unevenness of the struggle with the great organiza 
tion at the disposition of the smugglers was enormously in 
creased by the thorough-going corruption which was also dis 
tinctive of all branches of administration at the time, especially 
those branches which had to deal with the blockade. 
In part the system of bribery in earlier times undeniably 
formed simply a kind of pay for the servants of the state, 
although of the most objectionable kind possible ; and the h e 
between perquisites and bribes was often as fine as a hair. 
With regard to Bremen, for instance, we are told how the con 
stant exactions of money for commandants, war commissaries 
and consuls-for non-dutiable goods, certificates of origin, and 
all kinds of lawful intercourse-took the form of bed fees with 
definite names ; thus the fees for certificates of origin, for 
instance, increased tenfold during the first six quarters after 
the issue of the Berlin decree. There was scarcely a place in the 
territories occupied by France or under French control where 
similar tactics were not employed. In the autumn of 1810 
Napoleon wrote to Marshal Davout instructing him not to let 
the commander at Danzig, General Rapp, tolerate any corrup 
tion, although ‘everybody takes bribes ’. Hamburg seems to 
have been especially exposed to people of this type. Marshal 
Brune, Consul Lachevardi&re, and almost more than anybody 
else, Bourrienne, were perfect &uo& in this respect. As 
0 2 