

SMUGGLING AND CORRUPTION 189 Rist's Description of Hamburg Smuggling With this may be compared the more informative and certainly quite trustworthy account given by Rist, the repre sentative of Denmark, of the position at Hamburg a year after the period with which we are chiefly concerned here, namely, at the beginning of 1811.l For some time there had developed a peculiar and flourishing con traband traffic which was carried on from Hamburgerberg with varying success in full daylight and under the eyes of the customs officers. About this I wish to speak, because it was not only peculiar in its kind, but also not without influence upon the manners of the people and later events, and even became the subject of a genuinely humorous popular poetry. The abundance of cheap colonial goods in Altona, which could not be prevented by any prohibitions or other measures from this side of the frontier, and the similarly unpreventable connection with Ham burgerberg, macle this last-named place a regular emporium for contra band goods. Speculators in that line of business had at that time hit upon the idea of entrusting to all kinds of low-class people, chiefly women, boys and girls of the rabble, the task of carrying the forbidden goods in small quantities through the customs guard stationed at the town gates. The attempt had been successful and was soon continued on a large scale. The city gate was thronged with all kinds of canaille coming in and going out in a steady stream. Behind some wooden sheds near the city gate one saw the arsenal of this curious army and its equipment, which was at once disgusting and laughable. There women turned up their dresses in order to shake coffee beans down in their stockings and to fasten little bags of coffee everywhere under their clothes ; there boys filled their ragged trousers with pepper in the sight of everybody ; others poured syrup in their broad boots ; some even claimed to have seen women conceal powdered sugar under their caps in their black tangled hair. With these burdens they at once started off, and afterward delivered over their goods in certain ware houses located near the city gate and received their pay. In this way immense quantities of goods were brought in ; and agreements with these petty dealers, based solely on good faith, seem seldom to have been broken on either side. This trickery could not long remain concealed from the customs officers ; and there is no doubt but that they could soon have checked it. Rut this does not seem to have been the intention at all. This ' filtration ' 1 We bow from a letter of Bourrienne to Napoleon in October 1809 that the same situation existed at that time. Lingelbach, Hiatorical Investigation and the Commercial History of the Napoleonic Era, in the Amerdcan Historical Review (vol. XTX (1913-14), p. 270.

190 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING -that was the technical term-was regarded as a happy hunting ground, which was preserved as a means of enabling officers always to cover their requirements from it. If the officials seized every third or fourth ‘ bearer (Truger)-that was the people’s technical term-and kept his or her load, they derived a fine income from it ; but the traffic was not at all disturbed by this, for losses were part of the business, and the customs officials had simply to hold out their hands to get all that they needed. Many of them were also well bribed by the principal participators in the traffic. If an unknown face appeared on duty, recourse was had to strategical measures : a dense column was formed, some heavily armed persons in the van were sacrificed, and the others burst through like a whirlwind, to the great joy of the spectators. The manifold incidents and perils which surrounded this Schuckeln or Tragen, the spirit of good-fellowship with which the trade was carried on, and the gallows humour that it’created, inspired a poet, and by no means contemptible poet of his kind, from this or some neighbouring depart ment to indite some ‘ Schuckeln ditties ’, which for some time were in everybody’s mouth and were highly characteristic. It is certain that this business was for several years in succession a source of good earnings for the poorest elements of the population and considerably diminished mendicity. When the poor law officials asked parents receiving support about their children’s means of livelihood, their answer as a rule was : ‘ Hee [or see] drigt ’ (he-or she-bears). This offscum of society had suddenly appeared as if sprung out of the soil, and in the same way it afterwards vanished.