

c

SMUGGLING AND CORRUPTION ; FISCALISM AND LICENSING THE tendencies described in the last chapter made it in-' creasingly clear to Napoleon during the year 1810 that he must find new expedients if he was ever to succeed in making the Continental self-blockade effective; and he also had another reason for reshaping his policy, in the great inconveniences which had revealed themselves both in his finances and in French economic life. In order to form a clear idea of this second phase of the history of the Continental System, however, we must consider in a little more detail the smuggling and the system of bribery.1

SMUGGLING

Concerning the prevalence of smuggling under the Conti nental System lengthy books might be written, for it flourished throughout Europe to an extent of which the world since then, and perhaps even before then, has rarely seen the like. Coercive measures in the sphere of commercial policy have at all times found a palliative in smuggling, But that palliative was used to an infinitely larger extent now that coercion ac quired a range previously undreamt of ; and at the same time it was felt to be unendurable in a quite different way than For the smuggling and corruption there are ahmt unlimited materials in the extensive literature bearing upon this subject, particularly in the works of Konig, Schmidt, Serviires, Fisher, de Ckrenville, Rambaud, Rubin, Peez and Dehn, and also in the treatises of Tarle and Schafer. To these, moreover, should be added the work of Chapuieat, Le COntmerCe et i'i&wtrie d Genbe, &c., pp. 29 el 8% 44. The quotation from Bourriennerefers to his MMres, vol. VIII, oh. XI, pp. 196-6. The quotation from Rist refers to his Lebenssinwuqen, vol. II, pp. 106 et sq. The referenoe to Simond's Journal will be found in vol. I, p. 242 ; vol. XI, p. 77. Aa to the trustworthiness of Bourrienne and Rist, cf. Wohlwill, Newe Geschichte, &e., espeoially pp. 295 note, 397 note ; also his review of Servihres, in Hanaische Ge 8Chichtdliitter for 1900.

188 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING formerly, owing both to the increased importance ofinternational intercourse and to the fact that outside the limits of France proper it represented a foreign dominion and lacked moral support in all classes of the community. The purely external forms of the smuggling are of relatively subordinate importance in this connexion. The examples that have been mentioned in the preceding pages, and that will be mentioned in the follow ing pages, may here be supplemented by a couple of con temporary descriptions. One of these by Bourrienne refers to the year 1809 and has a more or less anecdotal character.

Bourrienm’s Anecdote

To the left of the short road leading from Altona to Hamburg there lies a field that had been excavated in order to get gravel for building houses and roads. The intention was to repair the broad and long street in Hamburg running to the Altona gate. During the night the hole from which the gravel had been taken was filled up ; and the same carts which as a rule conveyed the gravel to Hamburg were filled with raw sugar, the colour of which resembles sand. They contented them selves with covering the sugar with a layer of sand an inch thick. The pikes of the customs officials easily penetrated this thin layer of sand and the sugar underneath it. This comedy went on for a long time, but the work on the street made no progress. Before I knew the cause of this slowness I complained about it, because the street led out to a little country place which I owned near Altona, and where I used to go daily. Like myself, the customs officials at last found out that the work of road-making took rather a long time, and one fine day the sugar carts were stopped and seized. The smugglers then had to devise some other expedients. In the region between Hamburg and Altona, on the right bank of the Elbe, there is a little suburb inhabited by sailors, dock-labourers, and a very large number of house-owners, whose burial ground is in the churchyard of Hamburg. One now saw more often than usual hearses with their adornments and decorations, processions, burial hymns and the usual ceremonies. Amazed at the enormous and sudden mortality among the inhabitants of Hamburgerberg, the customs house officiaIs at length ventured to examine one of the deceased at close quarters and discovered sugar; coffee, vanilla, indigo, &c. This, accordingly, was another expedient which had to be abandoned ; but others remained.