

AU this was by no means peculiar to Hamburg, although the fact that Hamburgerberg and country residences and places of amusement lay on the Holstein side rendered control very difficult and led to the rudest and most repulsive corporeal searchings of both women and men in the middle of the open road. Rist says that it was an especially difficult time for the corpulent, just as seems to have been the case during the recent World War on the. shores on the Sound. On the North Sea coast the smuggling was still more systematic in Bremen, which, according to Max Schafer, the latest describer of its fortunes under the Continental System, was a ‘ smuggling metropolis ’. It derived special advantage from what Vandal has called the amphibious nature of the coast, in that, thanks to Die Watten (the numerous islands lying flush with the water), goods could be smuggled in direct from the British. From English sources we learn how raw sugar was sent when refined sugar was

SMUGGLING AND CORRUPTION 191 
prohibited, and eau swrde when raw sugar was prohibited ; 
how coffee went in as horse-beans, sugar as starch ; and how the 
names of pepper were legion. The same system flourished, how 
ever, from Gothenburg in the northwest around all the coasts of 
Europe to Saloniki in the southeast, without any great varia 
tion in the methods. Probably the most primitive. expedients 
were resorted to on the Balkan peninsula. Here sugar was 
packed in small boxes weighing at the most 200 kilograms, 
so that they could be transported ,on horses and asses ; in this 
way it was conveyed by armed bands through Bosnia, Serbia 
and Hungary to Vienna. France proper was undoubtedly the 
most closely guarded country, but even there, according to both 
English and French witnesses, smuggling flourished to a very 
large extent. At the very same time when the Berlin decree 
was flung out, when the new prohibitive customs ordinance was 
enforced for France herself, the English MondhZy Magazim, 
following the,statements of experts, described how British goods 
of different kinds were exported on French orders to France 
everywhere along the frontiers and could easily be insured up 
to the place of their destination, and how immediately after 
their arrival they were stamped as of French manufacture and 
made to serve as evidence of the high level attained by French 
industry. A well-informed and intelligent French-American 
traveller, Louis Simond, who visited Great Britain in 1810-11, 
relates how the English goods ' are packed in small packages, 
fit to be carried by hand, and made to imitate the manu 
factures of the country to which they are sent, even to the very 
paper and outward wrapper, and the names of the foreign 
manufacturers marked on the goods.' On pieces of broadcloth 
in Leeds, for instance, he observed the mark of Journaux FrBres 
of Sedan. 
On the sea the smuggling is said to have started principally 
from Cowes, in the Isle of Wight. Here the goods were packed 
into hermetically sealed chests, which were afterward thrown 
into the water, chained to little buoya, like fishing nets, and 
safely hauled ashore on the French side by the inhabitants 
under the very eyes of the patrolling vessels. If we may credit 
an active French customs officer at the time, Boucher de Perthes, 
192 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
the use of British textile goods came very close to the Emperor’s 
person. According to him, Napoleon learned, in the course of 
a journey with. Josephine, that her trunks were crammed with 
the forbidden goods, and made the customs authorities merci 
lessly seize them all. 
Normality of Smuggling 
Through this all-pervading system smuggling acquired a 
stamp of normality, which was of great importance, especially 
for Napoleon’s subsequent policy, and which forms yet another 
significant example of the general contrast between appearance 
and reality by which the policies were dominated. On both 
sides the smugglers were used as ordinary means of commercial 
intercourse in cases where it was not desired to recognize a 
traffic which could not be done away with. In this case the 
French made use of the English word in the slightly corrupted 