

Bm INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING Thus there can be no doubt that the Continental System had missed its mark in several decisive respects. Instead of hitting the enemy, it had partly shot past him and become a means of promoting the interests of France-correctly or incorrectly conceived-at the expense of her own helpers in the struggle against Great Britain. The customs policy proper had had this tendency from the very beginning; and its later develop ment, which continued along the same lines, wil be described in connexion with the effects of the system on the Continent, in part rv of this book. To what extent all this had driven Napoleon into the very course that the British in reality aimed at from start to finish, is shown with unusual clearness by a statement made in the autumn of 1811 by General Walter storff, the Danish minister in Paris at the time, to the effect that France had no other trade except with England and, of course, wished to keep that for hersel€. Here we find the position de scribed in words almost the same as those employed by the British ministers with regard to the object of their p0licy.l So far the success of the system was almost incontestable-for Great Britain.

1 See ante, p. 120.

CHAPTER IV 
THE TRIANON AND FONTAINEBLEAU POLICY 
IN OPERATION (1810-12) 
ADMINISTRATION OF NEW POLICY 
FROM what has been said in the foregoing chapter it is by 
no means to be inferred that the Continental System had failed 
altogether. The Fontainebleau policy was directed primarily 
against the exports of British manufactures ; and here Napo 
leon was in deadly earnest. 
But there was no sharp line of demarcation between the 
prohibitory measures directed against Great Britain and the 
orders relating to the importation of colonial goods, which 
were, in Napoleon’s view, half repressive and half fiscal ; nor 
could any such line be found owing to the lack of clearness in 
men’s grasp of the matter. It is quite impossible, therefore, to 
keep them distinct in this account. The administrative organs 
were largely the same for both, and both were violent and de 
tested by the people ; but there can be no doubt that the fiscal 
measures formed beyond comparison the most effective half of 
the new system, because the desire for the goods always made 
the people comparatively wdhg to pay, if only they could get 
the goods by so doing. It is true that the competition with the 
smugglers came far from putting an end to their traffic, that is 
to say, to continue the same terminology, far from giving the 
state the monopoly of importing prohibited colonial goods; 
but in any case it brought substantial sums into the public 
treasuries. Napoleon’s customs revenues alone rose to 
105,900,000 francs in the period from the Trianon tariff to the 
close of 1811, this as compared with only 11,600,OOO francs in 
1809; and the auctions of confiscated goods, together with 
the licence fees, brought in far more, to say not@ of what 
a22 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
the vassal states contrived to make. We have at present no 
complete survey of the total yield of the new policy to the 
government treasuries, but a general idea of the whole situation 
is given by the fact that, according to Thiers, the auctions 
alone during the remaining months of 1810 yielded a cash 
return of almost 150,000,000 francs. In the contemplation of 
such figures it is not difficult to understand the magnitude 
that the fiscal side of the policy was destined to attain ; and, 
indeed, it was to become more and more marked during each of 
the remaining years. 
The corner-stone of the new building, visible to all the 
world, was formed by the incorporation with France of the 
Hanse Towns and Oldenburg and the rest of the North Sea 
coast. This took place about the turn of the year 1810-11, and 
brought it about that the new measures, both administrative 
and military, struck by far the hardest on the North Sea. It is 
true that from the beginning this involved a great limitation 
in effectiveness, inasmuch as the centre of gravity of the British 
continental traffic had already been moved definitely from there 
to the Baltic coasts and Gothenburg. 
The special regulations that were issued in the early part of 
October concerning the payment of customs duties for goods 
between the coast and the old Rees-Travemiinde line are of less 
interest ; and their relations to the Trianon tariff are not clear 
in all details. Of the greatest importance, rather, are the new 
judicial system-if such a fair-sounding word can be used-and 
the new military barrier. 
CUSTOMS COURTS AND THE MILITARY CORDON 
It was on the North Sea coast that the new customs courts 
were of the most importance, and it was there that they pro 
ceeded with all the cruelty and contempt for private rights 
that invariably characterize an unscrupulous police. The new 
customs staff, which is represented as a rabble scraped together 
from different countries, penetrated bg day and night into 
dwelling houses, and espionage flourished more than ever. 
TRIANON AND FONTAINEBLEAU POLICY 9% 
With grim irony Eudel, the former head of the customs 
system in Hamburg who was tolerably well hated by every 
body, was able, according to Bourrienne, to prophesy that he 
and his greencoats would be positively missed : ' Hitherto,' 
he said, ' they have seen only roses.' Rist, on whose evidence 
what has been just said is partly based, furnishes the following 
information of greater value : 
A tribunal of blood, the prevostal court, the most frightful tool of fiscal 
despotism, was soon domiciled in Hamburg. In defiance of common law, 
the unfortunate accused here became a victim to the unlimited caprice 
of his merciless tyrants. Le Grand Prdvdt, half customs official and 
half judge, here settled matters of life and death ; and as a kind of 
mockery against every notion of honour, this bastard offspring of civil 
and military authority had received the same rank as the prefect and 
the president of the supreme court of justice. Everybody shunned his 
presence ; and, for my own part, I have never been able to meet without 
a sense of loathing ahis, as far as one can judge, quite worthy holder of 
such an office. 
During one fortnight in 1812 Le &and Prdv6t in Hamburg 
pronounced one hundred and twenty sentences of six months' 
imprisonment, all for offences against the blockade decree. 
The result was that in Hamburg the prison became so crowded 
that a hundred prisoners had to be conveyed to the galleys of 
Antwerp, while at Bremen the prison conditions were so bad 
that 224 per cent. of the prisoners died. Death sentences were 
also passed and executed, as Rist correctly states in the passage 
just cited, although no justification for this was to be found in 
the Fontainebleau decree, "he whole system became still more 
detestable for the reason that the licensing system was its back 
ground, Bourrienne states that the father of a family came 
near being shot in 1811 for having imported a small sugar-loaf 
in the Elbe Department, possibly at the very moment when 
Napoleon was signing licences for the importation of a million 
sugar-loaves. Moreover, in Hamburg the system gave rise to 
perfectly meaningless intrigues in conjunction with the usual 
lawless robbery on the part of the functionaries ; all of which 
was especially troublesome owing to the fact that Holstein was 
indissolubly united with Hamburg, and after the annexation 