

LICENSING SYSTEM a09 
for security to amounts which it was not possible to achieve 
(~,OOO4,000 per licence). 
Even in its consistent form, however, the licence system led 
to embittered 'resistance in many quarters of Great Britain, 
especially in the seaports. In 1812 Hull, Sunderland, South 
Shields, Scarborough, Aberdeen, &c., overwhelmed Parliament 
with petitions against the licensing system, largely for reasons 
opposite to those usually alleged by the opposition. Here the 
attitude adopted was that the neutrals, with the object of 
maintaining connexion with the self-blockaded ports of the 
mainland, were admitted to too large a share in trade and 
shipping, and further that British subjects, contrary to the 
Navigation Act, were allowed to ship cargoes in neutral vessels. 
In this way these, petitions alleged, it was unintentionally made 
possible for Napoleon himself and his allies, under a neutral 
flag and withBritish licences, to take part in trade with impunity. 
Thus one example was cited when thirty-seven vessels were 
allowed, in 1810, to go without hindrance from Archangel to 
Holland ; but this was due evidently to the usual carelessness 
in the application of the system. With regard to admitting 
foreign vessels and sailors, on the other hand, the government 
could point to the insufficiency of the British shipping for all 
purposes and to the advantage of penetrating to the markets 
of the Continent under a neutral flag when it could not he done 
under a British flag. This last was an idea which was strongly 
confirmed by Napoleon's view of the matter. On the whole, 
the British licences, despite their luxuriance of growth, re 
mained, at least in principle, what they had been from the 
beginning, namely, a means of combining the formal British 
blockade of the Continent with the real mercantilist aims of the 
policy, as has been described in part I of this book, "his found 
expression, among other things, in regulations which really 
placed a premium on exports, namely, in the form that the 
granting of a licence to import was made dependent on making 
exports to the same value, either in general or for certain goods ; 
e,g., the granting of licence for the importation of wine in return 
for an engagement to export colonial goods. And although 
1M)B.Q P 

2210 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING licences were often sold for high sums on the Continent (700 Rigsdaler in Norway, it is said, and 500 florins in Amsterdam) and in Great Britain itself were supplied by the state at such a considerable price as $13 or S14 apiece for individual licences, with the addition of a guinea for each licence when a large number were in question-on some occasions, however, higher charges did occur-yet the opposition, so far as I know, despite its repudiation of the whole system on constitutional grounds, never insinuated that the state was influenced by fiscal points of view, but only alleged abuses in favour of individuals. Even if one accepts the highest number of licences for a twelvemonth, about 18,000 for the year 1810, and the highest conceivable average amount per licence (Le., H4;which is assuredly too hgh an estimate), the highest annual amount would only be about 32250,000 or 6,5?50,000 francs.