

LICENSING SYSTEM 215 understand,’ runs an unusually explicatory letter to Eugene, Viceroy of Italy (September 19,1810), ‘ namely, what is meant by a licence. A licence is a permission, accorded to a vessel that fulfrls the conditions exacted by the said licence, to import, or export a certain kind of merchandise specified in that licence. For those vessels the Berlin and Milan decrees are null and void.’

LICENCE DECREE JULY (25, 1810)

What an almost all-embracing range this suspension of the Continental decrees attained is shown by an express order, the so-called ‘ Licence decree,’ of July 25,1810, and also by a number of confirmatory measures adopted by Napoleon during the sub sequent period. Thus it was laid down in the licence decree that beginning on August 1,1810, no vessel bound for a foreign port might leave French ports without a licence signed by Napoleon’s own hand. If the vessel was bound for any of the ports of the Empire, or was engaged in coasting traffic in the Mediterranean, a more general permit (acquit-d-caution) was required, but also a written bond which was not annulled until evidence could be furnished of the vessel’s arrival at the French. port. All vessels that were devoted to le grand commerce or la gTande navigation were therefore obliged to have a licence ; and for this procedure there was given the hghly significant justi fication that no such traffic was possible without calling at a British port or at least being examined by the British-which, according to the Milan decree, involved ‘denationalization ’ and confiscation. Despite the fact that both the Berlin and Milan decrees strictly forbade all intercourse with England and all calling at English ports, Napoleon now went so far as to make it a point of honour that French vessels should visit English waters, and go to London, even though they were under a neutral flag. ‘ Under this disguise England receives them, and I make laws for her owing to her pressing need of commercial intercourse.’ It was not surprising that such a change of front, which in 1812, for instance, led to a licence for the importation of rice from London, befogged many people completely.

216 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING It goes without saying, however, that licences were not given for nothing, either for visits to England or for any other purpose. At first they had to be paid for, as a rule at very high prices. At an early period we hear of 30 or 4Ll napoleons (600 or 800 francs) ; at a later period 41) napoleons (800 francs) plus 30 francs per ton of wheat, and 15 francs per ton of rye, was regarded as cheap for exports from the Hanse Towns. Import licences for colonial goods from England fetched as much as 300 napoleons or 6,OOO francs, that is to say, much higher amounts than the British licences. Nor did Napoleon make any secret of the fact that they were intended to yield him un revenu cdhabb.

OBLIGATION TO EXPORT

But further the licences were intended to serve Napoleon’s aims in the sphere of trade policy. In this connexion the main thing was to encourage the exportation of French, and to some extent also Italian, industrial products and, in good years, foodstuffs from both countries, as well as from Danzig and other granaries. In exchange for this there was granted, as a rule, the importation of colonial goods, which was simul taneously regulated by the Trianon policy, either generally or with special reference to Levantine and American products. But there were also stricter rules where nothing was to be brought back to France except ship-building materials or precious metals, and specie, which were in constant request, and which Napoleon, in consonance with his well-known views, was always seeking to draw from England. Thus from 1809 on there was a long series of varying types of licence, which differed widely in detail, but do not offer many points of in terest. One of the most significant types is the combined one which permitted vessels to take corn from German ports in Napoleon’s empire to Dunkirk and thence to England, pro vided the corn was discharged in England and naval stores were taken as return freight to Dunkirk, where French wine, silks, and manufactures had to be taken on board and conveyed