

LICENSING SYSTEM 81 3 the wind blew when they left Rotterdam (although they were never near the place) when they took a pilot on board, and a number of other particulars, which they are obliged to asseverate on the most solemn oath which it is possible to conceive ; knowing at the same time that they sailed from London and not from Rotterdam, that they took no pilot on board, and that their other statements are utterly false. So that, under this system, the whole crew and captain are under the necessity of perjuring themselves, if they wish to act up toheir instruc tions. In confirmation of these statements, I will read to the House a letter of a most curious description which has been put into my hands, written to an American merchant, of the highest respectability, the contents of which would be extremely ludicrous, if the contemplation of them were not accompanied by a feeling of disgust at the moral depravity it displays. It is written by a professional man, not that he is either a lawyer, a physician, or a divine, for he would be a disgrace to any of these honourable occupations ; but he is a man who has made the forgery of ships’ papers a regular and organized profession. I shall omit the names of any of the parties, because I should be sorry to injure individuals, whose only connection with the writer has been, that he has dared to send them this most atrocious circular. It is as foll’ows :

Liverpool, -. GENTLEMEN-we take the liberty herewith to inform you, that we have estab lished ourselves in this town, for the sole purpose of making simulated papers [Hear, Hear I] which we are enabled to do in away which will give ample Satisfaction to our employers, not only being in possession of the original documents of the ships’ papers, and clearances to various porta, a list of which we annex, but our Mr. G”+ having worked with his brother, Mr. J - h , in the eame line, for the last two years, and understending all the necessary languages. Of any changes that may occur in the different places on the continent, in the various oustom house and other offices, which may render a change of signatures necessary, we are careful to have the earliest information, not only from our own connections but from Mr. J-B”, who has proffered his assistance in every Way, and who has for some time past made simulated papers for Messrs. B” and P-, of this town, to whom we beg leave to refer you for further informa tion. We remein, &c, Then follows a long list of about twenty places from and to which they can forge papers (having all the clearances ready by them, from the different public agents) the moment they receive intelligence that any merchant may need their assistance in this scheme offabrication.

France

That part of this which made an impression upon Napo leon must above all have been the last-mentioned side of the licence system, for it evidently enabled the British to evade his

21 4 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING 
blockading decrees with success. But the whole fashion of say 
ing one thing, and meaning and doing another, accorded ex 
quisitely with his general bent and created a possibility, which was 
particularly welcome under the then prevailing circumstances, 
of altering his r w e in fact without formally repealing ‘ the 
fundamental law of the Empire ’ before the English had given 
way. It was only natural, therefore, that the licensing system 
on the British side should encourage imitation on the side of 
Napoleon. Accordingly, the Continental System during its 
last years developed into a huge system of jugglery on both 
sides, when neither side honestly applied its own regulations, 
but both broke them with a capriciousness that to some extent 
increased the sufferings of the already more than sufficiently 
harassed peoples. 
Rut this external resemblance between the tactics of Great 
Britain and Napoleon concealed a fundamental internal dis 
similarity. In this case there is an unusual amount of truth in 
the old dictum quum duo fmiunt idem, non est idem. The 
licences created, or at least had the power to create, a perfectly 
consistent application of the policy that Great Britain wished 
to pursue, namely, the promotion of trade with the Continent. 
For Napoleon, on the other hand, every licence, his own no less 
than his opponent’s, meant a breach in the self-blockade of the 
Continent and in the isolation of Great Britain, and thus 
drove one more nail into the cofh of the Continental System. 
For Napoleon the licences were an integral part of the new 
order of things, the other half of which was the Trianon regime ; 
and like that, the licences on his side contributed greatly to the 
more and more dominant fiscalism, which was not the case, to 
any notable extent, in Great Britain. In this way the licensing 
system in Great Britain acquired its real importance for the 
Continental System by kveigling Napoleon into an imitation 
which removed him still further from his great aim. 
Sometimes this fact fmds very open expression in Napoleon’s 
copious explanations of the licensing system, alternating with 
highly confusing and obscure accounts of its significance. ‘ In 
this place it is necessary to tell you again what you already 