

Letters to Champgny (Jan. 1) and hvary, minister of polioe (Jan. 7). Lettrea iddites, nos. 733, 748. Cf. letter to Davout (Jan. 1). Curreapondance, no. 17,267. See a160 Kijnig, op. cit., p. 237.

FISCALISM 205 200,000 francs into the cash box of the Foreign Office. In this manner the Continental System was perverted into a gigantic system of extortion, for naturally this was no way to cut off the Continent from the supply of goods.

LICENSING SYSTEM The Trianon policy is supplemented by the second great novelty which was introduced during the noteworthy year 1810 in the sphere of the Continental System, namely, the licences, It is true that these in themselves did not form any novelty, even on the part of Napoleon, and, as we know, still less on the part of Great Britain ; but on the Continent their impor tance had been slight, as is shown by the fact that, according to Thiers, the total value of the trade which had been carried on by licences before the Trianon tariff had amounted only to 20,000,000 francs. It was only now that they became a normal and integral part of the Continental System, in close conjunction with the general tendency of the new policy, and t.hereby contributed, just as much as the new customs regulations, to lead away from the original aim which was still officially main tained. The difference with respect to the Trianon policy in reality lies only in the fact that Napoleon here considered him self to be faithfully copying his adversary.

Great Britain 
In Great Britain, in fact, the licensing system had acquired 
an immense range, culminating in 1810 with the granting of 
over 18,000 licences in a twelvemonth; and, according to 
almost unanimous information, it was carried though to such 
an extent that the greater part, not only of British foreign trade, 
but also of the maritime trade of the whole world, was carried 
on with British licences. But this did not prevent the Heligoland 
merchants, for instance, from feeling their operations restricted 
by not getting so many licences as they wished. The licence 
system placed practically the whole power over foreign trade 

206 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING in the hands of the British government, more particularly in the hands of the president of the Board of Trade. This very fact was enough to provoke incessant attacks on the whole system on the part of the opposition ; and it also aroused great dislike on the part of the business world, which had already begun to regard as almost an axiom the incapacity of the state to judge commercial questions. It is true that on two different occasions, in 1805 and 1807, certain general exceptions had been granted from the current regulations, especially for importing foodstuffs and raw materials into Great Britain. But evidently the merchants considered-probably on the ground of dearly bought experience-that the commanding officers of the war ships and privateers did not refrain from seizing other vessels than those which had licences in due form, and therefore con tinued to take out such licences even when, from a strictly legal point of view, that was superfluous. In the opinion of the opposition, this state of affairs could not cease until the laws had been repealed from which the licences granted freedom in individual cases. Thus the opposi tion regarded the licensing system as a further inconvenience of the Orders in Council and as subject to the same condemna tion as they. In the House of Commons the chief speakers of the opposition in economic questions, especially Alexander Baring, the junior partner in the famous firm of Baring Brothers & Co., Henry Brougham, the barrister, and Francis Horner, the originator and chairman of the famous Bullion Committee of 1810, were therefore indefatigable in their attacks on the licensing system. The first two named, together with the lawyer J. Phillimore, author of a pamphlet entitled ReJlec tim on the Nature and Extent of the License Trade (1811 ), carried on the campaign outside Parliament too-Baring especially, by his pamphlet entitled An Inquiry into the Causes and Conseqwnces of the Orders in Council (1808). The attacks of the opposition, however, were met by the government with the assertion that licences would be quite as necessary, even if the Orders in Council and the blockade were entirely revoked, to serve as a form of dispensation from the prohibition of