

224 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING of the Hanse Towns people suddenly found the border of the Empire running between Altona and Hamburg. Consequently, the most elementary economic functions had to come to a standstill owing to the prohibitive legislation. This was carried to such an extent that the Holstein peasants were at first not permitted to take back over the frontier the money they had received in payment for the foodstuffs that they had sold, because it was against the law to take money out of the country. Alongside this new system of justice on the basis of the Fontainebleau decree, Napoleon now fell back on his military resources to a greater extent han ever before. Massha’s army corps, now under the command of Oudinot, was stationed on a line from Boulogne along the coasts of Brabant . and Holland, with its strongest division at Emden to maintain the connexion with the Hanse Towns. Next came Davout’s corps, which, accordmg to Thiers, was ‘ the finest, most reliable, and best organized ’ in the army, ‘ the invincible third corps,’ the only corps in the whole of Napoleon’s army which now, during the short interval of peace upon the mainland, was kept upon a war footing. It consisted of three divisions, each com posed of five regiments of infantry divided into four battalions (sixty battalions of infantry in all), with eighty cannons ; and in addition to these there was one division of cuirassiers and one division of light cavalry, a great siege train, and finally a flotilla of gunboats stationed in the mouths of the rivers. The extreme outpost of this line was General Rapp’s force at Danzig. In a letter of September 28, 1810, to Davout, the mainstay of this organization, Napoleon gave detailed in structions as to how the different generals with their forces were to be distributed, and he expressly declared that the two divisions stationed along the German North Sea coast had as their sole task the prevention of smuggling. Moreover, con siderable fortifications were made along the coast with the same purpose in the last months of 1810, after a plan to capture Heligoland without maritime forces had had to be abandoned.

TRIANON AND FONTAINEBLEAU POLICY 2%

CONFISCATIONS 
As was to be expected, the execution of the new decrees 
encountered far greater obstacles in the vassal states than in 
the incorporated territories. According to French opinion, the 
Trianon decree, in the beginning at least, remained a dead 
letter in all the states of the Confederation of the Rhine, except 
Baden. Prussia, like Saxony, made an attempt to except raw 
materials from the tariff ; and the somewhat more independent 
states, such as Russia, Austria, and Sweden, never, so far as is 
known, introduced-the tariff as a whole. It seems as if it was 
just this passive resistance in August and September 1810 that 
contributed to bring about the issue of the Fontainebleau 
decree in October. The great decree (for France) that usually 
bears this name, dated October 18 or possibly 19, was preceded 
a few days before (October 14) by a decree for the Grand Duchy 
of Frankfurt and followed by corresponding laws promulgated 
by the other states of the Confederation of the Rhine, as well 
as by Denmark and Switzerland. The most notorious and 
dramatic was Napoleon’s intervention in Frankfurt. Although 
that town, and the Grand Duchy created for the last electoral 
prince of Mainz that bore the name of the town, was nominally 
a sovereign state, on October 17 and 18 it was suddenly entered 
by two French regiments of infantry without the Grand Duke 
being so much as informed of the event. All the gates were 
occupied and artillery was stationed on the great square, after 
which the decree was posted up and an order was given that 
a declaration should be made of all colonial and English goods. 
French customs officials searched all warehouses, sealed all 
vaults and seized all books and letters ; in fact, the whole of 
the great trade movement was stopped. For several days there 
was a violent agitation, as the general belief was that all the 
goods were going to be confiscated ; but the excitement abated 
somewhat when the colonial goods were released, by a new 
decree of November 8, on payment of duty according to the 
Trianon tariff. As usual, malversation occurred on a large 
1569.49 Q 
226 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKIEG 
scale ; but none the less Darmstadter, the German historian, 
reckons the yield to the French treasury at 9,OOO,OOO francs. 
The fact that the direct intervention of France thus caused 
the other states to lose the profit served to stimulate the measures 
of those states themselves ; and externally, at least, they began 
to show great zeal in obeying the new decrees, so that colonial 
goods were seized everywhere. In Leipzig, which corresponded 
in eastern Germany to Frankfurt in the west, there was an un 
usual amount of colonial goods in the autumn of 1810, as has 
previously been mentioned ; 1 but the great interest of the 
Saxon government in maintaining the fairs evidently prevented 
very forcible measures there against goods that were always in 
such great request. Among the most striking measures are 
those taken in Holstein, which had become one of the principal 
regions for the storage of colonial goods. In order to get them 
into his hands, Napoleon now conceded that for a limited time 
they might be imported into Hamburg on payment of the 
duties corresponding to the Trianon tariff ; and at the same 
time he caused the Danish government to impose corresponding 
duties within his territory, in order that the owners should not 
be tempted to retain their goods. From Napoleon’s point of 
view this move turned out better than most of the others. The 
final date had time after time to be moved forward until the 
spring of 1811, so that the enormous stores could be completely 
exported ; and the French treasury made 19,700,000 francs on 
the payments in kind alone, and 4!2,500,000 francs altogether. 
Rist describes how during the last weeks the highways from 
Tonning were never free of loaded carts, inasmuch as half the 
peasants of Holstein had deserted their fields. Thousands were 
lost, many thousands were stolen, and hundreds of &-loads 
waited all night at Hamburgerberg for the gates of the town to 
be opened. Cotton lay all about the fields like snow. 
For the states of the interior there was a special difficulty 
in the treatment of colonial goods that had already. passed 
through another state in Napoleon’s sphere of power and had 
there paid duty according to the Trianon ‘tariff. The method 
adopted at first, namely, the exaction of the duty in every 
1 see ante, p. 186. 