

In other words, the fact was that trade had moved outside ' Napoleon's jurisdiction. Vienna, in particular, now obtained a great part of the central position in the trade of the Continent that had previously belonged to Leipzig. At an even earlier stage the Jewish Jierante of East Europe had sought on the coast of the Baltic, at KSnigsberg and Riga, the British goods which they or their customers would not do without, and had not been satisfied with the substitutes in the way of Saxon and Swiss manufactures that Leipzig had to offer. They now found a staple in Vienna. To that place the goods went by two routes, a northern one through the Prussian and Russian Baltic ports round the Grand Duchy of Warsaw to Brody in Galicia (on Austrian territory, quite close to the Russian frontier) ; and

TRIANON AND FONTAINEBLEAU POLICY %3 
a southern one to the same point (Brody), at first from Odessa, 
that is to say, across the Black Sea, and after the outbreak of 
the Franco-Russian war, wia Constantinople and Saloniki to 
Lemberg. But this connexion was by no means limited to 
supplying Eastern Europe. On the contrary, it also became, 
just as Bacher had predicted, the starting-point of a transport 
of goods through Bavaria, which permitted the duty-free 
transit of colonial goods and even passed British manufactures, 
to the rest of South Germany and Switzerland, and making 
possible their smuggling into France. 
But it is obvious that these roundabout routes and licensing 
fees or smuggling expenses and bribes were bound to increase 
the cost of transport enormously ; and so far this new policy 
also threw serious obstacles in the way of British trade, although 
these were relative and not absolute hindrances, as the Conti 
nental System in its original form was intended to create. 
Tooke gives a number of interesting examples of the immense 
cost oe freight during the years 1809-12 in comparison with the 
year 1837, when his book was written.l For instance, wheat 
freights were 50 shillings per quarter, as against h. 6d. ; hemp 
freights were $30 per ton, as against $2 10s. ; timber freights 
were 330 per load, as against $1, &c. Silk had to go round 
about ways from Italy, e.g., from Bergamo in one case &a 
Smyrna, and in another case via Archangel (sic), so that the 
transport took one year and two years, respectively ; and 
when it went through France, the expense was $100 per bale, 
besides the freight from Havre to England. Tooke particu 
larly states that the freights to and from France wer enormous. 
For a vessel of little more than one hundred tons the freight 
and the French licence might amount to no less than E50,000 
for a trip from Calais to London and back to Calais, which for 
indigo meant a freight of 4s.6d. per English pound, as compared 
with Id. (that is to say one fifty-fourth) in 1837 ; and the gross 
freight for a ship whose total value was $4,000 was S80,OOO for 
a trip from Bordeaux to London and back. 
1 Tooke, History of Prim, &c., vol. I, pp. 309-10 note. 