

TRIANON AND FONTAINEBLEAU POLICY 229 the autos-du-fi in North Germany. A number of them, which are given in Servihres’ account for the Hanse Towns and in M. Schafer’s account for Bremen, show the total value of goods burnt to be about 4,500,000 francs. But in addition to these many burnings took place for which we have no figures ; and besides it is very difficult to determine the truth behind the official statements. Nevertheless, these burnings of British goods formed the most striking and amazing feature of all in the new system, as the conflagrations, especially during the last months of 1810 and the beginning of 1811, blazed in hundreds of towns from one end to the other of the territory of Napoleon and his allies, with the sole xception of Denmark. Undoubtedly these blighting scenes produced a tremendous though altogether exaggerated impression of the Emperor’s dogged determination to follow out his plans for the economic overthrow of England, regardless of anything else ; and consequently they were a very cunning display of power. Even now it is impossible to read the Mvnhur without being impressed by the incessantly re curring inventories and details concerning British goods com mitted to the flames, sometimes in a dozen different places on a single day. The French Chambers of Commerce and Industry naturally struck up what one of them appositely calls ‘ a concert of blessings ’ that the Emperor in this unusually direct way had freed them from an overwhelming competitor, although it is true, as the German historian Zeyss has shown, that some of these blessings were conferred in consequence of orders from high places.1

&lres iddites, nos. 803, 830, 837, 845, &c. Prussian ordinances in Ifartens, Nouveau recueil, &c., vol. I, pp. 514 et seq. : Rist, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 78.87, 105-6; Bourrienne, op. cit., vol. w, p. 233 ; vol. IX, pp. 50-1 ; Rubin, op. cit., pp. 393 et seq. ; Darmstildter, Dm Groas?wmgtum Franlfurt, pp. 312 ei eeq. The decree for hmkfurt in Le Ymiteur, Nov. 11, 1811 ; Zesselbach, op. cit., pp. 135 et sq. ; Schmidt, Le Grand-dwlk de Berg, pp. 375 et sep., 380, 386; &rvibreS, Op. Cit., pp. 148-9, 273 et eeq. ; Sohiifer, op. cit., pp. 429-30 ; Konig, op. cit., pp. 195, 231-2, kc. ; Thiers, op. cit., vol. XII, pp. 28 et seq., 191-2 ; Tarle, Kontinentdnaja bbkda, VOl. I, p. 2% ; de CBrenviUe, op. cit., pp. 57 et seq. ; Zeyss, op. CiL, pp. 140 et eq,, Anheng IX ; Levasseur, Hietoire des classes ouvrQres, &c., de 1789 B ,18YO, voE I, pp. 485 et seq.

m INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING

NEW COMMERCIAL ROUTES (1810-12) 
The most remarkable consequence of the new system was 
a new arrangement of the trade routes, which took place in two 
directions. In the first place, the sea route was again brought 
officially into favour by the licence system, as it had not been 
since the Berlin decree. This change evidently was mainly 
important for France herself, where smuggling had always 
encountered the greatest difficulties ; and it put an end, for 
instance, to the prosperity which Strassburg had enjoyed as 
a staple for French imports, both legitimate and illegitirnate.l 
In the second place, and this was the most important, the whole 
of this trade in colonial goods and British manufactures shifted 
from Central Europe proper-the regions of the Rhine, Weser, 
Elbe and Oder-to Eastern Europe and the Danube basin. 
Beginning with the summer of 1811, there was a practical 
cessation in the supply of British goods to the Leipzig fairs, 
and even colonial goods declined there to an insignificant pro 
portion of what they had been. Curiously enough, Frankfurt 
suffered less, comparatively speaking. This was evidently due 
to the fact that a genuine good-will to obey the system existed 
to a considerably greater extent in Saxony than in the other 
states of the Confederation of the Rhine ; and this, in turn, is 
partly explained by the fact that the great and flourishing 
textile industries of Saxony profited by the measures against 
British competition, while Frankfurt in particular had nothing 
similar to gain by those measures. But at all events, this de 
velopment shows an increasing efficacy of the blockade in great 
parts of Germany. The question naturally arises, however, 
why Leipzig did not take advantage of the licence system with 
regard to colonial goods ; but the answer seems to be that 
imports through the Baltic ports could not penetrate to Leipzig 
after the Prussian certificates of payment had been disapproved. 
But this does not imply any general success for the new policy 