

1 For the United Kingdom (and in part other countries) : Report of the Neleet Committee on. the Sfate of Commercia2 Credit, Mar. 7, 1811 (Hansard, vol. SIX, pp. 249 et sq.) ; a h the debates and petitione on the subject (Hansard, vol. XIX, pp. 123, 327, 416, 403, 529, 613, 662 ; vol. xx, pp. 339, 431, 808, 744) ; Simond, Journal of a Tow, &c., vol. 11, pp. 48-9, 265 ; Tooke, op. cit. (extract9 from the Monthly Magazine), vol. I, pp. 300 et seq. ; vol. 11, pp. 391, 393 et 8e4. (tablea) ; Smart, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 2034,226-7,263 et seq.

!24!0 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING out as a principal cause is the all but inevitable rebound from the huge speculation, especially in South America, but also in the West Indies and the Iberian peninsula, which has been described previously ; 1 that is to say, it is still a phenomenon having no direct connexion with the Continental System. In all probability it was further accelerated, as the British op position always maintained, by an exaggerated granting of credit, caused by too extensive an issue of notes (inflation). The course of events appears to have been somewhat as follows : First of all, exporters could not get payment from their South American buyers. As early as August 1, 1810, we hear of five business houses in Manchester, with aggregateliabilities amount ing to what was for that time the stupendous.sum of 322,000,000, that had come to grief in this way ; and at the end of the year we hear of bankruptcies in Manchester occurring not merely daily but even hourly. The inability of exporters to honour bills drawn upon them by manufacturers involved the latter also, particularly the Scotch ones, in the crisis ; and later the confusion spread to the credit-giving banking houses and through them, in ever-widening circles, not only to the cotton trade but also to the hardware trade. Excessive specula tions on the South American market also affected prospects of the future, inasmuch as not only was there no payment for goods already sold, but .also new sales were largely rendered impossible. So far a completely adequate explanation of the dislocation is given by the South American trade. But to this there was added, as from March 1811, a new factor, which likewise. lacked any direct connexion with the Continental System, namely, the unusually successful strangling of Anglo American trade which the United States set going through the passage of the Non-importation Act. Finally, it is a self evident matter that the sufferings caused by the crisis, and the deep traces it left among the working population of Great Britain, were largely due to the fact that the country was in the midst of the sweeping transformation to which Arnold

#### Toynbee gave the name of ' Industrial Revolution '. 1 See ante, p. 176.

"HE BRITISH CRISIS OF 1810-13 
But if it is clear that many factors independent of the 
Continental System were at work, it would nevertheless be 
a great mistake to regard the crisis as entirely uninfluenced by 
the policy of Napoleon. Externally the situation was, almost 
to the extent that the Emperor himself might have desired, 
one that must inevitably have led to ' the conquering of England 
by excess '. The year 1810 was characterized by unprecedented 
imports of raw materials and colonial products. This appears 
from the following table, which gives a convenient summary 
of the gross imports of those goods from the outbreak of war in 
1803 to the final peace in 1815. (See next page.) 
This table shows that the figures for 1810, with only two 
exceptions, are in general much higher than the even hqh 
figures for 1809 ; and in the two most important items, cotton 
and sugar, they are higher than in any other year during the 
whole period. The explanation of this fact is stated to be, 
first, that the payment for exports to South America, so far as 
there was any payment, was made in colonial goods; and, 
secondly, that the great warehouses at the London docks had 
led to a great storing of all the products of the world and 
consequently to extensive speculation in them by middlemen. 
It is self-evident, too, that a great and expressly acknowledged 
part in this development was played by the trade with the 
United States, which was quite unimpeded in 1810, as well as 
by the conquest of the French and Spanish colonies, and also, 
so far as wool is concerned, by the British successes on the 
Iberian peninsula. When a stoppage of sales took place, 
therefore, the situation had unusually large chances ofbecoming 
serious. 
Accordingly, there followed in rapid succession during the 
summer and autumn of 1810 the events we all know about. 
As early as the spring (April and May) the signs of a crisis had 
really shown themselves in France, a crisis which might possibly 
have reacted on Great Britain ; but far more important was 
the incorporation of Holland, in the beginning of July, by which, 
according to British evidence, there was, at least for the 
moment, a complete interruption of the trade between the two 
1669 43 R 