

24% INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING

THE BRITISH CRISIS OF 1810-13 M 
countries which had been going on throughout the reign of 
King Louis. At the beginning of August there followed the 
Trianon tariff ; in October, the intensified blockade of the 
German North Sea coast, the Fontainebleau decree, and the per 
secution of British and colonial goods in all Napoleon’s vassal 
states ;. and at the same time six hundred trading vessels were 
wandering around the Baltic. It was also in the sphere of 
colonial trade that the first blow occurred, in that one of the 
foremost dealers in West Indian products became insolvent and 
dragged down with him his bankers, who in their turn dragged 
after them the provincial banks with which they were associated. . 
A meeting of London merchants and representatives of the 
Scottish manufacturing districts in February 1811, summed up 
in proud and somewhat exaggerated terms the situation in its 
connexion with the Continental System by saying that Great 
Britain had become ‘ the emporium of the trade, not only of the 
Peninsular but also of the Brazils, of Spanish settlements in 
South America, of Santo Domingo, the conquered .colonies of 
Guadaloupe, Martinique, &c., but even of countries under the 
direct influence of the enemy ’, inasmuch as the latter had 
wished to take advantage of the protection of British justice 
and the honesty of British merchants. ‘ The measures of the 
enemy having been especially directed toward preventing the 
exportation of the immense quantities of merchandize of all 
descriptions thus accumulated, the consequences are that the 
goods became a burthen.’ The following remarks of the French 
American, Simond, upon his visit to the West Indian docks in 
August 1811, are in full accord with this : ‘ At present . . . the 
giant receives, but sends nothing away. The warehouses are 
so full that it has been necessary to hire temporary ones out 
of the docks. The export district is literally deserted.’ 
The connexion with the Continental System thus seems to 
be manifest ; and to judge by alI English sources, the difficulties 
connected with the disposal of colonial goods were at first 
even greater than in the case of exports of manufactures. Duripg 
1810, for instance, the trade statistics give practically un- * 
altered figures for the exports of British goods, though, of course, 
R 2 

!&4 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING it is possible that in the first half year there was a rise which made up for the decline in the second half year ; on the other hand, they show a decline of 199 per cent. for foreign and colonial goods, and it was not until 1811 that the exports declined more or less parallel for both groups. From this one may safely conclude that the Trianon and Fontainebleau policy practically had the effect, at least for the moment, of making things more difficult by the stricter control than of making them easier by the fiscal customs and licensing system. As regards the effect of the different markets on the development, we may possibly make cautious use of the trade statistics, although their reliability is undoubtedly limited even with regard to the legitimate trade, and of course much more dubious with regard to smuggling into the Continent. We are here concerned with ‘ real ’, that is to say, declared, values ; but the decline is no less marked as regards the ‘ official ’ values, in which changes of price have been e1iminated.l (See opposite page.) - We note immediately the pronounced decline in 1811-for colonial goods partly even in 1810-for the northern part of the Continent, which, together with the almost complete dis appearance of exports to the United States and the substantial diminution in the figures for South America explains the great decline m the totals. On the other hand, it is remarkable how little the Mediterranean trade was disturbed, which indicates the importance of the Balkan peninsula as a port of penetration for the new trade route through Vienna. The relatively strong rise for Portugal in 1811 indicates a transformation at this point, which was favoured by Wellington’s military successes. This increase in the trade with Portugal, which is confirmed from other sources, constituted the first sign of the limitation of the crisis in the sphere of foreign trade as early as the spring and early summer of 181 1. It is also of interest to follow the development at closer range, so to speak, with regard to the most important domestic b usual, the figures are for Great Britain only, not for Ireland.