

TRIANON AND FONTAINEBLEAU POLICY 2%' country, was evidently fatal for intermediary states such as Frankfurt ; and gradually an arrangement was made whereby the tariff was generally applied as a tax on consumption, not as a transit duty, but with freedom for goods that had once paid the duty. In this connexion, however, there was the usual difficulty created by the systematic measures of Prussia and Sweden (Swedish Pomerania) calculated to make the Continental System illusory, despite the most abject terms in the ordinances issued. Prussia allowed payment at par in government securities, which stood at 59.5 per cent. ; and when the goods afterwards went through to other quarters with Prussian certificates of payment, the measures once again missed their aim, This went on until in the spring and summer of 1811 the Prussian certificates were disapproved and a fresh . violent raid was made on what had been let through in the meantime. In consequence of this, the results of the new policy in Central Europe proper could not emerge clearly until the middle of 1811. Owing to the confiscations which took place when non declared colonial goods were discovered, great auctions were arranged-preferably in towns which lay at some distance from the great smuggling places, because the prices were highest there. Foremost among these was Antwerp, but of consider able importance also were Frankfurt, Cologne, Mainz, Strass burg, Milan, Venice and other towns near the old frontier of France. At these auctions the colonial trade was provided with goods and thus given a constant source of supply alongside the smuggled goods and the duty-paid imports ; and by this means there was created a possibility, besides smuggling, of purchasing the goods at a rate lower than the foreign price plus the customs duty.

AUTOS-DA-~fi 
What we have here dealt with are the colonial goods pure 
and simple. British industrial products, of course, according 
to the Fontainebleau decree were under all circumstances con 
demned to destmction ; and from this rule Napoleon never, 
so far a6 is known, made an exception. But it would be a great 
82 

228 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING mistake to conclude from this that the blockade was more effective in this point than in the other. On the contrary, quite the reverse is true, and the reason is the total absence of pecuniary interest, public and private, in obedience to the latter regulations. The public burning of goods, as ordered by the decree, was a genuine auto-da-fb (act of faith), which was performed publicly to the accompaniment of military music and in the presence of all the high dignitaries of the place. But the ceremony was just as great whatever was the real value of the goods burnt at the stake ; and against the possibilities of malversation that this offered the virtue of Napoleon's officials could naturally make no resistance. It is improbable, indeed, that the autos-du-fk were 'comedies ', as Darmstadter calls them, everywhere ; but the fact that they were so in a large number of cases is shown by the accessible material, and was also admitted in cautious terms even by Napoleon himself. This was especially the case in Frankfurt, where at the first inventory, in November 1810, there was set to work an imperial commission consisting, among others, of French officers. When rolls of gold coins were placed in a drawer especially set apart for the purpose, the goods became Swiss or Saxon instead of British ; and the goods which actually came to the stake were regarded as having a value of only 800,000 francs, although they were officially valued at 1,&00,000 francs. At the renewed purgation at Frankfurt, after the Prussian certificates of origin had been condemned in the spring of 1811, one firm had a whole warehouse full of British goods ; but here again the same story was repeated. A Jew from Friedberg by the name of Cassella was made a scapegoat, and only his British cottons were burnt. On this occasion the mayor wrote with refreshing candour : ' When they were spread out, there seemed to be a lot of cloth, and they could give the impression of a great quantity at the burning '-which, in his opinion, was all that was required, as the object must be ' to ward off un pleasantness from France, not to ruin 'our own population '. For other places we have less detailed statements, although a number of figures are available. It is, however, impossible to check these figures with reference to their authenticity for.