

Darmstiidter, Die Verwaltung ~ Unter-E.?-9ae8 (Bae-Rhin) unter Napdm 1, in &it8chrift fur die Ges&ich$e des Oberrlaeina (N. F., XIX, IW), pp. 662 et seq. ; Tarle, Rontinental'naja blokada, vol. I, pp. 2744,280.

TRIANON AND FONTAINEBLEAU POLICY 231 in Germany, so long as the Baltic coast could only be barred ineffectively. Consequently, the chief effect, in fact, still.was to cut’ off Western Europe itself, while making Germany the purveyor of smuggled goods.

Bacher’s Account

The main thing, however, is the changed trade route which Napoleon thus brought about. With unusual insight and open ness the course of developments was predicted as early as October 2, 1810, in a report (printed by Schmidt in his work on the Grand Duchy of Berg) by Bacher, Napoleon’s minister to the Confederation of the Rhine. This seems to give such an excellent picture of the situation that it may be reproduced, as regards its main part, instead of a special account. If the reader will go to the trouble of placing a map of Central Europe before him, Bacher’s reasoning will prove extremely instructive.

The new direction which colonial goods take, now that the coasts 
of Holland and the Hanse Towns as far as the Oder are no longer 
accessible, is stated to have created such activity on all roads leading 
from different places in Russia to Prussia on one side and through 
Poland and Moravia to Vienna on the other, as also from the Turkish 
provinces to the Austrian empire with regard toBritish goods discharged 
in the Levantine ports, that the Danube will now take the place of the 
Rhine as the channel through which the states of the Confederation of 
the Rhine will in future be able to provide themselves. The German 
merchants consider that this sweeping change in trade that has reduced 
Holland and Lower Germany to commercial nonentity will lead to active 
new connexions between Russia, Austria, and Bavaria, and conse 
quently serve to create secure routes, which will convey not only colonial 
goods, but also British products, as far as the states of the Confederation 
of the Rhine, and from there to the Rhine and even to Switzerland, as 
soon as the price there covers the costs of transport. Even if one should 
admit that the connexion between the Rhine and the Elbe has been 
really cut by the threefold cordon created by the measures taken in 
hwer Saxony and Westphalia, which is far from being the case, still 
the effect would be nothing but the increase of the supply of colonial 
goods from Russia through Konigsberg and Leipzig. 
Even supposing that the King of Saxony, who has spent very con 
siderable sums in encouraging the muslin, calico, and cotton factories 

(r !& INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING

and printing works that are now so flourishing in his territories, might 
be willing to extend the customs cordon from Wittenberg to the frontier 
of Bohemia, and at the same time be induced to place a tax on raw 
cott,on, which is in conflict with his interest in procuring the best con 
ditions and qualities for his mills, nevertheless this painful sacrifice, 
which would reduce the whole of the mountainous part of Saxony 
[Erzgebirge, the chief seat of the calico industry] to the deepest misery, 
would be no profit to France. It would only enrich the government and 
merchants of Austria, who would derive benefit from the customs duties 
on imports and exports and a substantial profit on the transit of colonial 
goods, which one could never prevent from penetrating as contraband. 
Through Bohemia into Voigtland, Bayreuth, and the Upper Palati 
nate, and through Upper Austria. and Styria into Salzburg [which at 
that time belonged to Bavaria] and Berchtesgaden. For these have 
always been corridors through which French and other prohibited goods 
have passed into the empire of Austria [that is to say, in the opposite 
direction], despite all vigilance on the part of the customs officials of 
that empire. 
The cotton trade workers would be compelled to emigrate from 
Saxony and Voigtland, and even from Bavaria, Baden, and Switzer 
land, in order to seek their livelihood in the Austrian factories erected 
and managed by Englishmen, who by this means would again over 
whelm the states of the Confederation of the Rhine with their products. 
In this way France during and since the Revolution has lost a valuable 
part of the masters and workmen who in their time contributed to 
make famous the manufactures of Lyons, St. ztienne, Sedan, and 
Verviers, and the departments of Ourthe and Roer, but who afterwards 
enriched Austria, Moravia, and also Saxony. 