

CHAPTER V

THE BRITISH CRISIS OF 1810-12 How did the trade of Great Britain fare under the pressure of the events on the Continent described in the last chapter ? With regard to the exports of manufactures, one might surmise a decline beforehand, for sales via the North Sea coast were made distinctly more difficult, and the roundabout route zkz , the Baltic coast could not fail either to make the goods dearer for the consumer, and thus diminish sales, or, alternatively, to lower the price for the producer. As regards the trade in colonial goods, on the other hand, it was not clear, a priori, that the conditions would be greatly altered, inasmuch as the increased control and the new duties were counterbalanced by the extensive imports involved by the Trianon policy and the licences. Nor, if one looks at the actual course of events, does that give any certain pdnts d'appui for the connexion between cause and effect, a thing which must always to a great extent have to be solved by theoretical reasoning. At the first glance, it is true, that connexion might seem fairly obvious. For the fact is *. that the economic boom in England was brought '*to an end by a severe crisis in July and August 1810. The purely commercial difficulties, with bankruptcies occurring to an extraordinary extent among merchants, formed the beginning of this ; but they abated in some degree later on in the summer of 1811 and still more from February 1818. On the other hand, the great lack of employment and the profound distress which somewhat later made its appearance, especially in the cotton industry and among workers, still continued during the greater part of 1812 and in their turn brought about serious disturbances in particular, the ' Luddite riots ', with the wholesale destruc tion of looms from November 1811. It was, therefore, only natural that in these events, combined with the heavy deprecia tion of British currency, Napoleon should see the long-desired

THE BRITISH CRISIS OF 1810-12 %9 
fruit of his protracted struggle against the foundations of the 
enemy's economic existence. But the very fact that the crisis 
broke out not solely in England, but quite as much in France, 
and not solely in those countries, but also in Amsterdam, the 
Hanse Towns, Prussia, and Switzerland, and above all in New 
York, shows how complicated the whole connexion was. From 
the standpoint of the general effects of the Continental System 
on the economic life of the different countries, this question 
belongs to part IV ; but the most palpable side of the'question 
must be anticipated here.' 
Undoubtedly it was a peculiar combination of circumstances 
that worked together. In comparison with the systematic 
policy of economic blockade and the comparatively limited 
military results of the recent war, the Napoleonic wars exhibited 
a considerably greater uncertainty both in the execution of the 
blockade and in its range. The licensing system and the un 
certainty of the customs policy against which complaints were 
so often raised in France, on the one side, and Napoleon's 
lightning conquests on the Continent and Great Britain's 
colonial acquisitions, on the other, could not fail to give rise 
to dislocations and consequently to speculative enterprises 
which, within the department of economic life affected by it, 
namely, foreign trade, transcended anything we know in our 
own time. So far the existence of a very general crisis during 
the years 1810-11 is fully explicable ; and so far it has no direet 
connexion with the Continental System, but only the indirect. 
connexion that follows from the influence of the Continental 
System in bringing about general unrest in the world. At all 
events, it is very obvious that we here have to do with effects 
that did not strike Great Britain alone or even specially. 
Next, as regards the purely British crisis, what stands 