

25% INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING no traces in his correspondence of any formal measures on the lines of the January memorandum. Even his superhuman powers were more and more completely absorbed by his military preparations ; and in the sphere of economics the threatening shortage of corn formed a peril which occupied his thoughts to the exclusion of all plans with more remote objects in view. From what is so far known, therefore, it does not appear that the new order of things was ever formally accepted, even though the actual policy, so far as one can judge, came’ nearer and nearer thereto. Besides, already during 1812 the economic situation slowly improved in Great Britain, especially after the South American trade had got into a healthy state as early as February, although, it is true, there were still disturbances in the textile districts. The Continental System was deprived of a main pillar quite early in J812 (March) through the fact that Davout, whom Sore1 calls the ’ archi-douanier ’ of the empire, left for the front, which meant the removal of the inflexible determination to prevent smuggling into the country via the North Sea coast. After the retreat from Moscow and the advance of the Russian troops along the Baltic coast in the beginning of 1813, it became manifestly impossible to maintain the barrier. Thus the prefect of the Weser department reports that ‘ smuggling was raising its head all along the line ’ ; the warehouses were filled with contraband, and smuggling vessels went openly across the seas to the enemy. Rist gives a vigorous description of the rising against the French customs officials in Hamburg at the close of February 1813, when a whole army of trouserless smugglers hurled their hereditary enemies into the dried-up canals and good-humouredly stormed their premises. ‘ Thus,’ he goes on, ‘ there disappeared within a few hours all those barriers, those dens of imperial avarice, and the forbidden goods streamed unimpeded along the forbidden ways.’ In the same way smuggling broke out openly in Switzerland, after having been kept down as much as possible during the preceding period. This, however, did not mean that Napoleon had abandoned the Continental System. In Hamburg Davout resumed his

SELF-DESTRUCTION OF THE SYSTEM ,253 
power and exacted a frightful vengeance ; and as late as May 
and June 1813, the Emperor caused'quantities of colonial goods 
to be confiscated in the Grand Duchy of Berg, Hamburg, &c., even such as had paid the proper dues or had been sold by the 
French customs officials, and had them conveyed to the usual 
places for the collection of such goods. On the other hand, 
this does not settle the question whether, and to what extent, 
the object pursued was the great aim of the Continental System, 
or whether Napoleon, after the retreat from Moscou~, still 
believed in the possibility of success in his struggle against the 
economic fabric of England. At times this last was undoubtedly 
the case, as is stated by so credible an observer as Mollien, 
who lays particular stress on the hopes of an impending ruin 
for the credit of England with which the unfavourable rates of 
exchange inspired the Emperor at that time. Still, this question 
must be separated from that of gaining the end in view through 
the particular means called the Continental System ; and on 
this subject, which concerns us here, it must be said that fiscal 
considerations had now become so pressing that it was necessary 
to brush aside the idea of carrying out the war against the trade 
of Great Britain. Napoleon's utterances at this period become 
more and more frankly mercenary ; and we may regard as 
the epitaph of the system a new memorandum by.the Emperor 
immediately after his return from Moscow (December 22, Isla), 
a significant counterpart to the long memorandum of January 
in the same year that we have summarized at length above. 
In that document the Emperor charges his minister of finance 
to inform the ministry of commerce that he needs 150,000,000 
francs in ordinary and extraordinary customs revenues during 
1813, giving the following reasons : 
In order to arrive at this result, you must consider what remains 
to be received for licences already granted ; and for those additional 
ones which must be granted to obtain this result, which is necessary 
for the first of all considerations, namely, that of having what is indis 
pensable for the present Bervice of the state. Undoubtedly it is necessary 
to harm our foes, but above all we must 1ive.l 
1 CorreepndanCe, no. 19,391 ; krea idditea, hoe. 1,002, 1,013, 1,018, 1,082; 
Mollien, op. cit., vol. 111, p. 237 ; Rist, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 142-3, 159-60 ; Smart, 