

a 4 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING This necessity to live, that is to say, fiscalism, in com bination with the hopelessness of a consistent application of the self-blockade, was what had led to the self-destruction of the Continental System ; and we have good reasons to doubt the possibility of its continuance in spirit and in truth, even if the Russian campaign and the wars of liberation had not inter vened. As it is, the gigantic experiment had been followed to such a point that the end seemed to be in sight, though it was not obtained. It is therefore inevitable that opinions as to its feasibility must remain divided. Nevertheless, a good deal more light falls on this question if one investigates the effects of the Continental System on the economic life of the different countries. This is to be the subject and the object of part IV. op. cit., vol. I, pp. 335 et sq. ; de CBrenville, op. cit., pp. 113, 310 ; Tarle, Deutsch franwsische Wirtschf&beziehungen, pp. 686-7; Schmidt, op. oit., pp. 408 et seq.

PART IV EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM ON THE ECONOMIC LIFE OF GREAT BRITAIN AND THE MAINLAND

CHAPTER I

DIFFERENT TYPES OF EFFECT THE Napoleonic wars occurred during a period of far reaching importance for the material development of Europe, "hat implies that during this period the economic life of Europe must have undergone a great transf&mation which can be ascribed only in part to the system under discussion. The problem will therefore be not only too widely extended, but also-which is of more consequence-altogether erroneously stated from the very outset, if we regard it as identical with the task of showing the general changes in the economic life of Western Europe during the first. decade and a half of the nineteenth century. Instead of that, what we have to do is to isolate those aspects of the development which can be connected in any way with t,he Continental System. This is a problem of a more or less theoretical nature, which pre supposes a knowledge of the general connexion that exists between cause and effect in the sphere of economics, and which can therefore not be solved by purely historical methods. The point which offers the greatest interest in such a problem is the working of the blockade policy in so far as it be came effective. Consequently, we now lay aside the weakness (proved in detail in the preceding part) of the Continental System as a measure of blockade, and turn to the results of the policy. On the Continent proper the Continental System necessarily came to work as a gigantic protectionist policy pursued to the limit. By excluding foreign goods it stimulated the domestic production of all kinds of goods which found any general use within the country or even within the Continent. To this extent, the Continental System, like the system that prevailed during t.he recent war, affords an occasion of studying the effects i5SS.43 S

258 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM of a high protectionism enforced with the greatest violence and with all the resources of the state for a short period. The difference between this and the rkgime which characterized the blockaded states of the Continent during the recent war lies solely in the fact that such a system of protection was then freely chosen, while in our own day it was imposed from without. On the other hand, the Continental System, like the state of affairs prevailing during the recent war, exhibits one significant and very fatal dissimilarity from the ordinary kind of protection that prevails in peace time, namely, that under the latter r4gime the obstacles in the way of imports usually embrace only the products of industry and agriculture, not the raw materials of industry, whereas the nature of the Continental System as a general self-blockade compelled, or at least should have compelled, equally rigorous embargo against all kinds of commodities imported by sea. The efforts of the all-important individual who dominated the Continent had consequently to be directed toward procuring of raw materials within his own territories, a task which always encounters more insuperable limits than that of working up materials which are to be found within one'g own borders. And so far as such an effort failed, there was an irremediable self-contradiction within the policy itself. Either, in fact, it was necessary to sacrifice the industrial ' development by which the position of Great Britain as the workshop of the world was intended to be crushed, or it was necessary to accept raw materials through the co-operation of the ruler of the seas and thereby fail in the object of destroying the commercial and maritime power of Great Britain and consequently fail also in the object of ' conquering her by excess '. When Mollien speaks of the inexplicable ' contradic tion ' between the obstacles in the way of the supply of raw materials and the prohibition of British manufactures, because t,he former benefited British industry more than the latter damaged it, consequently he puts his finger on this irremediable doubleness of the very principle of the Continental System.1 On the Continent, however, there existed a further contrast, 1 Mollien, Mdmoiru, &c., vol. II, p. 462 ; vol. m, pp. 323.