

CHAPTER I1 EFFECTS ON FRANCE THE development of the industrial life of France under the influence of the Continental System, like the development of all the industrial countries under that system, took place especially in the sphere of textile industries ; and nowhere did the conflicting tendencies appear so marked as there. Nevertheless, a great deal of the development of the French textile industry was not only devoid of connexion with the blockade policy itself, but, on the contrary, an evidence of its restricted range.1

LUXURY INDUSTRIES 
This applied especially to everything which falls under the 
heading of luxury industries, including the most brilliant and 
historic textile industry of France, the manufacture of silk. 
We, who only recently felt the pressure of a rigorous blockade 
and shortage of supplies, can best appreciate the fact that in 

1 Chaptal, De l'induatrie franpise, vols. I-II; Levaaseur, Histoire des clusses ouvrikres, &c., de 1789 ci 1870, vol. I, especially bk. II, chs. v-vi, and blr. III, ob. ii-iii ; Darmstlidter, StwEien zur mplmis&n wirtsclrafltep~itik, loc. cit., vol. II; Tarle, Koniinental'naja blokada, vol. I (devoted almost exclusively to the trade and industry of fiance) ; Ballot, Les p b s aux munufacturtx, loc. cit., vol. 11 ; Schmidt, Jean-Baptiste Say et le blocus continental, in Revue d'laisloire des doctrines imnmniques et sociales (1911), vol. IV, pp. 148 et se4. ; aho, Le8 de%uta de I'indFtrie cotonnite en France, 1760-1806, ibid. (1914-19), vol. VII, pp. 26 et seq. ; Ballot, Philippe de Girard et E'inventim de 2aJikture mkanique du lis, ibid. (1914-19), vol. VII, pp. 135 et seq. ; also, La rkvolution technique et les dt?buts de la grande exploitation &ns 2a m6tallurgie franpise, ibid. (1912), vol. V, pp. 29 et ee4. For the incorporated territories, cf. Varlez, Lea saluirea dam l'industrie gantoise (Brussels, 1901), vol. I, pp. 9-36, and apps. 111 and IV ; vol. 11 (1904), pp. 24-32 ; Herkner, Die oberels2issische Baumwollinduatrie und ihre Arbeiter (Strassburg, 1887), pp. 35-93 ; T. Geering, Die Entm*cklung des Zeugdrwke im Abendland seit dem XVII. Jahrhundert, in Viertel jahrscbift fiir f.Jocial- und Wirtschaftageschichle (1903), vol. I (founded principally upon the great work of A. Jenny-Triimpy, Handel und Idustrie des Kantom Glarua, und in Pardlele dazu : Skizze der allgemeinen Qeachichte der Textilindwrtrien mit hmderer Beriickeichtigung der echweizeriechen Zeugdruchwei ; Glans, 1899-1902) ; Darmstiidter, Die Verwaltung dea unter-Elaa.88, &c., loc. cit., vol. XIX (1904), pp. 631-72; Zeyas, Die Enletehung der HadeZ%x?arnnern, &c., pp. 62-90,103-29. For comparison with England, cf. especially Mantoux, La rdvolution induatridle au XVIIP &Me. Eseai sur lea commencemente de la grande induatrie moderne en Angleterre (Paris, lw), and Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture of Great Britain.

EFFECTS ON FRANCE 26’7 
such a situation the production of luxuries would hardly 
expand and take more and more varied forms, and perhaps 
stiIl more the fact that governments, however great their lack 
of intelligence in the sphere of economics, would be foolhardy 
indeed to go so far as to encourage, not to say enforce, such 
production. As this was the case during the first French empire, 
therefore, it is in the very nature of things that the cause can 
not be sought in the Continental System regarded as a measure 
of blockade against Great Britain. On the other hand, it is 
intimately connected with the general protectionist tendency 
that completely dominated Napoleon\ and forms the explana 
tion of the peculiar nature of the Continental System as 
contrasted with the corresponding system of the present day. 
It was precisely the historic luxury industries of France 
that the inheritor of the administrative traditions of the 
Bourbons most unhesitatingly and enthusiastically supported ; 
and it was mainly in the interest of the silk industry that, 
on the one side, a licensing system was carried out with its 
obhgation to export French industrial products, and, on the 
other side, the commercial measures against the allies of France, 
which comprised a monopolization of Italian raw silk for the 
requirements of the French silk industry and every conceivable 
measure against the for’eign rivals of that industry. 
The vaunting luxury in both word and deed, which in 
Napoleon’s view was a principal means of raising the prestige 
of the empire both internally and externally, also worked 
particularly well with the tendency to create sales for industries 
of the kind in which the French had excelled for centuries ; 
and a great deal of the encouragement of industry therefore 
consisted, quite naturally, in orders of all kinds on behalf of 
the court and imperial palace. Probably the fact that such 
a policy diverted productive forces from turning out what was 
necessary for the support of the people as well as for the 
prosecution of the war, did not greatly occupy Napoleon’s 
thoughts. To him, in fact, the function of economics presented 
itself more in the light of the popular notion of the necessity 
of ‘ providing employment ’ than as a need to bring about the 