

GREAT BRITAIN 
Such, from the standpoint of general principles, must have 
been the position of the continental states. In regard to Great 
Britain, on the other hand, one may express oneself more 
briefly at this stage. The prime object of Napoleon’s policy, 
of course, was to bring about a dislocation, to prevent the sale 
both of manufactured products and of the colonial goods 
imported with a view to re-export, and consequently to ruin 
the credit ,system and create unemployment in industry. So 
long as it was a question only of such ephemeral phenomena, 
the contrast between Great Britain and the Continent must 
have been very great, with excess of goods prevailing on the 
island kingdom and scarcity of goods prevailing on the Conti- 
DIFFERENT TYPES OF EFFECT 963 
nent. On the other hand, in so far as the exclusion of goods 
from the Continent proved to be lasting and was not made 
unimportant through increased sales in other parts of the world, 
the economic life of Great Britain necessarily aimed in the Same 
direction as that of the Continent, namely, toward increased 
self-sufficiency. The losses incurred in foreign trade, shipping 
and export industry, indeed, must have made production for 
sale at home more profitable and thus have given a backward 
wrench to the unprecedented development which Great Britain 
was just then undergoing. There is nothing to indicate that 
Napoleon thought so far ahead ; od the contrary, any such 
speculations would undoubtedly have been answered by one of 
his usual candid expressions about ‘ideologues ’. But that 
would not have prevented the results from being what we have 
indicated. 
Manifestly, this would have damaged the economic position 
of Great Britain immensely, quite apart from the great disloca 
tions that occurred during the period of transition. It would 
have reduced her national income far below what it had been 
before, inasmuch as such a development would have involved 
passing over from industries which were excellently suited 
to her in her then position to other industries which were far 
less uitable. For this reason, too, the losses consequent 
upon a lasting mutual embargo between Great Britain and the 
rest of the world would have been far greater for Great Britain 
than for the Continent. For the international division of 
labour, specialization in industry and commerce-to confine 
ourselves now to what was most typical at the time-formed 
the fundamental condition for the possibility of Britain to 
derive benefit from her position as the almost sole possessor 
of the great new inventions. The position of the continental 
states, on the other hand, was already, at the outbreak of the 
great struggle, so much less widely separated from economic 
self-sufficiency that a return thereto would have involved 
far more limited sacrifices. They would thereby, it is true, 
have largely lost the advantages of enjoying, by means of 
purchase from England, the fruits of the great inventions and 
of covering their requirements in transmarine goods ; and at 