

250 INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING a consequence of it.’ He maintains, in fact-in the ,most palpable codict with his own decrees, though without the slightest sign of embarrassment-that he has never said that France should not receive sugar, coffee, and indigo, but alleges that he has been content with customs duties thereon. What U he now pretends to have said is merely that the goods were not to be received except in exchange for French goods on French vessels and dependent upon the licences. Of all this, needless to say, the Berlin and Milan decrees gave not the slightest hint. .‘ Accordingly, it is the thus improved system that has achieved this result, which had not been counted upon for several years.’ However, the question arises how such a general granting of licences, with the object of bringing in money to the treasury and forcing up exports, would affect England, the crushing of whom, of course, was the primary object of the original policy. ‘ This will not benefit England with regard to industry, brokery, or freights ; it wil profit England solely as a sale for her [colonial] goods, and a part of those goods are really Dutch and French [as originating in their colonies]. Without doubt this is very advantageous for England, but it will cause an upheaval there ; and is the profit less or greater for France ? ’ ‘ That profit,’ continues Napoleon, ‘ is for France like three to one, while the profit of the Treaty of Versailles (the Eden Treaty) was more like one to seven,’ and therefore we have now to deal with ‘ a lasting system that may well be eternal ’. For the present, however, in the opinion of the Emperor, it is unnecessary to discuss whether the system can be intro duced, for it should at all events be attempted ; if it fails, the whole thing may well remain in the minutes of the Council. The execution is to take the form of a normalization of the licensing system, in that two kinds of licences are to be granted, the one unconditional for the import of foodstuffs, the other for the import of colonial goods on condition of the export of wine and brandy from Nantes and Bordeaux and of textiles from the north of France. For the non-French territories of Napoleon there are to be arranged fourteen ‘ series ’ of importing

SELF-DESTRUCTION OF THE SYSTEM 251 
places with corresponding export obligations, which will 
partly include the products of these countries themselves, but 
should take place through French licences. Of the duties, 
an amount between one-third and two-thirds shall fall to the 
princes concerned and the remainder shall fall to the French 
treasury, provided they follow the routes indicated. Danzig 
may possibly be allowed to export not only building timber 
but also corn to England, on condition 02 sending twice as much 
to France, and on payment of a special export duty, which 
should be considered in detail.1 
We thus see on what courses Napoleon had now started 
out. We are here concerned with a balancing of the purely 
commercial advantages of France against those of Great Britain, 
that is to say, the points of view of the kind that are usually 
put forward, for instance, in negotiating a commercial treaty; 
and in full analogy with this, the system is thought of as a 
permanent measure, not as a war measure, designed to destroy 
England. The concession, deliberately shoved aside by 
Napoleon and treated by him as a trifle in form, that the new 
order of things would be advantageous for England in respect 
of the trade in colonial goods, stands in the strongest possible 
contrast to the proud announcement of 1807 that England 
sees her vessels laden with superfluous wealth, wandering 
around the seas and seeking in vain a port to open and receive 
them. Now Napoleon himself considers opening an his ports 
for the purpose, if only he can get these vessels to take French 
goods in exchange. This means that the principle of the 
Continental System has been abandoned. To use an expression 
of Professor Hjlirne, in his book Revolutionen och Napobon, in 
connexion with other sides of the policy of the empire, one may 
call this the ‘ self-destruction of the system ’. 
During the period of barely four months that remained 
before Napoleon’s departure for the Russian campaign we find 
1 Cwre.s@nce, no. 18,431. There is a kind of germ of all this in the Memo 
randum of July 25,.1810, which forms the hasis of the licenqe and Trianon decrees, 
extracts from which are given in Schmidt, op. cit., p. 368. 
a See ante, p. 74. 