

CHAPTER VI SELF-DESTRUCTION OF THE SYSTEM NAPOLEON completely misinterpreted the significance of British difficulties ; and how much the dislocation of British colonial trade was an effect of the general insecurity of the world, that is to say, not solely of Napoleon’s measures, is shown by the fact that the French crisis, too, had its origin in huge speculations with regard to colonial g0ods.l It is also doubtful to what extent Napoloen’s torrent of words concerning the impending ruin of England fully convinced even himself. At any rate, a remarkable document dating from as far back as the beginning of 1812 shows how far he had come to doubt the expediency of maintaining the Continental System in its original form and purpose. The document referred to, which is printed from an official copy in the great edition of Napoleon 1’s correspondence which came out under Napoleon 111, is there called Note SUT le blocus continental. It was dictated in the Council of Merchants and Manufacturers on January 13, and, like many of Napoleon’s other dictated utterances, it has the character of a kind of imperial monologue. In the case before us, however, it gives us the unusual impression of half-formed thoughts in the mind of a man who does not see his way clearly before him ; and if it did not end in charging the home secretary to work out plans in accordance with the lines laid down, one might easily conceive the whole as a mere experiment in thought. The pre-history and consequences of the plan have never been examined, so far as I know, and consequently much of it is obscure; but, notwithstanding this fact, it is of uncommonly great interest as an indication of the general trend of Napoleon’s thoughts. 1 Darmstiidter, 8tudim zur mpleonieciden Wi&ckz&volitik, Zoc. cit., VOI. n, pp. 579-80.

SELF-DESTRUCTION OF THE SYSTEM %9 
In his introductory words Napoleon lays it down that 
there are two alternatives : ' either to remain where we are, 
or to march with great steps toward a different order of things '. As an illustration of the established order he makes a com 
parison between the prices of sugar in the different countries 
under his rule in relation to the customs rates, and on the 
basis of this comparison he concludes that the laws are enforced 
loyally in France, the Kingdom of Italy, and Naples, but less 
diligently in the states of the Confederation of the Rhine; 
after this a calculation is made of the requirements in those 
three countries, on the supposition that the consumption has 
been reduced to a third. So far as one can understand, it is 
on the basis of this that the second alternative is to be founded, 
namely, an altogether unimpeded granting of licences for the 
whole requirements of all transmarine goods, on payment of 
heavy duties, and also on condition of the export of French 
goods. The requirements of sugar imports, estimated at 
450,000 puirztauo, will thus bring into the coffers of the state no 
less than 70,000,000 francs ; and this importation will be allowed 
against an export of money to the amount of 1O,OOO,OOO francs 
and of goods to the value of 30,000,000 francs. The same 
system is afterwards to be applied to coffee, hides, indigo, tea, 
raw cotton, and dyewoods. ' This will produce,' he says, 
' a great activity in industry, encouragement for navigation, 
the navy and the brokerage business, a customs income of 
200,000,000 francs a year, and a germ of prosperity and life 
in all our ports.' 
So far there was nothing more than a consistent following 
out of the established licensing system, even though the last 
expression cited hints how heavily the policy had fallen onFrench 
economic life. But the reasons alleged and the immediate 
execution show how far Napoleon had travelled from the 
original plan of the Continental System. It is true that he 
does not make the slightest admission of this. ' For France,' 
he says, ' the result will be a dream '- a dream which could 
not have been attained without the Continental System. ' His 
Majesty does not regard this as a change in the system, but as 