

1897). VOl. III, pp. 692 8q., 1089 et Sq. ; VOl. N (1899), pp. 165 d 8q. cf. ab0

286 EFTECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
competitors, who were stated to sell at 3 0 4 per cent. under 
French prices ; the blockade had had no more stimulating 
effect than that a 50 per cent. customs duty was necessary to 
keep the industry going. 
The total impression we get in these essential industries, 
therefore, may be summarized somewhat as follows : The 
effect of the Continental System was primarily to exclude at 
least the industry of the French empire from British influences ; 
and under the conditions then prevailing these influences were 
indispensable for every country desirous of participating in 
the fruits of the great economic revolution. 
CHEMICAL IXDUSTRY 
There was one department, however, in which the superiority 
and pioneering work of French industry were plainly to be seen ; 
and that department is at the same time one where we have 
an opportunity to study the positive side of the Continental 
System, the side that promoted progress. This is the chemical 
industry, or, to put it better, all processes where the results of 
chemical studies could benefit pr0duction.l 
The fact that the course of development took this direction 
in France rather than elsewhere, it is true, was fundamentally 
due to something quite different from politics, namely, the fact 
that Lavoisier, through his work during the two decades 
immediately preceding the French Revolution, had laid the 
foundation of the whole of modern chemistry and had made 
it immediately applicable to a number of practical tasks. 
Moreover, he had had a number of eminent pupils whose work, 
to a still higher degree, was directly beneficial to industry ; 
their results, too, were to a large extent apparent before or 
about the outbreak of the Revolution, when the external 
pressure had not yet begun to make itself felt. In certain cases, 
also, they had become economically usable before the Con 
1 Cf. the brilliant sketch by Professor Arthur Binz, Urapung und Ent2oickelung 
der chis& Indwtrie (a lecture delivered at the Berliner HanaXshbchule in 
1910). His statement aa to the development of artificial s& (p. 7 note 2) cannot, 
however, be brought into accord with the facts ; and the we of chlorine bleaching 
is older than one might infer from his words (p. 10 note 7). 
EFFECTS ON FRANCE a7 
tinental System and consequently had great importance for 
industrial development during its sway. In this connexion the 
first place should be given to Berthollet’s theory, based on the 
discovery of the Swede, Scheele, for the production of chlorine, 
which became of very great importance for the whole of the 
weaving industry owing to the fact that as early as 1785 
chlorine bleaching took the place of sun bleaching. James Watt 
almost immediately brought about the transference of the new 
method to England, which undoubtedly here followed in the 
wake of French progress instead of taking the lead. Another 
chemical method of still more central importance-which also 
had come into use during the years before the outbreak of the 
Revolution-was the production of sulphuric acid, which 
became the starting-point for a whole series of other branches 
of production, 
In this connexion, however, it is evidently not the chemical 
advances of this kind that possess the greatest interest, but 
rather such as were first helped on their way by the great 
self-blockade, the importance of which for the process of 
development was-if the expression may be allowed-maieutic. 
It may be laid down as a general rule, indeed, that the economic 
service rendered by a war or by a blockade consists mainly in 
breaking down the barriers which impede the use of new 
inventions rather than in evoking those new inventions or 
discoveries themselves. So far the dictum to the effect that 
‘ necessity is the mother of invention ’ would hit the point 
better if it were rephrased ‘ necessity is the nurse of invention ’. 
In a war situation, indeed, public feeling is so unnerved, as 
a rule, that there is seldom sufficient calm for profound scientific 
work ; and even if there were calm, time is lacking, for every 
thing has to be done on the spur of the moment, and science 
seldom allows herself to be commandeered. What is done in 
war and in case of blockade, therefore, is rather to seize violently 
upon inventions which have been already or almost completed 
-that is, in a purely technical sense-but which have pre 
viously been devoid of economic importance. When a country 
is suddenly cut off from the old sources of supply, processes that 
288 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
previously lacked economic importance may become the best or 
even the only expedient. This is largely the explanation of 
the ' development of the great industrial marvels ', of which 
Chaptal and others of that period speak. Afterwards, when the 
exceptional situation disappeared, the marvels also vanished, 
for they had done their work. They fell back under the 
threshold of consciousness, so to speak, and became once more 
potential instead of actual ; and this is the only proper thing, 
if we wish to keep the economic position of the people at its 
highest level. In this way is explained without difficulty the 
general ddbhle which overwhelmed the industrial creations of 
the Napoleonic age at the dawn of peace. In certain happy 
cases, however, the blockade has given ri.se to a new production 
that has only needed such a help to strike root ; and in those 
cases it has really carried economic development onward and 
proved itself a genuine protectress. 
In the sphere of chemical industry proper the great example 
here is the production of soda from sea salt. This discovery 
had been made by Leblanc as early as some time about 1789- 
statements as to the year vary somewhat, as is usually, and 
quite naturally, the case in the matter of inventions and 
discoveries. The efforts of the great French chemist during 
the whole of the revolutionary age to make his work bear fruit 
had come completely to grief, however, and he was ruined 
several years before his death in 1806. Then came the severance 
of intercourse with Spain, whence soda had previously been 
obtained, and this gave a hitherto undreamt of importance to 
the production of soda, which now proved itself to be, even 
economically, thoroughly justified, inasmuch as it was developed 
to such an extent that the price could be reduced from 80-100 
francs to 10 francs per 100 kgs. A similar development attended 
the manufacture of another product, which in the fullness of 
time was one day to become the basic material for a substitute 
of Leblanc soda, namely, ammonia ; and the production of 
alum and camphor by chemical methods may perhaps be 
mentioned here, and possibly, too, the advances made in the 
important production of nitric acid. 
EFFECTS ON FRANCE 289 
These fundamental discoveries led afterwards to a great 
many others, as has always been the case in the sphere of 
chemistry, owing to the many different products that are 
obtained by a synthesis. But it would fall far beyond the 
writer's competence to give a detailed account of all this, Yet 
one might venture the assertion that the French chemical 
industry during this period, on the basis of the hst great 
advances of modern chemistry, went through, and caused the 
world to go through, a development of somewhat the same 
kind as did the chemical industry of Germany after 1870, 
chiefly on the basis of the derivatives of coal-tar. To mention 
only one or two more examples, the supply of soda formed 
the foundation for the manufacture of soap, while the hydro 
chloric acid obtained as a by-product of sea salt in recovering 
soda became, in its turn, the basis for the manufacture of 
chlorine, Of special importance also in the development of 
the textile industry were the new possibilities in the manu 
facture of dyes and the printing of them on different kinds of 
material, which were brought about by the increased knowledge 
of chemistry. Most famous in the former respect was the manu 
facture of ' Berlin blue '-also called ' Raymond blue ', after 
its inventor-and the use of ' Adrianople red' in calico 
printing, where a member of the famous textile hm of Koechlin 
(Miilhausen) made advances in 1810 and 1811 which far ex 
ceeded what had been achieved in England, 
SUBSTITUTES FOR COLONIAL GOODS 
The question of the dye industry led one naturally to the 
problem of finding substitutes for the more or less inaccessible, 
and always condemned, colonial goods. It was quite natural 
that the work of the French government and its organs, perhaps 
Chaptal above all, should be directed primarily to this point. 
That measures were urgently needed here with regard to 
dyeing substances can be deduced from the great rise in prices, 
which, at least at Leipzig, was sometimes more marked than 
for raw cotton : for indigo the price was ordinarily twice as 
h h , but sometimes even three, four, or five times as high, 
1569.43 U 
290 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
while for cochineal, dyewood and other dyes the price was 
usually doubled.1 By far the most important dyeing sub 
stances were the two first-named : indigo and cochineal. As 
a matter of fact, this was no great novelty in either case, for 
people had long used two native dyeing plants, woad (Isatis 
tinctoria) and madder (Rubia tinctorum), for the production 
of blue and red, respectively, but it was now regarded as a great 
advance that the chemists had been able to establish the 
presence of the same dyeing substance, indigo, in woad as ex 
isted in Indian and Arnerican indigofera. Expectations, par 
ticularly as to the domestic production of indigo, were raised 
extremely high. People expected to he forever independent 
of the colonial product, and even as late as 1818, that is to say, 
after the Restoration, Chaptal cherished the hope that France, 
by means of her domestic production of indigo, would even get 
an export article that might compensate her for the profitable 
trade in colonial goods that she had lost when in 1814 and 
1815 she had had to sacrifice the greater part of her colonial 
empire. In reality, however, the results were very small, and 
they had no importance whatever for the future. The cultiva 
tion of 32,000 hectares with woad had been prescribed ; Indian 
indigo had been declared an English product and its importa 
tion had consequently been forbidden ; three imperial indigo 
factories had been founded and prizes had been awarded to 
private individuals ; but evea as late as 1813 the output came 
to only 6,000 kgs., apart, from 500 kgs, of Indian indigo (called 
‘ani1 indigo ’) from an Italian plantation. Only one single factory 
survived 1814 ; and the whole episode vanished without leaving 
any traces behind. As is well known, it is by synthetic methods 
that substitutes have been found in our own day for the natural 
dyeing substances, indigo and alisarin (the dyeing substance 
contained in madder) ; and during the recent war the reverse 
strate of things prevailed to such an extent that Great Britain 
had sometimes to fall back on natural indigo to take the 
place of the unobtainable synthetic indigo from Germany. 
With regard to the other colonial goods, the substitutes 
1 Figurea given in Konig, op. cit., p. 224. 