

274 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM

. . . . . . . . . 
. . , . . . . . . 

EFFECTS ON FRANCE 275 
cotton we note the enormous distance between British and 
continental prices, During the years 1808-13 the prices, even 
in Leipzig, the centre of the European cotton trade, are almost 
without exception twice as high as in London, and in certain 
years (1808-9) they are four times as high. To a far greater 
extent than one would have expected beforehand, the figures 
follow one another at similar distances-a fact which appears 
with particular clearness in the increase of price on Georgia 
cotton in 1808 (autumn) and in the fall of prices corresponding 
to both qualities in 1811. Tnis illustrates what has been 
previously said concerning the almost uniform increase of 
prices caused by smuggling. It is quite true, indeed, that we 
have no security here for agreement in quality between the 
different quotations ; but the conclusions here put forward 
may be said to hold good a fortiori, as at least one factor is 
excluded which would increase, and not diminish, the distance, 
namely, the heavy depreciation of British currency, which 
makes the British prices too high when, as here, they are con 
verted to francs at par. A levelling-down tendency first 
appeared in 1813, in connexion with the Anglo-American war, 
which raised the British prices, and the fall of the Continental 
System on the European mainland, which lowered the con 
tinental prices ; and the year 1814, owing to the continuance 
of the former factor and the peace on the Continent, led to 
a unique situation, in that Georgia cotton was cheaper in 
Leipzig than in London. 
However, the table shows something more, namely, that the 
French prices without exception stood higher than the Leipzig 
prices. Nor is this surprising, in view of the stricter customs 
watch in France; but it is none the less z1 fact which made 
still more difficult the position of the French cotton industry. 
Unfortunately, it is precisely these figures that least bear 
comparison in the table ; but light can be thrown on the matter 
by other figures, based on French consular reports, for a number 
of different places at the =me two points of time, namely, 
the two crises of May 1808 and June 1811. If we arrange 
these places as nearly as possible in accordance with the 
T2 

276 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM magnitude of the prices, the figures assume the following shape (francs per kilogram) : '

City

Wseilles . Antwerp . Paris . Ronen .

I- May 1808 1 June 1811 Pernamhuco 1 Louisianr

. -

City

Smyrna ~- 
6.50 London 
6.92 Naples 
7.50 Trieste 
7.92 Leipzig 
Frankfurt 
Base1 
Milan 
Paris 
~ Bremen ~ - ." 
As we see from this table, the French industrial centres 
come last, with the sole exception, at the later time, of Bremen. 
As all this necessarily followed from the nature of the 
self-blockade, it could not take Napoleon by surprise ; and in 
point of fact he was prepared for it, although his counter 
measures were somewhat hesitating. At times the only 
expedient he saw was to replace the colonial cotton by some 
other cotton which did not have to be obtained by sea. The 
most obvious kind was Levantine, but here, too, there were 
great difficulties, arising partly from its short staple and 
generally inferior quality and partly from the great delays and 
inconveniences of transportation, as it could not be conveyed 
across the Mediterranean and as a very expensive transport in 
wheeled vehicles had consequently to be arranged through 
Bosnia uia Genoa and Marseilles. The figures given above also 
show how the French prices for Levantine cotton ran up, even 
in comparison with the British prices for the far more valuable 
American cotton. The situation was all the more unsatisfactory 
because Napoleon would by no means be satisfied with the 
coarse goods that alone could be produced from Levantine 
cotton. Thus there arose the idea of starting the cultivation 
of cotton nearer home, preferably within the borders of the 
empire ; and in this connexion the most obvious choice was 
Naples. Naples, to use the expression of the French envoy 
EFFECTS ON FRANCE 271 
there, was to be ‘ France’s richest colony ’, or, to borrow a 
phrase from a French historian,l ‘the tropical element ’ in the 
Continental System ; it was this fact that caused Neapolitan 
cotton alone to be excepted from the enormously increased 
customs duties imposed by the Trianon tariff. But the cotton 
that could be obtained from Naples (Castellamare), even in com 
bination with that which was admitted in later years from Spain 
(Motril) and with what could be otherwise scraped together 
from places nearer home (from Romagna, &e.), supplied but 
a small fraction of the total requirements ; on the basis of 
Chaptal’s figures for the output of\the spinning-mills in 1812, 
one may perhaps calculate this supply at 12 per cent. of the 
whole.2 
All this was so obvious that Napoleon could never feel 
unmixed joy at the prodigious development of the cotton 
industry, but, on the contrary, time after time occupied his 
thoughts with the idea of rooting out cotton goods and replacing 
them by other textiles, such as had long been manufactured 
in France and were based on domestic raw materials. Even 
as early as 1809 he declared that ’ it would be better to use only 
wool, flax, and silk, the products of our own soil, and to proscribe 
cotton forever on the Continent, because we have no colonies ; 
but as we cannot control the fashions, of course, . . . 73 
The same thought lay behind his resolution, effected in 
the following year, to offer a prize of no less than a million 
francs for the invention of a flax-spinning machine ; but 
after the outbreak of the crisis of 1810-11, he took such a strong 
step against what was after all largely his own work as, in 
January 1811, to banish cotton goods from the imperial p laces. 
But for the very reason that Napoleon had given two years 
previously, the xtirpation of cotton goods-at which he 
assuredly did not even aim at this stage-was a hopeless 
1 Rambaud, Naph wu Joseph Bonaparte, p. 437. 
The weight of spun yarn in 1812 was 13,470,000 kgs., which with the addition of 
one-twelfth for loss of weight corresponds to 14,590,000 kgs. of cotton. In comparison 
with this the supply of Italian and Spanish cotton was 3,000,000-4,000,000 limes 
(French pounds), or an average of 1,750,000 kgs. Chaptal, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 7, 16. 
a Quoted by Tarle, Kontinental’naja blokdu, vol. I, p. 513. 
278 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
undertaking ; and he, like his people, had to take the conse 
quences of a situation from which there was no escape. 
The development of the cotton industry is characteristic 
of the effects of the Continental System, not only through t.he 
dualism that existed between the exclusion of raw materials 
and the forcing of manufacture, but to an equal extent through 
the violently enforced stimulation of a production that had not 
grown up out of increasing natural requirements for an article 
but out of a sudden embargo in combination with state measures 
of all kinds. There is no doubt that great over-speculation had 
occurred in the industry and had had its share in the French 
crisis of 1810-11, just as a similar over-speculation in the colonial 
trade gave the impulse to the crisis in Great Britain. Mollien, 
an observer who formed unusually cool judgments, pointed 
this out in a letter to Napoleon, and especially called his 
attention to the insufficient supply of capital possessed by the 
industry and its consequent dependence on loans and bills 
of exchange. In his memoirs he is, on the whole, very critical 
not only of the heads of factories, especially Richard Lenoir, 
whose untenable business position and reckless way of living 
he says that he explained to the Emperor, but also of the 
industry itself, where, in his opinion, many millions had been 
invested in what could have been made equally serviceable 
at half the expense.1 
When, after some months, the crisis of 1810 reached the 
cotton industry, it hit it very hard and effectively, especially 
the spinning-mills, which as a rule seem to have seen their 
number of workmen decline by a third in the course of 1811. 
There was a general improvement in the course of 1812 which 
continued in places during most of the following year, at least 
if we may credit the deliberately roseate reports of the home 
secretary to Napoleon in the latter half of 1813. But the Ghent 
industry declined steadily early in 1813, and later on in the same 
year, that is to say, before the fall of Napoleon, the decline 
spread in ever-widening circles. Probably with great exaggera 
tion, but certainly not, without grounds, the Executive Committee 
Mollien, MLm&res, &e., vol. m, pp. 12,22 et seq. 
EFFECTS ON FRANCE 279 
for Cotton of the Council of Manufactures expressed the view 
in the following year, immediately after the Restoration, that 
the whole of this branch of industry was ruined in 1813 to such 
an extent that 600,000 individuals had to choose between 
begging or putting an end to their misery on a battlefield. 
Capital to the amount of 300,000,000 francs was paralysed and 
working power to the value of 2L30,000,OOO francs was lost. 
The most comprehensible picture of the decline from the summit 
year of 1810 to the autumn of 1813 is offered by the official 
ilgures for the Ghent industries, reproduced on the next page.1 
We note in these figures the poweriul effect of the crisis 
of 1811 as regards the spinning-mill$, but, in contrast with this, 
no effect at all as regards the weaving-mills or printing works, 
while the decline in 1813, with a quite different kind of uni 
formity, extends over all branches of the industry ; and, if 
me judge by the number of spindles, it implies a. reduction of 
almost a half. 
The strongest evidence of the enforced stimulation of the 
industry, however, is shown in the events occurring at the fall 
of Napoleon. When the frontiers were opened in connexion 
with the march of the allied armies, and later, in April 1814, 
formally opened by a series of decrees issued by the Provisional 
Government, the cotton industry collapsed altogether, and 
almost all the leading manufacturers were ruined. The majority 
of them-chiefly Richard Lenoir, but also Li6vin Bauwens 
had received liberal support in the form of loans from Napoleon 
during the crisis of 1810-11, which they had not been able to 
repay ; and with the fall of the empire all prospect of their 
ever epaying them disappeared. Bauwens, who had been 
lauded in every conceivable fashion as the benefactor of his 
town and as a pillar of the prosperity of France, saw his property 
sold by distraint, and he himself had to flee to Paris to escape 
imprisonment. Chaptal particularly regrets the ruin of the 