

COTTON INDUSTRY 
Especially with regard to the linen and woollen industries, 
however, it is true that the comparatively slow development 
was caused by the expansion of the cotton industry, an expan 
sion which was unique, and, in the eyes of contemporaries, 
quite phenomenal. Here there is no doubt that we are brought 

1 Cf. a pronouncement of the leading man in the clothing induetry, Ternaux, sen., in Conseil g6ral des manufactures, immediately after the Restoration ; printed in Levaaseur, Histoire des chses ouwQres, &c., de 1789 d. 1870, vol. I, p. 732, app. A.

270 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM face to face with an effect of the Continental System; for, on one side, the whole of this branch of industry was compara tively undeveloped before the Revolution, while, on $he ot.her side, the competition of Great Britain was more overwhelming here than anywhere else in the industrial life of France. The (1 French people had already accustomed themselves to cotton goods to such an extent that the prohibition on imports in 1806 was all that was required to speed up the domestic production amazingly, especially as the foundation had been largely laid by the many prohibitions and embargoes during the whole of the preceding decade. Here again it was two incorporated territories that exhibited the most violent growth, namely, Mulhausen in Upper Alsace, with old traditions in that line, and Ghent, which under the leadership of one man, Li6vin Bauwens, the great captain of industry,' stands out as a striking example of one of the two kinds of development due to the Continental System. Ghent, it is true, had old and boasted textile t.raditions, dating from the Middle Ages ; but long before the Revolution almost all manufacture had disappeared there, and as the revolutionary wars put an end to the little that remained, this old manufac turing centre had come to be looked upon as a dead town. In 1801, however, Li6vin Bauwens started there a machine cotton-spinning mill and also a hand weaving establishment. To begin with, he was almost alone in the matter, being helped merely by his brothers, but as early as 1803 he had no less than 23'7 workmen. It was not long before his example began to be followed by a number of other persons, especially relatives, who entered into violent competition with him, particularly for the altogether inadequate supply of labour. An enormous expansion thereupon began ; the whole of Flanders and northern France were covered with spinning-mills and home weavers, the new enterprises extending, in fact, as far as Paris and its environs. But Ghent remained the main centre, and for a fairly long time it was the only place in the empire where cotton goods were manufactured on a large scale, especially for military requirements ; and it also obtained as markets,

EFFECTS ON FRANCE 271 
not only France and Belgium, but also Holland, Italy, Spain 
and the larger part of Germany. At the summit level of this 
prosperity the former ' dead town ' was stated to have fifty 
factories and ten thousand workers in the cotton trade; and 
the shortage of labour was so great that wages jumped up to 
wh.at was then the amazing amount of 5-8 francs per dkm. 
In contrast with this production for sale on a large scale 
there existed in Miilhausen, and in southern Alsace in general 
and had long existed-a flourishing manufacture of the finest 
qualities of calicoes and printed cotton goods. The real 
impetus, however, came with the annexation of the town by 
the French republic in 1798 ; and the Continental System made 
it the leading centre for calicoes and prints upon the Continent, 
at the expense both of Base1 and of British sales in Europe. 
The importance of the development at Miilhausen appears 
best, perhaps, from the population statistics, which show an 
increase from 6,628 in the year 1800 to 8,021 in 1805 and 
9,353 in 1810, a growth of 41 per cent. in ten years. Alongside 
this, however, there were also very important and comparatively 
new centres for the cotton trade within the limits of old France, 
especially in the old textile districts of northern France and in 
Paris and its suburbs. One of the most celebrated French 
leaders of industry, Richard Lenoir, was stated by a German 
observer who is generally regarded as reliable (Fahnenberg) 
to have had in his factories such for that time incredible 
numbers of workmen as 10,600 in 1808 and 14,000 in 1810. 
According to the statements of Chaptal, who is throughout 
obviously a partisan of the new industry, it is true, but who in 
spite of this is in many ways our most reliable source of informa 
tion, the production of cotton yarn was already sufficient for 
home requirements almost up to the highest number (finest 
gradeskin reality, however, up to number 100 only. Even 
as regards woven cotton goods, in his opinion, the imports 
had declined to about 6 per cent. of the figure for the last year 
of the ancien rdgime ; but in this estimate a considerable 
amount of smuggling, for which an overwhelming evidence 
exists, was assuredly left out of account. It is also worthy of 
27% EFFECTS OF THE CONTINEhTAL SYSTEM 
note that what was at times a very considerable export of 
piece goods had begun. 
Evidently this development was calculated to give Napoleon 
himself and his helpers a great certainty of victory, both as 
an evidence of the profitableness of the Continental System to 
France and as a blow against the economic supremacy of 
Great Britain. To what a great extent the whole thing was 
regarded as an important item in the struggle against Great 
Britain is hown by many facts. When Napoleon visited 
Oberkampf, the most famous of the leaders of the cotton 
industry, who a.s early as 1760 hAd laid the foundation of 
calico printing in old France by the establishment of his famous 
works at Jouy, outside Versailles, he decorated him and added 
the explanation : ‘ We are both carrying on war against the 
British, but your war is the best.’ And Li6vin Bauwens 
produced a wonderful judgment on the part of the British 
Court of King’s Bench, by which, on the accusation of Lord 
Erskine, he had been condemned to death in contumaciam, 
because, ‘ not content with having stolen the secrets of England 
in the art of tanning, he had also robbed her of the most 
important branch of her trade, the cotton manufacture, which 
was the apple of her eye.’ 
In reality, however, there was no point where the two 
opposing tendencies of the Continental System were so much in 
conflict with one another as here ; and the reason was, of 
course, that the industry was based on a raw material which 
was for the most part unobtainable by other means than by 
the forbidden route across the seas. From the very first 
moment, therefore, the shortage of raw materials hung like the 
sword of Damocles over the head of the flourishing new develop 
ment, causing continual fluctuations and constant changes. 
During the year 1808, for instance, Libin Bauwens, according 
to his own statement, employed 1,269 workmen on May 1, 
but only 230 on November 1 ; and the same state of affairs 
was said to prevail among his competitors. Moreover, according 
to the same authority, the price of raw cotton rose at the same 
time from 5.25 to 11 or 12 francs per half a kilo and then sank to 
EFFECTS ON FRANCE a73 
6 or 7. As early as 1807 the shortage of raw cotton had begun 
to make itself felt in France, and in the course of 1808 it pro 
duced a genuine crisis in the cotton industry, which found 
expression in many forms, Thus, for instance, the prefect of 
the Aube department declared that the closing of the spinning 
mills in Troyes caused by the ‘ equally sudden and unique 
rise in the price of raw cotton ’ had reduced 10,000 people to 
misery ; and on this account he submitted a placard which 
was apparently insurrectionary.1 According to another state- , 
ment, the difficulties of the French weaving mills were further 
increased by the fact that the weaving mills in Germany and 
Switzerland, owing to the scarcity of yarn prevailing there, 
had gotten hold of French cotton yarn and thus rendered 
that dearer. The difficulty was partly overcome this time, 
and the state of prosperity continued into the year 1810, 
which as a rule marks the summit level of the industrial pros 
perity of France, as also of England and the non-French parts 
of the Continent. But then, as we know, came the great crisis, 
of which the shortage of raw cotton formed one of the most 
obvious causes; and this shortage was made worse by Napoleon’s 
Rambouillet decree, issued in the spring of 1810, which dealt 
a severe blow at American shipping: During the following 
years of the empire the shortage became more and more acute, 
and in 1813 it led to a complete stoppage of operations. 
The whole of this position is not in the least degree difficult 
to explain, but its importance is worthy of illustration with 
figures. The available statistics especially show how practically 
impossible any real competition with the British industry-or, 
to be more explicit, the impossibility of creating an industry 
that could provide the whole population of the Continent with 
cotton goods on approximately the same terms as were offered 
to British and American consumers-must have been made 
by the mere fact that raw material was scarce or unobtain 
able, (See next page.) 
On examining the columns for North and South American 
1 Report to the home secretary, June-15, 1808, printed in Tarle, Kotltiwn#al’- 
naja blokada, vol. I, 720-1. 
1569.43 T 