

1 Calculated from figures given in Kiinig, op. cit., p. 226. See also Levaseem, Hisfoire ah dU48.54 0um"3res, &o., de I789 d I870, vol. I, p. 475 ; Tooke, 9. cit., vol. II, p. 414.

EFFECTS ON FRANCE 293 hand, in accordance with its usual methods, by means of measures which ran exactly parallel with the treatment of the manufacture of indigo, and which followed one another in rapid succession. A prohibition was established on the importation of colonial sugar, and it was ordered that beets should be cultivated first on 32,000 hectares and afterwards on 100,000 hectares, which order, it is true, was never carried out. It was ordered further that there should be four imperial sugar factories, and a special one in Rambouillet. There is no question that this gave rise to a lively development of both the culture of sugar beets and the manufacture of sugar, not least among the German-speaking people residing %thin and without the borders of the empire, and experimentally as far north as Denmark. And Napoleon’s organs made all that could be made of this success in the work of becoming independent of the supply by sea. Thus the home secretary, in his survey of the condition of the empire submitted to the Corps Zkgislatij in February 1813, stated how it had seemed an .impossibility to find anything to replace sugar, indigo, cochineal, soda, ‘and cotton ; but ‘ we have exercised a strong will, and the impossible has been accomplished through our efforts ’. From the year 1813 onward, he held out prospects of a manufacture of 7,000,000 livres (nearly 3,500,000 kgs.) of sugar in 334 factories, which were stated to be ‘ almost all ’ at work ; and this he considered to correspond to at least half of the demand, which had diminished greatly owing to the rise of price. . As usual, the reality was somewhat less brilliant. Accord ing to the home secretary’s own report to Napoleon later in the year, it turned out that, owing to ignorance and unfavour able weather, they had only got 1,100,000 kgs. of sugar and that of the 334 licences issued only 158 had been actually used ; and if one may believe a statement made by the director general of manufactures and trades immediately after the Restoration, the quality of the sugar placed on the market \ was so bad that it had created a prejudice against the home product. As a matter of fact, the retrograde tendency began as early as that same year (1813), and afterwards the fall of

2% EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM the empire drew with it the decline of the industry, so that not a single one of the sugar factories held its own. But after only two years two new factories were started, one of them by Chaptal on his estate at Chanteloup. A high duty on colonial sugar set the manufacture of beet sugar on its feet toward the close of the 'twenties, so that the contribution of the Con tinental System on this point turned out to bear fruit after the lapse of a decade and a half. Thus the sugar beet industry stands, by the side of the Leblanc soda, as an evidence that a blockade may, in certain cases, remove some of the obstacles that stand in the way of an important economic development.