

1 Varlez, op. cit., vol. I, app. III. The reports of the home seoretmy are printed in Tarle, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 735 et seq. The Report of the Committee of the Cmht of Manufactures in 1814 is printed in Levasseur, Histoire des clasee.9 wm&ee, &c., de 1789 d 1870, vol. I, pp. 726-7, app. A.

!BO EFFECTS

c r“ D 0 h

A h z 8

OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM

- 
. . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . 

EFFECTS ON FRANCE 281 
great nankeen manufacture owing to the overwhelming com 
petition of Indian and British goods, which were allowed to 
enter on payment of duty ; and the amount of the duty was 
in reality, according to circumstances, 45-50 centimes per 
metre, which can not have been less than 20-25 per cent. of 
the value of the goods and consequently no mean protection 
in itself.1 But, of course, this was a very considerable step from 
complete embargo, despite the smuggling. 
Whatever construction one may put on the matter, the 
fate of the French cotton industry on the fall of Napoleon 
shows that it had by no means become capable, during the 
time of the blockade, of holding its own against foreign com 
petition. Nor is the great prosperity which, after a quite short 
interval, occurred under the Restoration any real evidence of 
its competitive efficiency, inasmuch as a prohibition of the 
imports of foreign textiles was almost immediatelyre-introduced; 
and the protection of the industry was thereby even con 
siderably increased, as raw cotton now came in free. Indeed, 
as will be shown throughout this chapter, the technical advances 
the Continental System, and they still fell far behind Great 
Britain in almost every respect. Without the help of 
Englishmen very little progress could as yet be made in any 
thing which had to do with engineering or metal working 
industries ; and Lihvin Bauwens, for instance, started his 
machine spinning-mills with the help of five foremen whom 
he had virtually kidnapped from England, and whom he 
detained half with their consent and half by violence. As has 
been indicated before, however, it was almost inevitable that 
the blows of the Continental decrees against everything living 
or dead which bore the name of English should have a re 
straining effect on the spread of English ideas and the removal 
of English mechanics or inventors to the Continent ; and, 
indeed, Mollien said somewhat bitingly, in connexion with his 

Loi relative aw douanes, Dm. 17, 1814. Bulletin des lois, &c., 5th ser., bull. 62, no. 529. CT. Levassew, Histoire des ~2asses ouvritea, &c., de 1789 & 1870, vol. I, pp. 562 et seq.

in French industry were not, on the whole, very great under

a82 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
general criticism of the new industry, that the machinery was 
built by ‘ roving Englishmen who were not the best mechanics 
of their country ’. Chaptal’s complacent account of how, 
through his far-sightedness, machines were procured which 
were the best in Europe and were continually being developed 
by improvements from without and by native invention, must 
also be taken cum grano Balk 
This appears best from what, in the main, is distinctive 
of the two great branches of industry that were revolutionized 
by the inventions of the immediately preceding generation 
(the textile and iron industries), namely, that France and 
the Continent in general were even at the time of Napoleon’s 
fall far from being in a position to take up the new fundamental 
processes on which the industrial life of England had been 
based for quite a long time. 
FUNDAMENWL PROCESSES 
In the sphere of the textile industry this holds good both 
of the power to spin high numbers of yarn (fine grades), the 
use of the steam-engine in the spinning industry, and the 
power-loom. Regarding the first of these, as has already been 
mentioned, they had not gotten beyond number 100 in cotton 
yarn in 1815 ; it was reserved for the Restoration to move 
forward in a few years to number 200 or (as a rarity) even 
291. With regard to the steam-engine, we have already men 
tioned that one single French spinning-mill had passed, as early 
as 1787 (the year after the Eden Treaty) to the use of steam 
power, which was at that date a complete novelty even in 
England. It would be difficult to find anything more indicative 
of the technical stagnation which then occurred than the fact 
that the next time a French steam spinning-mill is mentioned 
is no less than twenty-five years later. It was not until 1812 
that the pioneering firm of DoUeus, Mieg & Cie., which is still 
famous all over the world, set up such a mill in Miilhausen 
that is to say, in an incorporated territory. Power-loom works, 
which, it is true, came far later than the revolution in spinning 
EFFECTS ON FRANCE 
in England also, but which nevertheless began to be set up 
there as early as 1801, are scarcely mentioned on the Continent 
during the whole of this period. The only examples known to 
the writer from the territory of the empire-where, for that 
matter, there is a total lack of detail-belong, like steam 
spinning-mills, to the incorporated territories, namely, Ghent 
an4 Sennheim (in Upper Alsace) ; and neither of them can 
have been of any great consequence, as the information about 
them is so sporadic. In the department of mechanical printing, 
it is true, greater advances were made on the Continent, in 
that the great invention in this department, cylinder printing, 
appears to have come into use at Oberkampf’s factory at 
Jouy, as the first place on the Continent, in 1800, and in 
Miilhausen and other places in 1805-6; but even this was 
just twenty years after the institution of similar technical pro 
cesses in England. In the department of engineering technics 
it was only outside the cotton industry that the Continent 
during this period ever took the lead in any decisive respect, 
namely, as regards both the Jacquard loom, which at first 
really served the silk industry alone, and Girard’s invention of 
a flax-spinning machine. This last, which was patented in 
1810 and thus realized one of Napoleon’s hopes, significantly 
enough, left France before anything had been achieved; the 
inventor had to flee from his creditors to Austria, and an 
Englishman got hold of his invention. This gave rise to a 
flourishing English industry, which did not return to the native 
country of the inventor until twenty-five years after the inven 
tion. The continental textile industry reached the same level 
as the British textile industry in only one single department, 
namely, in dyeing and other branches where chemistry could be 
employed, of .which more anon. 
IRON INDUSTRY 
French economic life in the sphere of the iron industry ; and it 
is highly significanthat Chaptal, in his detailed and enthusiastic 
description of the progress of industry, here confines himself 