

EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 297 Accordingly, it was not to exclude England, but to make a breach in the customs wall against French goods, that he here wished to make use of his victories ; and in full accordance with this the French manufacturers just a week later tried to bring about an export of fine French cloth to Vienna on payment of a very insignificant duty, without any reciprocity for Austrian goods in France. But Napoleon’s egoistic policy was most clearly framed with regard to the Kingdom of Italy (North Italy), which he was anxious to transform entirely into an economic dependency of France. Hermetically sealed to the sales of the industrial products of all other countries, it was open to receive French goods and to provide France with needed raw materials (chiefly silk), but without any corresponding right to derive advantages from the French market ; finally, it was designed as a barrier to prevent goods from the competitors of France from penetrating into Naples, Sardinia, and South Europe in general. Owing to the fact that Italy for hundreds and even thousands of years had been economically connected with Switzerland and Germany by close commercial ties, this policy involved a severe dislocation of the industrial life of these last two countries and compelled them to have recourse to other markets or to other branches of activity. Napoleon has never given his general principles relating to the treatmentjof allies and subordinate non-French territories a more intensive expression than in another famous letter which he addressed on August 93,1810, to his faithful and reliable step-son, Eugdne Beauharnais, who governed Italy in his name as Viceroy. The fundamental idea of this letter appears in the following extract, with Napoleon’s own highly significant italics : My fundamental principle is, France first and foremost (la France avant tout). You must never lose sight of the fact that if English trade triumphs on the seas it is because the English are the strongest there. It is reasonable, therefore, that as France is the strongest on lad, French trade should also triumph there. Otherwise all is lost. . , . Italy has France to thank for so much that she really should not mind if France acquired some commercial advantages there. Therefore, take as your motto : La France avant tout.

898 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
The beginning of this policy in Italy has already been 
described,l and the continuation followed along the same lines. 
The decree of the year 1806 was directed against Bohemian, 
Saxon, Swiss, Bavarian, and Berg textile goods, and seems to 
have hit hardest. the Grand-Duchy of Berg. fiat country, 
which was at that time nominally ruled by Napoleon’s brother 
in-law, Joachim Murat, but in reality by the Emperor’s own 
organs, managed to obtain an exemption for itself in January 
1807 ; but as early as December of the same year this exemption 
was cancelled. Beginning with the following year its goods were 
definitely excluded from the Italian market, while the exports 
of Switzerland were hit particularly hard by an intensification, 
introduced about the same time, of the decree of 1806, which 
forbade all imports of cotton goods except from France. The 
position of French goods in the Italian market was further 
strengthened in 1808 by a curious Franco-Italian ‘ commercial 
treaty ’ which Napoleon, in his capacity as autocratic ruler of 
both countries, concluded with himself. Finally, this policy 
culminated in 1810 in a triple regulation which in the first 
place extended the prohibition of imports from cotton goods’ 
to woollen goods, when they came from other countries than 
France, in the second place supplemented the prohibition on 
imports by a prohibition of transit, and in the third place 
forbade the export of Italian raw silk except to Lyons, the 
export of silk from Piedmont, which was incorporated with 
France, having been forbidden as early as 1805. The explana 
tion given for this (in the letter to Eugene just cited) was that 
it would otherwise go to England, because Germany did not 
manufacture silk ; but his explanation ignored the fact, 
well known to Napoleon, that Switzerland both carried on 
a trade in Italian raw silk and also had a flourishing silk manu 
facture. In the Kingdom of Naples, which was ruled first 
by Joseph Bonaparte and afterwards by Murat, there was 
applied, under the hard pressure of Napoleon, a similar policy, 
first .with preferential duties on French goods and afterwards 
with a prohibition on the import of foreign goods. 
See an&, -p. 86. 
EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 299 
As regards the states of the Confederation of the Rhine, 
Xapoleon observed considerably greater restraint ; and com 
paratively little is known as to violations of their right of self 
determination, despite Champagny’s proposals just mentioned. 
On the other hand, it is highly significant that not even the 
territories incorporated with the empire in Napoleon’s own 
time were thereby automatically placed on the same footing 
as ‘the old departments ’. This was a weakness which had, 
as a rule, characterized the loosely combined states of the old 
rkgime, not least France herself ; but in Napoleon’s strictly 
centralized realm it did not mean any such looseness of struc 
ture, but something quite different. There, indeed, it is an 
expression of the fact that the territories were worked into the 
empire in order to be shut out from British supplies, and at 
the same time were not to be more than proselytes of the 
gate ; that is to say, they were to be left without participation 
in the advantages of the French market. This policy, which has 
not yet been made the subject of special investigation, was 
applied, for instance, as against Holland and ‘ the Hanseatic 
departments,’ in such a way that French goods could be 
conveyed to the incorporated territories without let or hindrance 
in the same way as to the other parts of the empire ; but goods 
from there, on the other hand, were regarded as foreign when 
they were conveyed to France. For Holland, it is true, it was 
laid down in the decree of incorporation that the customs 
frontier with France should disappear as early as the beginning 
of 1811, but this disappearance was repeatedly put off and seems 
never to have been realized. It makes a peculiar impression, 
for instance, to hear of people from Leyden, in 1811, and from 
Osnabruck, in 1812, praying for free intercourse with the empire, 
although both places belonged to the territories incorporated 
in 1810 ; and the same was the case with the Hanse Towns. 
The whole of this egoistical system probably had an even 
more irritating than economically injurious effect on the other 
countries because it ran counter to the most cherished economic 
sentiments of the natural man as to the advantages of exports 
and the disadvantages of imports. Moreover, it did not even 