

EFFECTS ON FRANCE ' ' 291 for coffee and tobacco offer us no interest other than that which lies in ' ldoking into one's own windows '. Among coffee sub stitutes were included chicory, dried carrots, acorns, sunflower seeds, and sugar beets ; as substitutes for tobacco were used leaves of gooseberries and chestnuts and milfoil (Achillea millefolium) ; and the scope of the production of Europe as a whole is illustrated by the fact that Denmark alone had seventeen factories for making coffee substitutes.1 BEET SUGAR INDUSTRY But the great example indicating the importance of the Continental System for industrial development that is usually cited is the mamfacture of beet sugar ; and there certainly is a kernel of truth in this, if one only recalls what was said above regarding the character of the effects distinctive of such times. The fact is that it is far from true that the possibility of obtaining sugar from beets was a novelty dating from the time of the Continental System. As early as the year 174'7, the German chemist Marggraf, of Berlin, had discovered that sugar beets contained the same substance as sugar cane; and from the close of the eighteenth century another German chemist, Achard, had worked incessantly on experiments in the production of beet sugar. In a raw-sugar factory located on his Silesian estate, Kunern, Achard had even succeeded in producing sugar and had published his results in 1809 ; but no manufacture of importance had arisen in consequence of all this. Achard's fate exhibits a great resemblance to that of Leblanc some ten years earlier,in spite of the fact that a domestic production of sugar had also been the subject of investigation in France, through a committee appointed by the Iristit& de France in 1800. Thus the matter was technically in a fairly advanced state, though it served no economic purpose as long as it was possible to procure colonial sugar under something like the old conditions. When those conditions were changed,

1 Besides the works mentioned et the beginning of this chapter, cf. also de arenville, Le syst2me continental, &c., pp. 306 et seq. ; Vogel, Die Ham"&te, &x., u2

JOG. Cit., p. 35 ; Rubin, 1807-1814, &c., p. 436.

E92 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
therefore, it is not at all surprising that advantage was taken 
of the theoretical results already attained; on the contrary, 
there is more reason to be astonished that there was so long 
a delay before it was determined to replace colonial sugar in 
this way. Before that the shortage of sugar had had time 
to make itself very perceptible. At Leipzig the price of sugar 
rose almost uninterruptedly until 1813, when it was approxi 
mately three and one-half times the amount it had been seven 
years earlier ; and in Paris the price rose first (1810) to four 
francs per livre, and later (1819) to six francs, or approximately 
eight and twelve francs, respectively, per kg. Meanwhile, the 
London quotations for even the best qualities of sugar during 
1812 corresponded to between 1.35 and 2 francs per kg., that 
is to say, from one-fourth to one-ninth of the French price.l; ,' 
Naturally enough, therefore, people had at a much earlier 
date begun to search the Continent for a substitute, and there 
was scarcely any substance containing sugar that was not 
employed before they came to the beet. Honey, whey, chest 
nuts, pears, apples, maize, maple, potatoes, figs, cherries, 
plums, sea-weed, and finally grapes were tried. Grape sugar 
was the first stage, and as much as 2,000,000 kgs. were manu 
factured in the years 1810-11 and given a bounty ; but this 
syrup, which was black and did not crystallize, was repulsive 
and had an unpleasant odour. 
At this time, however, the cultivation of sugar beets had 
already been started, and the manufacture of beet sugar had 
begun at several places, especially at Passy by the firm of 
Delessert. It is only natural that enthusiasm was great when 
the result appeared ; and it was alleged, assuredly for that 
time with great exaggeration, that the product could not be 
distinguished from cane sugar. There followed a visit (dramati 
cally described by Chaptal in his Memoirs) by Napoleon to 
Delessert, who was decorated by the Emperor and regarded as 
a pioneer. The imperial administration took the matter in 