

CHAPTER I11 EFFECTS ON THE REST OF THE CONTINENT FRENCH POLICY OF INTERESTS THE strain of egoism in Napoleon’s policy is a well-known and abundantly proved side af the Continental System, which naturally weakens the sympathy usually shown by German writers :for the fundamental idea of the plan to exclude England from the C0ntinent.l The pretended object 2 of combining the Continent of Europe into an economic unit against Great Britain did not, it is true, altogether lack champions. The fairly obvious and undeniably important idea of developing the Confederation of the Rhine (which embraced the whole of Germany, with the exception of the possessions of Austria, . Prussia, Sweden, and Denmark, and whose creator and powerful protector Napoleon was) into a customs union, which, inciden tally, would have been an antecedent of the German Zollverein of 1833, was put forward by Beugnot, the ‘ imperial commissary ’ or supreme head of the local administration in the Grand Duchy of Berg, on two or three different occasions ; it also

1 The best general survey is contained in Darmstadter, Studien zur nupoleonischen 
Wirtschftspditik. koc. cit. (1905), vol. m, pp. 113 et seq. French commercial 
statistics are given in the earlier section, vol. II, p. 566 note 1. Cy. also Schmidt, 
Le Grand-duchi de Berg, pp. 342, 413 et aeq., 420, app. C (Champagny’s report of 
Aug. 5, 1807) ; Tarle, Deutsch-franziisische I~rjrtsc~~sbeziehungen, loc. cit., pp. 699 
et seq., 725 ; Tarle, Kontinental’naja blokm’a, vol. I, 119, 570, app. XIV (reports 
of French spies), app. XIX (petition from Leyden) ; de CBrenviUe, op. cit., pp. 141-2, 
155, 174 et seq., 255 et seq. ; Rambaud, op. cit., p. 440 note 3 ; Konig, q. oit., 
pp. 267,289 ; Kiewning, Lippe und Napoleons Kondinentalsperre gegen den britischen 
Handel, in Mitteilungen aw der Lippisctben Geschichte und Lande&unde (Detmold, 
1908), vol. VI, pp. 161 et eeq. ; Letters to Fouche and Eugene (Corregpondance de 
NapoZion ler, nos, 15,874, 16,824). The North Sea coast from a customs point 
of view : Bulletin des lois, &x., 4th ser., bull. 299, no. 5724 ; bull. 397, no. 7340 ; 
Zeyss, op. cit., pp. 129-30, 261 et seq. (Report of the Krefeld Chamber of Com. 
merce) ; Vogel, op. cit., pp. 47-8 ; SchLfer, Bremen und die KontinentaEsperre, loc. 
cit., vol. xx (1914), p. 428. 
2 See ailfe, p. 53. 
396 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
had a spokesman in Bacher, Napoleon’s minister to the Con 
federation of the Rhine at Frankfurt ; but it was not in the 
least degree this spirit that prevailed in Paris. In the late 
summer of 1807 Napoleon charged Champagny, who was just 
then passing from the Home Office to the Foreign Office, with 
the task of determining what the princes of the Confederation 
of the Rhine wished for their trade, and what measures should 
be taken to secure a market for French industrial products 
in their territories. It was assuredly in accordance with the 
Emperor’s intention that the second question was the one that 
Champagny in ‘reality answered, and in doing so he followed 
the significant line that it was necessary to prevent the now 
consolidated German states from throwing obstacles in the 
way of French sales and particularly the transport of French 
goods across Germany, obstacles which had been impossible 
at the time when the states were small and divided. In accor 
dance with this idea, Napoleon maintained a whole swarm of 
commercial spies all over Germany, and these made reports 
on the smuggling of English and continental goods and on the 
capacity of French manufacturers to beat foreign competitors ; 
and to a large extent it was on the strength of such information 
that Napoleon later directed his measures against sales in other 
countries. 
A celebrated illustration of the way in which Napoleon 
in reality regarded his political mission in this department is 
contained in a letter which he dispatched from Schonbrunn to 
Fouch6 (acting home secretary at the time) after his victory 
over Austria in 1809 (September 27). In that letter the master 
empties the vials of his wrath over the commercial department 
of the French Home Office : 
If the department had done its dut.y, it would have taken advantage 
of my march into Vienna to encourage merchants and manufacturers 
to export their clot.h, pottery, and other goods which pay considerable 
duties in Austria, cloth alone paying 60 per cent. I should, as a matter 
of course, have released them from these dues and filled the warehouses 
of Vienna chock-full of French goods. But that department thinks of 
nothing and does nothing. 