

310 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
the manufacture of muslins and embroidered goods, in which 
Switzerland and Baden had been beyond the reach of competi 
tion on the Continent and had suffered no inconvenience worth 
mentioning from the Continental System. But it was just here 
that a devastating crisis broke out which put an end forever to 
these branches of production in certain districts, and for the 
moment practically everywhere. To a somewhat smaller extent 
the position was the same for calicoes and coarser unprinted 
cottons. Outside the sphere of the cotton indust,ry, both the 
silk manufacture and the making of watches and jewellery . 
obviously satisfied what was in. the main a demand for luxuries. 
The most highly developed watch industry, t.hat of Geneva, is 
stated to have declined to a tenth of its former magnitude. 
Evidently it will not do to see in this an effect of t.he Continental 
System ; and the fact that Switzerland during the recent war, 
despite far greater difficulties in the supply of raw materials 
and foodstuffs, was yet able to avoid such great dislocations 
as in 1811-13 is evidently connected with the fact that it has 
now, not only industries that supply the luxury demand but 
also, and perhaps to a still greater extent, other kinds of 
industries. 
To outward appearances, consequently, the difference 
between Switzerland and Saxony is very great. If one tries 
to get to the bottom of the significance of the Continental 
System for Switzerland, the dissimi-larity, however, will diminish 
considerably. In both countries machine-spinning secured 
a firm foothold, while the weaving industry could not maintain 
itself in either country. But things were undeniably far worse 
in Switzerhd for' three reasons ; because of the much greater 
ruthlessness of the Napoleonic policy there ; because of its 
more intimate connexion with surrounding countries ; and, 
above all, because of the fact that Swiss industries were far 
more concerned with the production of luxuries. 

EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 31 1 GRAND DUCHY OF BERG Of all the regions of the Continent beyond the borders of France there is scarcely one whose fortunes under the Conti nental System are so indicative of the dualism of the policy as those parts of the right bank of the Rhine that Napoleon combined into the Grand-Duchy of Berg. What this territory at the present moment means to the industry of Europe is well understood when its most important part is mentioned, namely, the Ruhr district ; to this was added the closely allied Siegerland, which forms a continuation of the district farther to the south. To that region belong such centres of trade and Rhine navigation as Duisburg and Ruhrort, textile centres such as Elberfeld, Barmen, and Miilheim, some of the foremost coal and iron mines in the world, and iron-working and metal manufacturing centres, such as Essen, Gelsenkirchen, Dort mund, Bochum, Siegen, Dillenburg, Remscheid, and Solingen. In a word, it is one of the most eminent and highly concentrated industrial districts in the world. Even though the develop ment of the Rhenish-Westphalian territory into its present position has progressed with giant strides, especially since 1870, yet, even at the beginning of the last century, Berg was one of the most advanced industrial countries of the Continent, particularly in the departments of metal manufacture and of textiles, both woollen and cotton. It was, as a rule, superior to the corresponding French indudrial areas and was called, not without reason, ' a miniature England '. It is evident that a region of this kind would have served better than almost any other to form t.he central point in a combination of the Continent against the industry of Great Britain ; and few regions would, at least for the moment, have gained more by such a position. But evidently this would have presupposed a willingness to subordinate French manufac turing interests to the demands of the uniform continental policy ; and it was precisely this willingness that was lacking. The very industrial superiority of Berg thereby became its misfortune under the Continental System; it fell between