

300 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM have the redeeming feature of providing the export goods of France with the dominant position that was its sole object and ruimn #&re. To a considerable extent this was due to the funda mental character of the Continental System, with its tendency to make the supply of raw materials enormously dear and diffi cult ; for, as the figures already given show very clearly, this hit France the hardest, because smuggling by sea was checked more effectually there than farther to the north, while goods smuggled by land had to be filtered through many customs frontiers before they reached France. But it was further aided by the fact that French industry was marked by the production of luxuries, which rendered sales extremely difficult, especially toward the close of the period, when the burden of the endless wars, both bloody and bloodless, on the whole of Europe was pressing with increasing weight. Finally, there was the fact that France could not by any violent measures overcome the circumstance that her industries had not made so much progress as those of certain other countries.. In Italy, it is true, these factors made themselves felt to a less extent, for the industries of that country did not really appear as competi tors ; and the blockade towards the north would seem to have had a certain degree of efficacy. At any rate, the available flgures for the Kingdom of Italy show that Franco-Italian commerce increased many times over, so that about half the foreign trade, including both imports and exports, fell to the exchange of commodities with France ; and from Naples also there could be ascertained a rise in imports from France. On the other hand, this implies no increase in the exports of France on the whole. Only one year during the period of the empire (1806), according to the official returns, could show @yes as high as those of the last years of the anckien. rkgim, despite the huge annexations of important industrial regions that had taken place since then ; and, as has already been mentioned, the export of woollens had declined. It is particu larly striking how poor a showing France made in competition with her continental rivals in the German market. It is fairly obvious, and also confirmed by the sources, that the obstacles

EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 301 which Napoleon placed in the way of the exports of those countries to the south of Europe must have helped to further their penetration into other markets, where they entered into competition with France. Thus the Swiss showed themselves at a Leipzig fair for the first time at Easter, 1808, after the closing of the frontier toward Italy had been made more strict at the end of 1807 ; and their sales of muslins were forced anew on that market after the still stricter embargo of 1810. In that case it is evident that Iittle had been gained from a French point of view, even though injury was inflicted on the trade of the other countries as a result of its being diverted from its natural course. The reports of the French commercial spies completely agree with the statements found in German and Swiss sources as to the difficulty for France to compete with the other countries. Thus from Switzerland we learn that French competition was unimportant in Germany, except for silk ; from Bohemia, that French goods could not compete ; and from Frankfurt, that French goods were the least important of all. The French reports usually sought an explanation of the fact that German and Swiss goods had the upper hand in various accidental circumstances, such as greater proximity to the place of production, simpler qualities, greater ease in obtaining raw materials, &c. But some, on the other hand, are more frank. Thus the report from Darmstadt runs : ‘ The cashmere and ccjtton factories of Saxony and Switzerland injure our trade in Germany, where they find great sales and are much in request under the name of English wares, the appearance of which they imitate.’ And in the autumn of 1810 one of the French commercial spies made a statement which, from the standpoint of Napoleon’s egoistic policy, must be regarded as a condemnation of the entire Continental System : Their competition ‘ is perhaps at the present moment more dangerous for France and Italy than that of the English manufacturers, because they dispute the Continent with us ’. Thus, despite the best will in the world and despite unlimited powers to reserve for France what had become free through the blockade