

Zeyss, op. cit., p. 367; The different petitions are printed in Schmidt, Le eand-dwhd de Berg, app. E, and Zeyss, z%id., Anhang VIII. The actual material for the account in the text is taken substantially from Schmidt’s model work.

EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 315 tion of the duties of the Trianon tariff, but which broke out into open revolts in the beginning of 1813. It is true that the complaints may be reduced to some extent, as is indeed always the case ; for nothing would be more misleading than to write history, and particularly economic history, on the basis of complaints alone, for ' every torment hath its cry, while health doth hold its peace '. The loss of the French, Italian, and north west G-erman markets, and also the scarcity of raw cotton, certainly brought about great suffering ; but, on the other side, the smuggling of cotton went on to the last, and at the German fairs, where Napoleon's measures had no effect, the sales were good ; in particular, the woollens of Berg were regarded as keeping all others out in Frankfurt. The diminution in the exports of manufactures by a bare 30 per cent. (from 55,000,000 to 39,000,000 francs), which Roederer ascertained at the close of 1810, cannot in itself be regarded as overwhelming ; but, of course, it meant a great deal for a country that was indus trialized to such an extent as Berg and was especially well equipped for foreign sales. Above all, there was here, in sharp contrast with the state of things in Saxony and Switzerland, practically no single point in which the rigid and detested system afforded any compensation for its inconveniences. When the effects of the war on Europe in general began to make themselves felt more and more strongly, therefore, it was only natural that the situation should become unendurable in a country which was pressed so hard between two antagonists "almost literally between the devil and the deep sea-espe cially when it quite naturally seemed to the population as if the officially announced aim of the policy might have led to a very different treatment and rendered possible a favourable develop grateful, and with reason, for the orderly administration and the economic prosperity brought about there by the French rule, and just as the time of Napoleon was also important for various autonomous German states of the Confederation of the Rhine, e. g., Bavaria, through the indirect French influence, so did the pressure of the Continental System make itself detestable in b ment of the country. Just as the left bank of the Rhine was

316 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM this unique industrial region which was shut out from all quarters through the egoism of French policy.

INDUSTRIESN OTHER COUNTRIES

The development of industry in the other states of the 
mainland offers comparatively few new features ; and there 
is no reason to essay a monographic treatment of the several 
countries. Conditions in Bohemia seem to have accorded 
more or less completely with the developments in Saxony, 
while not only Baden, as has already been mentioned, but to 
a very large extent Italy, like Switzerland, came to suffer Rom 
the closing of the frontier of South Europe to all quarters. 
In th.e north the famous linen manufactures of Silesia especially 
suffered through the closing of the Italian frontier, so that 
the well-known misery of the Silesian linen-weavers-so 
dramatically treated by Gerhart Hauptmann, among others 
began during this period. Thus we have here a very close 
parallel to the Swiss development. The industries of Denmark 
were of so little importance that they could not suffer much 
harm ; but what the Continental System did to them was of 
a typical forcing-house character ; the number of looms in the 
Copenhagen cloth manufacture increased from 22 in 1807 to 
213 in 1814, only to fall back to 74 in 1825.1 
It is characteristic that the regions which worked for 
maritime trade were hard hit, not only by the stagnation of 
trade and shipping, but also by the fact that the blockade 
removed the very ground from under the feet of their industries, 
a thing which quite naturally could most easily happen in such 
countries because their industries are usually based to a very 
great degree on trade relations with other countries, either for 
raw materials or for sales or for both. In accordance with this, 
the industries of Hamburg were seriously crippled in every 
respect, because its sugar factories suffered from the scarcity 
of raw sugar and English coal, and its calico-printing works 
(to a small degree, it is true) from a shortage of unprinted 
calicoes ; in the same way Holland suffered not only through 
Rubin, op. cP., pp. 436-7, 510. 