

302 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
against England, Napoleon had scarcely succeeded in obtaining 
any increased sales for French export industries. As a measure 
to promote exports in the interest of France, therefore, the 
Continental System cannot be regarded as having achieved 
any great results. 
We must now examine somewhat more closely how the 
economic life of certain other continental countries, and particub 
larly their manufactures, was affected by the Continental 
System ; and in this matter, especially with regard to the general 
effect, it seems proper to limit ourselves to a few typical 
examples. 

SAXONY

Of all manufacturing countries on the Continent there is scarcely one which developed so powerfully under the Continental System as Saxony. Various factors contributed to this. To begin with, Saxony lay at some distance from France and was governed by a native prince in whom Napoleon had confidence. A powerful French interest further demanded that its economic life should be spared from violent dislocations and galling restrictions, because the Leipzig Fair, which has seldom had in its long history so much importance as during the Napoleonic wars, demanded a certain liberty of movement for its existence, and that existence was of great importance to French exports, the direct connexions of which seldom extended farther to the east than Leipzig. Under these cir cumstances it was natural that Napoleon should take care not to exercise there the continual intervention that fell to the lot of his vassal states that bordered on France, On the other hand, Saxony had an excellent situation for connexions both with the North Sea and with the Baltic, and also, before the incorporation of Trieste, with the Mediterranean, and it was therefore less affected than most countries by the changed directions of maritime trade. Even though the Leipzig Fair, owing to this change, diminished in importance during the last years of the Continental System, yet the supply of cotton for the country’s own requirements was even then, as far as one

EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 303 
can judge, sufficient ; and in any case it was incomparably 
better than in France, as is very clearly shown by the foregoing 
tables illustrating the prices of c0tton.l 
Saxony was already at this time a manufacturing country 
with a many-sided development, both as regards the majority 
of textile industries-cotton, wool, linen-and iron-working. 
But so far as I know, it is the history of the cotton industry 
under the Continental System that has been subjected to the 
most thorough investigation. This has been done especially 
in the work that has so often been cited in these pages, namely, 
Konig's Die Slichsische Baumwolknindustrie am Ende des 
vorigen Jahrhunderts und wahrend der Kotttinentalsperre (1899), 
which on the whole would seem to be the most useful of the 
existing monographs on the industrial conditions of this period. 
In general, this one-sidedness in the literature very well 
corresponds to the reality, for it is in the sphere of the cotton 
industry that one really has to expect the workings of the 
Continental System in Saxony. 
The Saxon cotton industry, which had a long history behind 
it, had not become the object of British competition until the 
seventeen-seventies, after the inventions in the spinning 
industry, principally as regards the fine goods (muslins) that 
were manufactured in Voigtland in the south of Saxony, 
mainly in Plauen. Tne competition had been met by the 
imitation of the British goods, but for this purpose the Saxon 
yarn was too coarse; and this brought about the admission 
of British yarn for the muslin factories shortly after 1790. 
But even then there was no more than a short breathing 
space, for before the close of the century the British competition 
was regarded as overwhelming, even in the matter of muslins. 
The second main division of Saxon cottons, the coarser calicoes 
intended for *printing, which were produced on the northern 
slope of the Erzgebirge, centering in Chemnitz, held out some 
what longer. That too was based on British yarn as warp, 
but it also went under immediately before the introduction of' 
the Continental System. 
See ante, pp. 274, 276. 