

EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 31 7 the entire annihilation of its carrying trade, but also through the scarcity of salt for its fisheries and an absence of markets for its spirit manufacture.

COUNTRIES PRODUCING RAW MATERIALS

Theaccount of the development under thecontinental System of the countries that provided raw materials must necessarily be very brief, as the sources are strikingly scanty, and as the blockade on the Baltic and in Austria was so intermittent. ,' In Russia the dislike of the nobility and of persons of political influence for the alliance with Napoleon and the Con tinental System was extremely strong from the very start, as has been set forth with typical French animation and wealth of colour in Vandal's famous work NapoGm et Bkzalzdre IeTer (1891-6) ; and without doubt economic factors also played their part. But one has nevertheless a kind of impression that their importance has been exaggerated. What especially gives occasion for doubt is the fact that the evidence for the stagnation of trade which is always met with is the great decline of the Russian rate of exchange (a loss of '72 per cent.). This cannot be explained by an ' unfavourable balance of trade ', for this cause is never sufficient in any case that occurs in practice to bring about a result of that magnitude. The true cause wis and is the depreciation of the currency in Russia and Austria, both then and now caused by an excessive issue of paper m0ney.l But this, of course, does not make it im possible that the stagnation in Russian timber exports may have been great, as is indeed stated from French quarters which had 'some interest in maintaining the opposite ; and the fact is partly and quite irrefutably confirmed by the great increase in the price of timber, to which we have already called attention: in both Great Britain and France. This stagnation was brought about, however, not only by the increased difficulty of maritime intercourse, but also by a rather 1 Oddy, in his contemporary description of the commercial conditions of the time, unheeitatingly explains the state of the Russian exchange in this way. Cf. Oddy, European Commerce (London, 1805), p. 197. a See an&, p. 173.

318 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
unique consequence of the blockade, which has had analogies 
during the recent war, namely, the great part that Englishmen 
played in the economic life of Russia before the Peace of Tilsit. 
This is illustrated by the vast amount of information from 
official Russian sources that can be found in Oddy’s work. 
For instance, in 1804, 35 per cent. of the imports and no less 
than 63 per cent. of the exports of St. Petersburg were in the 
hands of British merchants ; and the three greatest commercial 
houses, all of them British, taken by themselves, carried on 
more than one-fourth of the export trade of the Russian capital. 
French evidence testifies to the same conditions. General 
Savary, who reached St. Petersburg in July 1807, on behalf 
of Napoleon, gave a detailed description in his report of the 
all-dominating position of the British trade, telling how half 
of all the vessels were British and how Englishmen took over 
all the timber from the nobility and thereby provided them 
with their safest source ol income ; and he also remarked 
that they themselves founded industrial concerns in Russia 
when the importation of British manufactures was too 
much hampered by customs duties. When so important 
a part of the economic activity of Russia ceased to exist 
without warning, it was naturally impossible to obtain sub 
stitutes either in Russia itself or from France ; and the natural 
consequence was a stagnation in Russian exports. Napoleon 
was quite conscious of this position, and in November 1807, 
he ordered his ambassador, Caulaincourt, to lay before Emperor 
Alexander a proposition whereby the French government 
should buy several million francs’ worth of mast wood and other 
naval stores for its shipyards. It is uncertain, however, 
whether this plan was ever carried out.1 
The Continental System seems to have had a much more 
marked restraining effect on the exports of raw materials and 
foodstuffs from Prussia, that is to say, chiefly from the districts 
Vandal, Napoh et Alexandre Ier, vol. I, pp. 140, 324, 513 (Napoleon’s in 
structions to Caulaincourt, Nov. 12, 1807) ; Oddy, European Commerce, bk. I, 
especidy pp. 130 et seq., pp. 197-8 (computations by the present writer) ; Tarle, 
Kontinmtdncsja blokada, vol. I, pp. 477, 482, 486 ; Darmstiidter, Stdien, &c., vol. 11, 
p. 610 ; Rose, in the English Historical Review, vol. xvn~, pp. 122 et 8eq. 