

EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 31 9 east of the Elbe, probably because Napoleon had still greater reason to distrust the loyalty of the Prussian government than that of the Russian government oward the system, and because, moreover, he had considerably greater means of exercising pressure against the former than against the latter. According to an account by Hoeniger, great stocks of timber rotted away at Memel, while the price of- corn fell by 60-80 per cent. between 1806 and 1810 owing to the absence of markets. The same phenomena appeared in northwest Germany, which had been wont to dispose of its surplus corn to England via Bremen and now saw its means of export barred, with the consequence that, while the price of colonial goods at Bremen increased many times, the price of wheat there declined by 62 per cent. between 1806 and 1811, and the price of rye correspondingly. On the other hand, the shipping and corn exports of Mecklenburg were allowed to remain practically undisturbed until the latter half of 1810. In fact, accopding to accessible figures, the year between August 1809 and July 1810 marks the summit-level of development, which, it is true, was largely caused by the trade with Sweden which was resumed after t,he conclusion of the Finnish war. From Rostock there sailed during that twelvemonth no fewer than M9 vessels, as compared with 55 in the year 1808-9 and 31 in the year 1810-11 ; and the exports of corn exhibit equal figures. Here, as has been previously mentioned,' it was the licence system that put an end to the export of corn.2 ENTREP~T COUNTRIES Finally, as regards countries carrying on an intermediary trade, Sweden and-before the passing of the Embargo Act the United States, it appears from what has already been said that the effects of the Continental System were necessarily 1 See ante, p. 262. 2 Hoeniger, Die KontineWperre und ihe Einw'rkunqen auf Deutachland, in Volbwirtschflide Zeitfragen (Berlin, 1905), no. 211, p. 26 ; Schiifer, 9. cit., table IX; Stuhr, Die napleoniscke Kontinentdaperre in hle.cklenburg, 1806-1813, in Jahrbuch des Vereina fur Mecklenbwgksche Odickte und AEtertumhnde, 1906, vol. LXXI, tables on pp. 361 et seq.

3!20 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM limited substantially to the sphere of trade ; and in the pre ceding pages materials have been supplied for the illustration of this development. The United States is of particular interest in this connexion in that it shows a quite different development before and after the enforcement of the self-blockade. At one single blow this transformed the country to the type of France and gave a huge stimulus to the development of industry, especially the cotton industry, which, according to an inquiry of Secretary of the Treasury Gallatin, seems to have sextupled during the four years preceding 1809.

I,

GENERAL SITUATION ON THE CONTINENT When, after this discussion of the development of different countries, one undertakes to form a general picture of the situation on the Continent of Europe, it cannot escape the observation of anyone who is at all free from prejudice that the effects of the Continental System on the actual material foundation of the life of the people-what economists call the satisfaction of the wants of the people-were far less than those which accompanied the recent blockade. What was lacking with regard to pure articles of consumption was little else than coffee and sugar, and, to some extent, tobacco ; and however severely the scarcity of coffee may have been felt during the recent war, surely no one will. deny that the material effects of the war would have been quite insignscant in comparison with what they actually were if they had not extended beyond that. For the rest, the scarcity under the Continental System applied to industrial raw materials, mainly cotton and dye stuffs, but in many countries also other textile raw materials, such as wool, flax, hemp, and silk. So far, therefore, the situa tion seems to correspond to our recent experience ; but in reality this is not the case. For while the shortage in our own time seriously reduced the supply of woven goods themselves, that is to say, articles actually required for consumption, . during the time of the Continental System complaints were always, at least as far as I know, limited to the inconveniences suffered by production in consequence of the lack of raw