

3M EFFECTS OF THE COPlvllNENTAL SYSTEM What made it possible to check this development under the Continental System, however, was not only the fact that Saxony was an old home of the cotton industry, which was only gradually disturbed in its position, but also two other important facts. One was that what had been revolutionized in the British cotton trade at this time was really only spinning, while the power-loom was still only in its infancy. The beginning of the Continental System was simultaneous with the well-known and peculiar phase of -the British industrial revolution when the hand-weavers, who were later reduced to abysmal misery, had brilliant incomes owing to the scarcity of workers to weave the increased quantities of yarn produced by spinning-machines. No doubt the economic organization of British weaving also had been changed under the pressure of the great spinning-. mills, and the technique of weaving had also been improved in Great Britain. But for a country which was able to bring its own spinning industry into approximate equality with the British spinning industry, there was still some possibility of holding out against British competition ; and we here come to the second fact that made possible a restoration of the Saxon cotton industry when the Continental System placed difficulties in the way of the importation of British cotton. This second fact was that the spinning-machinery had already obtained a firm footing in the country before the blockade rendered difficult the importation of British machines and British operators. Hargreaves’s spinning-jenny, which was only a multiple spinning-wheel and therefore did not put an end to, but rather supported, home industry, had already reached Saxony in the seventeen-eighties, and there were thousands of machines there before the Continental System. But of far greater significance was the fact that in the year 1801, in conse quence of the importations of British operators, two great spinningmills were started in Chemnitz, one with Crompton’s mule and the other with Arkwright’s water-frame. This created the possibility of producing both long and fine thread, though not by any means so fine as the British thread (mule twist up to no. 70 and water-twist up to no. 36), and, in general,

EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 305 
of keeping pace with the development of British technique. 
It was really only the mule-spindles that obtained a firm footing 
during the period of the Continental System; while water- \ 
frames never came into common use, and jennies almost 
completely disappeared, the number of mule-spindles increasing 
steadily from 13,200 in 1806 to 255,900 in 1813 (of which in 
the half-year between Michaelmas 1811 and Easter 1812, 
there was a rise'from 132,000 to 210,150, an increase of 59 per 
cent.). The development of machine spinning suffered a slight 
check at the collapse of the Continental System in 1813-14; 
but on the whole the results attained in this matter seem to 
have held their ground. Alongside this, moreover, there arose 
8 special and comprehensive industry for the manufacture 
of spinning-machinery, distributed over some dozen workshops, 
of which the most technically advanced, though not the largest, 
was under the management of the British mechanic who had 
fitted up the first mule spinning-mill in 1801. 
Thus it is fairly clear what causes made it possible for the 
Continental System to check the decline in the Saxon textile 
industries. Despite their importance, the period did not bring 
any general quantitative increase in production. According 
to Konig's calculations, which are based on the year 1805 
when the effects of British competition had already appeared 
all along the line, there was only one year (1810) that exhibited 
higher figures (an increase of 25 per cent.) than the year 
taken as the basis, while the figures of the other years and 
average were lower. The course of development showed a 
decline for the. muslin industry, which was dependent on the 
almost unobtainable high numbers of yarn. That industry 
partly passed to Switzerland, and partly lost through British 
competition its most important remaining market, Turkey. 
On the other hand, there was an increase of nearly 44) per cent. 
for unprinted calicoes, so that the cotton industry of Voigtland, 
and consequently of Saxony as a whole, passed more and more 
to the production of calicoes. In a somewhat similar way 
calico-printing grew, and the results were so satisfactory that 
the British could sell nothmg whatever when, after Napoleon's 
1560.48 X 