

31% EFFEClCS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
two stools, being inexorably excluded from the French market, 
but no less inexorably bound to French policy. 
Situated quite close to the French frontier, which at that 
time, as everybody knows, was formed by the Rhine itself, its 
mere geographical position threw obstacles in the way of its 
retaining the relative independence enjoyed by the majority 
of the other states of the Confederation of the Rhine. But this 
was all the more impossible because the country in reality 
was governed throughout on Napoleon’s own account, at first 
in the name of Joachim Murat, but from 1808 even nomi.nally 
under the rule of the Emperor in his capacity as guardian of 
the new Grand-Duke, the minor son of Louis Bonaparte. 
Its position, in combination with t.he measures described above 
for the blockade against Holland by means of a customs cordon 
between Rees and Bremen in 1809 and the incorporation of 
Holland in 1810, placed difficulties in the way of the supply of 
colonial goods both from the Baltic and from the North Sea 
to quite a different extent than was the case in Saxony. This 
was especially the case after the Trianon tariff, which particu 
larly during its earlier phases involved dues in all the states 
through which the goods had to pass ; and there was still less 
possibility of any supply through the Mediterranean than there 
was in the case of Switzerland. The native minister of the 
Grand-Duchy, Nesselrode, said with bitterness that Berg 
was the only country that had ever conscientiously applied 
the Trianon tariff. Every reason conspired to force her to the 
French side in the great struggle. 
Under such circumstances ‘it constituted. an excess of 
punishment to place the country outside the French customs 
frontier, so much the more so because a very extensive mutual 
exchange of commodities with France had commenced before 
the Revolution, consisting, on the one hand, of the exportati.on 
of metal wares, cloth, and ribbons, and, on the other hand, of 
the importation of wine, oil, and colonial goods. The more 
unavoidable the sufferings that the new situation caused to 
Berg, the more persistent and ardent became the desire of its 
1 See ante, p. 183. 
EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 31 3 
inhabitants to be incorporated with the empire, like their 
more fortunately situated countrymen on the left bank of the 
Rhine ; and if that were impossible, at least they asked to 
enjoy some modification in the prohibitive French regulations 
regarding customs duties and prohibitions on imports, which, 
as has been previously stated,l did most effectually prevent 
competition from the right bank of the Rhine. The unbroken 
stream of prayers from the population in this direction was 
also actively supported by both Beugnot, the local French 
governor at Dusseldorf, and Roederer, the secretary of state 
for Berg in Paris. But all was in vain. Sometimes Napoleon’s 
heart softened, as in January 1807, when he admitted the 
goods of Berg into Italy ; but the old tendencies always 
regained the upper hand, and, as has already been mentioned, 
the specific concession referred to was revoked before the end 
of the year. Particularly violent was the resistance to the 
incorporation of Berg that was raised from the Roer department 
on the left bank of the Rhine, where a new and flourishing 
textile industry in &x-la-Chapelle, Cologne, and Krefeld was 
greatly profiting by sales on the closed French market and 
feared nothing so much as competition from the superior 
industry of Berg. In this matter there was unusual truth in 
the saying, ‘ Preserve me from my relatives ’. It makes an 
impression which is half-amusing and half-repulsive when one 
reads the addresses, reeking wit.h French patriotism, to Napoleon 
or to the prefect of the department, in which the Chambers 
of Commerce of Cologne, Aix-la-Chapelle, and ICrefeld, and also 
the cotton manufacturers of the Roer department, tried, with 
every conceivable sophism, to prevent any listening to the 
prayers of Berg, owing to its industrial superiority, its uafair 
methods of business, and its already sufficient sales in the north 
of Europe. When we read all this, we are forcibly reminded of 
a very apt remark made by Professor Morgenstierne to the 
effect that even a purely temporary frontier calls forth claims 
to protection against competition, while the same sort of 
competition is regarded as a healthy and natural development 
1 See ante, p. 84. 
314 EFFECTS’ OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
when it takes place within the boundaries of a country. The 
summit level of cynicism was probably attained in an address 
to the Emperor from the Cologne Chamber of Commerce in 
the autumn of 1811, where a plea was coolly put forward to 
move the population from the unfertile right bank of the Rhine 
to its fertile left bank : 
But it may be said that the great majority of the inhabitants of the 
French empire cannot but gain by the incorporation of so industrious 
a region as Berg. We reply to this that the object can be attained 
without the incorporation of the Grand-Duchy. As soon as Your 
Majesty has declared that no such incorporation should take place, the 
manufacturers of t.he Grand-Duchy, excluded from the markets of 
France, Italy, and North Germany, will find themselves reduced to the 
pressing necessity of moving their works to the left bank of the Rhine. 
All the cotton, wool, and silk factories of Berg will be restored to their 
mother country, and Berg will have left only the factories that belong 
to its soil, namely, the iron and steel industry, which will continue 
to exist.1 
Instead of growing milder, the French attitude toward 
Berg rather became more rigorous, especially under the influence 
of the severe crisis of 1810-11 in France, which naturally made 
competition from a superior industry still more objectionable 
than ever ; and as was so often the case during this period, 
the difficulties were increased by almost meaningless annoyances, 
as, for instance, when Remscheid’s steel manufactures were not 
allowed to be conveyed through France for exportation to 
America. 
Under such circumstances Berg, on the whole, suffered 
nothing but injury from the Continental System ; and after 
1810, when conditions everywhere began to get worse, the 
situation in the Grand-Duchy was represented as heart-rending, 
with unemployment and the increasing emigration of skilled 
workers across the Rhine (as the Cologne Chamber of Commerce 
had hoped) and as general discontent which Beugnot, immedi 
ately before the Russian Campaign, tried to exorcise by a reduc 