

EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 321 
materials and the resulting unemployment. Unemployment, 
in particular, with its consequences in the way of mendicancy 
and vagrancy, is a consistently recurring theme in the descrip-i 
tions of the effects of the Continental System-during the whole 
period in the ports, and in times of war and under the influence 
of shortage of raw materials in the industrial districts. Parallel 
with this run the accounts of the death-like silence in the great 
coast towns, grass growing in the streets of La Rochelle, the 
ruin of shipping, and the like. In order to conceive the impor 
tance of these phenomena aright, one must necessarily have 
a firm grip of the fact that trade, shipping, and industrial 
activity are means for covering the wants of the people, not 
ends in themselves ; and what settles the matter in the last 
resort is to what extent those wants could be satisfied more or 
less as usual. So far as we can judge, that was far more the 
case a hundred years ago than it has been in our own day. 
We might perhaps summarize this contrast by saying that 
the effect of the Continental System on the European mainland 
was continuous dislocation, while the dislocation of the recent 
war was, in the main, overcome during the first year of hostilities. 
On the other hand, during the recent war, in contrast wit,h the 
great war of a century ago, the lowering of the standards of life 
and the decrease in supplies necessary for the general wants 
continued uninterruptedly and probably at an accelerated pace, 
but without dislocations, in the proper sense of the term, and 
with an immense decline in unemployment, as compared with 
peace conditions. The fact that the course of development 
took two such opposite directions then and now and that 
there was no dislocating effect in our own day shows, on the 
one hand, how much more flexible and adaptable economic 
organization has become during the last century. But, on the 
other hand, the difference is due to the dissimilarity of the two 
blockades, which is the reason why the satisfaction of general 
wants remained comparatively undisturbed a hundred years 
ago, At a time when Great Britain asked for nothing more 
than an. opportunity to flood the Continent with colonial goods 
and industrial products, .the supply must, despite all self 
1669.43 Y 
322 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
blockade, have been quite different from what it was when the 
normal producers proceed to hinder all supply. 
FinaUy, another contributory cause was the relative self 
sufficiency ( u ~ T u ~ x E ~ ~ ) , which evidently greatly limited the 
effects of the Continental System as regards the satisfaction of 
general wants of the population of the continental states. 
"he most important fact is that difficulties regarding food did 
not possess anything like the importance that they had during 
the recent war ; indeed they practically played no part, what 
ever on the Continent before the winter of 1811-12. The one 
exception was in Norway.1 This self-sufficiency as regards food 
was far greater than can be found in our own time, even in 
countries that produce the necessary amount of food for their 
own population, because they are dependent upon imports 
of manure and fodder, while such a situation was practically 
unknown a hundred years ago. Moreover, the self-sufficiency 
within the continental countries, the relative economic inde 
pendence of the particular household, went far to prevent the 
hardships occasioned by a blockade in the twentieth century. 
The fact that, as a consequence of this, the corn problem was 
really a problem only for England, makes it proper to postpone 
its treatment to the section in the following chapter dealing 
with the effects of the Continental System in that country, 
and makes a mere reference to it sufficient in this place. In 
that connexion, too, Norway will be considered. The explana 
tion of the seeming paradox that the scarcity of raw materials 
principally hit production and left consumption almost un 
changed, also lies in the consumers' comparatively great inde 
pendence of market conditions as well as in the great reserves 
of linen, cloth, and wearing apparel kept in every self-respecting 
household. 
In spite of the limitation in the general effects of the 
Continental System that follows from all this, one cannot 
shut one's eyes to the fact that the yeark 1811-13, after the 
crisis in France, Great Britain, and most of the other countries, 
are characterized by a serious deterioration of the economic 
1 Worm-Miiller, Norge gjennem Waarwze, tc., pp. 82 et sty. 