

EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT 323 conditions prevailing everywhere on the Napoleonic mainland. It is true that the character of this deterioration is anything but clear and would deserve a really searching examination ; but the fact stands out clearly in many different quarters. As early as the autumn of 1810 one of the French commercial spies speaks openly and very pointedly of the ‘ pretty general condition of ill-being (malaise) ’ in Germany ; and afterwards the situation finds particular expression in the difficulties, already indicated, that the luxury industries experienced in finding a market. Moreover, the same thing is shown by the difficulty in overcoming the crisis of 1810-11 and its more or less latent continuation down to the great transformation brought about by Napoleon’s fall. It was just at that time, too, that food difficulties showed themselves to some extent all over Europe and hit the most vital of the general needs. There is no justification, it is true, for laying the blame for this position entirely on the Continental System, which was merely one side of a state of war that had then existed for twenty years; but undoubtedly the trade blockade had its share in the result. It is possible that conditions would have come to develop in a direction more like our recent experiences if the fall of Napoleon had been delayed a few more years. As things turned out, however, people got scarcely more than a prelimi nary taste of what would have been involved in such a situation.

Y2

EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM THERE remains the question of the effects of the Continental System on the United Kingdom, which is in a way the most important of all, inasmuch as it must show the importance of the policy in relation to its special purpose. LIMITATIONS OF OBSTACLES TO EXPORTS In order to be able to judge this matter aright, we must realize clearly the serious weakness that existed in Napoleon's position from the standpoint of the Continental System, a weakness that lay in the fact that the very most that he could be expected to attain by his own resources was the closing of the mainland of Europe. The importance of this for his object of smothering the exports of Great Britain probably appears with sufficient exactitude if we reduce the value figures corre sponding to her exports to percentages and then divide them into three groups according to countries of destination. The position is then. revealed as follows :

Year

1805 . 1806 . 1807 . 1808 . 1809 . 1810 . 1811 .

A. DOMESTIC GOODS / Europe I United States 1 Rest of world I

1 31.3 9, 37.8 ,, 3 33.4 ,, 41.1 ,,

25.7 ,, I 15.0 ,, 35.4 ,, 16.2 ,, 484 ,, i 23.9 ,, 42.0 9, . j 42.9 ,, 1 6.2 ,, i 50.9 ,, 1 The oalculation has been made on the basis of the figures given on p. 245, and like those figures, it applies to Great Britain alone (excluding Ireland). But a change has been made in the fact that the trade with Ireland, the Channel Islands, and the Isle of Man has not here been taken into account,