

EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 389 total amount of coal produced, but only for the quantities of coal shipped from Newcastle and Sunderland ; while probably the greater part, and the part that underwent the greatest increase, was consumed within the huge cotton, wool, and iron areas that lay on or behind the coal-fields. But in any case the @pres (yearly averages) are of interest.1

Period 1 Tons 1 preceding period Per cent. increase over " First quinquennial period of the century (1801-5) . 2,137,209 Period of the Continental System (1807-12) . . l"1 2,463,890 - 15.29 First quinquennial period after the p ace (1816-20). 2,812,851 14.83 ..

These figures do not in the least degree indicate that the rate of industrial development was retarded under the Con tinental System, but, on the contrary, they show that the growth was not greater even during the first years of peace; and the figures for the particular years give the same im pression. For the cotton industry by itself we have no figures to go by save those referring to the imports of raw cotton; and as appears from the tables given in a preceding chapter,' the fluctuations here were very great from year to year. But a summary of the figures for net imports, on t.he same method as before, gives the following result :

- ~~~~~

Year Per cent. increase over preceding period "" ~ _" ~ - . 1801-5 . . . 56,662,421 I 1807-12 . . . 79,744,529 40.73 1816-20 . . 89.27

..

Here too, therefore, we are confronted with an increase 
which is even several times greater than in the former case, 
although it falls far short of the increase during the following 
peace period, which, of course, is only natural. 
Nor does the rest of the somewhat scattered material that 
is available show any visible signs that the uniquely rapid 
industrial development which is characteristic of this period 
1 The figures have been collected on the basis of the table in Porter, Propea 
of the Nation, pp: 275-6. The other statistical data in this section have been 
taken, where nothmg to the contrary is stated, from the same work. 
2 See ante, p. M. 
330 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
was retarded by the Continental System. The population of 
Great Britain and Ireland increased 13 per cent. between the 
years 1801 and 1811, as compared with 1% per cent. during 
the following decade ; and naturally it was considerably 
greater for the industrial districts. Calico-printing works quad 
rupled their production between 1800-14, and the exports of 
iron increased. Nor did the years of the Continental System 
form an exception to the general transition to new technical 
methods which constituted the primus motm of the industrial 
revolution. Thus Cort’s son stated in a petition to the House of 
Commons in 1812 that even at that date 250,000 tons of 
malleable iron were annually produced by puddling and that 
Cort’s processes had obtained practically general acceptance.l 
The power-loom likewise made progress, though at a con 
siderably slower pace. A great new revolution took place in 
calico-printing with the year 1808, in that the pattern was 
transferred to the cylinders from a little steel cylinder instead 
of being engraved direct ; and the lace machine came int,o 
existence in 1809, &c. 
There was certainly no pause in the industrial revolution, 
nor any tendency to a backward development of the industrial 
life of Great Britain toward increased self-sufficiency, such as, 
in accordance with our previous findings, would have been the 
consequence of complete success for the Continental System. 
But, of course, it was not in that way that Napoleon himself 
thought of the matter ; his hopes were limited to dislocations 
in the system. 
EFFECTS OF DISLOCATION OF EXPORTS 
It appears from the account in part 111 that these hopes 
were not frustrated, but, on the contrary, were very nearly 
fulfilled through the British crisis of 1810-11. Also it appears 
equally dear that this crisis cannot be regarded wholly, or even 
mainly (though certainly in part), as a fruit of the blows of the 
Continental System against Great Britain ; nor was the extent 
of its effects at all what Napoleon had imagined. 
Hansard, vol. XXI, p. 330. 
EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 331 
On the whole, we have no reason to regard the economic 
effect of purely dislocation phenomena as particularly im 
portant. It is possible in this connexion that we are too much 
impressed by the unique experiences of the recent war in this 
direction ; but even if we think of crises occurring during 
otherwise normal times-even crises of such an incalculable 
character as the cotton famine in England during the American 
Civil War-it is striking how soon their traces are swept away 
by subsequent development. The whole of Napoleon’s plan 
on this point, made out at short sight as it was, cannot be 
regarded as having had any great prospect of attaining its 
object, that is, the crippling of Great Britain’s military power 
by undermining the foundations of her economic life. 
This, then, holds good of the purely economic effects of the 
dislocation ; with regard to its social and political effects the 
matter assumes quite a different aspect. Here the political 
economist can really neither contest nor confirm the process 
of thought, for the result depends almost exclusively on the 
character of the people in question. An impulsive race, which 
has also become accustomed to receiving help from the state in 
all things great and small, may be led by a mere trifle to over 
throw a government, a constitution, perhaps a whole order of 
society, while another people, which is more phlegmatic and 
less trained to rely on the state, may leave the conduct of the 
state entirely undisturbed even in times of serious distress and 
great difficulties. It is quite obvious that Englishmen, especially 
during the time of the Napoleonic wars, belonged to the latter 
category ; and as Miss Cunningham has justly observed, the 
rage of the unemployed was directed in the “ Luddite riots ” 
against the new machinery (frame-breaking), but not really 
against the government.’ One can easily imagine that 
Napoleon, with his experience of the continual COUPS d’ht 
during the French Revolution, could not see this ; but this 
makes no difference with respect to the fact that he made 
a thorough miscalculation. 
But to all this must be added the fact-and this is a very 
1 Miiss Cunningham, Brithh Credit, &e., pp. 76-7. 
33% EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
important fact-that the particular kind of dislocation in Great 
Britain due to the Continental System which was most favour 
able to Napoleon, was necessarily of a comparatively super 
ficial nature, just because it was a dislocation caused by 
obstacles in the way of exports and not of obstacles in the way 
of imports. A failure of exports can always be alleviated by 
production with a view to accumulating stocks-supported, if 
necessary, by public funds ; but that is not the case with the 
failure of imports, for if irreplaceable commodities are irre 
trievably left outside no measures can be of any avai1.l 
Napoleon’s thoughts certainly did not run in that direction, 
and the explanation lies in an attitude we have already learned 
to know, and which he shared not only with all his country 
men, but also, probably, with the majority of Englishmen. 
But even with due allowance for this, the position he took up 
was very peculiar ; for what England would have needed to 
do was pretty much what he himself did at that very time. 
His own remedy for unemployment, in fact, was state support in 
different forms, in order to enable manufacturers to continue 
operations ; and there is no reason to suppose that he ever 
ceased to believe in the efficacy of this remedy. In that case 
it would not have been a great flight of imagination to expect 
the same capacity on the part of his adversaries, whose fertility 
of resource and endurance he was not wont to deny. 
In reality, it is true, these remedies were employed in 
Great Britain only to a very limited extent, owing to the fact 
that the principle of laissez-faire had already obtained a great 
influence over the classes that held political power in England. 
But we may certainly assume that Napoleon was not so familiar 
with his enemies or their economic views that he took such 
a factor into account. The British measures were limited to 
an issue of treasury bills for ~6,000,000 for the support of 
embarrassed business men, chiefly manufacturers, the intention 
being to tide them over the time of waiting until the assets 
locked up in South America or elsewhere could be released. 
. It may be allowable to point out how well this result, which was reached 
early in 1918, ia in acoordanoe with later German developments. 
EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 333 
The proposal on this subject, based on a precedent of 1793, 
had been brought forward by a committee of the House of 
Commons in March 1811, but was not very enthusiastically 
reeeived in any quarter. None the less the plan was carried 
out, because no one really wished to be responsible for throw 
ing obstacles in the way of anything that might possibly be 1 
helpful in an unusually ticklish situation.1 
The arguments brought against the plan, especially by the 
economic authorities of the opposition, such as Huskisson, were 
especially that the crisis had been brought on by an excess of 
credit, which in its turn was connected with the excessive issue 
of notes by the Bank of England, and that these new loans 
would merely augment the speculation, the issue of notes and 
the rise of prices. To what extent this diagnosis was correct 
is a question that does not pertain to our present subject. 
We need only observe that if obstacles in the way of sale arise 
that are really caused by blockade and not by excessive specu 
lation, then the transition to that form of production which in 
such a situation would be the right one can be rendered easier 
by a granting of credit ,that permits of a limited production 
for stock during the period of transition. Further, if this 
granting of credit is effected by genuine saving, that is to say, 
by a diminution of the demand for credit for other purposes 
a thing which the banks can bring about by raising the rate 
of discount-then there do not arise the consequences alleged 
by Huskisson and by those who shared his views. This implies 
that the dislocation at which Napoleon aimed by placing 
obstacles in the way of British exports could have been over 
come without insuperable difficulties. As things were, one 
may say that, on the whole, the dislocation was overcome by 
itself, without any measure at all worth mentioning ; and it is 
not impossible that this was the best way out of the difficulty. 
The impenetrable conviction as to the harm of all kinds 
of state interference found unmixed expression when it was 
a question of the sufferings of the workmen. With reference 