

340 EFFECTS OF "HE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM come indicates more or less plainly that not even a complete barring of imports would have attained its object, even apart from the fact -that an effective blockade would probably have been able, after some time, to pave the way for some of the effective measures with which a much greater scarcity of food was met during the recent war. Napoleon's chances of striking at British food supplies were evidently limited to what had to be taken from the .mainland of Europe, or, in the case most favourable to him, from there and from the United States. In sources accessible to me there do not exist figures relating to all the countries of origin of the wheat imported into Great Britain during this period. But the American wheat went mainly to South Europe, especially to the Iberian peninsula during the tremendous struggles there, while all our information points to the idea that the Baltic lands formed the main source of supply of corn for Great Britain, with Danzig as the centre. From the very full statistics on the Baltic seaports printed in Oddy's work, it appears that in the year 1800, when British imports of wheat were great, 47 per cent. came from the three ports, Konigsberg, Elbing, and Danzig, 34 per cent. from Danzig alone.1 And besides these, other Baltic ports were of importance also. Con sequently, so far as Napoleon could make his will prevail, not only on the North Sea coast of Germany, but also upon the south and, to some extent, the east coast of the Baltic, he did no€ lack the possibility of hampering the food supply of Great Britain. Accordingly, the question is, How did he really regard such a task and what steps did he take to accomplish it ?

FOOD POLICY OF NAPOLEON AND HIS OPPONENT 
It is on this point that the accepted views have been 
determined by the conclusions of Dr. Rose in the article referred 
to above. They come to this, that Napoleon not only did 
nothing to hinder British imports of foodstuffs, but actually 
sought to encourage the exports of corn to that country with 
the object of ruining the enemy through the unfavourable 
* Computed on the basis of Oddy's figures, op. cit., pp. 234-52 ; passim. 
EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 341. 
trade balance which would be the consequence thereof. But 
this account gives a misleading impression both of the measures 
and of the motives of Napoleon, and it is not borne out by the 
letters cited by Dr. Rose in its support. 
It is true that the notion of, ruining the enemy by imports 
fitted in very well with the economic conceptions of Napoleon 
and of many of his contemporaries, as has been sufficiently 
shown in the foregoing pages. But the matter of food supplies 
here took an exceptional position, inasmuch as it was regulated 
in the continental states, and especially in France, along the 
lines of the mediaeval ‘ policy of plenty ’ rather than in accor 
dance with the principles of mercantilism, in that it was desired, 
primarily, to provide for. an abundant supply and not for 
profitable production and sale. Napoleon did not swerve from 
the economic traditions of France any more in this department 
of economic policy than in others ; and it would have been 
highly peculiar if he had allowed himself to be led by one set 
of ideas where his own country was concerned and by another 
set when the enemy was concerned. Nor was that the case, 
but, on the contrary, his opinion is quite consistent and not at 
all difficult to explain. 
The fundamental object of Napoleon’s food policy was, as 
has just been mentioned, to secure supplies within the country ; 
and this not only from the same motives that actuated his 
Bourbon predecessors, but also because of his desire to prevent 
labour disturbances. Consequently, he is always reminding 
his French helpers of the danger of being insufficiently pro 
vided with foodstuffs, urging them to remember what it had 
cost him in the Year X (1801-2) to procure a few thousand 
quintaux of corn, and insisting that it would involve the greatest 
danger if they had not a ‘ double supply ’. ‘ You hate not 
sufficient experience in this matter,’ he wrote in 1810 to Eugene, , 
the viceroy of Italy. ‘ The corn question is for sovereigns the 
most important and the most delicate of all. . . . The first duty 
of the prince in this question is to hold to the people, with 
out listening to the sophisms of the landowners.’ During the 
difficulties of the winter of 1812 he strove, by the distribution 