

EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 325

B. FOREIQN AND COLONIAL GOODS Year Europe 1805 . . . 78.7 per cent. 1806 . . .

1811 . . 83.6 ,,

1810 . . 76.9 ,, 1809 . , 83.1 ,,

1808 . . . 71.1 ,,

1807 . . . 80.0 ,,

72.9 ,,

. . United States I Rest of world 16.2 per oent. 21-4 ,, 16.9 ,, 28.0 ,, 15.5 ,, 20.4 ,, 16.0 ,,

This summary shows, to judge by the position immediately before the organization of the Continental System, that at the very highest about one-third of the exports of domestic goods could be affected by the self-blockade of the Continent, although, it is true, there must be added to this three-fourths of the re-exports. It was, therefore, a factor of fundamental impor tance for Napoleon’s success that the United States should also be driven to the establishment of a self-blockade, inasmuch as that would put an end to another third of the exports of British goods. It is impossible to deny that in this matter he received excellent help from the British government itself, when it allowed things to come to an almost unbroken series of conflicts with America, mainly because of the Orders in Council, which as a matter of fact were never more than quite a secondary weapon in the great struggle. This meant that, strictly speaking, everything had been done which was really possible in the direction of preventing British exports ; and so far Napoleon had achieved even more than he could have achieved with the resources of his own empire alone. But precisely the development thereby created, as it is illustrated in the above figures, shows a limitation in the range even in a course of action which was so surprisingly successful, namely, that it always left trade with the rest of the world un disturbed. We see from t,he third column of the table how the share of this department of exports with regard to British goods increases in relative importance under the Continental System in comparison with the preceding years ; and this tendency will be clear whether the situation is regarded from an English or from a continental point of view. British industry would

326 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
seek transmarine markets as substitutes for lost European 
ones ; and it would likewise find them, as the increased self 
sufficiency of the European Continent would make the rest 
of the world more dependent upon British supply than before. 
Of interest in this connexion is the fact that the Continental 
System gave the impulse for British transmarine exports of 
calicoes and prints, which had been unheard of before.1 And 
in this respect Napoleon was almost hopelessly impotent, for 
it must have been inconceivable to prevent for any long time 
the power that commanded all the seas of the world from 
exporting goods to other continents. Even if the self-blockade 
of the Continent of Europe had been complete, which was, 
of course, far from the case, the immediate effect would probably 
have been to hasten the economic orientation of Great Britain 
both from Europe and also, to a large extent, from the United 
States, to the rest of the world ; and this orientation, as a 
matter of fact, has taken place gradually during the last hundred 
years and has formed one of the most significant changes in , 
the position of Great Britain in the economy of the world. 
In one of his famous and most overweening utterances (1826), 
Canning justified British co-operation in the liberation of the 
South American colonies on the ground that ‘ he called the 
New World into existence to redress the balance of the Old ’. 
In the sphere of economics this British tendency already had 
century-old roots, and indeed it was precisely what was at 
tempted under the Continental System by the speculative 
exports to Brazil. When one follows the later development of 
transmarine exports, one scarcely doubts that this speculative 
touch would soon have vanished if the blockade of the Con 
tinent had become permanently effective. How important the 
change has been since the time immediately before the Conti 
nental System is shown by the following comparison with the 
situation immediately before the outbreak of the World War.2 
‘Erst die Kontinentalsperre zwang England, zum Ersatz fiir den Entgang 
des kontinentalen Marktes tlndere iiberseeische Absatzgebiete aufzusuchen. Das 
waren die Levanteliinder.’ Jenny-Triimpy, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 370-71, quoted in 
Geering, Entwkkdung des Zeugdrucka, &c., p. 422. 
The Sgures for 1913 are calculated on the basis of the Btatktical Abstract for 
the United Kingdom. 