

34& EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM of bread and soup, ' to make the most needy part of the multitude independent ' of food difficulties. Just as before, therefore, he forbade the export of corn when scarcity was apprehended, or even, as in 1810, while awaiting the results of the harvest. And although on August 6, 1810, he had authorized Eugene to permit the exportation of corn from Italy, he wrote to him three weeks later (August 31) : ' It is said that the Italian harvest is bad. Take care that not too much corn is exported and that we do not get into difficulties.' For this reason, too, he authorized his Italian minister of finance in 1813 to permit the export of French and Italian products with the exception of corn and rice, regarding which he wished to have a report first-a policy that marks the special position of food exports-and, in full analogy with this, Napoleon, in January 1812, expressed the opinion that licences for the importation of foodstuffs should be granted without conditions ; that is to say, he waived the customary obligation of exporting + goods to the corresponding value. The same point of view determined the whole series of measures that the Emperor took in the winter and spring of 1811-12, when, according to his own declaration, there was a real scarcity of corn in Paris. At the same time he deemed it necessary to take more pains than usual to secure quiet in Paris during his absence on the Russian campaign. His feverish zeal to intervene and regulate drove his helpers, especially Pasquier, the eminent prefect of police in Paris, to despair, and afterwards led Chaptal to make the biting remark that Napoleon took every measure that was calculated to further the rise in prices and the shortage of foodstuffs. These measures included the buying up and seizure of corn in the departments adjoining Paris, the taking over of the mills, secret sales by the agents of the government in order to force down prices when they rose in consequence of the previous measures-the only consequence of which was to raise them still farther, and the final result, as the culmination of the abortive ' policy of plenty ', was'the establishment of maximum prices. It should be obvious, on the face of it, that the whole of this series of

EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM $43 measures was totally incompatible with the notion that it would injure an enemy to provide him with f0od.l On the other hand, it certainly did not follow from such a point of view that the export of foodstuffs would be considered inexpedient or even looked at askance, under all circumstances, As soon as the supply of food within the country was considered safeguarded, the general interest for exports showed itself at once ; and the ruler of such countries as North Germany, Italy, and France, which were distinctively countries that exported foods and stimulants, could hardly be imagined as adopting any other standpoint, when in other respects he favoured the mercantilist or ' bullionist ' policy. It was only natural, therefore, that Napoleon, in a letter of 1810 to Gaudin, hi5 minister of finance, which has already been cited once or twice, spoke of his object of favouring, by, means of smuggling, the export of French foodstuffs and the import of precious metals ; and that in the same year he caused Champagny to inform the French ambassador at St. Petersburg-evidently with reference to complaints on the part of Russia-that he granted licences for the exportation of wine and corn as beneficial to his terri tories, without inquiring too closely as to how the English afterwards treated the vessels provided with licences. Similarly, in a letter of July 28, 1809 (cited by Dr. Rose), to the acting home secretary, FouchB, he bitterly denounced the allegation that he discountenanced export in itself, which he, on the con trary, regarded as being hindered by the British and not by him. ' Exports occur,' he said, ' as soon as there is a possi bility of sale.' Not one of these letters, or any other letter known to the writer, contains even a hint of an intention to injure England by the exports of foodstuffs, but, on the other hand, an evident intention to benefit France thereby. The real Letters to Archchancellor Cambad&, Apr. 5 and 25,1807 ; to Eugene, Ang. 6 and 31, Sept. 24,1810 ; various ' notes ' (imperial diotated addresses) dated Jan. 13, Feb. 8, Mar. 11, 1812 (Correspondance, nos. 12,297; 12,470 ; 16,767; 16,856; 16,946 ; 18,431 ; 18,485 ; 18,668) ;. Letters to the Italian minister of finance, Mar. 22, 1813 (Lettrea i&ites de Napdh Ier, no. 972); Pasquier, Hidoire de men temps : bik?tcoirea (Prrrie, 1893), vol. I, oh. XXI ; Chaphl, &uuenkrs, &o., pp. 291-2; Levamern, Ristoire des classes wvrilres, &c., de 1789 d 1870, vol. I, pp. 341, 477 note 6 ; Vandal, op. cit., vol. m, pp. 339, 459.