

938 EFFECTS OF THE COhTINENTAL SYSTEM amount would thus have been the normal import demand ; but if instead of this we wish to investigate the relative magni tude of the greatest shortage during the period, that for the year, 1810, we find that not even that, in relation to the then greater population, rises to more than about 12 per cent. However, there also occurs a lower calculation of the con sumption than one quarter (eight bushels) per inhabitant, namely, six bushels, which falls slightly short of the Swedish consumption of rye and wheat a hundred years later. As the home supply in Great Britain can only be obtained from a figure based on consumption, this gives a smaller amount for the harvest, and consequently a greater share for imports. On such a supposition, that share forms 6& per cent., or some what over one-sixteenth, on an average, for the decennial period of 1801-10, and a good 16 per cent., or scarcely one-sixth, for the year of maximum imports, 1810. Even if the imports of wheat had been totally cut off, therefore, the deficiency, even in years of bad harvest and on the most unfavourable estimate, would have been a mere trifle in comparison with what we had to accustom ourselves to during the recent war. For Sweden the average imports during the quinquennial period before the outbreak of that war formed a good fourth of the total requirements of wheat and rye, while the total supply of cereals in Sweden during the bad year 1917-18 was probably less than half of the normal. This shows to what extent normal food requirements have been curtailed, even in neutral countries in our own day, and the shortage a hundred years ago consequently dwindles into comparative insignificance. In spite of this, the blockade during the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars was sufficiently effective both to stimulate the cultivation of corn in Great Britain,l and also to bring about a severely felt shortage of food, which was especially marked in the years 1795, 1800, and 1812, and which gave rise to constant apprehensions. A large number of the measures adopted during the recent war were ‘ Cp. Ricardo, Primiple.g of Politid Ecolzoney and Tdion (London, 1817), ~h, Uf ; Malth-, P~<n~izyle~l Of Pditieal Eoon~my (London, 1820), ch. III, BBC). IX.

EFFECTS ON'THE UNITED KINGDOM 339 
also employed. a hundred years ago, though not the most 
effective and far-reaching among them, and especially not 
rationing. These measures included a suspension of the corn 
duties, the prohibition of the distillation of spirits and the 
manufacture of starch, the postponement of the sale of bread 
until twenty-four hours after baking, incessant exhortations in 
royal proclamations and also organized agreements to reduce 
the consumption of bread by a third, as well as a prohibition 
against baking bread of unmixed fine bolted wheat flour, which 
is known as the Brown Bread Act of 1800. But the population 
found it much more difficult to put up with these interferences 
with their food habits than with other privations which, 'to 
our way of thinking, were considerably greater. It proved 
impossible to enforce the Brown Bread Act, so that it had to 
be repeaIed immediately ; and serious food disturbances 
occurred both in 1800 and in 1812. So far, therefore, it is 
fairly evident that the placing of obstacles in the way of im 
porting corn would have had far greater prospects of affecting 
public opinion and tranquillity in Great Britain than the 
barring of exports, in which Napoleon placed his confidence. 
On the other hand, the assumption that even the barring of 
imports would have forced the conclusion of peace, or over 
thrown the British government, is one which is more or less 
refuted by experience. During the year 1812, when the prices 
of wheat reached a record height and remained there until the 
last weeks of the old harvest year, there prevailed just that 
position which would have been the consequence of a blockade 
as complete as one can reasonably imagine to have been enforced. 
For owing to the bad harvest, which was general in Europe, as 
well as to immense purchases made by Napoleon as a prepara 
tion for the Russian campaign, the rise in prices in Great 
Britain did not cause any imports worth mentioning ; for the 
whole year there entered the country only 55,000 tons, which 
is little more than half of the average figure for the sexennial 
period of the Continental System, and considerably less than 
half of the average figure for the preceding decennial period. 
Thus the fact that, despite all this, difficulties could be over 
2 2 