

##### 336 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM

BRITISH IMPORTS OF FOODSTUFFS The question of the dependence of Great Britain on imports from the European mainland has generally been regarded AS identical with the question of its provision with food. To a large extent this is correct, inasmuch as the majority of industrial raw materials imported came from transmarine countries, and practically all industrial products of importance for the mass of the community could be manufactured within the country. Yet it should be mentioned that both naval stores (especially timber) and wool formed exceptions from this general rule, inasmuch as they were taken from the Baltic lands (including Scandinavia) and from Spain or Germany, respectively ; and, as we have already mentioned, there was at times a scarcity of both these’kinds of commodities during the course of the Continental System. Consequently it is not impossible that two such fundamental sides of war require ments as shipbuilding and the clothing of troops might have offered difficulties if the supply from Europe had been cut off. It is far from probable, however, that these factors would have been decisive, since timber, like other things required for ships, could have been obtained from Canada ; and according to an estimate for the year 1800 more than nine-tenths of the wool required can be assumed to have been provided from domestic sources. Obviously the question of foodstuffs went much further. The importance of Great Britain’s imports of foodstuffs, which can practically be regarded as identical with her imports . of wheat, is anything but clear, it is true, as we have no informa tion at all as to the agricultural production of the country itse1f.l Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that the previously

1 Cf. also, Porter, op. cit. ; Tooke, op. cit. ; Smart, op. cit. ; Oddy, op. cit., bk. III; McCulloch, Dictionary, Practicul, Thuoretiml, arid Hiatoriml, of Cmmerce and Commercial Navigation (new ed., London, 1862), article on ‘Corn Laws end Corn Trade’ ; Cunningham, Ur&h of Enqtish Induatry and Cmmerce, 3d ed., vol. II, pp. 703 et se4. The British figures corresponding to volume (quarters of 8 bushels) have been recalculated according to weight, 1 bushel being taken as equal to 28.2 Irgs,

EFFECTS ON THE UNImD KINGDOM $387 existing surplus available for export had been replaced, within the twenty years before the outbreak of the revolutionary wars at the latest, by a normal excess of imports, and that the self-sufficiency of the country had thus ceased to exist. In absolute figures the excess imports of wheat quite naturally varied much from year to year, according to the harvest. The British imports during the Napoleonic wars-always including what came from Ireland-attained their maximum in 1810 with 336,430 tons, while one solitary year (1808) even showed an insignificant excess of exports. The average figwe during the period of the Continental System (1807-12) was an import excess of 104,000 tons. The absolute significance of this @we will be made clearer if in connexion with it we' mention the fact that the wheat imports of a country such as Sweden, for instance, during the period immediately before the outbreak of the World War in 1914, was about 200,OOO tons, and its combined imports of wheat and rye were about 300,OOO tons, that is to say, two or three times as much, respectively. Thus there can be no doubt that the quantities in themselves were small according to our notions. It is more important, however, to form a clear notion of the relative importance of such imports for the total British consumption of wheat ; but unfortunately this is impossible, as we do not know the amount of the harvests. The majority of estimates, both contemporary and later, how ever, are based on a consumption per inhabitant in Great Britain, that is to say, excluding Ireland, of one quarter or about 225 kgs. per annum, not counting seed-wheat. This undeniably strikes, one as a very high figure, as, for instance, the Swedish consumption of "wheat and rye together before the outbreak of the World War, that is to say, a hundred years later, was only about 180 kgs. However, if we take British calculations as to consumption as our basis, we find that, according to the 'average population of Great Britain during. the decade 1801-10 (about 112 millions) the total consumption of wheat would have been 2,655,000 tons, of which the average import excess during that decennial period (132,600 tons) formed just 5 per cent., or one-twentieth. This very modest lS69.4a 2