

EFFECTS ON THE; UNITED KINGDOM 327

A. DOMESTIU GOODS

Pear Europe

B. FOREIGN AND COLONIAL GOODS

1913 . . . 35.6 ,, 5.6 ,, I 58.8 ,,

1805 . . . 1 37.8 per cent 30.5 per cent. 1 31.7 percent. United States ~ Rest of world

Year 1 Europe 1 United States 1 Rest of world : : 1 56.1 ,, 276 ,, 16.4 ,, 78.7 per cent. 5.1 per cent. 16-2 per cent.

The same thing can also be illustrated by the quantity @pres, namely, the tons actually shipped to the same groups of countries ; but in this case we can deal only with the &st half of the nineteenth century, because statistics are no longer compiled in this way.

Year I Europe 1 United States 1 Rest of world 1802 . . . 66.97 per c nt. 7.63 per cent. 25-50 per cent. 1849 . . . 1 56.00 ,, 1 16.90 ,, I 27-10 ,,

I

More or less parenthetically it should be observed that at 
the present time Great Britain, as a consequence of this, would 
be considerably less susceptible to being barred from exports 
to Europe than she was a hundred years ago. 
The limitation of Napoleon’s possibilities of affecting British 
exports was thus obvious even during the comparatively few 
years that his continental empire lasted; and, as far as one 
can judge, it would have become still more so, in ever-increasing 
degree, if the Continent of Europe had passed through a long 
period of isolation. We must now try to form a notion of 
British economic life under the pressure of the blockade as far 
as it actually became a reality. 
Unfortunately it must be regarded as impossible, in the 
main, to separate these effects in any kind of inductive way 
from the general tangle of economic development. Not even 
in the peculiar department of war measures does the Con 
tinental System stand in isolation ; that is to say, the effects 
of the war and the effects of the Continental System do not 
coincide, Here the self-blockade of the Continent has by its 
338 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
side the Orders in Council and the many other subjects of 
dispute with the United States, which brought about the 
closing of that great market to British exports ;. and they 
were accompanied also by the burdens peculiar to the war 
itself, which could not possibly have been without importance 
even if there had been a complete lack of measures and counter 
measures in the sphere of commercial policy. But in addition 
to all this there was'the circumstance that not even this com 
plex of factors could take effect as a whole in anything which 
could be called, even approximately, a community in a state 
of economic equilibrium. On the contrary, the economic life 
of Great Britain would have been in a state of violent trans 
formation quite irrespective of the Napoleonic wars, owing to 
all the different movements included in the industrial revolution, 
the effects of which were made still worse by a poor law system 
. which was entirely devoid of guiding principles and was there 
fore extremely pauperizing. Finally, moreover, the confusion 
of the British currency caused dislocations which must be 
referred to yet a third cause, which was in the main independent 
of the others. It is manifestly impossible, under such circum 
stances, to arrive at more than rather general conclusions as 
to the effect of the Continental System on the economic life 
of Great Britain as a whole. 
RATE OF INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT 
The main thing is to determine to what extent the industry 
of the country was hit in the way that Napoleon intended. 
We ask ourselves, therefore, whether the six years during 
which the Continental System may be regarded as having been 
in force (1807-12) exhibited any stagnation or decline with 
respect to the preceding and succeeding development ; if there 
was, we may possibly see in this an effect of this special cause. 
The question is not easy to answer, as the period was so 
short and so full of ups and downs. But one starting-point 
might possibly be obtained in the figures for the supply of 
coal, if such were available ; for during the age of coal, coal 
has usually formed the best common standard of industrial 
development. As it is, however, we have no figures for the 