

note).

1 For this and the following paragraph, of. the references given above (p. 239,

3% EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM to petitions from the cotton operatives in Lancashire and Scotland, the House of Commons appointed, at the beginning of June 1811, a committee, which made its report after eight days. In that report it was stated, in the first place, ' that no interference of the legislature with the freedom of trade or with the perfect liberty of every individual to dispose of his time and of his labour, in the way and on the terms which he may judge most conducive to his own interest, can take place without violating general principles of the first importance to the prosperity and happiness of the community 'this as a reply to the petitions of the workmen for a regulation of the actual conditions of labour. In the second place, it was laid down that help in the form of money ' would be utterly inefficacious as to every good purpose, and most objectionable in all points of view ', and after this there was no alternative left. Never theless, it would be a misjudgment of the leading men of the time if we should choose to see in their position mainly in difference as to the welfare of the workers, who, on the contrary, had indisputably sincere spokesmen in both the House of Commons and in the committee in question, especially the great cotton manufacturer, Sir Robert Peel, the father of the statesman. The fact of the matter is, as far as one can judge, that they sincerely regarded any kind of relief to the workers as harmful-although, in strikmg contrast, relief in the form of loans was finally granted to the manufacturers-because it was calculated to raise hopes which could not be fulfilled and to bind the workers firmly to an industry which could not give them employment. One speaker in the House of Commons particularly emphasized the necessity of the transfer of labour to agriculture, with the object of making the country in dependent of the import of foodstuffs. This was precisely .a demand for the reorganization of economic life with a view to increased self-sufficiency. But the very fact that the work ing classes of Great Britain acquiesced with comparative patience in their tremendously heavy sufferings, even in the presence of so uncompromising a rejection, shows how limited the possibilities in reality were of putting an end to British

EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 835 power of resistance by any social movements caused by economic dislocations, This will be particularly clear if we compare the attitude of the holders of political power at that time with the concessions that had to be made to the demands of the workmen during the recent war in order not to endanger their good-will toward a continuance of the struggle. POSSIBILITY OF PREVENTING IMPORTS All tha.t has just been said, however, applies only toobstacles in the way of exports, with their obviously limited possibilities of causing ruin in the economic life of R country. As the economic function of exports is absolutely limited to providing payment for imports, it is quite meaningless when there are no imports. Imports, on the other hand, are ends in them selves, because they satisfy the wants of the people directly, which is the ha1 function of all economic activity. Conse quently, we cannot possibly turn our backs on the question as to what chances Napoleon would have had for gaining his object if he had directed the point of his blockade against the imports of Great Britain instead of against her exports. It is indeed true that this was quite incompatible with the economic views that he shared with the majority of persons of political consequence, as has been shown throughout our previous account. But it does not necessarily follow from this that he could not have made his object the cutting-off both of imports and of exports, as, on the whole, took place during the recent war ; in any case the problem is so important that it cannot be ignored. What especially necessitates an investi gation of the whole thing, including Napoleon’s policy in the matter, is that the view which has been pretty generally ac cepted during the last decade happens to have been determined by a popular article by Dr. J. H. Rose, which was hastily drafted for a purely practical purpose and which scarcely gives sufficient, or even correct, guidance in the question.1 1 ‘Britain’s Food Supply in the Napoleonic War,’ in the MontiaEy Review (1902), reprinted in Napoleonic Studh, pp. 204 et seq. The later statement by Dr. Rose in his chapter on ‘ The Continental System ’, in the Cambrae Modem Iliatory, vol. IX, p. 371, is in far bett.er accord with the 8ourceB as I read them.