

EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 355 in chief in the British financial administration of that time (1811-16), on which the German economic historian, Professor Richard Ehrenberg, has based that part of his study of the'house of Rothschild, Even at that time, with the greatly multiplied continental expenses for both subsidies and military require ments, the financing was at first managed partly by very cumbrous movements of silver from England, and partly, and more particularly, by bills drawn from the Continent on the British treasury in London. These last the continental govern ments and generals afterwards had the greatest difficulty in selling, and therefore they declined heavily in value. But now there was gradually carried out, through N. M. Rothschild, a change of system by which bills and coins were privately bought up on the Continent, with the result that difficulties of placing bills and the consequent dislocations in the exchanges almost ceased. Thus Herries states in his official report that during 1813. bills on Holland and Frankfurt for ~700,000 were bought up without depressing the exchange, while a payment of E100,000 on the old methods would, in his opinion, have had ten times as great an effect upon the exchanges.1 The whole of this account shows clearly enough that the difficulties lay in the matter of technical organization and were not due to any profound economic obstacles in the way of payments on the Continent ; for it is manifest that such obstacles, had they existed, would no less fully have lain in the way of Rothschild's purchases of commercial paper on the Continent, that is to say, his acquisition of continental assets on British account. What the change of system implied, there fore, was to organize the support in the main on the lines of international payments in general. But it was recently mentioned that in the earlier stage Rothschild sent gold to Wellington on the account of the British government, and that he later payments on the Continent were partly effected by sending silver. One thus 1 Memoirs of Sir Thomas Powell Buxton (3d ed., London, 1849), ch. XXI, pp. 288 et seq, ; Ehrenberg, Grosse Vernziigen, ihre Entstehung und ihre Bedeutung (Jena, 1903), vol. I, pp. 58 et sq.

A & 2

356 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINEXTAL SYSTEM 
gets the impression, in spite of all that has been said, that 
precious metals were necessary, at least at times, in order to 
support the Continent. This evidently needs explanation ; 
and the explanation mainly lies in the state of British currency 
during the Napoleonic wars. 
BRITISH CURRENCY 
As has been mentioned in part I, Great Britain had had an 
irredeemable paper currency ever since 1797 ; but before 1808 
this currency had only in particular years shown any great 
deviations from its par value. The quotations for gold do not 
appear to have been very reliable at the time, but the rates 
of exchange on Hamburg and Paris, both of which, character 
istically enough, were quoted in London without intermission 
during the whole course of the last Napoleonic war, make the 
matter sufficiently clear. In 1808, however, a great change set 
in. Especially from 1809 the exchanges began to show a very 
remarkable fall, i. e., the amount of foreign money to be 
obtained for 33 sterling declined heavily. The average de 
preciation for 1809 is given by Mr. Hawtrey as 21 and 23.3 
per cent. as compared with Hamburg and Paris, respectively. 
This gave rise to a great controversy--which offers a number 
of points of contact. with the discussion during the recent 
war-concerning the connexion between the changes in the 
value of gold and the rates of exchange, on the one hand, and 
the decline in the value of the British paper currency, on the 
other hand, and also concerning the true cause of the latter 
phenomenon. The first important contributions to this con 
troversy were made by Ricardo in the late summer a,nd autumn 
of 1809 in the form of three articles published in the Morning 
Chronicle, which were followed up in December by a celebrated 
pamphlet, the title of which, The High Price of Bullion a Proof 
of the Depreciation of Ban.k Notes, sufficiently expresses his 
point of view. In this pamphlet, Ricardo, who at that time 
was known only as a successful and highly respected broker on 
the Stock Exchange, laid down what is called the quantity 
theory of money and laid the foundation of his still unpresaged 
EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 357 
fame as the most acute of economic theorists. In order to 
test the question, the House of Commons in February 1810 
appointed a committee, known as the Bullion Committee, 
'whose report, framed entirely in the spirit of Ricardo, was 
announced in June but did not come before Parliament 
until the following spring. The discussion was carried on 
with great zeal outside Parliament as well, simultaneously 
with an almost continuous rise in the price of gold. Accord 
ing to the computations of Mr. Hawtrey, that rise was 364 
per cent. in 1813 (that of silver being 367 per cent.), while 
the fall in the exchanges had already culminated in 1811 with 
391 per cent. and 44 per cent. on Paris and Hamburg, respec 
tively. During these long discussions there also arose the 
question of the cause of the export of gold and its connexion 
with payments on the Continent ; and it may be said that in 
the course of this discussion the connexion was made clear in 
all essentials, especially by Ricard0.l 
As a starting-point in this discussion Ricardo took the case 
where a country, owing to failure of the harvest, has to embark 
upon unusually large imports of corn ; but he maintained that 
the payment of subsidies to a foreign power formed a still more 
marked instance of the same thing. Now, if the country in 
question, that is to say, Great Britain, had R metallic system 
of money and no ' redundant currency ', that is,. not a greater 
quantity of money in relation to the quantity of commodities 
than other countries, there was, in his opinion, no occasion for 
the export of precious metals. In that case, corn, like the 
subsidies, would be paid for by exports of commodities in the 
usual way, as has been explained at length above. If, on the 