

BRITISH CREDIT SYSTEM 
The above largely supplies the answer to the question that 
still remains, namely, as to the importance of the Continental 
System in relation to the solidity of the British credit system. 
If it was considered that the credit of Great Britain stood and 
fell with the metallic reserves of the Bank of England, neither 
Napoleon’s measures nor the depreciation of the currency 
would have prevented the preservation of the gold reserve, as 
has just been shown. It is true that the very conception of the 
importance of the metallic reserves for the credit of a country 
with a paper currency lacks support both in theory and in 
experience, although popular notions to this effect have been 
diligently nourished at all times ; and it is difficult to see what 
inconveniences would have followed if the metallic reserves 
of the Bank of England when it did not redeem its notes, 
had had to sink to the same level as at the Bank Restriction 

EFFECTS ON, THE UMTED KINGDOM %x3 of 1797 or even lower. But if it had been desired to avoid that state of things, then, as has been said, there would have been no insuperable difficulties, as is also shown by the experiences of the following years. It is a quite different and far more searching question, to what extent the British credit system could have been thrown into disorder by the general difficulties and dislocations caused to British economic life by the Continental System in combina tion with a number of other factors. As regards the credit of the state, nothing of the kind occurred. The system of the national debt was so firmly founded that it resisted the strain without difficulty, though the cost of the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars certainly appears, for various reasons, to have been much greater than would have been the case if the borrow ing had been effected in some other way. The private credit system, on the other hand, had not yet attained the same vital position in the economic life of the country as it has now. The new large-scale industry was to a predominant extent based on its own capital, and was mainly extended with the help of its own profits-a fact which is seldom properly emphasized. Consequently, the harm that could be involved by a dislocation of credit can probably be measured by the results of the crisis of 1810-11-that is to say, bankruptcies by the merchants with reaction on the manufacturers from whom they bought their goods. Besides, it is an open question whether the credit system of a country can be regarded as being so delicate as it has long been the fashion to make out. The experience of the recent war has largely suggested that our credit organization has a much more robust physique than anyone had previously suspected.

CONCLUSION COMPARISON WITH THE PRESENT DAY

THE Continental System had little success in its mission 
of destroying the economic organization of Great Britain, 
and most of the things it created on the Continent lasted a very 
short time. The visible traces that it left in the economic 
history of the past century are neither many nor strong. Indeed, 
it is difficult to find any more obvious and lasting effect than 
that of prolonging the existence of the prohibitive system in 
France far beyond what was the case, not only in Great Britain, 
but also in Prussia. Thus there are good grounds for doubting 
that the material development of our civilization would have 
been essentially different if this gigantic endeavour to upset 
the economic system o€ Europe had never been made. In 
general, it is true that what sets its mark on the course of 
economic development-largely in contrast with what is 
political in the narrower sense-is that which can be used as 
a foundation for further building, where cause can be laid to 
cause. Isolated efforts to destroy the texture of economic 
society, even if they are made with a giant’s strength, can 
generally do little more than retard the process of development, 
and gradually they disappear under the influence of what may 
be called in the fine-perhaps too fine-phrase, ‘ the self-healing 
power of nature ’ (& medicatria! naturae). 
However, the Continental System mainly had immediate 
ends in view. It was in the fist place a link in a life-and-death 
struggle, where, as is always the case under such circumstances, 
the thought of the future had to be relegated to the background. 
The fact that the future effects were small, therefore, is a thing 
which, strictly speaking, touches the heart of the Continental 
System no more than it touches the heart of other trade wars. 
It is true that in all such struggles people count on the most 
COMPARISON WITH THE PRESENT DAY 365 
far-reaching and profound effects in the future from the victory 
that they wish to win to-day ; but the only thing that they 
understand clearly is their desire to win the victory. First and 
foremost, therefore, the question is, to what degree the Conti 
nental System served this its immediate aim. 
So far as the answer to this question lies in the sphere of 
economics-and the present book has no concern with what 
lies outside that sphere-the answer has already been given 
in the preceding pages, and is mainly in the negative. But no 
detailed explanations need be given as to why just the failure 
of the Continental System, even as a pure measure of trade ' 
war, makes it especially important to confront it with the 
phenomenon that corresponds to it in our own day, the trade 
war in the shadow of which we still live at the time of this 
writing. If any point should have stood out clearly from the 
foregoing survey, it is surely the paradoxical character of the 
Continental System ; and so far the contrast with the present 
day has consisted in the very setting here given to the subject. 
But from a purely economic point of view every trade war is, 
strictly speaking, a paradox, for it is directed against intercourse 
which is profitable to both parties and therefore inevitably 
inflicts sufferings on its author no less than its intended victims. 
Consequently, the property of the Continental System of being 
an economic paradox does not render superfluous a comparison 
with the present time. Perhaps such a comparison derives 
still greater interest from the light it seems to cast over the 
general development of society during the past century in its 
connexion with economic conditions. But as the materials 
for such a survey have been largely given in the preceding 
chapters, these last few pages will to some extent have the 
character of a summary. 
The relatively limited effect of the Continental system on 
the economic life of Europe was primarily due to the autarchy 
of *e different countries, that is, their far-reaching economic 
seu-sufficiency in all vital matters. The speedy conclusion of 
the blockade of France at the outbreak of the revolutionary 
wars was undoubtedly connected, not only with the particular 
366 CONCLUSION. 
ideas with which we have become acquainted, but also with 
%he slenderness of the prospects of starving a country in the 
position of France ; and to a lesser degree the circumstances were 
the same with regard to a food blockade of the British Isles. 
On the other hand, it may be taken for granted that a blockade 
of the latter kind would now be effective if it could be carried 
out. But even with regard to its practicability the situation 
is altered. Nowadays such a blockade demands, almost 
inevitably, the command of the seas, as the countries that now 
produce corn are so many and so scattered that it can hardly 
be possible to command them all by land ; and the same holds 
good of the majority of products other than foodstuffs, even 
of the majority of raw materials. The possibility of blockading 
a country simply by power over the sources of supply has 
therefore been enormously reduced since the time of Napoleon 
with regard to all the main commodities of world commerce. 
Such a possibility is mainly reduced to a number of important, 
but quantitatively insignificant, articles, such as certain special 
metals, potassium, and indigo. Therefore, the possibilities of 
an effective blockade have been so far diminished that nowadays, 
to a much greater extent than a hundred years ago, they require 
power over the transport routes, while formerly there were 
greater possibilities of becoming master over production itself. 
In the opposite scale we have the fact that the damage done by 
blockade, when it can be carried out, is many times greater 
now than then. Consequently, it is obvious that the blockade 
of the Continent, which was never even attempted seriously 
during the Napoleonic wars, is now susceptible of a much wider 
range. 
In addition to these fairly self-evident material reasons for 
the greater efficacy of a blockade in our own day, there are other 
reasons which lie in the social or spiritual sphere, and are there 
fore far less obvious and generally known, but by no means 
less important. Foremost among these should be placed the 
increased power of governments in comparison with a hundred 
years ago. If there is anything which forms the burden of 
all discussions under the Continental System it is the hopeless- 