

EEFECTS 'ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 361 
events clear that the Continental System, as such, was 'not the 
cause of the situation, or at any rate not one of its principal 
causes. 
In the second place, from the standpoint of the payment of 
subsidies, it cannot even be regarded as having been necessary 
to let the export of gold or silver continue when the British 
government had once ceased to keep the currency at par with 
gold. From a purely formal point of view, it had obtained the 
possibility of independence in this respect by the Bank Restric 
tion Act, that .is to say, by making bank notes irredeemable ; 
nor was there any insuperable obstacle in the way of this 
expedient in actual fact. Strictly speaking, the Continent 
needed no importation of either gold or silver ; and it is far 
from the case, of course, that all the payments of the British 
government on the Continent were effected by the export 'of 
precious metal. For the moment it is not possible to state the 
relation between the total foreign payments and the trans 
ference of coin on behalf of the government except for the two 
years 1808 and 1809 ; but even the figures for those two years 
show how casual the proportion was.1 In 1808 the foreign 
payments of the government (here, as elsewhere, the figures 
refer to all countries outside the British Isles, and not merely 
the Continent of Europe) amounted to~330,!235,000, while the 
exports of precious metal on public account amounted to at 
least g3,905,000, or, if we include that sum which was paid for 
the purchase of silver dollars (without our being able to see 
whether they were purchased inside or outside the country) 
to ;E4&3,000, or over 4 per cent. of the whole. The principal 
part in this matter was played by over twenty remittances, 
principally silver, to the Iberian peninsula to a total of more 
than E2,666,000, and also 6e855,OOO in silver to Gothenburg, 
sums which the British government could not contrive to 
provide in a more convenient fashion. In the year 1809, on the 
other hand, when the total payments abroad were larger than 

1 The figures for the exports of precious metal follow tables 69 and 79 in the appendices to the Report of the Bullion Committee, reduced, when neoessary, to pounds sterling.

36% EFFECTS OF TfIE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM in the previous year (amounting to 51!2,372,000), the exports of precious metal on account of the government reached only &1,206,OOO, according to the lower calmlation, and 33,290,000, according to the higher calculation ; that is to say, at the most only 1% per cent. of the total payments. Now if it was regarded as necessary, out of regard for British ‘ prestige ’ or for any other cause, not to let so much metal go out of the country as actually did, these mere figures make it clear (and the idea is confirmed by the experiences of the recent war) that it would have been quite possible to avoid sending out gold or silver. Even if one had not been able to come to this conclusion by theoretical methods, it follows from the practical experience gained by Rothschild’s rearrangement of the system of foreign payments in 1813, that these payments did not involve any inevitable need for the export of gold or silver ; and for other purposes such export was, considering the general position of currency policy, a somewhat purposeless means of limiting the fall in value of British currency to a negligible extent, without restrict ing the circulation of bank notes.