

.%4 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM motive stands out distinctly in the most celebrated cases when extensive exports of corn from France, Holland, and Flanders to Great Britain took place in the years 1809 and 1810. During 1809 it is stated that about 90,OOO tons of wheat, besides other grain, came from those countries ; and of the unprecedented .. imports in the following year-which, without deducting exports, amounted to 353,500 tons of wheat and 135,MO tons .of other grain and represented a total value of more than S7,000,000-one-third of the wheat (evidently unground) and half of the flour were said to have come from Napoleon’s empire, all by means of mutual licences. The remarkable thing in this connexion is that not only Napoleon but also many Englishmen considered these large imports from France, under the existing conditions, to be extremely advantageous for the French, and consequently open to grave objection from a British point of view, This was partly because it provided means of disposing of surplus products, and partly because it was an important source of income to Napoleon owing to the huge licensing fees, which, together with freight and insurance, were alleged to raise the price by 30-50s. per quarter, or from $6 15s. to Ell per ton. This mode of thought, which is just as much French as British, was given characteristic expression in a speech in ,the House of Commons (February 19, 1810) by the politician Marryat, the father of the famous novelist, from which we cite the following : The benefit which the enemy derived from the present system of licensing the importation of his grain was much more than many gentle men imagined. It was a fact that in July last the farmers of France were so distressed by the low price of grain, that they could not pay their taxes. The price was then so low as 27s. the sack, whilst it was known that the French farmer calculated upon a price of 86s. as a fair ‘return for @s expences. Buonapartb, being apprized of these circumstances, .had no hesitation, of course [sic], in granting licences for the exporta tion of that grain, which our government readily granted licences to import ; the consequence of which was the raising of the price of that article in France, by the last accounts, above 50 per cent. beyond the BuonopartC’s treasury derived at the rate of 18s. a quarter from the same means. He would then submit it to the serious consideration .of

I rate in July last. Thus were the French corn growers benefited, while

EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 3.45

the House whether some measures ought not to be immediately taken 
to put an end to a practice which so materially served the resources of 
the enemy. 
This leads us to the third motive determining Napoleon’s 
corn policy, the motive that had decisive weight for more and 
more of his economic measures the longer the war went on-the 
need of money. This, and nothing else, dictated the whole 
of the motley multitude of export licences for corn to French, 
Italian, and ‘Neapolitan ports, the Hanse Towns, Mecklenburg, 
Danzig, &e., in combination with special export fees, especially 
in the last-named place, which was the most important export 
ing port of all. This fact alone shows that there was no thought 
of flooding Great Britain with corn, for in that case there 
would have been no question of export dues, least of all to 
such amounts as now occurred, which, according to General 
Rapp, the French commander in Danzig, were 60 francs per ton 
in 1810, and were so high that they were quite expected to 
smother the trade of Danzig. 
So far was Napoleon from believing that he was injuring 
England by the mere fact of supplying her with corn, that he 
.evidently perceived the profit of that supply to his adversary, 
as indeed is obvious beforehand. In the above-mentioned 
instructions to Champagny, meant to be forwarded to Caulain 
court, the ambassador in St. Petersburg, he expressly says : 
‘ The English, having need of corn, will naturally let them 
(the vessels) enter and leave, because the corn is a prime 
necessity for them.’ 
Since that was the case, however, the question arises 
whether the Emperor had no Lhought of giving a new turn to 
his policy and making a direct effort to starve out England. 
Thus far we have had no knowledge of this matter ; but some 
contributions toward an answer to ‘the question have become 
available through the publication, in 1913, of the first part of 
the work of the Russian historian, Tarle, entitled Kontiw&Z’- 
mja b20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,201. Thus in a report dated July 17,1810, Montalivet, 
the home secretary, wrote to Napoleon as follows : ‘ If our 
rival is eventually threatened with famine, it would seem to be 