

EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 359 
could continue for any length of time without.restoring equi 
librium, because the vacuum was constantly being fikd with 
new notes. Thus it was not the payment of subsidies or any 
extraordinary export of corn that caused the outflow of gold, 
but ' the superabundant circulation ', or, in other words, the 
lower value of money in Great Britain. 
This account, which goes to the root of the matter, can be 
regarded as conclusive in all essentials and needs to be supple 
mented only in one or two points, which are also touched upon 
by Ricardo. If the country in question has a mixed paper and 
gold circulation, as was the case with Great Britain, not only 
the paper money but also the metallic money declines in value 
within the country. In other words, prices rise in whichever 
currency they are quoted, inasmuch as they are both legal 
tender and their combined quantity has been increased. It is 
precisely this circumstance that drives out the ' better ', that is, 
the metallic money, because people get more goods for that in 
other countries. 
If, then, it was the case, on the whole, that the export of 
gold had its root in the depreciation of British currency, it 
should nevertheless be added, in common fairness, that a pay 
ment of subsidies in itself, regarded as an isolated phenomenon 
and without any connexion with the depreciation of the cur 
rency, would also set going a definitive export of gold from the 
subsidy-paying country, inasmuch as it would diminish its 
stock of commodities ; and an unchanged relation between 
the quantity of money and the quantity of commodities-in 
other words, an unchanged comparative price-level-would 
thus require a corresponding diminution on the other side of 
the equation. But the quantity of goods is exposed to so many 
changes in different directions that this matter is probably of 
no practical interest whatever. 
The argument brought forward against all this by Ricardo's 
opponents, especially by Malthus in the Edinbwgh Rmitw, in 
February 1811, was that a great export of corn, or claims to 
subsidies on the part of the continental states, need not evoke 
among them a greatly increased demand for ' muslins, hardware, 

860 EFFECTS OF T€iE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM and colonial produce ’, and that, therefore, it might be necessary for Great Britain to pay instead with money, which was always welcome. Applied to the payment of subsidies, however, this argument was particularly unfortunate, as the function of the subsidies was quite obviously that of procuring goods for the work undertaken by the continental powers, as has been ex plained at length above ; and consequently for our purpose the objection can be dismissed without further ado. For the sake of completeness, however, it may be added that the same conditions prevail in other cases. No country sells corn except to get something else instead ; and no country has 60 much of all commodities that it cannot use more. The origin of these commodities is a matter of no importance, as we have already seen ; and the limitation, in Malthus’s instance, to the articles of British trade itself is consequently quite unjustifiable. The only exception, which is scarcely treated by Ricardo, but which is discussed in detail, from a somewhat different standpoint, in the report of the Bullion Committee, would be if LL country had some special reason to increase its stock of precious metals, e. g., to form a war fund or to pass from a paper to a metallic currency. The Bullion Committee here showed the untena bility of the supposition that the Continent had any such increased need of gold as could explain the course of develop ment in Great Britain. The gist of all this is, therefore, that the export of gold from Great Britain can be regarded neither as a necessary condition nor a necessary consequence of the payment of subsidies to the Continent, but had its essential cause in the deterioration of the currency. From this, two conclusions follow. In the first place, the British government could have prevented, not only the export of gold, but also the permanent fall in the rate of exchange (to be carefully distinguished from the temporary dislocation occasioned by especially large payments on the Continent) by raising the value of money. Whether in that case the remedy would have been less harmful than the disease, after the depreciation had gone so far, it is not easy to say ; but that matter need not be discussed in this place, as it is at all