

EFFECTS ON THE U m D KINGDOM 853 detail, we are immediately impressed by the fact that it was precisely the flourishing period of the Continental System that was marked by quite insignificant subsidies to the continental’ states ; and the reaeon for this is closely connected with the fact just mentioned that efficacy of the self-blockade ceased as soon as Great Britain gained the support of allies on the Continent. For the whole of the sexennial period 1807-12, the sum total of the cash subsidies subsequently reported to Parliament was $14,722,000 ; and it is in the very nature of things that most of this amount fell to countries with which Great Britain had unimpeded intercourse, e. g. (in round numbers), Portugal (1809-12) nearly $6,000,000; Spain (1808-12) S3,660,000 ; Sicily (1808-18) $1,700,000 ; Sweden (1808-9 and 1812) H,660,000 ; and Russia (1807, before the Peace of Tilsit) $600,000. Altogether these came to $13,580,000, or more than nine-tenths of the total amount. There is no material available for estimating the total amount spent on British mili tary operations on the Continent ; but in 1808-10 the total payments of the British government abroad ran to something over E32,000,000.1 As has been observed above, however, the military expenses must always have been among those where the normal system ofinternational payments could be employed. As a matter of fact, however, we have the seemingly incom patible facts that, on the one hand, Great Britain had great difficulties with her payments on the Continent, and, on the other hand, was exposed to an outflow of precious metals, which constantly threatened the bank reserve and was usually connected with the heavy decline in the rates of exchange on England. It might thus seem as if Napoleon was right after all in trying to read the success of his war against the credit of England in the decline of the exchanges and in the difficulties of payment. But the true connexion was quite different. First, as regards the difficulty of financing the military operations on the Continent, we may say that that difficulty was mainly due to bad financial organization, and also to an

vol. I, pp. 362.

1 The figures are based on the tables in Porter, op. cit., p. 607, and Tooke, q. cit., 
1669.48 Ai3 

354 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM apparently ineradicable notion of the unimportance of the war in the Iberian peninsula. Wellington had many occasions to 7 complain of the inadequacy of pecuniary support and the shortage of the most necessary things, while at the same time huge sums were dissipated in far less important ways, even on the Continent, such as for the notorious and thoroughly abor tive expedition to the island of Walcheren, off the coast of Holland, in 1809. As regards the modus operandi, Wellington had to obtain funds by drawing bills on the British treasury and selling them on the spot, that is to say, without there being any available British assets ; and as there was an entire lack of organization, this could not take place without a heavy decline in their value. Nathan.Mayer Rothschild, the greatest financial genius of the house of Rothschild and its true founder, who at this time had already moved from Frankfurt to London, mentioned to Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, in the course of a conversation many years afterwards, that once during this period he set about buying up, on the one hand, a great number of Wellington’s bills on the British government, which were under par, and, on the other hand, gold, which was sold by the East India Company; and by so doing he declared that he compelled the government to come to an agreement with him, on the one hand, to prolong the bills which it had no means to pay, and, on the other hand, to pass over the gold, for which Wellington was very hard pressed. ‘ When the Government had got the money,’ he said, with well-founded contempt, ‘ they did not know how to get it to Portugal. I undertook all that, and I sent it through France. It was the best business I ever did.’ Apart from this scanty and late item, which is as meagre as most of the contributions to the history of the house of Roths child, we seem to know hardly anything about the actual manner in which the Continent was financed by the British government under the Continental System. On the other hand, we have a somewhat fuller knowledge of the circumstances during the next period, that of the Wars of Liberation and of the Hundred Days in 1813-15, owing to the materials collected in a biography of the politician J. C. Herries, the commissary