

Report of the Bullion Committee, with examination of witnesses. Hansard. vol. XVII, pp. ccii et seq. The appendices, however, are printed only in the otticial separate edition (see ante, p. 352 note). Ricardo, Works (McCulloch ed., London, 1852), pp. 267 et seq., 269 et seq., 292 et seq. ; Three Letters on the Price of Gold, A Reprznt of Economic Tracts (Hollander ed., Baltimore, 1903) ; Letters to Thomas Robert Malthus, 1810-1823 (Bonar ed., Oxford, 1887), pp. 1, 15 et seq., 19,20 et seq. ; Anonymous [Malthus], in Edinburgh Review (Feb., 1811), pp. 342 et sq., 361 et seq. ; Hawtrey, The Bank Restriction of 1797, Zoc. cit. (1918), vol. XXW, p. 64 ; Tooke, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 157 et seq., 207 et seq., 352 et seq., 375 et seq. ; also, A History of Pricea from 1839 to 1847, inclusive (London, 1848), pp. 100 et seq.

358 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM other hand, there prevailed a ' superabundant circulation ', that is, a greater quantity of money in the subsidy-paying country than in the country to which the subsidies were paid, it meant that the value of money was lower or the price-level of commodities higher in the former place than in the latter, in which case the precious metals flowed to the place where their value was highest ; in other words, an export of gold took place. Or, as also explained by him, if money or gold was export.ed instead of commodities, this was due to the fact that the transaction could be settled more cheaply in this way. In that case gold or money was what stood relatively lowest in value in the paying country (Great Britain), as compared with its value in the other country, and consequently people fulfilled their obligations at a smaller sacrifice if they paid with money or gold than if they paid with commodities. Otherwise, if the value of money was the same in both countries, the export of gold would never be worth while, but the payment must take the form of commodities. Ricardo did not dispute absolutely, it is true, that the transmission of gold could take place in all events ; he considered it highly improbable, however, because in that case the gold would have gone to a country where its purchasing power was less, or at least not greater, than in the country from which it came. But both he and his opponents were agreed that in that case the gold must soon flow back to the former country ; and even if this factor played a larger part than Ricardo supposed, it could never explain that one sided movement of precious met.al from Great Britain to the Continent that exhausted the gold reserves of the Bank of England and therefore gave rise to such great anxiety. The outflow of gold was thus an evidence that money had a lower value in Great Britain than on the Continent. But if Great Britain, like the Continent, had been on a metallic basis, this dissimilarity would have been removed by the outflow, inasmuch as the quantity of money would have been diminished in the former place and augmented in the latter. As it was, Great Britain had a paper currency which stood far below its nominal value in gold ; and in that case the export of gold