

, 3 4 6 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM quite natural to close all ports to him. It would be beneficial to the common cause if all the peoples of the North Sea and the Baltic united to deprive Great Britain of her means of existence.’ But Tarle’s supposition that Napoleon really entertained any ‘ serious plans in that direction at the time seems to be refuted by the fact that his licences for the export of corn were being issued in torrents just then ; and in any case he adhered to exactly the opposite view in the following year, as appears from a particularly illuminative imperial dictated utterance of June 24, 1811, which Tarle has also brought to light. The situation then was stated to be such that there was a scarcity of corn in Great Britain at the same time as there was a surplus thereof in Germany and Poland, which naturally caused the British to import the commodity by sea. The question, there fore, was whether this should be prevented. Napoleon’s answer to this question was in the negative, for three reasons : In the first place, he regarded it as useless because the English would procure the corn from America if they could not get it from the Baltic. Thus it was the limitations to his power over the supplies that here blocked the way. In the second place, it was, according to Napoleon’s declaration, impossible, even with all watchfulness, to prevent Prussia and Poland from exporting. This is undeniably a surprising utterance on the part of a man who was not wont to &knowledge economic impossibilities ; but an explanation of it may possibly be found in his conception that exports are always more natural, and consequently more difficult to prevent, than imports. Finally, in the third place, fiscalism stuck up its head as usual, in that the Emperor debated the question of moving the exports to the Hanse Towns, which were at that time incorporated in his empire, in order thereby to give the French treasury the benefit of the export dues. It is obvious that these reasons do not bear witness to any special zeal to prevent the importation of foodstuffs into Great Britain ; but, like everything else, they show that Napoleon did not overlook the utility to England of those imports, but rejected measures against them owing to their futility. The remarkable thing is that he recognized the

.EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM unfeasibility of the thing only in this case, while the argument might seem to apply with at least equally great strength to that kind of blockade which he tried to enforce.1 GREAT BRITAIN AND NORWAY Before leaving the subject of food supply, it may be asked whether the policy of Great Britain followed the same lines as that of Napoleon in regard to the unrestricted exportation of corn to enemy countries. It follows from what has previously been said that the question was hardly of importance in more than one case, namely, that of Norway, where, according to the recent work of Worm-Miiller, about a quarter of the normal consumption of corn (raw materials for the distilleries not in cluded) was covered by imports. The motives which guided British policy on this particular point hardly appear with the necessary clearness from hitherto-published materials ; but at least the external facts are not open to doubt. In the first years after the bombardment of Copenhagen, (1807-9) Great Britain maintained a rigorous blockade, but apparently with no object other than that of bringing about a relaxation of the rigours of embargo prevailing on the other side, and especially of securing a supply of Norwegian timber. When the needs of Norway prevailed over the somewhat quixotic loyalty of Frederick VI to the Continental System, the importation of food, as well as trade in general, was allowed to continue unhampered, upon the usual system of British licences, to such a degree that the situation was said to border on commercial relations in times of profound peace. So far British policy was apparently guided by the same principles which had dictated her earlier measures, e. g., the prohibitions on the exports of raw cotton and ' Jesuit's bark '. But in the last years of the struggle (1812-13) these methods were again reversed, and a food blockade was brought to bear on Norway 1 Correepndame, nos. 16,224, 16,608 ; Lettres iddites, nw. 491, 662 (to Monta livet, July IS, 1810) ; Ransard, vol. xv, pp. 396-7 ; Fisher, Studies, kc., p. 344 ; Stuhr, q. cit., p. 356 ; Rambaud, op. cit., pp. 426-7 ; Tarle, Kontinental'nuja btokada, VO~. I, pp. 486, 494-5.