

$50 EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM hand was either to provide the necessaries direct or else to provide the means with which they might be purchased. If, then, the situation was such that British goods could be imported into the Continent, the simplest arrangement of the matter was that described by Adam Smith, namely, an export of goods from Great Britain without corresponding imports. It was of no consequence whether the British goods were or were not precisely of the kind required by the troops or by the continental governments. Their sale on the Continent created in the latter case British assets which could be used to pay for the domestic goods needed by the troops or by the allies ; that is to say, the purchasers of the British goods in reality paid their debt, not to the British, but to the sellers of the domestic goods that were used by the British troops or by the govern ments supported by Great Britain. But the fact that the matter was simplified by the possibility of exporting British goods to the Continent by no means implies that the support of the continental governments would have been impossible without the realization of such a condition. If, for instance, we suppose, instead, that no British, but, only transmarine goods, could get into the Continent, the system only needed to be supplemented by the participation of a third country, for instance, the United States, in the operation. At times this was undoubtedly the case with the payments on the Iberian peninsula, where American corn went in great quantities. The assets that Great Britain acquired by her exports in transmarine countries went, under this supposition, to the European main land in payment for continental imports of colonial goods, that is to say, British exports for the non-European countries paid for British support to the Continent of Europe. In the one case as in the other it was a question of the exchange of commodities, and not of any need of payment in money or in gold and silver. When, therefore, it came about that Wellington wished to make cash payment during his campaigns in Spain and Portugal, this by no means meant that he had to have the requisite amount sent to him in precious metal. The only thing necessary was that the British government should have assets. on the Iberian

EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 351 
peninsula, for instance, in the form of bills of exchange or claims 
on business establishments there, to an amount corresponding 
to the requirements of the British army, so far as those require 
ments could not be satisfied by the supply of goods on British 
account. 
It is true that it is possible to imagine a situation in 
which Great Britain was cut off from exporting to transmarine 
countries as well as to the European Continent ; and it would 
then become a question of what possibilities there would be for 
supporting the Continent under such conditions. In that case 
the matter was manifestly hopeless ; for a completely isolated 
Great Britain-and a country without exports is practically the 
same as an isolated country-must, no less than a completely 
isolated European Continent, necessarily imply the impossi-. 
bility of British help for the adversaries of Napoleon. But 
this connexion is self-evident to such a degree that it need 
scarcely be pointed out ; and what is more, the supposition 
of its existence is so devoid of practical importance that it can 
never have played any part in the conduct of Napoleon or any 
other statesman of the time. 
The next question, then, is whether even a diminution of 
British exports would not have been able to place obstacles in 
the way of supporting the Continent, inasmuch as the assets 
held by Great Britain to pay for the support might in that case 
be expected to be smaller. But even this idea is incorrect, 
because the decisive thing is not the absolute amount of exports 
but the amount in relation to imports, i. e., the excess of 
exports. If only imports were diminished to the same extent 
as exports, the possibility of giving support would be in no wise 
altered. It is in the nature of things that the support must be 
paid for by limitation of domestic consumption when a country 
cannot count upon borrowing abroad,,a thing which was not 
to be thought of for Great Britain during the period of the 
Continental System. The general conclusion thus remains 
simply this, that exports (including carrying profits and other 
f,oreign trade profits) must exceed imports by the amount of the 
support given to foreign countries. It is true that. British 
352 EFFECTS OF TRE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 
commercial statistics for this period are altogether too uncertain 
to admit of any positive arithmetical proof in such a question ; 
but it may be mentioned that the British customs statistics €or 
the years 1805-9 show an excess in the trade balance itself (that 
is to say, apart from freights, &x.) varying between 5,900,000 
and 14,900,000 pounds sterling, or, as an average for those five 
years, amounting to almost precisely S1O,OOO,OOO.1 
However, still another possibility may be conceived, namely, 
that the European Continent might take no necessaries at all, 
either British or continental, or might take only money or 
precious metals. This was undoubtedly what Napoleon aimed 
at, although he never even approximately reached his goal. So 
far as Great Britain succeeded in carrying on military opera 
tions on the Continent, however, even this possibility was quite 
out of the question; for where troops could be landed, it is 
evident that goods could be landed with still greater ease. And 
as regards the allies, the matter would have been of importance 
only in the highly curious situation that the countries in question 
applied the Continental System strictly and received British 
subsidies at the same time. For the sake of completeness, how 
ever, this line of thought may be followed out. Here, too, the 
same thing holds good ; the idea to which Adam Smith had 
given expression, namely, that the precious metals in this con 
nexion were commodities like others and would have had to be 
purchased by means of British exports. The only difference 
in the situation from a British point of view would have lain 
in the fact that precious metals might prove difficult to obtain, 
as indeed was probably often the case. From the point of view 
of the Continent, on the other hand, such a form of payment 
meant that in reality nothing was imported that could serve 
military purposes ; and consequently the thing could have 
been of importance only in case one or more of the individual 
continental states could thereby acquire necessary goods from 
other continental countries. 
If we pause to consider the actual circumstances in greater 
1 Report of tke Sekct Committee 01c the High Pra'ce of BdZim (1810 : Home of 
Commons, 349, table 73). 