

948 EFFECTS OF THE CON'I'XNENTAL SYSTEM 
so far as is known, the only serious instance of such a measure 
in the course of the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. The 
blockade could be made exceptionally binding and effective, 
especially after Sweden and Russia had joined the anti-Napo 
leonic alliance. A contributory cause undoubtedly was that 
the need for Norwegian timber, as well as for exports to Nor 
wegian markets, had lost their importance to Great Britain. 
In other words, the policy which made exports of vital interest 
had lost a great deal of its force since the palpable breakdown 
of the Continental System. But even if these conjectures 
prove to be correct, the incident shows that Great Britain was 
already at that time more willing than her adversary to use 
a food blockade as a weapon of war. 
The weapon, however, came far from gaining eneral 
approval even among Englishmen, and naturally it called forth 
anathemas from the opposite side. The British chargd d'afluires 
in Stockholm, Foster, openly told the Swedish statesmen that 
' the starvation system appeared to him to be blameworthy, 
difficult to execute, and conducive to numerous dangers '. The result was that Norway came nearer to starvation than 
any other country during this period, so that her pitiful situation 
was alleged by Frederick VI as a reason for renouncing his rights 
to the country in the peace of Eel in January, 1814. Had it 
not been possible for spirited Norwegians and Danes to break 
through the blockade with their small corn vessels, the situa 
tion would have appeared all but hopeless in the eyes of con 
temporaries.1 

BRITISH SUPPORT OF THE CONTINENT

We may now return to the economic life of Great Britain herself. It has been shown that the more fundamental effects of the Continental System on her organism did not play a deci sive part in the issue of the struggle. But as the reader may

* Cf. Worm-Miiller, op. cit., the greater part of which is devoted to this ~ubject. For the later years, cf. Rubin, op. kt., ch. x, end Holm, Danwk.Nol.gea His2crrie, kc., vol. VII : 2 ; pm&m. The utterance of Fo&r may be found io Grade, &Age och Tikit-Alliamen, pp. 438-9.

EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM 34!9 
remember from part I, chapter IV, it was assumed in French 
circles that there was a more immediate connexion between the 
self-blockade of the Continent and the political elimination of 
Great Britain than that which was provided by its general eco 
nomic ruin. It was thought, in fact, that, owing to the inability 
to export, Great Britain would be prevented from supporting the 
Continent either by means of subsidies or by the maintenance 
of troops. Miss Cunningham, in the little study that has often 
been cited in this work, has not only successfully elucidated 
these ideas and their bearing on the policy of Napoleon but 
has also, with less success, so far as I can judge, sought to show 
the validity of that train of thought to such an extent as to 
prove the correctness of Napoleon's (falsely assumed) object 
of ruining Great Britain by supplying her with foodstuffs. 
Miss Cunningham's thesis, indeed, is that the excess of imports 
gave rise to an export of gold which came near to exhausting 
the metal reserve of the Bank of England and thus shaking 
' the real foundation of the credit system '.x This contention 
does not appear to give due weight to the real significance of 
international exchange as that was brought out, not only by 
Adam Smith, but more,particularly by the leading economists, 
in the great currency debate which went on during the actual 
period of the Continental System. To begin with, we must see 
whether that French line of thought was correct which made 
British exports the antecedent condition for the making of 
payments on the Continent ; and in so doing we must connect 
the matter with the discussion in our first part to which reference 
has just been made. 
The kernel of the question, then, is the point that Adam 
Smith maintained, namely, that both war and other functions 
are in reality paid for by goods and human efforts (services), 
and not by money or precious metals. The subsidies that 
G h t Britain had to pay on the Continent were intended to 
procure necessaries for her allies, and the same were required 
for the maintenance of the British troops after Great Britain 
had begun operations by land. Consequently, the business in 
1 Miss Cunningham, British Credit, Bco., pp. 4 et set&, pp. 71 et 8eq. 