

COMPARISON WITH THE PRESENT DAY 369 that British subjects would continue the trade with neutral foreigners as dummies and resort to every conceivable dodge and device to avoid detection. ' In fact,' concluded the British minister of commerce, in words which might stand as a motto for the entire policy of licences, ' we only permitted him (the merchant) to do that openly which *he would surely [sic} do clandestinely '.I It is of great moment to determine the causes of this enor mous difference in the effectiveness of governments then and now. Some of the causes are more or less temporary, that is to say, they are due to the peculiar conditions governing the carrying-on of wars both then and now, especially then ; but others, so far as one can judge, express a tendency in develop ment which deserves particular attention. When, in discussions as to the possibilities of state intervention in some respect or other, reference has been made to older precedents, people have usually failed to see to what an extent those old measures were ineffective, and have therefore completely misunderstood the connexion between cause and effect. The most profound change, so far as one can see, consists in the increased honesty and efficiency of public administration. In the preceding pages sufficient evidence has been given of .p> the corruption of the executive powers under the Continental 3 System, so that no further evidehce is necessary. To some extent the situation was undoubtedly affected by the reluctance with which people conformed to the Continental decrees, which was especially the case in the non-French states of the Continent; however, this factor played no part at all in England, and only 8 small part in France. We must, therefore, search deeper for the causes, and in so doing we can scarcely avoid the conclusion that the majority of European states and also Great Britain

perhaps the latter above aU--did not until the nineteenth ! century attain an executive organimtion on whose sense of duty i and incorruptibility it was possible to rely. Therefore, while in our day it is possible to entrust an executive with functions 1 Speeches in the House of Lords, Feb. 28, 1812; in the House of Commons, Apr. 17, 1812. Hansard, vol. XXZ, p. 1056; vol. X=, p. 435. 1669.49 B b

370 CONCLUSION 
that put these qualities to the test, such was not the case a 
hundred years ago, and is even now not the case in countries 
with an executive organization of the older type. It need not 
be further elaborated what consequence this involves with 
regard to the possibility of state intervention and the state 
management of economic undertakings, As a matter of fact, 
these possibilities vary largely according to the nature of the 
executive in each individual country. 
It is true that the palpable overstraining of government func 
tions during the recent war has led to a more or less marked 
relapse both as to the law-abidingness of subjects and the 
integrity of officials ; and it is quite conceivable that history 
will thus repeat itself. So far, however, the difference between 
now and then remains very great ; and at least one factor 
appears to work in the direction of keeping up this distinction. 
For, furthermore, technical development has played into the 
hands of the governments to an extent that people in general 
have not fully appreciated. It is especially the network of 
cables and lines of communication of every sort, which practi 
cally form a completely new factor in the economic life of the 
nineteenth century, that have brought about this result ; for 
it is obvious that power over this system creates a possibility 
of control over almost everything that falls under the head 
of intercourse, and over much that falls under the head of pro 
duction. Within a country it is especially railways and high 
pressure electric transmission lines that create this power, 
while both within and between countries a part of the same 
function is performed by the telegraph cables. The last-named 
have created a possibility for censorship and a possibility for 
counteracting revolutionary measures on the part of citizens 
or foreigners, and also on the part of the enemy ; and with 
the help of the railways it is possible to throttle almost all 
domestic industrial production and most of the imports or 
exports that it is desired to hinder. It is true that quite recent 
events have served to show various features which point to 
a certain degree of emancipation from the supremacy of a rigid 
system of lines, namely, wireless telegraphy and aerial naviga- 
COMPARISON WITH THE PRESENT DAY 371 
tion. But the latter is still, from an economic point of view, 
little more than the music of the future ; and even the part 
played by wireless telegraphy during the war, though certainly 
not altogether insignificant, was remarkably restricted, while 
the former types of communication are the genuine reality 
which for the present place resources hitherto undreamt of 
in the hands of governments-so long as they can hold them. 
Of course, anarchy can throw the system into pieces, or factions 
can get hold of these engines of power and destroy them ; but 
this in no wise alters the fact that they have increased enor 
mously the strength of an undisputed government. 
It is highly significant, in connexion with this increased 
strength of governments, that almost the only point one 
can speak of any real improvement in the treatment of the 
neutrals since the beginning of the last century is with regard to 
captures at sea. Here, indeed, a strictly military governmental 
organization has not only taken the place of the purely private 
and acquisitive enterprises of the privateers, but at the same 
time has also put an end to the pecuniary interest of naval 
officers and crews in the seizure of neutral cargoes ; and this 
means at least the abolition of that kind of high-handed treat 
ment which had its sole root in the desire of private gain. 
With these deeper dissimilarities between the past and the 
present may be associated others which have a more temporary 
character, but are nevertheless of great interest. One of them, 
which must strike every careful observer, is how completely 
that character of ' a political war of religion ', which was &st 
noticed by Lars von Engestrom, disappeared in the sphere 
of economics, and to what an extent an open and acknowledged 
intercourse existed among the belligerents. The licence system 
as such is one huge example, of this, but there are other still 
more striking ones. Thus, for instance, it appears from many 
details that journeys to an enemy country were by no means 
unusual, Napoleon told the deputies of the French Chamber 
of Commerce in his speech to them in March 1811, that he was 
well aware of these journeys ; and he does not seem to have 
taken them at all with a tragic air. From the continental 
B b 2 