

372 CONCLUSION states, of course, no feeling of hostility to Great Britain was to be expected ; but it is nevertheless remarkable that Englishmen seem to have lost hardly anything by their continental debtors. All this, however, referred to private individuals ; but the grandest example of economic co-operation between the enemies occurred on account of the governments themselves. This was what was known as the Ouvrard Affair, which pops up many times in the contemporary sources-most in detail in the memoirs of the great Parisian speculator, Ouvrard, but perhaps most authoritatively in Mollien’s memoirs-and which is one of the most astounding of the economic events of the period. The affair had to do with what was, for the conditions of those times, a colossal remittance of silver to an amount of 37,000,000 francs, which Spain was to make to France from Mexico through the mediation of the Anglo-French-Dutch banking firm of Hope & Co. of Amsterdam, with which Baring Brothers of London and the ultraspeculative banker, Ouvrard of Paris, worked. As the British controlled the sea, however, the trans ference could only be effected by British war-ships fetching the money from Vera Cruz in 1807, and conveying it to a Euro pean port on Napoleon’s account. Mollien’s comment on this is : ‘ Thus three powers which were waging war ci outrarwe could suddenly make a kind of local truce for an operation which did not seem likely to benefit more than one of them ’ ; and he goes on : ‘ When Napoleon expressed to me some inquietude regarding the fate of such an important remittance, I was able to answer him, with a confidence that the result fully justified, that the enemy hands that I had chosen would not prove faithless hands.’I Even though future researches should reveal many transactions from the recent war of which we now suspect nothing, yet it must be regarded, to put it

Mollien, &fdm*ree, &c., vol. I, pp. 434 et aeq., 490 et aeq. ; voL II, pp. 129 et aeq,, 242 (the quotation being from vol. 11, p. 132) ; Ouvrard, Hhoirea, &c., vol. I, pmsitn, especially pp. 107 et aeq. ; Ehrenberg, &me Vemdgen, &c., vol. I, pp. 72 et aeq. ; vol. 11 (1905). pp. 120 et eeq. ci. also, a. Weill, Lejinancier Outward, loc. cit. (1918), VOL 127, p. 39. An article on Pierre C h r LabouchBre, the head of the Hope fbn, m the Revue d‘;histoire diphm&ique for 1913, gives no informstion on this .or related subjects.

COMPARISON WITH THE PRESENT DAY 873 
mildly, as improbable that any of them will prove to show 
such a measure of working agreement between deadly enemies. 
One very important reason for this lively economic intercourse 
with the enemy is undoubtedly the distinctively mercantilist 
nature of the blockade. When exporting to the enemy was 
regarded as a patriotic action, regardless of the fact that the 
trade prohibitions with the enemy forbade it on paper, this 
really cut off the possibility of a political or economic war of 
religion ; and it was no longer possible in that case to avoid 
forming commercial ties with enemy subjects, so that govern 
ments had to take the consequences. Accordingly, the methods 
of the recent war in severing all commercial ties led, in quite 
another degree, to the establishment of a gulf between the 
combatants that was not merely material but also mental. 
The most obvious difference between the past and the 
present, of course, is precisely this dissimilarity in the object 
of the blockade, which has been set forth and discussed in the 
foregoing account. It is impossible to deny that the blockade 
of the World War, conceived as a means to the end of under 
mining the enemy’s power of resistance by economic pressure, 
had a far morecorrect economicobject thanhadthat of Napoleon. 
The recent blockade was primarily directed against the enemy’s 
imports, which procure what can be r placed by neither financial 
dexterity nor credit, while the Continental System was directed 
against exports, and therefore had very small prospects of 
attaining its object. Saying this is not the same asaying under 
what conditions the present-day policy of trade war may have 
a chance of attaining its object. Economic life has exhibited 
a power of adaptation that was completely undreamt of, 
a possibility of changing its direction with the shortest prepara 
tion under pressure of external conditions, which should have 
greatly diminished hopes of conquering an enemy by such 
means. In consequence of this the problem of self-sufficiency 
also has passed into a new phase. The primary thing for a 
country is, or at any rate should be, no longer to be self 
sufficient in peace, but to possess that elasticity throughout 
its economic organization which creates the power of becoming 