

COMPARISON WITH THE PRESENT DAY 367 ness of enforcing obedience to the blockade decrees. ‘ Why not prevent the skin from sweating ? ’ was King Louis’s de spairing cry in answer to the threatening complaints about the smuggling in Holland ; and an anonymous report of 1811 in the Berlin national archives expressed the matter in the following way : ‘ To keep the English away from the Continent by blockade without possessing fleets is just as impossible as to forbid the birds to build their nests in our country.’ In the same way a French report to Bonaparte in 1802 declared it to be a hopeless undertaking to prevent the importation of English manufactures that everybody wanted; and as we know, Napoleon himself justified his failure to try to prevent the export of corn to England on the ground that such measures were futile.1 No one who has followed the foregoing account can doubt the correctness of these opinions ; and as has been said already, the food supply of Norway during the years of rigid blockade depended on blockade-breaking. In contrast with all this, we are confronted with the fairly indisputable fact that during the recent ‘war both the belligerent parties were able, without any noteworthy leakages, both to exclude the enemy’s goods, when they deemed it expedient, and to prevent their own goods from leaving the country. No country has been able to get her food supply through blockade-breaking. In a manner corresponding to the utterances just cited, Stephen speaks of the great difficulties involved in preventing the conveyance across the sea of enemy goods disguised as neutral ; while, on the other side, those who had command of the sea during the recent war revealed a remarkable capacity to prevent, not only this, but also the exportation to the enemy from neutral territory of goods produced from imported raw materials, and even the exportation of a neutral country’s own goods when they had to be replaced in some way or other by goods imported by sea. The ‘ import trusts ’ that have been established in different countries created guaranties which were altogether lacking during the Napoleonic wars, and which 1 Duboscq. Louds Bonaparte en HoUande, p. 48; Hoeniger, op. cit., p. 19; Tarle, Kontiwntdnaja. blokada, vol. I, p. 147.

868 CONCLUSION fundamentally changed the nature of neutral trade. Highly significant, too, is the insurance of enemy cargoes, which de veloped into a perfect system under the Continental System, with a special provision for the underwriter that he should @ abstain from the right to have the insurance annulled on the ground of the enemy origin of the cargo, while there was no mention of anything of the kind during the recent war. Most striking of all is the contrast with regard to the export of gold and transactions in gold at rates above par. There is a famous eighteenth-century utterance by Bishop Berkeley to the effect that it is impossible to make a prohibition of the export of precious metals effective without building a brass wall round the whole country; and the majority of writers on the monetary system a hundred years ago were agreed on this point. Thus, for instance, the somewhat lower value of gold in specie than gold in bullion in England was explained by the existence of somewhat greater risk of exporting the former, because it was forbidden by law ; ' but,' says Ricardo, ' it is so easily evaded, that gold in bullion has always been of nearly the same value as (i. e., very little above) gold in coin '.l During the recent war, on the other hand, in Germany and France, for instance, gold was seen pouring into the coffers of the banks of issue in spite of its far higher value than the paper money given in exchange ; and consequently there has been scarcely any mention of smuggling gold out of the country, although such export would have yielded st large profit if it could have been successfully performed. This general weakness of governments a hundred years ago constitutes the constantly recurring justification for the frequent concessions toward disobedience to the prohibitive regulations existing on paper. Thus, for instance, Perceval in the House of Commons in 1812 justified the licences for the importation of lace and muslin on the ground that they would A be imported illegally if permission were not given for it ; and about the same time Lord Bathurst declared in the House of Lords that the only effect of the abolition of licences would be 1 Ricardo, Worb (High Price of Bullion), p. 265.