

BLBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 383 ences ; Max Schafer, Bremen und die Kontinentabpewt?, in Halzsische Geschichtsbliitter, vol. xx, 1914, the chief value of which consists in the statistical materials included. Of con temporary accounts, Rist’s Lebenserinwrungen, vol. 11 (Peel ed., Gotha, 1880), and Bourrienne’s Mkmoires sur NapoZkon, le Directoire, le Consulat, 1’Empire et la Restauration, chiefly vol. VII (Paris, 1829), are the most important ; but the former is in all respects the most useful and reliable. For the states of the Confederation of the Rhine, Konig’s work has already been mentioned. But by far the principal work, as an historical account, is Schmidt’s Le Grand-Duchd de Berg, 1806-1813 (Paris, 2905), which casts more light on the Continental System as a whole than most works ; the parts which are mainly concerned with the matter are chapters x and XI. Darmstadter’s Das Grossherzogtum Frankfurt (Frank furt-am-Main, 1901) has also an account of the Continental System in the small district covered by the book, which is excellent but much shorter and more anecdotal than Schmidt’s. There are three books dealing with the more important German territories that were incorporated in the French Empire : Zeyss, Die Entstehung der Handelskammern und die Industrie am Niederrhein wahrend der franzosischen Herrschaft (Leipzig, 1907), is an impartial and helpful account of the Roer department on the left bank of the Rhine ; Herkner, Die o berelsdssische Baumwollindwtrie und ihre Arbeiter (A bharzd lungen aus dem staatswissenschaftaftliche7t Semimr 221 Strassburg i. E., vol. IV, Strassburg, 1887), gives a somewhat meagreaccount of the extremely important Miilhausen district during this period, by way of an introduction to a social-political study of the present day. Darmstadter, Die Vemaltung des Unter Elsass (Bas-Rhilz) unter Napoleon I., 1799-1814, in zhtsCh&ft fur die Geschichte &a Oberrheim, N.F., vol. XIX (Heidelberg, 1904), treats, in its last sections, the economy of the Strassbwg district under the Continental System.

38% BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 
UNITED STATES 
The principal work for the history of the United States during 
this period, namely, Henry Adams’s History of the United States 
of Amrica during the Administrations of Thomas Jeflerson and 
James Madi8on, vols. I-IX (New York, 1889-91), has not been 
accessible to me. Good surveys of the general course of political 
events are given by Edward Channing, The Jeffemonian 
System, in The American Nation ; a History, vol. XII (ea. by 
Albert Bushnell Hart, New York, 1906), and J. B. McMaster in 
the Cambridge Modern History, vol. VII (Cambridge, 1903). For 
the actual course of the trade war, however, there is a work 
which largely makes the others superfluous, namely, Mahan’s 
Sea Power and its Relations to the War of 1812, vol. I (London, 
1905). In merits and defects alike it is similar to his better 
known general work which has previously been mentioned. 
SCANDINAVIA 
The lack of any kind of comprehensive survey for Sweden 
makes itself felt very strongly ; but it may be hoped that the 
great history of Gothenburg that is now being planned will 
largely fiU the gap. Moreover, a fairly complete collection of 
the letters of Governor von Rosen of Gothenburg from that 
time would probably prove to be of great value. A rather small 
number of them are available in Ahnfelt, Ur Svenska hofvets 
och aristokratielzs Zif, vol. v (Stockholm, 1882), Schinkel 
Bergman, Minnen ur Sveriges nyare historia, vol. VI (Stockholm, 
1855), and von Engestrom, Minmn och anteckningar, vol. 11 
(Tegn6r ed., Stockholm, 1876) ; and, moreover, Froding has 
based, mainly on such letters, an article bearing on our subject 
in his collection of essays, Det form Goteborg (Stockholm, 1903). 
There are statistical materials for the exports of ‘Gothenburg 
in Bergwall, Hbtorisk Underr&ttelse om Staden Gotheborga 
betydligaste Varu- Utskeppningar (Gothenburg, 1891). Some 
contributions toward an English presentment of the period 
may be found in Memoirs and Correspondence of Admiral Lord 
de Sawnmex, vol. 11 (Ross ed., London, 1838). The only com 
prehensive account, necessarily brief from the nature of the 