

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 377 politischen Bedezltung (Stuttgart & Tubingen, 1850). It is very far from impartial and is sadly confused on the economic side ; but a large number of what have been taken to be recent discoveries will be found there, especially in regard to the matters treated in part I, chapter IV, of the present work. The book is throughout dominated by the ideas of Friedrich List and advocates the necessity of combating England in order to free the Continent from the bondage of the ‘ agricultural state ’. I know only by name the next work, by Sautijn Kluit, Geschiedenis van het Continentual stelse1 (Amsterdam, 1865). An Italian work by Baron Lumbroso, Napoleone I e l’lnghilterra: Saggio sulle origini del blocco continentale e sulle sue consegzcenxe economiche (Rome, 1897), should properly come next in chronological order. It is a somewhat undigested collection of abstracts and information gathered from different sources. Quite recently two general surveys on a fairly large scale have been attempted. One of them is a German-Austrian work by Peez .and Dehn, Englands Vorherrschaft, vol. I, Aus der Zeit der Kontinentalsperre (Leipzig, 1912), an uncritical and biased work, mainly directed against England, which, however, does not lack information of value and may lead a critical reader to more authentic accounts. Of quite another kind is Tarle’s Kontinental’naja blokada (Moscow, 1913), which is based on exhaustive studies, especially in the French archives, and contains a great mass of material ; but the first part of it-and the only one that has so far appeared “treats of nothing but French commerce and industry. Owing to the language in which it is written I have been able to use the text only to a very limited extent, but the notes and appendices are accessible to everybody and contain an abun dance of valuable information. Last in time probably comes the work of Dr. Frank E. Melvin, Napoleon’s Na&gation System (New Yo&, 1919) ; but it had not reached me at the time of writing. There is yet another work, however, which, though dominated by a somewhat antiquated conception of history, as well as by a very obvious pro-British and anti-French bias, may probably be regarded as containing the best survey that

’378 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 
has so far appeared of the ideas of the Continental System 
and their application, namely, the last three chapters of Mahan, 
The In,wnce of Sea Power upon the French Re.oolution 
ami Empire, 1793-1812, vol. 11 (London, 1893). Despite its 
weaknesses, this work is still well worth reading. Its general 
thesis has several times been discussed in the preceding pages. 
Of general historical surveys of the time, two should be 
named in this connexion, namely, Sorel, L’Europe et ta rkvolution 
fraqaise, vols. I-VIII (Paris, 1885-1904), which has been 
sufficiently characterized in the preceding pages ; and Thiers, 
Histoire du Cowlat et de Z’Empire, the twelfth part of which 
(Paris, 1855) contains bk. XXXVIII, entitled Blocus continental, 
which despite a highly uncritical admiration of Napoleon 
particularly surprising with regard to the Trianon policy 
is based upon materials which still give value to an unusually 
absorbing account. 
A contemporary source of great value in regard to ,com 
mercial conditions, especially in the north of Europe, is Oddy, 
European Commerce, showing New and Secure Channels of Trade 
with the Colztinent of Europe (London, 1805), published little 
more than a year before the Berlin decree. The full and greatly 
needed particulars of the commerce and econonlic character of 
the northern countries, particularly Russia, are supplemented 
by a lengthy section on Great Britain, which is, however, more 
in the nature of an economic pamphlet, and besides, distinctly 
inferior to the rest. 