

$79 CONCLUSION self-sufficient in war or' on the occasion of any other isolation ; and in complete contrast to what most people have believed, the development of'modern industrial technique and a modern . . credit system has increased, and not diminished, the prospects . of this. But the discussion of these problems does not belong to an historical account, but to an analysis of the economics of the recent war. Such an analysis has been attempted*to ' , some little extent in a preceding work by the present writer, and therefore need not be repeated here.l 1 V&rl&krigeta ekonomi : en stdie af nutidens naringslif u&er big& inverkan

. .

(Stookholm. 1916).

RIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

FINALLY, it seems expedient to give a rapid summary of 
the most important materials that throw light on the Conti 
nental System itself. The present writer’s studies as regards 
the sources themselves, as well as the works in which those 
sources have b.een worked up, were necessarily limited to what 
was accessible in Swedish libraries, since it was practically 
impossible to obtain books from abroad during the period in 
wbich this book was in preparation ; nor had the writer either 
time or opportunity to visit foreign libraries. On the whole, 
the Swedish libraries cannot be regarded as poorly equipped 
for a subject ‘such as the present one ; but the lack of contem- 
’ porary British and American publications was nevertheless 
strongly felt‘. Consequently, in this book remarks to the effect 
that information of one sort or another was inaccessible mean 
simply that sources containing it were unknown to the author. 
The more important collections, in so far as they are known to 
the author, are included herein. 
BIBLIOGRAPHIES 

Mr. Dunan’s bibliography contained in Revue des &uks napoldoniennes, vol. 111 (Paris, 1913), merits study owing to its freshneis and searching appreciation of the various works (it even contains corrections of mistakes in detail) ; but it is far from complete as-regards the several countries, particularly as regards British and American literature. This, to a certain extent, is supplemented by a valuable article by Dr. Lingelbach in the American Historical Rewiew (January 1914), vol. XIX, containing a discussion principally of manuscript sources, with copious extracts, An extensive and more comprehensive, but less copious, bibliography, together with a criticism of the manuscript sources, forms an introduction to the Russian work mentioned below, i. e,, Tarle, Ko.ntinenial’mja blokadu (MOSCOW, 1913).

376 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

SOURCE PUBLICATIONS

The collection of original documents which must always 
remain the principal source for the history of the Napoleonic 
age is Correspondance de Napoldon Ier, published on the initia 
tive of Napoleon I11 in two parallel editions, both in thirty 
two volumes, which are quite identical as to contents (Paris, 
1858-69 and 1870, respectively). To facilitate the use of either 
edition, Napoleon’s letters are referred to by number in the 
preceding pages. In the first fifteen volumes of the Correspon 
dance practically everything of interest has been included ; but 
after that a selection was made out of regard to the prestige 
of the empire, a selection which applied especially to the 
letters written to Napoleon 111’s father, King Louis of Holland. 
“his has led to a number of collections, among which the 
collection issued by Lecestre in two volumes, Lettres iddites 
de NapoUon Ier (Paris, 1897), would seem to be the only one 
offering anything of importance for the history of the Conti 
nental System. That collection includes certain of the most 
characteristic letters of Napoleon, but the general impression 
created through them is too one-sided and violent owing to 
their being compressed into two small volumes. 
Besides these must be mentioned the well-known work of 
Martens, Nouveau reczleil de traitis, which in its first part, for 
1808-14 (Gottingen, 1817), contains a fairly abundant collection 
of the various blockade decrees, Of perhaps greater value, 
however, are the documents collected in different parts of the 
original Recwil, including earlier declarations and instructions 
which are less accessible. The American official publication, 
American State Papers (Foreign), vol. 111, is also supposed to 
contain a collection of the most important laws and regulations 
of all the belligerents governing .neutral trade. 
GENERAL SURVEYS 
These are not very numerous and are of less value than 
might be expected. The &st of a serious tendency appears to 
be Kiesselbach’s Die Continentalsperre in ihrer okomisch- 