

APPENDICES

c c 2

APPENDIX I THE BRITISH ORDERS IN COUNCIL, 18071

I First (Whig) Order

J.4NUARY 7, 1807. Order in council ; prohibitiug Trade to be carried 01% between Port a& and her allies.

Port of Countries under the dominion or usurped controul of France AT the Court at the Queen’s Palace, the 7th of January 1807 ; Present, The King’s most excellent Majesty in council.-Whereas, the French government has issued certain Orders, which, in violation of the usages of war, purport to prohibit the Commerce of all Neutral Nations with his majesty’s dominions, and also to prevent such nations from trading with any other country, in any articles, the growth, produce, or manufacture of his majesty’s dominions : and whereas the said government has also taken upon itself to declare all his majesty’s dominions to be in a state of blockade, at a time when the fleets of France and her allies are themselves confined within their own ports by the superior valour and discipline of the British navy : and whereas such att,empts on the part of the enemy would give to his majest.y an unquestionable right of retaliat,ion, and would warrant his majesty in enforcing the same prohibition of all commerce with France, which that power vainly hopes to effect against the commerce of his majesty’s subjects ; a, prohibition which the superiority of his majesty’s naval forces might enable him to support, by actually investing the ports and coasts of the enemy with numerous squadrons and cruisers, so as to make the entrance or approach thereto manifestly dangerous : and whereas his majesty, t.hough unwilling to €0110~ the example of his enemies, by proceeding to an extremity so distressing to all nations not engaged in the war, and carrying on their accustomed trade, yet feels himself bound by a due regard to the just defence of the rights 1 The Orders in Council are here reprinted from Hamard, vol. X, pp. 126-48. Although the text, unfortunately, is not very good, it has been followed literally in all respects, including spelling, capitalization, $0. A collation, kindly undertaken at my request by Dr. &ut Peteraron, with the text of the Orders 88 inwrted in the London Gazette (all except 11,111, VIII, X, and XI1 of the following series), has shown almost complete conformity with the rendering of ansard. The chronological order of the original has been presemed ; but for the different Orders issued under the same date, the order of the original has been slightly changed to one more logical. The headings have been italicized by the editor for the sake of convenience, and signatures have been omitted. NO. Iv is Signed ‘ Steph. Oottrell’ ; all the rest ‘ W. Fawkener’ or ‘ Fawkner ’.

390 THE BRITISH ORDERS IN COUNCIL, 1807 and interests of his people, not to suffer such measures to be taken by the enemy, without taking some steps on his part to restrain this violence, and to retort upon them the evils of their own injustice : his majesty is thereupon pleased, by and with the advice of his privy council, to order, and it is hereby ordered, That no vessel shall be permitted to trade from one port to another, both which ports shall belong to or be in the possession of France or her allies, or shall be so far under their controul, as that British vessels may not freely trade thereat : and the commanders of his majesty’s ships of war and priva teers shall be, and are hereby instructed to warn every neutral vessel coming from any such port, and destined to another such port, to discontinue her voyage, and not to proceed to any such port ; and any vessel after being so warned, or any vessel coming from any such port, after e reasonable time shall have been afforded for.receiving information of this his majesty’s Order, which shall be found proceeding t.0 another such port, shall be captured and brought in, and, toget.her with her cargo, shall be condemned as lawful prize : and his majesty’s principal secretaries of state, the lords commissioners of the admiralty, and the judges of the high court of admiralty, and courts of vice admiralty, are to take the necessary measures herein as to them shall respectively appertain.