

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 381 Smart, Economic Annals of the Nineteenth Century, vol. r, 1802-20 (London, 1910), which, as the name implies, is a purely chronological account of the more important economic events, based mainly on Hansard ; Tooke, A History of Prices, and of the State of the Circubtwn, from 1793 to 1837, vols. 1-11 (London, 1838), in which the indispensable material is made to support certain rather dubious economic theories of the author ; and finally Porter, The Progress of the Nation (many editions). The English work corresponding to Levasseur’s work is Cun ningham’s Growth of English Industry and Commerce, vol. 11, In Modern Times, 3d ed. (Cambridge, 1903) ; but this funda mental work gives much less on the Continental System than Levasseur’s, simply because that incident takes a far more humble place in the economic hist.ory of Great Britain than in that of France. There is, therefore, really no comprehensive summary for the United Kingdom. A special problem is treated in Miss Audrey Cunningham’s British Credit in thehst Napokonic War (Girton College Studies, vol. 11, Cambridge, 1910), which has been sufficiently discussed in the preceding pages. Two valuable short studies on the currency problems of the time have been published by Mr. R. G. Hawtrey in The Economic Jourrucl, vol. XXVIII (London, 1918), and reprinted in the volume Currency and Credit (London, 1919) ; of these the Bank Restric tion of 1797 bears more directly upon the problems treated in this book.

GERMANY 
Here we find by far the greatest flood of literature; but 
the political conditions in Germany during that period rendered 
possible only investigations for particular areas so that many 
of the volumes are far too special to find a place here. There 
is no comprehensive survey of the economic history of Germany 
as a whole in modern times. Curiously enough, Prussia seems 
to be the important territory in Germany whose position with 
regard to the Continental System has been least fully treated. 
A sort of substitute for a comprehensive survey is offered 
by the work which has been frequently cited in the preceding 
382 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 
pages, namely, Konig’s Die e&chsische Baumwollenindwtrie 
am E& des vm*gen Jahrhunderts urd zexihrend der KontinenduE 
sperre (published in Leipziger Studkn aw &em Gebiet der 
Geschichte, vol. v : 3, Leipzig, 1899). This has developed 
into a very detailed and useful study of the history of the 
Leipzig Fair during this period, based on excellent archive 
materials ; and owing to the importance of the Leipzig Fairs 
in the economic life of Germany, it contributes greatly to 
our knowledge of the position of the whole of Central Europe 
during the self-blockade. According to an announcement 
published in German periodicals, the Saxon Royal Commission 
for History at the end of 1915 awarded a certain sum to 
Dr. Konig for a work which he submitted on the influence of 
the Continental System on the industry of Saxony ; but of 
the fate of this work I have been unable to obtain information. 
With the work of Konig we may connect an article by Tarle, 
Deutsch-franzosische Wirtschaftsbeziehungen zur nupoleonischen 
Zeit in Schmoller’s Jahrbuch fiir Gesetzgebung, &e., vol. XXXVIII 
(Leipzig, 1914), which is also based on valuable archive material, 
with sections on Hamburg, the Grand-Duchy of Berg, and the 
rest of Germany. 
For the Hanse Towns, which are the most important in 
this connexion, there is a particularly copious literature, of 
which we may mention : Servidres, L’Allemagne fraryaise sow 
NapoUon ler (Paris, 1904), a work which, despite its compre 
hensive title, deals only with the Hanse Towns, but which, 
though written by an historical dilettante, is valuable owing to 
its employment of much French archive material ; Wohlwill, 
Neuere Geschichte der Freien und Hansestudt Hamburg, insbeson- 
&re von 1789 bis 1815 (Allgemeine Staatengeschichte. Dritte 
Abt., Deutsche Ladesgeschichten, 10. Werk, Gotha, 1914), 
a comprehensive account by the leading authority on the 
modern history of the Hanse Towns, and especially Hamburg, 
but meagre in the sphere of economics ; Vogel, Die Halzsestiidte 
und dk Konthmtabperre in Pfingstbltitter des Harwisch 
Geschichtsvereins (vol. IX, 1913), an unusually good little survey 
which suffers only from its popular, form and its scanty refer- 