

FRANCE With regard to source publications, of course, we have here to take into consideration the Correspondance de NapoUon Ier, the Bulletin des lois, &., and Le Moniteur, all of them very helpful. A contemporary, secondary, though very abundant source is Chaptal, De E’industTie frawoise, vols. 1-11 (Pans, 1819). It suffers from the very obvious vanity and prejudices of its author, who, however, probably had a better acquaintance than most of his contemporaries with the economic life of France under Napoleon. Of the almost innumerable memoirs

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 379 of the Napoleonic age scarcely more than two bear on the question in hand, both by ministers of Napoleon, namely, Mollien, Mkmoires d’un ministre du trksor public, vols. I-rn (1MShere used, Gomel ed., Paris, 1898) ; and Chaptal, Mes souvenirs sur NapoUon (Pans, 1893), of which the former is beyond comparison both the more useful and the more trustworthy. Chaptal’s reminiscences have the same weak nesses as his book, and also exhibit a rancour toward Napoleon that is difficult to explain. Of Mollien, on the other hand, the words of Macaulay in reference to George Savile, Marquess of Halifax, hold good to an unusual extent, namely, that he saw the events of his own day ‘ from the point of view from which, after the lapse of many years, they appear to the philosophic historian ’. Of secondary works we must first refer once more to Tarle’s book, which in the volume so far published chiefly falls under this section. A detailed survey of the economic history of France throughout this period is given in Levasseur, Histoire des classes ouwilres et de l’industrie en France de 1789 d 1870, 2d ed., vol. I (Paris, 1903). Darmstadter, who would seem to be the foremost living German authority of the administrative history of the Napoleonic age, has treated the economic life of France under the Continental System and during the crisis of 1810-11 in the first of his two treatises, Studien zur rtapoka nischen Wirtschaftspolitilc in Vierteljahrschrift fur Social- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, vol. 11 (Leipzig, 1904). The only thing lacking there is a thorough grasp of the deeper economic character of the question in hand. An excellent monograph on one particular problem is Roloff’s Die Kolo7Eialpolitik Napolebns I. (Hktorische Biblwthelc, vol. x; Munich and Leipzig, 1899). Moreover, the periodical Revue des & d s napoldoniennes (Paris) contains several minor contributions to the history of the Continental System in France. The periodical NapoEmienne, edited from Rome by Baron LuMbroso, also contains some studies which bear on the subject, as does even more the Rem d’histoire des doctrines kconomique8 et SoCkd.88 (lat.er called Rem d’hi8toil.e kconomiqw et 8W:ak).

380 BDLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 
The literature concerning the various incorporated terri 
tories is treated below under the countries to which they 
belonged just before the World War of 1914. 
GREAT BRITAIN 
With regard to published sources there is a very perceptible 
scarcity of all collections. Naturally enough there is nothing 
corresponding to Napoleon’s correspondence ; but there is not 
even any collection of official documents or legal enactments 
other than statutes. This makes Hansard’s Parliamentary 
Debates (after 1803) our main source in a very high degree, 
because it contains, in addition to the debates themselves, 
a number of official papers which otherwise appear only in the 
London Gazette, which was rather inaccessible to me. Besides 
Hansard, however, there is, so far as I can judge, very com 
prehensive and useful material in the great collection of Blue 
Books or Parliamentary Papers, of which, however, very few 
were accessible to me. The same is the case with the pamphlet 
literature of the period. Among the writings falling under 
this head is Stephen’s War in Disguise : OT the Frauds of the 
Neutral Flags (London, 1805 ; reprinted in 1917), which has 
been repeatedly cited in the preceding pages and needs only 
to be mentioned here. The many accessible voluines of Life 
and Letters, Memoirs and Correspondence, &c., which largely 
have the character of sources, owing to the number of 
original documents included, have proved to contain very 
little material of importance for the history of the Continental 
System. 
As regards secondary works, the foremost place must be 
given to those of Dr. J. Holland Rose, of which, however, only 
the a‘rticles Napoleon and. British Commerce (1893), Britain’s 
Food Supply in the Napoleonic War (1902), both reprinted in 
his collection of essays, Napoleonic Studies (London, 1904), 
contain a somewhat detailed discussion of the problems that 
concern us ; and even these are based mainly on politico 
historical studies. On the other hand, there are abundant 
economic materials, though but little worked up, in three books : 