

NOVEMBER 11, 1807 
Order in Council ; declarily the future Sale and Transfer of enemies 
A~’the Court at the Queen’s Palace, the 11th Nov. 1807 ; present, 
the King’s most excellent Majest.y in Council.-Whereas the sale of 
ships by a belligerento a neutral, is considered by France to be illegal : 
-and whereas a great part of the shipping of France and her allies has 
been protected from capture during the present hostilities by transfers, 
or pretended transfers, to neutrals :-And whereas it is fully justifiable 
to adopt the same rule, in this respect, towards the enemy, which is 
applied by the enemy to this country :-His majesty is pleased, by and 
with the advice of his privy council, to order, and it is hereby ordered, 

Vessels to the Subjects of n Neutral Country, to be invalid.

$98 THE BRITISH ORDERS IN COUNCIL, 1807

That in future the sale to a neutral of any vessel belonging to his majest,y’s enemies shall not be deemed t.o be legal, nor in any manner to transfer the property, nor to alter the character of such vessel : and all vessels now belonging or which shall hereafter belong to any enemy of his majesty, notwithstanding any sale or pretended sale to a neutral, after a reasonable time shall have clapsed for receiving information of this his majesty’s Order at the place where such sale or pretended sale was effected, shall be captured and brought in, and shall be adjudged as lawful prize to the captors. And, etc. [identical with no. VI.

vm

NOVEMBER 18, 1807 Order in council ; approving Draught of I!nstructions to the Commanders of his Majesty’s Ships of War and Privateers, &e. to act in due CMZ formity to and ezecution of the Order in Council of the 11th of Novem ber, declaring the Dominions of his Majesty’s Enemies and of Countries mder their Controul, in a state of Blockade. .4T the Court at the Queen’s Palace, the 18th Nov. 1807 ; present, the King’s most excellent Majesty in Council.-Whereas there was this day read at the Board, the annexed Draught of Instructions to the Commanders of all ships of war and privateers, and to the judge of the high court of admiralty, and the judges of the courts of vice admiralty, st,rictly charging and enjoining them to act in due conformity to and execution of his majesty’s Order in Council of the 11th of this instant, declaring the dominions of his majesty’s enemies, and of countries under their controul in a st.ate of blockade, under the exceptions specified in the said Order : his majesty, taking the said draught of instructions into consideration, was pleased, with t,he advice of his privy council, to approve thereof, and to order, as it is hereby ordered, That the right hon. lord Hawkesbury, one of his majesty’s principal secretaries of state, do cause the said instructions (a copy whereof is hereunto annexed) to be prepared for his majesty’s royal signature.

Draught of Instructions’ to the Commanders of his Majesty’s Ships of War 
and Privakers, and to the judge of the High Court of Admiralty, and 
Judges of the Courts of Vice Admiraltg. 
Whereas by our Order in Council of the 11th Nov. instant, it is recited 
and ordered as follows ; to wit, &c. [Here the said Order is recited, as 
in no. v, ante, p. 398.1 Our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby 
direct, by and with the advice of our privy council, that the commanders 