

Draught of an Additional Instruction to the Commanders of Our Ships of 
War and Privateers, and to the Judge of Our High Court of Admiralty, 
and the Judges of Our Courts of Vice Admiralty. 
Our will and pleasure is, thit vessels belonging to any state nor [not] 
at war with us, laden with cargoes in any ports of the united kingdom, 
and clearing out according to law, shall not be interrupted or molested 
in proceeding to any port in Europe (except ports specially notified to 
be in a state of strict and rigorous blockade before our order of the 
11th Nov. instant) or which shall hereafter be so notified, to whomsoever 
the goods laden on board such vessels may appear to belong : and we 
do further direct, that vessels belonging as aforesaid, coming from any 
pod in Europe (except as before excepted) direct to any port of the 
united kingdom with goods for importation, shall not be interrupted 
in the said voyages, to whomsoever the goods laden on board the said 
vessels may appear to belong : and in case any vessel which shall be 
met with, and asserted by her master to be so coming, shall be detained, 
on suspicion of not being really destined to this kingdom, such vessel 
shall be broughto the most convenient port in the course of her asserted 
destination, and the captors are hereby required to enquire, with all 
convenient speed, into the alledged destination, and in case any vessel 
and goods so brought in and detained shall be proceeded against in our 
high court of admiralty, or in any courts of vice admiralty, we hereby 
direct that the same shall be forthwith restored, upon satisfactory proof 
being made that the cargo was coming for importation to a port of this 
kingdom. 

xi

NOVEMBER 25, 1807 
Order in Cwdl; respecting Enemies Produce and Manufacture on 
AT the Court at the Queen’s Palace, the 25th Nov. 1807 ; present, 
the King’s most excellent Majesty in Council.-Whereas his majesty, 
by his Order in Council of the 11th Nov. inst. was pleased to order and 

board British Ships.

THE ,BRITISH ORDERS IN COUNCIL, 1807 403 declare that all trade in articles which are of the produce or manufbture of the countries and colonies mentioned in the said order, shall be deemed and considered to be unlawful (except as is therein excepted) : his majesty, by and with the advice of his prily council, is pleased to order and declare, and it is hereby ordered and declared, That nothing in the said Order contained shall extend to subject to capture and confiscation any articles of the produce and manufacture of the said countries and colonies, laden on board British ships, which would not have been subject to capture and confiscation if such Order had not been made. And, etc. [identical with no v].

XII 
NOVEXBER 25, 1807 
Order in Council ; appointing Times at which Notice shall be presumed to 
have been received of the Order of the 11th instant at t h different places 
specified in the said Order. 
AT the Court at the Queen’s Palace, the 25th Nov. 1807 ; present, 
the King’s most excellent Majesty in Council.-Whereas it has been 
represented that it would be expedient ta fix certain periods, at which 
it shall be deemed that a reasonable time shall have elapsed for receiving 
information, at different places, of his majesty’s Order in council of the 
11th Nov. instant, respecting the trade with his majesty’s enemies, and 
in their produce and manufactures : his majesty, taking the same into 
consideration, and being desirous to obviate any difficulties that may 
arise in respect thereto, and also to allow ample time for the said Order 
being known to all persons who may be affected thereby, is pleased, 
by and with the advice of his privy council, to order and declare, and 
it is hereby ordered and declared, That information of the said Order 
of the 11th Nov. instant, shall be taken and held to have been received 
in the places hereinafter mentioned, at the periods respectively assigned 
to them ; namely, ports and places within the Baltic, Dec. 21st 1807 ; 
other ports and places to the northward of Amsterdam, Dec. 11th 1807 ; 
from Amsterdam to Ushant, Dec. 4th 1807; fmm Ushant to Cape 
Finisterre, Dec. 8th 1807 ; from Cape Finisterre to Gibraltar, inclusive, 
Dec. 18th 1807 ; Madeira, Dec. 18th 1807 ; ports and places within the 
Streights of Gibraltar, to Sicily and Malta, and the west coast of Italy, 
inclusive, Jan. 1st 1808 ; all other ports and places in the Mediterranean, 
beyond Sicily and Malta, Jan. 20th 1808 ; ports and places beyond the 
Dardanelles, Feb. 1st 1808 ; any part .of the north and western coast 
of Africa, or the islands adjacent, except Madeira, Jan. 11th 1808 ; the 
United States, and British possessions in North America and the West 
Indies, Jan. 20th 1808 ; Cape of Good Hope, and the east coast of South 
1569.48 D d2 