



• MIN IST/f 







T H E MADRAS A R M Y. 



COMPHJJD 

By LIEUTENANT-COl 6 nBL W. J. wri.snv 

HXTn:*D I ',JT, MADUam ARMY. 


rOlt'Mf TUI an 


M A D R. A S 

nU^TEP UV I. KEYS AT THE QOV1 P.P S 
i y b u, 


.■ * 






| -W 

; °! S - ■osx> x - 

<? H ) 

\ i'- V 


c 




/ 7,'rs(v.-^ 

Vivi K^X-U 

19604 


mtSTfiy. 



ERRATA FOR THIRD VOLUME. 


P(\^o 93. Tho ligurcg under the head “Batta per day ” in the table 
ought to be in the oolumus for fanams .md cash— 

thus 0 6 0 

0 3 0 

0 10 

,0 1 30 

0 15 0 


Page 151. 3rd lino from bottom, /it 4 foot 6 inohes, read 5 feot 
4 riches. 

i>n R° 199- Top line, for “ inrtifforctii ” rend '■ in different." 

I upv 24* . 13th line from bottom, for “ Superior," read *' unporior." 
I’ W K° 373. Foot-note, Jbr “ Oodivt • y,” rend " Ncrbuddn," 

Pnge 106. For " Cnmiia, ’ r„arf •' Cunni.i." 











CONTENTS OF VOLUME THIRD. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


From mi*. ('ArTiT.ror Sfrinoapatam in 1799. to tip; Comme:-- emi.nt 
ok Tin Majiratta War in August 1803. 

Pack 

1 he conquered territory--Operations npaiust Dhcondia—Capitulation of 
Oooty -Snrn nder of J : .nalabnd■■-Occupation of SormdH—Sontliorn Toly 
^arfi—Northern Cirenrs - Am.'uition of Tanjorc -Rfsipiafn n of Ocinrnl 
Harr • s Service in Bnllum - Final operations nguiufft llhooudiu—A^quiti* 
am of the Ced'd Pi.itriets—Uperutiona n «_.1 inat the F.cIm Rajah—- 
Polygur.i of Dimliqul —F.xpoditions a^ninnt 'Arnnti—Acquisition o' (ho 
Carnatic- -Ir. .uvjrorl iou in Timm veil v r»ml Mud urn Kxpcditn n to K crypt •• 

Tre ay of Amion* —Final -vrvio: in Ballmu-— Insurrection m the \Yv:< at 
-A(Taira in Mnl'il.ai—Mnhrnttu affairs--Advance from IIurn* 1 ur -Beluf 
»1 TVot Hi --DeriurnLion or war—Foreign ts V' kmeiitu 

porate ur •. .n*., of inch lirnnch o r the Army. 1790 1803 , 07 


CHAPTER XVII. 

From 1 m Covi -ncfmfnt ok the Mahptta Wab in 1ND3 , to t ir t 
T it bait with Ho leaf:, 18CK5. 

of Auuit’driuggiir, and Jnulna -Tlntth at. Apt»nyo— Pcfem <T iC. rjei 
Ke* fcUUin AiVnii r» 1. mini* - -(: ull:» n cp/iduct of u'. ni\>nrt»i 

«»f Furhunpoor, urnl V um r,- .1 r- v*mi.u.t o with Srludin -Fault »* 
Aipun n- -oie^o and uiomi of Hawllghur Trrritio- of U.v mum ami .nr 
»e<» .njerifMt.ui- Mahiatta unhica'-Banditti in the Nfcnm'* oountry- 

Ineuldur nt Wivlit’s 1 tm-hmeat—Affair at MiinUm iv—Uotachiucnt* in 
D ar - (j.»n. r. 1 WoIIcmK; Ic.i /ou the arm v —fi . or<P > or ho occ mu - 
Fr./.c money Thun I the Jlouse of Ounun ua, -Ai y ol d 11 v • - 

AQ'ur ut 11 1 mini tin'1 i -in :i of tl e provim o of C'utt .1. - <, *U..i m 

T .1 U ' m i,i (?'in i<riHh—» ippiic 01 riir.ndo. 1. uly..U'n, 1 j]• ,»,j , 

i.m' 1 »nllin - TJt .nltM 10 tin troop- 1 ? k ■ ; f - » itnj n/ tl.o Ttr -nl.-nt 

n »11| Brimlii 8l* ' I'ondtir. '11 o.t- 0«.... ral \Y»»ile*»li.-- ■ fnr« »vr>H 

in*1 «i, 1 *m’t \\ 1 ■ r «» V**mI>n on tb«' Hr • . , Mi-i uf Mu’ uniu ’.»rao m ar 
M11 lit up' .»• ( Tl >utu of the V. unU tl. 1 iho tronypq IN' l' 

Ai | .*jitJon or turrit. 1 l(« 1 ? of Cm Ira* tr<n>p« at Foonnh 

Mil.i ( .’j"- fl ■’* /»' ■ »'* ‘ th.; UnJro 1 \ : V) lh(H f», 

I ‘lit In-fak in Ini ‘i. A - lywUow n In, CiuLtom Pollnms Affairu ii 

T»iivnn. v,... M/ilniiar, nn I t -> ’ t. \ 1 - D aih i f |), , l* vrn , \ , .1 Hue 

• Minton of Oovornors « 11 (Jouii ..tidi r* m (H ,’,4, , ^ 

r»l>T.»|.4 iny mtA i r - ‘ 1 * 'bo l?UU », 


V 


A 


Hd 

\n\ 






Cullii":’» * ' ’ vo i ? m:* mun. 

chapter xvrir. 


Muir y at Vi:l -irc, IMJO 



Pa nr. 
109 


CHAPTER XIX. 

1 U >1 TICK Yhfaty v. 3'11 HoLKAtt IN 180(1, TO Illr. Tl itlNATrm or 
rut ^S r AH i:, Thav .nooke, 1809. 


Arn.nl ol ^ir G joivce Btirlov;—.Mohipnfc ’Rar.i—Aflfair at. Amnloair—Ordor 
• * lr or-G f:.tl thereon—Capture of Buneush, and Damlin Klmti 

--Nyrtlnnn Ouv i - Projected expedition to the Peininn Gulf—Insurrec¬ 
tion in Tmvmtcoiv— Flight oi the Kesid m—Action** oc and near^hol- u- - 
j oi C'*chin -Thunks loth troops— Colonel Sent 1 force cuter • 

i < r. ru* ii"i—Taken the Arnmbooly linen and otl r places, aid i m<: mp , 

' of . ' rr*"vulrio-i -Fu h i cion ar (Jailon Thanks to i.he troopH- 

C >!o Jr! ( , Ui.i ;. encamp hefoi-* 1». \ .'Irani—Hubmioiiiou of tin Itujnh 
uutl i tth mom. <>i lot- province ... ... ... ... ... .. 1 ’O.J 

rU'lArui' . i.om.’» of out bruueb ot tho Army, 1800-9 ... ... ... 'jjn 


Oil APT ER XX. 

Mi r > or tm tVitnpi mr OirrCKiia, 1809 


CHAPTER XXT. 

: ’ V TJlh it [NATION OF TUF Wau I , TftAVAX'CAlU", 1800 , TO Tflh 
Cum: i.rau.s or nils Ces^umr < n Java, lsi^. 




Am m lihan • *:7«.0 1 thbulpoor—Colonel Clone tdvami 1 e 'ainat him to 
Or', fin ibu it'iim i»f t 0lom.1l doso 0 K.ipUnd- Ootupatlon 
ff ''ii! . • . r'nptur j of 8 l. P«. I’n b podiG >,i to Ponv! »n ■Riimmd -r 
of »V i di .ul --Tluniki to tl»0 iionprt — Cnmur© nf tin* I«h« <l*» In 1 .v, ,0 — 
T. . . 1 of lh« Ifr:«* Hipiridri - Bu Vti-I. ) of ihe l»lo do In P:»*an tn 
1 b*> r». r -The I'r .* b bin; -n le i.mi.Ijmi The bbrla.Je n.im -I- 

Cnpj »r. imi tip' iroofH.tJ*; A fri'iune— C«ptnn» of 1 1 m I x nob fri|,»ri!» 
V inn*, hi .1 r. (jipt .• f'i thu HilLUb ip I’rvion .nil AIhhc. otnbi" 
'< • 

e* nnun d tin J .dran Arn.y C .nln^ Mb* Mauritiu > H ' upturn of 

111 it 1 • b n if', it 11 • 1 riaruoif Bril 1 H 1 <»i 1; m- ••ComimIi !<• • •-•Hiivuip h ui 

U * < iiny Th»iiilrt< o ‘ ♦ roop,» » 1 »m : . 1 ,i • Di*» m .• 1 nf »b« Ulnnilrt of 

■ M -Whm;,' ri’ir r fm foioign *1 rvino — Cti pint e of 

Amino i'11 , M'l be dtijx idcnF. jiiln min—tk eupaiion of Mantedir* >Tlmuk| Id 
M top r "" ■ r Bfttjrl Neirs, anil aopaudonf island 'Thanks to 

' • » -< pi lira of H.rnate - I lu i 10 th» ti *)>»» - ttcBtnntiun "f 

G» ' 1 r H> Ni» 7 -Tbrri. Cirniri, MlU-’lii . locilnry f at (iu- 

• ■ l ! 1 In. a- n. aputiou ot' the .])it il- A« u\ilt and 

'* >■ • '<•••• ‘ bunt 1 ('• ■ • dt i ■ ( 1 ii ordni 1 r mol 

M " h '«r«»it'b • »•' Un . I'hant . of the f» *1 rtt- »■ ■( b»nm *>1 nn'l 

y' • ' r ./<>!' i I *'t ••*!',, 1 mi' . • b'apturii i>« I', . ■•»..*. . 

1 "f h'^tLdr » ' Iipbl. • • 1 .' 1 ■ ’ y ord'l/ - .IIIVII it'll! •' 4" •«» thn 

f »mF I. IoIO 

• 

H* \ M tG aoo unl« • 1 u Ii hri. ' t r «• A» . • »n< 11 












CHAPTER XXII. 


FUOM TIlK CoMI LF.TIi N 01’ THE CoNQlTar Ol :WA • X 1S12, TO ’I W 
COMMENC L’MKNT OS THE itlAHBAXTA VVaH IN J Si7- 

Coh.mol T)o\veo’« force—Complimentary order— First trial 1L Commit- 
^uriat in the field-intelligence Dcpnvimunt—Jnsun ortion in thu 
Wvniind—Mutiny ui Qailon—Succession of (V.'cruot’H and l ormimndci•'* 
in-Chitf, IS!3-14—Northern Oireara — Affairs in K.irnm -Wmln of 
tlc-fc ‘ Tivnry of Turin—Thunks of tho IToiu.c of ((•umionii- H turn of 
f he from tlio hicciiH, nnd orders tLercon— Pinduriop, IML' 17-- 

M hov e’ ! r r Mil /np^ro und plunder Gnnjain—Defentod hy Major Oliver 
I.iinti muit borthwick, Major Lashmgum, and Mnjor M. ale Duvall 
BejmiJvl'J nccouu'O Of erch branch of the Army, 18K1-1G 


r.Nc-r 


uni 

1175 


APPENDIX. 

A -Armw take ' from the Southern Potygar O 
H -CmmaUlf i a» a ’.iuodr.-ir.rur, 1803 ... 

C — Do. ftt Alfiya, 1805 ... 

D Do. ut Argcum, 1803 

0.*’i ant e > nkrn in l iuvanr uo, 1*09 
I* Uooty tukon ut Audi >\na. &c. t lblO 
<*».- Military If mb' hmenl at Ambtrtnu, iS 1 0 


100 
•1 *1 
•y»j 
10.1 
400 
107 
lob 




>» 













HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAPTER XVI. 

FROM THE CAPTURE OF SERINGAPATAM IN 1799, TO TfTE 
COMMENCEMENT OF THE MAHRATTA WAR 
IN AUGUST 1803. 


J he territory acquired by tbo conquest of the Kingdom of CHAP. XVI. 

Mysore was taken possession of without opposition with Tbo - 

tho exception of the districts of iNuggur, and Bullum in conquered 
Mysore, Wynaad and Cotiote in Malabar, tho fort of 
Jamalabad in South Canara, and the fort at Gooty, situated 
in what were afterwards known as the Ceded Districts. 

Operations against Dhoondiah. 

During tho confusion attending the wtonn of Seringa- 
paiam, Dhoondiah Waugh, a notorious freobootor who had 
bocu imprisoned by Tip poo, managed to effect his escape, 1 
.mil having collected a body of horse, he took possession 

of Shiraooga and other forts in Nuggur or Bodnore, and 
having thus provided himself with artillery, ammunition, 
and money, he increased his force, and assorted his right 
to the sovereignty o' tho province. 

Two field detachments wore immediately equipped Colonel 
against him. One. under Colour] Pal,i-r, compound of tho , u 

4th cavalry, tho 1st baftatio i |at|and tb< . .,i, 

1 Colonel Brataon (page 210) soya that Dhoondiah wan reUmvotl by tho 
inoonflidcrato humanity of tho Rriliab troops. Tho version in tho*' text 
jh lakun from Goneral ILuria icjiurt. 

VOL. Id. 


I 








mtStfty 



2 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Colonel 

Dalrpnple’g 

Detachment. 


Hnrpriaes 
aevoml 
\ articfl of 
Dhoordiah’s 

follow ora. 


N.I., advanced to the fort at Hnssan 1 in order to check 
any possible incursion from Nuggur, and to act according 


to circumstances. 


The other, under Lieutenant-Colonel James Dalrymple, 

who had succeeded to the command of the Hyderabad 

Subsidiary Force after the capture of Seringapatam, was 

composed of the 1st cavalry, the 2nd battalion 7th, the 

2nd battalion 11th, and a party of Bengal Artillery. This 

detachment obtained possession of the hill forts at Cbit- 

tledroog 2 on the 6th July without opposition. Colonel 

Dalrymple gave a minute description of the place in his 

report to the Adjutant-General, from which the followin'* 
, s 

is an extract :— 

“ Tho lower fort is very extensive, and contains within it 
several other smaller forts, and a great number of inhabitants. 
Some parts of the old Hindoo fortifications are still remaining 
in tho upper and lower forts, but by far the greatest part of 
the works are all done in the modern style of solid masonry, 
and built under the inspection of our unfortunate prisoners 
during their confinement at this place.” 

A few days after tho occupation of Chittledroog, 
Colonel Dalrymple was joined by tho 2nd cavalry, and 
both battalions of the 10th. regiment of Bengal sepoys. 
On tho 14th ho marched with tho two rogiinonts of 
cavalry nud 400 grenadior sepoys in pursuit of a body of 
Dlioondiall’s men who had been pluudering tho country. 
Ilo camo up with thorn on tho 10th, about 20 miles from 
Chittledroog, and having halted his infantry and guns, ho 
attacked with the cavalry, and destroyed nearly tho whole 
party, tho number of which was estimated at about 250 
boree, and *100 foot. 

This sarv <-o was accomplished after a march of 40 


Colonel 

Dalrpnple’g 

Detachment. 


Hnrpriaes 
aevoml 
\ artiefl of 
Dhoordiah’s 
follower#. 


Ai t»iit (JO niiko north-west of Sarinpupatuoi. 
About IDO luiKii north of Huringupntani. 



mtsr/ty 



miles iu 24 hours. The marauders having been guilty CHAP. XVI. 
of many atrocities, more especially after their capture of 
the small fort at Goondair, the Commander-in-Chief 
directed that the 40 prisoners taken by Colonel Dulrym- 
ple should be hanged at that place, with the exception of 
one man who was to bo set at liberty after lia\ ing wit¬ 
nessed the execution of his comrades. 

On the 17th Colonel Dalrymple agaia surprised a small 
body of horse and foot near the fort of Chengherry in 
Nuggur, and dispersed it with his cavalry, killing 40 men 
and taking 40 prisoners. He then attacked the fort and 
carried it by a “ coup dc main.” On the 20th ho captured 
about 0,000 head of cattle from Dhoondiah's brinjarries, 
together with a quantity of grain. Colonel Dalrymplo 
received the thanks of the Commander-in-Chief for tlieso 
services, and was authorised to grant the captured cattle 
and grain to his detachment. 

About tho end of July, Colonel James Stevenson Colonel 
rolievod Colonel Pater, and advanced towards tho fort of rc UcvA 
Shimooga in order to co-operate with Colonel Dalrymplo. p^^ 01 
By the 7th August both detachments had crossed to the 
western banks of the rivers upon which the forts of 
Shimooga and Honolly aro situated, and on tho morning Oapuuo 11 ' 
of tho 8 th these places were attacked aud t aken by storm, and Hoaclb. 
tho former by the detachment under Stevenson, tho lattor 
by that under Dalrymple. Genoral Harris, iu his report 
to the Commandor-in-Chief in India, remarked that a tho 
gallant behaviour of the native troops, who alone were 
employed, was highly honorable to thorn, and reflected 
croat credit on Colonels Stovonson and Dalrymple, and 
tho officers, who, under their orders, conducted tho 
attacks .” Colonel Stevenson was thanked in General 
Orders of tho 10th August, as were also Captain Mac- 
furlano, 1st battalion 8th regiment, Captain Strachan 





Storm of 
H'oolal. 


Defeat of 
Dhoondiab. 


4 niSTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Staff Officer, and Lieutenant Whitney McCally, 1st batta¬ 
lion 1st regiment. 

The head-quarters of the Army left the neighbourhood 
of Seringapatam on the 10th July, reached Chifctledroog 
on the 24th, and early in August advanced to Ilurryhur 
on the east bank of tho Toombuddra, a fort which had 
surrendered to Captain Willet of the 1st battalion 10th 
Bengal sepoys, on the 30th July. On the 14th August a 
detachment, 1 under Lieutenant-Colonel Wallace, H.M/s 
74th regiment, was sent against the fort of Iloolal, 
about 20 miles direct north of Ilurryhur. The place was 
carried by storm on tho 16th, and most of the garrison 
were killed, either during the assault, or in their attempt 
to escape. Colonel Wallace and the detachment were 
tliarkcd in orders. 

Early on the morning of tho 17th August, Dhoondiah's 
collected force, amounting to 1,200 horse, and 300 infantry, 
posted under the walls of the fort at Shikarpoor in 
Nuggur, was attacked and defeated by Colonel Dalrymplo, 
aided by a part of Colonel Stevenson's detachment, Tho 
action was thus described by General Harris 

“The infantry and artillery of Dlioondiah were formed 
behind a small river, which, swelled hy tho rains, had become 
almost unlordahlo from tho depth and rapidity of its current. 
His horse, separated by this stream from tho infantry, formed, 
and steadily waited tho atti> k of tho regiments of Native 
cavalry which led Lieutenant-Colonel Palrymple’s detach¬ 
ment. These instantly charged, and in a short, but arduous 
conflict, drove the enemy into tho river, who loft 000 men and 
horses killed or drowned. Lieutenant-Colonel Dairy mplo’s 
infantry at the same time assaulted and took the fort by storm, 
assisted by part of Colonel Stevenson’s detachment, whoso 
mtirrh had boon retarded by the badness of the roads Tho 



1 Tw * flank companion, 11 .M. 73 rd and 7 Alh, and a battalion of Bengal 
Native Volunteers. 




histoey of toe madras army. 


5 



Killadars of the fort, when taken, were hanged on its walls CHAP 
in sight of the enemy’s troops, who fled in the utmost disorder, 
while the depth of the river prevented an immediate pursuit.” 

The effect of this blow was decisive. Colonel Stevenson, 
who had assumed command of the united detachments, 
pursued Dlioondinh as far as the frontier of the Mahratta 
country, in which he took refuge on tho 20th August. 

That vory night his camp was attacked by a chief named 
Doondah Punt Gokla, who dispersed his remaining fol¬ 
lowers and captured liis elephants, camels, bullocks, and 


gUU9. 

The province of Bednore was then occupied by our 
troops without further opposition. 

CAPITULATION OF GOOTY. 

A detachment of the Hyderabad Subsidiary Force under 
Colonel Bowser obtained possession of Gurrumcondah, 
and other places which had fallen to the share of tho 
Nizam, without resistance, but the Killadar of the strong 
and extensive hill-fort at Gooty refused to givo it up, 
and did not capitulato until the Otli August when a prac¬ 
ticable breach had been made. Tho casualties 1 in the 
detachment during the investment were trifling. 

SURRENDER OF JaMALABAD. 

The fort of Jamalabad in CanaTa was reduced by 
blockade, and surrendered to the Bombay troops on tho 
8th October. 


Killed. WoumltM. Total. 


'Artillery ••• . 

. 2 

0 

17 

8 

oo 

2 nd bat n. 2ud rogt. (30r b M.N.I.) • 

6 

18 

1st do. U h <lo. (21el M.N.I ) •• 

, 2 

10 

Total . 

. 10 

39 

49' 

Lieutenant-Colonel Bowser woujuM. 

Captain Roberta, 2ml fcattal.on SM, k.ltea. 







Ml HtSTQy 



CHAP. XVI. 


General 
Harris goes 
to Madras. 


Action at 
Bambrauce. 


6 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



General Harris, being required at the Presidency, loft 
the Army on the 24th August, having made over the 
command to Colonel Wellesley, and taken farewell of the 
troops remaining in the field in a very flattering order. 


Occupation op Soonda, 1799. 

Ike Peshwa having rejected the conditions attached to 
the offor of Soonda, 1 Harponolly, and certain talooks in 
Mysore, viz., that he should accept the mediation of the 
British Government on every question in disputo between 
him aud the Nizam, and that he should exclude the 
French from his dominions ; these districts were divided 
between the Company and the Nizam, and Lieutenant- 
Colonel, tho Honorable A. Sontlegcr, with the 4th 
cavalry, tho 1st battalion 1st regiment, and 4 guns, was 
sent early in September to take possession of Soonda. 
He met with no opposition until he arrived at the village 
of Sambranee near Hullihal, which was hold by 300 Mali- 
rattas sent from Dlmrwar by the Killadar of that place, 
to plunder the country, and to maintain the post against 
the British. The fort at Hullihal was held by 500 men 
with similar instructions. 

Colonel Sentleger made his attack on Sambranee on 
the 29th. Tho village was strongly barricaded, aud tho 
walls loop-holed, but it was carried after an action of 
about two hours. The loss of the dotachmout was trifling, 
but most of the garrison were killed. The fort at Hulli- 
hul was evacuated the next day, end no further opposition 
was offered. Colonel Sontleger was thanked in Division 
orders by Colonel Wellesley for having “ brought 
forward, with incredible expedition, his troops and guns 


• 'v°^ d A‘' “ ""'ll ,11,,rio< ' "'' :,vc ‘’- e w «l«rn OliauU, now inolodod 
tor! ' 1 ' ■'° n “ rU ' n *T°“ , ' l| y i» *ho w.Mtorn diolriol of tho coded I,rn- 



UJSTOEY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


7 


through jungles, over swamps, by the worst roads that I CHAP. XYI. 
have seen in India/’ Lieutenant Mason, 4th cavalry, and 
Lieutenant Macally, 1st battalion 1st regiment, wero 
specially mentioned on this occasion. 

Operations against the Southern Polygars, 1799. 

Although the disturbances in Madura and Tinnevolly 
had been put down by Colonel Maxwell's detachment in 
1792, the Polygars soon began to resume their turbulent 
and predatory habits. They withheld payment of their 
kists, and not only attacked each other, but made inroads 
into the district of Ramnad, and into the Company's 
territory, burning villages, and murdering the inhabi¬ 
tants. 

The campaign against Tippoo had rendered it expedient Major 
to postpone operations against these offenders, but early Detachment, 
in August 1799, the Governor-General directed the form¬ 
ation of a detachment 1 * * * * 6 at Paiamcottah for that service, 
and appointed Major John Bannerman to the command. 

Ho was ordered to proceed in the first instance against 
Cataboma Naig, Polygar of Panjalameoorchy, a fort about 
26 miles north-east of Paiamcottah, and after haviug 
secured his person, he was then to dispossess tho inferior 
chiefs who had acted in concert with him, and finally to 
disarm the whole of the Southern Polygars, friendly or 
otherwise. He was invested with the power to execute 
such of the Polygars and their followers as might be 
found in open rebellion, and to sequester their lands. 


1 Detachment native cavalry. 

Doiacbmcnt Bongal artillery, with two 0 an 1 two 3»poundcn», under 
a Subaltern. 

U.M.’s 19th Foot, 100 t» 'u. 

1st battalion 3rd regiment-j 5 companies lot buttnlion 13th regi¬ 

ment. * 

6 companies 2nd battalion l«th rogim. nt ^3rd, 25th, fi D d 2Gtb 




miSTffy, 


HISTORY OF THR MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVI. 


Repulse at 
Panjalam- 
coorcby. 


<SL 


Major Bannerman wrote to Cataboma Naig from Pal- 
amcottali on the 1st September, directing his attendance 
on the M'th, to which a reply was sent dated the 2nd idem, 
to the effect that there was no lucky day at that time, but 
that as soon a3 there should be one, he would come. 

On receipt of this communication Major Bannerman 
marched for Panjalamcoorehy,and arrived on the morning 
of the 5th with the Native troops. The fort was sur- 
xounded by a detachment of the drd cavalry under 
Lieutenant Dallas supported by a party of infantry ; soon 
after which a considerable body of Polygars endeavoured 
to force tbeir way into the fort, but they were repulsed 
with loss. 

Cataboma Naig was then called upon to surrender at 
discretion, but he refused to leave the fort unless fur- 
nished with a written safe conduct. Major Bannerman 
bemg apprehensive that the Polygar might make his 
escape during the night, and not anticipating aT1 y diffi¬ 
culty m getting possession of the fort, determined to 
assault it at once. The storming party waa composed 
of six companies, viz., the Hank companies 1st battalion 
3rd regiment under Captain Bruce, and the flank com- 
panics of the 18th regiment under Captain O’Rmlly 
A few artillerymen, with a 6-pounder intended to blow 
open the southern gate, accompanied the party Tin 

supports consisted of the battalion companies 1st'batta 

110,1 3rd r °S ,mont ’ ,lnd companies 1st battalion 
13th regiment. The men advanced with seeming 
resolution, and the gate was blown opon by the artillery 
supported by the leading sections of infantry under Can- 
tam O Uoilly, who believed the place to be in his hands 
At Urn, U" .,„oni Lieutenant Douglas of the artillery was 
piked m the gateway, and the storming party, falling 

a ° ' COnimenct 'd a disorderly fire in return to that from 


WHlST/fy 


HISTORY OR THE MADRAS ARMY, 9 

Captain. 0 Reilly, after Laving in vain endea¬ 
voured to induce the men to advance, was finally obliged 
to retire with the loss of 93 men, and 6 European 1 officers 
killed and wounded. The Native commissioned and 
non-commissioned officers having, with a few exceptions, 
behaved ill on this occasion, General Harris recom¬ 
mended their summary dismissal, and that the vacancies 
thus made should be filled up from the detachments 
under Colonels Stevenson and Dalrymple, which had 
recently distinguished themselves in Mysore. 

The companies of H.M.'s 19tli Foot arrived at Panjalam- 
coorchy on the evening of tlio 6tli, and during that night 
the fort was evacuated. Early on the 7th the vakeels of 
the Polygar waited on Major Bannerman with a request 
that their master might be permitted to proceed to the 
Presidency with his ordinary retinue, and accompanied 
by a British officer, but without being in any respect 
considered as under restraint. 

Major Bannerman having refused to listen to any¬ 
thing less than an unconditional surrender, the Polygar 
went off in a northerly direction with a number of 
followers. 

A day or two afterwards he was overtaken bv the 
Zemindar of Etiapooram, who dispersed his people and 
captured Soobrauiooma Fillay, his principal officer and 
advisor. Cataboma Naig effected Lum escape on horseback. 
Soobraraoonia Pillay was executed at Nitglopoor on the 
13th for acts of plunder and outrage committed in the 
territories of the Company, and of the Nawaub, and on 
the lame day Soondr&pandia 2\aig, brother of the Polygar 



the fort. 


1 Licubctflamt Douglas 13eug;0 artillery, Lieutenants D'Ormieux ami 
Collins 1st battalion 13tb, and Lieutenant Blako 2nd battalion 13th, 
killed ; OovnotMuut of the cavalry, and Liontenant McDowull, lnt bat¬ 
talion 13th, wounded. 


<SL 


CHAP, xvr. 


Evacuation 
of the fort. 


Flight of tho 
Polygar. 


Capture of 
hi3 principal 
adhoronta. 


VOL. 111. 








CHAP. XYI. 


Capture and 
execution of 
tho Polygar. 


Forfeiture of 
fivo Poliams. 


Demolition 
of forte. 


Measure 3 for 
settling tho 
country. 


10 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

of Naglepoor, was sent for execution to the village of 
Gopalpoorum in the Zomindary of Raranad, tho inhabi¬ 
tants of which had been murdered by a party under his 
immediate orders. 

Cataboma Naig was taken on tbe 23rd by the peons of 
the Tondiman, 1 and was executed at Kytar on the 16th 
October. His brother, and several other members of his 
family, were brought to Kytar at the same time, and sent-, 
shortly afterwards, to Palamcottah as prisoners. 

The lands of the five most refractory Polygars, viz., 
those of Panjalamcoorchy, Naglepoor, Kolampettah, Yali- 
rampanna, Cadulgoody, and Kylatoor, were forfeited to 
Government. The remaining Polygars tendered their 
submission, and consented to demolish their forts under 
the supervision of European officers, and to give up 
.their arms. 

Tho destruction of the forts in the forfeited Poliams 
was effected by tho detachment of pioneers under 
Lieutenant Bagshaw. The completion 2 of these measures 
was reported to Government- on tho 21st October, and 
Major Banner man left camp for Madras tho next day, 
having made over charge to Major Turing. 

Shortly afterwards, steps were taken for revising tho 
assessment, and for relieving tho Polygars from the obli¬ 
gations of military service and police duties which wore 
attached to their tenures; flie Government charging 
themselves with the military protection of the country, 
and the administration of the police. 



1 UoproBontod by the Rnjah of Poodoocottab, whoso ancestors ren¬ 
dered material nervioo to the English during tho early warn in tho 
b' Uthorn Curnatio. This dignitary does not pay any tribute. 

* Forty-four for; h wore reported as having been destroyed. The arum 
r.rjni'HV'.od l nMr »c.‘i,r>ii of i.ioskots, n Mchlocks and pikej. About 1,800of 
t> <- two first, mid 3,8 f K) of tho last, worn given up. 

t ub: r qm .it event*- showed thul the Polygars had managed to retain 
r oouiidorsblo number. 




WNisr^ 


history of 'rnF. madras army. 


11 



Major Bannerman was thanked for his services by the 
Governor-General, as well as by the Government of 
Madras. 


Northern Circaes, 1799. 

A detachment 1 2 under Lieutenant-Colonel Fotheringham 
was employed during March and April against parties 
of marauders in Ganjam, but his progress having been 
slow, he was superseded by Colonel Urban Vigors, 
commanding the division, who soon brought matters to 
a satisfactory termination, and received the thanks of 
Government. 


Acquisition .of Tanjore, 1799. 

On the 25th October 1799 the Kingdom of Tanjore 
was made over to the East India Company on condition 
ol the annual payment to the Rajah of one lakh of pago¬ 
das, and oue-dfth of the net revenue of the province, 
after deducting the charges of collection. Tho fort of 
Tanjore was given up to the Rajah to be garrisoned at 
his pleasure. 

General Harris resigned command of the Army on the 
26th January 1600, and was succeeded by Major-General 
Brathvvaite of the Company’s service. 

Early in February tho three battalions o i Bengal Volun¬ 
teers under Lieutenant-Colonel Gardiner, set out on their 
return, but were detained in tho Northern Circars for 
some little time on account of disturbances in the Zemin- 
dary of Polaveram. Operations were brought to a suc¬ 
cessful termination in April, and tho services of Colonel 
Gardiner and hi-: brigade were acknowledged in hand¬ 
some terms by the Madras Government in a Gonernl 
Order dated 12 th May. 


1 lat battalion 10th, 3 companies ; 2ml buitaUon Stb, ? cor,panic. 

2 gimn. 


<SL 


CHAP XVI. 


General 

Harris 

resigns, 1800. 

The Bengol 
troops leuve 
Madam, 




v . xvr. 


history op the madras army. 

1 Le 10th regiment 1 Bengal native infantry , and the 
company of Bengal artillery, which had formed part of the 
Subsidiary Force at Hyderabad, marched for their own 
Presidency on the 27th February. Colonel Dalrymple 2 
issued a very complimentary order on their departure, a 
copy of which he forwarded to the Madras Government 
with a letter from which the following is an extract:— 
The accompanying extract from the order issued at 
parting with the Bengal troops is fully expressive of the 
estimation in which I hold them, and convoys tho general 
sentiments, I am convinced, of the Coast officers here, who 
have so long served with them on the most cordial terms.” 



bERVICE IN BulLUM, 1800. 

About the end of March a detachment 3 under Lieuten¬ 
ant-Colonel Tolfrey was sent against Kistnapah Naik, 
the Rajah of Bullum, who had taken possession of tho 
Bissly or Soobroomony ghaut leading from Mysore into 
Canara, and interrupted our communication with Manga¬ 
lore. Colonel Tolfrey arrived at Eygoor on the 30tli 
March, and finding it abandoned, he destroyed tho place 
and advanced to Arraknira, 4 where tho Rajah occupied a 

„ '?’* 1 1 0tba , nu l i0u aftorwarda h'-onmo tho 14th regiment, end tho 
/n.l batlBliou the Ibth regiment.. Neither of cl.oso is now in ox.atenoe 
, <het ' n gmshod and popular officor died ut Hyderabad 10ih 
llocembcr 1800, and was succeeded by Colonel Urban Vigors. Colonel 
Ualrymple rendered many imp, . taut services to the State, amongst which 
may be mentioned the storm, and capture of tho fortress of Kaichoor in 
1/Jo, and the expulsion of Dhoondiah from tho Mysore territory in 1799 

Z'Z: f f d t0 lra,J ^ s "*" k —P—sot M.N.T. employed 

ir ri rT??- 01 norai ^ Le*. 

If. 0 . 1 ? ? h ° Ucs ‘ ,k ' nt at Hyderabad, doted 17th December 1799 ._ 

I Join in thogenerol regret f - tho loss of Lioetenam-Colonel Dalrym- 

J : : 1 ;™;'-- - '•Pl-ohim; indeed, on X 

miXrtua' '' *‘ U “ '' “ 9 <UM “ h U looko ' J “P<>» by alt as a public 

l2 ' h > r< ffi "’ 0n ' 8 c0n, P*nio8 ; 2nd battalion 3rd reg,. 

Xrr::;:- 

L cu^l of Alunzc-nibaU, 





HISTORY OP THE MAEl (as ARMY. 


13 


strong stockaded position in thick forest. The barriers 
wore attacked on the 2nd April, but the detachment was 
repulsed with the loss of 47 men killed and wounded. 
About the end of the month, a reinforcement 1 arrived 
under the command of Colonel Montresor, H.M.'s 77th 
regiment, and the place was carried by storm on the 30ih 
after a stout resistance. 2 The following is an extract 
from Colonel Montresor's report: — 

“ I accordingly marchod to Munzcrabad on tho 29th, and 
on the following morning (this day) after leaving my equip, 
age and stores under the protection of the guns of that fort, 
and of the It.ijali of Mysore’s cavalry, I attacked and carried 
Arrakerry, dispersed the Polygar’s adherents, and burnt 
several of his villages and magazines of grain. I am much 
indebted to the troops under my command for the zeal arfd 
gallantry displayed throughout the day. 

“ Th ° colum “ of sttaok, consisting of the flank companies 
of H.M.’s 73rd and 77th regiments under Captain McPherson, 
three companies of the 2nd of the 3rd, and tho grenadiers of 
the 1st of the 12th, was led by Major Capper with a degree 
of spirit and gallantry which overcame a continued range of 
obstacles and resistance for near a mile and a half through 
u most intricate country.” 


1 Flunk companies H.M.’s 73rd and 77th, aud 4 
li<u, 1th regiment, under Major Capper. 


companies 2nd baita- 


: H.M.’a 73rd regiment 
H.M.’s 77th do. 

2nd bat)alion 3rd regiment N.F. 03th 

M.N.J ) . 

2nd battalion 4*!. regiment N-T. (ICth 

M.N.I.). 

1 st battalion J2fh regiment .S'.I.- (23rd 
• . ... 

Piouoors ... ... ... Hl 

Total ... 

Mjrooie troop*, 19 killed 41 w^undoil. 


Killed. Wounded. Total. 


5 ... 5 

4 ... 4 

2 32 , u 

2 42 U 

3 ft 8 

2 4 6 

18 63 81 


<SL 


CHAP. XVI. 


Capturo of 
Arrakaira. 






miSTfty 



CHAP. XVI. 

Thanks to 
the troops. 


14 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 



The tlianks of Government to Colonel Montresor and 
the detachment were published to the Army in an order 
dated 12th May. 


Final Operations against Dhoondiali, 1800. 

Dhoondiah, after his defeat by Gokla in August 1799, 
soon collected his scattered followers, and having been 
joined by nearly the whole of Tippoo's cavalry, and a 
number of disaffected men from the Hyderabad country 
and from Cuddapah, ho obtained possession of several 
places in the Southern Mahratta country, and threatened 
to enter Mysore. The Pesliwa sent a force consisting of 
5,000 horse and a large body of infantry to oppose his 
further progress in Savanoor, but this force was beaten, 
and a large number of horses captured. Such being the 
state of matters, orders were sent to Colonel Wellesley on 
the 2nd May 1800, directing him to assemble a held force 
as speedily as possible, and giving him authority to 
pursue Dhoondiah into the Mahratta territory or elso- 
. In conformity with this order a body 1 of troops 


Cavalry—* Colonel Stovcnson. 


1st brigade. J 1 J 9 , t , h d ™ ( ;nr,ue. 

' J eft and 4th native cavalry. 

2 nd do. f H ?5th dragoons. 

( 2nd nativo cavalry. 


Lirutcnant-Colonol Torin, 
1st cavalry. 

Colonel Pater, 2nd cav¬ 
alry. 


Fir at Brigade of Infantry. 

H.M.'n 73rd and 77th regiments Lieut.-Col. Monyponny, 

II.M.'s 73rd. 

Second Brigade of Infantry, 
lat battalion 1st regiment. 

1st do. 8th do. 
let do. 12tl» do. 


Liout.-Colonel Tolfrey. 
1st 12th. 


Third Bngade of Infantry. 

2nd battalion 4th regiment. > 

2u<\ do 2nd Bombay regiment, f ' Major Capper, 2ml *lth. 

The lut baMutioD 4th Bombay regiment, was ordered to join thin 
brigade, hut did not do bo until abont Uio middlo of August. 

I utnoliment Madras artillery under Captain, Sir John, Siurlnir. 
Detachment Madras pionoere under Captain Ucitland 6th regiment 






HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 15 

was assembled at Chittledroog during the early part of 
June, and by the 2orcx ot that month they had crossed 
the river Toombuddra at Hurryhur, and encamped in the 
Mabratta couutry. 

A detachment 1 of the Hyderabad Subsidiary Force 
under Lieutenant-Colonel Maclean, 2nd battalion 9th 
regiment, was sent to co-operate in the Raichoor Doab, 
and this was reinforced soon afterwards by another 
detachment 2 from the same force, composed of a regi¬ 
ment of cavalry and 8 companies of infantry under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Bowser, who assumed command of 
the whole. 

Colonel Wellesley marched for Ranee 3 Bednore on the 
27th. His advanced guard having been fired at from 
the fort, it was immediately attacked by the picquets 
under Colonel Monypenny, consisting of 50 eurbpeans 
and 150 natives, supported by the 1st battalion 1st 
regiment, and carried by escalade without the loss of a 
man. 

Tho cavalry having surrounded the fort so as to cut 
off retreat, Dhoondiah’s garrison, amounting to about 500 
men, wcro nearly all killed. 

The following order was issued to tho troops:— 

;; Ranee Bednore, Friday , 27 th June 1880. 

il Colonel Wellesley received much pleasure from observing 
the vivacity with which the attack of the fort of Ranee 



1 lot battalion 6th, and 2nd oatt&lion 9th regiment, 8 field piecoo, 

and 1,000 Nizam’s horse. 

3 3rd regiment native cavalry and six eompanioB of infantry, vi*.. 
iho flank companion 2nd bsi olion 2nd, 2ml battalion ah, and 2nd 
battalion 11th. 

•• About 14 miles uortharwit of Horryhur. 


<SL 

CHAP. XU. 


Detachmerus 
from Hydera¬ 
bad. 


Capture of 

Ranee 

Bednore. 








16 


HISTORY of THE MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAP. XVI. Bcdnore was conducted this morning under the orders of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Monv penny. To this is to be attributed 
the immediate success of the attack without any loss on our 
side, although it appears that the fort contained a large 
garrison.” 


Defeat of 
Gokla by 
Dhoondiah. 


C'apturo of 
Koondgul. 


Dkocnda Punt Gokla, the Makratta leader, with 10,000 
horse, 5,000 foot and 8 guns, who was at this time in the 
vicinity of Kittoor for the purpose of co-operating with 
the British, was suddenly attacked by Dhoondiah 1 on the 
oOtb June, and defeated with the loss of his guns. He 
himself was killed. 

Colonel Wellesley crossed the Werdah near Deogherry 
on the 8th and 0th July, and after having constructed a 
redoubt upon the river, in which he left a small detach¬ 
ment, he marched to Savanoor on the 12th. Leaving his 
heavy baggage and stores in that place, ho proceeded 
against the fort of Koondgul, in which Dhoondiah had 
left a garrison of 600 men, and carried it by assault on 
the evening of the 14th with trifling loss. The following 
is an extract from his report to the Adjutant-General, 
dated 18th July :— 

“ Tho troops attacked Koondgul after a march of above 2*2 
miles, and that they had been under arms above 12 hours. 
The cavalry surrounded the place ; the gateway was attacked 
by tho 1st of the 12th, and an endeavour was made to blow it 
open, while tho grenadiers of the 73rd rogimont under Captain 
Todd, supported by those of the 1st of the 8th, escaladed tho 
curtain on the opposite side with a spirit which overcame 
every obstacle.” 


Relief of 
Sirhott v. 


On tho 16th Colonel Wellesley relieved tho fort at 
Sirliotty, which was besieged by one of Dhoondinh’s 


It " aid llu i. Dhoondiah dyr»d hij muutaohoa in the heurl’o blood 
o\ ok In > ii ful turnout, of a vow of revenge mado after hi« defeat by 
that chief m AugiiRt 1799. 9 




MINlSr^ 


history op the madras army. 



17 



adherents, and ho then returned to Savanoor for the CHAP. XYI. 
baggage and stores. 

Dhoondiah, who had tied from Koondgul on the Capture of 
J . Duaimul. 

approach of the detachment, being reported to bo in the 

forest in the neighbourhood of the fort of Dummul, 

Colonel Wellesley moved in that direction from Savanoor 

on the 22nd, having been joined a day or two previously 

by a body of Mahratta horse recently under Gokla. Ho 

came before the fort on the morning of the 26th, and the 

garrison, consisting of about 1,000 men, having refused 

to surrender, the place was immediately attacked and 


carried by escalade. 

The following is an extract from Colonel Wellesley's 
report to the Adjutant-General :— 


“ Camp at Dummul , 26/7/ July 1800. 

“ The fort was surrounded by tho cavalry under Colonel 
Stevenson, and by tho Mahrattas under Goklah. 1 It was 
attacked in three places : at the gateway by Major Desse with 
the piequets, supported by two companios of the 2nd of the 
2nd; on one fa^e by Lieutonant-Colonol Capper with tho 
grenadiers and light infantry of the 73rd, and llio 2nd batta¬ 
lion 4th; and on the other face by Captain Macpherson with 
the grenadiers and light infantry of the 77111, and the 
remainder of the 2nd of the 2nd Bombay regiment. It was 
irnpe; mi hie to force the gateway, and the party on that attack 
entered the fort by escalade ; and the other two attacks like¬ 
wise succeeded nearly at the same time.” 

“ The Ibrfc is strong and well built, tho w ill about $0 feet 
high, with a dry ditch, in somo places of considerable depth. 
1 cannot say too much in favor of the troops, who, by this 
exploit, have added to tho reputation which they have 
already gained in this c ountry. 

Colonel Stevenson, Lieutenant-Colonel Capper, 2nd 


1 A leader who bn<l au m-odeil hid namesake. 


VOL. HI. 


3 


Nil HtSTfiy 



Dhoondmh 
refcreutb to 
tho nort h. 


Defeated at 
Mtmoleo. 


18 HISTORY OF rat MADRAS ARMY'. 

battalion 4tli, Major Desse, 1st battalion 8th, Captain 
Macpherson, H.M.'s 77th, Lieutenant Hooper, H.M/s 
/3rd, and Captain Heitland of the Pioneers were specially 
mentioned as having distinguished themselves. 

the fort at Gudduck was evacuated after the arrival of 
the accounts of the fall of Dummul, and was occupied by 
the British on the 27th. Dhoondiah, having thus lost all 
his torts in Savanoor and in the Dharwar country, moved 
northwards with the intention of crossing the river 
Malpurba at Manoloe, and encamped near Soondootty, 
about six miles south of thut place. Whilo there he 
heard of Colonel Wellcslc y’s approach, and broke up his 
army into three divisions. One division and the baggage 
marched towards Manoloe and encamped in front of it 
but without crossing tho river. In this hazardous posi¬ 
tion it was surprised on the afternoon of the 30th and 
destroyed. Tho following is an extract from Colonel 
Wellesley’s report: — 

“ 1 arrived hero with the cavalry at about 3 o’clock in tho 
afternoon and found the camp standing, and that wo had 
surpri sed the enemy. I instantly attacked his camp with 
tbc cavalry only. Lieutenant-Colon el Turin attacked their 
left with the 1st and 4th rcgimentB, and Colonel Stevenson 
and Colonel Pater their front and right with the 25th 
Dragoons and 2nd regiment of cavalry. 

“The camp was strong, with its rear to the Malpurba, 
covered by the fort of Manowly on tho other side of it, and 
a deep nullah along its front and left. The 2nd regiment of 
cavalry, under these circumstances, was the only corps which 
got into it; but every person thore was eithor killed or driven 
into the river. All the baggage, two elephants, many camels, 
horson, bollocks, Ac. foil into our hands. Numbers 1 of people 

' In a letter to Major Munvo, dated 1st August, Colonel Wellesley 
gnTcth/ j. nun i- at about 3,000. A n-:ir ,i r r <f arms and accoutrements 
belongin', to the 25th Dragoon a mm! tho Scotch Brigudd, which had 
boon stolon at Vellore, were found m tho oamp. 




WHtST/fy. 



lllSTOHY Of TUE MADRAS ARMY* 


19 


were drowned or bliot in attempting to cross the river, and 
uinny prisoners, women and children, &o. were taken.” 


<SL 

CHAP. XVI. 


This exploit was performed after a march of 26 miles. 

On the 2nd August the detachment from Hyderabad, Colonel 
augmented by the 4th cavalry, was placed under the com- commS 
mand of Colonel Stevenson with instructions to follow ?£ der \ 

abaci Uetach- 

Dhoondiah up the river Malpurba; Colonel Wellesley ment. 
moving in the same direction, but at the distance of about 
15 miles from the river. A fow days later it was ascer¬ 
tained that Dlioondiah having crossed the Malpurba near 
its sources had again turned eastward, and reached a place 
named Cowdelgliee, about 24 miles east of the fort of Further 
Gokauk on the Gutpurba. In consecpience of this intelli- i a pursuit of 
gonce the following* disposition of the troops was ordered. ' ' booutlml1 ' 
Colonel Capper, with his brigado strengthened by the 
1st battalion Itli Bombay regiment recently arrived in 
camp, and a body of Mabrattas, was directed to move 
down the southern bank of the Mnlpurba towards Jellalml, 
while Colonel Wellesley was to march along the northern 
hank by Manolee. Colonel Stevenson was to move 
down tho river Gutpurba from Manoor by Cowdelgliee 
towards Bhagalcottah. The Mali rat tas were to- move 
between Cohmels Wellesley and Stevenson. 


On the22nd August Lieutenant-Colonel Capper arrived Coionoi 
at the fort of llooley, the garrison of which had carried n, ‘sachmrnt 
off the baggage of the Dragoons as it was pas ting on tho 
march to Soondootty on tho 1st. Colonel Capper attacked 
the place at once and carried it by escalade ; after which 
ho inarched to Syringhy, a fort about eight miles east of 
Hooley. The place was strong, tho scaling ladders too Capturo of 
short, and the resistance determined, but it was taken 
after a sharp struggle. Those affairs were brought to ' 

(he special notice of the Commander-m-Chief, by whom 
the following order was issued ou he occasion :_ 


MIMS;*,, 



CHAP. XVI. 


jJiicondJah 
(roacc.s iuto 
tiio Doab* 


20 HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 

“ Head-quarters, Choultry Plain, 8 th September 1800. 

“ Major-General Bratliwaite has received from the Officer 
Commanding in Mysore a report of the very spirited conduct 
of a detachment from his force under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Capper, of the 2nd battalion 4th regiment, Madras native 
infantry, and composed of detachments from that corps, from 
the 2nd battalion 2nd, and 1st battalion of the 4th Bombay 
regiments under Captains Lock and Dickinson, and a detail of 
Coast and Bombay ai’tillery under Captain Sir John Sinclair. 
This force, on the morning of the 22nd August, attacked and 
carried by assault the forts of Hoc ley and Syringliy. 

“The praise with which the Honorable Colonel Wellesley 
reports the conduct of the officers of the detachment in 
carrying a ladder to the walls, and of the troops in general 
in the course of these attacks is so favorable to their military 
character, that Major-General Bratliwaite deems it his duty to 
announce it to the Army at largo ; and to particularize th s 
meritorious exertions of Captain Sir John Sinclair with his 
detachment of artillery in dismounting and carrying a gun 
(which the outer entrance was too small to admit on its 
carriage) for the purpose of bursting the inner gate of tlx* fort 
of Syringhy. This service, successfully performed nndor a 
heavy tiro from the place, reflects the highest honor on that 
officer, and on the gallant detachment under his immediate 
orders.” 

From Syringhy Colonel Capper proceeded towards 
Boodihall, a short distance above the junction of the 
Malpurba with the Kistna, and he had got within 20 
miles of Dkoondinh when the Malpurba foil suddenly. 
Dhoondiah, taking advantage of this, crossed near Bo 'di- 
hall on the night of the 24th, and marched towards the 
Ttaiekoor Doab. His escape wa3 attributed to the miscon¬ 
duct ol the Mahratta troops with Colonel Capper who 
refused to proceed in advance and guard tho ford as had 
been directed by Colonel Wellesley. 



XIISTORY OF TITK MADRAS ARMY. 


21 


On the 5tli September Dhoondiah and his pursuers 
occupied the undermentioned positions. Dhoondiah was 
at Mooski, nearly in the centre of the Doab; Colonel 
Stevenson was at Hoonagoonda, close to the north¬ 
western frontier; Colonel Wellesley near Uunmunsagur 
at the south-western frontier; and the Mahratta and 
Nizam s horse in the centre; the intention being to 
drive Dhoondiah into the narrow fork between the Kistna 
and Toorabuddra, by which the Doab is bounded on the 
east. 

The next few days were passed in getting nearer to the 
fugitive, and on the 10th he was defeated and killed at 
Conahgul. The following is an extract from Colonel 
Wellesley’s account of his proceedings from the time of 
his entering the Nizam’s country up to the conclusion of 
tho action. 


u Camp at Yepulporvy , 10 th September 1800. 

“ After I had crossed the Malpurba at Jeliahal, I marched 
on the 3rd inti ait, and entered the Nizam's territories at 
Jlunmunsagur on the 5th. As Colotiel Stevenson was obliged 
to cross the Malpurba in boats, he was not able to advance 
from that river until tho 4th. It appeared to me probable 
that when Dhoondiah should be pressed by tho whole of our 
force on the northern side of tho Doab, ho would return into 
Savanoor by Kanagherry andCopaul, and would thus impede 
out* communication ; or, if favored by the Pataus of Kurnonl, 
and the Pollgars on the right bank of the Toombuddira, ho 
wouM pass that river and enter the territories of tho Rajali 
of Mysore. I therefore determined to bring my detach mo nib 
to tho southward, aud to prevent the execution of either of 
thee a designs, if he had them: aud afterwards push him to 
tho ■ astward, and to tak such advantage of his movements 
as 1 might be able; while Colonel Stevenson should move by 


CHAP. XVI. 

Positions of 
the troops. 


Defeat and 
death of 
Dhoondiah. 


misr/fy 



CHAPJv-VI. Moodgul and Mooski, at the distance of between 12 and 20 
miles from the Kiatna, and the Mahratta and Mognl cavalry 
collected in one body between his corps and mine. 

“ I arrived atKanagherry on the 7th, and on tho 8th moved 
with the cavalry to Buswapoor, and on the 9th to this place. 
the infantry being on those days at Hutty and Chinuoor, about 
15 miles in my rear. On the 9th in the morning, Dhoondiuh 
moved from Mndgherry, a place about 25 miles from Raicboor, 
at which lie had been encamped for some days, towards the 
Kistna; but on his road Laving seen Colonel Stevenson’s 
camp, be returned and encamped about 9 miles in ray front, 
between me and Bnnnoo. It was clear that be did not know 
that I was so near him ; and I have reason to know that he 
believed that I waB at Chinnoor.* * 1 

“ 1 moved forward this evening, and met his army at a 
place called Conagul, about six miles from hence. He was on 
his march, and to tbe westward ; apparently with tbe design 
of passing between the Mahratta and Mogul cavalry and my 
detachment, which be supposed to bo at Chinnoor. Ho bad 
only a large body of cavalry, apparently 5,000, which I 
immediately attacked with the 19tli and 25th Dragoons, and 
1st and ‘2nd rogiments of cavalry.” 

“The enemy was Strongly post il, will, bin mr ftlu | )of , 
flank covered by the village and rock of Conagul, and stood for 
some time with apparent firmness; but such was the rapidity 
and determination of the charge made by those four regi¬ 
ments, which I was obliged to form in one line in order at all 
to equalize in length that of the enemy, that the whole gavo 
way, and were pursued by my cavalry for many mik.i. 
Many, among others Dhoondiah, were killed; and the whole 
body dispersed, and woro scattered in small parties over the 
face of the country.” 


' Tlilo illudoa to tho discovery of tho fact that the lion 

ZT7. " Dhoondiah with iutcliigonco of 

Wcllcaley a mo\ coiciui'. 


miiin of 
Colonol 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 23 

<£ Part of tlic enemy s baggago was still remaining in his camp CIIAr. XYI. 

nliont tlivpo miles from Conagul. I returned thither, and got - 

possession of elephants, camels, and everything he had ” 

“ The complete defeat and dispersion of tho enemy's force 
and above all, the death of Dhoondiah, put an end to thi 3 
warfare, and I cannot avoid taking this opportunity of 
expressing my sense of the conduct of the troops. Upon this 
last occasion their determined valour and discipline were con¬ 
spicuous, and their conduct, and that of their commanding 
officers, Colonel Pater, 1 Major Paterson, J Major Blaquiere, 3 
Captain Do vet on, 1 and Captain Price, 5 have deserved my most 
particular approbation. At the same time I must inform you, 
that all tho troops have undergone, with the greatest patience 
and perseverance, a series of fatiguing services.” 

Colonel Stevenson came up with tho retreating enemy Coionol 
tlio eume evening near Deodroog, and entirely dispersed ° a n 

them, capturing tlieir remaining guns, baggage, and the enemy, 
cattle. Colonel Wellesley in his report stated that he 
attributed “ the opportunity which was given of destroy¬ 
ing the enemy's army to the movements of tho detach¬ 
ment under Colonel Stevenson ; in no part of tho army 
has thoro boon greater exertion or more fatigue, or ha ib 
been more cheerfully borne, and I conceive Colonel 
Stevenson, Lmuteuaut-Colonel Bowser, and the officers 
and troops under their orders, to be entitled to my appro¬ 
bation, and to the favorable report of their conduct which 
I now make to you.” 

Colonels Wellesley and Stevenson, as well ns the Thanks to 
<*ffi‘ 0 is and men, received tlio thanks of tho Mudra* troops. 

1 2nd cavalry. 1 19tli Dragons. 8 20th Dragoons. * 1st cavalry. 

5 2nd cavalry. 

* Tho 4lh cavalry aud tho detachment from Hydorabod. Tho 
information as to tho position of Dhoondiah ou tho night of the 9th 
September was given by a sepoy of Lieutenant-Colonel BowBcr'n rogi. 
moot, viz., the 2nd battalion 2nd. < ohmol Wellesley presented the man 

with a toward of 200 pay ■ !: ». and recommended him for promotion. 







CHAP. XVI. 



2*i HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Government and of the Governor-General; the latter 
desiring that it might be particularly expressed <{ to the 
officers and men of the detachment of cavalry employed 
in the action of the 10th September, the high sense 
entertained by the Governor-General in Council of the 
eminent courage and discipline manifested by them in 
the attack of the army of Dhoondiah Waugh, which 
terminated in the fall of that insurgent, and in the 
complete destruction or dispersion of his force.” 



Acquisition op the Ceded Districts, 1800. 

The territory on the south of the Toombuddra and 
Kistna, now known as the Ceded Districts, which had 
como into the possession of tho Nizam under the treaties 
of 1792 and 1799, was principally hold by Polygar chiefs, 
generally in a state of rebellion, and from whom both 
Hyder and lippoo had experienced great opposition. 
Matters became worse under the Nizam, so much so that 
he made over the country to the East India Company on 
the following terms, embodied in a treaty dated 12th 
October 1800, viz. :— 

jYr n*y v.-ith That two battalions of sepoys, and one regiment of 

tho Nizam, , . _ _ . ° 

1600. cavalry, with a due proportion of guns and artillery, 

should be added to the existing Subsidiary Force at 
Hyderabad, bringing tbo strength up to eight battalions 
of sepoys (or 8,000 firelocks) and two regiments of 
cavalry (or 1,000 horse), with the requisite complement 
of guns, 1 European artillerymen, lasears, and pioneers, 2 
fully equipped with warlike stores and ammunition. 

That for the regular payment of the whole, all tho 
territnri: s acquired by the Nizam uuder tho treaties above 

1 Tw'> 12, and oightoon S-p-unders, 140 artillerymen, eyelunivo 0 f 
commissioned and xioiwcomniiAgionod officers. 

‘ J Sr '! ’‘“t, 1 Jonia l&r, 3 Tlavildara, 3 Naiguos, 100 Privates, and 1 
1 uc .ally. Tlie compm-y wiw generally commanded by a Lieutenant 








nrsTorr or tjie madras ar.mv. 


25 


• GO Vjt 



specified, should be made over to the Company for ever, 
with the following modification, viz., that with the' view 
of establishing a strong and well-defined boundary, the 
district of Adoni on the south of the Toombuddra, which 
belonged to the Nizam, should be given to the Company 
in lieu of certain districts north of that river, which had 
belonged to Mysore. 

Occupation of the Ceded Territory. 

Early in November the following measures, under 
tho direction of Colonel Wellesley, were taken for the 
occupation of the ceded territory. Lieutenant-Colonel 
Mack ay, with the 2nd battalion 6th regiment, entered 
lhtrponelly on the 9th, accompaniod by Major Thomas 
Mun o, who had been appointed to conduct the civil 
administration of the country. Lieutenant-Colonel 
Monypenny, with the 25th dragoons, tho 1st and 4th 
cavalry, the 73rd foot, the 2nd battalion 4th, and the 1st 
battalion 12th, crossed the Toombuddra near Anagoondy, 
and proceeded to take possession of Bellary, Adoni, and 
Gooty. Lieutenant-Colonel Cappago, commanding at 
Nundidroog, sent a detachment of the 2nd bAtalion 
18th to occupy tho fort at Gurrumcondah. 

On the 15th November Major-General Dugnkl Camp¬ 
bell was appointed to command in the Ceded Districts, 
oml war ordered to join immediately. 

The principal places were occupied without difficulty, 
but i.ho settlement introduced bj Major Munro was 
resisted by many of thevFaglmordnrs and Poly gar Chief j 
Serious disturbances ensued, und the troops were 
actively employed until September 1801, when General 
Campbell reported that tranquillity had been established 
throughout the provinces under his jfcutlmrity, and ho 
therefore recommended ’uu the l ,rco should be wit'. 


CHAP. XVI. 


General 
Campbell 
com i. and9. 

r>inrril)utioit 

1 ho troops 
1801 . 


19604 





CHAP. XVI. drawn from the field, and be distributed in the following 


manner, viz.;— 

Cantonment at Bellary . 

H.M/s 25th ‘dragoons, and the 4th regiment cavalry. 

Fort at Bellary. 

Detachment of artillery. # 

Six companies H.M/s 73rd, find 1st battalion 12th 
regiment. 

Fort at Gooty . 

Detachment of artillery. 

Four companies ILM.'s 73rd, and four companies 2nd 
battalion 4th regiment. 

Qanjecottali . 

Head-quarters and six companies 2nd battalion 1th 
regiment. 

Cantonment at Cnmlapoor. 

Sixth regiment cavalry. 

Fort at Rachouty . 

Head-quarters and five companies 2nd battalion 5th 
regiment. 

Fort at Qurnnneondah . 

Two companies 2nd battalion 5th regiment. 

Chit wail. 

Two companies 2nd battalion 5th regiment. 

Fort at Sidhout. 

One company 2nd battalion 5th regiment 
Climb um . 

Head quarters end six companies 2nd battalion I5(b 
regiment. 


I11ST0UY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


Cotia Gotta. 

Two companies 2nd battalion 15tli regiment. 
Nos sum. 

Two companies 2nd battalion 15tli regiment. 


27 


These recommendations were approved of, and General 
Campbell and the froops received the thanks of Govern¬ 
ment in a General Order dated 7th October, but this had 
scarcely been published, when the Polygar of Ternakul. 
a fort about 17 miles east of Adoni, broke out into 
rebellion. 

A detachment, * 1 under the command of Major Strachan, 
Gfch cavalry, attacked the place on the 14th December, 
but was repulsed with the loss of GO 2 men killed and 
wounded. 

A few days afterwards General Campbell arrived with 
ll.M.’s 73rd foot, and a second attack was made on the 
20th, but with a similar result, which was attributed to 
the want of artillery of sufficient calibre ; the light field- 
pieces, iu camp having been unequal to etfoct a practica¬ 
ble breach. The loss on this occasion w r as 173 officers 
and men killed and wounded. 

Breaching guns were afterwards brought up, and the 
fort was carried on the 30th December with the trifling 
1«>S3 of four men wounded, one horse killed, and two 
horses wounded. 

_ 

1 U.M.’s 25lh dragoons, 4th ami Gth regiments of cavalry. 

Detachment of ar(11 lory : 2nd l uttaliou ith, 1st battalion 12tb ; and 
2nd battalion 15(1. regiment: 

- Captain Maitland, 2nd battalion 1th, was killed on tlio 11th $ Gap. 
t.'in Cruuo, 1st battalion 12th, and Lieutenant D.utc, 4th cavalry, vvero 
wounded. 

tyuior Stracha- , 6ih cavalry, Lieutenant-Colonel Monypenny, Major 
'Pied- i.a Id, and Li. utcuuut. C l a ad IhouQptjou, 73rd,, were wounded 

' Li tho a’OlIi. 


CHAP.' XVI. 


Thanks to 
the troops. 


Kevolt of the 
Polygar of 
Ternakul. 


Ropulse? at 
Ternakul. 


Capture of 
Ternakul. 






23 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY, 


OHAF. XVI. 

AffaiM in 
Malabar, 
X7'J2-[)7* 


The *Pychy 
V v y h pocu to 
th a Wynaad, 
17U7. 


71© claims 
tliut district, 
179V. 


Operations against the Pychy Rajah, 1801. 

The -Government of Bombay, on acquiring the pro- * 
vine© of Malabar in 1792, reinstated most of the chiefs 
in their possessions, fixing, at the same time, a moderate 
assessment on their lands; but the revenues were not 
paid, and frejquent petty insurrections took place. The 
principal offender, generally known as the Pychy Rajah, 
was a junior member of the family of the Rajah of 
Cotiote near Tellichevry. During the early part of 1797 
he was at open warfaro with Government, but during 
the rainy season of that year ho agreed to resign his 
pretensions to authority in Cotioto, in consideration of 
an annual stipend of 8,000 rupees. 

Shortly afterwards he retired above tho ghauts into 
the Wynaad, which at that time was so difficult to 
.penetrate that Tippoo never attempted to occupy it, but 
contented himself with bending occasional detachments 
from his frontier posts a’ Kakeneottah and Edatora to 
destroy the crops, and to plunder the inhabitants. 

The Rajah, immediately on his arrival in the Wynaad, 
made friendly overtures to Tippoo, by whom they were 
favorably received, and who permitted him to remain in 
quiet possession of tho greater port of the district with¬ 
out paying tribute. Matters continued on this footing 
until tho conquest of Mysore, when tho Rajah preferred 
a claim to the sovereignty of the VVynuad on^tho ground 
that it had been granted to him by Tippoo. 

( blonel Close, and others, nominated to inquire, were 
of opinion that no r-.ueh grant had been made, nud that 
fht Rajah’s residence in tho Wynaad had been permitted 
in the hope that ho would make uso of his position th ro 
to neat' disturbances in Malabar, and thus embarrass 
the Brit i ah Go’-'crmnont. 


U\HtST$y 


r* v ^ 

I 

HISTORY OP THR MADRAS ARMY. 29 

rernor-General, in a letter to the Government 
of Madras, dated 15th January 1800, thus expressed 
himself with reference to the Rajah's claim:— 

“ With respect to Wynaad, my decided opinion "is, that 
any consideration of the pretensions of the Pychy Rajah 
previously to our taking possession of the district under the 
treaty of Mysore, would be fatal to the authority of the 
Company. No compromise must therefore be admitted on 
this subject. The authority of the Company must he estab¬ 
lished in Wynaad as soon as possible, and if the Pychy Rajah 

• should presume to resist the measure, his contumacy must be 
punished with the most signal severity. 

Early in March Colonel Wellesley was invested with 
the general command in Malabar and Cunava in addition 
to that of Mysore, and ho was about to march into the 
Wynaad when it was found necessary to postpone opera¬ 
tions in consequence of the inability of the Bombay 
authorities to.sparo troops to take part in the service. 

On tho 9tli September an order was issued by the 
Governor-General to the effect that tho Bombay troops 
serving in Malabar and Canara, as well as those at Goa, 
should bo placed under the Government of Madras, and 
put on the same footing as the Madras troops in respect 
of pay and allowances. 

Shortly afterwards preparations were made for taking 
possession of the Wynaad by a force under Colonel 
Wellesley, aided by llio Bombay troops in Malabar under 
Colonel Sartorius ; but Colonel Wellesloy having been 
Ordered to Cuylon on special duty, tho command in 
Mysore, AJMabar, and Oanara devolved upon Colonel 
SteveI'Son, who entered the Wynaad iu January 1801. 

The Fychy Rajah's adherents were speedily dispersed, 
be himself became a fugitive, and before the commence* 

* mom, uf- the rains every post of any consequence in tho 
Wynaad was in ouf bnLuft The Rajah, however, eluded 




CHAP. XVI* 

Opinion of 
tho Governer- 
General,! '->00. 


Bombay 
troops in 
Malabar 
placed 
under the 
Government 
of Madrid. 


Colonel 
Stovon on 
MtCCCCds to 

llio command, 


Occupation 
of \VynjiHvl, 
1601 . 



WHlSTfty. 


HISTOEV OP T.UE MADRAS ABM?. 



CHAP. XVI. 


Tbp.nkn to 
the troops. 


Colonel 

Wellesley 

resumes 

coiianand. 


30 



all attempts to secure his person and escaped into the 
hill country of Travancore. 

.1 he troops were sent into cantonments on the approach 
ot clie rains in May, and on the 10th of that month, a. 
General Order was published, in which Colonel Stevenson, 
Colonel Sarlorius. the second in command, and the 
troops were thanked for their services. 

Colonel Wellesley, having landed at Cannauore on tlio 
28th April, Was reappointed to the Mysore Division 
immediately afterwards. Colonel Stevenson, as a reward 
for his serviScs, was at the same time nominated to the 
command of Malabar and Canara under the orders of the 
Officer commanding.in Mysore 

Operations against tuii Polyqars op- Dindigul, 1.801. 

The Polygar chiefs in the hill tracts of Dindigul had 
withheld payment of their kists sinco 1798, and set tlm 
orders of the Collector at defiance. Government, however, 
were not in a position to coorco them until 1801, when 
Lieutenant-Colonel Innes, commanding at Dindigul, was 
directed to equip a small field force for that purpose. 
This wus immediately done, but the destination of tho 
detachment 1 was altered, and Colonel Innes was sent 
into Malabar to support Culoncl Stevensor^ then employed 
against the Pychy Rajah. Colonel lunea arri ved at! Arria- 
codo, about 25 miles from Calicut, on the 27th February, 
but Lis services not being required, he returned towards 
Dimlignl accompanied by a detachment of the 5th cavalry . 
ruder Major Leonard, lie arrived at Pylnoy about the 


Firm It oonipumoB 2»d b u. alien 13tli n ^irnont, MO. 
, DoUiohi' nt Malay onrptt, 100. 

»*i iu. lot Captain HngyhttW, lUO. 

DulucKmunt . r artiiloi v 





HISTORY OF TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 


31 


middle of March, and having received reinforcements/ chap. XVI. 
he commenced operations against Gopal Naigue,* Poly gar 
of *Veerapatchy, the principal of the refractory chiefs. 

Veorapatchy, 2 and. two adjacent strongholds belong- Captmv of 
ing to the same chief, were taken on the 21st without Veerapatchy. 
loss ; other places in the vicinity were occupied without 
opposition, and on the 27 th, most of the Poly gar’s 
baggage, horses and elephants wore taken at his resi¬ 
dence at Woodacaud. The Polygar himself having taken 
refuge with Yedul Naigue, the chief of Dhulleecottah, 
a fort about 40 miles west of Veerapatchy, and at which 
several of the minor insurgent chiefs had assembled, 

Colonel Innes sent a summons to Yodul Naigue desiriilg 
him to give up Gopal Naigue and all the othoV chiefs on 
pain of boing himself considered a rebel. An evasive 
reply having been returned, preparations were made to 
attack the place. 

Detachmonts were sent to occupy certain posts to the Capture of 
westward of Dhullce so as to cut off any attempted retreat ^ llll l L>0# 
towards Travoncore or Cochin, and a garrison having been 
loft at Veerapatchy, Colonel Innes advanced to Dhullce 
on the 12th April, and took tlio place on the 13th with 
tritiing loss, dispersing the Polygars and their adherents. 

Those who escaped fled to Jelliputty, where they made a 
hi.4 stand on the 22nd, after which no further opposition 
v to; attempted. The Polygar of Veerapatchy was taken 
on tho 4thMay, and on the loLli Colonel Innes reported to. 
Qcv^rnmont that tho authority of the Civil power *hud 
been comp tely re-established in tin province. Colonel 
Pines and the troops wore thanked by Government in 


» Dote eh men i H.M.’fl 12lh f . , uidor Major Eioton. 

Do. 2ud battalion Ihi raiment under Major Itmon. 
2 About 25 mihvi north *'' t 01 the tail of DuuUkuI. 






MIM ST/fy 



32 


HISTORY or THE MADRAS AHltT. 


<SL 


CH AP x T v I. an order dated 22nd May, from which the following is an 
extract:— 


Tbanka to 
tho troopg. 


Fort St. George; 22nd May 1801. 

* • * * * 

Tho operations of Lieutenant-Colonel Innes’ detachment 
have been equally distinguished by the judicious arrangements • 
with which they were planned, and by the great energy and 
ability which signalised their execution, and the Governor 
in. Council has viewed with tho highest satisfaction, tho 
undaunted and porsovering ardour with which the difficulties 
opposed by the united force of tho rebels, the severity of a 
fatiguing service, and # of an unfavorable climate have been 
surmounted. Tho force of the rebels has been subdued their 
strongholds attacked and taken, and the civil government 
restored in the rebellious pollams, with a degreo of rapidity 
judgment,^ and success, which merits his Lordship’s warmest 


Expeditions against Trrnate, 1801, 

Early in 1801, at the instance of Mr. Farquhar, Resident 
at Amboyna, Colonel Burr, commanding tho troops in 
Lie Moluccas, organised an expedition against Tomato, 
ono of the spice islands belonging *o the Dutch! 
Although tho detachment 1 was small, yet it was considered 
sufficient, as Captain Astl6, the senior Naval officer on the 


Madras artillery 22 Europeans and 28 gim-lnsears. Captain Ross 

».—.f A.;,r 

'> rupoans. Lieutenant Haves, India. 

!Company , 30 Europe. na Capt .in Ganjp? ‘' 

licntnT ,on °' r ® : 20 mcn - Lienbnuuit Wiswott, 9tb M.N f. 

Fiiui 11 V K ,,lU, "° n ! m meu ' Lieutenant Gill. 

‘"f 1 "nnKMN.l.i I Uavfldar, 8 Sopor*. 

' UlUy * r ( ' ur,n: r>3 m,; ' ‘-aptuin Boles, 3rd M N.I. 

Kuiujicnn* 17 .S. Natives 170, total 019. 








misr/ff. 



station had promised his co-operation, and the force of OEA?. XVJ. 
the Dutch was supposed not to exceed 50 Europeans 
and 2,000 trained natives. » 

The detachment loft Amboyna on the 22nd January Determent 
under the escort of H.M.'s frigate “La Virginio” and the 
sloop “ Hobart,” accompanied by the Company's armed 
vessel.) (< Ternate ” and " Splinter” The fleet anchored 
off Ternato on the 10th February, and the Governor 
having refused to surrender, arrangements were made 
to attack Fort Orange the next day; but Captain Astle 
liuying insisted that a detached work should be taken 
before any attempt was made on tbe principal fort, Colo¬ 
nel Burr was obliged to give way. 

The boats containing tho troops left tbe ships about 11 
a.m. on tho U(h, and got to tho shore about 1 r.si., tho 
frigate and sloop keeping up a fire all tho time, but from 
such a distance that a groat part of tho shot fob jn to tho 
soa. The jungle at the landing-place was so dense that 
the dotactflnont was obliged to make a considerable detour, 
and after having been led by guides lor abo^t an horn* 

•along a path bo narrow that tho men wero obliged to 
march in single file, it came in sight of the fort standing * 

in ah open clearing. The troops, after a short halt, 
advanced to the assault, but were received with so heavy 
ft tiro of grape aud musketry, aided by that of two field- 
pieces which opened upon their right flank, that thoy 
were obliged to retreat with considerable 1 loss, Liouto* 
imuts Scott, aud Rawlings of tho Indian Navy stood in 
with tho “ Ternato ” and “ Splintd " and engaged tho 
8 ii-face of the fort in a very spirited manner, but their 


i Tho return in not fart booming. Sox oral wounded mon wore loft, 
behind who wero well itouted by l, '0 Uuiol* . Whi . tho dcnob wont 
rvru.W iho bench the cmrf wn* so high thut tho two field-piocoe whirl* 
laid been landed wero spiked and abandoned. 


VOL. III. 




• <SL 

HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 

CHAP. XVI.'guns, being only sis and four pounders, did not make 
any impression on the works. 

Colonel Burr addressed Captain Astld on tho 12th, 
urging him to co-operate in an effectual manner by 
anchoring within a proper distance of the fort, but as he 
declined to comply, tho expedition returned to Amboyna, 
where it arrived upon the 1 Oth. Colonel Burr ascribed 
the failure to the want of co-operation on the part of the 
Naval force, and in his report to the Madras Government, 
he mentioned that although Captain Astle h#d promised 
assistance in the shape of seamen and marines, he did 
not furnish any, and that not a single man belonging to 
tho fleet was wounded. 

Sccc.ml The “ Albion” transport, which had sailed from 

expo ltion. Amboyna for Madras with 150 sepoys, 1 was obliged to put 

back early in March owing to stress of weather. Colonel 
Burr and Mr. Farquhar, being anxious to reprieve tho 
failure, took advantage of this occurrence to make another 
attempt, and on tho 2nd April, a detachment of Europeans 
and nativjb, amounting to 329 lighting men, sailed for* 
Tornate under the escort of the Company's squadron, com¬ 
posed of the “Swift" commanded by Lieutenant Hayes, 
tho “Star,” tho “Splinter,” and the brig “ Resource.” 

Captain Astie declined to join tho expedition. Tho 
passage having been tedious, tho ships did not anchor until 
. the 23rd April. Tho troops wore landed, and operations 

wore commenced a few days afterwards. The strong 
redoubt of Koya-meira surrendered on the 8ih May, 
but being commanded by the hill of Talangaainy, the 
acquisition wan of little uso for the time. A few days 


> ui: in -jk n voliu.l cored in o body for ibo second liii.ui. It has 
• / .Bi-ertalnod whether thoy belonged to tho 2nd in'iun l H t 

rogimunt, or b) tho " Madras Volunteer UatiaUon,” o> to both. 






rtwisjfy. 



later, a party detached from camp near the captured 
redoubt constructed a battery from which fire was opened 
on Talangnamy on the 17th. The enemy immediately 
made ft vigorous sortie, which was repulsed, but they 
renewed, the attack on the 18th, and were *not driven 
back until after a sharp struggle, in which twelve of our 
men were killed, and many wounded. Our tiro was kept 
up until the 22nd, on tho night of which the enemy 
abandoned the hill, carrying off their guns. 

Lieutenant Hayes cannonaded Fort Orange on two 
occasions during the month without producing much 
effect, whereas he lost several-men killed and wounded, 
ond the <( Swift” was a*good deal damaged in her hull, 
as well a%in her masts and rigging. 

The progress made during the early part of Juno was 
very slow owing to the smallness of the force, the obsti¬ 
nate resistance of the oneiny, and tho number of detached 
works to be reduced before Fort Orange could be closely 
invented. This was at last effected, mid several small 
cmft and boats laden with provisions having boon inter¬ 
cepted by the squadron, the garrison became' distre^ody 
and u.n\\ illing to continue tlio Aefeuce. On the evening of 
tho 20th four Comihissioners, vested with full power?, 
came into ( amp to discuss the terms of capitulation. 
Those we.ro settled during the night, and ou tho morning 
of tho 2 Ibt, Fort Orange, with its dependencies, was 
giv< n up. The place was found to bo so strong that it 
could not have been taken by tho weak ioivo before it, 
had it not boon di tituto of provisions. 

Captain Joseph Walker of the Madras Army, with a 
small garrison, was left in command of the island pernl- 
•njj instructions from the Readout at tho Moluccas, and 
Colonel Burr returned to Amboyna in Julv. 


♦ 




<SL 


chap. ::vi. 


Attacks by 
the squadron. 

a 


Surrender o£ 
the Fort and 
Island. 


The force 
1 urn o to 
Amboy ua. 





mtSTfiy 


* 



CHAP. XVI. 


Cuptaiu- 

GcnentJ, 

1801. 

G snoral 

stnart 

command*. 


' ,J> HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

On the 11th March 1801, the appointment of the 
Marquis of IVellesley to be Captain-General, and Com- 
inaiuler-in-Chief of all the Royal and Company's troops 
in India, was published at Madras. 

On the 28th July Lieutenant-General James Stuart, 1 
recently Commander-in-Chief at Bombay, assumed com¬ 
mand of the Madras Army. 

Acquisition of the Carnatic,# 1801. 

On the 31st of the same month, the following order, 
announcing the transfer of the . Carnatic to the East 
India, Company, was published to tho Army :_ 

Fort St. George, 31 st July 1801. 

"In conformity to a treaty 1 this .lay concluded between 
iho Right Honorable tho Governor in Council, and ITis High- 
11,0 Nawaub **eem ool Dowlah Bahader, Nabob of tho 
CaiUKc, by which the antire Civil and Military Government 
of He Carnatic has been transferred for over to tho hands of 
H- Honorable Company; orders have boon transmitted to the 
uvil officers appointed by tho Governor in Council to receive 
.•barge of tho provinces of tho Carnatic from tho offioers or 
(ho lato Government. His Lordship is thoreforo pleased to 
order and direct all Officers commanding Divisions, Stations, 
Garrisons, and Ports, to afford to tho Civil 0[beers of 
Government whatever military aid may bo necessary to n,,, 



1 Thia-fW carnet. Madras iu April 1782 with tho 78.1, (7-, n , v ,.j 
mem. and served in tin- Fro : lency for many years. Mo oomunmu, ,1 
lh«nxjv,iiti,,n lo Ceylon in 1705, and became Oommandor-in.Cl ,.l 
Hombttj In 170f. 

Tl;. Coni|du^ charged iUelf with tho maintonunco mml hm , .,f 
' H f*.rco . ,uirt'd for tho def.'noo of tho Cnrnntio, and with the prot.o- 
U^n r, f ,ighU, person, nud property of llio NaWauh. OikMIMi of tho 
r*^onvi(.« wore t- ho wt Riutio for hi* maintonunon, und to*U, ppJU i . 
‘ iuHtnlmoniii of 13,000 «.tur ( r.goilai, (ind noror h*» 

might tii tho .-nav of tho menucs. " 





HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


37 







t atablialimont of the authority of the Company throughout 
the provinces of the Carnatic.’* 

Insurrection in Tinnevelly and Madura, 1801-2 

The Polygar prisoners, confined in the fort at Palam- 
cottah lifter the suppression of tho disturbances in Tinne- 
volly by the force under Major Bannerman in 1799, made 
their escape 1 on the night of tho 2nd February 1801, and 
immediately repaired to the Walnaad hill near Panjalam- 
coorchy, where they were joined by nearly 4,000 armed 
men, who had been prepared for the attempt to escape, 
which, as subsequently ascertained, had been concerted 
for some time previously. 

Major Colin Macaulay, commanding in the province 
of Tinnevolly, assembled oil tho available troops 2 at 
Kytar, about 19 milos north of Palamcottah, and 17 miles 
direct west from Punjalamcoorcliy, against wliich place ho 
marched on the 6th February. On the 8th he arrived at 
Kolonclloor, and whilo coming on his encamping ground, 
ho was attacked at soveral points by considerable bodies 
of V olygars. The sepoys behaved ste adily, and repulsed 
those assault#, killing 40 or 50 of the insurgents. ’ On tho 
9th the detachment encamped close to PanjaUimcoofthy, 
' hen Major Macaulay was astonished to find that the 


1 ’I he decree of rofitramt in which then" prUonoro wero V* 

- ;»i‘l t r *havo h.^t n cU»rrrmiir;d fix>in limo to time by tho i *v. mid if, 

cpjM ar.-», tlmi in ot>n*oquin, c m - tifbrrnk of tnali.p. \ «h>>rtly 
before tho t scape, t heir fatter* hod beun i cmoveil 

The Collect >r, on Inn part. laid tin reap* n •libjijfcy on the mi bill . , om- 

i,Muuling at UnlaTO' ottnh. Tho n wish \\\y t\ ^mrr n | m. .1. A wliich it 
vua ilironod that all State priumcre should, n futmv, ht: made over o 
the officer oominwuiinp ho din<n.fc, 

* 1 ht brutallon 3rd v< ginionl under Major Sheppard ; 1H0 men of tho 
Tjfm velljr Provincial battalion * Nan-abb’* invguiav horse 28 men • two 
0 »’.rd t wo 8 poiu)'.i"t8. 


# 


CHAP. XVI. 


Major 
Macnulay 
advAucoa to 
Punjalam- 
coorchy* 





38 


III:jTORY OF TIIF MADRAS ARMY* 



<SL 


Retreats to 
Pnlamoottali. 


CHAP. XVI. fort, which had been reported as having been completely 1 
destroyed by the pioneers in 1790, liad been rebuilt, 
and that the insurgents were in considerable force, both 
within and without the walls. In theso circumstances 
the Major determined to retreat to Palamcottah, and he 
inarched’ accordingly about 3 a.m. on the 10th. The 
insurgents followed and attacked the column, bu?having 
been repulsed with loss by Captain Vosey, who com¬ 
manded the rear guard, they desisted from any further 
attempt. 

Owing to the unsettled stato ol: affaivs in Malabar, in 
Diudigul, and in the Ceded Districts, some difficulty was 
experienced in organising a force for sorvice in Tiunevelly, 
but Government lost no time in despatching such troops 
as could be spared. 

On arriving at Palamcottah Major Macaulay informed 
Government of his intention to defer offensive operations . 
until the arrival of reinforcements, but on the 22nd 
February he directed Captain Hazard, then on the march 
from Madura with a detachment 1st battalion 9tli 
regiment, to attack the fort at Cadulgoody, which ho 
described as being without gates, and defended by 300 
cordon peons, only 100 of whom were armed. 


Reinforce¬ 

ments. 


Proccvodingn 
of Major 
Alacuulay. 


1 “ Tho walla wer© levelled with tlio ground j this wag not tlio on i© 
• with tho bastions, which were large ma-Fos of aolid and very firm tiny, 

faced with unbnrnt brick. Those were dug down considerably from tlm 
.centre till tho earth formed a gradual slope, leaving considerable 
mounds. By scarping tho earth from tho remainder of their exterior 
facco, and raising it round tho centres which remained from 7 to 10 
foot high, tho rebels, iu tho short space of six days from their oocapc, 
completed the baptions in a dcfenH * lo manner, and connected I ’ in 
with a wall of 5 or 0 fe. i high, in which *}tat© Major Macaulay imw 
tho for on tho Bib February. All the lala'rera of tIre surrounding 
country hud been omumonod and compelled to perform this work, which, 
before tho one! of that i r nth, placed tho fort of Ihmjuloraowm hy it> a 
better mat o than ii hi 1 l>cen b« Wire » n demolition.”— liion tenant. Colonel 
A; -. 4, to tho Command-., i-in-Chief, P&launr.ttab, '• h Ma^rch 18054, 



TAIAI/Sr^ 



HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 


89 


Major Macaulay also took tho step of sending a party 
o£ GO men under a native officer to occupy the pagoda 
at Strcevygoondum, about 15 miles south-east of Palarn- 
cottali, which was accomplished on’tho night of the 25th 
February. 

Captain Hazard came before Cadulgoody on the 27th 
February, and found it surrounded by a dense hedge of 
thorns, and defended by at least 1,500 men. Finding 
himself not sufficiently strong to attack the place, he 
proceeded towards Nagulpoor, a fort distant only a few 
miles, which was held by a detachment of the Hamnad 
battalion. 

Captain Hazard was attacked on the march, and lost 
22 men killed and wounded, bat lie repulsod the enemy, 
whose loss was not ascertained. 

Tho party at Streevygoondum remained unmolested 
until about the 12th March, wliou tho pagoda was sur¬ 
rounded by large bodies of Polygars, and it was found 
necessary to send a strong detachment under Major Sliop- 
pard of tho 3rd to relievo and withdraw tho garrison. This 
was effected on tho 16th after some smart skirmishes. 

Theso proceedings ©licited the disapproval of Govern¬ 
ment, which was thus expressed in a letter to Major 
Macaulay:— 

44 His Lordship regrets that tho samo mot ives of prudence 
which induced you to relinquish tho intention of attacking 
tho rebels in Panjulamcoorchy wore not considered applicnb'o 
io your projected Attack on Cadulgoody, or any other offeusivo 
operation of the troopf under your command; for it tbo 
tviiolo disposal ’o force of tho provinco, collected under your 
own command, was insuLfieiVnl to make any impression on 
tho body of rebels at Panjalumcoorchy, it, was prcsumablo 
M» it a detachment from your force would be equally incapable 
•J attacking tho rebels with adjutage at any other poHt 

of imp ovtance to thorn- Tho system of detachments, id all 


<SL 

CHA’P. XVI. 


Failure 

Cuuuigoody. 


Withdrawn! 
oi' garrta'ni 
from Stroovy • 
gcondum. 


HoraarhB 
of Govern- 
mont. 



40 


niSTOKY or the madras army. 



CHAP. »W1. times exceptionable, the Governor in Council considers to he 


peculiarly hazardous in the face of an enemy so avowedly 
superior to your own force.’’ 

On tho 2nd March the fort at Tuticorin was taken by 
t!ie insurgents iu consequence of the misconduct of tho 
garrison, which consisted of a party of the 2nd battalion 
6th regiment under Lieutenant Ormsby. This officer, 
not having been longer than eight months in the country, 
•had no control over the men, who paid no attention to 
his orders, and gave up the fort without resistance, on 
being assured of their own personal safety. The Poly, 
gars behaved remarkably well on this occasion, as thoy 
put Lieutenant Ormsby on board a native craft with all 
his effects, and landed him at the adjacont port of 
Mannpur, from whence he made his way to ralamcottnh 
unmolested. 


Mr. Bagot, the Postmaster, who was taken at tho am 1 © 
time, was released a few days afterwards, without havihg 
been ilk treated in any way. 

Tlle expected reinforcements having arrived, tho whole, 
k : ,iur. amounting to about 2,800 men, 1 assembled at Kytar on 
t-lio 27th, and marched for Panjalameoorchy on the 20th. 

Mu r n 4 !i, h cu n ° n th ° ,norilin K of the ^Oth, while on the march to Pashon- 
tlielly, a body of about 20,0 Polygar pikemen appeared 


1 Body Guard 
1st cavalry 
ll.M.’s 71th raiment 


60 men nnd 2 galloper guua. 

One troop. 

Two companies. 

Tho.wholo. 

Five companies. 

Thrte do. 

Thtoo do. 

Six do. 

OlWl 

d two 12 



1st do. 4th do. 

1st. do. 9lh do. 

Int do. lath do. 

l*t do. mil do. 

do. 16th do. 

po 







history of rnr. madi as army. 


41 




on the right flank. This was immediately charged' by the CHAP. XY1. 
cavalry undo* Lieutenant Grant of the Body Guard, and 
almost entirely destroyed. Our loss was numerically small 
viz., 4 men killed and 12 wounded, 3 horses killed and 18 
wounded ; but Lieutenant Grant was severely woundeef, 
and Shnik Ibrahim, the Subadar of the Body Guard, a 
very gallant soldier, was killed. The services of this 
valuable officer were recognised in a Genera) Order dated 
,15th April, and a pension equal to the pay of his rank, viz., 

30 pagodas per mensem, was grunted to his family. 

The detachment came before Panjalamcoorcliy on the Repulse at 
* morning^f the 31st Marcfi.* It was an irregular oblong coorciiy. U 
about 500 feet in length and 300 feet) broad, and had 
been considerably strengthened.sinco Major Macaulay's 
retreat, the walls and bastions having been raised to the 
height of about i2 and 15 fcot respectively. Tho whole 
was surrounded by a thick hedge of thorns. Major 
Macaulay having determined to attack the bastion at tho 
north-wester!} angle, the guns wero placed in position 
accordingly, and what appeared to bo a practicable breach 
having been made by about 3 pyx., tho storming party, 
composed of the two companies 71th, tho grenadiers of 
the several native battalions, and iftio battalion company 
1st Dftttalion 3rd regiment, advanced to the agsattlt, 
covered by tho flro^f the rest of the force which hml 
.been disposed on the, Hanks. The hedge was passed 
under a heavy fire, and tho men reached the tup of tho 
breach, but they woro unable to nmko any further 
progress, being either killed or disabled tin moment they 


showed thomseh c 




Major Macaulay, in his rep i t, expressed himself as Behaviour 
having boon well satisfied with the conduct of the troops. Ol lho lr0oJ,J, 
M Notwithstanding tho intropid ftrmnosB ol the u vaulting ’ 
party, the daring and desperate resistance of the enemy 

. voi HI. 





HISTORY of the MADRAd ARiTY. 


<SL 


Crmeo of the 
failure. 


CBAP: XVI. made it utterly impossible to enter the place, all those who 
attempted it being instantly piked or shot. 

“Perceiving at length the impossibility of ’succeeding, I 
•'as 1 educed to the painful necessity of ordering the troops to 
i»tiro. Our loss is very sevore. The whole behaved with' 
tne greatest animation and ardour.” 

. 0n tlle ca P turo °f place in May it was found that 
the bastions were hollow, and that there was uo footing 
on the top for the assailants. The defenders, standing 
closely packed in the bastions, armed with sharp pikes 
from 18 to 20 feet in length, were enabled to get at any 
man who showed himself above them without being 
themselves in the least exposed. Moreover, tire, breach 
having been narrow, the front of the assailants was neces¬ 
sarily contracted. The repulse sustained by Colonel 
Fullurton at this place in 1783, was attributed by him to 
similar difficulties. 

Vhe casualties' were numerous, our loss having 
amounted to 317 killed and wounded of all ranks. 


C(i6uaUie«»* 


1 Cavalry * ..." 

Artillery .. ... ... 

DotncUmont II.M.’n 74th rrjriment 
IhL Letlftllon 3rd ror niout, (3rd L.I.) 
Detachment lntbatt. ifch regt. (4th N.I) 
lh». lut. do. 9lU do. (OthN.lfK 
t Do. l.-L do. 13th de. (26th 

do. (27lh NX) # 

Do. 2nd do. 10th do. (32ud N.I.). 


Killed. Wounded. Total. 


18 


12 

D3 


84 

36 


26 

10 


40 


1 

15 
71 
93 
45 
* 31 
10 
12 
0 


UO 


2G 7 


317 


Total ... 

Officers included above. 

Killed. - Uouicnaut Stank, 74th, Liontonant R IW », Jrt toll-,lion 8ncl 
u- 1 L.ooten^nt Mnngniil], 1*4. battalioo 4tlj regiment ** 

V-_ 1; ; , | ( :,K-;Cn 1 " .it, .1 ’•„ rtoll, Lioutonmu, FUfota, and ... 

< ' ' 

*I**mlitbatU<Won 4t , On,,min Hamid and Lluu.onunt 

• V.'.lJi i 9 "’' 1 Swin lit baltalivn Ilia. l.i M .t«. 

naui W a Mid Klhot Hi I It a lion 14th. 

* -Moj tally 


* 




HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. . 4% 

Major Macaulay retired to a favorable position about 
1,500 yards from the fort, and encamped there ponding 
the arrival of reinforcements. The Govornor in Council 
immediately on hearing of tho disaster, appointed Lieute¬ 
nant-Colonel Agnew, then Adjutant-General, to com¬ 
mand the troops in the field, and invested him with full 
powers, such as had been exercised by Major Banner- 
man in 1790. 

ELM.’s 77th -regiment was sent from Malabar by 
Colonel Stevenson, tho 2nd battalion 6th regiment M.N.I. 
• wa3 ordered from Ceylon, and such troops in the Carnatic 
as were available, wore ordered to march forthwith" fqr 
the seeno of action. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Agnow arrived in camp on tho 21st 
May and the troops camo up tho nest day. Batteries 
were constructed on the night of tho 22nd, and on the 
23rd fire was opened on the south-west bastion and tho 
adjoining curtains. A practicable breach having been 
made in tho bastion, the curtains having been nearly 
levelled, and tho ilonking defences ruined, the troops 
moved forward tg the assault about 1 o’clock on tho 
afternoon of the 21th. Their advance was impeded for 
some time by tlio hodgo,*nnd when they reached tho 
Bummit of tho breach, they mot with such an obstinate 
resistance that, an entrance was not effected until after a 
eontost of ubove twenty minutes, when nearly tho w holo 
. of tho dofondex-s of tho ba-bion hud been killed by hand 
grenades, and shot thrown over tho walls. 

Immediately on tho capture of the bastion, the Poly- 
pars, to tho nflmber of about 3,000, who had assembled on 
thw opposite side of the fort, ru: hod rapidly, but m closo 
enter, out of tlio place. • 

Tiny were purmed and charged by the cavalry umlor 
Captain JDovetou ami Lieutenant Grant, The los* of tho 



<SL 


CHAP. xvr. 

Lioutenatit- 

Colonel 

Agnew 

commander 


Roinforcn- 
jao nfcs. 


Capture of 
PanjnJutu- 
coorchy. 


* 







ctraCxvi. 


Operations in 
Bhovagunga. 


Colonel 
A^now 
march*?* to 
liumuud. 


# 


44 . HISTORY OP THE MADE A3 ARMY.* 

insurgents in the fort, ancl during tlie pursuit, was 
estimated by Colonol Agnew at about 1,000 men. Oi i 
loss amounted to 186. 1 of all ranks killed and wounded. 

On tlie capture of the fort the rebels fled into Sheva- 
gunga, then ruled by Vella Mur do o and Chinna Murdoo, 
generally known as “ The Murdoos,” who, from having 
been the principal officers of tho Zemindar, had usurped 
his authority, and oxercised supreme control over the 
district. They were called upon by Colonel Agnew to 
give up tlie Chief of Panjalamcoorchy, and other princi¬ 
pal leaders, on pain of being themselves treated as rebels, 
and as they failed to comply, operations wore commenced 
against them. * 

The detachment of the 9th * was loft at Panjalamcoor¬ 
chy, together with the sick and wounded. Tho company 
of tho 2nd battalion lGth was sent to occupy flkiticorin, 
which had been abandoned by the rebels, and tlxo rest 




• 


Killed. 

Wounded. Total. 

Cavalry 

... ... 

... 

2 

12 

n 

Artillery 




4 

4 

Dot obment JI.M.’g 74th raiment 

G 

14 • 

19 

U.M.’e 77th regiment 


n 

30 

63 

lnt battalion 

3rd logiinont 

... ... 

a 

15 

1U 

lot do. 

4th do. 

• • 


Ifi 

1H 

lot do. 

7th do. 


<> 

a 

Iftt tlo 

9th do. 

... ... 

2 

11 

13 

1 nt do. 

lJih do. 


2 

1* 

14 

1 at do. 

14th d.». 


2* 

5 

7 

Malay corps 



3 

12 

ir 

Piouccra 


. 

1 

0 

7 

* 


Total . 

.. ai 

152 . 

180 


Officer « included above. 

Killed.— Lieutenant GilchrUt 71th; Lioatonant* Campbell Mil 
RpalJ.’ug, 77i h. 

oamlctl. Ajjioi i truiui. Campbell 7lth ; LioutonanL Mik-Kci* Htn. 
'l v dry i Lieutenants Birch and Proper* lot butulkm 4th j ami f ulu 
WLitllfl Mr 111y corps. 


Dirnl o.i the 20th. 








history of the madras army. 


45 


of tho force marched towards Ramnad on the 26th. By 
this movement Colonel Agnew expected to be furnished 
with supplies from the friendly district in his rear while 
he should be engaged with the Polygars of Shovagunga, 
whom he intended to attack from the eastern side of the 
forest between Serruvial and Caliarcoil. On the 29th 
the fort at Comery, then invested by the insurgents from 
Slievagunga-, was relieved by the 1st battalion 3rd, and a 
detachment 2nd battalion 6th under Major Gray of the 
latter. The garrison of revenue peons having been 
replaced by a company of the 3rd under Lieutenant 
Greaves, the force proceeded towards Ramuad. 

Colonel Agnew halted at Tr’ppawanum, from whelicohe 
sent liis heavy guns to Madura, and then resnined his 
march. The rebels, takiug advantage of the many 
facilities for attack, with-little risk to themselves, which 
were afforded by the nature of the country on the lino 
of march, harassed the detachment a good deal, more 
especially near*Tripulchetty on the 7th, aud between 
Manamadura hnd Pntinoor on the 10th Juno. 

Our loss on the 7th, which amounted to 14 killed ? and 
31 wounded, was owing either to over-forwardness or 
nhsapproliension of orders on the part of Major Gray, who 
formed, his men in front of a bank, instead of behind it 
n Lad beef! directed. 

The lv)SB * on the 10th was caused by want of precau¬ 
tion on the part of the oflicor commanding the rear 
guard, who neglected to take up a proper pogitjon to 
ruver the passage of the river VT'.av. 

1 Qilc -m kilUd and wounUd, 70. J-au 1801 —1st bullion 3^1, 

I i *nt rmut t ' wort, woundod ; 2ml batlaliou 6th, Major Gray killed 
l. .uUmaDto Parmii.tor and Coin wounded. 

* K. t * * I 6. wow acted 70, niiiffeijig 3. 


CH AP. XVI, 


Relief of 
Comery. 


Colonol 
Agnew 
harassed 
on the inarch. 


Commit icj. 


TAWtSfy, 



4G 


HISTORY OK THE MAMAS ARMY. 


<SL 


Colonol 
Agnow 
returns to 
Mu dura. 


Detachment 

under 

Colonel « 
limes. 


Attacked at 

Mtmapa- 

»horry. 


Colonol 
• m iqh at 
N'uttum. 


•Joins Colonel 

Agt.A . . 


Colonel Agnew, on arriving at Ramnad about the 
middle of Juno, found tlio northern part of tlie district 
in levolt, and that he could not hope to bo supplied with 
provisions. In these circumstances he was compelled 
t) change his plan of operations, aud therefore marched 
to Madura, which he reached on the 4th July. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Xnnes, 1 commanding in Dindigul, 
having been directed to co-operate with the troops in 
Shevagupga, arrived. at Nuttum early in June, and on 
the 18tli ho surprised and cut up a party of the rebels 
at Singumpadaree, about three mil os south of t he fort at 
Perah Mally. He then encamped at Manapacherry, 
between Nuttum and Peruh Mally, for the purpose of 
covering the advance of certain reinforcements expected 
from Trichinopoly. On the 8th he was attacked by the 
rebels in force, who drove in his oiftposts, but they were 
soon repulsed, and having been charged by the detach- 
ment of tho 5th cavalry supported by the infantry, they 
dispersed, losing a number of men. The casualties in 
the cavalry 2 were sorious considering tho small number 
ongaged. 

Colonel Innes returned to Nuttum on tho 9th, and 
was joined at that place a few days afterwards by the 
flank companies of tho regiment DoHe^ron, the 2nd 
battalion 12th regiment native infantry, and a strong 
detachment of pioneers. 

Colonel Agnow marched from Madura on tho 22nd 
July, and reached Tricatoor on tho 24th without opposi¬ 
tion. Colonel Innos loft Nuttum on the 23rd, and I t or 
h" v ' U K roconuoitered the fort atPernh Mally, he proceeded 
to join Colonol Agnew. On the 25th ho Scamped at 
-- --- - - - ^ 

i it!!r' ,a 'iTe"' C '. h ro : aW >'’ ‘iotaolimnnt 12th foot., Solu. hmo.it Soil 

V 1 ,r ‘ ‘ . nnl 1V0 infantry, dotuchmuntr' artillery and plpnm r.-, 

■1 n Utt I *11, I^n m^n wgum 1 UC J > J hom» s killed, li bo ; *en wmib.i. I. 




mtSTfiy 



r# \ 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY J* 7 

•'Vv .-c;T\^y * * . ' 

Suttasingarncottah, about, 6 miles from Trieafcoor, and CHAP. Xvi. 


resumed liis march on the 26th. The country was close 
and difficult, and the Colonel was attacked 1 by the rebels, 
who had occupied some strong positions in his front, 
and when driven from theso they turned upon I 113 roar. 

Colonel Agnow, hearing the firing*, moved out in support, 
and on his approach the insurgents retired. On the 28th 
the united detachments 2 marched to Ookoor, and from 
thence to the neighbourhood of Serruvial , 3 where they 
encamped on the 29th after having been fired upon 
during nearly the whole day. On the 30th the place was 
abandoned by the Poly^irs after firing a few shots. 

lYora the 31st July until the 1st September, the force Failure to 
was employed in endeavouring to penetrate tho denso coil from 
forest between the camp and tho fort at Caliarcoil, the berruv ^* 
principal stronghold of tho rebels, situated about five 
ttdlcs direct south of Serruvial; but the difficulties were 
found insurmountable, and tho attempt was given up 
alter tho completion of a road about four miles in length, 
which had been offeeted by the labor of the pioneers,* 


1 Cnmujties iu tho detachment -undor Colonel lnnes, 26tli Jun© 1801 


Killed Wounded. Missing. 


t rivalry 

Kuropoun infantry 
do. it. 


1 * 


4 borsch wounded* 


4 


10 

n 


o 


6 


Capt; in Hoitland, pioneer* und Lieutenant Firth, lI.M.'i J2lh»foot, 
w6n mled. 

* JU. u j»jh ur.< incidentally fi*«•:*i inn rorroopruuilounn, that n detachment 
of tlo Hootch Bri ; .de wn§ ptvs* n 1 luring tl«u Of»eni») < in the f. M -i 

l>ets\(eu Sorrnvin 1 jind Caliuinoil, hut no particular* regarding it have 

* her n found. 

** fil.i.rotvelo in tho old mafw An ovfoiurivo villugo, which contained 
M 'n palfi.v . I tho MnrdoOS. Colonel Auniew’e return of the hva 0 n th 0 
haa noi been found Colonel W«d»h, in hij reMiim. 

1 n«i 10 $y^bpoau 5 and 26 ueuirrs killed and wounded. * 







CJI^P. XVT. assisted by r, largo number o£ vvoodcuttorB from Dindi- 


gul and Poodoocottali. 

The communications having been cut off, only three 1 
letters from Colonel Agnew between the end of July, and 
the Gtli September are forthcoming, so that there is little 
information to be found regarding his-proceedings during 
that time, l^oyond the fact of the failure. On the night 
of the oth August the rebels threw up an entrenchment 
across the road, and in driving them out on the tith, 
37 Europeans 2 and 25 natives were killed and wounded. 

The following extracts from a letter. written from 
Sorruvial by Colonel Agnew on tffo 21st August will givo 
some idea of the nature of the service :— 

“ *Paily attempts have since been made to cut roads to the 
flank of the enemy’s position, but, I : am sorry to add, without 
success. Covered by banks and entrenchments against which 
the troops cannot advance from tho thickness of tho jungle, 
the enemy has baffled every attempt which has been made to 
p enetratefurther: the pioneers being unable to work under 
the fire brought against them by the rebel., from, situation 
of perfect; security. Repeated fuilures have dispirited tho 
.troops, although they have not suffered any considerable loss, 
and I do not erd< ain an expectation of success on this line 
of attack.” # 

* * * 

“ Constant Exposure to tho sun, and considerable fcitigne, 
1ms p duccd much sickness in tho detachment. A gn at 
proportion of the officers are at present unlit for duty.” 


1 Of 4 the.8<, two urc on Blips of paper about 3 inches long an I l iiu-h 
brand, supposed to hnvo boon convoyed in quills. 

■< 'vplaiu Macintosh, 77ib, and LicuL.nant B. Campbell, 7Ub, v,. ro 
wound hI on i big occuoion. A general roll ot casual t.ie» during i) , 
' l’uo fur--t -u. lonvurdi-u by Col aol .• v t Uu. j ,t 

tu bu found. • 







Colonol Agnow left Sorruvial on tlio 2nd September CHAP. XVI. 

for Ookoor, where lie arrived tlio safno day without - 

opposition, and established his head-quarters. The Agnow at 
detachment, under Colonol Innes was located at Sliola- Ookoor- 
poor am, about three miles south of Ookoor. 

Government having determined to reinstate one of tho Inauguration 
' Shovagunga family in possession of that zemindary, -they zemindi-r «I 
fixed upon Moottoo Vadaganadha Taver, and on the 12th Skevagunga. 
September ho was duly inaugurated by Colonel Agnow 
in camp at Sholapoorum. 

On the 18th the fort at Perah Mally was takon posses- Capture of 
ftion of by a small detachment 1 under Colonel Agnew, who Pcrah ^ ully * 
then returned to Ookoor, leaving a detaphmont of the 1st 
• battalion 7th in the fort. 

The fort at Comcry was invested by the rebels on the Investment 
21st July. They did all in their power to induce tho ofCoulory • 
sepoys to desert, and having enticed Lieutenant Greaves 
to the walls by a flag of truce, thoy fired at him, but 
. without doing any mischief, No assistance was received • 
trom Colonel Agncw, as the communications had been cut 
off, but on tho 13th August .the placo was relieved by iu*hcf of 
Lieutenant Millar, with a detachment of the Ramnad Come| y. 
local corps, who, although greatly outnumbered by tho 
rebel*, attacked them without hesitation, and Lieutenant 
Creaves sallying from tho fort at tho same time, tho 
enemy were defeated. Lieutenants Greaves and Millar' 
received the thanks of Government for their conduct. 

About tho ond of tlio mouth Colonol Agnow, having Cnptunjif 
received information which led him to believe lie might c,llh Vcoi ’- 
surprise the rebels at Oaliiicoil, maij^ tho following 
arrangements for a combined movement upon that place. 
Lieutenant-Colonel Spry with II.M/s 77th, and the 2nd 


A party of the* Ut c^-.dvy unrioi Major D .vetoo, nnd dofcachmeii 
battolion ArU, and l«t battalia 7tli N.I. 0L 


• lie 1 
VOL. 


1X1. 


7 






t 






a 





\ 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


<SL 


CHAP. XVI. battalion 6th regiment, amounting to about 1,000 men, 
Tvi u 50 pioneers, marched from Ookoor about 10 p.u. 
on the 30th September in order to reach Caliarcoil 
i\Y the road which had been cut through the forest 
u-om Serruvial, and afterwards by a path, the existence 
of which had been communicated by a Mahomedan 1 who 
had formerly been an officer in our cavalry. 

Colonel Agnew, with the centre party, set out before 
daylight on the 1st October by the main road leading to 
Caliarcoil through Moottoor. 

Colonol Innes marched from Sholapoomm about the 
same time by Kcrranoor and Calangoody. . 

This operation was completely successful. The fort at 
Caliarcoil - was in Colonel Spry's possession by 8 a.m. on 
the 1st, and Colonol Agnew occupied Moottoor after a 
trifling resistance. The march of Colonel Innes was 
opposed at several barriers, but the rebels wore quickly 
driven from them, and the detachment reached Calan¬ 
goody without loss. At one barrier alone, and at an 
adjacent tank, the enemy loft 100 men killed. • 

'Hus was the death-blow to the insurrection, and the 
roboh dispersed in every direction immodialoly after¬ 
wards. One body under the Polygars of Pnnjahuucoorohy, 
catimat d at about 600 men, entered Dindigul and 
endeavoured to collect adherents in the hills near Y otll .... 

' patchy, but being prof od by a detachment under Colonol 
Innos, tlioy Separated, and the loaders wore captured 
soon afterwards by the peons of tho Collector. By the 


fnannrortiori 

<jUolR'i. 


■ M iliomO'' Klm.1* 1. Us won futon at Brntbwaito’s Uefo " in 1'sr 
i <l ufwrwartU aorvcl until the ..-low, or (ho wur In 

J J™ '• w * rdfld on tills oocuwon 1,/u n,„„l, „ 

oJ 20 paj oilna a monf h. 1 

.’^Twonty-oight guns a«il swivels, 14,000 cttrtri.igcn nnrl , r „ w 
, ■'•ros were found In Un-fort. A quantity I rmnr-v.h , „ ,, 
" ul " 1 'Mpeovcred i„ di% c . • iwrc of the fj,. ' 






HISTORY OF THIJ MADRAS ARMY 


51 



end of the month, the two Murdoos, their sous, and CHAP. XV I. ~ 
principal followers, as well as the Chiefs of Panjalam- 
‘ coorchy, had all been taken, and executed, with the 
exception of a few, who were deported to Prince of Wales 
Island: 

Early in November Colonel Agnow marched for PaJam- Breaking up 
cottak by Paujalameoorchy to make arrangements for of tho forC0, 
the destruction of the forts, and the disarming of tho 
population. H.M.’s 77th, the detachment H.M.’s 74th, 
and the 1st cavalry were sent to Triclii nopoly, and the 
rest of the force to the stations from whence they had 
come. The 2nd cavalry recently from Trichiuopoly, 
together with the 2nd battalion 6th, and tho 1st battalion 
3rd, were to remain in Tinncvolly under Major Sheppard, 
appointed to command iri that district. The 2nd batta¬ 
lion 12th, the detachment 1st of 7th, and tho five com¬ 
panies of tho Malay corps, were left in Shevagunga and 
llamnad under Major Lindsay of the 7th. 

The destruction of the forts was completed early in Destruction 
March 1802, and the officora commanding wore directed ^oo " 1 ,l " 1 ’ 

to cause the sitos to be visited at certain rogukir intervals 
by European ollieers. Tho general disarming 1 of the 
population was completed about the sanio time, and 
Colonel Agnew left Palamcottah*on the 7th March on bi3 
return to Madras. Tho following is an extract from the 
General Order issued by Government on the suppression 
of tho rebellion 


1 Vito Ll»t of Arm**, Appendix A This li«t, one item of which ia 
15,h7S piko»i wn«i signed ■ Uulnmcottah by ('clonal A ;ncw on iho 7th 
March 1S02. It m erroneously i ted by VVclwh that A .ncw left the 
h u October 1H0\, making ovor tho coun t .nd to Major Mq aulav\ 
j n v . mi&, tho CoArt ox Directors, tv. the instance of the 8ociWnry 
t l’ S \to for tho War Department, wrote to tho overnrnont of Mudrua 
jiOjCMX) Bulyga* pikes of the Ik-iji H**al r y 1 r iho uao of lli* 

ipoot. 






4 



m HSTQy 



Thanks to 
the troops. 


* 



history of the madras army. 

Fort St. George , 22nd February 1802. 

l , he whole coarse of operations connected with that sor- 
vico has been distinguished by a spirit of animated bravery, 
3tul persevering oxortion, which has merited the warmest 
approbation of the Governor in Council, and His Lordship in 
Council on bestowing upon the officers and troops the applause 
due to their conduct, reflects with the greatest satisfaction on 
the advantdge3 which have been derived to the public inter¬ 
ests by the suppression of a confederacy which tliroatened the 
most injurious consequences to the tranquillity of the British 
possessions.” 

Expedition to Egypt, 1801-2. 

• 

A detachment of the 2nd battalion artillery, and one 
of pioneers, accompanied tlio expedition to Egypt under 
Major-General Bail’d in 1801. 

The force arrivod at Rosetta on the 31st August, and' 
reachod General Hutchinson'S camp in time to witness 
the surrender of Alexandria on the 2nd September. It 
left Alexandria on the 7th May 1802 on its return to 
India, and in July of that year it was thanked by tho 
Governor-General .in Council, who, at tho same time, 
was pleased to order that medals should be conferred on 
all tho nativo troops which had been employed upon 
tho expedition. Tho Royal troops having been graut :d 
the. privilege of bearing tho "Sphinx” with tho word 
“Egypt” on their colors and appointments, the Com¬ 
pany's troops‘were subsequently allowed to participate 
in that honor. 



Treaty op Amieno, 1802. 

* Intelligence of tho Treaty of P^nco between Grout 
Bntuii) and E ranee, Spain, and the Batavian Republic, 
which was signed at Amiens on tho 27th March 1802, 




having been received at Madras, it was published to the CHAP. ZYI. 
Army on the 4th September. ’- 


Final Operations in Bullum, 1802. 

+ 

The Rajah of Bullum re-occupied his position at Arra- 
Jaira immediately after the departure of Colonel Aron- * 
tresor’s detachment in June 1800, and recommenced his 
predatory incursions. The operations against Dhoondiah, 
those in Alalabar and Wynaad, and in the Ceded Districts, 
prevented Government from taking any notice of his 
conduct until January 1802, when Colonel Wellesley 
* marched against him from Seringapatam. On arriving 
in the neighbourhood of Arrakaira he divided his own 
infantry into three parties for 4 the attack of tho stockaded 
posts in the forest, and placed that of the Mysore Rajah so 
Rs to cut off tho retreat of the enemy towards the ghauts. 

Ihe cavalry, uudor Lioutunant-Colonel Macalister, 
occupied all tho open ground. 

The Attack was made at 10 a.m. on the 16th by tho Capture bf 
three 1 divisions, viz., one nnder Lieutenant-Colonel A. *^ rraka ^ rtt * 
Cupp ago, 1st battalion 5tli regiment ; one under Major ’ 

English, 2nd battalion 10th regiment; and one under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Spry, H.Al/s 77th foot. Each 
party was successful, and all tho posts in the forest 
wore canned with trilling loss. Colonel Weilt^loy, and 


1 Light attack uudor Lioutem.ut-Colonpl Spry.—H.M.’a 19th 
thagoona, detachment. of artillery, defcaobmemB H.M.’a 77th, and 
raiment Do Mom. i, lat battalion let rngimt.'xit, l -‘ battulion 2nd 
i< . irnent, ami ft parly of pionok n*. 

Centro attack under Lieutenant-O t) l 0 n< I Cnppoge.—JDetoelm: ,-ci 1 6th 
cavuhy, artillory, n.M.’e 77th and regiment De Mearon, tho lut 
b iic linn 6th rrgiuiont, and a parly ol ploneera. 

Left at tuck under Major IfinglJgh.— Dctachmeuta H.M.’a 77th, and 
rupinioni Do Meuron, 2nd battalion 10th regiment, and u p ftV {y r 
Vi-.ui'urn. 













CHAP. XYT. 


Exertion of 
the Rajah. 


Arran ^ om out b 
for fkUling 
Liio country. 


^ t history OF THE MADRAS ARMY. • 

the officers and men employed on this service received the 
thanks of Government, conveyed in an order dated 16th 
March. 

A detachment was left at Arrakaira while Colonel 
TV ellesloy proceeded towards the Bissli Ghaut to destroy 
other strongholds which the Rajah was reported to possess 
in that direction, and also to open roads down the several 
passes leading into Canara. 

The Rajah was captured on the 9th February, and 
executed the next day, together with six of his followers, 
after which Colonel Wellesley broke up his detachment, 
and marched on his return to Seringapatam, having first 
made the following arrangements for the occupation of 
Bullura, and certain adjoining districts of the Mysore 
territory. 

five companies 1st battalion 5 th, three companies 2nd 
battalion 10th, two guns, and a detachment of pioneers 
wore left at Arrakaira, under Captain Macfarlane of the 
oth, for the purpose of making n road down tho, S’, mil 
Ghaut, constructing defensible posts at the Loads of (.he 
Si-jSul,’ Bissli, and bumpaji Ghauts, clearing tho jungle, 
and destroying tho stockades, and filling up the ditohos 
by which tho villages were surrounded. 

Major English, with soven companies 2nd battalion 
10th, anrMivo companies 1st battalion 5th, with two guns, 
and a party of pionocro, was to encamp at Belloor - in 
order to support the authority of the Mysore Rajah in 
that district, and in those of Oo8tara and Maharajdro vr. 

The inhabitants were to be disarmed, roads were t > bo 
n • do, and tho fortified vdlagol dismantled as in Bui: am. 



i lu’:': grants lead down into Canar?, tho Siso d or Ch illy l.. i 
■Kt. ’ir.rlhdrnmoftL 

O ybfura, Rolloor, mid Mfthurnjdroog bound Iiullum on tlio o»st. 








HISTORY OJF THE MADIJA3 ARMY. 


Insurrection in Wynaad, 1802. 


55 


On the 11 tli October 1802 the post at Panamurtha 1 
Cottali in Wynaad was surprised by a body of Nairs 
- about 400 in number, divided into three parties, one* of 
which seized the barrack in which the arms were kept, and 
another attacked the sepoys, while the third surrounded 
tko houses of the officers. 

The detachment consisted of about 70 men of the 1st 
battalion 4th Bombay regiment, with two European 
officers. Both of these, viz., Captain Dickinson and 
Lieutenant Maxwell, were killed. Twenty-four sepoys 
shared the same fate, and twenty-one were wounded* All 
the buildings were set on fire and destroyed. The head¬ 
quarters, and about? 1 3G0 men of this battalion were at 
1 ooliugall, about nine miles west of Panamurtha Cottali, 
but the Major in command neither moved from his post 
nor took any steps for the security of the district. This 
was not the only instance of such inactivity, for Colonel 
Wolk sloy, when writing on the 20th to the officer com¬ 
manding tlio Bombay troops in Malabar, animadverted 
upon tho general want of energy on the part of the 
officers, and went on is follows:— 

I beg that yon will unje tbo officers to active measures. 
Let them put their troop? in camp forthwith, excepting tho 
number of men that may be absolutely necessary for tho 
do fence of tho small posts against surprise* If the rebels are 
really in force, let u junction be formed, and thou not a 
nmmont lost in clashing at them, whatever may bo their 
force.” 


At t'l! inn- there • e o 3M dr&s tl >bps either in 
Wynaad or Malabar, but the 1st battalion.8lii regiment, 
under Captain Burnell, with a party of pioneers, and 


1 la North Wynuad, about 7 milei south-east of M»uuntcx*dy> 



CHAP. XYI. . 


Surprise of 
Punamurtlia ** 
Cottah. 


Inactivity of 
the officer in 
command in J 
tho Wynaad* 


Mndma 
* roups enter 
Wynaad. 




4 






'HAP^XVI. -.00 Mysore horse, was ordered from Seringapatam 
nau cdiately the disaster became known. Captain 
Gurnell was directed to enter Wynaad from Kakencottah 
or the relief of Manantawaddy, and the general support- 
of the Bombay troops in the district. The battalion 
marched from Kakencottah on the 27th, and on reaching 
the frontier at Sungaloo on the Bawally nullah, it was 
opposed by a body of Nairs who had occupied an old 
stockade. Captain Gurnell passed the nullah on both 
flanks of the stockade under cover of the fire of a,third 
party, and carried it without loss j the Nairs suffered 
considerably. 


Tho 1«t 
bn t tali on 8th 
relieve* • 
Mniupta- 
wadtly. 


filcirmtfih nl 
^oii^uloo. 


The next day ho marched 17 miles to Manantawnddy, 
and reached that place with trifling* logs, although opposed 
nearly the whole way. On the 30th, five companies of 
the 3th returned to Sungaloo as an escort to the Mysore 
horse, which were sent back as being useless in so wet a 
country. A few days later. Captain Gurnell was ordered 
o construct a stockade for one company at Sungaloo, and 
two snmlar stockades between that place and Mnuanta- 
waddy. Tho main body of the battalion was to keep 
moving m tho neighbourhood of Sungaloo, and to attack 
the insurgents wherever they could bo found. These 
arrangements produced so m.wfi, effect* that Colonel 
Wellesley halted a detachment of H.M.’s 33rd and tho 
1st LatUilioa 14th NJ, „hbh wore moving to™,,,, „, 0 
Wyuafid as a further support. 

About the 12th November a smart skirmish took place 
between a dotachmont of the 8fch and the Nairs near 


.’bog 


wounded.'^ tU ° > - ,y00r0 C " V “ ,rjr W( ' rC kil,0d - nild 8ev outooa her 

frin'i ^(Kr^V 1 ” 08 Major Drummond h,. l.oon .clour 
tog sbnt op m h(» post at Ptflli 

-' ■i . ,i, er 180* li *" Bttt C ° Ion<)1 WoUoBl< ’>'* t,J M. 




HTSTOKY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Sungaloo, thus described b y Colonel Wellesley in a chap. x\ 
report to the Coramaiider-iu-Chief :— ° - 

“ » Siuce 1 mote t0 y° u 011 tho ^th instant, a detachment of 
the 1st battalion 8tli regiment has hud a smart action with 
the Nairs in Wynaad, in which they sustained a considerable 
lops. They had marched to* Manautawaddy with a despatch 
to Lieutenant- Colon el Lawrence, and on their return were- 
attacked near a swamp at which the battalion had been hard 
pressed heretofore. The Nairs took advantage of a nullah 
which was impassable, across which they fired at them, and 
killed nine and wounded eighteen. The officer in command 
of the battalion, however, at Sungaloo, sent out three com¬ 
panies to the support of the other detachment, and the Naira 
were driven off with considerable loss. Many of those on this 
sido of the nullah were put to death in the road. By all 
accounts the troops behaved remarkably well on this occa- 
cion.” 


Intelligence having been received about this time of Madms 
the dofeat of tho armies of tho Pesliwah and of Scindiah, n* 

by that of Holkar at Poonah, it became necessary to frotn 
0330111 %, n strong force ou the Toombiuklra, in.con 
poquonco of which ordors wore issued for the withdrawal 
.•I ibo Madras troops in tho Wvnaad. 


Apvairs ir* Malabar, 1802-3. 

On the 30th October 1802, Colonel John Montrosor, 
H.M.’a 80th regiment, was appointed to tho command in 
Malabar and Cunara, which had been temporarily held 
by I dptatenant-Colonel Boles of the Bombay Army since 
the dupai ture of Colonel StevonsoD, win had boon nomi- 
naiod m February to tho command of rho Subsidiary Force 
tic Hyderabad in succession to Odom. I Urban Vigors. 

The disturbances in tho Wynaad spread into Malabar 
t rly in 1803, and as Colonel Moutrosor made a spcci u 
application for a Madras battalion, the 2nd of the 1 st w 

you rn. 0 



CHAP. xvr. 


Cause of the 
rebellion in 
Wyi&ad. 


« » 


nTSTORY or THH MADRAS ARMY. 

ordered into the Wynaad from Erode in February to 
supply the place of the 1st of the 8th, which had been 
selected 1 by Major-General 2 Wellesley for field service in 
the Mahratta country. 

General Wellesley, when writing to Colonel Montresor 
on the 27th December 1802, expressed the following 
opinion regarding the disturbances in the Wynaad :— 

“ I don’t believe that the disturbances in the Wynaad arc to 
be attributed to extortion on the part of tho revenue officers. 
They appear to have commenced by an accidental murder, 
and riot, after which tho party proceeded to surprise ilio 
post at Panamurta Cottah, and murder tho officers, and then 
finding that tho troops did nothing to defend themselves, or 
to revenge the murder of their comrades, Coongan Nair who 
was at the head of the insurrection, issued a proclamation 
calling upon tho inhabitants to meet him on a certain day at 
a pagoda not far from Manantawaddy, another of our posts 
They met there to tho number of 5,000, and have been in 
rebellion ever since. ,, 

# * * * * 

** tJp on tho whole T ain induced to believe that accident 
alone was the original cause of an insurrection which ban 

grown to be a rebellion from tho subsequent inactivity of tho 
troops.” 



1 ‘ It is nccoseary that I should appriee you that the lsb of ) o RfK 
ono of tho oorp. Which I have pitched open 

Bhljr sickly at presout, having bronght nearly 800 tick from the U'vn„„ i . 
mid I don't fc Hevo they v-K. leave lei8 than 200 sick aUWa^Uho 

: VC Ll “‘‘ r a I^- 1 ’" ,V0 ' refo ™» 1 ° take thin corps to tho field 
to cither of tho fi bers abovomenlionod, first, bocaufc I know it , a 
good corpc which has seen moth so, vice, and, secondly, liccou, , 

. tb. Mahraf, territory I.of e, • ',ich you may find m, »dv«n. 

, Mi, m-.Gonorul Woilcloy to the Commaudor-iu-f k,of dntad 
>■ ’ingapatain, 13lh January 1809. 

J47ih November jgQg, 






HISTORY OF 1UK MADRAS ARMY. 



M An katta Affairs, 1802-3. 


CHAP, xvi 


The dominiops formerly constituting the Mahratta 
Empire had, for many years previous to this period, been 
divided into five separate independent states, which in 
1802, were governed by the undermentioned chiefs, 
viz. :— 

Bajeo Row, the Peshwah, who resided at Poonali, and ThoPcohv,,:.. 
ruled over the Southern Maliratta country, Sattarah, and 
the. Concan, in tho name of the Rajah of Sattarah, tho 
nominal sovereign of the Mahrattas, who lived at Sattarah 
under surveillance, if not in a state of actual imprison¬ 
ment. 

Ragojeo Bhonslali, Rajah of Berar, residing at Nag- Rajah of 
pore* in Gondwana. " Berar. 

Dowlut Row Scindiah, residing* at Oojein in Malwah, Scmdiali. 
und possessing Candeish and half of Malwah. 

Jeswnnt Row Ilolkar, residing at Indore, possessing Hollar, 
half of Malwah. This chief ruled ostensibly in behalf of 
his nephew Khan dab Row. 

The Guickwar ruling in Guzerat. Guickwnr. 

Scindiah, who was ambitious of becoming tho head of Defeat of tho 
tho Mahratta Empire, had, with a view towards that end,' 
succeeded in obtaining complete ascendancy over tho Golkar,’ * 
councils of tho Peshwah, and on tho 14th October 1801, ho 1802 ‘ 
advaucod his prospects by inflicting a severe defeat 
upon Holkr •, his principal rival, but having neglected to 
follow up this victory, Ilolkar reassembled an army, 
laid waste Candeish, and defeated the combined armies 
o( ,Scindiah and tho Peshwah uuder tho walls of Poonali 
on I ho 25th October 1802. The Poshwab fled into tho 
Com...n, and shortly afterwards embarked 4or Basscin 
where he landed on the fith December, and immediately 
ui 'do overture- to the Brilish. 




mtST/fy 



Treaty of 
B'jpdoin. 


• * 

HISTORY o? TIIE MADRAS ARMY.* 

ibe result was the treaty of Bassein concluded on the 
dlst December, tho principal stipulations of which were 
a3 follows, viz.:—That a permanent subsidiary force of 
not less than 6,000 regular native infantry, with the 
usual proportion of field pieces and European artillery¬ 
men, and a proper equipment of warlike stores and 
ammunition, should be stationed in His Highness* domi¬ 
nions ; and that for the regular payment of this force, 
territory, the annual revenue of which was estimated at 
26 lakhs of rupees, should be ceded to the Company in 
perpetuity. All the iorts in the coded territory were 
to be made over, together with their equipment of 
ordnance, stores, and provisions. It was subsequently 
agreed that a regiment of native cavalry should bo added 
to tho force, and paid for by a f urtlier cession of territory. 



Advance from Hurryhur, 18.03. 

In the meantime, an army, amounting to 19,798 regular 
troops, was being assembled at Hurryhur on the north¬ 
west frontier of Mysore, for tho protection of the Com¬ 
pany ^ territories, and the eventual # establi:jhment of 
tho subsidiary force at Poormh; but in conformity with 
instructions subsequently roceivod from tho Governor- 
General, the troops destined to advauco into the Mahrutta 
country wore limited to 10,617 1 met! under tho command of 


Cavalry Brigade.—(!oloiu! Thorny Dallam, 4th cavalry. 

H.M.’h 19th drngoone 412, 4th cavalry* 438, 5th cavalry Ui. 7ih 
cavalry 438. 

F\r*t Infantry Brigade.—Lieut.. Colonel Harriots, FI.M.'a 80 th foot. 
Scotch brigade 1,013, Ui battalion 2nd reorimont 1,005, 2nd baUuli.m 
3rd ropdmont 998, 2ml Imitation 12th regimeut 1,000. 

Fncwd fnjnn'ry Brigade. —Limit.•Col-oncl Wallace , 74th. 

n .«!.’* 7 1 1 n* regiment 76-i, Int battalion 3rd rogimont 1,109, !• 1 
buMuliun 8th regiment 997, 2nd batUlion 18th ngimont 1,014. 

Artillery 108, gnn Wmre 206, pioneer* 704. 

Europe iv.s 2,287. natives 8,330, Iota) 10,617. 







muisrff 



> -— IITSTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 61 

Major-General 1 Wellesley, to be supported by the Hyder¬ 
abad Subsidiary Force under Colonel Stevenson, which was 
ordered to Periudah on the western frontier of the Nizam’s 
domiuions, there to remain pending instructions from the 
General. 


CHAP. XVI. 


Tiie General marched from Hurry hur on the 9th March Relief of 
1803, and. crossed the Toombuddra into the Mahratta Poonal1 - 
territory on the 12th. On the 31st he crossed the lviatna 
at Eroor, and halted there for two days. On the 13th 
April he reached Akloos on the river Neera, and, while 
halted there on the l-5th, ho detached the <f Scotch 
Brigade” - to join Colonel Stevenson’s division, 3 which 
had moved from Periudah, and was encamped near Nur- 
singpoorat the junction of the rivers Beemah and Neera, 
about two ordinary marches from Go*eral Wellesley’s . 
camp. On the 10th the General resumed his march 
towards Poonah, having directed Colonel Stevenson to 
move up the left bank of the Beemah, and to take up a 


r ‘ °" A P' n , 180a Govornor-Goneral directed that tho 

1“ ° f Uy . B0r0 eb °! ,Id bo retained by General Wellesley during his 
b v \ '’ e ^ V,C0 ' " 8 lv ‘ H m oonseqocnoo of rt representation made 

by the General to the effect that he could not. otherwise make certain of- 
receiving the necessary supplies for his army. 

in 1 303 ‘bnt°,h h B T d °” W ' 13 mlmbCr °' 1 th ° 9 tth rep ‘ m0nt " f *•** «ly 
■ r ’, r 7 V W:i8 “ 0t ,mbli3hui1 « Madras nntil September. 

W -' V LflMh*r, 

did regiment cavalry 61G, 6ik regiment cavalry 502. 
f'irrt Brig ado.— £i«*t .-Colonel Xaeltan, 2nd bails. 9th rest SI 

and battalion 2nd rogW 1,275, 1st battalion Cl- regimen, 1.2S1, 
^nd 1 :itt niton 9th regiment 1,28G. 

Srcind lufanlry KHjade.—J. Uuliburton, 2nd balln. flh ngt. ,Y. t. 

2nd battalion 7th regirnont 1,290, 1 rl battalion lltb regiment 1 OO.S 
2ml battalion 11th regiment 1,086. 

Artillery 103, gun labours 010, two coxnpanie r of pioneers 20G 
thiit.j u t (including Scotch Hrigodo) 1,181, native 8,7U> tcital 9 8 >7 
Am; diary troops attach'd u ulor Colonel Sliftnson'x comma, 7 
N’ 1 '-!' i'i horso 7,000, Ni?nui’a infantry 6,000, Kiiam’- 
guns. ’ winery 10 










> 


Tho Pcahwah 
rot arua to 
Poonah. 


General 
Well--toy 
uiftjelu y t > 
< ho nurth- 

• u,a(. 


a 

tlui t, iiiloii< r 
rn.o obit fa 
11 rrliro, 


G2 


history of tite madras army. 


<SL 


position on tliat river between Poonah and Gardoon. On 
tiiL j.Sthj wliefi in camp near Baramatfcy, the General* 
xeceived intelligence that it was the intention of Ainrut 
Pow, the brother of tlolkar, who had been left in charge 
of Poonah since the battfc of the 25th October 1802, to 
set fire to the town soon as the British troops should 
arrive in the neighbourhood. In order to pi'event this, 
General Wellesley set out on the night of the 19tli with 
the cavalry, and the 2nd battalion 12th regiment N.I., 
aud reached Poonah at 2 p.h. on tho 20th, after a forced 
march of above 40 miles, in time to save it from the 
flames. Tho road down the little Bhore Ghaut was so hud 
that six hours were occupied in getting through, and 
several of the tumbrils attached to the cavalry had to bo left 
behind. Colonel.McLeod, with tho 2nd battalion 12tli 
regiment, was ordered to halt at Loohee near tho foot of 
the ghaut, and to rejoin the General the next day. The 

remainder of the force did not reach Poonah until tho 
22nd. 

On the 13th May’the Peshwah returned to his capital, 
escorted by the 78th foot, five companies of tlio 84th, and 
a battalion of Bombay sepoys, all under Colonel Murray 
of tho 84tli regiment. 

On tho 4th .Tune General Wellesley marched towards 
the Godavcryin order to watch the armies of Seindiah, and 
tho Rajah of Borar, which had been assembled near 
Boorhanpoor 1 with the supposed intention of invading 
tho territory of tho Nizam. Ho took with him the 78th 
foot in exchange for the 2nd battalion 3rd regiment which 
was left at Poonah. 

<)l! the 14th July it was ascertained that tho Uo 
confederate chiefs wore advancing towards the Adjuntnh 

T ‘J, hl of CnmleiMi, on p, - no nl)orn i,,., . , I ,i„, 

' 1 •" /U i. | from Adjuntnh on the ^i/.ruu’g northern 



. . vr mo MADRAS ATIMV. 


63 


GliaifT, iu consequence of which General W-n« i 
. . . nerai Wullosley wrote CIIAP. x\ 7 j. 

to the effect that unless the Rajah of Borar should 

immediately return to his capital at Nugpoor, and Scindiah 

recross the Nerbuddah, their want of compliance would bo 

treated as a declaration of war. Colonel Stevenson, then 

encamped near Aurangabad, was directed to be prepared 

to oppose Scindiah’s ascent into the Nizam’s country by 

tho Adjuntah Ghaut should ho attempt it. 

On the 18th the General received a despatch from Invested with 
Calcutta, dated 2Gth June, by which he was empowered plenary 
assume, and exercise, the general direction and control 
cf all the political and military affairs of the British 
Government in tho territories of the Nizam, of tho ' 
oshwah, and of the Mahratta states and chiefs. He 
was also invested with the power of negotiating and 
concluding treaties. 

In the meantime ho had advanced towards Ahmed- Encamp 
'inggur, and while encamped about six milos from the “u? - ' 
uly on the 3rd August, he received replies from tho ‘ 
umfedorato chiefs to tho effect that, provided the 
British troops near Aurangabad, those under the immo¬ 
late command of General Wellesley, and those in the 
Raichopr Doab, would all return to their respective' 

■a ‘one at Hyderabad, Seringapatam, and Madras, they 
ocmditih and Rngojee Rhonslah, would retire towards 
iSoorhunpoor. * 

Upon this tho General determined to attack Ahmed- 
auggnr at once, and ho sent orders to The officer oom- 

' Carp. »/o beervatian at -at I). Campbell. 

IT.M.’t] 25th dragoons, 1st ami 2nd cm airy. 

2nd battalion artillery, one company. 

II.M.'h 38rd rogiment tivo companies, 80tb regimont 

companion. 6 8cv0lJ 

i ‘t battalion 12tli, and let ^attalion J7th regiment 
Pioncertt, • ae company. 




ims^ 



CHAP. XVI. man ding in Guzerat, desiring liim to commence operations 
against Baroach and other possessions jof Scindiah in 
that province. To Scindiah, and to the Rajah of Berar, 
he wrote as follows on the 6th August:— 

Declaration ** Yon will recollect that the British Government did not 

of war. . 

tijreaten to commence hostilities against you, hut you threat - 
• eucd to commence hostilities against the British Government? 
and its allies ; and when called upon to explain your inten¬ 
tions, you declared that it was doubtful whether there would 
bo peace or war ; and in conformity with your threats, and 
your declared doubts, you assembled a large army in a station 
contiguous to the Nizam’s frontier. On this ground T called 
upon you to withdraw’ that army to its usual stations if your 
subsequent pacific declarations were sincere ; but instead of 
complying with this reasonable requisition, yoa have proposed 
that I should withdraw tho troops which are intended to defend 
the territories of the allies against your designs, and that 
you and the Rajah of Berar should be suffered to romain 
with your troops assembled, in readiness to take advantago of 
their absence. . 

ibis proposition is unreasonable and inadmissible, and you 
must stand the consequences of tho measures which I find 
myself obliged to adopt in order to repel your aggressions. 
I offered you peace cn terms of equality, and honorable to 
all parties: you have chosen war, and are responsible for all 
consequences.’’ 

# 

Foreign Settlements, 1800-3. 

occiw.tif v , Shortly after intelligence of the coalition of the north, 
isoV. ,Jar ’ cm powers against Great Britain in December 1800 had 
reached India, tho fort and town of Tran quo bar, which 
l belonged to Denmark, were taken possession of, ami 
attach d to the southern division of the army. 

Alb'b'i hi <, * 

Vonflichi i ry, ,i00n a *for the ratification of tho Treaty of Amiens in 
Maj h 1802, troops were despatched to Pondicherry by 


65 



Napoleon with the view of endeavouring to restore the 
influence of France in Southern India, and the Royal 
Warrant from England, directing tho restoration of all the 
settlements taken from the French or Dutch, was received 
in due course, but the Governor-General, being apprehen¬ 
sive of the danger likely to ensue from the presence of the 
armament expected at Pondicherry, in addition to the large 
disciplined force under French officers in the service of 
Scindiah, directed the Governor of Madras to postpone 
the actual restitution of any portion of territory until 
express authority to that effect should be received by him 
from Bengal. 

No officer regularly accredited by the French Govern¬ 
ment arrived until the 15th June 1803, when the frigate 

La Belle Poule ” reached Pondicherry, having on board 
Citizen Lcger the Colonial Prefect, Monsieur Binot Chief 
of the Staff of the Expedition to the East Indian Islands, 
several other officers, and about 150 men. 

Lord Clive, in conformity with his instructions, declined 
to make over possession, but he permitted the officers 
and men to laud, and ordered arrangements to be made 
for fcheir-reception. 

On the 11th July, a French squadron, consisting of’ 
tho lane -of -battle Ship “ Marengo ” and several other 
vessels of war, conveying General Do Caen Captain- 
Ceneral and Governor of tho Islands of Mauritius and 
Bourbon, several staff officers, and a body of European 
troopB, arrived at Pondicherry, from whence a frigate 
immediately sent off to Madras with a lettor for tho 
Governor, demanding tho immediate restoration of tho 
French possessions. 

Lord Clive refused as before, but before his reply 
reached Pondicherry, the French squadron set sail and 
L'ft the place on tho night of the 12th, without having 

VOL. IJ7. 9 


CHAP. XVI. 


Arrival of 
a French 
detachment. 


Arrival of 
a French 
squadron. 


Precipitate 
departure of 
tho aquadrqn, 





ClIAP. XVI. 


War with 
Fi ftiicc. 


Surrondor of 
/•louHiour 
Binot nnd 
p;irty. 


HISTORY OF 1IIE MADRAS ARMY. 

landed any of the troops. This precipitate departure was 
opposed to lmvo been caused by the receipt of intelli¬ 
gence from France, brought by a corvette whicli arrived 
at Pondicherry about noon on that day. 

Monsieur Binot and his party remained until September, 
when news of the war with France, which had been 
declared in May, having reached Madras, the Officer com¬ 
manding TI.M/s 73rd foot, then on the march to Pondi¬ 
cherry, received orders to make prisoners of tho detach¬ 
ment. Monsieur Binot, however, had sufficient address 
io obtain terms “ infinitely 1 rnoro favorable than ho had 
any right to expect,” und, although tho capitulation was 
not approved of, it waB confirmed, and tho French, amount¬ 
ing to about 80 officers and 150 soldiers, were sent back 
to France in a cartel hired for that purpose by the British 
Government. 



1 Lieiitenant-Goncral Stuart, to General LaLo, 28tU October lb03. 





imsr$ y 



history or the madras w.uy. 


Cavalry, 1799-1803. 


07 


<SL 


CIJ.U. \\ i. 


Daring June and July 1790, a troop of cavalry for fcl le Governor- 
body guard of the Governor-General was formed by Gcucral ’* 
drafts of picked men from each of the four regiments of I70y/' u ’ 
Madras cavalry, and was sent to Bengal shortly after¬ 
wards undor the command of Lieutenant IT. C. Mont¬ 
gomery. The families of tho -men were permitted to 
accompany them. 

Two additional regiments of cavalry were raised in Sep- AuRmen- 
tember, one in consequence of tho increase of territory, tanon - 
the othor for tho purpose of serving with the Hyderabad 
subsidiary force. Tho 5th was formed at Triehinopoly 
and tho Oth at Arcot. The nucleus of both regiments, to 
the extent of about 100 men in oach, was composod of 

Montgomery's Troop,” tho supernumerary troop of tho 
h°dy guard which had been raised during tho war, and of 
drafts from the old corps. 

The six regiments were then formed into two brigades, Brigades or 
the first to consist of the 1st, 3rd, and 5th regiments under cavu ^ >*• 
Colonol Dugald Campbell Commandant of Cavalry, and 
the sooond of tho 2nd, 4th, and Cth regiments undor 
Colonel James Stevenson. This arrangement, however, 
appears to have been merely nominal, for in the distribu- 
f iou of the army ordered in Novembor, tho undormon- 
tioiK’d stations wore assigned to tho cavalry, \ iis. : — 

Arcot ... 1 regiment. Chi tiled roog ... 1 rrgim ut. 

Bangalore... 1 do, Borah ... 1 do. 

Coimbatore. 1 do. Hyderabad . 1 do. 

Dining Novembrr a Surgeon, and an Assistant Snrgoon ii tP - i 

were posted to each regiment of cavalry, in ©'mformily 
with orders to that effect freui tho Court of Directors 


Diulnbuf j,v, 
of ttJguju ■ t i. 



mm sr Ry 



CHAP. XVI. 

Embassy 
to Persia. 


Brcsdiag 

stud, 

1795-1800. 


(foldings, 

1800-1648. 


Angn^nta- 

UOU, IS j\J. 


Pn v%if 
3ubf)0ul S. 


<§L 

HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 

About tbo ond of the year a detachment of volunteers 
from the bodyguard, consisting of 1 Subadar, 1 Jemadar, 

2 Havildars, 2 Naigues, and 20 troopers, proceeded 
to Persia as part of the escort of Captain Malcolm, 
appointed Ambassador to that Court. 

Lieutenant Evans of the infantry having urged tho 
advantages to be gained by the establishment of a breed* 
ing stud, ho was permitted to make an oxperimont on 
his own account in 1705, assistance being granted by 
Government in the ahapo of grazing land in the neigh¬ 
bourhood of Ganjam. This experiment having been 
favorably reported upon. Government took over tho stud 
in 1800, fixed tho number of maxes at 500, that of stallions 
at 25, and instructed the Revenue Board to purchase 
tho tract of land lying between Munsoorcottah and the 
Ganjam river for grazing purposes. The purchase of 
stallions was restricted to that of Arabs of the best blood 
and figure. 

About this time the question of mounting the cavalry 
on geldings was taken into consideration, and referred 
for the opinion of tho Military Board, and of oiticors 
commanding rogiini nts, but the general opinion having 
been against the change, the matter dropped, and does 
not appear to have been revived until 1848, when geldings 
were tried in the 4th regiment with such success that flie 
use of entire horses was discontinued shortly afterwords 
throughout the service. 

A seventh regiment of cavalry wa^. raised at Arcot in 
July 1800. Drafts to the extent of 88 office's, non- 
, .t, i i; ' 1 officers, and mem, with horses complete, 

wci o received from the existing regiments. 

During July an order 1 was published granting ud 
addition to the pay of aubadurs of cavalry, opacifying 

particulars v»a) 'jo fuimd iu tho nut)'.'© of rnvti*© infantry. 


misTfy 


ftlSTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 69 

the pay and batta of recruit boys, and directing that 
in future no men belonging to the cavalry should be 
admitted into the invalid establishment. 

In May.1802 it was resolved that the .detail of 120 
troopers serving in Bengal with the Governor GenornPy 
body guard, should bo borne on the strength of the Madras 
cavalry, which was carried into effect accordingly. 

Each regiment of cavalry was reduced at this time to 
800 private troopers, exclusive of tho 12 men detached 
to do duty at tho breeding stud. 

Tho following order of the Governor-General in Coun¬ 
cil on the return to Europe of Captain Montgomery was 
published at Fort St. George on tho 5th October:— 

“ The public service on this establishment has derived 
important advantages from, the exporionoe, skill, and abilities 
of Captain Montgomery in various branches of establishments 
connected with tho cavalry. The state of discipline and 
subordination which tho new body guard at Fort William 
li.H already attained, and tho alacrity and military spirit 
which havo Veen manifested on several occasions of foreign 
Si rvico by the nativo officers and troopers of that corps, aro 
to bo ascribed to tho abilities, rkill, aud activity of Captain 
Montgomery.” 

Captain Montgomery was succeeded in the command 
by Captain F. A. Daniolof tho 4th regiment, who appears 
to have retained it until 1805, when it devolved upon 
Captain Doveton of the 7th regiment, 

.During November the number of gnn Incurs allowed 
f* ^ tho galloper guns attache 1 to cavalry wiri reduced to 
1 hi :t tindul and 10 men for cm h Kuropeau regiment, 
and to 1 second lindal and 8 uiou for cueh uative regiment. 

Oil the 20th March 1803 a detail from the body guard, 
con listing of 1 Bubodar, 1 Jemadar, 2 lla vildars, and 
12 Naigues, was *ont to Bombay for tho purpose of being 
•joiployod a9 instructors during the formation of a body 






CJIAP. XVI. 


Details 
serving in 
Bengal, 
1802 . 


Reduction. 


Governor- 
Geueral’s 
body guard. 


Guu l*«cn. 


DoCaoLuiou t 
to Ikmibar. 
1803. 



HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 


<§L 


Detachment 
to Nagporo. 


-Vi. oj. iognlar cavalry proposed to bo raised in that Presi¬ 
dency. 

Another detail from the body guard, composed of 20 
mcn unc ^ er ft native officer, was detached in June as an 
escort to the Resident at Nagpore. 

_ 4 ... w During May and June regiments of cavalry were corn- 

full strength, plefced to their full complement of 70 privates per troop 
in consequence of the expected war with the Mahrattus. 


Regiments 
completed to 


71 



HISTORY 01'_TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 



Artillery, 1799-1803. 


chap, xv r. 


°n the 18th December 1799, a Native Adjutant was Gun lMoara , 
appointed to the companies of gun lascars attached to 1799 - 
each battalion of artillery, and four recruit boys were at 
the samo time allowed for each company of lascars, on 
the samo pay as that given in the native infantry. 

About the end of the year models of field and garrison Modola 
gun-carriages, and of tumbrils, were supplied to Bombay '«>PP>iod to 
on tho requisition of General Stuart, the Commander-in- 1< '’ mbay ' 
Chief at that Presidency. 

During January 1SOO, a draft of 200 selected men was Draft from 
sont to tho artillery from tho 2nd European regiment, ]^ ufanLrv ' 
which was then being reduced in conformity with tho ^ ’ 
new formation. 


On the JGth February two companies were added to Augmon- 
each battalion of artillery, and eight matrosses to each tation * 
company. A further draft of 300 men was sent from tho 
European regiment to meet this augmentation. 

The establishment of a company was fixod at— 


1 Cap lain. 

1 Captain-Lieutenant. 

2 Lieu ton ant a. 

1 Liei-Jetifint- Fire¬ 
worker. 


5 Serjeants. 
5 Corporals. 
10 Gunnora, 

2 Drummers. 
70 Matrosses. 


On tho 31st December it was ordered that'tho artillery j„oica«c 
should receive nn addition to then pay eijual tc that uf >’■ >'• 
which had been made to the European infantry under 
I ho provisions of the Royal Warrant of 1797. 

Xho company of native artillery, which had been ftoductl , 
raised at Madras shortly before the commencement if thonn,ivo 
ihe war of 1799, was reduced on the 17th March 1802 SST*' 








HISTORY or THE HABEAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVI. 

Augmonta- 
iion of tho 
European 
artillery. 


Reduction of 
gun loacni B. 

Inoificient 
r :ito (>f tho 
rorriiucnt, 
1803. 


72 



and on the same day an order was published directing 
that each battalion of artillery should consist of soven 
companies instead of five, and that tho establishment of 
eicli company should consist of— 


1 Captain. 

1 Captain-Lieutenant. 

2 Lieutenants. 

2 Lieutenant-Fire¬ 
workers. 


5 Sorjeauts. 

5 Corporals. 

10 Gunners. 

2 Drummers and Fifers. 
80 Matrosses. 


During April of tlfe same year tho number of gun 
las cars was reduced from 5G to 45 per company. 

On tho 21st March 1803, tho Commander-iu-Chiof 
found it necessary to address Government regarding the 
condition of the corps, which he did in the follow inn- 
words :— ® 


“ That vttluab!o cor P 8 . from a want of recruits, has become 
weak aud inefficient; and should the supply of recruits con- 
tinue to be so inadequate to its demands, tho army, in a very 
uhort period of time, will be destitute of artillery. I trust 
that your Lordship will represent this circumstance, and its 
consequences to tho Honorable tho Court of Directors. It 
^uust have hitherto escaped their notico ; for I cannot sup¬ 
pose that tho Honorablo Court would otherwise allow a corps, 
which has always done credit to their army, aud whoso 
services are ofloantial Wits success, to bo reduced to 
of its proper establishment.*’ 



miSTffy 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


73 



European Infantry, 1790-1803. 


During September 1799, the office of Military Secre¬ 
tary to the Governor was created, and Captain Mark 
Wilks was appointed thereto. The salary was that- of an 
Aide-do-Camp, with an allowance of 40 pagodas per 
mensem for clerks. 

During the same month Lieutenant-Colonel Close was 
appointed Resident in Mysore, and was succeeded as 
Adjutant-General by Lieutenant-Colonel P. A. Agnew. 

On the 5th November orders wore issued for organis¬ 
ing the European infantry in conformity with instruc¬ 
tions contained in a letter from the Court of Directors, 
dated 25th July 1799, from which the following are 
extracts:— 

“Wo have been apprised of Ilis Majesty’s intention to now 
model his regiments of infantry serving in the East Indies, 
by forming them into twelve companies of 100 rank and tilo 
each, and in order to preserve a proper uniformity between 
His Majesty’s, and tbo Company’s European infantry, wo 
have resolved that our present establishment shall bo Torino^ 
also into regiments of the same strength. Each regiment is 
therefore to consist of— 

10 Ensigns, 

48 Serjeants, 

GO Corporals, 
i!G Drums ciud Fifes, 
1,140 Privates, 

SI PiickaUfns, 


1 Colonel, 

2 Li.-Colonels, 

2 Majors, 

7 Captains, 

1 Captai n- Lieu tonau t, 

25 Lieu bonrnts, 


I 

I 


Each to 
have a 
com¬ 
pany. 


with staff as c present. The establishment, v liieh oti a 
(Lv> consideration of all tlic circumstances connected with 
ihu arrangement, wo have i solved on for your Presidency, 
1h oue regiment of European infautry of tlto foregoing 
* strength . ,t 

# * * * 


chap, xvi; 


Military 
Secretary to 
the Governor, 
1799. 


Adjutnnt- 

Goneral. 


Reorganisa¬ 
tion of tlio 
European 
infantry. 


Kstnbli’h* 

meet. 


10 




CHAP. XVI. 


Promotion by 
rr-gln *nia] 
ribo, lbOO. 


T ling of • 
' ?IU «m i o 
* rr*|'iu,out»j. 


<§L 

' * HISTORY of the madras army. 

Tho corps is in future to be denominated the ‘Madras 
European Regiment.’ ’’ 

At tie time of tie reorganisation in 1796 , tie Court 
of Directors wished to introduce tie principle of selection 
^ ^” iigliex ranks, and also tie system of regimental 
rise, but neither of these measures was then carried out. 

.The Court, in their letter of July 1799, quoted above, 
cancelled their order so far as regarded selection, but 
they adhered to their decision respecting regimental 
promotion, and expressed themselves as follows :_ 

“ Having considered that part of our orders of tho 8th 
Ja 'Wiry 1796, which relates to the passing over such Licutc- 
nanl-Colonels as may bo considered unfit for the command 
of regiments or battalions in tho soveral corps, or to bo 
Chief Engineer, as also the application of the same principle 
to the promotion of Colonels to be Major-Generals ; we have 
thought proper to direct that tho same be rescinded. 

“ 0n tl10 most maturc aTld deliberate attention to all (hat 
has been urged in objection to the principle laid down in 
our orders of the date above mentioned, of promotion by 
regimental succession,, wo have seen nothing to induct us 
to depart from thif rule, which is therefore to be abided 
by, with tho following modification, viz., that tho officers 
of infantry be promoted by 'seniority in tlieir respective 
regiments to the. rank of Major, and afterwards to tho 
higher ranks l»y seniority in the wliolo corps.” 

Ontiio 5th November 1799, the following ordor was 
issued, proscribing tho principle upon which officers were 
t o bo poHt(»(l to rugimontfl :— 

"The Right Honorable the Governor in Council has been 
pi. ased to resolve that tho fifteen senior officers of each rank 
nliull bo successively posted to the fiftcou regiments 1 of 
infantry now on the establishment, that the next in senimity 
'•fiall be posted in a similar manner, eud that this operation 

Ih.r. t ii in on of E umpool) n i.-l fourteen of I II I i vo inftiutr.. 




H 


75 


[I1ST0RY 01' Tilt MADRAS ARMY. 


slinll ho repeated until all the corps may he complete with CliA.P v 
officers. * 1 ’ - 

The postings were made accordingly, but tho distribu¬ 
tion was cancelled almost immediately in consequence of* 
the contemplated addition to the establishment of three 
regiments of native infantry*, which took place in Decem¬ 
ber. The officers were then posted 1 on tho principle laid 
down in the order, and regimental rank in tho infantry 
commenced on the 1st January 1800. 

Certain other orders, of which the following ia an 
abstract, were received from the Court of Directors in 
November 1799, and published to the Army. 


The order of the Supreme Government, granting an 
addition of one rupee per diem to the pay of Captain- 
Lieutenants, was. confirmed. 

I lie order of the same Government, by which the batta 
of Captain was granted to Brevet-Captains, was cancelled, 
and an addition of one rupee per diem to their pay was 
auct ioned instead. 


Additional 
allov ancog 
to Capluin- 
L am tenant a 
and Brc\ f't 
C aptaiuB, 


Officers who had attained tho rank of Lieutenant- Retiring 

Colonel, Major, Captain, or Captain-Lieutenant, and 

w hose health rendered it impossible for them to servo “wMo to 

longer in India, were permitted to retire on half pay. India. ^ 

I he satno privilege, under similar circumstances, was 

granted to Lieutenants of 13 years* standing, and Ensigns 

of 9 years, including a furlough of 3 years. Lieutenants 

of shorter standing, if unable to serve in India, wero 

allowed to retire on tho half pay of Em ign. 

The sale of. commissions, the aecoptnnco, directly Solo of 

or indirectly, of any comin iisa& u. pia.u niiiry or other Cun '«q ‘ 'no 

' protutytaj. 

on retirement, was prohibited on pain of forfeiture of W 
pension. 

1 Although officers were i^rmnnoutlf \Atu\ before this tlnio 

I l»t \uu’ ueld'iui minorcd f . n* ono regiment to ftuoihor. 






CHAP. XVI. 


Passuge- 

money. 


Ilc-distri- 
bunion of 
the troops. 


Centro 
bi vision. 


Northm n 
I j >'- 11‘0r 


76 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


Subalterns leaving India on sick certificate were 
allowed Its. 1,000 as passage-money, and Commanders of 
Indiamen were prohibited from charging more than that 
sum for tko passage of any Subaltern, Assistant Surgeon, 
or Cadet. 

During the same month the following re-distribution of 
the Army, which had become necessary in consequence 
of the accession of territory, was dirocted to be carried 

9 

out. 


Centre Division . 

A brigade of European and native troths’at each of 
the undermentioned stations, viz., Fort St. George, Walla- 
jahbad, and Veiloro. 

A brigado of European and native cavalry at Arcot. 

One regimont«of European infantry, and a detachment 
of native infantry at Arnec. 

One battalion of native infantry at Sankerrydroog, 
furnishing detachments to Salem, Namcul, and Ah too r. 

One battalion of native infantry at Chandorglmrry, 
furnishing detachments to Rarapore, Ongole, and Nclloro. 

One battalion of native infantry, divided between 
Kistnaghervy and Ryacottali, • 

Threo companies native infantry at Am boor. 

One company of Europeans, and two companies of 
native invalids at Cuddulorc. 

One company of native infantry at Pondicherry. 

Five companies of artillery at the Mount. 

Invalids, recruits, and tinfe-expired men at Poona- 

inalloe. 

Northern Division. 


Six companies European infantry, on-' company 
avUll.M-y, and tv*o hnitnliona of uutivu infantry t,hy 

dihtrivl ol Masidipatatn. 


* 





Four companies European infantry, a detachment of CHAP. XVI. 

artillery, and a battalion of native infantry in the district - 

of Vizagapatam. Head-Quarters at Chicacole. 1 

One battalion native infantry, two-companies European 
invalids, and ono company native invalids in the district 
of Ganjain. Head-quarters at Aska. 

Mysore. • 

Two regiments of European infantry, three battalions Myaorc. 
of native infantry, and two companies of artillery at 
Seringapatam. 

One regiment European infantry, two battalions native 
infantry, one regiment native cavalry, and ono company 
of artillery at Ckittledroog. 

Two battalions of native infantry in Bednore and 
Soonda, one battalion native infantry at Nundidroog and 
Puughur. 

Ono regiment native cavalry at Bangalore. 

One regiment native cavalry at Serah. 

Southern Division . 

Ono regiment of European cavalry, and one of infantry, Somhorn 
ono battalion of native infantry, and one company of 1 l ' 1J,0I1 ‘ 
artillery at Triehinopoly. 

One battalion native infantry in the district of Tun- 
jore. 

Ono battalion native infantry at Madura. 

battalion native infantry at Palamoottah. 

One battalion native infantry, and a detachment of 
invalid artillery at Dindigul, furuiBhing detachments to 
Onroor and oilier poatn. 

One regiment of native cavalry, and one battalion of 
native infantry Coimbatore. 

1 Chtoncolti wcu> at that Umo incluU«)d in thn Strict of Vii^gnputium 

fj 






CHAP. XVI. 


Hyderabad. 


Foreign 

service. 


Cadet 

company, 

IbOu 




78 


history or THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Hyderabad . 

*1 wo companies artillery, one regiment native 
and six battalions native infantry. 


cavalry, 


Foreign Service . 

One company artillery, and two battalions native infan¬ 
try in Ceylon. 

Ono company artillery, one regiment European infantry, 
and one battalion native infantry divided between Malacca, 
Amboynn, and Bauda. 

In July 1800 tbe following orders were issued for tho 
formation and discipline of a company of Cadets :_ 

“ G.O.O. , Fort St. George, 15 th July 1800. 

“Tho Right Honorable tho Governor in Council has boon 
pleased to resolve that for tho present the above-mentioned 1 
Cadets of Infantry shall bo formed into a company, placed 
under the command of Captain Charles Armstrong and* 
stationed at Chingleput, 1 whore tbe unoccupied barracks and* 
quarters will be allotted for their accommodation. 

“ Major-General Brathwaite will be ploa-od to fix upon an 
uniform for (ho company of Cadets; ho will also appoint such 
Non-Commb aioned Offieora to assist Captain Armstrong as 
he may doom necessary for this purposo; ho. will cause tho 
company to bo supplied with tho requisite arms and accoutre¬ 
ments, and furnish Captain Armstrong with such instructions 
for hi3 guidance as ho may judge necossary with resp^t to 
tho discipline of the company. 

“ As it is the intention of the Right Honorable the Govornor 
in Council to promote the Cadets on this establishment to 
1 11 vacant commissions in the corps for whioh they arc 


1 1 ' : '"ha oompi.ny wag removed to Tripuasoor in November ISO" 
tv CiuUlaloro about the middlo of 1806. 





respectively destined, when Captain Armstrong shall report CHAP 
them qualified to act as officers ; they are permitted to draw — 
the pay and allowances of Lieutenants from this date. 

“ Captain Armstrong is permitted to draw, so long as ho 
shall continuo to command tho company of Cadets, the pay 
and allowances of a Major of Iufantry, instead of those of his 
own rank.” 

# 

“ Head-Quarters , Choultry Plain, 24th July 1800. 

“ O.O. by Major-General Braihwaite. 

“ As directed by the Government orders of the 15th instant, 
tho Cadets of Infantry lately arrived are formed into a 
company to be denominated tho 1 Cadet Company,’ which is 
to be' mustered, paid, and returned as such, and to be 
commanded by Captain Armstrong of tho lt>th regiment 
native infantry. 

The Cadet Company is to be prepared as expedite usly as 
possible to march from the Presidency to Chingloput, and tho 
necessary indents arc to be mado upon the arsenal of Fort St. 

Goorgc. for such articles as cannot bo supplied at Cliingleput, 
i ds completing tho company with Europe accoutrements, 
arms, either muskets or fusils, and ammunition both balled 
ami blank, in the proportion allowed by tho regulations to a 
corps nf infantry for annual pmctico. 

u When reported ready to move, Captain Armstrong will 
bo instructed in regard toils camp-cquipngo ” 

“ The dress of the Cadet Company is established as fob Uniform 
Iowa:— 0 

u A scarlet jacket inn do to ill cl go and to button down tho 
front, with yellfcw cuffs nnd collar; three rows oi small 
white raetul buttons with twist, the colour of tho jacket,’ 
down the forepart: twiBt also to be substituted for shoulder 
straps; a round black hat with cockade and red feather; 
white linen waist-coats and pantaloons, and half.boots ; aide 
#nns—n bayonet/' 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


80 


CjJ AP. X VI. On tho 7tli July 1801, regulations on the subject of 
Droas r?£u- dress were issued by the Commander-in-Chief, prescribing 
l aUonE ’ iy01, the color and pattern of the clothing to be worn by each 
branch of the army. Standards, colors, and equipments, 
wore all minutely described. 

for^thc 1 Cadet ’August rules and regulations for tho 

Company. management of the company of gentlemen Cadets, of 
which the following is an abstract, were published to the 
army :— 

1. The company to bo formed into two sub-divisions, each 
to be commanded by a European Officer. 

2. The Ensigns, Serjeants, and Corporals required for tho 
company to bo selected from amongst the cadets. 

3. The company to attend drill or parade twice a day. 

4. General orders, and the orders of the Cadet Company 
to be read daily to each sub-division. 

5. The articles of war to be read to each cadet on his 
joining, and to the whole company at evening parade on the 
first Sunday in each month. • 

b. The instruction at drill will comprehend overy part of 
the rules and regulations for the formations, movemonts, and 
field exorciso established for His Majesty's forces ; and in 
addition thereto, tho form of mounting and relieving guards, 
pickets, sentinels, Ac., as also the modes of performing all 
other military duties of parade and otherwise." 
buty. $ “ A suitable proportion of the Cadet Company nhall 

always tfompose a part of the detail of the main guard at 
Gheagfepnt, and from retreat beating till 8 o’clock of tho 
following morning shall furnish a certain number of sentinels, 
viz., at tho Commanding Officer’s quarters, over tho arms, hr 
prisoners of iho guard, and at tho main gate of tho fort." 

8. “ The cadets shall rise at daybreak, breakfast at 7 or 8 
oVlc k according to the season, cimo at 2. sup at 8, and retire 
immediately after. All lighU shall bo pul. mi 
ur,H ^» lu ‘d the officer of the day shall bo held rc*poi nhlu r.,t 




• mtSTQy 


HI9T0BY OF TJIE MADRAS ARMY. 


31 



an exact and punctual observance of this order. No cadet, 
between i) o’clock at night, and daybreak of the following 
morning, shall go out of the foxt. 

9 n A Qoneral Mess shall be established for tho breakfast, 

dinner, and supper of the Cadet Company. The Captain of 

the company shall bo considered as the President of tho 
Mess, and a Commissioned Officer in turn as Vice-President. 
Every individual of tho company shall belong to tho Moss, 
and no ono shall be absent from it on any other account than 
sickness. Each person shall appear in the prescribed uniform 
on all occasions at the Moss. Tho utmost decorum in every 
respect shall be observed, and no meal shall bo of longer 
continuance than an hour, or an hour and a half. 


CHAP. XVI- 


Mess. 


10. “ ISTo spirituous liquor, wine, or l>eer, shall be admit- Liquor, 
ted into the fort or pettah of Chengloput without the express 
sanction of tho Commanding Officer, nor shall any issuo of 
either of theso articles ‘be allowed from tho Mess between 
meals, but under the permission oi tho Commanding Officer, 
and any native butler, or other person, convicted of selling 
spirituous liquors, wine, or beer, at Chengloput, or in its 
neighbourhood without the license of tho Commanding Officer, 

Bhail he punished in tho most exemplary manner, and turned 
out of the place.” 

11. “ Every cadet shall study the Hiudnstauoo languago, studios, 
and for that purpose, as well as of being instructed in the 
manner of making out returns, reports, &o., and of acquiring 
a knowledge of the rules and ivgulatiomB of the servi ce by 
copying the goneral orders in force ; tho port liberty of tho 
Cadet Company shall be stopped daily between the ha °f 
JO and 12; during which time i&o individual of the dompu^V] 

•hull b permitted to go out of the tort.” 

12 “ Divine service shall be perfbrimd c-vory Sunday Divine 
f ronoon by tho Captain, or other person unde- hi.; nomination, Bl ' rvil ‘ 
ot which the company shall atu ml.” 

i:>. “ Except on occasions of taking some manly exercise, tt. i 
such as playing at cricket, fi »ou, o. other filin', no cadet shall 

VOl. Ut. , 11 

m 


t 



Leave. 


Puimhnienta. 


CJet.rral 
r. gu la lions. 


Military 

1802 . 


82 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


appear ont of hiB quarters, otherwise than dressed in the uni¬ 
form established for the Cadet Company in the General Order 
of the 24th A pril 1800 : the habit of lounging from quarter to 
quarter in a white waistcoat is expressly forbid.” 

14. “ No leave of absence from Cliengleput, even for a day, 
shall be granted to any individual belonging to the Cadet 
Company but by application to head-quarters.’’ 

15. “ Inattention to ordors, neglect of duty, and other 
irregularities will be punished by private, or public, reproof, 
extra drills, and duties in the first instance : by a privation 
of port liberty, and seclusion from society by temporary 
confinement, in the second, and by arrest or confinement in 
the last.” 

“ Upon tho receipt of this order at Chcngloput, it is to ho 
read at three successive evoniiig parades to the Cadet Com¬ 
pany.” 

On the 20th of the same month a new code of general 
regulations and orders, framed upon one recently issued 
for the guidance of the Royal troops, was published to tho 
army. Every officer serving in the Presidency was 
directed to furnish himself with a copy of those regula¬ 
tions which consisted of ten separate sections or chapters, 
viz.:— 


1. Rotation of duties. 

2. Field. 

3. Garrison. 
p 4. Sent lies. 

5. Mounting of guard b. 


G. Orderly men. 

7. Sick officers. 

K. Leave of abbcnco. 
9. Ordors. 

10 . Otumulti.es. 


On the 22nd September 1802 an order was issued for 
the regulation of military bazars with the view of pro* 
vf r ng tho abides and oppression which had ovistod 
under thu old i- v- tom. Tho following is an abstract uf 
the order 

i All otHoorrf nouimandi.ig forts, stations, or cantoumr uta 
un prohibit,ad, from and after the 1st January 1^03, from 





MlNtST# 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


83 



being engaged, directly or indirectly, in levying, receiving, CHAP. XVI. 
or boing concerned in any tax, impost, or receipt*from tlie 
bazar, or from any article of supply; or receiving, in any # 
manner whatever, any perquisite, or emolument of command 
not expressly authorised by Government. 
m II. Tho authority of officers commanding fort's or canton¬ 
ments, ‘over military bazars, or dealers of any description, 
ia hereby oxprossly limited to tho necessary means of preserv¬ 
ing peace and order, to the prohibition, within the limits of 
their command, of the sale of intoxicating drugs and liquors, 
to tho extent that tho health and discipline of tho troops, 
may, in their judgment require, and to tho punishment of 
crimes, strictly military, which may bo committed by fol¬ 
lowers of tho army. 

III. All disputes rclativo to property, all cases of civil 
injury, or matters relating to the general police of the coun¬ 
try, bolong exclusively to tho jurisdiction of tho civil magis¬ 
trate, and military officers shall not interfere thoroin. 

TV. Rice, butcher’s meat, and all articles of food for the use 
of tho troops, shall be exempt from duties or imposts of any 
description, oxcept such as may ho levied by the authority of 
the Collector of the district, on i.hc principle which regulates 
tho ordinary collection of the rovenue. 

V. The forcible seizure of sheep is expressly prohibited. 

Vi. Annnally, in the month of July, when a statement shall 
have been received of tho amount colloeted from ‘military 
bazars under the direction of tin Board of Revenue, a com 
tuition of officers will be appointed to report upon tho distri¬ 
bution of Lho funds in conformity with tho following rules :— 

Officers entitled to share shall be divided into threo 1 gbaren 0 f 


olnMuB, viz 


First Class—Officers commanding l)h boons. 
Rocond do. d»». District**. 


oflti'oi'B j n tJip 
prole h of 
bum in. 


Third do. do. Garrisons or Canton¬ 

ments 





This classification *** modified by mi Onlor dritud I6th October 1801 




I I 





84 


HISTORY OF THIS MADRAS ARMY. 



T. 


T-Iio portion allowed to officers of tlio first class shall bo 
double the amount allotted to officers of the second, and the 
portion of officers of the second shall be double the amount 
allotted to those of the third class. 


j.he distribution being approved by tho Governor in Coun¬ 
cil shall be published in General Orders to the army, and the 
payment provided for in the same manner as in a distribution 
of off-reckonings. 


85 


During August 1799 a representation regarding the 
conditiou of the Native troops serving at Amboyna and 
Banda was received by Government from Lieutenant- 
Colonel McNeile, commanding in the Eastern islands. 

Ho stated that the 17tli battalion had been four years 
on foroign service, and the volunteers from the 11th 
battalion nearly three years, although at the time of 
their embarkation the men did not expect to be absent 
for more than a year. He pointed out their sufferings 
from the climate, and from want of pay; arrears for 
13 months having been due at the date of his report, and 
he concludcMl by saying that bad health had “ prevailed 
to so distressing an excess as to have occasioned more 
instances of in amity and Ruicide than I have before 
known in the whole course of my service,” 

Major-General Brathwaite, then in command at Madras 
during the absenco of General Hands in tlie field, when 
forwarding Colonel McNeile’a letter to Government, 
proposed to raise two or more corps of 500 men each for 
the special purpose of foreign service. 

This proposal was not adopted, but the Supreme 
Government were requested to order the Bengal Marine 
battalion to relieve the Madras Native troops, as the acces¬ 
sion of territory from the conquest of Myi-oro rendered it 
impossible for the Madras Government to spare iron for 
that purpose. 

Government about the same time issued tho following 
order as some compensation to the troops for their pro¬ 
longed detention on foreign service :— 

« Q.O.Q'j Fori St.. George, 5th A: . .o ^ r 1799. 

“ Until an opportunity shall occur, which tho Right Honor- 
nhl. tho Governor in Council now trusts will not be long 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


Native Infantry, 1709-1803. 


( SL 


CHAP. XVI. 


Protracted 
detention 
on foreign 
service, 1799. 


Mea* tiros 
for relief. 


Family 

oortifieu • oe. 




80 



CHAP. XVT. 


Pensions. 


AuRinon- 

iutiou. 


15t.li rerci- 
rnftnt 

< McLeod's) 
a '.i« m.n.i. 

J tith regi- 
umnt 
(l Uviwvi’ii) 
M.N.X. 


^ fllh rryi 
\ *.nt 

( 1 i « rcil,i) 
81 i T.li.I. 


<SL 

history or Tnr madras army. 


proti acted, for relieving the Native troops now serving at 

a acca, Ambojna, and Banda; his Lordship in Council is 

pleased to order and direct, that no deduction shall bo made 
from the family certificates of those corps, on account of the 
casualties which may have happened since their embarkation 
on that service. 1 * 

“ being the further intention of tbe Governor in Council 
to manifest his sense of the zeal and gallantry of these troops, 
and to reward their attachment to the Honorable Company, 
by granting to the families of those who nmy have died in 
battle, or otherwise, a pen ion. equal to the regulated pension • 
of the different ranks ; tho Commander-in-Chief is requested 
to order lists to be prepared of the persons constituting the 
immediate families of the deceased, for the purpose of 
regulating the payment of the pensions.’ 1 

The troops on the Madras establishment having been 
found unequal to the duties entailed by the increase of 
territory on the conquest of Mysore, an order was issued 
on the 14th T)ocembor authorising an augmentation to 
the extent of threo regiments of Native infantry, to bo 
numbered the 15th, 16th and 17th. 

ilie 1st battalion 15th regiment was formed from tho 
ord extra battalion, and placed under the command of . 
Lieutenant-Colonel Georgo LJre. 

ih>.: 2nd batt .iion was formed from the Masulipatam 
battalion, supple man tod by drafts from tho Native corps 
at Ainboyna, tho 2nd of the 7th, iho 2nd of tho Oth, and 
tho 1st of the 12lL. Lfeutouant-Colonol Thomas Coko 
was appointed to-command. Colonel Robert Crokor 
became Colmiol of tho regiment. 

J1- 1st battalion 10th rogimont was raised at Trichi- 
nopoly on tho 1st January 1800, the nudeim, tn tho m 
extent of 360 men of all ranlfb, having boon furnished 
irom Iho Ut let, lat 2nd, 1st and 2nd 6tb, lot oth, Ufc 
7th, Ibi bth, and 1st LltLi. Lioutonant-Ooloncl Joimo- 


# • 




HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


87 


retfc, by whose name .tlio battalion is still known, was cnAP XY.I. 
appointed to command. 

The 2nd battalion was raised at Madura on the 1st 16 th rocri- 
January 1800, tho nucleus being furnished by drafts co m!n\i? 
the extent of 350 men from the 2nd 3rd, 1st and 2nd 
4th, 2nd 6th, 1st 7th, 1st 9th, and 2nd 13th. Lieutenant- 
Colonel Dvco was appointed to this battalion, and Colonel 
George Fotheringham to command the regiment. 

Tho 1st battalion 17th regiment was raised at Guntoor 
on tho same date as the other new battalions, and was (w^hab) 
formed of drafts from the 2nd 1st, 2nd 2nd, 2nd 5th, 1st 83rd M * NX 


8th, 1st 9th, 1st lOfcli, 1st and '2nd 11th, and 2nd 12th. 
Lieutenant-Colonel Kinsey was appointed to command. 

Tho 2nd battalion was raised at Chicocole and formed 17th r vpi 
of drafts from the 2nd 5th, 2nd 8tli, 2nd 10th, and 1st (Doran,l) 
and 2nd 11th. Lieutenant-Colonel Durand was appointed 3uh J,L * 1, 
to command. Colonel Goorgp Wahab became Colonel 
of the regiment and gave his name to the 1st battalion 
having been in command of tho district of Guntoor whoa 
it was raised. 


Tho officers and men of the regiments which had 
misbehaved at Paujalamcoorchy on the 5tb September 
1799 wore excluded from any share in the promotion 
created by this augmentation. 

The corps of Mak\ys was struck off tho strength of Ou Malays vj>s 
Madras establishment during tho month of December, 
and traus r errod to the Government of Ceylon. 

On the 17th June 1800 orders wore issued for the An^nim- 
formation of two additional regiments of Nntivo infantry, t,vtion > 1800 
t,o 1,,, numborud thu 18th and l. fL ic-pnttivnly. 

fho 1st battalion .18th regiment wa* raided at Banga- mh 
loro iu July fioin a nnclona of drafts from the let 2nd, Sgj 

U :ird, 2nd 6th, 2nd Otli, Ut 7th, 2ud 12th, 2nd 13th, a0l! ‘ 


mciit 

l< IMtJi ^ 

M.N I. 


WtStfly 



CHAP. XYI. 


18th regi¬ 
ment* 
(Nuiidy) 
odiii M.N.I. 


19th regi¬ 
ment 

(Forbea) 37th 
Grenadiers. 


19th regi¬ 
men, t 

(M.'u. U'Cgor) 
38th M.N.I. 


Regimental 

Adjcitaneies 

fiboliahod. 


Increase to 
the pay and 
a.' .wanoes 
of Native 

troop®. 


history op the madras army. 

tvnd 1st 9th. Major Parkison was placed in command, 
the Lieutenant-Colonel being on the staff. 

The 2nd battalion was raised at Nundidroog during 
the same month, receiving drafts from the 1st and 2nd 
1st, 2nd 3rd, 2nd 4th, 1st 8th, 1st 12th, 1st 13th, and 1st 
14th. Lieutenant-Colonel J. Cuppage was appointed to 
command. 

The 1st battalion 19th regiment was raised at Itcha- 
poor, receiving drafts from the 2nd 7th, 2nd 8th, 2nd 
9th, 2nd 10th, 1st and 2nd 11th, 2nd 14th, and 1st 7tli. 
This battalion appears to have been named after an 
officer who originally belonged to tho 2nd battalion. 

The 2nd battalion was raised at Ellore, receiving drafts 
from the 2nd 1st, 2nd 2nd, 1st 4th, 1st 5th, 1st 6th, 1st 
9th, and 1st 10th, and was placed under Major Macgro- 
gor, the Lieutenant-Colonel being in England. 

Colonels Francis Torreus and Carey Lolando wore 
appointed to the 18th and 19th regiments respectively. 

As a European Adjutant was allowed to each battalion 
of Native infantry, and the duties connected with tho 
stores were performed by a serjoant, the appointment of 
Adjutant and Quartermaster to a regiment was consider! d 
to bo unnecessary, and was abolished on the 25th June. 

Shortly after the iucrcaso to tho pay of the Europeon 
troops in 1798, tho propriotyof taking similar steps iu the 
case of tho Native Army was urged upon the Supremo 
Governmont on the ground that the increased price of 
provisions in the Carnatic ronderod it almost impossible 
for a sepoy to subsist upon the established rate of pay. 
It was also pointed out t-bat— 

“Tho sepoy in B« ngal, where rice is, at an average cmnpn- 
tfuiun, procurable at th«; rate of from 30 to 40 score for tho 
rupee, motives in addition to his pay a ooiiHtaufc allowance 
° r half hutta. His situation is infinitely superior to that of an 
ordinury laborer, and consequently an object of attainment. 








“ On the Coast, where rice is seldom cheaper in any station CHAP. XV 

than 18 seers per rupee, and where it is frequently served to - 

the troops from the public stores at 13 seers per rnpeo as a 
• ncccssai’y indulgence from Government, this allowance is 
unknown.” 

The Supreme Government eventually consented to * 
revise the scalo of pay and allowances to the Madras 
Native tro'ops, and on the 11th July 1800 the following 
General Order was issued on the subject:— 

“ The Right Honorable the Governor in Council reflecting 
on the scries of important servicos rendered by tho sepoys 
on the establishment of Fort St. George, has been impressed 
with a deep senso of the gallantry and fidelity so generally 
displayed by them. Ho has therefore been studious to 
avail himself of every opportunity to manifest his Lordship’s 
attention to their interests and comforts, and his Lordship 
reflects with pride and satisfaction on the frequent instances 
in which lie has beon enabled to reward the distinguished 
merit of individuals. 

“ Underlie impression of these sentiments, the Governor in 
Council has extended his enquiries with the assistance of 
Major-Geiloral Brathwaiff into the Actual situation of the 
Native soldiers, and has in consequence satisfied himselfTrom 
% tho reports of General Brathwaite, as well as from other 
sources of information, that the rate of pay at present allowed 
to tho Native infantry doos not bear a ju«t* proportion to the 
expense of maintaining themselves and their families, nor to 
the duties attached to the profession of arms. The Gover¬ 
nor in Council h is therofo .o represented tho result *.l\hiB 
Lordship's enquiries to the Most Noble tho Govornor-Goncral 
of Bengal. 

“ Tho .Most Noblo the Govcrnor-Gi nrral in Council having 
considered this representation, and being convinced from 
personal observation during his Lordship’s residence) at this 
Brostdoncy, of the necessity of extending tho bounty of the 
Company to the Native troops, tho Governor in Council baa 
vuj„ in. 12 




T mST/fy 





CHAP. XVI. 


90 


• iySTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 



therefore sincere pleasure in announcing his Lordship’s 
resolution to bestow on them a more adequate portion of the 
advantages derived to the State from those successes to which 
their bravery and attachment have materially contributed. 

“ The Right Honorable the Governor in Council has accord- 
ingly been pleased A establish, under the authority of the 
Most Noble the Governor-General in Council of Bengal, the 
following increase of pay and advantages to the Native 
troops on iho establishment of Fort St. George according to 
the annexed tables of pay and batta :— 


Commissioned Officers . 

Pay of Native ‘‘The pay of all subadars of infantry who shall have 
ulRcerj. actually served ten years in that rank shall 1x5 twenty star 

pagodas per month. 

“ The pay of all subadars of infantry who shall have 
actually served six yoars in that rank shall bo fifteen star 
pagodas per month. 

“The pay'of all subadars of infantry who shall not 
actually have served six years iu that rank shall continue as 
at present to bo twelve star pagodas per month. * 

“ Subadars of cavalry who shall dually have served t ri 
years in that rank shall receivo an addition, to thoir present 
pay, of eight star pagodas per month. 

“Subadars of cavalry who Hliall have actually served six 
years in that, ranlf shall receive an addition of three star 
pagodas per month to their present pay. 

“The pay of subadars of cavalry who may not actnully 
have served six years in that rank shall continuo to bo, as at 
presont, twenty-six star pagodas per month. 

"The pay of syrangs of gun lascars, and jemadars of 
pioi- iug tbo eonwtend of companies) who 

actually have served ten yours in that rank shall bo twelve 
star pagodas por month. 

Tbo pay of syrangs of gun lasoars, and jemadars of 
pionoiM (having llio command nf companion) who filial! 








ft 


TAIMSr*,, 



HISTORY OT TITK MADRAS ARMY. 


01 



~5cf uAlly have served six years in that rank shall bo nyie star CHAP. XVI. 
pagodas per month. ' - - 

“The pay of syranga of gun lascars, and jemadars of 
pioneers (having the command of companies) who shall not 
actually have served six years in that rank shall continue as 
at present to ho seven star pagodas per month. 

“ The Commander of the Army in Chief will direct the 
Adjutant-General of the Army to famish the Native officer 
who may attain the gradations of rank above specified with 
certificates from his office, and to transmit duplicates of them 
to the Office of audit. 

° The pay of jemadars of infantry shall be seven star 
pagodas per month. * 

The Native adjutants of corps of cavalry as well as of’ Native 

infantry shall invariably be chosen from anionp* the iemadars ad 3 utanta to 
Jirnl o,.„1 ... „ *_ J •_ ' bo selected 


and Major-General Brathwaite will direct that if the appoint- from cho 
mont of Native adjutant should now be held in any regi- of 

Dn-jnfc or battalion by officers of the rank of subadar, it shall ’' 

bo immediately vacated, and filled up according to the teuor 


of this order. 


The batta of commissioned Nitivc officers, of whatever Pni'^of 
corps or rank, shall continno to be the same as is at present ’ 
fi^cd by tho existing regulations. office™. 


Non-Commissioned and Privates. 


"The pay of liavildara of infantry shall be three star 
pngodns per month. «,f non o >ir. 

I bo pay of naiguea oP infantry shall bo two star pagodas nffleem amt 
and twenty-one fanning per month. prfvateu. 

llio pay of sepoys and Native ■ doctors of infantry shall 
be two star pagodas per month. 

“ The-pay of sepoy boys of whatever corps shall bo one 
litar pagoda per month. 

“ Tho pay of first tindale of gun Iubuu-s, and at havil- 
du/H of pioneers shall each be three star pagodas p fcr 
month. 




imsTfy 



CHAP. XYI. 


NO Htopr»uges 
t»> he nuido 
»• * vlotbiug. 


*’ Ihe pay of second tindals of gun lascars and naigues 
of pioneers shall be two star pagodas and twenty-one fanams 
per month. 

“ Iho pay of gun lascars, of pioneers, and of Nativo 
doctors shall be two star pagodas and ten fanams per 
month. 

“ The batta of first and second tindals of gun lascars, 
and of liavildars and naigues of pioneers, shall be one fan am 
and forty 4 *ash per day. 

“ The batta of liavildars, naigues, and sepoys of infantry, 
of gun lascars, pioneers, and of Native doctors, shall be one 
fanam per day, or in lieu thereof one seer of rico in cases 
when rico may be issued from the public stores. 

“ Tho pay and batta of drummers, lifers, puckallies, and 
of bhestioa shall continue to be the same as arc at presoul 
fixed by the existing regulations. 

“ Tho rates of pay and batta above specified for all corps 
and rank8 Bhall bo clear and exclusive of all stoppages for 
clothing, which will continue to be provided for, as at present, 
by issues of cash from tho public treasury. 

4 ' The rates of pay above specified for all corps and ranks 
shall be the same in all months without reference to tlio 
number of days in each month.” 


Vn\ nnrl 
'•u' (iof 
tuvulidu. 


• Invalids. 

“ The pay and bat ta of invalid! of Native infantry, of gun 
lascars, and of pioneers, shall continue to bo tho Bamc as at 
prosont. 

“Snbadars of infantry, syrangs of gun lascars, and y ma- 
dars of pioneer:, who may havo attained the gradations of 
•ml; before specified, shall receive invalid pay or pensions 
according to tho scale of their actual pay at the timo of their 
being admitted on tho non-oflectivo list. 

No class of Nativo cavalry chad in futoro bo invalided, 
bnioftitors and men, of whutevor class or rank, shall, when 


# 




HISTORY OF Tiy: MADRAS ARMY. 


93* 



• 

judged unfit for the service by the proper committees, bo CHAP. XVL 
pensioned on half the not pay which they respectively enjoyed 
at the time of being transferred to the non-effective list. 

“The Governor in Council has been pleased further* to Pensions for 
resolve that the Native officers and men, of whatever corps or {faJba° B8 of 
ranks, who may lose a limb by wounds on actual service, shall 
bo pensioned on the full pay of their respective ranks. 

“ The Governor in Council is pleased to order and diroct Operation 
that the foregoing regulations for the payment of the Native of ordor * 
troops on this establishment shall commence from the 1st 
day of July 1800. 

u The Governor in Council takes this occasion to publish Revenue 
his Lordship’s intention of disbanding the x'evenue corps as cor l )3 ‘ 

'soon as circumstances may render that measure convenient. 

The pay and batta of those corps arc not to be affected by 
this order. ^ 

Such parts of all orders or regulations as may bo con- Orders 
trary to the tenor of this order arc to ceaao to have effect oancellod 
from tho let July 1800.” 

1 ho following were tho tables of pay and batto accord¬ 
ing to tho now rates :— 


Natirf Infantry. 


— 

Not Puy pur month 
cxolnhive of Stop¬ 
pages for Clothing. 

Batta per day when 
in tho iiohl, <fco. 


VAO. 

fan. 

CASH. 

rAO. 

FAN. 

i-Aini. 

Subadar ... 

12 

0 

0 

6 

0 

0 

Jemadar ... 

7 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

llnyjldar ... 

3 

0 

0 

1 



N"iguO 

o 

21 

* 0 

* 

0 

0 

orpoy . tid Nr. 1 ivo Dociur. 

2 

0 

0 

f l 



Drummer and Fifcr 

•> 

21 

0 

l 

SO 

0 

tiepoy Roys 

1 

0 

0 




Pm Uully with Pollock 

a 

2 

7 :J 

2 

0 

0 


•Or in lieu thore-d', ono ecir of net) p< day when rioo may be 
inraii tram tho public store’ . 














mts/ffy 



HISTOUY or THR*MADKAS AKMY. 
Gun Zarcars and Pioneers. 


<SL 


Bp emit boys. 


Jlolinf of (bo 
T»f n*i n.B 
troop* at 
Amhovna. 
lbVl. 


Gun Laecars. 


Net Pay per 
month exclu¬ 
sive of Stop¬ 
pages foi 
Clothing. 


Pioneers. 


Net Pay .per month exolu- 
eivo of Stoppages for 
Clothing. 


Bntta 
per day 
whou in 
the field. 


Syrang 

First Tindal ... 

Second Tindal. 

Lascar and Na- 
tivo Doctor. 

Bheaty 

Lascar Boys ... 


PAG. Y. c. 

7 0 0 

3 0 0 

2 21 0 
2 10 0 

^2 0 0 
10 0 


Jemadar . 
Havildnr . 
Nuiguo 
Pioneer 


PAG. P. c. 

7 0 0 
3 0 0 
2 21 0 
2 10 0 


F. C. 
3 0 

* 1 40 
♦1 40 
1 0 

2 0 


Or in lieu thereof one seer of rico per day vhen rice is feued. 

“ It » to be understood that the pay of the boy.s under tho 
dof.cnpt.on of sepoy, Ac. recruits, is to bo the same, whether 
x onging to the corps of cavalry, or infantry, or gun 
tavears, that, is to say, one pagoda per month ; but thoy aro 
not to receive batta in any situation until thoy are of ago to 
bo put on tho effective strength of such corps respectively.” 

Un the 11th August 1800 tho Bengal Marine battalion, 
abou , , strong, w.th 280 followers, including women 
and children, embarked at Madras under Captain Thomas 
Brougham for the relief of tho Madras Native troops 
serving at Malacca and Amboyna. About two-thirds of 
this corps were Mahouuxlans. 

Tho 2nd battalion 1st regiment (formerly tho 15 th 
battalion) and the Madras Volunteer battalion ret urned 

from" <r':. lr : Jf? 180L Th0 blowing is an extract. 
a * Rural Order iefjued on the or caeion 



























mNisr^ 



HI8T0KY OK T HE MADRAS AII1TY. 


95 


<SL 


“ 29 th May 1801 

J CHAP. XVI. 

“ Major-GeneralBrathwaitehas much satisfaction in availing Tha^To 
himself of tins opportunity to express bis entire apjfroba fc be 2ml oi tbo 
tion of Lioutcnant-Colonol McNcilo’s conduct during a long VotaEtU? 0 
course of arduous and important command, as well as of the battalio12 - 
exemplary zeal and spirit which have so eminently distin¬ 
guished the 2nd battalion 1st regiment, and the Volunteer 
corps, throughout a very trying 1 service, and an uncommonly 
tedious passage by sea. 

“ The General derives particular pleasure also in annonn- Honorary 
cmg to these corps tho resolution of the Governor in Couucil bad 8 e s. 
to testify his sense of thoir faithful attachment to tho British 
Government during a period of more than fivo years on 
foreign service, by bestowing on them individually a badge to 
be worn as an honorary mark of distinction ; and which the 
General hopes may bo in readiness for delivory previous to 
1 1 C departure of tho corps from tbe Presidency,” 

On the 20th August a new code of general rcgula- General 
ions and ordors, ,or tlio conduct of tho forces serving r^^tiou*. 

audor tho Presidency of Fort St, George, was published 
to tho Army. 

The following is an extract from that part of tho 
regulations which relates to orderlies 
“ 0rd f y mem—Para. lst - “The attachment of orderly BmpIoy * tet 

soldiers to officers being solely for the performance of duties ^ordorhc* 
purely military, the disgraceful practice of omploying Native 
Hifldiers in Carrying articles of table consumption ! in running 


1 OasuaUion wh«n ou snrrico in tho Extern 
in O.O., March n»*d Aujurunt 1802: 


letlandii, rvs imMiahect 


2ml battalion 1 nt roginiont ' 


... 233 

Volnntccr battalion 


03 

Gun Jafloaw . 


40 

Pionoora ... ... 

• 


• ... 22 



307 















HISTORY of THE MADRAS ARMY. 



<SL 


CHAP. XVT. 


kj the sides of palankins ! in supplying the place of domestics, 
and 4 horse-keepers behind carriages- and bandies ! and in 
following close at the heels of mounted horses, is to bo dis¬ 
continued, and no orderly soldier, except on urgent occasion, 
is to exceed the regulated military pace in tho execution 
of his duty.” 


Order 
modi Hed 
a-» respects 
roeruit boys, 
1806. 


Shortly after tho mutiny at Vellore in 1806, when the 
causes of that outbreak, and of the successful mainte¬ 
nance of the secrecy of the design, were under 
discussion, the expediency of tho order quoted above, as 
well as that of another of a similar character regarding 
rocruit boys, was called in question as tending to 
destroy the intimate association formerly existing ' 
between the sepoys and tlicir officers; it was also con¬ 
tended that the performance of the services specified in 
the orders was considered more as a privilege than as a 
degradation. 


This view appears to have been adopted by the then 
Commander-in-Chief, who, in an order dated 22nd Aug. 
1806, in which he colled che attention of all officers to the 
imperative necessity of becoming'thoroughly conversant 
with Hindostanee, went on to rescind tho order.-, by 
which the attachment of iho boys of the sepoy recruit 
establishment to thr European officers of corps as order¬ 
lies was prohibited, and concluded with these words :— 

“ His Excellency has been induced to adopt this decision 
from the conviction that the advantage gained by the 
restriction of the boys to duties purely military has not 
balanced the injury tin crvic. has sustained by tho lorn of 
the facility to tho acquirement of a common language aud 
knowledge of native coston , which their former attachment 
<o i ho junior officers jmxlueed.” 

Of tho 22nd September it wns tftsolved to raise a mow 
VuluntcK eorp to servo in the Moluccas for throe yours. 




V .hint • Li 
i n. 


marouY op the madras army. 97 

The strength was fixed at 500, non-commissioned officers, CHAP. XVI. 

rank and file, with tiio ordinary proportion of Native - 

commissioned officers, drummers, puckallios, &c. Tho 
European staff consisted of a Captain Commandant 
rm Adjutant, a Serjeant-Major, and a Quartermaster 
Serjeant. Tho Native staff, of a Jemadar Adjutant, a 
Drill Havildar, a Drill Naigue, a Drum-Major, and a Fife- 
Major. Captain Macpherson of the 14th regiment was 
appointed to command. 




Tho following order sotting forth tho conditions of Condition* 
service was issued by the Commander-in-Chief on the of 80rvic0 
23rd September:— 

“ For the purpose of carrying into effect the resolution of 
the Right Honorable the Governor in Council as published 
in the Government General Order of the 22nd instant, the 
Commander-in-Chief is pleased to direct that such men of tho 
undermentioned corps as may make a voluntary offer to 
serve in the Madras Volunteer battalion during a period of 
throe years at tho Molucca Islands, shall be permitted to do 
:,o on the following terms, viz., jemadars to enter tho Madras 
\oIuntcer battalion ns subadars, havildars as jemadars, 
naigaes as havildars, and the requisite proportion of privates 
as uaigues, according to seniority. 

“ During the timo the Madras Volunteer battalion moy 
icumin embodied, tho promotion shall be confined to it; tho 
K five commissioned, non-commissioned, and rank and file, 
e ill tor the present bo struck off the strength of their respec¬ 
tive corps, but on their return to i he coast, bo re-admitted in 
tho sovoral ranks which they may have thon attained on the 
<»utablishmont of b icli roiq ■* m m y best .mil tho conveni¬ 
ence of tho public service, and they will be permitted to 
lucre family certificates ' 


“ Corps from which msn arc permitted to volunteer for tho 
Mi dms Volunteer battalion, viz. :— 


VOL. mi. 


Corps from 
whirli \ oJ'» n 
kotn'nf .* an 
allow/ -1 


13 


?V 


08 


HISTORY OF mi: MADRAS ARMY. 



C HAP XVI. 


Assistant 
Burgeon, and 
r.eruit boys. 

Battalion 

'mbarka. 

Rod act Iona, 
lbUi-2. 


Invnlidb, 

IH02. 


and butting. 


Detachment 1st battalion 4th regiment at Fort St. George. 

The 2nd battalion 14th regiment at Fort St. George. 

The 1st do. 17tli do. do. 

The 1st do. 18th do. do. 

The 1st and 2nd Madras battalions. 

On the 13th October an order was issued by which an 
Assistant Surgeon was posted to tlio battalion, and threu 
recruit boys allowed to each company. 

This battalion embarked at Madras oil the 10th Octo¬ 
ber 1801. 

The Muggletoor Revenue battalion having shown 
symptoms of insubordination in November, was broken 
up during the month. 

The Tinnevolly Provincial battalion, the Nair, Tier, 
and Mopla battalions in the province of Malabar, ;md 
the 1st and 2nd Madras battalions, were reduced early 
in 1802, the four fir3t on the 31st March, and the others 
on the 29th April. 

Two companies, viz., the 19th and 20th, woro added to 
the Native Invalid estrblishmcnt on tho 2nd April, and 
ordered to be stationed at Fort St. George. 

On the 22nd May an ordor, from which tho following 
is an extract, was published regarding camp equipage nud 
hut ing:— 

“ Hospitals, and buildings for tho reception of tho amirs 
stores, and gram of regiments of cavalry, and for tho arms 
and stores of battalions of infantry, will bo provided at lixed 
stations at tho expense of Government, but the ruon, v ' . ,» 
not encamped, must bo hutted without auy additional ;pon-o 
to the public, as it is to ho clearly understood that tb allow¬ 
ance for tho provision and carriage of camp equipage in (.. 
defray all oxponsos for cover to the Native troops lu Mm 
Hold, in cantonment, or in garrison, in peace or in war," 

The allowance in question for ouch bran oh of tho 


iff i ora or ihe MAniiiV,- a it my 



PO 


<SL 


Corps. 

S 

o 

a 

B 

3 

Carriage 

and 

followers 
attached 
to tents. 

Carria go 
and 

follower. 

for 

regimontal 

stores. 

© 

© 

n 

a) 

| 


o 

CO 

a 

a> 

o 

"S 

u 

X 

Cm 

Bullocks with 
saddles. 

Drivers. 

Lascars. 

Bullocks with 

saddles. 

2 

a> 

*E 

a 

Lascars. 

’rt 

>, 

a 

| 

3 

H 


A regiment of Native 
envnlry with artillery 








FAQ. P. C. 

KS. A. i». 

nttnehed 

25 

30 

10 

8 

18 

6 

4 

187 0 0 

or 651 8 0 

A company of artillery... 

A ban Jion of Native 

12 

11 

5 

4 

5 

o 

2 

90 0 0 

or 315 0 0 

infantry 

Thu corps of pioneers ... 

36 

41 

14 

12 

29 

7 

8 

272 0 0 

or 952 0 0 

8 

9 

3 

3 

8 

3 

l 2 | 

63 0 0 

or 220 0 0 


ll^o number of tents, cattle, and followers specified, The nllow- 
WO'to be maintained, mastered, and kept in constant aU^hargoH. 
readiness for service by officers commanding corps, 
who were also to provide butting accommodation for 
taeir men, and carriage for the regimental stores, out of 
tii*' sums allotted to them respectively a 3 set forth in the 
table. 


In January 1803 it was ordered that the cummerbunds cumrnmv 
ehmild be discontinued as part of the clothing issued to bu udR, isoii. 
the ISativo soldiery. 

On the 28th ot' the same month tho existing ostab- Bmtullwm 
bnlimont. of I t companies of pioneers * 1 was angmonted to , ’ 1 i*‘''' 


‘ Ah ilic services of tho pioneers hav.- boon included in t’< “ 1 na iry 
»>f the Mitdrna hn«J -i urs,” published m 1881 if may bo •. II to explain 
w hy tlioy bavo boon dtdored hnro und iho head of Nufivo infantry. 
TliO pioneers wero nut aiiacht«] to llu» <\.rpn of Bngb--oru n*.til May 

I i.il, when tho lat battalion ./a* muih> ov to it, ami inurtiotod in 
■dipping and rniniug. Thu 2nd butt Jicrn vr. n • over, in like 
manner, in Deoember 1333. If. n m t!i time 01 it. !r*jt. fore -ition q{ 

r • < ra in 1780 up to their transfer in 1M1 v d 1883, they v ero 
ot , ■»■««(I ■ iolui'ivoly from the n.l'-nl ry, omployu 1 no pion« cr •. and |,| :iWM | 
ui r (In. K er Liai direction «,f the Qi trior®' autor-Otmcml. 












































[00 


HI .'TORY O! THE MADItAS Ah*MY. 



ClIAP. XVI. 


Distribution. 


Kitm 

l"»f, aliqnn, 
Aj ril t«U0. 


1 t Kxtr*. 

(1m' att.UOth, 
H’Mh M.N.l.) 


«M-| Fxha 
(1»* I u 21 at, 
♦ l*e M.tf I ) 


fl» 1 ' I ra flat. 
hnl» 22n«l. 

. w 1 M N.J.) 


<§L 


to bg formed into two separate battalions of oigbt 
companies eacli. The strength of a company was to 
remain as before, viz., 1 jemadar, 3 havildars, 3 naigues, 
1 puckally, and 100 privates. Captain W. P. Heitland 
of the 6th regiment was appointed to command tho 1st. 
battalion, with Captains Brown of the 7th and Davis of 
the 4th, and Lieutenant Barclay of the 5th to do duty. 

Captain Fitzpatrick, 0th regiment, was appointed to 
the 2nd battalion, with Captain Bagshaw of tho 10th, and 
Lieutenant Grant of tho 12th to do duty. 

The new formation was completed in March, at which 
time the companies were distributed in the following' 
mariner, viz. :— 

1 st battalion.—The 6th company at Hyderabad ; tho 
remaining companies in camp. 

2 nd battalion.—The 1st company at Hydorabad; tho 
3rd company in tho Moluccas j tho remaining 6 com¬ 
panies in camp. 

On the 16th April orders were issued for tho form- 
ation of three battalions of Native infantry, to bo returned 
as (< Lxtra Battalions.” Bach was to consist of ton 
companies, and the establishment was fixed at ono 
Captain Commandant with a subaltern, and 900 privates, 
with tho ordinary proportion of Nativo officers, havil¬ 
dars, and naigues. 

Tho 1st Extra battalion was raised at Tricbinopoly, 
and placed undor the command of Captain Martin of 
the 5th regiment, with Lieutenant Trewman as adjutant. 

Tho 2nd Extra wa3 raised at Chicacole, and placed 
under tho command of Captain Crane of the 12th regi¬ 
ment, with Lioutonunt Shaw as adjutant. 

The 3rd Extra was raised at Neilore, and pJaccd under 
the command of Captain Whitlio of the 19th regiment, 
with Lieutenant Porter as adjutant. 






Kacli of til 000 battalions received drafts from the old CHAP. XV 1 . 

regiments to tho following extent, viz., 10 ietrudars as „ — 

r •» . CompoeiLiun. 

subadars, 10 haviltlars as jemadars, oO naigues as havil- 

dars, and 50 privates as naigues. 

# On the 22ml July orders wore issued directing that Ext™ 

all the additional privates which had been raised under JuJ^lboa.’ 
recent instructions by corps of Native infantry serving 
in the .Carnatic, in Mysore, and in tho Ceded Districts, 
should bo formed into four extra battalions of the snmo 
strength as those raised in April. 

The 4th Extra was raised at Elloro, and placed under 4th KxtrU 
Captain Macfarlane of the 5th regiment, with Lieutenant aYsb-iini 
Hughes as adjutant. M.N.l.) 

The 5th Extra was raised at Wallajalibad, and placed 6 th Extra fUL 
under Captain Shaw of tho 10th regiment, with Lieuto- 45 ^'l) 
♦unit Bird ns adjutant. 

The 6 th Extra was raised at Triehmopuly, and placed 6 th Extra 
under Captain Buchan of the 12 th regiment, with Lieuto* 22 nd 
najit P. Le Couteur as adjutant. M.N.l.) 

The 7th Extra was raised u,t Sankernacoil in the 7 th Extra 
District of Tinnevolly, and placed under Captain Farran o'/ni, cth 
of the 14th, with Lieutenant Kent as adjutant. ' **’**•!•) 

Those battalions wero brought on the permanent 2 ml hat 2f>»h 
Btrongth of the army in October 1804, as was also tho ( 40tb » M.N.l.) M 
Volunteer battalion on its return from tho Moluccas, when 
it bocaiue tho 2nd battalion 20th (40th M.N.L) 





102 



CUAP. XVII. 

Ahmt'd- 
iiUggiif, 1803. 


Atom (>t tho 


<SL 

HISTORY op TtlJ: MADRAS AKMY. 


CHAPTER XVII. 

FROM THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE MAHRATTA WAR IN 
1803, TO THE TREATY WITH HOLKAR IN 1800. 


Major-General Wellesley arrived before Ahmednuggur 
on tlie 8th August 1803, and found the pettah occupied 
by a body of Arabs, supported by one of Scindiah’s 
regular battalions, and a number of horse encamped 
between the pettah and the fort. The Killadar having 
refused to surrender, the pettah was immediately attacked 
by escalade in three columns. The curtains were about 
eighteen feet in height, connected at every hundred yarda 
by towers or bastions hold by Arabs. The first column, 
composed of the pickets, and tho flank companies 
H.M.’s 78th regiment under Lieutenant-Colonel Harness, 
planted the ladders on one of tho curtains, but as these 
had no ramparts, tho men on getting to tho top found 
nothing on which to stand, and wore consequently obliged 
to desist. The 78th alone hud 55 killed and woundod, of 
whom 4 wore oflicorg. 

Tho right column, composed of the flank companion 
JFLM.'s 74th, and tho 1; t battalion 8rd rogiment, all under 
Captain Vosey of the lattor, was more fortunate, mi it 
escaladed at a re-ontering angle touching one of tho bas¬ 
tions. Tho \xubs raado an obstinate defunoo, bntui , 
i -harp struggle, during which 13 of the 74th, and 18 m 
the Mrd wore killed or wounded, the men nm.lo good 
tlmir footing, and getting down into tho pettah, they 
'•period tho gate to the third parly under leeutonunt- 
t • ionel Wallace, composed of the battalion companion of 





HISTOKT OF THb MADINAS A KM V. 


103 




the 7 1 tli, and the 1st battalion 8th regiment. The two CHAP.XVIi. 
columns uniting, the place was speedily cleared of its 
defenders. 




Our total loss 1 during tho storm amounted to 27 killed 
and 92 wounded. 


On tho morning of the 9th, a position within 400 yards 
of the fort, was seized by Colonel Wallace with five 
companies of the 74th, and the 2nd battalion 12th regi¬ 
ment. During the night a battery for four guns was 
constructed at this post, and opened at daylight with 
such effect that the Killadar surrendered, and gave up 
1 lie place on condition that the garrison should be allowed 
to depart with their private property. 


Ho marched out accordingly on the morning of the Surrender ol 
12th, with about 1,400 men, many of whom were Arabs. <liC ioit ’ 
Tho fort was found to contain a largo quantity of military 
stores. Tho gunpowder was of such good quality that 
the Oeueral made use of it to replace that which had been 
expended during the siege. 

The troops eugagod in this service received the thanks 
of tho Governor-General in Council conveyed in an order 
'Ittted at Fort William on the 8th September 1803. 

After having made arrangements for the settlement of C!moral 
the districts dependent upon Ahmodnuggur, and having 
placed a garrison 1 in tho fort. General Wollosloy marched 
♦ o the northward, and crossed tho Godavery ou tho 21st 
and 22nd August at Toka, where he was joined ou the 
2 r>fh by Major Dallas with the l b baltalion 10th regi¬ 
ment. 


1 Appendix B. 

* JTotAChmeut of artiltory. 

TI.M.’m Mih rogiui©" r . nmn \ 

2ud bttttnlion »Jrd roj^iiumt unitor C ptain Lucks. 




Welle. '•’> 
oroMc ’flu* 
(• <>-1 U «»ry. 



mtsr/fy 


HFoTOKY of the madras army. 






Cl.TAV.XVTJ. 


The conforl- 
‘ mLrt elude 
« nlom 1 
Btevezmon. 


< HJU IHV' of 

•I I’lim. 


Tin 

I Hi Nopftll.'! 

r. i in it Lo iho 
north 


r. I,r r.i1 
We II. iley 
ui'.l Colonel 
HU'M»u »ti 
u.i > i U 

i • i ly on 
Ili.'Li r'.un. 


During* those operations Colonel Stevenson b.\d moved 
to the northern frontier of the Nizam's dominions in 
order to watch the passes ; and on the 2Gth August lie 
encamped near the Dewul ghaut, in consequence of a 
demonstration made in that direction by Scindiali and 
the Rajah of Berar with part of their army, but tho main 
body of their cavalry had been sent to tho westward, and 
on the 24th it had entered the Nizam's country by the 
Adjunta ghaut. Colonel Stevenson followed, and on tho 
2 nd September lie attacked and carried by storm the small 
fort of Jaulna 1 at that time belonging to Scindiah. On 
the Gth, and again on t he 9th, he surprised and dispersed 
the camps of two parties of tho enemy's horse, after 
which he halted at Buduapoor near Jauina for some days. 

In the meantime the confederates, who had arrived in 
tho neighbourhood of Partoor with tho apparent inten¬ 
tion of marching upon Hyderabad, suddenly broke up 
their camp on tho night of the Gth September, and returned 
to tho Adjunta ghaut, whore they effected a junction * ill, 
their artillery and infantry. 

General W ellesloy, who had been watching their move¬ 
ments, was delayed on the Godavery until tin 18ilt 
September, when tho arrival ofa largo convoy, escorted i v 
tl/j 1st battalion 1th regiment under Major Hill, enabled 
him to p >p ire to bring the enemy to action. On the 19th 
hu detached tho 1st battalion 2 3rd, and tho 2nd battalion 


1 4(0 lnileB raah of Anrtingabnd, Lat. 10° 62' N. w 

Long tho h ad.quortore of the light Cel,l dh i on , Hyderabad 8u b,Hil¬ 
ary force. 

•* TM, wo. a very K oo,l battalion. It ba.l marchod from W-Horn ... 
the. Titptoe, o di.tnnae of about 1,000 mile, without a n „„. 

uml -van .ho urtooiul B' l.iur nativo corp* wifh flm forep. It t n . , , 
; Voo »* h ' b<50aueeof Warned complrdnta mud by <lw 
• ~r * tfardnig iho i oin in which bin men wore paid. 

OH|.j,lunwM.t.iry iloapatohw, Dukaof vs 0 lltegi«.n, Vol. IV pn K r I7y 



miST/fy 


history of the madras army. 105 

18tli for tho bettor protection of Poonah, and the next 
day he encamped at Gola Pangree on the river Doodna. 
On the 21st he made a short march to Julgaum near 
Budnapoor, where he reviewed Colonel Stevenson’s divi¬ 
sion, and concerted the plan of a combined attack on the 
enemy, to be made on the 24th. The two divisions 
separated on the 22nd, and moved towards Bokerdun, 
where the enemy was reported to be, Colonel Stevenson 
marching nearly due north by Hussainabad, and General 
Wellesley taking a more easterly route. 

Tho latter arrived at his ground near the village of 
Naulniah about 11 a.m. on the 23rd, and hearing that 
the enemy were within six miles of him, and preparing 
to move off, he determined to attack at once without 
waiting for Colonel Stevenson, so leaving his stores and 
baggage at Naulniah, protected by the 1st battalion 2nd 
regiment, and the rear guard, all under Lieutenant- 
Colonel Chalmers of the 2nd, he advanced with the rest 
of his division, consisting of four regiments of cavalry, 
six rogiments of infantry, and detachments of artillery 
and pioneers. 

About 1 o’clock in the afternoon the British troops 
came in sight of the armies 1 of Scindiali and the Rajah < f 
Berar, drawn up in order of battle between the rivers 
Kaitna and Juab, having the former parallel with their 
front at a short distance, and the latter nearly parallel 
with their rear. The General resolved to attack their 
left, and making a Hank march to tho right, he crossed 
the Kaitna at tho village of Peepulgaum, rather more 
than half a mile above it confluence with the Juah. 
The passage was not disputed, and the infantry was 

1 About 20,000 cavalry, IS battalion of dboiplined infantry, under 
European oflioors, c timated at about 12,000 men, and upwards of 100 

k'uns. 



<SL 

CHAP. XVII. ~ 


Gene ml 
Wellesley 
leaves bis 
stores at 
Naulniah. 


Crosses the 
Kaitna. 


VOL. Ill, 


14 



U\NlSr/fy 


106 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 




CH AP. X \ II. formed across the fork between the two rivers in two 
lines, with the cavalry in the rear. The first line was 
composed of H.M.'s 78th on the left, the 1st of the 10th, 
and 1st of the 8th in the centre, and the pickets 1 on the 
right. The second line, which followed the first at the 
distance of about three hundred paces, consisted of the 1st 
of the 4th, and the 2nd of the 12th, with II.M.'s 74th on 
the right immediately in rear of the pickets. 

The enemy The enemy, in the meantime, had changed front, throw- 

ciiange front. . , . . _ . * 

mg their left on the Juali at the village of Assaye, and 

resting their right on the Kaitna, being sufficiently strong 
to occupy the whole space between the two rivers, which, 
at that place, was about a mile broad. Their line was 
defended by upwards of 100 guns, several of which wore 
disposed in front of the village of Assaye w hich was occu¬ 
pied by a strong body of infantry. 


Batti.e of Assaye. 

The British troops advanced with great steadiness 
under a remarkably heavy fire, but Colonel Orrock of the 
8 (h, who commanded the pickets, and who had'been 
directed to keep on 1 of the range of shot from Assayo, 
mistook his orders, diverged to tlio right, and led directly 2 

1 Tho pickets wero composed of details from each corps, and generally 
formed the advanced guard. Their strength on this occasion, probably 
amountod to about 100 rank and file. The detail of thn 2nd battalion 
horving with the pickets on tho 23rd September consisted of 1 subal¬ 
tern and CO sepoys, besides non-commissioned officers. This, with a 
t ’tnilar detail from each of tho other six regiments of infantry, and front 
the battalion of pioneers, would make 400 rank and file. 

2 Major-General Welle ley in a letter to Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas 

Mtinn., r nr -1 1 Ht November 1803, expressed himself us fallows regard* 
nig Ljoatenant-Oolonel Orrock I do not wi.^h to cast any reflection 
up«»r <ho officer who led tho picquetn. I lament, tho consequences of 
1 iitfikf', but. 1 must nek now lodge thut it was not possible lor r> tuan 
1 - tm a r.,iy i n to a hotter firo than ho did the piequctu on that day 

against Atomy©.” 


mtSTfty 



upon that village followed by the 74tli regiment. The CHAP. XVII. " 

consequence was that not only did the pickets and the 

74th suffer severe * 1 Joss from the village, but they were 

charged by the enemy’s cavalry on their left flanks, 

through the break in the line which had been caused by 

the divergence of the pickets. Fortunately, and before 

irretrievable damage could be done, our cavalry came up 

from the rear, defeated the enemy’s horse, and pursued 

them to the left of their line. The 78th, with the native 

corps in the first line, supported by those in the second 

line, advancing at the same time, drove the enemy from 

their guns with the bayonet. A second position which 

they had taken up on the Juah at right angles to their 

first lino was then attacked and carried. Several of the 

enemy’s battalions gave way entirely and fled, but others 

retired in order until charged and broken by the cavalry. 

It was in one of these charges that Colonel Maxwell 2 of 
the 19th dragoons, a most valuable officor, who com¬ 
manded the whole corps of cavalry, was killed. 


The false movement of the pickets was unfortunate in 
other respects than the loss of iufantrj as was oxplaiuod 
by the General in his letter to Colonel Munro dated 1st 
November. 


Efficiency of 
tbe cavalry 
impaired by 

the iniritni.o 

of the picket f, 


1 Almost every man of tho half company lstbattaliou 2nd regiment 
Serving with the pickets was either killed or wounded. 

Killed.— 1 lieutenant, 1 havildar, ' drummer, 17 hcpoya, 

1 pnckally ... ... ... 21 

Wounded.—2 havildars, 20 sepoys 

Misaiug.—3 sepoys ... ... .. ••• 3 

46 

The casualties nmongat tho other details composing tho pickets cannot 
In: ascertained, as they are merged in the general casualties of the 
HOvoml regiments. 

: A pension of £300 por annum na« grouted to his widow by tho 
Court of Director*. 





miST/fy 


108 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 


Casualties, 


<SL 


“ Another evil which resulted from this mistake was the 
necessity of introducing the cavalry into the cannonade, and 
the action, long before it was timo; by which the corps lost 
many men , * 1 and its unity and efficiency that I intended to 
bring forward in a close pursuit at the heel of the day. But 
it was necessary to bring forward the cavalry to save the 
remains of the 74 th and the picquets, which would otherwise 
have been destroyed. Another evil resulting from it was, that 
we had no reserve left, and a parcel of stragglers cut up our 
wounded : and straggling infantry who had pretended to be 
dead, turned their guns against our backs. 

***** 

“ After the action there was no pursuit, because our cavalry 
was not then in a state to pursue. It was near dark when 
the action -was over, and we passed the night on the field of 
battle.’* 

The loss of the enemy was computed at 1,200 killed, 
and 4,800 wounded. Our casualties amounted to 1,584, 2 
viz., 198 Europeans and 230 natives killed, 442 Euro¬ 
peans, and 696 natives wounded, 4 Europeans, and 14 
natives missing. The 74th alone had 40l of all ranks 
killed and wouuded. The native regiments also suffered 
severely, more especially those which became on the right 
after the divergence of the pickets and the 74th, viz., 
the 1st of the 8th, and the 2nd of the 12th, the former 
having had 174, and the latter 228, killed and wounded. 


Killed. Wounded, Horses killed. Wounded. 

1 H.M.’b 19th dragoon* ... 17 40 87 36 

4th, 5th and 7tli cavalry. 39 93 238 75 

- Appendix C. Welsh, in his Reminiscences, gives the number ns 
2,277, bring an exceas of 693, and this error has been repeated in 
several works. 

It will be aeon on examining the items in the return, tied, both Euro- 
ana and natives are included in ihe general total# of killed and 
viz., 198 -f- 230 428, and 412 4- 696 = 1,138; but Wclttfc 

hn* counted i.) > European: tv r e, and the European oificers three time*, 
* 1/ , 198 k *28 y 412 -f 1,188, 4~ 23 -f 30 = 2,259. This, with thfc 18 
•uintnnp, givn. 2 . 277 . 





HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


109 


One hundred and two remarkably fine guns, of which CHAP. XVII. 
seventy-three were brass, a number of tumbrils, seven c , P turea 
stands of colors, and a quantity of ammunition, and or dnanoe. 
stores, fell into our hands. 

The General, both in liis official and private corre- Confiuofc of 
spondence, spoke most highly of the conduct of the troops. the troo P s - 
In his report to the Governor-General he said :— 

“ I cannot write in too strong terms of the conduct of the 
troops. They advanced in the best order, and with the 
greatest steadiness under a most destructive fire, against a 
body of infantry far superior in number, who appeared deter¬ 
mined to contend with them to the last, and who were driven 
from their guns only by the bayonet, and notwithstanding 
the numbers of the enemy’s cavalry, and the repeated demon¬ 
strations they made of an intention to charge, they were kept 
at a distance by our infantry.” 

In a letter to Major John Malcolm he gave the follow¬ 
ing opinion regarding the infantry of the confederates 
“ Their infantry is the best I have ever seen in India, 
excepting our own ; and they and their equipments far surpass 
Tippoo’s. I assure you that their fire was so heavy that I 
much doubted at one time whether I should be able to induce 
our troops to advance, and all agree that the battle was the 
fiercest that has over been seen in India. Our troops behaved 
admirably. Our sepoys astonished me.” 

Tho troops wore thanked by the Governor-General in Honorary 
Council in an order, dated 30th October, and honorary cU ° 1 
colors with an appropriate device 1 were ordered to bo 
prepared for presentation to each regiment engaged. 

Sir John Malcolm, when writing in later years L ‘ con- Anecdote of 
ceruiug tho management of sepoys, related the following r 

anecdote connected with tho battle at Assay© ; — 


1 Tho word “ Assayo ” with tho device of tho elephant, is bon.o on 
(lie colors nud appointments of th several regiments engaged. 





HJdTOKY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


<SL 


Number of 
troops 
ciig4god at 
Asoaje. 




Among tlic? many instances of the effect which pritle in 
themsehes, and the notice of their superiors, inspire in this 
class of troops, wo may state the conduct of the 1st battalion 
8th regiment, which became at the commencement of his 
career in India a favorite corps of the Duke of Wellington. 
They were with him on every service, and the men of this 
corps used often to call themselves ‘ Wellesley ka Pultun,’ 
or Wellesley s battalion ; and their conduct on every occasion 
was calculated to support the proud title they had assumed. 
A staff officer, after the battle of Assaye, saw a number of 
the Mahomedaus of this battalion assembled apparently for a 
funeral. He asked whom they wero about to inter. They 
mentioned the names of five commissioned and non-commis¬ 
sioned officers of a very distinguished family in the corps 
‘ We arc going to put these brothers into one grave ’ said one 
of the party. The officer, who had been well acquainted 
wffh the individuals who had been slain, expressed his regret 
and was about to offer somo consolation to the survivors but 
he was stopped by one of the men. There is no occasion, ho 
said tor such feelings or expressions : these men (pointing to 
the dead bodies) were sepoys ; they have died in the perform¬ 
ance of their duty; the Government they served will protect 
their children, who will soon fill the ranks they lately oecu- 
pied.” 

The number of troops engaged in the battle at Assayo 
has generally been given at about 4,500, 1 of whom 1,300 


1 " The numbors actually under fire wore 4,626 viz 

Infantry.—H.M.’s 74tU 570, H.M.'a 78th Cut) ) 
European artillery 150 ... > 

Four uopoy buttalionj about 500 oath 


1,320 

2,000 


T 




3,320 

1,200 


Total bayonets 

Cavalry.—19th dragoons 350 
Tbret native regiments 850 ... ( ~ 

I.hi'1'o mnat 1» added ono sopoy battalion left in rump. Coo. ai d 

rog: mt ’ ,cft -" *>«*. «oo .’tl! 

Ali»on’a Hi»t 0 ry of Europe, lotb oiition. Vol. VIII, pogo 0(1. 



Ml NlST/ty 



were Europeans; but neither the battalion of pioneers/ CHAP.XVII. ' 

nor the corps of gun lascars, both of which suffered in - 

the action, have been included in the several accounts. 

Moreover, an examination of tho returns for August 
and September 1803, will show that the strength of tho 
native corps, cavalry, as well as infantry, was consider¬ 
ably greater than has been generally represented, and 
that it is difficult, after making all reasonable deductions, 
to get the number of effective rank and file alone below 
6 , 000 . 


Corps. 

Hank and file present 
for duty exc’lusive of 
sick. 

Return, 
1st Sept. 
1803. 

Return, 
1st Oct. 
1803. 

tl.M.’s 19th dragoons ... ... 

4th cavalry 375, 5th cavalry 383, 7th cavalrv 
387 ... ... ... ... 

European artillery 

Oun lascars 

H.M.’s 74th regiment .. 

H.M.’g 78th do. 

1st battalion 2nd 800, 1st of 4th 765, 1st of 
8 ' 764, 1st of 1 . 2nd of 12tb 

1st battalion pioneers ... 

Total ... 

Deduct 1st of 2nd (minus 50 men with tho 
pickets), and 700 men for tho baggage 
guard . bh _ 

Effective rank and filo available for iction ... 

313 

1,146 

154 

323 

500 

670 

3,764 

605 

275 

1,028 

133 

317 

220 

687 

3,366 
643 . 

7,474 

1,450 

6,469 

6,024 

... 


Number of 
effective rank 
and file as 
per returns. 


It is not clear now tho 700 men for tho baggage guard 
are to be accounted for. One hundred from each of tho 
four native battalions in tho buttle gives 400- The rest 


1 The pioneers had 66, and the vim luacars -13, men killed and 
wounded ; the latter corps was probably recruited from Colonel Steven 
w u’a division, which joined On tho 25th September. 

» 


























mtSTfty 



<SL 


HISTORY Or THE MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAP. XVII. -must "be supposed to have "been taken from the cavalry 
' ,. and artillery; but these corps could not possibly have 
spared '300 men. Jt is extremely improbable that either 
of 'the wpak regiments of European infantry would 
. * ^ detach any considerable party on the evo of a general 

' action, more'.especially .as. an* .experienced field officer, 
with a strong , body of native troops, had already been 
selected for'the duty. A deduction of 700 men, in addi¬ 
tion to the 750 rtfen of the 1st. battalion 2nd, appears, in 
these circumstances, to be excessive ; ' nevertheless it has 
been accepted in the statement in the text. 

It was stated officially at the time, that the casualties 
somewhat exceeded 'a third of the whole British force 
engaged. This" calculation, with the addition of the 
pioneers and gun lascars, would give a total of about 
5,680/ but 6,000 is probably nearer the truth, bearing 
in mind the fact that the non-commissioned officers, 
European and native, have not been included in the 
foregoing table. 

The enemy passed the night about twelve miles from 
the field, and went down the Adjunta ghaut the next 
day in greatsdisorder on their retreat towards Bnrlian- 
poor. Colonel Stevenson joined General Wellesley nenr 
Assaye on the 25th, and marched down the ghaut on the 
26th, his pursuit of the qnfcmy having been delayed in 


Probable 
otrength of 
tho l i*o op B 
engaged. 


Tho enemy 
retreat. 



1 1,884 X 3= 4,752 ; 4,752 + 605pionoer8 + 323 gun lnecars = 5,680. 


H M/a 78tb regiment haring boon attached to the Bombay Presi¬ 
dency, it does not appear in tho Madras records, and no return of it 
has been obtained, with the exception of one, dated at Fort William, lttth 
January 1803, when tho regiment was about to embark for Bombay. 
This return, a copy of which waB kindly furnished by Brigadier-0euoml 
Anucsley, Adjutant-General of the Bombay Army, shows 751 rank and 
file, sick included. The number, 670, given in tho tnblo in tho text is 
nnpposed to represent tho total effective men in September. With this 
eye-option ali the figures wore taken from tho Madras returnt for 
August and September. . -•* 


HISTORY Or T1IE MADRAS AliAIY. 


118 


order that the surgeons of his division might assist in CHAP. XV!l. 
dressing tho wounded. 1 

General Wellesley remained at Assaye for a few days Goner*! 

to make arrangements for the security of the captured movea** 

ffunr* and stores, after which he proceeded to Aaiunta. fc . oward9 

i ’ii’ t o ~ Aurungnbad 

where he established a held hospital in tho fort. On the 

8th October ho marched towards tho south, and on the 

10th he arrived at Binkenhully 80 miles north of 

Aurangabad, where he halted to watch the movements of 

the confederates who had gone to the westward with the 

supposed intention of entering the territories of the 

Peshwah. 

While at that place he received accounts of the success- Dcfenco of 
hit defence of tho village of Korjet Corygaum by a small Qo^aum 
de tachment 2 of native infantry which had.been attacked 
by about 1,500 men, a third of whom wero Arabs. The 
position was steadily.maintained against several attacks, 
during which tho assailants lost, in killed alone, a number 
exceeding that of the detachment. The place was relieved 
by Captain Lucas with four f\>in panics 2nd battalion. 3rd 
regiment which came up fiom Alimedmjggur, distant 
about 40 miles. 

Tho detachment was thanked by General Wollosley, in 
division orders, and the conduct of the officers nod men 
wna brought to tho favorable notice of the Cornmandor- 
Hi-hhief. 

Intelligence having been reeoived to tho offert that Morem«* 

__• -_*_ . _ . . . __ _ _ . of OriMrtl 

* Th» groat proportion of tho wounded having boon Strunk by can- 
r -ii *hoi f it wn « approh. .idotl that at loan 100 v, <ultl bo i unuun»'i tly 

4 Ono tympany It*f bntluiion 1li regimen r ^il3u! T, 1), ni)\a 
» i ant Morgan, ftcemnpunJad by , Cih u •<», ' cm , i in tump 

mtvbdinl for now baftaliona then b.n'ng rai.unl in tho 'smllt. Captain 
O Uomtf 11 tin d f lieutenant Hrysnt of i Uo l»t ounhy happening to bo 
null tho *it<t*olni)cnfc, tbo u.jfnmand, during the* a«. n, wsw* nasamed 

by ihoformoi ms sonior-officor. 

, vui.> nn 16 





Of ' MIA 


114 


UISlOEY or THE MADRAS ARM*. 



XVII. 


<SL 


Sciudiali had marched to the north for the purpose of* 
relieving Burhanpoor, then threatened by Colonel 
Stevenson, General Wellesley retraced his steps, and was 
joiner', near Adjunta on the 22nd October by the 1st 
battalion 3rd regiment which he had recalled from 
Ahmednuggur to replace his loss at Assaye. While at 
Adjunta he heard of the surrender of Burhanpoor; and 
also that the Rajah of Berar, separating from Scindiah, 
had gone towards tho south. This information led the 
General to march to Aurangabad, where ho arrived on 
the 29th, and, ascertaining that tho Rajah was in tho 
neighbourhood, ho endeavoured to surprise him, but 
without 8UCCC08, although ho compelled him to move his 
camp five times between tho 29tli and 31st. 

On the date last mentioned, the Rajah detached a body 
of 5,000 horse to intercept a convoy of 1,500 bullocks, 
carrying grain for the army, which was protected by an 
escort 1 under Captain Baynes. 

The convoy left the Godavcrv on tho morning of tho 
31st, and was attacked at the village of Umber 2 tho same 
afternoon, but tho assailants were repulsed with consider¬ 
able loss, particularly in horses, find tho convoy joined 
tho General on tho next day. 

Captain Baynes was thanked for tho able disposition 
ho had made of his small f-rree, and tho BtoadiuoBB of tho 
officers aud mon was favorably noticod in the same order. 

The Rajah, immediately after this failure, retreated 
hastily towards his own territories. 


1 2nd battalion 3rd regiment, 3 companion. 

2nd do. 10th do. 2 do. 

Hyderabad (mhetidlary 1‘oroo, 1 company (battalion uot known). 
Two 3-j‘Oumicnf- 
Mjfooio borao, 400. 

About 20 mile# north of the Ciodavery, and half way botwetn it 
* *d Juuluu. 



HI810RY 01' Till. MADRAS ARMY. 



115 


<SL 


About the same time as the action at Umber, an GHAP.XYUr 
attempt was made to take possession of the bridge of (jaliatY 
boats at Rackisbaum’on the G-odavery which was in ^ 0 )“' r ot 
charge of a party of the 1st battalion Gtli regiment under of the 6th 
Jemadar Shaik Modeen of that corps. This officer not rc 8 imcut * 
only repulsed tho enemy, but followed them up, and 
captured part of their equipments. This affair was 
mentioned in goneral orders of the 28th November, and 
Hie Jemadar was promoted. 

General Wellesley, in reporting tho circumstance to 
tho Commander dn-Chiof, observed: “ This man has 
bohaved remarkably well in other instances besides that 
slated in my letter to tho Adjutant-General. If the 
Soubah had had a dozen such men iu his service, the 
Rajah of Berar would have lost his baggage in his flight 
from me.” 


Tho large and opulent city of Burhanpoor surrendered Surrender v f 
1 , Burhauptwr 

1 o Colonel Stevenson on tho 15th October without resist- 

unco, and oil tho 17th ho marched against tho fortress 

of Asseergliur, about 12 miles north of Burhanpoor. On 

the 18th ho reconnoitred tho fort, attended by a squadron 

of cavalry, and tho pickets of native infantry, and on tho 

evening of tho same day ho attacked 1 and carried the 

pottah. During the 19th, batteries for seven guns were 

established in the pettah, and on the 20th, fire was 

opened on the lower fort. The extraordinary strength 

of the upper, or lull fort, and the great import unco 

attached to the possession of the plnco, induced Colonel 

Stevenson to offer liberal terms of capitulation, via., that 

the garrison should bo paid 20,000 rupee \ on account of 


' c unities during t! op. inli'ino at A#*soergl» » 
1st battalion 6th rogin cur, 2 k.llod, 1 wound, d. 
rionoorn, 1 killed. I wouudod. 



nnd 

A 36 eorghur. 


Movcmonts 

General 

Wellesley's 

division. 


rnustico 

with 

Beiudiah. 


116 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

arrears due to them, and that they should be allowed to 
march oat with their private property, and to go where 
they pleased. These terms were accepted, and the fort 
was given up on the 21st. The operations were con¬ 
sidered to have been very creditable to Colonel Stevenson 
whose division 1 appears to have been in a very efficient 
condition. 

On the 6th November, General Wellesley, when about 
35 miles south of Jaulna, detached 2 Lieutenant-Colonel 
Chalmers to take possession of the towns of Pokrio, 
Soorengaum, ancl Kamila, distant from 10 to 20 miles 
from cam}), and to make them over to Appah Dessayc, 
the commandant of the Peshwah's contingent, in behalf 
of his master. 

Tho General encamped near Tatreo on the 10th, and 
then proceeding northwards, ho crossed the Payen Gunga 
ae Wakud on the20th, and arrived at liajoora on the 23rd, 
where ho concluded an armistice with Scindiah for ten 
days, the principal condition of which was that Scindiah 
should take up a position about 50 miles to tho eastward 
of Ellichpoor. On the 25th tho General entered Berar, 
on tho 27th ho reached Akolah, 3 and on the 20tli ho 
joined Colonel Stevenson at Partcrly, for the purpose of 



1 “ I cannot emit to take U is opporturity to express to your E.wi I 
lency my sense of tho merits of C lonel Stevenson, ancl of the body (if 
troopo under his command. 

“ Upon every occ sion I have received from the Colonel the mo I. 
cordial, and zealous assistance, and tho troops under his oominand uiv 
iu tho highest slate of discipline and order, and fit for ony oorvico in 
which they can bo employed." 

Major-General Wcllosley to ihe Governor.General, 0th November 
1803 

Ini battalion 2nd rogimont, 60 pioneers, 100 Mysore horse, and a 
party of artillery. 

* A comndmbla oily in Borar, Lait. 22 *10 N. Long. < / * *' 





undertaking the siege of Gawilgliur 1 with their united CIIAP.XVH, 
divisions. 


Shortly after arriving at Parterly, bodies of the enemy’s Battle of 
cavalry approached, and commenced to skirmish with the Ar S aum * 
Mysore horse, in support of which the infantry pickets 
were sent out, and it was then discovered that the enemy 
were drawn up in force on the plains of Argaum 2 immedi¬ 
ately in front of the village of that name, distant about 
six miles from Parterly. 

Their centre and left were composed of the troops of 
the Rajah of Berar consisting of artillery, cavalry, and 
infantry. A very heavy body of Sciudiali’s cavalry, with 
a number of Piudarries, composed the right wing. 

Although it was late in the day, an immediate attack was 
determined upon, and both divisions advanced in ono 
column in a direction almost parallel to the line of the 
enemy which was about 5 miles in length. On emerging 
from the rear of a village nearly opposite their contro, 
where it was intended to deploy, the enemy’s guns 
opened upon the native pickets, the 1st of the 10th, and 
the 2nd of the 12tli, 3 which led the column, and although 
the canuonado'Was from a distance, and not to bo com¬ 
pared with that at Assayo, these regiments broke, and 
retreated in confusion. Fortunately, the General, who 
was close by, was ablo to rally them himself, and to bring 
them back into action. 

Tn the monutimo Colonel Stevenson’s division had Advance of 
deployed and formed on the left, and about half past tho Ku6 * 

------* 

1 A strong fortress botwoeu tho sources of the Tapteo and Pooma, 
about 15 miles north wont from filliubpoor Lat. 22' N. Long. 

IT 81' E. 

- A village in Berar, 38 mile., wr*fc-south-wc a of K Mich poor. 

s This battalion waj badly off for Wuropoun officers. Licutonant- 
Cohnud McLeod, Major ‘MoCally, and -1 lieutc uuuts hud boon ivonndod at 
Awnnyu. Neither of the field officers were present at Argaum 




1 J 8 


tnSTOUT OF THU MADUAS AI;MY. 


<SL 


Defeat and 
p irnuit of the 


p. x \ I). four o clock, the whole army advanced in liue, and in 
perfect order. The 74th and 78th wore attacked by a 
large body of infantry, supposed to have been composed 
of Persians and Arabs, which suddenly made their 
appearance from behind a battery in front of the 74th. 
Nearly all of these men were killed, and several standards 
taken from them. 

Scindiali’s cavalry charged the 1 st battalion Oth 
regiment, which was ou the left of Colonel Stevenson’s 
division, but they were repulsed with loss. The enemy 
made no further attempt, and gave way immediateh 
afterwards, leaving 88 guns, and all their ammunition. 
The cavalry, under the Honorable Lieutenant-Colonel 
Soutlegcr of the 6 tli regiment, pursued them for ho vend 
miles, killed groat numbers, and captured a quantity at 
baggage, together with many elephants and camels. The 
pursuit was continued for two days, and with great effect, 
by the irregular horse belonging to the Nizam, the 
Kajah of Mysore, and the Poshwah. 

Out - loss was inconsiderable, 1 viz., 15 Europeans killed. 
145 wounded, and 2 missing; 81 natives killed, 168 
wounded, and 5 missing; 19 horses killed, 9 woeudod, 
and 11 missing. 

Aft- 1 " the battle, the General lost no tiiuo in commenc¬ 
ing the siege of Gawilghur, a fortress of great strength. 


Crumultios. 


Mivc of 
f *’i riltfhur. 




I •uropooTirt. NativcH. 


Horsra. 


i K. W. M. 




K. | W. M. K. W M. , 

1 -L _1_I J 


Majwr-Ciuul. AVellonloyV, 

diviMi,,I « 13 101 ... I 21 I 10 *! 4 

Colour! Mtcvcnftou'h di- 

vi,ion 2 M 2 1 10 ftp! 1 

13 1 l "> 2 31 1 f> 10 




C | 3 1 0 

13 ,0,2 

f 11 


Oor particular« poo Appendix D. 





imSTfty 


111 ' 







HISTORY TUH MADRAS ARMY. 


HISTORY " 


standing on a lofty mountain in the range of hills between ClIAP. XVII. 
the sources of the Taptee and the Poorna. Both divisions 
encamped near Elliehpoor on the 5th December, and 
halted on iho 6th to establish a hospital for the wounded. 

On tho same day the 1st battalion 2nd regiment, under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Chalmers, was sent to drive tho 
enemy from their position on,the south of the fort, while 
two companies of tho 94th, and tho 1st battalion Gth 
regiment, all under Captain Maitland of the latter, took 
possession of tho fortified village of Damergaum which 
commanded the road by which Colonel Stevenson was to 
advance in order to take up his position on the north of 
tho fort, that being the side it was proposed to attack. 

Colonel Stevenson crossed tho river Sapun near Jinkerra 
on the 7th, and reached his destination on tho 12th. havin'* 

J CO 

experienced the greatest difficulty in getting his guns 
and dorcs over the hills and ravines through which his 
route lay. General Wellesley took up his ground at 
Deogaum on the southern side. Practicable breaches in 
the outer fort having been effected by the night of tho 
1 1th, the following dispositions were made for the assault 
on tho noxt day. 

Tho storming parties, under Lieut.-Colonel William DiRp^H 
Kenny, 1st battalion 11th regiment, wore composed of— for th " 


One sorjoanfc and twelve volunteors 91th regiment in 
advance. 

First party.—One flank, and two battalion companies 
94th, and tho flank companies of the 2nd battalion 
7th, and of the 1st and 2nd baUaiioM J. Iih regi¬ 
ment under the immediate command Oolong! 

Kenny. 

* 

Second party.—One ilank, and two battalion 
companies 91th. and tho Hunk companies 1st 





120 


Ul.STOfcy UY THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 


<SL 


battalion 6fch, 2nd battalion 9th, and 2nd battalion 
2nd, under Lieutenant-Colonel Lease of the last. 
Third party.—The remainder of the 94th under 
Major James Campbell. 


The 2nd brigade under Lieut.-Colonel Haliburton, 
viz., the battalion companies 2nd of the 7th, and those 
of the 1st and 2nd of the 11th followed in support. 

A detail of artillery accompanied each of the storming 
parties. 

The first brigade under Lieutenant-Colonel Maclean 
formed the reserve. 

The troops were ordered to advance at 10 o’clock a.m. 
Attooks by Two demonstrations were made from General 
Wellesley's camp at the same hour with the object of 
drasving the attention of the garrison from the real attack 
on the north. One of these, composed of the 74th, tivo 
companies of tho 78th, and the 1st battalion 8tli regi¬ 
ment, was commanded by Colonel Wallace. The other, 
under Colonel Chalmers, was composed of five companies 
of tho 78th, and the 1st battalion 10th regiment. 
fjAMuraof The assault on the breach wu3 successful, and tho 
party under Colonel Chalmers happening to reach tho 
north-west gate while the enemy wore endeavouring to 
escape by it, he entered without difficulty. Shortly 
afterwards, Captain Campbell, with the light company 
94th, escaladed tho w all of the inner fort, and opouod tho 
gate for thereat of the stormers. 

The garrison, composed of regular infantry, which had 
escaped from Argaum, and of Rajpoots, was numerous 
arut well armed with English muskets and bayonets. 
Great numbers wore killed, particularly at the breaches, 
and at the gateways. 


mtSTfiy 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY’. 


121 


Our casualties were trifling, viz., 12G 1 killed, wounded, 
and missing. 


<SL 

CHAP. XV if. 
Casuultios. 


Tlie following is an extract from the order of the day 

“ Q.A.O. Camp at .Deogaum, Thursday , 15 th Dec. 1803. 

“ Major-General Wellesley has great satisfaction in eon- Thanks to Uk» 
gratulating the troops under his command upon the brilliant troo P s ‘ 
success of this day. 

“ In the course of this short hut laborious siege, Major- 
General Wellesley has, with pleasure, observed in all, a 
most anxious and zealous desire to forward the service, the 
most steady perseverance in the performance of laborious 
services which would be thought impracticable by other troops, 
and that gallantry which they have shown so frequently 
during the campaign, and which has carried them with honor 
through so many difficulties. 

“The most laborious and brilliant part of tho siego of 
Gawilghur fell to the lot of the subsidiary force serving with 
tho Soubah of the Deccan, under the command of Colonel 
Stevenson; and Major-General Wellesley adopts thk mode 
of declaring that he never witnessed sueli laborious and per- 
bovering exertions as were made by this corps to bring their 
ordnance and stores to tho point of attack. 



I 

Knropeaus. 1 Natives. 

K. 

w. 

M. j K. 

W. AJ. 

M jj or-General Wellesley's 
division 

e 18 i evens on’s division 

G 

2 

57 

... 1 .■ 

... , 7 

I 

9 1 
42 2 

1 

6 

50 

... | « 

51 i 3 

1 


Kill d.—Lieutenant Touug. 2nd battalion 7fch N.l. 

Wounded.—Lieutenant Purlby, 2nd battalion 7Ui N.l. 

X»o. Lieutenant -Colonel Kenny, 1st ’ mtwJion 11 tli N.], 

VOL. Ill* 1(3 






















HISTORY OF IIJK MADRAS ARMY. 



Trunty of 

with 

4 he Rajah of 
fierur 


and Bcindiah. 


Ratification 
of 'ho treat it 3, 
lout. 


Fpiudiah^H 

infantry, 


Artillery. 




122 



“ TLe ga-llantiy with which the attack was made by flic 
detachment under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Kenny 1 
has never been surpassed.” 

Lieutenant-Colonels Desse and Lang, and Captain 
Campbell, H.M.’s 94th, also received the thanks o£ the 
General for their services on this occasion. 

The capture of this fortress having opened the way to 
Nagpore, the capital of Berar, the Rajah immediately 
sent Vakeels with full powers to conclude a peace. A 
treaty was signed accordingly at Deogaum on the 1 i th 
December. 

As this event enabled tlio General to prepare to direct 
hn wliolo force against Scindiah, tliat chieftain also sued 
for peace, and on the 30tli December, a treaty with him 
was concluded at Surjee Anjongaum. 

These treaties were ratified by the Governor-General 
in Council, the former on the 9th January, and the latter 
on the 4th February 1804. 

The following account of tho troops of the Mahratta 
confederates is taken from a report made by Lieutenant- 
General Stuart- to the Right Honorablo Lord Hobart:—• 

“ Scindiali’s army consisted of a largo amouut of infantry 
regularly constituted, composed of natives from the north of 
Hindustan, the finest men in India, conducted by Europouu 
officers, and possessing all tho advantages of discipline, of 
lon«r experience in war, and of the confidence inspired by 
numerous successes. 

“His artillery had attained a degree of proficiency which 
was scarcely to be surpassed by the skill of European troops, 
and the founderies, which wore established in his dominions 
under the direction of Europoan officers, had supplied an 
extensive train of ordnance of excellent manufacture. 


1 Tlu.i officer died in April J801 from tlio offset of wounds recur oil ut 
lUu storm. 




HISTORY OF T1TE MADRAS ARMY, 


123 


“ His cavalry, although numerous, was inferior in quality 
to his infantry, and inferior indeed in activity, boldness, 
and skill, to the former cavalry of the Mahrattas. 

“ In all the actions which have been fought, his troops 
performed evolutions with a facility and order, which denoted 
a considerable progress in European tactics. 

“ The troops of the Rajah of Berar were constituted upon 
the same principles with those of Scindiali, but they possessed 
Je^JS experience, and were less respectable than the latter.” 

Shortly after the conclusion of the treaties, Major- 
General Wellesley returned to the southward, leaving the 
Hyderabad subsidiary force in Berar under Lieuteuant- 
Colonel Haliburfcon, who had succeeded to the command 
on the departure of Colonel Stovenson. 1 

The Nizam’s dominions were, at this time, infested by 
hordes of banditti, principally composed of men former¬ 
ly in his own service, who had been discharged under the 
mistaken idea that the peace of the country could be 
preserved by the subsidiary force, which, however, had 
never been equal to such a task, and when it was with- 


1 The following 18 an extract from an ordor published in camp, 30th 
Dvcombor 1803 :— 

“ Major-General Wellesley is much concerned that Col. Stovonsorf’s 
uruto of health should oblige him to quit the field. * * Major- 

General Wellesley har-», for some year s bad tlio assistance of Colonel 

8tevonsou in tho various services in which both have been employ* d by 
t!'o Government of Fort Si. George, and, in tho course of char time, ho 
Las derived tho greatest advantage fx*om his great experience, hi.* 
ndvkoand opinions, on all occa ions, ar well ns a renlmn ami uciivo 
discharge of all tho duties of an officer in his situation in tho field, 
particularly in this last crimp ilgn.” 

Tho Colonel ombarked for England in March ISO*, upon which 
occasion he received tho thauka <>f Government, for th long scries of 
important uud distinguished >:ervic ; w‘ irh h i nl i adored to the 
Ktfttu. 

Colonel Welsh in his ttcminisconocs, Vol. I, page 192, says that, 
1 oloncd IStr.-enson died a few days after the battle of Argaum—a 

of range mi haka to have boeu in.-dt by uu officer who was present at 

the siege of Gnwilghur. 


CHAP. XVII- 
and cavalry. 

Their skill In 
evolutions. 


Troops of the. 
ltajah of 
Borar. 


General 
Wellesley 
marches to 
the south. 


Banditti in 
the 'Nizam’s 
country. 





124 


HISTOCY ( V TUK 2IADKAS A/!21Y. 


<SL 


Lieutenant 

Wjght’g 

detachment. 


Defeat of 
k • > l''»otor8 at 
ALinkniair. 
IttOI. 


jVH. drawn for the purpose of acting against the Mnhrafcta 
confederates, the number of marauders increased, and 
they became so daring as to attack detachments of 
British troops. 

On the 11th December a company of the 1st battalion 
9th, under Lieutenant Wight of that regiment, which 
was escorting two lacks of treasure to Hyderabad for the 
use of General Wellesley's division, was attacked near 
the town of Paungul 1 by a body of about 1,200 moo, who, 
after an obstinate contest, were repulsed with the loss 
of their leader, and a number of his followers. 

Lieutenant Wight also sustained some loss both in 
killed and wounded, but ho made his way with the 
treasure to the village of Jamapooram, where ho main¬ 
tained himself until relieved by Major Bowness, 1st 
•battalion 17th regiment, then commanding a detachment 
near Paungul. Lieutenant Wight and the native officers 
and men received the thanks of the Commander-iu-Chief 
conveyed in general orders of the 22nd January 1801. 

General Wellesley arrrred at Jaulna on the 19th Janu- 
ary 1804, and while thero ho received a deputation from 
the town of Bhcer, 2 soliciting protection againsta numer¬ 
ous and formidable bond of freebooters, who, after having 
beaten a body of the Hi/t in's troops, and taken their guns, 
wore then plundering the country, and threatening Bheer. 
In compliance with this requisition, the General grossed 
the Godavery on the 21th, and on the 2nd February, while 
in camp at Ncemgaum, about 30 miio 9 south-east of 
Ahmednuggur, ho received information to tho effect th it 
the marauders wore in the neighbourhood of Perindn, 
upon which ho resolved to attempt to surprise them. Ho 


Hie southern dihtriofc cl tho li yd iTiifld country juyt north of ih,, 
Xw.inn. 

UlUi dominions, uhoat 70 rnuou iiwt of AUmcUmigRui:. 


MWtsr/fj, 





HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 


125 


<SL 


^accordingly loft Neemgaum on the 3rd with all his 
cavalry, 1 and a select body of infantry, and arrived at 
Sailgaori*, about 18 miles north-west of Perinda, on the 4th. 
Tie resumed his march that night, and came up with the 
enemy about 9 a.m. on the 5tli, just as they had moved 
off from their encampment at Munkaisir. They were 
immediately followed and dispersed by the cavalry, who 
killed great numbers. All their guns, ammunition, and 
stores fell into our hands. Our iufantry arrived at 
Munkaisir with the cavalry, but from the nature of the 
action, they were unable to co-operate further than by 
taking possession of the enemy's camp. 

The General in a letter to Major Malcolm, dated on the 
'th, thus described the conduct of the dotaehmont: — 

“ The exertion made by the troops is the greatest I ever 
witnessed. Every tiling was over by 12 o*clock on the 5th, 
anr h 1 think that, by that time, the infantry must have marchod 
<>0 miles from 6 in the morning on the 4th. 

“We halted from 12 in the day till 10 at night on the 4th, 
so that we marched GO miles with infantry in twenty hours.” 

In a letter of tho same date to Colonel Murray, ho 
observed :— 


CHAR xvur 


Exertions of 
tho detach¬ 
ment. 


41 1 think we now begin to beat tho Mabrattas in the celerity 
of onr movements. 7 ’ 

General Wellesley quitted tho army near Perinda on The (hmoi ui 
thu 23rd February, and proceeded to Bombay, leaving l y 
Lieutenant-Colonel Wallace in command. 

About the middle of April Lieutonant-Colouul Lang, ixi tt ch;.w! t 
commanding a brigade in Berar, composed of the 1 d and 111 
‘hid battalions 11 th regiment, with a proportion of 


1 Jt.M.'s llKh light dragoons i tho 4th, 6i! and 7l>. cavahy, and tho 
Mysoro aud Mahratta Lor.- - H.M 1 7: h reinmc? ' j f! • 1st bnttri- 

h"«i 8lh rogimont; lOOuion from ei: h of iho oth« mvt m* corps in camp, 

11 1st of Xud, 1st of 3rd, lm. * »* 4i b, 1 i or Kali, uid 2nd of l^tli ; 160 

\» i. «i- ; and u parly of lu-lilW'ty wit,' A g*ins. 



12C 


oISTORV 01-' THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 


flio General 
g'jes to 
Calcutta. 


0:ilt*r on tho 

C/COU4UOU . 


<SL 


artillery and pioneers, which had been detached from the 
Hyderabad subsidiary force in January, for the purpose 
of establishing the authority of the Nizam in that province, 
surprised and defeated a body of freebooters under the 
command of Denojee Dosmookh, Nayaram Punt, and 
Ismael Khan. 

General Wellesley rejoined the army onthe22nd May, 
when ho recalled Lieutenant-Colonel Lang from Berar, 
and made arrangements to collect a force at Aurungabad 
with the view of attacking Holkar'a possessions in 
Candeish. Ho then resigned command of the subsidiary 
forces, and left Poonah on the 24th June for Calcutta in 
compliance with tho instructions of the Governor-General. 
The following is an extract from tho order of the day :_ 

“ Camp at Poonah , Sunday , 24 th Juno 1804 . 

“ Upon the occasion of quitting tho army in consequence o! 
the orders of the Governor-General, Major-Gene ml Wellesley 
once more returns his thanks to tho officers and troop 3 for 
their uniform good conduct since he has had tho honor of 
commanding them. In the apace of little more than a year, 
those in this quarter in particular, now composing tho sub¬ 
sidiary forces serving with the Peshwah, and the Soubalidar 
of tho Deccan, and those which are under orders to march 
to the southward, havo boon fried in every mode in which 
it is pohsiblo to try troops, and havo uniformly manifested 
that patience under fatigues, and seventy of climate, !mt 
activity and perseverance in Libor, and bravery and discip¬ 
line in action, which are the characteristic qualities of the 
beet soldiers; their success, and the honor which the 
troops have acquired arc proportionate to the good qualities 
which they have displayed: on which qualities Major-Goner a* 
WolIuBley bus always had the fullest reliance in < v «-vy 
1 nu 1 roucy 0 / flio aorvioo. Ho now recommend? to theta .in 
aeborence to tho principles which buvo brought them >vif I» 


lil /MtY OF TILE MAD I {Ac. AltM\. 


127 



<SL 


lionor 


Prize-money 
ami battu. 


Thanks of tlio 
House of 
CuininODs. 


through so many difficulties, as the certain pledge of CHAP.XYU. 
future success.” 

All ordnance and military stores taken during the 
campaign were reserved by Government, but Major- 
General Wellesley was authorised to distribute to the 
troops, in the usual proportions, the captured treasure 
and other property, valued at 11,52,196 Hyderabad 
rupees, and a donation equal to six months* full batta was 
granted to the European officers as compensation for the 
extraordinary expenses to which they had been subjected. 

On tho 10th November 1804, the Resolutions of the 
House of Commons, dated 3rd May, in which the officers 
and men were thanked for thoir sorvicos during tho war, 
were republished at Fort St. George, together with those 
of the Court of Directors, and tho General Court of 
Proprietors of tho East India Company to tho samo offeet. 

Tho Governor-General in Council directed that these 
Resolutions should bo road at tho several stations to tho 
troops under arms, and that they should bo particularly 
explained to the native ranks. 

Field Force in the Do ad, 1803. 

When Major-General Wellesley first advanced into the Army of 
Mahratta country, a strong force was assembled in the 
Raichoro Doab as a reserve under General Stuart, tho 
Cominander-in-Chief,but the retention of this having been 
considered unnecessary, he returned to Madras in August, 

Mid tho force was disposed nf in the following manner, 
viz., two battalions 1 of native infantry were sent to join 
General Wellesley—a division, composed of cavalry,, 
artillery, infantry, and pioneers, remained near Moodgul 
in the Doab under Major-General Dugald Campbell com¬ 
manding tho Ceded districts, and the remaining regi- 

1 lat battalion 4lh rogimenfc- Mnjur Hill. 

1st do. IOth do. — Major Halim. 


rcfloivo, 1803. 



128 


HISTORY OF TUE MADRAS ARMY. 



<SL 


CltAKXvii. ments were sent back into the territories of the Company. 

campb’n Early in December 1803 Major-General Campbell 
destroys a crossed the river Malpurba for the purpose of protecting 

b(Mer.fin tb’a ^' s country of Siddojee Rao Nimbulkur, Appall Dessaye, 
which had been invaded and plundered by the Polygar 
of Jelloor during the absence of the Dessaye, who, with 
his quota oi troops, had joined General Wellesley in tho 
field. General Campbell, having accomplished this object, 
received information, on the 27th December, of the 
irruption into the Doab, and advance towards the 
Company’s territories, of a body of Mahratta freebooters, 
consisting ot about 10,000 horse, and a number of 
irregular infantry, all under Mahomed Reg Khan, a leader 
who had assumed the title of Bhoondia. 

Leaving Colonel Urban Vigors, the second in command,- 
to follow by easy stages, General Campbell marched from 
Woodapoory on the 28th, with all his cavalry,' the flank 
companies of his infantry, and detachments of artillery 
and pioneers. The next morning lie recrossed the Mal¬ 
purba and reached Jallybal , 2 where he surprised a party of 
horse which had been detached to watch his movements. 

The General left Jallybal at 7 p.m. on the 29th, and 
after a night-march of 30 miles, he surprised the camp of 
the freebooters,about 6 miles from Hnnmunsagur 3 at day¬ 
break on tho 30th. and instantly charged into the contro 
of it with his cavalry. Two thousand of the enemy wore 
killed upon the spot, and upwards of one thousand, 
amongst whom was Mahomed Bog Khan, were woundod 
or taken prisoners. The rest, throwing down their arms, 
dispersed in all directions. 


1 U.M.’s 22nd.light dragootiBthe 1st and 2nd nntivo cavalry ; 
>1.M.’j 33 r <; and 80th foot; 1st battalion 12th, and 1st battalion 17ih 


uiionta N.I. 

* Dialrict of HolgQuun, Lat. IB* r.*y t Long*. 76® 'iS'. 
Hmohoor Uoab. Lm . . pft).96* ft 



imsr^ 


120 


HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 

of their baggage and upwards of 20,000 
carriage-bullocks fell into our hands. The casualties 1 on 
our side were trifling. 

General Campbell, and the. troops, received tho thanks 
of Government, aiid the Commander-in-Chief, for this 
brilliant affair, by which" the Doab and the Company's 
country were, in all probability, saved from a renewal of 
the evils occasioned by Dhoondia. 

The General'spoke highly of the conduct of tho troops 
of all arms, and “especially mentioned the flank companies 2 
of H.M.’8,33rd under Lieutenant-Colonel Elliot, who were 
up with the cavalry at the commencement of the attack. 

Occupation op tiie Province op Cuttack, 1803-05. 

During August and September 1803 an expedition was 
formed at Ganjam for the purpose of taking possession of 
the province of Cuttack, tlion belonging to the Rajah of 
Borar, The force was placed under the command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Harcourt H.M.’s 12th regiment, in 
conseqnenco of the illness of Lieutenant-Coldnel Campbell, 
H.M.’s 7*1 th, commanding in tho Northern Division. 

Tho troops 3 left Ganjam on the 8th September, raid 
occupied Juggoril&uth on the ISth without opposition. 



1 IT.M.’s 22nd dragoons—1 man an 1 2 horses killod K 12 men and 33 
borces wounded, 31 hoi*803 midsing. 

1m. cavalry—-1 man killed, 2 horses nr-sing. 

2nd do. —8 men ainl 7 horses wounded, 4 horses missing. 

2 Tho Europeans did not carry knapmeks, tho native iroopa did. 


Il.M.’s 22nd rogimout 
20th regiment B.N.I. 

Detachment, Bengal artillery 
Madras European regiment 
1st battalion 9tb regiment (9th M.N.L ... 
1st battalion 19th regiment (87th grena¬ 
diers) • • . . 

Detachment, Madras avfillory . 

Do. do. cavalry ... 

VOL. Ill, 


200 

600 From Calcutta 
50 ) 

30 <n 
686 

From (he North- 
055 f Cixcars. 

30 
60 




CHAP. X\ 


Thanks to 
troops. 


17 





It I STOP, Y or THE MADRA, ARMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 


Storm of 
JBarftbutty. 


Gperni iona 
ngaiuttt the 
cbicla of 
Koordnh and 
Kunjcoh. 


War with 
Jlolkur, 1804, 


130 



They were delayed afc that place on account of tlie inun¬ 
dated state of the country, and did not resumo their inarch 
until the 24th, on which day the advanced guard had 
several skirmishes with the enemy. The town of Cuttack 
was entered on tho 10th October without resistance, and 
the adjoining fort of Barabutty was taken by storm on 
the 14th idem, after which the greater part of tlio pro¬ 
vince submitted. The casualties during the operations 
from the time of leaving Juggernautb were small, viz., G 
killed, and 47 wounded. 

The officers and men were thanked by the Governor- 
General in Council in an order dated at Fort ‘William on 
tho 22nd October 1803. 

During November 1804 it was found necessary to move 
against tho Rajah of Koordah in Juggernautli. His fort 
was taken after some resistance, and lie came in and 
surrendered soon afterwards. Early in 1805 a force was 
sent against tho Rajah of Knnkah in the north of the , 
district, and succeeded in obliging him to submit in 
March. With this event tho conquest of tho province 
may be said to have been completed. 


Operations in Candkish, 1804-05. 

During our operations against Scindiah, and the Rajah 
of Berar, Jeswuut Rao Holkar was engaged in predatory 
incursions in the province of Malwa, in the course of 
which he levied enormous sums of money, and captured 
booty of every description. With these means, lie was 
enabled to employ a number of soldiers discharged by 
Scindiali at the close of the war, and early in 1804 lie 
way of, the head of an army consisting of nearly 80,000 
in ‘ n. Intoxicated by success ho made tlio most extra- 
" K an t demands fox tho cession of territory, both in the 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 331 

ices, and in the Deccan, and, on these being 
refused by the Governor-General, he took up a threaten¬ 
ing position, and sent plundering parties into the country 
of the Rajah of Jeypoor, anally of the British Government. 
All attempts at an accommodation having failed, orders 
Were issued about the middle of April for the commence¬ 
ment of hostile operations against Holkar in Hindostan, 
and also in the Deccan. The force at, and near Agra 
under General Lake, destined for this service, was com¬ 
posed of Bengal troops, and that which was directed to 
advance into Malwa from Guzerat under Colonel Murray 
belonged to tho Presidency of Bombay. The reduction 
of Holkar's possessions in Candeish was entrusted to the 
Madras Army, and with this object part 1 of the Poouah 
subsidiary force, under Lieutenant-Colonel Wallace, 
marched on tho 22nd August, and formed a junction with 
a detachment 2 of the Hyderabad subsidiary force under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Haliburton near Aurungabad on the 
27th September. 



<SL 

CIIAP.XVII, 


Colonel Wallaco assumed con mand of tho whole, aiul capture of 
on the 8fch October ho came before the hill fort of Chan- Chandore * 






1 Detachment of artillery. 


6th and 7th cavalry GOO 

H.M.’n 74th regiment ... 200 
V. t battalion Jbd regiment. COO 

lat do. 8th do. ... 500. 

Two companies pioneers. 
a Detachment of Artillery. 


Lionfcenani-Colonel lludloi-ton 
commanding the brigade. 

Lieutenant-Colonol Coleman, 
ll.M.'s 84th commanding tho 
brigade. 


3rd and Oth cavalry about 700. 

II. M'a 04th regiment 

about .. ... 300 

1st battalion 11th regi¬ 
ment about .700 

2ud battalion 2nd regi- 
mont nhout ... 000 

2nd battalion 7th regi- i 

mont abi/ut ... buO ■ 


Lieutenant-Colonel Lang, 1st of 

11th. 


Lioutemmt -Colonel Dosse, 2nd 
of 2nd. 









WtSTfiy 



cHaP. XVII. dore . 1 The pettah was taken tlie same evening without 
resistance, and early on the morning of the Oth, a column 
composed of two' companies of the 94th, 150 details 
serving with the pickets, and 800 of the 1 st battalion 
3 rd regiment, attacked and carried the lowor fort, and 
took possession of tho outworks between it and tlio 
upper fort. -This was accomplished without loss on our 
side, but a number of the enemy, principally Arabs, were 
killed. Tho garrison surrendered on the 12 th, and 
wore permitted to march out with their private property. 
Tho upper fort was found to be remarkably strong, and 
capable of making a good defence. 

Capture of When approaching Cliandore on the 8 th, the 2nd 

Leased gaum. battalion 7 ^ re giinont under Captain Brown, with o 
couple of 12 -pounders, was detached against tho fort of 
Lussulgaum, situated about 12 miles to tho south of 
Cbandore, regarding the strength of which we had no 
information. The gate of the pettah was blown open, and 
the men advanced without much opposition, but on 
getting through the pottah they found themselves in 
front of a high citadel, from which so heavy a lire was 
opened that tho European officers were either killed or 
disabled, and tho greater part of the ammunition having 
been expended, the battalion retired into the pettah, 
where it was joined during tho night by a reinforcement 
composed of a regiment of native cavalry, two companies 
of the 94 th, and five companies 1 st battalion lltli regi¬ 
ment, all under Major Simons of the latter. The assault 
was renewed early on tho morning of the 9th, and tho 
place was carried by tho storming party under Captain 
Lindsay of the 11th, after a desperate resistance made 
by the Arab garrison, all of whom, 80 in number, were 


1 About 60 uiiles .vo3t-noit'lwwoBt from Aur’n^abt.d, 





killed. Tho casualties 1 at botli attacks amounted to 9 CHAP. XVII. 
killed and 37 wounded. 

Tlic fort of Dlioorb, situated about IS miles west of Surrender of 
Chandore, having been included in tho capitulation of Dhoorb ‘ 
that place, it was taken possession of on tho 14th, by a 
detachment 1 st battalion 3rd regiment, under Captain 
Welsh. 

On the 21st the force arrived at Galna, a hill fort of Capture of 
great strength situated about 87 miles north-west of 
Aurangabad. Tho pettah was occupied on tho 22nd 
without opposition, except by the fire from the fort which 
did no execution owing to the good cover afforded by 
the buildings in the pettah. Two breaches were made 
during tho 25th, and the Killadar surrendered the next 
day on condition that ho and the garrison should be per¬ 
mitted to retire with tlieir private property. The ascents 
to the breaches wore extremely difficult, and, as the 
garrison consisted of 500 men, chiefly Arabs, all well 
armed, it was fortunate that the place had uot to be 
Htormed. Tho loss in tho Hyderabad J detachment Casualty®, 
amounted to 1 man killed and 9 men wounded. 

The captuTO of these forts having deprived Holkar of all 
his possessions to the south of the'mver Tap tee, Lieute- Buunou'u 
nant-Cblonel Wallace proceeded to Bunneim, a central 
position in Candeish, where he encamped pending further 
orders. 

.. .—i- 

1 Artillery—Lieutenant Purvis m l 2 men killed, 7 men v-nuudod. 

IT.M’i!. iHik regiment —1 ilrummtr, C rank nhd tik» wounded. 

2nd battalion 7'h regiment—Captain Drown and 5 nun killed. 

j) 0t do. —Lieutenant Pailby and lii men wounded, 

1«(. battalion-11th regiment—2 privates wounded. 

1 Wxsrs^r-l sOrjeuu* wnuudod. 

“The ca’ftuullies in the Poonah lorco aro not fbrt booming. Colonel 
lliilihurton reported them fewer time those of the Hyderabad 
ib'tuoUmont. * 







CHAP. XVII. 


Thanks to 
the troops. 


Colonel 
lluliburton 
conrtm.inds 
iu Candoi3h, 


Enters Berar, 


Encamps at 
Fultypoor. 


ITolU lmok to 
tlu. Clodavciy, 


L6q> HISTORY OF THE 2IADEAS ARMY, 

The services of Lieutenant-Colonel Wallace, and of 
the troops, were duly acknowledged by the Governor- 
General, and the operations wore described by General 
Wellesley as having been of the greatest importance, and 
as having been performed with a degree of gallantry, 
celerity, and skill, seldom surpassed. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Haliburton, having been promoted 
to the rank of Colonel about this time, assumed command 
of the whole force, shortly after which Lieutenant- 
Colonel Wallace was recalled to Poonah, but the brigades 
from that place under Lieutenant-Colonels Coleman and 
Hudleaton continued in the hold. 

Early in December, Mr. Jenkins, then acting Resident 
with Scindiah, suspecting that the Rajah of Berar medi¬ 
tated an incursion into the territories of the Nizam, 
calkd up the Madras troops from Candeisli. In compli¬ 
ance with this requisition, Colonel Haliburton arrived at 
Omraoty * on the loth January 1805, but the alarm 
proving to bo without foundation, ho withdrew nnHI 
encamped at Futtypoor closo to the frontier of West 
Berar, about 30 miles soutb-west of the town of Mulka- 
poor, where ho romained until February, when, in 
conformity with instructions from the Gov. nor- General, 
he foil back to tho northern bank of the Godavery 
near Propnlgaum. 

Attacks on thb Camp or thk Rbsipbnt with Scindiah 
1804-05. 

Wittul Punt, the Minister of Scindiah, having died in 
O' tobor 180 !, was succeeded by Sirjee Kao Ghatkny, an 
inveterate enemy of the British, who, in the hope of 

1 A largo town in Bt-rar, 34 mileij south cwvt of Kllii.-bpooi. 


UWSTfiy 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY, 


135 



compromising his master, induced a body of Pindaries to OHAP.XTU. 

attack the camp of Mr. Jenkins, the Acting Resident on - - 

the night of the 27th December 1804. The attack was December 
made in large numbers, and baggage valued about 1S04 - 
12,000 rupees was carried off, but most of the public 
property was saved by the exertions of the escort, who, 
at last, succeeded in beating off the marauders. In conse¬ 
quence of this affair, and of Seindiah's refusal to dismiss January 
the Minister, Mr. Jenkins quitted the camp on the 23rd 1:S0G ’ 
January 1805, and marched to a distance of 14 miles. 

He was immediately followed by messengers entreat¬ 
ing him to return, and promising compliance with his 
demands. Mr. Jenkins accordingly returnod on the 
24th, but on the 25th, while in attendance on Scindiah 
accompanied by Lieutenant Josiah Stewart, 1 commanding 
the escort, his camp was surrounded by a large body of 
Scindiah ? s Pindarries, who succeeded in plundering it in 
apito of the gallant dofeuco made by the escort, composed 
of two companies 2nd battalion 11th regiment, and a 
party of the body guard. Lieutenant Green of the 11th, 
and Mr. Wise, tho Residency Surgeon, wore wounded, 
and several men of the detachment killed and wounded. 

Scindiali, who was believed to have beou innocent of 
any complicity with the perpetrators of this outrage, 
expressed great horror and regret, and promised full 
i eparation. 

Mr. Jenkins, in his report to tho Suproiue Government, CKk>j 
which was republished in General Orders at Madras on th^o'iVcT^ 
tho 21st May 1800, spoke most highty of tho conduct of 
Lieutenants Stewart and Green, and of that of the, native 
officers and men of the detachment;'in consideration of 
which he recommended (hat tho families of those who 




1 After vrwrds U 'dout at Uycicrulmd, L: 






OIlAP.XVII. 


General 
Wellesley’s 
farewell 
erdor, 1803. 


136 HrdTORY OF THE MADRAS AUMY. 

had fallen should be granted the same indulgences 4 as 
those enjoyed by the heirs of men killed during the 
Mahratta war. This recommendation was duly complied 
with, and those of the detachment who had been disabled 
by wounds were placed on the pension list. 

General Wellesley returned to Scringapatam on the 
30tli November 1804. 

On the 9th February 1805 he finally left that place for 
Madras on his way to England, and on the 9th March he 
issued his farewell order to the army. 



“ General Order by Major-Gcal, the lion. Sir A. Wellesley , K.B. 

“ Fort Saint George , 9 th March 1805. 

“ Major-General Sir Arthur Wellesley informs the troops 
under his command that he has received the permission of 
His Excellency the Governor-General to resign the political 
end military powers with which he had lately been intrusted 
in the Deccan, and the leave of His Excellency the Coin- 
mander-in-Chief to procoed to England. 

“ He cannot avoid expressing the regrot which lie t'ecle 
upon taking leave of officers and troops with whom ho hrw 
served ao long. 

“ In the course of tho period of time which has elapsed since 
Ma^r-General Wellesley was appointed to the command of a 
division of this army, various nervines have been performed 
by the troop:, and great difficulties have been surmount, d 
with a steadiness and perseverance which have seldom hemi 
surpassed. Upon every occasion, whether iu garrison or in 
the field, tho Major-Coneral has had reason to be satisfied 
with their conduct, and he once more returns them his 
thunks, and assures them that ho shall never forget then 


’ rho families of tho men of tho body fruard who v ere killed on i h u . 
oc’union iu question had ulroady been adinittod on the pen,ion c .Lulj. 
bailment. 




HldTom OP Tim MADRAS ARMY. 



1 37 


m i vices, or ecaso to feel a lively interest in whatever may 
concern them. 

“ Ho earnestly recommends to ihe officers of the army 
never to lose sight of the great principles of tho military 
service, to preserve the discipline of the troops, and to encour¬ 
age in their respective corps the spirit and sentiments of 
gentlemen, and of soldiers, as the most certain road to tho 
achievement of everything that is great in their profession.” 



CHAP. XVII. 


* 




# 


* 


Conclusion op the War, 1806. 

Early in 1805 tho conduct of Scindiah. appeared so 
suspicious that it was considered necessary to be pre¬ 
wired for a renewal of hostilities, aud on the 20th April 
Colonel Haliburfcon 1 was ordered to advance to his former 
position at Fnttypoor. Affairs were in this state when 
iScindiah, ou tho approach towards Him of tho army 
under General Lake, suddenly made a precipitate retreat 
towards tho Chumbul, by which tho Governor-General 
was relieved from any apprehension of war in the Deccan. 
Nevertheless, it was still thought expedient that tho 
Madras Field force should proceed to Futtypoor as 
** directed, there to await the course of events. 


I M>4 Cl! ' tool B H '' :•!'» t) gfi . - t, 

l! "" 2mi t'^lalion 2m’, 2nd battalion 7ih, lot anil 2nd battalions 11th 
nyiniont ; dolnohmonls of artillery umI pinmer-i. 

'flu' force ivaa j.-nod shortly aft.'iwru* Ly tho lnt cavalry from 
Ih-llury, nu«l tho Isl battalion 7ili Uombny natlw infantry from 
1‘oooidj. 

A\B.—TV 1 of I,bo AlndriLM in,o ( v, anting with (bo P«.<mah foroo 
n urpnfl towards tho * Uh ul tbit nun.., vi/.. - lm ami 7th on-, td^y 
•'* roido Lfi tho Carnatic, tho Jut bnthdioTi 3rd ivgin.iMit to Poonah. and 
ir.M/s 7 If h regiment to Madras for rmbarkntl. n to Kn H liuul. The |< lQ fc 
l*ad. by that time, bofcn reduced l.y h : 1 . .-hv and .... mi , u . t 0 „• , ut 

VJO rank f%ml lllo. A very com pi ii ih utar order ft< knowlodging tho 
Immient at fvicc* rendered by thin rivn..-nt wan p .bliwhod a t p r>1 .j ^ 
Ooo»|-r i>n (.ho 27tli August lb"“ Lo.tly hpforn i ho rv.d k<>* ,on 

ni.ui. 18 













UWtSTfty 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



D< feat of 
Arubs on 
the Beema. 


<SL 


_ r ^ ie * st cavalry, under Major Neale, which had loft 
Bellary about the end of March in order to join the 
j oonah Subsidiary force near Ahmednuggur, arrived at 
Baramuttee on the 23rd April, and while there Major 
Neale roceivcd intelligence that a body of freebooters 
was in the neighbourhood of Inderpoor. On the 24th he 
was joined by a detachment 1 st battalion 2 nd regiment 
under Lieutenant Peilc, and making a night march ho 
crossed the Beema at 3 a.m. on the 25th, and two hours 
later ho came in sight of the enemy at the village of 
Cowutgaum. The mounted portion wont oft' at once, 
but the infantry, consisting of about 350 Arabs, formed 
in front, of tlieir encampment. Tho ground wns veiy 
unfavorable for cavalry, being rocky and much inter¬ 
sected by ravines, but Major Neale pushed on, and the 
enemy broke on Ins approach, taking post amongst somo 
adjoining rocks from whence they opened a smart lire. 
However,^ they were soon dislodged and most of them 
killed. 1 he loss of the cavalry was trifling, viz., 3 men, 
and 8 horses killed and wounded. Several standards and 
a quantity of baggago were taken. This service was 
brought to tho favorable notice of Government by Colonel 
Wallace, commanding the Poonah force. 


ur'.f u’o . C ° loncl Ualiburton 1,aviu S die <i ^ July, was succeeded 

‘ re". 1S06. 111 ,ll ° command at Futtypoor by Colonel Wallace, who 

retained it until the early part of 1800, when tb ratifica¬ 
tion of a new treaty with Scindiah, and tho conclusion 
of peace with Ilolkar, led to tho breaking up of tho force 
shortly afterwards. The troops belonging to the Hyder¬ 
abad Subsidiary force roturnod to Hyderabad under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Lang, and Colonel Wallace marched 
to Poonah with the rest. 

r f 1 ^hiring tho continuance of tho forco near Futtypoor, 
(loiachmontL vero sonfc out from timo to time •• gainst the 





HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY, 


139 


hands of marauders by which the country was infested. 
One of these detachments, composed of the 2nd cavalry, 
iho 2nd battalion 7th regiment, and a party of artillery, 
under Captain Hopeton Scott of the 7th, surprised a body 
of Mahratta plunderers near Mulkapoor on the 22nd 
December 1805. Their number was computed at 3,000 
horse, 4 guns, and a small party of infantry. They were 
completely defeated, losing their guns and baggage. 

The following is an extract of a letter from the Gover¬ 
nor-General in Council to the Madras Government on 
the conclusion of the war, which was published at Fort 
St. George on the 27tli May 180G :— 

“ On tho occasion of withdrawing tho armies of the esta¬ 
blishments of the several Presidencies from the duties of tho 
field, and placing them in cantonments in consequence of 
tho late honorable and advantageous peace with Joswunt Rao 
Holkar, we discharge a satisfactory obligation of our public 
duty in conveying to your Lordship in Council the expres¬ 
sion of the high sonso we entertain of the distinguished 
coi.duct of the officers and men of that portion of Hia 
Mujesty’b and the Honorable Company’s forces att, *hed 
iho Pre sidency of Fort St. George which has been employed 
on active service during the late contest. 

41 Under every trial of fatigue and difficulty incident to a 
protracted term o', military service in countries recently 
r, \'posed to the injuries of famine aud the ravages of war, 
tho officer;-! and troops of His Majesty's and tho Honorable 
Company's service employed under tho Presidency of Fort 
St. George have manifested an exemplary degree of fortitude, 
r -t ,iiy and military discipline; and in tho execution of the 
military operations which required their services, their con¬ 
duct lias been distinguished by every quality of per. \ erance, 
tMllantry, a nd skill, which can tend to elevate the reputation 
and establish the ascemlauoy of the British arms. 

,f We request that your Lorddiip in Council will lie 
pleased to direct tlio communication of these eutimeuts fca 


<SL 

CHAP- XVII. 


Thanks 
of tho 
Governor- 
General. 


' 

140 TIIhTuRY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

the officers and men of Hia Majesty’s and the Honorable 

Company’s forces of the Presidency of Fort St. Georgo 

engaged in the duties of the field during tho late contest 

with Jeswunt Rao Holkar.” 

Acquisition By tho successful issue of tlie war witli the Mahratta 
• of territory. 

confederates, the East India Company acquired a large 
accession of territory. Tho Upper Doab between the 
Ganges and Jumna, and the fort of Baroach with tho 
country dependent thereon, wero ceded by Scindiah. 
The province of Cuttack, including the fort and district 
of Balasore, was ceded by tho Rajah of Berar. 







Relief of the Madras Troops at Poonaii, 180 LG. 

When the Madras troops wore ordered into Malabar 
and Canava, it wa., determined that tho subsidiary force at 
Poonah should, for tho future, be furnished from Bombay, 
with tho exception of the rogiment of native cavalry, 
which was to be sent from Madras. 

Tho relief commenced about tho middlo of 1804, but 
in consequence of the threatening attitude of Scindiah 
and other circumstances, it was nob completed before 
March 1806, when tho remaining Madras battalions, viz., 
the let of the 2nd at Poonah, the 2nd of the 3rd at Ahmc. d- 
nuggur, and the 1st of the 8th in the neighbourhood <>i 
that place, wore withdrawn to thoir own Presidency. 

Military Operations within the Limits op the 
Madras Presidency, 1804-5. 

Outbreak in DhuUgvl, 1804. 

On tho 19tli Juno 1804, Mr. Parish, Collector and 
Magistrate of Madura, left Dindigul for Veorapatochy m 
consequonco of certain disturbances existing in that part 
of the district, but as tho-o wero not believed to bo 
noririu'’, his escort was limited to 40 sepoy and ah-ml. 
300 armed peons. 



iriS'loEY ‘>r TIT E MADRAS ARMY. 


141 


<SL 


Al*ter attacked 11 "ar 
Veera patchy. 


On tlie afternoon of tlie 20th, when within a march of CHAP. XVII. 
hit* destination, Mr. Parish was attacked by a body of The Collcci..r 
tlie insurgents, estimated at about 1,000 men. 
maintaining his ground for some time, during which he 
lost, several of his best peons, Mr. Parish retreated to a 
dismantled fort near tlio place where he had been 
attacked, and from thence ho made his way back to 
Dindigul, whero he arrived the next day. 

On receipt of this intelligence at Trichinopoly, five Captain 
companies 2nd battalion 13fch regiment (20th M.N.I.) ^pr^^c, 
wore immediately dispatched to Dindigul under Captain ^ ” l8urr,,tv 
Galbraith Hamilton. On the night of the 4th July a 
party of the rebels under Lotchmana Naigue, their 
principal leader, was surprised near Poottoornuttuin by 
Captain Hamilton with the flank companies of his detach¬ 
ment. Several of the rebels were killed, and the rest 
dispersed, leaving 80 pikes and several matchlocks cm 
the ground. 

Captain Hamilton again surprised Letclnnana Naigue 
about noon on the 7th while resting with his party in 
the bed of a river. A few wore killed, the rest fled, 
leaving 85 pikes, 17 matchlocks, 4 jinjals, and a number 
of swords. 

Lotchmana Naiguo was taken on tho 1 ltli by the Poly- 
gar of Myawaddy, and given up to Captain Chambers 
commanding a detachment 2nd battalion Gth regiment 
at Columbuin. 

Tho disturbances ceased after this capture, and tho 
troops returned into cantonments. 


Operation p in the Chittoor Poll am?, 1804-5. 

At the period of tho transfer of P Carnatic to tbo Ret, iii 0] , ,.r 
llritish Government in perpetual sovereignty, under tho ! r'l*} " 1 ,'’ ‘" 
operation of the treaty eoneludod with His Highness 


history of thd madras army. 



C.’oloiml 

Darluy'a 

brigade, 

1801. 


112 



Azeem-ocl-Dowlah on the 31st July 1801, the assessment 
o. the lands held by the Polygars of Chittoor was revised 
and fixed after a minute examination of the village 
accounts, which were submitted for the purpose. Tho 
assessment thus fixed was paid with punctuality at first, 
but tho Polygars soon relapsed into the contumacious 
and disorderly habits for which they had been notorious 
under the feeble administration of tho Nawaubs of the 
Carnatic, and, taking advantage of the disturbances of 
the period, they ceased to make any payments, and 
having assembled considerable bodies of armed peons, 
they began to plunder villages in the Company’s territory. 
The employment of the troops on service of moro urgont 
importance precluded the Government from taking stops 
to reduce the Polygars to submission until the end of 
June 1804, when tho Collector was directed to call upon 
thorn to discharge their arrears on pain of forfeiture. 

This requisition having been disregarded except by 
the Zemindar of Goodiput, a detachment 1 under Lieute- 
n.mt-Colonel Tlarlcy, 2nd battalion 4th regiment, marched 
into the district about the middle of July, and com¬ 
menced active operations shortly afterwards. No serious 
opposition was offered, except on two occasions, viz., 
at the Droog, or hill fort, of Pulloor, in the attack 
on which, on the 13th August, tho detachment had 4 
men killed and 16 wounded, aud again at tho attack of 
Snndoor Conduk on the 21th September by two com¬ 
panies of tho 1st battalion IGtb regiment under Captain 
Armstrong, when 5 men wore killed and 13 wounded. 






1 Artillery— 9 officers, 2S iJuropeana, 66 natives. 

Officers. Havildara. 
battalion 4th regiment. 16 60 

Ui lfifcl* do. 16 60 

Finnoom . . ,,, X 6 


Honk file. 
065 
913 
192 





HISTOKY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


143 



By tlie end of September the numerous hill-forts and OHAP.XVII. 

stockades having been destroyed, and the armed followers - 

of the Polygars having been dispersed. Government 
directed Colonel Darley to suspend hostilities ; and they Suspension of 
appointed a Commission of three experienced officers of 
the Civil Service to meet at Chittoor for the purpose of Appointment 
redressing any grievances of which the Polygars might Commui ' 
have just cause to complain, and also of revising the 
system of management in the Pollams. The troops were 
accordingly withdrawn, and the Polygar chiefs came into 
Chittoor on the requisition of the Commissioners, but 
they brought 5,000 armed men with them, and after a Renownl oi’ 
fruitless discussion which lasted some days, they suddenly thc rcvoU ‘ 
quitted Chittoor, and again broke out into insurrection. 

About tho end of November a respectable force 1 was Colonel 
assembled at Vellore under Lieutenant-Colonel Mony- 
penny, fl.M.'s 73rd regiment, who was invested with 
full powers. He reached Chittoor on the 13tli December 
aud immediately issued notifications to all the chiefs, 
calling upon them to surrender within seven days on 
pain of forfeiture. Theso notifications having been 
disregarded, except by the Polygars of Nargunty and 
Goodiput, martial law was proclaimed, and on the 23rd 
the detachment marched to Mograul, about sixteen 
miles north of Chittoor. The fort was evacuated on the 
approach of tho troops, and the Polygars retired to a 
st< op and rocky hill close by. On tho morning of the 
vl4tli the following dispositions were made for tho 


Artillery ... 

44 rank and tile. 

A troop of cavalry 

70. 


If.M.'e 73rd regiment 

120 

rank and ttlo. 

lot battalion ]at rtjpno’ul N ! 

500 

d«». 

2nd iln. 4th do. 

1,1 do 

do. 

l»t do. 16th do. 

0G2 

do. 

I'ioncorB 

313 

do. 



114 


HISTORY 01' THE .MADRAS • . 



P.XVII. 


Jlepulho at 

M ograul. 


<SL 


assault. The right attack under Lieutenant-Colonel 
I>arley was composed of the grenadiers of the 73rd and 
live companies 2nd battalion 4th regiment. The left 
attack under Major Grant was composed of the Light 
company 73rd and five companies 1st battalion 16th 
regiment. Colonel Monypenny romained near the fort 
with the rest of the detachment. The hill being very 
steep and rugged, tho ascent of the troops was slow, 
and when they came near tho summit they found them¬ 
selves in front of masses of perpendicular rock surrounded 
by dense jungle. This position had been converted into 
a kind of redoubt by connecting the rocks with high 
walls. The existence of such an obstacle not having boon 
suspected, I he men had not been provided with scaling 
ladders, and after soveral unsuccessful endeavours to 
gain an entrance, the attempt was given up. Our lo*e 1 
was small, probably owing to the circumstance that tho 
Polygars were badly supplied with firearms. Tho hill 
was deserted a few hours after the assault, aud no other 
stand was mado again t the troops, small parties of 
which, aided by a detachment 2nd battalion 19th regi¬ 


ment sent from tho Coded Districts by Lieufceuant- 
Colouel Thomas Munro, scoured the country in search 
of tho lebel knderH. Tho pursuit was so vigorous and 
unremitting that tho Poly gars of Mograul, Pulloor, 
Kulloor, Poolichcrln, Prmcal, and Toomba gav< thorn- 
•"PI'X ;• n selves up during January and February 1806, and by 
rid i, i j 05 . en( ^ the month last named the disturbances iu 

tho Pollanm had boon entirely suppressed. Tho only 
capital punishments inflicted were in the cases of tho 


lf..1 Vi 7dr*l Ki 1 lod : CajMM n f w !«, r (]-ilio thrivii) 1 Hr.’rjvuiu, 
l ,r vutoi'. Wotmdod : Lioutonnr.t Glonltolmo *nrl 1 private. 

Uud bnltnlion 4tb rcj.pmtnit—Killed 2 piirutea. 
i hi. do. JCtli do. —Woundod ; 3 dv. 


do. 







Chiefs of Yodergoond.il and Chergul captured by the CHAP. XVII. 


Mysore horse. These men, having been tried and 
found guilty of having plundered certain villagg^m the 
taluk of Amhoor, were sentenced to bo hung, which 
sentence was carried out. 


Affairs in Travancore , 1804-5. 

A serious mutiny having broken out amongst the Tfco HesiderJ 
troops in the servicoof the Rajah of Travancore, attended Cochin, 
by general disturbances throughout that province, and 1804 * 
the life of the Resident, Major Colin Macaulay, having 
been supposed to be in danger, he quitted Alleppy 
on the night of the 1 Gth November 1804, and repaired 
to Cochin, then garrisoned by a company of the 2nd 
battalion 1st regiment. 

The Government of Madras, apprehensive that the Madras 
insurgents might enter the territories of the Company, at 

directed the Officer commanding tho southern division 1805 * 
to make, in communication with the Resident, such dis¬ 
positions of the troops at his disposal as might appear 
necessary to guard against any such attempt. 

The garrison at Cochin was immediately strengthened, 
and early in 1805, the 1st battalion 7th, and the 2nd 
battalion Gth arrived at Quilon, followed shortly after¬ 
wards by the 2nd battalion 13th, and a detachment of 
artillery, which demonstrations produced the desired 
effect. 

Affairs in Malabar } 1802-5. 


The provinces of Malabar and Canara were garrisoned Disturbance* 
by Bombay troops from tho period of thoir acquisition in 'wm at a 
1702, up to tho end of 1804, when most of tho Bombay l 8u2 *&* 
regiments were relieved by those of the Madras establish¬ 
ment. The province firat named was, for year#, the 
floenc of frequent insurrections. Tranquillity had been 
vox.. m. 19 






CHAP. XVII. 


Colonel 
Montros' r 
r. .hb for a 
* ^inrorce- 
iriiniv, 
1803. 


I nettle lent 
nth 'a r.f the 
Bern bay , 
i roopu in 
IA ulub^r, 

1802-C 


146 


<SL 

HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


temporarily restored in 1801 by the field force under 
Colonel Stevenson, but disturbances broke out again in 
the Wynaad in October 1802, and although a consider¬ 
able 1 force was maintained in Malabar during 1808-4, 
the rebellion was not put down. On the contrary it 
increased, and the European settlements on the coast 
having been threatened, it became necessary to use, for 
their protection, troops which might otherwise have been 
employed in Cotiote, and in the Wynaad, the principal 
seats of disaffection. 

In December ,1803, Colonel Montresor reported that 
the spirit of rebellion, and of obstinate opposition to tlm 
British Government, still prevailed in these parts of the 
province, and that his efforts to restore tranquillity had 
been unsuccessful in consequence of the small number 
of men at hie disposal who were available for service in 
the field, for which reasons he asked for a reinforcement 
to the extent of 5,000 men, with which requisition the 
Government of Madras were unable to comply as they 
had not a single battalion to spare. 

Out of 18 battalions 2 of native infantry at that time 
belonging to the Bombay establishment, from six to 
eight liad beon constantly employed in Malabar mid 


TV '»ps in Jlfalat-nr, May 1803, exclusive nf artillery. 


H.M.’h 77th and 80tb foot, and tLv Bombay Kiuro- ^ 

penn regiment . 851 j 

Bombay native infantry ... ... .. 6,000 48,1117 

Do. pioncpra ... . .. .. 390 I 

2nd battalion let regiment Madras native infantry. 1/9-1 ] 


In October 1801. 


H.M.’h SOlh, and Bombay hampean regiment 
Bombay native infantry ... ... 1,015/ 

I>o. pionoern ... ... 112 ( 

2nd (,; tt.ullon lid rtarinierjl- Mji-'ihh on i. ire iufflr.lry. 999 

■* 1*0t»» rt giruent i> ui two Lutinliouh each. Tim 0fi» wan 
DrruniU i ltfcj. 


n ; sio 

ruined 


in 





IilSJOKY or THE MAD RAH A KM Y. 


14V 


Canaia, a service which was extremely unpopular on 
account of the climate, the distance of the men from 
their homes, and the length of time they were separated 
from their families owing to the impossibility of making 
regular periodical reliefs. The regiments could not be 
kopb complete because of the difficulty experienced in 
obtaining recruits, and from all these causes combined 
they became so weak 1 and inefficient that their relief was 
considered “ absolutely 2 necessary, both to preserve the* 
peace in Malabar, and to secure the existence of the 
Bombay Army as a respectable body.” 

Service in Malabar was equally disagreeable to the 
Madras sepoys, but as they could bo regularly, and com¬ 
paratively easily, relieved from Mysore or from the 
southern division, it was determined to send them to the 
Western Coast, and iu accordance with that resolution 
ft respectable 3 body of Madras troop* was assembled in 
Mulubar by the end of 1804 under Lieutenant-Colonel 
A. Macleod, who was appointed to command in Malabar 
and Cauaru, with powers to try, by summary process 
under martial law, all persons found in arms against 
fho State, nnd to carry out sentences of death without 
roforonoo to Government, i xcepfc in cases whero any 
reasonable doubt might exist. 

Colonel Macleod 4 entered the Wynaad at Mateletto on 
tia: 10th January J805, and issued a proclamation no f ify- 


CHAP.XViJ 


Madras 

troops 

garrison 

Malabar and 
Canara, 180 


Colonel 
Maclood 
invested 
with up-. cla l 
powers. 


JTocnli cm 


Wyimud, 

1806. 


' liimitenant-Gcn • ral Stuart, to Lord Clivo, 6iL Juno 1803. 

Mujor-General Wollosloy, to Lit>utonuut.Oon6rul Stnsr*.. I Uh I'lIj- 
' wary 1804. 

3 Detachment <»f urlilloryj Ui l nttn 1». ;> 7r.h. Jnd biutubon 6th, l?i 
battalion 12th, J«a buttuljc n JUth, 1st bnnulio; Hlh, l-.r batetliem I71;b. 
and lat battalion pioneers. So\on ma of II.M/h Noth toot 

tnsrehod from the Coded l' 1 ', 11 »ota into Mnlabm at the htimo iinic, and 
f| ** 10 * tin? three com pa nic-f of tho regiment then at. CVinuanon . 

1 H M. h 80 th fo )t 600, 2ud hattali'ju lat, U: battalion i:tth OauL 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS AKMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 


Operations. 


Posts during 
tie rains. 


Death of the 
IV , Rajah, 
and puppree- 
nii n of tho 
™jbeliion. 




148 



ing his powers, and offering pardon, with a few excep¬ 
tions, to all who had been concerned in the rebellion, on 
condition of their immediate submission. 

He at the same time announced his intention to maintain 
in the district, during the-rains, a force sufficiently strong 
to protect the well-affected portion of the population. 

After rebuilding the redoubt at the head of the Cotioor 
pass. Colonel Macleod marched to Panamurta Cottoh, 
where he stationed four companies to protect the pioneers 
ordered to rebuild the fort, and to construct cover for the 
troops during the rains. 

Detachments were sent into every part of the district 
in pursuit of tho rebels, and redoubts were constructed 
at VeTlaud in the north, and at Koiladdy and Kunyote in 
the south. During March, and April several captures 
were made, and a number of the inhabitants repaired to 
tho different camps and tendered their submission. 

By the end of April tranquillity was restored, and 
Colonel Macleod* returned to Cannanore about tho middle 
of May, leaving about 2,152 1 non-commissioned, rank 
and file in Wyuaad, who were distributed amongst eleven 
posts. Captain Watson, with 800 of the Malabar Police, 
corps, was also left-in tho district, and Lieutenant-Colonei 
Tunes,-2nd battalion 1st regiment, was appointed to 
-command tho whole. 

Active operations were recommenced at tlie end of the 
rains, and the disturbances in Wyuaad and Cotiote were 
at last terminated by the death of the Pycliy Itajah, who 

A Siud bacwilwn Ufc,1,000.—Panamurta CoUaIi, Koiladdy, Kanvcto. 
tottah. 

I t hatt' lion 18tb 81k—Vr-llnud, A,ttwoyb, Cuniiioh A rry, Dr, rRloor. 

1st bottalion 12th 80S.—Maiol- l<., Pallingal, Mauantoddy, La« r 7 . 

coUah. ** ' . •' 

Jluvildnr's post at San^aloo on the Mysore frontier, to bo relieved 
ovury third day from Manantoddy. 





was surprised and killed on tlie 30th November 1805 CHAP. XYli. 
by a party of the 1st battalion 4th regiment under Cap¬ 
tain Clapham, supported by 100 armed peons under the 
direction of Mr. Baber, the Sub-Collector, who had 
accompanied the detachment. 

Emin Nair, one of the principal rebels, was taken a 
few days after the death of the Rajah, and deported to 
Prince of Wales Island. 

Congan Nair, who burnt the cantonment at Panamurta- 
cottah in 1802, despairing of being able to evade capture, 
committed suicide about the end of the year. 

The troops suffered very much during this service Distress of 
from want of proper shelter, provisions, and medical aid. thc 
The 2nd battalion 1st regiment, which had been 
employed during tho rains without cover, had upwards 
of 200 men on tho sick list in May 1805. 


Succession of Governors and Commanders-xn-Chief, 

1803-6. 

Lord William Bentinck succeeded Lord Clive as Lord W. 
Governor of tho Presidency of Fort St. George on tho bcutmck * 
30th August 1803. 

Lieutenant-General Stuart resigned on tho 21st Octo- Lieutenant, 
bor 1804, and was succeeded, as a temporary measure, by gtSST* 
Major-General Dugald Campbell of tho MadraB Army. 

General Stuart issued an order on his departure, from 
which the following is an extract :— 

“Lieutenant-General Stuart retires from tho command of 
an army, with which it haB boon his fortune to servo during 
a considerable 1 portion of his life. 

1 Landed at Madras, April 1782, in command of H.M.'b 78th (present 
72nd). Sorvodat the fcttaok on Cnddalor*. 1783. With Colonel Ful- 
*’»rWs army in tho south, 1783-84. Myaoro campaign, 1790-92. 

Nujgo of Pondichory, 1793. Expedition to Cev ion, 1795-96. Oommander- 
in-Chief, Bombay, 1797. Siego of Seringapatam, 1799. Commander-iu- 
Ghiof, Madras, 1801. 





mtsT#^ 



CHAP. XVII. 


JLI^utoiiam- 

Gmu'i‘ul 


C'ovcrnors- 

(iuiicral, 

lbOo-6. 







•150 HISTORY 

“ In tlie several gradations of his command over His 
Majesty's, and the Honorable Company’s troops serving 
under the Presidency of Fort St. George, Lieutenant-General 
Stunrt has found his authority supported by a spirit of liberal 
subordination pervading every rank, and by a zeal and energy 
for the public interests which have commanded his appro¬ 
bation and respect.” 

***** 

“ The welfare of the Army of Fort St. George will for 
ever hold an everlasting place in his remembrance, and a 
holiil claim on his sincere 'ttacliment; his parting good wishes 
for its honor, and prosperity ait; derived from the most power¬ 
ful motives of personal affection, and public gratitude.” 

Lieutenant-General Sir J. P. Cradock, afterwards 
Lord Howden, assumed command on the loth Februar* 
1805. 

Lord Wellesley was succeeded by Lord Cornwallis, who 
took his seat a« Governor-General on the 30th July 1805. 
He died at Ghazeopoor on the 5th Octobe r of the same" 
year, and was succeeded by Sir G. H. Barlow of the 
Civil Service, who was superseded in 1806 by Lord 
Min to. 


<SL 

OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 




TIfflTOTlY OF TIIK 2JADRA8 ARifY. 


151 


Cavalry, 1803-1806. 

An additional regiment of cavalry , numbered the 8th 1 
was raised at Arcot in May 1804, the nucleus being com¬ 
posed of drafts of men and horses from the other seven 
regiments. ' 

The corps of cavalry was then formed into four bri¬ 
gades, the whole to be under the command of Major- 
General Dugald Campbell. 

First brigade, 1st and 5th regiments ... Major-Genl. ramp- 

bell. 


Second do. 

2nd and Gth 

do. 

... Colonel Stevenson. 

Third do. 

3rd and 7th 

do. 

... Colonel Pater. 

Fourth do. 

4th and 8th 

do. 

... Colonel Orr. 

Subadar 

Oawder Nawaz 

Khan 

of the 4th cavalry 


having been employed in situations of a confidential aud 
important nature under Major-General Wellesley during 
the campaign in the Deccan, his services were brought 
t«> the special notice of Government in August 1804, 
whereupon he was rewarded by an allowance oi 100 
rupees per mensem in addition to a pension equal to the 
full pay and batta of his rank, and the usual allowance 
for the maintenance of a palankin. The additional 
allowance was paid in arrears from the date of the battle 
of Assay e in conformity with a resolution to that effect by 
the Governor-Genc-r.il in Council. 

About the middle of 1805 enlistments for the cavalry 
were limited to men between 17 and 25 years of age. 
No man to be taken under 4 fo-t 5 inches, and no recruits 
enlisted except Mahomed.m a oi good sects. Rajpoots, 
Muhnutas, and Rachware. 


’ Tbc» 8t.b was rodneed on the lah December 1857, and fche Gth, fith, 
nuil 7*h on the 31 m December IStHJ 


CHAP. 31VII. 


Brigades, 

1804. 


Subadar 
Oawder 
Nawaz Khun 


Knlistnn nts, 
1H05 


152 


HISTORY 0? TRF, MADRAS ARMY, 




CHAP. XVII. 

Depot for 
instruction. 


Detachment 
returns from 
Bengal, 1806. 


Mesa 

»llowance. 


In December of the same year detachments from each 
regiment were ordered to Arcot for the purpose of being 
instructed in one uniform system by Lieutenant Neville, 
H.M.'s 19th light dragoons, under the general superin¬ 
tendence of the Officer commanding the cantonmont. 

The officers and men of the Madras cavalry serving with 
the Governor-General's body guard in Bengal, returned 
to Madras in January 1806 under Captain Doveton of the 
7th regiment. 

Those still fit for service wore distributed amongst the 
several regiments, and the rest transferred to the pension 
establishment. 

On the 30bh June an allowance of thirty-live pagodas 
per mensem when marching, or in the field, or of eighteen 
pagodas per monsem when in garrison or cantonment, 
was granted to each regiment of cavalry in which an 
Officers' moss was maintained. 



Artillery, 1803-1806. 

In April 1805 orders were issued for the formation of a 
small - body of Horse Artillery, to be composed of drafts 
of selected men from the two battalions of artillery, and 
the regiments of native cavalry. 

The establishment of the European portion was fixed 
as follows:— 


1 Captain. 

2 Lieatonant3. 

2 Lieutenant-Fire workers 
1 Assistant Surgeon. 

5 Serjeants. 


5 Corporals. 

10 Gunners. 

82 Matrosses. 

1 Native Trumpeter. 

2 Native Furriers. 

Non-Effective Staff. 
and Quarter- 1 Riding Master. 

2 Rough Riders- 

1 Drill (jrfpornl. 

2 European Farriers. 


1' Adjutant 
master. 

1 SerjoauL Major. 

1 Quartermaster Serjeant. 

179 horses, viz., 57 lor saddjo and 122 for draught. 
No,*-Combatants. 


102 Horsckeepers. 
183 G rass- cuttor?- 
4 Carpenters. 
t< Smiths. 

0 Armourers. 

3 Hammermen. 


3 Bellows boys. 

1 Sickledur. 

1 Chuck ler. 

1 Conicopoly, 

4 Pr.ekallie.s. 

1 Dooley with Bearers. 


Ordnance, fyc. 

In 

dmuphr. 

To carry 
'men. 

2 twelve and 1 six pounders 

... 36 

18 

2 five and a half inch howitzers 

... 12 

0 

8 tumbrils 

... 48 

24 

1 forge cart 

2 

... 

1 storo do. ••• ... 

. 2 

... 

1 spare carriage ... 

Hones for ridei*s 

4 

57 


Spare horses lr.uncfisod 1 to 0 in draught. 
VOL. HI. 


18 


20 




<SL 


CHAP. XVII. 

IIor30 

artillery, 

1803 . 


European 

troop. 






HISTORY 01 THE MADRAS ARMY. 




CHAP.XVII. The native troop, which was to be thoroughly in 

hYtive troop, structed in the duties of artillery, consisted o£— 


1 Lieutenant. 

1 Second-Lieutenant. 

1 Subadar. 

2 Jemadars. 

4 Havildars. 


4 Naigues. 

1 Trumpeter. 

1 Farrier. 

70 Privates. 

2 Recruit boys. 


1 Puckally. 

32 Horsekeepcrs, 84 Grass-cutters, and 83 horses. 

The undermentioned officers of artillery were posted to 
the troop :— 


Kative foot 
artillery or 
G« ! 'iithinze. 


• 1 2 nifurro 
•if 

art ill m y 
ami 1 4 


Captain-Lieutenant Noble, Commandant. 


Lieutenant G. W. Poignand. 
Do. E. M. G. Showers. 
Do. W. M. Burton. 

Do. Walter Shairpe. 


Lieutenant H. T. Rudyard. 
Do. R. Beauchamp 
Proctor. 

Mr. Abst. Surgeon D. Ainslie. 


Officers were to piovido their horses on the same 
principle and terms as officers of cavalry. 

On the 20th of the same month an order was issued 
directing that two companies of native foot artillery, of 
the undermentioned strength, should bo raised, one 
company to bo attached to each battalion ot European 
artillery :— 


1 Subadar. 

2 Jemadars 
6 Havildars, 
f> Naiguce. 


1 Drummer, 

1 Fifer. 

2 Bhjstics. 
80 Privates. 


A European officer was to be detailed by the com¬ 
mandant of artillery for the immediate charge of each 
company of Golandauze. 


The following order regarding the uniform of the Horso 
Artillery and Gulaudauzo was issued on the 8th May :—. 
41 The lo'.ting of I lor Be Artillery is to be blue, with b<:;rlet 





HISTORY OP THR MADRAS ARMY. 


155 


collar and cults; trimmingsyellow, and of the fashion of cloth¬ 
ing of cavalry regiments. 

•“ The clothing of Golandauze is to bo of the colours and 
fashion of clothing of artillery.” 

The undermentioned alteration in the designation of the 
Horse Artillery took place in January 1806 ;— 


0.0 . by the Commander-in-Chief, 6th January 1806. 

“ The Horse Artillery, which was established by General 
Orders of 4th April 1805, shall be denominated ‘ The Squa¬ 
dron of Horse Artillery/ aud shall bo mustered, paid, and 
returned as such from the 1st January 1806. 

u The European non-commissioned, rank and file, shall be 
denominated ‘The First Half Squadron.’ 

The Native commissioned, non-commissioned, rank and 
file shall be denominated ‘ The Second Half Squadron.’ 

“To the first half squadron shall be posted the Captain- 
Lieutenant, the second Lieutenant, the fourth Lieutonant, the 
sixth Lieutenant, and the Assistant Surgeon ; and to the 
second half squadron the senior Lieutonant, and the third 
and fifth Lieutenants.” 


CHAP. XVII. 


Golandauze. 


Squadron of 
Horse Artil¬ 
lery, 1800. 


Posting of 
officers. 


156 


nrsTo&y or the madras achy. 




European Infantry, 1803—1806. 

On the 15th May 1804, a despatch from tlio Court of 
Directors regarding the off-reckoning funds, and other 
matters, and from which the following are extracts, was 
published to the army. 

Computation. <l Para. 21. By the regulations established by Marquis 
hi 1788.° Cornwallis in 1788, for the annual computation of the off¬ 
reckonings, those of tho European artillery, and infantry aro 
calculated upon tho actual strength ; but in regard to the 
native corps, the established strength is taken, whether tho 
same be complete or not; hence if these corps bo deficient, 
the company aro charged with off-reckonings for a greater 
number than are clothed, and tho clothing being issued to tbo 
effectives only, the fund for distribution is thus increased.” 

* * * 

.Computation 'Tara. 23. * * As the mode of calculating tho off- 

ol off-reckon- i * i , 3 

jitga, 1801. reckonings above noticed appears exceptionable, vve direct 

that in future the stoppages from the men actually clothed be 

considered as the fund applicable to distribution, and that 

the off-reckonings shall bo calculated upon the effective 

strength only of nil the corps. 

* * * # 

r U , 1 ' : b f0i; th0 ‘Tara. 84. In fact we aro convinced that the interests 
o funds. Lieutenant-Colonels aro amply provided for in tho 

prospects held out to them by the arrangement for distribut¬ 
ing the off-reckonings, which, after mature deliberation, wo 
have resolved on, and which is as follows :— 

*T. That the off-reckonings at all tho Presidencies, from 
tho regular corps of artillery, infantry, and cavalry, calculated 
08 above directed, bo drawn into a general fund. 

‘ 2. That a retirod list of General Ofticors, or Colonels, bo 
formed, who are to bo struck off tho strength of the Army, 
lu "' considered ftltog ’her out of the service ; tho number to 



HISTORY op the madras army. 


15 / 


bo twenty-one, viz., nine from Bengal, eight from Madras, 
and four from Bombay. The senior officers from all the corps' 
at each Presidency, according to the dates of their commis¬ 
sions, to form this list, unless it should bethought proper by 
our Governments to reserve any of this class of officers for 
staff appointments. 

“ 3. That each of the retired Generals or Colonels above 
mentioned, be .allowed the sum of £543-15-0 per annum from 
the off-reckoning fund in addition to the full or half pay they 
may be entitled to according to tho length of their actual 
service in India. 

“ 4. That the remainder of the off-reckoning fund be 
divided among the Colonels of the regiments of infantry, and 
cavalry, and of the battalions of artillery. 

“ 5. That tho officers last mentioned bo allowed to reside in 
Imrope with their shares of off-reckonings and their pay ; 
subject always to the Court’s orders for their return to their 
duty in India, and if they decline so to do, they arc to relin¬ 
quish their rdiare of off-rookonings, and retire from the service 
on their pay only. 

“ & That when ».u augmentation of tho armies in India takes 
phico, in increasing tho Goucral fund, tho shares to [he 
Colonels above mentioned in tho service arc to bo augmented 
accordingly; on tho other hand, iftlm armies be reduced so as 
to diminish tho General fund, their shares arc to bo reduced 
m proportion, it being our intention that whatever surplus 
remains after providing for the retired list in the manner 
stated in the 3rd article, it is to be divided amongst tho 
Colouels v ho continuo in tho service'. 

u 7. That if a reduction in the number of regiments takes 
place, tho Colonels ut the reduced regiments arc not there¬ 
after to participate in the off-reckoning*; rv.il h, waneioi 
occurring they are reinstated in the command of regiments. 

“ 3, That the General officers not on tho staff, or kept in 
India by tho orders of our respective Governments to succeed 
to tin? ^tnff (if such a measure should hu thought necessary), 
bo nPowed only their pay and *bare of tlie off reckoning j 


<SL 


CHAP. XY1I. 


Unemployed 

Ctntral 

oftiuvrfl. 


^mSTfty 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 


Commands 
of General 
officers 
limited to 
four years. 


Certain 
rotirod officers 
admitted to 
the now 
retired list. 


Chief 

Engineers. 


rro;.f>*'*d 
f.MnMUlmuin 
of aivu if>«. 


158 



whether resident in India or in Europe; buck officers not 
being competent by the existing regulations to do duty with 
their regiments. If, however, these officers shall be employed 
on actual service, they are to be allowed the usual batta. 

“35. "We have also to inform you, that after mature deli¬ 
beration, we have resolved that General officers on the staff 
Bliall continue to hold their staff appointments for four years 
only, at the end of which 'hey are to be relieved by other 
officers, unless our Governments should re-appoint them to 
the staff at the expiration of four years, subject, of course, 
to our approbation. 




# 


* 


# 


“ 37. But in forming this arrangement it has been impos¬ 
sible for us to overlook the pretensions of those General 
officers, and Colonels who have already retired from tho 
service on tb i r pay only, under the idea that our orders of 
June 1798 wero to be strictly adhered to. Some doubts 
may also bo fairly entertained whether these orders were 
strictly compatible with those of 1796, under the construction 
of which those officers came to Europe; the alteration in tho 
orders of 1798 by the present arrangement, which in a great 
degree reverts to that of 1796, gives the officers above- 
mentioned a just and equitable claim to participation in the 
benefits derivable from the change of system, and we havo 
therefore agrcod to admit them on the retired list. 

* * * * 


“ 45. Tho Chief Engineers are to bo allowed to reside in 
Europe, and receive heir pay, and the equivalent for off¬ 
reckonings, in tho same manner as Colonels in command of 
regiments.” 

The necossary orders for carrying these instructions 
into effect were issued to the Army on the same date. 

While the manner of the distribution of tho off¬ 
reckoning fluids was under consideration in England, a 

1 'im wn^ put forward on behalf of Lieutenant-Colonels 






9 * : 8fi\ 

HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 159 

of battalions, on the ground that they were CHAP.XVU. 
called upon to incur extraordinary expenses in receiving —~ 

and entertaining their officers. 

The Court of Directors, in disposing of this applica¬ 
tion, observed that the custom in question was not con¬ 
sistent with the practice in His Majesty's or any other 
service, and that they saw no reason why commanding 
officers should not live at mess with their brother officers 
without affecting any expense inconsistent with the fair 
emoluments of their situation. They further remarked 
that although it might be difficult for individuals to 
break through an established practice, it was the duty of 
the Government to discountenance habits of useless 
expense, incompatible with the well-regulated constitu¬ 
tion of any army, and to relieve, by the weight of their 
sanction and admonition, tho feelings of officers, who 
might otherwise be reluctant to depart from what may 
have grown up into a general habit. 

In consequence of these observations the following 
order was issued by the Governor in Council on tho 
15th May:— 

“The Governor in Council, fully impressed with the im¬ 
portant advantages to tho public service, and general disci¬ 
pline of the Army, which will result fr<?m the establishment 
of messes of officers in the several corps of the Army .as 
proposed in the 32nd paragraph of tho letter of the Honorable 
Court of Directors, desires that tho Commander-in-Chief will 
adopt such measures ns he may doom proper and necessary to 
obtain so desirable an object, to the extent which the nature 
of the service will admit, reporting bis proceedings 1 in this 
respect to the Right Honorable the Governor in Council.” 




1 j\Ie«bOB were introilw ed in Juno 1806. 




ITI3T0RY Or THC MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 


Complement 
of neces¬ 
saries. 


C impany of 
th». regiment 
of SViirtem- 
Wg. 


Marriage®, 

IrfiptiniOB, 

Mini funerals, 
1805. 


160 



On the 17tli June the undermentioned revised com¬ 
plement of necessaries was ordered to be adopted in the 
artillery and infantry. 

Shirts . 4 

White-sleeved waistcoats of 
Nankeen, with red and green 
wings to distinguish the flank 

companies . 3 

White pantaloonB ... ... 3 

White linen false collars ... 3 

Cloth half-gaiters (blackened) 

pairs. 2 

Black leather stock . 1 

Pipo-clay, whiting, black ball, ^ In such proportions as may bo 
grease and powder for the hair, rogulatodin the standing orders 

and powder bag and puff. j 0 f corps by their Colonels. 

The company of the regiment of Wurfcemberg, com¬ 
manded by Captain Gaupp, which had been admitted 
into the British Service in 1796, having become ineffi¬ 
cient in consequence of the great reduction in the number 
of men, it was ordered to be struck off the strength of 
the Indian Army from tue 1st September 1804. 

The officers and men were allowed to retire on full pay, 
in consideration of tho “ distinguished merit ” of the 
company, and such of tho latter as were able aud williag 
to serve, were admitted as privates into the East India 
Company's European infantry. 

On the 27th March 1805 an order was issued pro¬ 
scribing C( rtain rules for tho performance of marriages, 
baptisms, and funerals, and for the preparation of 
registers; of which order tho following is a precis :— 

(1) Registers of marriages, baptism., and funerals 
to bo kept by every Clergy man, Magistrate, or 
Military off! er who may perform them. Copies 
of tho entries to bo forwarded to the Senior 


biioea (pairs) ... ... ... 3 

Stock, clasp brass ... ... 1 

Hair leather .1 

Foraging cap ... ... ... 1 

Knapsack . ... 1 

Cumly watch coat .1 

Clothes brush ... ... ... 1 

Shoe brushes ... ... ... 2 

Combs ... 2 







Chaplain at the Presidency on the day of the 
performance of the ceremony. 

(2) In the absence of a Clergyman, marriages and 
baptisms were to be performed by the undermen¬ 
tioned functionaries in the following order, viz. : 
Magistrate, Collector, Commercial Resident. If 
no Civil Servant should be available, then by 
the senior Military officer on the spot. 

(3) No officer or gentleman residing at an out-station 
to be manned without a license from the Governor 
of Fort St. George, such license to be obtained 
by application through the Town Major, 

(4) Funeral ceremonies to be performed either by 
Civilians or Military officers according to cir¬ 
cumstances. 

The order contains forms of certificates to be used 
when the duty should not bo performed by a Clergyman. 

On the same date officers commanding regiments of 
infantry, whether European or Native, were directed to 
instruct their men in tho duties of light troops as 
recently introduced in Europe. The instruction so 
imparted was not to be limited to the light companies, 
but every company was to be taught to manoeuvre in 
extended order. 

Ou tho 21st February 1806 the establishment of Divi- 
siomd staff was fixed at ono Assistant Qunrtrrma U< r 
General, one Assistant Adjutant-General, and one Aide- 
ih -Camp or one Bvigudo-Major according ns tho command 
of the division or district might be held by n Major- 
Uonoral or by an officer of inferior rank. Tho Hydera¬ 
bad Subsidiary force was excluded from tho operation 
of this order, and St aft officers of tin? grade of Deputy 

von nr. 21 


<SL 


CHAP. XVII. 


Light 
infantry 
oxen iso, 
1805. 


l)ivif iomil 
U-air 1800 . 



ursTORT or the :,udt:a 3 ARtiy. 



Companies 
ot invaJida. 


1 niform. 


New general 
regulations. 


Company. 

Ifindostaneo 
Irv truotor 


IVinsionu 

foi lora 
t f liraN. 


162 



Adjutant-General and Deputy Quartermaster-General 
were continued therewith as before. 

During the month of March the existing companies of 
European invalids were reduced, and the following 
arrangement substituted. Two garrison companies, to be 
officered from the non-effective establishment, each 
company to consist of 10 Serjeants, 10 Corporals, 10 
Gunners, 4 Drums and Fifes, and 100 Privates, were 
ordered to be formed from the invalids of artillery and 
infantry not holding situations on the staff. The 1st 
garrison company, under Lieutenant-Colonel Aiskill, 
was stationed at Vizagapatam, and the 2nd, under Major 
Jones, at Tanjore. 

The clothing was ordered to be blue, with scarlet 
facings. 

A new code of regulations for the several branches of 
the Army was published on the 11th March, and all 
previous regulations militating against the spirit of the 
new code were abrogated. 

On the 1st April tho Cadet company was ordered to 
inarch from Tripassoor to Cuddalore, there to be stationed. 

On the 0th May Lioutonant Charles Stewart, 21st 
regiment N.I., was appoint* d to instruct the cadets in 
Hindostaneo on a salary of 100 pagodas per mensem. 

The following order regarding pensions for wounds was 
published to the Army on Ihe same date :— 

“His Lordship in Cuun.il ha. been pleased to resolve that 
every European, or Native soldier, who may have lost a 
limb in tbp service by wounds received in actio shall bo 
pensioned on full pay; the certificates with which such 
soldiers kivo boon furnished will accordingly bo exchange* 1 
fur othorB entitling thorn to tho payment of their augmented 







HISTORY OF TTIK MAP BAR ARMY. 


163 


<SL 


The number of Chaplains, which had been fixed at six 
in 1796, was increased to nine during May 1806, and the 
following distribution was ordered to bo made, viz. : _ . 


CHAP. XVII. 


At fcho Presidency town 

,, Masulipatam. 

„ Vellore . 

Trichinopoly 


At Seringapatam 

In Malabar . 

„ Canara . 

Provinces ceded by Nizam 


Establish¬ 
ment of 
Chaplains. 


The following table of Precedence, established by the 
Court of Directors, was published on the 27th June :— 
Senior Merchants to rank with Lieutenant-Colonels. 


Relative 

rank. 


Junior 

do. 

do. 

Majors. 

Factors 

do. 

do. 

Captains. 

Writers 

do. 

do. 

Subalterns. 


The undermentioned allowances to bo drawn on account 
of any moss established in a regiment of European 
infantry, either in His Majesty’s or the Honorable Com¬ 
pany’s service, were sanctioned on the 30th June, viz.:— 


Allowance 
for messes. 


Wheu marching or in tho Gold 12 Star Pagodas, per mensem. 
In garrison or cantonment ... 21 do. do. 






HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 



Native Infantry, 1803-6. 


Adjutants, 

1804. 


Madras 

Fencibles. 


Oil tlie 17th February 1804 an order was published to 
the effect that no officer should be recommended for the 
adjutancy of a native regiment unless he understood 
Hindostanee sufficiently well to be able to explain his 
orders to the men in that language. 

On the 10th April the following order was issued, 
directing the formation of a regiment for the service of 
the Presidency town during the war :— 


OH.'-t I S of 

iVrcililes. 


uoi ri to 

'>*' l "!» .i of 
• -on killed 
»u iwllou. 


“ Fort St. George , 10 tli April 1804. 

“The Eight. Honorable the Governor in Council, deeming 
it expedient that an additional corps of infantry shall be 
raised for the immediate service of this Presidency during 
the continuance of the present war 1 with the French and 
Batavian, Republics; and having dispensed for the present 
with the personal services of the European, Portuguese, 
Armenian, and Native inhabitants of this Settlement; has been 
pleased to resolve that a native corps of 750 rank and hie, 
with a due proportion of native commissioned and non-com 
missioned officers, shall lie raised and maintained by private 
contribution in lieu of the personal services of the inhabitant. 
This corps to bo denominated the 1st regiment of Native 
1 unci files of Madras. The Right Honorable the Governor v;iU 
as..nine the command of the corps as Colonel Commandant.” 

Mr. George Jaswoll of the Civil 8ervice was appointod 
Lieutenant-Colonel, and two Majors, and ten Captains, 
all of whom wore Civilians, were posted to the corps. 
The native officer-’ were selected from the regular regi¬ 
ments. 

On the conclusion of the campaign in the Deccan, 
Government determined to make some provision for the 
families of men killed in action, and a General Orel wn > 



issued on tlie subject in September 180 k from which the 
following are extracts :— 


“ His Lordship in Council has accordingly been pleased to 
adopt, and to publish the following resolutions for general 
information:— 

“ First .—That the half pay of his rank shall he allowed to 
the nearest heir of every native officer and soldier 
of cavalry, infantry, pioneers, and gun la&ears 
who has died in battle, or in consequence of 
wounds received during the late war against the 
Mahratta confederates. 

u Second .—That in cases where the deceased officers and 
soldiers may have left sons, the provision shall be 
continued during the term of 12 years only. 

“ Third .—That in cases where the families of the deceased 
officers and soldiers may consist only of women 
and aged persons, the provision shall be continued 
during the life of the nearest heir of the family.” 

On the Oth October orders were isxuod for an augment¬ 
ation to the extent of four 1 additional regiments, and 
*ix extra battalions were ordered to be raised at the 


§L 

CHAP.XYTL 


Aupncnt* 
at ion. 


same time. 


The head-quarters of the 20th regiment were tixed at 2<hh rep. 
Tanjore. The 1st battalion was formed from the 1st 
**xira battalion, the second battalion was composed of the 
"Madras 2 Volunteer Battalion, ” supplemented by drafts 
from the “ Tanjore Provincial Battalion.” 

The 21st regiment was formed in the Northern Circars. >i*t n •: 
The 1st battalion was composed of the 2nd extra, uml wom 
stationed at Chicacole* The* 2nd battalion was composed M.K.l.) 
of the fourth extra, and was stationed at Mnsulipatr m. 


1 Tho 46th ami 45th wc.ro reduced * the 21th January 180*. tho 
41th, 48vd nt. 1 12a.fl on the 2UOi April aud tho lloL, 40th, and 
8 Uth i>n tho 30th Juno 1882. 

1 Rriuin* d from the Moluccas in e of the tre: y of Auiiong. 


HISTORY of THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CLTAP.XVII. 


22 ncl regi. 
Tuonfc (43rd 
arid 44th 

r.i.). 

23rd regi- 
men* (15th 
mid 46th 
M.N.I.). 


Officering of 
v.i - extra 
battalions. 


TK* ir 
wtnilona. 


OnidoM, 

1803. 


Tin DxtrtL 
hall u!io»h 
brek ‘in np, 




i or» 



The 1st battalion 22nd regiment was formed of the 
3rd extra, and was stationed at Vellore. The 2nd bat¬ 
talion was formed of tlio 6th extra, and was stationed at 
Tricliinopoly. 

The 1st battalion 23rd regiment was formed of the 
5th extra, and was stationed in Fort St. George. The 
2nd battalion was composed of the 7th extra, and was 
stationed at Sunkernacoil. 

The full complement of native commissioned and non¬ 
commissioned officers and naigues was furnished to the 
new extra battalions from the senior nineteen regiments, 
the men of each grade receiving a step in rank on their 
transfer. A largo proportion of this promotion was 
given to the regiments recently employed in the held, as 
a reward for their services. 

r l he 1st extra battalion was stationed at Seringapa- 
tam, the 2nd at Bangalore, the 3rd at Cuddapah, the 
4th at Erode, the 5th at Tanjore, and the 6th at Sunker¬ 
nacoil. 

* )n the 7tli June 1805 the establishment of the Corps 
of guides was fixed at 3 head guides, 14 second guide 4 
and 36 privates. 

! he six extra battalions above mentioned were reduced 
on the 30th June, and the native commissioned and 
non-commissioned officers, drummers, and rank and file 
were distributed amongst the regular regiments, large 
drafts being sent to those corps which had suffered mo^t 
during the war. For example, the 1st battalion 8th 
received 465 rank and file, and the 1st of the 3rd, the 
2nd of the 12th, and the 2nd of the 18th upwards i,f 300 
men each. 

On tho 14th November 1800 tbo following order, 
'■h. ii v. .3 destined to achievo an unenviable notoriety, 
vv,lH published to tho Army :— 


HIf)TORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY, 


107 


‘‘Head-Quarters, Choultry Plain , 1 Uh November 1805. 

“ Lieutenant-General Sir J. F. Cradock lias established a 
turband for the native commissioned officers, non-commis¬ 
sioned officers, and rank and file, of regiments of native 
infantry, of companies of golandauze, and of gun lascars 
attached to battalions of artillery belonging to the Army on. 
the establishment of Fort St. George. 

“ The turband so established shall be considered to be the 
uniform of the above-mentioned corps, and shall be worn as 
such to the exclusion of every other that may heretofore have 
been authorised. 

41 Sealed patterns of the turband will be furnished to 
corps, and the Commander-iu-Chief forbids any deviation 
whatever from those patterns as established for Grenadiers, 
Light infantry, and battalion companies, either in their 
-e.nion or trimmings, or in their dimensions or weight.” 

I he Stoppages formerly made from the pay of the sepoys 
f'»r the purpose of supplying them with medical aid and 
country medicines were discontinued on the 1st January 
180t>, and the native dressers were ordered to bo received 
° u the strength of the corps to which they had been 
attached, and to be regularly paid by Government at the 
of ten pagodas each per mensem. One dresser was 
allowed to each regimont of native cavalry, and two to 
caeli battalion of native infantry. 

On tho 27tlx February orders were issued for the 
f <j illation of a corps ot dooly bearers, to bo employed 
iu tho carriage of doolies 1 for the conveyance of the sick 
and wounded, or as cauvedy coolies. 

Tho bearers wen formed into companies, each com¬ 
pany consisting of oik head maistry, three second 
tnaistrios, and ninety men. 

1 A lighi kind of pUankiu. tho 1 hi imr of . a »vn+ inrli >,j 0 f 
CnUrodioa nro haakotn, or boxen, carried on ho shoulder hv 
nici.nu of n liranhoo, to enoh end if which a rope netting 1*3 fixed For 
•Jo* roue pi ion of the busk ’t, or box, r.j 1.30 cmo may lx). 


CHAP. XVII. 

New 

turban ds. 


Native 

tlrcajerd, 

1806. 


OorpR 01 

dooly 

bearorn. 


E8inUii.li. 

mont. 




1C8 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAP. XVII. 
Pay. 


Privileges. 


Commandant. 


Fnll batta 
granted to 
Ibo pioneers. 


AI low n nc 
ir men • . 


The pay was "fixed at four pagodas per mensem for 
the head raaistries, three pagodas for the second maistries, 
and one pagoda thirty-four fnnams for the men, besides 
batta at the rate of one fanam a day when marching, or 
in the field on service. 

The men were to be enlisted in the same manner as 
sopoys, and entitled to the same privileges as regarded 
prize-money, family certificates, and pensions. 

A European officer was appointed to command the 
corps. 

On the 11th March the following order was issued 
regarding the allowance of batta to the corps of 
pioneers:— 

“The Right Honorable the Governor in Council is pleased 
to direct that the corps of native pioneers attached to the 
Army under this Presidency, in consequence of the laborious 
duties which this corps is frequently called upon to execute, 
shall at all times be considered entitled, the European officers 
to the difference between their half ond fall batta, the non¬ 
commissioned European officers to their net dry batta 
according to the regulations, and the Nativo commissioned, 
non-commissioned, and privates to the full batta of their 
ranks respectively.” 

On the 30tli June an allowance of thirty-five pagodas 
per mensem when marching or in the hold, and of 
eighteen pagodas per mensem when in garrison or canton¬ 
ment, was grantod to each battalion of native infantry in 
which an. Officers* moss was maintained 




CH A PT 13R XVIII. 

MUTINY AT VELLORE, 180G. 


On the 14th November 1805, an order was issued by cn \ptyr 
the Commandcr-m-Ohief to the effect that a new paitern XVin. 
of turband had been determined upon for the native 
infantry and artillery. The introduction of stocks, leather iso™**’ 
cockades, and plumes, was directed about the same time. 

The new turband was ordered on the ground that Reasons fm 
those in wear were heavy and inconvenient, and also SSda.* 10 
because there was a want of uniformity in that article of 
dress as worn in different regiments. This last objection 
was not well founded, inasmuch as a pattern turband had 
been sanctioned by Government in March 1797, after the 
Military Board hud “ f liven > t every consideration which a 
subject oj that delicate and important nature required- 
consequently, any want of uniformity, which might bavo 
existed, ought to have been rectified by inspecting 
officers. 

Early in 1800 Major Pierce, Deputy Adjutant-General, Now 
prepared a volume of regulations for the army, which ,llio,1 *» 
f contained standing orders for the guidance of native 
infautry. These regulations were approved of by the 
Commandor-m-Chief, and submitted by him for the 
sanction of Government, but without calling attention to 
those paragraphs which prescribed alterations in dress, 
mid cognate matters. The lOtli paragraph of the ilth 
nation of these regulations ran as follows : — • 

M It is ordered by the Regulation that a mdivo soldier Canta mnrktjfl 
shall not mark his face i > denote his caste, nr wear earring# 'Uidonmn 
when drcoHedin 1ns uni IV »n.n ; uud it is further direetmi that :it 
all parades, and upon all duties, ©very soldier of the battalion 




TER 
XVIII. 


Pattern 

turbands 

issued. 


Refused by 
the 2nd of 
the 4tb. 


Action of the 
i’ommnndcr- 
-Chief. 


t rat f^rdor 
f'r tho trial 

«>» lh«- men 


170 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



aliaJl be clean shaved on the chin. It is directed also that 
urifo. mity shall, as far as it is practicable, be preserved in 
regard to the quantity and shape of the hair on tho upper lip.” 

During the months of April, May, and June 1806 
pattern turbands were sent to each regiment, and com¬ 
manding officers were directed to cause new turbands to 
be made up in conformity therewith, and to be issued to 
the men. 


The 2nd battalion 4th regiment/ then'at Vellore, was 
the first to show dissatisfaction. The men declared that 
the new turbands bore an offensive resemblance to the 
bat, or cap, worn by the East Indian drummers, and that 
they were objectionable with reference to caste, for which 
reasons they positively refused to wear them. 

Colonel Fancourt, commanding at Vellore, reported 
the matter, and the Commander-in-Chief, acting on tho 
advice oi his Staff, who informed him that there was no 
real objection to the turband, directed that the ring- 
leaders in the 4th should be confined and sent to Madras 
for trial. Lieutenant-Colonel Dnrley, commanding the 
battalion, remonstrated, and prevailed upon Colonel Fan- 
court to postpone the execution of tho order, pending 
u reference to head-quarters, but this reference had no 
effect. The correspondence is given below, having been 
afterwards quoted by the Governor, Lord William Ben- 
tinck, as having committed him to a certain line of action, 
which he might not otherwise have pursued. 

(l To Colonel Fancourt, 

ComrnaQding Vellore. 

“ Bir ~-Ihftve received your letter by express of yesterday's 
date, aud I have submitted it toth^ Co mm an d or-m-Chief. 


J hi 16th battalion, now the 15 1, regiment N.I. Tl.m nyimi 
T ,Mlinp,l * hea iu “***• campaigns, and has nlwavn borne a hi 
ini,irlt * r m ur '«y »P to thu present timo. 


Ub 




HISTOllY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


171 



“ While the Commander-in-Chief regrets the cause which 
requires such measures, he feels it to be his duty to check 
by the most decided resolution, the symptoms of insubordi¬ 
nation which you have reported in the 2nd battalion 4th 
regiment of native infantry. 

“ His Excellency has therefore ordered to Yellore a detach¬ 
ment of H.M.’s 19th dragoons, who will receive and escort 
to the Presidency for trial, before a General Court-martial 
now sitting, the 19 men confined by Lieutenant-Colonel 
Parley, against whom he will prefer charges, and prepare to 
support, the same by tho requisite evidence. 

u You will also direct the non-commissioned officers of the 
grenadier company (the two, who did not object in the first 
instance to deliver their turbands, excepted) to be reduced to 
the ranks; the Commander-in-Chief deeming a man who hesi¬ 
tates a moment to obey an order unfit to bear the character 
of a non-commissi ned officer. 

“ You will farther, through Lieutenant-Colonel Parley, 
direct the nativo commissioned officers of tho 2nd battalion 
4th regiment N.I .immediately to make up, and wear the turband 
of tli© prescribed pattorn. 

“ Disobedience, or hesitation , on their part will he instantly 
followed by their dismission from the service in public orders on 
r report. Lieutenant-Colonel Kennedy has orders, should 
yon require it, to march the 19th dragoons to Vellore to assist 
in enforcing obedience. 

Il is the intention of the Commander-in-Chief imme¬ 
diately to r liovo the 2nd battalion 4th regiment, biH ^-ough 
ho thinks proper to remove them from Vellore, he will not 
admit hesitation even in their obedience to rho orders he has 
given. 

“ (Signed) P. A. AG NEW, 

“ Fort Saint George, Adjutant-iitmeral of the Army," 

“ 7th May 1800. 

“ 9 r.M ” 


CHArTKR 
XVI11. 



UUAI'TKH 
XVIII. 


-occmd 

melon; 







\ } .o uH, of 
thr i i lain, 



l,z UI8T0RY Or TIIE MADRAS AH.UY. 

44 To the Officer commanding Vellore. 

^ ,r > Tour letter of the 7th instant by express, covering 
one from Lieutenant-Colonel Darley,and stating your intention 
to suspend the execution of expected orders, has been received 
and submitted to the Commander-in-Chief. 

<c His Excellency secs no cause to relax from the orders ho 
has already given, which you will accordingly enforce. The 
places of the non-commissioned officers whoso reduction has 
boon ordered will be supplied from othor corps, as the Com- 
mander-in-Chief deems tho 2nd battalion of the 4th regiment 
of N.l. to be at present unworthy to participate in any 
promotion. From this prohibition, however, he excepts tho 
non-commissioned of the grenadiers who did not refuse to 
obey orders. They, if naigues, aro to bo promoted in the 
place of the havildars reduced. 

14 The 2nd battalion of the 23rd regiment N.l. has been 
directed from Wallajahbad to relieve the 2nd battalion of the 
4th in Vellore. 

44 (Signed) P. A. AGNEW, 

“Fort Saint Georoe, Adjutant-Gncral of the Army*" 

“ m May 18015.’* 

In conformity with these orders, 21 privates of tho it I , 
viz., 10 Mahomoduns and 11 Hindoos, wore tried at Fort 
St. George for contempt of authority and disobedience ei 
orders, in having refused to wear the new turband. Two, 
viz., one Mussulman and one Hindoo, wore sentenced t" 
receive900 lashes each, and to be discharged from tho 
service as 44 turbulent and unworthy subjects/* 

The remaining 19 men wore sentenced to receive 500 
lash os * m h, but they wore pardoned “ in consequence of 
'heir full ackuowlodgmdnt of error, deep contrition, and 
'dm, n promises of futuie good conduct.” Tho charges, 

; hto a m, and orders of tho Oomumndor-in-Chief thevoon. 





*wIiicli last were dated on the 29th June, were published 
to the army on the 2nd July. 

The Commander-in-Chief had gone on a tour of inspec¬ 
tion about tlie middle of May, and while at Nundidroog 
in the end of June he received a letter from Lieutenant- 
Colonel James Brunton, an able and experienced officer, 
then holding the appointment of Military A uditor General, 
hi this letter the Colonel stated that the introduction of 
the now turbaud had occasioned great discontent through¬ 
out: the army, and ho earnestly recommended that the 
order should bo cancelled. 

On tho 29th June the Coinnmnder-in-Cliief sent Colonel 
Brunton’s letter to Government, together with one from 
himself, in which he mentioned that the new turband had 
boon introduced by the advice, and under the superin¬ 
tendence, of Colonel Agnew and Major Pierce; that a 
change having appeared necessary, he had thought that 
“ *° simple a matter ” could not bo confided to better 
1 lands or to officers of greater local experience ; but that 
he had at last come tv fh< conclusion that the object in us 
1° the turband were almost universal, and that it was 
wnmonly believed that ilv next attempt would be to force 
tl;,- sepoys to become OJtridians . He added that were the 
]u.'stion connected with British troops ho would not 
I eel any embarrassment, but, being ono of caste, he was 
desirous to have tho advice of his coadjutor:: in the 
Government. 

1 ho decision «-i Government was eommtinie fed in a 
letter dated 1th July, from which the following i« an 
extract:— 

If there had been reason • * suppose that 'ho into change 
oj dress was liable ». tho uhjoetn.n of militating against tlio 
• cligiou principles of the inhabitants of this country, no 
should have had no lit dniioo in inmudi itel) reoommemli 


CUArTTClC 

XVJIl. 

Colonel 
Brun ton’s 
■warning. ~ 


Tho 

Commander- 
in-Chief 
consults iho 
Governnuia. 




Dooiafon 

of tho 

Gu\ orumciil 








rtW($r^ 



Proposed 

order. 


Postponed nt 
tho instance 
of the 

Commander- 
ill.Chi< . 


lN‘U.-»nnn of 
the Oot em¬ 
inent for nor. 
' 

Uio order. 




lri HISTORY OP THJ2 MADRAS ARMY. 

to your Excellency the relinquishment of the intention to 
establish the propose 1 change, but as it appears from tie*, 
evidence taken in the late enquiry 1 at Vellore, that no objec¬ 
tion of this nature exists, we certainly deem it advisable, 
that the alternative of yielding to the “ clamor” arising from, 
an unfounded prejudice should, if possible, be avoided.” 

Notwithstanding the opinion thus expressed, Govern¬ 
ment sent to the Commander-in-Chief, by the same 
opportunity, the draft of a General Order intended to be 
published with the object of reassuring the sepoys, but 
the publication was postponed at the instance of His 
Excellency, who advised that course because lie believed 
that tho disinclination to wear tho turband was becom¬ 
ing more feeble, and he therefore thought it judicious 
to allow the matter to drop. 

After the mutiny, when the reference from Nundi- 
droog became the subject of discussion, Lord William 
Bentinck gave the following reasons for not having inter¬ 
fered iu a decided manner. He remarked, in the first 
plto'e, that the alteration in the turband had been ordered 
without any communication with Government, and that, 
when the 2nd of the 4th refused to wear it, tho ordc?r 
instantly issued by tho Commandor-in-Chief, iu which ho 
declared his resolution to put down all such manifesta¬ 
tion in the most, vigorous n inner, was of such a charac¬ 
ter that Government, cn becoming acquainted therewith, 
were of opinion that it would be impossible to r< code 



1 Poor* of enquiry al Volloro, hold 14th May, <'ompo*od of Licutanant- 
Colunol Me Kerraa $ud‘ battalion 2Urd, Lieutenant-Colonel Fori a n 1. 
battalion Jut, nod Liontcnant-Colomd Marriott 1st battalion 5th, in 
rl (/ tho Myaore I’rbioGH at Volt re. Th» proooodIngB aie not 
fm 1 'morning, bnt it appears from a zjiirmfc of tl; Cominandn ni-Cln f 
*hns nlthnnt.h uo it.jocliun to tho new turband was elicited from any 
1 ’ 1,1 native witimaaoR, yot tho oflkorj composing th Court e:pivvui 
ik |ii*fi:n m o for il <. old turband. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS aRMY. 


175 




without committing the discipline of the army. He went chapter 
on to say that Government, at the time the reference was 1IL 

made, were not in possession of positive information of 
the existence of general dissatisfaction, without which 
knowledge there would have been no sufficient reason 
for cancelling the order. So far as Colonel Brunton's 
warning was concerned, His Lordship remarked that 
the health of that officer had long been so bad, that 
his nerves were gone, and that he suffered from great 
despondency. 

The severe measures pursued in the case of the 2nd Seditious 
battalion 4th regiment appear to have rendered the 
opposition to the new turband more determined than ever. 

Frequent secret meetings were held in the lines of the 
native battalions at Vellore, at which the men bound 
themselves to resist all innovations, and finally formed 
the plan for the attack and destruction of the European 
officers and men. These meetings were attended by the 
majority of the native officers, and by several of the 
retainers of the sons of Tippoo then confined in the fort. 

On the night of the 17th June, the intentions of the Mustapha 
mutineers were divulged to Lieutenant-Colonel Forbes 
of the 1st, by Mustapha Beg, a private of the battalion. iao0ntiuei1 - 
The Colonel, instead of making cautious inquiries, scut 
for his native officers, who, on being questioned, affirmed 
their innocence of any <" il intention, professed their 
readiness to wear the turband, and persuaded Colonel 
Forbes to place tho sepoy in confinement as being insane. 

It also appears that a European woman named Burke Mra. limb 
would have givGn mu hn<l aim not boon prevented. 

41 The deponent * furl hoi* suite?. Hi.it, bIig v\. nt to Colonel Informs Linn. 
M : ice art to state what she- hud hoard, as well as to apply for 
her husband's prize-inonoy, but on his nuking her il she was 


‘ Evident*** before the rmumisiem at Vuliorc after the umi.nv 





Cat riaun 
‘ ' Vellore. 


* luurdp on 
tho. !Mi July. 

ll.M.'n GihJi. 







1 76 



or rill. MADKA i A l:.M y. 



«i married woman, and her replying slie was a widow, lie said 
ho took hi r to ho u bad woman, and bade her go away." 

Tlio garrison of Vellore at this time consisted of four 
companies 1 II.M.’s 69th regiment, six companies 1st 
battalion 1st, and the whole of the 2nd battalion 23rd 
regiment N.I. Tho 1st battalion was the oldest 2 in the 
service, and had always maintained a high reputation. 

The 23rd had recently been raised in the district of 
i iunevclly, and contained in its ranks a number of tho 
followers of the Polygar chiefs whose possessions had 
been forfeited in 1801 for rebellion. Tho 69th were 
quartered in the fort. Most of the sepoys lived in the 
pettuh, but their arms were lodged in tho fort. 

Tho men for general duty on tho night of the 9tli July 
were taken from the 09th, and the 1st rogimont. 

The detail of tho 69th consisted of 3 serjeants, 4 corpo¬ 
rals, 2 drummers, and 44 privates, under Lieutenants 
Eley and Popkam. 

The men were divided between the main guard, tiiu 
general magazine, and the gate, but the number at each 
post has not been precisely ascertained. The main guard 
furnished fivo h entries, viz., one at the guard, and four at 
different points nt some little distance, from which it nmv 
be inferred that it consisted of about 20 rank and file, 
svirli one or two serjeants and a subaltern. 


1 ] -.ri.jr*i\2 Captains, 7 I louti Juints, 1 Assistant Surgoon, jj» s«m - 
*n1 . 18 CdrporalB, 5DrotmaerH, 330 Privates.—Return, 9t!i July lstHi. 
* Ir is *tfUed WiUon’s History of llritiah Tmliu, Vol. I, p it gn 1,13, 
1 1,1,1 1,10 ,1,fc rugimont had been ehicjbj raised in My* >r.. ant] thru runny 
I - t)i. and in on lmd florv.-d j n i ho nruiioe of lly.hr and T-t,,.,,,,. 

U'lu »u urary of this . . qu^tionn .In. '1 ho l.t battnlion v. r..rn.. .1 
]7bh from t..o indcpunl .t oompanien, forty yourn Inborn w had i.i, v 
cnjinoction ii h 'Myoi.rc. It dintim'd: hod it .oil in tho lirst ouiu , n ,, ,, 
1 •' hy«h '- 17S7-(»J. tt \v;t*i or •*ri\ do t roved at bnim ,, ! f».-i m 

1” m, ‘ r 1 Vsu, nml wiin » f- inn 1 at T„ni ,o in 17SI. It V \ ,| j fl 
1 to o 'n.pnign of nd g-bu during 'ho • nl . { ^ n 

j ! * * 11 ^ V(l • ‘ I «uu in the My >o < ounn until |.< 









The number of the 1st regiment on duty amounted to 
4 native ofllcoru, 0 havildara, and 251 run k und file, under 
Lieutenant O'Reilly, No return showing the particulars 
of tho distribution lias been found. 

1 serjeant, 2 corporals, and 12 privates of tlie 69th 
were on duty ot tlie barracks, and furnished three sentries, 
viz., one at the gate of the barrack yard, one immediately 
outside the barracks, and one over the regimental maga¬ 
zine close to the ramparts. 

Captain Miller of the 1st regiment was captain of the 
day. 

Nearly the whole of the 2nd battalion 23rd regiment 
appear to have received permission to sleep in the fort 
on the night in questiou in order to bo in readiness for 
»u early parade next morning. 

Nothing unusual attracted the attention of the officers 
on duty during the night; indeed it was afterwards 
Stated in evidence by a Hindoo sepoy who had been on the 
main guard, that tlie European officer did not go his 
rounds, but desired one of the native officers to tuke the 
duty, upon which Jemadar Shaik Cossim of the 1st, one 
of the principal conspirators, volunteered to do so, and 
(oft the guard ostensibly for that purpose. 

About half past two o'clock on the morning of tho 10th, 
tlie native troops made an almost simultaneous attack on 
tho European guards, and on the barracks, also keeping 
up r» smart fire on the officers’ quarters in order to keep 
them from joining tlie men. 

Tho following account of the commencement of the 
attack is taken from n letter 1 to the Commander-in-Chief 

1 Ill reply to an order calling upon im lo lln nature of tlio 

precautions Wikon for tho protoction oi ih.< lsarroek*. Tbit, it nrrmttiob 
v»ufi required in consequence of ri> .»m to the • ir.*ct that tho barracks 
|,„ i llc ,j b, on nt lacked until mm* tina; fior tho men on tho main guirJ 
Uu •! V.'M t • l wered. 


CHAPTER 

XVIII. 

1st regiment. 


Parrack 
gnard. 


23rd 

regiment. 


Laxity c f 
discipline. 


Tho mutiny 
break* uui. 


VOL. III. 


23 



178 


HISTORY OF TJir: MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAPTER 
XVII r. 


Attnck on 
th© main 
guard. 


A ttncK on the 
barracks. 


<SL 


irom Major Coates of the 60th, who resided outside the 
fort. 

“With respect to the main gnard, one of the four Euro¬ 
peans who survived is Corporal Piercy, who received a sever© 
wound. He states that he was called to by the European 
sentry about half past two o’clock, saying that a shot or two 
was fired somowhere about the 69th barracks. He had scarce 
time to answer when the sepoy part of the guard rushed on 
the English and murdered the whole, himself and three more 
excepted. He conceives they thought him dead ; he sa}*s they 
were instantly joined by several more, who assisted in com¬ 
pleting the dreadful havoc, adding, that he perceived numerous 
bodies of sepoys attacking the barracks of the 69th regiment 
til that time.” 

* * * * 

“ Agreeably to your Excellency’s command, I relate to you 
as follows concerning the barracks occupied by the 69th 
regiment, 

“ Having the command of the detachment stationed at 
Vellore, I conceived it proper to mount a guard consisting of 
one serjeant, two corporals, and twelve privates, placing three 
sentinels from it on such parts of the barracks as I thought 
would most conduce to their order and regularity. The 
account I recoivod from Serjeant Cosgrave, who was serjeant 
of the barrack guard on the 10th of July, and was so severely 
wounded as to render him incapable of being of further 
service to His Majesty. He gives the following statement of 
the transaction- Hearing a trampling of feet, he called to 
the sentry at the guard houso door about half past two 
o’clock, expressing his astonishment that the patrol should 
pass that way. He had scarce spoke when a party of sepoys 
formed in front of the gate, and discharged a volley of mus¬ 
ketry on lho guard, and in the* uarrQcks, by which several of 
the 69th fell. On tho guards getting undor arms the pcj* >y«j 
qvHtod that Riation, when an instantaneous, and general 
aibwglr wuh made upon thu barracks. Ho uusuroM m**, as do 


HISTORY Of THK MADRAS ARMY. 


170 


4 ?v 

a number of respectable testimonies, that the barracks of the 
60th regiment was the first object of attack, the result of 
which has been so fatal to so many brave officers, and soldiers/* 

Surgeon Jones of the 1st, and Assistant Surgeon Dean 
of the 23rd, who were actively engaged during the out¬ 
break, especially after all the other officers were either 
killed or disabled, made the following joint report for the 
information of the Commander-in-Chief. 

‘‘The following gentlemen, having been previously alarmed 
by a heavy fire of musketry, met accidentally at the house of 
Lieutenant and Adjutant Ewing, 1st battalion 1st regiment, 
about half past 3 A.M., viz., Captain Maclachlan, Lieutenants 
Mitchell, Baby, and Jenour, and Serjeant Brady, H.M.’s 
60th regiment, Lieutenant and Adjutant Ewing, Lieutenant 
Cutcliffo (desperately wounded), and Mr. Surgeon Jones, 1st 
regiment. 

u Mr. Assistant Surgeon Dean, 23rd regiment. 

41 Lieutenant and Adjutant Ewing having previously secured 
the arms and ammunition of one naigue and three sepoys (the 
guard over the battalion books at his house), every ono 
prepared for being attacked. In a quarter of au hour an 
attack was made by a strong party of sepoys on the front of 
the house. After a sharp fire on both sides thejr Retired, 
none of us having received any injury. 

“ On consideration,nt appeared advisable to retire to the 
house of Mr. Surgeon Jones (tho adjoining house) as being 
more capable of defence, the doors and different apertures of 
the house being better secured. This was immediately done. 

“ At the time of our quitting Lieutenant Ewing’s house, Ser¬ 
jeant Brady wos requested to go, and to endeavour to procure 
information of whrvt was going on, and < n his return an hour 
? iter, ho brought us the lament able account of the murder of 
every European on the difi\ rent guards, of ilio Mysore flag 
being hoisted, of the European officers, together with tho 
commandant of tho ga 1 itson, being killed. Many men in tho 
European barracks killed and wounded by two G-poundcm 


CHAPTER 

k xvm. 


Account gj 
by Surgeons 
Jones and 
Dcau. 


Eight officers 
and a sci joant 
meet at tho 
house of 
Lieutenant 
Ewing. 


They rotirn 
to that uf 
Surgeon 
Jones. 


Serjeant 
Brady'a 
report. 


180 


UISTQRY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 



friou tenant 
Mitchell 

ffOOa to tho 

barracks. 


<SL 


^litl musketry keeping up a continued, fire on them, and the 
whole fort appeared to him to be in possession of the insur¬ 
gents. 

About ( a.m. Lieutenant Mitchell, H.M.’s G9tli regiment, 
f ft the party to endeavour to make his way to the barracks, 
or to the house of Captain Barrow, the senior officer of the 
regiment then in the fort. 


Tho othor 

ofllccru 

follow. 


r i ho officers 

and -m sully 

from tho 

baiTU' ku. 


“ Nothing had been heard since our retreat to this house, 
but confuted shoutings, and constant heavy firing of guns 
and musketry in different parts of the fort. In this state of 
anxious suspense did we remain until about 8 a.m., when a 
strong party attacked the rear of the house, and broke open 
tho door of the room in which we were posted to receive them. 
After having exchanged fire, judging any further opposition 
fruitless, wo retreated to the European barracks by the front 
of the house, the insurgents still kcoping up a fire on our rear 
during the retreat. 

‘ On our entering the barracks they were found in tho 
greatest possible confusion, every man sheltering himself in 
the best way he was able, from tho shot which were frequently 
fired from the two guns placed to command the range* of tho 
cots. Many men lay killed and wounded. Hero we found 
Lieutenant Mitchell. 

“ Having a short time debuted on what was best to be done 
Captain Maclachlan, as senior officer, taking tho command, 
it was determined to enlly out from the windows opposite to 
the parcherry, 1 and to gain the ramparts adjoining. 

“It was found tho men* had been originally provided 
with only six rounds of ball cartridges. Many of these had 
been expended during tho morning. At the bottom of thu 
ramparts was a small magazine for tho European stores. All 


1 The ran^cn of hula oocupiod by the oamp-followerfl. 

ILe r»i.» -borot uon-com ml ten mod rail k nml fiJo in tho fort a mom (oil 
to 3 1 *, of whom 101 wore killed or wounded. ISlanyof thofic fell on t lm 
nunpurtB. Tho number < ( aouo who sallicri may therefore bo cation t- ,i 
about 2JO. 







tU bal1 cartridges hod been taken oat by the insurgents, and CHAP'j :S 
nothing left but a few blank ones, of which some were taken XVIII, 

“ Havin & climbed up the face of the ramparts under a heavy They^o 
fire of musketry, we took post on a bastion near at hand to P ossession 
collect the men. Wo then advanced to dislodge the instir- eLfcavalicl 
gents (in considerable force) from the north-east cavalier, 
which we accomplished, bnt with the loss of Captain Mac- 
lachlan’s further services (he having received a severe wound 
through the thigh) as also of several men. On our way to the 
attack of the cavalier w r c were joined by Captain Barrow, 

H.M.’s 69th regiment, who then took the command as senior 
officer. 

A party having been left at the cavalier, wc proceeded and the 
nloug the ramparts under a constant heavy fire of musketry to K atowa ^ 
take possession of the gateway, 1 which was effected. Wishing 
to ascertain whether the gafco was open we proceeded below 
and found it locked, and a 6-pounder placed opposite to it for 
lt * defence. fire from the palaco at this time was exces¬ 

sively heavy. Many men fell, and Lieutenant Mitchell was 
severely wounded by a musket shot in the arm. There boing 
no ammunition with tho 6-pounder, it was suffered to remain, 
aud the party stationed over the gateway was ordered to 
keep it from falling into the hands of tho insurgents. Tho 
men at this time had scarcely a ball cartridge remaining. 

To attack tho arsenal w as deemed impracticable, and the only 
remaining chance of gaining ammunition was by attempting 
to gain possession of the grand magazine. 

“ Tho main body of the detachment proceeded with Captain Capture of 
Barrow to carry tho bastion and cavalier at the south-east face tho ,Qlh * 
of tho fort, which lay on our way to the flagstaff and mag*- LmISod ami 

«e, then defended by a strong party of tho insurgent*. In oavaUor ' 
advancing to tho attack. Captain Burrow foil by o musket shot 
pa-.sing through his leg. There thon remained no officer 
e a pt Mr. Burgeon Jones, :.nd Mr. Ansiutant Surgeon Dqau, 

1 On tho eostom fueo of iho fort. A zigzag entrance, defended by 
four gates, and a drawbridge. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



OHAPTKR 

XVIII. 


The party 
reaches the 
magazine, but 
finds nothing. 


It returns to 
tbo cavalier 
and gateway. 


The Mysore 
bag pulled 

down. 


182 



to cany the plan in execution, who, leading on the party, 
carried the cavalier and bastion, but with the loss of several 
men. 

“ The insurgents chiefly fled into the body of the fort, but 
many posted themselves in the gateway of the granary. 
These were destroyed by a party sent down from the rampart 
for the purpose. 

u The party soon arrived at tho flagstaff, and were much 
annoyed by fire from tho pettah on the opposite side of tho 
ditch, and from the garden in the fort. A soldier, in attempt- 
ing to take down tho Mysore 1 flag, was shot from the pettah. 
A very heavy fire being kept up, and the men falling fast, no 
time was to be lost in proceeding to the magazine, which 
having boon burst open, t-o oar general disappointment, nothing 
but loose powder could be obtained. 

“Tho men at this time wished to proceed towards, and to 
attack, the sepoy barracks, which was instantly opposed. 
Our numbers being very much reduced, added to the disap¬ 
pointment of not getting ammunition, it became our principal 
object to return and keep possession of the gateway, and 
cavaliers, until tho arrival of a relief which we had hopes of 
soon seeing. 

On our return from the magazine the Mysore flag was 
taken down by two men who were requested to volunteer for 
the occasion, viz., Serjeant MacManus 2 and Private Philip 
Bottom, H.M. s 69th regiment, under a very heavy fire from 
the pettah 3 and fort. 

We returned to the cavalier and gateway, having left a 


1 This was said to bavo been handed out of the palaco by Mok.ool- 
deen, the third arm of Tipp o. It was an old flag-groon strips on a 
rod field, with a. sun in tho centre, and was supposed to have* bo» m 
bought at, one of tho sales of tho Soringapatam booty, a ooubidorahlo 
timo before iLo mutiny. 

! hope men wore thanked in General Ordciri for their gallantry, and 
received a donation of 50 and 20 pagodas respectively. 

3 Tho fiagstnfT on thocQnt.ro bastion of tho southern face win; within 
«Hu,y rango of tho pettah or native town. 





Ill,STORY OP THU MADRAS ARMY. 


183 


strong party at the cavalier and bastion on the south-east CHAPTER 
face for its defence. Soon after onr return a party of cavalry XVIiT ' 
was descried to approach towards the fort. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Marriott, the officer in charge of Statemem 
the Mysore Princes, who lived in the fort with Captain Marriott." 
Marriott, Assistant Paymaster of Stipends, was awoke by 
the firing, and immediately afterwards the naigue of his 
guard, who belonged to the 1st battalion, came upstairs 
and reported that the disturbance was caused by the men 
of the 23rd battalion, who were firing in every direction. 

The Colonel went down to his guard, where he found 
Lieutenant and Adjutant Coombs 1 of tho 23rd, who was 
very unpopular with his men, and had escaped from his 
quarters, where he had been fired at. Colonel Marriott 
desired him to go into the house, and he had just done 
so, when a number of tbe 23rd came up and ordered the 
guard to join them as it was a iC general business ” ; but 
they did not attempt to molest the Colonel, who returned 
into his house, whore he found Lieutenant Gunuing of the 
09th, who had come thoro afte^ an incfleetual attempt 
to reach the barracks. About daylight the house was 
surrounded by sepoys, who took possession of tho lower 
rooms, and fired a volley upstairs, by which Captain 
Marriott, the Assistant Paymaster, was wounded, after 
which thoy went and set fire to Lieutenant Coomb's house. 

About 7 o'clock the sepoys fired another volley, and then 
went upstairs, calling for tho Adjutant of tho 23rd. 

Colonel Marriott and his friends retreated from room to 
room, and then going down tho back steps, they returned 
into the lower part of the house, fortunately unobserved. 


1 Uv- adior Cooi was sIkm at Palnvarnm iu October 3S33 by a 

hftvildar of tho Kifle oompgny of the 6th wgimont, who had ini'onded, 

n« wr « RcnoraPy. beli«w«d, to kill tho Major of his corpu Ho had uo 
w i ic'ii’ t aguinHl Colonel Coombs. 




CHAPTER 
XV 111. 


Statement 
< f Captnin 
Marrett, 
l Zt raiment. 





•' Mir and 
Colon. 1 
Vor bt’h 
** i Uc 10 tl* 


HISTORY Or’ THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Tho sepoys went away shortly afterwards, and were heard 
to call out “ Come out, Nawab, come out, Nawab, there 
is no fear." This was supposed to be addressed to 
Futteh Ilyder, the eldest of the four Mysore Princes, who 
lived in the palace close to Colonel Marriott's quartors. 

About 8 o'clock the Colonel heard that the Europeans 
were coming out of the barracks, but he did not venture 
to leave his house until about lOi a.m., when tho gate 
was blown open, and the troops entered the fort. 

Lance-naigue Mahomed Yacoob of the 1st, who was on 
the in-tying picket, went to the house of Captain Marrotfc 
of the same battalion about 3 a.m., and warned him not 
to go near the barracks as the men of the 23rd wore 
firing upon them. Captain Marrett immediately went to 
the Amboor gate, whore he found a guard of his own 
regiment under arms. The naigue of this guard, Svod 
Ahmed, also advised him not to approach the barracks, 
upon which he returned to his quarters, where he wu.s 
joined by Lieutenant Bissett of the 69th. Presently they 
resolved to go to the Train guard, and on the way they 
passed another guard posted on tho Nawab's bastion 
near the north-west angle of the palace. Vencatram, 
tho naigno in command of this guard, t-old Captain 
Marrett not to venture near the parade, upon which tho 
two officers returned to the other side of the palace by 
the magriirine, and succeeded in gaining a houso behind 
the main guard. After waiting there a short time they 
got over the wall into the main guard, which had been 
deserted, and they concealed themselves there until the 
arrival of the cavalry. 

Liuutcnant Ewing of the isl having become separated 
from the other officers after leaving the house of Burgeon 
Jones, aa ambled several European straggleis, and 



HISTORY OV Til K MARK VS AllMY. 


1S5 



making 1 his way out of the fort, lie joined Colonel Forbes* 
These two officers, accompanied by a number of unarmed 
men belonging to the 1st battalion, then took possession 
of the principal hill fort, where they remained until after 
the dispersion of the mutineers. 

Major Coates, on hearing the beginning of the firing, 
endeavoured, together with some officers of the 23rd, to 
outer the fort, but being unable to effect this, he sent off: 
an officer to Arcot with a letter for Colonel Gillespie, 
who commanded the cavalry cantonment at that place, 
distant about 16 miles from Vellore. The letter having 
reached the Colonel about 6 o’clock a.m., he set out imme¬ 
diately, taking with him a squadron of the 10th dragoons 
under Captain Young, supported by a strong troop of the 
7th cavalry under Lieutoimnt Woodhouse, leaving orders 
h r Colonel Kennedy to follow with the rest of the cavalry, 
with the exception of a detachment left to protect the 
cantonment aud to keep up tho communication. 

When Colonel Gillespie arrived he : >und the draw¬ 
bridge down, aud tho two outor gates open The third 
gate was opened from the inside by souv of the 69th, 
who wore let down from the rampart by their comrades. 

This progress was made without Ions owing to tho 
position occupied by tho 69th, but when tho detachment 
came iu front of the fourth, or iuner gate, tho approach 
thereto was found to bo so completely commanded by tho 
liro of the mutineers, that Colonel Gillespie thought it 
prudent to await tho arrival of the guns, fu the meantime, 
in order to encourage the brave mmi above the gateway, 
who, being without ammunition, had to trust 1 > theur 
bayonets alone, Colonel Gillespie got himself drawn up by 


‘ Lirtuonnvit Ewing’* doponition has not boon found. It ia presumed 
1,„ nin ’l 1. jyc left !ho fort , the alU.poi i or Aiuboor M gnto on tho 
woulborn face, w Wo h w;is be Id hv :i ■- ; '«it guard >>[ hiy own regiment. 

24 


OH APT Lit 
XVIll. 


Major Coati 
sendsto 
Arcot. 


Colonel 

Gillespie 

arrives. 


VuL. 111. 



mtsTfy 



18G 


<SL 

II IS TOUT OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAPTER 

XVIII. 


Recapt ire 
of the f jrt. 


Casualties in 
tho cavalry. 


u rope, and immediately began to employ the men in turn¬ 
ing the guns towards the interior of the place, and while 
thus engaged the rest of the cavalry came up from Arcot. 
It was then about 10 o’clock. The gate was blown open 
at the first discharge from the galloper guns of the 
19th under the direction of Lieutenant Blakiston of tho 
Engineers, and the troops entered the place headed by a 
squadron of the dragoons under Captain Skelton, hand¬ 
somely supported by the native cavalry. 

Colonel Gillespie, descending from the rampart, joined 
in the attack, and in about a quarter of an hour the fort 
was again in our possession* About 850 1 sepoys wove 
killed, the rest escaped by tho sally-port on tho southern 
face, but a number were taken in different parts of tho 
country within the next few days. 

The loss of the troops from Arcot was next to nothing, 
viz., one 2 European trooper killed and three wounded, 


1 Extract from a minuto hy tho Commander*in«Chief entered in tho 
Consultations of Government, lGtb September 1800. 

1st batt. 1st regl. 2nd batt. 23rd rogt. 



N.O 

N.C. R. & F. 

NO. 

N.C. R. A* F 


At CLandraghe: ry and 





Chittoor exempt from 





guilt ... ... ... 8 

401 




At Vellore, innocent 2 

1 

2 

7 


At Vellore, prisonern for 





mutiny ... ... 5 

152 

9 

223 


At Vellore, not confined 





but considered as im¬ 





plicated . o 

310 

9 

17G 


M inning since lQtli July, 





of whom many wer> 





killed, and many lakou 





prisoners in different 





districts ... . 

240 

2 

639 


Total .. 21 

1,134 

22 

1,046 


— 

—— 


— 


* Tho return of casualties iu 

• lie native cavalry had 

not boon fur 


ukl.i <1 when Colcmol Gillespie bent iu hia firr-t report, and it nul 

found. 



^■v ..'tfgy HISTORY OF Till; MADRAS Ak'lY. 187 

a result which may be attributed to the gallantry of the 
09th, for had the mutineers raised the drawbridge and 
closed the two outer gates, the fort could not have been 
recaptured by a coup de main . 

Five serjeants, 4 corporals, 1 drummer, and 90 privates 
of the 69th were killed during the outbreak, and 15 
privates subsequently died of their wounds. The num- 
bor of wounded, exclusive of these, amounted to 76. 

The undermentioned officers were killed, viz., Colonel 
Fancourt, H.M.’s 34th regiment, commanding tho garri¬ 
son, Lieutenant-Colonel McKerras, Captain Willison and 
Lieutenants Winchip and Jolly of the 23rd, Captain 
Miller, Lieutenants O’Reilly, Smart, and Tiehbourne of 
the 1st, and Lieutenants Floy and Popham of the 69th, 
Mr. Mann Deputy Commissary of Stores, Mr. Gill Con¬ 
ductor of Ordnance, and Mr. Smith tho Military Pay¬ 
master. 

Major Armstrong of the 16th N.I., who happened to 
be passing tho fort in his palankin, was first wounded 
by a Hindoo sepoy of the 1st and then killed by a Maho- 
modan follower of one of the Mysore Prince 

Captains Barrow and Maclaclilan and Lieutenant 
Mitchell of the 69th wore severely wounded, also Lieute¬ 
nant Cutclitfe of the 1st. 

Captain "Marriott Assistant* Paymaster of Stipends, was 
wounded slightly. 

The officers and men engaged in the suppression of 
the mutiny were thanked tor their services. Serjeant 
Brady of tho 69th was recommended fo> a commission, 
but lie was afterwards permitted, at his owe request, to 
exchange it for an appointment Conductor of Ordnance 
as being better suited to his circumstances. 

The detachment of native ciualry c\ nested of 107 of 
[hr 7th under Captain Dovoton, and of details from the 
other seven regiments, amounting to 305 men of all ranks 


CHAPTER 
XVIII. 


CasualtiesMt 
the garrison. 


Re want? to 
til. < llir. 1-8 
and men. 



XV1IJ. 


Puui hrnent 
of tho ring- 
loaders. 


188 history or tub m auras army. 

under Captain Mason of the 5th regiment. r l heSo men 
were rewarded by an addition to their ordinary pay on 
the following scale, viz. :— 

Subadar ... 

Jemadar ... 

Havildar... 

Naigue and Private 
This allowance was continued to the recipients on their 
being pensioned or discharged. 

It was resolved at the same time that medals, with a 
suitable inscription, should bo presented to the detach¬ 
ment, to be of gold for the native officers, and of silver 
for the other ranks, but this resolution was never carried 
into effect. 

Private Mustaplm Beg of the 1st regiment was pre¬ 
sented with a donation of 2,000 pagodas, and pensioned 
for life on the pay of a subadar of infantry. 

Tho principal leaders of tho mutiny were tried at 
Vellore, and disposed of in tho manner reported in the 
following letter from Colonel Harcourt to the Adjutant- 
General :— 

“ Vellore , 23rd September 1806. 

“ 8ir, 

“I request you will bo pleased i-j communicate to His 
Excellency tho Commaudcr-in-Cliicf, that 1 have this morn¬ 
ing carried into execution tho approved sontencca 1 of tho 


us. 

... 21 

... 14 
... 7 



i lsf battalk 

Blown from n ■ un 
Shot 

Unng . 

Transported 

2 »i i hatf I li 
Blown from a gun 
llung 

M *'vn from « gun 


1 st roq intent. 

... 1 huvildar, 1 naigne. 

... 1 naigno, 4- wepoys. 

.. 1 jemadar, 1 uepoy • 

H buvildnrtj, 2 naigue^, 
l nopoy. 

23, > nji.mnt. 

2 md'udartt. 

... 2 havildara, 1 naigo v 

... 2 







189 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARM Y. 


Native General Court Martial; six of the convicted mutineers 
were blown away from guns, five were shot with musketry 
(by a detachment of the 1st of the 1st, and ‘2nd 23rd) and 
eight were hung. The two men that were acquitted are 
released, and those sentenced to be discharged the service, 
and to be transported, remain in confinement, awaiting His 
Excellency’s further orders. 

“2. Tho execution took place on the western glacis of the 
fort, and tlie painful duty was performed without a single 
failure or accident. 


<SL 

CHAPTER 
XVIII. 


“ (Signed) GEO. HARCOURT, Colonel.” 


Eight of the retainers of the Mysore Princes were Trial of tho 


tried before a Special Commission at Chittoor in April of^hc^ 


1807, rind the proceedings were confirmed by Govern- 1 nllC0R * 
ment in May. One was sentenced to death, two to 
transportation for life, one to imprisonment for life, one 
to imprisonment for ten years, and threo were acquitted. 


The princes themselves wore sent to Calcutta, (heir Deportation 
complicity not having been established to such a degree prinoea. 


us to warrant more extreme measures. 

The obnoxious orders regarding dress were cancelled 1 
on the 17th July, and on tho 21-th September a General 
Order was published, by which all unauthorised alterations 
in dross, or interference with the native soldiery in regard 
tu tlieir national observances, was f,trimly prohibited. It 
was further directed that tho turband sanctioned by 
Government on the 15th March 1797 should continue to 
b the path rn for tho army. 

Immediately after tho suppression of the mutiny steps 
were taken to ascertain tho causes whic.lt had led to it. 

A. Court of enquiry, of which Lieutenant-Colonel 
Kennedy of IT M.’s 19th dragoons was President, .was 


Tho 

obnoxious 

orders 

cancelled. 


Court h of 
enquiry. 




1 Those ordom *111 bo t< md n tho accouui of tho Native Infantry, 
1800-0, at the end of Chapter XI 



H!STOUT OF TFFR MADRAS ARMY. 



"chapter 

XVIII. 




100 



assembled by Colonel Gillespie.at Vellore, but the mem- 
ber.-^ had not proceeded far with their investigation when 
tney were relieved by a Special Commission appointed bv 
Government on the 12tli July, and composed as follows, 
viz. :— 

President. —Major-General Pater. 

Members. —Lieutenant-Colonel Dodsworth H.M/s 
3 tth regiment, Messrs. Webb and Ogilvie of the 
Civil Service, and Major Dowse of the 8th regi¬ 
ment N.I., with Major Leith, Judge Advocate- 
General, in attendance. 


Report of the The following extracts are taken from the renort of 
Coraraiaaion. .1 n . . , 

tlio Commission, which was submitted to Government on 
the 9th August, together with the depositions taken 
during the enquiry ;— 

“ There are tw *° .principal causes which appear to us to 
have led to the mutiny. The late innovations in the dress 
and appearance of the sepoys, and the residence of the family 
of the late Tippoo Sultan at Vellore. We shall beg leave to 
submit our reasons on each of these heads, and first in regard 
to the dress. 

Ch.,nge 8 in “ The article of dross is, both with the Hindoos and Main,- 
medans, an indication of their caste, and a badge of their 
respective distinctions and piano in society ; and when it is 
recollected how obstinately the Indians of all descriptions 
adhere to their enjoins, and with what difficulty the natives 
v.orc brought to adopt many parts of their present military 
dress, it will not appear surprising that some of the late 
innovations in that respect were offensive to their feelings. 

“The sepoys appear to have felt that the wearing of the 
new tnrband wonld make them como to be considered as 
J uropoans, and would have removed them from tho society 
ai, d intercourse of their own cantos. 

Wo did not think it material to ascertain how far ovory 
u-Ue lo nf dress, which they have oomplaiuod of, was repug- 



HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


191 


nant to their tenets, or unreasonable in itself. Prejudices 
would cease to be so could they be regulated by reason. 

“ We shall not dwell particularly upon that part of the 
order which respected effacing from the forehead the marks 
of castes, as it has not been specified to us as a cause of 
grievance, though one of the battalions appears to havo 
previously carried it into execution. We may be allowed to 
suppose, however, that it was not without its effect upon the 
minds of individuals. In the same corps the turband was not 
complained of, yot we know that it led to the mutiny. 

These distinctions of castes add to the personal importance 
of the individual with society, and create a sense of honor, 
which operates more strongly than the fear of punishment in 
the prevention of crimes, 

“In this country the prejudices of the conquered have 
always triumphed over the arms of the conqueror, and have 
subsisted amidst all tho revolutions and shocks to which the 
empire has been subjected. Any innovation, therefore, in that 
respect must be calculated to call forth their feelings, and tho 
more trivial the object required to be sacrificed,, the stronger, 
in our opinion, would the reluctance be to make it. Nothing 
would appear to be more trivial to tho public interests than 
the length of the hair on tho upper lip of a sepoy, yet to the 
individual himself, the shape and fashion of the whisker is a 
badge of his casto, and an article of his religion, 

“ We shall now remark on the second cause, viz., the 
residenco of the families of tho late Tippoo Sultan at Vel¬ 
lore. 

“ Accommodations were here provided for them nearly 
resembling a pnloco in magnificence, and an establishment 
allowed them on a very extensive scale ol liberality. Their 
followers had emigrated u groat numbers t.» VolJoro, and 
husbands for tho Princesses were allowed to come from diffor- 
ent parts of the country. These persons naturally brought 
along with thorn their former attachments and prejudices, 
and tho interests of Soringapatam wore transplanted with its 
inhabitants to the Carnatic. Hpeaking the same language, 


CHAJPTFIi 

XVIII. 


Intrigues of 
tho Mysore 
prisonen*. 


?V . 


102 


FfTST' >l:V W 'I HE MAO JR AS ARMY. 


CILYTTEK 

XVIII. 


<»pi uion 
ot t tio 
('oil unit teo. 


I lie Govern¬ 
ments concur 
with t-he Com¬ 
mix lioncid. 


y’ho Oommnn 
Udr-in. Chief 
rliALOntB and 


j»»rii like* 
tin* no w 
i K •Intlnri . 


and following the same religion, connections were easily 
formed, and amongst men who were not much occupied 
with engagement • of trade or business, schemes of power and 
ambition would naturally occur to those who had been born 
to enjoy thorn. 

<l Under other circumstances the tnrband, &c., might have 
proved^ offensive to the sepoys, but when we look back t o 
sumo former insurrections amongst the troops, and remember 
(and it falls within the personal knowledge of some of us) 
the civility with which tho men distinguished their officers, 
and tho point of honor which they seemed to feel in doing so, 
we cannot hut think that the outrages on the late occasion 
are of foreigu growth and could only have been inspired by a 
barbarous enemy. 

“ On iho whole we draw from the evidenco now before us 
he following circumstances :— 

“ That the late innovations as to the dress and appearance 
of the sepoys was the leading cause of the mutiny, and the 
other was the residence of the family of the late Tippoo 
Sultan at Yell ere. ” 

The conclusion arrived at by the Commissioners was 
concurred in by t he Government of Madras, and by tho 
Supremo Government; tho only dissentient voice being 
that of Sir J. F. Crad ck, the Commandor-in-Chief, who, 
in a report to the Court of Directors dated 21 at Septem¬ 
ber 180<>, expressed the opinion that the alterations in 
dress had been nothing more than a pretext; 1 .he real 
object having been the restoration of the Mahomcdau 
power. He maintained that the new turband was free 
from objection of any kind, a , had been fully established 
by tho depositions of several Mohomedans arid Hindoos 
r, t tho highest, castes who wore examined before l he 


(hs would scorn to have ftr.->itcn hia loiter of tho£9Mi June, in 
ho informed Government that tlv objections to tb ui*lM%m) ? i. • 

uiiivuin il. 






history or rirc madras army. 


103 


<SL 



court of enquiry at Vellore in May. He was supported 
in this view by the Adjutant-General,and his Depjutv, who 
stated that turbands nearly resembling’ the new one in 
shape and material had long been worn by the 2nd batta¬ 
lion I8th ; that the men of the 2nd battalion 14th had 
shown a decided preference for the new turband ; and 
that no appearance of dissatisfaction had been manifested 
until it was unexpectedly shown by the 2nd battalion 4th 
regiment. It was further remarked that the old 12th 
battalion (12th M.N.I.) had, for many years, worn a 
bonnet almost exactly similar to those of the Highland 
regiments, and had continued to do so until the introduc- 
tion of the turband of 1797 ; and that when the 36th 
battalion (26th M.N.I.) was first raised, the men wore a 
bonnet of the -amo kind as the 12th, with the addition 
of a tuft and leather cockade. 

The order regarding caste marks and earrings was 
justified on the ground that, although they had not 
previously been prohibited by any formal order, it had 
never been (ho custom in any well regulated corps for 
the men to appear with them on parade. Letters from 
Geueral Dugald Campbell, Lieutenant-Colonel Chalmers, 
and Major Bruce were quoted in support of this assertion. 

It must be remembered that the reputation of the 
Military Department was at stake, and the report of the 
Comraandor-in-Chiei seems to have boon written with 
the view c.t showing that the new regulations lmd not 
been the can c of tlio mutiny, or, if they T :td, then that 
the responsibility rested with his advisors. Colonel Agiu n 
and Major Picroe, by whom lie had been assured i hat 
the p oposed changes were not open to any objection. 

As the. defence of the new turband rested chiofiy on 
the evidence! of the native officers and soldiers as given 
before the court of enquiry, it nay bo well to consider 


CHAPTER 

XVlil. 


Rrimtat ion of 
tho Military 


tho Milu ivy 
Depti: liuo'it 
ftt elitko. 


VaIuoIobm 
churn i. l n* of 
tho p^ 
in favor of 


wbut that evidence "as worth 
VOL. III. 


Bearing iu mind the uronoii. 


2d 






CHAPTER 

XVIII. 


f xcitoment 
uiouulati jm, 


A1 >>nn hi 
JI3 'lerabad. 


194 HISTORY OF Tlir MADRAS ARMY. 

exceedingly summary, arbitrary, and severe manner in 
which the 2nd of the 4th had been dealt with only six 
days before the assembly of the court, it ought not to 
have been matter of surprise to any one at all conversant, 
villi the disposition of the native soldiery, that the court 
should have failed to elicit any unfavorable opinion 
regarding the new turband. It was well known that the 
change had been recommended, either by the Adjutant- 
General or his Deputy,or both, officers, who,at that period, 
and for many years afterwards, were supreme in respect 
to all matters connected with native troops. With this 
knowledge, and with the punishment of the 4th before 
their eyes, was it to be expected that tho turband would 
be condemned by the native officers called upon for 
their opinions ? The extraordinary thing is, that opinions 
obtained under such circumstances should have been 
gravely put forward as good evidence in favor of tho 
change. The significant hint of the field officers of whom 
the court was composed docs not appear to have mot with 
any attention. 

The excitement created by the proposed alteration-, in 
dross extended to tho troops at Hyderabad, Bollary, 
Wallajithbad, Bangalore, Nundidroog, and Simkorry- 
lroog, but not to such a degree as to cause any anxiety 
•xcept at Hyderabad ; the subsidiary force at which ph i o 
was Uion commanded by Colonel T. G. Montresor, ILM.'h 
22nd dragoons. 

The first intimation of alarm was conveyed to Colonel 
Montresor, on tho evening of tho lltli July, by bouio 
officers of the 11th regimont who told him that 

Hie native troops suspected Government, of an intention 
I-, -make tlu»m rdiminHi uh <1 is; motions of cust» , ami to 
< overt them to Christianity by degrees. Thcexcii.- 
iTH'ht was intensified by certain absurd rumours invent* d 
end . ireulatod by ill deposed persons. It was generally 



£95 



m-'loltV Ml* TIIK MADRAS ARMY. 


reported and implicitly believed, both in the cantonment, 
and in the city, that the existoneo of a considerable 
treasure at the bottom of the well in the European barracks 
had been revealed by an oracle, which treasure, however, 
could not bo discovered until a certain number of human 
heads had been offered to the tutelar deity of the w T elI. 
The uumber of heads required was to be provided by the 
European troops, who were to be employed at night to 
waylay the natives ; and the discovery, about this time, 
of a headless corpse near the Residency, so completely 
confirmed the belief in the rumour, that few of the natives 
ventured out after dark. Other reports, of an equally 
monstrous character, obtained similar credence. 

On the night of the 12th a number of men assembled 
in rear of the cantonment, and the pickets w'ere ordered 
out for fear of a tumult, but their services wore not 
required. During the next few days the genera' dissat¬ 
isfaction was manifested in several ways. The sepoys 
declared it to bo impossible for them to comply with tho 
orders regarding dress, and at the same time to .adhere to 
the tenets of their religion. Tho men of tho 2nd batta¬ 
lion 15th regiment publicly announced their intention to 
refuse to wear the turband, and the other battalions wero 
believed to be of the saino mind. Lieutenant-Colonel 
Dovetou informed Colonel Montresor that the cavalry 
would not dr:iw a sword to put down any riot tint might 
be occasioned by an attempt to force ilio new lurbuud on 
the infantry. 

Colonel Montresor, after mature deliberation, nml having 
considered the small number 1 of European troops at 
his disposal, determined, in communication with Captain 


i il.M.’a 33r<l regiment, and a detachment m artillery. Tho 
i.ntiv. troops foiifliated of two reglmontn of cavalry, Bix Imli.dlona 
4 ,f , lir j v0 infantry, and knchuiontn of native nn iltci .v and phmetan. 


chaptui; 

XVIII. 


General 
disoontriiL 
in the force. 


C 'h.erl 
M out re <>i 
revokes the 
order* 
regarding 
droiJ. 









CHAPTER 

XVIII. 




Inefficiency 
of the nativo 
offioci a. 


196 FT 1 STORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Sydenham the Resident, to take the responsibility of 
revoking the offensive regulations, and this was done by an 
order published to the force on the 23rd July. Although 
immediate tranquillity followed this wise and timely 
concession, the importance of which can scarcely bo 
over-estimated, the Colonel does not appear to have been 
rewarded except by the approval of the Supreme and 
Madras Governments, subsequently endorsed by that of 
the Court of Directors. 

Nothing of moment took place at the other stations 
specified above beyond the dismissal of a few men at 
Nundidvoog, Bangalore, and Bollary, and the disarming 
of the 1st battalion 2ord regiment at Wallajahbad. Tho 
investigation which followed this last measure showed 
that the disaffection was limited to a few native officers, 
and men of indifferent character. Tho only other point 
worthy of remark is the circumstance that the nativo 
officers generally evinced extreme indifference in the 
discharge of their duty, and made no attempt to check 
inflammatory expression made use of by some of the ruon, 
more particularly at Wallajahbad. Nothing criminal, 
however, was established against any native officer, except 
in the easo of three subadars of tho 15th regiment at 
Hyderabad, who were transported to Penang for life, 
and of a jen Mar of the 1st battalion 22nd, who was 
■'Ontenced to be phot, which sentence was afterwards 
commuted to transportation for life. 



Pi v'i ‘din git 
of Major 
V* i*Mi itnd 

I • . 

C ol<*no) 
firuut. 


The agitation caused by tlicso events had begun to 
subside when it was revived by ttio precipitate action 
of Major Welsh commanding the 1st battalion 3rd regi¬ 
ment at Pahimcotiiih, ami of JY titoimnt Colonel Grant 
commanding tho subsidiary force in Travancore, who, 
n bout the middle of November, disarmed and confined 
a largo proportion of the Mahomeduu troops under their 
rc ] -ciive command’*. 


mtsT/ty 



l?TSl*OKY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


197 



These officers were tried by court-martial at Fort St. CHAPTER 
George in February 1807, for having taken such extreme II L 

steps without justifiable cause, adequate necessity, or 
sufficient investigation; such conduct being calculated 
to produce disunion, and distrust. 

Roth Colonel Grant, and Major Welsh were honorably Opinion of rhu 
acquitted, and the proceedings were approved and con- Cu " crumou '‘- 
firmed ; nevertheless Government, while giving these 
officers credit for their good intentions, aud zeal for the 
public service, condemned them for their precipitation, 
and want of judgment. 

The investigations in connection with the mutiny Final 
appear to have terminated with the proceedings of a V5s07. L sari011 * 
court of enquiry composed of Mr. A. Scott of the Civil 
Service, Lieutenant-Colonel (afterwards Sir John) Mal¬ 
colm, and Lieutenant-Colonel John Mu lire, who wore 
appointed to enquire and report their opinion regarding 
the existence of a general Mahomcdan conspiracy for 
the subversion of British rule in India, a view which had 
been pressed upon the attention of Government by 
Major Hazlewood of the 2nd battalion 24th regiment. 

These officers close 1 thoir proceedings on the 19th March 
1807, when they came to the conclusion that “ the infer¬ 
ences drawn by Ma jor Hazlewood were not supported on 
any sufficient grounds.” 

Government, on vlie 2nd April, expressed their entire 
concurrence in that conclusion. 


On Hie 15t h April 1807, the Court of Directors sent otu Bcinorni of 
an order directing the removal of Lord YVJimm B.ontinck, ^ n ‘ or - 



198 


CHAPTER 

XVIII. 


Remarks of 
f lie Court of 
Directors on 
the canp os of 
the mutiny, 
and on the 
conduct of 
the authori¬ 
ties, 


HISTORY 01 TIIE MADUA3 ARMY. 


They were of opiuion that the u immediate cause of the 
discontent among the sepoys was the introduction of 
certain innovations in their dress, which wore offensive, 
and, as they held, degrading to them ; and that the cap¬ 
tive sons of the late Tippoo Sultan, with their adherents 
and abettors, took occasion, from the dissatisfaction of 
the sepoys, to instigate them to insurrection and revolt, 
with the view of effecting their own liberation, and the 
restoration of the Mahomedan power.” 

They remarked upon the dangerof interfering, “ without 
y onie object of great and undeniable importance, with the 
sepoys in any manner which, however erroneously, they 
might consider as affecting their castes,” and they went 
on to say that to have proceeded with a measure which 
compromised tho authority of Government on the one 
hand, or risked the disobedience of the sepoys on tho 
other, seems to argue a want of that prudeuceand discern¬ 
ment so requisite in administering tho government of r. 
numerous and peculiar people.” They further observed 
hat (i when it was found that the sepoys discovered 
great reluctance to tlio adoption of these novelties, tho 
important question to be solved was, not whether the use 
of tho turband was indeed inconsistent with the purity of 
caste, or whether tlio prohibition of marks and whiskers 
was sanctioned by any former practice; neither was it 
enough that the M; horaodan priest and Hindoo brahmin, 
who wore consulted, both admitted that there was in (he 
turband, or in thoso other articles, nothing contrary to 
their castes; but the matter of enquiry should have boon, 
whether the sepoyn, ignorant and bigot tod as they might 
be, were really persuaded that the usages imposed upon 
tiiom did troii 'li opon heir castes, because, if they wore, 
n > compliance was to lie expect d from them, whatever 
momt be the sacrifice. And, if this enquiry, which might 




HISTORY OF THE AT A LIUS ARMY. 


199 


liavo boon made indifferent modes, had given vou rcaron CHAPTER 
to suppose what the sepoys affirmed, that their conformity XVIIL 
would have determined persons of the same caste no longer 
to associate with them, the impositions, being of no real 
importance in themselves, might have been given up with¬ 
out discredit, and a new proof would have been afforded 
by Government of its tenderness to religious scruples.” 

The Court greatly regretted that when, on the 29th 
June, the Commander-in-Chief reported the existence of 
“ an almost universal objection ” to the new turband, Lord 
William Bentinck should have neglected to make full 
enquiry before permitting the change to bo carried out. 

As to the Commander-in-Chief, they observed that it 
was impossible to exonerate him from responsibility on 
the plea that he had acted under the advice of his Staff. 

The following reasons were given for the recall of the Reason* for 
Governor and the Commander-in-Chief:— tho recaIlof 

“ It acorns to us that tho Government, considered generally, 
did not exercise tho discernment and vigilance which all the 
circumstances of tho time required. 

“ Besides tho application of this observation to Sir J. CW.mandor- 
Cmrlock in particular, the injudicious regulations enforced in '^ ljloP 
under his authority, the remarkable degree in which he was 
unacquainted with tlio state of his own army just at theevo 
ol an insurrection, when he thought all was calm; and tho 
unpopularity which, it is too justly to be apprehended, the fatal 
issue of the wliolo would ontail upon him, rendered it, in our 
opinion, impossible, whatever regrot we felt on tho occasion, 
to continue him iu the comrn.«nd of the army. 

u With respect to L >rd William Bentinck. Of the upright¬ 
ness of his intentions, and his rcgvtrd for our service, wo 
have no doubt; and wo bav - hnd pleasuro in expre sing onr 
satisfac tion with different measureof his government ; but 
others which we felt oursolvos obliged, in tho Cv ir • of tho 
lost year to disapprove, impaired our confidence in him ; and 


and tlio 
Ouvprnor, 




HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY'. 



liemovnl of 
tho Adjutant- 
Geuoral and 
Deputy. 


Rewards. 


Annuities. 




(irutuity. 




I’uni.dnnent 
of tins 
luu l. incus 
l»it .u lions, 
1«07 


200 



after weighing all the considerations connected with the 
business of Vellore, we felt ourselves unable longer to con¬ 
tinue 1 that confidence to him which it is so necessary for a 
person holding his situation to possess.” 

Lieutenant-Colonel Agnew, 2 and Major Pierce were 
considered to have shown so little acquaintance with the 
disposition and prejudices of the native troops that they 
were removed from their respective appointments, and 
ordered to England. 

Colonel Gillespie was presented with 7,000 pagodas 
(lis. 24,500), and Serjeant Brady with 800 pagodas 
(Its. 2,800) in acknowledgment of their services. 

Mrs. Fancourt was granted an annuity of £100, so long 
ns she might continue a widow, and an allowance of £25 
per annum was given to each of her two children, to be 
continued until the age of 16 iu the case of tho boy, and 
to that of 21 in the case of the girl. 

A gratuity, equal to one month's pay, was sanctioned 
for each non-commissioned officer and private of the 19th 
dragoons who had been employed at Vellore. 

The punishment of tho mutinous battalions became 
the subject of much controversy, and was not finally 
settled until January 1807, when the 1st, and 23rd regi¬ 
ments wore struck off tho strength of the army from tho 
31st December 1800. 


1 In reply to n rr monstrance against this summary treatment, un<l 
nn application f«»r ich • : winch w;u vi»>- [uently profiled L v Lord 
William Dentine*Mho Court of Directors, on the 25th July 1809, whih. 

■ ■ • i • ir VI. O of hi ■ . \ ■. .-hi < • 

disc Ini tiling any intentiou of per*..mil dir respect, still adhered to their 
original view, and logi-ited tl*at “ fr . Uoroureund camion luid i.ct Ik vh 
' ^‘ i ikCiI ih examining’ Ivtu tlio real i imnnt » and .li j ■ ii ions «.f 
i 1m tf'.pny* Ik Tore mniMuroti of .-m verity were adopted to enforce l h<» 
order re upon flag c bo uao of iho new lurh&nd.” 

Tin-...- di •• i returned to duty, but »ro not icitorcd to their 
»PL did meiita on tho staff. 


201 




HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Their places were supplied by two regiments of two 
battalions each, numbered respectively the 24th 1 and 25th 
regiments. 

Mr. Petrie, Senior Member of Council and Provisional 
Governor, took liis seat as Governor on the 11th Sep- Qovomorand 
tember 1807, and Lieutenant-General Hay McDcwall in-Chief. 
assumed command of tho army on the 17th of the same 
month. 


CHAPTKU 

XVIII. 


Interim 


1 For the formation of these regiments, i'iae account of Native 
Infantry, 1S0G-9, Chapter XIX. The 24th and 25th regiments were 
restored to their original positions in the army in consideration of tho 
gallantry displayed by the 1st battalion 21th regiment at the battlo of 
•^eetabuldeo near Nagpore on the 26th and 27th November 1817. 







VUU Ul. 


26 





HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CliAT’ XIX. 


'.lolapufc 
Hum, tbOS. 


Action at 
A innhiuir. 




202 



CHAPTER XIX. 

prom THE TREATY WITH HOLKAR IN 1806, 

TO THE TERMINATION OF THE WAlt IN TRAVANCOKE, 1809. 


Sir George Hilaro Barlow, Bart., arrived from Cal¬ 
cutta in December 1807, and took his seat as Governor 
of Madras ou tho 24tli of that month. 

In February 1808, Incut. -Colonel Montresor marched 
from Hyderabad towards Sholapoor, in order to suppress 
.in insurrection caused by Mohiput Bam, an influential 
Jaghlrdar who had been recently dismissed from tho 
Court of the Nizam, at the instance of tho Resident, us 
being inimical to the interests of tho British Government. 
Mohiput Ram retreated on the approach of tho detach¬ 
ment., 1 and ultimately, but with difficulty, succeeded in 
making his escape into Candoish, whore ho took refuge 
with Holkar, but he had been so hard pressed, that he 
was obliged to abandon his guns and baggage. 

Colon -1 Montresor returned to Hyderabad in June. 

During this year, Mohiput Kao Ilolkar, Wahid Ally 
Khan BuDgush, and Daudin Khan, three dependents of 
Holkar, taking advantage of the confusion which followed 
the insanity of that Chief, established themselves in 
Candci h, from whence they mode incursions into the 
territories of tho Pe~hwa, and of tho hi i /.mil . In conso- 


' let imd Hill cnvnliy, a detachment of artillery witli S gune, r - I f. 
hawltMtn. 33rd foul. 6 aoinpaniiu, Ut tutuiIii'U I'lili, .uni 

s,„| I,, 111 ,lion 21bt »»' mCintry, unil 100 ptonocra. Joim-J .-ou,, 
afti rivfuUii by Uio 2n l vn lr>, and 2nd battalion I.Otli niilivn lofaniij. 







HT6T0KY OF THE MADRAS ARM'S . 203 

quence o£ those depredations, troops wore ordered from 
Poonah and Jaulna, and on the 28th December the free¬ 
booters were surprised near the fort at Amulnair, 1 and 
dispersed by the Jaulna detachment under Lieutenanfc- 
Colonel Doveton, who displayed great energy and activity 
during this service. 

The following order was issued by the Governor- 
General on this occasion : — 

“ Fort William , 30th January 1809. 

“The Right Honorable the Governor-General in Council 
littH received tho satisfactory intelligence that a detach tin ut ‘ 
of tlio subsidiary force of Hyderabad, under the command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Doveton, consisting of a corps of horse 
artillery two regiments of native cavalry, and twelve eom- 
pani.of native infantry, employed in the province of Oaudeish 
y\\ i lie pursuit of the predatory force of the Chiefs Mohiput 
Ham Holkar, Wahid Ally Khan, and Daudin Khan, after a 
forced march of near 100 miles, having succeeded in surpris¬ 
ing the enemy at the fort of Ainnlnoir on tho morning of the 
28th ultimo, effected the completo dispersion of their troops, 
consisting of between four and fivo thousand men, cavalry, 
and infantry, captured tho whole of their gunr, baggage, and 
camp equipage, and near 1,000 horses. Tho lo on the part 
of the enemy in stated to have been very groat; on tho part 
of tho British detachment, between 20 and 30 men killed and 

minded. 

u Tho Governor-General in Council deems it proper, on 
this occasion, to expres- in the moat public manner the high 
Son80 which In entertains of tho zeal, judgment, and activity 
manifested by laouummUCuluncl Doveton in planning, and 


1 Alwat 22 niiloa nnlli-oo it "f Dhonlia in Camlt Fab. 

* Horao artillery one troop, 4th auU Sth roguncuts cavalry, iletuch- 
ii vntfl ,f tho lflt haitttljon lOfh (lOih M.N.I.), 1st battalion 12th (23rd 
W 2nd battalion l7<-h(lULh C.L.L) 






<SL 


CHAP. XIX. 


Oomplii en- 
tarv order, 
lbdu. 




HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAP. XIX. executing this arduous enterprise, and of the distinguished 
perseverance, exertion, and gallantry of the officers and troops 
under hri command in accomplishing a march of near 100 
miles in the space of 48 hours, and immediately attacking 
and defeating a superior force of the enemy, whose depreda¬ 
tions in the province of Candeish, and in the territories of 
the allies of the British Government, had so long disturbed 
the tranquillity of the Deccan, and hud rendered necessary a 
combined movement of divisions of the subsidiary forces of 
Poonah and Hyderabad under the general direction of Colonel 
Wallace, commanding the subsidiary force of Poonah.” 


* * * * 


Capture of Bnngush Khan having managed to re-collect several 
.Duudin Khan, hundreds of his scattered followers, retreated northwards, 
crossed the river Taptee near Ivoprcll, and took refuge 
in the adjoining hill country belonging to a Blieel chief¬ 
tain, by whom both lie and Daudin Khan wore given up 
to Colonel Wallace in January 1809. Mohiput Rao, who 
had separated from the others, effected his escape. 


Northern Circars, 1808-9. 

Disturbances took place near Vizianagram, and in the 
Hill Zemindary of Maringy during 1808. One of tbo 
chiefs, named Deo Pudmunabha llauze, was captured at 
Striugaram Cottah in August by a dotachment under 
Captain Powell, 1st battalion 21st, but others evaded 
pursuit, and towitrds the end of the year Government 
considering it necessary to direct that martial law should 
b*: proclaimed in certain parts of the district, issued 
special instructions for the composition of the Courtand 
laid down the principles upon which their sentences were 
to be guided. The disturbances appear to have been 
quolled tor the tirno during the early part of 1809. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


205 


Projected Expedition to the Persian Gulpii. 


CHAP. XIX. 


About the end of 1808, orders were issued by the 
Supreme Government for the assembly of an expeditionary 
force at Bombay for the purpose of taking possession of 
the island of Karrack in the Persian Gulpii. The quota 
furnished by the Madras Army amounted to 50 officers, 
and about 1,000 men, and was composed of horse and 
foot artillery, four troops 1 of cavalry, and a detachment 
of pioneers, all under the command of Brigadier General 
John Malcolm. 

The intention having been given up, the troops returned 
to Madras during May 1809, when they received the 
thanks of Government for the alacrity with which they 
had proceeded on foreign service. 

Honorary badges were conferred on the native officers 
and men. 


The other troops destined for this expedition wero 
H.M/s 05th regiment under Lieutenant-Colonel Lionel 
Smith, and the Bengal Marine battalion under Lieutenant- 
Colonel Shuldham. 

The force was reviewed at Bombay on the 2 nd Febru¬ 
ary 1809, and highly complimented in general orders on 
its appearance and discipline. 

On the departure of Lieutenant-General Macdowall 
for England in January 1809, Major-General Gowdic, tho 
senior officer in the Company's service, was appointed i > 
command the army. 


War in Tkavanoore, 1S08-9. 

The subsidy payable by the Hajali of Tmvancorc Tnimnoofc 
having fallen cons idem bly into urrear, Lieutr nant-Colonel 130 ^° 
Macaulay, tho Resident, urged upon him, as a measure 


1 One fn w each of tho following 


regiment t, viz., 3rd, 5th, (5th anil 



HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 



206 


<SL 


of economy, the expediency of dismissing a body of 
regular infantry in his service known as the Carnatic 
Brigade,” but this proposal was not acceptable. The 
Resident believing that the Dewan, or prime minister, 
was the principal cause of the opposition, insisted upon 
his removal from office, which was agreed to, but during 
the interval required for the selection of a successor, the* 
minister employed himself in organizing an insurrection 
of the Nairs with the view of accomplishing the murder 
of the Resident, and he inducod the minister of the Rajah 
of Cochin to join in the plot. 


Ttemforco- 

rnenta. 


Attempt, to 
murder tbo 
Tlcuidcat- 


“Kv.-nU at 


This design having become known at Madras, additional 
t roops were immediately ordered into Travancore. H.M.’s 
12 th foot sailed from Cannanoro for Quilon on the 2Gth 
December 1808, followed two days afterwards by the 2nd 
battalion 18th native infantiy, and on the 1st January 
by a detachment of artillery consisting of 45 Europeans, 
and 82 natives, with four 0-pounders, and two 5 V inch 
howitzers. The 1st battalion 17th native infantry em¬ 
barked at Tellicherry for Cochin on the 30th December. 

On the night of the 28th December, the house of the 
Resident, who was then at Cochin, was surrounded by u 
number of armed men, and he had barely time to concord 
himself when they broke into the Residency. Not 
finding him, they left the place, and the Colonel got on 
board one of the ships coming down the coast with troop. ’, 
which, most fortunately, happened to pass Cochin about 
daybreak on the 29th December. 

Lieutenant-Colonol Chalmers 1 was at this time in com¬ 
mand of tlio subsidiary force, the bead-quarters of whit h, 
consisting of the 1st battalion 2nd, 1st of 4th, and 2nd 
of 13th, were stationed at Quilon. 

■ lojt -Omi ;ul Bir John Chalmem, u.c.B. The officer, wl.o, 

wIujji n Lloutonunt, made the gnllanf defence of Coimbatoro in 17U1- 



HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY 




207 



The Colonel, having received information on the 29th 1 CHAP. 
December that a number of armed men, well supplied ~ 
with ammunition, had assembled at the house of the 
Do wan in the immediate neighbourhood, ordered the 
force to be on the alert, which had scarcely been done 
when he heard that a large body of Nairs was about to 
advance upon the cantonment from Paroor, a village on 
the coast about ton miles south of Quilon. Upon this 
he detached Captain Clapham, with five companies of the 
4th, and a gun, to occupy some heights near the Dewan's 
house, and to remain there during the night, with the 
object of preventing the force being placed between the 
fire of two parties. On approaching the heights, Captain 
Clapham found that a small hill On tho right of tho road 
was already held by the insurgents, whose numbers were 
increasing every moment, and he had scarcely time to 
load when he was attacked by a strong body in column. 
Reserving his fire, until it had como within a very short 
distance, ho delivered a volley, but it was not until after 
a good deal of firing that the enemy were finally compel¬ 
led to retreat. 

Nothing further took place until next morning, when 
Captain Clapham, having beet* joined by Major Galbraith 
Hamilton with two companies of the 13tli, the-Dewan's 
house Was attacked, and taken, together with six 1- 
potinders which had been mounted in front of it. 

1 his had just been effected when if- was reported ffial AtiAu 
the rVavauoore troops wore crossing the bar nf Ivicka,- ' 1 '* l - 
about five miles north of Quilon. Major Hamilton was 

’Rome accounts uny t ho 3<Uh ; that inthe«eH ix taken from tho 
rojiort rando by Oolouul ChalmrM H |., tho Uj- admit, dated ui (Quilon, 2ml 
January 1809. 

1 Thin bar oc eatanry about n quarter milo broad and half a q,i | 0 
('< unuct' tIn <*r.' 'Mth n larg. hike or haekwai'T, v.luY.R extend. 


jiMHirly ptimUol to the cv«dt i\?r never: l mile;-). 





208 


HISTORY OF TllK MADRAS ARMY. 




CH AP. X IX. Immediately pushed on to oppose this movement, and 
failing in with several small parties of the enemy on the 
way, ho dispersed them and took a number of prisoners, 
from whom he learned that the troops at Ivicka consisted 
of about 4,000 Nairs, and a battalion of the Carnatic 
brigade from Alleppy. On arriving at the bar it was 
found that a considerable number of men lmd already 
crossed, and were drawn up to cover the landing of the 
remainder. Major Hamilton attacked them instantly, 
killed about 400, and drove the rest into the river, where 
a number were drowned. The guns were then opened 
upon the Carnatic battalion on the opposite side of the 
bar, and compelled it to retire, but in about two hours it 
returned with several guns, supposed to have been 12- 
pounders, and began to fire round and grape, which was 
replied to from our side. 

While this was going on, a number of boats, full of 

men, were seen crossing on each flank, observing which 

Colonel Chalmers directed Major Hamilton to fall back 

lest lie should be cut oft* from the cantonment. 

Colonel During the afternoon reports were received to the effect 

unwraps*near 1^,000 men were advancing from Paroor, in conse- 

tl |c canton- qnonce of which Colonel Chalmers moved the troop* into 

l -icnt. . . r 

the ruined fort at Quilon, as being a more defensible 

position, but early next morning, finding that nu imme¬ 
diate attack was to be apprehended, he left the fort, and 
encamped near the cantonment, which he entrenched to 
the best of his power. 


Defence of Cochin, 1800 . 

On the 10th of January an attack was made by several 
strong bodies of Ike onemy on the town of Cochin, 
defended by hi*. companies 1st battalion 17th native 
infantry, and 50 moil of II M.'s 12lh foot, all under the 



command of Major Hewitt of tlio former corps. Tho CHAP. XIX. 
defence was made with much skill and gallantry, and 
the assailants, after several determined attempts, were 
repulsed at every point, and compelled to retreat with 
the lo3s of about 300 men. 

The following is a copy of the report made to Colonel 
Macaulay :— 

“ I have the honor to inform yon that the detachment 
R.M.’s 12 th regiment, and the six companies 1 st battalion 
17f,b regiment under my command, were attacked by three 
columns of the enemy on three different points about 6 
o’clock this morning, and after a very severe engagement of 
three hours, we repulsed them on all sides with considerable 
slaughter, and captured their two gnus. 

“ By tho enclosed return you will obsorvo that our loss 1 
is not trifling. Since your departure wo are entirely cut off 
from all communication by sea, r.nd I am given to understand 
frtJ&U troops aro eomiug in from all sides. 

“From what I could observe in tho field of action tho 
enemy’s force appeared about 3,000 excellent disciplined 
troops, but from what lean collect from report, they amounted 
lo much more. 

“On tho othor side of tho river, close to the mouth, they 
have erected a battery of two guns, which prevents vessels 
m coining in or going out, and which played ■ , th 

nnmo effect on our charging tho enemy on the south side. I 
trust you will immediately dispatch the armed cruiser to koop 
the month of the river open, and recover our craft.” 

(Signed) W. HEWITT, Major, 

Camp Cochin, Commontli j. 

VMK January 1809. 

I... - 

H M's I2th-»V private kill***!; IJouumnni Thompson, mid U rank 

,..l ftu, wimndoil 1st Iwn'ftlinn 17 h- 10 imviOr killed; rni»tutn 
Komi monally woundod ; A* fm iiml ttlo woundoU. 


210 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XIX. 


Thnnks of 
I iOTornniont. 


lt"inforco- 

uieuta. 


( SL 


A subsequent report, dated on the 21st, concludes with 
the following w r ords :— 

“ The small detachment H.M.’s 12th regiment behaved 
with great gallantry, and showed a noble example to the first 
battalion of the 17th regiment, who followed it entirely to my 
satisfaction.” 

Tho detachment received the thanks of Government, 
convoyed in a general order dated 4th February 1809 :— 

“ The Honorable the Governor in Council also takes this 
opportunity of expressing his warm approbation of the con¬ 
duct of a detachment of troops stationed at Cochin, 1 under 
tho command of Major Howitt, who with great skill and 
bravery repulsed a numerous and united force of the troops 
of Truvancoro aud Cooliin in an attack which they made ou 
the British detachment on the 12th ultimo. The Governor 
in Council has particular satisfaction in expressing to Major 
Hewitt, and to tho officers and troops under his command, his 
public thanks for tin ir highly deserving conduct.” 

Ou tho 3rd January a detachment of artillery, 300 
H.M.’s 80th foot, the 2nd battalion 12th, and tho 2nd 
of the 22nd arrived at Cannanoro from Soringnpatain to 
replace tho troops sent to Cochin and Quilon, and further 
reinforcements were put in motion from Mysore in tho 
direction of tho Western Coast A requisition for Euro¬ 
pean troops from Ceylon was made about tho same time. 

Operations in thp South op Travancore, 1809. 

About tho middle of January a force 2 was assembled 
in tho southern division with the object of operating in 

* On the lib S< t iSK) tho S8rd regiment M.N.I. was author- 

• cd to hour tho word 1 Oocb.in ” on the colors und appoint monttf in 
commemoration of this vortioo. 

htl> cavalry, ono company of : . tilery with f. or 0-ponnd.r" nr.d 
* vVt> howitzers, J1 M.’b 69th regiment, bi. battalion JJrr! live 

com, p,oI<h. 2mi butlr*lion 3rd, l«t battalion 13th, 2nd btiltalion 18ih 

’ 1 P*‘"v, 2nd but valiou IGt »i Livo coonvmiutf, 2nd battalion p. > i f 
too. 







HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


211 


Travancoro from the south, and thus creating a diversion CHAP. x:x. 
in favor of Colonel Chalmers. 

Travancorc is divided from Tinnevelly by the range Arambooly 

of mountains running from the north to Cape Comorin Canuiixh 
. Comary hnea. 

■which are not practicable for tlio passage of an army 

except at a point some 14 miles distant from the Cape, 

where there is a break in the chain about throe miles in 

width. This break was defended by walls of masonry 
with bastions at intervals armed witli cannon, and the 
position could not be turned on either flank without much 
difficulty owing to the impenetrable nature of the country. 

This portion of (ho defences was known as the ,f Aram- 
booly ” lines, and the road from Palamcottah led nearly 
through the centre of the works The southern portion, 
called tho a Cunniah Comary ” lines, soparatod from those 
on tho north l>y a mountain, extended to tho Capo, was 
nearly ten miles in length, and similar in character to tho 
othor. 

The foreo from Tricliinopoly, which had been placed Capture 
under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel the Honorable ° A nh( \ . 

0 '.ram uooly 

A., bentleger, Gth cavalry, eamo before the Arambooly bnea. 
lines on the Gth February. The Colonel, being without 
a battering train, determined to attempt a surprise, and 
on the night of the Oth, twelve 1 companies of infantry, and 
a party of pioneers with scaling laddors, all under Major 
Welsh of the 3rd regiment, moved towards tho redoubt 
on tho hill at tho southern extremity of the works. Tho 
country being very diflicult, owing to the thickness of the 
jungle, and the numerous ascents and descents, the troops 

1 Il.M.'a 69fch two coinpamod ami the pukota, (’aptuin Sima; lat 
battalion 3rd flank companion, 2nd battalion 3rd seven oompu lies, nil 
nmlor Captain bin.aa -ud battalion 3rd rogim-'ntj piuioora under 
Idontcnant Hcitrnpi of the 2nd battalion 17th N.I. Another company 
• f Uio fldili ami three oompanua let, bati a ion 13tli N.I., all undur 
Unptuiu ’Llodgxou of the *• ero nfiorwmdii :?unt ii support. 




^CFI A.P. xrx. did not reach tbe foot of the walls near the summit of the 
hill until after a march of six hours, when the ladders 
were planted, and the whole of the works, together with 
the arsenal, were in our possession by 8 o'clock on the 
morning of the 10th. Our loss was extremely small, viz., 
Captain Cunningham of the 69th and one sepoy killed, 
four Europeans, and seven natives wounded. 

Thanks to Major Welsh arid his detachment were thanked by 

fcho troops. , . J 

Colonel Sentlegor for “ their gallant exertions in accom¬ 
plishing an object which must ever be considered as enti¬ 
tled to a high place in military records," and ou the 16th 
February the Colonel's report was published in general 
orders, together with the names of the officora who hud 
been engaged in the escalade. Tho thanks of the Govoruoi 
in Council wore convoyed to Colonel Sentlegor, and tho 
officers and men in tho same order. 

Cnp ur. r,f Colonel Sentleger, having been joined on the 16th by a 
company of royal artillery from Coy Ion with six tliree- 
pounders, and a wing of the 3rd Coylon native regiment, 
marched about 3 o’clock \.m. ou the 17th for the contigu¬ 
ous villages of Nagercoil arid Cotaur, distant about eight 
miles south-west of Anunbooly, and where tho enemy 
had ruiHomblod in rouio xtrength. Tho advance, com- 
posed of n strong picked d< tachinenb, 1 led by Colonel 
McLeod ol tho 69th, crime upon tho enemy at daybreak 
in a Rtrong position, defended by cannon, and with a river 
in their front. 

Colonel McLeod immediately attacked, and compelled 
them to retreat in confusion with (he loss of nine guns. 

1 flth cuv.Uy Oiiuo tioops, ttunk uouapunit a GUih j C\ y luu tvgi nujiil , 
llank companit . lt-i ami 2iul battalions ttrd regiment ; flank ouinpunt"! 

13t)i ; « no company pinnnori undor bioutuiiant Pat error Minimi 
Krropnhn rngimont: detnohnumf royal artillery; galloper gtiun uf tho 
oava’rj 4iud u IjiigAtlii of Bi£-jx>UJuloro attached to t he 1st 13th 



The two villages were taken possession of without further CH AP. X IX. 
Opposition. Captain Lena of the Ceylon regiment, and 
Lieutenant Swayne 1st battalion 13th regiment, were 
wounded, and 4*0 rank and file killed and wounded. 

On the 19th the force advanced against the forts of Occupation of 
Oodagherry and Papanavoram, distant from Nagercoil an°(fpapanL 
about eight miles in a north-westerly direction, and found veram * 
them both abandoned. A. number 1 of guns and valuable 
arms wero taken, but the treasure had been removed. 

The following order was published on the 2Gth Feb¬ 
ruary :— 

“ The Governor in Council repeats to Lieutenant-Colonel Thanks to 
Sontloger, and to the officers and men under his orders, his t tr °°* a * 
wannest thanks for the activity, zeal, and bravery which have 
signalised their operations. 

“The Governor in Council has particular satisfaction in 
observing the further proof of military i-kill and gallantry 
afforded by that distiiignishod and valuable officer, Lieutenant- 
Colonel McLeod of ILM.’s tiOth regiment, in the action of 
Ootivnr and Nngorcoil, which has been followed by events of a 
highly important nature.” 

On the 21st February Colonel Senllcgcr took up a The force 
position half-way between Oodagherry and the town of ^ r Jvairnn,. 
Coluah.ee on the coast, which \yas taken possession of 
on tlm 23rd by a detachment for the purport of opening 
n communication by : ca with Colonel Chalmers atQuilon. 

This having been secured, Colonel Seutlegor inarched 
on tho 27th for Trovandruui, the capital of the Rajah, 
where he arrived on the night of tho 28th, and occupied 
h position commanding tho place 

When tho main body inarohod from Arambooly, u CnjUm* .,f 

detachment of the 2nd battalion Glh, under Captain jboaomi-.cm 

liuru. 

'1'ownsend, was- left thorn to protect tho eomimuncatriohs, 





CHAP. XIX. 


Action at 
Quilon. 


Dirtp itionB 
for attack. 








Lkfoat of 
the onomy. 


2M 


HISTORY OP TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 


<si 


and also 10 take possession of the southern, or Cunniali 
Comary lines, which was accomplished without opposi¬ 
tion about the 21st February. 


Affairs at Quilon, 1809. 

H.M.'s 12th regiment, followed by the 2nd battalion 
18th regiment N.I., joined Colonel Chalmers early in 
January, and the next few days were spent in adding to 
the strength of the cantonment, then threatened by the 
enemy, who had assembled in the neighbourhood to the 
number of about 30,000 mon with eighteen guns. 

Early on tho morning 1 of the 15th January the enemy 
was observed approaching in force from several directions, 
and the troops were immediately got under arms. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Picton with a wing of H.M.’s 12tli, 
eight companies of the 18th under Major Mnirhead, and 
a couple oL guns, advanced against a large body which 
had occupied some heights in frout of the cantonment,, 
while Major Hamilton of the 13th, with the other wing 
H.M/s 12th, the 1st battalion 2nd, and his own batta¬ 
lion, moved against another considerable body with guns, 
which had taken up a position on the loft, about half a 
mile from the cantonment, upon which they had opened 
fire. Colonel Chalmers accompanied this column. Cap¬ 
tain Nowall, with tho 1st battalion 4th, was left to defend 
the camp. 

Tho right column under Colonel Picton eniiroly defeated 
the enemy, killing a great number, ami taking two gun-. 
Ho spoke highly of tho behaviour of the troops, Euro¬ 
pean and native. 

The left column was equally successful, having dis- 
pc rsed two separate bodies, and taken four guns During 




1 (Irilor.itl CinklmcrH' report 




HI- TORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


215 



the pursuit, part of tlie Carnatic Brigade, with guns, 
appeared on the heights to the west of the cantonment 
and opened fire. It was immediately charged and forced 
to retire, and the guns taken. 

In the meantime three regular corps of Nairs, which 
had advanced on the right of the camp, had been attacked 
and dispersed by Captain Newall. A number of them 
were killed, and four of their guns were captured. Cap¬ 
tain Newall was wounded, but the battalion did not lose 
a man. 

Although this engagement lasted four hours, our casual¬ 
ties, including officers, only amounted to 141 1 killed and 
wounded. Fifteen guns were taken. 

Tho following order was issued on this occasion:— 


“ Fort St. George, 4th February 1800. 

“The Honorable the Governor in Council has recently 
received a particular account of the action which took place 
at Quilou on tho 15th ultimo, between the British troops, and 
the troops of Trav&ucore, in which, after a severe and long 
contest, the Travancore troops wero defeated with heavy loss. 


1 _ 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

.3 - 

g 

*s 

o 

H 

Euro* 

poans. 

Natives. 

Euro* 

poanfl. 

Natives. 

Artillery 

1 

5 

6 

9 


20 

H.MVb 12th regiment. 

8 


47 



66 

3 «L haltnlion 2nd 


1 


6 

1 

8 

1st. do. 4th 



1 

12 


13 

2nd do. 13th 


l 


12 


13 

2nd do. lfifh 


2 

1 

89 


32 

TotuI ... 

0 

y 

61 



141 

-- - 

-1 

. __1 

. __l 

_ 


.2- 


Captain Buyloy, Lieutenant ' o]|. , anti Hurgoou l.'rakine, TT.M.’m 
12th, wounded 

('it|ii,nu Ne\ ill 4il», Ei'Mi'.niKint Fludo 18th, and Afitfi.ituut Sur^oou 
Djivi’d iOu nrti'*0rj, w 'iudod. 


Si. 


CHAP. XIX. 


Casualties. 


Complimen¬ 
tary order. 



























niS'lORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XIX. 


fci ijud 

i* < nok on th<" 
riiiitonmunt. 


Mnnl defeat 
of iho enemy, 


210 

Irora flie extent of the combined furce which wos opposed 
to the British troops, this signal victory reflects the highest 
honor on their discipline and valour: and the Governor in 
Council has great satisfaction in expressing his strongest 
approbation of their meritorious conduct. 

£lf Ihe Goverror in Council accordingly conveys to Lieute¬ 
nant-Colonel Chalmers, who commanded the British detach¬ 
ment at Quilon in this distinguished action, his public thanks, 
and Lieutenant-Colonel Chalmers is requested to convey the 
thanks of the Governor in Council to Lieutenant-Colonel 
Picton H.M.’s 12th regiment, Major Muirhead, Major Hamil¬ 
ton, Captain Me wall, Captain Peppor, Captain Mackintosh, 
Lieutenant Lindsay, Lieutenant Arthur of the Engineers, 
and the oflicors of his stair Captain Cranston and Cup tail! 
Ahmnty, with the othOr officers and troops of the detachment 
who bravely signalised themselves on the occasion.” 

The cantonments were again attacked 1 on the 31 si 
January, with a similar result, and the Naira suffered *. 0 

severely that they began to desert in considerable nunir 
bers. 

No further attempt was made by the enemy after tin 
repulse of the 81st January, and Colonel Chalmers, 
having been joined on the 19th February by H.M ,’s 
19th regiment under Licutonant-Colonel the Honorable 
1 Stuart, felt him- ! sufficiently stroug to attach their 
position at Killmuooi, 1 which was protected by batteries 
Laving a deep nullah full of water in their front, and 
defended by about 5,000 men. 

The first brigade, oompo-od of II M’s 12th, the 2nd of 
L8th, and a wing of the 4th, all under Lieutonunt- 
Coloncl Pieton, was ordered to turn the left oft! o posi- 
' on, while tin; second brigade, eoiupo-, 1 of ll.M.’s Huh. 

' Thr ’ ri l ,ort i he pririioulorq of 11 > • alTaii l>;»« ma l. 

founrl 

I wo /tiiil n-hulf milca iulMfcid from < tinLnnnmu» b 








msTonv of tiu: madras army. 


217 


loci by Major Beaver, the 2nd of the 13th under Major CHAP. XJX. 
Hamilton, and three companies of the 2nd under Captain —T 

Pepper, all commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Stuart, 
attacked in front. Both attacks were completely success¬ 
ful, and the enemy took to flight, leaving their guns 
behind. The advance of the front attack having been 
covered by a well-directed fire of artillery until the head 
of the column had nearly reached the batteries, the casual¬ 
ties in this brigade were much less than they would other¬ 
wise have been. 


It does not appear that the other brigade sustained any 
loss. 

Tbo following are extracts from the report of Colonel 
Chalmers, dated 23rd February : — 

“The greatest credit is due to the troops for the steady 
inaunor they advanced against the batteries, through deep 
water and mud. and thorny bushes, under a heavy fire of 
musketry, round, and grapo. ILM.’s 19th regiment lost one 
killed and ten wounded, several very severely, and about the 
same number of natives. 

“ Captain Foote, H M.’s 1 Piedmontaiso * volunteered his 
services on shore, and landed a detachment of seamen. Half 
of them went with Lieut»-Colonel Picton under Lieutenant 
Turner, and the other half, under Captain Foote, accompanied 
bitntenant-Colonel Stuart. They wore employed in bringing 
up our artillery in the front of tbo enemy’s batteries. They 
did this with that alacrity and courage whioh they invariably 
display on all occasions of service. I regret one of them was 
severely wounded.” 

On the 3rd Afaroh a geneml order was published, from OompHmcn* 
which the following is an extract:— bar - v ur ‘* r * 

“ The Honcvable the Governor in Council has great, p na uire 
m recording the high sense which ho entertains of the skill 
mid judgment evinced bv Lieutenant-Colonel Chalmers in tin 

V OL. III. 28 





218 


HISTORY OF TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 


CD Al\ XIX. arrangements made by him to secure the success of the attack 1 
upon the enemy’s position, and requests that Lieutenant- 
Colonel Chalmers will convey to Lieutenant-Colonel Picton, 
to the Honorable Lieutenant-Colonel Stuart, and to the officers 
and men who served under them, the public thanks of the 
Honorable the Governor in Council for their meritorious 
exertions on this occasion.” 

The army Colonel Chalmers inarched from Quilon on the 26th 

Trovandrum. February, and encamped afew miles north of Trevandrum, 
a day or two after Colonel Sentlegcr had occupied n 
similar position on tho south. The Hajub submitted 
immediately after tbe concentration of tbe army round his 
capital, and on the 1st or 2nd March it was agreed that, 
in addition to all arrears of subsidy, ho should pay tho 
expenses of the war, uud that the Carnatic Brigade, ami 
the Nair battalions in his service should be dismissed. 
£u,--idoru tho The Dewan committed suicide, but his brother was 
!>'.i^ nti‘ rTof taken and hanged for his participation in the murder 
t;* brother. 0 f Assistant-Surgeon Georgo ITume of the Company’. 

service, and about thirty-three men of H.M/s 12th foot, 
which had been treacherously perpetrated at Alleppy on 
the 29th December 1808, the day after the commence¬ 
ment of the insurrection. Tho body of the Dewan was 
hung in irons and exposed upon a gibbet, a proceed¬ 
ing which called forth the vere animadversion of the 
Supremo Government. 

i julim. nt Tn the meantime, a strong detachment 2 under Lieute¬ 
nant-Colonel John Ouppago had entered tho territory of 
Cochin and encamped about t welve miles north of tho 
town, where it remained until affairs wore iinally settled. 

‘ From this »>rd"i it would ap| ar hafc tUo action took jjlaoo on th. 

» but Colons! ('hrtfnwrR mnkca it tho 22tid. 

J Dotfichiru nt artillery, rV hichments Q.M it 50th and 80th, flank 
tomf • i h i balu 1 i\ 5tb, 2nd battalion Ot ,2nd of I2tb, aud 2nd of 


HISTORY 01 ' THK MADJRAB ARilY. <419 

Lieutenant-Colonel John Monro, previously Quarter¬ 
master-General, was appointed Resident in October 1810. 
Soon afterwards, at the request of the Rajah, and with 
tlio assent of the British Government, he assumed the 
administration of the province, which he conducted with 
great success until 1814, when he made over the manage¬ 
ment to a Native, by which time the State had been 
relieved of pecuniary embarrassment. This arrangement, 
however, was condemned by the Court of Directors, who 
pronounced it to be entirely opposed to all the principles 
upon which their relations with triendly Native States had 
theretoforo been conducted. 










<SL 


CHAP. XIX. 

Settlement of 
tlie province, 
1810 -U. 


220 


UlbTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 



n \i\ :;ix. 



inapccting 
officer of 
cavalry, 180G. 


Abolition of 
Uie appoint- 
i tent, 1807 


Popflt for 
In ft ruction, 

lso7. 


Hcalo of 
pcnwIonB, 

1807. 


lfM»H 


Cavalry, 1806-9. 

In August 1806 Colonel Gillespie, H.M/s 19th dragoons, 
was appointed to be Inspector and Exercising Officer of 
Cavalry, on a staff allowance of 200 pagodas per mensem, 
but this appointment was discontinued in November 1807, 
in consequence of orders from the Court of Directors, by 
whom it was pronounced unnecessary. They at the same 
time remarked, that as four-fifths of the cavalry consisted 
of nativo troops, with whose usages Colonel Gillespie, 
who had only been a short time in India, could not possi¬ 
bly bo acquainted, the selection for the appointment, had 
it been required, ought to havo been made from amongst 
the experienced officers of their own service. 

In April 1807 a dep6t, for the instruction of young 
officers, and recruits of cavalry, was established at Arcot 
under the command of Captain Davidson, 4tli regiment, 
but it was abolished in February 1808. 

The following scale of pensions to the several ranks of 
native cavalry wns published in general orders of the 
13th May 1807, to havo effect from the 1st January 1807 
in arrears for December 1806 :— 


PAG f. c. 



( First 

class ... 

. 17 

0 

0 

Snbadur 

< Bocond do. 

14 

21 

0 


fTbird 

do. ... 

... 13 

0 

0 

Jemadar 



... 4 

21 

0 

Havildar 



... 3 

0 

0 

Naigue 

... 

... 

2 

21 

0 

Trooper < 

nr Trtim peter 

. 1 

21 

0 

Farrier 



3 

0 

0 


1 he body guard was discontinued as a separate corps 
boui the 30tli Apiil 1808, and the nnti\o officers raid mun 









221 



were ordered to be borne on tbe strength of the several OHARXix. 


regiments. 


The regulation of 1802 regarding the provision and Uniting 
maintenance of camp equipage having been abolished in 
May 1808, hutting allowances on the following scale were 
then granted to the native cavalry and infantry, for whom, 
up to that time, officers commanding regiments and 
battalions had been bound, in consideration of a certain 
monthly allowance, to provide accommodation for their 


men when not in camp. 


Each Subadar of cavalry or infantry 


Do. Jemadar do. do. 

Do. Havildar do. do. 

Do. Naiguo do. do. 

Do. Private do. do. 


24 

12 

4 

3 




"Field officers, 
1806. 


Oonerfil 
Officers 
eligible for 
staff employ. 


ttnliBlmentfl, 

Ib07. 


222 ITTBTOBY Or THE MADRAS Att.MY. 


Artillery, 1806-0. 

On the 19th August 1806, an additional Lieutenant - 
Colonel, and Major were posted to each battalion of 
artillery, the promotions to have effect from the loth May 
preceding. 

On the 16th November the following order regarding 
the employment on the staff of General Officers of Artil¬ 
lery and Engineers, was published to the army :— 

“ G.O.G.G ., Fort William , 15 tli May 1806. 

“ Tho Honorablo tlio Court of Directors in their gone nil 
letter to the Governor-General in Council of the 12th July 
1805, have been pleased to confirm the general orders o 4 the 
Governor- Goneral in Council of 4th August 1803, declaring 
officers of Artillery and Engineers, when promoted to the 
rank of General Officers, to be eligible, 1 conformably to tiro 
existing regulations of the Honorablo the Court of Directors, 
to be employed on the general stafl.” 

These officers wore, by tbo samo order, declared in 
eligible for tho command of their respective corps. 

In February 1807 it was reported by the Commandant 
ot artillery that ton privates had recently shot or other¬ 
wise injured themselves, in order to obtain 1 heir disclui rge, 
and that ho attributed this conduct to the manner in whi-h 
men had been enlisted during tho last few years. Tho 
established period of service, up to the year 1800, had 
been five years, ot tho end of which men were entitled to 
bounty on ro-onlistmont; but the recruits recently reoc i \ d 
had boon enlisted for long terms, viz., some for ton years, 
nomefor ' f gonoral service/' without limitation of pe ' >d. 



Cancelled by the Court c Directors, February 1814. 




and others ns “ culprits 99 to serve for life, but unuccom- CHAP. xi::. 
pnnied by any specification of crime or record of sentence. 

Many of these men declared themselves ignorant of the 
conditions of their enlistment, and all were discontented 
at seeing the payment of bounty to their short-service 
comrades. 

Government, at the instance of the Commander-iu- 
Ohief, agreed to rocommend to the Court of Directors that 
these recruits should, at the expiration of five years, 
be entitled to tho same privileges as their comrades, and 
the Commander-in-Chief was requested to cause this 
resolution to be made known to the corps of artillery, 
aud to the European regiments. 

During August it having been brought to the notice of Tomb-etonea 
Government that a number of tomb-stones, which had J^tterioB. 
been taken from St Mary’s Church during the siege of 
Fort St. George in 1758, to bo used as platforms in tho 
batteries on tho northern face, had remained there ever 
rdneo, it was ordorod that they should be replaced. 

A new scale of pensions for Grohndauzo was introduced l’on»iona to 
during tho year, to have retrospective effect from tho 1st Gt)l uulau °* 
•January 1807 in arrears for Decembor 1806. Tho follow¬ 


ing were the rates fixed :— 

PAG. V. 0. * 

Subadar ... ... ... ... 8 0 0 

Jemadar ... ... ... ... 4 0 0 

Havildar ... ... ... 200 

Naiguo ... ... 1 21 0 

Sopoy . i 7 40 

Dru tumor or IP for ..200 


During 1808 the artillery received 113 men from tho Tmr ^r 
lleghnont de Meim i., which called forth the following 
re mark from the Court of Directors in their general letter UH ut * 1 
dated 0th April 1800 :— 




HISTORY OF TUK MADRAS AUMY. 



CHAP. XIX. 


Strength of 
the artillery, 
November 
1808. 


iTorro 

Artillery, 

IbOb-O. 


221 



In consideration of the long and faithful services of the 
Regiment de Menron under the British Government in India, 
and of the deficient state of your artillery corps, wo do not 
object to the transfer of a part of that regiment to the corps 
alluded to, notwithstanding our disinclination,on general prin¬ 
ciples, to any large proportion of foreigners being admitted 
into that corps.” 

Besides the draft mentioned above, 442 recruits were 
received from England during the year, and a return 
dated 12th November shows Vhe strength of the artillery 
to have been as shown below:— 


— 

Serjeants. 

Corporals. 

Gunners. 

! 

Drummers 

to 

9 

1 

.2 

Horse Artillery 

G 

5 

11 


82 

1st Battalion Artillery. 

42 

37 

73 

18 

6G7 

2nd do » do. 

40 

36 

73 

15 

551 

J 


On the 15th March 1808, a Captain-Lieutenant was 
attached to tbo squadron of Horse Artillery, and on the 
2/th January 1809, the establishment was augmented, 
and denominated “ The Corps of Horse Artillery.” It 
was to consist of three troops, viz., two of Europeans, and 
one of natives. The Captain and throe Lieutenants were 
posted to tho first troop; the Captain- Lieutenant and three 
Lieutenants to the second troop ; and the third troop was 
to be commanded by a Lioutenant, with two other officers 
of that rank as Subalterns. Tho officer commanding tho 
corps was vested with authority to repost the officers to 
troops from time to time, as he might consider best for the 
public service. 

In July another Cap tain-Lieutenant was appointed to 
tbr*. corps, and the following detailed account of tlic- 
vMtalilishmont v as published in general orders, viz :• 





















HISTORY or Tin-; MAPI! AS ARMY. 


22 : 


1 Oaptain-Commaudant. 

2 Captain-Lieutenants. 

0 Subalterns. 

i Surgeon. 

1 Adjutant. 

1 Quartermaster. 


1 Serjeant-Major. 

] Quartermaster Serjeant. 
1 Ridingmaster Serjeant. 

1 Prill Serjeant. 

4 Rough Riders, and 
<*1 Sub Assistant Surgeon. 


European Non - Comm is* ioncd, Rank and File, 


0 Serjeants, 

4i Farriers. 

4 Trumpeters. 


0 Corporals. 
18 Gunners. 

142 Matrosses. 


Oil A P 


Native Nun-Commissioned, Ranh and File. 



1 Subadar. 

70 Troopers. 


2 Jemadars. 

1 Pay Haviklar. 


1 Havildars. 

2 Rough Riders. 


4 Naiguen. 

5 Sal lustrics. 


Ordnance. 


Two 12-pounders. 

1C Tumbrils. 


Two 5J-iuch liowitz* rs. 

2 spare carriages. 


T* n f»-pounders with car¬ 

2 forge carls, and 


riages, 

2 store carts. 


TIorsos. 

2d for Officers, 412 Regimental. 

The Adjutant, and Quartermaster non-clleetive. 


XIX. 





220 


HISTORY 01' THE MADRAS ARMY. 




European Infantry, 180G-9. 


Promotion 
of Colonols, 
1806. 


Abolition of 
Jillowancca 
from the 
B'izar Fund, 
1807. 


In November 1806 it was notified to tbe army that 
Colonels in the Company's service would not, in future, 
bo promoted to the rank of Major-General independently 
of the operation of promotions under the Royal Brevets. 

In Juno 1807, it was announced that, in conformity 
with orders received from the Court of Directors, all sums 
collected on account of duties levied in military bazars 
would thenceforth be carried exclusively to the credit of 
Government. The final payment to be made to officers 
commanding districts, garrisons, cantonments, &c. to bo 
for the period between the 12th July 1806, and 11th July 
1807. 


t orngo cape. About the end of the year it was ordered that the pat¬ 
tern of forage cap worn by the officers of H.M/s 59ih 
regiment should be adopted by the European officers of 
the Company's infautry, including those attached to the 
native corps. 

?;!X T iS0Z. In March 1808 the establishment of a Military Fund 
for the benefit of the officers of each branch of the army 
was authorised by Government, subject to the approval 
of the Court of Directors. 

The following is an abstract of the main points of the 
original regulations •— 

1. It was optional with officers to join the fund. 

2. Monthly stoppages, at certain fixed rates, were to i>«. 
made by Paymasters from the pay and allowances of sub¬ 
scribers. 

3. A donation, equal to a month’s regimental pay, waft 

; ' , so tbit the whole amount should bo 

liquidated either in nix, twoltro, or eighteen mouths at ihe 
option of the Huhstiibcr. 





Native Infantry, 1806-9. 

The following orders were issued in July, August, and 
September 1800 in consequence of the mutiny at Vellore : 

« G.O. by Government.— Fort Saint Gooryo, 17th, July 1800. 

“ It having been represented to the Right Honorable the Dan cellini. 
Governor in Council that considerable misunderstanding has 
occurred among some of tho native corps of this establish- dress, 1JS0C. 
ment with respect to a late alteration in the dress of the 
nativo corps; and it being in all cases the desire of His 
Lordship i?i Council, and of the Co mmandcr-iu-Chief, to shew 
every just degree of attention to the usages of the native 
troops; it has been in consequence resolved that the orders 
which have been considered liable to the objection of affecting 
these usages shall be rescinded/’ 


“ 0.0 . by the Commai der-tn-Chi»f—.Choultry Plain , 

1 7th July 1806. 

“ The Commander-in-Chief is pleased to cancel the 10th 1 
paragraph of the 11th section of orders for Battalions of 
Native Infantry” under date the 13th March 1806.” 

On the 22nd August an order was published in which Native 
the Commander-in-Chiei called the attention of all officers u 
to tho necessity of making themselves acquainted with 
the native languages, and announced his determination 
not to recommoud any officer for appointment to the staff, 
unless duly qualified in that respect. 

The order of 1801, by which tho attachment of recruit hov» <l«i 
boys to European officers ns orderlies had been prohibited, 

\v is rescinded c»a this occasion for the following reason : 

“ 11 is Excellency has hi indue* d to adopt hb decision, 
from the conviction that tho advantage gained by tho reBtric- 

1 I'robjbilinjt cu.to-marlu uml luniugii wlioii iu iinifi/rm. 














rntSTfy 



<SL 

niSTottt ov rut :jadtias; army. 


<-NAt\ XIX. lion of the boys to duties * purely military ’ bas nol balanced 
the injury the service has sustained by the loss of that facility 
to the acquirement of a common language, and knowledge of 
native customs which tlieir former attachment to the junior 
officers produced.” 


Dvcflfl. 




r*r 5 Mtirks of 



On the 24th September, a further order, from which 
the following is an extract, was issued by Government on 
the subject of dress, and marks of caste. 

“The Right Honorable the Governor in Council deeming it 
of the utmost importance that the intentions of the Govern¬ 
ment with regard to the drc.ss and customs of the native 
troops should be exactly understood, and that all unauthorised 
ul t< ’ratio v in the established pattern dress should cense, is 
pleased to issue the following orders. 

“The order of Government under date the 15th March 
17‘d7, fixing a pattern turband, shall continue to be in forc< . 
leather co •kudos and plumes shall not bo worn. Stocks of 
every description shall be abolished. 

“ The jacket shall be worn as received from the contractor, 
without any additional ornament or distinction, and the li tli' 
mounting shall in no particular differ from the pattern lodged 
iu tbo office of the Military Board and already in use. 

il Tho fullest permission shall bo given to the native troop* 
to wear their murks of caste at all times, and ii any manner 
they think proper. The same full liberty shall be grunted 
with r l spoct to the hair on the upper lip, and the wearing of 
joys, and ornaments peculiar to different families, and caste*. 
The imposition of any restraint, either by order, or by ret] net-1, 
on tho inclination the .sepoys in these particulars, is pt>- : - 
: v ly fovhuhhm. T!,< Governor iu Council also requires 
that evey all bo shown to the 

in tbo observance oi his domestic customs.” 

Tho existing . rangemcMs of tho native* invalid o*trw 
id -hint nt wore revised iu November, with the v \v oi 
• Gliding tin mcii u> serve in their native tli trii tv, ;» ml 
.d o with the object of territorial recruiting. 










/ 


220 





HISTORY 01 THi: MADRAS AltM Y. 


The number of companies was ordered to be increased 
to forty-six from the 1st January 1807. Each company 
was to be considered as attached to an effective battalion, 
and was to be permanently stationed in the district where 
that battalion had been raised. 

The companies were to recruit for their respective 
battalions, and it was intended that when their connection 
had become fully established, the families of iho batta¬ 
lions on field service should reside under’the protection 
of tho invalid companies under the superintendence of 
a European officer whenever practicable. The pay of 
sepoy invalids was raised at this time to the same amount 
as that of effective men, to have effect from the 1st Decem¬ 
ber 180G. 


Tho Commander-in-Chicf was direclod to publish tho 
detailed arrangements for tho formation, allotment to 
corps, and distribution to stations, of the companies of 
native invalids on the principle above mentioned, but 
this was not done until the 4th September 1807, when 
tho fallowing distribution was ordered :— 


Stations 

Number of 

) 

JJotinlioQB to which 

of companies. 

companiofi. 

>h 

M nd raa 

a 

2nd of 20fh. 1st and and 25lh. 

uia malice 

l 

2nd of 2nd. 

i i’hi 'lepul 

l 

lPt. «.f lath. 

| Wivllujithbad 

l 

lat of 8th. 

| 1 Vi mi;. . >il 

l 

l.-tof 3rd. 

| Veil -iv and 
\ll»l»OUl ... • 1 

1 

\ * 

Ut of 1th and 2nd of 12th. 

Ariuo ... 

i 

2nd of lllh. 

i‘mMal"ro 

l 

2nd of 10th. 

Nugnpatara 

i 

Ut of CUtll. 

. • 

a 

2nd of l:h h. 2nd of 2 li h. 

THcl.im M.lv • • • 

it 

1 »f Oth, 1 ' of HI ill, Utcf ldi h 



2nd of 22nd. 


* 

Ut of 1 ll h 

i MnHura uud 
' Um nifU^cl 

i * 

Ut of r h, 2nd of 16th. 


<SL 


CHAP. XIX. 


Tcrrirorml 

recruiting. 


Station:? 
of invalid 
corn|-an k , 
1807. 


















umsT/ty 



CHAP. X{X. 


Pioneers 
Hud public 
L wimago. 

Jirduct ‘on 
mi tho lhti 

^ »UJ«1 'i)rd 

I ♦•tfllTM'lll 

Ah* >7. 


K '.nn'.i.ji 

«>f Un fc4i.h 



2: JO 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Stations 

Number of 

Battalions to which 

of companies'. 

companies. 

the companies are attached. 


2nd of 3rd, 2nd of 6th. 

1st of 22nd. 

2nd of 15th. 

1st of 17th. 

2nd of 7th, 1st of 15th. 

2nd of 9th. 2nd of I9tli, 1st of 
24th. 

2nd of 8th. 
let of 9th. 

2nd of 11th. 

1st of 19th. 

1st of 21st. 

1st of 11th, 2nd of 17th, 2nd of 
21st. 

1st of 10th. 

2nd of 18th. 

2nd of 5rh. 

1st of 18th. 

1st of 5th. 

2nd of 1 th. 

1st of 2nd. 


Tlio Quartermaster-General was vested with the goner nl 
superintend on co and direction of the corpn of pioneers in 
November 1800, also with that of nil public cattle, of tho 
corps of dooly bearers, and of all doolies and sick carts. 

On the 14th January 1807. the 1st and 23rd regiments 
were ordered to be struck "ft the li.st of the army from 
the 31st December 1800, on accouut of the mutiny of 
the 1st battalion of the former, and the 2nd battalion of 
tho latter at Vellore in July 1806. 

Two regiments, numbered respectively the 24th, uml 
25th, were fore d to replace them. Such of tho native 
oflicen uid men of tho 1st, and 23rd, as had been foui «i 
free from any imputation of disaffection, or previous know •* 


Palamcottah and 
Tin neve lly .. 
Nelloro 
Ongolo and 
Cumbum ... 
Gnntoor 
Masulipatam 
Elloro 

Condapilly ... 
Samulcottah 
Rajahmundry 
Vizagapauun 
Vizianagrom 
Chicncolo ... 

Gan jam 
Bullnry und 
Goaty 

Cnddapah and 

Gnrrumcondah 

Bangalore ... 

Nnndvdroog 

Kistnagherry and 

Sunkerrydroog 

Beringapatam 

Total Companies.. 


2 

1 

1 

1 

2 

3 

1 

l 

1 

1 

1 

3 

1 

1 


1 

1 

1 

1 

•Id 


















,231 




HISTORY or TUX MADRAS ARMY. 

] 0 ,lg C of the mutiny, were retained in the service; the 
rest were discharged. The innocent men of the 1st batta¬ 
lion 1st were disposed of as follows :—7 native officers, 
17 havildars, 19 naigues, and 313 privates formed the 
nucleus of the 1st battalion 24tli regiment; 18 havildars, 
8 naigues, and 87 privates were sent to the 2nd battalion. 
The 1st battalion was completed to the full strength by 
transfers from the 2nd battalion late 1st regiment. 

The 1st battalion 25th regiment wa3 composed of the 
1st battalion 23rd, and the few well-affected men of the 
2nd battalion of the same. 

The European officers of the late 1st and 23rd regi¬ 
ments wore posted to the 1st battalions of the 24tli and 
25th regiments respectively, pending the formation of 
the 2nd battalions : the officers of the 1st going to the 
21th, and those of the 23rd to the 25th regiment. 

Tho 2nd battalion^ 2 1th was formed at Tanjoro, in 
March, of volunteers from the “ Tanjoro Provincial Bat¬ 
talion/' a local corps commanded by Captain Butler, 
and then about to be disbanded. The officers and men 
having been allowed tho privilege of entering the 24th 
with tho benefit of their rank and service, the number 
>k > of tl ' ion was so largo that 

tho battalion became known as 4,1 ButlerV./* a name 1 
which it still retains. 

The 2nd battalion 2otli warf formed at Madras in 
"Mairh of volunteers from the u Madras Foncible Batta¬ 
lion/* a corps r. hich Jmd been disembodied on the 2«th 
February. Tho officers and men were allowed io outer 
(he 25th on tho same terms as those granted to the 
volunteers from tho t: Tanjoro Provincial Battalion.’’ 

* ’i ‘-je 17ih regiment M.N.J. Tho nriirtaal I7tb biam'ion noa rie- r| 
In |v77. ft became »br i’nd htetalhiu 1 nt at tho m>rg aufsnt.ion in ITBH, 
mi l wn ■ iu •-porutod into tho If. t hie A -on 2llh in li'O? ms menhuj <»tl 

in 1 li«* text. 



chap, xr: 


1st battalion 
24th. 


1st battalion 
25th. 


European 
6ftfcers, 24th 
a ud 25th. 


2nd battalion 
24th. 


2nd 

25th, 


HISl'OUV OF TUE WADKAI AJfMY. 



232 


<SL 




CHAP, XIX. 

Ewcopodn 

officers. 


Pioneers. 


PoiiRionfl. 


Tlio posting of European officers to the 2nd battalions 
of the 24-tli and 2>5tli took place on the 1st March, the 
fonner receiving half of tliose who had belonged to the 
old 1st, and the latter half o£ tliose who laid belonged 
to the old 26 rd regiment. 

On tho 27th February 1807 a native adjutant was 
allowed for each battalion of pioneers. 

A new scale of pensions was sanctioned on the 16th 
May to have retrospective effect from tho 1st January 
1807 in arrears for December 1806. The following wore 
the rates for native infantry, pioneers, guides and lasoa-’J 



respectively :— 

Native Infantry— 

PAOS. P. 

t. 

^ First rlnss .. ... 

Subodar 5 Seoond do. 

^ Third do. 

.. 10 0 

0 


7 21 

0 


0 0 

0 


Jemadar . 

a 2 i 

0 


lluvildar 

1 29 40 


Naiguo . 

1 21 

0 

Sepoy 

1 0 

0 


Drummer or Fifcr . 

2 0 

0 


Gun l.'.igcarfl and Pioneers— 

, First class 

6 0 

0 


Hyrang or Jemadar ! Second do. 

•1 21 

0 

■ Third do. 

3 21 

10 


Fii.it Tindal or Ifavlldar 

3 29 

0 


Hnoond do. or Nuiguc 

1 21 

0 


Lui*( ar or Pioneer 

i 6 

0 


(Jijiflc.j-- 

11 end Guido 
Second do. 

Private do. 

EOorenrd Tint Lu.earn— 

By rang 
First Tindul 

Botiniid do. ... , 

Lftiic-ur 

Purkul 1 f «vhni«. v<>- coi « 

Bhf’L'tu - 


a o o 
2 0 0 
l o o 

a 21 o 

1 20 -40 
i 21 0 
J 0 O 
1 0 0 
i 0 0 







Tlie tent contract, wliicli had been introduced in 1802, 
was abolished in May 1808, and it was then determined 
that the establishment of camp equipage, lascars, and 
carriage for camp equipage, and regimental stores, should 
bo permanently maintained at the public expense. The 
Quartermaster- General was vested, under the orders and 
authority of tho Commander-in-Chief, with the general 
charge, direction, and control of all establishments con¬ 
nected with camp equipage; and a set of regulations for 
tho guidance of the department was published in general 
orders. 

Tho tents in use were made over to Government on tho 
terms specified in the following order, dated 3rd May :— 
“ The Honorablo the Governor in Council having resolved 
that the camp equipage maintained by Commanding Officers 
for tho uso of native corps shall be purchased by tho public 
on the expiration of the existing contract, at valuation ; to bo 
certified upon honor by those officers respectively, is pleased 
to order and direct that, the tents attached to native corps 
hhull ho delivered over on tho 31st instant to tho officers of 
custody of Government, and charged for in bills supported by 
declarations upon honor.” 

On tho abolition of the regulation above mentioned, 
allowances 1 for hutting wore granted to the several ranks 
of the native army, for whom, up to that time, accommo¬ 
dation had been provided by Commanding Officers. 

l'n August 1808, Captain Conway, then Deputy 
Adjutant-General at Hyderabad, recommended that tho 
knapsacks of tlio sepoys, when ou service, should bo 
carried at the public expense iu the sumo manner as 
those of tho European troops. Mo stated that during 
long and severe marches numbers of men 1 od to fall to 
tho rear, and that many of those rowarning in tho ranks 

' For ihn soalv of allowance* r!io a<\ »unt .»f Cavalry, LfiOU 9 




<SL 


chap. xix. 

Abolition 
oF the tool 
contract, 
1803. 


Jluttinr: 

money. 


Oarr.iff* of 

knapimek*. 





234 


history of the madras army. 




CHAP. XIX. 


Hoi 1 action, 
ISO 1 ). 


were jaded and fatigued by the weight they had to carry, 
which he estimated at 30 lbs. over and above that of arms 
and accoutrements. He remarked that “ the European 
soldier, who is relieved from this embarrassment, is 
seldom known to fall in the rear, even on the longest 
inarches or under the hottest sun.” This recommend¬ 
ation was supported by the Commander-in-Chief, but 
Government, although admitting the advantage of sucJi 
a measure, “ did not consider it expedient to issue any 
general order on the subject.” However, a few years 
later, on the occasion of the formation of battalious of 
“ Light Infantry,” and subsequently in the case of the 
“ Ritie Corps,” orders were given that the knapsacks of 
the men of these corps should be carried at the expense 
of Government. 

During June 1800 the establishment of privates on 
the strength of native battalions was reduced from 900 tu 
^0, but the troops serving with the Hyderabad subsi¬ 
diary force were kept up to the former number, 100 
being returned as supernumeraries. 

fhe two battalions of pioneers were reduced at the 

•one time from S00 to 700 privates each. 


% 




HISTORY 0? THE MADRAS ARMY. 


235 


CHAPTER XX. 

MUTINY OF THE EUROPEAN OFFICERS, 1809. 

Vv r HEN Lord Cornwallis died at Ghazipoor in October 
1805, the Governmont devolved upon Sir George Hilaro 
Barlow as senior Member of Council in Bengal, and 
in February 1806 he was appointed Governor-General 
by the Court of Directors, which was agreed to by the 
Board of Control as a temporary measure. 

This appointment, however, was revoked a few days 
afterwards by the Ministry, who did not approve of the 
policy of Sir George Barlow in regard to certain Native 
States, and, after some discussion and correspondence, it 
was determined to send out Lord Minto, who arrived at 
Calcutta in July 1807. 

Sir George Barlow, who had been nominated Governor 
of Madras as some compensation for his supersession, 
reached that place in December, when that administration 
commenced which has been described as a “ season 1 of 
unprecedented private mi*er>i } and unexampled pub lit' peril 
and alarm. 99 

During tlio time Sir Georgo Barlow filled the office of 
Governor-General, he not only failed 2 to obtain tlio defer- 
ence and respect due to his station, but made himself 
obnoxious b^ his despotic condu ‘t in official matters, and 
his cold and repulsive manners in pi j vat v life. 

On arriving at Madras the Governor found the conduct 
of Mr. Sherson of the Civil Service under investigation. 

1 W'lson’e History of Jlriti h India. Vol. I, page 236. 

Mui-ihman's II in Lory of India, Yr i U, ]»ig c 230. 


CTIAP. XX. 

Sir G. H. 
Barlow, 

1806 . 


Becomes 
Governor 
of Madras, 
1S07. 


TIis unp »pu- 
Inritj' in 
Calcutta, 
1H06-7. 


Mr. 8ber«ot 
case. 






<SL 

nrSTOIiY OF THE MAD it AS ARMY. 

CH AP, x x. The accounts of that genfcleman had boon reported correct 
by the Civil Auditor, but as they happened not to agree 
with the native accounts in the office, Sir George Barlow 
assumed that Mr. Sherson had been guilty of peculation, 
suspended both him and the Civil Auditor from tho 
public service, and instituted a prosecution against the 
-former in the Supreme Court. Mr. Sherson was acquitted, 
and the Court of Directors being of opinion that ho had 
been improperly treated, they restored him to the service, 
and presented him with a donation of Rs. 70,000 as 
compensation. 

Reddy Itao’s A Special Commission was engaged at this time in 
enquiring into the claims of the creditors of tho lalo 
Nawaub of the Carnatic, and the Commissioners had 
employed, as their adviser, a native named Reddy ilu, 
who had been in the Account Department of the Nawaub. 
During the investigation, Reddy Rao produced, for exami¬ 
nation, a bond held by himself, the validity of which was 
impeached by another creditor named Avadanuin Paupiah, 
who supported tho accusation by witnesses. The bond, 
however, was pronounced by the Commissioners to bo 
genuine, and they resolved to prosecute the witnesses for 
perjury, but this intention was anticipated by the com¬ 
mitment of Reddy Ruo on a charge of forgery. At this 
stage of the proceedings Sir George Barlow interposed his 
authority. He summarily dismissed the Magistrate who 
had committed Reddy Rao, and ordered the Advocate- 
General to defend the latter at his trial. Two gentlemen, 
viz., Mr. Parry, a respectable merchant, and Mr. Roebuck, 
oho of the senior members of tho Civil Service, were also 
punished fur having opposed the Commissioners, the 
former by being deported to England, and tho latter by 
being removed to mi inferior situation in flic Northern 
Ci rears. where ho died soon afterwards. 




HISTORY OR THE MAD I? A3 ARMY. 


287 


■Rodcly Iiao was found guilty before tlie Supreme Court, CHAP. XX. 
ard it was subsequently discovered that lie bad been 
concerned in the issue of other fabricated securities, and 
generally implicated in the frauds upon the Nawaub's 
treasury. 

The proceedings, in the matter of Mr. Sberson,as well 
as in that of the Carnatic bonds, were marked by want 
of judgment, undue severity, and injustice, and in the 
case of Reddy Rue, Sir George Barlow committed tho 
Government by “ throwing 1 11 the whole weight oj his autho¬ 
rity - into the same scale as an impostor and a cheat. 

Those occurrences did not tend to impress tho public 
with any respect for the justice or moderation of tho 
Governor. 

From tho beginning of 1807, if not from an earlier 
period, a spirit of discontent had existed among the 1807-s. 
officers of the Madras army, of which the uudermen- 
I i ruled appear to have been tho principal causes, viz., tho 
higher allowances granted to tho officers of the Bengal 
r rmy, and tho undue proportion of commands which had 
been recently bestowed upon tho officers of tho Royal 
army. This feeling was aggravated by the discontinu¬ 
ance, in July 1807, of certain allowances paid to officers 
c.mnuandiug districts, stations, and cantonments, out ot 
tho duties levied in military bazars ; and by tho ubolit ion 
of the tent contract in May 1808. 

the mutiny, 'which broke out in May 1809, **j“'«*i ’ 

ennnot iuirly be attributed to these grievances, but rather griovane.-, 
to the harsh and arbitrary measures of the Governor in uf 1 '< 


1 WiUon‘t, 'i .ory of Mulish India, Vol. 1, pa^ - 1 - 1 * 

- 1 was bn 1 i that tho Gtoteranont hod b lloddy 

:„o on lbs rq)i wutations of oorf.ln ofli. lulu who bud a J “<. '• interest 

1 1 . In.Mil, nml oUo in BcviTnl oil : claim. pr. fonx .1 by H. 'ldy Ha. 
Mm-li’s Jti'vn o' Boor imporin.a e.: -mV- in the • m.n.stnuioP 



HISTORY" OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Disparity of 
allowances. 





238 



Council, yet it may be well to describe the nature and 
extent of the former in order that t-lio reader may esti¬ 
mate their reality and importance, and judge what degree 
of influence they may be supposed to have exercised over 
the events of May. 

The disparity between the allowances of the Bengal 
officers, and those of Madras, had always existed, and 
was justified by the Court of Directors in their letter of 
the 15th September 1809, when commenting on the several 
grievances set forth in a general memorial 1 addressed to 
them, which had been submitted by the Coinmandor-iii- 
Chief to the Madras Government on the 23rd January 
with his favorable recommendation, but which they had 
censured 2 and refused to forward. The following are 
extracts from that part of the Court's letter treating o< 
the disparity in question :— 

“In the ditferent Presidencies of tho Company in India, 
distinctions, have from the beginning, snbsisted in respe ct to 
emoluments, and advantages (not only in the Military, but in 
every department); these distinctions have arisen from tbo 
comparative importance of the Presidencies themselves, and 
of the public business to be transacted under them.” 

u Thus Bengal, the first great territorial possession of tho 
Company, had its establishments early settled with some 
analogy to its income, and that country, as being the scat of 
Government, tho centre of tho British interests in India, came 
to have a standard of public allowances which could not l»» 
exactly imitated at theotli i Presidencies under very different 
circnrastances.” 


Although IhomJdi Hof tho officers in noL yot hoforu u n »u 
unthont irfttod T u rn, wo ’hint*. it proper i > tnluj tho present oppoiiuni! 
1<> make onto observation y upon tho I . pice contained in it.” 

2 “2nd Mm jh 1809 Government i fumed tho Commands. ?, 

Chif.fji, it, mi officer who itcid signed tho Tuomoriul v. »i to I ■ • api )inu 
tfi the Staff until further ordure. 








history or the madras army, 



a persons nominated to Civil and Military employments CHAP. XX. 
liavo entered the services perfectly aware of these inequali¬ 
ties, and are therefore not entitled to expect that they should 
be afterwards removed.” 

u The Company have hence always resisted the idea of a 
general equalisation of allowances and emoluments of the 
different Presidencies as not founded on right 3 or reason, or 
tho nature of things. Supposing for a moment that such a 
principle could bo admitted and enforced, the consequence, 
in the present state of the finances of the Company, must bo to 
reduce the few remaining distinctions of the Bengal Presidency 
to a level with those of Madras, and Bombay, as it would be 
utterly impossible to provide for the expense of raising the 
emoluments of the inferior Presidencies to a level w T ith thoso 
of Bengal, extended, as this rise must be, to all the Civil as 
well as Military branches of the service, if once tho principle 
of equalisation were adopted.” 

“ In all tho Presidencies, however, tho scale of allowances 
has boon more than sufficient, for comfortable subsistence, and, 
in the case of all the privates and non-commissioncd officers 
of tho army, the rates have been at all times very generally 
the Fame at all tho Presidencies. The regimental allowances 
of both officers and men are very nearly tho same at all tho 
Presidencies, and, wherever mere comfortable subsistence is 
concerned, it has been tho object p£ the public regulations, at 
all times to approximate as nearly to an equality of allow¬ 
ances as tho local circumstances of each Presidency ’iavo 
admitted.” 

“ But staff, and other extra allowances rest upon a different 
foundation* They arc gratuitous advantages conferred on 
individuals at the pleasure and discretion of Government, and 
' arc calculated, not with regard to what othor men receive who 

1 Ah tho ego Hsnti .m of pay and allowances had boon recommended 
l,y Lord Cornwallis, and subeoqmmtly bolh by the Comninuder-in-C hi- f 
:«ml the Government of Mudrun, it is not surprising that tho continued 
codtttcmoeof the- disparity should have boon con Mured aa a grievance - 









TTnfnir 
th Attribution 

of c'oiuumudii 
and staff 

appoint- 

merits, 

1806-7. 


Command nf 
tho troops in 
For* Faint 
George. 


PoY irrihtor- 

* hip of fclm 
rryd.'riib id 
H'>I»*tdUry 
f«»l C«'. 


2i0 




niSTOBY OF THE MADEA.3 ARMY. 



may perhaps perform similar services in oilier places, but in 
reference to the means of the governing power, and the view 
which it may take of the merits and services of the receiver.” 

Tho Rorond grievance specified above wns ronlly Sub¬ 
stantial, and although it had been animadverted upon 
by the Court of Directors on more than one occasion, 
no steps had been taken by tho Madras Govornmont to 
remove it. The undermentioned extracts from a letter 
of the Court, dated 12tli June 1807, will show that tho 
partiality complained of existed, at that time, to a very 
serious extent. 

After observing that the just pretensions of both ser¬ 
vices ought to be duly regardod, the Court proceeded 
to remark upon the objectionable manner in which th : 
patronage of Government and of the Compandor-in- 
Chief had, in several instances, been exorcised. 

With respect to the special appointment of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Monypenny, H.M/s 73rd, to tho command of 
the troops in Fort St. George, with a staff salary, they 
observed that, in conformity with the usual practice, tho 
command devolved upon tho senior officer at the Presi¬ 
dency, who was bound to perform the duties without any 
additional allowance, and for these reasons they directed 
the immediate discontinuance of tho appointment. 

Tho nomination of Lieutenant Hall, H.M/a 22nd 
dragoons, to bo Paymaster to the Subsidiary Force at 
Hyderabad, calle d forth the following c< n sure :— 

14 The Subsidiary Force at Hyderabad consists of about 
7,000 men, mostly nativo troops, and its annual expense 
amounts to several lacs of pagodas. The office of Paymaster 
to this corps must therefore bo considered as of equal impor¬ 
tance with that of any of the fixed stations of the army, and 
in this view it should have been filled by a Civil Sot 1 nut of tho 
higher mnks, in tho same raanuer taj the paymirttoiwbip «»f 
Mysore, Vellore, Trichinopoly uud Vizagapatain.” 


rtwgirjjj. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARM 241 

Tliuy went on to say that tho Governor, Lord Willia: 
Bontinck, in a minute dated 3rd March 1805, had recom- 
monded that paymasterships should be held by Captains 

n f not loss Hum ton years' service, notwitl /ihinding which 

ho had appointed a Subaltern of II.M.’b rervieu, who hud 
oidy been a few months in India, to be Paymaster of a 
large force, and they concluded by remarking that they 
had “ seldom met with an instance of so much inconsis¬ 
tency as is displayed in this appointment. We object to 
it, not only on this account, but also for the general 
reasons assigned above, and we direct that it be instantly 
annulled. No stronger proof cau be adduced of the 
impropriety of the preference to which we have alluded, 
than the present instance. The Subsidiary Force, being 
composed chietly of native troops, naturally pointed out 
t ho Company's officers, who had been accustomed to servo 
with such troops, as most proper to fill the staff offices 
annexed to the detachment." 

The appointment of Inspector and Exercising Officer 
of cavalry, which had been recently created and con¬ 
ferred upon Lieutenant-Colonel Gillespie, H.M.’s 19th 
dragoons, with considerable emoluments attached thereto, 
\s :is ordered to be discontinued forthwith as unnecessary, 
and the Court observed that had such an office been really 
required, it ought to have boon given to one of tho 
Company's old and experienced officers of cavalry, in 
preference to one who had only been a short time in India; 
more e pcciully us four-fifths of that branch of I lie army 
Were natives. 

The Court then proceeded to remark tlm the com¬ 
mands at llydoruhad and Poormh, of Mysore a * i Mala¬ 
bar ; besides those of most of tho regular garripon:-;, such 
a , Vellore, A root, Poonuumllee, and »Seer t, wmv enjoyed 
hj officers of the H >y«l m my ; and (hey m uclmlod their 
despatch u fell- ws 

VOL, HI 31 



<5L 


CHAI*. XX. 


Appoint mom. 
of luBpiiCtor 
of cavalry. 


Diviiiimift) 

ami 

command*. 








212 


<SL 

HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


Having thus brought under your notice several instances 
m which we conceive that an unjust preference has been showu 
to the King’s officers at the expense of the Company’s, and 
particularly in situations where the superior local knowledge of 
the latter, and their acquaintance with the manners, customs, 
officers of the &nd prejudices of the natives, pointed them out as the fittest 
ISO? 1 . arm ' > to be employed ; we have only to repeat that while on the one 
hand we disclaim any intention of throwing any reflection on 
the character of the individuals so selected by you, and are 
ready to acknowledge to the fullest extent tbe meritorious 
services of His Majesty’s forces in India, we feel it our boun¬ 
der: duty, on the other hand, to guard the interests of our own 
officers. Their claims upon our countenance and protection 
are strong, and indisputable, their exertions have been great, 
and their services zealous and faithful. Oar interests must 
suffer materially from any want of harmony and cordiality 
between the two descriptions of officers, and wc know of no 


CHAP. XX. 

The Court 
of Directory 
condemn 
the uujust 
preference 

ahown to 


circuinstance more likely to produce that injurious effect than 
an undue preference of either. The exigencies of the public 
service may, unquestionably, jnstify occasional and temporary 
deviations from the principle we havo laid down, but wc aro 
so fully persuaded that a fair adherence to it is so easy, and 
tho path to ho followed so plain and obvious, that we desire 
it to be distinctly and explicitly understood that we shall 
consider a different line of conduct on the part of any of our 
Governments or Commamlers-in-Chief to ho so highly excep¬ 
tionable, as to do; t an , the strongest expression of our,cciisu.ro, 
and disapprobation.” 

^ The discontinuance of the allowances from tlio Bazar 

biinvum-'s fund was justified by the Court as being m strict con- 
f(,rmii y with the Articles of War, " which prohibit tho 
levy of duties by Military officers on any articloe of con¬ 
sumption, and is evidently founded on the most incon¬ 
trovertible principles of suimdpolh y. It is not polit i• to 
givo officers an interest iu the amount of imposts lovied 
on military markets, because it has an oviden t* ndoncy 
fo einkr the soldiers discontented wiih tlmir office!’'. \>y 


• TAtNrs 


243 


HISTORY or nil: ilADRAS ARMY. 

feeling themselves taxed for the benefit of those who 
command them. It is further to be observed that in 
India the amount of Hie collections in military bazars lias 
al ways depended, principally, on the extension of spirit u¬ 
ous liquors to the troops.” 

Moreover, the abolition of this allowance was not con- 
liped to Madras, but was carried out in the other Presi¬ 
dencies also, and it affected the officers of the Royal army 
as well as those of the Company. 

The officers having pre-facod their memorial with coni- 
plnints of the length and severity of the service to be 
endured in a foreign land before becoming entitled to 
pension, and having spoken of their pay and allowances 
ns being scarcely adequate to their subsistence, the Court 
very justly observed that no one entered their service, 
but on their own application, and with full knowledge of 
their probable prospects; and they concluded their reply 
on that part of the subject with the following words :— 

44 They surely forget tliat the military allowances of the 
Company arc higher than t.hoso of any military service in the 
world, although the necessaries of life are comparatively cheap 
in India ; that they attain the highest raid: without punch an' 
or expense ; and that the provision for retiring officers : 

• in h ns no othor service has over afforded, and Ruch i\m the 
tin uncos of the Company are ever strained to support.” 

Lieutenant-General Stuart, w hen Comriiaudor-in -Chief, 
ill wised a plan for the provision ami conveyance of camp 
equipage, e nd regimental stores, with the object of avoid¬ 
ing the sorious lo^s which had been bu Uninod l y Clov¬ 
en i men t in con; 'queue > of the frequent capture < i -ublie 
cal tie and tent s during the wars with Hydur and 1'ippoo. 

This resulted in the issue of a regulation in i Sl)2, 
which, n consideration of a certain monthly sum to i»c 
di av 11 by officer:-, commanding regiment of cavalry, 
battalions of infantry, companit of artillery and tho 



CHAT. XX 


This nholit ion 
general. 


Unreasmmlilo 

complaints* 


Rfipl.v of 
tho Com, t. 


Establish¬ 
ment of t ho 
tout cualr/tot, 
1802. 


244 




HI3TORY 01’ THE MADRAS ARMY. 



corps of pioneers, made it obligatory upon them to provide 
and maintain, in constant readiness for the field, camp 
equipage and carriage for tlieir respective corps on a 
scale laid down in the regulation, besides carriage for 
regimental stores, and hutting accommodation for the 
men when not encamped. The allowance in question was 
to meet all expenses for cover to the native troops in the 
field, in cantonment, or in garrison, in peace or war. 

I his regulation came into operation shortly before 
the Mahratta War of 1803, and was found to answer 
remarkably well; but shortly after the peace in 1806, 
Government, in compliance wnth instructions from Eng¬ 
land, commenced to reduce the military expenditure, 
and Sir John Cradock, at that time Commander-in-Chief, 
called upon Major Munro, the Quartermaster-Gene ml, 
for information regarding the working of the tent con¬ 
tract. That officer accordingly submitted a report, in 
which,* for reasons assigned, the abolition of the contract 
was recommended, and the Commander-in-Chief, concur¬ 
ring, laid the report before Government in June 1807. 
f he recommendation, having been duly considered, was 
approved, and, having received the sanction of the 
Supreme Govern men t, the contract was ordered to bo 
abolished from May 1808. 

This change was adverse to the interests of commanding 
officers, inasmuch a-, it was ma le during a tiino of peace, 
when the wear and tear of camp equipage being trifling, 
they expected to have had the opportunity of reimbursing 
themselves for the expenses incurred during the long and 
trying campaigns from 1803 until 1800, being debarred by 
the terms of their contract from soliciting any special 
compensation, although they did receive a gratuity of :• ix 
months’ batta iu common with all other officers of tho 
ai my in the field, to whom it had been grunted at ihc 









245 




recommendation o£ Major-General Wellesley at tlie close 
of tbo campaign of 1804. Nevertheless, the new order 
was quietly carried out without remonstrance beyond that 
contained in the memorial mentioned above, and in a 
separate memorial signed by a number of officers in com¬ 
mand of corps, which was forwarded by the Commander- 
in-Chief on the 28th January 1809, but returned to him 
by Government. 

In all probability the matter would then have been 
dropped had it not been that the Quartermaster-General's 
report, marked “private and confidential/’ and which had 
been given by Sir George Barlow to Colonel Capper, 
the Adjutant-General, came, in some unauthorised, 1 and 
unexplained manner, to be circulated to officers ■ommand- 
iug corps, who immediately took serious offence at one of 
the arguments used therein, viz., that the grant of the 
same allowances in peace and in war, placed the interests 
and duties of commanding officers at variance with each 
other. The result was that the following charge, signed by 
five commandants of cavalry, and twenty-three of infantry, 
was prof erred agaiust. Lieutenant-Colonel John Munro, 
Quartermaster-General of the Army, and Captain in tho 
Madras European Regiment 

(i For having * * * made use of fuLo and 

infamous insinuations, thereby tending to injure our charac¬ 
ters ns officers, and ofchervviso injurious to our reputations as 
gc lit lemon/’ 


CDAP. XX. 


Charge 
against the 
QuurtormaR- 
ter-General 


1 U in ditlicult to avoid the conclusion ihnt tho Qin rcorm st’r-CJcno- 
ral’* report vra circulated by oqn poreon or peieoAe in oilier, with the 
intention of tnnkin mischief 

It i i , untctl in Knot's Life of Sir John Malcolm, Vo). 1. p oie -ICO, that 
l ho mmi' unis pavii«raplm were circulated by Colonol Cajipor. No 
authority is given for thio p> - .ement, and nothing tending to corroborate 
it has be n fuuud in tho records. Si ha pn :<vliog on tho pro of 
Cudonol Cal>por w uild hove boon a Irgiumaii roro .n iV his Rnspomd 
and would certainly have huen mentioned by Sir <*«v>rgo liu'i ow litul !,<• 
know o of il 


HISTORY OF THi: MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XX. 

li is arreafc, 
1800. 






Hnepicious 
ivboyftuco of 
tRu chax-go. 





2 16 



Tliid charge, although dated on the 25th September 

1808, had been kept in abeyance until the 20th January 

1809, on which day Lieutenant-Colonel Munro was placed 
in arrest by order of Lioutenant-Genoral Hay Macdo wall, 

the Commander-iii-Chief, who, at tho uumo time, informed 
tile Colonel that he regretted “that this subject has not 
been sooner decided upon, but being desirous of obtaining 
every opinion, and a recent one of some importance having 
only been forwarded to me a few days ago, it was impos¬ 
sible to avoid delay.” It never .became known what this 
opinion was, but it is not improbable that au occurrence 
which took place at Madras at this time may have had 
some influence on the decision of the Commander-in-Chief. 

Government having determined to employ Major 
Blacker, then Deputy Quartermaster-General, on special 
duty in Travancore, acquainted the Commander-m-Cbief 
with their intention on the 15th January. General Mac- 
do wall, in reply, requested that the subject might be 
reconsidered, because the selection of an officer from tho 
general staff ought to have been left to his judgment,, 
and ho therefore recommended Captain Macdowall for 
the situation a- being equal to Major Blacker in point 
of ability, while he was Superior to that officer in tho 
knowledge of the people and country of Travancoro. On 
the lbtli, Government wrote to the General declining to 
accept Ins nomination of Captain Mucdowall, and, on tho 
20th, Lieutenant-Colonel Monro was placed under arre't, 
by which measure the employment of his Deputy iu Tra- 
vancore was necessarily precluded. It is possible that tho 
propur/d employment of Major Blacker may have born 
unconnected with the arrest of Lieutenant-Colonel Mum-), 
but the circumstances have a suspicious appearance, espe¬ 
cially when it ia remembered that the charges had been 
shelved, i,ml tbui h at is factory reason was assigned 
their sudden revival. 


imSTQy 


247 



HISTORY OP TUP MADRAS ARMY. 





Colonel Muuro appealed to Government through the CHAP. XX. 
Military Department, on the ground that his report had colo^f* 
boeu prepared by order of the late Commander-in-Chief, 
aud was a confidential communication. General Mncdowall 

having refused to forward the appeal, the Colonel sent 
it. in direct. Government, after having consulted their 
legal advisers, 1 requested the Commander-in-Chief to re¬ 
lease Colonel Munro, and as he declined to do so without 
a, positive order, Government, on the 27t’u January, did, 
through their Chief Secretary, direct that Colonel Munro 
should be released from arrest forthwith, which order 
was obeyed .Accordingly. The General, who, a few days Gcnomi^ 
previously, had announced his intention to resign, and i e &vee 
who sailed from Madras to Negapatam on the 30th Janu- > " adr ‘‘ 3 ' - 
ary on his voyage to England, was so much annoyed at 
having been overruled by Government, that he left, for 
publication to the army, an order dated the 28tli idem, 
in which Colonel Munro was severely reprimanded for 
having appealed to the civil power, “ an act of disrespect 
for which ho would have been brought to trial had General 
Mucdowall remained in India.” 

Government, on becoming acquainted with this order, Hia 
directed that it should be expuuged from the public 
uncords; but not contented with this, they anticipated the 
expected receipt, from Negapatam, of the Commander-in- 
Chief s official resignation, and publicly dfemiBfed him, in 
the ground that the order of the 28th January contained 

\ ftww afterwards fluid that il.- officers who jnvI-mMl th" rhar.;n 
hud, in conBcqutmcc ofthocjj i’i m of the Ju«I;;o Ail-'U-m o-fa uoml, 
ted in tl*cu wpamte memorial forwardml by tho Command 
.n il.ft 2Pth January, that tho pror.coutit *wf Ooh-’ «d Mmn > 










Suspension 
of tho 
Adjutant- 
Go iHii-u l and 
lii J Deputy. 


Major Boles 
dooUiu . to 
apologise. 


App; ivul of 
tlio S u promo 
t»o'< nimeut. 


iriSTOEY OP THE MAD HAS ARMY. 

insinuations grossly derogatory to tlio character of tlic 
Government, and subversive of military discipline, and 
of tlie foundation of public authority.’’ 

Major Boles, Deputy Adjutant-General, who had signed 
the order in the absence of his principal, Lieut.-Colonel 
’Capper, who had accompanied General Macdowall on 
board ship, was suspended from the service for having 
knowingly acted in direct violation of his duty to the 
Government, by giving currency to an order of so offen¬ 
sive a character. Colonel Capper, 1 who, on his return, 
had immediately avowed himself to be responsible for 
the circulation of the order, was suspended on the 1st 
February. 

Major-General Gowdie of the Madras army, a respect¬ 
able, but by no means brilliant officer, who succeeded 
General Macdowall as the next senior, caused it to bo inti¬ 
mated to Major Boles that provided he would express :my 
adequate regret for his conduct, he should bo restored 
to the service, and reinstated in his office. Major Boles 
having declined to make any acknowledgment tending 
to show that he had been in the wrong, his refusal was 
made tho subject oi a fresh complaint against him, but 
he was afterwards publicly exonerated by the Court of 
Directors from all blame on that account. 

I Jm proceed mgs in the matter of the Commander-in- 
1 lnof. and his Staff were reported to the Supreme Govern 
merit on tho 8rd February, and the memorial of the 
officers to tho Court of Directors was forwarded “for the 
sent iinenta of His Lordship ” by the same opportunity. 

The Governor-General in Council, in their reply dated 
20Ui February, expressed their entire approbation of tlm 
whole of tho proceedings of tho Madras Government, mid 



1 Colont'l On)i|»r and (loin n»1 Mnc«lowent 
Alaic.1. 1HOU, wild it un i. It o vnyngo 10 Enylnml. 


Inilh lu»t d n ft in 







H1MT0KY OF 'lifE MADRAS AttMY. 


249 


condemned tin* * conduct of General Maedowall. They C1IAF. X? 
pronounced tlic memorial to be disrespectful in its tenor, 

•and they approved of tlie resolution not to forward it 
The Supremo Government went on to encourage Sir 
George Barlow to “ repress the spirit of insubordination 
which prevailed in some portions of the army of Fort St. 

George,” and assured him of their fullest support. 

A lthough the suspension of Major Boles was not specially 
mentioned in this letter, it must be presumed to have 
boon included in the general approval. 

Nevertheless, it appears that Lord Minto heard of the Lord Minto’* 
suspension of Colonel Capper and Major Boles “ with the U ' (lr > 

greatest 1 possible regret ” and that he foresaw the suspensions, 
consequences which would follow that “ most unfortunate 
<md impolitic measured* He abstained from roversing 
h, partly because lie did not wish to “ pul Sir Georgo in 
the wrong on any point ” and partly because he thought 
the suspension justifiable in a legal 2 point of view. 

The astuteness evinced by Sir George Barlow in a o> 

obtaining the unqualified support of the Suprome Gov- jj" 1 
eminent on an u ex parte ” representation was further to 


Bole*. 


1 Lord Minto in India, pages 209-211 

* The weight of opinion, even at the time, was against tho logtditv l 

uf tho auspomnon. General Mr\itln;jd. then Governur nnd Gomwiamler- 
iu-O’hief in Coy Ion, vindicated the oOnrao followed by tlmutiJF officers; 
uud »:.n'crul other ollioora of experience, ami distinction, dwelt upon 
lh. impolioy of encouraging officers to del ate upon tJ o propriety of 
orders indued by their superiors, or npon the relative powers, of different 
authorities. 

Tho CdtiH of Liroctoru, on bearing of tho su»prn«ion. inpnaod lately 
ordered that it should ho removed, hut tliov rest indod thi* order on huing 
I d L> bolievo that Major 11 ,*e had permitted himsol/ to he nmd* n 
rallying point lor dungorou* doctrines. II w, %er, on bring disabused nf 
»hia mprer h n, they ixmoxKd 1 hoir opinion in ' * hr nary 1811 to tho 
ijltcel that they " could not discon-r an</ nn -h tnJu r< >a >r obrious Mogul. 
n.';r royjjl thn Adjutant or Deputy Adiutaot.t h- oral r« 

(■ in mu l tbry h*ut rorn-rd /<nw* Lira ten- t-Ooti , al 11 ar¬ 

il 4 /will order should be imcv/ iteJ to //»# army." 








1:50 


UISTOHV OF TTic MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XX. 








T)j uppvval 
<j f >.ho C 'urfc 
<»l OI*« jL'Q. 




I hM* on tout of 
th. <‘oni. 
ouudi-r-iu- 


<SL 


exemplified by his conduct towards Major Boles after his 
suspension. That officer, finding himself in difficulties in 
consequence of the loss of hi3 allowances, applied for 
permission to go to England in the Sir Stephen Lushing- 
ton } tho last ship of the season, which was expected to sail 
from Madras about the end of February. This appli¬ 
cation was refused, on tho ground that the nature of the 
service upon which that vessel was about to bo employed, 
rendered it improper that Major Boles ehould proceed 
by that opportunity. The fact was, that Government, at 
tho suggestion of Sir George Barlow, had determined to 
send tho Chief Secretary, Mr. Buchan, to England by tho 
Luskington “ as possessing a correct knowledge of the 
course of the lato events,” in other words, that he might 
gain tho oar ot the Court of Directors, an object which 
might not have been accomplished, had Major BoFa 
arrived in England at tho same time. 

Tho Court afterwards expressed their disapprobation 
of tho manner in which Major Boles had been treated. 

“ 5Tou do not assign any special cause except the >aturo of 
the service on which that ship was to bo employed. "Wo arc 
not- aware however that there could have been auy objection 
to hlB being allowed to take his passage in the Lu*hi:vitvt\ % 
and we think thia refusal imj*oped upon liim an unnecosaut), 
hardship,*’ 

Jt seems desirable that the eircumatr ace?, which caused 
the dissatisfaction of the Commander-in-Chief, and led to 


lii'i fulfil differences with Government, should he described 
in lliis jduoe, ns they worn not without influence on tho 
events which followed. 

Lumtonant-Gonoral Buy Mncdowall, who had been on Mu. 
staff of tho Madras Establishment since 1801, mice- nlcd 
hir Join. Crndook iu 'September 1807. IJp tot-hat tru % a 
Wuxi i" Council, with a handsome additional uUo'v«ince 
attached thereto, hud, almost always, Wen hold by the 






HISTORY OF THU MADRAS ARMY, 


251 


(jt , } anmmler-in-Chief; bat upon this occasion the Court of CHA* 3 . XX 
Directors thought tit to depart from the usual practice, 
and they nominated a civilian to till tho vacant office ; not 
from any personal objection to General Macdownll, but 
bocauao thoy had resolved that in future the Commander- 
in-Chiof should not be a member of Government, a 
resolution which they afterwards found it expedient to 
rosciud. Tho General naturally felt aggrieved by his un¬ 
expected exclusion from a situation of dignity and 
emolument, and this feeling seems to have led him to 
eympathizo with tho several complaints of the officers 
more fully than might otherwise have been the case. 

This sympathy, however, was not expressed in any 
objectionable form until about the end of 1808, when 
disturbances broke out in the province of Travancorc, and 
a plan of operations was determined upon by Govern¬ 
ment without consulting 1 tho Comuiander-iu-Chief, who 
became so much irritated in consequence, that ho appears 
to have placed little restraint upon his words or actions 
Iroiu that time, and he showed his resentment in a manner 
which uld scarcely tail to produce a bad effect upon 
tho discipline of the army. 

In i’. spcoch made to the Madras European Regiment on lu'tnmmn** 

V) occasion of inspecting it at .Masulipatam on the 24th j.' i i’ 
December 1808, hft observed that tho regiment had boon 1: - ir :il » 

. verlookod and negloctod by having boon stutionod in 
a remote part, of tho country where it had no opportunity 
of being exorcised w«’th other troops; not withstanding 

1 Otnuc-r* I Mardoyml) having compln noil of t his in a lo'C/ to Govt-rn- 
iM-nl ilatud 1U1 . 'inuarv 1600, a reply tru mado on i!.u 2 <t*d idon. in 
wtiic’li it f o ! tl. i tv® Oonimanilor-in-('"ii’f h d hoen o t o inid- 

oii I I * digtnnro . a i Prc^idcn > win . f lit dr n- i »f i ptun of 

iinpui; r» * oxnmaMHXl, hut thin IT in Kvxdlancy L»ol boou furnished v dh 
im , i, - full matori 1 papers < onncxdu.l iih f.r subjo fmmtinioro 
tlpim mul w ith h • lo'nt pum i'-a« dolay. No rejoinder * ihta «».tplauo 





252 


lTISTOr.Y 01 THE MADE AS ADM V. 



Ef i row ell 
Order, 
1800. 


Ord*T cenour- 
Dii, Colonel 
W uiro 


<SL 


winch disadvantage he had found it to bo in a high state 
of discipline. Ho then proceeded as follows :— 

C I know that this state of inactivity must be painful to the 
feelings of honorable gentlemen and officers, end painful to the 
feelings of brave soldiers—indeed I am at a loss to know the 
reason for this neglect.” 

The General's farewell order to the army dated 25th 
January 1800, was also objectionable as containing a 
passage tending to convoy f he idea that his exclusion from 
Council 1 had been the means of preventing him from 
efficiently advocating the interests of the officers. 

“ Had Lieutenant-General Macdowall succeeded to tho 
high and enviable office with all tin*, advantages enjoyed by 
his predecessors, he would, upon first assuming the command, 
have promulgated his sentiments on so flattering an event; 
but tho circumstances of his appointment were so humilia¬ 
ting and unpropitious that he declined addressing the army, 
in the anxious hope that the Court of Directors, might, on 
further deliberation, he induced to restoro him to his right j, 
and by altering the new and extraordinary form of Govern¬ 
ment, have enabled him to exercise tho functions of hi 3 station 
as the Representative of the Army, with honor to the service, 
and with credit to himself—no prospect of such an occurrence 
appearing at all probable; in justice to the army, and to bin 
character, he has deter lined to retire.” 

This was followed by the order of* the 28th January 
mentioned above, in which Colonel Munro was repri¬ 
manded for having appealed to tin Government against 
his arrest, and in which the Government wore censured 


by implication. 

k '‘Trent The summary punishment of Colonel C ipper and Major 
11 ' f ’ niy * Boles created great excitement and disgust thru ugh out 





1 IjohI Minto in adverting to a U tier of (General Mrudowali iluicd 
Ir-t Wn 1808, observed U.rtl it n'Uiifi: 'i! ‘'th 1 doltber ! «• iritm -u of 
t'i o (..< uorul to mu L v' tho a: i y an inutrunionfc of ooj» : iimn ami diiLurt. 
nuii-». M Lf.l r to the Secret Committor, Otb Fobruurj 1810. 




mtSTfiy 



HISTORY OF THK MADRAS ARMY. 


263 


<SL 


."ft*** 

the array. 


CEAF. XX. 


It was maintained that the illegality of the 
order of the 28th January was by no means evident, in 
which case alone, could these officers have been justified 
in refusing to issue it. It was also thought that they 
had the same claim to immunity as had been accorded 
to Colonel Munro, and they were consequently regarded 
as the victims of an unjust and vindictive resentment. 

Colonel Capper had loft India immediately after his sus¬ 
pension, but Major Boles received addresses from sever- Address to 
al quarters in which he was apprised of the intention of iJn ** or Bol ° 8, 
his brother officers to organise a fund for his support. 

Had they confined themselves to this intimation little 
exception could have been taken, but they denounced 
the punishment as “severe and unmerited/* and ended 
by saying that “such mutual support must be expected 
aud accepted by all, who, like yourself, have, or may, 
buffer through any such exceptionable measures on the 
part of the Civil Government of Fort St. George, as have 
rendered necessary the painful step wo have now taken. M 

Curly iu February a memorial was secretly prepared Proposed 
for transmission to the Supreme Government, of which Bengal!*' ° 
the following is an abstract. After complaining of the 
exclusion 1 of the Coramander-in-Chief from Council, the 
release of Colonel Munro, and the suspension of Colonel 


1 Tho phrase “ Representative of the Army,” used with reference to 
the Commander-in-Chief, waj, derided by tho Governor-General, n?ni 
by the Court of Directors ; and many paragraphs were written to prove 
il absurd m l inapplicable. I: was justly remarked that the tmbi.-ef. 
'van beyond the province of tho citicors, but- tho other crithdumH worn 
more sfu ioue than souud. for . . orts certain that manors connected 
Mith the wi 11 being and comfort of the aimy uro likely to ' e more fully 
an*. i?i». Uir\ ntly fl v iV r, ith when tho Command* r. in.Chief 
a wat in Counoil, than when that body in composed cxclm ivvly of 
Civilians. Moreover it is manifest from <h<* subsequent action of the 
tour’ that they were ‘otsoiblo of tho error which I d been comniittod 
win n i h-jy appointed u success ;r to Sir John C radock without nomi* 
uu i.g him to be a Member of tho Government 





Memorial 

abandoned. 


Kir Goorgo 
Harlow 
piopnroa to 
ptinlali all 
concerned 
in im pro¬ 
of, ru; ion of 
< 1; uiomorial 
lit: l address. 


*“ ,0 ‘ HfflTuRY OT' THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Capper and Major Boles, the memorialists observed that 
the general discontent produced by local and partial 
injuries had been falsely represented a3 public disaffec¬ 
tion, and they concluded by observing that they “ could 
not suppress the expression of their concern at the 
manner in which the exclusive rights of the army liavo 
recently been violated, and of tlieir sanguine hope and 
earnest entreaty that the Supreme Government may, in 
its wisdom, be induced to appease their just claims, and 
to anticipate the extreme crisis of their agitation by 
releasing them from a ruler, whose moasures, guided by 
the councils of their implacable enemies, are equally 
detrimental tu the interests of the State, as they aro 
repulsive to the feelings of a loyal and patriotic army." 
The circulation of this memorial was almost entirely con- 
lined to tho officers in Travancore, and in the Southern 
Division, and the intention of forwarding it was aban¬ 
doned about tho middle of March, when the general indig¬ 
nation had begun to subside. 

Shortly afterwards, a copy of this document was re¬ 
ceived by Sir George Barlow through a privato channel 
which ho decliucd to reveal, and although perfectly 
aware 1 that all idea of transmitting it to Bengal had boon 
given up, ho nevertheless prepared to punish all thuso 
concerned in signing and promoting the circulation of 
the p iper us soon as ho could discover thorn. About tho 


‘ “ A0 1 hnfl reaGon ‘o Micv* that Mm spirit of Man fat (on tint 
y fjsoiti d ill l.hu army, il did not appear thru ony danger wuu 
incuriud by waiting for fuller proof as to tho individuals who had brow 
non corned in winning and promoting the circulation of thin paper.* • • 
The information indeed, which I have lately received, afford Very 
' fri “JJ to hr>ACV '■ ihat tM$ intention i, almost, y not wholly ab<m<l pn«*< 
hut if r -on cortuin ilmt tho parties concerned in framing the paper 
mout polomn ition f ir , 

duty would demand that wo ah on Id adopt each njcnsuren re^ardim p. 
an the nature of it obviously requires "— Minute, 1st M . , 180ff. 




255 






HISTORY 01' THi. MADRAS ARMY, 



same Hme ho became acquainted with the existence of the CIIAP. XX, 
addresses to Major Boles, regarding which no secrecy had 
been sought- tu bo observed. 

On the 1st May, after having maturely considered the Hiarccom- 
whole subject. Sir George Barlow laid a minute before moijdutloliL 
fche Council, in which he recommended that the under¬ 
mentioned officers should be punished for their several 
shares, active and passive, in these transactions, via. :— 

Lieutenant-Colonel the Honorable A. Sentlegcr, Major 
John DeMorgan, Captain Josiah Marshall, and Captain 
dames Grant, to be suspended pending the decision of the 
Court of Directors. 


lliG dismissal of Lieutenant-Colonel G. Martin, who had 
gone to England, to be recommondcd to the Court. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Itobert Bell to be removed from 
die command of the artillery ponding the decision of tho 
Court. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Chalmers, commanding in Tra- 
vaucoro, Lieutenant-Colonel Cuppago Adjutant-General, 
and Captain Coombs Assistant Quartcrmaster-Qcnerul 
i T Mysore, to be removed from their respective appoint¬ 
ments and f o rejoin their corps 
Captain Smith -2nd battalion 14-th, .Major Keasbury 
2nd battalion 9th, Major Muirhead 2nd battalion LSth, 
and Major Hazlewood 1st battalion 21-tli regiment, to be 
superseded in their respective commands, for not. having 
exerted themselves to muintaiu proper df-cipline. Liou- 
tmmnt -(-olonol Burnley, commanding at Bangalore, to be 
rumen i d to tho cavalry at Arcot, his conduct hi \ lug 
been mi.- 1 1 isfnetory. 


'I’ll»>-10 recommondations woro agreed to in Council, 
•'»'! '■“» suspouMious and removal* were puliliahod in 
Ci, in ml Order dated 1st May. Several of tho olfic-r.j 
'•ann«d ■'.'»>/<) douied liavmyliad nny 'Amur to do w j(i, il;i , 

-d.ii xioua dorunouts, but all wore auimof.rily puniahed 


Olflcons 
puniahed 
wilhoi liin! 
or -»pport u» 
ii Uv of 
(I •hnu o. 













256 


HISTORY OP TUP MADRAS ARMY. 





'•n tin strength of private information^ not only without 
trial, but without having been allowed the opportunity 
oi: ofleriug any defence. Colonel Robert Bell of tho artil¬ 
lery, a most respectable officer, positively denied having 
had any thing to do with the paper the circulation of 
which he was said to have promoted, and this denial 
was supported by the statements of the whole of tho 
ofbeers at the Mount, twenty-nine in number. Tho 
deiiiah: of some officers wore not so satisfactory. 

No sooner had the order of the 1st May become public 
than the great majority of the officers placed themselves 
in opposition to Government, an attitude from which, n* 
several stations, viz., Hyderabad, Jaulna, Masulipatuin, 
Samulcottali, Ellore, Chicacole, Chittledroog, and Bering - 
apatam, they speedily passed into actual mutiny. 

Events at Hyderabad. 

rr he order having contained favorable notice of the < on 
Ouct of the lore, at Hyderabad/ tho officerB repudiated 
lie ec niplimeut, and issued an address to tlie army on the 
'J'-ib, in which iboy condemned tho action < 'Government, 
und announced their resolution to contribute toward: I lm 
support oi t bo Bur pended officers, ns well as to joi in 
any lc.pil men urc. calculated to remove tho cause of the 
< vis‘ ing discontent. This wo s , ellow-d by a letter to the 
Governor in Council, forwarded ou tho 23rd June mu! 
bearing the signature of f.,3 oflir ere, including tlmne of 
ilm brigades * at Junlna. In tins lot tor it wmh’ assert ml 


' PoloiKt T. (I. Jlo .trcor, H.M.-h L‘2 U <1 dragoon,. .„ 

1 * • ■• ‘" l •* l •> ••-■‘l- • trlilh y. I ; irolmonk 

-••'rnu-yj Jml But. r- linn Gtli, 2r.il hattalir-n 1 Oil I.i l;.uinlu,’i I|; t •, l 
WntlbMuii 21 il, mul ridiiitoTir i.mnocr: 

' Mc.Uoniiui-r:olon«l John Dovoiun, M <lrn« -uvnlrj. r, „ m „,| „ 

1 » '*«» «lh rnglim.uU , nV ftlr> ; Ut Utlaliou Um li, 1 *.t buUuUon I ,h 
*»»U } <x toll hi 1 1 



UtHlST/fy 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


257 




that with the exception of a few individuals bolding CHAP. XX. 
confidential staff situations, or otherwise dependent upon 
the favor of Government, the whole body of officers con¬ 
sidered themselves pledged to support each other for the 
purpose of obtaining redress, and that unless the order 
of the 1st May were rescinded, they had strong reason to 
fear the most disastrous consequences. The letter con¬ 
cluded by promising that if the suspended officers w r ere 
restored, the army would patiently await the decision 
of the Court of Directors. 


About this time a Committee of Officers was formed Committee 
for the purpose of conducting correspondence, and con- ° f otiicora * 
certing ulterior measures, an example which was followed 
at most other stations. 


On the 17th July the 2nd battalion 10th regiment was Tho Commit- 
warned to prepare to march to Goa in conformity with tec r( :f ll f 3 t0 

, _ J permit the 

orders from Head Quarters, but ou the next day Colonel *0th rogi. 

Montresor received a letter from the Committee to the march** 
effect that although the officers of the force wero rc.'dy 
to obey him in all matters connected with ordinary duties, 
they could not permit the 2nd battalion 10th to leave 
Hyderabad. 

On tho 21st of tho same month the officers presented a Ultimatum to 
document, styled their “ ultimatum” to Colonel Montresor J? ln:,] bc!ord 

. ^ Oovcrumonf. 

in winch their demands were set forth in the following 
order :— 


1. The repeal of the order of the 1st May. 

2. The restoration of every officer who hud been suspended 
or removed. 

3. Tho trial of Lieutenant-Colonel Tones at Masulipatuni. 

4. The removal from office of every officer of the General 
Staff supposed to have influenced Government in thoir several 
rccont measures. 

5. A general amnesty. 


VOL in. 


33 


mtSTt!y 



Declaration 
or test. 


Colonel Cloao 
appointed to 
command at 
llydcrubad. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

paper was signed by every officer in the force, 
except those on the staff. 

Towards the end of July, Government, with the view 
of ascertaining the exact state of feeling in the army, 
resolved that all the European officers iu the Company's 
service should be called upon to sign the following decla¬ 
ration :— 

“ We, the undersigned officers of the Honorable Company’s 
Seivice, do, in the most solemn manner, declare upon our 
word of honor as British Officers, that we will obey the orders, 
and support the authority of the Governor in Council of Fort 
St. George, agreeably to the tenor of the Commissions which 
we hold from that Government*” 

Such officers as might decline 1 to comply were to he 
removed from doing duty with the troops, and to proceed 
to any station on the sea coast, between Sadras, and 
Negnpatam that they might select, there to reside, and 
draw their ordinary allowances, until the state of affairs 
should admit of their being re-employod, 

A copy of this declaration was sent to Colonel Barry 
Close, Resident at Poonah, who had, on the 14th July, 
been appointed to command at Hyderabad, in the hope 
that his eminent talents, and great influence with tho 
army, might enable him to bring tho officers to a sense 
of their duty, and to restore order in tho force. 

The Colonel, on approaching Hyderabad, received a 
letter from tho officers desiring him to halt at the last 
stage as his services were not required. Notwithstand¬ 
ing this, he continued liis march, and arrived at the 
Residency on the 3rd August, when, after a consultation 
with Colonel Montresor, he determined, at all hazards, to 
attempt to place himself at tho head of tho troops. Ho 
en tered the cantonm ent accordingly, and was met by the 

1 Tim doctoral inn ««,. only signed by about 150 officer, out of 1,800* 







imsr$y 



two Senior Officers, Major Neale of the 1st cavalry,, and CHAP. XX. 
Major Deacon 1st battalion 16th regiment. 

Colonel Close used every argument to persuade these He addresses 
officers to return to their duty, and nrged them either to any 

sign the declaration, or to withdraw from the performance apparent 
of military duty, but, although deeply affected, they 
declined to accept eithor alternative. 1 he Colonel, upon 
this, declared that he felt himself at liberty to communi¬ 
cate directly with every native soldier in the cantonment, 
and he advanced with that intention towards tho troops 
which had turned out, and were forming on the general 
parade under their officers. He first addressed the 
cavalry, but -without effect, after which he rode up to 
tho 16th regiment and spoke to tho men, but with the 
same result. Finding his attempts unsuccessful, and the 
men having begun to load, Colonel Close left the parade, 
and going to the quarters of Colonel Montresor, ho relin¬ 
quished the command, as the object of his appointment 
had been defeated. 

The next day he received tho following communica¬ 
tion :— 

“ Sir, Tho officers of tho Hyderabad forco having considered Ho is ordered 
your conduct yesterday in the oxccution of the orders of tj< J tlie 
Govornmeut as highly prejudicial to that confidence which 
subsists between the sepoys and their officers, and subversive 
of the discipline they are anxious to maintain ; they do declare 
that your presence in the vicinity of this cantonment after 
such conduct, must bo dispensed with, and they hereby direct 
you to leave the place in the course of this day, lest more 
unpleasant decisive measures should bo necessary/’ 

The fact was that tho Colonel's arguments had pro- RubmisAon of 
dneed a much stronger impression, both upon offioere and 1110 ollicer3 * 
men, than had been supposed, and they contributed 
materially towards the suddeu, and unexpected return to 
obedience which took place u few days later. On tho 





CHAP. XX. 


Address to 
Lord Minto. 


‘- 0U ni3T0Ry OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Stli August tlie Committee of Officers wrote to Colonel 
Montresor, and after having expressed their respect for 
liis character and conduct, they proceeded to say that the 
recent treatment by Government of the officers at the 
Mount 1 and elsewhere, rendered it necessary to adopt 
measures of precaution which might cause him uneasi¬ 
ness, and they therefore suggested to him the propriety 
of giving up the command of the Company's troops, 
which they, the Committee, proposed to withdraw from 
the cantonment, and to encamp in the neighbourhood. 
The Colonel, in reply, addressed himself to Major Neale 
as the senior officer, and one whose influence had fre¬ 
quently been exerted in the cause of order. 

He pointed out the fatal conseqences of the contem¬ 
plated movement, and earnestly warned him and his 
brother officers, of the disgrace and ruin by which any 
further perseverance in their present course, must inevi¬ 
tably be followed. This remonstrance, following the 
address of Colonel Close, and the recently acquired 
know j edge of the intention of the Governor-General to 
proceed to Madras, had the desired effect, and the officers 
tendered their submission three days later, in the follow¬ 
ing terms. 

“To the Right Honorable Lord Min to,” 

“ Governor-General.” 

41 U y Lord > We > the undersigned officers of the Honorable 
Company’s Army attached to the Hyderabad Subsidiary Force, 
are fully impressed with a sense of the dangers that threaten 
the country, and not less actuated by thoso firm sentiments 


It _ was eaid that tho officers in camp at the Little Mount were 
offered tho tost at Colonel Hare’s house at the Madras end of tho 
Marmalong bridge, and that on their refusal, thoy were placed under a 
gu .rd, and gent off to the Coast without being allowed to revisit the 






WHlSTffy. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 2G1 

of loyalty and patriotism from wliieli we have never departed, 
beg leave to assure your Lordship that we chiefly attribute 
the want of success that attended Colonel Close’s mission, to 
the sudden and unexpected manner in which he presented the 
test that was proposed for our signatures. Relying, however, 
as we are now disposed to do, upon the justice, clemency, and 
wisdom of your Lordship, we do not hesitate in avowing our 
determination to abide by your Lordship’s decision ; and as a 
proof of the sincerity of our principles, have subscribed to the 
test which now accompanies this address, at the same time 
trusting to 3 'our Lordship’s generosity in granting a general 
amnesty to us, and all those who have engaged in the late 
unhappy events.” 

“ Hyderabad, 11th August 1809,” 

Tlio Jaulna brigades marched for Hyderabad on or 
about tlio 13th August, under Lieutenaut-ColonelDoveton, 
in compliance with a requisition from that place, and had 
reached Partoor, distant 30 miles from Jaulna, when they 
received intelligence of the submission at Hyderabad, 
upon which they immediately returned into cantonment, 
and the officers sigued the declaration a few days after¬ 
wards. 



Events in the Northern Division. 

The garrison of Masulipatam, at this time, consisted 
of the first division 1 Madras European Regiment,-the 1 st 
battalion 19th regiment under Major Storey, and a de¬ 
tachment of artillery. On the 7th May Lieutenant-Colo¬ 
nel Innes, who had been recently appointed to command 
the European Regiment, arrived at Masulipatam, aud lie 
dined at mess that evening, several strangers being 
present as guests. After dinner Lieutenant D. Forbes, 
seconded by Lieutenant and Quartermaster Maitland, 

l The regiment at this time consisted of two divisions uf six corn, 
panics each. 


<SL 


CHAP. XX. 


Submission of 
the officers at 
Jaulna. 


Masulipatam* 




Ml NtSTfiy 



‘- u - HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

proposed the <e Friends of the Army ” as a toast. Tliis 
having been preceded by strictures on the recent orders 
of Government, and by remarks in commendation of the 
attitude of the officers at Hyderabad, Colonel Innes, who, 
before leaving Madras, had been warned that the officers 
were not favorably 1 disposed towards the Government, 
objected to the form of the toast, and requested that “ The 
Madras Army ” might be substituted. This amendment 
not having been agreed to, the Colonel left the room, 
immediately after which the toast first proposed was 
drank with three cheers. The next day Colonel Innes 
reported the occurrence demi-officially to Head Quarters 
particularly requesting that no public notice might be 
taken of the matter until such time as ho might find it 
necessary to bring it forward officially, failing the tender 
of any sufficient apology from the officers named above. 



Notwithstanding this request, an order, dated 17th 
May, was received at Masulipatam on the 22nd, directing 
the removal of Lieutenant Maitland from the Quarter- 
mastership, and detaching Lieutenant Forbes to the 
unhealthy outpost at Condapilly, distant 5i miles from 
Masulipatam, and at which there was not a single man of 
the European Regiment. Colonel Innes was at the same 
time directed to inform the officers that a repetition of 
the irregularity would involve “ the severest penalty to 
which such insubordinate proceedings wore liable.” 

Mutiny Of the The excitement caused by the publication of this order 
■was further increased by a requisition of an unusual 
. character. It so happened that an urgent application for 
European troops to serve as Marines had been made to 


' Tho dieciplino of tho regiment had boon relaxed emcc 180G, nud the 
officer# had rocomly boon irritated by the supjioBod intentional 
neglect of Go\ ernmont, which had been dwelt on by General Muedowall 
: ’ bio inspection in December. 






WMST/fy. 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 263 

as Government by the Naval Commander-in- CHAP. XX. 

Chief, and as the employment of H.M. regiments in such a - 

manner had recently been forbidden except in cases of 
emergency, Government directed that three officers and 
one hundred men of the Madras European Regiment 
should be warned to be in readiness for embarkation on 
board H. M. Ships of war, for that duty. The officers, 
for several reasons, determined to disobey this order. By 
that time they had made common cause with the officers 
at Hyderabad, and were opposed to any measure by which 
the strength of the regiment would be diminished. More¬ 
over, the service was disagreeable in itself, and the legality 
of the order questionable. Advantage was therefore taken 
of certain expressions which had been used by Colonel 
Innes, and it was represented to the men that the pro¬ 
posed embarkation was the first step towards disbanding 
the regiment, a representation which appears to have 
obtained immediate credence, and to have been followed 
by the promise of support. On the arrival of the frigates, 
which took place on the 1st June, the officers waited upon 
Colonel Innes, and requested him to countermand the 
yrder for embarkation, pending a reference to Madras. 

This the Colonel refused to do, upon which the officers 
placed him in confinement under European sentries. 

The command of the garrison was then assumed by 
Major Storey, and that of the European Regimout by 
Captain Andrews. 

Government, on becoming acquainted with thoso t'olouol Mni- 
occummces, appointed Lieutenant-Colonel John Malcolm £du‘ 
to tho command of the European Regimout, and of the m <rad. 
garrison at. Masulipatam. 

ITo was also nominated President of a Committee to ho 
assembled at that place for the proposo of enquiry, and 
report. Tho other members were Lieutenant-Colonel 
Herkoley commanding tho 2nd battalion 4th rogiment at 







CHAP. XX. 


264 


history op the madras army. 


<SL 


Colonel Mal¬ 
colm advises 
Government 


Berhampore, and Major Evans Superintendent of the Stud 
at anjam, hut as both of these officers were prevented by 
illness from proceeding to Masulipatam the performance 
of the duty devolved upon Colonel Malcolm alone. He 
arrived on the 4 th July, and found everything in the hands 
of a committee composed of violent young men : the 
authority of Major Storey being little more than nominal. 
This committee was in correspondence with almost every 
station in the Presidency, and had received the strongest 
assurances of support from Hyderabad, towards which 
place, the garrison, together with the native battalions 
at Lllore and Saraulcottah were preparing to march. 
After a discussion which lasted for several hours, the 
officers consented to acknowledge Colonel Malcolm's 
authority, and to submit to an enquiry into their conduct. 

On the next day the Colonel reported that after having 
perused certain papers shown to him by the officers of 
ordcTof'tho 6 th ° S^vinon, he was satisfied that there was not a single 
corps in the Company’s army from Cape Comorin to 
Ganjam which was not pledged to rise against Govern¬ 
ment, and that no commanding officer had any real control 
over his regiment or battalion. 

In these circumstances he advised the Government to 
give way, and he went the length of drafting a resolution 
for their adoption^ in which they engaged to recommend 
to the Court of Directors the restoration of the officers 
whose suspension had been reported to that bodv • to re 
appoint, of their own authority, Colonels Bell and Chal¬ 
mers to the commands of which they had been deprived 
and to grant a general amnesty. Neither the matter nor 
.} <> manner of this communication was likely to bo at all 
acceptable to the Government, who could not have yielded 
at such a crisis without inflicting a fatal blow on their 
own authority, and on the future discipline of the army 
Colonel Malcolm was therefore informed that, after the 


1st May. 



nil. mvdiw.s Al;>iv. 


•2G5 



most irrture consideration, Sir George Barlow could nut 
u satisfy liis mind of tlio policy oi the courso of mea¬ 
sures ^ which had been recommended. 

Thu Colonel was at the same time authorized to grant, 
at his discretion, a pardon to the non-commissioned offi¬ 
cers, and privates of the European Regiment, and to all 
the native ranks of the 1st battalion 19tli, for any part they 
might have taken in tlio recent insubordinate proceed¬ 
ings. lie was also informed that it was presumed he had 
already explained tlie causes which had led to the requisi¬ 
tion for rnen to serve as marines, and that there never had 
been any in ention 1 to break up the European Regiment, 
mid place iho officers on half pay, or to impose any mark 
of disgrace or disapprobation whatever on the corps. 


CUAlv \\\. 

The Govern¬ 
ment dctli'.e. 

Colonel 
Wnlnolm 
empowc i'd to 
oiler j>nrii<m 
fco the men. 


Colonel Malcolm, who had not con-idored it prudent to 
at' . 'npt any direct communication with the men, for fear 
of “ irritating the officio*, and driving them to (hsjnur,” 
took tlio opportunity of a punishment parade on the 
lit 1 1 July to address thorn, and he there stated that there 
j /or had been any intention to disband, or to disperse the 
rcginujiit; but in’ refrained from any mention of the prof¬ 
fered pardon, for the same ren m which had deterred 
him from communicating with them before. 


- rr 


1 Notwill. nmJii •.* fin* disavowal, tht u in rvtdo'.'o to sh^vv, that 
v with, < r ' ul du. authority, inron s woiv miulo u.-o of i<*li 

\u«ri» indicuiiio of inionriijn to di-.tmnd tlio n ;imonl. C.\ <»ucl 
tunc wheu urging LicufSjmhkir i«» accept t)n« vtitatu Qtm. . > 
oiu.M orcl.i |> (old tin that “ontho conduct of t to olTi (•»!•« of I ho r> ^ i. m 
i•*«'*»» f UWi’h tlojir-i] l. d on thin occasion, 1 if llu v ]>. i \ ^ n .1 iu I ho nii- 
v.ni.’i i»t • I # I *. ooimtc ihi wim. pm'-.idng', the i» plrnonl w .aid hw roil 
m ' • ' 'hi* Mr.' 'H, urn on . put. ujx » i hr* I f j>m »' of them' i :mk," 

I iiM. < ..ml C'donol Inn.' to Lit <t **i :< ;it -Colonel M Uvlm, '-Vth July 

XWJJ. 


A • i■ • I • 1 w i'i ” 10 I iM (I'linul Span! i. bv 1 • 
Wimo limn CffUtluiW »■ follow*, *• it is nl>. ..hit< ! ; 
t V»l \ H 'ihiitlld HO' t'dl* 1 • : hr t iioj nl' v h> * If 

I Sin!. ..I 

v *i in 


ih'iu'l iiu.P; aUutt th 

(U |K‘V I I i'O' ’ll I 
i \> 1 "W icrimeiit -~ 


il 




But vefn ; n 
from cl-ioijj no. 





[» i/.’ \ «: 





Ifc rums to 
"Mrulva. 


Tils conduct 

*!• “approved 
of. 


m*ral 

Vntr-r offers 
n p irdon to 
thu men. 


•Sahudfi, ton 
or Hi.- 
or n tJl 


“ U niSTOlCY or THE MAD IMS' AIJMY. 

Oil tl?e 1/th July ho wrote to Madras for permission 
ro k turn to that place for the purpose of conferring 1 per¬ 
sonally with Sir George Barlow. He left Masulipatam 
accordingly a few days afterwards and arrived at Madras 
on the 26th July. 

The course he had pursued was not approved by Gov¬ 
ernment, who, in their report- to the Court of Directors, 
dated 6th September, remarked that “to this apparently 
unreasonable forbearance, 1 and attention to the feelings 
of officers who had, by their acts of violence and aggres¬ 
sion, forfeited all claims to such consideration, may, 
v.v conceive, be ascribed, Lieutenant-Colonel Malcolm’s 
failure in the establishment of any efficient control over 
the gail*i&on. ,, 

A copy of the declaration of the 26th July was received 
in due course by Major-General Pater commanding the 
Northern Division, who laid arrived at Masulipatam 
shortly after the departure of Colonel Malcolm, but who 
did not deem it expedient to produce it for signature until 
the 9th August, when ho orderod a general parade of the 
troops, at which lie offered a pardon to the garrison, tli . 
European officers excepted, on condition that they would 
return to thew duty to the State; but the offer was 
rejected because of the exclusion of the officers. 

On the t-ith of the same month intelligence of tlm 
submission at Hyderabad reached Masulipatam, and on 
(he next day the officers consented to sign the declur- 
ation. This sudden change alarmed the men of the 
Enropoan Regiment, who immediately began t- 
their officers of a design to abandon them to punishnmut, 



’ 1 TI ‘“ ry policy of Colonel Malcolm was d.-fomlod W Mm ,.|f 

ot 1 " 1 ' * >arr Y Clc .t*, < !tu !> most nldo unci v ju U ,. IH>( l( 

■' - " • ’ * n oppr»uU« «>; Snion, imd i«i fu\ r ,4 

L "" n 0 , n. "I'iuiou wbf' hsQcm- jn tilied Uy U10 event. 




HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 207 

and under tbe influence of that feeling they turned out, 
and threatened to shoot any officer who should sign the 
test. 

The General, not knowing to wliat extremities the men 
might not proceed, was induced to promise, in the name 
of Government, a general pardon both to officers and 
men, which pacified the latter for the moment, but they 
continued to suspect the existence of some treachery, and 
a violent disagreement ensued, a number of the men in¬ 
sisting upon marching to Madras with their officers, there 
to state their grievances. 1 At last Lieutenant Scott, 
one of the General Staff, took it upon himself, with the 
view of allaying the tumult, to order the whole regiment 
to march, and it quitted the fort accordingly about 
I p.m. on the 17tli It was intended that the native batta¬ 
lion should follow', but the Europeans, finding, after having 
gone some little distance, that they and their officers were 
unprovided with the necessary requisite for a march, 
returned to the fort the next day with tho exception of 
i serjeants and lbO rank and hie, who, with 5 officers 
chosen by themselves, proceeded towards Madras, accom¬ 
panied bv 12 artillerymen, and a Jemadar's party of the 
1st battalion 19th regiment. 

Subordination was restored in the garrison immedi¬ 
ately after the departure of the detachment, and tho 
whole of tho officer.* signed the declaration, an example 
which was followed by the rest of the officers in the 
Northern DiviVinn. 



' A jarrotifc umul.er of <| « men bail ctilisusl for unlimited ervioe, tun l 
wore ill t 'iitontod borauKc tl»ry bud not been .idotiltod ft* tho bom (it 
of ori Act, BqhfloqncntW parsed, which allt wed of limi'e I M»rvic».*, nml 
nod l 1 ho provision# of which n :iivy of their ycmngv r radon bad 
n^intcd. Another c. o ol conin' lint wan the long detention of tho 
r< t.iinr»f tv .nultp.u • n, i. Ir .m 1 sOO ujth th<< exception o: uu 
tuiin Mtl .luiing 1H0S whoq it • u i to Cut t«tck ..n n vvii c. 



CHAP. XX. 

Violent 
conduct <»r 
the men of 
the European 
Regiment. 




Order 

restored. 






FIISTORY OF THE MAhltAS ARMY. 



2G8 



Samulcottah. 

On tlie 12tli August, the 1st battalion lltli regiment 
stationed at Samulcottah, marched out of cantonment 
against the orders of Lieutenant-Colonel Simons the 
Commanding Officer. Captain James Patterson then took 
charge of the battalion, and detached two companies to 
Cocanada, distant about ten miles, with orders to take 
possession of the treasure at that place. The sum of 
Rs. .3,42,539 was seized accordingly, and conveyed to 
Samulcottah, from which the battalion marched the fol¬ 
lowing day for Masulipatam. It arrived at Rajahmundry 
on the 17th, when Captain Patterson took possession of 
the Post Office, and ordered that all the mails should bo 
delivered to him. 

The next day he crossed the God a very, having first 
called in the detachment of ilie battalion doing duty ut 
the station. On the arrival of the battalion at Covoor on 
the 20th, it was met by an express from Masulipatam 
with the intelligence of the submission of the officers at 
that place, in consequence of which Captain Patterson 
retraced his steps, and returned to Samulcottah, where 
ho arrived on the 25th, haviug previously restored tho 
treasure. Lieutenant-Colonel Simons resumed com nun !, 
and the officers signed the declaration. 

Ellore. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Fletcher, commanding the Ft 
battalion 24th regiment at Ell ore, being aware of the dis* 
Flection of his officers, had form< d a plan to place them 
under restraint iu the event of their refu-ing to sign the 
i esl, but this design having been divulged by the Native 
Adjutant, the Colonel was seized on the 5th August, and 
plwoil in confinement. However, he way allowed !o 
k :,vr ' the cantonment the same evening, and io gu to 


Madras. The command o£ the battalion was assumed CHAR XX. 
by Captain Sadler, who retained it until the submission of 
thu officers at Masulipatam, when he was superseded by 
Major Hazlewood of the same battalion. The officers 
signed the declaration on or about the 19th August. 

Chicacole. 

The liead-quarters of the 1st battalion 21st regiment. Mutiny at 
under Captain George Wahab, took possession of the trea- ChluUuI °* 
sure at Chicacole about the 15th August,, and marched for 
Masulipatam, being joined on route by a detachment of 
the same battalion under Captain Fair, who had seized the 
treasure at Vizagapatam to the amount of 11s. 5,50,000. 

Captain Wahab had arrived within two marches of Saniul- 
eottali on the 21th when he was met by a messenger from 
Masulipatam, upon which he returned to his station. 

The treasure was restored. 

Be an am pore. 

Lieutenant-Colonel AV. Borkely, commanding the 2nd Hattklion m 
battalion 1th regiment at Berhampore, on hearing of the 11,14,311,011 

march of the battalion from Chicacole, sent a detachment 
f*»r the protection of that place. The officers of the 2nd 
of the 4th do not appear to have been implicated, in the 
mutiny. 

Tho pardon granted by General Bator to tBe garrison < ^ i u. 
of Masulipatam, and subsequently to the officers at Mllore, ',.’,^ 1 ’,,!' 
Sunmleotlnb, and Chieaoolo, was not recognised by Gov- <IW 

c , Qciitnul 

ominont, who • nt orderr directing tho march of thu JPutor. 
undermentioned corps to Madras, viz., the European 
liOgimcnt, tho 1st battalion 19th, and iliu 1st battalion 
2lfh regiment, all 0 1 which niovonieiits commenced Oailv 
et September. 



CHAP. XX. 

State of the 
garrison. 


C«»lonol Dnvi -i 
lUliPpsoa tho 
oi T '*« i'.ta 
without 
H&uct. 


- /U HISTORY OF THE MAP RAF ARMY. 

Affairs at Seeing apatam. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Davis, H.M/s 22nd dragoons, 
Commanding the Mysore Division, the Head-quarters of 
which were at Bangalore, happened to be at Mysore un 
the 24th July when he received a letter from Lieutenant- 
Colonel John Bell of the artillery then in command at 
Seringapatam, requesting that certain recent orders for 
the march of a company of artillery, and the second 
battalion 19th regiment, might be countermanded on 
account of the severity of the duty which their removal 
would throw upon the remaining company of artillery, 
and the 2nd battalion loth regiment, which corps, to¬ 
gether with two companies H.M.bs 80th foot, composed the 
garrison. This request was accompanied by letters from 
the officers expressing their alarm in consequence of the 
prevalence of a report to the effect that it was in con¬ 
templation to separate the native corps, and to seize tho 
European officers. It was well known, however, that the 
officers of the garrison were in communication with tho-o 
at Hyderabad and at Masulipatam, and pledged to 
support them, hence their principal objection to reduce 
the strength. 

Colonel Davis, being without the means of enforcing 
compliance with his orders, consented to their postpone¬ 
ment pending a reference to Head-quarters, and on the 
29th he entered the fort with tho view of usim' his 

o 

personal influence with the officers. On the morning of 
the 80th he called them together, and after having 
addressed them without effect, 1m was told that ho must 
not only remain in the fort, but that ho must not quit 
his lion -c. 



However, they changed their minds during the day, and 
allowed him to return to Mysore the same evern «»■. 


history of thk madras army. 



271 


The public treasure was seized, under the immediate 
direction of Captain Cadell tlie Town Major, on the same 
day. 

On the 31st Colonel Davis sent the declaration of 
fidelity to the fort with instructions to Colonel Bell 
desiring that it might be tendered to the officers for 
signature, and that in event of refusal he should use his 
endeavours to prevail upon them to abstain from the 
further exercise of their military functions. 

The envelope and letter were returned along with the 
note given below, tho copy of the declaration having 
been abstracted, and retained. 


11 Seringa pat a m , 316/ July 1809.” 

“ My dear Colonel. You must bo perfectly aware of tho 
state of the garrison which I reported to you long since, and 
it is at the peril of my freedom, to open any public communi¬ 
cations.’’ 

(Signed) J. BELL. 


On the 2nd August the sum of Rupees 1,40,000 on tho 
way from the Ceded Districts, was seized by a party sent 
from the fort for that purpose. 

On tho 3rd August the detachment of K.M/s 80th regi¬ 
ment was sent out of the fort with instructions to march 
t' Bangalore. It was duly provided with camp equipage, 
and sick carriage, and the garrison went through the 
form of presenting arms as it left. These companies 
proceeded along the Bangalore road for some marches, 
and then changing their route they joined Colonel Davis 
id My sere on tho 7th August. 

Tho declaration was signed, b ( Bell on the 

3rd August, upon which he was invited by Cob uel 
Davis, and the Resident, to abandon the mutineers and 
come to them at Mv or but ho declined, ami announced 


chap. xx. 


•Seizure ot 
treasure. 

The declara¬ 
tion sent to 
the Fort for 
signature. 


Further 
seizure of 
treasure. 


Tho detach¬ 
ment. )1. M.'h 
SO tb sent out* 
of the Fort. 


Colonel Hell 
signs tho 





Tho other 

officers 

rufu.io. 


It- iiiHiii of f ho 
b /»ff Officers. 


r.'.icorl of fiic 
JUiHmt. 


I iivr» : l mort 
< f the fmt. 


“' * 1! 1 TOUV OF Til K MAble AS A \l M V. 

intention to remain in the fort as long as he could bo 
llf an y service. With the exception of Colonel Bell, the 
whole of the officers refused to sigu the declaration for 
the reasons given in the following resolution which was 
subscribed to by the officers of artillery, and those of the 
native battalions. 

“ The moment the grievances of the army are redressed, we, 
the undersigned officers, will, with the greatest satisfaction, 
sign the proffered declaration of Government under date the 
^(ith July 1809, but as the intention (at present) of’ that 
obligation is evidently to bind us down to abed the bluod of 
our own brother soldiers, we must decline affixing our names 
thereto.” 



The staff officers, viz., Captain Do ljavilland of the 
engineers, Captain Cadcll, Town Major, and three others, 
recorded their dissent in the following terms :_ 

“ We never cun pledge ourselves to obey the orders of .Sir 
George Barlow and his advisers, which so clearly tend to the 
total destruction of the British Empire in India. In this 
declaration we are actuated alone by principles of regard 
for the public safety, and the welfare of the State.’ 1 

I he European officers of the detachment doing duty 
at Mysore ns the liesident’s escort, and who belong it to 
'he ind ot the 15th, resiguod their military functions 
rather than sign the test, but tho native officers and men 
remained steady. 

Governinont, on the oth August, sent orders for tho 
investment of the fort, and on tho 10th, a detachment 
Jr-m Bangalo v , consisting of two squadrons H.M.’m L’.M h 
dragoons, three companies II.M.’s 50th regiment, ,1,. 
5th regiment cavalry, and the 1st battalion 3rd regiment 
with a party of artillery, all under Lieutenant Colonel 
Jibhij U.M. n o »th, arrived, am] encamped about t-lirco 
mil- from the fort. 




1 V. 

history or Tin: mat-ws army. 27‘3 

About this time. Colonel Bell, when called upon to 
surrender, wrote several letters of an extraordinary 
character to Colonel Davis, and to Government. He 
complained of neglect, of his not having beon made 
acquainted with the real objects which the Government- 
had in view, aucl feigned to believe that an attack on 
the fort was contemplated by the troops of the Mysore 
Itajah, for which roason he declared that he could not 
give it up without the special order of the Governor 
General. 

All hough tho fort was amply supplied with artillery, 
and military stores of all kinds, the garrison was scarcely 
equal to the defence of so extensive a place, and the 
officers were therefore anxious to obtain an addition to 
their -itrength. With this object they placed themselves 
in communication with the 1st battalion loth regiment 
rtationed at Chittledroog about 150 miles north of Sering- 
uputam, and also with the 1st battalion 8th regiment 
then on the march from Nuggur Boduore to YValhyjalibad, 
nml they succeeded in persuading lie officers of these 
corps to join thorn The 1st of the 8th left their 
Fauijlic: at Chittlcdroog having boon informed by their 
officers that their .services were emergently required to 
nssi t in the defence of Serii)gapatam against the troops 
of the Rajah of Mysore who were about to attack tlm 
fort. 

The 1st of the loth were misled in a similar man nor. 
Tho two battalions ' left Chittlodroog accordingly on fho 
5ih Aug'ml, and ou the morning of the 10'h, while 



1 1 it of Sill iucln I'npiam II Molnttuh, 8 <• m] ni" 
m C liittli- iltong.) 

lit ni I 'it ii under Caplttin l' K. A * »U i » I 7 , am; n.> t'J iMjinj , )M >n 
Uiiu'.r.lru i n I’ 

voi.. in. 35 


<§L 


CHAP. XX. 

Extraordi¬ 
nary ooud^ot 
of Colonel 
Bell." 


Tho 1 Rt of 
the 8th, ami 
1st of the 
loth marqj) 
to Suringupn- 
tam 




HISTORY OF TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAI\ XX. 


Attacked by 

the My Bore 

ho run, and 

European 

troops. 






approaching Nagamungalum, 1 distant about 20 miles from 
beringapatam, they fell in with a body of 3,000 silladur 
horse, which, together with about 1 ,500 armed peons, had 
been sent by the Honorable Arthur Cole then officiating us 
Resident, with instructions to retard the progress of tho 
detachment, and to prevent it from entering Seringupa- 
tmn. No collision took place that day, and the battalions 
encamped at Nagamungalum. 

The march was resumed at 10 o'clock the same night, 
and next morning, when about 10 miles from Seriuga- 
patam, tho rear guard, which had fallen behind, was 
suddenly attacked by tho Mysore horse, a few men 
wounded, and the baggage taken. The horse then made 
several charges which were repulsed, and tho battalions 
had arrived within about two miles from their destination, 
when they were simultaneously attacked and broken by 
H.M.’a 25th dragoons, and the Mysore horse. The 
sepoys were completely surprised, and made no attempt 
to defend themselves against tho Europeans, whom they 
believed to bo their friends. Captain McIntosh was 
v f unded, and taken prisoner*, and a number of tho men 
were killed, and wounded y but a very large proportion, 

ihi.f n count of rtio maroh « liken from un inforueptfd let-tor 
writ tun by L.uatonum llukcr of tbo 8th to hi.* brother. Mr. Coir, in u 
Jt-port dated 12lh August «ays, " a very considerable number of t ho 
. illadtr horr.r have bo.-n Icillr ), this body having flkirnn hod with tho 
doluchmont during the In 20 mile* before the notion took place.” 

' 1,0 uct,ai1 Cu ’ 1 ' i,! 1 ,u ulladar horse More 125 men, and 150 horhca, 
killed, and w*>uruiod. lor this information Tam indebted to Colon I 
K. C. KU:\VArt recently Lit eomrnai.J of the Mysnn Silladar Hunan 


8th rcgixnCnt. 15th x :/iu c nt. 
' Killed .. o y 

Wounded . . *h 

M ‘Ming .166 Ha 

2*'G 237 


1" Jdenant lic it 811. regiment lad of fatigue. 

Tlu- uhov. i.. ken fx«m n rot urn dated 15th Avgimi. 

- : ■ inj of those entered »j ** 
•uippo ed i * Ua In. i >i killed or wounded. 


i 





mtsrtfy 


HISTORY OF tllK MADRAS ARMY. 275 

viz., 20 European officers, 19 native officers, 10 Havil- 
ilars, and 785 rauk and file, made tlieir escape into the 
fort under cover of the guns. 

The conduct of the officers of the Chittledroog batta¬ 
lions, and that of those in Seringapataui seems to have 
been equally discreditable. 

The former induced thoir men to march by means of 
false representations, and the latter treacherously kept 
their advancing comrades in ignorance of the arrival of 
the troops from Bangalore. 

Indeed, had it not been for the receipt of a pressing 
requisition from the fort, it may be assumed, as nearly 
certain, that the lamentable conflict would never have 
taken place. It appears from a report to Government 
from the Resident, dated lltli August, that a few hours 
before the action, Captain McIntosh received a letter 
from the garrison, in which ho was urged to push on. In 
lonscquoucc of this ho made ft forced march which was 
the cause of his missing a despatch 1 from the Resident 
mentioning the arrival of tho force under Colonel Gibbs, 
and the determination of Colonel Davis to prevent tho 
entrance ef the battalions into Seringapatam. It cannot 
bo supposed that Cap to hi McIntosh, at the head of about 



1 It is greatly ' o bo lamp a ted that wo did not receive tho letters 
from Mr. C<»I*•, a d Colonel Daria, which I understand they sent, 
impiORting ns not t proceed. Even had an officer cornu to us from 
cither of tho King's corps, i 

did coin i on, we should never have proceeded."—]nure<*pp d loti or 
from Lieutenant Baker. 

An officer of 11. M 25th approach- d tho column while it wan harassed 
by iho Mysore hoi . Th ■* icoount i of whn S dlowod ru- coiiuml h* 
lory Lieutenant C. A Walker uf the 8th deposed, supported by 
other of I ci.v '.bar h * ivlvonc d lowntd.' < i;- dim -ui linn, holding 
n whit fhg, but that bin' - , i n onnhl i\ u h him, the oflhn V artind, 
raHopo-ii.H and joined ! he *J • m- l K ,; • Others «Ay that the officer 

-x U* ill imI id 


<SL 


CHAP. XX. 


Discreditable 
conduct of 
tho officers 
at Chittlo- 
droog and 
Soringap: - 
tam. 


Mijofiirln ,a 
of the 
•Resident’-! 
warning. 



UfSTi.IfY OF THE MAO If AS A EM Y. 



<SL 


Iji-0 natives, would have ventured to oppose such a force 
fts that under Colonel Gibbs. 


ilie fort. Guiing attack, the guns in the fort opened upon 

the camp, and a party under Colonel Munro of the loth 
sallied in that direction, but was driven back. The camp 
was again cannonaded at intervals during the night, and 
a few camp-followers and horses were killed and wounded, 
but no further damage was done. Another sally was made 
u]nn the Mysore troops on the 13th, in which Captain 
■Turner of the loth battalion was wounded, and several 
of his men killed. 


Burro nil or 
ol’ tl f fort. 


l)ifponnl 

Of fct'J 

f '»|mny’a 
olli .. ih 




The next few days were passed in negotiations, during 
which the intelligence of the submission of tho offices 
at Hyderabad having been received, the fort surrendered 
at discretion, and was taken possession of by Colonel 
Davis on the 23rd August, tho declaration having boon 
previously signed by tho officers of the garrison. 

Tho officers of the 5th cavalry, and 1st battalion 3rd 
regiment at Bangalore, having refused to sign the test, 

' 'icy had boon removed from tln ir respective corps hv 
Li. uteufint-Coloncl Dibits before his march upon Soringti- 
putam. 

1 he officers of the 2iid battalion 3rd regiment, which 
mul relieved the th at Bcdnoro, ulso refused to sign, and 
-Major Lucas made overcharge of tho lm.ttali.ui to tin; 
a nior native officer on the 9th August , pending the non..- 
tiatiou ol a European Commandant. 


Ci* (tfuiitU uu 
Oi.vciu- 
Mihllt 


A t fairs a* i nr 1 


KFIDIM'Y. 


I'.arly in Jut . in consequence of tho threatening .cpc.t 
ol ulTaiv :c Hyderabad and Mi, iilipatam. Govcnment 

I.ppli. -I to Ceylon, and to Bombay, tor roinforccim utn ,.f 
' utri.jn.un tnmps. They also took steps, by menus ..f 








HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 


277 


<SL 


correspondence, and agents, to disunite ' the native troops 
and their officers. 

About tbo sumo time they dneoW tie assembly ot » 
field force to bo encamped 0» tbo racecourse nearthe 
Mount, cod on tiro 20tb July tl.c declaration of hdelity, 
‘„i„ ,ly mentioned, rvas tendered to the Company . 
.Ulcers in the said camp, to those at the Mount, and also 
thee in garrison at Fort St. George. Tbo who e of 
Mtoso hi camp, with the exception of tlu-cc or four refused 
to sign, and were ordered off to the sea coast between 
Sadras aud lStogapatam. 

Amongst these were Lieutenant-Colonel Floyei am 
officers 3rd cavalry, Lieutenant-Colonel Runiley ami 
7 officers 7th cavalry, Major Bruce and 14 officers 1st 
battalion 20th, aud Major Gurnell aud 5 officers ‘-ud 
battalion 25th regiment. 

All the officers of artillery at the Mount, viz., 1 Licuten- 
uut-Colonol, 0 Captains and 15 Lieutenants, having 
refused to sign, Major Sir John Sinclair, Bart., f» Bent 
from Madras to command one battalion, and Captain 
Creighton, Jl.M.’s 59th regiment, to command the other. 

The vacancies in the native corps were filled, so tar 
as the means would admit, by officers of the Royal army, 
and such available Company’/} officers as had signed the 

The declaration was signed by all the officers of the 
General Stall at tho Presidency, but only by n anuu 

t <0 _* A 1. . ( Mil tfICf th item 


chap. J.X. 


Tender of th.* 
declurutioto. 


Reault in 
camp. 


At tho 
Mouut. 


At Made 


vnuicttii “ . • 

number of the regimental officers in the ’ rf, viz., those 


1 Thia mcn-nro In. l.een denounced n* dungeo.i.n mol Imi-lm. 
Tli. . IlnwiiiK extract irom on intercepted In ri ' ’ ’ "" ’ ‘ ‘ ' 

“ 

" . ' Tl •< ««+ lorn; before nil wl.tto fat !•••'««• 1 '■** 

" ’ (iovvrn Itf O il M o t nnto, «b»i tin y ’ lhau ulm. mu 


u •! I 


)„ V ( „o V uy m-v«r miml in wbui tit- 









imsTfy 


history op tiik madras army. 



cjiap. xx. 


Field force 
for the 
Ceded 
! »>' trictH. 


Tn hiiiopoly. 


278 



b longing to the 1st of the 6th, 2nd of the 8th, and 2nd 
of the 20th. 

About tho end of July a detachment of Royal artillery, 
J00 H.M.’s 60th, and 200 H.M.’s 89th were sent from 
Ceylon, and the 1st battalion H.M.’s obth from Bombay, 
llie Government, on being informed of the approaching 
reinforcements, determined to send a strong force into 
the Ceded Districts, to move, either upon Hyderabad, or 
Masulipatam according to circumstances. This force was 
placed under the temporary command of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Conran of the Royals, and inarched from Madras 
about the middle of August. 

VELLORE. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Ross Lang having been unable to 
prevail upon any officer of the 2nd battalion lltli regi¬ 
ment, then stationed at Vellore, to sign the declaration, 
they wore all ordered off to the sea coast. 

Proceedings in the Southern Division. 

Thr declaration was tendered to the officers at Trichino- 
P 0, y on 30th July by Colonel Wilkinson, H.M.’s 30th 
regiment, commanding the Southern Division, and win 
signed by 20 officers, viz., 1 of cavalry, 1 of artillery, 2 
oi‘ engineers, 3 of tho 2nd battalion 13th, 12 of tho 2nd 
bat talioii 3 tfch,and 1 Staff officer. The remaining officers 
of iho 24th who were stationed at Tan j ore signed a few 
days afterwards. Sixteen officers at Tridbinopoly having 
not only refused to subscribe tho declaration, but having 
declined to u give their word of honor that they would 
not interfere, or have a* / further intercourse” with their 
nK.*ii, Colonel A\ ilkinson placed them in confinement, 
and 8ont them towards Negapatam under a guard of 2t'0 
rmm iLM.sd' iu, with instructions to liborato thorn .t 
1 ijon> provided t 1 m would engage to proceed cpiietly f .. 




HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


279 


their destination. Of the officers thus removed, 7belonged CHAP. XX. 
to the Gth regiment of cavalry, 1 to the artillery, and 8 
to the 2nd battalion 13th regiment. 

About the 12th of August Colonel Wilkinson, at the Dindiprui. 
head of a strong 1 detachment, left Trichinopoly by order 
of Government for the purpose of enforcing obedience 
throughout the division. He arrived at Diudigul on the 
17th, but none of the officers of the 2nd battalion 16tli 
regiment would sign the declaration with the exception 
of Major McDonell, the Commandant. The rest, eleven 
in number, were sent off to the coast. 

The officers of the 2nd battalion Gth regiment, then at Palamcouah. 
Paid moot tali, had been extremely violent in their language 
for some time, and on two occasions they had gone tho 
length of seizing and opening tho mails, from which they 
abstracted despatches destined for the officers command¬ 
ing in Truvancore, aud in Malabar. Colonel Wilkinson 
readied tho station on the 30th August, and found the 
Officers prepared to submit, with tho exception of four, 
who wore cousecpicntly removed from the battalion and 
sent to Ouddalore. Captain Townsend and two others, 
who wore charged with having seized tho mails, were sent- 
to Madras for trial under a guard of tho Gth cavalry. 


PliOCKEDlNOS IN TraVANCORK, MALABAR \ND OaNAR \, 
AND AT Goa. 

On tho 9th July orders wore issued for the march of 
three battalions <»t‘ native' infantry from Travincore, but 
tho officer* refused to obey, on the ground that i’ was 
the intention of Government to separate the native corps, 

* o as to place thorn under the control el lI.MVe regiment 

nml tho e,v c ement Was so groat at Quilon that picquets 

I (•(!, iv^imont Oftv.Ury; tinnk or»*npnuii 1 R» H.MXnWUh, 

• , l uuh,2ml lmitulion 2 Ith, &n«i 1 • »injmiiy of urtilki). 





insU'n oi* in r: madiia* akmv. 

- .'^0 men each, nruler European officers, were regularly 
detailed from each native battalion to guard against 
surprise. Lieutenant-Colon el the Honorable 1\ Stuart, 
H.M.’ : 10th regiment, then commanding in Travam - .o, 
nnf bring sufficiently strong to coerce the native troops, 
remained passive. 

The declaration was tendered to the officers of (he 1-t, 
battalion 2nd, 1st battalion 4th, ami 2nd battalion 0th 
regiments at Quilon about tho 16th August, but they all 
refu ed to sign with the exception of four, unurngs* 
whom were the Commandants of tin 4th and 9th. \ f« ,v 
day - hi' *r, v : z., on tho 22nd August, tho officer, of the 
4Ut wore prevailed upon to submit. 

Tho officers or the 1st battalion 17th regiment at 
Cochin, imd those ol the 2nd battaliou 14th, and 2nd leu 
tnlmn 18th rogimonts stationed at Alleppy, all signed tho 
decla ration. 

Major G-albmith Hamilton commanding tho 1st but ; 
lion 18th regiment, then iu the fort at Oodaghnrry, md 
nl! hia officers, refused to sign. 

Tho garrison at CVnnanoro was composed, in addition 
to European troop :, of tho 2nd battaliou J2th, mid 2nd 
battalion 22nd regiments The officers of tho 22nd, v>ltli 

♦ Im exception of those on detm Uinent nt Tdlli.-hmiy, 

- 11 ‘ d tho do 1’iralion. The office! < of the I2lli ivfu ;« {, 

The officers of tho 1st battalion th regie. mi ft | \|,imr. 
I, l° rr . while professing their loy dty, rofuned to ;:Ii 

• um UU.-0 "Colo.ml Wilkinson commanding the S ,,thm n 
1 livisiou, lm i n.d »|»ted tin; moat violent and unprt . ,y tl , „i 
tic ihu ref', by mi lilting and degrading ihe officer of 
Honorable Com pm r ’s aorvieo , the « uicusim , h i, of 
com ho been anctimiod by (Wernmoiit, uimi a' 1 t tin. 
i clings "f every m 1 ti.r vim jold- a ci ininiuHnm m 



mtsr/fy 



> 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


SSI 



The officers of the 2nd battalion 2nd, 1st battalion 14tb, CHAP. XX 
and 1st battalion 15th regiments then forming part of Goa * 
tlio Auxiliary Force at Goa, do not appear to have taken 
any active part in opposition to Government. 


Ceded Districts. 


Most of the officers in the Ceded Districts having 
refused to sign the declaration, were removed from their 
respective corps by Major-General Croker of the Madras 
army commanding the Division. 

Major Keasbury, and 10 officers 1st battalion 9th, Major hcllarr. 
Wright commanding 2nd battalion 7th, and 11 officers 
of that corps, 3 officers of artillery, and 3 Staff officers, 
all belonging to the garrison of Bellary, were sent off to 
the sea coast. Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Ogilby Bart., 
commanding the 9th, and 1 Captain and 1 Subaltern 
of Engineers, were the only officers at Bellary who wore 
not removed. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Bowness, commanding the 1st bat- Gootjr. 
talion 25th regiment at Gooty, signed the declaration. 

The Major and 11 officers, as well as the artillery officer 
at the station, refused. 

All the officers of the 1st battalion 22nd regiment then Cumlnim. 
stationed at Cumbum, refused to sign, and were sent to 
Sadras, as soon as arrangements could be mado to supply 
their placos. 


Analysis of the Declaration. 


Although the number of officers who consented to sign 
the test boro a very small proportion to the whole, yet 
the minority comprised, with a few exceptions, all the 
senior and most distinguished officers, such as Colonols 
Close, Lang, Malcolm, and Barclay. 

The parts taken by the Field officers of cavalry, and 
infantry, so far as they can bo ascertained, are given 
below :— 

vol.. in. 3(> 




282 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS Al!.\fV. 


<8L 


chap. xx. 

Cavalry. 



— 

Lieut.- 



Colonels. 

Majors. 


Adhered to Government, Regimental. 

0 

2 


Do. Staff 

0 

1 


Mutinied, and refused to sign 

4 

3 


Under suspension 

1 

0 


Furlough 

3 

2 


Total Field Officers of cavalry ... 

8 

8 


Infantry. 




Liout.- 



Colonols. 

Majors, 


Adhered to Government, Regimental. 

19 

15 


Do. Staff . . 

8 

3 


Mutinied, and refused to sign 

2 

17 


Under suspension 

L 

2 


Furlough 

18 

5 


Not ascertained 

0 

6 


Total Field Officers of infantry ... 

48 

48 


There were only four. Company's officers of 

the rank 


of Lieutenant-Colonel doing duty with 

the troops in 


' ' -I- J — v w 

and two at Suringapatam Of these. Colonel Innes alono 
was an avowed supporter of Government. Colonel Munro 
was active in the mutiny. Colonel Bell pleaded that ho 
had not been a free agent, and Colonel Doveton defended 
the abandonment of his post at Jaulna on the ground 
that he accompanied the troops solely for the purpose of 
preventing excesses. 

Lord Minto's arrival and proceedings. 

Lord \Tinto, the Governor-General, had intended to 
go to Madras in July, but ho unfortunately postponed 
his dc par tare on being assured by the Madras Govern¬ 
ment that the agitation was rapidly subsiding, an ass nr 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


283 


ance which showed how little that Government under¬ 
stood tbe nature of the indignation, which had been 
created by their hasty and indiscriminate proceedings. 
It was not until the 5th August, when, alarmed by the 
events at Masulipatam, his Lordship sailed from Calcutta, 

but having been delayed by bad weather, ho did not 
arrive at Madras until the 11th September. 

Lord Minto had supported the Madras Government 
throughout from the first, and in an elaborate despatch of 
95 paragraphs, dated 27fch May, he discussed, and entirely 
condemned the memorial 1 which had excited the wrath 
of Sir George Barlow who had sent him a copy thereof 
on the 1st April. Nevertheless, there was a general 
feeling of confidence, throughout the army, in the justice 
and moderation of His Lordship, which was justified by 
the result, and it seems probable that had ho arrived at 
an earlier period, the disastrous affair at Seringapatam 
would not have taken place, and the impolitic measure of 
separating tbe European officers from tbeir men would 
not have been attempted. 

On tho 25th September a general order was published, 
in which tho Governor-General, after having dwelt upon 
the criminal, and desperate character of the contest in 
which the officers had been engaged, granted a general 
amnesty to all concerned, with the exception of tho 
undermentioned, viz. :— 


Garrison of Seringapatam. 
Lieutenant-Colonel John Bell, Commandant. 

Captains DeHavilland Engineers, and Cadell 2nd bat¬ 
talion 12th regiment. Staff Officers. 


1 It would set-in to have been tho policy of both UovernmontB, to 
disregard, if not to ignore, the fact that tho 1 1 .mmni-.sioii of the memo¬ 
rial had been given up by tho authors u.; far back aa the mouth of 


CHAP. XX. 


Confidence 
felt iu the 
justice of 
Lord Minto. 


Amnesty. 


Exceptions 
to tho am¬ 
nesty. 





CHAP. XX. 


O filccr r at 
Hyderabad. 


Thi :' i8pnnd- 
rd offloern re. 
turn to fluty. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Lieutenant-Colonel JR. Muuro, and Major D. C. Kenny, 
commanding the native battalions in the garrison. 

Captains McIntosh, and Aiskill who commanded the 
battalions from Ckittledroog. 

Captain Turner 2nd battalion 15tii regiment who had 
taken a prominent part in the proceedings, and in a sally 
from the fort. 

Garrison of Masulipatam and NeigiibouFwIng Posts. 

Major J. Storey 1st battalion 19th, Captain Andrews 
European Regiment, Captain J. Sadler 1st of 24th, 
Captain J. Patterson 1st of 11th, and Captain G. Wahab 
1st of 21st. 

Field Force at Jaulna. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Joan Poveton Commanding. 

Captains J. L. Lushington, and A. McLeod of tho 
cavalry. 

( aptains-Lieutenant Hopkinson, and Poignand of the 
artillery. 

Major Mathew Stewart, and Captains G. M. Gibson, 
and T. Pollock of the infantry. 

The three Commandants, viz., Lieutenant-Colonels 
Bell and Dovoton, and Major Storey, were ordered to be 
tried by Court Martial. The remaining otlicers were 
allowed the option of standing their trial, or of being dis¬ 
missed from tho service. 

Although the officers at Hyderabad had been tho 
leaders of the mutiny, they escaped punishment in consid¬ 
eration of the importance attached by Lord Miuto to 
their submission at a critical period. 

On the 30th September an order was issued by which 
all officers who had been removed from their military 
function:, were permit ted to rejoin their respective corps 
on signing the declaration, a proffer which was universally 
accepted. 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


285 



Trials of the Officers. 


On the 1st November, a General Court Martial, of which 
Major-General Warde, H.M. Service, was President, and 
which was composed of an equal number of officers of each 
service, assembled at Bangalore for the trial of Lieuten¬ 
ant-Colonel Bell and others. 


<SL 

CHAP. XX. 


Colonel Bell was found guilty on the 9th December Colonel Bell. 
1809, and sentenced to be cashiered. The Proceedings 
were returned for revision, but the Court adhered to their 
original sentence. The Commander-in-Chief, when con¬ 
firming it, remarked that the punishment awarded to the 
prisoner bore no proportion to the atrocity of the crime. 

Major Storey was sentenced to be cashiered. This Major Storey, 
sentence was also returned for revision, but the Court 
having declined to make any alteration, it was confirmed 
by the Commander-in-Chief without remark. 


Lieutenant-Colonel Munro was sentenced to be 
cashiered, which sentence was duly confirmed. 

Major Kenny was also sentenced to bo cashiered, and 
the seutence was confirmed. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Doveton was charged with having 
marched from Jaulna without authority, and with mutin¬ 
ous designs, with having endeavoured to oxcito tho troops 
under his command to mutiny against the Government, 
and with having affixed his name to a mutinous and sedit¬ 
ious paper. 

The Court wore of opinion that Colonel Doveton was 
not guilty of any of tho charges, and therefore acquitted 
him in tho “ most full and honorable manner.” 

The proceedings having been returned for revision, tho 
Court sent them back on the Lith February 1810, with a 
remark to tho effect tlmt they saw no reason to alt< r their 
former opinion. 


Colonel 

Munro. 


Major Kenny. 


Colonel 

Doveton. 


Acquitted by 
the Court. 


miSTffy 



Suspended by 
the Governor- 
General. 


Colonel 

Doveton’a 

defence. 


Dissolution 
of tho Court. 


ABsembly of 
& nc.v Court. 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 

I he Commander-in-Chief disapproved of the finding, 
and recommended that Colonel Doveton should bo sus¬ 
pended until further orders, but that he should continue 
to draw his pay and allowances. 

This recommendation was approved of, and acted upon 
by tho Governor-General in Council on the 21st March 
1810. 

Colonel Doveton had rested his defence partly on the 
plea that he accompanied the troops with the object of 
preventing them from the commission of excesses, and 
partly on the strength of a private and confidential letter 
from the Resident at Hyderabad in which that line of 
conduct had been recommended. Neither of these pleas 
were considered admissible either by the Commander-in- 
Cliief, or the Governor-General, who pronounced it- to 
have been the duty of Colonel Doveton to leave the 
mutinous officers so soon as he found himself unable to 
control them. 

Tho Court Martial of which Major-General Warde was 
President was dissolved on tho 4th April 1810, and an 
order was published at the same time in which, while the 
Governor-Genoral admitted the ff upright aud honorable 
motives of the respectable officers who composed tho 
Court,” he took exception to their judgments as having 
been erroneous in some points. 

It is conceivable tliat this Court may have been con¬ 
sidered not sufficiently plastic, and too favorably disposed 
towards the accused officers. 

Neither of these objections could bo urged against the 
members of the fresh Court Martial which was ordered 
to assemble at Wallajahbad for the trial of the remain- 
iug officers. The President of this Court was Colonel 

Vilkinson H.M. 80th Regiment, a firm and uneompro- 



mtSTfty 



iaieing 1 adherent of Sir George Barlow; and two-thirds of 
the members belonged to H.M. Service. The Court was 
consequently believed to have been packed, and the 
accused officers having preferred the alternative of dis¬ 
missal to that of trial, they were dismissed accordingly 
on the 5th April 1810. The name of one officer, viz., 
Captain McLeod 8th regiment cavalry, having been 
inserted iu the order by mistake, his dismissal was can¬ 
celled on the 28th April. 

Case op Colonel the Honorable A. Sentleger. 

During, and after, these troubles, many complaints 
were made of the harsh and degrading treatment to 
which a number of officers had been subjected after the 
suspension of Colonel Capper, and Major Boles; but it 
will be sufficient to mention two instances, one of which 
is a striking example of insubordinate and intemperate 
behaviour on one sido, and undignified retaliation on the 
other. 


1 This officer in a letter to tho Military Secretary, dated 18th July 
1809, reported that ho had no reason to beliove that any officer under his 
command meditated any hostile measure against Government, but ho 
added that, in event of “ any wretches po far forgetting themselves 
as to bo taken in arms agaiust Government, it would be desirable to 
know if the punishment dui to rebols might not bo indicted on them 
ini mediately.” 

Ou tho 21st of tho same month, ho offered to make prisoners of tho 
European officers of the native corps at Trichinopoly, and to appoiut 
King’s officers thereto—Letter to Lieutenant-Colonel Barclay, 21st July 
1809. 

Shortly after the arrival of tho Governor-General, charges were pre- 
ferred against Colonol Wilkinson for unnecessary severity in carrying 
out the orders of Government with respect to tho declaration, but his 
acts were held to be covered by the general amuo * y. Li these circum¬ 
stances, although Colonel Wilkinson had probably ucted honestly 
according to his convictions, he could not be considered an unbiassed, 
and vra3 therefore not a fit and proper porann to bavo been selected ao 
t hr President of the Court MartiaL 


<SL 


CHAP. XX. 

The officers 
decline to bo 
tried by it. 




288 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Lieutenant-Colonel the Honorable A. Sentleger of the 
6th cavalry was an officer who had served with distinc¬ 
tion under Coote, Cornwallis., and Wellesley, and had 
recently received the thanks of Government for distin¬ 
guished service in Travancore. Nevertheless, his con¬ 
duct on some occasions had called forth the displeasure of 
Government, who, in a despatch to the Court of Direc¬ 
tors, written in October 1807, before the arrival of Sir 
George Barlow, reported that “ a very dangerous spirit 
of cabal has shewn itself among several officers of your 
army. This feeling has been greatly inflamed by the 
impunity with which the Honorable Lieutenant-Colonel 
Sentleger has hitherto been enabled to brave and insult 
the authority of this Government. Every means of the 
most public nature have been taken at some of the princi¬ 
pal military stations to hold up Lieutenant-Colonel 
Sentleger as the champion of the rights of the Com¬ 
pany's army, and as one whose example calls for general 
imitation. ” 

On the 7th April 1800, the Government, having re¬ 
ceived information that Colonel Sentleger had been con¬ 
cerned in the preparation of the memorial to the Governor- 
General, sent a letter to the Resident at Travancore, 
desiring that the Colonel should bo relieved from the 
command at Oodagherry, and desired to return to liis 
regiment at Tri chi no poly. 

It so happened that in this letter, which was not re¬ 
ceived until the 25th April, the title of “ Honorable M had 
been omitted, upon which Colonel Sentleger addressed 
the Chief Secretary in the following terms : — 

41 That the letter, I have herewith the honor to enoloso, 
was intended by the Honorable the Governor in Council to 
hurt, iny feelings, I am fully satisfied ; that he has succeeded, 
I am unable to dony; but although it maybe in tho power of 
tbo Honorable tho Governor in Council to wound iri3 T feelings, 


mtsrffy 



msiuKY Oi 1’Htt RADIUS AKSiY. 


289 


r* pun 
VOL. 


<SL 


luui degrade lilt: from command, I am ignorant, of any power 
or uuthority ’ estcd in him tu annul that- title to which my 
birth lias elevated me.” 

‘ As removal from command is generally conceived a 
punishment for an offence committed, I am relieved from 
i lueh anxiety ns to tin cause of my removal, by having 
received officially the cop; of a letter addressed by the present 
Commancjtir-in-Chief to the Officor commanding in Travan- 
f*oro respecting the expression of the general sense of the 
army on the unfortunate situation of Major Boles, a paper 
to which I affixed my name as being purely expressive of 
my hvntixtti'nts on the subject to which it iclatos; and 
further, 1 have no hesitation to declare that, had I been 
appointed to bit as member of a general Court-martial to 
investigate the conduct of Major Boles, as having refused to 
«ign and publish the orders of his immediate Commander- 
in-Chief on a subject ;o purely military, I should have 
n warded cashiering as a punishment only adequate lu such 
Jisol>odionce. M 

'L i• i^ letter did not reach Madras until after ho publ - 
cation of the order of tbo 1st May, in which Colonel 
flcnth'gor u’ul others had been suspended, but the inslnut 
it hoi been received, the permission vliicli had L oa 
grunted Colonel Scntlogdr to visit Trichiiiopoly for the 
purpnn. of arranging his v*ri vato affairs before proceed¬ 
ing to Madras via- revoked, aud Colouol Wilkinson was 
u dered to send an officer to meet him on bis way from 
Trnvaneorc to desire him to march to Poouamalleo by 
Ibr ‘.ea cn: k 1, in d to await Hind orders a( iLnt rtntion, 
which lit that mo . was tho depOt lor foreign pri iuv* 
Failing nu u^nrnnoo on (bo part of Colon . 1 Sentb get 
th i? !i*% wou 1 obey these nrd«n, ho wn to bo ml to 
ihxiliuinalleu under a guard. The Colonel ar.Med il 
ih aim i dh in due cour r having gi on tho promise 
1, and << n ftorwniah lm wan alliK « 1 to go to 


CHAV XX. 










WQUU 0 


HISTORY OF THR MADRAS ARM V. 




CilAF. >,X. Madras, where he filed an affidavit in the Supreme Court 
preliminary to an action in the King's Bench, which he 
proposed to bring against Sir George Barlow for unjust 
suspension, and slanderous and malicious libel. In this 
affidavit, which was sworn to about the middle of June, 
tbo Colonel denied having circulated, or promoted the 
circulation, of any memorial to the Governor-Goncral, 
or that he had employed his influenco for the purpose of 
subverting the authority of Government. On the 18th 
of Juno lie applied for permission to remain at Madras 
in order that he might be present at the next session of 
the Court, but this was refused, and he embarked for 
England a few days afterwards. During October two 
witnesses, viz., Lieutenant-Colonel Veney Madras army, 
and Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod H.M.'s 69th regimoi.it, 
wore brought forward to rebut the statements of Colonel 
Sentleger, and after having given their evidence before 
„ the Judges, they were cross-examined by the ColoncLs 
counsel. 

Colonel Vescy deposed that the inomorial had been 
sent to biin at Paluincottah some time during March by 
Colonel Sentleger, and that ho had immediately written 
to him to tho effect, that he had destroyed it am bring 
an improper document, of which action the Colonel had 
afterwards approved, became the intention to forward 
the memorial in tliat shape had been abandoned. 

Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod stated that the momm -l 
had been brought to him in TVavaricore by tho Colonel, 
who requested him to sign it, und also to procure tho 
bi gnat urea of his officers thereto; both of whi«h he 
refund to do, and also told the Colonel that if he did 
n<»t Hutvood in turning out Sir Goorgo Barlow, lie, the 
Colonel, ought to bo turned out luinself. Thin t« «ti 
niony was uol shaken iu crosK-oxaminiitioii. It may lm 




presumed that the removal of Sir George Barlow, and CHAP. XX. 
the subversion of Government were not considered as 
synonymous terms by Colonel Sentleger. 

Officers at Triciiinopoly. 

The other instance was the treatment of the officers at 
Triciiinopoly by Colonel Wilkinson, who was said to have 
marched them to the barracks surrounded by a detach¬ 
ment of H.M.’s 30th regiment, with loaded muskets, 
and fixed bayonets, and with orders to shoot thorn all 
in case of a rescue being attempted. 

There is reason to believe that this complaint was 
true, but there must have beeu considerable difficulty in 
knowing how to deal with a set of officers 1 who would 
neither sign the declaration of fidelity, nor promise to 
abstain from communicating with the men of the regi¬ 
ments from which they had been removed. Officers, in 
making such complaints, forgot the manuer in which 
th» y had themselves behaved in ar resting and confining 
thcr lawful commandants. 

Debates at the India House. 1810-12. 

The measures of Government were attacked at the 
India House by Sir Francis Faring, Sir Hugh Inglis, 

Messrs : Baimerman, Hudleston, and others, and defended 
1 y the majority, led by Messrs : Grant and Astell, the 
Chairman and Deputy Chairman. Lc ng and angry de¬ 
lates followed. It was maintained by one party that the 
mutiny had been entirely caused by tlio inveterate spirit 
of insubordination wlm h prevailed among the officers 
whereas it was contended on the other sido th t all the 

1 Many i * mom bcloiii r t , <l to tbo cnvairy, tho oITIcojh <»f which had 
h*. n much irr’»tn+"l t v flm .mapeimi.m of (Yh.ml £ 1 i.tsr ami tho 

..vul <>. Ouhaul Itua.lcy from hi a .• nuunml. 




Mr. Banner- 
xnan'n 

tinctures ou 
tlio conduct 
of Govern¬ 
ment. 





L ill STORY or THi; MADRAS ARMY. 

evils which were to he lamented in the disgraceful, and 
guilty state of the army of Fort St- George, were, in o 
great degree, to be ascribed to the acts of Government. 

The following is a summary of some of the principal 
objections taken by Mr. Bannerman in his dissent, dated 
23rd April 1810 :— 

The rejection of the memorial 1 of officers commnnding 
corps forwarded by the Commander-in-Chief on the 28th 
January 1809, on the ground that it was objectionable and 
improper; by which rejection the door of appeal was shut, 
and authority interposed, to stop, not only the regular course 
of justice, but the ultimate appeal against oppression. 

“ The suspension of Colonel Capper and Major Boles for 
the strict performance of their military duty; an act unsound 
in its principle, and rash and unnecessary in its npplicatl >n, 
and which may be considered the chief ground of discontent 
in the army, and by the subsequent measures growing out of 
this fatal error, to have been one of the leading causes of the 
lato unfortunate rebellion. 

“Tbo promulgation of the Goneral Order of the 1st May 
1809, which suspended and degraded, without trial , officers 
whose characters, in the order, were publicly stigmatised ou 
private examination and private information , withholding from 
the accv.. ed the detail of tho accusation , the name of the accuser, 
or any of those circumstances which justice exacts for the pur¬ 
pose of enabling the accused to repel imputed guilt.'* 

I he contest at the India House continued for about 
three year.*, when the attacking party having acquired 
tho majority, orders were sent out in December 181.2. 
nominating Lieutenant-General the Honorable John 
Abercrornby to be Governor of Fort St. George, and 
annulling the provisional appointment of Sir George 


1 IJ. t"fir of biioi’tors im i»r t 99 r»f their general U*t t« r Kind lGth 
1 ' 1 - omW 1HU9, oxprvavH their «l.*i»i>|>rovui of the rUmml U 
thin muiM i iuI 







M MtSTQy 




HISTORY OF 1 II K.MADRAS Al.'.V.Y. 2'J3 

Barlow to succeed to the office of Governor-General. 
These orders having been received at Madras in May 
1S13, Sir George Barlow vacated office on the 21st of 
that month. 

Pardon op the Officers, 1811-16. 

With the exception of Lieutenant-Colonel John Bell, 
and the Commandants of the battalions which had 
marched from Chittledroog, every surviving officer who 
had either been suspended, dismissed, or cashiered, was 
ultimately restored to the service. This was an act of 
grace in the cases of most, but the few who had been 
unjustly treated had reason to complain of the continu¬ 
ance of their suspension by the majority of the Court, 
who were desirous to avoid any thing having the appear¬ 
ance* of reflecting upon any of the actions of the Madras 
Government. On this plea, Major Boles, and Captain 
Marshall wore not relieved from suspension until October 
1811, although a large body of officers, who had been 
engaged in actual mutiny, had been exempted by tho 
amnesty from any punishment whatever. 

Lieutenant-Colonels Doveton, and Robort Bell were 
restore 1 to their respective commands in January 1813. 
With respect to the former, the Court observed that 
although they doubted whether his acquittal had been 
justified by the evidence, the} would not deprive him of 
tho benefit thereof. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Munro, Major 0 Kenny and Stewart, 
and Captains Sadler and Poigmud were not restored until 
April and Juno IS 14, and Major Storey not until two 
years later. All the others wer restored during 181:2 
and 1813. 

Tho bad feeling, and dissension engendered by these 
lamentable events dicin' i •$ubeidefor notin v years. Several 
i\»uit h. martial wire held upon officers during 1801)-10 



<SL 


CHAP. XX. 

Sir G. H. 
Bnrlow 
va;*ate3 
eftiue, 1613. 


BnU 

in ha anwT 


HISTORY 01 THK MADRAS ARMY. 



291 



for insulting others who had aided with tho Govern¬ 
ment^ and in 1812, an officer was suspended for having 
ieiused to dine with Colonel Conran Commanding tho 
Hyderabad Subsidiary Force, or to make any apology 
foi his refusal. Fvcn so late as 1835, an officer of rank, 
then holding an important staff appointment at tlio 
1 i esidency, was still in bad odour with his surviving 
contemporaries for alleged treachery towards the officers 
of his own regiment. 


Although the motives which led the Commander-in- 
Chief to take action against Colonel Munro may havo 
been questionable, yet it must be admitted that his pro¬ 
ceedings were regular, and consistent both with military 
law, and tho usages of the service; whorona those of 
Government, besides being severe and arbitrary in the 
extreme, were, in some instances, positively unjust. It 
is now conceded that Major Boles ought not to hnvo 
suffered for his obedience to the Commander-m-Chiof, 
mure especially ns he only signed the order in conse¬ 
quence of the temporary absence of his superior, who, on 
his return, assumed the responsibility ; but this avowal, 
instead of having the effect of leading to the restoration 
of Major Boles, only involved Colonel Capper in the sumo 
predicament. Again, supposing an example to have been 
necessary, the removal of those two officers from their 
important situations on the staff would have been suffi¬ 
cient to murk the displeasure of Government with .at tin-, 
infliction of the additional cruel pmbMimmt of suspen- 
• ion. 'I his puTiidiment, folk wed immediately after wards 
by tho refusal fcu permit Major B 1< to 
in tlm Gmhington,” was ono proximate cause of ih" 
mutiny, for, hud not that ofika been detained in India, 
m. subscript a in ffir lus maintenance would have U,-,i 
required, and tho addresses to him, fur being emu era, d 





uifroKY o* 'nit Madras -imv 


2L» 5 


in which, several officers of rank were removed from CMJ 
their commands, would never have been framed. 

In reading the correspondence of the time it is impos¬ 
sible not to be struck by the exaggerated and violent 
language in which the officers described their grievances 
and fears. The former, with the exception of the unfair 
preference shown to the officers of the Royal army in 
respect to commands, and appointments on the staff, 
were more imaginary than real, and not sufficient to 
a. count for any violent agitation, far less for the mutiny, 
the principal cause of which must be sought for in the 
severity of the local Government; for although the feeling 
of alarm and insecurity, which pervaded all ranks subse¬ 
quently to the suspensions and removals ordered on the 
1st -lay, seems at first sight to have been out of all pro¬ 
port urn to the importance of the circumstances so far as 
they affected the general body of officers, yet it must be 
remembered that in those days of slow communication 
with England, suspension meant being reduced to a bare 
i ubsbmneo for an indefinite period, certainly for a year 
at least, and that the Madras Government had shown 
thouiselvof disposed to make an unsparing use cf that 
n< vere, and thoretofore exceptional method of punishment, 
without trial, and without disclosing the evidence upon 
which they acted. No man felt safe, and no relief could 
bo exported 1 torn the Supreme Government, w hich had 
committed itrolf to an unqualified approval of the pro¬ 
ceedings of Sir George Barlow. Nothing can justify the 
misguided and guilty conduct of the officers, but (ho 
arbitrary closing of the door of appeal in India, and the 
nuforfcunuto procrastination of Lord Minto i) delaying 
to proceed to Madras, must bo held as important factors 
in their continued insubordination, and the culmination 
thereof in ini'iny 







CHAP. XXI. 

Amcf*r Khan 
Aoifcua 

J’ALulpoor, 



Preparations 
i*l i I *' Britinh 
< ovommont. 


A»1. aaco t>» 
EnrODgrj 


<SL 

290 HISTORY OF rur MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAPTER XXL 

FROM TEE TERMINATION OF THE WAR IN TRAVANUORE 
IN 1809, TO THE COMPLETION OF THE CONQUEST 
OF JAVA, 13L2. 


Occupation of Seronob, 1810 . 

A soldier of fortune named Ameer Klmn, wlio had 
attained some distinction in the service of different 
princes in Contra! India, at last attached himself to 
Jcswnnfc Rao Holkar, and ultimately became independent. 
In January 1809, taking advantage of the insanity ol 
Holkar, he entered the territories of the Rujah of Nagpore 
at the head of a largo force estimated at 10,000 homo 
and 24,000 Pindarics, and took possession of the city of 
Jubbulpoor, and tlio surrounding country. 

The interests of the British Government being supposed 
to ho injuriously affected by this movement, an army waA 
assembled at, and in the neighbourhood of, Jaulna 
during November, and placed under tho command of 
Colonel Barry Close, who was invested by the Governor- 
General with the entire control of all the British troops 
serving in the territories of the Nizam, the Pcishwa, and 
the Rajah of Bcrar. 

Encouraged by these prepnrations, the Nagpore ti\ «p» 
attacked Ameer Khan,and drove him into Bhopal; but the 
advance of Colonel Close being ^iill consicU r< 1 n • c m v 





HISTORY Otf'lHC MADRAS ARMY. 


297 


lie Inarched 1 from Jaulna about the middle of November 
by Ain raw u tty, Ashty, and Bliilsa, and on the 10th Febru¬ 
ary 1810, he arrived at Seronge, 2 the capital of Ameer 
Khan, after a long and difficult march. 

The place had been evacuated on the 9th by the last 
party of Ameer KhaiTs troops, he himself having previ¬ 
ously takon refugo at Indore. On the lltli, Colonel 
Close placed himself in communication with Lieutenant- 
Colonel Martindale commanding a detachment of Bengal 
troops, which had been ordered to co-operate from 
Bundleound, and which was then encamped about 45 
miles from Seronge. 

All apprehensions of a further invasion of Berar being 
over for the time, Colonel Close was soon recalled. He 
reached tho Nerbudda on the 8th March, and from thence 


CHAP. XXI. 


Occupation 
of Seronge, 


1810. 


Breaking up 
of tho arfciy. 


1 Tho army was brigaded aa follows in December 1809:— 

Cavalry division, Lioutcnant-Colonol Hare, H.M. 22nd Dragoons. 


Is*, brigade, Major Neale, 

1st cavalry. 

H.M. 22nd Light Dragoons, 
let .’togiment Cavalry. 

7th do. do. 


2nd brigade, Major Lewis, 
2nd cavalry. 

2nd Itogiment Cavalry. 
4th do. do. 

8th do. do. 


Right, brigade, Major Bruce, 
20ili native infantry 
1st. battalion lGth N.I. 
2nd do. 17th do. 


Centre brigade, Lieutenant Colonel 
Irton, 12th native infantry. 

1st battalion 10th N.I. 

H.M. 31th Reirimetit. 

1st battalion 12th N.I. 


Infantry division, Liontenant-Colonel Conran, Royals. 


T oft brigade, Lieutenant-Colonol Troitcr, 20th native infantry. 
1st battalion 9t.h native infantry. 

1st do. 20th do. 

2nd do. 7th do. 


Major Cross.lill to command tbo artillery. 

Captain Bowes (litb N.I ) to command the pioneers. 

Duropouns 1,507, natives 7,600. 

Nizam's troop: 2,078, Mysore llorso 1,300, Balabut Khan’s coutiugout 

2,2U0. 

* In iho province T Malwa, Lat. 21-5 N. Long. 77-41 JE., about 450 
mile;, from JauLna in o D' rth-easterly direction. 




VOL. III. 


38 






Ml HtST/ty. 



Recognition 
of Colonel 
Closo’s, 
services. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

proceeded to Amrawutty, where the army was broken 
up on the 24th April, A detachment under Lieutenaut- 
Colonol Hewitt of tho 17th was sont to Hyderabad. A 
brigade under Lioutenant-Colonol Conran marched to 
Jaulna, which had recently been fixed upon as the Head 
Quarters of the Hyderabad Subsidiary Force, and the 
remainder of the army, under Colonel Close, followed to 
the same station, from whence the regiments, under orders 
for cantonments in the south, proceeded to their several 
destinations. 

Colonel Close returned to England in September, upon 
which occasion the following order was issued by Govern¬ 
ment :— 



“ Fort St, George, 6th Septemrer 1810. 

“ Col op el Close is permitted to proceed to Europe on 
furlough. The important services rendered by Colonel Close, 
in the high and confidential situations which he has held 
under the Government of this Presidency, have so frequently 
received the testimony 1 of public approbation that it would 

1 Extract of a letter to tho Governor-General from Gcner:il Harris, 
Soringapatam, 13th May 1799. 

In every point of view, I must call your Lordship’s particular 
attention to the Adjutant-Goneral of tho army. Hia general chaiactor 
a« an ofheer hi too well established by a long and distinguished course of 
tho most meritorious service to require my testimony. * « * Tho 

ability, zeal, and energy displayed by him in superintending tho various 
operations of an arduous siege, whero he was ever present, stimulating 
tho exertions of others, or assisting their judgment ;md labor with hiu 
own, claim from me to be stated to your Lordship in the meat forcible 
terms. It in my earnest wish that my sentimontB on this subject may 
bo publicly recorded, and it is my firm opinion that, if the nuccoss of 
this army has been of importance to the British interests, that surer 38 
is to be attributed, in a very considerable degree, to Lieutouant-Colonel 
Cloao.” 

Extract from General Orders by tho Governor-Gen era I, Fori St George, 
24th May 1799. 

Ilio conduct of tho Adju ant-General, Lionicuant-Colonel Closo, 
has amply justified the implicit confidence reposed by tho Governor- 
tenoral in Council in his extensive knowledge, approved c:cporionco, 
■upurirr t&leute, ardent valor, and indcfatigablo activity.'" 





mist# 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 200 

be superfluous to recapitulate them. The Governor in 
Council, however, cannot allow that officer to depart without 
again expressing the hig(\ sonso which this Government must 
ever entertain of services so eminent and distinguished, 
which have contributed ao essentially to the prosperity of 
the British interests in the Deccan,* and which so justly entitle 
him to the strongest expressions of gratitude and esteem.” 

Colonel Close became a Major-General in July 1810. 
He was created a Baronet soon afterwards, and died in 
England in 1813, aged 56. 

The Court of Directors sent out a handsome monument 
to his memory “ in testimony of their gratitude for his 
ardent zeal, and entire devotion to their service, equally 
manifested in the application of high military attainments, 
and of profound political knowledge .” This monument 
is now in St. Mary’s Church, Fort St. George. 

Expeditions against the French Islands, 1809-10. 

Occupation of Rodrigues, 1809. 

Between 1792, and 1809, the trade of the East India 
Company suffered severely from the attacks of .French 
men-of-war, and of privateers sent from the Mauritius 
and Bourbon, but the British Government was long 
averse to undertake any. expedition against these islands 
on account of tho expense which it would iuvolve. At 
last our losses became so serious that it was determined 
to establish a blockade, and in furtherance of this object 
it was resolved tj take possession of tho small island of 
Rodrigues 1 as a depot for stores and provisions, and as 
a station for tho squadron. This island, almost uninhab¬ 
ited, was occupied accordingly by a detachment from 
Bombay consisting of about 200 of H.M.’s 56th foot, and 


! About. 300 miles c «t of tiro Mauritius ox Isle of France -hat. 
Vr -U' S., Long. 03' DO h. 



<SL 


CHAP. XXI. 


Ho returns to 
England. 



miSTffy 



300 HISTORY OY THB MADRAS ARMY. 

an equal number of men from tbe 2nd battalion 2nd regi¬ 
ment Bombay native infantry, attainder tbe command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel H. S. Keating of the 56th. 

During August, and the early part of September 1800, 
ordnance, stores, and provisions were landed, roads 
were made leading to the interior of the island, and the 
troops wero exei'cised preparatory to an attempt to sur¬ 
prise tho town of St. Paul's situated on the west coast 
of Bourbon. 



Capture of St. Pauls. 

On tho 16th September, a detachment, consisting of 
368 officers and men, embarked on board H.M.'s ships 
“Nereido” and “ Otter” and tho East India Company's 
cruiser “Wasp.” On the morning of tho 19th, they 
fell in with H.M.'s ships “Raisonable” and “Sirius” 
off the Mauritius, and on tho Bamo day the troops and 
seamen destined for the attack, consisting of 604, wero 
put on board tho “ Nereid e,” and tho squadron sailed 
for Bourbon that evening. 

About 5 o’clock on the morning of the 21st, the troops 
landed a short distance to the south of Point de Galotte 
on the north-western coast of the island, about seven 
miles north of the town of St. Paul’s. Colonel Koating 
moved rapidly forward, and by 7 a.m, ho was in posses¬ 
sion of the first and second batteries. 

The enemy made a stand behind a stone wall near tho 
third battery, but they were soon forced from that posi¬ 
tion. The remaining batteries were then taken, and the 
guns turned upon the shipping in the harbour, the whole 
of which surrendered shortly afterwards to the British 
squadron which stood in at this time. 

By half past 8 o’clock, the town, batteries, magazines, 
and public stores were in oar possession. The French 
frigate u La Caroline,” of 46 guns, was taken, and sov ral 


mtSTfty 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


301 


merchantmen belonging to the East. India Company, were 
recaptured, also the brig Grappler ” of 18 guns. 

After this brilliant exploit, Colonel Keating returned to 
Rodrigues, whore he arrived on the 25th October, and 
immediately began to build store-houses, barracks, and 
houses for the officers. 


Expedition to Bourbon , 1810. 

On bearing of the success which had attended the 
efforts of so small a detachment, the Supreme Govern¬ 
ment resolved to attempt the complete reduction of the 
French islands, and they sent instructions to Madras, 
in conformity with which, a force, 1 consisting of 1,650 
Europeans, and 1,000 Natives, embarked at that place for 
Rodrigues on the 8th May 1810, under the command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Hasting' Fraser, H.M.'s 86th regi¬ 
ment. 

The troops arrived on the 20th June, and Colonel 
Keating having assumed command, tbo expedition sailed 
on the 3rd July for St. Denis, the capital of Bourbon, 
and approached the place of debarkation on the 6th 
idem. 

The first brigade, under Lieutenant-Colonel Fraser^ 
composod of H.M.’s 86th, the 1st battalion 6th Madras 
native infantry (6th M.N.I.), with a party of artillery 


Madras artillery ... ... ... ... ... 100 

Flank companies, H.M.’s 12th and 33rd. . *100 

U.M.’a 69th rogiment ... ... ... 730 

„ 86th do. ... ... ... 420 

1,650 

lf t. ’ . + ralion 6th Madras native infantry . . S50 

2nd do. 12th do. ... 850 

Detachment 2nd battilion pionoora ... . 200 


<SL 


CHAP. XXX. 


Arrives off 
St. Denis. 


Orders to tbo 
troops. 


Total rank and filo ... 3,550 




Difficulty in 
landing. 


Success of the 
Urst brigade. 


302 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

and pioneers, was ordered to land at Grand Chaloupe, 
about six miles west of St. Denis, which is situated on the 
northern coast of the island. 

The remaining three brigades, under the general com¬ 
mand of Colonel Keating, were ordered to land near the 
“ Riviere de Pluies/' about three miles east of the town, 
viz.:— 

The second brigade under Lieutenant-Colonel Drum¬ 
mond, H.M.'s 86th, composed of a party of Royal marines, 
and the 2nd battalion 12th regiment Madras native infan¬ 
try (24th M.N.I.). 

The third brigade under Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod, 
H.M.'s 69th, composed of H.M.'s 69th, and a detachment 
of Bombay native infantry. 

The fourth brigade under Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell, 
H.M.’s 33rd, composed of the flank companies H.M.'s 
12tli and 33rd regiments, a detachment H.M.'s 56th, and 
a party of pioneers. 

The disembarkation began at 2 p.m. on the 7lh, aud 
about 300 men of the third and fourth brigades under 
Colonel McLeod, together with a few seamen under 
Captain Willoughby, had landed, when the surf became 
so heavy that nothing more could be done. Upon this 
Colonel McLeod moved a short distance to the eastward 
as far as St. Marie, where he took possession of a battery 
and remained during the night. 

The first brigade succeeded in landing at Grand 
Chaloupe without loss, and Colonel Fraser, pushing on 
towards the town, occupied the western heights above it 
with the view of preventing the eutrance of any succour* 
from St. Paul's. Early on the morning of the 8th, the 
Colonol, leaving the 6th battalion, to protect his rear, 
descended the hill towards the town with the Europeans, 
and attacked the enemy, who were drawn up in two 



Nil MSr#y, 



‘ e <W 
• ,-_ ^ 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


303 


columns on the plain with two field-pieces, and supported CHAP. XXL 
on the flank by a redoubt. They were quickly driven 
back by the bayonet, broken, and pursued so closely that 
they retreated into the town, leaving the redoubt in our 
possession. The guns were then turned upon the place, 
and the rest of the troops coming up about 4 o’clock in 
the afternoon, the commandant surrendered, and a capit- Surw* of 
illation was signed by which the whole island, together 
with all public property, was ceded to the British. The 
troops became prisoners of war. Our loss was incon¬ 
siderable, viz., 18 killed 1 and 70 wounded, exclusive of 5 
seamen. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell was detached to St. 

Paul’s with his brigade on the 10th, and took possession 
of that place, where 1,500 men laid down their arms. 

145 pieces of ordnance of various calibres, 195,000 lbs. Captured 

r ordnance, 

of gunpowder, and a quantity of small arms, and military 

stores fell into our hands. 

Captain Moodio of the 6th regiment. Captain Lambert Thanks to 
1 . A in/-« j. officers of tho 

2nd batt alion 13th regiment, acting Aidc-dc-Lamp to brigade 

Colonel Fraser, Lieutenant Davies Engineers, Lieutenant 

Abdy artillery, and Lieutenant Soouler of the pioneers 

(1st battalion 22nd regiment) received the thanks of 

the brigadier. 

The services of the several brigadiers, and of tho and staff, 
officers on the staff, were duly acknowledged by Colonel 


brigade. 


/■ H.M.’s 86th ...11 
j 6th M.N.I. ... 1 
C Pioneers ... 1 


Killed. 


Wounded, 
r H.M.’s 86th . 58 
1 st brigade. ^ 6th m.N.I.... 7 


2nd 

3rd 

4th 



H.M.’s 69th ... 2 
J Flank corps ... 1 | 

I H.M.’s 56fch ..1 









imtSTffy 



Thanks of the 

Governor- 

General. 


301 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


<SL 


Keating* in liis report to the Governor-General, dated 
21st July, which was conveyed to Calcutta by Lieutenant- 
Colonel Campbell H.M.'s 33rd regiment. 

On the % 24th August an order was issued by the 
Governor-General in Council in which the officers and 
men engaged in the expedition were thanked for the 
zeal, courage, and perseverance, by which a conquest of 
so much importance to the national interests had been 
achieved. 


Capture of the Isle de la Passe. 

On the night of the 13th August the “ Isle de la Passe/' 
situated at the mouth of the harbour at the south-eastern 
extremity of the Mauritius, known as the “ Grand Port/' 
was attacked by a small 1 party of marines and seamen 
in the boats of the " Sirius" and “ Iphigenia" and carried. 
Lieutenant Norman of the " Sirius ” and 6 men were 
killed, and 18 men wounded. A garrison of 130 men was 
placed in the island, and Lieutenant Davies of the 
Engineers was entrusted with the duty of improving the 
defences. 

Attacks on the Captain Willoughby of the “ Nereide ” having been 

pOBtS Of tllQ 11*1 ® 

enemy. placed in charge of the island, made preparations for 
attacking some of the enomy’s posts on the mainland, and 
leaving Captain Todd H.M.’s 33rd, in command, ho 
embarked a small detachment 2 in the boats of the 
“ Nereide ” and “ Staunch ” at 1 a.m. on the 17th, and 
assaulted and carried the fort at “ Point de Diablo,” which 

1 Seventy-one in all.—James’ Naval History* Vol. V, p. 146. 

3 170 officers and mon, viz., Liontcuant Aldwinklo Madras artillery, 
and 12 mon; Lieutenant Morlett H.M’g 83rd, aud Lieutenant Ncodhall 
H.M’b GUtb, with GO men ; Lieutenants Pye and C-or Loyal murines, with 
GO men ; and Lieutenants Deacon and Wiees R.N., with 60 men. 

Lie id count Davies Mtdrus Engineer*, accompanied tho party nud 

WU 0 nightly wounded -^Jamra’ Naval Ulglurjr, V«*! V, nod Mu-iioa 
Army List for 1810. 





history or tiil maijRa.i my. 



3 u r> 


<SL 


A 10I 
Uarhouj ol 

“ Ol'llUo 

Port.” 


fmnndcd tho nortli-cantor n entrance into the t<r Grand c’IIA l\ XXI 
p,, r t Having spiked the guns, do .troyed the carriages, 
and blown up the magazine, Captain Willoughby advanced 
to the town of “ Grand Port/' distant about twelve miles, w 
after having dispersed a party of the enemy by which he 
was opposed on tho march. lie returned to his ship the 
sarins evening. 

The next day he landed again with the same force, 
and destroyed the signal-house at the port ot “ Grand 
Riviere/' about live miles north of “ Point do Diablo/' 
to which place ho then returned, and after having 
destroyed the works, lie went back to the " Isle do la 
Passo." 

Disasters of the Squadron. 

Those successes were quickly followed by a series of 
disasters to the squadron. On the 22nd August the 36-gun 
friga is “ Sirius/' and “ Nereide" made an attempt to 
attack the French vessels in the "Grand Port/' but the 
“ Sirius ” having grounded near tho entrance, nothing 
wn effected. The “ Iphigenia," and “ Magiciomio/' 
also of 36 guns ends having arrived the next day, tlio 
attempt was renewed by the four ships, but the “ Sirius " 
and Mugiciouno " both took tho ground, and the 
other two vessels w *ro unequal to contend again at Die 
combined fire of the enemy's ships and batteries. The 
‘ Nereide,” which had grounded after standing into the 
harbour, was obliged to strik« her Hag about 10 c m , 
iii tcr ho iiighod 230 seamen, marines, and soldiers killed 
nnd wjumlcd put of a total of 2SI Amongst the killed 
Wore Lieutenant Morlett Il.M.'s 33rd, and Lieutenant 
i\ Aid winkle hi battaliou Madras artillery. Lieutenant 
Neeilliall of t ho dPth was wounded. 

f | M . ) i-viciem ■>" wuh nl nnd- red, and et on fire »< 

/ i- i lIu- 2 1th, and bh*w up t LI e On the 2->tli 

if, Inin i uia M 'ideas »mvd to gel lliO ” mills - II, 

:o 


IjOSi -a’ On. 
whip.*. 


HJS'IiMY OF THK MADKAs Al'MV. 



CHAV XXI. 

— 





Mil' “ lull! tfl<* 

I IV " TO 





'll., Irouch 
WxoUilc 
IU uil.ou 


I «U.l* 






•Mi 



^ >ut finding this impracticable, she rook the crew on 
board. The “ Sirius ” was set ou fire, and blew up 
about 11 a. if. 

riie “ Ipliigenia ” then began to warp herself out, but 
the wind against hev was so strong that she did not 
get back to the “ Isle de la Passe ” until the night of the 
“(ith, when she anchored about three-quarters of a mile 
from the island. 

On the 27th the French were reinforced by four ships 
of war from Port Louis, and on the same day Captain 
Lambert of the “ Ipliigenia” was called upon by CajHain- 
Gcneral Decaen to surrender the officers and crews of the 
squadron within one hour, together with liis ship, ;nnl 
the batteries, arms, ammunition and troops upon the 
island. 

Me was also summoned by Commodore Ilamelin of thu 
40-gun frigate “Venus,” who commanded the French 


squadron, and after some correspondence the surrender 
took place at 10 a.m. on the 29th. 

The English squadron being reduced to Comm, dore 
Rowley ’s ship “ Boadicca” of 38 guns, the sleep “Otter ” 
of 10 guns, and the gun-brig “Staunch,” the French 
turned the tables, blockaded the island of Bourbon, ami 
captured some transports carrying troops and prove ions 
for the projected expedition against the Mauritius. 

Hus blockade was maintained until tho 12th Scpb mix 
on whrnh day the “Africame^ frigate of 38 gunB,.Caplxm 
t oi’bi It, arrived *fT St. Denis, when 1 he Cnimnodore v 1 ii 
the 44 Boadicea,” “Otter,” and “Staunch” put out fium 
St. PauL’a to meet it, having received intuinuit - >n oi ir h 
rn val from Colonel Keating. Tim blockading nl,ip., nl 
this t utu were the “ Astr6o” of 44 guns, the “Ipnigmiiu * 
(captured ul “ Lie do la Passe;,” and tlic brig “ Emu*, 
l I’enant,” \vi . li iqq .muil)y in conHequcm-i ' ■ ’ -ual 

from thr others, mndv ail t<» t m* m ri li-ri i • u i m 


liiHTORV or nil-: mai:i:as aum\. 




aj)pc iranoc* of the “Africaine,” and was quickly out of CHAP. 
sight. The Commodore then endeavoured to bring the 
frigates to action, but the ‘^Boadieea” was a bad sailer, 
and at 2 a.m. on the 13th, when the “Africaine ” had got 
close to the “Astree,” the “Boadioea” was still four or 
five miles to leeward, and the ** Otter ” and “ Staunch 3> 
out of sight. 

Captain Corbett, knowing that the frigates wore within Cujmuo 
a few hours run of Port Louis in the Mauritius, and ^Afl'icuiuo ” 
e xpecting that the “ Boadicca” would como up, deter¬ 
mined to engage notwithstanding tho disparity of force, 
but In. was overmatched, and the “ Africaine 33 struck 
her colors about 4-45 a.m. with tho loss of 49 killed, and 
114 wounded. Captain Corbett was mortally wounded at 
tho commencement of ihe action. 

Out of a detachment of 25 men and one officer 
HOth which had been taken on board at St. Denis, 5 were 
killed and 18 wounded, including the officer. Captain 
Robert Elliot 5th Bombay native infantry, who bad 
volunteered at St. Denis, was killed. 

About 7 A.M. tho “ Roadicea ” was joined by her two Her 
consorts, and the wind having freshened, the Commodore rcru, * li ‘° 
boro up for tho frigates, which Were making slow progress 
owing to tho crippled state of the prize, which had been 
much damaged both in her masts and hull. They deserted 
her about 3-30 r.M., and the “ Boadicea 33 "coming up 
about 5 o’clock, towed her back to St. Paulks, where slio 
nniv d on tho 15th. 

On the morning of the 18th throe ships having appeared r.qm,,.,, - r 
»'i tho utlin _ tho Commodore made sail after I hem. 1 u f ' 

t !r 1 i'i '< Vi! ii iii. 




i lie eorvcl to “ Viet or,” the liltk r hav i .. in r w tin Briii h 
frig.o ‘ u Ccvlon ’ 1 of 52 guns, winch tho\ bad euptmvd 


1 An • <!ii. i? in .f U/2 ■ hi-, 'v I urli I vl I- • Imhi lit tin- lii-jf, |, 
< min- jit m l M‘ Ci hi * f , :ii l i i i. ii 







HISTORY or TUP. MADRAS ARMY. 



ciiAi*. y.yi. 


< i*iioral Aber¬ 
crombie*. 


A uclumity 
»tnmiaul:, 

1810. 





<>n tbf preceding day. The “ Victor ” cast oft the prize 
about. 3 r.M. and stood off to the eastward. The “Boadi- 
cea” came up w r itb the “Venus” about 5 r.M. and com¬ 
pelled her to strike her colors in about ten minutes. She 
had lost her mizen mast and topmasts in the action with 
the “ Ceylon/’ and consequently made a poor defence. 

Lieutenant-General the Honorable John Abercrombie, 
Cummander-in-Chief at Bombay, who had recently been 
appointed to command the troops destined for the Mau¬ 
ritius, and Major Caldwell of the Madras Engineers, were 
both 6n board the “Ceylon.” 

Lieutenant-General Sir Samuel Auchmuty succeeded 
Major-General Gowdie in command of the army of Fort 
St. George on the 27th September 1310. 


Capture or the Mauritius, 1810. 


The embarkation of the troops 1 from Madras destined 
for the expedition against the Mauritius, began oa the 


1 1 

European 

Officers. 

i 

Kfu 1 

i= 5^ 

|ll| 
Sc = | 

B SfiJ 

5 8 

-B 1 c.2 ^ 

£o ,*6 11:3 , 

: j; 1 

Detachment ll.M.’n 25th dra- 






. 

\ 

o 

100 

... 1 ... - 


. D'.-UHhiiicnt ha battalion artil- 






llTV 

8 


ISO 

... m j 


) »1. M.' 1 2t 1 1 regiment 

1 19 

! "a 

62-1 


1 . 

n.M.’a.mh do. 

1 -o 

1 0 

1,110 

1 ... 1 


1 Dot-, fhmont H.M.’s 22nd regi* 






ment 

a 

... 

51 



Ih'Uu-hmHit H.M.’s 09th rcri- 






1 incut. .... . 

2 


82 



i Detn hau nt H.M.’s sr.th regi- 

• 





| niont 

i i 


II 

.. l ... 


U- Muncut ll.M.’s 89th regi- 






tin nt 

it 


y>i 



Mji ’r is vohmtf^r hultulion 

a 



1 20 l.uM 

l. 

l»ii. , 1 ,t ofmh.Jind 2nd of 12th 

| 





! U N.l 




1 * 


imhini nt 1*1 battalion pi*> 







a 


i 

. 

1 2 108 



Tf»1ttl 113 13 £t 1.20 


V/i.- iw>nl.-.. 0 • > (Ac, Mi j lit |-:»l W irtlo m c'liitl lu roiniumnl. I D.AH. 

Krw' I roup*., 1 l».<» M Mmr : i • Aidot-di •■amp. 1 ItiudgM "f 1 .1 • Ml. 

n • ., ) » mi iln. 

1 *■«. 1 '' " ' iT'ail m 1 .• ill .aii, c.v c|it w .M.\ II. ilultm td • a v mil -I 

















WW tSTfiy 


A ft m y. 


300 



UI3TOBY or Tin: madjia.* 


<SL 


I7tb Soptembcr, and v.-as concluded by the 2-1 tli. Ou CUAP. XXT, 
the (Jlli November the squadron, and transports reached 
Rodrigues, where they found the Bombay contingent, bat 
tlmt. from Bengal did not. arrive until the 21st. Tho „ 
whole anchored in Grand Bay on tho northern extremity 
of tire Mauritius on the 29th idem, and the troops were 
landed without opposition on the afternoon of the same 
day. 

The following distribution of the force was made : 


Landing of 
tho troops. 


Formation of 
brigades. 


First brigade .— Lieutenant-Coload Picton H.Mds Vlth. 
IT-M.'b 12th and 22nd, and right wing Madras volunteer 

battalion. 


Second brigade. — Lieutenant-Colonel Gibbs H.M.’s 59 th. 
Jl.M.’s 59th, 300 89th, one company 87th, left wing 
Madras volunteer battalion. 


Third brigade- — Lieutenant- Colonel Kelso• 

H.M.’b 14th, and 2nd Bengal volunteers. 

Fourth brigade .— Lieutenant-Colonel MeLood II.M.'s 60th. 
H.M.’s GOtli, ltoyal marines 300. dank companies 6th and 

12th M.N.I. 

Fifth brigade .— Lieutenant- Colon d Smith H. M.'$ 6bth. 
Troop H.M.’s 25th dragoons, H.M.’s 65tli, and 1st Bengal 
volunteers. 

Reserve brigade ,— Li an tenant-Col an el Keating. 

Flunk companies H.M.’s 12th and 33rd, H.M.’r bltli, two 
e.oiipui .. I l.M.’s 56th. 

One company H.M.’s 11th and 89th, and a detachment 
ol Bombay native infantry under Captain Tt duoh. 

Tho troops in Fort Malartic near the head of tho bay 
bud quitted the pi ice on tho uppeuvuutv of the licet, and 

jHhodtoiVrt Bonis. 



' H U*. XXI. 


.Advance of 

t\o army. 


AfT.iim fvt 
' 1*.» rlvf. a 
*1 oHifuaw, 
tu» l Hocl.' 




’ A J TTISIORY OF THE MADRAS AUMV. 

Tlie fifth brigade was left to secure tho landing-place, 
\viil. orders to follow next day with tlie ammunition and 
stores. 

Tlio remainder of the force moved on at once along 
the coast for about five miles, after which it bivouacccl 
for the night. 

During this march the reserve brigade, which was in 
advance, was fired upon when emerging from a wood 
into the plain, but the enemy retired without making any 
stand. 

Colonel Keating, and Lieutenant Ashe of the 12th were 
wounded, and two men hilled at this place. 

The march was resumed on the morning of the dOth, 
but the heat was so great that the force war obliged to 
halt and encamp at Moulin a Poudre," about six mdes 
from Port Louis. 

During the afternoon a reconnoitring party under 
General Decaen attached our pickets and compelled them 
to retire, but being reinforced they rallied and dmv< 
back the enemy with some loss. 

Before day-light on the 1st December Colonel Mel cod 
was detached with his brigade to take possession of i ho 
batteries at the bays of Tortue, and Tombeau, about a 
couple of miles to the right of tho lino of march, which 
service war successfully performed. 

About r. o'clock tho main body moved on towards 
Port Louis for about two miles, when it touud tho 
} ruroge of tho river Tombeau disputed by about :',0n < i 
Mm enemy with two field-pieces. They were booh driven 
lack, and tho troops crossed the bridge, but it would 
not admit of tho passage of t ne guns, having been part i dly 
destroyed. This caused mmo delay as tho guns had I<i bn 
MOn1 to a lower- down. Major O'Keefe JLM A J 
wu- lcdled in this uCair, 




Tlie troops were again opposed about two miles further 
on at the river Seche, where Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell, 
commanding the European flank battalion, was killed. 
Tho enemy were driven back with the loss of about 100 
men, and pursued to the river Lataniers near the out¬ 
works of tho town. The troops were then withdrawn 
beyond the range of tho batteries, and encamped for the 
night. 

A Hag of truce was sent to the camp by the enemy the 
next morning, and terms of capitulation having been 
agreed upon, they were ratified on the 3rd December, 
win i the whole island was surrendered, together with a 
largo quantity of military and naval stores and ammuni¬ 
tion. 209 pieces of heavy ordnance were found upon tho 
voiks. 

The frigates “ Bellone,” “ Minerve,” “Manchq,” 
“ Ah tree ” and (lato British) “ Iphigeuia,” tho corvettes 
f< Victor” and “ Entreprenant,” with a new vessel of the 
same class, woro taken in tho harbour, besides twenty- 
four merchant ships, some of which were of large burden. 

Tho Kngli-h Indiamen “Charlton,” “ ^eylou,” and 
u Buih'd Kingdom” were recaptured, and about 2,000 
English amen and soldiors, who had been taken pri- 
Moitors, were rescued from confinement. 

The French troops and seamon. wore not made prisoners 
of war, but wore sent to France with their arms nnd 
c* iIiU’m, and nil their personal effects, nt. the expense <>F tho 
British Uovornmant, far more favorable Conditions t inn 
the enemy hud any right to expect, considering the great 
disparity o' force* 

O '* loss was only 28 killud, 9 1 wounded, and 47> mis 
ing, 107 in all Maj<* Taynton of the Madras artillery, 
la, i,n mini Kcnpp k H M.’s 12th, and Lioutenaut Join-s 


<3L 


chap. xx.. 


Sarreader of 
tho island. 


Captured 

Hhipa. 


British 

recaptured. 


Knemy’fl 

troopi. ^iif- 

to Piumw. 





CHAT. XXL 


Fom» of the 
cnomy. 


ThnnkHto 
'to treops. 


1hnnU* to 
H< Mticlms 

11 i 1 . • o 

i loop*, 1812 . 


M tlrvln. 


UT8T0RY OF Tin: MADRAS AUMY. 

li.M/s 84th, were wounded, besides the two officers pre¬ 
viously named. 

The French regular troops did not exceed 1,300, of 
whom about 500 were Irish, chiefly recruits taken out of 
captured Iridiamen. 

The native militia were computed at about 10,000 men, 
but they did not render any assistance to rhe French, 
having been deterred, it was believed, by proclamations 
distributed by Captain Willoughby in August at tbe time 
of his incursion from the “ Isle de la Passe.” 

Th ' services of Major-General Warde, of the offiec'r.s 
commanding brigades, of Major Taynton senior officer of 
artillery, of Major Caldwell Madras Engineers, and -I 
the officers and men generally, wore duly acknowledged 
by General Abercrombie in his report to the Governor- 
Gcru ral, and ou the 9th February 1811 the force wan 
thanked by the Governor-General in Council. 

The Madras troops returned early in 1812, when the 
following order was issued at Fort St . George, dated 1 hh 
February 1812 :— 

“ The whole of the native troops employed on thelafo tr pe- 
dition against the Islands of Bourbon, and Mauritius having 
returned to Fort St. Gcm-ge, the Honorable the Governor in 
C ouncil performs a satisfactory part of his duty in requosliiiy 
that His Excellency the COmmandor-in-Chiof will bo pi-as .1 
i convey to the several native corps and detachments which 

rvod at tho conquest of those islands, the public th:ud> nt 
tho Government for tho alacrity with which they omlmrlc d 
(>• Ui:.t service, for the gallantry which they displayed wl -u 
oppt.-.od to tho enemy, ad for tlieir uniform good conduct, 
on all ooeajii.jis during tho period of their absence from tb%j 
ooaAt," 

't**!** ro granted f,'. vtly »ift,r.rw;ird.i i.. (,ho ,iti\ „ 
trf.( |,s, ( ;i.n lawars included, but it wiih not uui.il bit. 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 313 

hi 1838 that they 1 were permitted to carry the word CHAP. XXI 
“ Bourbon” on their colors and appointments. 

The island of Bourbon was restored to the French after Disposal of 
the peace in 1815. The Mauritius still remains in our thSl3lauds * 
possession. 

A noticeable feature of this expedition was the prompt! - Volunteering 
tude with which the native troops volunteered for the serv i CQ> 
service the moment they heard it was in contemplation. 

The undermentioned corps are specified in the report 
which was made by the Coramander-in-Chief to Govern¬ 
ment on the occasion, viz., the 3rd and 6th cavalry, the 
1st battalion 5th, 1st of 6th, 2nd of 3rd, 2nd of 12th, 2nd 
of 21st, and the 2nd battalion of pioneers. The 2nd of 
the 20th, and 2nd of 25th volunteered at the same time 
to form a battalion which it was proposed to raise for 
duty at the settlement of Bencoolen 2 in Sumatra. The 
Governor-General, who was then at Madras, thanked tbo 
troops in an order dated 6th April 1810 for the “zeal, 
fidelity, and military spirit by which their conduct has 
been distinguished on this important occasion.” 




Expeditions against the Moluccas, 1809-10. 
Capture of Amboy na, 1810. 

In October 1809, the frigate u Dover ” of 88 guns, the 
rf Cornwallis ” of 44 guns, and the sloop u Satnaraug ” of 
18 guns, sailed for iho Dutch settlements in tho Eastern 
Islands, having on board a detachment of Madras artil- 


1 6th and 24t.h regimen la and tho 41 Sappovd and Miners *' 

i\ n-osentiug tho “ pionorra.” Tho word 44 Bourhnn ” had been granted 
to IT.M.'-i 69th, and SBth some years earlier. No honorary distinction 
was conferred for tho capture of St. PnuTs, which, considering rho 
small furuo at the disposal - >. Colon d Konting, was tho moat dtirhin^ 
affair daring the expedition. 

' Exchange with the Dutch in 1821 for th m posscB-ions in Malacca 

40 


VOL. 111. 




ciiap. xxi. 




lery under Captain Court, and one of the Madras Euro- 
pean regiment under Captain Phillips. Captain Tucker 
of the “ Dover” was in command of the whole. 

The expedition arrived at Amboyna on the 13th or 
14lh February 1810, and anchored at some little distance 
from the land in order to reconnoitre the defences, the 
principal of which was Fort Victoria with a battery on 
each flank. There were also two batteries on the heights 
above the town, with an interval of about 1,500 yards 
between them, one named Wanitoo, and the other Battoo- 
Gantong. About 215 pieces of ordnance were mounted 
in the fort and lower works, and 21 in the hill batteries. 
The garrison consisted of 130 Europeans, 220 officers 
and seamen, and 1,000 natives. 

The boats left the ships with the troops about Ia.m. 
on the 15th, but they missed the landing-place in tho 
dark, and a discharge of rockets from the fort indicating 
that the enemy were prepared, the attempt at a surprise 
was given up, and tho boats returned to the squadron. 

About 2 p.m. on the 16th, after a farther reconnais¬ 
sance had beon made, the troops 1 landed under cover of 
the fire of the ships. One party, composed of 30 artillery¬ 
men, 85 seamen and marines from the “ Dover,” and a 
company of the European regiment, all under Captain 
Phillips, advanced against the battery at Wanitoo, which 
was soon carried, and three of the guns turned against 
Battoo-Gimtong under the direction of Liontenant Duncan 
Stewart, 2 who, although wounded, continued his exer¬ 
tions. Captain Phillips, leaving a small party in Woni- 
too, proceeded to attack Battoo- Gan tong, but finding * 


1 Artillery 4u, Madron European regiment. 130, Beamon and marine* 
2*25, total lOt). 

let but to li<>n 2otii i/iuiftm U.N.l . doin^; duty with the artillery. 



MINIS/*,, 



the approach barred by an impracticable ravine, he was CHAP. XXI. 


obliged to desist. 

In the meantime the other party, led by Captain Court, 
composed of 15 artillerymen, 140 seamen and marines 
from the " Cornwallis ” and “ Samarang,” and a company 
of the European regiment under Captain Forbes, turned 
the position at Battoo-Gantong, and having gained a 
height which commanded it, the enemy retired about 
sunset and left it in our possession. 

During the advance of the troops against the batteries 
on the heights, a heavy fire was kept up by tbo fleet on 
the furt and shore * * batteries, and during the night the 
party in possession of Battoo-Gantong was reinforced by 
40 men under Captain Spencer of the “ Samarang.” 

Early on the 17th fire was opened from the heights 
on the fort and town, and the commandant, having been 
called upon to surrender, forwarded articles of capitula¬ 
tion, 1 and the place was given up the next day. 

The capitulation included the whole island, and the Capitulation, 
dependencies of Saparoifa, Ilila, Haroeko, Laricque, 

Bouro, and Muni pa. 

Five armed ships, and six merchant-men, fell into our Prize, 
hands, and the value of the public property captured was 
estimated at 2 £&00,000. 


The Dutch and Javanese troops were sent to Java, and 
the Amboynese, 5 * who were well disposed towards us, were 
taken into our service. 

Our loss was extremely small, viz., 1 seaman, 1 marine. 




1 General Daond* (9, Governor and Commandor-iu-Chief of thr Dutch 
settlements, n 1 • »pt* .1 very severe i icaaures again.it tho principal ofticorri 
Concern capitulation. Colom l Fite, the Commandant, wng 

executed, and tho Civil Governor diuinisHcd and dh'tji .*< d 
J Appendix F. 

* Appcmii* (.♦• 





WMSTfiy 



CliAP. XXI. 
Casualties. 

Mauado. 


Tbankato 
the troopa. 


<SL 

,J l6 niSTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

and 2 privates of the European regiment killed; 1 Lieuten¬ 
ant and 1 corporal of artillery, 4 seamen, 1 marine, and 
4 privates of the European regiment wounded. 

The Dutch settlement at Manado, on the north-eastern 
coast of the island of Celebes, was taken possession of by 
Captain Tucker about the end of May, in order to pre¬ 
vent the supply of provisions from thence to the islands 
of Banda-Neira and Ternate, which it was intended to 
attack on the arrival of reinforcements expected from 
India. 

Lieutenant Nelson of the European regiment, with a 
few of his own men, and a party of Amboynese, was left 
in charge of the post. 

The conduct of the troops received the special commend¬ 
ation of the Governor-General, who caused the report of 
Captain Court to be published at Fort St. George on the 
Gtli May 1810. 

Capture of« Banda-Neira i 1810. 

On the 6th May 1810 two companies of the Madras 
European regimeut under Captain Nixon, with Lieuten¬ 
ant:’ Brown andDacre, sailed from Madras for Amboy mi 
in the frigates “ Caroline” aud “ Piedraontaise ” of 36 and 
38 guns respectively, and the 18 gun brig “ Bamicouta.” 
Captain Cole of the “Caroline,” who commanded the 
squadron, having received permission from Admiral 
Drury to attempt the reduction of the Banda group of 
Spice Islands, touched at Penang, where he took in some 
military stores and a number of scaling ladders. The 
41 Barrncouta ” was detached to Malacca, where sho 
embarked 20 men of the Madras artillery and a couple of 
field-pieces under tlio command of Lieutenant Yen tea. 
These preparations ba\ mg been completed, the squadron 





proceeded on tlie voyage, and after having taken in water CHAP. XXI. 
and provisions at the Sulu Islands it arrived off Great 
Banda on the 8th August. 

Banda-Neira, the principal island, separated from Great 
Banda by a narrow strait, was selected for attack. About 
two miles long, and three-quarters of a mile broad, it was 
defended by two strong forts, Belgica and Nassau, and 
by several detached batteries. The number of guns in 
the several works amounted to 138, of which 52 heavy 
pieces of cannon were in Fort Btdgiea. 

Captain Cole having determined to attempt a surprise, 
a party of 200 men, composed of seamen, marines, artil¬ 
lerymen, and infantry, left the ships at midnight. The 
boats assembled under the bluff point of Great Banda 
about 2 a.m. on the 9tli, and then pushed oft’ towards 
Banda-Neira, where the men landed in a heavy squall an 
hour and a half before day-light. 

A battery close to the beach was instantly attacked, and 
carried by a party of seamen armed with pikes, under the 
command of Captain Kenah, and Lieutenant Carew of 
the “ Barracouta.” The sentry was killed, and an officer 
and several men taken prisoners without creating any 
alarm in the other works. 

Leaving a small guard in the battery, the detachment 
advanced against Fort Belgica with the ladders aud 
seamen in front, and, although the enemy were on the 
alert, the assault was made with such speed and resolu¬ 
tion that the place was escaladed and taken by 5-80 a.m. 
without the loss of a man. The colonel commandant, 
and 10 of the garrison were killed, 4 officers and 40 
artillerymen were taken prisoners ; the rest made their 
escape. Shortly after day-light, the mcn-of-war stood into 
tho harbour, aud as Fort Belgica commanded the town 
as well as the othor works, the enemy, finding them- 
fiolvea between two fires, surrendered the settlumcnt 



CHAP. XXI. 


Thanks to 
tliO troops. 





'H8 HISTORY OF TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 

unconditionally, togethei* with tie several islands 1 depen¬ 
dent thereon. The garrison consisted of 700 regular 
troops and 800 militia. 

This brilliant and successful, although extremely haz¬ 
ardous enterprise, was duly appreciated by the Governor- 
General, who, in an order dated at Fort William on the 
16th February 1811, thus expressed himself :— 

“ His Lordship in Council considers the rapid conquest 
of a place so strongly fortified by nature and by art as the 
island of Banda, in the face of a superior force, without the 
loss of a man, as forming a singular event in the annals of 
British enterprise, and the Governor-General in Council has 
great pleasure in recording a public testimony of the appro¬ 
bation and applause with which he contemplates the distin¬ 
guished zeal and gallantry of the Commanding Officer of the 
troops, Captain Nixon, and the courage, discipline, and firm 
ness of the general body of the officers and troops under his 
direction, in carrying into effect, with such signal and rapid 
success, the plan of operations for the reduction of that settle¬ 
ment, concerted by Captain Cole of His Majesty’s Ship 
1 Caroline.* ” 

Lieutenant Yeates 2 doing duty with the artillery, and 
Ensign Allen 3 who hnd volunteered from Penang, also 
received the thanks of the Governor-General, conveyed 
in a separate letter to Captain Cole, dated 23rd Novem¬ 
ber 1810. 



Capture of Ternate, 1810. 

On the 21st August 1810 a detachment under the com¬ 
mand of Captain David Forbes of the Madras European 
Regiment, with Lieutenants Charles Forbes, and Curshatn 
of the same corps, embarked on board H.M/s ship 


1 Cr.-al Han-’n, Coouong Api, Rost ufgen* Palo Ay, Pu! v Iihiui, 

• . n<l battalion lgtb M N.l. 

* Simi battalion Slat M.NJ. 






HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


310 


<SL 


at- Amboyna on the requisition of Captain CHAP. XXL 
Tucker, for an attempt upon the island of Ternate, the 
last remaining possession of any consequence in the 
Molucca seas still in the hands of the Dutch. The town 
was defended by Fort Orange, and the detached works of 
Kayo-Meira, and Kota-Barro. 

The garrison was composed of 500 disciplined infantry, 

203 European inhabitants and seamen, and 500 native 
soldiers. 

The island was sighted on the 25th, and the troops 1 left 
the ship on the night of the 27th, but the landing was not 
effected until 7 a.m. on the 28th, when Captain Forbes 
marched inland with the object of gaining a hill which 
was supposed to command Kayo-Meira. i he hill was 
reached about noon, but nothing could be seen from it 
owing to the thickness of the forest. After resting his 
men, Captain Forbes proceeded in the direction of the 
fort for a short distance, when, finding the road rendered 
impassable by large trees which had been cut down and 
thrown across it, he turned to .the right and made his 
way, with much difficulty, along the course ot u stream, 
to the beach, which he reached about 10 p.m., aud ho then 
found himself within about 800 yards ot the fort. 

Ho immediately advanced, but had not gone abovo 
fifty yards, when he was discovered by an outlying picket, 
which opened fire. Captain Forbes, however, pressing 
forward, crossed the ditch, and the fort was speedily esca- 
laded and taken with trifling 2 loss owing to the darkness 
of the night, and the rapidity of the advance. One officer, 
and sixty-eight men were taken prisoners. A number 
mado their escape. 


1 Enropenn infantry, and artillery 74, marines 36, seamen 3 Amboy- 
nt»u 32 i total 174. 

Ki?bd 3, woundod 14 




mtSTfiy 



CHAP. XXL 


Ordnance. 


Color a. 


Tlmnk* to 
tlm trvMip i 


JtohM>ruMon 
" f 'l" ulilmln 
IH10. 



<SL 

0 history ok the madras army. 

The wind and current were so strong against Captain 
Tucker that he did not succeed in laying the “ Dover ” 
opposite the battery at Kota-Barro (between Kayo-Meira 
and Fort Orange) until about 2 p.ra. on the 29th, when 
he quickly silenced it, and passed on towards another 
shore battery, in doing which he became exposed to Fort 
Change; and the gunners in Kota-Barro reopening fire, 
Captain Tucker was obliged to return, and had nearly 
regained his former position when Kota-Barro was 
attacked in rear and taken by Lieutenant Curshain, who 
had been sent from Kayo-Meira by Captain Forbes for 
that purpose. The guns of tho battery were then turned 
upon tho town, and tho cc Dover ” coining to close action 
with tort Orange, the place surrendered about 5 p.m. 

Isiuety mounted, and twenty-nine dismounted gnus, 
ami mortars were found in the several works. 

i The colors of the Fort Kayo-Meira, and those of tho 
European regiment in garrison at Fort Orange were seht 
to Amboyna for transmission to India. Captain Forbes 
remained in command at Ternate. 

The Governor-General thanked the detachmont in tho 
sumo general order which was published regarding tho 
capture of Bauda. 

The Governor-General in Council considers the expression 
of his high commendation to be equally duo to the gallantry 
and exertions of Captain D. Forbes, and of tho officers and 
“ on uudm ’ hlH oommand, so conspicuously displayed in tho 
attack of the fortified places on the island of Tomato, under 
the general superintendence, a ail authority of Captain Tucker 
cL IJ.M 'a ship “ Dover,” the success of which was followed 
by to. surrender of that important possession to tho British 
arms.’' 

Aniboyna an( ^ t ' )l! oilier islands reuininnd in our pom ck- 

u.n until 181(5, when tboy wore restored to tho Dutch n , 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


321 


conformity with the terms of the Convention of August 

1814. 

During the interval between their capture and restora¬ 
tion, the detachment of the European regiment was em¬ 
ployed on several occasions against pirates in the island 
of Celebes and elsewhere, and some of the officers were 
employed in political situations of importance. Captain 
D. Forbes was appointed Deputy Governor of Banda, and 
while holding that office, he quelled, 1 with a party of his 
regiment, at the requisition of Mr. Martin, the Governor 
of Amboyna, an insurrection in the island of Poran, which 
the Bengal troops had failed to suppress. Lieutenant 
C. Forbes, Assistant to the Resident at Palembang in 
Sumatra, was permitted, at the special request of the 
Resident, to retain his appointment after the return of his 
regimont to India. Captain Richard Phillips, Resident, 
and Commandant at Macassar under the Government of 
Batavia, received the acknowledgements of the Supreme 
Government for his valuable services, and on the receipt, 
at Batavia, of the intelligence of his death at Macassar 
on the 3rd December 1814, a general order was published 
by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, expressing their 
sense of his great merits, and of tho loss sustained by tho 
public service owing to his premature decease. 

Several officers, 2 and a number of the men of the regi¬ 
ment died in the islands owing to tho unhealthiness of 
tho climate. 


Northern Circars, 1810-12. 

During 1810 detachments of the 1st battalion 11th, 
1st of the lGth, and 2nd of the 21st regiments were 


1 Services oP the First. Mndi.ifi European Regiment, page -108. 

- Ijieutcunnt DavonaDt died at Banda 1811, Captain Phillips at Macu*i- 
nar, 1814. Ideutenaufc Dacre at Banda Neira 1811, Oaptuiu i orbofi ut 
Banda 1815. Lieuienan Carbonv at Tomato 1815, and AbBifituut 
Burgeon Milne ut Banda 1811 

VOL. III. 41 


CHAP. XXI. 


European 

Regiment. 


Golooudah, 

1810 . 




uiMsr fiy 



CHAP. XXI. 


Palcondah, 

1811 - 12 . 


<§L 

322 HISTORY or THE madras army. 

frequently employed against refractory zemindars in the 
hill districts of Vizagapatam, and also against freebooters 
in the neighbourhood of Rajahmundry. 

Reddy Nursimlia Deo, one of the principal insurgents, 
was taken in Golcondah during September, and Naganali 
Derail, and other leaders having fled, that part of the 
country became quiet for the time. 

Early in 1811 Viziaram Rauze, ex-Zemindar of Pal- 
condah, assembled a body of men near Veeragottum, 
about 13 miles from the town of Palcondah, and began 
to collect the revenue from the adjacent villages, and to 
commit depredations. Martial law was proclaimed ; a 
brigade under Lieutenant-Colonel Fletcher, composed of 
the 1st of the lOtli, the 1st of the llth, and a couple of 
guns, was sent into the zemindary, and after a harassing 
service which lasted for about a year, Viziaram Rauze 
escaped into the Nagpore country, and order was re¬ 
stored. 

The 1st of the 10th suffered very severely from fever, 
having had upwards of 500 men in hospital. The 1st of 
the llth, having been more accustomed to the climate of 
the Cirears, was comparatively healthy. 

Auxiliary Force at Goa, 1800-13. 

On the 30th January 1810, the Auxiliary Force at Goa, 
composed of H.M.’a 78th regiment, the 2nd battalion 2nd, 
2nd battalion 10th, and 1st battalion 18th M.N.I , with 
detachments of artillery and pioneers, was transferred 
from the Bombay establishment to that of Fort St. 
George. 

In May 1811 the command of this force devolved upon 
Lieutenant-Colonel A. McCally of the l()th, in succession 
to Lieutenant-Colonel Adams, lI.M.’s 78th, ordered on 
service to Java with his regiment. 

The Madras troops, which bad been first sent to Goa 
in 1809 to assist the Portuguese in event of any attack 


WtSTfty 



on fhe part of the French, were recalled within the limits CH\P- XXI. 
of their own Presidency in April 1813. - 


Conquest of Java, 1811-12. 

Tho practicability of the conquest of Java, which, 
together with tho other settlements of the Dutch in tho 
Eastern seas, had been incorporated into the French 
Empire, had, for some time, been under consideration by 
the Bengal Government, but the undertaking was post¬ 
poned until after tho capture of the Mauritius, when 
preparations were made both at Madras, and in Bengal, 
which were completed early in 1811, and Lieutenant- 
General bir Samuel Auclimuty, Commander-in-Chief at 
Madras, was appointed to command the expedition. 

The force from Madras sailed in two divisions, 1 one on 
the 18th April under Colonel Gillespie, H.M.'s 25th 
dragoons, and the other on the 29th under Colonel Gibbs, 
H.MPs 59th foot. The last division was accompanied by 
the Commander-in-Chief. The whole, amounting to about 


1 Fir.s! Division .-—Horse artillery 152, 22nd dragoons 260, 14th Foot 
J-h, 59th 4/6, 89 th 549, Madras Europeans (as pioneers) 07, gun 
lascara 105, tent lascare 122, Dooly corps 97, artificers 45, puckallics 
55 ; total, with officers, 2,920. 

Scmnd Divicio ...—Horse artillery 7, 22nd dragoons 154, Hoyal 
artillery 94, 14th Foot 10, 59th 530, 69tb 858, 78th 1,054, 1 at’battalion 
pioneers 144, 2nd battalion pioneers 165, gun Ineeors 99, tent las cars 
210; total 3,325. Grand Total, with officers, 6,251. 

Staff. 

Major-General F. A. Wethernll, Second in command. 

Colonels Gillespie, Gibbs, and Lieu tenant-Colonel Adumi, H.M.’s 78th 
regiment, commanding brigades. 

Colonel P. A. Agnew, 21s( Adjutant-Genera! 

Colonel Eden, 84th Foot, Quartermaster-General. 

Major P. Van A new, 2kh M.N.I., Deputy Adjutftnt-Gotu’rnl. 

Major Bnrslem, 14th Foot, Leptav Qaartermascer-Gonorttl. 

Captain Carroll, G9th Foot, Assistant Adi*.tani-General. 

I.iouteuanfc Hanson, 14th M.N.I,, Assistant Quartermaster-Gonoral. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Coliu Mackniris Madras Lnginrois, Chief Epui 
neei. 









V . 


324 


HISTORY OF TriE MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAP. XXI. 


Landing of 
the troops. 


Occupation 
of tho capital 
and of 

VYeltcvreeden 


Action on 
the 10th. 


10,800 men including the troops from Bengal, anchored 
off the north coast of Java on the 2nd August. 

The village of Chillingsi in the bay of Batavia, about 
ten miles east of the town of that name, having been 
fixed upon for the disembarkation of the troops, tho fleet 
ran for that place, and the landing was effected before 
dark on the 4th without opposition. 

The army then moved on about two miles and halted, 
one division being on the road to the town of Batavia, and 
tlie other fronting in tho direction of tho lines of Cornells, 
situated about eight miles south of the town, 

A general advance towards the capital was mado on 
the 5th, and on the 8th the town was occupied without 
opposition, having been abandoned by the enemy. On 
the 1.0th the army took possession of the cantonment at 
Weltevreeden, about four miles direct south of the town, 
and half way to Corn el is. About a mile beyond the 
cantonment there was a strong position, defended by a 
division of French and Dutch troops under General Juinel. 
This division was attacked and speedily driven back in 
disorder to the defences at Cornelia. Lieutenant Driffield, 


Cuptain Farqnhar, Lieutenant Garrard, Ensigns Fullerton, Fim, 
Coventry, Anderson, and Proby, Madras Engineers, doing duty under 
the Chief Engineer. 

Doing duty with Corps and Deportments. 

Captains Dnrand, 5th and Mears, 17th M.N.I. Lieutenants 

Stewart, 16th M.N.f., Low {Lieatonant-Genoral Sir John Low, k.c.b.), 
24tli M.N.I. Bayloy, 11th M.N.I., Jonrduu, 10th M.N.I , Clodo, 26tl» 
M.N.T., Dulgairns, 7th M.N.I., and Marr, 3rd M.N.I. 

Two Surgeons, and eleven Assistant Surgeons* attached to the Staff. 

Bengal Division. 

Govorno"'Goneraro Body-guard 107, two companion Bengal artillery 
160, six battalion rj of Entive infantry, viz., le battalion 20th regi- 
ment 1,601 (uiti.rwarda 25th B.N.I.), fa: r bail iliona of volunteers 3,602 
nm! a light infn . ty battalion 676, pioneers 3Gi. 

John , (be poet, an Assistant Surgeon on tho Madias Estab¬ 

lishment. but doing duty in Bengal, died on thio fceivico. 




mtSTffy 



Madras liorse artillery, died on the 2Sth of wounds CHAP. XXI. 


received in this action. This corps was highly praised 
by Colonel Gillespie in his despatch of the Ilth : “1 
cannot say too much of Captain Noble, and the officers 
and men under his command, who so gallantly fought the 
two guns that drew a most terrible fire from the enemy ; 
indeed the zeal and ability displayed by Captain Noble 
throughout this service demand my particular commend¬ 
ation.” 

The force of the enemy was estimated at about 17,000 Entrench- 
men, European and native, of whom 13,000 were in the Cornell! 
lines at Cornells under the Governor, General Jansens. 

The position was extremely formidable, being an en- 
trenchcd camp between the unfordable river Jacatra, and 
the Slokan canal, defended by redoubts and batteries 
containing about 280 guns and mortars mounted on the 
works. 

The army broke ground before Cornelia on the 14th, 
and the batteries were completed on the 21st. Early on 
the morning of the 22nd the enemy made a sortie but 
were repulsed. 

The preparations for the assault w r ere completed on 
the 2Gth, by which time our casualties amounted to 
about 200 officers and men killed and wounded, amongst 
whom were Captain-Lieutenant Shepherd of the Madras 
European Regiment, serving with the 1st battalion 
pioneers, killed during the sortie of the 22nd, and Ensign 
Norman McLeod, 1st battalion 6th regiment N.I., also 
doing duty with the pioneers, who was morally wounded 
at the same time. 

The troops marched soon after midnight, and the AitsmiHand 
assault begun at daybreak on the 27tli. The principal Cornel Z. * 
attack was made by the column under Colonel Gillespie, 
supported by a brigade under Colonel Gibbs. This 


326 


history or the madras army. 



CHAP. XXI. 


Casualties. 


Captured 
ordnance 
o ud stores. 


Pursuit of 
(loueral 
J ansone. 


<sl 


column was headed by a company of the 14th Foot under 
Lieutenant Coglan, followed closely by a detachment of 
Madras pioneers under Captain Smithwaite (1st battalion 
10th M.N.I), commanding 2nd battalion pioneers. Tlio 
second attack was under Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod 
of the 69th, the third under Lieutenant-Colonel Wood, 
Bengal Volunteers, and the fourth under Major Yule of 
the 20th B.N.I. 

After a sev T ere struggle the enemy gave way, were 
forced from all their entrenchments, put to total rout, 
and pursued for about ten miles by the cavalry, under 
Major Travers of the 22nd dragoons, and by the 
Madras horse artillery mider Captain Noble. 

Great numbers were killed, and 6,000 taken prisoners, 
amongst whom was a regiment of Voltigeurs recently 
arrived from France. Our loss amounted to about 643, 
killed, wounded, and missing. Fifteen officers were 
killed or died of their wounds, thirteen of whom 
belonged to the Royal, and two to the Bengal army. 

Besides the 280 pieces of ordnance mounted on the 
works, 150 wore found in the entrenched camp. The 
whole number captured at Cornell's, and at the citadel of 
Batavia, amounted to 2Ul* brass, aud 504 iron guns and 
mortars, and a very large quantity of ammunition and 
stores fell into our hands. 

General Jansens fled to the eastward, and wa 9 followed 
to Cheribon 1 by pnrt of tho fleet with a Bengal Volunteer 
battalion under Colonel Wood. The place was surren¬ 
dered, but the General having escaped to Samarang/ lie 
was followed early in September by General Aiuhmuty. 


’On tho northern coaut of tho island, about 198 miles uast-somh- 
casfc from Batavia. 

2 On tho northern coast of the inland, Lut. 0* 56* 8., Lon^. llo L. 





mtST/ty. 



TT1ST0RY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


327 


<SL 


CHAP. XXI. 


The troops landed on tlie 12th, and on the 16th they 

came in sight of the enemy in a strong position at Jatu, - 

six miles from Samarang. They were about 8,000 
strong, principally natives, with 20 guns. The detach¬ 
ment under General Auchmuty, composed of a few 
companies of the 14th and 80th foot, one company of 
Bengal volunteers, and a party of artillery and pioneers, 
did not exceed 1,200 men. 

This small body advanced without hesitation, but the 
enemy made no stand, and retreated upon the fort at 
Onarang, about four miles further on. Being pursued 
at once, they dispersed. 

General Jansens, finding further resistance hopeless, Surrender of 
proposed a capitulation, and on the 17th September a the 18land * 
treaty was signed, by which the island and dependencies 
were surrendered to Great Britain. 

Colonel P. A. Agnew, Adjutant-General to the expedi- Gonernl 
tion, was sent to England with the despatches early in retunS'tJf 
October, and the Commander-in-Chief, having made Intlia - 
arrangements for the transport to India of part of the 
cavalry and artillery, H.M.’s 69th, and tho head-quarters 
and a wing of the 89th, made over the command of the 
remaining troops to Colonel Gillespie, and emb rked for 
Madras. 

Ou the 14th January 1812, a letter from the Governor- 
Ceneral in Council, dated 26th December 1811, was 
published to the army, in which His Excellency the 
Commander-in-Chief was thanked for his eminent 
ter vices during the expedition. Those of the officers 
and men were also duly acknowledged in the same 
letter. 

On the 28rcl May, a general order was issued by tho TVmce 
Oom'rander-in-Cbief, in which he communicated to the ' 

troops the approbation of HisKoyal Highness tho Prince 
Regept for the distinguished gallantry, and spirit dis¬ 
played during the several operations in Juva, more parties 


TtnnlcR of 
t ho < !i verncr- 
General and 


, 1812 . 




328 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



ularly at the assault and capture of the entrenchments. 
Medals 1 * were granted to all the native troops, and to such 
of the superior European officers, as had distinguished 
themselves. 

Lord Minto, the Governor-General, w ? as raised to an 
earldom. 

Expedition to Palembang, 1812. 

The Sultan of Palembang" in Sumatra having destroyed 
the Dutch factory at that place, and murdered the people 
belonging to it during September 1811, a detachment 3 
under Colonel Gillespie proceeded against him in March 
1812. The Colonel arrived off the Palembang river by 
the middle of April, and the troops went up it in boats 
towards the town, distant about sixty miles. On the 
morning of the 25th, when close to the place, intelligence 
was received of the flight of the Sultan, upon which 
Colonel Gillespie, pnshingon with a few officers and men, 
landed about 8 o'clock at night, when he found the town 
in a state of tumult, the troops of the Sultan being engaged 
in firing the houses, and plundering the inhabitants. 
Passing quickly through the excited crowds, he reached 
the palace unmolested, and was joined, boon after mid¬ 
night, by a party of the 89th under Major Trench. The 
next day an investigation was commenced, which result: d 
in the confirmation of the accusations against the SuHan, 
upon which he was formally deposed, and the sovereignty 
conferred upon his brother. Colonel Gillespie returned 
to Java about the end of May, having taken possession 
of the island oj Banca on his way, and placed therein a 

1 On the 20th December 1820 the corpB of Madras Engineers, the 
florae Brigade of artillery, and the 2nd Battalion Piomvrs . j>. r- 

Tnirtod to boar the word " JAVA ” on the ir appointmenta in comr.t mo* 
ration of their services in the redaction of that inland. 

"A Malay principality at tbo southern one! of SurarIra, opposite lit© 
island of Bauca, from which it is separated by a strait. 

3 Dotaohmontn Madras horse and Bengal foot artillery, C'Jtb and 
6Bfh, and Bengul Volunteers. 









miSTfiy 



detachment under the command of Captain Mears, 1 17th 
M.N.I., who had raised a native battalion in Java. 


Further Operations in Java, 1812. 

The Sultan of Mataram, one of the southern districts of 
the island, having called upon other native chiefs to assist 
him in expelling the British, a force 2 was sent against 
him under Colonel Gillespie, which came before the 
capital at Djojo-carta 8 on the 17th June 1812. 

The principal fort, called the Kraton or palace, was an 
oblong quadrangular, enclosed by a good rampart with 
a bastion at each angle, the whole surrounded by a 
broad wet ditch. It was garrisoned by about 15,000 4 
men, and defended by nearly 100 guns. 

The place was attacked and carried on the 20th, with 
the loss of 99 killed and wounded, after a contest of 
three hours. Great numbers of the enemy were killed. 
Captain Rudyard, and Lieutenant Black of the Madras 
horse artillery were amongst those thanked for conspic¬ 
uous gallantry. 

During the advance of the second detachment of the 
force into Mataram, Lieuteuant-Coloncl McLeod, who 
was in command, found it necessary to communicate 
with Captain Byers of the Royal artillery, who was a 
day's march behind. This service, which was extremely 
hazardous, owing to the numerous scattered parlies of 
the enemy, was performed by gunner Johu O'Brien, 
Madras horse artillery, who was thanked in treneral 
orders and rewarded with a gold modal. 

* Thir; officer wn.i killed on the 15th September 1812 in the attack ou 
n stockade hold by the cx-Sultan of Valembang, 

2 Detachments H.M ’a 22nd dragoon8, Royal, Bengal, and Mndun 
m ullery, Mtb, 59M and 78th foot nod Bangui volunteer^. 

*> AIro called Yodhya-carta and Yughya cartu 

« Some writers say 17,000; Sir T. Stamford Raffia says from 10,000 
lo 15,000. 

vol. in. 42 


<SL 


CHAP. XXT. 


Storm of the 
Kruton. 


Recognition 
of services. 




umsT/} y 



C1IAP. XXI. 

Compliment- 
ary orders, 
18X2-13. 

H.M.'s 86th. 


Horeo 

artillery. 


330 HISTORY OP HIE MADRAS ARMY. 

Hostilities ce&sed with, this capture. 

The following orders were afterwards issued regarding 
the services of certain corps and individuals during the 
expedition, and our subsequent occupation of the island. 

In a general order published at Fort St. George on 
the 10th October 1812, the detachment of H.M.’s 89th 
under Major Trench, which had recently returned to 
Madras, was thanked for the exemplary zeal, gallantry, 
and subordination which it had displayed since being 
separated from regimental head-quarters. 

On the 22nd July 1813 the following order by Colonel 
Gillespie was published at Fort St. George by the 
Commander-in-Chief. 

“ Head Quarters, ]Vcltc Vrccden , 2 7th May 1813. 

“ On tho return of the Madras horso artillery to their 
Presidency, the Commander of the forces cannot bettor evince 
the high opinion he entertains of their merit, than by a 
short review of the active services in which they have been 
engaged under liis personal command. Placed in the advanco 
of the army, Major-General Gillespie had early an oppor¬ 
tunity of discerning the character of the corps, nnd their 
conduct on every occasion confirmed his first impression of 
the value of their services. In the successive achievements 
of tho 10th, and the memorable 26tli of August 1811, their 
exertions, directed by that experienced officer Captain Noble, 
eminently contributed to the glory acquired to the British 
arms; and the brigade employed under Captain Rudyard at 
Pale di bang, and Djojokarta were conspicuous for tho gallant 
conduct which so honorably marked their first career. 

“ The Commander of the forces also offers his thanks to 
Captain Rudyard and tho officers, for tho discipline and 
highly creditable appearance the corps lias uniformly main¬ 
tained ; and will perform a pleasing duty in communicating 
tbe .o his sentiments to the Commandor-in-Chicf, and to tho 
authorities under whom they will eventually bo placed- 







HISTORY OF THE MATHIAS ARMY. 


33). 


<SL 


C( The Commander of the forces regrets that the medal 
which it was his intention personally to present to John 
O’Brien in commemoration of his gallant conduct near 
Djojokarta lia 3 not yet been received from Bengal; it will, 
however, be forwarded to Madras through the regular 
channel.” 

The detachment H.M/s 22nd dragoons, when about to 
return to India in June 1813, were thanked for their 
services by the Major-General, more especially for “ that 
gallant and decisive charge, which, by overthrowing the 
retreating columns, occasioned the final dispersion of the 
army at Cornells, and secured an earlier termination to 
the campaign.” 

The same order concluded with the following para¬ 
graph :— 

“ The Commander of the forces has equal pleasure in 
recording liis sense of the conduct of the detachment of the 
Madras pioneers commanded by Lieutenant Stuart, 1 who have 
been uniformly distinguished by a zeal and steudiness, and 
patient enduring under trying circumstances, which have 
rendered thoir services eminently useful, and themselves 
deserving of particular regard and consideration. ’ 

On the departure of Lieutenant-Colonel Mackenzie of 
the Engineers for India, an order, from which the follow¬ 
ing are extracts, was issued by tho Lieutenant-Governor 
in Council at Batavia, and republished at Fort St. George 
on the 10th September 1813 :— 

“ Tho Honorable tho Lieutenant-Governor in Council 
avails himself of the opportunity afforded by the approaching 
departure of Lieutenant-Colouel Colin Mackenzie, Chief 
Engineer on the expedition to Java, to render to that distin¬ 
guished officer his peculiar acknowledgments, and to testify 


CHAP. XXI. 


H.M.’b 22nd 
dragoons. 


Pionoers. 


Colonel 
Markon xio. 
Chief 
Engineer, 


> Lieutenant G. M. Steuart l.t battalion 24th N I., doing duty with 
iht? 2nd battalion pioneers. 




miSTffy. 



CHAP. XXL his unreserved approbation of the zeal, ability, and unwearied 
application which he has displayed on this island. 

<k Lieutenant-Colonel Mackenzie has, since the conquest of 
Java, been employed, under the sanction and authority of 
the Right Honorable the Governor-General, in collecting and 
arranging the topographical and military reports and 
surveys of the former government, in investigating the 
history and antiquities of the island, and in ascertaining' 
the state of the landed tenure, and the general condition of 
the inhabitants.” 


* # # # 

“ Under his superintendence, a general statistical table of 
the population and produce of the island has been compiled 
on principles which ensure its near approach to accuracy, 
and the answers which have been given to the queries, histor¬ 
ical, literary, and economical, circulated through the island 
at his suggestion, afford information of considerable interest 
and importance.” 

* * * # 

“Java must ever be considered as a great agricultural 
country, and ns the granary of tho Eastern Islands. To 
remoye every restriction on the agriculture and commerce 
of the country is alike conducive to the happiness of the 
people and to tho interests of Government; and the informa¬ 
tion and opinions furnished by Lieutenant-Colonel Mackenzie 
will enable the Government, in ameliorating and improving 
the general condition of the colony, to‘establish a more 
enlightened and advantageous system of internal adminis¬ 
tration.” 

* * # * 


Java restored A convention was entered into by Lord Castlereagh 
Dut ° h ' August 1814, restoring to the Dutch all their 

former possessions in the Eastern Islands, but Java was 
not actually made over until tbe 19th August 1816, when 
# the flag of the Netherlands was hoisted at Batavia. 


miSTffy 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


333 



Cavalry, 1810-11. 

On the 21st April 1810 orders were issued for the 
formation of a Veterinary Establishment at the Presi¬ 
dency under the immediate direction of the Commander- 
in-Chief, for the purpose “ of educating and instructing 
in the veterinary art, a number of boys not exceeding 
48, who will ultimately be posted to regiments of cavalry 
with the rank and pay of European Farriers.” 

“The boys to be educated at the Madras Veterinary 
Establishment are to be enlisted for the Service of the 
cavalry.” 

The establishment was to be recruited from the “ Mili¬ 
tary Male Asylum and the Charity School, as far as those 
institutions can supply the number of boys required, or 
from such sources as he may deem most advisable in the 
event of those institutions not furnishing the required 
number of boys.” 

A Veterinary Surgeon was placed in charge of the 
establishment. 

During October of the same year tho manner of wear¬ 
ing the swords, which, up to that time, had been carried 
in a shoulder belt, was altered. “ The swords of all ranks 
in the horse artillery and cavalry are to be carried in a 
waist belt of the breadth of 2* inches, and the cartouch 
boxes over tho left shoulder in a belt 3 inches in breadth.” 


<SL 


CHAP. XXI. 


Veterinary 
Establish¬ 
ment, 1810. 


Swords and 

cartoueh 

boxes. 



Artillery, 1810. 


Horno 

artillery, 

1810. 


In March 1810 the troop of Native liorso artillery was 
disbanded, and the squadron of European horse artillery 
was augmented to the undermentioned establishment, 
which was formed into two troops. 


1 Captain Commanding.^ « 

2 Captain-Lieutenants. I e 

10 Subalterns. • % 

> £3 

1 Adjutant. 

1 Quartermaster. 

1 Surgeon. 

2 Quartermasters. 

1 Sub-Assistant Surgeon. 


10 six-pounders with carri¬ 
ages and 16 tumbrils. 

1 spare carriage and 1 

spare tumbril. 

2 forges. 

2 Artificer’s carts. 


1 Serjeant-Major. 

1 Quartermaster-Ser- 
jcant. 

1 Ridingmastor Ser¬ 
jeant. 

1 Drill Corporal. 

4 Rough Riders. 

12 Serjeants. 

8 Farriers. 

4 Trumpeters. 

12 Corporals. 

24 Gunners. 

240 Matrossea. 

450 saddles and bridles. 

320 sots of harness. 

28 Officers’ horses. 

450 Regimental horses. 

1 Conicopoly. 

9 Puckallies in canton¬ 

ment. 



Artificers in the Field. 


2 Maistry Carpenters. 
2 Maistry Smiths. 

8 Carpenters. 

8 Smiths. 

8 Armourers. 


8 Bellows Roys. 
8 Hammermen. 
4 Chncklors. 

4 Ohickledara. 








miSTfiy 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY". 


305 


Artificers in Canionment. 


1 Maistry Carpenter. 

1 Maistry Smith. 

2 Carpenters. 

2 Smiths. 

2 Armourers. 


2 Bellows Boys. 
2 Hammermen. 
1 Chucklev. 

1 Chickledar. 


The officers and men of the native troop were drafted 
into the cavalry from the 1st of May. 

During October of the same year a Farrier-Major and 
a Trumpeter-Major were added to the squadron. 

The Court of Directors in a general letter to the Madras 
Government, dated 4th May 1810, announced the estab¬ 
lishment of a College at Addiscombe for the education 
of Officers intended for the corps of Artillery and Engi¬ 
neers ; and in a subsequent letter, dated in November of 
the same year, they pronounced the appointment, to com¬ 
missions in these branches of the service, of persons other 
than those properly educated and qualified, to be incon¬ 
sistent with their views. They at the same time directed 
the Government to cancel certain commissions in the 
artillery, which had be en granted to men in the inferior 
ranks. It appears that up to this time most of the Officers 
ii the artillery had been educated at Woolwich at the 
expense of the Company, but in January 1811 the Court 
of Directors informed tho Madras Government that in 
future, all Officers of Artillery and Engineers would 
be sent from their own College; that the selection for 
these corps would be mado in England ; and that those 
appointed to tho Engineers would be permitted to re¬ 
main at College for some time after their examination lor 
tho purpose of receiving further instruction. 

This part of their general letter concluded as follows 
u It- is therefore our express desire that you should, in no 
case, till up from tho inferior ranks of the artillery, or from 


<SL 


CHAP. XXI. 


Addiseombo 

College. 


No officers to 
be appointed 
to the 
Artillery or 
Engineers, 
except from 
Addiseombo 
College. 



Nil Htstfiy 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XXI. 


Store lascars, 

1811. 


336 



the cavalry or infantry, the vacancies which may occur 
among the Commissioned Officers, either in your artillery 
or engineer corps, but that upon the receipt of the list of 
Cadets intended for the latter service, you do immediately 
post them to such vacancies as shall appear to have existed 
at the time when the said list was dated.” 

On the 19lh July 1811 it was ordered that the lascars 
in the Store Department should be formed into thirty- 
two companies, each company to consist of 1 syrang, 
1 first tindal, 1 second tindal, and 50 lascars. 

The following distribution of these companies was 
ordered at the same time, viz.: Presidency Division 11, 
Centre 2, Northern 3, Southern 3, Mysore 3, Ceded Dis¬ 
tricts 2, Hyderabad Subsidiary Force 3, Gun Carriage 
Manufactory 3, Malabar and Canara 1, Goa Quilon J. 


MINlSr^ 


337 





HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


Engineers, 1810. 


On tlie Gtli November 1810 the following extract from 
a letter of tbe Court of Directors was published in 
general orders :— 

“ Wo have taken into consideration the memorial of the 
Engineer Officers, and being satisfied by their representation 
that the promotion in that corps has not kept pace with 
that of the other branches of the military servico, wo have 
resolved upon the following establishment for the Engineers : 


Present Establishment . 

1 Colonel. 

1 Lieutenant-Colonel. 

2 Majors. 

4 Captains. 

4 Captain-Lieutenants. 
8 Lieutenants. 

8 Ensigns. 


New Establishment. 

1 Colonel. 

2 Lieutenant-Colonels. 
2 Majors. 

9 Captains. 

8 Lieutenants. 

8 Ensigns. 


This establishment to be considered as having effect 
from the 1st January 1806. 

On the 9th October 1810 it was determined that the 
several officers then in charge of surveys should be 
placed under one superintending authority, and with this 
view Lieutenant-Colonel Mackenzie of the Engineers was 
appointed Surveyor-Gone ml on a monthly salary of 400 
pagodas (Rs. 1,400) with an allowance of 200 pagodas 
for draughtsmen, clerks, and office rent. The office of 
fchirvoyor-General was placed immediately under Govern¬ 
ment, but subject to the inspection of the Commander- 
in-Chief. The Surveyor-General was charged with the 
direction and superintendence of all surveys, and his 
office was made the repository of all geographical, sta¬ 
tistical, and topographical maps and plans, routes 
and memoirs, or reports connected with the state of the 

43 


CHAP. XXI. 


Augmenta¬ 
tion, 1810. 


Department 
of Survey. 


Surveyor- 
Gunorai. 




VOL. IU. 




HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XXI. 


Young 
officers 
employed on 
surveys. 




country, and all maps and papers of tliat description 
then deposited in other public offices were ordered to 
be transferred to the charge of the Surveyor-General. 

The Quartermaster-General was authorized to receive 
from the Surveyor-General, on application, any maps and 
papers that might be required from time to time, such 
maps and papers to be returned at the earliest practi¬ 
cable period. 

Officers commanding troops in the field were, on 
application to Government, to be supplied with maps by 
the Surveyor-General. 

Progress Reports of surveys were to be submitted to 
Government quarterly, and returns of maps, plans, and 
instruments were to be made half-yearly. 

The appointment of Inspector of Revenue Surveys was 
discontinued, and the records and establishment of that 
office were made ovor to the Surveyor-General. 

A certain number of young officers attached to tho 
Military Institution, not exceeding twenty, to be selected 
by the Commander-in-Chief, were ordered to be placed 
under the immediate direction of tho Quartermaster- 
General for tho survey of routes, passes, fortresses, and 
the military objects of such provinces as might have 
been the least explored. 

The maps and reports of these officers, and of those 
charged with the survey of the marches of detachments, 
wore to he sent to the Quartermaster-General, by whom 
they were to be transmitted to the Survey Office after 
such parts of them as might seem to bo required had been 
copied. 











HISTORY OF THE MADE AS ARMY. 


339 



European Infantry, 1S10-11. 


CHAP. XXi. 


The formation of a Commissariat Department, tlie Commissariat 
functions of which w r ero to come into operation on tlie igjfo. 

1st Decomher 1810, was ordered by Government in 
October. The Commissary-General was charged with 
the entire control and management of the several depart¬ 
ments theretofore conducted by Garrison Storekeepers, 
and also with that of certain details formerly managed by 
the Quartermaster-General. 

On the 1st December all previous orders and regulations Regulations, 
relating to the branches of the service placed under the 
Commissariat were annulled, and a new Code was pub¬ 
lished to the army, consisting of the undermentioned 
sections, viz. :— 

Section I. Grain and Provision Department. 

,, II. Victualling European Troops on the march 
from station to station, or iu the field 
„ III. Supply of Military Stores. 

„ IV. Supplies for Cavalry. 

„ V. Barrack Department* 

,, VI. Supply of Remount Horses. 

„ VII. Regulations for the Dooley Corps and Bearers.. 


„ VIII. 

Do- 

Public Cattle. 

» IX. 

Do. 

Hired Cattle. 

„ X. 

Do. 

Military Bazars. 

„ XI. 

Do. 

The Grain Department iu the 



field. 

XII. 

Do. 

Provision do. do. 

Captain W, 

Morisou of 

the artillery was appointed Officers. 


Commie -ary-General, with the official rank of Major 
and a seal at the Military Board. Seven officers were 
appointed Assistants and four officers Sub-Assistanta 
Co minima ry - General. 


MIMS;*,, 



Reductions in 
thr General 
Staff. 


Tonarc of 
cert:«u ap- 
pointmentB. 


340 HISTORY OF THE 31 ARRAS AR3.1Y. 

The undermentioned reductions in the General Staff 
were ordered to have effect from the 1st November, vi^.:— 

The appointments of Assistant Adjutant, and Assistant 
Quartermaster-General of Divisions were abolished, and 
officers of the grade of Brigade Major, and Brigade 
Quartermaster were nominated to perform the duties. 

The situations of Brigade Major in the Centre, and in 
the Southern Divisions were abolished. 

The appointments of all Deputies Judge Advocate, 
with the exception of that at Hyderabad, were abolished. 

The proceedings at courts-martial were to be conducted 
by officers specially selected for that purpose when re¬ 
quired. 

Field Officers were not to bo considered eligible in 
future for the situation of Barrack master, except at the 
Presidency, and at Bangalore. 

The appointments of Town Major at Seringapatam, 
and of Fort Adjutant at Bangalore, and at Caunanoro, 
were to be discontinued from the 1st December. 

The situations of Superintendent of Bazars in Travan- 
core, at Goa, and at Secunderabad, were to cease from 
the same date. Arrangements for the performance of 
the duties of these officers were left to be made by the 
officer at the head of Commissariat. 

Orders regarding tho tenure of certain appointments 
on the General Staff were published on tho 9th October. 

No officer to be eligible for the appointment of Adju¬ 
tant-General, or of Quartermaster-General, unless holding 
the rank of Major in his regiment, or in tho army by 
Brevet. 

No officer to be appointed Deputy Adjutant-General, 
or Deputy Quartermaster-General, under the rank of a 
Captain of two years* standing. 

No officer to be appointed Assistant Adjutant-General, 




HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


341 


or" Assistant Quartermaster-General, under tlie rank of a 
Captain. 

No officer to liold any Staff appointment, except tliat 
of Aide-de-Camp, until after a service of four years in 



India. 

No Subaltern to be Aide-de-Camp until after a service 
of one year with his regiment. 

During October the Commander-in-Chief issued an Dress of tho 
order prescribing certain alterations in the dress of the ^ 
army. With the exception of the following, none of these 
seem to require any particular notice. 

“ 2nd. Clubs and Queues are abolished in all ranks, and tho 
hair is, in future, to he cut close to the neck—no powder to 
be worn on duty.” 

“ 5th. All Field Officers, whether by Brevet or otherwise, 
are to wear two epaulettes.” 

“ Captains of flank companies, who have the Brevet rank 
of Field Officor, are to wear wings in addition to their 
epaulettes.” 

“ Captains and Subaltern officers are to wear one epaulette 
on the right shoulder, excepting those belonging to flank 
Companies. Captains and Subaltern officers of flank com¬ 
panies are to wear a wing on each shoulder, with a grenade, 
or bugle horn on the strap, according as they belong to tho 
grenadiers or light infantry. 

“ Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons are not to wear either 
epaulottos or wings. They are to substituto a waist belt 
instead of tho shoulder belt at present worn, and are not to 
wear a sash. 

“ 9th. In lieu of pantaloons and half boots; widq trousers 
with gaiters, or gaiter pantaloons, are permitted to be worn 
in the Engineers, artillery, infantry, and pioneers, but all 
Field Officers in full dress will still wear full boots and chain 
spurs. Regimental mounted Stuff Officora full boots and 
plain spurs.” 


TAiNisr^ 



r5,L HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

u 12tli. The non-commissioned officers and privates of Euro¬ 
pean artillery and infantry are to wear white trousers and 
white gaiters.’* 

u 13th, The very unmilitary practice of officers appearing 
out of quarters without their swords and uniform is strictly 
forbidden.” 



Military 

Fund. 


Royal 

Commission a 
grant* d to 
Company’s 
ofiucory, 1811. 


Medals for 
Boringa. 
pa lam. 


In the month of November a letter was received from 
the Court of Directors in which they approved of the 
establishment of a Military Fund, and authorised tho 
Government to pay on that account an annual subscrip¬ 
tion of 5,000 pagodas. 

On the 9tli June 1810 His Majesty was pleased to issue 
a warrant, by which rank in the Royal Army in India 
was granted to officers in the Company's service. The 
commissions to bear the same date a 3 those held by 
officere from the Company. 

The Commander-in-Chief in India, for the time being, 
was vested with the power to issue these commissions. 

The warrant in question was published to the army of 
Fort St. George on the 30th March 1811. 

The following extracts from a letter from the Court of 
Directors, regarding the medals granted for the capture 
of Seringapatam, were published to the army on the 6th 
July 1808 


I£ Some time ago we caused a medal to be executed by one 
of the most eminent artists in this country, in commemoration 
of the brilliant success of the British arms in Mysore in 1799, 
for distribution amongst tho officers and soldiers (European 
and Native) employed on that glorious occasion. On one sido 
of it is represented the storming the breach of Seringapatam 
from an actual drawing on tho spot, with the meridian sun 
denoting the time ot the storm, with the following inscription 
in Persian underneath : The Fort of Seringapatam, tho Gift 
of God, tho 4th May 1799. On the reverse side is tho British 
Lion subduing the 1 iger, the emblem of the 1'ito Tippoo Sul- 


Ml HtSTffy 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


343 


Government, witli tlie period when it was effected, and 
the following words in Arabic on the banner : ‘ Assad-oollah-ul 
Ghalib,’ 1 signifying the Lion of God is the Conqueror, or tho 
Conquering Lion of God. 

" Of those medals, gold ones have been struck for His 
Majosty, the Right Honorable Lord Melville, the Governors in 
India at the time, Marquis Cornwallis, the Nizam and his two 
Ministers, the Peshwa and his Minister, the Nabobs of 
Arcot and Oudo, and the Rajahs of Tanjore, Travancore, 
Mysore, Coorg, and Berar, Dowlut Row Scindiah, the Com- 
mander-in-Chief, General Officers on tho Staff omployed on 
tho service, and the Oriental Museum. 

“ Silver gilt for the Members of Council at the three Presi¬ 
dencies, the Residents of Hyderabad and Poonah, the Field 
Officers, and the General Staff on tho service. 

“ Silver for the Captains and Subalterns on the service. 

“ Copper bronze for tbo Non-Commissioned, and puro 
gravin tin for the Privates.” 


Tho medals were not received at Madras until January 
1311, when ordors were issued for their distribution to 
survivors, whether effective or otherwise, and also to tho 
heirs of decoased persons who had been entitled. 

On the 5th April 1811 the undermentioned dot-ail from 
tho Madras European Regiment was warned to serve as 
pioneers with the expedition about to sail for Java, viz., 
1 subaltern, 3 serjeauts, 3 corporals, and 30 privates. 

During the same month it was ordered that the three 
companies of European invalids should be embodied as 
tho nucleus of a Veteran battalion, to be denominated tbo 
ts Carnatic European Veteran Battalion/ 5 to be paid and 
mustered as such from the 1st May. 

The battalion was to be divided into five companies, the 
strength of which was to be determined by circumstances. 


<§L 

CHAP. XXI. 


Distributed, 

1811 . 


Derail for 

foreifirn 

service. 


Veteran 

battalion* 


Establish¬ 

ment. 


1 Literally fr Lion of God, tbo Couquorur. 1 




miSTfiy 



Officers. 

Clothing. 

Stations, 

I no reuse to 
pensions. 


Boon to 
invalids. 


344 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



but-the number of non-commissioned, corporals, &c., was 
fixed at 5 serjeants, 5 corporals, 1 drummer, and 1 fifer. 
50 men, viz., 10 for each company, were to be selected 
from the invalids of artillery, and armed and clothed as 
gunners. 

The staff and artificers attached to the battalion were : 


1 Adjutant. 

1 Surgeon. 

1 Surgeon-Major. 

1 Quartermaster-Serjeant. 
1 Drum Major. 

1 Fife Major. 

5 Puckallies. 


2 Armourers. 

1 Carpenter. 

1 Smith. 

1 Hammerman. 
1 Bellows Boy. 
1 Chiekledar. 

1 Chucklcr. 


4 Lieutenant-Colonels, 4 Majors, 12 Captains, 12 
Lieutenants, and 1 Ensign, all of the invalid establish¬ 
ment, were posted to the battalion, and Lieutenant- 
Colonel F. Aiskill was appointed to command. 

The clothing was ordered to be rod, with grey facings 
and silver lace. 

The head-quarters were fixed at Masulipatam; two 
companies, each of 50 men, being detached, one to Vizaga- 
patam and the other to Ganjarn. 

In May of the same year the pensions of European 
non-commissioned, rank and file, were increased to the 
following rates from the 1st of the next ensuing mouth, 
viz. :— 


Pngs. Fnn. Cash. 

Toasorjeant . 4 11 33 

Rank and tile. 3 26 40 

It was resolved at the same time that on the transfer 
of any European or native soldier to the non-effective 
establishment, he should be allowed his effective pay and 
batta until he joined the corps or station to which ho Lad 
been appointed. 



miST/fy 



On the 10th September His Majesty’s regulations CHAP. XXI 
regardiug gratuities for the loss of limbs in action, and Gratuities for 
those granted to the widows or children of officers killed, }^ b 1 ° 8 i 3 n of 
or who might have died of their wounds within six action, &c. 
months, were extended to the officers of the Company s 
service. The following are the particulars : 

1. For the loss of an eye, or a limb, or the total loss 

of the use of a limb—One year’s full pay 
according to regimenial commission. 

2. To the widow of a commissioned officer killed in 

action—A full year’s pay (i.e., subsistence) 
according to her husband’s regimental commis¬ 
sion. 

3. To each child under age and unmarried—One- 

third of what is allowed to the widow. 

Posthumous children to be included. • 

During the same month a table, showing the propor- Gratuities for 
tion of the gratuity payable to the several ranks of the’ Travancore 
troops which had served in Travancore and Cochin aiu ^ Cochin, 
between the 30th December 1808 and the 24th February 
1809, was published to the army. 

The following selections have been made from General 
Orders by the Commander-in-Chief during the expedition 
to Java. 


“Hoad Quarters, Wultevreeden , 18/& August 1811.” 

“ The good conduct of the troops having merited overy Extra 
practicable indulgence, the Commandor-iu-Chief has directed 
one ounce and a-half of coffee and two ounces of sugar per 
man, to be added to the daily ration of the European troops, 
and this is to be indented for accordingly.” 


“ 2nd September 1811. 


“ Captain Phillip? of the Madras European Regiment (Act¬ 
ing Major of Brigade) is authorised to enliet Europeans from 
VOL. lit. ^ 


Enlistment 
of Prisoners. 


TAIN/Sr^ 



316 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



the prisoners, for that Corps, agreeably to instructions he has 
received.” 


* * 


# * * 


Curreney of “ Notice is hereby given, that from and after this date, 
Sicca rupees shall be taken and given in exchange for Spanish 
Dollars, at the rate of 2 Sicca rupees, and 1 Stiver for 1 Span* 
ish Dollar Silver—the value of the Sicca rupee being fixed at 
31 Stivers and a-half, and the Batavian, Surat, and Arcot 
rupee, continuing to circulate as heretofore at the value of 
30 Stivers only.” 

“The following table showing the current value of the 
different coins circulating in Java, is published for general 
information:— 


Discontinu¬ 
ance .f Extra 
Rations. 


Riflea. 


4 

Doits make one Stiver. 


10 

do. 

do. ono Dublichi. 


30 

do. 

do. one Shilling. 


60 

do. 

do. one-half Batavian, Surat, or Arcot Rupee. 

63 

do. 

do. one-half Sicca 

rupee. 

120 

do. 

do. ono Batavian, Surat, or Arcot Rupee. 

126 

do. 

do. one Sicca rupee. 

192 

do. 

or 48 Stivers make 

one Rix Dollar (uominal). 

240 

do. 

or 60 do. -do. 

oue American, or Austrian Dollar, 

256 

do. 

or G4 do. do. 

one Spanish Dollar. 

312 

do. 

or 78 do. do. 

one Old Ducatoon. 

320 

do. 

or 80 do. do. 

one New do. 

1960 

do. 

or 480 do. do. 

one Rupee Mas, or Gold rupee. 

10 

Spanish Dollars equal to 

one American Gold Eagle. 

16 

Do. do. do. 

ono Doubloon. 

The 

rations of sugar and coffee ordered to be issued to 


the Luropcan. troops, being considered as no longer neccsi try 
in their present situation, they are to be discontinued from 
this date.” 

Kiflos appear to have been coming into use with the 
Madras army at this period, for on the 9th December 
1811, Colonel Gillespie, then in command of the troops 
in Java, made a requisition on the Arsenal at Fort St. 
George for 600, which was duly complied with. 


mtSTfty 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


34? 


Native Infantry, 1310-11. 


On the 13th February 1810, orders were issued for the 
formation of a Battalion of Volunteers to be denominated 
the f< Madras Volunteer Battalion,” and to be of the 
undermentioned strength, viz. :— 


1 Captain Commandant. 
3 Captain8. 

10 Lieutenants. 

5 Ensigns. 


1 Q uartermas t er-Serj ea n t. 


1 Adjutant. 

1 Surgeon. 

1 Assistant Surgeon. 
1 Serjeant-Major. 


10 Subadars. 
10 Jemadars. 
50 Havildars. 


20 Drummers and Fifcrs. 
12 Pucka Hies. 

50 Naiques. 

900 Privates. 


Captain W. Munro of the 15th Regiment was appoint¬ 
ed to command. 

This regiment 1 was raised for foreign service to the 
eastward, but the intention was given up, and it was 
tii t employed on the expedition against the French 
islands in 1810. 

On the 9th March, the native troops about to embark 
on foreign service were informed that their absence would 
not exceed the period of three years, and that the families 
of all the fighting men and camp-followers who might 
either die or fall in battle during the absence of their 
Corps from the Presidency, would be pensioned on the half 
pay of the rank of their deceased relatives. An advance 


1 It became the “ Madras Rifle Corps in March 1814, and was 
highly distinguished during the Mahrafcta War of 1817-3 8. It. was 
broken np in 1830, and the companies wore then at .ached to certain 
regimentr; on the permanent < atablishmcnt, viz., the let, 6th, 16th, 24th, 
26th, 36th, 38th, and 49th Those Rifle o-mptuiios wore abolished in 
January 1869. 


<SL 


CIIAF. XXI. 


Madras 
Volunteer 
Biutn lion, 
1810. 


Arrange¬ 
ments for 
Foreign 
Sorvice. 






Bheeaties for 

Foreign 

Service. 


348 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

of two months’ pay, exclusive of arrears and pay for the 
current month, was made to all ranks, and the issue of 
woollen cloaks and pantaloons to all the native troops 
employed was authorised at the same time. Full batta 
and rations wore also granted to the native troops and 
followers. 

On the 3rd April four Bheesties, in lieu of Puckallies, 
were allowed for each company of native infantry and 
Pioneers under orders of embarkation. 



Hutting During October, men of the undermentioned ranks 

were admitted to the benefit of the Hutting regulations 
on the following scale, viz.:— 

Drum Majors 4 Rupees. Yakeek and Dressers 3 
Rupees. Drummers, Fifers, Puckallies, or Bheesties 2 
Rupees. 

Fioncors. On the 12th of the same month the establishment of a 

battalion of Pionoers, to consist of eight companies, was 
fixed as follows :— 


3 Captains. 1 Serjeant-Major. 

4 Subalterns. 24 Havildars. 

1 Assistant Surgeon. 24 Naiques. 

8 Jemadars. 700 Privates, 

9 Puckallies. 


Ramnad local 
Bp Gallon. 


V. i/wuWIb for 

prolicicnr y m 

U iudwi’tunc®. 


The Ramnad local battalion, long commanded by Colo¬ 
nel Martinz, was disbanded on the 1st December. In 
consideration of the long and faithful services of tho 
Corps, the officers and men were permitted to enter tho 
regular battalions with the same claims on the Invalid 
and Pension Establishments as if they had been employed 
in the infantry of the line. Such officers and men us 
wero no longer fit for duty were transferred to the non- 
effective establishment. 

On the 2nd November, an order of Government wn 
published to the army in which it was announced that 


W UlSTffy 



a reward, to the extent' of 500 Pagodas, would be given 
to every young officer, or gentleman Cadet, who, on 
due examination, should bo found to have made himself 
master of the Hindostanee language. All Cadets arrived 
at Madras since the 1st May 1809 were considered eligi¬ 
ble for this reward, but no Officer or Cadet who had not 
passed the necessary examination within the period of 
three years from the time of his landing in the country, 
was entitled to benefit thereby. 

On the loth January 1811, the provision for the 
families of Native Soldiers killed, or dying when on 
Foreign Service, as set forth in general orders of the 5th 
November 1799, was extended to the families of tent, 
and store Lascars, and other public followers of the army. 
This order was to have retrospective effect from the date 
of that quoted above. 


<SL 


CHAP. XXI. 


Families of 
Public 
followers 
dying on 
Foreign 
Service, 1811. 


MINlSr^ 


350 



CHAP. XXI. 


Increase of 
Salaries,1810. 


Distribution 
of Medical 
Officers t o 
the army. 


<§ L 

HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


Medical, 1810. 

On the 9th October 1810, the salaries of the members 
of the Medical Board were increased, and fixed as follows : 
—viz., 1st Member 800, 2nd Member 700, 3rd Member 
600 Pagodas per mensem. 

The salaries of staff Surgeons were raised to 450 
Pagodas per mensem. 

Although at this time there were upwards of 60 full 
Surgeons on the establishment, only 9 were doing regi¬ 
mental duty, an arrangement which the Government 
considered to be incompatible with the efficient medical 
treatment of the sick, for which reason they determined 
to assign a larger proportion of junior medical officers 
for the performance of Civil duties, such as the charge 
of Zillah stations, and the undermentioned distribution 
was ordered : — 



Surgeon. 

Assistant 

Surgeon. 

Horse Artillery 

1 

1 

Cavalry 

8 

8 

Artillery 

2 

4 

European Infantry 

1 

1 

Native do. 

23 

46 

Pioneers 


2 


35 

62 


— 

— 








WHlSTfty 



CHAPTER XXIL 

FROM THE COMPLETION OF THE CONQUEST OF JAVA IN 
1812, TO THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE MAHRATTA 
WAR IN 1817. 


Lieutenant-General the Honorable John Abercromby chap.xxii. 
took command of the army on the 12th February 1812. Colonel 
A considerable extent of territory in the southern ^^ sforco » 
Mahratta country was held on condition of military service 
to be rendered to the State of Poonah, but the several 
chiefs, taking advantage of the weakness of that Govern¬ 
ment, had not only long omitted to furnish their contin¬ 
gents, but had taken possession of lands not included iu 
their grants* * On the other hand, they suffered much 
oppression from the Peishwa. So much confusion ensued 
that the Governor-General considered it necessary to 
direct the assembly of a force to act under the immediate 
instructions of the Resident at Poonah, for the purpose 
of compelling the restoration of all usurped lands, and 
the fulfilment of the obligations of the service due to 
the Peishwa, while the possession of the Serinjaumy 1 
lauds was to he guaranteed to the holders so long as they 
adhered to their engagements. 

In compliance with this order troops 2 were aasem- 


1 These lands were hereditary in a lew instances, but, as a rule, they 
wore only granted for tho lifetime of tho holder, and were reaumable 
at his death. However, they wore generally renewed in favor of tho 
Loirs. 

* H.M.'b 25th light dragoons, one squadron, and the gun troop ; 3rd 
regiment cavalry j H.M.’b 5t>th regiment) 1 it battalion 12th, 1st battalion 
13th, 1st battalion 22nd, and 1st battalion 24th N.i.; detachments of 
artillery and pioneers. The 2nd battalion 2nd N T joined tho forco 
in June 1813, and the 1st of the 12th - hen marched to Bangalore. A 
detachment of the Royal Scots, under Lieutenant-Colonel UcKeUur, 
\ in October of the -uma year 







Compliment¬ 
ary order, 
1814 . 


352 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

bled in the Ceded Districts about the end of August 
1812, under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse, 
which crossed the river Toombuddra at Humpsagur, and 
arrivod at Gudduk in the Mahratta country on the 28th 
September. 

The force was actively employed until early in 1814, 
when it was withdrawn, the objects for which it had been 
called out having been successfully accomplished. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse died at Goa on the 27th Juno 
1814, shortly after which the following general order 
was published to the army 

“ Q.O.G ., Fort St. George , 8 th July 1814. 

‘ The Honorable the Governor in Council had directed 
that the sentiments of approbation expressed by the Supreme 
Government in the following letter from the Secretary at Fort 
William should be communicated to Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse 
on bis recent return from field service, but the lamented 
death of that highly deserving officer having occurred before 
the communication could be made, the Governor in Council 
is desirous of manifesting his respect for the memory of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse by publishing them to tho army in 
general orders.” 

<c Sir,—The Resident at Poonah having reported to the 
Governor-General in Council that the services of the detach¬ 
ment under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse is no 
longer required in the Mahratta country, and that he had 
requested that officer to direct the troops to return to the 
stations al lotto ito them by the Government of Fort St. George, 
1 am directed to take this opportunity of convoying to you, fur 
the information of His Excellency tho Governor in Council of 
Fort St. George, ,he sentiments of the Governor-General in 
Council relative to the conduct of Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse, 
and tho officers aud troops under his command, daring the 
poriad of their employment in that quarter. 



mtSTfty 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 353 

Governor-General in Council has great satisfaction 
in transmitting to the Governor in Council of Fort St. Georgo 
the enclosed copy of a letter addressed to Lieutenant-Colonel 
Dowse by the Resident at Poonah, and in adding the expres¬ 
sion of his own sense of their exemplary conduct, founded 
on the uniformly favorable report which has been made by 
the Resident under whoso immediate observation they were 
employed. 




CHAP.^XII. 


“3. The Governor-General in Council has, in the course of 
his correspondence with the Resident concerning the affairs of 
the Southern Jaghircdars, had frequent occasion to mark his 
approbation of the zeal, judgment, and ability of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Dowse in the exercise of his command, and His 
Excellency in Council has great satisfaction in conveying this 
sentiment, as well as his approbation of the conduct of the 
detachment generally, to the Government of the Presidency 
to which it belongs.” 

“ Fort William, 

“ 20th May 1814.” 


The efficiency of the Commissariat Department, which Enquiry 
had been organised in 1810, was first put to the test into tho 
with Colonel Dowsed field force, and was very favorably ^eVommia- 
reported upon by that officer; but complaints having Z^To^t 
been made by Major Sir Charles Burdett, H.M.'s 56th 
regiment, who attributed the sickness of his men to tho 
bad quality of the meat issued to them during the service, 
a Court of Inquiry, composed of Lieu tenant-General Pater 
of the cavalry, Lieutenant-Colonel Evorard H.M.'s 34th, 

Major Fraser Royal Scots, Major Munro Madras riflo 
corps, and Captain Rudy&rd horse artillery, was assem¬ 
bled iu November 1814 to investigate the subject and 
report thereon. Tho Court wore of opinion that the sick¬ 
ness and mortality in the 56th had not been owing to the 
bad quality of the animal food served out to thorn, but— 

VoL, 111 . 45 


umsr/iy 



CHAP. XXII. 


Intelligence 

Department. 


Insurrection 
in the 
Wvnaad, 
181 *. 


<SL 

354 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

To the immoderate use of spirits, and exposure to vicis¬ 
situde of climate ; 

To the large proportion of recruits recently joined ; 

To the men failing to report themselves when taken ill; 

To the very wet weather at the commencement of the 
service, and the loss of baggage and bedding in con¬ 
sequence of the failure of a private bullock contractor. 
The Commander-in-Chief and the Government con¬ 
curred in this opinion, and Captain Josiah Stewart, 1 11th 
native infantry, the senior Commissariat officer with the 
force, was thanked in general orders for the ability and 
attention with which he had conducted the duties of his 
department in the field. 

It appears from the correspondence of Colonel Dowse 
that several men of the 2nd battalion 2nd regiment were 
employed by him in the Intelligence Department during 
the continuance of the service, that they acquitted them¬ 
selves to his satisfaction, and were handsomely rewarded. 

Wynaad, 1812. 

A rebellion having broken out in the Wynaad in March 
1812, troops entered the country early in April from 
Canuanoro, and Seringapatam, for the relief of our de¬ 
tachments at Manantoddy and Sultan’s battery, which 
were threatened by the insurgents. 

The troops from Cannanore under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Webber 2nd battalion 3rd, consisted of a company of 
il.M.’s 30th regiment, the 2nd battalion 3rd, and a detach- 
meat 1st battalion 5th native infantry. Those from 
Seringapatam under Major Welsh 1st battalion 3rd, con¬ 
sisted of the light company H.M.’s 80th regiment, two 
companies 1st of the 3rd, and two companies 1st of the 
13th, formed into a light battalion. 

1 Afterwurdu Resident At Hyderabad. 



Ml HlSTfty 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 355 

Colonel Webber’s detachment was attacked when CHAP 
ascending the Cotiaddy Pass. Captain Hunter, Lieutenant — 
Inverarity, and 17 or 18 men of the 2nd battalion 3rd were 
wounded, the two former severely; but the rebels were 
dispersed, and the post at Manantoddy, which was held 
by two companies 2nd battalion 3rd under Captain Tagg, 
was relieved on the 9th April. The detachment under 
Major Welsh arrived next day ; parties were then sent 
out in several directions, and by the end of the month 
the principal rebels had been taken, and the disturbances 
suppressed. 

The detachment at Sultan’s battery, under a native 
officer, had expended most of its ammunition, and was in 
danger when relieved by Major Welsh on the 18th; but 
we suffered nothing except from the climate, a great 
number of officers and men having been prostrated by 
fever. 

Tho European companies marched for cantonment on tho 
23rd April, and the native troops followed early in May, 
after a chain of posts had been established at Panamurta- 
cottah, Porakaudy, Paukurn, Moodramoly and Sultan's 
battery, garrisoned by detachments of the 2nd of the 3rd 
and 1st of the 13th, each under the command of a Euro¬ 
pean officer, with the exception of the last, which was 
held by a nativo officer with 30 men. 

Mutiny at Quilon, 1812. 

On the night of the 24th May 1812, the existence of a 
conspiracy at Quilon, having for its object tho destruc¬ 
tion of the European officers and men of the subsidiary 
force in Travancore, was brought to the knowlcdgb of 
Lieutenant and Adjutant Cox 2nd battalion 14th regi 
ment, by Jemadar Iyaloo of the same battalion, to whom 
it had been revealed by a private of his company 




CHAP. XXII. 

Subsidiary 

force. 


Apprehen¬ 
sion of the 
conspirators. 




Execution 
of the ring¬ 
leaders. 



Result ot 
of Iter trials, 

1813. 


3o6 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

The subsidiary force, at this time under the command 
of Colonel Hamilton Hall, was composed of a company of 
European artillery, the 2nd battalion 9th, 2nd of the 11th, 
2nd of the 14th, and 2nd of the 18th regiments of native 
infantry. 

On the morning of the 25tli, Colonel Hall, and tho 
officers in command of battalions, mot at the Residency, 
and it was there arranged that a general parade of the 
troops should be ordered for that afternoon, and that the 
principal conspirators should then be seized ; wbilo tho 
Resident, Lieutenant-Colonel John Munro, took stops 
for the apprehension of such inhabitants of the town and 
vicinity, as were believed to bo implicated. 

These measures were successfully carried out. Jemadar 
Shaik Hoossain of tho 14th, together with 2 liavildars 
and 22 men of that battalion, were called out of tho 
ranks, and placed in confinement, the troops behaving 
with perfect steadiness. 

Womnuah Tumby ex-Dewan of Travaucore, an indi¬ 
vidual claiming to be the nephew and representative of 
the late Pychy Rajah, and several religious mendicants, 
were seized at the same time by the Resident's people as 
being the chief instigators. 

Jemadar Shaik IIoos3ain, and Private Salabut Khan of 
the 14th were tried in a summary manner by a board of 
officers, of which Major Fraser 2nd battalion 9th, was 
President. Both were convicted, and sentenced to be 
blown from a gnu, which sentence was carried into exe¬ 
cution on the ovening of the 28th May at a general 
parade of the whole forco. 

Two haviidavs, one naiguo, and twenty-six privates of 
the 14th, of whom 19 were Mahomedans, and 10 Hindoos, 
were tried by ordinary court-martial, and sentencod to 
death. Of these, two privates were pardoned, the rent 



MWisr^ 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY, 


357 


<SL 


wore either shot or hanged, the sentences being carried 
into execution at Quilon, Cannanore, Seringapatam, Tri- 
chinopoly, Yollore, and St. Thomas' Mount respectively. 

Six native officers, and one havildar of the 18th, two 
native officers of the 9th, and ono native officer of the 
14th, were also tried and sentenced to death, but- it was 
subsequently discovered that they had been falsely 
accused, and they were consequently pardoned and 
released, full belief in their innocence being expressed by 
the Commander-in-Chief in general orders. 

Nothing transpired to prove that the conspiracy ex¬ 
tended beyond the 2nd of the 14th. The 2nd of the 11th 
(22nd M.N.I.) was specially reported as having “ mani¬ 
fested distinguished attachment and discipline ” through¬ 
out. 

Hie result of the enquiries made by the Resident, 
which occupied some time, led him to the conclusion that 
Womanah Tumby, th e pseudo Pychy Rajah, and Jemadar 
Shaik Hoossain of the 14th, had been tho originators of 
the conspiracy. 

The design was to confer the sovereignty of Travancoro 
upon the Pychy Rajah. The Jemadar was promised the 
office of Pewan, but this, in all probabiliiy, was, really 
intended for Womanah Tumby. The pay of all sepoys 
as might join in the plot was to be raised to Rs. 10 per 
mensem. 


CHAP. XXII. 


Pardon of 

native 

officers. 


Good conduct • 
of 2nd batta¬ 
lion 11th. 


Originators 
of tho 
conspiracy 
and their 
object. 


The chief body of conspirators consisted of discharged 
sepoys, fakcers, and disaffected natives of the province. 

The European officers were to have been attacked while 
at dinner, and the barracks sot on fire at the same tone 
in order to distract attention, after which tho public 
treasury was to have been given up to plunder. 

On the 16th February 1813 Jemadar Iyaloo of the Rewards 
1 ttb was promoted to be Subadar, and presented with 






Niwisr/fj, 



OHAP. XXII. 


Baninhment 
ot Wouianuh 
Tmnby. 


Governors 
and Com¬ 
ma nderii-in- 
Chiof, 
1813 - 14 . 


358 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

a palankeen, and an allowance for bearers. He also 
received a gold medal, and a donation of 1,000 rupees. 
On liis decease, bis nearest heir was to be allowed a 
pension of 35 rupees per mensem. 

Vencatram, the sepoy who had informed the Jemadar 
of the plot, was pensioned on the pay of a Jemadar, and 
received a donation of 500 rupees. 

Private Hoossain Khan, who had given information to 
Captain Ives of the same battalion on the 24th May, but 
in rather an incoherent manner, was pensioned on the 
pay of a Havildar. 

Womanah Tumby, and the Pychy Rajah were tried by 
the Court of the Travancore Government. The former 
was sentenced to death, but this sentence was commuted 
to banishment, and he was removed to Nellore. The 
Pychy Rajah was banished to Ckinglepnt, but he was 
released from confinement in 1815. 

General Abereromby relieved Sir George Barlow as 
Governor on the 21st May 1813, and continued to hold 
the office of Commandor-in-Chief in addition, until the 
3rd December of the same year, when Lieutenant- 
General Sir Thomas Hislop Bart., arrived from England, 
and assumed command of the array. 

The Right Honorable Hugh Elliott arrived at Madras 
in June 1811, and assumed charge of the Government 
on the lOtii of that month. 



Northern Circars, 1813-17. 

Kimwly, Towards the end of 1813 disturbances were com¬ 

menced in Kimcdy at the instigation of the widow of the 
Zemindar Gujputty Deo; and the civil authorities being 
unable to quell them, five companies of the 1st battalion 
10th from Yizianagrum under Captain Eraser, and three 
companies 2nd battulion 21st from Borhainpore under 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 359 

Major Waliab, entered tlie Zemindary about the middle 
of March 1814. 

The 1st battalion 3rd regiment, and a detachment of 
pioneers wore sent up from Madras about the end of 
April, and Lieutenant-Colonel Fletcher was appointed to 
command, but tranquillity having been restored before 
the arrival of these reinforcements, the 3rd battalion was 
kept for a time at Teckely as a corps of observation, and 
Colonel Fletcher remained on the coast. 

The Zemindar of Goomsoor having been guilty of sever¬ 
al acts of cruelty and oppression about this period, and 
having resisted the authority of Government when called 
to account, Colonel Fletcher marched against him from 
Berhampore in April 1815, and took possession of the 
fort at Kolada on the 20th May without opposition. 

The Zemindar having fled towards the hills, ho was 
followed by Colonel Fletcher, and surprised near Gullery 
on the 27th, but he made his escape. Ultimately he gave 
himself up on the 24th June, and tho troops returned to 
cantonment. 

It was afterwards discovered that Colonel Fletcher had 
received 7,000 rupees from the Zemindar for the purpose 
of securing his good offices with the authorities, and of 
delaying the advance of the detachment. It was also 
ascertained that treasure, jewels, and other property to a 
very considerable amount had been taken at Gullery, 
20,000 rupees of which the Colonel retained for himself, 
and divided the remainder amongst, the detachment, 
making no report whatever of the transaction. Ho was 
tried for these acts of misconduct in November 1816, 
and sentenced to be cashiered, which sentence was con¬ 
firmed in July 1817. 

Troops were again sent into Kiniedy in October 1816, 
in consequence of disturbances created at the instigation 



<SL 


CHAP. XXII. 


Goomsoor, 

1815 . 


Gross 

misconduct 
of Oolonol 
Fletcher. 


KLiuu’dy, 

1818 - 17 . 


TAINfSr^ 



CH AP. X XII. of Padmanabha Deo, a landholder on the borders of the 
zomindary, who was discontented at his removal from the 
office of manager. He was apprehended by order of the 
Magistrate, and tried before the civil court, but escaped 
punishment for want of sufficient evidence. Doorgarauze, 
his less guilty instrument, was captured and oxecuted in 
April 1817. The troops were then withdrawn with the 
exception of detachments at Kimedy and Bageereddy- 
pooram, a large village on the Palcondah river°about 16 
miles south-west of Kimedy. 


Government 
interfare 
in the 
succession, 

1813. 


Kurnool, 1813-16. 


When the Nizam transferred Bellary and Cuddapah 
to the East India Company in 1800, the suzerainty of the 
principality of Kurnool/ which had been tributary to the 
Nizam, became vested in the Company. 

In October 1813 the Collector of Bellary was sent to 
Kurnool to enquire into the state of the intellect of 
Munawur Khan, the eldest son of the then Nawaub Alif 
Khan, to remonstrate against the unjust preference of 
the Nawaub’s sixth son Gholam Rasool, and to signify 
the wishes of the British Government with respect to the 
succession, viz., that it should devolve upon the eldest 
legitimate son. This mission having failed, a force, 2 of 
snch stren gth as to preclude any attempt at resistance. 


° n th ; ri0rt , h '' y th0 riverB Toomhuddra and Kistn;,, and on 
the east, vest,. nd sooth by the Coded Districts. The revenue at t! o 
end of loot century was estimated at 20 lakhs of rupee#, hat owin - to 

hnTfTTT tb 0 . C 0 i ,Wti0 “ equally diminished, and by 1S13 'tVey 
had fallen to about half that amount, 3 3 

First cavalry, R.M.’a 66th foot, l*tbattalion 2nd Inf ^ , 

2nd buttnlion 18tb, 2nd battalion 17th, Mmol of n l 

1 • ant-Colonel Alai-,in of the 

„„l 1 T'' f' 0l0 “ el Bar ‘' lny HM ■* 8«th. «•-• whole 

1 , 11 Taylor, eommeudi.ig iu tho Ceded Diotrictr 








miSTffy 



HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY, 
was sent from Bellary in December with tho 


-3(3 i 


view of 


releasing Munawur Klian from the confinement to which 
he was subjected, and of causing his formal recognition 
as heir. These objects having been satisfactorily accom¬ 
plished, the troops returned to cantonments. 

Alif Khan died about the end of September 1815, upon 
which Munawur Khan was immediately set aside by his 
next brother Mozuffer Klian, who took possession of the 
town and district. 


Government, on receiving intelligence of this occur¬ 
rence, directed the assembly of a field force 1 at Gooty, and 
on the 14th October they appointed Colonel Marriott to 
the.command, associating with him Mr. Chaplin of the 
civil service for the purpose of installing Munawur Khan 
in his rights and dignities. 

Tho troops marched in November, and on arriving at 
Kurnool, Mozuffer Khau was called upon to submit, but, 
being confident in the strength of tho fort, which was 
defended by a numerous garrison, he held out, and 
obliged us to lay regular sioge to the place. 

Fire wa r opened from the batteries on the 14th De¬ 
cember, and Mozuffer Khan surrendered the next day. 
Munawar Khan was then duly installed, and agreed to 
permit tho British troops to occupy his fori until matters 
should have settled down. 


Colonel Marriott and the troops were thanked in gene¬ 
ral orders of the 1st January 1810, and on the 29th June 


1 Squadron HUtf.’a 22nd dragoon#, 4th regiment cavalry, H.M.’g 84th 
foot. M i Iras Eu < |>oun Ueghnont, one company Madras Kith corps, 1st 
battalion 3rd. 2nd battalion. 6Ul, lai battalion 12th, ono and a half 
company of artillery, three romp;.: dog lit tmttrtimn pioneers 

The Assistant Adjnti nt-fSouonil. mid V- istunt Quortenua; u r-Gonornl 
of the unity ( Join Ui f01*00. 

VOL. HI. 40 


<SL 


CHAP.^XII. 


Mozuffer 
Khan usurps 
tho Musnud, 
1815. 


Government 

again 

interfere. 


Surrender 
of Kurnool. 


Field foroo 
broken up, 
1816. 









MIMS?*,, 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XXII. 


362 



the force was broken up, and the Colonel returned to his 
own command at Bangalore. 


Garrison 

•withdrawn, 

1817 . 


An ordinary garrison, composed of the European regi¬ 
ment, the 2nd of the 9th, the 2nd of the 14th, and 
detachments of artillery and pioneers, was placed in 
Kurnool, as a temporary measure, under the command of 
Lieutonant-Colonel Thompson of the European regiment. 
This Government command was abolished on the 7th 
April 1817, and the troops were then withdrawn. 


Peace with France. 

Intelligence of the conclusion of the Treaty of Paris 
on the 30th May 1811 having been received at Madras in 
January 1815, it was ordered that royal salutes, with 
three volleys of musketry, should bo fired at all the prin¬ 
cipal stations of the army in honor of the event, and 
that batta should be issued to the European and N ative 
troops, as on other occasions of extraordinary rejoicing. 


Thanks to the Troops. 

On the 7th February of the Rime year the following 
extract from a despatch from the Court of Directors, 
dated 3rd August 1814, was published to the army : — 

“ His Royal Highness the Commander-iu-Chief having 
transmitted to us the following Resolutions of the Honorable 
House of Commons, we feel great satisfaction in transcribing 
them for your information, and wo desiro that the same may 
be communicated in the most public manner to tho whole of 
the troops serving in your Presidency.” 


44 Mcrcurie, 6th Die Julie 1814. 

“ Resolved —Ncthijic contradicente : 

“ That the thanks of this House be given to the officers of 
the Army (including the troops employed in the service of 



HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 363 

tisfc India Company) for the meritorious and eminent 
services which they have rendered to their king and county 
during the course of the war. 


u Resolved —Neminc coiitrctdicoitc: 

« That this House doth highly approve and acknowledge 
the services of the non-commissioned officers and men em¬ 
ployed in the Army during the course of tlie war, and that 
the same be communicated to them by the commanders of 
the several corps, who are respectively desired to thank 
those under their conimatid for their exemplary and gallant 
behaviour.’ * 


Hifl Royal Highness the Duke of Vork, then Corn- 
mander-in-Chief, when transmitting copies of these 
resolutions to the Court of Directors, concluded his letter 
with the following sentence :— 

il It is with peculiar satisfaction that I avail myself of the 
opportunity to express, through the channel of the Court of 
Directors, the high scuso I entertain of tho universal good 
conduct displayed by the Company’s European and Native 
troops during the course of tho arduous services upon which 
tlioy have been employed.” 


Return of the Troops from the Moluccas, 1816. 

The following order was published to the army on the 
return of tho Madras troops from tho Moluccas in Novem¬ 
ber 1816 

(?.0. C.C., 30lh November 1816. 

“ The Commauder-in-Chief has great satisfaction in publish¬ 
ing to the army the following extract of a letter from tho 
Resident of Fort Victoria addressed to tho Government, of 
Fort St . George. 

“ Such testimonials of .he zealous aud valuable services of 
the officers of this establishment, and of the orderly nod good 


<§L 

CHAP. XXII. 


Letter from 
tho I)uko of 
York. 


mtsTfy 



CHAP. XXII. 


Services of 
the Madras 
troops in the 
Moluccas 
HiibBocmenfc 
to their 
capture, 
1811 - 16 . 


-iff “ W*? <SL 

HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

conduct of their detachments, reflect the highest honor on 
themselves, and are creditable to their respective corps.” 


tl Extract of a letter to the Government of Fort St. George 

from the Resident at Fort Victoria, Amboyna, dated 19th 

August 1816. 

u I have the honor to acquaint you that under the expect¬ 
ation of the speedy restoration of these islands to the Dutch, 

1 have judged it proper to take immediate measures for send¬ 
ing to Fort St. George as large a proportion of the troops 
belonging to that establishment which are now employed at 
the Moluccas, as can be conveniently removed. 

“ On the occasion of the final departure, for the Presidency 
to which they belong, of the officers and troops proceeding on 
the “ Laurel,” I consider it to be a duty incumbent on me to 
communicate to the Government of Fort St. George the 
sentiments of cordial esteem, and approbation which the 
invariable tenor of their conduct, and their eminent profes¬ 
sional services, and merits, have indelibly impressed on my 
mind. In the exigencies of, every public crisis, and on every 
occasion of difficulty and danger which lias occurred during 
my administration at the Moluccas, they have always been 
distinguished by their eminent alacrity,zeal, and promptitude; 
and by their uniform skill, activity and courage they have 
confirmed those claims to public approbation and gratitude, 
which they had previously established by their services in the 
capture of the island.” 

Lieutenant Kyd of the European regiment,and Lieuten¬ 
ant Nelson of the artillery, wore specially thanked for 
their sendees while in civil employ under the Resident 
for the period of five years; and the skilful execution 
of topographical military charts, and plans of the fortifi¬ 
cations at Banda, and Amboyna by Lieutenant Gale of 
the European regiment, was also duly acknowledged. 



imSTfty 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


365 



‘ G % 



PlNDARIES, 1812-17. 


CHAP. XXII. 


The Pindarics, 1 originally obscure freebooters, grad¬ 
ually became auxiliaries to the several Maliratta powers 
to whom they attached themselves, and by whom they 
were granted unlimited license to plunder, besides being 
occasionally rewarded by grants of land. J heir head¬ 
quarters were in the province of Malwa, where they lived 
under the protection of Scindia, and of Holkar. Their 
numbers, periodically increased by success, and dimin¬ 
ished by misfortune, were continually fluctuating, but 
were generally estimated at about 25,000 horse, of whom 
some 6,000 were good, 4,000 fair, and the rest indifferent. 

The leaders appear to have been generally, if not 
always, Mahomedans, but the men were of every caste 
and religion, and natives of every province in Central 
India, the Deccan, and the Southern Maliratta country, 
united only by their common love of plunder, and a law¬ 
less life. The following extract from Sir John Malcolm's 
report on the province of Malwa describes their com¬ 
position and method of warfare : — 

When they set out on an expedition they placed them- Method of 
solves under the guidance of one or more chosen leaders, wartaro * 
called Lubbireaha, 3 who were selected on account of their 
knowledge of the country they meant to plunder ; they were 
neither encumbered by tents nor baggage; each horseman ear 
lied a few cakes of bread for his own subsistence, and some 
feeds of gram for his horse. The party, svhich usually con¬ 
sisted of two or three thousand good horse, with a proportion 
of nioanted followers, advanced (as secretly as they <?on Id, 
ond without plundering) at the rapid rato of forty or fifty 
miles a day, neither turning to the right nor loft till they 

1 Supposed to bo derived from I'iuria, an intoxicating drink to which 
they wero addirted.-MaWlm It.‘port on M.»lwa. v ' -80. 

a Selected for tlioir iul -iligenco and activity j tlicir iirving ont with 
Uio standard w the signal Cor murch. 







366 


history of the MADRAS army. 


<SL 


They enter 
Mirzapore, 
1812. 


They plunder 
Uuntoor and 
Cud<la[»uh, 
1810. 


XII. arrived at the country meant'to be attacked. They then 
divided, and made a sweep of all the cattle and property they 
could find ; committing at the same time the most horrid atroc¬ 
ities and destroying what they could not carry away. They 
trusted to the secrecy and suddenness of tho irruption for 
avoiding the troops who guarded the frontiers of the countries 
they invaded, and before a force could be brought against them, 
they were on their return. Their chief strength lay in their 
being intangible. If pursued they made marches of extra¬ 
ordinary length (sometimes upwards of sixty miles) by roads 
almost impracticable for regular troops. If overtaken, they 
dispersed and reassembled at an appointed rendezvous ; if 
followed to the country from which they issued, they scat¬ 
tered into small parties. 

“ Their wealth, their booty, and their families, were dis¬ 
persed over a wide region, in which they found protection 
amid the mountains, and in tho fastuosses belonging to them¬ 
selves, and to thoeo with whom they wero either openly or 
secretly connected ; but nowhore did they present any point 
of attack ; and the defeat of a party, the destruction of one of 
their cantonments, or tho tomporary occupation of some of 
their fastnesses, prodneed no effect beyond the ruin of an 
individual freebooter, whose place was instantly supplied by 
another, generally of more desperate fortune, and theroforo 
more eager for enterprise.” 

The Pindaries do not appear to have made any inroad 
into tho territory of the Company until 1812, when they 
entered the district of Mirzapore, and carried off their 
plunder through Rewah, in consequence of which a treaty 
was entered into with the Rajah of that province, who 
undertook to guard tlie passes, and to allow our troops 
to occupy such posts in his country as might bo suitable 
for the purposes of observation and defence. 

About tho 10th March 1816, a numerous body crossed 
tho Kistna, and entered the district of Guntour, which 
they plundered for seven successive days, after which they 


mtST/fy 



passed into Cuddapah, and making a detour, recrossed the CHAP. XXII. 
river on tlie 21st, just as a party of British troops came 
in sight. The detachment in the town of Guntoor was 
quite inadequate for its protection, consisting only of a 
few invalid sepoys, and peons, employed to guard the 
treasury and the jail. 

A Board of Commissioners appointed to inquire into Estimated 
the nature and extent of the losses and injuries sustained, losse3 ‘ 
reported that 269 houses had been burnt, 6,203 houses 
plundered, 183 persons killed, 505 wounded, 3,603 sub- 
jected to torture; and property to the value of £250,000 
carried off or destroyed. 

In December 1816 another body of Pindaries, esti- They plunder 
mated at about 5,000 men, entered Purlakimedy through * n ^ au i arD * 
the zemindary of Jeypoor, burnt the town, and destroyed 
a number of villages in the neighbourhood. The town 
of Ganjam was plundered about the same time, and the 
taluks of Itchapoor, Munsoorcottah, and others in that 
part of the district were laid waste. 

The celerity of the movements of the marauders, and 
the quickness with which they broke up into small 
parties, saved them from sustaining any considerable loss 
from the detachments of native infantry stationed at 
Kimedy, and at Berliampore, but the officers at those 
places acquitted themselves as well as the means at tlicir 
disposal would admit, and they received the thanks of 
Government for their exertions. 

The following is an account of the attack upon Kimedy Defeated at 
as reported by Major Oliver 1st battalion 6th regiment, 
v T, ho commanded the detachments 1 at that place, and in 
the neighbourhood :— 

1 Throe companies of tlie 6th at Kimedy, and one at an outpost under 
Lieutenant Jackson ; one company 2nd battalion 2nd under Lieutenant 
M. Ttvoedie. » 




mtSTfiy. 


\ 

368 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

CHAP.XXII. “I have the honor to acquaint you, for the information of 
the officer commanding the division, that about 5 o’clock 
yesterday evening we were surprised by the Mahratta horse 
entering this town. Having only Lieutenant Tulloh with me, 
I sent him to take post at the other end of it, and from both 
our divisions parties were sent out to the different streets 
to endeavour to keep them out of the town. Wo had a con¬ 
tinued skirmishing for about two hours, and some men and 
horses were killed in the streets. 

“ A little after 6, Lieutenant Tweedie, who had retreated 
upon my detachment, arrived, having marched all night 
and that day, having been surrounded by them from 11 
o’clock in the morning. I found it impossible to save the 
town as they galloped through, and set fire t-o it in several 
places. At 11 o’clock p.m. Lieutenant Jackson, who had been 
stationed with his company about. 10 miles off, arrived, when 
considering myself strong enough to gi\e them an alert, I 
left Lieutenant Twcedio with two companies in a strong posi¬ 
tion, and having procured two peons from Mr. Spotliswoodo, 1 
who promised to show me the road to their camp about a 
mile off, I put myself under their guidance, and am happy to 
say we succeeded beyond my expectation. We were actually 
in the middle of their camp before they discovered us, and 
we gave them two volleys from the companies within ten 
yards, which did great execution, and caused such confusion 
among them that they fled in every direction. 

t: We traversed their camp, and killed, I should imagine, 
from twenty to thirty of them. They left the p&rt 

of their baggage on the ground, and this morning there were 
about a hundred horso running looso about the town, and we 
have killed and taken about seventy horse. Lieutenant 
Tweedie, when he heard the firing, detached Lieutenant 
Tulloh with a company to take post on the bank of a lank 
for which they appeared to be making. This win- such an 




1 Tbo Collector of the district 




miSTffy 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


369 


unexpected measure that a party of them galloped up closo to 
Lieutenant Tulloh without discovering him, when he gave 
them a volley and killed some men and horses. They have 
been drawn up in front of ns this morning. I should suppose 
there aro about 5,000 of them, and they are now moviug off 
in the direction of Jcmboor and Sericottah. 1 I shall march 
this evening for Chicacolo as I conceive it probable they will 
move in that direction. We havo taken a standard and a 
trumpet.” 


“ KlMBDY, 

“ 20 th December 181G.” 


The Right Honorable the Governor in Council, when 
publishing this letter in general orders, requested the 
Commander-in-Chief to <c signify to Major Oliver, and to 
the officers and troops who served under his command, 
the high approbation of the Government for the exem¬ 
plary discipline and gallantry which they displayed in 
their attempt to defend the town of Kimody, and in their 
subsequent attack on the camp of the Pindaries.” Tho 
officers and men of tho detachment were thanked accord¬ 
ingly by tho Commander-in-Chief in an order dated at 
Fort St. George on tho 17th January 1817. 

The troops in the north of tho district of Gaujam, con¬ 
sisting of tho head-quarter wing of the 2nd battalion 
2nd regiment at Bcrhampore, and of tho other wing at 
Aska, wore quite inadequate to protect <he country against 
a numerous body of predatory horse, but Lieutenant- 
Colonel Steele, who was in command at Berhampore, 
made the best dispositions in his power to prevent the 
Pindaries from entering the province of Cuttack, in which 
object ho was successful. 


1 Direct south oi Pttrlakimedv, a ml on the wav to tho town 
ooli». 


•>f Chic a • 

17 


<SL 


CHAP. XXII. 


Thanks totho 
dotachmont, 

1817 . 


Detn hmonts 
from Berliam- 
porc. 


VOL. III. 



Lieutenant 
Borthwick 
defcatu the 

Titularies. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

The first notice of the irruption was given by the 
burning of Itchapoor, a thriving town about 18 miles 
south of Berhampore, which took place about the 20th 
December, upon which Colonel Steele sent olf an express, 
desiring Major Monin to march from Aska to Ganjam, 
after having detached a party into the zomindary of 
Calicote 1 to close the road into Cuttack from that direc¬ 
tion. Lieutenant Byrn, with 50 men, was sent from 
Berhampore on the 25th to hold the narrow strip of land 
between the southern extremity of tho Chilka Lake, and 
the sea at Priaghee, while Lieutenant Borthwick, with 
another detachment, marched towards Hautghur with 
instructions to act according to his discretion. 

Lieutenant Borthwick left Berhamporo early on tho 
27th, and having received information while on the march 
that a body of about 1,000 horse were iu the neighbour¬ 
hood of Hautghur, he surprised them near tho village of 
Bagwanny 2 about 11 o'clock the same night when in camp, 
killed 20 men, and captured 50 horses, together with a 
number of spears, swords, and shields, and all their 
heavy baggage. 

Ho followed them up into Goorasoor the next day, and 
about 4 a.m. on the 20th he again surprised them when 
encamped in tho open paddy-fields near tho village o» 
Now gaum, 3 killed the leader and u number of his men, 
and took .19 horses, tho weakness of his party h iving 
prevented him from securing more. A considoniblo 
quantity of plunder wus taken by tho villagers. After 
this defeat the Pindarics retreated north in great haste, 
and loft tho district by Bodingy and Chokapad. 



1 On the went* rn shorn* of tho Chilka Lake. 

4 Between Aeku and Hautghur, or Autugudda. Probably the jduoo 
market " Boiniony " in t ho nmp. 

3 About four utiles boulli of Koluiu, and do&c to Kuuuollcoudu. 







HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 371 

Major Monin having missed the express from Berhain- 
jpore, did not reach Gan.jam until about noon on the 23rd, 
a few hours after it had been plundered, but he was in 
time to secure the passes iu Calicote. He then marched 
into Gooiusoor to support Lieutenant Borthwick, but the 
Pindarics had fled before his arrival. 

The exertions of Lieutenant Borthwick and his detach¬ 
ment wore handsomely acknowledged by the Governor 
in Council in the following general order, dated 27th 
January 1817 :— 

“ The Right Honorable the Governor in Council having 
received the satisfactory intelligence of the complete expul¬ 
sion of the numorous body of predatory horse which lately 
penetrated the Company’s territory in the Ganjam District, 
deems it proper to express iu the most public manner his 
high sense, as well of tho zoal, judgment, and enterprise 
1 1 is played by Lieutenant Alexander Bortliwiek of the 2nd 
battalion 2nd regiment of native infantry throughout tho 
operations which have led to this decisive and important 
result; as of the exemplary perseverance, exertion, and 
gallantry of the native officers and men of the detachment 
under his command, whoso conduct equally in their unwearied 
pursuit of tho enemy, and in every attack on their camp, 
reflocts tho highest credit on tho discipline and efficiency ot 
tho corps to which they bolong, and has entitled them to his 
unqualified approbat ion. ’ ’ 

Two other successful attacks upon tho Pindarics wore 
made about tlio same time,ono by Major Lushington, 1 with 
tho 4th light cavalry, in the territories of tho Peislnva, 
the other by Major Robert McDowall commanding a 
brigade in the Hyderabad country. 

On tho night of tho 25ih December Major Lu-diiugton, 
then at Pcppulwarrie, having received information that 

' Afterword* General Sir Jaino Law Luebing'ton, <i.e.n 



<SL 


CHAP. XXII. 

Major Monin’a 
movements. 


Thanhs of 
Government. 


Other affair* 
with tho 
Pindarics, 
1810 - 17 . 


Their defeat 
by Major 
Lunhtugnm.. 


miSTfty 


372 HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 

CHAP. XXII. the Pindaries had appeared at the village of Sogaum, 
distant about. 22 miles, marched for that place at 1 a.in. 
on the 26th. Before he had gone above a few miles both 
of his galloper guns broke down, and ho was obliged to 
leave them. On arriving at Sogaum about 7 a,ra., he 
found that the Pindaries, about 2,500 strong, had gone 
off tho day before in an easterly direction. Leaving the 
recruits, baggage, and followers at Sogaum under the 
protection of the gun troop and rear guard, he continued 
the pursuit as far as Kami 20 miles further on, at which 
place he arrived about noon, having with him 350 rank 
and filo. He there halted for nearly an hour to water 
the horses and refresh the men, after which he went on 
to Peepry, distant 7 miles, where he was told that tho 
whole body of Pindaries, after having plundered a number 
of villages, had halted at Gowak about 3 miles from 
Peopry, and were engaged in preparing their food. Major 
Lusliington then pushed on at a brisk pace, and came 
upon the plunderers without having been discovered. 
Tho rost of tho account shall be given iu his own words. 

Defeat of tho “The surprise was complete, the success proportionate, 
and though the Pindaries were not two minutes before they 
were on their horses, flying in various directions, yot ilio 
ground was so favorable to pursuit, and it was kept up by 
tho pursuing divisions for 10 miles with such ardor, that I 
cannot estimate their loss, from the sovoral reports I have 
received, at less than 700 or 800 killed and wounded, together 
with a great number rendorod incapable of pursuing their 
plundering excursion by tho los3 of thoir horse 3 . Balliah, 
tho person who was at the bead of the party, escaped with 
about 200 of the best mounted, and went off iu a southerly 
direction. I am of opinion that ho will scarcely bo able to 
reassemble, at tho utmost, moro than 400 or 500 of his late 
party, and which I learn was estimated at 3,000. Including 
f-ho pursuit and return to Cowah, I estimate tbe dietanco gone 




Ml HlSTfiy 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


373 



over by the regiment from 1 in tbe morning to 6 at night on CHAP. XXII. 
the 26th at 70 miles- 

“ Though I have only one casualty to report to you, yet I Beatli^of 
feel it a most painful duty, for in Captain Darke the service D ^ k ““ 
has lost a gallant and most excellent officer, and the regiment 
has been deprived of a brother officer, highly respected and 
esteemed. He fell, shortly after I ordered the pursuit to 
commence, by a thrust from a spear which proved almost 
instantly fatal. 

“ 1 enclose a return of tbe killed, wounded, and missing 
horses, which is very inconsiderable.” 

This affair having been communicated to the Madras Com^liment- 
G-ovcrnment by the Resident at Poonak, a general order ig* l7 ° 
was published at Fort St. George on the 27th January 
1817, in which Major Lushington was thanked for the 
judgment, activity, and professional ability which he had 
displayed ; and the officers, native officers, and men of the 
regiment were also thanked for their exemplary conduct. 

Early in November 1810 a body of Pindarics, computed The Pindarics 
at about 2,500 men, under the command of ono of tlicit ^ a Jj 1orc an j 
principal leaders named Buksoo, left Nimav. ar 1 in Malwa, 
crossed the Nerbudda, and advanced in a south-easterly 
diroction by Seoneo and Ramteak, leaving Nagpore on 
the right, and Chanda on the loft. It then passed 
Yedalabad, andBeder, and penetrated as far as the-Kistna, 
plundering as it went. On reaching the Kistna it turned 
up along the left bank for some distance, and then struck 
north towards the district of Nuldroog, which it entered 
early in January 1817. 

At this time Maior Robert McDowall 2nd battalion 

J _ T . , ,. by Major 

21th regiment, was moving about in the Nizams uis- McDowall. 

* Ou tlie Goc.ln.vory opposite to ScinditPs fort at Hiutlla. It wnn one 
of tlio bead-quarter camps of the Pindarics. The account oi the 
movements of Buksoo’s party is taken fiom a letter from the Resident 
at Hyderabad to the Madras Government. I9th January 181, 




chap.xxil 


374 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

tncts of Beder, Nandair, and Nnldroog, witli a small field 
force consisting of part of his own battalion, some com¬ 
panies of tlie 2nd battalion 15th regiment under Captain 
Williams, and a body of Mysore Silladar horse under 
Annajee Row. On the 14th January, when marching 
towards the town of Omergh in Nuldroog, he received 
information to the effect that the Pindarics were in the 
neighbourhood of the village of Moorli, distant about 8 
miles towards the south-west. Leaving his camp at 
Omergh under the protection of 80 men, the Major marched 
about 9 p.m. with 325 rank and file, and 1,000 Silladar 
horse, and about 3 a.m. on the 15th ho surprised tlio 
Pindaries in their encampment, and dispersed them with 
considerable loss. 

They continued their flight until evening, when they 
made a short halt, after which they resumed their retreat, 
taking the most direct line for the Oodavery. Their loss 
was estimated at about 500 men, killed, wounded, and 
taken prisoners ; 800 horses, of which half were very good , 
were captured, and about 200 were killed and wounded. 
Two of the chiefs, named Cawder, and Moomdee, besides 
several other leaders, were wounded, but they were 
earned off by their men by being tied on their horses. 
All their booty was loft behind, oxcopt what they had 
about their persons, and a large quantity of arms, princi¬ 
pally swords and spears, were abandoned. 

The inhabitants rose upon tlio plunderers during their 
retreat and captured a number, all of whom were exe¬ 
cuted by order of the Nizam’s Government. 



WHtST/fy, 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 375 


Cavalry, 1812—1816. 

In March 1812 the standard for the horses of native 
cavalry was raised to 14 hands 2 inches, but with per¬ 
mission to take horses one inch lower, provided they 
were of good blood, compact, strong, and active. As 
regards age it was laid down that no horse should be 
bought under 3^ years' old in time of peace, or under 4 
years in time of war, or above the age of 6, except when 
the exigencies of tho service might require it. This 
order continued in force until June 1816, when the 
standard was again reduced to 14 hands. 

On the 26th January 1813, tho native officers and men 
of the body guard, and of the 1st regiment of cavalry, 
who had returned to Madras after having been attached 
to tho Embassy in Persia, were thanked in general orders 
for their meritorious conduct while on that service. A 
gratuity equal to three months'pay andbatta was granted 
to each man of the two detachments, and a similar gra¬ 
tuity was paid to the families of men who had died during 
their absence from the Madras Presidency. Several of 
the native officers and mon received additional rewards, 
borne in the shape of promotion, others in that of 
enhanced pensions. 

Gold medals of the order of tho (i Lion and Sun ” 
having been subsequently conferred on Jemadars Syed 
Hoossain, aud Hoossainee Beg, by Abbas Mirza tho 
Prince Royal, the Court of Directors, as a special mark 
of favor, permitted these officers to wear ihora. 

During the early part of 1813, it was ordered that, 
fr,>m the 1st January 1 81 1, tho cavalry, which since 1 7‘d 1< 
had worn scarlet jackets witli white lacings, should bo 



<SL 


CHAP. XXII. 


Height anil 
ago of horses, 
1512 . 


Rewards for 
service in 
Persia, 

1813 . 


Module* 


Uniform, 

1818 . 





CHAP. XXII. clot-lied in dark blue with silver lace, and tlie undermen¬ 
tioned facings were assigned to tlie several regiments 


1st regiment Pale yellow. 
2nd „ Orange. 

3rd „ Buff. 

4th „ Deep yellow. 


5th regiment Pale yellow. 
Gth „ Orange. 

7tli „ Buff. 

8th „ Deep yellow. 


Changed to Tho Court of Directors objected to the change on 
grey, 1818. accoU nt of the high price of blue cloth, owing to which 
the amount of the off-reckoning fund had been seriously 
diminished, for which reason it was ordered that grey 
cloth should be worn by the cavalry. This order was 
carried out in 1818, since which time there has not been 
any alteration in the color of the uniform. 


Veterinary During November 1813, the “ Madras Veterinary 
iuent^i8l3 Establishment ” was transf erred from the Presidency town 

to Arcot. The number of boys to be educated as farriers 
was increased to fifty-eight, with the view of supply¬ 
ing the horse artillery, and body guard, as well as tho 
cavalry. Each boy was to receive four pagodas per 
mensem, from which sum his messing, and necessaries 
were to bo provided. 

He was to bo furnished annually, at the expense of 
Government, with one uniform jacket and one watering 
cap. A barrack was provided for the accommodation of 
the lads, with the same allowance of furniture ae that for 
European soldiers. 

Allowances On the 17th April 1816, the pay and allowances of 
1816. JU lUtb ’ Adjutants of native cavalry wore fixed at Rs. 147 per 
mensem, viz., staff pay Rs. 62, allowance for a clerk Rs. 
40, for stationery and candles Rs. 15, and Rs. 30 for u 
horse. 


Itacrmriiig 

dtpdt. 


A recruiting depot h r the general service of the 
alry wa, formed at Arcot in May under the command of 




t':i plain Outlaw 3rd cavalry. lilach rrgimont wan directed ( ua»\a>:ii 
to furnish a detail consisting of 2 subadurs, 2 jemadars, ^ /u;j* 

8 havildars, 8 naignos, and 1G privates, to do dutj at 
tlio depot. The staff was to consist of 1 riding-master 
and native adjutant, J drill liavildar, 2 pay hnvilcbmi, 

1 drill meg ip, 2 rough-riders tirst cla*s, 2 rough-riders 
ioco: d class, 1 staff serjeant, 2 trumpeters, uud the 
ordiin »/ proportion of artificers, 

200 recruits, 200 horses, 200 sots of horse appoint- 
uoul« 




<SL 

873 HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY 

Artillery, 1812— 181G. 

Tho detail of native liorso artillery which returned 
from Persia in September 1812 having been strongly 
recommended to the favorable consideration of Govern¬ 
ment by successive British Ministers in Persia, and by 
the Qommander-in-Ohief, a pension of 110 pagodas per 
mensem was granted to Subadar Sliaik Moideen Bahador, 
and it was resolved at the same time that a peusiou uf 
50 pagodas per mensem should, on his decease, be paid t»> 
bis nearest heir for the maintenance of the family. The 
subadar was also presented with a horso and a palattkin, 
and a grant of 16 cawnies of laud was made to him. 

The non-commissioned officers and privates fit for 
farther service were promoted to the ranks of jemadar, 
and havildar of cavalry respectively, ami such of tho 
privates a3 were unfit for duty were pensioned on the 
pay of naigues of cavalry. 

Subadar Shaik Moideen having subsequently been 
presented with a gold medal of the order of the “ Li il 
and Bun” by Abbas Mirza, tho Prince Royal, ho was 
permitted by the Court of Directors, as a special ■ ..irk 
of favor, to wear that decoration. 

General, the Karl of Moira, afterwards Marquis of 
Hastings, havP landed at Madras in September 18 b; 
on his way to Bengal as Governor-General, tool il* 
opportunity to review tho artillery at tho Mount, aft< i 
which he issued the following order:— 

1 72a«r' 7 Quarter*, Ob llrj Pini , IS th ^ptmnhn lhi:i 

‘ Tho Earl <if Moira desires to twprcjn how highly he wu* 
gnitiiiod by his inspection oi the Hnnorr.olo Compiiny’i 
c of artillery nt. tho Mou. I yc.tordey. Thp condition 
i tin* onrp.-*, the sii idinof.s of the 'a on, and tho pm: i<»n uf 
• ' luuiiuouvrc. p/.'o doci ivoly in pruittc *.l tlio ttoiu a. 


MiAiisr^ 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 37P 

which must have been applied by Colonel Boll, Captain CHAWXXII. 
Noble, and the oilier officers acting* under him. 

“ The observation of Lord Moira was, not very long ago, 
rpQciiieally called to all those details which constitute the 
fitness of a corps of artillery for service ; and ho is happy to 
say that the troops which he saw yesterday, hear an honorable 
comparison with the excellent pattern lie was, at the former 
period, accustomed to contemplate.” 

About the end of October the use of the gorget, as Abolition of 
part of the appointments of an officer of artillery, was Sorget 
ordered to bo discontinued. 




On the 7th December the Commissary of Stores, in Comm.uid of 
charge of the arsenal at Fort St. George, was relieved 
from the duty of superintending and inspecting the lUu:M 

ordnance on the works; the charge of the guns on the 
fortifications and in the batteries of the Fort and Black 
Town, and of the expense magazines belonging to them, 
together with the command of the detachment of artil¬ 
lery doing duty in Fort St. George, was ordered to bo 
vested in an officer of experience, to bo specially selected 
for that purpose from the corps of artillery, and whose 
authority was to bo entirely independent of the C< utnis- 
Hury of Stores. 


The horse and foot artillery Stationed at the Mount Tnsj,. i.,n 
v.uim inspected iv A reviewed by tlio Corainander-in-Ohief 1 ' 1 " 

* m.mdcMn 

iu July 1*1 J, and Major-General Bell, the Commandant, chief, ' 
w tlmnkod in general orders lor the high state of disci¬ 
pline and efficiency iu which tlio corps had been found. 

The Court of Directors, in their letter to Beugal of the rw , 

Ibtli February 1S1J, which was published at Madras on or * 

th liHtli Got t Lor, can veiled the ordor of 180b regarding h>».i . »u ,» 
tb>. employment of Clone!a 1 Officers of artillery and 
Oiigincoi'i on the Staff, and also that which prohibited 
I’'.in from exercising the comm and of their rcnpcoiivu 
i j, uflei' promo! ion 


• to l»o 
Upl“V«'U n,l 
tJ.o f lair. 








ill-.TORY or rrir. madras army. 



omp.xxTi. 


380 



“ Para. 333. We therefore direct that no General Officer of 
engineers or artillery he hereafter put upon the General Staff 
of tho army ; but that you select from among tho General 
Officers of engineers and artillery, and tho officers actually at 
the head of those corps at the time, whether General Officer** 
or not, such officers as ycu may think most fit to conduct iho 
duties of those corps respectively.” 


Command of In March 1815 the Commander-in-Chief, when in camp 
vrVci* iu g 11 with tho “ Army of Reserve/’ directed it to be considered 
uutory, 18 5. as a rn ] c 0 f the service, that whenever cavalry guns wore 
brigaded, or brought together to act in battery, the com¬ 
mand of them should be given to an officer of the corps of 
horse artillery, if any part of that corps should happen to 
bo serving with the army or detachment. 
l‘ay ’ - On the 17th April 181G the pay and allowances of 

A.i;uiuui, S ° Adjutants and Quartermasters of horse and foot artillery 
wore fixed upon tlic following scale, viz.:— 


JRrkl L. 


Staff pay . 

Writer 

Stationery and can-lies 
Hor.no 


R-*. 62 \ 
40/ 
» 15 1 

„ 30 ) 


Rs. 147. 


On the 23rd December ot the same year orders wc -o 
issued for the formation of a “ Rocket troop/* to bo 
at 1 idled to tho corps of horse artillery. 

The following establishment was sanctioned »— 


4 Subalterns. 

1 Troop Quartermaster. 

2 Staff Serjeants 
4 Serjeants. 

2 Trumpeters. 


2 Pa rriers. 

4 Corporals. 
8 Gunners. 
04 Mstresses. 


7 t ificern horse s 110 regimental horses, 10 cmolcwitlj 
drivers. 

1 .ie ordinary pi 'portion of artificers, hoi -.-jIcvtci-m, and 

pudiullios. 



HISTORY OF THR MADBAfc ARMY. 3S1 

CHAP. XXII. 

Engineers, 1812—1816. 

Lieutenant-Colon el Colin Mackenzie, of tlie Madras Surveyor. 
Engineers, having been nominated by the Governor- 
General to bo Surveyor-General of India, the appointment 
was notified in general orders at Madras on the 26th May 

1815. 




EritorrAN Infantry, 1812—1816, 

Tlia followi»ig order regarding the performance of the 
ceremonies of marriage and baptism by military officers 
was published on the 23rd October 1812 :— 

“Adverting to tho augmentation recently made by the Mnvvfi,.v,s \ 
Honorable tho Court of Directors to the establishment of 
Chaplains, the Honorable the Governor in Council i -* of opinion 
tlmfc no uoe ity can in futnro exist for the peifornuuicc of 
(ho crit mony of marriage hy any miliinry oiVk- r, and : coord- 
ingly directs that all military olllcora do consider thcniv.'lvta 
precluded from discharging the part of (ho doty eventually 
nsHi^iu.d 'o them iu the general ct’dora dated ho JuTth of 

March 1805. 

'* The ' . »v nor in C unoil likowiso directs that the name 
\i tnction n .) Im. < i nidored applicable <o tl common) 

.(' baptism, except m the oaso of such children ui uuiy bt 
in v weak or precarious stuto of health 



imsr/fy 



CHAP. XXII. 

Lowering r\iul 
numbering. 


A .rack* 

ibiU. 


.luilg 

A«l-O'jut' 3. 


8n- 'lny 
fni md’ff. 


Uc.:» V/ by 
1 • • I Muira. 




382 


<§L 

history or the madras army. 


On the 15th Novomber, the practice of distinguishing 
troops and companies by letters was introduced into tho 
Madras Army. 

Tim grenadier and light companies were excepted from 
the operation of the regulation. It was ordered at tho 
same time that every man should, when entertained, hnve 
two numbers assigned to him, viz., a general or regiment¬ 
al number and a company number. 

Tho arms and accoutrements of all corps were to be 
marked with the letter and number of tlie troop or 
company. 

The distribution, custody, and issue of arrack for the 
me of the troops was placed under the Commissariat 
Department from the 1st February 1813. 

The office of Deputy Judge Advocate was revived early 
in 1813, and live officers wore then appointed to tho 
department, to be stationed at the undermentioned places, 
viz., one at the Presidency, one at Trichinopoly, one at 
Seringa pa tam, one at Bellary, and one at Secunderabad. 

On the 23rd June Lieutenant-General the Honorable 
John A bore ro in bjTj then Governor and Commandoi-in- 
Ciiiof, issued an order directing that a general puratb 
and public guard mounting should :ako place on the inland 
at. Madras every Sunday 1 morning at 6 o'clock, and that 
it should be attended in full drosR by every officer of tin. 
General Stuff at- the Presidency, and also by all other 
officers ihere, unless prevented by sickness or specially 
permitted to be absent. 

/Ml tho troops at tho Presidency woro reviewed on the 
iffih September by General, the Earl of Moira, iP r - 
vvvds Man pi is of Hastings, then on his way to (. nit uttn 
io take Jiia treat as Governor-General. Jli lAcdlciuy 

1 T' «<i : -i coatlmiMi.: . foroo until tho 22] .d N mb. . 1 -u |., 

1L w:«* can. ■« llod by U « Cummuml r in OR i. 







II'STORT OF TIIE MADI1AM AlCH7. 


383 



paid a high compliment to the appearance of the troops, CHAP. XXII. 
more especially to that of H.M.’s 89th toot, then forming 
part of the garrison of Fort St. George. 

No particular rule having been laid down n9 to the Pay and 

c . ftllowanoca 

amount claimable by officers during men* connnement o£<jfficora 
as prisoners of war, the following order of the Court of 
.Directors on that subject was published to the army on 
the 6th October 

“ When an officer shall be detained by the enemy as a 
prisoner of war in India, he shall, dnring his residence on 
shore in India, receive the pay and half batta of the rank he 
may hold at the time of his capture, or may obtain by promo- . 

tion during his captivity, but on all other occasions during 
liis captivity, whether on boardship in India, or ashore or on 
boardship in Europe, he shall receive the pay of his rank 
only.” 


On the 29th October an order, of which the following 
is a precis, was issued with regard to appointments oi. 
the staff— 

1. No officer to be eligible to hold any appointment 
conferring the official rank of Lieutenant-Colonel until 
after nine years* service. 

2. No officer to be eligible to hold any appointment 
conferring the rank of Major, or any subordinate app int- 
meat on the general staff of the army, until after seven 
years* service. 

3. No officer to hold any general or personal staff 
app« intiuenl, that of aide-de-camp excepted, until after 
too years’ service, three of which must have I on passed 
in regimen ltd duty. 

1. No officer to bold a i gimeiital stal v appointment 
until l.o ban performed three years’ regimental duty. 

, No officer to bo au aide-de-camp until be } •> •, ljomi 
p: -.c ut 'a ith hi* regiment for one year. 

The dress roguhoioiw of October 1810 woro modified 


Appointments 
on the **tall. 





Dm*. mi i. 







QHA^xxil. by an order of July 1814, from which the following are 
extracts:— 


W elliugton pantaloons and half boots aro to bo worn by 
aH officers of engineers, artillery, infantry and pioneers, 

Illack kid-skin 1 caps, of the same muster in every respect 
as in use with the Madras European Regiment, urc to bo 
worn by all officers of engineers, infantry, and pioneers, 

“ For bad weather and cold climates, Wellington panta¬ 
loons of dark gvoy cloth are permitted to be worn—quito plain 
without trimming or ornament. Plain great coals of the 
same color aro also established, made single-breasted with 
regimental buttons and distinguishing epaulettes or wings, 
for all regimental oiiicerg. 

Sword-bolts and sashes to bo worn abovo tho great, coats. 

‘ The full dress coats of tlio general officers, and of b uoh of 

the general staff as havo lacings, a»c always to be worn with 
tho 1: ppol» buttoned back.” 


Cniitocn**, 

ISM. 


Cartridges. 

rue. 


if U <jf 

f iiiPIttii-y 
bmi .I i. |t*n. 


On tho 20tli December 1811 regimental canteen^ were 
o.itobl - lied, and regulations for thoir nmuigomunt \wa> 
published to the army. 

On the 5tli January 1810 it was directed that for tho 
future, blank cartridges wore to be mud, up exclusive ly 
m blno paper, and ball can ridges in brown paper. 

On tho 17th April orders wore issued for the abolition 
‘•r tho lf Military Institution,” 2 and of the survey branch ' 





tho oliumfu fl»ii ; thoy 


1 Thowi non (bund «o uuRuitcd 
i 1S10. 

j'hi. vi«iit,iitir,uwn .?«(.,(HI,lie I’rr 'XMlcutv ill Novi'1.,1,,1 iwil 
during tin, noverumeiit of Lord Willi™ B. ntinok, for U„. .. . 

» u «~» -. ■•■■■ 1 - . . 

° ‘ * ,J * JO-* • until r , mi!.iary druwini/ un i t lu* piaofir il upplh lt iof 

. .' ‘ "' ,t, ,n ’' l U ’V '■ miliUny «cr moo.” T! ,• ,„i 

""7" l,n ‘" ;| I" Iv.ulvo VOO.KI ..III..., . 

. }" . L ' 1 I ,r •! ' • at.... Ml ... 

.' 1 " ■ 1 I..I in | 

1 •<• -KO I'll- the rqembor>i,nq ! „ ...or, wiu> rxh.Vi. hod.nl> 

■>’ T>U> “ UJ ‘ " ' • Wl,h : 





liUitsr/} 


HISTORY .OF THU MADRAS ARMY. 


3f)5 




of tlie Quurturimistor-General’d Department, from the CiLAi*. x.xn. 
3lsfc May, iu conformity with instructions from tlio Court 
of Directors to that effect, conveyed in the following 
terms:— 

“Tho Military Institution in England rendering that of 
Fort St. George unnecessary, that institution is to be dis¬ 
continued, together with all expenses connected with it, . uch 
as the salary of the Mathematical Instructor and his assist¬ 
ant, as well as all the expenses of the Surveying Department.” 

When publishing these instructions the following 
remarks were made by Government :— 

“ The Right Honorable tho Governor iu Council takes this 
opportunity of expressing his entire approbation of the mode 
in which the duties of Mathematical and Drawing Instructor 
to the Military Institution have heon discharged by Captain 
Troy or of II M.’s 12th regiment. 

u The Governor in Oouucil has also noticed with the highest 
;* it is tho I ion the testimony borne by Ilin Excolloncy the Cora- 

mumlor-iii-Ohief to tho inoiits uud acquirements of all the 
oflleiL ' who have hi on attjuhod to the inhlitiifion Tlmi» 


^niforfu good oondu »t and exemplary applh .. n aVdonUth J 
'em (>) the onnmendalion of Government, and are niiko 
poeorable to tho clu ' -ter ol the institution, to its supiri.o 
i Mikiifi, Mild io liiornflelvos.** 

During tho same umnth tho pay and alii wnncob of 
Ad julrnl of European infantry woiv fixed upon Uu> sunu 
ih 1 ms til.if. sum Tic od for Adjut uitu and QmirfornijM- 
ie*M ot artillnry. 

Dll the 2lD May l^ld ail order wu. i*niv l by the 
t-'oioi mdor iu-Cbiof by vvui«• ]i <»l)i< re ol till i i • U:i woo 
i"ipois.-d i u* lh u* words on every ( • avion «.• i > •«r 
apj'i o iny m pubic ,tud the » outre y } •notion V vaa d • 

'»' 1 »11 * 111 a. ntumlitary <>lHe r. Woroui (ho hintlli lnm 
mini hi d that Uudre • j:,rk -U and foraging cap* worn n 
t*‘"d' 1 e. d 1’ •, In/ dutii or c e :i ». • nu^tui . « io i 
wllb fluty w 'bin i l)ou T'uxpootivo Iiuom I’llO up|Hin' mm, o 
VOl. 1J1. 40 


l*u v mid 

iHmuin« , i»a nf 
A ij a Mint i 








nisTokY oi rirr M.rmas .vr.tfY. 




'JUaI'.XXU. of any officer in public except iu full dress v,ns prohibited, 
Htul His Excellency remarked that he had witnessed with 


Urcvtif 

C'bjjujnd. 






* 




Jto^Ci '»aul 
CU| «. 


Hhi'.M Jud. 




regret instances of “ very serious inattention to llxt eti¬ 
quette of dreys.” 

Brovot commissions of the rank of Captain were granted 
in Juno to all Lieutenants in the Company’s service who 
had not attained that, rank at the expiration of fifteen 
years from the dates of tlioir appointments as cadets, but 
no e\i ’’ft allowances were sanctioned. Eight Lieuteni'ids 
of cavalry and twenty-four Lieutenants of native infantry 
were promoted on this occasion. This brevet promotion 
con tinned upon the same principle until the changes which 
followed the mutiny of 18o7. 

During Juno a new regulation cap, as prescribed for 
II.Mb* regiments tf infantry, was ordered to bo adopted 
by Eie officers of the Madras European Hegimert, which 
O' • I>■ r was extended u few mouths later to all European 
officers of infantry. * 

for officers >f artillery, ougi- 
Tt j. a and in l an try, to bo won. at drills, fauguo dutie. . 
M.irclung, and in the lines, were introduced during Sep¬ 
tember. 


!, t *. t Ci the llfh October an order was published by tho 

[ t i > ii [ Governor-General to tho effect tint all ind n < n 

bcl.tiilug to H.MA regiments in India should bo allowed 
tho option »f volunteering into tlio Company's artilluy 
>r infantry. This order wiu republished at Eort St, 
Giniy. .n Iluj 20tb NovouiIh » with t’uo iindee ntieu< d 
particular. , vi , in* n onh «'ing IV»r a period »f three y.*r ra 
l * n.nd. on bounty o r Id pugodis t It*. Vi-8-0) < a.U, » a om«i 
cab t/ug for live yc. 'H t •» i*( five 25 paged.* ; (Us. 
each. 

About the unrnr mo, homily, lo tho amount "f three. 

I * i* pert . i , w lk tii'im.de t! t, . ;i * uf ^.bn»l«*ijrw 

b<. >m any oi U..M/p icgnnei.i - reiunu i ( ; • England. 




ilOlli.t . 


WtSTfiy 



uif.ii above 80 years of ago, er rnulor 5 foot 7 inches 
m height, to be received into tho artillery. There was 
no limit'll ion as to height with rospcct to volunteers for 
the European Regiment, but no tv in above 32 years of 
ago was eligible. 

On tho Ofh December tho Governor in Council, in 
conformity with instructions received from tho Court of 
Directors, fixed the undermontionod sums as the extont 
to which tho officers of the Commissariat Department 
we re to bo required to furnish security. 


Commissary-General 


us. 

.. 50,000 

Deputies 

. 

... 3 O .000 

Assistants 


.. 20,000 

Deputy Assistants ... 


... 10,000 

Snb-AsMtitmi a 

. 

... 5,000 


It was ordered Uu tho same time that in future tho 
security rhould b.i lodgod with tho Accountant-General 
before tho officer appointed assumed charge of hi- office. 

In 1806 the number of Chaplains allowed for the whole 
Presidency wr only P, but, on the urgent, renv entation 
of tho Senior Oh q lain, tho lrumbor \ as it creased to 18 
during 1809, viz., 3 at tlm Presidency, l in Black r J\ wn, 
1 l -i St. rhotnuK* Mount mid Pvimanialh e, 1 for Vellore, 
A root, ami Wnllajahbnd, 1. at Seriugnputrm, 1 atBunga- 
lore, 1 at Oammnore, l at Mangalore, 1 at Mnsiuipavitn, 
1 at Vi/agupatmu, 1 fur tho C ah d Districts, latTrmhin i- 
poly, 1 at Nogapatnm, and 3 to nua t eonlingcTicieu, 

Hie Court > i Directors, in their let in <>{ the 3rd Nov 
urubor lblo, uulhori/.ud m further iu« euSi lu the extent, 
“t lour uddit uml Chuplams, and the f. .Hewing chain t* 
in I lie d d rihill mu wore ordered ilurini; 18it», vb bcj.ii- 
rale C"iiplain wore allowed lb:* Si. Tin tmv Wb t u,(., a i jt j 
t’c /icmudleo, 2 for Voile"O, Arivl, mid WnHajahhad, 1 lor 
S< . * i.u.ibad, l for JiuihiH, n id pinion w.i a.ik-tinuod 
fur Mangalore. 


<§L 

CllAP.XXU. 

Si .il l«r^ of 
voiuii \ ,i 

l 'iiminjp; mi . u 

oHmorn. 


Ohaj ’unci 
lHOIMO. 



jiwtpS 



hiai 1 . >;xi i. 


U l H I <; i ‘ v . V MIK MADRAS' AI: M V. 


§1 


Native Infantry, J 812-16. 


^q' ip’nems Oft tho 30th September 1811 a pattern knapsack of a 
now kind was sent from tlio Adjutant-General's Office to 
every battalion, with instructions to adopt it as soon as 
il could be done without putting the men to unnecessary 
expense. Haversacks were introduced at the same time, 
principally for the carriage of rice for which purpose the 
knapsack was forbidden to be used. 

I’li-* following is tli • list of necessaries to be carried in 
the knapsack :— 

3 white jackets. j 2 handkerchiefs. 

3 pairs of drawers, ’ 2 duputtulm. 

2 pairs of knee bands. i 2 loongrin 

1 Hut drill ( To bo made of a small portable size, and to (It 

2 burins. I into t aeh other. 

Krnery, whiting, black- ^ In such quantities :»m shall be 
log or heel-ball, and 1 regulated by Commandant ; 

pipc-clny. \ of corps* 

1 curpci. of a small size, and neatly folded, to be placed >n 
■h ; top of tho l uapsack, over which the watch-con ,, in to 
lie horizontally, and both attached to the kmipback by 
tho long strep ... 

1 j unh » to ho slung from the sepoy’s right shonldei. 

«- i <li. , Or the 22nd Jurmary 1812, officers commanding’ divi- 
ni«> i : ami force. 1 , were informed by circulars b un tlm 
oil’ • f the Ydjutie.-General, ilmi tho Cuiumundm in 
Chief would permit pantaloons to Ijo woru instead ol 
tthurt-dn.\eow< ( Volume 1, page 330) by m h N itiv< : .,- 
fiuilr eorpa und* r tin ir rr.mmuhd u* might * f h. licit tho 
ud.ilgeu i.’ 1 A U day 1 ev 1 be .lump Was umdu 
oinpulaory. 

Tho following iv .nu rxT.i d f« i <1 c * bruin i* Mlnr n 
1 •• 1 ■ *t, d 11 h 1 .1- u , 1 > l 2 : • 






i.isi.*irv or Tin: jiam;\ at?mv 


389 




u The whito pantaloons arc to be considered as the full OH.VV.XXb. 
dross of the battalion, and to be worn on all occasions of »v u ln i u oM. 
parade, in review order, general duties of garrison and can¬ 
tonments, and on occasions of ceremony, Kreli man to bo 
provided with two pairs. 

“ The colored pantaloons to be made of striped source, or 
iicli other suitable cloth as the commanding officer may, 
from the local situation of the corps, think it eligible to adopt, 
but the greatest attention must be paid to uniformity in color. 

1 ‘ Commanding officers will take caro to choose the most 
plain, and correspondent either with the color of the. jackets 
or facings." 

The great inconvenience 1 of the short-drawers was 
unsigned as the reason for discarding them, and it was 
al o assort ml that they wore not less oxponsivo than 
pantaloon** 

The same letter contained the following paragraph 
regarding sandals : — 

*’ The Ooimminiler-in-Obicf also directs that you will take Simdnls. 
ovi r\ pains to establish a uniform sandal to bo worn by the 
men on ml doth , and that it mnv be fixed upon, m communi¬ 
cation with t to Native officers, of a light strong muster, 

Million mly lavgo in tho solo to cover the l ttom of tlio foot, 
nnd not euguiuboivd by uny unuce/;s&iry straps or fostering* 
over the foot.” 


Tl . - mid other changes introduced during 1820-23, 
it. t i. .• : n-r been published iu general orders, escaped tho 
(•hsorvm ion ol t ievernn tit until about ih< cm] of l' M, 
when I bey were div erted 1 Sir Thomn- Munro, \ 1 <> 
prnnou mod them to have been m.ulo in volition of the 

1 - i MMu rnti Muni , tvlion i\ v ; ow» t*^; tie ^ul j. r » i hori/od 

m'i* i .mm in .! • >tu voni •' olU'fv i »iu, l iimc ki’.l (bnl n iu , 

i \ ti for p.'vjiv v.ii.ti lh« druwrrft c< »M ft't bo i I'tiiiftly 

'ai'.- d IK ol»i «'vodK .tile ~ Kutl tx»ftn nv n for miurly i tcnliir 

>• if . !• i i I u • i • i • ) vrl.i iur* t»\ rv b*i\ii. ' • n «ll« • <vc •• 1, Hhw u 

ItM iiuuti l a ill- i •• 'hum it . i iu ]- a* S m 1 i h:i r i w. 

cl I in* | 


rii ji]{< i in 
tl»r ilrrf” "( 
i )»•» Nut i .« 
tl " , ‘\VJl*» iu 
I nr I»n v. <UH 
i uu«.i Uiii i.i 

(h \ <<i nm» >if 
forhuMmi, 

lg&Mfrt fcffi 


in ituiiy r>r mr, ii.uu'.Ai a.tj.my. 





resolution of Government, dated 24th Sopfcemhor I860 
rn:; 'j P a <?c 228), and recommonded that a slop .should 
be put to the is-i ie of circular letters affecting, in • oy 
way, the lives of tho Native troops, without proviuua 
rciorenco to Government. The matter was also reported 
to tho Court of Directors, who, in July 1820, sent on I m 
order forbidding any changes iu 'he dross or equipments 
of the Native Army vvithoub their previous sanction. 

On the loth October orders wero issued for tho form¬ 
ation of four light infantry battalions at Bangalore under 
the superintendence of Lieutenant-Colonel McLcmV 
iL'T.h. Royal Scots. Tho undermentioned battalion.' 
wore selected for this purpose:— 

TIh 1st battu. 3rd regt. or Palamoott ih Lt. Ipfy. '3rd Phi) 
»» , 12th „ WalUjithbfid „ (23rd >V.L.l.) 

1st „ lflth ,, „ TrioHnopoly „ (31st T. T Jt l. t 

■» 2nd „ 17th ,, ,, UhicacoIo a ,, (34tb C.L I.) 

Tho establishment of each battalion was fixed at— 


10 BuhodarM. 

10 T.inailarrt. 

h0 Havihlu; r i. 

Ml Nuiguod. 

10 Dminnierr. 

10 Fife i K. 

10 Riijrlnr ■ 

20 Pui'kallieA. 

700 Privates. 

70 Sepoy roorulK 

l 1,, n companies, mn hoi 


1 Soijeant Major 
1 Quartermaster Seijennt. 
I Nath' Adjutant. 

1 prill Iluvildar. 

1 Drill Nnigiiu, 

1 Drum Major. 

1 I'mi Major, 
i 1 Bugler Major. 

1 Vulrool. 

I 2 Native Drcsaorn. 

1 from 1 to 10 . 


1 T HJ'I ’.ati, • ’ f \>J|» .ItA ; |.r»ivt ,f D". tlie I Jfiuri . f 1)1 
l« 0< r t,l flu* li’tli Jr, r, ISiTi «.ft f.’,. t nin ' u ..i ty 
' lll( . »'U^IU . lifivv. » "'ll fuMie! iu their cvw »..•» 

Uwi'M’dA iHf-i 


I'uriom 

Uv>y fj 


in lliflt 
• all fit*' 




v u (• 






G91 







msi'Hiy ui 'in: iiA!»RAo army. 



The iigld infimtry battalion:, wero entitled to take tlio OiLU’.xxii. 

f Right,” agreeably to their respective -oniority, of all riI 
other corps of Native infantry. 

hlaoli battalion was to bo furnished with cloaks >f 
broadcloth once in six years, and the knapsacks wore to 
be carried at the public expense on all occasions of actual 
field service. 

Subsidiary orders, from which the following nre 
extracts, woro issued by the Colnmander-in-Chief in 
November:— 

“ Ah hough the battalions of light infantry n o liable, in 
common with the <>t tier troops of tho lints, to ho called upon 
to perform all duties to which infantry nro subject, T t, in 
order to m.ui.xn'u their discipline more pm .helm cantonment, 
and to keep them in rcadiuoFS in tho held f >r their more 
n divo .service:, they are not to be included in tho rosters for 
ati ,nc and ordinary dutie.i, aniens in can j of argent noce. - 

‘'Tholowcat standard height of the men of the light s :i uian. 
itihintry battab ns in fixed at five feet fou- inched. They atlU M ‘S 0 * 
n ti bo . ml, well limbed, active, of good o&ste and con 
hedun..;, ami free tco.m ah natural or con uncled complaints 
Mo man n to hr - idhtou for th battaliono uhvo the age < 

VO y< ars. ’ 

" The Commando i*-in-Chief is pleaaed io os tab I i, . t Irefu ui 1 . ,n, 
of >lo: lg'ht infantry battalions u f dlow* .— 


W, v Color uf 

( *n > ? "t Mini 

i Dollar. 


Oolui* r»f 
l/nr**. 


I». p Wlmo^ith 1 ; 

vr a. gresn 


Oolor of Cy| ( .r 

Clorhin^of • t'OiHror.r Ofl • ’ 

Jiru.mijec. UulliUiH urn] 1 Tnmmiitgu. 
pul on 1 

. - - 

Urnai.'i ! V. ko,3nn»l3.| • i ,M . It h 

rtti. grt*“Hi*li»po. 






Ab«mt th*» cud ot tKo f uxuf voiu it was i»rdoi\d tlwt \, lnM , 

♦ I... lmvihlard *. \ vll tup. L’ Native u Vmtiy . .1 .Jd, ' i r> 

lutoiu, hu mi d win lmlbrnns, .>•' .woi • •• .* i m . •• m 








imsTff 


HlsrOl: T . OF TUE >tADR '.3 ARMY 



C TAP. a Ivi I. 


ao2 



tro^ 1‘Its; with the exception of the havildar3 of light 
companies, who were to carry fusils, and small fiuul 
carton cli-boxes. 


ih<i w bon. Tho establishment. of battalions of Native infantry wm 
reduced to 780 privates from the 1st October; all men 
in excess of that number to be returned as supernumera¬ 
ries until absorbed, or until further orders. Tho batta¬ 
lions with the Hyderabad subsidiary force were still kept 
up to the strength of 900 privates, 120 of whom were to 
oe returned as supernumerary. 

On the 28rd February 1813, tho establishment <d‘ 
recruit uud pension boys, as fixed in 1800, wns revised 
a follow's :— 


il * t ulr a ml 
)>< - n lniyb, 

1 I.' 


Tl'« U 

oiilihOn^nt 
• •! i run i >. . 


Mr* r<4 



Uacruit 

Boys. 

Pension 

1»« *_S 14. 

Total. 

To n n cimu'it r f N.iriw cavalry 

8 

10 

IS 

,, battalion. , h im.try 

30 

40 

70 

• i it n artillery 

30 

40 

70 

„ ,, ,, pioneers 

30 

30 

•JO 

Tho recruit boys were to bo selected from tho relative^ 


or connections of old soldiers of the several ranks, tioUn 
bo taken under i ig age of 11 yea nor uni ess lionllliy 
uu‘l well grown. Any recruit boy vho, at the age ..f 
lb years, was unfit for transfer to the ranks, w>n lo bo 
reported to hoad-ijuartors in order that, ho u -1' be 
dii charged. 

Fe idon boys were admissible ai nny ago in <L v II 
years, n-i.i wen) to hoc looted on tho same prim ij In »• 
recruit-In ys • , the occurrence of -icaniaV-, pr.-vid-d 
(Li y V.tv • < h; iblo ifj respeci of In 1 11>i nnd nv.rv Any 
y.i.iaoni, boy f<- ml uniil for traad.-r al’l.r- hivn- ul- 
*l ti ' : ' of > 1. years, vns lo 1)0 report*- to hi mj. 

v« m ordfi th . h L ought 1 m do e.hnrgml 
Oil il i* I fh | Augu-jj avn nd vO d reasers •-la < ! m.vmI 
hr ivory hatKIIoii, vi/,., * no fhxt dresser ou 10 p ( g, M h^ 
and one «ln. „**r on 7 pag'd-*-, ] :>r u^.,^ 






HISTORY OF VilF MADRAS / i:MY, 


3V3 



Dining lbOtj, each of the 46 companies of Native invalids CHAP. XXII. 
was ordered to bo permanently located in tlio district ~ 
where the battalion to which it was considered attached 
had boon raised. 

This arrangement was made principally for the pur- The 
poso of facilitating recruiting, but also with the view of ,Vi 
affording protection to the families of battalions on field 1 „ orm '; l r 111 : 

° r four \ oroviwi 

or foreign service. Thirty-nine stations were fixed upon tuuuUunrt, 
accordingly, and the distribution was made in general 
orders daring September 1807. However, the system 
was "bund objectionable in many respects, and in July 
1818, Lieutenant-General John Abercrombv, then Gover¬ 
nor and Gommander-iu-Ohief, recorded a minute in which 
ho condemned the existing organisation of the Native 
invalid establishment for the following reasons, vie., that 
in consequence of the want of efficient means of super¬ 
vision, ovorything connected with payments, clothing, 
returns, musters, &c. ; was complicated and irregular, 
the result being unsatisfactory both to the soldier and 
the officer in charge ; that many of the companies wore 
stationed at places where there was no duty for the moil 
io perforin, whereas there wore many stati »ns at which 
they might bo profitably employed. 

That in point of facL they could only be considered as 
pensioners drawing the full pay of oifiwtivc snldiern, 
be lidos burdening the State with the co.'t v>f i heir arn s, 

. •‘•outn nionis and clothing. 

On these grounds the Lieutenant-General proposed to 
fOrm tie* oompnnie • into battalions and this being agreed 
to, it .as resolved, on the loth October, that from the 
I *31 -Im unary 18M the whole of the Native n velid onlh 
* .tablihhn.cat fc’ioiild bo form* d ini< font veteran l.iUu- 
lioitrj, t;» V)(< dmu minuted 

VO! til. vMt • ■ 





301 


CHAP. XXII. 


CfMonmud- 

ftnts. 


Adjutant. 


KHtnbiish- 

mcnt 


Pay nnd 

Mien- 


Uniform. 


OlU. , r * i 


l. o 


<SL 


HISTORY or Tin: MADRAS army. 


The 1st oi* “Madras Native Veteran Battalion.” 

The 2ml or “ Arnce Native Veteran Battalion.” 

The 3rd or “ Caujarn Native Veteran Battalion.’’ 

The 4th or “ Dindigul Native Veteran Battalion.’ 

Each battalion waj to be commanded bv a European 
commissioned officer of the invalid establishment, to be 
selected and appointed by the Commander-in-Chief. 

An Adjutant, to be selected from the list of Conductors, 
or of deserving Serjeants, was allowed to each battalion. 

Each battalion was to consist of ten companies of such 
strength as might be found necessary from time to time, 
and the following tixed establishment was allowed :— 


1 Serjeant Major. 

1 Quartermaster Serjeant. 
1 Native Adjutant. 

1 Havildar Major. 

1 Vakeel. 

1 Drum Major. 


1 Fife Major. 
Sepoy Recruits. 

40 Pension Boys. 

10 Puokallioa. 

2 Native Dressers. 
2 Toties. 


Tho same proportion of artificers a, allowed to a batta¬ 
lion of ofi’ectivo Native infantry. 

It was ruled at the same time that, all officers transfer¬ 
red to the Veteran establishment, from whatever branch 
of the service, should draw tho pay and allowances ..I 
officers of infantry. 

Leu uniform oi tho Native \ etenvn baUalkm was 
m ierod to he tho same as that of tho " Carnatic European 
Ytternu Battalion,’ viz., red, with grey facings and 
silver laco. 

On the 30th November the number of IDnropoan com¬ 
mit loued officers to be attached to a batt alion of pioneers, 
w:o (ix.o'1 at two Captains, six Subalterns, undone .Wist- 
ant Siu'goon. 

Ahh 'Ugh the Govorum -Ocneral in Council had, 
tlm 30th October dimled that honorary 






imSTffy 



RTS TO l.‘Y OT T H K MADRAS ARMY. 



with an appropriate device, should be presented to every CHAP.XXjj. 

regiment or battalion engaged at the battle of A ssn ye, 

no slops were taken to carry out the order at Madras 

until October 1811, when the Comniauder-in-Chief moved 

the Government to adopt the device of the “Elephant/” 

as borne by His Majesty's regiments which had been 

present on that occasion. Government approved of the 

recommendation, and ordered the preparation of the 

requisite number of badges, silver for the Native officers, 

and copper for the other ranks. It appears, however, from 

a letter to the Court of Directors dated <‘31 st December 

1813, from which the following is an extract, that the 

budges were not issued until the month of May iu that 

year. 

“ It was oar intention to have published a general order on 
the occasion of distributing these badges, but as honorary 
4 ‘‘dors had alrcndy been presented to the corps engaged in 
f hat battio by the late Commandor-in-Chief, and as the Euro¬ 
pean officers had been permitted to wear badges of distinction 
under tho same authority, wo deemed it sufficient to request 
the present Cominiiuder-in-Chief to give the necessary direc¬ 
tions for the distribution/’ 


On tho llth March 1814, tho “Volunteer Battalion ” Mmlm* 

W.is formed iu to n rifle corps of the undermentioned Con"/ 181 


strength, viz. :— 

1 Field Officer. 

K Captains 
U* Subaltern . 

I Adjutant. 

I Qunrtcrumsti'r. 

I Surgeon, 
a Sulj&durs. 

' *hnittdius. 

1 Native Adjutant. 

I Horji nil M» jn, 


1 Quartet master Serjcnul 
1 Ilavildaifi. 

1 JBqglor Major 
Id Buglers. 

48 Naigucs. 

-0 Privates. 

40 Recruit Boys 
30 Feusion Boys. 

H PuckaHr . 

2 Native Dressers 




TJlWfST^ 


HISTORY \JV rUK MADRAS ' CMY. 




' hat. xxii. The ordinary establishment of artificers was allowed, 
also i Drill Haviidar, 1 Drill Naigue, 8 Pay Havildars, 
and 1 Vakeel. 


the commissioned officers, European and Native, were 
to continue to be borne on tlio strength of fclieir respec¬ 
tive battalions. 

The corps was to consist of eight companies, and as 
it was to be a select body of men, all non-commissioned 
officers, rank and file, not considered equal to the duties 
of light infantry, were drafted into the line. The batta¬ 
lion wa-i allowed the same privilege with regard to the 
carriage oi knapsacks as had been granted to the regi¬ 
ments of light infantry. 

In January 1815 it wu , ordered that the “ Rifle Covps” 
should be entitled to take the " right 3i of all other regi¬ 
ments ol Native infantry, and that it should be exempted 
from fatigue, and other ordinary general duties in canton¬ 
ment in the same manner as fho light infantry batta¬ 
lions. 

a i 1 1 r h ° f ^ 10 battalion 3rd regiment was inspected and 

. revie wed by the Comraander-in-Chhf at Wallajnbad in 

March 1814, for the first time since it had been rnado a 
light infantry corps, and it was found to have at tained 
bo high a degree of efficiency that tlio officers were com¬ 
plimented in general orders. 

On the 20*11 April 1811 the establishment of ubntta- 
lion of Native infantry was reduced from 73d to 750 
pn vates. 

: v 11,0 The'* Rifle Corps” was inspected at Poonamaflcc m 

b ' i ) < . 1 1 | ^.4 _ 

Jul> by the Commander m-CWt. His Excellency c.\- 
pr- his satisfaction in general orders with the soldicr- 
liko appearance «.f the men, the p . r. r t at ate of tlu-ir 

• 1, l' , 'p»" I||,| i nud i li it, ulinr- i liiivl pr<M-i*i«m of Uk 
ai field cxoi 'i 






• WtST^ 


HISTORY OF Tin: MADRAS ARMY. 807 

On the 22nd July regulations wore published regarding OHAP ::xn. 
the issue of family certificates, and the manner in which Ffln 
payments were to bo made. The department was, at the payment;', 
same time, placed under the management and control 
of an offioer dosignatod the i( Superintendent of Family 
Payments.” Subsidiary rules for the guidance of the 
department were issued iu February 1815. 

The fort uf Seringapatarn, always unhealthy, became Seringa- 
po much worse during 1814-15 that tho European part patam ’ 
of the garrison, consisting of II.M/s 34th regiment, and 
a detachment of Madras artillery, was reduced to such a 
State of inefficiency that it was withdrawn during July 
ISLe. The Native troops had also suffered, but not to 
so great an extent, and it was therefore resolved to limit 
tho garrison to a detachment of Native infantry, and a 
small detail of ; rtillerv, to be relieved from Bangalore 
ever)' throe mouths. 

Tliis resolution, however, was not carried into effect, 
and two battalions of Native infantry remained at Serin- 
gapatuin until 1810, when the garrison was reduced to a 
single battalion. 

v)n the 8th January ISIGu circular lettor was sent n, v ,.<• 
officers in command of light infantry battalions dircctinv 
tho substitution of black pantaloons in lieu of the red lh, ' : 
pantaloons then worn. 




Tli(! otti era wore directed to wear white trousers in 
nndi. .<*, sunt trousers of gKion cloth ou duty, nt r, views, 
mul in marching order. 

During April tho allowances of Adjutants wore ilxed nt A<i , I1f f (ltl 
il... 182 per mensem, viz., stair pay Its. G2, writer and ’* ' 11 “ * 
Htutimioiy, ■?« 10, und T?g. 30 for n horFO 


A 

eoi'pn 


h’pdt to provide recruit u 1 *r tho Nutiw ir mtry K 
employed boy mid the frontier wan oobiMmljod at 




lmtST/ty 



CHAP. XXII. 


Payment of 
ponfii*>ii8. 


<SL 

IIISTO-HY OF THK MADRAS ARMY. 

Ignore in May, and was placed under tlie superintendence 
of a European officer. 

Each battalion on service was to furnish a detail con- 
bisting of i Native Officer, 2 Havildars, 2 Nuigues, and 
•1* Privates, to bo stationed at the depot* The staff* was 
to consist of 1 Native Adjutant, 1 Drill Havildar, 1 Drill 
Naigue, 2 Pay Havildars, and i Vakeel, 500 Recruits, and 
the ordinary proportion of Artificers. 

On the 25th May the payment of military pensions 
was transferred to the office of the <e Superintendent of 
Family Payments.” 





A r P E N D IX. 










A. 

List of Arm* col trefoil in Tinncuelltj, fiheoagungcb, Jl'Xntnad, and Dinh'gul, 
dated 7th March 1802. 


Small guus ... 



... 


*15 

Swivels 



... 


1,283 

Ginjals 



... 


82 

Firelocks 

... 




6,L64 

Matchlocks 



... 


0,955 

PUloui 





587 

Musket and pistol barrels 





1,181 

Vikos and Bpears ... 



... 


... 30,878 

Piko a i l spear heads 

... 


... 


2,412 


N./i.- -About 12,000 swords and dagger, 1,000 bayonets, l,C0o bowu, 10,000 Oollr-ry 
m i pon«. 

(Signed) P, A AG NEW, Lieut,.-Col., 
Palamcottah, Commanding Dctach>ncnt. 

’ll March 1802. 















WtSTQy 


111 roltY OF THV MAM! \ AUMV. 




B. 


n <h:’ titles at the StorM of the Peltali at AhmeJiiuggur, $(h August 1S03. 


H.M.'b 19th dragoona 
5th cavalry ... 
ll.M.’a 71th regiment 
ll.M.'a 78th ,, 
b t hntt ilion 2nd N.I. 
lftt „ 3rd „ 

1st „ 8th ,, 
2nd 12th „ 

2nd 18th ,» 

Jat ,, pionoom 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Totul. 


1 

1 

. 1 

... 

1 

2 

11 

13 

. 11 

41 

53 


o 

o 

. ^ 


** 

7 

11 

18 

. 2 

9 

11 


5 

6 

. 1 

3 

•1 

... 

9 

9 

— 

— 

— 

Tutnl ... 27 

92 

119 


( :.i » rlti • •• ftcfn'o the, I'oet, Olh i 1 Otu, >tK>1 11 th Au</Uf>l 1 B'.'h. 




Killed. Wounded. 

Total. 

Artillery 

1 7 

8 

ll.M.'a 

7Uh. 

o 

? 

lut battalion 3rd 

. ... 1 

1 

1st 

„ 8th . 

1 

1 

’nd 

„ liJth . 

3 

3 

lHt 

„ pioneers. 

1 ft 

7 


Total ... a 19" 

22 


OJlicern K,a ml. 

O'Kt’o* ir.miid-d. 


Capfaln timid, H.M.% 78th. 

i ;• ntuiirtnt Ntilsc n, H.M. 

e 74th. 


llumterwbon, 

,, Larkins, „ 

7Wth 


..aui A mil l f ». 




IMcndcrlefiih. 1 *»t hat ltd. 






ai. 





\Oh. HI 







Am:.\ T r>ix 10 Tin. 



<SL 


c 


V cl urn of the Killed, Wounded, ard Mmiay of the Detachment v ,/*,• (it. 
command if Major-General the Honorable Arthur Wellesley at the Haiti', 
of AS'iyc, ayainst the Army of Dotolut Row Scindiah , on Friday 'Idrd 
September lc03. 


Killed. 


I'uropcauH. 


Corpg. 


Jl.M. i- Tilth light dragoons . 
4 th Nai ivo i .■ ■. • Iry 

“>tl. „ „ ... 

* •> »» 

lh:taohmi*ut, 1st balt:ili..n 

artillery. 

2nd 

n Mom bay „ 

A' <?•! t j Ouva 11 y guna 
li- - 1 ‘; 74th ri.^iiucut 
7Hil> 


. 


I lid 

butt ali 

uu 2nd M.N M 

Jut 

M 

Ifli 

1,1 

pt 

8th 


M 

10th 

2 i.i 

• 1 

12tli 


* * i iiiorr i 













P 

2 

1 



3 




m 



e 

it 



r p 

< 

r 



Z 




c: 

i 





c 

*rr 


a," 

a 

3 

E 

rj 

i 

8 

P 

a 

i 

c 

g 

i 

% 

p 

a 

1 o 

c 

-l 

a 

| 

g 

.2 

E 

E 

o 

w 

a 

c 

2 

u' 

Cl 

X 

J 

5 

13 

r* 


ir. 


Notivea. 


1 1 
.. T 


TotnI ... 


P 

I ._i 


15 


1 | 11 


. 1| i 

li 101 




13 

11, 


l 1 

.1' i 

1 ... 

1. ll 

I 


17' 

iii 

38 

‘2V 

1 


i « 2li2| i i| jW iqa 3 Ll t 

- - - LLU.L i J 1 i 

' .. wcu- oat «f elta half ,rvi 0 «w ,h 

' ■ ■ . . . 
1,1,u u • Nax'. iult ’with the 



1 



d 



.fc 









r-» 



9 



3 


R 

& 



s 



w 

t 

S'l 



w ^ 

a- 

U) 

rr 


. - 


»! 

*•« 

... 

hi 

T'm 

.... 

IM 

Hd 

I 

1 <V 


IV 1 

l!> ! 

... 

4 . 

H 

1 4 1 I 

2 

Hi 

i 

... 1 


ilii 

!“ 1 


..!! 


1 

21 



,-y 

1 • 1 


■, 1 

1:1 



ID 



__: 

■ T ., w 


1% 

the 

lltrl 


k i. m aar 


1‘Wkeli i li>i 
hlw 1 hr )x* r • 

















































































imsTfir 


Uisiony "i Tin: ' v:iy.v 




C— (Continue'?). 

A Jit:'nr), it/ the Killed , Wounded, ond Mi**tug oj the Detachment under the 
rvnmand of Major.General the Honor able Art hut Wellesley at the 1 at 1b: 
of Asia ye, against the Army of Dowhit li to Scindmh, on Friday 23m 
Stpi< mb:) 1803—(Continued). 







Wouu do d. 










Europeans. 





Corpa. 

JV 

o 

o 

JC 

0 

i 

d 

.9i 

h3 

i 

# o 

. or* 

3 

C. 

O 

3 

1 

3 

to 

3 

i 

-! 

3 

a 

rt 

J 

2 

.1 

as 

n 

W 

& 

rr> 

O 

E 

1 5 

ll) 

i) 

Tj 

2 

o* 

*© 

ci 

JN 

St 

l 

02 

t: 

& 

a 

I 

a 

& 

Q 

V 

c 

U5 

1 

c 

2 

*£? 

&> 

02 

E 

a- 

3 

1 

u 

n 

o 

£ 

a 

*0i 

5 

rs 

t, • 

© 

£ 

i 

£3 

M 

a 

01 

BJ 

T( 'l.' i UHlt duipjOuiiM ... 



2 ! 


VI 




a 


2d 







i 


... 1 



i ; 

.. 



X 


i 

.. 

1 




. 

j 7ll ‘ 


• 1. 

. 

, # . 


M . 






1 1 . i ,K . 1 ! lud tu'iivi 

» rlillarv. | 

... 

• 


... 




’ '# 

1 


it? 

n 2nd ,, 









1 


7 

,, Ttombfiy „ 

| A>' i. fd.ril to rnvuh-y r uif 1 

... 




... 




1 


ft 

M M.7 71th raiment 


i 


L 

d 

l 



17 

i 

12f*f > 

iU.M.r 7»tIt 




1 

8 

l 


... . 

h 


ti;. 

1*1 b. (allot 2nd M.N l 
f/Ui hb . . ( 

1 I'M .. Hill 



i 


• 

i , 



1 




1 Ut „ lOili 



. 


i i 







: 4m'l ,, I2ib 

J 

1 1 

i ... 



i . 




... 

. 



— 


- 



—i 


— 

—i 


—.— j 

Total 

i 

2 

-! 

1 

7 

3 1 

1 

1 

it 

(1 

U71 


















































Al'HwNDlX TO THE 



C—( Continued ). 



A 2?c turn of the Killed, Wounded , Missing of the Deiochmc.it rnjt.r the 
com:nurd of Major-General the Honorable Arthur Wellesley at the lid* 1 *' 
of Assaye, against the Army of Doeolut Row Scindiah, on Friday 23r«7 
September 1803—(Continued). 



H M * 1 «i l l 1 light dragoons 
4* h Native cavalry 

Bih n . 

7th ,, ,, « 

h< I .rlnJQOni Jot battalion 
»rtiUory. 

2 ml „ . 

Bond my ,, 

\r .i It iI to cavalry guun 
H .M 'i 74th n-gjrr out 

11 ' i y 7Htli ,, 

! «i > talion 2nd 74. N ).* .. 


» 

l«t 

2l. f 


4th 

8th 

10th 

lilh 


ToiM 


1 

1 I 

r> , 
3 


24 | 
28 
27 


20 

. 82 , 


100 I 

901 
180 
•jf; 


40 

27 

33 

33 

39 

in ! 
n i 

277 

77 1 
«.•» 1 

90 | 
127 I 
105 . 
1*5 
51 1 


30; 
22 1 
20 
27 


.. 2 

2 2 111 I 


I- 


.J i 


2 I 


Hi I 39 DKO 35 2 1.J38 111 10 


*.! 1(1 




* 1 ' “ i-nJtifs «:<ro out e? th > I. Of « umptiny ,*ing \\ b . thu pick* In mi*. ImI* 
Mi'viWMmnt Oro^u, * mounting t» bout *2 riMh-cotnumiinnf .k ml t,l. U.o un 
Odi« * 'i u Nimliiinh with the Ima;', 























































D' 

• i. : K lh ?\ -a \ aril .V rVy T. ys.vhr tie comm 'fA of N"jor-General the Uomrabh 

,. ; . jy, :k .! ■ ... •” 2V-h n i"Vfi.O /'t 1;n*At ecn- ; - */:>* ;:'2a/ws of Argaitm \ci‘h ihc united Armie? of 
,.f p „ ; >* ■ u : t ,I «•/ B>rar, c> Kr.y' i'J’d Oj the Maharajah and. Munnoo Bappoo, li 'otl. r 


ff*t Tefal ./ Bern -• 


t* *n*»l Welifiste\‘a 
Division. 

European-. 


Native*. 


I 

Colonel Stevenson’s 
Division. 

Europeans. ! 


Natives. 


• K. 

w 

T. 

K. 

W. 

M. 

i 

T. 

K. 

W. 

M. j 

T. 

K. 

W. 

1 

M.| 

1 

T. 

. ■ ■ i 

• ‘ 

6 

6 


. 



3rd cavalry . 


1 

1 

... 

1 

1 

7 


8 

i* u ca • airy 




i 

1 

1 

2 

6th „ . 


1 


1 


4 


4 

y v 



.. 

. 


1 


Artillery . 


5 

... 

5 


1 


1 

7tb j 






'l ! 

1 

H. M/a 94th . 

2 

37 

0 

Ad 

41 

.. 




AriAerv 


. 6 1 

i ”e 

”2 

ii 

.. ! 

13 

2nd of 2nd N.l. 



... 


5 

15 


20 

: *M0 74ih . ...; 

| + ' 

48 

o2 

1 - 




13t of 6th „ ... 

... 


... 


... 

1 


1 

H^ATSrh 

9 

38 

47 




... 

2nd of 7th „ . 






2 


0 

1 v A s i. . 



... 

0 

12 

i 

16 

2nd of 9th „ . 





*3 

9 


12 

*st rn 3r.’ 


*i 

1 

5 

36 


41 

Ut of 11th „ . 




... 

1 

10 

1 

22 

1st of 4\h , 

I >f*L 

1 :.: 

1 

1 

3 

29 

1 3 

... 1 

1 

: 32 

4 

2nd 01 11th >; . 





... 

10 

_ 

10 

'• i i . / • , 

. 

. 



: 4 

1 

j 9 

Total ... 

2 

| 44 

2 

; 

10 

59 

1 

70 

2-ri -f iZii . 


i 

; i 

3 ! 

1 

! 8 


Lii 

Wellesley’s Division 

23 .101 

... 

114 

21 

104 

1_ 

i 4 

129 

Tora’ w. 

i 

13 ;101 

[iu 

: 21 IlGf 

4 

(129 

Grand Total ... 

16 

Jl45 

2 

| J62 

31 

jl63 

1 

5 

199 | 

1 






















Horses. 



1 

K. 

| W. | M. | T. I 

H HA ' -“1 d r • . ... 
4*4i .-a 

• 

— • — 1 

2 

1 . • j J 

• l G ! !• i 


... - s 1 ■ 3 : t 

•d ... 3 I J, • i 

.. . 9 1 3 . l “ • 1! 

. * -iL'-rr ... ... 1 ' : . 1 



O 


HI STOP Y or T L\ K MADRAfl ARMY 









































































•UTr\Dix tu mi: 


<SL 




' V 


ltahim of Otdunucr, l'ire Arms, frc., ire., taken ly the Force 
* n i,ie t'- v'h of Trov -dear.: under the command of Lieutenant- 
Colonel the Honorable A. SeutJeger. 



\|.»w,'vjly Jjill(‘8 
Ouimiu Comary Lines. 
Action at Nugnreuil .. 

, ' 'oduglion .* 

ivontra .. 
Cotatohio 
Tm igapatam 
Arlcior ... 

I'uomJnw 

Total .. 


? • 1 


r.3 


Hand Grenades 

“ f 30 rl 

■32 

1 3 
s* 

i-, 

C3 

n • 

a 

p ^ 

c ^ 

is 

851 

so 

... 

71 


... 

64 



600 


57 

20*190 

2.000 

... 

770 


... 

70 



33 



:jn8 

... 

IOC 

22,012 

, 2,080 

- — 

— 



A ’ ,; - "A- number of iho above brass guud rendered umdoja i , y 0( .t, r , 
.' 1 n.,or..~ iron finn (-ibunt .0) destroyed on tb' con.a ; t2,<XK) ntnnd 
‘ n.n n la,., of |. v|,.„ bill! ,, and ROD hands of poivder found 
aLTtu ' ' uow *>■• «•«-• «*d to Oodaghw;. alto no of 

■ ..loan, to bo removed from Trovnndr.m, to Oodngl.orry for lb„ 
|iui|, 0Bl . Of I.,,,,/ dontroyoil, other with about 5 lui -t i 0 iul. „ 
:t ’’“I’huavomin. About one lao of round .ho* t..l:on : t 

’ ,ut indl " ,l " l; " »»« »'*<»vo. (•*., waut of ; UB , 1U mour- It 

»'*•** yet I-!*ei» sorted. 


(Higmul) ,1. C. FRANOKE, Captain, 

Attilt. 

„ (Sig.iul) A. 88NTLEGER, luvuu-Col. 

r '”•' Oof»fl*ilir.|U: f 

! 1 / A/'i tf 1 H«y i 




























ViQNV 


HI,STOP.V OF IHK MAFur ,.S ARM; . 



407 


F. 

Several disputes arose between the captors, as well as 
botweon the captors and Government, respecting the distj i- 
bution of the property found at Amboyua, Banda, and tbo 
other islands. The spices alone amounted to 255,584 lb. of 
cloves, 307,549 lb. of nutmegs, and 55,378 lb. of maco, tbo 
whole of which was claimed by the captors, but it was ulti¬ 
mately decided by the Admiralty Court a* Madras, in Septem¬ 
ber 1811, tint the captors had no right to any spices recoiv* d 
into the Government store3 alter tho surrender. 

Two Dutch brigs, one taken by the Madras troops .n : ui 
island of Bouro, aud tbo other by those; at Lariequc, were 
f;oiz( d by Captain Tnclcor as prizes to His Majesty’s ship 
“Dover,” iko right of making such prV.cB l ing, in hui 
opinion, restricted to His Majesty’ ship, of war. Ttt<» 
tsnnll vessels, raptured by Bnsiga Ilov of tho Madras Euro¬ 
pean Begimonb at ♦Saperoua, wore taken poss. -sion * by 
Captain Tucker on the same ground. 

T1)'j result of this affair has not. I con eHuincd. 



<Vi:NDlX TO THK HISTORY OF ITS MADRAS ARMY. 


G. 


Tin: following h the estimate of prospective military charges 
after tho capture :— 


Jlegrlar Troop •. 


Artillery 480 pagodas ; Detachment Madras European 
Regiment, completed to 200 rank and file 1,800 pagodas; 
victualling 750 pagodas. Total per mensem 3,0:i0 pagodas, 
uquivalent to 11s. 10,605, or 4,606-21-0 Spanish dollars. 

Porps of Amboynesc. 

] Captain, 1 Adjutant, 1 Serjeant Major, 1 Drill Serjeant. 


Natives, 


1 Adjutant, 20 Serjeants, 20 Corporals, 10 Drummer.!, 600 
Pnvi'fo:;, 7 Wat;or-carriens 2 Carpenters, 2 Smiths, 1 Bcl- 
Jov.ij 1'oy, l Chink! dar, 1 Obuckler. 

Each man allov. od one dram oF arraok and one t sure of 
rice per diem, and two measures of suit monthly. 

Pay r.f tin whole per mensem 2,004 Sp.iiish dollar.. 

The i' ot Iho Amboy nose corps wore reported as hung 
tractable*, and of good pbydqm. 





Central Secretariat Library 3 
Government of India 4 
^ NEW DELBtt 





« 


^i'itarg iappartniMit 









