      Number, Size and Energy Consumption of Draught Animals in
                        European Agriculture

                                  Working Paper, March 2009

                             by Astrid Kander (University of Lund)
                           and Paul Warde University of East Anglia)


This paper provides information on the number of draught animals of various kinds that
were used in agriculture in Europe during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and
the sources and assumptions we have used in making our estimates. Tables provide animal
numbers in thousands for each country at benchmark dates.

The aim of the paper is to provide a methodological approach to assessing the availability of
draught power over time, and an explanation of how the available statistical information
from various European countries can be employed to this end. This paper will be linked to a
more detailed analysis of the role of draught power in raising agricultural output and factor
productivity in European agriculture in the period 1800-1914.

However, our main concern has not been to estimate draught power (although it would
indeed be desirable to know this figure), but the energy consumption of draught livestock. In
other words, we are interested at this stage in energy inputs into the animals, not the final
consumption of energy used for useful work, or indeed the power output of the animals
when working. The energy consumption of the animals is energy contained in the fodder
that they consume. This is in turn a function of the animal’s size, the length of time spent
working, and the intensity of their work. The last two figures could only be very roughly
estimated on the aggregate level of the agricultural sector across nations, and we have not
attempted to do this. We have however built a simple model of likely energy consumption
levels based on estimates of the average size of animals at benchmark dates. This is the
subject of the second part of the paper.

The paper proceeds on a country-by-country basis. While the principles underlying the
calculations made for each country are generally the same, the procedures followed by
contemporary statisticians who assembled the data varied, as will be seen. This has required
methods of estimation tailored to suit each individual country.
