Oxen and cows
Oxen and to some degree cows were used as draught animals in Swedish agriculture. The
cow was the poor man’s ox, especially preferred by poor crofters, since it could be used both
for milk and for draught power, although the latter could be detrimental to the former.
Often two cows were used in a pair, or one ox went in pair with one cow. The habit of using
cows as draught animals increased along with the number of landless and land poor people
over the course of the nineteenth century.


Oxen were not used as draught animals for their entire lives. This means that the total
amount of oxen in the statistics must be reduced to account for those not actually working.
In fact, in calculating oxen as ‘horse equivalents’ one must also remember that they were
used differentially and thus consumed different amounts of fodder dependent on age.7 One
cost advantage with the ox compared to the horse was that the ox had its highest sales value
when fattened for slaughter. In especially oxen rich parts of Sweden like Småland a special
trade with oxen developed, with far- reaching specialization, where some farms took care of
the breeding, others took care of the training, others used the draught oxen, and yet other
farms with rich fodder availability took care of the final fattening, and then the oxen were
sent for slaughtering. On basis of the cycles in this trade we can say that below three years of
age the ox was not yet tamed and ready for work. Then the ox worked for roughly four years
and then was put to final fattening for one and a half years and then eventually slaughtered.8
On the basis of this information it seems reasonable to assume that 50% of all oxen
(including the calves) were used for work. In other parts of the country with less
specialization and fattening options it is however likely that the oxen worked longer before
eventually being slaughtered, so a more reasonable assumption is that 60% of oxen all ages
worked. Out of the adult oxen population, which is provided in the statistics, we have
assumed that 80% of them worked in agriculture. For Swedish cows we assume the same
proportion used for draft purpose as in Germany (see below).




7 Collins, ‘The farm horse economy’, pp.89-91.
8 Sigvardsson, Oxen, p 22; Peterson, ’Häst eller oxe’, pp.46-7.
