were used in urban centres (more if only the share of adult horses is calculated).3 This
amount of horses clearly should be deducted from the total horse stock when we estimate
the number of horses used for draught power in agriculture. The local investigations of 1916
usefully divided the horses into two different uses: workhorses, and riding horses and
carriage horses. On average 1916-1918 the workhorses amounted to 53% and the riding and
carriage horses 4% of total horses.


The procedure for reaching an estimate of agricultural workhorses has been the following:
    1. Start with the total number of horses
    2. Deduct young horses below 3 years. This figure is generally recorded in statistics and
         the share is around 15-16%.
    3. Deduct horses used in the cities, for transportation and industry. In 1901 this was
         4.4%.
    4. Deduct riding horses and carriage horses in the countryside. Only part of the 4%
         that were categorized as riding and carriage horses were used in the cities. Some
         indication of the proportion of heavy workhorses and light riding horses among the
         city horses is provided for a few cities in the local investigations. In Malmö 61%
         were heavy workhorses, but in Filipstad and Luleå there were only working horses.
         We thus assume that some 3% of the total were riding horses and carriage horses in
         the countryside.4
    5. Deduct horses used for military purposes. They were around 2%.5
    6. Deduct horses in the countryside that were mainly used for transportation and
         industry. The number of horses used for personal transportation during
         skjutsväsendet was only around 1 000 - 3 000 horses, thus less than 1% of the total.
         However the total use of horse and oxen time for transportation and industry (work
         other than agricultural work) has been estimated to be 10% of adult working horses.6

20% of the horses aged over three years were deducted on the basis that they were used for
non-agricultural work.

3 BiSOS series Q, Agriculture, 1901.
4 BiSOS series Q, Agriculture, 1901.
5 Kocken, ’Krigshästen från äldsta tider’; Ribbing, ’Hästen i vår nuvarande armé’; Furugren, ’Arbetshästen och

svensk hästavel.
6 Krantz, Transporter och kommunikationer.
