Part One: Draught Animal Numbers

In this article we present new series for draught animals available for use in agriculture for all
the countries concerned. The livestock series are based on a mixture of already available
series, previously available data adjusted to improve accuracy, and material collected from
printed statistical sources. However, almost inevitably, inconsistencies remain between series
that are assembled from data collected using different premises. For example, they contain
aggregates of different animals, in part because of genuine differences in agricultural practice
(thus it is of no importance that donkeys or mules do not appear in the English series).
Wrigley’s schema did not embrace donkeys or mules, but they are of some significance in
Mediterranean agriculture, including that of southern France. There is rather less data on the
amount of work performed by these beasts, or what they consumed, than for horses and
oxen. This is unimportant for England and Wales, or the Netherlands, where nearly all work
was done by horses, but is probably significant elsewhere. Equally, not all series contain
cows, although they were widely employed for draught purposes and outnumbered draught
oxen in Germany as late as the beginning of the twentieth century. For aggregating the
number of animals we first use the principles outlined by Wrigley in 1988 and 1991 to
calculate ‘raw’ data of livestock numbers, where one ox equals two-thirds of a horse (exactly
the proportion also employed by contemporary German statisticians). Similar allowances are
made for other animals: one mule is assumed to equal one horse, a donkey half a horse, and
a cow one-third of an ox, i.e. two-ninths of a horse.


A very important further problem is assessing how many of these animals out of the national
herd were actually used in the agricultural sector. This disaggregation is rarely made although
in some countries total numbers of beasts give a very misleading impression as to those
available for draught use in agriculture. In England the number of horses employed on-farm
is very clearly recorded from 1867. In estimates from the early nineteenth century, it seems
that agricultural horses made up around 60% of the total number of horses, less than half by
1870 and a mere third by the start of the twentieth century. In 1852 72% were so employed
in France, falling to 53% by 1890. In the German states as a whole the first comprehensive
statistics from 1873 suggest that 70% of horses were predominately used in agriculture, and a
