Data was collected from the national statistical surveys mentioned above. These figures
assume that 40% of all bovine animals were employed for draught power. This is based on
the actual number of working animals as a proportion of all bovines recorded in 1965. As
with Italy, each bovine animal is treated as two-thirds of an ox for ‘horse equivalent’ and
energy calculations. This rests on the assumption that roughly half of draught cattle are oxen,
and half are cows, and that a cow is equivalent to a third of an ox.


Part Two. Animal weights and energy consumption


The method of calculating draught animals in terms of horse-equivalents is rather crude,
although employed by German statisticians in the nineteenth century. One ox equals two-
thirds of a horse, one donkey is one-half of an ox, and one cow is one-third of an ox.27
Animals are of the same size and power in different countries and do not change over time.
This is certainly a simplification. We know for instance that England and Wales had
relatively large working horses. Sidney in 1875 writes: ‘It is in England that the cart-horse
like every other kind of live stock valuable in agriculture, has attained the greatest average
perfection, because the principles of breeding have been more carefully considered by our
farmers than in any other country, and also because it is the country where, as compared
with the rest of Europe the roads are good, the farmers are rich and the landowners lead the
way in every stock-breeding improvement.’ A similar testimony was given by a Pehrson, a
Swede, about the same time.28 Thus it may be that England actually had larger access to
muscle power than the sheer numbers indicate. But it is also likely that other countries
caught up with them over time due to imports of cold blooded working stallions and cross-
breeding with their domestic smaller working horses. In south-western France and Spain, the
asses were very tall compared to the British donkey, reaching a height of 14 hands (140 cm).
The draught mules in Britain and Spain could reach a height of 16-17 hands and be very
strong.29 In southern Europe and the Mediterranean region the donkey and mule were
favoured above the horse for agricultural work, and often were harnessed together with an
ox. In these regions mules and donkeys may generally have been larger than their northern
27 Statistik des deutschen Reiches, VIII, (1874), p.105.
28 Sidney, The book of the horse, p 276; Pehrsson, Om hästkulturen, p 38.
29 Sidney, The book of the horse, pp 285-286; Lefour, Le cheval, p.166.
