of these surveys (1851 and 1890) also provided estimates of horses employed for draught
power in agriculture, when the proportion of total adult horses employed in agriculture was
72% and 53% respectively. In the 1840s, Mounier considered around two-thirds of horses
reaching working age (over three) to have been used for husbandry. For the earliest dates,
numerous agronomists provided estimates of the numbers of horses working in agriculture
in the eighteenth and early nineteenth century, although the principles underlying these
estimates are not always clear. To estimate the proportion of total horses that were used in
agriculture, we have used the estimate of Lavoisier (1791) despite its early date, on the
assumption that numbers remained relatively static over the Revolutionary period. Lavoisier
made an estimate of the horses employed to cultivate in certain acreages in different regions
of France and scaled these up to a national estimate on the basis of land surveys. This gives
an estimate of 76% of adult horses being used in agriculture (assuming that, as in 1840,
around 13% of the horse population were foals), a figure consistent with what might be
expected from later trends, as well as comparable estimates for other nations.21 For
intervening years the trends in the proportion of total horses working in agriculture has been
linearly interpolated. Between 1890 and 1914 the proportion of total adult horses in
agriculture is assumed to have remained static.


The number of donkeys in toto, and mules employed in agriculture, is recorded in surveys of
1840, 1862 and 1914.22 It has been assumed that 80% of donkeys were used for draught
power in agriculture. As the figure for the total number of donkeys approximates steadily to
around 25% of the number of horses employed in agriculture, donkey numbers for
intervening years have been calculated on this basis. For years where no data for mules is
available, it has been calculated that total mule numbers are equivalent to 22% of the
number of horses working in agriculture, the proportion found in years with comparable
data; and that 80% of those mules are employed for draught power. This presumes that
nearly all adult mules and donkeys were employed in some way in agriculture, though many
in the south would have also been used for transport.


Oxen

21 Monier, De l’agriculture en France, p.354; Lavoisier, Statistique agricole,, p.132.
22 See note 19.
