attempts were generally not very successful.53 Most successful was cross-breading with the
Norwegian horse, which developed into a new kind: The North Swedish horse, named in
1901. Breeding of Clydesdales continued for a while but never became widespread. Only
with the import of the first Belgian Ardenner horse in the 1870s did a really successful cross-
breading start, which eventually made the Swedish Ardenner horse the dominant rural horse
in most of Sweden. Around the turn of the century larger Ardenner horses were imported
and affected the size development of Swedish agricultural horses: the average height was 165
cm in the 1920s, and they were substantially broader and stronger than the original Swedish
agricultural horses. Horse breeding was mainly designed to provide strong working horses.
Cattle-breeding was devoted to increased beef and milk production. Cattle or horses are not
likely to have grown stronger and bigger during the first half of the nineteenth century, when
the horse was still smaller than an ox.54 It seems reasonable in the Swedish case to believe
that the size figures given Hansson´s book on fodder recommendation for 1920s were
relevant then, and that means that we assume an average size for horses of 550 kg in 1913
and 500 kg for oxen. Additional support for this assumption is provided by Johansson’s
statement that the average body weight for fully-grown Ayrshire cows was 587 kg.55

The Netherlands


The Netherlands was very early in developing heavy cold-blooded horses, one of which was
the Frisian. In the eighteenth century average height was around 150 cm, which probably
rose during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century boom years in agriculture. Later,
the Frisian horse lost market share, largely to cross-breeding and some imports. Although a
specific breed and although they lost market share, the size evolution of Frisians is probably
representative for the whole, and it is not clear that they developed much in height over the
duration of the period under consideration.56 However, the body mass of agricultural horses
is likely to have increased to some degree as in the other countries.



53 Dyrendahl, Från arbetshäst till sport-och rekreationshäst; Furugren, Arbetshästen och svensk hästavel.
54 Support for the idea that cattle, especially in the south, grew bigger from the mid 1850s is given by the price

of milk and beef in relation to the price of cows, which clearly shows that the cows became more expensive in
relation to beef or milk. This indicates more productive animals in terms of meat and milk, and thus larger
animals. See Kander Economic growth , p.177; Furugren, Arbetshästen och svensk hästavel, p.132.
55 Johansson, De svenska nötkreatursrasernas.
56 Ben Gales, Personal Communication based on Unpublished Paper.
