84                                                                STORJA '98


government in London was opposed, stressing that nothing must
compromise the continued retention of Sicily and Malta. 8
        Once it became obvious that Britain's main effort on land against
Napoleon must be made in the Iberian peninsula, and that Napoleon's
attentions were now focused on Spain and Russia, not the Mediterranean,
the government in London lost interest in its islands and their garrisons,
save as sources of reinforcements for Wellington. Troops were sent to him
from Sicily and Malta in 1811 and 1812. The fear of a French attack on
Sicily had subsided after 1810 and Murat's abortive assault on the island,
while Malta was never considered imperiled, save by a revolt of the Maltese
themselves.
        Due to the exigencies of war, all the Mediterranean islands occupied
by Britain were governed as military fortresses (save only Corsica), and
although civil commissioners were appointed to head the islands'
administration, those civil commissioners were infact generals or, one case,
a naval captain/Rear Admiral. Sicily was not a British possession but its
king was persuaded, against his wishes to adopt a British-style constitution.
It did not work and, by 1812, the British minister, who was also commander
of all land forces in the Mediterranean, found himselfin a position of having
to act <;lS an Oliver Cromwell.
        There was never any long term government strategy during the course
of the wars against France between 1793 and 1815, to enlarge Britain's empire
in the Mediterranean, though there were individuals who favoured such a
policy. One was Henry Dundas who died in 1811; another was the writer
Francis Gould Leckie who, in his Historical Survey of the Foreign Affairs of
Great Britain, published in 1808, advocated Britain annexing the principal
islands of the Mediterranean;9 and Lord William Bentinck, the commander
in Sicily and British minister of the court of Palermo, when disillusioned by
the Sicilians' failure to work the constitution he had wished on them,
suggested at one stage that Sicily should be made a part of the British Empire,
though he Shortly after disowned his plan. lo
        When the war with Napoleon finally ended, only Malta was retained
as a colony, for reasons already mentioned. The Ionian Islands became a
British Protectorate, but only because the Allied Powers were unable to agree
a better solution. The Admiralty never favoured Corfu or developed it as a
naval base. It was in Malta alone that they were interested, as was the British
government, and so remained fi)r a century and a half.
