STOR]A '98                                                                   83

 able to pay its way (a consideration of importance to the Westminster
 Parliament), but "a place of eminent importance as the central point of a
 great commerce, and the seat of English influence in the Mediterranean"
 (words of the Under Secretary of State to Sir Thomas Maitland, the new
 Governor of Malta)?
        Malta and Sicily were interdependent. The latter was occupied by
 the British in February 1806 with the consent of the king of Naples, after a
 small British army had been forced to evacuate the kingdom of Naples. It
had been hoped that, with Russian assistance, the French could be driven of
Italy, but Napoleon's victory at Austerlitz had effectively put paid to all that.
 By agreement with Ferdinand the king of Naples(then in exile in Palermo)
to whom the British paid an annual subsidy, Britain retained in Sicily a
force of never less than 10,000 and sometimes as large as 20,000 troops.
The aim was to keep a military base from which to launch attacks on Italy
with the assistance of the Austrians and Russians, and to be able to exert
influence on policy of the Ottoman Empire. Little ever came of the formed
alliance, save a brief occupation of several islands situated in the Bay of
Naples, though Capri was held for two years, as a kind oflistening-post on
Europe. The latter aim led only in 1807 to two highly successful expeditions
- a military one to Egypt, and a naval one to the Dardanelles.
       Sicily, like Malta, was useful to Britain as a base tor trading contraband
to the mainland; it was also vital as a source of supply of essential food and
drink tor Malta. If Sicily ever tell to the French, the British could not have
remained in Malta. The British government in 1806 were right to refuse
napoleon's off-er to recognize British possession of Malta if they handed over
Sicily. Sicily also had useful ports, and both Collingwood and Cotton, the
otlicers who successively commanded the British fleet in the Mediterranean
from 1805 to 1812 used Sicily's harbours extensively during the middle
years of the war.
       In 1809 Collingwood arranged for the occupation of the southern
five Ionian Islands - the sixth followed in 1810. The aim was to safeguard
the mainland of Greece, then part of the Ottoman Empire. Napoleon had
obtained these islands from Russia at the Treaty ofTilsit in 1807 and had
strongly fortified Corfu. His occupation of the province of IIIyria, taken
from Austria in 1809, seemed to Collingwood to pose a series threat to
Constantinople. The British command in the Mediterranean would like to
have gone on to assault Corfu, were reinforcements made available, but the
