80                                                                      STORJA '98


     THE BRITISH PRESENCE IN MEDITERRANEAN ISLANDS,
                                 1793 - 1815.

                               Desmond Gregory


       Between 1794 and 1815 Britain occupied no less than eighteen islands
in the Mediterranean, though several were very small indeed (Cap raja,
Lampedusa, Camino, Cerigo and Ithaca, for instance). Most were held
until the wars ended, though some were given up earlier: Corsica in 1796,
Elba in 1797, Minorca in 1802, Capri in 1800 and Ischia and Procida in
1809.
       Can any common purpose or purposes be discerned in this amazing
dispersal of effort? First, there was the quest for a sovereign base from which
the navy could operate to safeguard trade in the Mediterranean. Second,
there was the wish to save Italy from falling into the grips of France and,
when this became impossible to attempt a recovery of that peninsula in
cooperation with Austria and Russia. Third, there was the determination to
preserve Egypt, the route to British possessions in India and ultimately the
whole Turkish empire, from conquest from Napoleon, by the occupation of
strategically placed islands.
       Soon after the outbreak of the war with France, a British fleet under
Admiral Hood was sent by Pitt to the Mediterranean. Hood's instructions
were to bolster morale of states bordering on that sea who were al ready at
war with France or seemed to be threatened by her aggression; give them
such naval and military assistance as the fleet and a small British army could
afford; disrupt all French seaborne trade, while protecting that of the allies;
and attack the French fleet when occasion offered. 1
       After the allies were forced out ofToulon in December 1793 - the
base having been surrendered to Hood by the French royalists during the
summer - Hood and his forces seized Corsica, at the invitation of the
Corsicans. Corsica provided the British with harbours, a base well placed
from which to watch Toulon and the remnant of the French republican

       . Desmond Gregory is the author of various works on Britain's presence in
Mediterranean Islands in the 18th and 19th Centuries, including Malta, Britain and the
European Powers 1793-1815 (London 1996).
