STORJA '98                                                                81

fleet, and support the armies of Austria and Sardinia on the mainland of
north Italy. Cap raj a and Elba were also seized. But in October 1796 the
British were forced to withdraw from Corsica and Capraja, and from Elba
in April of the following year, due to Napoleon's victories in Italy.
       The Corsican episode had been unpopular in Britain. An experiment
in granting a constitution (liberal by the standards of the time) and the
creation of a joint kingdom under a British Viceroy (and not the Corsican
leader Paoli) had not appealed to the Corsicans as a whole, and their refusal
to pay taxes led to a widespread and successful revolt. This failed venture in
colonial rule was to colour the views of British statesmen when, in 1812,
they had to decide on Malta's future form of Government.
       In November 1798, after the British fleet had again entered the
Mediterranean (having been absent for two years) and Nelson had destroyed
the French fleet at the battle of Aboukir Bay, the British occupied Minorca
(Spain now being an ally of France). Minorca, which had been a British
colony for much of the eighteenth century, until it was returned to Spain at
the end of the Anlerican War, has a tine harbour at Port Mahon. It was
much valued by British admirals who were given the task of watching Toulon,
though with France and Spain both at war with Britain it remained a liability,
needing the constant presence of the navy to ensure it remained inviolate.
Though its repossession was clearly important in the war to dominate the
Mediterranean, now that Corsica was lost, the reason for its capture was not
(curiously) naval. Dundas, the secretary of state for war in William Pitt's
administration, wanted to distract the attention of Spain from a projected
invasion of Portugal, whose harbour Lisbon, at the mouth of the Tagus, was
of vital importance to British trade. 2 The island was given back to Spain at
the Treaty of Amiens in 1802. By that time the much tlner harbour of
Valletta had been in British hands for eighteen months.
       Naval opinion differed sharply on the relative importance of Minorca
and Malta for the performance of the navy's tasks in the Mediterranean
theatre of war. Captain Alexander Ball and Admiral Lord Keith both strongly
favoured Malta, as did General Sir Ralph Abercromby, as being more easily
definable and a place where good water was more plentiful and the cost of
provisions notably cheaper. 3 The island was given back to Spain at the
treaty of Amiens in 1802. By that time the much tlner harbour ofValletta
had been in British hands tor eighteen months. Nelson however thought
Malta useless tor his purpose. He told the prime minister in 1803 that
