82                                                                STORJA '98


"Minorca may have its inconveniences, but its conveniences are so great,
that trust at the moment a Spanish war is certain, that we shall be able to
secure it." Malta, on the other hand he considered" a perfectly useless place
to refit in" or one from which to procure refreshments, owing to its distance
from the waters offToulon and the prevalence of unfavourable winds. 4 Pitt,
in 1805, pressure from the Tzar to give back Malta to the Knights, toyed
temporarily with the idea of advised him strongly against. When in 1808
Spain rose in revolt against the occupation of the French, and offered the
facilities of Port Mahon once again to the British fleet, Minorca, though
not occupied by the British, became an important British base. Admiral
Cotton, commanding the fleet wrote to the admiralty in 1811 that it was
vital to retain the use of Minorca. "The fleet in Toulon cannot be efficiently
watched, or the blockade at all kept, without the advan tage of this island". 5
        Malta came into British hands at the surrender of General Vaubois of
the port ofYalletta in September 1800. In giving naval and military assistance
to the Maltese in revolt against the French, Britain was primarily interested
in denying the island to France. It had been discussed by Napoleon, who
seized it, as "the watch-tower of the Mediterranean". During the course of
the siege, Britain had agreed with the Tzar that, at the peace, the Maltese
islands would be handed back to the knights of St. John, the Tzar being by
then elected as their head. Grenville, Pitt's Foreign secretary, had been
responsible for this arrangement, having no very great opinion of the
importance of Malta to Britain, though Dundas, the secretary of state for
war, profoundly disagreed on this point. 6 In 1802 the new ministry under
Addington honoured the previous British commitment at the Peace of
Amiens in 1802. The settlement was intended by the government to keep
the island in neutral hands and prevent them falling to the French once
again. Once it became clear that Napoleon had not relinquished his designs
on Egypt, to which Malta was a necessary stepping-stone, and so to designs
on the British in India, Britain decided to renege on the treaty. Her continued
occupation of Malta was a purely defensive measure.
        It was only after 1806 (Napoleon's Berlin Decree) and the
intensification of the economic war, that Britain looked at Malta in a new
light - a base for smuggling her manufactures and colonial produce through
Napoleon's blockade. The prosperity that Malta then began to enjoy as a
result of pursuing this plan induced the British government in 1812 to
annex Malta as a crown colony. Not only was Malta a colony that looked
