ipi 


|M<*iipiffWM^^ 


f^^' 


I-  ■'. 


-'  \ 


SAN  »i&&0 


f>^ 


COUNT  LAV  ALETTE 


T  t  ^  ? 


W^S^F  this  Edition  of  the  Memoirs  of 
"^"^  Count  Lavalette  Five  Hundred 
Copies  are  printed.  Three  Hundred  and 
Fifty  for  England^  and  One  Hundred  and 
Fifty  for  America. 


« 


•i  1  'j/Ur  <,'  C.'U.:  y\  ci\ 


MEMOIRS 


OF 


OUNT 


AVALETTE,(Zv.5w. 


ADJUTANT  AND  PRIVATE   SECRETARY  TO 

NAPOLEON 

AND 

POSTMASTER. GENERAL    UNDER    THE    EMPIRE 


WriH  PORTRAITS 


GIBBINGS  AND  COMPANY,  Ld. 

i8,  BURY  STREET,  LONDON,  W.C. 

189+ 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Biographical  Sketch  of  Count  Lavalette     .  .  .      xv 

Count  Lavalette  to  the  Reader         ....  xxxv 

MEMOIRS. 

CHAPTER    I. 

My  education  and  early  tastes — I  witness  the  beginning  of  the 
Revolution — Plunder  of  M.  Reveillon's  warehouses — Convo- 
cation of  the  States-General — Taking  of  the  Bastille — Murder 
of  M.  Foulon        .......         I 

CHAPTER  II. 

Organisation  of  the  National   Guards — Lafayette — Bailly — The  5th 

and  6th  of  October  at  Versailles — The  King  returns  to  Paris       .       10 

CHAPTER   III. 

I  am  employed  by  M.  d'Ormesson,  one  of  the  Presidents  of  the 
Parliament — His  advice  and  influence — I  become  a  Royalist — 
The  Marquis  de  Favras — Silly  conduct  of  the  NobiUty    .  •       19 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Departure  of  Louis  XVI.  for  Varennes  and  his  return — The  Legis- 
lative Assembly — Beginning  of  the  war — Riot  of  the  20th  of 
June — False  hopes  of  the  Royalists — Attempts  of  M.  de 
Lafayette  in  favour  of  the  King — Failure  of  those  attempts, 
and  flight  of  Lafayette      .  .  .  .  .  .28 


vi  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  V. 

TAGS 

Preparations  for  the  lOth  of  August — My  Company  repairs  to 
the  Tuileries — The  King  retires  to  the  Assembly — Attack  on 
the  Palace — Dissolution  of  the  Legislative  Assembly — The 
Girondins  .......       42 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Approach  of  the  enemy — Taking  of  Verdun — The  2nd  and  3rd  of 
September — I  leave  Paris  and  enlist — My  hopes  and  dis- 
appointments— Arrival  of  Colonel  d'HiUiers — He  joins  the 
Army  of  the  Rhine,  whence  he  sends  me  a  commission  of 
Sub-Lieutenant — Death  of  Louis  XVL  .  .  .  '53 

CHAPTER  VH. 

I  arrive  at  Worms — Treachery  of  Dumouriez — Retreat  of  Custines — 
He  is  recalled  and  sentenced — Alexander  Beauharnais  succeeds 
him — Pichegru — Mission  of  St.  Just — Atrocities  of  Schneider      .       66 

CHAPTER    VHL 

Opening  of  the  Campaign  of  1794 — Our  victories — The  Legion  of 
Conde — ^Junction  of  the  Armies  of  the  Rhine  and  the  Moselle — 
Discussions — The  two  Generals  are  separated — I  return  to  Paris 
with  General  d'HiUiers — Observations  on  the  Army  of  the 
Rhine       ........       79 

CHAPTER   IX. 

Paris  in  August,  1794 — Constitution  of  the  Year  HI. — Revolt  of  the 

Sections — Bonaparte — The  13th  Vendemiaire      .  .  '89 

CHAPTER  X. 

The  Directory — General  Bonaparte  marries  the  widow  of  General 
Alexander  Beauharnais — He  sets  off  for  Italy — Pacification  of 
the  Vendee — General  d'HiUiers  receives  an  order  for  service  in 
Italy,  whither  I  follow  him  .  .  .  .  .100 

CHAPTER  XL 

My  arrival  at  Milan — I  am  appointed  Aide-de-camp  to  the  General- 
in-chief — The  army  marches  to  Vienna — Battles  of  Rivoli,  La 
Corona,  &c.  .......      107 


CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER  XII. 


PAGE 


My  Mission  to  Tyrol — Its  dangers — Preliminaries  of  Leoben — Venice 
is  ceded  to  Austria — Riot  at  Genoa — Murder  of  a  Frenchman — 
General  Bonaparte  sends  me  to  ask  satisfaction   .  .  .117 

,     CHAPTER  XIII. 

Embarrassed  conduct  of  the  Directory — Meditated  coup  ctetat — 
Bonaparte  sends  me  to  Paris — His  instructions — I  transmit  to 
him  the  result  of  my  observations — Madame  de  Stael — The 
1 8th  Fructidor — My  return  to  Italy  .  .  .  .126 

CHAPTER    XIV. 

My  return  to  Paris  after  the  i8th  Fructidor — First  idea  of  the 
Expedition  to  Egypt — Its  motives — Its  aim — Mission  of  M. 
Pousseilgues  to  Malta      ......     140 

CHAPTER    XV. 

Departure    of    General    Bonaparte    for    Rastadt — Murder    of    the 

Plenipotentiaries  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     148 

CHAPTER    XVI. 

Preparations   and  departure  of  the   Egyptian   Expedition — Malta — 

I  am  sent  to  Corfu  and  Janina — Return  to  Egypt       .  .154 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Interview  with  Admiral  Brueys  on  board  the  Orient — My  arrival  at 
Cairo — Mourad  Bey — His  intrepidity  and  firmness — Oppressive 
government  of  the  Mamelukes  —  Battle  of  Salahieh  —  The 
General  receives  the  news  of  the  loss  of  the  Battle  of  Aboukir     158 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Ibrahim  Bey  retires  to  Syria — Project  of  an  Expedition  to  Syria — 
Revolt  at  Cairo — Death  of  Colonel  Sulkowski,  Aide-de-camp  to 
the  General-in-chief — Mission  of  M.  de  Beauchamp — The  plague 
at  Alexandria — Expeditious  mode  of  administering  justice  adopted 
by  the  Cadi  at  Cairo         .  .  .  .  .  .165 


viii  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER    XIX. 

PAGE 

The  General's  motives  for  his  Expedition  to  Syria — Regnier — Kleber 
— Bon — Lannes — Murat — Departure  of  the  Expedition — Taking 
of  El  Arisch — Taking  of  Jaffa — The  General-in-chiePs  presence 
of  mind — The  Army  arrives  before  St.  John  of  Acre — Loss  of 
the  Flotilla  conveying  stores  for  the  siege  .  .  .173 

CHAPTER   XX. 

Ibrahim  Bey  reappears — Battle  of  Gafarkala — Battle  of  Mount 
Thabor — The  General-in-chief  sleeps  at  Nazareth — Respect 
of  General  Bonaparte  for  religious  prejudices — Death  of  the 
interpreter  Venture — Return  before  St.  John  of  Acre — Death 
of  General  Caftarelli — Thirteenth  Storm — We  penetrate  into 
the  town  and  are  forced  to  go  out  again — Fourteenth  Storm        .     180 

CHAPTER    XXI. 

The  General-in-chief  resolves  to  return  to  Egypt — The  wounded 
are  sent  away — Passion  of  General  Bonaparte — Pretended 
poisoning  of  the  wounded — Return  to  Jaffa — The  infected — 
Instance  of  humanity  in  the  General — Return  to  the  capital  of 
Lower  Egypt — Judgment  on  the  Syrian  Campaign — Landing  of 
the  Turks — Battle  of  Aboukir — Departure  for  Europe — Arrival 
in  Corsica  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     188 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

General  Bonaparte  re-establishes  some  order  at  Ajaccio — He  lands  at 
Frejus — Enthusiasm  of  the  population — His  arrival  at  Lyons  and 
Paris — State  of  public  affairs — The  Directory  give  General 
Bonaparte  a  dinner  in  the  Church  of  St.  Sulpice — Conspiracy 
to  overthrow  the  Directory — The  General  presents  himself  before 
the  Council  of  the  Elders — Both  the  Councils  are  transferred  to 
St.  Cloud — The  Council  of  Five  Hundred  assemble  in  the 
Conservatory — General  Bonaparte  and  Sieyes — Resolutions  of 
the  former — General  tumult — He  gives  an  order  to  drive  the 
members  out  of  the  House — The  Constitution  of  the  Third  Year 
is  abolished — Three  Consuls :  Bonaparte,  Cambacer^s,  and  Lebrun     1 98 

CHAPTER  XXIIL 

Sensation  produced  by  the  Revolution  of  the  1 8th  Brumaire — The 
First  Consul  sends  me  on  a  mission  to  Dresden — My  journey  to 
Berlin  in  1801 — The  First  Consul  recalls  me  to  Paris — The 
Infernal  Machine  —  Conspiracy  of  Georges  and  Pichegru — 
Sentence  on  the  Duke  d'Enghien  ,  .  .  .     209 


CONTENTS.  ix 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

PAGE 

Reflections  on  the  death  of  the  Duke  d'Enghien — Suicide  of  Pichegru 
— Georges  is  executed  with  nine  of  his  accomplices — The  Emperor 
Paul  assassinated — Consternation — The  Continental  War  breaks 
out  again — Campaign  of  Austerlitz — Organisation  of  the  General 
Express  service — Interior  Administration — Prodigious  memory  of 
the  Emperor         .......     220 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Campaign  of  1809 — Marriage  and  Divorce  plans — Singular  conver- 
sation with  Marshal  *  *  * — Despair  of  the  Empress — Unfeigned 
grief  of  the  Emperor — Courage  of  Josephine — She  is  abandoned 
by  almost  every  one — Marriage — Birth  of  the  King  of  Rome       .     230 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Breach    between    France    and    Russia — Campaign    of    18 12 — Fatal 

system  of  the  King  of  Naples — Conspiracy  of  Mallet        .  .     240 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Intelligence  of  the  disasters  of  the  Russian  Campaign — Firmness  and 
intrepidity  of  the  Emperor — Campaign  of  18 13 — The  Emperor 
returns  to  Paris — My  evening  conversations  with  him — His 
prodigious  application  to  business — Formation  and  composition 
of  the  National  Guards     ......     250 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Campaign  of  18 14 — Intrigues  of  the  Royalists  conducted  by  M.  de 
Talleyrand — Perplexity  of  the  Council  of  Regency — Energetic 
advice  of  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe  to  the  Empress — Departure  of 
the  Government  for  Blois — Battle  under  the  walls  of  Paris — 
Capitulation — Arrival  of  the  Emperor  at  the  stage  called  Le 
Cour  de  France — His  dejection — Entrance  of  the  Allies — Aspect 
of  the  Metropolis — Napoleon  at  Fontainebleau — Weariness  and 
falling  off  of  the  Chiefs — Abdication         ....     257 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Departure  of  the  Emperor  for  the  Island  of  Elba — Attempts  to 
poison  and  murder  him — Entrance  of  Louis  XVIII.  into  Paris 
— Spirit  of  the  populace — Various  impressions — Sittings  of  the 
Senate — Reflections  on  the  state  of  the  nation      .  .  .     269 


X  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

PAGE 

My  singular  and  perilous  situation — The  Empress  Josephine  at 
Malmaison — The  Emperor  Alexander — His  opinion  of  the 
Bourbons — Death  of  the  Empress  Josephine — Errors  of  the 
Government — Discontent  of  the  Army — Anger  of  Marshal  Ney     281 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 

Conspiracy — Affair  of  General  Excelmans — General  Lallemant, 
Marshal  Davoust,  the  Dukes  of  Otranto  and  Bassano  are  at  the 
head  of  the  Conspiracy — Prudent  conduct  of  Marshal  Davoust — 
News  of  the  Emperor's  landing — Various  sensations  produced  by 
it — I  seek  refuge  at  the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu's — Departure  of  the 
King^My  visit  to  the  Post-office  ....     290 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 

Aspect  of  the  Tuileries — Arrival  of  the  Emperor — Fouche  at  the 
Police — Carnot  at  the  Home  Department — I  again  resume  the 
service  of  the  Post-office  on  the  21st — Proclamation  of  the 
Congress  of  Vienna — Situation  of  the  Emperor  ;  its  danger  and 
novelty — Champ  de  Mai— Declaration  of  the  Council  of  State — 
General  Bourmont — Singular  and  painful  discovery — Fouche       .     305 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Assembling  of  the  Champ  de  Mai  on  the  ist  of  June — Mass — 
Aff'ecting  speech  of  the  Emperor — His  departure — Battle  of 
Waterloo — Return  of  the  two  Chambers — My  conversation  with 
Napoleon  at  the  Elysee — He  retires  to  Malmaison — Last  con- 
versation— His  departure .  .  .  .  .  .321 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

I  am  arrested — General  Labedoyere — My  confinement  at  the  Pre- 
fecture of  Police — My  examination — ^Anecdote  of  one  of  the 
Accomplices  of  Georges — I  am  transferred  to  the  Conciergerie — 
Marshal  Ney — His  delusion         .  .  .  .  "SSI 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

My  thoughts  and  occupations — The  female  prisoners — Apartment  of 
Queen  Marie  Antoinette — My  examination  before  M.  Dupuis, 
Supernumerary  Justice — His  generous  impartiality — Animosity  of 
the  Royalists  against  me — Visits  and  comfortings  of  my  friends, 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


Messrs.  Alexander  de  la  Rochefoucault,  Vandeuil,  Briqueville, 
Tascher  de  St.  Roses — I  see  my  daughter  again  for  the  first 
time — M.  Tripier  ......     34" 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

Letter  of  the  Duke  de  Richelieu  against  Marshal  Ney — My  anxiety 
respecting  Madame  Lavalette — Opening  of  the  debates — The 
list  of  the  jury  communicated  to  me — M.  Heron  de  Villefosse — 
My  sentence  of  death  is  passed — The  fatal  news  announced  to 
Madame  Lavalette  —  She  solicits  and  obtains  an  audience  of 
the  King— Words  of  Louis  XVHL  .  .  .  -352 

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

Madame  de  Lavalette  comes  to  see  me — Count  Carvoisin — Some 
particulars  concerning  Emilie  Beauharnais — My  marriage  with 
her — I  leave  her  to  go  to  Egypt — My  Mission  to  Saxony — My 
journey  to  Berlin .  .  .  .  .  .  •     S^i 

CHAPTER  XXXVIH. 

Conduct  of  General  Clarke  towards  me — M.  Pasquier — The  Duke  of 
Ragusa — His  friendship  for  me — My  prepossession — I  grow 
familiar  with  the  idea  of  a  violent  death,  and  its  horrible 
details— The  Princess  de  Vaudemont  takes  measures  in  my 
favour — Trial  of  Marshal  Ney — Disguised  Life-guards — The 
Marshal's  execution — My  sentence  confirmed  by  the  Court  of 
Cassation — The  Duke  of  Ragusa  accompanies  Madame  de 
Lavalette  to  the  Tuileries  —  His  courage  —  Answer  of  Louis 
XYHI. — Harsh  conduct  of  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme    .  .     369 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

Consternation  of  the  Turnkeys — Affecting  trait  of  one  of  the  female 
turnkeys — -Madame  de  Lavalette  makes  me  acquainted  with  her 
plan  of  escape — My  objections — Its  execution  is  put  off  to  the 
following  day— Last  attempt  of  Madame  de  Lavalette  with  M. 
de  Richelieu — Visit  of  M.  de  Carvoisin — My  daughter  comes  to 
see  me — I  send  her  away — Madame  de  Lavalette  brings  her 
back — She  gives  me  my  instructions — Last  visit  of  M.  de  St. 
Roses  and  Colonel  Briqueville — Old  Madame  Dutoit — Our 
supper — My  disguise — I  go  away — I  meet  the  sedan  chair — The 
chairmen  not  at  their  post — My  perplexity,  and  the  resolution  I 
take — Count  Chassenon — New  disguise — I  follow  M.  Baudus  on 
foot — We  meet  gendarmes — We  arrive  at  the  Foreign-office — 
Delicate  attention  of  my  hosts      .....     377 


xii  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XL. 

PAGS 

Particulars  related  by  M.  Baudus — M.  and  Madame  Bresson — Their 
vow — They  both  come  to  pay  me  a  visit — Sensations  produced 
by  my  escape — Various  reports — Precautions  I  was  forced  to 
take — Fresh  anxiety — I  hear  cried  under  my  window  the  Police 
Ordinance  against  those  who  might  give  me  a  refuge — ^Joineau 
and  his  wife — Visit  of  Madame  Bresson   ....     390 

CHAPTER  XLI. 

Account  of  what  happened  attheConciergerie — Rage  of  the  Turnkeys — 
Their  brutal  conduct  to  Madame  Lavalette — M.  Bellart  examines 
her  with  excessive  severity — Chief  cause  of  her  illness — Her 
terrors — She  is  placed  in  solitary  confinement — My  daughter 
returns  to  her  boarding-school — Conduct  of  the  Superior  towards 
her — The  police  pursue  their  investigation — Various  plans  to  get 
me  out  of  France — Mr.  Bruce — Sir  Robert  Wilson — Preparations 
for  my  disguise — I  leave  the  Hotel  of  Foreign  Affairs — M.  de 
Chassenon  brings  me  to  the  Rue  de  Helder — House  of  my 
Reporting  Judge — Mr.  Hutchinson — I  set  off      .  .  .     398 

CHAPTER  XLH. 

Various  adventures  —  Conversation  of  Mr.  Ilutchinson  with  the 
gendarmes  at  La  Chapelle — Our  arrival  at  Compiegne — Diffi- 
culties started  by  the  Postmaster  at  Valenciennes — I  pass  the 
frontiers — I  take  leave  of  my  two  deliverers  .  .  .     407 

CHAPTER  XLHL 

I  travel  under  the  name  of  Colonel  Losack — I  arrive  at  Worms, 
where  I  read  the  newspapers — The  police  discover  the  generous 
guilt  of  Sir  Robert  Wilson — Bribery  and  Informations — I  pass 
through  the  Grand-duchy  of  Baden  and  the  Kingdom  of  Wir- 
temberg — I  arrive  in  Bavaria — Words  addressed  to  me  by  the 
King — I  retire  by  his  orders  to  Frayssingen — Information  laid  by 
an  old  Emigrant — The  King  sends  me  to  Starnberg — Prince 
Eugene  comes  to  see  me  twice  a  week — Fresh  change  of  abode 
— Kindness  of  the  King  of  Bavaria — I  go  and  live  at  Munich 
under  a  feigned  name — France  demands  my  expulsion,  as  well  as 
that  of  General  Drouet  d'Erlon — Answer  of  the  King  of  Bavaria — 
I  seek  refuge  first  at  Eichstadt,  and  afterwards  at  Augsburg,  with 
the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu — I  go  back  to  France       .  .  .411 


CONTENTS. 


APPENDIX. 

PAGE 

I.    Berthier,  Chief  of  the  General  Staff,  to  Citizen  Lavalette, 
Aide-de-camp  to  the  General-in-Chief,  28  Floreal,  Year 

VI. 419 

II.  Bonaparte,     General-in-chief,    to     Citizen     Lavalette,     29 

Prairial,  Year  VI.  .  .  .  .  -419 

III.  The  same  to  the  same,  22  Frimaire,  Year  VII.  .  .     420 

IV. 18  Nivose,  Year  VII.  .  , .     420 

V.  18  Vendemiaire,  Year  VII.   .  .     421 

VI.  Report  addressed  by  Lavalette  to  the  General-in-chief,  on 

his  Journey  to  Peluse,  dated  6  Brumaire    .  .  .421 

VII.  Bonaparte,     General-in-chief,     to     Citizen     Lavalette,     27 

Nivose,  Year  VII.  ......     423 

VIII.  The  same  to  the  same,  9  Pluviose,  Year  VII.  .  .     424 

IX. 20  Pluviose,  Year  VII.  .  .     424 

X.   Extract  of  a  Letter  of  the  Duke  de  Ragusa  to  M.  *  *  *       .     424 

XI.   Letter  of  M.  ,  Aide-de-camp  of  the  Duke  of  Ragusa, 

to  M.  ......     426 

XII.  Letter  of  Sir  Robert  Wilson  to  the  Right  Honourable  the 

Earl  Grey  .......     427 

XIII.  Extract  of  a  Letter  from   Count  Lavalette  to    M.     , 

dated  from  London  .....     434 

XIV.  Letter  of  M.    Ballouchey  to  Count   Lavalette,  dated   i6th 

May,  1827 437 

XV.  First  Letter  of  Count  Lavalette  to  the  Duchess  of  Ragusa, 

dated  Starnberg,  28th  July,  1816   .  .  .  .     440 

XVI.   Second  Letter,  14th  August,  1816    .  .  .  .     442 

XVII.   Instructions  for  Citizen  Lavalette  on  his   departure    on   a 

Mission  to  Saxony,  dated  Paris,  15  Pluviose,  Year  VIII.  .     446 
XVIII.  Abstract  of  the  General  Instructions  given  to  M.  Lavalette 
on    his    above-mentioned    Mission   to   Saxony,    dated   2 
Pluviose,  Year  VIII.  .  .  .  .  .     447 

XIX.   Instructions  for  Citizen  Lavalette,  from  M.  Talleyrand       .     451 
XX.  The  Minister  of  the  Foreign  Department  to  Citizen  Lava- 
lette, Paris,  12  Nivose,  Year  IX.  ....     454 


LIST  OF  PLATES. 


Napoleon.     From  an  Engraving  by  Bromley  and  Murray,  after 
Gerard.  {Frontispiece.) 

Carnot.     After  RafFet.  Face  page   128 

Kleber.      After  Raffet.  Face  page   184. 

Lavalette.      From  an  Engraving.  Face  page  300 

Lavalette,   Countess.      From  an  Engraving.  Face  page   ^6z 


BIOGRAPHICAL     SKETCH      OF     COUNT 
LAVALETTE.i 


A  FEW  days  before  the  loth  of  August,  King  Louis  XVI. 
was  reviewing  the  National  Guards  of  Paris,  assembled  on 
the  Rue  du  Carrousel ;  the  monarch  walked  from  the  right 
of  the  front  of  the  line,  with  a  slow  and  measured  step, 
distributing  encouragements  and  praises,  when,  from  the 
opposite  end  of  the  line,  a  young  soldier  rushed  forward 
into  the  rank  facing  the  King,  and  cried  with  enthusiasm, 
"  Long  live  the  King  !  Long  live  Louis  XVI.  !  We  are  all 
for  the  King  until  death  !  "  Louis  XVI.  stopped  surprised, 
thanked  the  young  man  by  a  sign  with  his  head  and  hand, 
and  asked  his  name — it  was  Lavalette. 

Soon  after,  the  events  of  the  loth  of  August  gave  his 
impatient  courage  an  opportunity  of  showing  itself.  La- 
valette got  the  command  of  a  post  at  the  Tuileries.  He 
defended  it  for  a  long  while  against  the  fury  of  the  rebels, 
who  seemed  to  multiply  under  the  fire  of  the  palace.  But 
he  was  at  last  forced  to  yield.  When  the  news  came  that 
Louis  XVI.  had  retired  to  the  Assembly,  the  massacre  began. 
Lavalette,  covered  with  dust  and  blood,  was  dragged  away 
by  some  friends,  and  thus  by  a  miracle  escaped  a  glorious 
death  ;  but  his  fate  was  not  to  end  there. 

Five  years  later,  on  the  19th  Fructidor,  a  young  officer  in 

'  This  was  jjublished  a  few  days  after  the  decease  of  Count  Lavalette, 
in  the  "  Revue  de  Paris,"  vol.  xii..  No.  I,  7th  March,  1830. 


xvi  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

a  brilliant  uniform,  wearing  round  his  arm  the  tricoloured 
sash,  quickly  jumped  into  a  cabriolet  near  the  gate  of  the 
Petit  Luxembourg  ;  one  of  his  former  school-fellows,  passing 
by,  recognised  him,  and  after  the  usual  congratulations 
said  : — 

"  Where  are  you  going  ?  " 

"  I  intend  to  return  to  Italy  as  quickly  as  possible." 

"Why  in  such  a  hurry  ?  " 

"(Barras  threatens  to  have  me  shot  within  four-and-twenty 
hours." 

"Then  I  advdse  you  to  get  away,  for  he's  in  the  humour 
to  do  it." 

"  Who  knows  that  better  than  I  ?  I  wanted  to  make  some 
opposition  to  the  barbarous  follies  of  last  night,  and  so  they 
send  me  away  this  morning  ;  but  my  conscience  is  clear,  and 
Bonaparte  protects  me.  Adieu,  I  go  ;  if  it  please  Heaven, 
we  shall  see  each  other  again." 

The  very  evening  after  that  conversation  Lavalette  left 
Paris. 

We  shall  leave  him  galloping  on  the  road  to  Italy,  and 
going  some  years  back,  we  will  follow  his  steps  from  the 
loth  of  August  to  the  i8th  Fructidor  ;  from  a  Royalist 
volunteer  to  a  captain  in  the  Republican  army. 

There  is  no  doubt  but  the  Revolution  of  1789  was  wished 
for  by  the  great  majority  of  the  French.  Nevertheless  the 
cruelties  that  marked  its  commencement  disgusted  all  honest 
minds.  Neither  the  plunderers  of  Reveillon's  stores,  the 
murderers  of  Foulon  and  Berthier,  nor  the  brawling  rebels 
of  the  20th  of  June,  represented  the  wishes  and  feelings  of 
France,  and  the  party  of  Louis  XVI.  seemed  at  first  to  enlist 
all  the  patriots,  irritated  by  such  criminal  acts. 

While  the  public  mind  was  thus  disposed,  the  foreign  war 
broke  out,  preceded  by  insolent  threats :  it  proved  a  power- 
ful diversion  to  the  difficulties  in  which  the  Republican 
party,  then  masters  of  the  Legislative  Assembly,  were 
involved.     They  turned  it  to  advantage  in  a  skilful  manner  ; 


CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  xvii 

and  while  the  emigration  of  the  nobles  deprived  the  King 
of  all  his  natural  support  at  home,  those  whom  generous 
feeling  had  rallied  in  his  defence  now  flew  to  the  frontiers, 
and  triumphed  in  the  victories  of  Valmy,  Jemmapes,  and 
Savoy,  with  Kellermann,  Chartres,  and  Montesquiou  ;  they 
heard  no  longer,  in  the  rumour  of  camps  and  the  intoxication 
of  glory,  the  cries  of  royalty  in  distress. 

It  was  then  that  the  throne  fell  for  want  of  support. 
Lavalette  followed,  under  the  standard  of  the  Republic, 
the  crowd  of  young  men  who,  like  himself,  without  fortune, 
name,  or  expectation,  did  not  wish  to  speculate  either  upon 
emigration  or  terror.  From  the  armies  which  remained 
neutral  between  the  two  opposite  excesses,  were  destined  at 
a  future  period  to  rise  those  new  fortunes,  those  reputations 
so  pure,  so  dear  to  France,  among  which  Lavalette  was  to 
shine.' 

His  father,  who  was  a  respectable  tradesman  in  Paris, 
gave  him  at  Harcourt  College  an  education  which  at  first 
sight  appeared  above  his  station  in  society.  In  consequence, 
when  his  parents  began  to  think  of  his  establishment,  they 
found  nothing  better  than  to  devote  him  to  the  Church  ;  for 
he  had  no  taste  for  entering  into  trade,  and  he  had  too  much 
merit  to  pass  his  days  in  the  idleness  of  a  garrison.  He 
therefore  took  holy  orders,  obtained  the  situation  of  under- 
librarian  at  Ste.  Genevieve,  and  buried  himself  in  books. 

But  the  Revolution  was  soon  announced  by  symptoms 
that  could  not  escape  Lavalette.  His  ambition  was  roused 
at  the  thoughts  of  the  events  that  were  preparing. 

One  day,  as  he  was  walking  arm-in-arm  with  two  friends 
in  the  Rue  Mazarin,  the  conversation  happened  to  fall  on 
futurity.  That  subject  is  a  common  one  among  young 
men. 

"  As  for  me,"  said  Lavalette,  "  you  think  me  very 
quiet,  quite  buried  in  my  books  ;  well,  I  can  tell  you  that  I 

'  Lavalette  was  born  in  Paris  in  1769,  in  the  same  year  with  his  pro- 
tector and  friend  the  Emperor  Napoleon. 

la 


viii  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

wish  to  make   my    fortune.      This   Revolution  encourages 
me." 

"  You,  my  friend  !  you  will  always  be  walking  close  to 
the  houses  as  you  do  now,  for  fear  of  being  run  over." 

"  Leave  that  to  time  ;  we  can  answer  for  nothing.  I  shall 
perhaps  have  the  best  part  of  the  pavement  in  my  turn,  and 
then,  my  friends,  take  care  I  don't  bespatter  you.  Will  you 
bet  that,  in  the  highway  they  are  opening  for  us,  I  do  not  get 
on  quicker  than  you  ?  " 

The  bets  were  agreed  to.  The  two  companions  followed 
honourably  their  several  careers,  but  Lav  alette  advanced 
with  giant's  strides,  and  at  thirty  years  of  age  he  had  won 
his  wager. 

The  events  of  1789  are  known.  Young  Lavalette  did 
not  follow  the  Church.  A  musket  on  his  shoulder,  he 
entered  the  National  Militia  which  Lafayette  was  organising 
for  the  defence  of  King  and  country.  In  1792  he  signed  the 
Royalist  petition  of  the  ten  thousand  ;  but  his  conduct  on 
the  loth  of  August  appearing  suspicious,  he  enlisted  as  a 
volunteer  in  the  Legion  of  the  Alps,  and  was  one  of  the 
soldiers  of  that  army  of  peasants  and  citizens  which  formed 
the  coalition,  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  between  their 
mercenary  bands  and  France.  He  served  with  great  dis- 
tinction during  the  whole  campaign.  At  first  named 
adjutant  of  engineers,  he  was  afterwards  chosen  as  aide-de- 
camp by  General  Baraguay  d'Hilliers.  But  when  that 
General  came  to  Paris  to  defend  Custines,  whom  all  his 
exertions  could  not  save,  he  was  persecuted  himself,  and 
deprived  of  his  hberty  until  the  9th  Thermidor,  so  that  he 
could  do  nothing  for  Lavalette. 

After  the  9th  Thermidor,  the  Revolution,  tired  of  pro- 
scription, stopped.  The  inviolability  of  the  territory  had 
been  secured,  and  the  principles  of  reform  were  beyond 
all  danger  :  a  second  period  was  beginning,  in  which  the 
Revolution  wished  to  get  her  rights  acknowledged.  She 
was  mistress  of  France,  and  her  fate  urged  her  on  towards 


COUNT  LAVALETTE.  xix 

the  conquest  or  Europe ;  with  those  old  and  obstinate 
monarchies  she  could  only  treat  sword  in  hand,  and  reply 
to  sophistry  by  victories. 

The  Constitution  of  the  Third  Year  opened  this  second 
and  exclusively  military  period.  France  passed  from  the 
government  of  Terror  to  that  of  Glory  :  it  was  then  that 
Bonaparte  appeared. 

At  the  sight  of  this  hero  of  twenty-six,  with  his  pale  and 
melancholy  countenance,  his  proud  and  calm  deportment,  his 
eagle  glance,  his  short  sentences,  his  rapid  gestures  which 
commanded  obedience,  his  gravity  which,  notwithstanding 
his  youth,  made  him  respected  by  the  oldest  generals  of  the 
Republic — at  sight  also  of  that  firm  and  devoted  army  that 
was  about  to  fight  under  his  orders,  of  those  young  enthusi- 
astic lieutenants  who  thronged  around  him,  of  that  Italian 
soil  which  presented  itself  as  a  rich  prey,  it  might,  perhaps, 
'not  have  been  difficult  to  foretell,  that  the  first  act  of  this 
military  drama,  which  began  at  Montenotte  and  terminated 
at  Waterloo,  would  be  the  most  poetical  and  most  brilliant 
of  all. 

Lavalette  was  at  first  but  coolly  received  among  the  staff- 
officers  of  the  General-in-chief,  and  was  forced  to  conquer  at 
the  point  of  his  sword  the  esteem  of  Bonaparte.  It  was 
on  the  field  of  battle  at  Areola  that  he  received  from  the 
General  the  title  of  aide-de-camp  and  the  rank  of  captain. 
Being  wounded  in  his  perilous  mission  to  Tyrol,  he  was 
complimented  by  Bonaparte,  who  said  to  him  in  presence  of 
the  army,  "  Lavalette,  you  have  behaved  like  a  brave  man. 
When  I  write  the  history  of  this  campaign,  I  shall  not 
forget  you  !  "  He  kept  his  word.  In  the  meanwhile,  our 
young  officer  gained  the  friendship  of  his  General  by  other 
qualities  as  well  as  personal  valour  :  he  possessed  solid  infor- 
mation, a  scrutinising  mind,  wonderful  sagacity,  prudence, 
and  perfect  good  breeding.  This  latter  quality  Bonaparte 
liked  above  all  things,  and  he  distinguished  Lavalette. 

A  few  months   afterwards  he  chose  him  for  a  difficult 


XX  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

mission.  The  General  of  the  Italian  army,  surrounded  by 
his  glory,  nevertheless  watched  with  anxiety  the  movements 
and  struggles  of  the  parties  which  at  that  time  agitated 
France.  In  the  conflict  of  so  many  passions,  he  could  with 
difficulty  distinguish  the  truth.  He  therefore  sent  to  Paris 
his  aide-de-camp  Lavalette,  to  learn,  through  his  reports, 
the  real  state  of  afTairs.  A  cipher,  invented  by  Bourrienne, 
served  for  their  correspondence. 

Lavalette,  young  and  unknown,  cast  thus  in  the  midst  of 
the  dangers,  intrigues,  and  seductions  of  political  life,  dis- 
played nevertheless  remarkable  prudence  and  firmness.  He 
frequented  all  the  societies  of  the  period,  but  he  connected 
himself  with  none.  At  the  Luxembourg,  at  Carnot's,  in 
Madame  de  Stael's  drawing-room,  at  the  circles  of  Augereau, 
everywhere  his  ingenuity  discovered  the  real  aim  of  each 
party,  through  the  veil  of  vulgarity  or  refinement  which 
covered  them.  He  saw  the  Directory  in  all  the  ridiculous* 
glory  of  its  magnificence,  and  never  could  forget  the  farces 
performed  by  those  tyrants,  in  whose  government  ridicule 
seemed  to  vie  with  cruelty.  In  1829  he  wrote  the  following 
to  one  of  his  friends  :  ^ 

"I  saw  our  five  kings,  dressed  in  the  robes  of  Francis  I., 
his  hat,  his  pantaloons,  and  his  lace  :  the  face  of  La  Reveil- 
Ibre  looked  like  a  cork  upon  two  pins,  with  the  black  and 
greasy  hair  of  Clodion.  M.  de  Talleyrand,  in  pantaloons  of 
the  colour  of  wine  dregs,  sat  in  a  folding-chair  at  the  feet  of 
the  Director  Barras,  in  the  Court  of  the  Petit  Luxembourg  ; 
and  gravely  presented  to  his  sovereigns  an  Ambassador  from 
the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  while  the  French  were  eating 
his  master's  dinner,  from  the  soup  to  the  cheese.  At  the 
right  hand  there  were  fifty  musicians  and  singers  of  the 
Opera,  Laine,  Lays,  Regnault,  and  the  actresses,  now  all 
dead  of  old  age,  roaring  a  patriotic  cantata  to  the  music  of 
Mehul.  Facing  them,  on  another  elevation,  there  were  two 
hundred  young  and  beautiful  women,  with  their  arms  and 
'  The  author  of  this  sketch. 


CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  xxi 

bosoms  bare,  all  in  ecstasy  at  the  majesty  of  our  Pentarchy 
and  the  happiness  of  the  Republic.  They  also  wore  tight 
flesh-colour  pantaloons,  with  rings  on  their  toes.  That  was 
a  sight  that  will  never  be  seen  again.  A  fortnight  after 
this  magnificent  fete^  thousands  of  families  wept  over  their 
banished  fathers,  forty-eight  Departments  were  deprived 
of  their  representatives,  and  forty  editors  of  newspapers 
were  forced  to  go  and  drink  the  waters  of  the  Elbe,  the 
Synamary,  or  the  Ohio  !  It  would  be  a  curious  disquisi- 
tion to  seek  to  discover  what  really  were  at  that  time  the 
Republic  and  Liberty." 

Lavalette  had  no  power  to  oppose  such  violent  acts. 
He  entered,  however,  a  sort  of  protest  against  them  by 
refusing  to  Barras  the  money  Bonaparte  had  promised  him 
out  of  the  cash  of  the  Army  of  Italy.  This  raised  against 
him  the  fury  of  the  Directory  and  the  brutal  anger  of 
Augereau.  But,  if  he  did  not  prevent  the  i8th  Fructidor, 
he  contributed,  at  least,  to  fix  the  General's  opinion  in 
regard  to  that  coup  d'etat^  struck  by  a  power  at  once 
violent  and  weak,  oppressive  and  despised,  and  who  had  not 
courage  enough  to  be  equitable.  From  that  moment  the 
Directory  was  condemned  in  the  eyes  of  Bonaparte.  He 
saw  that  no  futurity  existed  for  the  feeble  Constitution  of 
the  Year  III.,  and  from  that  day,  even  before  the  peace  of 
Campo  Formio  was  signed,  his  long-sighted  genius  formed 
the  plan  of  the  Egyptian  campaign. 

Having  escaped  from  the  threats  of  the  Directory,  La- 
valette rejoined  the  General-in-chief  at  the  Castle  of  Pas- 
seriano.  Bonaparte  did  not  leave  his  zeal  time  to  cool.  A 
few  days  afterwards  Lavalette,  his  sash  round  his  arm 
and  his  sword  in  his  hand,  entered  the  walls  of  Genoa, 
which  had  insulted  the  French.  The  gates  of  the  Senate- 
house  were  opened  for  him,  and  there,  in  the  midst  of  the 
patricians,  trembling  at  once  with  fear  and  rage,  he,  with  a 
high  hand  and  a  loud  voice,  demanded  satisfaction,  and 
forced  the  Doge  to  abandon  and  disown  all  English  influence. 


xxii  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

After  the  peace  of  Campo  Formio,  Bonaparte  crossed 
Switzerland  on  his  way  to  Rastadt.  Lavalette  accom- 
panied him  in  this  triumphant  journey,  during  which  the 
people  everywhere  flocked  to  meet  the  conqueror  of  Italy. 
The  General  did  not  remain  long  at  Rastadt.  Disgusted 
at  the  protracted  delays  of  German  diplomacy,  he  left  the 
place,  where  Lavalette  remained,  entrusted  with  secret 
powers,  and  placed  in  the  most  difficult  position  between 
the  mistrustful  plenipotentiaries  of  the  Directory,  who 
detested  him,  and  the  ceremonious  German  Ministers,  who 
caressed  in  his  person  the  name  and  influence  of  Bonaparte. 

He  was  recalled  a  few  months  afterwards.  It  was  then 
that  Bonaparte,  not  daring  to  solicit  from  Barras  a  reward 
for  Lavalette,  married  him  to  a  young  lady  of  the  House 
of  Beauharnais,  a  niece  of  his  wife,  and  whose  father  had 
emigrated.  Thus  his  kindness  prepared  the  future  welfare 
of  his  friend,  and  allied  a  plebeian  name  to  the  lustre  of  his 
dynasty. 

Lavalette  was  no  sooner  married  than  he  was  forced  to 
depart.  Bonaparte  resolved  to  send  him  to  Egypt,  that  he 
might  not  be  compromised  in  the  trivial  intrigues  which 
were  going  on  in  France.  Near  him,  high  in  his  confi- 
dence, we  still  find  Lavalette,  with  his  soldierlike  devotion, 
his  open  cheerfulness,  his  taste  for  solitary  studies  in  the 
camp,  his  poetic  enthusiasm  for  the  distant  and  perilous 
enterprise.  After  the  capitulation  of  Malta,  he  was  com- 
manded to  accompany  to  the  end  of  the  Adriatic  the  Grand 
Master  and  his  staff.  On  his  return  he  visited  the  for- 
tresses of  Corfu.  He  was  also  to  have  carried  assurances 
of  peace  to  the  Pacha  of  Janina,  but  the  latter  was  then 
fighting  on  the  banks  of  the  Danube.  On  arriving  before 
Aboukir,  Lavalette  had  a  conversation  with  the  unfortunate 
Brueys,  whom  he  found  moored  in  the  roads,  preparing  for 
a  battle  and  inflated  with  the  hope  of  a  certain  victory. 
He  departed  the  day  before  the  disaster,  and  after  having 
suffered  a  violent  storm  at  the  mouth  of  the  Nile  he  went 


COUNT  LAVALETTE.  xxiii 

to  Cairo,  and  from  that  time  he  only  twice  left  the  General — 
first  to  accompany  to  Alexandria  Citizen  Beauchamp,  at  a 
moment  when  the  plague  raged  with  the  greatest  violence 
in  that  city,  and  the  second  to  assist  Andreossy  when  he 
went  to  reconnoitre  Pelusium.^ 

Lavalette  was  admitted  to  the  intimacy,  the  conversa- 
tions and  the  amusements  of  Bonaparte  ;  he  was  his  table 
companion  and  his  reader,^  and  he  also  shared  his  dangers.3 
He  fought  next  to  him  at  the  Pyramids  and  Mount  Thabor  ; 
he  crossed  the  desert  by  his  side,  and  followed  him  to 
the  murderous  siege  of  St.  John  of  Acre.  This  was  a 
memorable  period  of  Lavalette's  life,  and  he  was  fond  of 
recalling  it  to  his  recollection.  His  friends  will  never  forget 
his  narrative  of  the  fourteenth  assault  commanded  by  Kleber, 
which  he  used  to  take  so  much  pleasure  in  repeating.  It 
seemed  like  a  page  taken  from  an  epic  poem. 

The  curtain  that  protected  a  great  part  of  the  town  and 
the  palace  of  Djezzar  had  been  opened.  The  grenadiers  of 
Kleber,  brought  back  to  the  trenches  by  a  strong  fire  of 
musketry,  openly  demanded  a  fresh  assault.  Bonaparte 
hesitated  ;  however,  pressed  by  these  brave  men,  he  gave 
the  signal.  The  scene  was  grand  and  terrible  !  The 
grenadiers  rushed  forward  under  a  shower  of  bullets  ; 
Kleber,  with  his  giant-like  stature  and  his  thick  head  of 
hair,  had  taken  his  post,  sword  in  hand,  on  the  reverse 
of   the   ditch,   from   whence    he   animated    the    assailants. 

'  See  in  the  Appendix  the  narrative  of  a  journey  to  Pelusium. 

^  Bonaparte  was  not  fond  of  novels.  One  evening,  however,  he  said 
to  Lavalette,  "  Come,  Mr.  Enthusiast,  read  me  that  famous  letter  from 
La  Meillerie  !  "  It  was  at  Cairo,  and  the  heat  was  suffocating.  La- 
valette, to  shelter  himself  from  the  insects,  had  taken  his  seat  behind  the 
muslin  curtains  of  the  General,  who  was  in  bed,  and  showed,  as  the 
reading  advanced,  the  greatest  signs  of  impatience  ;  at  last  he  stopped 
him,  and  Ijade  him  good  night  in  the  following  words  :  "  That's  enough, 
Lavalette  ;  this  passion  is  too  talkative  for  me." 

3  Bonaparte  had  brought  eight  aides-de-camp  with  him  to  Egypt  ;  four 
perished  there.  Julian  and  Sulkowsky  were  murdered  by  the  Arabs ; 
Croisier  was  killed  at  St.  John  of  Acre,  and  Guibert  at  Aboukir  ;  Duroc 
and  Eugene  Bt-auharnais  were  severely  wounded  ;  Lavalette  assisted  in  ail 
the  hottest  encounters  and  escaped. 


xxiv  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

The  sound  of  the  cannon,  the  cries  of  rage  and  enthu- 
siasm of  our  soldiers,  and  the  roaring  of  the  Turks,  were 
mixed  with  the  thundering  accents  of  his  voice.  In  the 
meanwhile  General  Bonaparte,  standing  in  the  breach 
batteries,  followed  the  movement  Avith  a  spying-glass 
resting  on  the  fascines.  A  cannon-ball  passed  over  his 
head,  and  the  shock  threw  him  down.  In  vain  Berthier 
pressed  him  to  leave  his  perilous  post  ;  he  received  no 
answer.  At  the  same  instant  a  bullet  mortally  wounded 
the  young  and  unfortunate  Arrighi,  who  stood  between 
the  General-in-chief  and  Lavalette,  others  were  killed  by 
his  side,  and  still  he  did  not  make  the  slightest  motion  to 
retire.  All  of  a  sudden  the  column  of  the  besiegers  stopped. 
Bonaparte  rushed  forward  and  saw  the  ditch  emitting 
flames  ;  thick  grape-shot  came  from  under  the  ground  and 
beat  down  whoever  dared  to  approach  ;  the  troops,  how- 
ever, persisted  with  incredible  ardour.  Kleber,  enraged, 
was  striking  his  thigh  with  his  sword,  but  the  General-in- 
chief,  convinced  that  the  obstacle  was  not  to  be  surmounted, 
gave,  by  a  sign  with  his  hand,  the  order  for  the  retreat. 

It  was  thus  that  the  siege  of  St.  John  of  Acre  concluded. 
Bonaparte  having  left  Syria  and  added  to  his  immortal 
campaign  the  bulletin  of  Aboukir,  delivered  the  command 
of  his  army  into  the  hands  of  Kleber  ;  and  after  stopping  at 
Corsica  on  his  way,  he  was  received  on  the  shores  of  France 
by  the  enthusiasm  of  the  citizens,  carried  in  triumph  to 
Paris,  where  he  overthrew,  as  it  were  with  a  breath,  the 
worm-eaten  throne  of  the  Directors.  France  applauded 
when  the  young  hero,  borne  upon  the  consular  shield  by 
his  lieutenants,  appeared  in  her  eyes  as  an  umpire  and  a 
saviour.  Lavalette  had  followed  Bonaparte  on  his  return,  and 
was  useful  to  him  in  the  coup  dc  main  of  the  i8th  Brumaire. 

War,  however,  continued  with  Austria.  The  French 
Government  wished  to  have  near  the  eventful  scene  a 
man  capable  of  judging  which  moment  would  be  most 
favourable    for    a    negotiation.      Lavalette     was    sent    to 


COUNT  LAVALETTE.  xxv 

Dresden,  with  all  the  necessary  powers  to  treat  of  peace 
with  Austria  ;  but  General  Moreau  was  at  Hohenlinden 
as  the  real  negotiator  for  France.  Peace  was  concluded, 
and  Lavalette  returned  to  Paris. 

Here  ended  his  military  and  diplomatic  career.  The 
First  Consul,  whose  chief  care  was  directed  towards  his 
reign,  which  had  already  begun,  though  under  a  republican 
form,  wished  to  associate  with  himself,  in  the  government 
of  France,  all  those  among  his  companions  in  arms  of 
whose  fidelity,  zeal,  and  talent  he  had  received  proofs.  La- 
valette was  chosen  among  the  first.  Appointed  in  the 
beginning  Commissioner-General  of  the  Post  Office,  he 
obtained  at  the  establishment  of  the  Empire  the  title  of 
Postmaster-General,  to  which  Bonaparte,  at  a  later  period, 
added  those  of  Count,  Councillor  of  State,  and  Grand 
Officer  of  the  Legion  of  Honour. 

M.  Lavalette  gave  himself  wholly  up  to  the  duties  of 
his  situation.  His  ambition  was  satisfied.  So  that  when, 
in  1815,  Napoleon  offered  him  the  Ministry  of  the  Home 
Department,  he  preferred  resuming  the  ftmctions  he  had 
already  fulfilled,  in  difficult  times,  with  equal  zeal  and 
success.  It  must,  in  fact,  not  be  forgotten  that  he  had  to 
organise  the  service  of  the  Post  Office  at  a  time  when 
France,  bounded  on  one  side  by  the  Rhine,  extended  on 
the  other  to  both  the  Peninsulas,  and  kept  up  armies 
over  all  Europe.  He  was,  in  some  measure,  the  centre 
from  whence  motion  and  life  was  to  depart  and  circulate 
over  that  vast  empire.  He  constantly  maintained,  with 
a  laudable  ardour,  the  sacred  connections  of  the  soldiers 
with  their  mother  country  ;  the  exchange  of  glory  and 
enthusiasm  between  the  army  and  the  citizen.  His  elevated 
Ration  put  him  in  possession  of  many  family  secrets. 
Never  could  policy  oblige  him  to  reveal  them.  *'  With  him 
candour  and  effusion  of  heart  never  carried  any  danger 
with  them." ' 

'  Words  spoken  by  General  Sebastiani  over  the  tomb  of  Lavalette. 


xxvi  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

We  need  not  recall,  then,  the  many  famous  events  which 
filled  up  the  period  of  the  Empire,  but  which  have  no 
connection  with  the  present  sketch.  We  may  pass  over 
the  golden  dreams  of  a  man  too  strongly  intoxicated  with 
his  fortune  ; — we  may  leave  M.  Lavalette,  governing  during 
twelve  years  the  Post  Office  with  a  firm  and  discreet  hand  ; 
carrying  to  the  discussions  of  the  Council  of  State  his  know- 
ledge, clear  judgment,  and  the  inspirations  of  his  upright 
conscience  ;  shining  in  the  circles  of  an  elegant  and  polished 
Court  ;  and  towards  the  decline  of  so  much  grandeur,  when 
the  soil  began  to  tremble  beneath  the  throne,  giving  to  the 
Emperor  the  bold  advice  of  a  friend,  which  was  proudly 
rejected.     The  world  knows  the  rest. 

The  events  of  1814  restored  Count  Lavalette  to  private 
life,  from  which  he  did  not  stir  until  after  the  return  of 
Bonaparte  to  the  capital  on  the  20th  March  of  the  following 
year.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  place  in  a  false  light 
the  motives  that  rallied  him  to  the  Imperial  throne  after 
the  whole  army  had  acknowledged  the  Emperor,  and  in  the 
midst  of  such  exciting  circumstances.  These  motives,  how- 
ever, he  drew  from  his  conscience.  "  He  was  accused  of 
having  been  prejudiced  ;  he  was  convinced  he  had  been 
faithful."  ^ 

His  return  to  public  affairs  was  marked  by  an  act  of 
moderation,  of  which  he  in  vain  set  the  example  to  his 
enemies.  One  of  the  chief  clerks  of  his  department  came 
in  a  busy  manner  and  presented  him  with  a  list  of  suspected 
persons  ;  M.  Lavalette  let  him  speak  out,  and  when  the 
informer  had  finished,  he  said  to  him :  "  Pray,  Sir,  have 
you  ever  looked  an  honest  man  in  the  face  ?  "  The  clerk, 
abashed,  faltered  out  a  few  confused  words.  "Well,  Sir, 
now  you  may  learn  who  I  am,"  and  taking  the  list  h^ 
threw  it  into  the  fire. 

M.    Lavalette    was    frequently   called    to    the   Emperor 
during  the  Hundred  Days.     He  saw  him  in  his  councils 
'  Words  of  Count  Montlosier. 


CO UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  xxvii 

and  in  his  privacy.  The  Emperor  was  resolved  not  to 
continue  at  war  unless  it  were  to  defend  the  soil.  The 
spirit  of  liberty  had  made  its  way  to  him  ;  his  table  re- 
echoed with  liberal  professions  that  perplexed  him.  He 
said  at  one  time  to  M.  Lavalette,  in  the  secret  bitterness 
of  a  confidential  conversation  :  "  But  what  do  they  want  ? 
the  liberty  of  the  press  ?  I  shall  give  them  more  of  it 
perhaps  than  they  wish.  Let  them  only  suffer  me  to  save 
France."  France  was  again  invaded  ;  and  the  fortune  of 
the  Emperor  expired  on  the  field  of  Waterloo. 

That  event  was  for  Count  Lavalette  the  beginning  of  a 
series  of  unheard-of  sufferings.  Secure  in  the  persuasion  of 
his  innocence,  he  remained  in  Paris  ;  but  he  was  appre- 
hended on  the  1 8th  of  July,  while  at  table  with  his  friends. 
He  was  placed  in  solitary  confinement.  His  trial  began  : 
the  preparations  were  tedious  and  threatening.  The  fate 
of  Labedoyere,  then  of  Marshal  Ney,  were  bad  omens  for 
his  own.  On  the  19th  of  November  he  appeared  before 
the  jury  accused  of  having  been  an  accomplice  in  the 
conspiracy  which  brought  on  the  events  of  the  preceding 
loth  of  March  ;  he  defended  himself  in  the  most  noble 
manner  ;  ^  but  after  two  days'  discussion,  overwhelmed  by 
the  force  of  the  insatiable  passions  which  had  been  excited 
by  the  reaction,  and  were  daring  enough  to  seek  vengeance 
through  the  medium  of  the  law,  he  was  sentenced  to  death. 
He  heard  his  sentence  read  with  great  calmness,  and  said 
with  a  firm  voice  to  his  sorrowing  friends,  "  My  friends,  this 
is  a  cannon-ball."  Then  turning  to  the  numerous  clerks  of 
the  Post  Office  who  had  borne  witness  against  him,  he  made 
them  a  salute  with  his  hand,  and  said  :  "  Gentlemen  of  the 
Post  Office,  receive  my  farewell  greetings." 

,  His  voice,  which  resounded  mildly,  yet  firmly,  through 
the  court,  amidst  the  general  consternation,  might  have 
made    people    suppose   he   was    resigned  :   but,   when    he 

'  The  celebrated  Tripier  helped  him  with  his  advice,  and  gave  him 
proofs  of  the  most  generous  friendship. 


xxviii  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

returned  to  his  solitary  dungeon,  the  old  soldier  felt  his 
heart  quail  at  the  thoughts  of  the  death  that  awaited  him. 
He  wrote  to  one  of  his  old  companions  in  arms,  who  at  that 
time  enjoyed  great  influence  at  court,  to  beg  he  would 
solicit  for  him  the  favour  of  being  shot.  A  cruel  refusal 
was  the  only  answer  he  received  from  his  friend.  From 
that  moment  the  consciousness  of  the  injustice  under  which 
he  suffered  stimulated  his  courage.  He  endeavoured  to 
reconcile  his  mind  to  the  idea  of  that  death  at  which  he  was 
so  dismayed  :  he  listened  to  the  description  the  turnkeys 
made  of  the  humiliating  preparations  by  which  it  was 
preceded,  and  of  the  horrible  details  of  the  execution.  He 
made  them  repeat  their  story  several  times,  and  insisted  on 
knowing  all.  At  last,  after  having  struggled  for  some  time 
with  the  horror  of  these  gloomy  thoughts,  which  filled  his 
days  and  agitated  his  sleep  with  frightful  dreams,'  he  at  last 

'  One  dream  in  particular  left  very  deep  impressions  on  the  mind  of 
Lavalette,  which  time  itself  was  not  able  entirely  to  efface.  This  is  the 
manner  in  which  he  related  it  : 

"  One  night,  while  I  was  asleep,  the  clock  of  the  Palais  de  Justice 
struck  twelve,  and  awoke  me.  I  heard  the  gate  open  to  relieve  the  sentry  ; 
but  I  fell  asleep  again  immediately.  In  this  sleep,  I  dreamed  that  I  was 
standing  in  the  Rue  St.  Honore,  at  the  corner  of  the  Rue  de  I'Echelle.  A 
melancholy  darkness  spread  around  me ;  all  was  still,  nevertheless  a  low 
and  uncertain  sound  soon  arose.  All  of  a  sudden,  I  perceived  at  the 
bottom  of  the  street,  and  advancing  towards  me,  a  troop  of  cavalry,  the 
men  and  horses,  however,  all  flayed.  The  men  held  torches  in  their  hands, 
the  red  flames  of  which  illuminated  skinless  faces  and  bloody  muscles. 
Their  hollow  eyes  rolled  fearfully  in  their  vast  sockets  ;  their  mouths  opened 
from  ear  to  ear,  and  helmets  of  hanging  flesh  covered  their  hideous  heads. 
The  horses  dragged  along  their  owti  skins  in  the  kennels,  which  over- 
flowed with  blood  on  both  sides.  Pale  and  dishevelled  women  appeared 
and  disappeared  alternately  at  the  windows,  in  dismal  silence ;  low, 
inarticulate  groans  filled  the  air ;  and  I  remained  in  the  street  alone, 
petrified  with  horror,  and  deprived  of  strength  sufficient  to  seek  my  safety 
by  flight.  This  horrible  troop  continued  passing  in  a  rapid  gallop,  and 
casting  frightful  looks  on  me.  Their  march,  I  thought,  continued  for  five 
hours  ;  and  they  were  followed  by  an  immense  number  of  artillery-waggons, 
full  of  bleeding  corpses,  whose  limbs  still  quivered ;  a  disgusting  smell  of 
blood  and  bitumen  almost  choked  me.  At  length,  the  iron  gate  of  the 
prison  shutting  with  great  force,  awoke  me  again.  I  made  my  repeater 
strike  ;  it  was  no  more  than  midnight,  so  that  the  horrible  phantasmagoria 
had  lasted  no  more  than  two  or  three  minutes — that  is  to  say,  the  time 
necessary  for  relieving  the  sentry  and  shutting  the  gate.     The  cold  was 


CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  xxix 

felt  himself  capable  of  tranquilly  awaiting  death  ;  and  all  his 
thoughts  were  then  directed  to  the  comforting  of  his  family 
and  friends.  "  Why  do  you  deplore  me  ?  "  he  said  to  them  ; 
*'an  honest  man  may  die  murdered,  but  his  conscience 
follows  him  to  the  scaffold." 

Days,  however,  passed  on.  The  Court  of  Cassation  had 
rejected  hi?  writ  of  error  :  a  petition  for  pardon,  presented 
by  Madame  Lavalette,  and  vainly  supported  by  the  cou- 
rageous zeal  of  the  Duke  of  Ragusa,  had  also  been  refused. 
The  day  of  execution  approached.  The  unfortunate  man 
had  no  hope  left  :  the  turnkeys  themselves  trembled,  as 
they  came  near  him,  with  pity  and  emotion.  On  the  eve 
of  that  last  day,  the  Countess  Lavalette  entered  his  prison. 
She  had  put  on  a  pelisse  of  merino,  richly  lined  with  fur, 
which  she  was  accustomed  to  wear  when  she  left  a  ball- 
room :  in  her  reticule  she  had  a  black  silk  gown.  Coming 
up  to  her  husband,  she  assured  him  with  a  firm  voice  that 
all  was  lost,  and  that  he  had  nothing  more  to  hope  than  in 
a  well-combined  escape.  She  showed  him  the  woman's 
attire,  and  proposed  to  him  to  disguise  himself.  Every 
precaution  had  been  taken  to  secure  his  escape.  A  sedan- 
chair  would  receive  him  on  his  coming  out  of  prison  ;  a 
cabriolet  waited  for  him  on  the  Quai  des  Orfe\Tes  ;  a 
devoted  friend,  a  safe  retreat,  would  answer  any  further 
objections.  M.  Lavalette  listened  to  her  without  ap- 
proving of  so  hazardous  a  plan  :  he  was  resigned  to  his 
fate,  and  refused  to  fly  from  it.  "  I  know  how  to  act  my 
part  in  a  tragedy,"  he  said,  "but  spare  me  the  burlesque 
farce.  I  shall  be  apprehended  in  this  ridiculous  disguise, 
and  they  will,  perhaps,  expose  me  to  the  mockery  of  the 
mob  !     On  the  other  hand,  if  I  escape,  you  will  remain  a 

severe  and  the  watchwOTd  short.  The  next  day,  the  turnkey  confirmed 
my  calculations.  I  nevertheless  do  not  remember  one  single  event  in  my 
Ufa,  the  duration  of  which  I  have  been  able  more  exactly  to  calculate,  of 
which  the  details  are  deeper  engraven  in  my  memory,  and  of  which  I 
preserve  a  more  perfect  consciousness." 


XXX  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

prey  to  the  insolence  of  prison  valets,  and  to  the  persecution 
of  my  enemies  !  " 

"  If  you  die,  I  die  ;  save  your  life  to  save  mine  !  " 

The  prisoner  yielded  to  her  urgent  entreaties. 

"Now  put  on  the  disguise,"  she  added;  "it  is  time  to 
go  ;  no  farewell — no  tears — your  hours  are  counted  1  " 

And  when  the  toilet  was  finished, 

"  Adieu !  "  she  said  ;  "do  not  forget  to  stoop  when  you 
pass  under  the  wickets,  for  fear  the  feathers  of  your  bonnet 
should  stick  fast  !  " 

She  then  pulled  the  bell,  and  rushed  behind  a  screen. 
The  door  opened  ;  he  passed,  followed  by  an  old  servant  of 
his  wife,  and  leaning  on  his  daughter's  arm.  When  they 
arrived  at  the  sedan-chair,  the  chairmen  were  not  there. 
The  soldiers  of  the  guard-house  had  assembled  to  see 
Madame  Lavalette,  and  looked  on  without  moving  !  This 
was  a  fearful  moment.  The  men  arrived  at  last  ;  the  chair 
went  off.  A  few  minutes  later,  a  cabriolet,  drawn  by  a 
swift  horse,  rolled  over  the  stones  of  the  Pont  Michel. 

This  took  place  on  the  23rd  of  December.  M.  Lavalette 
remained  concealed  in  Paris  until  the  loth  of  January.  A 
singular  favour  of  fortune  gave  him  as  a  retreat  the  very 
roof  under  which  lived  one  of  his  political  enemies,'  equally 
powerful  by  his  name,  his  station,  and  his  wealth.  From 
the  garret  floor  which  Lavalette  inhabited,  he  heard  persons 
crying  in  the  streets  the  police  ordinance  which  prescribed 
search  after  his  person.  The  barriers  were  shut ;  the  delivery 
of  passports  suspended  ;  expresses,  bearing  the  description 
of  his  person,  were  flying  about  on  every  side.  In  the 
Chambers,  in  the  Court  circles,  the  utmost  consternation 
prevailed  among  those  who  were  convinced  that  all  was  lost 
if  M.  Lavalette  was  not  retaken.  Paris,  however,  rejoiced, 
while  the  police,  falsely  accused  of  connivance,  burned  with 
impatience  to  damp  the  public  joy,  and  answer,  by  a  feat 

'  This  was  a  secret  which  he  kept  until  his  death,  but  which  his  Memoirs 
will  now  explain  to  the  public. 


CO UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  xxxi 

worthy  of  its  zeal,  the  complaints  of  the  gilded  drawing- 
rooms,  and  the  reproaches  that  re-echoed  from  the  tribune. 

In  the  midst  of  all  these  dangers  Count  Lavalette  lived, 
protected  by  a  family  to  whom  he  was  personally  unknown, 
but  whose  courageous  friendship  helped  him  to  bear  the 
agonies  of  his  concealment.  His  days  passed  on  between 
agreeable  conversation  and  diversified  reading  :  a  double- 
barrelled  pistol,  hid  under  his  pillow,  like  a  talisman,  secured 
to  him  some  nightly  rest.  This  lasted  seventeen  days. 
Finally,  on  the  9th  of  January,  181 6,  at  eight  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  he  went  on  foot  with  a  friend  to  Captain 
Hutchinson's  lodgings,  and  next  day,  at  the  very  hour  when 
a  gibbet  was  being  put  up  on  the  Place  de  Gr^ve  for  his 
execution  in  effigy,  he  set  off,  dressed  in  English  regimentals, 
with  Sir  Robert  Wilson,  crossed  the  barriers  in  an  open 
cabriolet,  and  proceeded  to  Mons.  During  this  journey,  M. 
Lavalette,  who  did  not  know  one  word  of  English,  was 
forced  to  keep  a  handkerchief  to  his  face,  as  if  he  had  been 
suffering  from  a  violent  toothache,  that  he  might  not  be 
under  the  necessity  of  speaking  to  the  numerous  English 
officers  that  stopped  his  guide  on  the  road.  Once,  at 
Compiegne,  having  entered  a  public  room  in  an  inn,  a 
travelling  clerk  of  a  trading  house  told  him  the  whole 
history  of  his  escape  from  prison,  accompanied  by  the  most 
ridiculous  circumstances,  and  adding  between  every  sentence 
the  words,  "  You  may  believe  me,  for  I  was  in  Paris  at  the 
time.''  Another  time,  near  the  frontiers,  a  captain  of 
gendarmerie  asked  for  their  passports,  and  took  them  with 
him.  M.  Lavalette  travelled  under  the  name  of  Colonel 
Losack.'  The  captain  came  back  a  long  while  afterwards, 
saying  that  there  was  no  colonel  of  that  name  in  the  English 
army.  Sir  Robert  replied  that  he  was  talking  nonsense 
— that  they  were  fools  for  staying  so  long  ;  and,  making  a 
sign  to  the  postilHons,  they  set  off  at  full  speed.  At  Mons 
his  generous  guide  was  to  leave  him.      M.  Lavalette,  deeply 

'  M.  Lavalette  took  the  name  of  Cossar  when  he  arrived  in  Bavaria. 


xxxii  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

affected,  pressed  his  hands  while  expressing  his  gratitude  ; 
but  Sir  Robert,  still  maintaining  his  wonted  gravity,  smiled 
without  replying.  At  last,  after  half  an  hour's  silence,  he 
turned  to  M.  Lavalette,  and  said,  in  the  most  serious 
manner  possible,  "  Now  pray,  my  dear  friend,  why  did  you 
not  like  to  be  guillotined  ?  "  M.  Lavalette  stared  at  him, 
surprised  at  such  a  question.  "  Yes,"  added  Sir  Robert,  "  I 
have  been  told  you  solicited  as  a  favour  to  be  shot." 

"  Because  the  condemned  person  is  placed  in  a  cart,  his 
hands  tied  behind  his  back  ;  then  he  is  bound  to  a  plank 
which  is  slipped  under  the  axe." 

"  Ah  !  I  understand  ;  you  did  not  wish  to  have  your 
throat  cut  like  a  calf." 

M.  Lavalette  crossed  a  part  of  Germany,  and  soon  entered 
upon  the  hospitable  soil  of  Bavaria.  The  King  received 
him  with  great  zeal,  and  protected  him  against  the  French 
Ministry,  who  insisted  on  his  being  delivered  up  to  them. 
The  Duchess  of  St.  Leu  offered  him  her  house  ;  and  Prince 
Eugene  lavished  on  him  all  the  consolations  of  friendship. 

In  1822,  letters  of  pardon,  granted  by  Louis  XVIIl., 
restored  him  to  his  native  country.  M.  Lavalette  thus 
hoped  to  enjoy  still  some  happy  days  ;  but,  when  he  arrived 
in  Paris,  in  the  midst  of  the  congratulations  that  poured  on 
him  from  all  sides,  one  voice  remained  silent,  and  that  was 
his  wife's  !  From  that  decisive  hour  when,  with  such  over- 
powering energy,  she  had  arranged  his  escape,  and  remained 
a  hostage  in  his  place,  she  had  not  seen  him.  And  now 
she  looked  upon  him  without  emotion  and  without  tears. 
She  knew  him  not  !  The  unfortunate  lady  had  spent  all  her 
reason  in  saving  him  ! 

This  last  trial  surpassed  all  the  rest.  M.  Lavalette  was 
overwhelmed  by  it.  He  wrote  to  the  King  : — "  Your 
Majesty  has  restored  to  me  possessions  I  prized  more  than 
life  ;  but  all  your  royal  favour  can  never  counterbalance  my 
misfortune." 

His  unfortunate  situation  traced  to  him  the  path  he  ought 


COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  xxxiii 

to  follow.  He  gave  up  the  world,  where  he  had  left  such 
brilliant  recollections  and  so  many  faithful  friends,  and 
devoted  himself  to  complete  solitude,  which  he  only  once 
left  to  go  to  London  in  1826,  and  support  Sir  Robert 
Wilson's  election.  His  life  was  one  continued  scene  of 
devotion.  He  repaid  his  wife  by  daily  care,  and  by  pious 
and  delicate  attentions,  almost  as  great  as  he  had  received 
from  her  ;  and  when  death  overtook  him,  he  expired  tran- 
quilly, for  he  left  no  debt  behind  him. 

Study  was  the  only  comfort  he  had  in  his  retirement  ; 
during  all  his  lifetime  he  had  cultivated  literature  with 
assiduity  and  enthusiasm.  In  the  camp  before  Mentz,  at 
the  table  of  General  Bonaparte,  in  the  drawing-room  of  the 
Tuileries,  he  always  passed  for  a  remarkably  witty  man  and 
a  most  agreeable  narrator.  His  misfortunes  multiplied  for 
him  opportunities  for  study  and  reflection,  so  that,  when  he 
returned  from  exile,  he  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  follow  the 
movement  and  progress  of  New  France.  Though  far  from 
his  country,  he  had  advanced  with  her  ;  he  had  her  manners, 
her  enduring  patience,  her  confident  hope  in  future  events,^ 
her  ardour  for  useful  reform,  her  freedom  from  all  ridiculous 
delusions.  His  mind  possessed  all  the  freshness  of  youth, 
and  he  viewed  with  enthusiasm  the  efforts  making  in  favour 
of  glory  and  liberty.  The  consequence  was,  that  he  was 
respected  by  men  of  all  ages,  but  that  he  was  more  particu- 
larly pleasing  to  the  young.  They  loved  to  hear  him  speak  ; 
all  the  past  lived  in  his  recollection,  with  its  real  colours, 
adulterated  neither  by  enthusiasms  nor  by  regret  for  the 
high  station  he  had  lost.  Numberless  witty  sayings,  inte- 
resting and  unexpected,  flowed  without  effort  in  his  rich  and 
easy  conversation.  His  imagination  gave  a  colouring  to 
objects  ;  but  fiction  was  repugnant  to  his  just  and  accurate 
mind.     His  lively  discourse,  like  an  amusing  book,  kept  his 

'  M.  Lavalettc  should  have  lived  a  few  months  longer.  The  Revolu- 
tion of  July  has  realised  his  hopes,  it  would  have  fulfdled  all  his  wishes. — 
Note  of  the  French  Editor. 

\b 


xxxiv  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH. 

friends  by  his  side  till  night  was  far  advanced,  and  cheated 
time  in  its  rapid  flight. 

Death,  however,  unexpectedly  aimed  his  shaft  at  his 
victim  amidst  his  books  and  his  unfinished  labours.  Even 
the  day  preceding  his  decease  was  devoted  to  study  and 
friendship.  Under  the  hoary  frost  of  age,  his  mind  preserved 
all  its  vigour;  his  heart  was  young  by  the  warmth  of  his  virtues. 

This  reflection  comforts  us. 

Though  he  fell  beneath  an  unexpected  blow,  Count  La- 
valette  died  in  the  sixty-first  year  of  his  age,  surrounded  by 
his  family,  and  regretted  by  his  friends. 

If  he  had  died  in  1815,  by  the  political  sword  which  struck 
so  many  other  victims,  fifteen  years  of  his  existence  would 
have  been  suddenly  cut  off  (not  the  happiest  surely)  ;  but 
what  a  cruel  death  awaited  him,  what  a  funeral  !  a  scaffold 
on  a  public  thoroughfare,  a  cart  transporting  his  mutilated 
remains,  and  after  the  cries  of  the  Greve,  the  solitude  of 
Clamart. 

But  the  victim  escaped.  Banishment  defended  him 
against  death  ;  by  degrees  passions  are  calmed  ;  rage  and 
resentment  appeased.  Thus,  at  one  breath  the  whole 
edifice  of  a  sanguinary  trial  falls  to  the  dust  ;  the  justice 
of  the  Sovereign  tears  out  the  fatal  page  ;  an  honest  man 
resumes  his  place  and  rank  under  the  same  heaven  that 
serves  as  a  canopy  to  his  accusers  and  his  judges  ;  and  when 
his  last  hour  arrives,  his  soul  leaves  the  earth  among  the 
endearments  and  blessings  of  his  children  ;  religion  receives 
him  ;  his  country  honours  his  remains  ;  his  companions  of 
all  times,  his  friends  of  all  parties,  throng  around  him  ;  the 
salute  of  the  brave  resounds  over  his  grave,  and  Fame  repeats 
to  France  the  farewell  of  friendship. 

Manes  of  victims,  of  whatever  party,  who  have  been  con- 
demned for  political  crimes,  and  on  whom  the  thunderbolt 
has  fallen  in  the  fury  of  the  storm,  let  the  fate  of  Lavalette 
comfort  you  : — you  have  all  been  restored  to  your  rights  in 
his  person  !  Cuvillier  Fleury. 


TO  THE  READER. 


I  NEVER  should  have  determined  to  record,  in  writing,  the 
events  which  have  passed  before  my  eyes,  nor  even  those  in 
which  I  have  acted  a  part  during  eight-and-twenty  years, 
had  I  not  been  involved  in  so  conspicuous  a  manner  in  the 
catastrophe  that  put  an  end  to  the  Imperial  Government  ; 
but  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  leave,  both  to  my  family  and 
my  friends,  an  indisputable  testimony  of  my  innocence  and 
general  conduct.  It  would,  moreover,  be  but  ill  requiting 
the  interest  with  which  so  many  honourable  persons  have 
favoured  me,  to  maintain  a  silence  which  my  enemies  might 
misuse  to  justify  their  persecutions. 

My  first  intention  was  to  describe  only  late  events  ;  but, 
having  been  for  above  twenty  years  attached  to  the  Emperor 
Napoleon,  it  appeared  to  me  that  I  ought  not  to  pass  over  in 
silence  one  part,  at  least,  of  his  glorious  history.  Could  I 
look  upon  myself  as  at  liberty  to  deprive  posterity  of  any  cir- 
cumstances connected  with  a  hero  who  will  never  cease  to 
engross  attention  ?  He  has  been  exposed  to  the  insults  of 
his  ungrateful  contemporaries,  and  it  is  my  duty  to  oppose 
truth  to  those  insults.  No  exertion  has  been  wanting  on 
my  side  to  avoid  being  led  away  by  the  deep  affection  I  shall 
cherish  to  the  end  of  my  life  for  a  man  who  has  been  my 
general,  my  sovereign,  and  my  benefactor.  It  is  not,  how- 
ever, his  public  actions,  and  still  less  the  wars  which  have 
shed  a  lustre  over  his  life,  that  I  pretend  to  describe.     He 


xxxvi  TO  THE  READER. 

has  still  friends  left  among  the  generals  who  shared  his  toil 
and  his  glory  :  to  them  the  noble  task  belongs.  I  shall  paint 
the  private  man.  Few  persons  have  known  him  as  well  as 
I  have  ;  and  historians,  gathering  materials,  may  place  full 
confidence  in  my  recital.  I  shall  mention  no  other  facts- 
than  those  of  which  I  have  been  an  eye-witness  ;  and  I  am 
much  mistaken  if  my  character  will  not  prove  a  sufficient 
voucher  for  their  truth. 

Still,  I  require  much  indulgence.  I  write  far  from  my 
country,^  in  deep  solitude,  often  depressed  by  misfortune, 
and  deprived  of  the  materials  requisite  for  recalling  facts, 
dates,  and  names.  The  impressions  are,  however,  still  vivid 
in  my  memory  and  in  my  heart. 

Many  persons,  seeing  my  name  on  the  title-page  of  these 
Memoirs,  will  perhaps  expect  to  find  in  them  an  abundant 
feast  of  anecdote  and  scandal :  they  will  be  mistaken.  During 
thirteen  years  I  filled  a  delicate  situation,  thanks  to  which  I 
have  discovered  some  painful  secrets  of  the  human  heart ; 
but  I  will  not  disgrace  my  character  by  publishing  them.  It 
is  not  with  rubbish  that  durable  monuments  can  be  raised. 

It  is  my  resolution  that  this  work  do  not  appear  during 
my  life.  Not  that  I  wish  to  escape  criticism  ;  but  because 
a  feeling  which  honourable  minds  alone  can  appreciate 
makes  it  a  duty  to  me  to  occupy  the  public  attention  no 
longer  with  myself.  My  unfortunate  celebrity  has  been 
dearly  bought,  and  I  now  want  rest  rather  than  pity. 

'  A  great  part  of  these  Memoirs  was  written  in  Bavaria,  during  M. 
Lavalette's  banishment,  in  his  various  retreats  on  the  borders  of  Lake 
Starenberg,  at  Eichstadt,  and  at  Augsburg.  It  will,  however,  be  observed 
in  reading  the  conclusion,  that  they  were  revised  and  finished  at  Paris,  or 
rather  in  the  country  near  Sevres. — Note  of  the  Editor. 


MEMOIRS 

OF 

COUNT    LAVALETTE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

I  WAS  born  in  Paris  in  1769.  My  father  having  enjoyed 
a  liberal  education,  and  being  sensible  of  its  advantages, 
watched  over  mine  with  constant  application.  I  went  late 
to  school,  because  my  health  was  indifferent,  and  left  it  in 
1788  ;  after  having,  for  eight  years,  filled  my  head  with 
Latin,  in  which  I  never  was  a  proficient — and  with  Greek, 
which  I  have  completely  forgotten.  My  confessor  was  a 
most  excellent  man,  but  he  heated  my  imagination  to  pre- 
serve my  morals.  He  put  into  my  hands  a  great  many 
religious  books,  and  took  a  particular  pleasure  in  making  me 
learn  the  sacred  orators  by  heart.  I  was  so  pleased  with  the 
sermons  of  Massillon,  and  the  funeral  orations  of  Bossuet, 
that  I  had  no  doubt  but  the  church  was  my  real  calling.  I 
tormented  my  family  until  I  got  permission  to  follow  a 
course  of  lectures  on  theology  ;  but  the  very  first  year  was 
sufficient  to  disgust  me.  The  method  of  disputing  in  bad 
Latin,  the  everlasting  passion  for  proving  both  sides  of  the 
question,  without  presenting  fixed  ideas  upon  any  subject 
whatever,  inspired  me.  with  an  aversion  for  that  study.  I 
could  not  conceive  why  so  much  trash  should  be  deemed  a 

2  ' 


2  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

necessary  introduction  to  the  eloquence  of  the  pulpit.  I  re- 
solved, therefore,  in  preference,  to  follow  the  bar.  My  father 
observed  with  satisfaction  the  turn  my  taste  had  taken,  and 
it  was  decided  that  I  should  be  placed,  first  in  a  notary's,  and 
then  in  an  attorney's  office.  The  notary's  business  appeared 
to  me  still  more  irksome  than  theology.  I  remained,  how- 
ever, nearly  a  year  with  him,  after  which  I  went  to  the  legal 
practitioner,  and  was  fortunate  enough  to  find  him  a  sensible 
man.  His  name  was  Dommanget,  and  his  love  of  his  pro- 
fession was  confined  to  the  profits  he  drew  from  it.  He  pos- 
sessed a  large  and  well-chosen  library  ;  and  as  I  cost  him  no 
salary,  he  suffered  me  to  pass  my  time  among  his  books. 
There  I  read  many  excellent  works,  and  gained  a  taste  for 
literature  that  has  never  diminished.  I  studied,  in  particular, 
the  history  of  France,  of  which  I  had  not  previously  the  least 
idea.  A  strange  system  of  instruction  prevailed  at  that  time. 
Thousands  of  young  men  every  year  left  the  university,  after 
having  finished  their  studies,  their  heads  being  filled  with 
republican  maxims,  their  minds  inflamed  with  admiration  of 
the  virtue  of  the  ancient  commonwealths,  most  cordially 
despising  all  monarchical  governments,  and  at  the  same  time 
shamefully  ignorant  of  the  history  of  their  mother  country. 
Not  once  during  my  eight  years'  studies  did  I  hear  the  name 
of  Henry  the  Fourth  pronounced  ;  and  I  must  own  that  at 
the  age  of  seventeen  I  was  acquainted  neither  with  the  time 
nor  the  manner  in  which  the  House  of  Bourbon  mounted 
the  throne. 

The  events  that  preceded  the  grand  drama  of  1789  took 
me  by  surprise  in  the  midst  of  my  books  and  my  love  of 
study.  I  was  then  reading  "  L'Esprit  des  Lois,"  a  work  that 
charmed  me  by  its  gravity,  depth,  and  sublimity.  I  wished 
also  to  become  acquainted  with  the  code  of  our  own  laws  ; 
but  Dommanget,  to  whom  I  mentioned  my  desire,  laughed, 
and  pointed  to  the  Justinian  Code,  the  common  law  code  of 
the  kingdom,  the  parliamentary  decrees,  and  the  statutes  of 
our   kings,  accompanied  by  an  immense  number  of  inter- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  3 

preters  and  commentators.  So  monstrous  a  heap  of  folio 
volumes  made  me  shudder,  and  I  concluded  somewhat 
rashly,  but  like  many  other  people,  that  it  was  better  to  re- 
model the  whole  than  to  load  my  memory  with  such  obscure 
lore.  To  my  graver  studies  I  added  the  perusal  of  political 
pamphlets,  \vhich  then  began  to  be  numerous.  Thus  my 
imagination  was  excited,  and,  wiseacre  of  twenty  as  I  was,  I 
thought  I  should  do  well  to  unite  with  the  meditations  of 
my  closet  the  observation  of  those  scenes  of  disorder  that 
were  the  harbinger  of  the  Revolution. 

There  lived  at  that  time,  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Antoine,  a 
wealthy  paper-hanging  manufacturer  called  Reveillon.  This 
man  employed  several  hundred  -workpeople,  who,  being  dis- 
satisfied with  his  refusal  to  raise  their  wages,  and  probably 
instigated  by  the  enemies  of  their  master,  resolved  to  murder 
him  and  ransack  the  establishment  by  which  they  got  their 
livelihood.  The  disturbance  soon  rose  to  a  great  height,  and 
the  gnet,  or  guard  of  the  town,  not  being  strong  enough  to 
suppress  it,  a  detachment  of  the  regiment  of  the  Gardes 
Francaises  was  ordered  out  against  the  rioters.  Wishing  to 
be  a  witness  of  the  scene,  I  went  to  the  spot,  and  was  stand- 
ing between  the  plunderers  and  the  troops,  when  the  latter 
arrived  by  divisions  and  fired.  Many  persons  were  killed, 
several  were  sent  to  prison,  and  one  man  was,  I  believe, 
hanged  a  few  days  afterwards.  So  brutal  a  manner  of  restor- 
ing public  order  exasperated  me,  and  I  soon  understood  that 
such  is  the  custom  of  governments  that  wish,  as  the  phrase 
is,  to  show  energy  and  inspire  respect  ;  in  one  word,  that  it 
is  easier  to  repress  crimes  by  force  than  to  prevent  them  by 
Avisdom  and  resolution.  The  inhabitants  of  the  suburb  never 
forgot  this  military  expedition  ;  and  I  have  good  reason  to 
believe  that  it  contributed  greatly  to  keep  alive  the  spirit  of 
revenge  and  sedition  that  prevailed  so  long  among  the  popu- 
lation of  that  part  of  Paris. 

The  resistance  of  the  Parliament  to  the  orders  of  Govern- 
ment  caused   great   agitation    in    the   public    mind.      The 


4  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

magistrates  would  no  longer  consent  to  administer  justice  ; 
the  counsel  and  attorneys  would  no  longer  follow  their  suits  ,' 
all  the  clerks  of  the  bar  assembled  tumultuously,  and  sided 
openly  with  the  Parliament.  These  young  men  formed  at 
that  time  a  corporation  called  "  La  Basoche."  They  had 
their  own  chiefs,  observed  a  sort  of  discipline,  and  wore  a 
peculiar  dress.  Though  I  was  not  enlisted  in  their  body, 
one  of  my  fellow  clerks  proposed  that  I  should  join  them, 
and  I  consented.  We  found  them  in  the  garden  of  the 
Luxembourg,  several  hundred  in  number,  highly  excited, 
and  disposed  to  procure  arms.  I  took  it  in  my  head  to  pro- 
pose to  several  among  them  to  attack  the  guard  of  the 
Theatre  Francais,  seize  their  muskets,  and  march  against  the 
battalion  of  the  guards  stationed  in  the  Place  Dauphine.  My 
proposal  was  received  with  enthusiasm,  and  communicated 
to  all  the  groups.  Some  young  men,  more  reasonable  than 
the  rest,  and  who  probably  had  come  there  with  the  sole 
view  of  dissuading  and  restraining  the  others,  expressed  a 
wish  to  see  the  author  of  so  wise  a  plan.  One  of  them  ex- 
amined me  from  head  to  foot.  The  shortness  of  my  stature 
made  him  smile,  and  he  found  but  little  difficult}-  in  proving 
the  extravagance  of  a  resolution,  the  consequences  of  which 
must  inevitably  be  fatal  to  us.  The  most  violent  among  us 
left  the  garden  to  proceed  towards  the  Place  Dauphine.  The 
soldiers  stood  dispersed  with  their  arms  piled  beside  them. 
We  looked  at  one  another  ;  and  I  know  not  what  would 
have  been  the  result,  if  the  drum  had  not  suddenly  beat  to 
rally  the  troops. 

These  tumultuous  scenes  had  already  lasted  eighteen 
months,  and,  by  the  ridiculous  success  obtained  in  the  Fau- 
bourg St.  Antoine,  Government  seemed  persuaded  that  the 
armed  force  would  be  sufficient  to  answer  all  ends.  The 
States-General  had  assembled  at  Versailles,  having  been  sum- 
moned at  once  by  the  Parliament,  who  wished  to  embarrass 
the  Court  and  revenge  itself, — by  the  Ministers,  who  knew 
not  which  way  to  act, — and  by  the  majority  of  the  nation,. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  5 

justly  discontented  with  an  incapable  Government,  and  per- 
h'aps  also  tired  of  too  uniform  a  tranquillity.  The  States- 
General  soon  felt  that  the  system  and  prejudices  of  the  Court 
"would  be  insuperable  obstacles  to  the  redress  of  the  evil. 
They  wished  for  a  plan  of  government  in  which  the  rights 
•of  the  nation  at  large,  rather  than  those  of  the  privileged 
-classes,  might  be  considered.  M.  Necker,  who  was  a  clever 
financier,  a  philosopher,  and  by  birth  the  citizen  of  a 
republic,  encouraged  them.  But  the  King,  yielding  to  the 
representation  of  his  courtiers,  and  to  a  secret  aversion  he 
•entertained  for  M.  Necker,  dismissed  him  from  his  councils. 
The  news  of  this  event  reached  Paris  abruptly  on  the  12th 
of  July,  at  a  moment  when  the  inhabitants  were  dispersed  in 
the  several  public  walks.  It  spread  confusion  and  grief  on 
all  sides  ;  whilst  the  busts  of  M.  Necker  and  the  Duke  of 
Orleans  were  carried  in  triumph  through  the  streets.  Orators, 
mounted  on  chairs  in  the  Palais  Royal,  drew  crowds  around 
them.  "  All  is  lost,"  they  said  :  "  the  States-General  are  to 
be  dissolved.  Already  your  most  zealous  defenders  are  obliged 
to  fly,  and  soon  you  will  groan  under  an  insufferable  load  of 
taxes,  and  the  sanguinary  caprice  of  a  horrible  despotism." 
The  agitation  occasioned  by  speeches  of  this  kind  was  con- 
siderably augmented  by  the  presence  of  the  Swiss  soldiers. 
Government  wanted  to  make  use  of  the  regiment  of  the 
Guards  to  disperse  those  whom  they  called  rebels  ;  but  the 
soldiers  pushed  their  officers  back,  and  took  the  part  of  the 
people.  A  detachment  of  the  regiment  of  Royal  German 
cavalry  presented  itself,  and  was  hooted.  They  tried  to 
charge  the  crowd,  but  they  were  fired  at,  and  the  Swiss 
encamped  in  the  Champ  de  Mars  were  sent  away.  The 
mob,  grown  furious  through  exasperation,  then  fell  upon 
their  natural  enemies,  the  persons  employed  by  the  Ferme 
Generale  for  the  collection  of  the  excise  duties.  These  per- 
sons were  forced  to  conceal  themselves,  and  the  barriers 
were  set  on  fire.  In  the  midst  of  this  disorder  a  rumour 
suddenly  spread,  fearful  even  in  its  uncertainty,  that  robbers 


6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

were  approaching  to  ransack  the  capital.  This  was  at  best 
but  a  ridiculous  joke,  the  inv^entors  of  which,  however, 
seemed  well  acquainted  with  the  character  of  the  Parisians.. 
The  citizens,  after  remaining  peaceful  spectators  of  this  great 
tumult,  showed  at  last  some  signs  of  spirit,  and  on  the  13th 
of  July  above  two  hundred  thousand  men  had  armed  them- 
selves with  whatever  weapons  they  could  find.  The  news  of 
this  general  insurrection  terrified  the  Court,  and  all  the 
regular  troops  disappeared  from  the  environs  of  the  capital. 

At  length  arrived  the  14th  of  July,  a  day  for  ever  famous, 
an  era  for  ever  memorable,  in  the  annals  of  France,  and 
almost  equally  so  in  the  history  of  every  other  nation  ;  for 
there  exists  no  people  whose  political  and  civil  existence  has 
not  been  considerably  modified  by  the  French  Revolution. 

For  the  mob  to  pursue  police  officers,  collectors,  and  spies, 
is  a  natural  thing  ;  but  how  did  an  immense  population  first 
conceive  the  idea  that  their  fate  was  connected  with  the 
taking  of  the  Bastille,  and  persuade  themselves  that  their 
,  victory  was  complete  when  they  were  masters  of  it  ? 

The  fortress  of  the  Bastille  was  built  in  the  reign  of 
Charles  the  Fifth,  at  a  time  when  fire-arms  were  scarcely 
known.  Situated  without  the  precincts  of  the  city,  beyond 
the  Porte  St.  Antoine,  it  was  evidently  never  intended  as  a 
check  upon  the  metropolis.  It  was  said  the  King  meant  to 
keep  his  treasures  there  ;  but  the  interior  distribution  clearly 
evinced  that  it  was  destined  to  serve  as  a  state  prison.  This 
pretended  fortress  consisted  of  five  towers,  about  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  feet  high,  joined  together  by  strong  high 
walls,  and  surrounded  by  broad  deep  ditches.  Its  entrance 
was  protected  by  drawbridges,  and  on  the  14th  01  July  it 
was  commanded  by  a  gov'ernor,  and  defended  by  about  sixty 
Swiss  veterans  ;  a  few  old  guns,  of  small  size,  were  placed 
on  the  terraces  of  the  towers.  There  was  nothing  very 
formidable  in  its  appearance  ;  but  something  like  a  super- 
stitious terror  pervaded  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  most 
marvellous  stories  were  told  respecting  the  Bastille.     For 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  7 

many  ages,  the  most  noble  victims  of  despotism  had  groaned 
within  its  mysterious  \\^lls.  Some  prisoners,  who  had  been 
fortunate  enough  to  escape  from  it,  had  pubhshed  most 
terrifying  accounts.  Those  formidable  towers,  those  vigilant 
sentinels,  who  suffered  no  one,  even  by  stealth,  to  cast  a 
look  towards  them  ;  —  these  numerous  ferocious-looking 
guards,  frightful  by  their  appearance,  and  more  frightful 
still  by  their  deep  silence, — all  united  to  excite  terror  and 
anxious  curiosity.  Nevertheless,  this  state  prison  was  not 
dangerous  for  the  people  :  it  was  designed  for  persons  of 
high  birth,  or  for  literary  people  who  ventured  to  displease 
the  ministry.  But  to  the  wish  of  satisfying  curiosity  was 
added  a  noble  feeling  of  pity  for  the  numerous  victims  sup- 
posed to  be  shut  up  in  the  fortress,  and  the  whole  population 
of  Paris  resolved  to  make  themselves  masters  of  the  Bastille. 
A  considerable  number  of  muskets  and  some  cannon  were 
deposited  at  the  Invalides.  The  mob  repaired  to  that  place, 
seized  them,  and  rushed  against  the  Bastille,  headed  by  the 
Gardes  Francaises.  A  few  cannon  were  fired,  but  did  not 
much  injure  the  walls.  The  governor  answered  by  some 
balls  that  were  lost  in  the  Rue  St.  Antoine.  Terror  and 
rage  soon  rose  to  the  highest  pitch.  The  governor  had 
neither  troops  nor  ammunition  sufficient  to  defend  himself. 
He  had  not  even  received  any  positive  orders  to  that  effect. 
It  is  said  that  he  lowered  the  drawbridge  to  receive  a  depu- 
tation of  patriots  summoning  him  to  surrender.  Hulin, 
afterwards  a  general,  who  was  one  of  the  deputation, 
assured  me  that,  on  entering  the  governor's  court,  he  and 
his  companions  were  fired  on.  The  governor  was  arrested 
first,  the  Swiss  major  afterwards,  and  the  Bastille  was  taken. 
These  two  officers  were  dragged  to  the  Place  de  Greve,  and 
loaded  with  blows  and  imprecations.  I  was  there  with  the 
unformed  battalion  of  my  district.  The  unfortunate  major 
passed  before  our  ranks  ;  his  stature  was  tall,  and  his  aspect 
venerable.  Two  men  held  him  by  the  throat,  and  cried 
with  furious  gestures,  "  Here  is  the  villain  !  "     The  major 


8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

strove  to  keep  up  a  bold  appearance,  but  dismay  and  agony- 
were  painted  in  his  countenance.  A  few  minutes  afterwards 
we  heard  the  report  of  some  fire-arms.  A  pistol  shot  had 
put  an  end  to  his  sufferings.  That  terrible  spectacle  inspired 
me  with  a  horror  and  disgust  for  the  licentiousness  of  the 
mob  that  nothing  ever  could  allay  ;  and  the  scenes  I  have 
yet  to  describe  were  but  too  strongly  calculated  to  augment 
those  sentiments. 

I  could,  however,  in  some  way  comprehend  that  foreigners 
who  had  killed  Frenchmen  might,  in  the  first  heat  of  battle, 
be  slaughtered  by  ferocious  conquerors  who  had  no  idea  of 
the  laws  usually  observed  in  war  ;  but  I  never  could  explain 
the  murder  of  Messieurs  Foulon  and  Berthier  de  Sauvigny. 
The  former  had  been,  I  believe,  Intendant  of  Paris,  and  the 
latter  was  his  son-in-law,  and  successor  in  that  employ.  In 
the  province,  an  Intendant  was,  through  his  functions  and 
influence,  a  considerable  personage.  His  character  or  abilities 
might  create  esteem,  or,  as  it  more  frequently  happened,  his 
incapacity  might  excite  dislike.  In  Paris,  on  the  contrary, 
the  Intendant  was  in  a  manner  lost  in  the  immensity  of  the 
city.  In  times  of  scarcity,  the  people  blamed  the  Prevot 
des  Marchands,  the  Lieutenant  of  Police,  and  sometimes  the 
Parliament.  The  Intendant,  not  being  a  magistrate,  was 
unknown  to  the  multitude  ;  and  I  dare  assert,  without  fear 
of  being  contradicted,  that  among  the  middling,  and  still 
less  among  the  lower  classes,  no  one  was  acquainted  either 
with  his  person  or  his  name.  They  knew  at  best  the  way 
to  his  office,  where  the  taxes  used  to  be  paid.  All  of  a 
sudden,  however,  a  rumour  was  spread  about  that  the  Inten- 
dant had  said,  and  repeated  aloud,  that  "  hay  was  good 
enough  to  feed  the  Parisian  rabble."  Messieurs  Foulon  and 
Berthier  had  fled.  Some  zealous  patriots  pursued  and  over- 
took them  at  about  twenty  leagues  from  Paris.  They 
brought  them  back,  and  some  hundred  wretches  butchered 
them,  under  circumstances  of  atrocious  barbarity.  I  crossed 
the  Place  de  Greve  to  go  to  the  Comedie  Francaise  ;  it  rained, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  9 

and  there  was  no  tumult  anywhere  but  facing  the  Hotel  de 
Ville.  I  was  standing  on  the  parapet,  when  I  saw  raised 
above  the  crowd  the  figure  of  an  old  man  with  grey  hair  ; 
it  was  the  unfortunate  Foulon  being  hanged  at  the  lamp- 
post. I  returned  home  to  study  my  beloved  Montesquieu  ; 
and  from  that  moment  I  began  to  hate  a  revolution  in 
which  people  were  murdered  without  being  heard  in  their 
defence. 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  tumult,  which  on  the  14th  had  been  only  a  riot,  next 
day  became  a  decided  revolution,  the  consequences  of  which 
were  not  to  be  calculated.  The  taking  of  the  Bastille  had 
elated  the  minds  of  the  people  :  three  thousand  disciplined 
troops  (the  Gardes  Francaises)  formed  the  vanguard  of  an 
army  above  one  hundred  thousand  strong,  of  which  at  least 
thirty  thousand  were  armed  with  muskets.  It  would  have 
been  impossible  either  to  attack  or  disband  that  army.  The 
Government,  taken  unawares,  was  forced  to  consent  to  its 
organisation,  and  to  the  choice  of  M.  de  Lafayette  as  com- 
mander-in-chief. The  Prevot  des  Marchands  and  city 
magistrates  had  fled.  In  their  place  were  put  a  mayor  and 
common  council,  titles  already  in  use  in  several  French 
towns.  M.  Bailly  was  elected.  He  was  a  celebrated  astro- 
nomer and  a  clever  writer.  The  States-General  had  chosen 
him  for  their  president.  The  whole  organisation  was  com- 
plete in  three  days  ;  and  on  the  1 7th  the  King  came  to 
Paris,  where  he  legitimatised  by  his  presence  and  his  speeches 
all  the  outrages  that  had  been  committed.  This  step  taught 
his  friends  what  they  had  to  expect  of  him,  and  the  partisans 
of  the  Revolution  all  they  might  dare  to  undertake.  Re- 
bellion had  reached  its  highest  pitch  :  soldiers  and  official 
persons  had  been  killed  in  the  exercise  of  their  duty,  and 
still  the  Sovereign  spoke  hesitatingly  on  the  subject  of  these 
crimes.  The  provinces,  encouraged  bj-  the  example  of  Paris, 
hastened  to  follow  it.    The  same  couriers  that  brought  down 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  ii 

to  the  country  intelligence  of  the  revolution  of  the  metro- 
polis carried  back  accounts  of  similar  occurrences  in  the 
several  places  they  had  passed  through.  The  States-General, 
which  had  given  the  impulse,  received  it  in  their  turn.  The 
two  first  estates  were  obliged  to  unite  to  the  third.  The 
States  took  the  title  of  a  Constituent  Assembly,  and  from 
that  moment  set  themselves  to  work  to  raise  a  monarchy 
where  the  nation  was  to  be  represented  by  its  deputies. 
Then  began  the  long  struggle  between  new  interests  and 
uncurbed  passions.  The  King  was  a  stranger  to  all  the 
ideas  that  had  circulated  for  thirty  years  among  his  subjects. 
Bred  in  the  maxims  and  customs  of  an  absolute  monarchy, 
he  could  not  but  observe  with  dismay  the  conduct  of  the 
Assembly  ;  and,  if  he  rejected  the  violent  measures  he  was 
pressed  on  to  adopt,  it  was  owing  to  the  weakness  of  his 
character  rather  than  his  wish  to  spare  blood,  and  also  to 
the  hope  that  some  more  favourable  chance  might  replace 
in  his  hands  the  authority  that  rebels  had  wrested  from 
him.  The  only  reasonable  step  would  have  been  to  awe 
the  Assembly  he  no  longer  possessed  the  power  of  dissolving, 
by  going  still  farther  than  they  did  ;  and  to  give  of  his  own 
accord  a  constitution  which  would  have  maintained  some  of 
the  privileges  of  the  nobility,  and  determined  the  rights  of 
the  people.  Such  was,  in  fact,  M.  Necker's  proposal :  the 
King  rejected  it,  and  all  was  lost.' 

The  plan  of  quitting  Versailles,  and  establishing  himself 
in  some  stronghold,  appeared  to  the  King  the  most  advan- 
tageous one  ;  but  it  was  soon  discovered,  and  the  patriots 

'  The  translator  cannot  help  remarking  that  M.  de  Lavalette  has  l)een 
lietrayed  Ijy  his  memory  in  several  parts  of  this  passage,  i.  The  Prevot 
des  Marchands  (M.  de  Flesselles)  had  net  fled  ;  he  was  murdered  at  the 
Hotel  de  Ville,  on  the  14th  of  July,  whilst  presiding  over  the  electors  of 
Paris.  2.  The  .Stales  did  not  take  the  name  of  Constituent  Assembly, 
that  name  having  lieen  used  for  the  first  time  two  years  later.  3.  .So  far 
from  rejecting  any  plan  of  M.  Necker,  the  King,  of  his  own  accord,  three 
weeks  jjcfore  these  riots  (on  the  23rd  of  June),  proposed  to  the  Assembly  a 
complete  constitutional  charter,  in  thirty-five  articles,  which  the  Assembly 
rejected  without  even  vouchsafing  to  discuss  it. 


12  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

felt  alarmed.  The  inhabitants  of  Paris  had  not  only  organ- 
ised their  military  force,  but  also  their  political  institutions. 
The  sixty  headquarters  of  the  several  battalions  were  at  the 
same  time  so  many  centres  of  districts,  each  of  them  having 
a  president,  secretaries,  and  officers.  There  all  the  idlers  of 
the  middle  and  lower  orders  went  to  listen  to  the  popular 
orators,  who  practised  themselves  in  that  flow  of  hollow 
words  that  afterwards  proved  so  fatal.  Three  months  later 
a  rumour  was  suddenly  spread  in  the  districts  that  the  King 
was  preparing  to  fly.  The  population  of  the  Faubourg  St. 
Antoine  was  soon  set  in  motion.  An  immense  number  of 
people  assembled  before  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  declaring  they 
would  march  to  Versailles  and  bring  back  the  King.  M.  de 
Lafayette  for  a  long  while  refused  to  put  himself  at  their 
head  ;  but  at  last,  intimidated  by  their  threats,  and  foresee- 
ing that  they  would  otherwise  do  without  him,  he  sent  word 
to  the  principal  officers  of  the  National  Guards,  inviting  them 
to  lead  to  Versailles  all  the  reasonable  citizens  they  could 
collect,  to  prevent  if  possible  the  fatal  consequence  he  but 
too  clearly  anticipated  from  these  disturbances.  A  great 
many  National  Guards,  among  whom  were  some  incomplete 
companies  of  my  battalion,  went  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  where 
I  hastened  to  join  them.  There  we  found  an  enraged  multi- 
tude exclaiming  that  they  were  betrayed,  and  stirring  one 
another  up  to  murder  and  all  manner  of  outrage.  At  last 
the  torrent  began  to  move,  thickening  as  it  advanced.  The 
commander-in-chief  marched  foremost,  followed  by  cannon 
and  caissons,  driven  by  inebriated  women,  the  refuse  of 
human  kind.  Then  came  the  National  Guards,  the  pelo- 
tons  of  which  were  continually  broken  through  by  those 
furious  wretches. 

My  company  grew  dissatisfied,  and  received  so  ill  those 
who  came  amongst  us,  that  no  one  would  venture  to  approach 
us.  Our  march  lasted  eight  hours,  and  night  had  closed  in 
when  we  arrived  at  the  avenue  of  Versailles.  If  the  Court 
could  have  resolved  to  take  violent  measures,  they  must  un- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  13 

doubtedly  have  succeeded.  The  National  Guards  did  not 
amount  to  above  six  thousand  men.  The  ruffians  that 
preceded  and  surrounded  them  were  in  number  about  eight 
or  ten  thousand,  but  kept  such  bad  order  that  one  charge 
of  a  few  squadrons  of  horse  would  have  been  sufficient  to 
disperse  them,  whilst  a  voile}-  or  two  of  cannon-ball  would 
have  effectually  prevented  their  return  ;  but  the  Court 
lacked  courage,  and  the  King  thought  his  family  safer  in  a 
badly  guarded  palace  than  on  a  high-road  surrounded  by 
faithful  troops.  The  arrival  of  the  rabble  dismayed  the 
palace,  made  the  regular  soldiers  stagger,  and  satisfied  the 
Assembly.  Those  members  who  influenced  its  decisions 
were  not  unacquainted  with  the  insults  lavished  on  them  at 
Court,  nor  with  the  fate  they  had  to  expect  if  the  King 
succeeded  in  escaping.  The  courtiers  openly  acknowledged 
that  the  most  disgraceful  death  awaited  the  members  who 
had  begun  to  distinguish  themselves  in  the  contest.  It  was 
therefore  resolved  that  the  King  should  come  to  Paris  and 
remain  there  ;  but  in  all  probability  no  one  knew  by  whom 
he  was  to  be  escorted,  and  what  outrages  were  about  to  be 
committed.  We  halted  in  the  great  square  facing  the  palace. 
The  Flanders  regiment  was  drawn  up  before  us.  The  mob 
surrounded  the  military.  Women,  holding  glasses  of  liquor 
in  their  hands,  entertained  the  soldiers  with  vulgar  tales  and 
low  jests.  This  was  too  strong  a  seduction  for  men  indif- 
ferent to  all  political  discussions.  The  want  of  discipline 
was  too  general  for  them  to  be  able  to  resist  such  tempta- 
tions, and  all  the  exertions  of  their  officers  to  maintain  order 
were  useless.  The  colonel  either  knew  not  what  to  do,  or 
dared  not  come  to  a  resolution,  for  he  had  no  positive  orders. 
M.  de  Lusignan,  who  commanded  the  regiment,  and  whom 
I  knew  at  a  later  period,  was  an  honourable  man  ;  but  how 
could  he  extricate  himself  from  so  difficult  a  position,  when, 
at  fifty  steps  from  him,  the  King  was  in  as  great  a  perplexity 
as  he  ?  The  regiment  being  seduced,  the  Monarch  had  no 
other  defence  left  than  the  Life  Guards,  the  Cent  Suisses, 


14  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

and  his  unserviceable  Court.  The  National  Guards  remained 
under  arms  until  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  they  got 
permission  to  retire  to  rest,  but  with  orders  to  be  ready  at  the 
first  beat  of  drum.  M.  de  Lafayette  went  up  to  the  palace, 
where  he  strove  to  comfort  the  Royal  Family,  but  was  received 
with  an  appearance  of  distrust  and  coolness,  at  which,  in 
fact,  he  could  scarcely  be  surprised  ;  for,  having  arrived  at 
the  head  of  a  troop  of  enraged  ruffians,  he  was  in  some  way 
to  be  looked  upon  as  their  commander.  He  could  not  dis- 
semble that  the  population  of  Paris,  and  even  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly,  wished  the  King  to  fix  his  abode  in  the 
metropolis.  The  Court  had  therefore  to  decide  whether 
they  would  consent  to  go  there,  or  set  out  in  search  of  some 
distant  refuge.  I  cannot  say  whether  or  not  these  points 
were  ever  discussed.  It  seems  that  the  King  expected  either 
military  assistance,  or  a  strong  resolution  of  the  Assembly, 
that  might  impress  the  multitude  with  awe.  The  proffered 
assistance  of  M.  de  Lafayette  was  rejected.  The  King 
declared  that  his  guards  were  sufficient  for  his  protection, 
and  that,  far  from  accepting  the  service  of  the  National 
Guards  of  Paris,  who  were  extremely  devoted  to  his  person, 
he  did  not  even  require  those  of  the  Versailles  Guards,  over 
whom  Alexander  Berthier  (afterwards  Marshal  Prince  of 
Neufchatel)  was  second  in  command.  From  him  I  heard 
that  he  was  very  ill-treated  by  the  Court  party  ;  and,  though 
sincerely  attached  to  the  King,  no  one  would  hear  his  name 
mentioned  from  the  day  he  had  accepted  a  command  in  the 
National  Guard. 

At  one  o'clock  we  received  permission  to  go  to  bed.  I 
sheltered  myself  under  the  roof  of  a  citizen,  who  granted  me 
a  chamber  for  my  money.  The  man  was  attached  to  the 
King's  household — I  cannot  recollect  in  what  quality  :  he 
pretended  to  be  a  warm  patriot  ;  and  if  I  had  lent  an  ear 
to  all  he  had  to  say  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  palace,  and  of 
the  Queen  herself,  I  might  have  thought  myself  fully  justi- 
fied in  mixing  with  the  rebels.     I  inquired  very  coolly  from 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  15 

whence  he  had  collected  all  those  infamous  stories.  My 
question  at  first  disconcerted  him,  but  he  soon  answered  in 
an  angry  tone  :  "What  I  have  been  telling  you  is  the  talk 
of  all  Versailles  :  and  yet  if  the  Parisians  take  the  Royal 
Family  from  us,  they'll  beggar  the  whole  town."  I  turned 
my  back  on  the  man,  and  went  to  sleep  till  six  o'clock,  when 
the  drum  beating  the  alarm  summoned  me  to  the  square. 
The  crime  had  already  been  committed  in  the  shades  of 
.night.  The  report  was,  that  the  wretches  had  entered  the 
palace  by  a  secret  and  feebly  guarded  door  ;  they  had 
murdered  the  guards  that  defended  it,  and  pursued  the 
Queen  to  her  bedchamber,  from  whence  she  had  but  just 
time  to  escape  to  the  King's  apartments.  I  must  own,  that 
so  great  was  my  surprise  and  indignation  that  I  joined  in 
the  hue-and-cry  of  some  of  my  comrades  against  the  Marquis 
de  Lafayette.  We  had  been  summoned  by  him  to  come 
and  protect  the  Royal  Family  and  secure  public  tranquillity. 
Why  then  were  we  left  to  be  witnesses  of  such  horrible 
crimes  ?  Why  had  we  not  been  employed  ?  Could  there 
have  been  any  doubt  entertained  of  our  fidelity  ?  Surely 
one-half  of  the  six  thousand  men  we  mustered  would  have 
been  suflScient  to  defend  the  palace,  and  would  not  have 
been  overawed  by  an  ill-armed  rabble,  exhausted  at  once  by 
fatigue  and  intoxication.  But  it  was  too  late  ;  the  victims 
had  fallen,  and  those  who  were  doomed  to  perish  next  were 
as  yet  beyond  their  reach.  The  Life  Guards  had  barricaded 
themselves  round  the  King's  apartments  ;  their  resistance 
had  dismayed  the  assassins,  and  given  General  Lafayette 
time  to  come  up.  He  took  all  the  military  he  fell  in  with, 
and  the  rabble  filled  the  marble  court,  rending  the  air  with 
their  savage  cries.  I  remained  long  in  suspense  concerning 
the  general's  conduct  during  that  fatal  night.  The  details 
of  the  proceedings  instituted  a  short  time  afterwards  against 
many  persons  who  perhaps  were  not  guilty  appeared  to  me 
far  from  satisfactory.  I  learned  the  truth  at  a  later  period, 
and  ^Madame  de  Stael  has  published   it  in    her   Memoirs. 


i6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

The  whole  misfortune  was  owing  to  the  aversion  of  the 
Court  to  the  Marquis  de  Lafayette, — to  the  stupid  opinion 
still  entertained  that  the  Royal  Family  was  sacred  in  the 
eyes  of  the  multitude,  who  would  not  dare  to  look  them  in 
the  face  ;  and,  above  all,  to  the  foolish  presumption  of  the 
nobility,  who  wished  to  preserve  their  exclusive  privilege  of 
defending  their  Sovereign.  M.  de  Lafayette  had  insisted  on 
guarding  the  palace  with  his  faithful  troops,  and  I  venture 
to  assert  that  he  had  brought  with  him  all  the  members  of 
the  National  Guards  who  were  most  distinguished  for  their 
honourable  feeling,  courage,  and  loyalty  ;  but  his  offers  were 
coolly  and  sarcastically  rejected.  However,  notwithstanding 
that  refusal  and  the  insults  that  accompanied  it,  the  general 
did  not  give  way  to  culpable  confidence.  He  visited  the 
posts,  and  showed  himself  everywhere,  until  midnight. 
Tranquillity  then  prevailed  on  all  sides.  The  rabble  lay 
dispersed  and  asleep.  At  two  in  the  morning  the  deepest 
silence  reigned  in  the  courts,  the  great  square,  and  the 
streets  of  the  capital  ;  nothing  seemed  to  forbode  the 
approaching  outrages.  The  palace  was  attacked  a  little 
before  daybreak.  All  eye-witnesses  have  declared  that  the 
mob  entered  by  one  of  the  communication  doors  which  had 
been  left  open  ;  the  unfortunate  Life  Guards  who  defended 
it  did  their  duty,  for  they  were  killed  at  their  posts.  But 
why  was  that  door  open,  so  near  to  the  Queen's  apartments  ? 
The  palace  being  of  a  vast  extent,  the  Life  Guards  were  not 
sufficiently  numerous  to  protect  it  effectually  ;  but  then  why 
not  close  all  the  outlets  ?  or,  rather,  why  not  augment  the 
guard  with  all  the  loyal  persons  that  could  be  found  ?  Why, 
at  the  moment  of  attack,  were  not  ten  thousand  swords 
drawn  by  that  nobility,  so  clamorous  in  their  speeches,  but 
who  never  knew  how  to  defend  the  King  they  so  bitterly 
regret  ?  Emigration  had  at  that  time  not  yet  commenced. 
There  were  in  Paris,  Versailles,  and  the  environs,  more  than 
twenty  thousand  noblemen,  devoted  by  feelings  of  honour 
and  interest  to  the  defence  of  the  throne  and  the  life  of  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  17 

monarch  ;  notwithstanding  which,  Louis  XVI.  was  forsaken 
by  them  on  that  fatal  day,  the  plans  of  which  had  been 
openly  arranged  and  proclaimed  by  those  whose  real  aim 
was  undoubtedly  the  murder  of  the  Royal  Family.  I  have 
not  yet  done  with  the  nobility  :  their  conduct  on  other 
occasions  was  more  disgraceful  than  on  this. 

The  mob  crowded  in  the  marble  court,  and  wandering  on 
the  outside  of  the  palace,  began  to  express  again  their  designs 
with  frightful  bowlings.  "  To  Paris !  to  Paris  !  "  were  the 
first  cries.  Their  prey  was  promised  them,  and  then  fresh 
cries  ordered  the  unfortunate  family  to  appear  on  the 
balcony.  The  Queen  showed  herself,  accompanied  by  her 
children  ;  she  was  forced  by  threats  to  send  them  away.  I 
mixed  in  the  crowd,  and  beheld  for  the  first  time  that 
unfortunate  Princess  :  she  was  dressed  in  white  ;  her  head 
was  bare,  and  adorned  with  beautiful  fair  locks.  Motionless, 
and  in  a  modest  and  noble  attitude,  she  appeared  to  me  like 
a  victim  on  the  block.  The  enraged  populace  were  not 
moved  at  the  sight  of  woe  in  all  its  majesty.  Imprecations 
increased,  and  the  unfortunate  Princess  could  not  even  find 
a  support  in  the  King,  for  his  presence  did  but  augment  the 
fury  of  the  multitude.  At  last  preparations  for  departure 
did  more  towards  appeasing  them  than  promises  could  have 
done,  and  by  twelve  o'clock  the  frightful  procession  set  off. 
I  hope  such  a  scene  will  never  be  witnessed  again,  I  have 
often  asked  myself  how  the  metropolis  of  a  nation  so  cele- 
brated for  urbanity  and  elegance  of  manners, —  how  the 
brilliant  city  of  Paris  could  contain  the  savage  hordes  I  that 
day  beheld,  and  who  so  long  reigned  over  it !  In  walking 
through  the  streets  of  Paris,  it  seems  to  me,  the  features 
even  of  the  lowest  and  most  miserable  class  of  people  do  not 
present  to  the  eye  anything  like  ferociousness,  or  the  meanest 
passions  in  all  their  hideous  energy.  Can  those  passions 
alter  the  features  so  as  to  deprive  them  of  all  likeness  to 
humanity  ?  or  does  the  terror  inspired  by  the  sight  of  a 
guilty  wretch    give    him  the  semblance  of  a  wild  beast  ? 

3 


i8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

These  madmen,  dancing  in  the  mire  and  covered  with  mud^ 
surrounded  the  King's  coach.  The  groups  that  marched 
foremost  carried  on  long  pikes  the  bloody  and  dishevelled 
heads  of  the  Life  Guards  butchered  in  the  morning.  Surely 
Satan  himself  first  invented  the  placing  of  a  human  head  at 
the  end  of  a  lance.  The  disfigured  and  pale  features,  the 
gory  locks,  the  half-open  mouth,  the  closed  eyes,  images  of 
death,  added  to  the  gestures  and  salutations  the  executioners 
made  them  perform,  in  horrible  mockery  of  life,  presented 
the  most  frightful  spectacle  rage  could  have  imagined.  A 
troop  of  women,  ugly  as  crime  itself,  swarming  like  insects,, 
and  wearing  grenadiers'  hairy  caps,  went  continually  to  and 
fro,  howling  barbarous  songs,  embracing  and  insulting  the 
Life  Guards.  This  scene  lasted  eight  hours  before  the 
Royal  Family  arrived  at  the  Place  de  Greve  and  alighted 
at  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  their  first  resting-place  during  pro- 
tracted misery  that  terminated  some  years  afterwards  in  a 
horrible  death. 

Thus  terminated  the  memorable  6th  of  October, — a  day 
during  which  it  is  difficult  to  decide  what  is  most  to  be 
regretted — the  imprudent  weakness  of  the  King,  or  the 
terrible  necessity  that  forced  the  representatives  of  a  noble 
nation  to  trample  on  the  sacred  rights  of  humanity,  and  the 
majesty  of  the  throne,  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  grand 
design. 


CHAPTER  III. 

The  impression  that  frightful  spectacle  made  on  me  taught 
me  that  nature  had  not  designed  me  to  play  a  part  in  the 
Revolution,  and  that  I  ought  to  keep  carefully  aloof  from.  it. 
But  the  sight  of  the  Queen  so  shamefully  insulted,  and  the 
fate  that  was  preparing  for  her  august  children,  inspired  in 
me  feelings  of  loyalty  which  grew  stronger  every  day.  I 
could  not  bear  to  think  of  the  situation  of  the  Royal  Family, 
and  the  success  of  the  patriots  had  caused  them  to  show 
a  presumptuous  exultation  which  made  me  hate  them.  At 
that  period  a  lucky  circumstance  allowed  me  to  resume  my 
studies.  The  convents  were  suppressed,  and  a  friend  of  my 
father  got  me  admitted  among  some  persons  chosen  to  make 
out  the  catalogue  of  the  monks'  library.  Some  time  after- 
wards, M.  d'Ormesson  de  Moiseau,  one  of  the  presidents 
of  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  who  had  been  appointed  King's 
librarian,  wished  to  employ  a  well-informed  and  laborious 
3'oung  man.  I  was  introduced  to  him.  He  received  me 
with  a  kindness  that  delighted  me.  He  had  been  told  that 
I  knew  a  little  Greek  ;  he  was  himself  deeply  versed  in  that 
language,  and,  to  try  my  knowledge,  he  laid  before  me  a 
Xenophon  in  two  columns,  Latin  and  Greek.  I  blushed  at 
the  sight  of  the  formidable  book.  The  hero  himself,  during 
his  celebrated  Retreat  of  the  Ten  Thousand,  never  was  more 
perplexed  than  I.  However,  my  courage  revived  when  I 
looked  at  the  president,  whose  amiable  features  inspired  me 
with  confidence.  I  owned  that  I  had  made  but  superficial 
studies  in  an  obscure  college  ;  that  I  never  had  any  share 


20  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

in  the  triumphs  of  the  university  ;  and  that  my  utmost 
exertions  in  Greek  had  not  gone  beyond  the  explanation  of 
some  fragments  of  Demosthenes.  He  smiled  at  my  candour, 
and  began  to  read  fluently  the  Greek  in  French,  requesting 
me  to  follow  him  in  the  Latin  translation.  During  the 
time,  he  placed  his  hands  between  the  two  columns,  so  that 
I  might  see  he  made  no  use  of  the  Latin.  I  could  scarcely 
follow  him.  I  had  never  met  with  so  learned  a  Greek 
scholar,  and  I  expressed  openly  my  admiration.  He  appeared 
satisfied  with  me — partly,  perhaps,  because  he  was  so  with 
himself,  and  he  promised  to  provide  for  me.  I  felt  com- 
pletely happy.  A  part  of  the  day  was  spent  among  dusty 
old  books,  but  I  passed  every  morning  a  few  hours  with  M. 
d'Ormesson.  All  I  had  to  expect  through  his  influence  was 
merely  an  inferior  employment  in  the  King's  library  ;  but 
I  looked  upon  that  as  the  highest  pitch  of  good  fortune  ; 
and  often  since,  when  in  the  most  brilliant  situations,  I  have 
sighed  in  thinking  of  the  sweet  obscurity  I  had  been  pro- 
mised. We  were  then  far  from  entertaining  an  idea  that 
the  same  scaffold  was  designed  for  both  of  us,  and,  in  con- 
science I  must  own,  for  having  both  done  our  duty.  The 
painful  gratitude  with  which  I  remember  the  kindness  of 
that  respectable  gentleman  will  last  as  long  as  I  live.  I 
never  hear  the  name  of  Ormesson  without  emotion  ;  and 
whenever  chance  brought  me  in  presence  of  some  person  of 
his  family,  I  have  felt  an  involuntary  wish  to  address  him, 
to  speak  of  his  unfortunate  relation,  and  to  solicit  his 
friendship. 

The  generous  kindness  of  M.  d'Ormesson  extended  not 
only  to  my  pecuniary  welfare  ;  he  also  gave  me  some  excel- 
lent advice  on  the  conduct  I  was  to  observe  in  the  world — 
pointed  out  to  me,  with  truly  paternal  solicitude,  the 
different  quicksands  I  might  encounter.  In  speaking  of  the 
King,  he  showed  himself  a  subject  whose  loyalty  was  carried 
to  the  highest  pitch  of  enthusiasm,  though  he  deplored  the 
fatal  weakness  that  hurled  the  Monarch  down  the  precipice 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  21 

through  torrents  of  blood.  "  The  King,"  he  said,  "  shudders 
at  the  thought  of  spiUing  one  drop  of  blood  ;  and  all  his 
most  faithful  friends  will  die  without  being  able  to  save  him. 
He  has  been  warned  of  his  mistake,  but  nothing  can  make 
him  open  his  eyes  ;  we  have  therefore  no  choice  but  resig- 
nation and  death."  All  our  conversation  was  upon  the 
same  subject  ;  and  M.  d'Ormesson  communicated  to  me  the 
ardour  of  his  own  sentiments.  Notwithstanding  the  horror 
I  felt  at  the  scenes  of  tumult  that  we  witnessed  every  day,  I 
still  comprehended  well  enough  that,  the  Revolution  being 
a  struggle  between  the  privileged  classes  and  the  nation,  the 
latter  would,  if  successful,  reap  advantages  which  it  had  a 
right  to  claim.  I  also  felt,  that  as  I  did  not  myself  belong 
to  the  privileged  classes,  I  was  at  liberty  to  remain  indif- 
ferent to  their  interests  and  their  contest.  But  M.  d'Ormes- 
son fixed  all  my  thoughts  on  the  deplorable  situation  of  the 
King  and  his  family.  My  imagination  took  fire,  and  all 
I  then  perceived  was  a  virtuous  Prince  in  durance — his 
noble  consort  and  her  children  exposed  to  the  most  bar- 
barous treatment  ;  and  I  vowed  from  that  moment  to  take 
a  share  in  all  the  plans  that  should  be  attempted  for  their 
deliverance. 

I  must  acknowledge  that  my  disgust  for  the  idle  pratthng 
of  the  Revolution  not  a  little  contributed  to  make  me  a 
Royalist.  I  am  far  from  refusing  a  just  tribute  of  esteem 
to  the  eminent  talents  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  and 
only  mean  to  speak  of  the  assemblies  of  my  section  that 
were  held  every  day,  and  where  I  was  forced  to  assist  as  a 
national  guard.  The  citizens  of  Paris  are  unquestionably  very 
honourable  men  ;  but  it  must  have  been  impossible  for  any 
person  of  good  sense  and  some  little  instruction  not  to  feel 
disgusted  at  their  foolish  and  extravagant  speeches.  Their 
mania  for  political  assemblies  and  long  orations  were  encou- 
raged by  the  immense  number  of  gentlemen  of  the  Bar,  who 
made  themselves  quite  ridiculous  by  misusing  perpetually 
their  excessive  facility  of  elocution.     In  my  neighbourhood 


22  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

there  lived  a  lawyer  of  some  repute  called  B ,  whose 

exuberance  of  speech  was  truly  marvellous.  The  objects  of 
the  deliberations  were  necessarily  very  circumscribed  ;  but 
when  that  man  opened  his  mouth,  we  were  sure  to  be  over- 
whelmed with  a  deluge  of  quotations  and  moral  sentences, 
all  frequently  about  a  lantern  or  the  stall  of  an  apple-woman. 
His  stentorian  voice  made  the  roofs  ring  ;  and,  after  speaking 
for  two  hours,  he  was  sure  to  be  rewarded  by  thunders  of 
applause.  The  orator  then  seemed  to  think  himself  a  Mira- 
beau,  and  his  auditors  the  Constituent  Assembly  deciding 
over  the  fate  of  France.  These  people  setting  the  example, 
others,  who  at  first  listened  to  them  patiently,  wished  to 
speak  in  their  turn  ;  and  three  years  afterwards  they  cut  the 
throats  of  their  instructors,  and  of  those  whom  the  latter 
had  taught  them  to  regard  as  hostile  to  their  views. 

In  1790,  I  frequently  mounted  guard  in  the  palace.  I 
expected  to  find  in  the  countenance  of  the  King  some  marks 
of  grief  and  pride  ;  but,  I  must  own,  I  saw  nothing  but 
listlessness.  His  enormous  embonpoint — his  eyes  without 
expression — his  gait  deprived  of  all  manner  of  dignity,  dis- 
concerted a  little  my  enthusiasm  ; — but  it  rekindled  at 
sight  of  the  Queen  and  her  children.  She  was  a  woman 
and  a  mother.  Born  in  a  foreign  countr}-,  she  had  been 
entrusted  to  the  honour  of  France.  How  strong  were  her 
claims  on  our  profound  devotion  !  The  errors  of  which  she 
had  been  accused,  even  supposing  the  truth  of  the  accusa- 
tions, were  surely  deserving  of  pardon  among  a  nation 
frivolous  enough  to  be  vain  of  its  corruptness.  For  that 
unfortunate  Queen,  therefore,  and  for  her  children,  my  heart 
was  moved  by  the  most  tender  and  respectful  admiration. 
Madame  Roy  ale  was  then  about  thirteen  years  old  :  the 
dignity  of  her  countenance — the  melancholy  expression 
spread  over  her  features  at  so  tender  an  age — the  sincere 
piety  that  seemed  to  fortify  her  in  her  misfortunes,  drew 
tears  from  my  eyes.  I  followed  the  Princesses  to  the  chapel, 
and  returned  quickly  to  the  saloon  of  the  guards  to  behold 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  23 

them  again.  I  would  willingly  have  given  my  life  for  them. 
So  much  grandeur  in  such  abasement,  so  much  innocence 
and  beauty  threatened  with  such  a  fate,  might  well  have 
ensured  to  them  the  protection  of  every  Frenchman.  Wher- 
ever I  went,  I  spoke  of  them  with  a  warmth  of  which, 
however,  I  could  not  succeed  in  making  other  young  men 
of  my  age  partake. 

I  could  not  imagine  that  there  was  not  in  the  Constituent 
Assembly  a  strong  and  active  party  to  save  the  Royal 
Family.  I  knew  that  M.  de  Clermont-Tonnerre  was  very 
much  attached  to  the  Queen.  I  wrote  several  letters  to  him 
to  express  my  grief,  and  to  beg  he  would  employ  my 
youthful  courage.  I  suppose  he  looked  upon  me  as  a 
young  enthusiast  who  might  bring  him  into  some 
trouble  : — he  never  answered  me,  and  I  believe  he  acted 
wisely. 

I  soon  observed  that  M.  d'Ormesson  became  less  unre- 
served than  usual  in  his  conversation.  I  suppose  he  was 
himself  terrified  with  the  success  of  his  plan  for  making  me 
a  Royalist  ;  for,  having  tried  in  vain  to  moderate  the  warmth 
of  my  zeal,  he  probably  feared  I  should  ruin  both  him  and 
myself  at  the  same  time.  When  I  asked  him  whether  any 
measures  had  been  taken  to  place  the  Royal  Family  in 
safety,  he  observed  that  the  time  for  that  would  come  ;  and 
then  entered  into  general  remarks,  of  which  I  could  not 
comprehend  the  drift.  One  day,  I  had  just  left  him  when 
I  learned  the  imprisonment  of  the  Marquis  de  Favras.  It 
was  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  :  the  particulars  of  the  crime 
of  which  the  Marquis  was  accused  were  not  yet  known  ;  and 
already  the  speech  delivered  at  the  Hotel  de  Ville  by  Mon- 
sieur, brother  to  the  King,  had  been  published.  The  Prince 
had  demanded  during  the  night  that  the  Council  should 
assemble  at  eight  o'clock  ;  and  there  he  betrayed  M.  de 
Favras,  his  former  servant,'  who  had  received  his  instruction 

'  M.  de  Favras  had  been  attached  to  Monsieur  as  Captain  of  the  Cent 
Suisses,  or  guards  of  the  door. — A'ote  of  the  Author. 


24  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

and  acted  by  his  orders,  with  whom  he  had  arranged  the 
flight  of  the  King,  of  the  Royal  Family  and  himself.     He 
made  many  protestations  of  his  attachment  to  the  new  order 
of  things  and  to  the  Constitution,  and  declared  himself  the 
first  citizen  of  the  kingdom.     By  that  means  he  delivered 
over  his  confidant  to  the  rigour  of  the  laws  and  to  an  infamous 
death  on  the  gallows.  The  Royalists  were  overwhelmed  with 
dismay  and  indignation.     The  most  sensible  amongst  them 
felt  convinced  that  the  royal  cause  was  irretrievably  lost,  and 
that   no  hopes  were  left  for  the  King.      Such  treachery, 
which  could  not  but  be  the  consequence  of  the  most  shameful 
cowardice,  discouraged  all  the  friends  of  the  King.     "  What 
is  to  be  done,"  said  they,  "for  a  Prince  who  suffers  those 
who  take  up  his  defence  to  be  sent  to  the  scaffold, — who, 
far  from  trying  to  protect  them,  finds  informers  against  them 
among  his  own  family  ?  "    Of  all  the  faults  committed  by  the 
Court,  this  was  the  most  unpardonable.     Excuses  may  be 
found  for  want  of  experience,  resolution,  and  strength  of 
mind  ;    but  to  deliver   up   one's   friends   out   of    fear, — to 
abandon  them  without  once  raising  a  hand  to  save  them 
from  the  scaffold,  is  unpardonable  baseness  !     M.  de  Favras 
was  sentenced  to  death.  I  was  on  duty  on  the  Quai  Pelletier 
when  the  unfortunate  man  passed  it  in  a  cart,  with  a  halter 
round  his  neck,  and  his  hands  tied  before  his  breast.     His 
confessor  seemed  as  dejected  as  though  he  himself  had  been 
doomed  to  die.    Favras,  on  the  contrary,  by  his  noble  attitude, 
his  proud  and  animated  look,  reminded  me  of  Samblangay, 
on  whose  death  Marot  made  those  celebrated  lines,  "  Lorsque 
Maillard,"  &c.     He  walked  up  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  uttered 
a  few  noble  sentences,  took  great  care  not  to  expose  the  man 
who  had  so  cruelly  betrayed  him,  and  courageously  submitted 
to  his  fate.     Some  wretches  were  base  enough  to  applaud. 
A  few  days  before  his  death,  he  expressed  a  wish  to  see  M. 
Talon,  the  Advocate-General.   To  him  he  told  in  confidence 
all  the  particulars  of  his  plan,  and  the  orders  he  received 
from  the  Count  de  Provence.     "  Have  you  these  orders  in 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  25 

writing  ?  "  asked  the  magistrate.  "  No." — "  In  that  case 
you  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  recommend  to  the  King's 
generosity  your  wife  and  children,  for  you  are  a  lost  man." 
I  heard  twenty  years  ago,  at  Dresden,  that  the  family  of  the 
unfortunate  Favras  lived  in  Bohemia  in  the  greatest  misery. 
My  indignity  at  the  strange  and  odious  conduct  of  the  Court 
in  this  affair  was  so  strong  that  I  made  no  secret  of  it  to 
M.  d'Ormesson.  "You  are  too  young,"  he  said,  "and  at 
too  great  a  distance  from  the  Court,  to  be  able  to  judge 
of  its  motives.  Supposing  even  M.  de  Favras  had  re- 
ceived orders,  could  the  Royal  Family  acknowledge  them  ? 
That  man's  death  is  undoubtedly  a  very  unfortunate  cir- 
cumstance, but  it  was  a  necessary  sacrifice  to  the  King's 
safety.  He  has  perished,  the  victim  of  his  loyalty.  He 
has  suffered  an  ignominious  death  ;  but  God  will  receive 
him  in  grace,  and  his  sentence  will  be  rectified  by  pos- 
terity." I  had  too  much  respect  for  M.  d'Ormesson  to 
make  any  reply  ;  but  he  must  certainly  have  perceived 
that  he  had  not  convinced  me. 

Twenty-eight  years  have  now  elapsed  since  the  death  of 
M.  de  Favras.  I  have  read  more  than  twenty  times  over 
all  the  particulars  of  his  trial.  Neither  age,  knowledge  of 
mankind,  experience,  nor  the  various  events  I  have  witnessed, 
have  had  power  to  weaken  or  modify  the  first  impression  I 
received.  I  am  still  convinced  that  those  who  sacrificed 
him  were  guilty  of  a  total  want  of  honesty  and  good  policy, 
and  acted  with  the  utmost  baseness.  By  his  conduct  in  this 
affair  the  King  was  irretrievably  lost  ;  and  a  part  of  his 
family  inspired  sentiments  of  hatred  and  contempt  that  still 
subsist  to  this  day.  Those  sentiments  were  not  felt  alone 
by  those  who  were  by  birth  and  rank  connected  with 
royalty  ;  they  were  shared  by  every  honest  citizen.  Many 
years  afterwards  I  discovered  in  all  classes  the  same  energetic 
indignation  ;  and  when  Louis  XVni.  re-entered  the  metro- 
polis, all  those  who  were  not  led  away  by  the  enthusiasm  of 
novelty,  and  the  number  was  great,  had  at  the  bottom  of 


26  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

their  heart  and  on  their  lips  the  name  of  the  unfortunate 
Favras.^ 

This  enterprise,  which  so  fatally  terminated,  augmented 
the  distrust  of  the  people,  and  was  of  wonderful  service  to 
the  revolutionary  party.  Those  who  still  believed  that  the 
King  really  intended  to  give  the  people  their  promised 
advantages  were  undeceived,  and  his  enemies  turned  it  to 
account  to  envenom  their  accusations.  Libels  were  spread 
about  with  so  much  profusion  and  such  rapidity,  that  it  became 
impossible  for  the  Court  to  offer  any  defence.  It  was  about 
that  time  that  the  rage  of  emigration  began.  It  appeared 
an  easier  task  to  go  to  Coblentz  to  threaten  than  to  remain 
in  Paris  to  assist  the  King,  or  to  commence  in  the  provinces 
a  civil  war,  the  chances  of  which  would  at  that  time  have 
been  doubtful,  especially  when  waged  by  men  who  were 
unable  to  cast  off  their  luxurious  habits,  and  who,  unknown 
to  themselves,  carried  in  their  breasts  some  of  the  seeds  of 
the  revolution,  that  is  to  say,  want  of  discipline  and  sub- 
ordination, discontent  and  a  taste  for  innovation.  The 
Royal  Family  remained,  therefore,  surrounded  by  a  few 
hundred  noblemen,  whom  duty,  or  the  most  noble  and 
courageous  fidelity,  still  retained  in  France  ;  but  this  fidelity 
was  accompanied  with  so  much  hatred  of  the  patriots,  and 
so  much  foolish  presumption,  that  it  proved  more  dangerous 
than  useful  to  their  master.  They  were  jealous  of  the 
National  Guards  who  did  duty  in  the  palace  ;  their  ever- 
lasting derision  and  threats  disgusted  all  the  citizens  honestly 
attached  to  the  King.  As  soldiers,  the  National  Guard  un- 
doubtedly were  not  undeserving  of  some  little  ridicule  ;  but 
ought  they  to  have  been  thus  irritated  whilst  they  were  giving 
such  disinterested  proofs  of  fidelity,  and  when  they  might 
have  been  so  extremely  useful  ?     The  commander-in-chief 

'  The  reader  must  here  not  lose  sight  of  the  peculiar  situation  in  which 
Count  Lavalette  was  placed,  as  a  devoted  friend  of  the  Emperor  and  a 
personal  enemy  of  Louis  XVIII.  A  very  different  account  of  the  affair  of 
M.  de  Favras  may  be  found  in  Bertrand  de  Moleville,  Histcire  de  la  Revo- 
lution, vol.  ii.  page  341. — Note  of  the  Translator. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  27 

of  the  Guards  was  more  particularly  the  object  of  their 
bitter  satires.  This  soured  our  temper,  and  I  observed  with 
rregret  that  many  honest  men  who  would  have  laid  down 
their  lives  for  the  King  took  the  fatal  resolution  of 
abandoning  him.  I  must  say,  however,  that  the  Royal 
Family  were  far  from  approving  the  conduct  of  their  pre- 
tended friends.  The  King  and  Queen  always  showed  the 
greatest  affability  to  the  National  Guards  ;  but  their  example 
was  not  followed,  nor  were  even  their  remonstrances  listened 
to.  I  may  quote  one  instance,  of  which  the  consequences 
were  fatal.  The  Duke  of  Orleans  had  for  some  time  felt 
that  he  stood  in  an  equivocal  light,  and  that  his  position  at 
Court  was  unworthy  of  his  name  and  character.  He  wished 
to  come  to  a  reconciliation  with  the  King  and  Queen.  A 
negotiation,  prudently  managed,  succeeded  completely.  It 
was  agreed  that  the  first  Prince  of  the  Blood  should  come 
publicly  to  pay  his  respects — I  think  it  was  on  Easter 
Sunday.  The  apartments  were  crowded.  The  Prince 
appeared  at  the  moment  dinner  was  being  served  up  to 
the  Royal  Family.  Immediately  some  silly  yovmg  men, 
thinking  themselves  very  clever,  cried  out — "Take  care  of 
the  dishes  !  Here  comes  the  Duke  of  Orleans !  "  Another 
imagined  he  was  doing  some  wonderful  achievement  in 
brushing  by  the  Prince,  and  saying  insolently — "  That  was 
a  kick.''  The  Prince,  seeing  himself  thus  insulted  in  the 
King's  presence,  left  the  palace  abruptly,  convinced  that  the 
Queen  had  drawn  him  into  an  odious  snare.  From  that 
moment  he  joined  the  most  violent  of  the  factions,  and  the 
fatal  and  shameful  consequences  of  that  step  are  but  too  well 
known. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

The  members  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  were  still  chiefly- 
occupied  in  preparing  an  ill-combined  Constitution  ;  by  it, 
however,  they  laid  the  foundation  of  the  Representative 
System,  which  cost  us  so  dear,  but  by  which  alone  France 
can  be  saved.  All  the  powers  of  the  state  became  vested  in 
that  Assembly,  from  the  time  that  the  King  was  unable 
to  wield  them.  Public  Opinion,  a  jealous  and  capricious 
sovereign,  had  commenced  her  stormy  reign  :  Louis,  whom 
she  was  driving  from  his  throne,  aware  that  her  strength 
no  longer  reigned,  imagined  that  he  should  recover  his 
sceptre  and  his  crown,  where  his  brother,  and  the  small 
troop  of  emigrants  that  surrounded  him,  were  under  foreign 
control  assuming  a  threatening  attitude.  As  he  could  not 
hope  to  find  any  Frenchman  that  would  aid  his  flight,  the 
King  confided  his  design  to  a  foreigner,  the  Swedish. 
Ambassador.  The  plan  was  executed  with  an  address  and 
a  zeal  deserving  of  better  success  than  it  obtained.  The  21st 
of  June,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  city  learned 
with  the  greatest  astonishment  that  the  whole  Royal  Family 
had  disappeared  ;  but  the  first  feeling  of  surprise  was 
immediately  succeeded  by  an  indifference  so  general,  and 
by  so  decided  a  resolution  to  dispense  with  the  King  and 
with  the  royal  authority  of  King,  that  the  grand  question 
of   a   republic    seemed   decided.     However,  some   persons  ^ 

28 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  29 

ashamed  of  having  been  deceived,  wished  to  stop  the 
fugitives  :  the  particulars  of  the  King's  arrest  at  Varennes 
are  well  known.  The  postmaster  Drouet,  with  whom  I 
became  acquainted  a  long  time  afterwards,  told  me  that  the 
King  might  have  passed  without  hindrance,  if  he  had  not 
mounted  on  horseback  the  moment  he  was  stopped.  Drouet 
was  then  too  agitated  to  have  acted  in  such  a  case  with 
decision.  Besides,  the  escort  was  more  than  sufficient  to 
overawe  the  few  persons  whom  curiosity  had  drawn 
round  the  carriage  ;  and  even  when  the  tocsin  had  col- 
lected a  greater  number,  a  few  firm  words  from  the 
King  would  have  dispersed  them  or  checked  them  ;  but 
the  King  would  not,  or  rather  dared  not  speak.  How 
severely  would  history  have  judged  this  prince,  had  he 
been  less  unfortunate  ! 

His  return  to  Paris  was  at  the  same  time  a  most  dismal 
and  most  imposing  scene.  An  immense  population  crowded 
around  him  as  he  passed  ;  a  hundred  thousand  armed  men 
lined  the  road  and  the  Champs  Elysees,  to  the  Tuileries  ;  a 
feeling  of  delicacy,  as  well  as  pride,  dictated  to  this  multi- 
tude the  deepest  silence.  A  man  deprived  of  the  faculty  of 
hearing  might  have  fancied  he  saw  the  triumphant  entrance 
of  a  conqueror,  whilst,  in  truth,  the  solemn  scene  was  only 
an  escort  of  prisoners.  This  was  the  second  time  they 
passed  in  agony  the  square  embellished  with  the  statue  of 
Louis  XV.  ;  they  were  destined  to  visit  it  once  more,  and 
there  to  suffer  by  the  hands  of  the  executioner.  The  sight 
of  that  family  was  heartrending.  Their  incomprehensible 
fate  excited  horror  in  some,  whilst  the  timid  recoiled  from 
them  as  from  beings  bearing  a  mark  of  inevitable  doom, 
and  whose  approach  brought  with  it  the  contagion  of  mis- 
fortune. 

The  National  Assembly  adopted  the  only  reasonable 
course  left  to  that  body,  namely,  to  suspend  the  royal 
functions.  Louis,  on  the  contrary,  chose  the  worst  possible 
course — that  of  wishing  to  remain  a  king,  after  his  flight 


30  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

had  proved  his  resolution  not  to  execute  sincerely  the  new 
laws,  and  his  antipathy  for  all  that  had  taken  place  since 
the  Revolution.  His  forced  return,  and  all  the  circum- 
stances with  which  it  was  accompanied,  had  degraded  the 
majesty  of  the  throne,  and  dissipated  those  illusions  with- 
out which  royalty  cannot  exist  in  France.  A  short  time 
afterwards,  the  Constitution  was  completed  and  presented 
to  him  for  his  acceptance.  He  signed  it,  and  here  begins 
that  long  series  of  acts  with  which  he  was  reproached  in  his 
trial.  All  things  are  difficult  to  a  weak  mind.  A  thousand 
dangers  presented  themselves  to  the  King's  imagination,  and 
it  must  be  owned  that  he  was  still  more  unfortunate  in  the 
people  that  surrounded  him  than  in  his  own  disposition. 
A  crowd  of  ambitious  men  besieged  the  gate  of  his  palace. 
The  King,  who  himself  had  no  faith  in  the  Constitution, 
chose  ministers  who  wished  to  make  it  serve  their  private 
ends,  and  who  sometimes  indeed  struggled  with  the  public 
folly,  but  who  frequently  caressed  it.  At  first  the  King  was 
suffered  to  try  quietly  enough  the  scanty  prerogatives  of  a 
constitutional  royalty.  He  was  allowed  to  form  a  guard  for 
the  protection  of  his  person,  but  he  entrusted  the  command 
of  it  to  friends  of  his  own,  who  were  enemies  of  the  Revolu- 
tion. The  law  completed  this  guard  with  non-commissioned 
officers  and  privates  influenced  by  the  revolutionary  spirit,, 
and  a  few  sons  of  citizens  were  admitted  into  it  as  a  proof  of 
the  King's  sincerity.  The  division  between  these  different 
elements  surpassed  the  most  sanguine  hopes  of  the  Re- 
publicans, besides  which  the  King  took  no  pains  to  attach 
his  new  guards  to  his  person  :  attentions,  kind  words,  and 
all  that  amiability  of  manner  by  which  men  are  won,  had 
been  since  Henry  IV.  unknown  to  his  posterity  ;  a  con- 
temptuous etiquette  scorned  the  use  of  such  means,  and. 
regarded  them  as  vulgar  intrigue.  The  consequence  was 
that  the  Assembly,  under  I  know  not  what  pretence,  dis- 
banded this  troop,  which  already  amounted  to  fifteen 
hundred  men.     Two  obscure  municipal  officers  came  to  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  31 

Palace  of  the  Tuileries  ;  induced  the  Guards  to  follow  them 
to  the  Military  School,  where  they  peaceably  laid  down  their 
arms  ;  the  next  morning  not  a  trace  of  them  was  remaining. 
By  a  chain  of  those  extraordinary  circumstances  which  belong 
to  the  history  of  our  age,  there  arose  from  the  ranks  of  these 
obscure  soldiers,  who  thus  passed  under  the  most  igno- 
minious yoke,  a  Marshal  of  France  (Bessieres),  a  man  equally 
distinguished  by  his  gallantry  and  by  his  faithful  devotion  to 
his  master,  when  acknowledged  as  King  by  all  the  Sovereigns 
of  Europe.  The  life  of  Bessieres  was  distinguished  by 
brilliant  feats  of  valour,  and  would  have  occupied  many 
bright  pages  in  history,  had  he  not  in  his  latter  days  dis- 
graced his  crown  of  glory  by  odious  ingratitude  towards 
his  benefactor. 

The  Constituent  Assembly,  fatigued  by  long  struggles, 
had  resolved,  as  much  perhaps  out  of  disinterestedness  as 
discouragement,  to  abandon  the  field  of  battle.  It  was 
succeeded  by  the  Legislative  Assembly,  who  found  itself 
surrounded  by  hatred  of  royalty  among  the  people,  hatred 
of  the  Constitution  on  the  part  of  the  King,  discouragement 
in  the  hearts  of  all  honest  men,  and  a  faction  full  of  energy 
in  favour  of  a  republic.  The  Assembly  divided  under  two 
banners.  The  most  numerous  party,  and,  what  is  more 
singular,  the  most  talented  one,  set  to  work  at  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  monarchy,  with  an  ardour  and  a  blindness  so 
inexplicable  that  the  members  of  that  party  who  still 
survive  have  never  been  able  to  assign  any  reasonable 
motives  to  justify  so  much  fury.  The  Legislative  Assembly, 
on  opening,  received  the  King  in  a  very  decorous  manner, 
and  the  Book  of  the  Constitution  with  a  ridiculous  solemnity. 
It  is  sufficient  to  point  out  to  a  people  the  road  to  ruin  and 
degradation,  and  they  will  stride  in  it  with  giant's  steps. 
In  the  present  circumstance  they  did  not  mistake  the  mark. 
They  began  by  loading  the  King  with  obloquy,  and  then 
they  ridiculed  the  Constitution  itself.  But  the  King  was  a 
defenceless  victim  held  in  reserve,  whom  they  were  sure  of 


32  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

■finding  whenev^er  they  might  be  disposed  to  sacrifice  him. 
First  of  all,  it  was  necessary  to  overthrow  the  fundamental 
laws.  The  Constitution  was  therefore  attacked  in  its  essence 
— in  the  Ministers  and  the  King  that  were  to  put  it  in 
execution  and  protect  it.  During  the  last  three  years,  a 
boundless  profusion  of  laws  had  been  enacted, — a  circum- 
stance which  deprived  them  of  solemnity,  their  most  neces- 
sary appendage.  It  was  consequently  not  very  diflScult  to 
bring  them  into  contempt.  After  them  nothing  remained 
but  the  Sovereign,  despoiled  and  insulted,  a  true  Ecce  homo^ 
who  had  borne  the  greatest  outrages,  and  had  not  resolution 
to  look  in  the  face  a  people  whose  first  and  constant  idol 
had  always  been  courage.  They  were  to  overthrow  that 
King,  and  never  was  design  wrought  with  more  open 
audacity.  The  numerous  insults,  their  regular  progress, 
their  variety  until  the  terrible  day  of  the  fall, — all  was 
calculated  with  a  coolness  and  a  depth  of  combination  of 
which  there  is  no  other  example  in  history.  If  the  hour  of 
destruction  were  protracted,  no  merit  is  due  to  the  exertions 
of  the  Court.  The  abettors  of  the  Revolution  wanted  to 
dispose  all  things  according  to  their  plan,  and  one  of  their 
chief  points  was  to  degrade  their  victim  before  they 
slaughtered  him. 

However,  the  Sovereigns  of  Europe  now  began  to  imagine 
that  they  ought  not  to  remain  idle  spectators  of  our  conten- 
tions. The  French  Revolution  had  not  alarmed  them,  for 
they  hoped  that  our  troubles  would  weaken  us.  The  power 
of  our  brilliant  nation  had  made  others  pay  dearly  for  our 
glory  ;  and  our  civilisation,  which  they  were  forced  to  admit 
amongst  themselves,  wounded  their  pride.  But  when  at 
last  they  saw  that  the  great  question  of  social  organisation 
assailed  their  thrones,  they  resolved  to  stop  the  torrent  that 
threatened  them.  Two  of  the  Sovereigns  had  a  conference 
together,  and  with  the  Elector  of  Saxony  at  Pilnitz,  who, 
although  too  wise  to  approve  of  their  plans,  was  still,  as  a 
monarch,  too  weak  to  reject  them.     Thus,  in  conjunction 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  33 

with  an  Emperor  of  Austria  and  a  successor  of  Frederick  the 
Great,  a  French  prince  was  planning  the  dismemberment 
of  France,  without  uttering  a  word  in  the  defence  of  his 
country.  The  news  of  this  act,  so  like  the  partition  of 
Poland,  fell  on  Paris  like  a  thunderbolt.  The  great  ques- 
tion of  war  was  discussed  in  the  Legislative  Assembly.  The 
debates  that  took  place  there  had  less  influence  on  public 
opinion  than  those  of  the  Jacobin  Club,  where  Robespierre 
began  to  rule.  This  man  voted  against  the  war.  Was  it  a 
forewarning  that  military  glory  would  one  day  be  fatal  to 
him  ?  Did  he  fear  that  the  French  would  be  beaten  ? — 
that  foreigners  would  overthrow  the  Republic  he  wanted  to 
raise  up,  and  punish  him  for  the  crimes  he  was  about  to 
commit  ?  However,  in  spite  of  his  faction,  war  was  resolved 
on.  It  was  undoubtedly  the  wisest  measure  ;  for  the  enemy 
was  resolved  to  begin,  and  France,  ill  prepared,  would  have 
lost  all  the  advantages  of  the  attack.  The  King  gave 
the  command  of  the  army  to  generals  who  had  taken  part 
in  the  Revolution,  such  as  Messieurs  Lafayette,  Luckner, 
Montesquiou,  Biron,  De  Broglie,  Custines,  Kellerman, 
Beauharnais,  &c. 

But  the  Jacobins,  who  already  possessed  a  formidable 
power,  had  by  far  outrun  the  patriots  of  1789.  Their 
cherished  government  was  the  Republic,  whilst  the  latter 
remained  true  to  the  constitutional  Monarchy.  The  first 
action  of  the  war  was  disgraceful.  Our  troops  attempted  an 
attack  on  the  enemy  at  Mons,  but  were  repulsed  in  such 
confusion  that,  if  the  uprightness  of  our  generals  had  not 
been  so  well  known,  the  affair  might  have  seemed  concerted 
either  with  the  Court  or  with  the  Jacobins.  M.  de  Dillon, 
one  of  the  commanders,  was  on  his  return  assassinated  by 
his  soldiers,  exasperated  at  the  disgrace  they  had  suffered. 
But  in  Paris  the  Jacobins  threw  all  the  blame  on  the  King, 
and  persuaded  the  people  that  it  was  impossible  for  the 
troops  to  gain  a  victory  when  commanded  by  generals 
appointed  by  him.     In  fact,  the  Monarch,  having  no  more 

4 


34  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

power,  was  unable  to  transmit  energy  and  discipline  to  the 
army.  The  generals  themselves,  placed  in  a  most  false 
position,  and  foreseeing  political  changes,  no  longer  knew 
for  whom  they  fought.  The  soil  of  France  was  undoubtedly 
to  be  protected  ;  but  it  was  necessary  to  know  in  favour  of 
what  government.  All  the  generals  were  noblemen  ;  they 
had  wished  for  freedom,  but  with  a  Monarchy  ;  and  the 
principles  of  the  Jacobins  could  not  be  very  pleasing  to 
them.  The  latter  resolved  to  put  an  end  to  all  uncertainty, 
by  hastening  the  fall  of  the  throne  and  the  establishment  of 
a  republic. 

I  have  already  described  how  the  National  Guards,  who 
were  the  King's  real  defenders,  had  been  discouraged  by  the 
Court  ;  the}'  were  afterwards  intimidated  by  the  faction  of 
the  Jacobins.  The  destruction  of  the  throne,  and  the 
establishment  of  a  republic,  determined  and  proclaimed  by 
furious  men,  whom  torrents  of  blood  were  incapable  of  with- 
holding, spread  dismay  among  the  respectable  citizens  of  the 
metropolis.  Had  they  been  gifted  with  but  a  small  portion 
of  energy,  had  unity  reigned  among  them,  and  had  they 
themselves  known  how  numerous  they  were,  the  throne 
would  have  been  preserved.  But  could  obscure  citizens  be 
required  to  show  that  foresight  in  which  men  of  the  highest 
rank  had  been  wanting  ?  Could  they  be  expected  to  die  for 
a  Sovereign  who  did  not  choose  to  defend  himself?  They 
in  consequence  kept  aloof,  and  the  disaffected,  delivered  of 
that  obstacle,  had  only  the  regiment  of  Swiss  Guards  to 
conquer.  The  King  had  preferred  being  protected  by  them, 
because  he  thought  it  easier  to  pay  foreign  troops  than  to 
gain  the  good- will  of  the  French.  The  Jacobins  found  but 
little  difficulty  in  exciting  the  people  against  the  Swiss  ;  and, 
thanks  to  their  speeches  and  writings,  the  fury  of  the  citizens 
equalled  that  of  Spanish  bulls  at  the  sight  of  a  red  flag. 
"  Why,"  said  they,  "  do  Swiss  peasants  act  as  guards  to  the 
King  of  the  French  ?  Why  do  those  men,  so  foreign  to  our 
customs,  our  manners,  and  our  language,  place  themselves 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  35 

between  the  people  and  their  constitutional  King  ?  Are 
there  no  more  French  soldiers  ?  The  National  Guards  have 
lost  the  confidence  of  the  Court,  who  seek  the  protection 
of  foreigners,  and  a  time  will  come  when  foreigners  will 
triumph  over  them.  The  Royal  Family,  the  generals,  the 
foreign  powers,  are  bound  by  a  secret  compact,  the  execu- 
tion of  which  grows  every  day  more  visible.  There  is 
treason  everywhere,  and,  if  adequate  measures  are  not 
soon  taken,  all  France,  but  particularly  Paris,  will  be 
delivered  up  to  fire  and  sword.  Not  a  moment  must  be 
lost." 

Sedition  of  this  sort  was  circulated  in  a  thousand  pam- 
phlets, and  repeated  in  all  the  assemblies  of  the  mob  with  that 
vulgar  energ}-  so  powerful  over  them.  It  afforded  increased 
excitement  to  minds  in  which  all  ideas  of  order  or  submis- 
sion were  long  since  obliterated.  The  Jacobins  began  their 
operations  ;  but  they  wished  to  begin  by  a  trial,  in  the  hope 
of  gaining  amidst  the  fury  of  a  new  riot  what  might  perhaps 
not  succeed  in  a  regular  attack.  On  the  20th  of  June,  the 
whole  faubourgs  set  themselves  in  motion,  and  came  down 
to  the  Palace  of  the  Tuileries,  under  the  pretence  of  claiming 
from  the  King  his  assent  to  several  decrees  he  had  rejected. 
General  Lafayette  was  no  longer  in  Paris ;  the  heads  of  the 
divisions  commanded  by  turns  the  National  Guards  ;  but 
none  of  them  had  any  influence.  The  orders  that  were 
given  to  the  citizens  to  assemble  at  the  palace  were  not 
executed,  and  the  Royal  Family  had  only  to  depend  on  its 
own  influence  and  that  of  the  courtiers  who  did  not  show 
themselves.  The  rebels  entered  the  palace,  broke  open  the 
doors,  and  advanced  to  the  apartments  of  the  King,  who 
came  to  meet  them  with  noble  spirit.  The  sight  of  the 
Monarch,  and  the  calmness  of  his  manner,  disconcerted 
those  who  marched  foremost,  and  who  were  probably  the 
most  desperate  of  the  gang.  That  first  moment  saved  the 
King  and  his  family.  The  shouts  and  imprecations  of  the 
mob  that  followed  were  without  effect.     The  opportunity 


36  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

was  lost  for  slaughter,  and  the  rebels  attempted  in  vain  to 
regain  their  advantage.  A  sort  of  strange  dialogue  took 
place  between  the  King  and  the  leaders  of  the  mob.  The 
vanity  of  the  latter  was  flattered,  but  the  Monarch  could 
not  avoid  the  humiliation  of  putting  on  the  red  cap.  The 
roof  rang  with  horrible  cries  and  frightful  abuse.  The 
Queen,  in  particular,  was  the  object  of  most  terrible  threats, 
and  she  was  present  all  the  while.  This  time  the  King's 
condescension  was  not  an  act  of  weakness.  His  fate  must 
be  deplored,  and  the  barbarous  insult  of  the  red  cap  must 
be  considered  in  the  same  light  as  the  crown  of  thorns 
placed  on  the  head  of  the  Christian  lawgiver.^  That 
despicable  triumph  satisfied  the  Jacobins.  They  let  the 
mob  depart,  firmly  resolved,  however,  to  take  more  decided 
measures. 

The  20th  of  June  was  a  signal  victory  for  the  rebels  ;  but 
did  it  cause  the  Court  and  the  Royalists,  who  prided  them- 
selves in  being  so  courageous  and  powerful,  to  open  their 
eyes  ?  If  the  King  still  entertained  hopes,  they  could  only 
be  founded  on  the  enemies  of  France.  A  pitiful  resource  ! 
Ought  he  not  to  have  felt  that  their  triumph  would  be  a 
sentence  of  death  for  him  ?  When  a  great  body  of  men, 
led  by  bold  and  able  chiefs,  have  once  placed  outrage  between 
themselves  and  reconciliation,  their  success  can  only  be 
ensured  by  crimes.  One  step  alone,  and  the  noblest,  re- 
mained to  be  taken  by  the  King  ; — that  was,  abdication  :  he 
should  have  laid  down  all  the  ensigns  of  royalty,  have  left 
the  Tuileries  in  broad  daylight,  on  foot,  surrounded  by  his 
family,  and,  having  disbanded  his  guards,  put  his  life  in  the 
hands  of  the  magistrates.  That  would  have  been  a  bold 
act  ;  but  the  King  had  no  comprehension  of  such  a 
step. 

I  know  that  it  is  easy  to  reason  on  events  after  they  are 
passed  ;  but  in  this  case  the  Monarch's  conduct  was  traced 

'  Le  Legislateur  des  Chretiens.  The  translator  begs  his  readers*  pardon 
for  M.  Lavalette's  impiety. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  yj 

out  by  circumstances.  He  had  no  more  hope  left — no  more 
friends  whose  devotion  am.ounted  to  the  sacrifice  of  their 
hves — no  more  power,  for  his  enemies  turned  it  against  him. 
When  disgraced  on  the  throne,  it  was  high  time  to  become 
a  private  citizen.  Such  a  noble  step  would  have  struck,  awe 
in  the  minds  of  every  one.  In  the  eyes  of  the  people,  he 
had  been  till  then  an  every-day  King  ;  but  that  King,  divest- 
ing himself  of  his  purple  robes,  stepping  down  from  the 
throne,  and  saying  to  the  nation,  "  I  have  governed  you 
during  eighteen  years  with  moderation  ;  you  deprive  me  of 
the  necessary  power  to  hold  the  reins  of  the  state  ;  you  wish 
for  a  republic  ;  establish  one  ;  I  submit  to  your  will.  In 
giving  up  the  throne,  I  only  ask  for  the  lives  of  my  wife 
and  children.  As  for  myself,  I  remain  in  your  hands.  You 
may  subject  me  to  insult  and  bodily  suffering  ;  but  my  soul 
belongs  to  God — you  can  neither  enfeeble  nor  debase  it."  I 
am  much  mistaken  if  such  words  addressed  to  the  French 
people  would  not  have  deeply  touched  and  perhaps  reclaimed 
them.  Instead  of  that,  the  unfortunate  Monarch  wished  to 
retain  a  sceptre  already  broken  in  his  hands :  the  result  is 
but  too  well  known. 

Among  the  persons  whom  I  met  in  society,  my  attach- 
ment to  the  royal  cause  particularly  attracted  the  attention 
of  the  Marquis  de  Verdiere.  He  was  an  old  man,  of  an 
ardent  and  chivalrous  mind.  His  long  services  in  India  had 
raised  him  to  the  rank  of  a  major-general.  He  was  not  rich, 
and  at  the  age  of  sixty-five  he  came  to  court  dangers  in 
defence  of  his  King,  with  as  much  spirit  as  he  formerly  had 
sought  them  in  battle  for  the  sake  of  glory.  That  amiable 
old  gentleman  had  conceived  a  particular  friendship  for  me. 
I  used  to  see  him  every  day,  especially  in  the  interval 
between  the  20th  of  June  and  the  loth  of  August.  It  v/as 
through  him  that  I  was  enabled  to  form  some  idea  of  all  the 
childish  delusions  with  which  the  poor  defenders  of  the  King 
fed  their  fantastic  hopes.  They  had  suffered  during  three 
years  all  the  insults  of  their  enemies,  and  instead  of  fixing 


38  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

their  eyes  on  the  inevitable  future,  they  triumphed  when 
perchance  some  biting  pamphlet,  well  seasoned  with  witty 
sarcasms,  was  published  with  success.  I  frequently  left  the 
Alarquis  in  the  evening  hopeless  and  dejected,  and  the  next 
morning  he  appeared  full  of  the  most  extravagant  hopes. 
Letters  had  been  received  from  Coblentz,  announcing  the 
advance  of  three  formidable  armies,  or  one  of  the  provinces 
had  risen  up  in  arms,  or  some  secret  plot  was  to  burst  like 
thunder  and  level  the  Jacobins  with  the  dust.  Even  after 
the  20th  of  June  he  still  dreamed  of  the  most  decided 
successes  :  an  immense  party  was  forming  among  the 
National  Guards,  under  the  protection  of  the  Ministry, 
and  the  Federation  of  the  14th  of  July  was  to  give  the 
signal  of  the  King's  triumph  over  his  enemies.  The  long 
wished-for  day  came  at  last,  and  brought  with  it  only  fresh 
insults  to  the  unfortunate  Monarch. 

The  inhabitants  of  Paris  were  at  that  time  infatuated  with 
a  deputy  of  the  Legislative  Assembly,  called  Petion.  He 
was  a  member  for  one  of  the  departments  of  the  late  province 
of  Picardy.  I  have  in  vain  consulted  my  memory  to  dis- 
cover in  what  manner  he  became  mayor  of  Paris.  The 
publications  of  the  time  have  recorded  of  him  not  one 
action,  not  one  speech,  capable  of  explaining  his  celebrity. 
It  is,  however,  probable  that  his  party  found  him  possessed 
of  some  talent,  or  they  would  not  have  conferred  on  him 
the  highest  magistracy  of  the  metropolis,  at  a  period  when 
that  office  gave  so  much  influence  over  the  Assembly  to  the 
man  who  enjoyed  it.  Petion  was  in  the  meridian  of  life  ; 
he  was  a  man  of  tall  stature  and  dignified  appearance  ;  his 
manners  were  polite,  and  his  character  bold,  which  latter 
quality  was,  I  suppose,  the  circumstance  that  determined 
the  choice  of  his  party.  Perhaps,  however,  that  boldness 
was  nothing  more  than  ambition  in  a  shallow  mind  ;  for 
nothing  resembles  courage  more  than  ignorance  of  danger. 
Petion  was  then  the  idol  of  the  people.  He  succeeded  M. 
Bailly,  who,   a  little  while  beforehand,   had  exercised  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  39 

■greatest  rigour  of  the  law  against  the  rebels  who  assembled 
in  the  Champ  de  Mars  to  proclaim  the  Republic.  On  their 
refusal  to  disperse,  he  hoisted  the  red  flag  as  a  signal  that 
martial  law  was  to  be  executed,  and  gave  orders  to  fire  upon 
them.  A  mayor  who,  on  the  contrary,  caressed  the  caprice 
of  the  mob,  and  who  had  devoted  himself  entirely  to  the 
Republicans,  could  not  fail  to  excite  considerable  enthusiasm. 
On  the  14th  of  July,  Petion  appeared  at  the  head  of  all  the 
most  vulgar  and  turbulent  part  of  the  populace  of  Paris. 
Above  one  hundred  thousand  men  wore  on  their  hats,  in 
large  characters^  the  inscription  :  Petion  or  death.  This 
was  the  watchword  of  the  day,  and  appeared  like  a  funda- 
mental maxim  of  the  horrible  anarchy  that  was  about  to 
exercise  its  fury. 

The  King  was  dragged  to  the  ceremony  with  his  family. 
There  he  heard  once  more,  and  not  for  the  last  time, 
expressions  of  hatred  and  rage.  He  took  his  station  in  the 
same  palace,  and  at  the  same  window,  where  two  years 
before  the  better  portion  of  the  nation  had  assembled  in  his 
presence,  to  render  him  the  homage  of  veneration  and 
gratitude,  which  was  then  sincere.  Undoubtedly  at  that 
time  the  illusion  which  a  faithful  people  had  impressed 
on  the  King's  mind  was  removed,  and  this  new  and  gloomy 
representation  must  have  appeared  to  him  as  the  conse- 
quence of  the  first,  but  how  different  in  the  eyes  of  those 
who  observed  with  attention  the  succession  of  events !  In 
1790,  a  great  people,  inflamed  by  liberty,  powerful  by  the 
consciousness  of  their  strength  and  their  rights,  demanded 
sincerely  a  monarchy  founded  on  law  :  the  most  affectionate 
concord  seemed  to  reign  between  the  people  and  the  Sove- 
reign. The  storms  of  July  and  October,  1789,  the  agitations 
which  had  taken  place  in  some  of  the  provinces,  had  grieved 
all  honest  men,  who  detested  them  from  the  bottom  of  their 
hearts:  love  for  the  Monarch,  and  an  abhorrence  of  anarchy, 
seemed  a  sacred  pledge  that  France  would  be  no  more 
troubled  by  it.     In  the  month  of  July,  1792,  on  the  con- 


40  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

trary,  that  nation,  so  generous,  so  united,  had  in  a  manner 
disappeared  before  a  horde  of  barbarians.  Feelings  of 
hatred  and  revenge  had  succeeded  nobler  sentiments.  The 
Monarch,  but  lately  so  beloved  by  the  country,  and  his 
family,  her  most  cherished  hope,  were  disgraced  by  cruel 
insults,  and  dragged  to  the  public  squares  like  as  to  the 
place  of  execution.  At  the  ceremony  of  the  Federation,  the 
King  was  forced  to  pass  between  two  files  of  ruffians  utter- 
ing insults  and  threats  of  rage,  on  his  way  to  the  Champ  de 
Mars  to  swear  once  more  that  he  would  maintain  a  Consti- 
tution he  had  signed  in  spite  of  himself,  and  that  had  already 
disappeared  under  the  rebels'  feet. 

M.  de  Lafayette,  having  received  the  account  of  the 
criminal  attempt  of  the  20th  of  June,  wanted  to  lead  his 
army  to  Paris  to  protect  the  King  against  the  Republicans  ; 
but  he  soon  discovered  that  all  feeling  of  love,  and  even  of 
interest  for  the  fate  of  the  Monarch,  was  extinguished  in  the 
hearts  of  his  soldiers.  A  king  seemed  now  to  be  a  thing 
superfluous,  or  out  of  place,  in  the  Constitution.  The  army 
was  in  the  enemy's  presence  ;  its  chief  desire  was  to  wash  off 
the  disgrace  of  its  first  defeats,  and  to  lay  by  victory  the 
foundation  of  national  independence.  M.  de.  Lafayette  had 
the  noble  courage  to  attempt  alone  what  he  could  not  obtain 
of  his  army.  He  came  to  Paris,  appeared  at  the  bar  of  the 
Assembly,  complained  with  energy  of  the  insults  the  King 
had  suffered,  of  the  acknowledged  plan  of  destroying  the 
Constitution,  and  of  the  anarchy  with  which  France  was 
threatened.  This  noble  step,  although  supported  by  the 
minority  of  the  Assembly,  did  not  succeed,  and  Lafayette 
was  on  the  point  of  being  impeached.  From  thence  he 
went  to  the  Palace  of  the  Tuileries,  where  he  was  received 
with  coolness.  Instead  of  appearing  grateful  for  this  act  of 
fidelity,  the  prejudices  of  the  Royal  Family  were  so  strong, 
that  it  is  said  the  Queen  declared  she  would  prefer  dying  to 
being  served  by  such  an  enemy.  The  general  left  Paris, 
sorely  grieved  for  the  fate  of  his  King  and  country.    He  was 


I     I 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  \\ 

soon  followed  by  the  emissaries  of  the  municipality  ;  and  a 
few  days  after  his  return  to  the  camp,  he  was  obliged  to  fly 
to  a  foreign  country  for  refuge  ;  but,  instead  of  finding  that 
refuge,  he  was,  in  violation  of  all  the  laws  of  nations,  made 
a  prisoner  in  the  dungeons  of  Austria. 


CHAPTER  V. 

The  enterprise  of  M.  de  Lafayette,  notwithstanding  its  ill 
success,  made  the  Jacobins  sensible  that  they  had  not  a 
moment  to  lose  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  plans. 
The  Court  was  upon  its  guard  :  it  was  no  longer  possible 
to  attempt  assassination  ;  an  attack  by  open  force  was  in 
consequence  resolved  and  fixed  on  for  the  4th  of  August. 
But  whether  the  conspirators  were  not  yet  ready,  or  whether 
that  day  had  only  been  named  to  deceive  the  Court,  the 
attack  did  not  take  place  then.  M.  de  Verdiere  passed  all 
day  at  the  palace,  and  on  returning  in  the  evening  he  used 
to  make  me  share  his  fears  without  being  able  to  inspire  me 
with  his  hopes.  He  told  me  that  emissaries  were  dispersed 
through  all  the  suburbs,  and  even  in  the  club  of  the  Jacobins 
itself  ;  that  all  their  designs  were  known  ;  that  the  National 
Guards  were  commanded  by  M.  Mandar,  a  late  officer  of  the 
Gardes  Francaises  ;  that  on  the  first  order  he  might  give, 
twenty  thousand  citizens  would  rise  in  arms  ;  that  all  the 
loyal  nobility  and  citizens  of  Paris  would  go  to  the  palace  ; 
that  the  King  would  mount  his  horse  ;  and  that  the  day 
intended  for  his  ruin  would  be  his  triumph.  I  did  all  I 
could  to  convince  him  that  the  National  Guards  would  not 
march  ;  that  they  had  lost  all  confidence  in  their  own  power  ; 
that  they  were  divided  in  their  opinions,  and,  above  all,  dis- 
couraged ;  in  one  word,  that  they  were  afraid  of  the  Jacobins. 
I  observed  that  M.  Mandar  was  scarcely  known,  and  inspired 
no  confidence  ;  that  three  or  four  battalions  of  gallant  men 

42 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  43 

would  be  insufficient  to  repulse  the  aggressors,  who  were  the 
whole  populace  of  Paris  ;  that  the  Swiss  Guards  were  objects 
of  horror,  and  would  be  overpowered  by  the  irritated  people  ; 
that  it  would  therefore  be  wiser  to  make  use  of  the  protec- 
tion of  these  troops,  for  the  purpose  of  leaving  Paris,  and 
retiring  towards  Normandy,  where  a  numerous  body  of 
cavalry  might  join  the  Court.  I  insisted  chiefly  on  the 
necessity  of  leaving  the  Tuileries  in  the  night.  The  Swiss 
being  masters  of  the  post  at  the  turning  bridge  that  com- 
municated with  the  Place  Louis  XV.,  the  first  hours  of  the 
retreat  would  pass  off  tranquilly.  But  it  was  impossible  to 
make  Verdiere  listen  to  reason.  He  continually  referred  to 
the  marks  of  courage  and  loyalty  exhibited  in  petitions 
signed  by  two  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  citizens,  who 
every  day,  and  on  every  occasion,  openly  declared  their  love 
for  their  King  and  their  implacable  hatred  of  the  rebels. 
"These  are  only  signs  manual,"  I  said  ;  "the  citizens  will 
fly  on  the  firing  of  the  first  cannon.  You  do  not  know  what 
it  is  to  hear  women  lament  and  children  cry.  The  good 
people  will  retire  to  their  beds  and  weep."  I  was  unable  to 
convince  him,  and  he  was  a  faithful  echo  of  all  those  who 
surrounded  the  Royal  Family.  However,  this  noble  old  man 
behaved  very  gallantly ;  he  escaped  by  a  miracle  the 
massacre  at  the  palace,  went  to  Coblentz,  and  having  re- 
turned to  Paris  a  short  time  afterwards,  he  perished  on  the 
scafi"old. 

The  loth  of  August  was  at  last  decidedly  fixed  upon  by 
the  conspirators.  The  battalion  of  St.  Antoine,  in  which  I 
served,  was  not  decided  to  take  any  share  in  the  day,  although 
it  was  commanded  by  a  staunch  Royalist  ;  but  my  company 
of  chasseurs  was  under  the  orders  of  a  young  architect  named 
Bleve,  a  man  of  determined  spirit,  and  one  in  whom  we 
placed  entire  confidence.  He  sent  us  word  at  two  o'clock  in 
the  morning.  The  greatest  part  of  the  company  joined  him, 
and  at  four  we  set  off  for  the  Tuileries.  A  dismal  sight  pre- 
sented itself  to  us  in  the  way.    Numerous  groups  of  common 


44  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

people,  armed  with  sabres,  pikes,  and  pistols,  crossed  the  Rue 
St.  Antoine,  going  towards  the  suburb,  and  casting  threaten- 
ing looks,  as  if  they  were  surprised  to  see  us  march  another 
way.  Some  of  them  abused  us,  others  called  their  neigh- 
bours. The  women  were  at  the  windows,  or  in  the  streets^ 
embracing  with  tears  their  husbands  and  sons.  The  gloomy 
energy  of  these  men  was  depicted  in  their  countenances  and 
motions.  As  we  advanced,  the  deepest  silence  reigned  on 
the  quays  ;  daylight  seemed  to  recoil  before  the  sacrilegious 
spectacle  of  a  city  abandoned  to  all  the  horrors  of  civil  war 
and  crime. 

We  arrived  in  the  court  of  the  Tuileries  a  little  before  five 
o'clock.  At  that  time  the  palace  had  not  the  imposing  aspect 
which  now  renders  it  one  of  the  most  noble  royal  residences. 
The  large  court,  separated  in  all  its  length  from  the  square 
by  an  iron  railing,  was  divided  in  three  parts,  each  encum- 
bered by  houses  and  walls.  Instead  of  the  railing  there  were 
old  decayed  buildings,  occupied  by  tradespeople,  and  the 
grand  entrance  closed  with  a  folding  door.  A  short  while 
after  we  had  arrived  in  the  middle  court,  a  company  of 
artillery  of  the  sections  of  the  Blancs  Monteaux  entered  with 
two  field-pieces,  crying  Vive  le  Roi  !  The  battalions  of  the 
Petits  Peres  and  the  Filles  St.  Thomas  had  preceded  us,  and 
were  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  in  the  court.  We  soon  joined 
together,  interchanging  the  most  touching  tokens  of  friend- 
ship for  one  another,  attachment  to  the  King,  and  hatred  of 
the  rebels. 

At  five  o'clock  we  learned  that  the  King  was  going  to 
review  us.  He  soon  appeared,  accompanied  by  a  few  oflBcers 
of  his  household  and  about  twenty  persons  in  plain  dresses, 
armed  with  pistols  and  muskets.  His  cold  tranquillity  and 
apathy  under  such  terrible  circumstances  produced  a  painful 
impression.  He  addressed  to  us,  as  he  was  passing  by,  a  few 
words  we  did  not  hear,  and  returned  to  the  palace.  This 
scene  made  a  dismal  impression  upon  us,  but  it  was  quickly 
dissipated  when  the  grenadiers  of  the  battalion  of  the  Filles 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  45 

St.  Thomas  proposed  to  us  to  sign  a  proclamation  in  favour 
of  the  King,  written  by  one  of  their  officers.  We  went  into 
a  room  on  the  ground-floor,  which  has  since  served  as  ante- 
chamber for  the  home  department  of  the  Council  of  State. 
The  gallant  author  of  the  proclamation  had  been  wounded  a 
few  days  before  by  the  Marseillais  in  the  Champs  Elysees, 
and  had  been  carried  to  the  Tuileries  in  a  handbarrow.  We 
had  the  pleasure  of  embracing  him.  I  suspect  he  must  have 
perished  a  few  hours  afterwards,  and  I  am  sorry  I  do  not 
recollect  his  nam.e. 

The  emissaries  we  sent  to  the  Faubourg  St.  Antoine  came 
every  now  and  then  to  tell  us  that  the  enemy  was  setting 
out  and  would  soon  arrive.  We  were  fully  determined  to 
repulse  him.  Nevertheless  our  unbounded  devotedness  to 
the  royal  cause  could  alone  make  us  blind  to  the  smallness 
of  our  numbers  and  our  desperate  situation.  I  can  affirm 
that  there  were  no  more  than  three  hundred  men  in  the 
chief  court,  and  none  at  all  either  in  the  Pavilion  de  Flore 
or  in  the  Pavilion  Marsan.  The  Swiss  occupied  all  the 
apartments  of  the  palace,  and,  to  crown  the  whole,  the  gene- 
ral in  chief  of  our  well-disposed  army  was  AI.  de  Wittinghoff, 
an  old  man  above  sixty,  who  spoke  barbarous  French,  knew 
nothing  either  of  France  or  Paris,  was  rather  lame,  and  cer- 
tainly had  not  the  least  idea  of  the  enemies  he  had  to  oppose 
or  the  position  he  had  to  defend.  In  fact,  if  the  Jacobins 
themselves  had  arranged  the  order  of  our  defence,  and  chosen 
our  general,  they  could  not  have  done  better  for  their  own 
interest. 

On  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  the  King  resolved  to  seek 
refuge  in  the  Legislative  Assembly.  A  grenadier  of  the 
National  Guards  informed  us  that  he  had  carried  the  Prince 
Royal  in  his  arms  on  the  terrace  of  the  Feuillants,  and 
described  all  the  insults  the  Royal  Family  had  endured  from 
the  populace,  who  already  filled  that  part  of  the  garden.  A 
little  while  afterwards,  M.  Roederer,  syndic  or  president  of 
the  directory  of  the  department  of  the  Seine,  came  to  us, 


46  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

and  desired  us,  in  the  name  of  the  law,  not  to  attack,  but  to 
repel  force  by  force.  This  was,  no  doubt,  very  prudent  on 
his  part ;  but  what  were  we  to  defend  ?  Was  it  the  palace 
and  its  furniture  ?  or  did  not  the  King,  by  leaving  his  resi- 
dence and  going  to  the  Assembly,  seem  to  declare  that  he 
surrendered  himself  up  to  that  Assembly  which  was  now  the 
sovereign  authority,  and  whence  we  were  to  receive  our 
orders  ?  The  King's  retreat,  and  the  speech  of  M.  Roederer, 
spread  discouragement  and  confusion  among  the  National 
Guards  ;  the  cannoneers  of  the  battalion  of  Blancs  Monteaux 
threw  down  their  matches,  stamped  upon  them,  and  said 
there  was  nothing  more  to  be  done,  there  being  no  king  to 
defend. 

During  this  scene,  I  was  on  duty  at  the  gate  of  the  court, 
facing  a  Swiss,  an  absolute  machine,  with  whom  it  was  im- 
possible to  exchange  a  word.  But  an  aide-de-camp  of  General 
Wittinghoff  passing  near  me,  I  asked  him  what  his  general 
intended  doing.  He  shrugged  up  his  shoulders  and  said,  "  I 
do  not  think  he  knows  himself  ;  but  I  believe  we  are  in  an 
awkward  situation.  We  have  to  fight  the  Marseillais  ;  I 
know  the  people  of  Provence  ;  and  if  the  plan  is  to  spare 
them,  we  are  lost."  He  had  scarcely  spoken,  when  bowlings 
gave  us  notice  of  the  enemy's  approach,  and  the  doors  soon 
gave  way  to  the  repeated  blows  of  the  thick  beams  with 
which  they  struck  them.  All  the  guards  that  \vere  in  the 
court  dispersed,  and  I  followed  gravely  my  Swiss  companion, 
who,  according  to  the  orders  he  had  received,  returned  at  a 
slow  pace  to  the  palace,  and  we  entered  together  the  saloon 
of  the  guards. 

The  Swiss  were  ranged  on  the  two  sides  of  the  great  stair- 
case, and  in  all  the  apartments  facing  the  windows,  three  in 
depth.  The  officers  were  trying  to  stimulate  them,  but  their 
faltering  voices  betrayed  their  consternation.  I  had  expected 
to  find  National  Guards  in  the  palace.  Surprised  to  see 
nothing  but  foreigners,  I  was  uncertain  as  to  the  manner  I 
should  act,  when  a  Swiss  officer,  taking  me  by  the  arm^ 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  47 

begged  me  to  accompany  him  to  the  garden,  where  his  com- 
pany was  stationed.  My  regimentals  were  a  sort  of  protec- 
tion. We  went  down  together  to  the  first  landing-place, 
facing  the  door  that  leads  to  the  old  chamber  of  the  Council 
of  State.  There  we  found  the  great  staircase  barred  by  a  beam, 
and  defended  by  several  Swiss  officers,  who  were  politely 
disputing  the  way  with  about  fifty  men,  whose  dress  made 
them  look  like  robbers  in  a  melodrama.  They  were  intoxi- 
cated, and  their  coarse  accent  betrayed  their  origin  :  they 
came  from  Marseilles.  The  officer  repeatedly  told  them  that 
the  Royal  Family  were  gone  to  the  Assembly,  that  there  was 
nobody  in  the  palace,  and  that  the  Swiss  had  received  a 
positive  order  to  defend  its  entrance.  But  reason  was  of  no 
avail  with  them.  "  We  will  enter  !  we  will  examine  all  the 
apartments  !  "  was  their  only  answer,  mingled  with  cries  of 
"  Vive  la  Nation  !  "  The  soldiers,  by  command  of  the 
officers,  returned  in  bad  French  the  same  cries,  and  raised 
their  hats  on  their  bayonets.  At  last  the  conspirators  suc- 
ceeded. The  barrier  gave  way  to  their  efforts ;  they  forced 
their  passage,  and  we  seized  the  opportunity  to  go  down. 
We  were  still  in  the  vestibule,  when  a  well-directed  fire  began 
from  the  apartments  and  almost  at  the  same  moment  the 
cannon  were  heard.  I  am  convinced  that  the  Swiss  fired 
first  ;  my  memory  has  never  for  a  moment  deceived  me  in 
respect  to  that  circumstance.  It  is,  however,  useless  to  dis- 
cuss the  point  ;  for  it  is  certain  that  the  conspirators  came 
with  a  view  to  attack  the  King  :  if  the  Swiss  began  to  fire, 
it  must  have  been  because  the  Court  had  hopes  of  gaining 
the  victory.  But  in  that  case  the  Swiss  ought  to  have  gone 
down,  or  rather  to  have  marched  against  the  enemy,  and 
have  attacked  him  in  the  streets  before  he  had  time  to  draw 
up  in  the  square.  It  seems  that  the  plan  was  to  attack  the 
enemy's  flank,  as  some  Swiss,  posted  in  the  court  of  Marsan, 
made  a  sortie,  and  even  took  two  field-pieces  ;  but  they  were 
repulsed.  The  first  discharges  from  the  palace  had  killed  or 
wounded  a  great  many,  and  the  principal  court  had  been 


48  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

quickly  evacuated  :  but  the  cannonade  brought  disorder  and 
consternation  into  the  ranks  of  the  Swiss.  They  abandoned 
the  windows  ;  the  enemy  advanced  with  renewed  courage, 
crossed  the  court,  and  rushed  into  the  apartments.  The 
unfortunate  Swiss  were  unable  to  defend  themselves  any 
longer.  The  most  horrible  massacre  began,  and  terminated 
only  when  the  last  of  them  fell.  They  were  pursued  from 
chamber  to  chamber  ;  the  most  obscure  corner,  the  most 
solitary  cabinets,  even  the  chimneys  into  which  some  had 
crept,  could  not  save  them.  They  were  thrown  out  of  the 
windows,  and  their  bodies  were  stripped  and  exposed  to  the 
barbarous  derision  of  women  of  the  lowest  class,  as  those 
of  the  murdered  Protestants  after  St.  Bartholomew  were 
subjected  to  the  indecent  railleries  of  the  ladies  of  the 
Court. 

Two  hours  sufficed  to  exterminate  twelve  hundred  warlike 
and  well-disciplined  soldiers  commanded  by  brave  and 
devoted  officers.  Three  or  four  hundred  noblemen  stationed 
in  the  apartments  that  join  the  Pavilion  de  Flore,  and  who 
were  undoubtedly  designed  to  attack  the  enemy's  left  flank, 
had  the  good  luck  to  escape  through  the  gallery  of  the 
Louvre.  They  had  been  hoping  for  a  triumph  in  the  result 
of  the  battle. 

A  battle  it  really  was,  and  ability  as  well  as  courage 
ensured  the  success  of  the  revolution  party.  The  manner  in 
which  the  royal  troops  were  disposed,  was,  as  I  mentioned 
above,  quite  contrary  to  common  sense.  The  throne  and  the 
existence  of  the  Royal  Family  were  at  stake,  and  they  were 
trusted  to  an  old  Courlander  in  the  service  of  France,  and  to 
Swiss  soldiers.  In  such  a  populous  metropolis,  where  so 
many  brave  men  might  have  come  to  assist  the  Monarch,  he 
was  left  with  only  four  hundred  defenders.  The  King  might 
at  least  have  stimulated  his  troops  by  his  presence  and  his 
courage  ;  instead  of  which,  he  left  them  in  the  decisive 
moment  to  seek  refuge  among  his  most  inveterate  enemies. 
On  the  part  of  the  conspirators  the  plan  for  the  attack  had 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  49 

been  well  combined  ;  the  vanguard  was  composed  of  Mar- 
sellais  and  enthusiasts,  who  feared  no  danger  and  looked  upon 
death  as  a  glorious  martyrdom.  The  army  was  protected 
by  fifty  cannons,  well  served,  and  had  determined  chiefs. 
Among  these  were  principally  distinguished  an  Alsatian 
named  Westermann,  who  acquired  a  great  name  in  the  war 
of  the  Vendee  afterwards,  and  Ragowski,  a  Polish  refugee,  a 
well-informed  man,  and  tutor  to  the  son  of  one  of  the  first 
noblemen  in  France.  Forced  to  leave  his  country,  after 
having  fought  for  his  liberty,  he  had  carried  to  his  new 
home  all  the  hatred  he  entertained  for  the  treachery  of  his 
Sovereign.  Louis  XVI.  appeared  to  him  as  guilty  as  Ponia- 
towski,  and  he  seemed  on  the  loth  of  August  inspired  with 
a  wish  to  avenge  the  indifference  which  the  cabinet  of  Ver- 
sailles had  shown  to  Poland  at  the  time  of  her  first  mis- 
fortunes. He  was  killed  at  the  head  of  the  column  he 
commanded. 

Cannon-balls  fell  on  all  sides  in  the  garden  of  the  Tuileries. 
I  sought  refuge  in  the  Legislative  Body.  What  a  scene  did 
I  witness  there  !  The  King  and  his  family  were  crowded 
into  a  reporter's  box  near  the  President.  The  King  remained 
motionless,  and  affected  the  air  of  an  indifferent  spectator  ; 
the  Queen  softly  pressed  her  children  to  her  bosom,  and 
seemed  from  time  to  time  to  wipe  away  her  tears  with  her 
handkerchief.  In  the  hall  some  persons  showed  marks  of 
fear,  while  others  took  pains  to  disguise  their  fury  and  their 
satisfaction  ;  all  betrayed  an  agitation,  an  anxiety  that  did 
not  allow  them  to  remain  in  their  places.  The  debates  con- 
tinued, however,  with  an  appearance  of  order,  on  subjects 
foreign  to  the  terrible  tragedy  that  was  acting.  Victory  was 
at  last  announced  by  the  conquerors  themselves  bearing  into 
the  hall  the  spoil  of  the  palace,  and  proclaiming  the  massacre 
of  the  vanquished  amidst  furious  cries  of  "  The  Nation  for 
ever  !  Death  to  all  traitors  !  "  The  King  had  been  obliged, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  contest,  to  sign  an  order  forbidding 
the  advance  of  the  Swiss  battalion  at  Courbevoye  ;  and  it  is 

5 


50  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

a  circumstance  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  Court,  being 
resolved  to  defend  itself,  did  not  call  in  that  battalion  during 
the  night. 

I  left  the  melancholy  scene  and  went  to  the  Marquis  de 
Verdiere.  The  unfortunate  old  man  was  not  yet  come 
home,  but  he  soon  arrived,  half  dead  with  despair  and 
fatigue.  He  had  passed  the  night  in  the  palace,  and  had 
escaped  by  a  sort  of  miracle  through  one  of  the  doors  of  the 
gallery  of  the  Louvre.  We  embraced  one  another,  and 
both  of  us  shed  tears.  He  was  at  last  convinced  that  no 
hope  remained,  and  I  pressed  him  to  leave  the  country  as 
quickly  as  possible.  He  wanted  to  take  me  with  him,  but 
I  told  him  I  was  going  to  join  the  defenders  of  my  country. 
"Your  cause  is  no  more  mine,"  I  said  ;  "I  am  not  born  a 
nobleman  ;  I  have  paid  my  debt  to  my  Sovereign,  and  now 
my  country  claims  me.  I  must  defend  her  against  foreigners 
who  wish  to  divide  her  for  their  spoil,  and  I  shall  remain 
faithful  to  her."  He  had  no  more  illusions  to  offer  me  ;  he 
yielded,  and  we  separated  never  to  meet  again.  I  learned 
since  that,  after  having  made  a  pilgrimage  to  the  Royalist 
army,  where  he  was  badly  received,  because  he  came  too 
late,  he  returned  to  Paris,  was  denounced  as  a  returned 
emigrant,  and  died  on  the  scaffold. 

The  day  after  the  loth  of  August,  the  fate  of  the  Royal 
Family  was  at  last  decided.  They  had  passed  the  night  in 
the  cells  of  the  convent  of  the  Feuillants,  near  the  hall  of 
the  Assembly.  They  stepped  into  a  large  coach,  and  were 
led  in  triumph  to  the  tower  of  the  Temple,  along  the  Boule- 
vard, and  across  the  Place  Vendome,  where  the  equestrian 
statue  of  Louis  XIV.  had  already  been  thrown  down.  I 
wished  to  cast  a  last  look  on  the  unfortunate  family  before 
their  imprisonment,  and  I  forced  my  way  into  the  mob  while 
they  were  getting  out  of  the  coach.  Among  the  number  of 
persons  that  surrounded  the  carriage,  I  observed  a  horrible- 
looking  man.  Half  his  face  was  covered  with  a  long  and 
thick  beard  ;  he  was  dressed  in  a  sort  of  smock  frock,  which 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  51 

soon  after  became  the  uniform  of  the  Jacobins.  Though 
his  look  was  haggard  and  furious,  he  seemed  embarrassed 
on  observing  the  anxious  curiosity  of  those  that  stood  around 
him.  I  asked  who  he  was.  "It's  Jourdan  of  Avignon," 
was  the  answer  ;  "  Jourdan,  Coupe-Tete."  In  fact  it  must 
have  been  either  the  wretch  who  distinguished  himself  by 
the  massacres  of  the  Glaciere  d'Avignon,  or  some  one 
resembling  him,  placed  there  with  a  view  to  augment  the 
terror  of  the  Royal  Family. 

A  few  days  after  the  loth  of  August,  the  Legislative 
Assembly  closed  its  session,  and  decreed  that  another 
Assembly  should  sit  in  its  stead.  The  members  of  the 
Gironde  party,  who  had  contributed  most  to  the  fall  of  the 
throne,  hastened  to  get  themselves  re-elected. 

Among  the  members  of  that  party,  some  have  so  many 
surviving  friends  that  they  ought  not  to  be  condemned 
rashly.  Great  praise  is  still  bestowed  on  the  uprightness  of 
their  intentions,  their  rigid  honesty,  their  eminent  talents, 
and  their  invincible  courage.  I  am  far  from  disputing  these 
two  last  qualities  ;  but  what  was  the  situation  of  France 
when  they  entered  the  Legislative  Assembly,  and  what  did 
they  do  to  maintain  the  Constitution  which  that  Assembly 
was  appointed  to  protect  ?  Had  it  become  utterly  impossible 
to  support  it  ?  Was  the  King  an  invincible  obstacle,  or  the 
republican  faction  an  enemy  whose  progress  could  no  longer 
be  stopped  ?  Was  not  a  courageous  struggle  in  favour  of 
constitutional  monarchy  a  sacred  duty  ?  Was  not  unani- 
mous, firm,  and  heroic  resistance  preferable  to  the  miserable 
presumption  of  wishing  to  reign  on  the  ruins  of  the  throne 
and  the  Constitution  ?  I  fear  history  will  accuse  the  Gironde 
party  of  having  been  led  away  by  the  desire  of  shining  as 
orators  ;  and  it  will  probably  be  said  that  the  greater  part 
of  them  were  more  intent  on  keeping  up  a  successful  contest 
with  the  heroes  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  than  impelled 
by  the  noble  ambition  of  saving  their  country  by  following 
a  steady  line  of  conduct. 


52  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

The  last  twenty  days  of  the  month  of  August  were  not 
lost  for  the  revolutionary  party.  They  knew  the  maxim, 
that  a  victorious  general  must  not  leave  a  moment's  rest  to 
his  vanquished  enemy.  As  soon  as  they  had  shut  up  the 
Royal  Family  in  the  Temple,  and  butchered  all  the  Swiss 
soldiers  that  remained  in  Paris  and  its  environs,  they 
hastened  to  imprison  all  persons  suspected  of  being  attached 
to  the  King.  Noblemen,  clergymen,  servants  of  the  palace, 
women,  and  even  children,  who  had  had  the  least  connec- 
tion with  the  Court,  were  seized  without  any  exception,  and 
prisons  were  soon  more  numerous  than  playhouses.  A 
new  misfortune  roused  to  the  highest  pitch  the  rage  of  the 
Jacobins,  and  filled  the  public  with  consternation  :  a  foreign 
enemy  obtained  alarming  successes,  whilst  the  ridiculous 
manifesto  of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  announced  to  the  city 
of  Paris  the  terrible  punishment  that  threatened  her.  The 
frontier  towns  of  Longwy  and  Verdun  had  surrendered  ; 
and,  by  a  shameful  and  criminal  policy,  the  Sovereigns  who 
came  to  assist  the  unfortunate  Louis  XVI.  placed  their 
banners  on  the  conquered  cities,  as  a  proof  that  they  would 
never  restore  them.  The  French  nation,  insulted  in  its 
independence,  united  its  exertions  to  the  fury  of  the 
Jacobins,  and  France  was  saved  amidst  torrents  of  blood. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

The  news  of  the  surrender  of  Verdun,  and  the  impossi- 
biHty  of  stopping  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  reached  Paris 
on  the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  September  ;  and  by  five 
o'clock  some  members  of  the  municipahty  began  to  ride 
about  the  streets  on  horseback  with  flags  in  their  hands,  and 
crying,  "To  arms  ! — The  enemy,"  they  added,  "approaches 
— you  are  all  lost !  The  city  will  be  a  prey  to  fire  and 
pillage  !  Take  up  your  swords,  join  the  armies,  and  the 
infamous  foreigners  will  be  repulsed  !  You  have  nothing 
to  fear  from  the  traitors  and  conspirators  you  leave  behind  ; 
they  are  in  the  hands  of  the  patriots,  and  national  justice 
will  strike  them  with  its  thunderbolts."  These  terrible 
words,  repeated  on  all  sides,  spread  general  dismay.  What 
was  the  meaning  of  the  thunderbolt  of  justice  ?  Alas  !  that 
expression  was  but  too  soon  explained  :  about  two  hours 
after,  it  was  reported  that  the  prisoners  were  to  be  executed  ! 
I  ran  to  the  hall  of  my  section,  where  I  found  M.  Dutillet. 
He  took  me  aside,  and  said,  "  Within  an  hour  the  prisoners 
at  the  Hotel  de  la  Force  will  be  butchered.  I  have  an  order 
from  Tallien  for  the  release  ot  Madame  de  Tourzel  and  her 
daughter.  Bleve,  captain  of  the  Chasseurs,  accompanies 
me.  We  want  a  third  person  :  will  you  go  with  me  ?  "  I 
accepted  most  readily  his  proposal.  It  was  agreed  that 
Dutillet  should  enter  the  prison  ;  that  Bleve  and  he  should 
take  charge  of  the  two  ladies  ;  and  that  I  should  accompany 

S3 


54  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

them,  for  the  twofold  purpose  of  engaging  the  attention  of 
such  as  might  stop  them  in  a  part  of  the  town  where  they 
were  so  well  known,  and  to  help  to  defend  them  in  case  they 
should  be  attacked.  We  encountered  no  difficulty  in  getting 
the  ladies  out  of  prison  ;  we  passed  along  the  Rue  du  Roi  de 
Siecle,  and  boldly  crossed  the  church  of  the  Petit  St.  Antoine, 
where  the  Assembly  was  held.  By  good  luck,  night  was 
beginning  to  protect  us  ;  we  were  in  no  manner  disturbed, 
and  Madame  de  Tourzel  found  in  the  Rue  St.  Antoine  her 
friends,  who  placed  her  in  safety.  When  we  returned  to 
Dutillet's,  we  deliberated  on  the  means  of  preventing  the 
massacre  of  the  prisoners  of  La  Force.  The  consciousness 
of  doing  a  good  action  augments  one's  courage.  It  was 
impossible  to  think  of  beating  the  g'encralc  without  an  order 
from  the  commander-in-chief ;  time  pressed,  and,  besides, 
the  commander  was  Santerre,  one  of  the  leaders  of  the 
Jacobins.  We  had  no  alternative  but  to  run  to  some  of  the 
National  Guards  whom  we  looked  upon  as  the  most  steady. 
I  spoke  to  a  great  many  of  them  in  the  space  of  an  hour  and 
a  half,  and,  notwithstanding  my  most  pressing  entreaties,  I 
could  make  no  impression  on  them.  Men  in  the  prime  of 
life  and  health,  in  whom  I  thought  I  had  discovered  a  strong 
love  of  liberty,  feelings  of  humanity,  and  respect  for  the  laws, 
remained  unmoved,  while  I  pictured  to  them  the  slaughter 
they  were  going  to  witness.  "  What  can  we  do  ?  "  was  the 
answer  of  all  those  I  saw.  I  could  not  excite  them  to  a  noble 
effort.  Some  did  not  believe  the  massacre  ;  others  said  they 
could  not  march  without  an  order  from  their  chiefs.  Some 
even  said  to  me — "  The  prisoners  are  conspirators  who  deserve 
no  pity  ;  our  sons  are  going  to  the  army  ;  civil  war  will  break 
out  ;  we  shall  perish  the  victims  of  our  humanity  ;  it  is  said, 
besides,  that  there  will  be  judges,  and  that  the  innocent  will 
be  spared."  The  exertions  of  my  two  companions  were  not 
crowned  with  more  success  than  my  own  ;  we  separated  at 
nine  o'clock.  The  massacre  was  already  raging  in  all  its 
force.     Being  less  known  than   my  friends,  I  flew  to  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  5  5 

prison.  Before  the  wicket  that  leads  to  the  Rue  des  Ballets, 
I  found  about  fifty  men  at  most.  These  were  the  butchers  ; 
the  rest  had  been  drawn  there  by  curiosity,  and  were  perhaps 
more  execrable  than  the  executioners  ;  for,  though  they  dared 
neither  go  away  nor  take  part  in  the  horrid  deed,  still  they 
applauded.  I  looked  forward,  and  at  sight  of  a  heap  of 
bodies  still  palpitating  with  life,  I  uttered  a  cry  of  horror. 
Two  men  turned  round,  and,  taking  me  abruptly  by  the 
collar,  dragged  me  violently  to  the  street,  where  they 
reproached  me  with  imprudence,  and  then,  running  away, 
left  me  alone  in  the  dark.  The  horrible  spectacle  I  had 
witnessed  deprived  me  of  all  courage  :  I  went  home,  over- 
whelmed with  shame  and  despair  for  humanity  so  execrably 
injured,  and  the  French  character  so  deplorably  disgraced. 

The  particulars  of  the  massacre  having  all  been  recorded 
in  the  memoirs  of  the  time,  I  need  not  repeat  them  here.  I 
was  moreover  no  spectator  of  them.  They  lasted  three  days, 
and,  I  blush  while  I  write  it,  at  half  a  mile  from  the  different 
prisons  nobody  would  have  imagined  that  their  countrymen 
were  at  that  moment  butchered  by  hundreds.  The  shops 
were  open,  pleasure  was  going  on  in  all  its  animation,  and 
sloth  rejoiced  in  its  vacuity.  All  the  vanities  and  seductions 
of  luxury,  voluptuousness,  and  dissipation,  peaceably  swayed 
their  sceptre.  They  feigned  an  ignorance  of  cruelties  which 
they  wanted  the  courage  to  oppose.  And  still  there  existed 
an  Asserabl}',  the  organ  and  supreme  protectress  of  the  laws, 
ministers  entrusted  with  the  executive  power,  a  paid  guard 
and  magistrates.  The  unfortunate  prisoners  that  were 
slaughtered  had  friends  and  relations,  on  whom  they  could 
not  bestow  a  last  look.  They  perished,  after  horrible  agony, 
in  the  midst  of  the  most  cruel  torments.  Twelve  hundred 
persons  were  killed  in  those  three  days. 

Still,  so  much  bloodshed  did  not  satisfy  the  rage  of  the 
September  murderers !  They  were  sensible  that  the 
slaughtering  of  twelve  hundred  persons  would  spread  dis- 
may and  indignation   over  France  and  Europe.      Victory 


56  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

was  therefore  become  doubly  necessary.  National  pride 
and  the  bad  policy  of  the  enemy  were  of  wonderful  service 
to  them.  In  less  than  a  fortnight,  more  than  sixty  thousand 
men  left  Paris  for  the  army.  The  youths  of  the  depart- 
ments, animated  by  the  most  generous  patriotism,  did  not 
wait  for  the  example  of  the  metropolis,  and  in  a  short  time 
the  armies  were  augmented  threefold.  I  did  not  dare  to 
enlist  in  a  battalion  of  volunteers,  being  noted  as  an  enemy 
of  the  country, — that  is  to  say,  of  the  Jacobins.  The  more 
indulgent  blamed  me  :  they  said  I  was  hot-headed,  heedless, 
and  had  thrown  myself  through  vanity  into  a  party  I  ought 
to  have  detested.  I  had  moreover  signed  all  the  petitions 
in  favour  of  the  Court,  and  had  been  at  the  palace  on  the 
loth  of  August  :  that  was  more  than  sufficient  for  a  sentence 
of  death.  Not  knowing  how  to  get  away,  I  went  and  con- 
sulted one  of  my  best  friends,  Bertrand,  the  same  who  has 
since  made  himself  so  honourably  known  by  his  talent  and 
his  devotion  to  the  Emperor,  and  who  is  at  present  at  St. 
Helena.  I  had  made  his  acquaintance  at  the  office  of  the 
attorney  Dommanget,  where  he  studied  for  the  bar.  His 
family  had  designed  him  to  fill  a  judicial  post  in  his  pro- 
vinces ;  but  since  the  suppression  of  the  parliaments  his 
studies  were  without  aim.  He  acted  more  wisely  than  I 
had  done.  Instead  of  meddling  in  political  quarrels,  he 
applied  himself  during  eighteen  months  in  perfect  retire- 
ment to  the  study  of  mathematics.  Gifted  with  judgment 
and  a  tenacious  character,  he  could  not  but  succeed.  He 
had  just  passed  his  examination,  and,  having  been  received, 
he  was  going  to  Chalons  to  study  engineering.  To  take  me 
with  him  was  not  to  be  thought  of  ;  but  he  advised  me  to 
enlist  in  a  free  corps,  and  gave  me  the  address  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  d'Hilliers,  who  was  then  organising  the  Legion  of 
the  Alps.  Some  of  my  friends  were  in  the  same  situation 
as  myself ;  we  went  therefore  together  to  that  officer. 
There  were  five  of  us — young,  well  educated,  possessing 
some  fortune,  desirous  to  fight,  but,  above  all,  to  leave  Paris. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  57 

M.  d'Hilliers  received  us  very  well  ;  he  gave  us  orders  for 
our  route,  and  next  morning,  the  7th  of  September,  at  five 
o'clock,  we  were  on  the  road  to  Fontainebleau,  our  knap- 
sacks on  our  backs,  military  caps  on  our  heads,  and  perfectly 
well  disguised  by  a  sort  of  sailor's  dress  called  a  carmagnole. 
I  must  beg  leave  to  stop  for  a  few  moments  before  I  enter 
the  army.  I  feel  a  wish  to  cast  a  look  behind  me  on  my 
conduct  during  the  latter  years.  My  education  had  been 
rigid.  The  principles  on  which  it  was  formed  were  ex- 
cellent in  all  respects.  Until  I  was  twenty  years  old,  all 
scenes  of  corruption  had  been  carefully  kept  out  of  my  sight. 
My  parents,  my  tutors,  all  the  persons  who  surrounded  me, 
had  shown  me  no  examples  but  those  of  the  purest  morality. 
At  a  period  when  the  most  important  political  questions 
were  discussed,  my  educators  preserved  me  from  sharing 
the  errors  that  were  most  generally  adopted.  The  ridiculous 
harangues  of  the  section  orators  saved  me  from  the  wish  of 
imitating  them.  To  the  study  of  the  works  of  Montesquieu 
I  added  those  of  Fenelon,  Voltaire,  Rousseau,  Mably,  &c.  ;. 
but  the  authority  of  the  first  awed  me.  I  should  have 
imagined  I  had  committed  a  bad  action  if,  even  in  language, 
I  had  swerved  from  the  discretion  a  young  man  must  be 
inspired  with  by  reading  such  works.  I  was  therefore  wise 
enough  to  await  a  maturer  age  before  I  manifested  political 
opinions  of  any  sort,  and  to  consult  for  my  conduct  my 
conscience  and  my  heart.  These  two  guides  kept  me 
within  the  bounds  of  reason  and  modesty.  The  Revolution 
took  me  by  surprise  when  I  was  twenty  years  old.  I  was 
born  in  too  obscure  a  class  to  be  acquainted  with  all  the 
abuses  which  that  Revolution  was  meant  to  correct.  I 
think,  however,  I  did  my  duty  in  embracing  the  Royal 
cause ;  and  still,  at  this  present  moment,  I  recur  with 
pleasure  to  the  feelings  I  experienced.  Nevertheless,  since 
I  grew  acquainted  with  the  emigrants,  I  have  frequently 
asked  myself  what  I  had  to  do  among  those  privileged 
persons  who  reckoned  the  commoners  for  nothing — I  who 


58  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

was  born  a  commoner  ?  Whether,  after  victory,  they 
would  have  shown  me  any  gratitude  for  having  fought 
with  them  ?  and  also,  whether,  in  case  a  civil  war  had 
broken  out,  I  should  have  done  a  good  action  in  destroying 
the  sacred  cause  of  Liberty,  and  marching  against  my 
countrymen,  and  perhaps  against  my  family  ?  I  did  not 
wish  for  the  new  revolution  which  took  place  four  years 
ago,  to  answer  some  of  those  questions  against  myself.  But 
at  that  time  I  did  not  yet  know  all  I  have  since  learned  by 
experience. 

We  arrived  at  Auxerre  on  the  third  day  after  our 
departure,  delighted  with  having  quitted  Paris,  but  full 
of  anxiety  for  the  dear  friends  we  had  left  there.  The 
Revolution  had  also  passed  through  that  town,  and  had 
left  bloody  traces  behind  it.  The  inhabitants  were  full  of 
consternation,  and  deploring  several  young  clergymen,  sons 
of  the  most  honourable  citizens,  that  had  been  slaughtered. 
We  lodged  with  the  uncle  of  one  of  these  victims,  the  corpse 
of  whom  had  been  left  for  three  days  ion  a  dunghill,  his 
parents  not  being  suffered  to  bury  him.  We  thought  that 
we  ought  not  to  remain  long  in  that  city.  We  set  off  in 
consequence  for  Autun,  and  we  arrived  next  day  at  a  village, 
not  far  from  Vermanton,  situated  amidst  woods,  and  the 
inhabitants  of  which  got  their  livelihood  by  making  wooden 
shoes.  Two  days  before,  a  bishop  and  two  of  his  grand 
vicars,  who  were  escaping  in  a  post-coach,  had  been  arrested 
by  them.  The  coach  was  searched,  and  some  hundred 
louis-d'or  having  been  found  in  it,  the  peasants  thought 
the  best  Avay  to  gain  the  property  would  be  to  kill  the  real 
owners.  Their  new  profession  being  more  lucrative  than 
their  former  one,  they  resolved  to  continue  it,  and  in  con- 
sequence set  themselves  on  the  look-out  after  all  travellers. 
Our  sailors'  dresses  were  not  very  promising,  but  we  carried 
our  heads  high, — our  manners  seemed  haughty  ;  and  so 
a  little  hunchbacked  man,  an  attorney  of  the  village, 
guessed  we  might  perhaps  contribute  to  enrich  them.     The 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  59 

inhabitants  being  resolved  not  to  make  any  more  wooden 
shoes,  applauded  the  hunchback's  advice.   We  were  brought 
to   the   municipality,   where   the  mob   followed   us.      The 
attorney  placed  himself  on  a  large  table,  and  began  reading 
with  emphasis  and  in  a  loud  voice  all  our  passports  :  Louis 
Amedee  Auguste  d'Aubonne,  Andre  Louis  Leclerc  de  la 
Ronde,   Marie  Chamans  de   La  Valette.     Here  the  rascal 
added  the  de^  that  was  not  in  my  passport.     On  hearing 
these  aristocratical  names,    a  rumour  began  :  all  the  eyes 
directed  towards  us  were  hostile,  and  the  hunchback  cried 
out  that  our  knapsacks  ought  to  be  examined.    The  harvest 
would  have  been  rich.     I  was  the  poorest  of  the  set,  and  I 
had  five-and-twenty  louis  in  gold.     We  looked  upon  our- 
selves  as   lost,  when  D'Aubonne,  whose  stature   was  tall, 
jumped  on  the  table  and  began  to  harangue  the  assembly. 
He  was  clever  at  making  verses,  arid  knew  besides  at  his 
fingers'  ends  the  whole  slang  dictionary.     He  began  with  a 
volley  of  abuse  and  imprecations  that  surprised  the  audience  ; 
but  he  soon  raised  his  style,  and  repeated  the  words  country 
— liberty — sovereignty  of  the  people, — with  so  much  vehe- 
mence and   such  a  thundering  voice   that   the  effect  was 
prodigious.     He  was  interrupted  by  unanimous  applause. 
The  giddy-headed   young   man   did  not   stop   there.      He 
imperiously  ordered  Leclerc  de  la  Ronde  to  get  upon  the 
table.     La  Ronde  was  the  cleverest  mimic  I  ever  saw.     He 
was  thirty-five  years  old,  of  a  grotesque  shape,  and  as  dark 
as  a  Moor.     His  eyes  were  sunk  in  his  head  and  covered 
with   thick   black   eyebrows,   and   his   nose   and   chin    im- 
measurably   long.      D'Aubonne   said    to    the    Assembly  : 
*'  You'll  soon    be    able   to  judge   whether   or  not   we   are 
Republicans   coming   from    Paris."      And   turning   to    his 
companion,  he  said  to  him  :  "  Answer  to  the  Republican 
catechism.     What  is  God  ?     What  are  the  people  ?     What 
is  a  King  ?  "     The  other,  with  a  contrite  air,  a  nasal  voice, 
and    winding   himself    about   like   a   harlequin,    answered, 
''  God  is  nature  ;  the  people  are  the  poor  ;  a  King  is  a  lion, 


6o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

— a  tiger, — an  elephant — who  tears  to  pieces,  devours  and 
crushes  the  poor  people  to  death."  It  was  not  possible  to 
resist  this.  Astonishment,  shouts,  enthusiasm,  were  carried 
to  the  highest  pitch.  The  orators  were  embraced, — hugged, 
— carried  in  triumph.  The  honour  of  lodging  us  grew  a 
subject  of  dispute.  We  were  forced  to  drink,  and  we  were 
soon  as  much  at  a  loss  how  to  get  away  from  these  brutal 
wretches,  now  our  friends,  as  we  had  been  to  escape  out 
of  their  hands  while  they  were  our  enemies.  Luckily, 
D'Aubonne  again  found  means  to  draw  us  out  of  this  scrape. 
He  gravely  observed,  that  we  had  no  time  to  stop,  and  that 
our  country  claimed  the  tribute  of  our  courage.  They  let 
us  go  at  last.  On  the  road  my  companions  blamed  me  for 
having  taken  no  share  in  the  scene,  and  having  maintained 
an  air  of  gravity  that  might  have  become  suspicious  in  the 
eyes  of  people  who  only  sought  a  pretext  to  murder  us.  I 
had  nothing  to  answer  to  their  observations.  I  had  admired 
their  presence  of  mind  and  their  gaiety  ;  but  my  humour 
did  not  accord  with  such  tricks.  Nature  cannot  be  forced. 
During  the  farce  they  had  acted,  I  recollected  a  fact  I  had 
read,  I  think  in  a  work  of  M.  Leboeuf,  on  the  History  of 
France  during  the  thirteenth  century.  A  monk  of  Auxerre, 
or  Dijon,  intimated  to  the  abbot  of  the  Benedictines  of  Paris, 
who  had  expressed  a  wish  to  see  him,  that  at  his  age  he 
could  not  leave  his  country  and  undertake  so  distant  and  so 
perilous  a  journey.  Alas  !  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  the  journey  was   more  perilous  still  ! 

From  this  haunt  of  robbers  we  went  to  Autun.  One  of 
us  had  letters  of  introduction  to  a  member  of  the  Legislative 
Assembly,  who  had  not  been  distinguished  in  the  Con- 
vention, and  was  afraid  of  showing  himself  at  his  usual 
abode.  His  family  consisted  of  a  respectable  and  clever 
wife  and  three  charming  daughters.  Our  stay  with  them 
might  have  endangered  them  ;  we  therefore  continued  our 
journey.  There,  as  well  as  everywhere  else,  terror  was 
carried  to  a  great  height.     Not  a  motion,  not  an  attempt 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  6i 

had  been  made  to  counteract  the  enterprises  of  the  factious. 
People  remained  silent,  or  left  the  place,  for  fear  of  exposing 
themselves.  The  most  honest  were  denounced,  the  lower 
classes  made  everybody  tremble  with  their  clamour,  and 
became  everywhere  masters,  through  the  misunderstanding 
and  want  of  courage  of  those  who,  having  property  to  save, 
did  not  blush  to  fall  back  before  those  who  had  nothing 
to  lose. 

We  arrived  at  last,  on  the   I2th  of  September,  at  Ville- 
franche,  near  Lyons,  where  the  legion  of  Montesquiou  was 
in  garrison.     M.  d'Hilliers  had  shown  us  a  pattern  of  the 
regimentals,  and  had  boasted  to  us  of  the  discipline  and  good 
appearance  of  the  regiment.     We  were  to  be  received  in  the 
most  flattering  manner  by  the  officers,  all  of  them  well-bred 
young  men,  and  who  would  undoubtedly  live  as  brothers 
with  us.     We  formed  to  ourselves  most  delightful  ideas  of 
our  new  manner  of  living.    As  we  got  nearer  to  Villefranche, 
our  excited  imagination   made   us   hasten    our   pace.     We 
came  to  the  side  of  a  very  extensive  field,  at  the  other  end 
of  which  we  saw  some  troops  manoeuvring.   My  companions, 
either  through  some  illusion,  or  indistinctness  of  vision,  fell 
into  rapture  at  the  wonderful  good  order  of  the  troops.     In 
fact,  their  muskets  glittered  in  the  rays  of  the  sun,  and  their 
lines  seemed  to  present  admirable  regularity.     As  for  me, 
I  saw  nothing  but  strange  dresses,  or  rather  the  rags  of 
misery ;  and  the  reader  may  judge  of  our  consternation,  when, 
on  approaching,  we  found  four  or  five  hundred  wretches  in 
tattered  garments,  and  none  but  the  officers  dressed  in  the 
elegant  regimentals  we  had  so  much  admired.     We  were 
going  away,  and  should  perhaps  have  taken  the  dangerous 
resolution  of  deserting,  when  an  officer  came  up  to  us,  and 
asked  us,  in  a  strong  German  accent,  whether  we  had  not 
the  honour  to  belong  to  the  corps.     Without  waiting  for 
the  answer  of  my  companions,  I  showed  my  fctn'lle  de  route. 
They  were  all  obliged  to  do  the  same  ;  and,  as  soon  as  the 
manoeuvres  were  finished,  the  officer  placed  us  in  the  rear  of 


62  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  troop  and  we  entered  the  city,  marching  Hke  experienced 
soldiers,  but  ashamed  of  being  seen  in  such  bad  company 
by  the  fair  ladies  of  Villefranche,  who  looked  at  us  as  we 
passed,  and  did  not  seem  greatly  to  admire  our  appearance. 

This  still  incomplete  legion,  whose  existence,  by  the  bye, 
was  neither  long  nor  brilliant,  consisted  of  the  remainder  of 
the  regiment  of  Royal  Liegeois  that  had  been  disbanded  for 
some  wild  freaks,  and  of  young  men  who  had  enlisted  for 
ten  crowns  each.  They  were  all  of  them  averse  to  discipline, 
and  wished  to  fight  for  diversion  ;  but  the  major,  M.  Ross, 
was  a  grave  man.  I  have  never  since  met  with  a  person  who 
carried  to  so  great  a  degree  as  he  did  his  enthusiasm  for  the 
military  catechism,  and  for  all  the  minutiae  of  the  service. 
He  knew  just  French  enough  to  command  his  troop,  which 
consisted  almost  wholly  of  Flemings  and  Alsatians.  After 
five-and-twenty  years'  service  he  had  attained  the  rank  of 
major  ;  but  still  M.  Ross  was  not  satisfied.  Since  he  could 
no  longer  maintain  discipline  by  flogging,  he  complained 
that  command  fatigued  him.  I  had  become  his  fi-iend 
because  he  had  found  me  exact,  attentive,  and  serious  at  my 
exercise.  "My  friend,"  he  used  to  say  to  me,  "war  is 
always  fatal  to  an  army  ;  there  is  no  more  discipline,  no 
more  order,  no  more  subordination  ;  woe  to  the  regiment 
that  leaves  its  garrison  for  the  field  of  battle !  Oh  !  if  you 
had  seen  the  camp  at  Verberie  or  St.  Omer  ;  what  a  beauti- 
ful sight  that  was  !  The  tents  all  in  straight  lines  ;  the 
troops  under  arms  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  their 
dresses  clean,  admirable  manoeuvres,  and  in  the  evening  at 
the  calling  over,  nobody  missing,  everybody  ready  !  Now 
I  have  to  command  nothing  but  tattered  wretches  !  What 
am  I  to  do  with  these  young  men,  whom  it  is  impossible  to 
keep  in  order  ?  This  will  be  a  war  indeed  !  Things  will 
go  as  bad  as  they  can.  But  I  am  resolved  to  retire  from  the 
service."  Poor  man,  he  did,  in  fact,  retire  the  following 
year,  and  I  hope  he  lived  long  enough  both  to  wonder  and 
rejoice  at  our  victories. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  63 

I  suffered  a  great  deal  in  the  beginning.  I  had  Hved  in 
affluence  in  Paris  in  the  midst  of  my  family,  by  whom  I 
was  beloved,  and  in  the  society  of  agreeable  friends.  Now 
I  was  forced  to  live  with  soldiers  :  the  sergeants  vouchsafed 
to  protect  me,  but  the  officers  never  cast  a  look  on  me.  I 
began  to  feel  some  disgust  ;  but  luckily,  before  it  was  too 
late,  I  made  deep  reflections  on  my  situation,  and  I  conceived 
it  might  be  possible  to  raise  myself  out  of  it  by  giving 
myself  up  entirely  to  the  duties  I  had  to  fulfil.  Till  then 
I  had  passed  my  time  in  coflfee-houses,  or  in  reading  novels. 
I  left  oif  that  idle  life  :  I  studied  the  military  law,  and 
rigidly  obeyed  it  in  all  its  details  ;  so  that  within  six  weeks 
I  was  made  a  corporal.  My  situation  was  growing  better. 
I  still  obeyed  everybody,  but  I  commanded  a  few. 

M.  d'Hilliers  arrived.  Our  troop  was  soon  completely 
equipped  ;  and  as  that  officer  had  served  in  the  regiment  of 
Alsace,  he  subjected  us  to  such  severe  and  rigid  discipline 
that  in  less  than  two  months  our  legions  could  vie  with  the 
finest  corps  of  the  Northern  army. 

The  duties  prescribed  for  each  moment,  instead  of  dis- 
couraging me,  made  me  fond  of  them.  The  manoeuvres  of 
a  battalion  gave  me  a  desire  to  learn  the  elements  of  the  art 
of  war,  and  I  read  with  eagerness  several  new  works  that 
had  lately  appeared,  such  as  "  La  Guerre  de  Poste,"  by 
Cossac  ;  "  Les  Fortifications  de  Campagne,"  by  De  Belair, 
and  others.  My  colonel,  who  had  taken  a  liking  to  me,  gave 
me  lessons  in  strategy  and  castrametation,  and  taught  me  to 
understand  military  maps.  I  was  soon  raised  to  the  rank  of 
sergeant,  and  my  hopes  knew  no  more  bounds  when,  all  on  a 
sudden.  General  Custines  summoned  Colonel  d'Hilliers  to 
the  Rhine  army,  instead  of  General  Houchard,  his  first  aide- 
de-camp,  who  had  been  appointed  to  the  command  of  the 
Moselle  army. 

The  departure  of  M.  d'Hilliers  was  a  thunderstroke  for 
me.  But  he  promised  to  transfer  my  companions  and  myself 
to  the  Rhine  army,  and  he  kept  his  word.     A  short  time 


64  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

after  his  arrival  at  Mentz,  we  received  commissions  of 
second-lieutenants  in  the  93rd  regiment  of  infantry  of  the 
line. 

It  was  at  Bourg  I  received  the  order  to  go  to  the  Rhine, 
and  just  then  arrived  the  news  of  the  sentence  and  death  of 
the   King.     Although    the   Jacobins   were   masters   of  the 
town,  and  added,  by  their  vociferations,  consternation  to  the 
terror  their  threats  and  conduct  had  already  inspired,  still 
the  fatal  account  caused  a  deep  impression  on  the  minds  of 
the  public.     To  form  a  just  idea  of  that  terrible  sentence, 
we  must  consult  a  pamphlet  published  by  M.  de  Chateau- 
briand in  the  beginning  of  181 5,  wherein  he  explains  with 
great   sagacity  the   secret   motive   that   induced   so   many 
deputies  to  vote  for  the  death  of  Louis  XVI.     The  munici- 
pality  of  Paris  ruled  with  all  the  energy  of   savage    and 
desperate  tyranny.     That  body  insisted  at  any  rate  on  the 
death  of  the  King,  and  threatened  openly  to  murder  the 
whole  Royal  Family,  who  were  then  in  their  sole  power. 
Many  deputies  imagined  that  the  only  way  to  save  the  heir 
to  the  throne  and  his  family  was  to  offer  up  the  unfortunate 
King  as  a  victim  to  popular  fury.     They  were  mistaken,  but 
still  deserving  of  pardon.     On  the  other  hand,  if  it  be  true 
that  Louis  XVI.  signed  the  treaty  of  Pilnitz  ;  that  he  per- 
suaded the  privileged   classes  to  leave   France   and  enlist 
under  foreign  banners  ;  that  he  had  agreed  with  his  brothers 
and   their  party  that  they  should  try   to  deliver  him    by 
means  of  a  war  that  was  to  expose  his  country  to  all  the 
horrors  of  invasion,  though  he  had  sworn  to  maintain  and 
execute   the   Constitution  : — if   all  this   be  true,  I  do    not 
hesitate   to   say  that   he   was  guilty  ;    he   could   reign    no 
longer.     But  the  Convention  had  no'  right  to  try  him,  and 
by  putting  him  to  death  they  committed  a  most  impolitic 
fault.     Did  they  not  see  that  by  taking  the  life  of  Louis 
XVI.  they  gave  the  crown   to  Louis  XVIII.  ?   that   they 
ought  to  have  kept  the  King  prisoner,  lest  they  should  place 
a  King  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  ?  that  the  life  of  a  Monarch 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  65 

so  celebrated  for  weakness,  and  for  false  and  contracted  ideas, 
ought  to  have  been  carefully  protected,  as  he  would  soon  or 
late  be  succeeded  by  his  brother,  the  qualities  of  whose  mind 
were  so  superior  to  those  of  the  King,  and  whose  character, 
already  known,  would  have  so  deplorable  an  influence  over 
the  destiny  of  France  ?  But  the  Convention  was  pressed 
"by  passing  events,  inflamed  by  resentment,  and  by  the  con- 
test of  the  loth  of  August.  It  consisted  in  a  great  part  of 
men  without  experience,  who,  seized  with  a  fatal  mania  for 
celebrity,  wished  to  impress  the  minds  of  the  people  with  a 
sort  of  horror  mixed  with  admiration,  by  a  great  act  of 
injustice,  which  they  called  an  act  of  national  justice.  They 
succeeded  ;  but  the  revenge  of  Europe  fell  heavily  on  France, 
and  France,  mighty  through  the  fury  of  her  government, 
subdued  the  armies  of  Europe. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

None  but  young  men  can  well  feel  the  happiness  of  wearing 
an  epaulette,  and  particularly  those  who  rise  from  the  ranks. 
It  is  a  feeling  of  vanity,  I  own  ;  but  that  vanity  makes  heroes. 
I  was  not  destined  to  be  one  ;  but  it  is  not  my  fault,  for  I 
never  felt  a  greater  degree  of  incitement.  During  the  journey, 
I  constantly  reflected  on  the  duties  I  should  have  to  fulfil. 
My  heart  beat  at  the  thoughts  of  my  country  ;  I  was  proud 
at  the  idea  of  shedding  my  blood  for  her.  War  then  raged 
in  all  its  force.  At  every  place  where  we  stopped  to  rest,  I 
read  the  newspapers  ;  I  questioned  my  landlords  ;  and  when- 
ever I  learned  that  the  Rhine  army  had  fought,  I  burned  with 
impatience.  It  seemed  to  me  as  if  I  ran  the  risk  of  arriving 
too  late.  All  the  ideas  that  had  tormented  me  in  Paris  were 
forgotten  ;  the  happiness  of  fighting  for  my  country  had 
absorbed  them  all.  If  I  speak  of  these  deep  impressions, 
that  every  Frenchman  shared,  it  is  because  at  present  they 
are  considered  as  criminal. 

In  the  Holy  Week  of  the  year  1793  I  arrived  at  Worms, 
where  the  second  battalion  of  my  regiment  was  in  garrison. 
I  went  to  see  my  colonel,  M.  de  Loriol.  He  was  an  old  man, 
who  bore  in  his  countenance  all  the  austerity  of  a  former 
major,  and  all  his  vexation  at  being  obliged  to  command 
plebeian  officers.  He  received  me  very  ill,  assigned  me  a 
company,  and  sent  me  away.  I  then  went  to  my  new 
captain.  If  the  colonel's  reception  was  haughty,  that  of  the 
captain  was  impertinent.    He  had  served  as  sergeant  in  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  67 

King's  regiment,  the  non-commissioned  officers  of  which 
used  to  learn  a  Httle  mathematics,  to  distinguish  them  from 
their  comrades  of  other  corps.  This  poor  man  consequently 
looked  upon  himself  as  an  officer  of  old  standing.  He  spoke 
ill  of  his  comrades  and  superiors  ;  said  a  number  of  absur- 
dities about  war,  which  he  did  not  understand  ;  and  would 
perhaps  have  succeeded  in  making  me  very  unhappy  in  my 
situation,  if  I  had  not  found  a  protector  in  M.  de  la  Poterie, 
my  lieutenant-colonel.  This  respectable  gentleman  invited 
me  to  come  and  see  him  frequently,  and  promised  to  advance 
me  if  I  behaved  well.  He  was  killed  a  short  time  after,  at 
the  head  of  his  battalion.  His  memory  has  always  been 
dear  to  me,  and  I  shall  never  forget  the  kindness  he  showed 
me. 

The  success  of  our  armies  began,  however,  to  diminish. 
Our  conquests  had  been  rapid,  but  we  were  in  danger  of 
losing  them  again.  Dumouriez,  after  having  deceived  both 
the  Court  and  the  Jacobins,  wanted  to  draw  the  King  out  of 
the  abyss,  and  crush  his  enemies.  His  presumption  led  him 
to  hope  that  he  should  be  luckier  than  ]\I.  Lafayette.  But 
the  army  took  no  interest  in  the  King,  being  bound  by  no 
tie  to  his  person  ;  and,  though  the  troops  had  no  affection 
for  a  Provisional  Government  scarcely  established,  they  still 
remained  nobly  faithful  to  their  high  duty  of  defending  the 
territory,  and  insuring  the  independence  of  the  country. 
Dumouriez  lost  Belgium,  and  was  obliged  to  seek  refuge  in 
foreign  countries,  after  having  committed  two  disgraceful 
acts  ; — namely,  treating  with  the  enemy  of  his  country,  and 
delivering  over  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention,  among 
whom  was  one  of  his  own  old  comrades,  General  Bournon- 
ville.  The  army  of  the  Rhine  also  was  attacked  by  the 
enemy  with  renewed  force.  Frankfort  was  evacuated,  and 
we  retired  to  Mentz,  and  from  thence  farther  back.  General 
Custines  left  there,  as  commander-in-chief.  General  Doire  ; 
as  commander  of  the  engineers.  Colonel  Meguier  ;  as 
commander  of  the  fortified  camp,  Major-General  Kleber  ; 


68  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

and  as  commander  of  the  fortress,  M.  Aubert  Dubayet. 
General  Blou  was  ordered  to  leave  the  town  at  the  head  of  a 
body  of  some  thousand  men,  and  the  garrison  of  Worms  was 
to  cover  his  retreat.  The  command  of  the  four  battalions 
of  that  garrison  was  given  to  a  young  officer  of  the  staff : 
this  was  Desaix,  who  subsequently  distinguished  himself  by 
so  man}^  noble  feats,  and  by  his  heroic  character.  General 
Blou,  embarrassed  in  his  retreat  by  an  enormous  quantity  of 
equipages  belonging  to  persons  unconnected  with  the  army, 
that  had  been  sent  out  of  the  town,  was  unable  to  resist  the 
imposing  force  of  the  enemy,  and  was  obliged  to  re-enter 
the  city.  He  and  his  troops  contributed  largely  to  the  loss 
the  enemy  suffered  during  the  siege. 

General  Custines  might  have  taken  a  fine  position  behind 
the  Queich,  but  he  preferred  retiring  behind  the  lines  of  the 
Lutter,  resting  on  the  mountains  of  the  Vosges,  and  on  the 
Rhine  at  Lauterbourg.  The  intention  of  the  general  in 
choosing  a  position  so  far  from  Mentz,  a  place  that  could 
not  long  be  left  to  itself,  was  undoubtedly  to  take  leisure  to 
instruct  and  discipline  a  young  and  inexperienced  army. 
But  he  was  blamed  by  many  generals,  and  particularly  by 
Coquebert,  one  of  his  aides-de-camp,  an  officer  of  distin- 
guished merit,  and  much  esteemed  by  his  commander,  not 
only  for  his  extended  information  in  different  branches  of 
military  science,  but  also  for  a  frankness  of  character  which 
was  perhaps  not  devoid  of  some  asperity.  Two  days  after 
the  arrival  of  the  headquarters  at  Weissemburg,  Coquebert 
came  to  the  general,  and  after  having  again  brought  to  his 
mind  the  weighty  reasons  that  ought  to  have  led  him  to 
prefer  the  position  of  the  Queich,  he  said  somewhat  harshly 
that  evil  reports  had  been  the  result  of  his  contrary  resolu- 
tion, and  that  even  the  word  treason  had  been  pronounced. 
Custines  immediately  seized  his  pistols,  and,  throwing  them 
on  the  table,  cried,  "  If  I  am  a  traitor,  blow  my  brains  out !  " 
Coquebert,  struck  with  the  noble  indignation  of  a  man  so 
unjustly  aspersed,  was  himself  confounded,  and   the   only 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  69 

answer  he  gave  his  general  was,  to  discharge  one  of  the 
pistols  off  in  his  own  face.  He  fell  :  his  jawbone  was 
broken  ;  but  he  did  not  die  of  his  wound.  At  the  trial  of 
General  Custines,  Coquebert  was  called  as  a  witness,  in  the 
hope  that  he  would  renew  his  charge  ;  but  he  behaved  like 
an  honourable  man,  completely  justifying  his  general,  and 
accusing  himself  of  a  fit  of  madness.  He  was  subsequently 
taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Hondschoote.  I  saw  him 
afterwards  in  Paris  ;  but  probably  the  sufferings  he  ex- 
perienced during  his  captivity  deranged  his  intellects,  for  he 
completely  lost  his  senses,  and  died  in  a  madhouse,  notwith- 
standing the  pains  that  were  taken  for  several  years  to  cure 
him. 

The  departure  of  General  Houchard  left  the  post  of  chief 
of  the  general  staff  of  the  army  vacant.  Custines  bestowed 
it  on  Colonel  d'Hilliers,  who  was  made  a  major-general,  and 
who  chose  me  for  his  aide-de-camp.  I  occupied  that  post 
with  a  great  deal  of  pleasure,  because  it  was  an  advancement, 
and  procured  me  means  of  instruction.  The  army  was  at 
that  time  not  above  forty  thousand  strong.  The  generals 
were  well  chosen  ;  most  of  them  belonged  to  that  part  of 
the  nobility  which  had  given  proofs  of  fidelity  to  their 
country,  in  defending  it  against  foreigners,  but  for  which 
they  were  cruelly  punished.  Distrust  of  the  nobility  was 
growing  stronger  every  day  in  the  new  Government.  Near 
the  armies  were  placed  commissioners  of  the  Convention, 
who  shared  the  same  sentiments.  The  extent  of  power 
with  which  they  were  invested  prompted  them  to  misuse  it. 
The  general-in-chief  was  forced  to  communicate  and  discuss 
with  them,  not  only  his  plans,  but  even  the  particulars  of 
the  service.  They  were  the  fountains  of  favour,  and  their 
influence  soon  became  dangerous  and  fatal  to  the  respect 
due  to  the  general-in-chief.  Several  commanders  bore 
impatiently  the  contumely  with  which  these  pro-consuls 
affected  to  treat  things,  and  they  frequently  uttered  offensive 
railleries  against  their  persons. 


JO  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VA  LE  TTE. 

The  violent  temper  of  General  Custines  made  him  repel 
with  anger  contradictions  that  were  rendered  unbearable  by 
a  total  absence  of  propriety  and  military  knowledge.  His 
situation  grew  more  difficult  from  day  to  day.  It  became, 
however,  necessary  to  act.  The  communication  with  Landau 
had  ceased  to  be  militarily  established.  The  siege  of  Mentz 
was  urged  with  vigour.  Custines  was  at  this  time  made 
commander-in-chief  of  the  Northern  army,  in  the  place  of 
General  Dam.pierre,  who  had  been  killed.  He  would  not, 
however,  leave  the  army  of  the  Rhine  without  having  drawn 
it  out  of  the  unfortunate  position  in  which  it  then  was  ; 
he  attacked  the  enemy  along  his  whole  line,  but  without 
success.  It  was  reported  that  his  intention  was  to  get  his 
army  beaten  by  the  corps  of  emigrants — an  absurd  calumny  ; 
we  scarcely  saw  that  body  on  the  17th  of  May.  The  fact  is, 
that  the  general  who  commanded  the  right  of  the  army  at 
Lauterbourg  did  not  obey  the  orders  he  had  received,  or 
executed  them  ill.  The  enemy,  who,  according  to  the  plan 
of  the  general-in-chief,  was  to  have  had  his  left  wing  turned, 
not  being  attacked  on  that  side,  found  himself  in  full  force 
before  the  centre  of  the  army  commanded  by  Custines  ;  a 
charge  of  cavalry  was  repulsed  by  a  masked  battery  of  two 
field-pieces,  and  in  their  flight  the  cavalry  hurried  along 
with  them  some  battalions.  I  only  mention  this  battle  be- 
cause it  became  one  of  the  charges  against  the  unfortunate 
Custines.  He  left  us  on  the  following  day  for  the  Northern 
army,  where  the  same  prejudice  and  calumny  awaited 
him.  He  was  soon  after  deprived  of  his  command,  and 
summoned  to  Paris,  where  he  died  on  the  scaffold.  His 
condemnation  was  one  of  the  first  crimes  of  the  sanguinary 
tribunal  which  afterwards  committed  so  many.  Custines 
was  a  lover  of  liberty,  and  never  did  a  thought  of  treason 
enter  his  mind.  The  consolation  of  religion  soothed  his 
last  moments  ;  and  such  was  the  fanaticism  of  his  time, 
that  a  man  who  had  always  shown  himself  full  of  intre- 
pidity under  the  greatest  trials  was  accused  of  cowardice 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  71 

"because  he  walked  to  the  scaffold  accompanied  by  a  clergy- 
man. 

General  Custines  had  his  son  with  him  at  the  army  of  the 
Rhine.  All  who  have  known  that  young  man  loved  him  for 
the  noble  qualities  with  which  he  was  gifted.  He  accom- 
panied his  father  to  the  Northern  army,  and  afterwards  to 
Paris,  and  he  soon  followed  him  to  the  scaffold.  It  is  of 
Tittle  importance  to  know  what  pretence  was  employed  to 
condemn  this  amiable  youth  ;  the  judges  had  already  begun 
to  trample  on  the  most  sacred  forms.  His  age,  his  pro- 
fession, his  manner  of  living,  made  him  equally  a  stranger 
to  all  factions.  He  left  an  only  son,  who  will,  I  hope,  not 
betray  the  noble  quahties  of  his  father  and  the  glory  of  his 
grandfather. 

General  Alexander  de  Beauharnais,  who  took  the  place 
of  Custines,  had  also  been  a  member  of  that  Constituent 
Assembly  so  replete  with  honourable  men.  He  had  neither 
the  faults  of  his  predecessor,  nor  his  habit  of  command.  The 
former  was  violent  to  an  excess,  and  sometimes  incapable  of 
listening  to  the  voice  of  reason  ;  still,  he  was  beloved  by  the 
soldiers  for  his  frankness  and  popularity.  M.  de  Beau- 
harnais, on  the  contrary,  had  a  cultivated  mind  and  a  calm 
temper  ;  he  was  fond  of  order  and  discipline  ;  his  activity 
was  boundless  ;  his  perception  was  quick  and  accurate  ;  his 
valour  cool  and  brilliant.  The  army  soon  became  fond  of 
him.  Modest,  and  even  a  little  circumspect,  he  showed 
reserve  in  the  presence  of  the  troops  ;  and  as  he  did  not  say 
much  to  them,  he  did  not  inspire  them  with  the  same 
enthusiasm  as  General  Custines,  who  liked  to  make  speeches, 
knew  the  name  of  every  private  soldier,  visited  the  men  in 
the  camp  and  hospitals,  and  whose  blunt  good-humour  and 
repartees  were  quoted  everywhere. 

General  d'Hilliers  was  also  superseded  and  summoned  to 
Paris,  where  he  was  thrown  into  prison.  His  successor  as 
chief  of  the  staff  was  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clarke,  of  Irish  ex- 
traction, who  some  years  before  had  been  attached  to  the  Duke 


72  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

of  Orleans.  At  the  battle  of  the  17th  of  May  he  commanded 
a  troop  of  the  2nd  regiment  of  cavalry.  His  horse  having 
been  killed  in  a  charge,  and  being  unable  to  procure  another, 
he  took  up  a  musket  and  placed  himself  in  the  ranks  of  a 
company  of  grenadiers.  That  action  was  then  considered  as 
very  courageous,  and  he  was  made  a  colonel.  M.  de  Beau- 
harnais  took  him  for  chief  of  his  staff,  and  procured  him  the 
rank  of  major-general.  M.  Clarke  added  to  a  taste  for  his 
profession  all  the  suppleness  of  a  man  who  wishes  to  advance, 
and  that  sort  of  spirit  of  intrigue  for  which  his  countrymen 
are  reputed.  He  left  the  army  on  the  12th  of  October, 
having  been  superseded  and  sent  to  Paris.  That  campaign 
was  the  only  one  in  which  he  ever  served.  He  died  a 
marshal  of  France.  I  shall  have  more  than  one  occasion  to 
mention  him  ;  and,  although  I  have  cause  to  be  dissatisfied 
with  him,  I  hope  to  do  him  justice. 

M.  de  Beauharnais  hastened  his  march  to  Mentz  ;  and, 
though  the  resistance  of  the  enemy  grew  stronger  from  day 
to  day,  he  succeeded  in  repelling  him.  After  having  fought 
for  five  days,  we  made  ourselves  masters  of  Spire  and 
Frankenthal.  Two  days  more  and  we  should  have  arrived 
under  the  walls  of  Mentz,  when  accounts  of  the  town  having 
capitulated  were  received  at  our  headquarters.  We  were 
forced  to  return  behind  the  Lutter. 

Courage  and  good  intention  were  the  only  qualities  of 
the  garrison  of  Mentz  at  the  beginning  of  the  siege.  The 
generals  were  intelligent  and  bold  ;  but  the  attacks  of  the 
besiegers  were  so  vigorous  and  repeated  that  the  besieged, 
soldiers  as  well  as  officers,  acquired  both  experience  and 
valour  in  so  remarkable  a  degree  that  they  might  afterwards 
be  looked  upon  as  the  most  formidable  body  the  Republic 
was  able  to  oppose  to  its  enemies. 

The  Prussians,  eager  to  make  themselves  masters  of  that 
barrier  of  the  Rhine,  and  not  caring  what  use  the  French 
Government  might  make  of  these  troops,  were  satisfied  with 
stipulating  that  they  should  retire  into  the  interior  of  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  73 

country,  and  not  serve  against  the  Allies  for  the  space  of  a 
year.  This  article  of  the  capitulation  saved  the  Republic, 
and  cost  the  enemy  dear.  The  garrison  of  Mentz,  com- 
manded by  the  intrepid  general  Kleber,  flew  to  the  western 
departments,  defeated  the  Vendeans,  and  when  the  year  was 
expired  reappeared  under  the  walls  of  Mentz. 

Having  returned  to  Weissemburg,  we  were  soon  obliged 
to  prepare  for  the  attacks  of  an  enemy  that  had  become 
formidable  by  his  junction  with  the  Prussian  army,  and  was 
besides  free  in  all  his  movements.  But  the  commissioners 
of  the  Convention  wanted  first  of  all  to  abolish  the  distinction 
that  still  subsisted  between  the  troops  of  the  line  and  the 
battalions  of  national  volunteers.  The  amalgamation  was  a 
difficult  and  dangerous  operation  at  the  moment  of  a  decisive 
action.  The  generals  explained  their  fears  ;  but  instead  of 
being  listened  to,  they  became  objects  of  suspicion  ;  and, 
just  at  that  instant,  a  decree  of  the  Convention  having 
ordered  the  dismissal  of  all  the  officers  who  belonged  to  the 
nobility,  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  was  thrown  all  of  a  sudden 
into  a  state  of  confusion,  of  which  the  enemy  did  not  fail  to 
make  use.  The  decree  also  concerned  M.  de  Beauharnais  : 
by  disobeying,  he  would  have  placed  himself  in  open  defiance 
to  Government.  The  commissioners,  however,  proposed 
that  he  should  wait  for  an  individual  order  and  the  appoint- 
ment of  his  successor  ;  but  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety 
had  already  named  the  officer  that  was  to  command  in  his 
place.  The  choice  had  fallen  on  General  Delmas,  a  young 
man  of  great  merit,  but  as  yet  too  inexperienced  for  so  im- 
portant a  command  in  such  difficult  circumstances  :  he  was,, 
besides,  at  Landau,  and  that  town  being  blockaded,  his  return 
to  the  army  was  impossible. 

General  Beauharnais  was  deeply  grieved  at  leaving  the 
army :  his  noble  spirit  could  not  brook  the  thought  of 
departing  from  the  scene  of  the  glorious  contest  to  which  the 
voice  of  the  country  called  all  Frenchmen.  In  returning  to 
the  interior  of  the  Republic,  he  moreover  was  exposed  to 


74  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

innumerable  dangers.  He  had  constantly  supported  the 
system  of  representative  government  ;  and  although  he  felt 
the  necessity  of  defending  a  Republic  born  amidst  storms,  yet 
the  system  of  the  Jacobins  and  their  cruelty  inspired  him 
with  horror.  All  the  members  of  the  Constituent  Assembly 
were  persecuted,  and  even  the  purest  and  most  prudent  con- 
duct was  far  from  ensuring  him  tranquillity  in  an  obscure 
retreat.  I  was  in  his  closet  at  the  moment  that  he  was  con- 
fiding his  grief  and  regret  to  the  bosom  of  his  faithful  friend 
Lahorie,  who  had  been  his  secretary,  and  who  was  then  one 
of  the  officers  of  his  staff.  This  gentleman  advised  him  to 
attack  the  enemy  and  seek  an  honourable  death,  rather  than 
expose  himself  to  all  the  outrages  of  his  foes  in  the  interior 
of  France.  The  advice  was  more  courageous  than  wise. 
The  general  answered  :  "I  must  first  of  all  consider  the 
interest  of  the  army  and  my  country.  I  do  not  flatter  myself 
as  to  my  future  fate  ;  but  the  death  of  so  many  brave  men 
must  not  rest  on  my  head,  nor  all  the  fatal  consequences  of 
a  defeat.  The  army  will  perhaps  be  commanded  by  a  more 
fortunate  chief  ;  besides,  the  decree  that  supersedes  me  is 
positive  :  even  victory  would  be  looked  upon  as  a  crime,  and 
I  see  no  possibility  of  gaining  one  at  present  :  we  have 
scarcely  thirty-five  thousand  men,  in  bad  order  ;  and  the 
enemy  have  eighty  thousand  ;  my  death  would  be  of  no  use  ; 
I  must  go.''  The  day  after,  he  resigned  his  command  and 
left  the  army,  which  remained  without  a  commander  in  the 
presence  of  a  formidable  enemy,  and  the  organisation  went 
on  but  slowly.  Little  attention  was  paid  to  that  state  of 
disorder.  Forty  thousand  farmers  arrived  without  arms  or 
regimentals  :  they  were  undoubtedly  well  disposed  ;  but 
they  had  no  experience,  having  never  faced  the  enemy.  The 
choice  of  a  general-in-chief  was  a  difficult  one  :  the  post  was 
first  offered  to  General  Laudremont,  who  commanded  the 
vanguard  ;  but  he  was  a  nobleman,  and,  though  he  had 
great  merit,  he  was  recalled  a  few  days  after  his  appointment. 
Thus   it  was   necessary   to   seek   somebody   else,   and   one 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  75 

Colonel  Corbin  did  not  fear  to  take  the  burden  on  his 
shoulders.  Two  days  after  his  appointment,  the  commis- 
sioners of  the  Convention,  to  put  him  entirely  at  his  ease, 
dismissed  abruptly  from  the  army  thirteen  generals,  the 
chief  of  the  staff,  the  commander  of  the  vanguard,  generals 
of  division  ;  no  one  was  spared.  This  foolish  measure  was 
adopted  on  the  12th  of  October,  1793,  and  on  the  13th,  at 
four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  enemy  attacked  us  on  the 
whole  length  of  our  line,  broke  through  our  ranks,  put  us 
to  the  rout,  and  at  eight  o'clock  we  had  lost  the  lines  and 
were  in  full  retreat  towards  Brompt  in  the  greatest  disorder. 
By  good  luck,  our  forty  thousand  peasants  were  so  active 
in  their  flight  they  did  not  long  embarrass  our  retreat  ; 
they  had  their  houses  and  families  to  defend.  The  second 
day  there  was  not  one  of  them  remained  behind  : 
nevertheless  they  afterwards  became  very  excellent  soldiers 
when  they  were  recalled  ;  but  they  had  been  ren- 
dered able  to  fight  before  they  were  placed  in  front  of  the 
enemy.  The  rear-guard  was  well  enough  commanded  to 
cover  our  retreat  :  it  fought  courageously  on  the  heights  of 
Brompt  during  a  whole  day,  so  that  the  army  had  time  to 
arrive  at  Haguenau  ;  there  the  commissaries  and  the  general- 
in-chief  deliberated  whether  it  would  not  be  best  to  retire  to 
Saverne  and  leave  Strasburg  to  defend  itself  ;  happily,  before 
they  came  to  a  resolution,  they  thought  it  necessary  to  con- 
sult M.  da  Villemanzy,  commissary-general  of  the  army.  He 
declared  that  Strasburg  having  constantly  furnished  the 
army  with  provisions  and  stores,  its  magazines  were  com- 
pletely exhausted,  and  that  some  time  would  necessarily 
elapse  before  the  town  could  be  put  in  a  state  to  support  a 
siege  ;  so  that,  if  left  to  itself,  it  was  to  be  feared  it  would  be 
obliged  to  capitulate.  M.  de  Villemanzy  was  taken  prisoner 
at  Haguenau,  where  he  had  remained  to  keep  an  eye  on  the 
evacuation  of  the  magazines  :  the  general  opinion  at  the 
time  was  that  he  had  delivered  himself  up.  If  that  be  true, 
I  think  he  acted  wisely  ;  he  would  undoubtedly  have  been 


76  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

arrested  on  his  arrival  at  Strasburg,  and  probably  have  died 
on  the  scaffold.  He  passed  for  an  enemy  of  the  Republic. 
I  can  say  nothing  as  to  that  :  all  I  know  is  that  he  was  a 
well-bred,  agreeable  man,  and  that  his  situation  was  an 
object  of  envy.  Villemanzy's  observations  made  the  council 
resolve  to  cover  the  town  ;  the  headquarters  were  estab- 
lished at  Schiltikeim,  a  village  a  league  from  Strasburg. 
The  army  extended  in  a  line  of  more  than  ten  leagues,  from 
the  banks  of  the  Rhine  to  Saverne,  and  until  orders  from 
the  Government  could  be  received,  the  chief  command  was 
entrusted  to  General  Michaud.  This  temporary  choice  was 
a  wise  one.  General  Michaud  was  a  prudent  man,  who  felt 
the  danger  of  his  situation,  and  did  his  utmost  to  make  the 
best  of  it,  presenting  to  the  enemy  an  appearance  of  strength 
that  forced  them  to  be  cautious. 

It  was  Wurmser  who  commanded  the  combined  armies 
opposed  to  us.  With  a  little  more  resolution  he  might  have 
beaten  us  once  again,  and  perhaps  made  himself  master  of 
Strasburg.  But  he  reckoned  on  the  friends  he  flattered 
himself  he  possessed  in  Alsatia.  He  was  persuaded  that  the 
bad  government  of  the  Jacobins,  and  his  own  intrigues, 
would  make  the  whole  population  of  the  province  fly  to  him. 
He  was  mistaken.  The  Austrians  were  still  more  detested 
than  even  the  Jacobins,  for  the  Alsatians  were  Frenchmen. 
While  he  was  contriving  low  intrigues,  the  army  had  time 
to  recover,  and  the  eastern  frontiers  were  saved. 

At  last  the  arrival  of  a  general-in-chief  was  announced  j 
but  our  astonishment  was  great  when  we  heard  the  name  of 
Pichegru  :  he  was  completely  unknown  to  the  army.  After 
many  inquiries,  we  learned  that  he  had  had  an  obscure 
command  in  the  department  of  the  Upper  Rhine  ;  that  he 
had  served  in  the  artillery  as  a  non-commissioned  officer  ; 
and  that  he  had  a  little  while  before  been  chief  clerk  in  the 
War  Office.  The  name  of  Pichegru,  which  a  short  time 
after  became  famous  in  France  and  all  over  Europe,  was 
mentioned  with  contempt  by  all  the  giddy-headed  youths  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  77 

the  army.  A  few  days  were,  however,  sufficient  to  gain  him 
the  esteem  of  every  one.  I  was  still  on  the  staff,  and  was 
one  of  the  first  persons  who  saw  him.  He  was  about  thirty- 
five,  and  of  middling  size.  His  eyes  were  fine,  full  of  fire 
and  intelligence  ;  his  air  was  martial,  and  his  deportment 
calm  and  dignified  in  the  highest  degree.  He  began  by 
restoring  order  in  the  army,  and  by  rectifying  as  much 
as  possible  all  that  was  faulty  in  its  positions.  He  again 
inspired  the  troops  with  a  consciousness  of  their  strength, 
spoke  to  them  of  their  duty  without  harshness,  and  promised 
them  success  without  exaggeration.  The  winter  was  then 
in  all  its  rigour  ;  many  were  the  obstacles  to  be  surmounted, 
but  they  were  the  same  for  both  armies.  The  Prussians 
and  Austrians  did  not  agree  well  together  ;  their  generals 
hated  one  another  ;  and  M.  de  Wurmser  appeared  timid 
and  irresolute.  Our  part  was  therefore  to  make  use  of  the 
favourable  chances  those  circumstances  presented  us,  to 
attack  and  raise  the  blockade  of  Landau.  We  soon  received 
reinforcements,  and  St.  Just,  a  member  of  the  Committee 
of  Public  Safety,  arrived  unexpectedly  at  the  army.  The 
conduct  of  that  young  man  made  me  acquainted  with  the 
existence  of  a  government  most  terrible  from  its  energy, 
while  we  imagined  we  were  swayed  by  a  turbulent  and 
stupid  Assembly.  St.  Just  severely  reprimanded  his  col- 
leagues, and  sent  several  of  them  away.  He  asked  also 
an  account  of  the  causes  that  had  led  to  the  loss  of  the  lines 
of  Weissemburg  ;  he  arrested  several  generals,  and  eight  or 
ten  superior  ofl&cers.  Among  them  were  the  poor  noblemen 
who  had  not  yet  left  the  army.  A  sanguinary  tribunal 
sentenced  them,  and  they  were  shot  in  front  of  the  ranks. 
This  was  a  useless  act  of  cruelty  ;  for  no  treason  had  been 
committed,  and  the  loss  of  the  lines  was  much  less  owing  to 
the  generals  than  to  the  bad  measures  of  the  commissioners 
of  the  Convention  ;  but  St.  Just  had  read  that  the  Romans 
sometimes  made  use  of  cruel  severity  to  re-establish  discipline 
among  their  troops ;  and  that  man,  who  imagined  he  pos- 


78  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

sessed  the  genius  of  Sylla  because  he  had  his  cruelty,  thus 
made  a  prelude  to  the  scenes  of  murder  which  a  few  months 
after  he  extended  all  over  France.  He  probably  thought 
he  had  made  a  just  compensation  by  threatening  the  presi- 
dent of  the  atrocious  tribunal  he  had  employed.  This  man 
was  a  wretched  foreign  priest,  called  Schneider,  who  gloried 
in  his  assumed  title  of  the  Marat  of  the  Rhine.  For  several 
months  he  had  acted  as  president  of  the  tribunal  and  general 
of  the  revolutionary  army,  and  terrified  Alsatia  with  his 
cruelty  and  debauchery.  He  used  to  travel  through  the 
province,  followed  by  judges  who  were  no  better  than 
robbers,  and  by  soldiers  who  were  his  executioners.  A 
guillotine  drawn  by  horses,  like  a  field-piece,  accompanied 
him  everywhere  ;  and  when  he  arrived  in  any  town,  not 
one  of  the  inhabitants  could  count  on  escaping.  Sex,  age, 
beauty,  respectability,  fortune — nothing  was  sacred  in  the 
eyes  of  this  wretch.  Of  all  the  ferocious  men  that  made 
themselves  famous  during  that  period,  Schneider  perhaps 
bore  the  greatest  resemblance  to  Nero.  The  sight  of  death 
and  blood  gave  him  a  sensation  of  unspeakable  delight. 
The  examples  of  this  monster  of  cruelty  have  in  them 
a  sort  of  originality  that  makes  one  shudder  ;  and  one 
would  wish  to  doubt  their  truth,  if  the  testimony  of  one 
hundred  thousand  inhabitants  and  the  evidence  of  facts 
were  not  certain  proofs  of  their  existence.  St.  Just  had 
the  monster  arrested  and  sent  to  Paris.  There  he  was 
condemned,  not  for  the  crimes  he  had  really  committed,, 
but  for  prior  conspiracies  that  never  existed  ;  so  far  was 
justice  reviled  in  those  deplorable  times. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  campaign  opened  in  the  month  of  December.  The 
right  wing  of  the  array  was  commanded  by  General  St. 
Cyr,  and  the  left  by  General  Desaix.  General  Hoche,  who 
was  at  the  head  of  the  Army  of  the  Moselle,  seconded  our 
movements  by  vigorous  and  perpetually  renewed  attacks. 
Brilliant  though  dearly-bought  successes  brought  us  to  the 
heights  of  Brompt ;  they  caused  us  both  to  love  and  respect 
our  new  general-in-chief. 

It  was  near  Brompt  that  we  had  a  cavalry  engagement 
with  the  corps  of  Conde,  in  which  we  were  on  the  point 
of  taking  prisoners  a  part  of  that  corps,  with  the  three 
Princes  who  commanded  it.  The  Duke  of  Bourbon  was 
wounded,  but  he  escaped  by  the  devotion  of  the  brave  men 
that  surrounded  him,  and  b}^  one  of  those  chances  the 
influence  of  which  so  strongly  modifies  events.  An  officer 
of  the  39th  regiment  of  dragoons,  called  Dieudonne,  had 
distinguished  himself  by  valour  on  those  same  heights  of 
Brompt  during  our  retreat.  The  commissioners  of  the 
Convention  sent  him  to  Paris  to  present  two  standards  he 
had  taken.  He  was  received  with  marked  distinction  by 
the  Assembly,  and  he  returned  to  the  army  a  month  after- 
wards with  the  rank  of  general  of  brigade.  In  the  battle 
which  might  have  been  so  fatal  to  the  Bourbon  Princes, 
Dieudonne  commanded  two  regiments.  That  was  too  much 
for  his  experience.  He  did  not  know  how  to  develop  them 
in  due  time,  and  the   Princes  were  saved.     His  error  was 

79 


So  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

considered  a  crime  :  he  was  arrested  and  sent  to  Paris  as 
a  traitor  ;  he  died  on  the  scaffold. 

The  battle  of  Brompt  gave  us  a  superiority  over  the 
enemy  which  we  did  not  afterwards  lose.  General  Hoche 
continued  advancing  on  the  right  of  the  enemy.  He 
succeeded  in  turning  his  position  near  Pirmasens  ;  and  a 
few  days  after,  while  debouching  from  behind  the  moun- 
tains, the  two  French  armies  met  near  Weissemburg.  The 
enemy,  discouraged,  began  to  retreat,  and  Landau  was 
delivered.  Pichegru's  fame  was  from  that  moment  firmly 
established.  He  also  displayed  his  character  in  a  trait  I 
must  not  omit.  General  Desaix  was  of  noble  extraction  ; 
but  the  decree  that  excluded  all  noblemen  had  not  yet  been 
applied  to  him.  The  commissioners  of  the  Convention 
hesitated  to  deprive  the  army  of  an  able,  valiant,  and 
beloved  officer.  The  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  never- 
theless, sent  three  times  to  Pichegru  orders  to  dismiss  him  ; 
but  he  did  not  obey  them,  and  even  took  care  not  to 
mention  the  fact  to  any  one.  It  was  not  till  the  campaign 
was  over  that  Desaix  learned  it.  Thus,  by  his  generous 
disobedience,  he  saved  a  general  who,  during  ten  years,  shed 
lustre  on  the  armies  of  France,  and  whose  noble  character 
may  be  offered  as  a  model  to  all  soldiers. 

The  junction  of  the  two  armies,  after  such  great  successes, 
was  a  beautiful  scene.  The  generals  congratulated  one 
another  on  their  mutual  exertions ;  but  discord  soon 
created  between  them  dissensions  more  dangerous  than 
even  the  enemy  had  proved.  Each  pretended  to  the 
greatest  share  of  the  glory,  and  wounded  vanity  would 
perhaps  have  soiled  the  field  with  blood,  had  not  Govern- 
ment checked  the  misunderstanding  by  separating  the 
commanders.  Pichegru  was  sent  to  the  Northern  army, 
and  Hoche  to  that  which  was  assembled  near  Nice.  He 
had  scarcely  arrived  there  when  he  was  arrested,  and  shut 
up  in  the  dungeon  of  the  Conciergerie,  where  he  remained 
until  after  the  9th  of  Thermidor.     Thus  the  Committee  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  8 1 

Public  Safety  made  him  expiate  his  glory,  and  humbled  his 
proud  character. 

The  Army  of  the  Rhine  pursued  its  successes  during  the 
remainder  of  the  year  1794.  Our  position  on  the  Queich 
was  secure  :  the  Austrians  had  repassed  the  Rhine.  We 
had  some  other  brilliant  actions  with  the  Prussians  ;  and 
I  remember  that  at  the  close  of  one  of  them  that  had  proved 
entirely  to  our  advantage,  in  the  environs  of  Germersheim, 
we  saw  the  words  chalked  on  the  doors  of  a  village  we  had 
taken — "  Adieu  !  brave  Frenchmen  !  "  X  short  time  after, 
the  treaty  of  Basil  was  signed,  and  established  friendship 
between  two  nations  which  already  esteemed  one  another. 
The  common  hatred  awoke  again  at  a  more  recent  period, 
and  a  long  time  will  now  be  required  to  suppress  it. 

In  the  month  of  October  the  army  established  itself 
before  Mentz,  to  keep  the  enemy  in  awe,  and  prevent  him 
from  advancing  on  that  point.  The  soldiers  constructed 
huts  underground  in  a  very  ingenious  manner.  Protected 
by  field  fortifications  that  covered  this  new  sort  of  camp, 
they  passed  there  one  of  the  longest  and  severest  winters 
ever  recorded.  The  result  aimed  at  in  taking  that  position 
was  obtained,  at  least,  during  six  months  ;  but  it  was  too 
dearly  bought.  In  the  month  of  January,  one-half  of  the 
army  lay  sick  in  the  hospitals.  In  June  the  enemy  again 
began  his  operations,  and,  as  we  might  have  foreseen,  he 
crossed  the  Rhine  behind  us,  turned  our  position,  and 
obliged  us  to  fall  back  on  the  Lutter.  General  Moreau 
came  to  take  command  of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine.  The 
history  of  that  campaign  is  known  ;  I  shall  therefore  enter 
into  no  particulars  concerning  it.  I  left  the  army  a  little 
while  before  its  retreat.  General  d'Hilliers  had  just  got  out 
of  prison,  and  had  been  appointed  chief  of  the  staff  of  the 
first  military  division  in  Paris.  He  proposed  to  me  to 
return  and  resume  my  duty  as  his  aide-de-camp.  I  was 
happy  in  the  army,  but  I  wished  to  see  my  family  once 
more  ;  so  I  set  off. 

7 


82  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

Before  I  leave  the  Army  of  the  Rhine,  to  which  I  shall 
not  again  allude,  I  must  beg  permission  to  take  leave  of 
it  with  a  few  lines.  That  army  was  by  no  means  the  first, 
either  b}^  its  consequence  or  its  exploits.  Its  duty  was  to 
protect  Alsatia  and  defend  that  part  of  the  Palatinate  it  had 
conquered.  It  succeeded  by  battles  strongly  disputed,  but 
in  the  issue  always  favourable  ;  and  it  was  of  great  service 
to  France,  for  the  enemy  coveted  that  part  of  our  frontiers 
that  he  would  perhaps  never  have  restored.  Lorraine  is 
the  cradle  of  the  Imperial  house,  and  the  Germans  look 
upon  Alsatia  as  a  part  of  the  empire,  which  it  is  as  much 
their  advantage  as  their  honour  to  unite  again  to  the 
mother  country  ; — there  prevail  the  same  language,  the 
same  customs,  the  same  religion,  and,  above  all,  the  strong 
wish  of  weakening  France,  and  enabling  themselves  to 
attack  her  in  the  very  heart.    The  plan  is  not  yet  given  up. 

The  Army  of  the  Rhine  shared  at  that  period  with 
our  other  armies  the  advantage  of  being  commanded  by 
generals  and  officers,  almost  all  of  whom  had  risen  from  its 
own  ranks  and  been  instructed  among  them.  At  the  head 
of  the  most  able  must  be  placed  Kleber,  Desaix,  and  St. 
Cyr.  Kleber  was  born  at  Strasburg  :  he  had  served  before 
the  Revolution  in  the  Austrian  army,  and  he  came  to  ours 
as  commander  of  a  battalion  of  volunteers  of  the  Upper 
Rhine.  His  stature  was  strong  and  gigantic,  and  called  to 
mind  the  heroes  of  Homer  :  his  voice  was  sonorous  and 
imperious  ;  his  spirit  rose  and  warmed  at  the  sight  of 
danger  ;  though  learned  in  all  the  branches  of  military 
science,  he  was  not  gifted  with  that  boldness  of  execution 
that  distinguished  other  generals  :  but  he  possessed  the 
prudence  which  long  experience  gives,  joined  to  the 
resources  derived  from  an  imperturbable  coolness  and  rapid 
perception.  Of  all  our  generals,  Kleber  is  perhaps  the  one 
of  whom  the  soldiers  retain  the  most  flattering  recollection, 
for  he  loved  them  as  if  they  had  been  his  children,  was 
continuall}'  thinking  of  their  comforts,  and  diverted  them 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  83 

in  the  midst  of  their  perils  by  quaint  sayings,  which  were 
rendered  more  piquant  by  the  harsh  accent  of  his  mother 
tongue. 

Desaix,  who  was  born  in  Auvergne,  had  served  for  several 
years  as  an  officer  in  the  regiment  of  Brittany.  His  stature 
was  tall,  and  his  figure  singular.  He  had  fine  black  fiery 
eyes,  and  a  nose  that  seemed  to  descend  from  the  top  of  the 
forehead  ;  his  thick  and  usually  separated  lips  showed  a  set 
of  teeth  of  sparkling  whiteness  ;  his  hair,  flat  and  black  as 
jet,  shaded  his  dark  face.  His  gait  was  embarrassed,  but 
still  without  awkwardness,  and  betrayed  bashfulness  and 
want  of  knowledge  of  the  world.  Altogether,  he  resembled 
a  savage  of  the  banks  of  the  Oroonoko  dressed  in  French 
clothes.  But  one  soon  got  accustomed  to  him.  His  voice 
was  soft,  and,  when  once  drawn  out  of  his  usual  reserve,  he 
delighted  by  the  variety  of  his  information  and  the  sim- 
plicity of  his  manners.  He  had  none  of  the  faults  of  men 
accustomed  to  camp  life  :  I  never  heard  him  utter  a  vulgar 
expression — an  indecent  word  made  him  blush.  As  he  was 
constantly  easv  and  kind,  his  staflf  led  a  merry  life,  and  the 
pretty  girls  of  the  Palatinate  used  frequently  to  visit  his 
headquarters.  He  smiled  at  our  pleasures  without  sharing 
them,  but  with  the  indulgence  of  a  father  who  shuts  his  eyes 
on  his  children's  wild  tricks.  I  do  not  think  I  ever  saw  him 
dressed  in  the  uniform  of  his  rank  :  he  usually  wore  a  blue 
coat  without  any  lace,  and  the  sleeves  of  which  were  so 
short  that  we  used  to  say  in  jest  he  had  certainl}'  worn  it 
when  he  first  took  the  sacrament.  He  frequently  mounted 
his  horse  without  a  sword  when  he  went  to  visit  the  posts. 
One  night,  having  ordered  an  attack  on  the  convent  of 
Marienborn,  near  Mentz,  which  the  enemy  occupied  in  force, 
he  suddenly  found  himself  without  arms  in  the  midst  of  a 
surprised  body  of  infantry  which  was  defending  itself  with 
the  bayonet  amongst  the  vines.  Desaix,  perceiving  he  had 
forgot  his  sword,  pulled  a  vine-prop  out  of  the  ground,  and 
continued  fighting  as  if  he  had  had  Orlando's  sword  in  his 


84  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

hand.  Savary,  who  was  then  his  aide-de-camp,  threw  him- 
self before  him,  just  in  time  to  save  his  hfe,  and  killed  a  Hun- 
garian grenadier  that  was  about  to  pierce  him  with  his  bayonet. 
I  must  not  forget  General  St,  Cyr,  though  still  alive  and 
in  the  enjoyment  of  power  ; — but  this  work  is  not  meant  to 
appear  till  after  my  death.  He  entered  the  army  as  captain 
of  a  free  corps  raised  in  Paris  during  the  terrible  month  of 
September,  1792.  This  troop,  which  consisted  of  Parisian 
vagabonds  (I  need  not  say  any  more),  boasted  on  the  road 
that  they  were  going  to  teach  the  army  the  right  step, 
meaning  that  they  would  make  it  Republican  ;  for,  to  say 
the  truth,  we  were  neither  robbers  nor  braggers.  However, 
they  committed  such  terrible  outrages  that  General  Custines 
ordered  his  cavalry  to  surround  and  disarm  them,  after 
which  they  were  disbanded.  St.  Cyr  remained  in  conse- 
quence unemployed.  He  had  in  his  early  youth  visited 
as  an  artist  Italy  and  Greece,  and  he  had  a  great  facility  for 
drawing.  One  day  he  was  busy  near  Mentz  sketching  the 
positions  of  Oekheim,  when  General  Custines,  whose 
glance  was  piercing,  observing  him  at  a  distance,  darted 
towards  him  with  all  the  swiftness  his  horse  was  capable  of. 
Seeing  him  dressed  in  a  uniform  he  detested,  he  asked  him 
angrily  what  he  was  doing,  and  tore  the  paper  out  of  his 
hands.  Finding,  however,  that  the  positions  were  taken 
accurately,  he  asked  him  some  questions,  appeared  satisfied 
with  his  answers,  and  appointed  him  officer  of  the  staff.  A 
few  months  afterwards,  and  shortly  before  our  disaster  at 
Weissemburg,  chance  was  still  more  serviceable  to  him. 
We  had  been  repulsed  in  the  pass  of  Annweiller  ;  the  com- 
missioners of  the  Convention,  seeing  treason  everywhere, 
knew  not  to  whom  they  ought  to  entrust  the  command  of 
the  troops  :  St.  Cyr  was  crossing  the  street  under  the  win- 
dows of  the  headquarters  ;  an  officer  pointed  to  him  as  a 
man  in  whom  the  greatest  confidence  might  be  placed.  He 
was  called  upstairs,  and,  after  a  few  questions,  the  commis- 
sioners proposed  to  him  to  march   off  with  two  thousand 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  85 

men  and  attack  the  enemy.  His  surname  Gouvion,  how- 
ever, made  them  frown  ;  the  same  had  been  that  of  a  friend 
of  M.  de  Lafayette,  a  former  major-general  of  the  National 
Guards  of  Paris.  Though  the  latter  had  been  killed  in  the 
army,  his  relations  were  not  the  less  persecuted  for  that, 
St.  Cyr  beat  the  enemy,  made  some  hundred  prisoners,  and 
retook  the  positions.  Three  months  later  he  was  a  general 
of  division.  He  constantly  commanded  the  centre  of  the 
army,  and  was  called  its  shield.  Next  to  these  celebrated 
generals  shone  a  great  number  of  young  men,  who  have  all 
acquired  lasting  glory — Sainte  Suzenne,  Guyot,  Boursier, 
Bellavesne,  Ferino,  Haxo,  Dode,  Nempde,  Clemencel, 
Fririon,  D'Astrel,  and  the  unfortunate  Lahorie  !  so  praise- 
worthy for  his  constancy  of  spirit,  which  ten  years'  adversity 
was  unable  to  shake,  and  who  received  death  with  a  smile. 
And  you  also,  my  old  chiefs,  ray  dear  friends  !  why  cannot 
I  surround  your  names  with  all  the  splendour  of  your  noble 
deeds  ?  You  greatly  contributed  to  save  France  !  Could 
you  expect  that  your  services  would  one  day  be  rewarded 
by  forgetfulness  and  persecution  ? 

With  such  chiefs,  and  friends  of  the  soldiers,  most  of 
whom  had  commanded  as  private  officers,  discipline  was 
exact  but  gentle.  They  all  loved  their  profession,  and 
were  well  acquainted  with  it.  Mean  jealousy,  hatred,  and 
backbiting  were  unknown.  The  oldest  of  these  generals 
was  scarcely  thirty,  and  the  Revolution  having  found  them 
in  a  middling  condition,  and  at  a  time  of  life  when  luxury 
and  corruption  have  not  yet  gained  an  empire  over  the  mind, 
they  had  no  wish  but  for  glory,  and  glory  itself  pleased  them 
only  when  surrounded  by  perils.  I  have  frequently  heard 
doubts  raised  as  to  the  skill  of  our  generals,  notwithstanding 
the  constant  successes  by  which  their  fame  has  been  estab- 
lished. It  has  been  declared  impossible  to  learn  so  quickly 
and  so  well  the  most  difficult  of  all  sciences,  and  that  which 
more  than  any  other  requires  a  number  of  different  branches 
of  knowledge,  which  can  only  be  acquired  by  a  great  deal 


86  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

of  time,  particularly  where  the  peculiar  education  is  wanting, 
as  was  the  case  with  most  of  the  Republican  generals.  It  is 
not  sufficiently  known  that  the  first  quality  necessary  to 
attain  distinction  in  the  military  career  is  strength  of  mind. 
That  gift  of  nature,  which  is  so  little  esteemed,  and  of  so 
little  use  in  ordinar}'  life,  is  however  so  important  that  it 
might  have  saved  France  a  few  years  ago,  if  those  who  at 
that  time  influenced  her  fate  had  been  possessed  of  it.  It  is 
quite  indispensable  in  the  military  profession.  Nature  alone 
can  give  it  ;  and  she  did  give  it  to  all  our  celebrated  generals. 
In  the  second  place,  it  is  not  true  that  their  education  had 
been  neglected  ;  for,  to  speak  only  of  those  of  the  first 
period  of  the  war,  Pichegru,  Bernadotte,  Jourdan,  Moreau, 
Kleber,  Desaix,  St.  Cyr,  and  Hoche  (the  latter  was  bred  at 
the  school  of  the  sons  of  the  gardes  Fraufatscs),  had  all 
studied  the  military  art.  The  education  of  most  of  them 
had  been  as  well  attended  to  as  that  of  the  nobility.  It 
must  also  be  considered  that  in  other  professions  the  most 
ambitious  student  can  scarcely  devote  more  than  twelve 
hours  a  day  to  his  studies,  and  is  frequently  interrupted  ; 
whereas,  in  the  army,  every  instant  is  given  up  to  military 
knowledge.  A  passion  for  glory,  ambition,  the  pleasure  of 
command,  freedom  from  the  duties  of  the  world — all  induce 
soldiers  to  talk  and  think  unceasingly  of  their  profession. 
The  variety  of  events,  their  rapidity,  their  number,  hourly 
correct  the  wrong  judgment  of  young  officers,  enrich  their 
memory,  multiply  the  examples  they  may  want,  and  com- 
plete their  improvement.  Their  mistakes  appear  in  open 
daylight  ;  they  are  quickly  punished  ;  and  as  the  blow 
strikes  not  only  the  guilty,  but  also  those  who  are  placed 
below  or  around  him,  each  individual  is  in  some  respect 
answerable  for  his  neighbour,  and  all  have  the  greatest 
interest  in  acting  well. 

The  composition  of  the  troops,  as  well  as  their  valour, 
contributed  also  to  our  successes.  The  love  of  their  country 
and  the  hatred  of  a  foreign  yoke  had  animated  them  even 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  87 

under  the  paternal  roof  since  the  year  1789.  At  the  first 
call,  the  citizens  flew  to  the  frontiers  ;  a  great  number  of 
well-educated  young  men,  whom  the  passion  for  glory  and 
ambition  had  assembled  under  the  banners  of  the  army, 
were  like  a  nursery  of  excellent  officers.  The  warlike 
Marseillaise  hymn  filled  every  breast  with  such  deep 
emotion  and  enthusiasm  that  its  first  notes  were  sufficient 
to  make  the  troops  rush  on  the  enemy  with  irresistible 
impetuosity.  At  Gaisberg,  near  Weissemburg,  the  enemy 
had  crowned  the  plateau  with  thirty  cannons,  which  dealt 
death  and  devastation  into  our  ranks.  The  troops  advanced 
nevertheless  with  a  slow  step  :  when  they  arrived  at  the 
foot  of  the  frontier,  the  warlike  song  was  heard,  and  at  the 
same  instant  the  soldiers,  as  if  they  had  been  borne  up  by  a 
whirlwind,  overcame  every  difficulty.  The  position  was  taken, 
the  cannon  were  in  our  power,  and  the  enemy  put  to  flight. 
The  perils  and  sufferings  our  troops  endured  at  that 
period  were  the  more  deserving  of  admiration,  because  they 
had  no  other  compensation  than  the  love  of  their  country 
and  their  ambition.  The  most  simple  enjoyments  were 
unknown  to  us.  We  were  all  of  us  poor.  The  soldier 
received  no  more  than  an  ecu  per  month  in  money  ;  and 
the  officers,  of  all  ranks,  only  eight  francs.  Our  salaries 
were  paid  us  in  assignats,  which  were  already  depreciated  in 
France,  and  were  of  no  value  at  all  in  foreign  countries. 
During  the  severe  winter  of  1794,  I  shared  with  some  of  my 
comrades  a  peasant's  room  in  the  village  of  Fintheim  near 
Mentz  :  we  had  only  one  bed  amongst  us,  and  every  week 
we  drew  lots  who  was  to  sleep  in  it  ;  the  rest  lay  upon 
straw.  Our  assignats  were  barely  sufficient  to  procure  us  a 
little  bad  wine  three  times  a  month  :  we  knew  that  our 
landlord  possessed  a  considerable  quantity,  but  not  one  of 
us  ever  cherished  the  idea  of  forcing  him  to  give  it  us  for 
nothing.  My  companions  were  all  young  officers  of  engineers. 
Three  of  them,  Haxo,  Dode,  and  Nempde,  became  celebrated 
generals  in  that  corps — the  rest  were  killed. 


88  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

I  beg  pardon  for  having  dwelt  so  long  on  this  subject. 
To  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  I  owe  those  qualities  that  have 
embellished  my  life,  and  the  strength  of  mind  that  decided 
my  fate.  When  I  entered  it,  I  was  full  of  enthusiasm,  but 
my  ideas  on  military  subjects  were  confused,  and  I  wanted 
experience.  I  had  not  yet  seen  the  enemy,  and  I  was  very 
anxious  to  know  what  figure  I  should  cut  in  the  first  battle. 
My  ardent  courage  did  not  leave  me  at  full  liberty  for  reflec- 
tion ;  but  I  was  lucky  enough  to  be  attached  to  the  division 
of  General  Desaix.  The  easy  and  immovable  calmness, 
the  soft  cheerfulness  of  that  excellent  man  in  the  midst  of 
the  most  murderous  fire,  made  me  sensible  that  there  exists 
no  real  valour  without  those  qualities.  I  reflected  seriously, 
and  was  discontented  with  myself.  I  did  not  know  how  to 
manage  my  horse  when  in  the  direction  of  the  balls  ;  I 
crossed  too  rapidly  the  field  of  action  ;  and  I  frequently  went 
a  round-about  way,  when  I  could  have  rode  straight  before 
me.  I  blushed  at  such  foolish  conduct,  and  schooled  myself 
so  well  that  case  shot  soon  lost  all  power  of  embarrassing 
me.  It  required  time  before  I  arrived  at  that  degree  of  self- 
possession.  How  often  did  I  not  go  back  and  place  myself 
purposely  in  the  middle  of  the  fire  !  How  satisfied  I  was 
when  I  had  remained  long  in  such  a  situation  !  That  moral 
strength  did  not  contribute  considerably  to  my  advancement, 
but  it  made  me  worthy  of  being  the  aide-de-camp  of  the 
Conqueror  of  Italy,  and  gained  me  his  esteem  :  it  also  made 
me  bear  prosperity  with  moderation,  and  was  a  strong 
support  to  me  in  the  days  of  misfortune. 


CHAPTER   IX. 

I  ARRIVED  in  Paris  towards  the  middle  of  August.  When 
I  left  that  city  in  1792,  the  people,  freed  from  the  whole- 
some restraint  of  the  laws,  intoxicated  with  fury,  and  elated 
with  their  abominable  triumphs,  were  madly  enjoying  a 
savage  licentiousness,  and,  ever  threatening,  ever  oppressive, 
set  no  bounds  to  their  tyranny.  What  a  change  did  I  not  find 
after  the  short  space  of  three  years !  Scarcity  was  terrible, 
misery  at  the  highest  pitch,  and  the  dethroned  Sovereign 
scarcely  dared  to  complain.  The  people  were  no  better  than 
a  vile  rabble,  devoid  of  energy,  shrinking  under  the  rod  that 
chastised  them,  but  having  not  even  the  thought  of  resist- 
ance. In  the  morning,  the  city  presented  a  deplorable 
spectacle  :  thousands  of  women  and  children  were  sitting  on 
the  stones  before  the  doors  of  the  bakers'  shops,  waiting 
their  turn  for  receiving  a  dearly-bought  bit  of  bread.  More 
than  one-half  of  Paris  lived  on  potatoes.  Paper  money  was 
without  value,  and  bullion  without  circulation  :  this  lasted 
nearly  a  year.  A  still  stranger  sight  struck  the  observer's 
eyes.  The  unfortunate  prisoners  had  recovered  their  liberty, 
and,  having  escaped  almost  certain  death,  they  enjoyed  their 
good  luck  with  a  sort  of  ecstasy.  The  dangers  to  which 
they  had  been  so  long  exposed  excited  a  lively  interest  in 
their  favour  ;  but  vanity,  so  ingenious  in  France,  discovered 
the  means  of  turning  their  situation  to  advantage.  Each 
person  pretended  to  have  suffered  more  than  his  neighbour  ; 
and,  as  it  was  the  fashion  to  have  been  persecuted,  a  great 

89 


-90  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

many  people  who  had  remained  safe  in  their  hiding-places, 
or  had  bought  their  security  by  base  concessions,  boasted  of 
having  languished  in  prison.  An  immense  number  of  inno- 
cent persons  had,  in  fact,  perished  on  the  scaffold  ;  but,  if 
credit  could  have  been  given  to  the  accounts  propagated  by 
hatred  and  vanity,  one  might  have  thought  that  one-half  of 
Paris  had  imprisoned  or  butchered  the  other  half.  Confu- 
sion was  at  this  period  at  its  highest  pitch  in  society  :  all 
distinctions  of  rank  had  disappeared  ;  wealth  had  changed 
possessors  ;  and  as  it  was  still  dangerous  to  boast  of  birth, 
and  to  recall  the  memory  of  former  gentility,  the  possessors 
of  newly-acquired  wealth  led  the  ton,  and  added  the  ab- 
surdities of  a  bad  education  to  those  of  patronage  devoid 
of  dignity.  The  class  of  artists,  more  commendable,  acquired 
consideration  through  the  general  thirst  for  amusement,  and 
through  the  necessity  many  persons  were  in  of  seeking  a 
livelihood  in  the  arts  of  imagination.  This  same  taste  for 
the  fine  arts,  so  universally  diffused,  caused  in  the  fashions 
and  even  in  the  morals  of  the  metropolis  a  most  inconceiv- 
able licentiousness  :  the  young  men  dressed  their  hair  en 
victime — that  is  to  say,  raised  up  at  the  back  of  the  neck  as 
if  they  were  going  to  suffer  on  the  scaffold.  The  w^omen, 
on  the  contrary,  imitated  in  their  dresses  the  costume  ot 
ancient  Greece.  It  is  scarcely  credible  to  those  who  have 
not  seen  it,  that  young  females,  well-bred,  and  distinguished 
"by  their  birth,  should  have  worn  tight  skin-coloured  panta- 
loons, sandals  on  their  feet,  and  transparent  gauze  dresses, 
while  their  bosoms  were  exposed,  and  their  arms  bare  up  to 
their  shoulders  ;  and  that  when  they  appeared  thus  in  the 
public  places,  instead  of  making  modesty  blush,  they  became 
objects  of  universal  admiration  and  applause.  The  palaces 
and  private  gardens  were  changed  into  scenes  of  riotous 
pleasure,  called  Elysium,  Paphos,  Tivoli,  Idalia,  &c.,  where 
crowds  of  people,  boisterous  diversions,  bad  manners,  and 
an  utter  contempt  for  decency,  created  both  shame  and 
disgust. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA   VALETTE.  91 

Between  the  two  extremes  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Fau- 
iDOurg  St.  Alarceau  and  the  Chaussee  d'Antin  were  still  to  be 
met  with  the  estimable  citizens,  and  those  numerous  well- 
informed  men,  friends  to  their  country  and  to  freedom, 
whose  indignation,  hitherto  suppressed  by  terror,  blazed  up 
with  an  energy  that  at  last  brought  on  the  catastrophe  of 
the  13th  of  Vendemiaire.  To  unfold  the  causes  of  that 
catastrophe,  it  is  necessary  to  cast  a  look  on  the  government 
of  the  Conventional  Assembly. 

That  Assembly  had  been  loaded  with  an  enormous  burthen. 
The  King  had  been  precipitated  from  his  throne,  and  the 
monarchy  existed  no  longer.  The  Republic  had  been 
established  without  consulting  the  people  ;  and  the  King 
Jaad  been  put  to  death  because  his  existence  was  trouble- 
some to  the  Assembly.  The  members  soon  became  few, 
and  they  were  composed  of  elements  too  hostile  to  one 
another  to  be  able  to  direct  affairs  securely  and  rapidly  ; 
they  enacted  therefore  among  themselves  a  government 
called  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  that  was  to  superin- 
tend the  general  administration  of  the  country,  and  to  direct 
the  exertions  of  France  against  her  foreign  enemies.  They 
instituted  also  a  Committee  of  General  Safety,  that  was  to 
suppress  the  attacks  of  interior  foes.  The  successes  of  the 
Vendeans  and  of  the  allied  armies  carried  these  two  com- 
mittees beyond  all  reasonable  ideas,  and  made  the  Conven- 
tion feel  that  it  must  conquer  or  die.  Defence  was  main- 
tained with  all  the  force  and  energy  that  personal  safety  and 
Tevenge  can  inspire.  The  excellent  direction  given  to  the 
armies,  which  they  followed  with  admirable  courage,  pre- 
served France  from  a  foreign  yoke  ;  but  the  progress  of  civil 
war,  and  the  secret  exertions  of  the  royalists,  could  scarcely 
justify  the  massacres  and  the  horrible  tyranny  under  which 
the  country  groaned  for  so  long  a  period.  The  rulers  of  the 
Assembly  will  remain  for  ever  loaded  with  the  odium  which 
their  barbarous  government  (of  which  history  does  not 
present  another  instance)  will  excite  among  future  genera- 


92  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

tions.  Of  all  the  lessons  given  by  the  history  of  human 
passions,  there  is  one  especially  on  which  the  moralist  must 
insist  with  force — I  mean,  the  impossibility,  which  the  most 
honourable  men  will  ever  experience,  of  stopping,  if  once 
their  passions  draw  them  into  the  path  of  error.  Surely,  if 
a  few  )-ears  before  so  many  crimes  were  committed,  they 
could  have  been  pictured  before  the  eyes  of  the  most  bar- 
barous among  their  perpetrators,  I  fear  not  to  say  that  all, 
even  Robespierre  himself,  would  have  recoiled  with  horror. 
Men  begin  by  caressing  theories  ;  heated  imagination  presents 
them  as  useful  and  easy  of  execution  ;  they  toil,  they  advance 
unconsciously  from  errors  to  faults,  and  from  faults  to 
crimes,  till  the  contaminated  mind  corrupts  sensibility, 
and  adorns  by  the  name  of  state  policy  the  most  horrible 
outrages. 

It  must,  however,  be  acknowledged  that  several  of  those 
men  felt  themselves  justified,  and  perhaps  encouraged,  by 
the  praises  which  historians  of  all  ages  have  lavished  on  the 
scourges  of  humanity.  The  pulpit  itself  has  not  been  able 
to  avoid  so  fatal  a  folly.  Every  schoolboy  has  learned  by 
heart  the  beautiful  picture  of  Cromwell  drawn  by  Bossuet  : 
"  A  man  was  found,"  &c.  What  ambitious  mind  can  hesi- 
tate on  the  road  to  crime,  when  he  reads  such  praises  written 
by  the  first  of  sacred  orators  ?  The  Cardinal  de  Richelieu 
found  a  defender  in  the  grave  and  wise  author  of  "  L'Esprit 
des  Lois  ;  "  his  cruelty,  his  thirst  of  blood  and  revenge,  are 
considered  by  most  historians  as  the  workings  of  a  superior 
mind,  or  at  least  as  a  proud  contempt  for  humanity.  The 
memory  of  that  man  has  perhaps  done  more  harm  to  France 
than  his  genius  did  her  good.  The  execrable  maxim,  "  The 
dead  never  rise  again,"  is  written  in  letters  of  blood  through- 
out his  history  ;  and  I  have  many  reasons  to  believe  that 
the  rulers  of  the  Convention  had  chosen  him  for  their  model. 
The  horrible  system  of  killing  one's  enemies  instead  of  sub- 
duing them,  and  of  reigning  by  the  aid  of  terror,  is  convenient 
to  cowardly  and  narrow  minds  ;  but  men  of  elevated  genius 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  93 

follow  other  maxims.  They  know  that  scaffolds  are  but 
indifferent  means  of  government.  Henry  the  Fourth  was 
the  most  indulgent  of  sovereigns,  and  he  made  himself 
popular  by  gaining  the  affections  of  every  one.  Once  he 
gave  way  to  a  fatal  and  sanguinary  policy.  It  is  but  too 
sure  that  the  death  of  Biron  was  of  no  use,  either  to  his 
own  authority,  or  to  the  happiness  of  the  following  genera- 
tions. 

The  rage  of  the  Convention  necessarily  drew  to  an  end. 
The  government  they  had  established  exercised  their  tyranny 
on  themselves  :  fear  gave  birth  to  despair  ;  thousands  of 
victims  had  been  butchered  under  the  eyes  of  the  Assembly, 
which  remained  insensible,  and  at  last  sacrificed  the  govern- 
ment to  its  own  safety.  But  it  did  not  foresee  that  general 
contempt  would  succeed  to  terror.  In  vain  did  the  Conven- 
tion expel  and  punish  such  of  its  members  as  had  bathed 
themselves  in  blood — in  vain  did  it  recall  those  who  had 
made  themselves  respected  by  their  courage  and  humanity. 
Hatred  and  indignation  assailed  it  on  all  sides  ;  and  such 
was  its  situation,  that  even  when  adopting  an  amended 
course  it  was  surrounded  by  the  distrust  of  all  honourable 
men,  and  the  clamour  and  threats  of  a  populace  whose 
perverseness  it  had  itself  completed  by  encouraging  outrage. 
In  the  month  of  Prairial,  the  Faubourg  St.  Antoine  be- 
sieged the  Assembly,  and  came  to  seek  for  victims  in  its 
bosom  ;  and  if  the  Convention  was  not  forced  to  submit,  it 
was  owing  to  the  heroic  resistance  of  Boissy  d'Anglas,  whose 
admirable  courage  subdued  the  mob.  The  Assembly  resolved 
at  last  on  a  desperate  measure,  the  only  one  that  could  suc- 
ceed :  regular  troops  were  called  in,  and  Pichegru  led  them 
to  the  suburb.  The  rebels  were  disarmed  and  humbled. 
This  victory,  which  did  not  cost  a  drop  of  blood,  has 
delivered  us  for  a  long  while,  I  hope,  from  the  fury  of  the 
rabble. 

When  I  arrived  in  Paris,  these  events  had  already  taken 
.place.     The  Convention  was  at  that  time  completing  a  Con- 


94  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

stitution  which  was  not  good,  but  which  at  least  gave  force 
and  independence  to  the  executive  power,  while  it  preserved 
the  representative  system.  But  the  nation  would  accept 
nothing  from  that  polluted  Assembly  ;  and,  notwithstanding 
all  its  exertions,  the  Constitution  was  but  little  approved  of. 
The  Convention,  not  wishing  to  renew  the  fault  committed 
by  the  Constituent  Assembly,  who  had  abandoned  the  fruit 
of  their  labours  to  jealous  and  hostile  hands,  had  passed  a 
law  declaring  that  two-thirds  of  its  members  were  necessarily 
to  belong  to  the  new  councils  established  by  the  Constitu- 
tion. Public  opinion,  however,  was  against  them  all  ;  so 
that,  when  the  citizens  came  together  in  the  primary 
assemblies,  to  vote  on  the  Constitution  and  on  the  Law  of 
the  Two-thirds,  they  were  exasperated  publicly  by  orators 
whom  misfortune  and  resentment  had  soured,  and  secretly 
by  crafty  royalists.  "  Must  we,"  they  said,  *'  continue  to  see 
for  several  years  sitting  among  our  legislators  and  deciding 
over  our  fate,  men  who  have  favoured  and  practised  the 
most  horrible  tyranny  ?  We  will  have  nothing  more  to  do 
with  them  ;  let  them  go.  It  is  sufficient  that  we  accept 
their  labour  and  insure  their  safety  by  a  generous  oblivion 
of  their  crimes."  Such  violent  speeches,  repeated  with 
emphasis  in  all  the  assemblies,  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  the 
citizens,  who,  after  having  in  vain  attempted  to  reject  the 
Constitutional  Act  and  the  Law  of  the  Two-thirds,  resolved 
to  repel  by  force  of  arms  those  whom  they  had  not  been 
able  to  remove  by  their  votes.  General  Menou  was  com- 
mander-in-chief of  the  military  division.  General  d'Hilliers 
made  me  acquainted  with  all  the  details  of  his  staff.  The 
regular  troops  at  the  disposal  of  Government  did  not  amount 
to  above  five  thousand  men.  They  were  sufficient  to  main- 
tain tranquillity,  but  not  to  oppose  thirty  thousand  hostile 
and  well-armed  national  guards.  It  was  not  possible  to 
draw  any  troops  from  the  armies.  The  war  was  going  on 
actively  ;  the  disturbances  in  the  Vendee  were  not  sup- 
pressed ;  and  strong  forces  were  required  against  the  rob- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  95 

beries  of  the  Chouans.     It  was  therefore  resolved  to  deceive 
the  people  in  regard  to  the  weakness  of  the  garrison  by 
multiplying  its  movements,  so  that  it  continually  marched 
out  of  one  gate  and  into  the  other.     This  little  stratagem 
was  soon  discovered  :    it  augmented  the   assurance  of  the 
leaders  of  the  sections,  and  the  day  for  the  attack  was  fixed. 
On  the  evening  of  the  12th  of  Vendemiaire  (2nd  October), 
several  battalions  of  national  guards  had  taken  up  arms. 
Those  of  the  Petits  Peres  and  Filles  St.  Thomas  assembled 
in  the  Rue  Vivienne.      General  Menou  surrounded  them 
with  regular  troops,  and  summoned  them  to  disperse.     He 
might  have  forced  them  to  do   so  without  engaging  in  a 
battle  ;  but  an  orator  stepped  out  of  the  ranks  and  began  to 
harangue  the  general  with  a  warmth  which  he  communi- 
cated to  his  comrades.     Menou  had  the  weakness  to  listen 
to  him,  and  even  to  answer  him.     From  that  account  all 
was  lost ;  the  battalion  remained,  and  the  general  retired, 
giving  them  a  proof  of  his  irresolution,  and  leaving  Govern- 
ment in  doubt  concerning   his  fidelity.     The   Convention 
felt  that  such  a  man  might  ruin  its  cause  :  the  command 
was  taken  from  him  during  the  night,  and    given  to  the 
deputy  Barras.     A  Commission  of  Public  Safety  was  also 
appointed,   to   whom   very   extensive   powers   were   given. 
Barras  was  a  man  of  resolution,  and  had  greatly  contributed 
to  the  fall  of  Robespierre  on  the  9th  of  Thermidor.     Having 
been  a  commissioner  of  the  Convention  with  the  Southern 
army  in  1793,  he  had  remarked  a  young  officer  of  artillery, 
whose  courage  and    advice  had   a  great  influence   on    the 
retaking  of  Toulon.     This  young  man,  who,  after  the  9th  of 
Thermidor,  had  been  dismissed  by  one  of  his  former  com- 
rades called  Aubry,  a  member  of  the  Convention,  had  come 
to  Paris  a  few  months  before,  where  he  was  soliciting  with- 
out success  his  restoration  to  his  rank  of  general  of  brigade. 
Vexation  and  disgust  had,  it  was  said,  made  him  at  last  seek 
permission  to  go  at  the  head  of  a  troop  of  cannoniers,  to 
serve  among  the  Turks,  to  teach  thtm  the  manoeuvres  of 


96  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

artillery.  He  was  ready  to  set  off  when  Barras  sent  for  him, 
and  presented  him  to  the  Committee,  who  consulted  him  on 
the  difficulty,  which  they  were  resolved  to  get  out  of  at  any 
price.  The  members  of  the  Committee  agreed  with  one 
another  on  one  point  only  ;  that  is  to  say,  that  all  was  lost 
if  the  sections  gained  the  victory.  Civil  war  would  then 
extend  its  ravages  all  over  France,  and  nobody  could  calcu- 
late its  consequences.  On  the  other  hand,  they  could  not 
bring  themselves  to  fire  upon  the  people.  Some  wanted  to 
make  concessions  which  would  have  destroyed  all  hopes  of 
redress  ;  others  spoke  of  stoically  awaiting  death  in  their 
chairs  like  true  Romans.  The  artillery  officer  laughed  both 
at  their  scruples  and  ridiculous  resolution  :  he  demonstrated 
to  them  that  the  Parisians  were  nothing  but  fools,  led  on  by 
cunning  rogues  ;  that  Government  had  in  its  favour  power 
and  right  ;  that  nothing  was  easier  than  to  disperse,  without 
spilling  much  blood,  inexperienced  battalions,  which  had 
neither  clever  leaders  nor  artillery.  His  firmness,  his  elo- 
quence, his  consciousness  of  great  superiority,  which  his 
countenance  itself  betrayed,  inspired  confidence  and  carried 
persuasion  into  the  minds  of  every  one.  This  young  man's 
name  was  Bonaparte.  The  command  of  the  artillery  was 
given  to  him,  and  he  was  left  master  of  all  the  arrangements 
for  the  defence.  He  immediately  assembled  the  officers,  and 
made  himself  sure  of  their  obedience.  He  then  placed  two 
cannons  at  the  entrance  of  the  Rue  St.  Nicaise,  another 
facing  the  church  of  St.  Roche  at  the  bottom  of  the  Petite 
Rue  du  Dauphin,  two  more  in  the  Rue  St.  Honore,  near  the 
Place  Vendome,  and  two  facing  the  Pont  Royal  on  the  Quai 
Voltaire.  Reserves  of  infantry  were  stationed  behind  the 
cannon,  in  order  to  protect  them,  and  on  the  Place  du  Car- 
rousel. The  cavalry  was  posted  in  the  Place  Louis  XV. 
He  afterwards  acquainted  the  battalions  that  they  were  at 
liberty  to  remain  where  they  were  as  long  as  they  chose  ;  but 
that  if  they  went  one  step  beyond  the  prescribed  limits,  or 
if  they  fired  a  single  musket,  he  would  repel  them  with  his 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  97 

artillery.  His  firmness,  instead  of  inspiring  awe,  convinced 
the  enemy  that  he  was  afraid,  and  would  not  dare  to  fire. 
After  a  good  deal  of  hesitation,  the  enemy's  troops  put 
themselves  in  motion,  those  who  were  behind  pushing  on 
those  who  were  in  front,  and  a  discharge  of  musketry  was 
the  signal  of  the  attack.  At  the  same  instant  the  grape  shot 
of  the  three  field-pieces  carried  death  and  terror  into  their 
ranks.  Their  flight  was  so  rapid,  so  abrupt,  and  so  com- 
plete, that  a  bullet  shot  off  along  the  Rue  St.  Honore  did 
not  touch  a  single  person.  General  Carteaux  had  been 
placed  on  the  Pont  Neuf  with  a  battalion  of  infantry  of  the 
line,  in  order  to  cut  off  the  communication  between  the  two 
banks  of  the  Seine.  I  was  sent  to  carr>^  him  an  order  to 
stand  firm  ;  but  he  had  already  retired  under  the  garden  of 
the  Infante,  and  the  columns  of  the  sections  appeared  already 
on  the  Quai  de  la  Monnaye,  with  a  view  to  make  themselves 
masters  of  the  Pont  Royal,  and  attack  the  Tuileries  from 
that  side.  The  general  who  commanded  at  the  foot  of  the 
bridge  sent  them  word  not  to  advance  any  farther.  They 
took  no  heed  of  it,  and  received  the  discharge  of  the  two 
cannons,  after  which  they  dispersed.  That  was  enough  to 
make  the  citizens  tired  of  fighting  ;  but  the  most  determined 
among  them,  whose  fear  had  subsided  when  they  imagined 
the  danger  distant,  wanted  to  resume  the  attack.  They  had 
made  themselves  masters  of  the  Palais  Royal,  and,  like  mad- 
men, fancied  they  should  be  able  to  defend  themselves  there. 
Luckily  night  brings  counsel  :  in  the  morning  the  leaders 
put  themselves  in  safety,  and  the  rest  went  home.  Peace 
was  signed  next  day,  and  order  was  re-established.  I  do  not 
think  that  the  regular  troops  lost  more  than  four  or  five 
men.  On  the  part  of  the  sections  the  loss  was  more  con- 
siderable. By  the  most  exact  calculation,  it  seems  to  have 
amounted  to  forty  killed,  and  about  two  hundred  wounded. 
This  will  not  appear  exaggerated  if  we  consider  that  the 
steps  of  the  church  of  St.  Roch  were  covered  with  people  ; 
that  the  cannon  fired  in  that  direction  was  at  no  more  than 

8 


98  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

sixty  paces  distant,  and  that  the  battahon  of  the  Rue  St. 
Honore  filled  the  whole  space  to  a  great  depth.  The  com- 
mand of  the  Parisian  army  was  entrusted  to  General  Dani- 
can,  a  man  almost  unknown,  even  in  the  ranks,  where  he  had 
served  for  some  time,  and  whom  the  Restoration  did  not 
bring  into  distinction. 

Government  felt  that  a  too  severe  inquiry  on  this  affair 
would  only  contribute  to  exasperate  the  minds  of  the  public, 
and  that  they  ought  to  enjoy  with  moderation  a  victory 
which  had  been  bought  at  the  price  of  so  much  blood.  A 
court-martial  was  nevertheless  instituted,  with  a  view  to 
frighten  the  leaders  ;  but  they  were  all  acquitted,  with  the 
exception  of  one  unfortunate  emigrant,  named  Lafont,  who 
had  got  secretly  into  Paris  in  order  to  intrigue  in  favour  of 
his  employers,  and  who  had  made  himself  conspicuous  by  a 
very  violent  behaviour.  He  was  sentenced  to  death  ;  but 
even  he  would  have  been  saved,  if  his  intense  devotion  to 
the  cause  of  the  Bourbons  had  not  made  him  reject  all  the 
means  he  might  have  used  to  avoid  his  condemnation. 

The  Royalists  have  pretended  of  late  years  that  this  insur- 
rection of  the  Parisians  was  a  generous  effort  attempted  in 
favour  of  the  Bourbons.  I  declare  that  this  is  not  the  fact. 
I  was  placed  in  the  most  favourable  position  for  observing 
the  passions  and  intrigues  which  brought  about  the  un- 
fortunate catastrophe  of  the  13th  of  Vendemiaire.  I  was 
acquainted  with  several  honourable  men  who  had  taken  part 
with  the  sections,  and  I  saw  neither  in  the  people  nor  in 
their  leaders  any  wish  for  the  return  of  the  Bourbons,  much 
less  a  plan  for  recalling  them.  The  death  of  the  King  was 
deplored  by  all  sensible  m^en  ;  but  liberty  was  beloved. 
Hatred  of  the  Convention  was  carried  to  the  highest  pitch, 
on  account  of  the  horrors  with  which  that  Assembly  had 
visited  the  country.  I  questioned  the  most  violent  as  to 
what  they  wished  to  establish  in  the  place  of  the  expiring 
government.  Their  answer  was,  "  We  will  have  nothing 
more  to  do  with  them.     It  is  the  Republic  we  wish  for,  with 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  99 

honest  men  to  govern  us."  No  one  went  farther  than  this. 
It  is  true,  that  some  insinuations  were  made  in  the  sections, 
in  favour  of  the  Royal  Family  ;  but  so  feeble,  so  ambiguous, 
that  very  little  attention  was  paid  to  them.  No  one  thought 
of  pronouncing  the  name  of  that  family.  I  have  no  doubt 
that,  if  the  sections  had  triumphed,  the  attempt  would  have 
been  more  direct  and  more  bold  ;  perhaps  even  it  would  have 
succeeded,  but  then  civil  war  would  have  broken  out  on 
all  sides.  And  if,  eighteen  years  after,  with  the  aid  of  all 
Europe,  the  Bourbons  were  unable  to  maintain  themselves 
on  the  throne,  what  would  have  been  their  fate  at  a  period 
when  France,  not  yet  accustomed  to  the  yoke,  was  animated 
by  republican  habits  and  ideas,  and  uncurbed  energy  ? 

Two  days  after  the  13th  of  Vendemiaire,  Barras  introduced 
to  the  Convention  all  the  generals  and  officers  of  the  staff 
who  had  contributed  to  save  that  Assembly.  General  Bona- 
parte was  there,  but  he  mingled  with  the  crowd.  When 
Barras,  in  his  speech,  pronounced  his  name  with  compli- 
ment, those  who  surrounded  him  wanted  to  make  him 
advance  to  the  first  rank.  He  pushed  them  aside  with  a 
look  of  ill-humour  and  diffidence  which  pleased  me.  There 
was  in  his  actions  less  of  pride  than  a  delicate  feeling  of  pro- 
priety. He  was  ashamed  to  be  praised  for  such  a  victory. 
Besides,  it  is  certain  he  felt  no  great  esteem  for  those  in 
whose  favour  he  had  fought,  and  who  were  thus  lavishing 
their  applause  on  him. 


CHAPTER  X. 

The  Convention  hastened  to  put  an  end  to  its  stormy 
session,  so  fatal  to  humanity,  but  still  so  memorable  from 
the  incredible  vigour  with  ^yhich  it  saved  France  from  a 
foreign  yoke.  The  reins  of  government  were  delivered  into 
the  hands  of  the  Directory,  General  Bonaparte  was  made 
commander-in-chief  of  the  first  military  division  and  of  the 
city  of  Paris.  One  of  the  first  measures  that  were  taken  by 
the  new  Government  was  the  disarming  of  all  the  citizens  of 
the  metropolis.  They  delivered  up  their  arms  without  much 
regret :  the  trial  they  had  just  made  of  their  strength  was 
not  of  a  nature  to  inspire  them  with  great  confidence  in 
themselves.  This  measure  was  executed  with  great  rigour. 
Swords  and  sabres  were  comprehended  in  the  general  con- 
fiscation. The  widow  of  General  Beauharnais  was  going  to 
deliv^er  up  to  one  of  the  commissioners  entrusted  with  these 
orders  the  sabre  of  her  late  husband,  when  her  son  Eugene, 
then  scarcely  thirteen  years  old,  seized  the  weapon,  and 
declared  that  they  who  wished  to  have  it  must  first  take  his 
life.  The  commissioner  consented  to  leave  it  him,  provided 
he  got  a  permission  from  the  general-in-chief.  Eugene  flew 
to  his  house  :  the  deep  emotion  the  child  evinced,  his  name, 
his  interesting  appearance,  the  ardour  and  simplicity  with 
which  he  expressed  his  wishes,  touched  the  general.  He 
embraced  him,  allowed  him  to  keep  the  dearly-beloved 
sword,  and  visited  Madame  de  Beauharnais.  She  was 
young,   amiable,  and  more  than   pretty.     He  fell    in   love 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  loi 

-with  her,  and  soon  after  married  her  ;  so  that  their  union, 
which  was  so  long  a  happy  one,  had  its  origin  in  an  amiable 
trait  of  filial  piety. 

When  General  Beauharnais  left  the  Army  of  the  Rhine, 
he  had  retired  to  one  of  his  estates,  situated  a  few  leagues 
from  Blois.  There  he  lived  in  profound  retirement,  lament- 
ing the  deplorable  outrages  that  disgraced  liberty,  and 
bitterly  regretting  the  glory  he  could  no  longer  share. 
But  his  name  had  been  too  celebrated  for  him  to  enter- 
tain a  reasonable  hope  of  escaping  the  persecutions  to  which 
the  members  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  were  exposed. 
He  was  arrested,  and  thrown  into  the  prisons  of  Paris, 
shortly  before  the  9th  of  Thermidor,  and  at  a  time  when 
the  people  were  at  last  returning  to  right  feeling  and  begin- 
ning to  shudder  at  the  sight  of  the  blood  with  which  they 
had  long  feasted  their  eyes.  The  Jacobins  invented  the 
prison  conspiracies,  as  a  pretence  for  prolonging  their 
measures.  They  had  mixed  with  the  prisoners  some  spies, 
who  found  men  vile  enough  to  purchase  their  lives  by 
atrocious  calumny.  One  of  these  wTetches,  enraged  at 
having  been  discovered  by  M.  de  Beauharnais  in  the  midst 
of  his  infamous  intrigues,  and  at  hearing  him  speak  openly 
of  the  fact  with  all  the  honourable  pride  of  an  upright  man, 
denounced  him.  He  was  sent  to  the  scaffold,  and  suffered 
on  the  7th  of  Thermidor,  two  days  before  the  fall  of  Robes- 
pierre. 

Madame  de  Beauharnais  had  been  locked  up,  during 
eighteen  months,  in  one  of  the  prisons  of  Paris,  where 
she  had  fallen  seriously  ill,  when  her  indictment,  which 
was  no  better  than  a  sentence  of  death,  was  transmitted 
to  her.  Fortunately  a  Polish  physician,  an  honest  and 
courageous  man,  whose  name  I  am  sorry  I  do  not  know, 
attended  her.  He  declared  that  she  would  not  survive  eight 
days  longer,  and  by  that  means  saved  her  life.  When  she 
came  out  of  prison,  she  exerted  with  resolute  benevolence  all 
the  advantages  which  her  name,  her  misfortune,  and  the 


I02  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

gifts  of  her  amiable  mind  conferred  on  her,  to  obtain  the 
liberty  of  the  greatest  part  of  her  former  companions  in 
captivity.  She  was  beloved  and  esteemed  by  the  most 
respectable  members  of  society.  The  excellent  qualities 
of  her  heart  made  her  fully  worthy  of  her  exalted  station. 
I  shall  more  than  once  recur  with  pleasure  to  her  in  the 
course  of  these  memoirs. 

The  functions  of  commander-in-chief  of  the  city  of  Paris 
gave  considerable  influence  to  General  Bonaparte,  and  his 
conduct  on  the  13th  Vendemiaire  ensured  him  a  just  title  to 
the  confidence  of  the  Directory  ;  but  Government  soon  felt 
itself  troubled  and  even  humbled  by  the  authority  of  the 
young  general.  To  say  the  truth,  he  continually  acted 
after  his  own  way,  meddled  with  everything,  decided  on 
everything,  and  never  acted  but  upon  his  own  ideas.  The 
activity  and  extent  of  his  mind,  and  the  pride  of  his  nature, 
rendered  him  unable  to  obey  in  any  circumstances.  The 
Directory  wished  still  to  spare  the  Jacobins  ;  the  General 
locked  up  their  assembly-room,  and  Gov^ernment  learnt  the 
step  he  had  taken  just  when  they  were  going  to  deliberate 
upon  it.  Some  members  of  the  old  nobility  seemed 
dangerous  in  Paris.  The  Directory  resolved  to  send  them 
away  ;  the  General  extended  to  them  his  protection,  and 
Government  was  forced  to  yield.  He  prescribed  measures, 
recalled  disgraced  generals,  repelled  with  pride  all  prepos- 
session, wounded  the  vanity  of  everybody,  laughed  at  pre- 
judices, braved  hatred,  and  condemned  the  slow  and  em- 
barrassed pace  of  Government.  If  the  Directory  happened 
to  remonstrate  with  him,  instead  of  appearing  offended,  he 
developed  his  ideas  and  plans  with  so  much  clearness,  care, 
and  eloquence,  that  no  objection  was  possible,  and  two  hours 
afterwards  all  he  proposed  was  executed.  But,  if  the  Directory 
was  tired  of  Bonaparte,  the  General  was  no  less  so  of  Paris 
life,  which  afforded  no  career  to  his  ambition,  no  field  for  his 
genius.  He  had,  a  long  time  before,  formed  a  plan  for  the 
conquest  of  Italy.     Long  service  in  the  Army  of  Nice  had 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  105 

procured  him  the  necessary  leisure  to  mature  his  designs,  to 
calculate  all  their  difficulties,  and  guess  all  their  chances. 
He  solicited  of  Government  the  command  of  that  army  with 
money  and  troops.  He  was  made  general-in-chief  :  he  got 
troops,  but  only  the  small  sum  of  one  hundred  thousand 
crowns.  With  those  scanty  means  he  was  to  conquer  Italy 
at  the  head  of  troops  who  had  received  no  pay  for  the  last 
six  months,  and  who  had  not  even  shoes  to  their  feet.  But 
Bonaparte  felt  the  consciousness  of  his  strength  ;  and,  look- 
ing forward  with  delight  to  the  future,  he  took  leave  of  the 
Directory,  who  saw  his  departure  with  secret  pleasure,  happy 
to  be  rid  of  a  man  whose  character  awed  them,  and  whose 
projects  were,  in  the  eyes  of  the  majority  of  its  members, 
nothing  more  than  the  wild  fancies  of  a  youth  full  of  pride 
and  presumption. 

General  d'Hilliers  had  been  dismissed  on  the  13th  Vende- 
miaire,  for  having  expressed  himself  in  strong  terms  against 
that  expedition.  He  went  to  General  Bonaparte,  who  pro- 
cured him  a  fresh  appointment,  and  he  was  sent  as  chief  of 
the  staff  to  the  right  division  of  the  Western  army,  whose 
headquarters  were  at  Alencon.  The  war  in  the  Vendee  was 
brought  to  an  end  through  fatigue  and  want  of  food.  The 
consequences  of  the  passage  of  the  Loire  had  been  too  fatal 
to  the  Vendeans  to  leave  them  in  a  situation  to  prolong  the 
contest.  Their  most  able  leaders  were  killed.  "  The  grand- 
children of  Henry  IV."  had  disdained  to  appear  among  those 
gallant  soldiers,  who  fought  without  regimentals,  without 
order,  and  whose  appearance  had  not  the  sometimes  useless 
brilliancy  of  regular  troops.  Charette,  the  only  man  who 
still  might  have  supported  his  part,  had  been  shot  at  Nantz 
by  order  of  Government,  who  would  have  acted  more 
honourably  in  granting  him  his  pardon  ;  and  the  un- 
fortunate attempt  at  Quiberon  had  struck  the  last  blow 
to  the  enthusiasm  and  hopes  of  the  rebels.  Scattered 
bands,  acting  without  any  decided  aim,  still  ravaged  some 
parts  of  the  country.     General  Hoche,  to  whom  the  com- 


I04  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

mand  of  the  western  departments  was  entrusted,  succeeded 
in  a  short  time,  by  his  wisdom,  moderation,  and  reso- 
lution, in  destroying  the  last  remains  of  civil  war.  He 
established  a  system  of  movable  columns,  whose  motions 
were  calculated  with  so  much  precision  that,  while  they  were 
continually  crossing  the  country  in  all  directions,  they 
frequently  met  and  were  enabled  to  support  one  another 
in  case  they  should  be  attacked  by  superior  forces.  The 
enemy,  thus  chased,  unable  to  enjoy  one  moment's  rest  or 
safety,  got  discouraged,  and  at  last  preferred  to  exertions 
without  aim  a  peace  which  ensured  him  the  free  exercise  of 
those  religious  duties  for  which  he  had  taken  up  arms,  and 
the  hope  of  better  times.  In  Normandy,  where  I  was,  war 
was  raging  without  glory,  but  not  without  peril.  The 
Chouans,  secured  against  surprise  behind  their  high  hedges, 
aimed  close  upon  us,  and  cost  us  a  great  number  of  men. 
When  they  wanted  to  replenish  their  military  chest,  they 
stopped  the  stage-coaches,  stripped  the  travellers,  and 
frequently  killed  them.  These  gentlemen  fancied  that 
their  title  of  Royalists  ennobled  even  their  profession  of 
robbers.  A  little  while  before  our  arrival,  a  general  and 
well-directed  bush-beating  had  taken  place  against  them, 
and  had  disgusted  them  at  a  profession  which  left  them  no 
other  prospect  than  the  punishment  due  to  highway  robbers. 
Count  Frotte,  who  commanded  those  noble  troops,  gave  his 
companions  leave  to  make  their  peace,  and  went  over  to 
England,  after  having,  as  it  was  reported,  broken  his  sword. 
The  principal  leaders  then  wrote  to  General  Montigny,  who 
commanded  the  division,  to  solicit  an  interview,  which  took 
place  at  the  castle  of  Louvet,  near  Alencon.  I  went  to  meet 
these  gentlemen  into  a  wood  near  the  castle.  I  was  conducted 
there  blindfolded  ;  and  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  walk,  I 
found  in  a  thicket  a  dozen  tattered  wretches  lying  on  the 
grass,  exhausted  from  fatigue  and  want.  Some  of  them  were 
remarkable  for  a  haughty  expression  of  countenance  which 
they  did  not  belie  during  the  conference.     Their  submission 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  105 

was  unreserved.  Several  among  them  were  obliged  to  leave 
the  scene  of  their  achievements,  others  joined  the  armies  of 
the  Republic.  When  the  treaty  was  signed,  we  all  stepped 
into  a  room,  where  a  splendid  breakfast  was  prepared. 
There  were  twenty  of  us  standing  round  the  table  and 
looking  at  one  another  in  silence.  General  Montigny 
invited  them  to  sit  down.  An  unequivocal  motion  of  the 
head  was  all  the  answer  they  gave.  Cold  ceremonies  were 
exchanged  ;  after  which,  we  all  mounted  our  horses  and 
separated. 

One  of  the  conditions  of  the  treaty  was  that  the  leaders 
of  the  troops  should  recover  the  unsold  part  of  their  property, 
as  those  of  the  Vendean  army  had  already  done.  This 
favour  was  justly  due,  not  only  to  their  valour  and  exertions, 
but  also  to  their  patriotic  sentiments,  which  had  made  them 
prefer  the  dangers  of  civil  war  to  the  disgrace  of  serving 
under  foreign  banners.  Now  that  the  emigrants  are  happy 
in  the  enjoyment  of  the  rank  and  confidence  the  Sovereign 
allows  them,  one  may  speak  freely  on  their  conduct.  The 
first  impulse  which  urged  them  to  fly  cannot  be  blamed  ; 
but  how  can  one  justify  the  disgraceful  resolution  of  placing 
themselves  in  the  pay  of  the  enemies  of  their  country  ?  The 
Revolution  was  a  family  quarrel,  from  which  foreign  nations 
ought  by  all  means  to  have  been  excluded.  What  was  to 
be  expected  of  the  Austrians,  the  Prussians,  or  the  English, 
but  the  subjection  of  France,  her  dismemberment,  and  dis- 
grace? The  Vendeans  also  fought  to  maintain  their  religion 
and  the  monarchy  ;  but,  far  from  giving  themselves  up  to  a 
foreign  enemy,  they  never  would  suffer  English  troops  to  come 
to  their  support.  They  had  not  forgotten  that  Henry  IV. 
was  obliged  to  take  German  troopers  into  his  pay,  but  that 
his  magnanimous  soul  would  have  recoiled  at  the  thought 
of  receiving  pay  of  the  Germans.  The  cause  of  the  Vendeans, 
thus  defended,  was  respectable.  They  certainly  could  not 
hope  to  get  the  better  of  the  determined  will  of  a  whole 
nation  resolved  to  be  free,  and  who  could  not  be  so  under 


io6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  government  of  the  Bourbons  ;  but  at  least  they  were 
Frenchmen,  and  the  troops  who  fought  against  them  expe- 
rienced a  feehng  of  pride  at  the  sight  of  French  peasants 
opposing  them  with  more  courage  and  firmness  than  all  the 
kings  of  Europe  united  together. 

This  war  against  the  Chouans  was  not  more  pleasing  to 
General  d'Hilliers  than  to  myself.  He  did  not  wait  for  the 
pacification  to  solicit  of  General  Bonaparte  the  honour  of 
serving  under  his  orders.  The  letters  of  appointment  soon 
arrived.  M.  d'Hilliers  set  off  post  for  Italy.  I  was  obliged 
to  travel  on  horseback.  The  name  of  Bonaparte  greeted  my 
ears  in  every  place  through  which  I  passed.  Each  day 
brought  in  the  account  of  some  new  victor}-.  His  letters  to 
Government — his  proclamations,  so  elevated  in  style  and  so 
wonderfully  eloquent,  roused  all  minds.  All  France  shared 
the  enthusiasm  of  the  arm}^  for  so  much  glor}' — for  such 
brilliant  and  numerous  triumphs.  The  words  Montenotte, 
Millesimo,  Lodi,  Milan,  Castiglione,  were  repeated  with  a 
noble  pride  next  to  those  of  Jemmapes,  Fleurus,  and  Valmy. 


CHAPTER   XT. 

When  I  arrived  at  Milan  the  victory  of  Castiglione  had  just 
been  gained.  General  Wurmser,  beaten,  was  flying  in  the 
direction  of  Mantua  ;  and  after  having  come  to  force  us  to 
raise  the  siege  of  that  city,  he  was  himself  obliged  to  seek 
a  refuge  within  its  walls.  I  was  convinced  that  General 
d'Hilliers  was  to  be  employed  in  military  service,  and  during 
the  journey  I  indulged  in  glittering  dreams  of  glory  and 
advancement.  How  great  was  now  mj''  consternation  when 
I  found  him  governor  of  Lombardy  !  I  was  going  to  be 
buried  again  in  the  paper  business  of  a  staff,  sentenced  to 
distribute  the  bulletins  of  our  victories — to  be  busy  about 
the  thousand  minutiae  of  an  office,  so  tiresome  to  a  soldier — 
and  at  last  not  even  dare  to  acknowledge  that  I  had  been  in 
the  Army  of  Italy,  of  which  I  should  share  neither  the  perils 
nor  the  triumphs.  Besides,  m}^  sword  was  my  only  fortune, 
and  could  I  hope  for  advancement  when  I  had  not  deserved 
any  ?  These  thoughts  grieved  me  sorely,  and  made  me 
adopt  the  resolution  of  soliciting  the  command  of  a  troop 
of  infantry  in  a  brigade  of  the  vanguard.  General  d'Hilliers 
attempted  in  vain  to  make  me  alter  my  mind.  Forced  at 
last  to  yield  to  my  entreaties,  he  was  about  to  give  me  my 
orders,  when  the  intelligence  of  the  victory  of  Areola  arrived 
at  Milan.  Two  aides-de-camp  of  the  General-in-chief  had 
been  killed — Muiron,  an  officer  of  artillery,  for  whom  he 
entertained  a  great  regard,  of  which  his  good  qualities 
made  him  worthy — and  young  Elliott,  a  nephew  of  General 
Clarke.     M.  d'Hilliers  spoke  of  me  to  General   Bonaparte 


lo8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

with  great  warmth,  and  got  me  appointed  to  succeed  Muiron. 
My  first  sensation  was  joy  at  this  unexpected  favour  of 
fortune,  but  it  was  soon  troubled  by  the  fear  of  being 
severely  judged  by  one  so  well  able  to  scan  my  merits. 
My  uneasiness  was  such  as  to  make  me  regret  the  success 
General  d'Hilliers  had  obtained.  I  went  to  the  General-in- 
chief,  who  lodged  in  the  Palazzo  Serbelloni.  He  was  giving 
audience.  His  saloon  was  filled  with  military  men  of  all 
ranks,  and  high  civil  officers.  His  air  was  affable,  but  his 
look  so  firm  and  fixed  that  I  turned  pale  when  he  addressed 
himself  to  me.  I  faltered  out  my  name,  and  afterwards  my 
thanks,  to  which  he  listened  in  silence,  his  eyes  fastening 
on  me  with  an  expression  of  severity  that  quite  disconcerted 
me.  At  last  he  said, "  Come  back  at  six  o'clock,  and  put  on 
the  sash."  That  sash,  which  distinguished  the  aides-de- 
camp of  the  General-in-chief,  was  of  white  and  red  silk,  and 
was  worn  round  the  left  arm. 

When  I  went  back  to  the  palace  at  the  appointed  hour, 
the  officer  on  duty  introduced  me  into  the  saloon  of  the 
aides-de-camp.  This  was  a  new  subject  of  perplexity.  I 
was  not  acquainted  with  any  of  them.  They  could  see  by 
ray  sash  that  I  was  a  new  comrade,  but  not  one  came  up  to 
me.  They  communicated  their  observations  to  one  another, 
directing  towards  my  person  looks  that  did  not  seem  to  me 
very  favourable,  until  Marmont  came  in,  and  perceiving  me, 
took  me  by  the  hand,  and  said,  "  Here  is  a  new  comrade, 
who  will  soon  be  a  friend."  "  In  the  field  of  battle,"  I 
answered  with  a  blush,  "  I  shall  be  less  embarrassed  than  I 
am  here."  A  few  days  were  sufficient  to  establish  between 
us  a  degree  of  friendship  that  has  never  diminished.  The 
aides-de-camp  of  the  General-in-chief  were  at  that  time  eight 
in  number.  Murat,  who  had  been  named  general  of  brigade, 
was  no  longer  one  of  them.  The  first  was  Colonel  Junot, 
afterwards  Due  d'Abrantes.  He  was  born  in  Burgundy, 
and  enlisted  as  a  private  soldier  in  a  company  of  volunteer 
■cannoniers  of  his  department.     At  the  siege  of  Toulon  he 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  109 

was  admired  for  an  instance  of  intrepidity  that  has  seldom 
occurred  since.  The  famous  redoubt  called  Les  Sans- 
C!//oites,  defended  by  the  English,  had  been  attacked  for 
several  hours,  but  its  fire  was  still  very  troublesome  to  us. 
General  Bonaparte  ordered  a  battalion  to  take  it  by  storm. 
Although  Junot  did  not  belong  to  that  battalion,  he  rushed 
first  of  all  into  the  ditch,  climbed  up  the  scarp,  jumped  into 
the  redoubt  through  a  battlement,  killed  two  cannoniers  at 
their  posts,  and  by  that  means  gave  his  companions  time  to 
join  him.  The  redoubt  was  taken  amidst  cries  of  "  The 
Republic  for  ever !  "  General  Bonaparte  made  him 
sergeant  ;  and  his  handwriting  being  clear  and  neat,  he 
made  use  of  him  as  his  secretary  during  the  remainder  of 
the  campaign.  When  I  met  him  for  the  first  time  he  was  a 
colonel,  and  had  been  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Castiglione. 
Junot  added  to  great  courage  much  natural  shrewdness. 
After  having  served  during  twenty  years,  and  passed  through 
all  military  ranks,  he  ended  his  life  in  a  deplorable  manner. 
The  cold  he  suffered  in  the  Russian  campaign  disordered 
his  mental  faculties.  The  unhappy  man  died  under  his 
paternal  roof.  His  reason  returned  a  short  time  before  he 
breathed  his  last,  and  seeing  himself  again  in  the  humble 
chamber  in  which  he  had  passed  his  youth,  he  was  enabled 
justly  to  appreciate  his  glittering  dream  of  fortune  and 
glory. 

Marmoat,  a  colonel  of  artillery,  was  also  born  in  Burgundy, 
of  an  ancient  and  respectable  family  in  that  province.  His 
education  had  been  particularly  well  attended  to,  and  he 
had  entered  very  young  into  the  army.  The  principal 
features  of  his  character  were  at  that  time  an  unbounded 
passion  for  glory  and  ambition,  and  an  attachment  to  his 
general  that  amounted  to  enthusiasm.  Duroc  was  the  third 
aide-de-camp.  Though  less  brilliant  than  the  two  former, 
he  possessed  greater  solidity  of  judgment,  and  a  remarkable 
tenaciousness  of  character.  In  1789  he  was  an  officer  of 
artillery  ;  he  had  emigrated,  but  had  speedily  returned  to 


no  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNI  LAV  ALETTE. 

France.  The  General-in-chicf  was  much  attached  to  him. 
Duroc  was  grateful,  and  I  believe  his  fidelity  would  have 
nobly  borne  the  dangerous  ordeal  of  the  revolution  of  1814. 
The  fourth  aide-de-camp  was  Le  Marrois,  a  young  man 
scarcely  seventeen  years  old,  and  already  covered  with 
wounds.  After  him  came  Sulkowski,  a  true  Pole,  of 
chivalrous  valour,  passionately  fond  of  adventures,  with  a 
romantic  and  restless  mind,  well  informed,  and  speaking 
fluently  all  the  languages  of  Europe.  When  almost  a 
child  he  had  fought  for  the  liberty  of  his  country.  Wounded 
at  the  siege  of  Warsaw,  and  compelled  to  fly,  he  came  to 
France.  He  was  soon  after  sent  to  Constantinople  with 
M.  Descorches,  our  ambassador.  The  Committee  of  Public 
Safety  wishing  to  have  an  agent  in  India,  Sulkowski  under- 
took that  mission.  He  had  already  passed  Aleppo,  where 
the  English  discovered  him,  and  got  some  Arabs  to  rob 
him  of  his  papers.  Having  escaped  out  of  their  hands,  he 
returned  to  Paris,  and  obtained  an  appointment  in  the 
Army  of  Italy.  He  was  engaged  at  the  siege  of  Alantua, 
when  a  report  that  he  had  addressed  to  the  chief  of  the  staff 
fell  under  the  eyes  of  the  general-in-chief,  and  the  following 
day  he  was  made  his  aide-de-camp.  We  had  also  among  us 
Louis  Bonaparte,  then  scarcely  sixteen  years  of  age,  and 
whom  his  brother  spared  no  more  than  the  rest  of  us  on 
the  most  perilous  missions.  Louis  fulfilled  them  with  a 
satisfaction  which  proved  him  worthy  of  his  name.  Elliott 
having  been  killed,  as  I  mentioned  above,  the  General-in- 
chief  took  in  his  place  Crossier,  a  brave  and  clever  oflficer  of 
cavalry. 

Such  were  my  new  comrades,  whose  acquaintance  I  made 
while  waiting  for  the  General-in-chief.  He  arrived  at  seven 
o'clock,  and  we  sat  down  to  converse.  He  placed  me  next 
to  himself.  All  the  guests  were  as  much  surprised  as  I  was 
at  this  extraordinary  favour  ;  but  I  did  not  remain  long  in 
suspense  as  to  the  cause  to  which  it  was  owing.  The 
General  wished  to  know  what  he  had  to  expect  of  the  new 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  V ALETTE.  1 1 1 

acquaintance  he  had  rather  rashly  made.  His  questions 
began  with  the  very  first  course,  and  lasted  till  we  rose  from 
the  table  ;  that  is  to  say,  during  three-quarters  of  an  hour. 
"  Where  have  you  served  ?  In  what  army  ?  At  what  time 
did  you  enter  on  service  ?  Under  what  generals  have  you 
fought  ?  What  was  the  strength  of  the  Rhine  army  ? 
What  position  did  it  occupy  before  Mentz  ?  Why  did  they 
not  go  to  the  assistance  of  that  city  ?  How  were  the  lines 
of  the  Lauter  lost  ?  How  was  Landau  delivered  ?  What 
generals  had  the  highest  reputation  in  the  Rhine  army  ? 
What  were  the  forces  of  the  enemy  on  the  13th  of  October, 
and  when  the  lines  were  retaken  ? ''  He  listened  attentively 
to  all  my  answers,  and  shortened  them  when  they  were  too 
diffuse.  I  perceived,  by  his  pithy  observations,  that  he  was 
perfectly  well  acquainted  with  the  history  of  the  Rhine 
army.  The  distance  and  position  of  the  different  places, 
the  abilities  of  the  generals,  their  systems  and  faults — all 
were  familiar  to  him.  When  dinner  was  over  he  ceased  to 
speak  to  me.  I  was  afraid  he  was  dissatisfied  with  my 
answers.  I  was  comforted,  however,  by  the  thought  that 
the  ordeal  of  the  field  of  battle  would  be  more  favourable 
to  me. 

We  remained  a  fortnight  at  Milan,  waiting  for  the  enemy 
to  come  once  more  down  from  Tyrol,  and  make  a  fresh 
attempt  on  Mantua.  The  General-in-chief  was  at  that  time 
just  married.  Madame  Bonaparte  was  a  charming  woman  ; 
and  all  the  anxiety  of  the  command — all  the  trouble  of  the 
government  of  Italy,  could  not  prevent  her  husband  from 
giving  himself  wholly  up  to  the  happiness  he  enjoyed  at 
home.  It  was  during  that  short  residence  at  Milan  that  the 
young  painter  Gros,  afterwards  so  celebrated,  painted  the 
picture  of  the  General.  He  represented  him  on  the  bridge 
of  Lodi,  at  the  moment  when,  with  the  colours  in  his  hand, 
he  rushed  forward,  to  induce  the  troops  to  follow  him.  The 
painter  could  never  obtain  a  long  sitting.  Madame  Bona- 
parte used  to  take  her  husband  upon  her  lap  after  breakfast, 


112  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

and  hold  him  fast  for  a  few  minutes.  I  was  present  at  three 
of  these  sittings.  The  age  of  the  newly-married  couple,  and 
the  painter's  enthusiasm  for  the  hero,  were  sufficient  excuses 
for  such  familiarit}'.  The  portrait  was  at  the  time  a  striking 
resemblance.  Some  copies  have  been  taken  of  it ;  but  the 
original  is  in  the  possession  of  the  Queen  of  Holland, 
Duchess  of  St.  Leu. 

We  set  off  for  Verona.  The  day  after  our  arrival  I 
received  an  order  to  reconnoitre  the  enemy  posted  on  the 
banks  of  the  Adige,  facing  Roveredo.  My  instructions  were 
to  force  him  to  make  some  demonstrations,  but  not  to  come 
to  an  action.  I  was  to  bring  back  an  exact  account  of  all 
points  the  enemy  occupied  in  the  valley,  with  particulars 
— which,  by  the  bye,  the  General  was  very  fond  of — on  the 
respective  positions  of  the  two  vanguards.  Some  troops 
were  put  at  my  disposal,  and  I  learned  some  da3's  after  that 
a  secret  order  had  been  given  to  one  of  the  generals  of  the 
vanguard  to  follow  me  in  all  my  movements,  and  rectif}^  my 
blunders.  This  commission  was  not  very  important.  The 
manner  in  which  I  acquitted  myself  of  it  was  not  very  bad  ; 
and  if  the  General  bestowed  no  praises  either  on  my  beha- 
viour or  on  my  report,  at  least  I  received  no  reproaches. 

The  enemy  soon  returned  in  force.  General  Bonaparte 
had  foreseen  on  which  side  he  w^as  to  be  attacked,  the  chief 
aim  of  the  Austrians  being  naturally  the  deliverance  of 
Mantua.  He  had  in  consequence  placed  the  mass  of  his 
army  along  the  Adige,  at  Rivoli  and  La  Corona.  He  knew 
that  the  Archduke  Charles  was  intent  on  taking  Kehl,  and 
that  that  small  fortress,  less  formidable  still  by  the  strength 
of  its  walls  than  by  the  determination  of  General  Desaix, 
who  defended  it,  would  cost  the  Prince  a  great  many  men 
and  much  time.  The  diversion  the  enemy  made  on  Porto 
Legnago  and  St.  Georgo  was  of  no  use  ;  they  were  beaten 
at  Rivoli  by  the  division  of  Massena,  under  the  command^of 
General  Bonaparte.  The  consequences  of  this  battle  were 
beyond  all  calculation  for  the  Army  of  Italy.     Tyrol  was 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  V ALETTE.  1 1 3 

open  to  us  ;  Mantua  surrendered,  and  the  General-in-chief 
found  time  to  explain  himself  with  the  Pope  at  Tolentino. 
A  short  time  before  the  battle  of  Rivoli,  General  Brune  had 
arrived  at  the  army.  He  was  sent  by  the  Directory.  He 
experienced  such  a  flattering  reception  as  surprised  us.  His 
name  was  utterly  unknown.  Report  stated  that  he  had 
come  to  make  his  first  campaign,  and  we  were  curious  to 
judge  in  how  far  he  would  deserve  the  distinction  General 
Bonaparte  had  shown  him,  who  was  not  often  prodigal  of  his 
praises,  and  who  knew  so  perfectly  well  how  to  appreciate 
real  merit  :  however,  General  Brune  justified  them.  I  was 
not  at  Rivoli,  having  been  sent  to  St.  Georgo  ;  but  I  learned 
the  next  day,  through  Sulkowski,  that  Brune  had  fought  at 
La  Corona  with  great  skill  and  singular  valour.  He  had 
acquired  an  extraordinary  reputation  as  a  Republican.  In 
1 79 1,  when  the  expiring  monarchy  was  struggling  against 
an  enemy  who  crushed  it  at  the  end,  Brune  was  one  of  the 
leaders  of  the  club  of  the  Cordeliers,  and  led  the  riot  of  the 
Champ  de  Mars,  which  the  mayor,  Bailly,  dispersed  by  pro- 
claiming martial  law.  He  was  imprisoned,  and  a  report  was 
spread  that  his  Court  friends  had  attempted  to  get  rid  of 
him  by  odious  means.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war,  Brune 
was  employed  in  some  obscure  posts  ;  but  afterwards, 
whether  the  Directory  was  afraid  of  a  man  of  such  unusual 
spirit,  or  whether  he  felt  himself  that  his  courage  would  be 
better  employed  in  the  army,  he  obtained  leave  to  serve  in 
Italy.  General  Bonaparte,  foreseeing  that  he  should  one 
day  have  great  contests  with  the  Jacobin  party,  resigned  to 
General  Brune  a  part  of  the  honour  of  the  victory  of  Rivoli, 
and  made  him  a  general  of  division.  Some  years  after,  he 
was  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  same  army,  of 
which  he  had  been  one  of  the  least  distinguished  generals. 
These  distinctions  were  owing  either  to  some  talents  he 
really  possessed,  or  to  General  Bonaparte's  wish  of  attaching 
to  his  person  one  of  the  leaders  of  a  party  among  which 
several  men  of  merit  were  to  be  found.     The  pursuit  of  the 

9 


1 14  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

enemy  and  the  conquest  of  Tyrol  were  entrusted  to  General 
Joubert,  a  young  man,  who  had  begun  his  military  career  in 
the  Army  of  the  Pyrenees,  and  whom  the  General-in-chief 
raised  in  a  short  time  from  the  rank  of  colonel  to  that  of 
general  of  division.  His  merit  was  so  conspicuous  that  his 
comrades,  though  older  than  he,  did  not  complain  of  a 
preference  he  deserved  by  his  courage,  talents,  and  prudence, 
which  Massena  himself  openly  acknowledged.  I  was  ordered 
to  accompany  Joubert  to  Trente,  of  which  he  made  himself 
master  five  days  after  he  had  begun  the  attack. 

While  the  Austrians  were  making  so  unlucky  an  effort  to 
deliver  Mantua  and  drive  the  French  out  of  Italy,  the  Pope, 
excited  by  them,  and  discontented  with  the  loss  of  the  three 
Legations,  hastily  raised  some  troops  and  resolved  to  take  a 
part  in  the  formidable  contest.  The  time  when  the  pontiffs 
used  to  influence  so  powerfully  the  doctrines  of  Italy  was 
long  past  :  Pius  the  Sixth,  a  stately  pontiff,  possessed  none 
of  the  dangerous  qualities  of  Julius  the  Second.  The 
General-in-chief  marched  against  him  with  a  single  division. 
His  aide-de-camp,  Junot,  was  ordered  to  oppose  this  new 
enemy.  He  fell  in  with  him  near  Faenza.  A  few  cannon 
shots  were  exchanged  ;  but  all  the  troops  he  found  laid  down 
their  arms  with  so  much  docility,  that  the  Pope  sent  in 
haste  three  cardinals  to  sign  a  treaty,  \vhich  caused  him 
long  to  repent  his  imprudent  attack. 

By  this  treaty  the  cession  of  the  three  Legations  was 
confirmed,  while  the  Pope  was  obliged  to  pay  fifteen 
millions  for  his  perilous  enterprise,  and  deliver  up  the 
most  precious  masterpieces  of  antiquity  which  adorned  his 
capital  and  provinces.  This  episode  of  the  war  was  very 
short.  The  Archduke  Charles,  having  at  last  made  himself 
master  of  Kehl,  was  marching  to  us  in  great  haste  to  help 

General  to  deliver  Mantua  and  the  Holy  Father.     He 

arrived  too  late :  the  town  had  opened  its  gates,  and  the 
Pope  delivered  up  his  treasures.  A  certain  number  of 
emigrants  were  found  in  the  fortress.     The  laws  that  had 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  1 1 5 

been  passed  against  them  were  far  from  being  repealed  ;  the 
General-in-chief  nevertheless  ordered  General  Serrurier  to 
let  them  pass  unmolested.  I  do  not  know  whether  they 
showed  themselves  grateful  for  that  act  of  generosity. 

The  General-in-chief,  foreseeing  that  his  new  campaign 
would  require  great  exertions,  applied  to  Government  for  a 
fresh  supply  of  troops.  He  could  not  continue  fighting  in 
exhausted  Lombardy  ;  but  having  his  line  of  operations 
strongly  supported  on  Mantua,  he  wanted  to  go  in  his  turn 
to  seek  the  enemy,  and,  uniting  his  operations  with  those  of 
the  armies  of  the  Rhine,  disgust  the  Republicans  of  a  war 
which  had  no  longer  a  reasonable  aim,  and  was  kept  alive  by 
malicious  passions.  In  France,  everybody  was  desirous  of 
serving  under  General  Bonaparte.  Bernadotte  obtained  the 
preference,  and  his  army  arrived  on  the  banks  of  the  Piave, 
the  day  before  the  passage  of  that  river.  I  was  ordered  to 
go  and  compliment  him,  and  to  seek  a  ford  where  he  might 
pass  the  river.  The  most  elegant  politeness  of  manner 
distinguished  the  general  and  his  staff ;  they  appeared 
delighted  at  forming  a  part  of  the  army,  and  especially  at 
serving  under  the  command  of  the  hero  of  Italy.  The 
interview  took  place  next  day,  and  it  was  marked  by  a 
degree  of  cordiality  and  candour  which  produced  a  good 
impression  among  the  troops  present  at  the  scene. 

The  first  attacks  of  the  French  army  were  made  with  so 
much  impetuosity  that  the  enemy  felt  himself  unable  to 
resist,  and  compelled  to  choose  another  ground.  He  retired 
to  the  Tagliaraonte,  the  passage  of  Avhich  he  resolved  at  last 
to  defend.  General  Bonaparte  settled  everything  so  that 
the  honour  of  the  day  might  belong  to  Bernadotte  :  a  corps 
of  six  thousand  grenadiers  was  placed  under  his  orders,  and 
he  received  the  command  of  the  centre,  where  the  enemy 
had  the  strongest  forces  to  oppose  to  ours.  Bernadotte 
passed  the  numerous  branches  of  the  rivers,  at  the  head  of 
his  soldiers,  crying,  "  The  Republic  for  ever  !  "  and  under 
the  most  murderous  fire  ;  but  Massena,  who  commanded  the 


1 16  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE. 

left  wing,  had  attacked  with  so  much  vigour,  that  the  enemy 
before  us  only  fought  to  get  to  the  end  of  the  day,  and  not 
to  be  too  much  harassed  in  their  retreat. 

The  result  of  this  battle  made  the  General-in-chief 
sensible  that  the  Archduke  retreated  to  await  him  beyond 
the  plains  of  Styria,  and  that  the  nearer  he  might  approach 
to  Vienna,  the  more  equal  the  forces  and  the  more  stubborn 
the  defence  would  become.  Bonaparte  resolved,  therefore, 
to  recall  the  division  of  Joubert  that  was  at  Brixen.  He  left, 
it  is  true,  Lombardy  open  to  the  enemy,  who  would  not  fail 
to  attack  it  ;  but  he  was  very  sure  that  if  once  the  Austrians 
were  vanquished  and  forced  to  make  peace,  it  would  not 
prove  very  difficult  for  him  to  recover  his  conquests  and 
re-establish  order  everywhere. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

With  two  companies  of  grenadiers  of  the  69th,  and  some 
cavalry,  I  was  sent  to  fetch  General  Joubert.  General 
Zayonjeck,  a  Pole,  newly  arrived  at  the  army,  received  an 
order  to  support  me  with  some  squadrons  of  dragoons.  I 
arrived  at  Lienz  without  any  impediment  ;  but  there  I  got 
certain  information  that  I  could  not,  without  losing  all  my 
men  to  the  very  last,  penetrate  to  the  place  where  our  first 
troops  stood  under  the  command  of  General  Belliard.  I 
wished,  however,  to  carry  my  undertaking  into  execution, 
and  what  I  could  not  do  with  my  soldiers  I  resolved  to 
attempt  alone.  I  therefore  left  my  troop  at  Lienz  under  the 
command  of  a  good  captain,  and  taking  with  me  a  lieutenant 
named  Acyorte,  a  brave  and  resolute  man,  I  threw  myself 
with  him  into  a  caleche,  both  of  us  well  wrapped  up  in  our 
cloaks,  hoping  we  might  be  able  to  cross  that  part  of  Tyrol 
in  the  character  of  Italian  merchants.  We  advanced,  in 
fact,  some  stages  without  meeting  with  any  obstacle.  We 
had  already  reached  the  first  houses  of  Miihlbach  at  nightfall, 
when  our  carriage  was  stopped  by  the  clergyman  of  the 
place,  who  said  to  me  in  Latin  :  "  Do  not  enter  ;  fly  to  the 
mountains,  or  you  are  lost.  You  are  expected,  and  nobody 
will  be  able  to  save  you."  Since  I  had  left  college,  I  had 
entirely  neglected  the  Latin  language.  I  scarcely  under- 
stood it,  and  I  was  making  the  clergyman  repeat  his  speech, 
when  his  sudden  flight,  added  to  furious  cries,  warned  us 

that  we  had  not  a  moment  to  lose.     In  an  instant  we  jumped 

117 


1 18  MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  VALETTE. 

out  of  the  carriage  and  ran  to  the  hills.  We  hid  ourselves 
in  a  ditch  :  when  up  to  our  necks  in  the  snow,  we  heard  the 
Tyroleans  pass  and  fire  their  muskets.  The  pursuit  was 
long,  and  not  without  uneasiness  to  us.  At  last  we  ventured 
to  change  our  position.  We  penetrated  farther  into  the 
mountains,  and  the  garret  of  a  hovel  was  our  retreat  for  the 
remainder  of  the  night.  At  daybreak  we  were  obliged  to 
adopt  some  resolution.  To  advance  was  impossible  :  we 
decided,  therefore,  to  return  on  foot  to  Lienz,  avoiding  the 
inhabited  places.  We  succeeded  for  some  leagues  ;  but 
after  having  in  vain  attempted  to  turn  a  village,  we  were 
forced  to  pass  through  it.  The  peasants  were  at  church,  the 
doors  of  which  were  open.  Some  old  women  called  after  us, 
and  a  dozen  of  the  most  alert  among  the  men  soon  reached 
us.  We  were  forced  to  yield  to  numbers.  We  did  not 
know  German  enough  to  make  ourselves  understood  by 
people  who  besides  spoke  that  language  very  ill,  and  they 
resolved  to  lead  us  back  to  Miihlbach.  The  whole  popula- 
tion of  the  town  and  environs  were  assembled  together. 
We  were  introduced  into  the  townhall,  situated  in  the 
great  square.  The  people  were  highly  excited,  and  I  could 
see,  by  the  fear  depicted  on  the  faces  of  the  municipal 
officers,  that  our  situation  was  becoming  dangerous.  Several 
of  those  brutes  were  dragging  us  along,  when,  after  having 
suddenly  disengaged  myself  from  their  hands,  I  peremptorily 
insisted  on  being  heard.  But  then  came  again  the  difficulty 
of  making  myself  understood.  I  sat  down,  took  up  a  pen 
and  wrote  in  Italian,  that  I  was  an  aide-de-camp  of  the 
General-in-chief  Bonaparte  ;  that  I  was  carrying  to  General 
Joubert  the  news  that  a  truce  had  been  signed  with  the 
Archduke  Charles  ;  that  they  were  at  liberty  to  murder 
us, — but  in  that  case,  my  mission  not  being  executed, 
hostilities  would  continue  in  Tyrol,  and  my  death  be  re- 
venged on  the  inhabitants.  This  account  being  proclaimed 
from  the  top  of  the  balcony,  and  repeated  among  the  crowd, 
succeeded  in  calming  them.     I  then  asked  leave  to  continue 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  119 

my  journey,  but  the  cries  began  anew.  The  only  permission 
I  obtained  was  to  return  to  Lienz.  We  were  escorted  there 
by  a  gentleman  and  a  clergyman  respected  by  the  peasants. 
On  our  arrival  I  gave  them  a  written  acknowledgment  of 
their  generous  conduct,  and  hope  one  day  to  be  able  to 
record  their  names,  and  recommend  them  to  the  esteem  of 
all  friends  of  humanity. 

I  had  scarcely  arrived  at  Lienz,  when  I  learned  that  I  was 
about  to  be  attacked  by  the  Tyroleans  who  had  assembled 
in  the  mountains.  The  inhabitants  of  the  place  were  not 
very  peaceably  disposed  ;  but  I  hoped  to  awe  them  by  my 
firmness.  I  could  not  entertain  the  intention  of  engaging  in 
a  useless  action.  I  wished,  however,  to  carry  along  with 
me  about  fifty  wounded  Frenchmen  whom  I  found  in  the 
hospital,  and  whom  the  Austrians  had  abandoned  in  their 
retreat.  While  I  was  taking  the  necessary  measures  for 
their  transfer,  I  was  told  that  one  of  the  posts  placed  at  the 
entrance  of  the  town  had  been  killed  by  the  Tyroleans,  who 
were  advancing  against  us.  I  returned  to  the  inn  to  get  on 
horseback  ;  but,  just  as  I  was  coming  out  of  the  door,  a 
dozen  of  these  rebels,  placed  in  ambush  at  thirty  steps 
distance,  fired  at  us  and  killed  my  horse,  and  also  those 
my  servant  was  holding  by  the  bridle,  and  gave  me 
a  severe  bruise  in  the  belly.  I  had  just  time  to  extri- 
cate myself  and  rejoin  the  troops.  To  attempt  resistance 
in  the  interior  of  the  town  would  have  been  madness  :  we 
left  it  amidst  a  shower  of  bullets,  shot  from  the  windows. 
The  Tyroleans  were  waiting  for  us  at  the  gate.  We  were 
obliged  to  repulse  them  with  the  bayonet,  and  continued 
fighting  till  we  arrived  at  Spital,  several  leagues  off.  There 
I  found  General  Zayonjeck,  who  had  at  last  succeeded  in 
getting  forward,  and  was  coming  to  join  me.  This  affair 
cost  us  five-and-twenty  men  killed  and  wounded,  and  three 
distinguished  officers.  This  loss  grieved  me  sorely,  and 
though  I  had  done  all  that  prudence  required,  I  was  never- 
theless anxious  to  know  what  impression  it  would  make  on 


1 20  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VA  L  E  TTE. 

the  General-in-chief.  My  report  had  preceded  me  :  I  was 
well  received,  though  he  blamed  me  for  having  ventured 
alone,  and  without  the  hope  of  being  assisted.  The  order  I 
had  been  the  bearer  of  had  also  been  entrusted  to  an  officer 
who  went  from  Trente,  and  who  was  more  fortunate  than  I. 
General  Joubert  hastened  to  join  the  General-in-chief  with 
his  whole  army  corps  ;  but  the  truce  was  already  signed. 

After  the  victory  of  Neumarck,  General  Bonaparte  had 
written  to  the  Archduke  to  propose  peace.  The  Cabinet  of 
Vienna,  tired  of  the  long  and  unfortunate  contest,  and  fear- 
ing that  the  loss  of  a  battle  might  bring  the  enemy  to  the 
gates  of  their  metropolis,  eagerly  seized  the  only  means  of 
stopping  the  French  in  their  victorious  career.  The  truce 
was  signed  at  Judenburg  on  the  7th,  and  the  preliminaries 
at  Leoben  on  the  1 8th  of  April,  by  Messieurs  de  Gullo  and 
Meerfield  on  the  part  of  the  Austrians,  and  General  Bona- 
parte and  M.  Clarke  on  the  part  of  the  French. 

The  close  of  hostilities  and  the  expectation  of  a  speedy 
and  lasting  peace  were  hailed  by  the  belligerent  nations 
with  the  greater  enthusiasm,  because  during  the  latter 
years  the  war  had  no  longer  for  its  object  either  the  safety 
of  the  people  or  the  dignity  of  the  Sovereign.  The  Govern- 
ment of  the  French  Republic  was  acknowledged  by  a  part 
of  Europe,  and  the  conquest  of  the  Austrian  states  was 
commemorated  by  twenty  victories.  However  great  might 
be  the  talents  the  Archduke  Charles  had  displayed  in  his 
German  campaigns,  the  Emperor  could  not  expect  to  be  able 
to  beat  the  Army  of  Italy  with  troops  discouraged  by  so 
many  defeats,  and  by  a  system  of  retreat  in  which  they  only 
saw  a  proof  of  their  inferiority,  without  guessing  at  the  real 
plan  of  their  leader,  which  was  to  draw  his  adversary  out  of 
Italy,  from  whence  he  got  all  his  supplies. 

The  march  of  Bonaparte  through  the  hereditary  states, 
where  he  seemed  obstinately  pursuing  an  enemy  continually 
retiring  before  him,  was  strongly  criticised  at  that  time 
when  the  lustre  of  his  glory  had  surrounded  him  with  envy. 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  1 2 1 

It  has  been  said  that,  if  the  Archduke  Charles  had  refused 
the  truce,  Bonaparte  would  have  been  obliged  to  follow  him 
to  the  banks  of  the  Danube,  and  that  there  all  the  chances 
of  success  would  have  been  in  favour  of  the  Austrians  ;  that 
a  first  check  in  that  position  would  have  been  the  certain 
prelude  of  a  defeat,  after  which  he  would  have  had  no  means 
of  retreating  and  avoiding  total  ruin.  No  one  doubted  but 
Italy  would  have  been  lost,  General  Laudon  having  pene- 
trated into  Lombardy  through  Tyrol,  while  the  insurrection 
of  the  Venetian  states  had  spread  disorder  among  our  troops, 
and  consternation  among  all  the  friends  of  France.  If  all 
those  assertions  had  been  founded  in  truth,  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  Bonaparte  not  only  wanted  prudence  in 
his  campaign,  but  also  that,  by  a  degree  of  vanity  contrary  to 
all  common  sense,  he  resolved  to  expose  to  the  most  perilous 
chances  his  army,  his  glory,  and  Italy,  to  satisfy  the  frivolous 
ambition  of  vanquishing  Prince  Charles,  and  making  himself 
master  of  the  metropolis  of  the  Austrian  empire.  But  it 
was  not  so.  In  the  first  place,  the  necessity  of  repulsing 
the  Archduke  was  urgent,  the  Prince  having  come  to  seek 
Bonaparte  on  the  banks  of  the  Piava.  In  pursuing  him 
beyond  the  Julian  Alps,  the  French  general  took  all  the 
precautions  that  the  art  of  war  and  the  most  consummate 
prudence  required.  The  left  of  his  army  had  made  itself 
master  of  the  valleys  of  the  Adige  and  the  Drave,  in  those 
parts  of  Tyrol  of  which  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  have 
possession  in  order  to  ensure  his  operations.  When  he  saw 
that  by  the  retreat  of  the  Archduke  he  should  be  obliged, 
if  he  wished  to  pursue  him,  to  penetrate  into  the  interior 
of  Styria,  he  recalled  General  Joubert,  and  reinforced  his 
army  by  twenty-two  thousand  men.  This  augmentation  of 
his  troops  gave  him  a  superiority  in  numbers  which  the 
Austrians  would  not  have  been  able  to  equal  even  under 
the  walls  of  Vienna  ;  for  all  the  forces  of  the  monarchy  were 
already  exhausted, — and  the  campaigns  of  Austerlitz  and 
AVagram  have  sufficiently  proved    that  the  inhabitants  of 


122  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

Vienna,  and  even  those  of  the  hereditary  states,  except  the 
Tyroleans,  do  not  readily  take  up  arms.  They  would 
probably  have  remained  peaceable  spectators  of  the  contest^ 
of  which  the  object  was  of  no  advantage  to  them.  As 
to  the  loss  of  Italy,  there  was  no  likelihood  of  such  an 
event.  The  small  corps  commanded  by  M.  de  Laudon 
might  certainly  have  caused  some  confusion  at  first ;  but 
that  general  was  without  support — without  any  real  line 
of  operations.  We  possessed  well-furnished  fortresses, 
numerous  garrisons,  a  body  of  excellent  and  well-com- 
manded troops.  The  insurrection  of  the  Venetian  states, 
on  which  the  enemy  reckoned,  had  been  much  exaggerated. 
Some  hundred  wretches,  urged  b}'  the  Venetian  Govern- 
ment, had  massacred  the  sick  at  Verona,  and  some  solitary 
Frenchmen  on  the  highway  ;  but  there  was  a  great  difference 
between  these  outrages  and  a  general  strongly  organised 
insurrection,  gathering  force  from  hatred  and  the  thirst  for 
revenge.  The  Venetian  people  were  but  little  attached  to 
their  government.  The  creation  of  a  powerful  republic  in 
the  midst  of  them  inspired  them  with  a  desire  of  making  a 
part  of  it  ;  while  a  taste  for  novelty  made  them  shut  their 
eyes  on  the  sacrifices  which  revolutions  require,  and  their 
vivid  imagination  had  exaggerated  the  advantages  they 
expected  to  reap  from  it.  The  friends  of  government  were 
undoubtedly  numerous,  especially  among  persons  in  office 
and  the  priesthood,  who  cannot  but  lose  in  modern  revolu- 
tions ;  but  the  mass  of  the  people  were  strangers  to  their 
designs  and  their  ambition.  I  have  rather  enlarged  on  the 
subject  of  this  campaign,  because  I  found  in  Paris,  some 
time  after,  people  who  blamed  it  openly,  notwithstanding 
its  brilliant  and  solid  result  ;  but  I  was  soon  convinced 
that  those  reflections  originated  with  the  members  of  the 
Directory,  who  had  been  much  less  uneasy  about  the  result 
of  the  conquest  than  dissatisfied  with  the  haughty  in- 
dependence of  General  Bonaparte,  who  did  not  choose  to 
submit  to  the  plan  traced  out  by  Government.   The  passage 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  123 

of  the  Rhine  by  Hoche  and  Moreau  was  a  powerful  diversion 
which  the  conqueror  of  Italy  had  himself  wished  for  ;  but 
that  operation,  to  have  been  really  advantageous,  ought,  in 
his  opinion,  to  have  been  put  into  execution  much  earlier. 
A  last  consideration,  and  which  is  in  itself  an  answer  to  all 
objections,  is  the  intimate  and  convincing  knowledge  the 
General-in-chief  had  acquired  of  the  dispositions  of  the 
ministers  and  persons  who  enjoyed  decisive  influence  over 
the  mind  of  the  Emperor. 

After  the  signature  of  the  Treaty  of  Leoben,  the  army 
took  up  its  position  beyond  the  Tagliamento,  and  the 
General-in-chief  came  to  Milan  ;  but  in  his  way  he  thought 
fit  to  punish  the  cruelties  committed  during  the  insurrection. 
He  knew  well  that  the  insurrection  had  been  prepared  and 
directed  by  the  Government  of  Venice  ;  and  he  had  acquired 
proofs  that  it  had  been  concerted  with  the  enemy,  and  in 
his  interest.  But  Bonaparte's  revenge  was  one  of  an  able 
politician.  Austria  had  a  great  wish  to  get  Venice  into  her 
possession.  Bonaparte  destroyed  its  government,  and  was 
enabled,  by  that  means,  to  offer  that  rich  prey  as  a  com- 
pensation in  the  negotiation.  It  was  accepted,  without 
blushing,  by  a  government  which  never  hesitated  in  making 
its  friends  pay  for  faults  caused  by  its  own  misconduct. 

In  the  meanwhile  a  circumstance  happened  at  Genoa  that 
strongly  fixed  the  General's  attention.  The  government  of 
that  small  republic  had  refused  to  admit  one  of  our  squadrons 
into  its  ports.  The  English  party,  that  was  uppermost  in 
the  Senate  of  Genoa,  had  stirred  up  a  riot  among  the  rabble ; 
a  Frenchman  had  been  killed,  and  the  frigate  La  Modeste 
had  been  burned.  Such  acts  of  violence  required  a  speedy 
and  energetic  repression  ;  but  General  Bonaparte  wished 
that  such  punishment  might  be  inflicted  by  the  French 
Government.  Secret  emissaries,  sent  from  Paris,  had  been 
instructed  to  obtain,  by  all  possible  means,  the  union  of 
Genoa  with  France.  This  was,  however,  not  the  opinion 
of  General    Bonaparte.      It  would   have  caused  a  renewal 


124  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

of  painful  discussions  with  the  Austrians,  at  the  very 
moment  when  the  treaty  was  being  put  into  execution. 
Besides,  the  ItaHan  army  derived  considerable  advantages 
from  the  Genoese  republic.  In  consequence,  General  Bona- 
parte thought  fit  to  send  me  to  Genoa,  with  precise 
instructions,  and  an  order  to  deliver  to  the  Doge,  in  full 
Senate,  the  letter  he  addressed  to  him,  giving  him  no  more 
than  four-and-twenty  hours  to  execute  the  measures  of  which 
I  was  the  bearer.  My  entrance  into  the  city  caused  great 
anxiety,  and  the  approach  of  a  terrible  though  unknown 
danger  made  the  magistrate,  in  whose  hands  the  care  of  the 
public  reposed,  feel  that  the  republic  was  irretrievably  lost, 
if  any  fresh  outrages  were  committed  in  the  presence  of  an 
aide-de-camp  of  General  Bonaparte.  The  people  became 
calm,  as  if  by  enchantment.  M.  Faypoult,  the  French 
ambassador,  was  greatly  dispirited  ;  and,  when  I  declared  to 
him  that  the  orders  of  the  General-in-chief  were  that  I 
should  deliver  my  letter  to  the  Doge  in  full  Senate,  he 
recoiled  with  alarm,  and  said  there  was  no  instance  of  a 
stranger  ever  having  entered  the  Petty  Council  presided  by 
the  Doge.  I  replied,  that  there  was  no  instance  either  of 
an  order  of  General  Bonaparte  not  being  executed,  and  that 
he  was  immediately  to  acquaint  the  Doge  of  my  arrival  ; 
that  in  an  hour's  time  I  would  go  to  the  palace  of  the 
Senate  ;  that  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  forms  of  the 
republic,  nor  to  care  for  the  peril  I  might  run  in  executing 
the  orders  of  my  chief.  Half  an  hour  afterwards  I  was 
informed  that  I  might  go  to  the  palace.  When  I  entered 
the  hall,  anger  and  consternation  were  visible  on  the  features 
of  all  the  members  of  the  Council.  After  having  delivered 
my  letter,  and  required  the  execution  of  the  orders  it  con- 
tained within  four-and-twenty  hours,  I  retired  ;  and  the 
agitation  was  so  strong  in  the  Assembly  that  I  heard  a 
powerful  voice  repeating  the  words,  "  Ci  batteremo"  (We 
will  fight).  However,  they  did  not  fight.  Three  senators 
were  arrested. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  125 

Despatches  were  sent  to  the  General-in-chief.  A  pro- 
visional government  was  instituted,  and  a  commission 
chosen  to  modify  the  Genoese  constitution.  Anxiety,  agita- 
tion, and  fear  were  carried  to  the  highest  pitch.  I  thought 
I  should  be  able  to  set  oflF  the  next  day,  when  a  vessel  that 
entered  the  port  gave  me  fresh  cause  of  uneasiness.  She 
had  on  board  Madame  Bonaparte  (the  General's  mother), 
with  two  of  her  daughters — afterwards  known  as  Queen  of 
Naples  and  Grand  Duchess  of  Tuscany — and  M.  Bacciochi, 
newly  married.  These  ladies  had  not  seen  the  General-in- 
chief  for  several  years.  They  had  come  from  Marseilles, 
fancying  that  Italy  was  tranquil.  General  Bonaparte  had  not 
received  the  letter  in  which  they  acquainted  him  with  their 
arrival.  No  measures  had  been  taken — no  orders  given  ; 
the  riots  might  perhaps  begin  anew,  and  they  might  fall 
victims  to  popular  fury.  My  first  thought  was,  to  remain 
with  them,  and  to  collect  some  means  of  defence,  in  case 
they  should  be  attacked.  But  Madame  Bonaparte  was  a 
woman  of  great  sense  and  courage.  "  I  have  nothing  to 
fear  in  this  place,"  she  said  ;  "since  my  son  holds  as  hostages 
the  most  considerable  persons  of  the  republic.  Go  quickly 
and  acquaint  him  with  my  arrival.  To-morrow  I  shall 
continue  my  journey."  I  followed  her  advice,  merely  taking 
the  precaution  of  ordering  some  detachments  of  cavalry  I 
found  in  my  way  to  go  to  meet  them.  They  arrived 
without  accident  the  next  day  at  Milan. 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

While  France  and  her  armies  were  at  last  enjoying  the 
repose  bought  by  such  heroic  exertions,  Government  be- 
trayed, by  its  internal  dissensions,  the  fatal  secret  of  its 
weakness  and  incapacity.  The  enlightened  part  of  the 
country  had  soon  become  sensible  that  the  Directory 
would  never  obtain  any  but  a  temporary  and  stormy 
existence.  Besides  the  impossibility  of  preserving  perfect 
harmony  between  five  persons,  possessing  power  in  common, 
while  they  were  swayed  by  different  passions,  prejudices, 
and  characters,  it  was  easy  to  be  convinced  that  even  the 
concentration  of  power  in  so  few  hands,  being  an  homage 
paid  to  monarchy,  would  recall  too  many  recollections,  and 
too  much  regret  for  the  old  form  of  government,  not  to 
tempt  its  adherents  to  make  efforts  in  its  favour.  In  the 
eyes  of  the  Royalists,  the  Directory  was  then  only  a  passage 
to  monarchy.  They  hoped  that  it  would  be  short  ;  and 
their  wishes,  inflamed  by  the  expectation  of  success,  made 
them  bold.  For  the  first  time,  they  combined  a  reasonable 
plan  by  addressing  themselves  to  the  passions  of  their  foes, 
and  to  ambition  so  ardent  in  its  calculation.  The  Con- 
stitution of  the  Year  III.  had  created  two  councils — one 
called  the  "  Council  of  Five  Hundred,"  and  the  other  the 
"  Council  of  Ancients."  Among  the  persons  composing 
them  were  still  many  members  of  the  Convention,  who 
could  not  bear  the  idea  of  the  return  of  the  Bourbons  ;  but 
among  them  also  sat  some  old  Constitutionalists,  who  had 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  127 

united  their  exertions  and  wishes  for  the  establishment  of  a 
representative  monarchy.  The  greatest  part  among  them 
were  men  of  merit.  All  had  been  persecuted  by  the  Com- 
mittee of  Public  Safety.  The  members  of  the  Directory 
had  been  all  chosen  out  of  the  Convention,  and  the  majority 
of  them  had  voted  for  the  death  of  the  King.  These  were 
no  titles  to  recommend  them  to  the  confidence  of  the 
people,  and  much  less  so  that  of  the  Constitutionalists. 
This  difference  between  the  conduct  and  the  opinions  of 
Government,  and  a  part  of  the  Chambers,  soon  created  an 
animosity  which  betrayed  itself  in  all  their  mutual  concerns. 
Perhaps,  however,  it  would  not  have  brought  on  a  cata- 
strophe, if  one  of  our  most  celebrated  generals  had  not 
entered  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred,  already  resolved 
to  carry  into  execution  a  conspiracy  in  favour  of  the 
Bourbons. 

Pichegru  it  was  who  conceived  that  fatal  design  a  long 
time  before.  I  was  told  by  General  Lahorie,  who  accom- 
panied him  to  Paris  when  the  Convention  summoned  the 
conqueror  of  Holland  to  her  aid  to  crush  the  Jacobins,  that 
when  he  left  the  metropolis  after  the  affair  of  the  12th 
Germinal,  Pichegru  lost  no  opportunity  of  showing  his 
contempt  for  the  Assembly, — contempt  so  great,  that  he 
grew  angry  at  the  thought  of  the  praises  and  honours 
that  had  been  lavished  on  him.  Such  were  his  ideas  when 
he  took  the  command  of  the  Rhine  army,  and  soon  after 
began  his  correspondence  with  the  Prince  of  Conde.  It 
could  not  remam  long  a  secret  :  the  Prince  wavered,  asked 
advice,  and  solicited  orders  of  the  Count  de  Lille.  This 
hesitation,  these  numerous  letters,  let  so  many  people  into 
the  secret  that  authentic  papers  were  alone  wanted  to 
establish  complete  evidence  of  the  plot.  Those  papers  were 
soon  found.  Count  d'Entraigues,  a  fiery  and  active-minded 
emigrant,  though  not  very  prudent,  was  one  of  the  agents 
of  the  correspondence.  He  was  attached  to  the  Russian 
legation   which    had    been    sent    to   the    former    govern- 


128  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

ment  of  Venice,  and  he  remained  in  that  city,  thinking 
himself  safe  in  his  foreign  regimentals.  The  General- 
in-chief  had  him  arrested.  A  great  part  of  the  corres- 
pondence was  seized  among  his  papers,  and  sent  to  the 
Directory. 

A  government  that  felt  itself  strong  enough  to  be  just 
would  have  had  the  traitor  arrested,  and  the  laws  would 
have  decided.  But  the  Directory  considered  that  Pichegru 
was  protected  by  eminent  services,  by  his  great  reputation, 
his  title  of  Deputy,  and  the  support  of  a  whole  party.  The 
examination  of  the  plot  proved,  besides,  that  if  General 
Moreau  had  not  taken  a  direct  part  in  it,  he  had  at  least 
known  of  it.  When  he  learned  that  Government  was 
acquainted  with  it,  he  hastened  to  disclose  it  ;  but  this 
tardy  disclosure,  instead  of  destroying  suspicion,  confirmed 
it.  Besides  that,  other  respectable  names  might  be  exposed. 
All  these  considerations  made  Government  fear  legal  pro- 
ceedings, the  publicity  and  final  result  of  which  might  too 
probably  prove  fatal  to  its  members  ;  so  that  it  was  deemed 
preferable  to  involve  in  one  common  destruction,  by  a  coup 
d  'etat,  the  private  foes  of  Government  and  those  who  had 
betrayed  the  Republic. 

General  Bonaparte  followed  attentively  the  progress  of 
these  sad  dissensions.  In  the  heat  of  the  debates  of  the 
Council  of  Five  Hundred,  some  aspersions  had  been  directed 
against  his  lieutenants,  and  even  against  himself.  He  at 
first  proudly  repelled  them  ;  but  on  maturer  thought,  he 
resolved  to  send  to  Paris  some  one  who  could  obtain  exact 
information  on  the  situation  of  aflfairs,  and  I  was  chosen  for 
that  mission.  ''Mix  with  everybody,"  he  said;  "do  not 
let  yourself  be  led  away  by  party  spirit  ;  tell  me  the  truth, 
and  tell  it  me  free  from  all  passion." 

I  arrived  in  Paris  in  the  month  of  May.  The  five 
members  of  Government  were,  at  that  time,  Barras,  B.QVf- 
bell,  Carnot,  La  Reveilliere  Lepaux,  and  Barthelemy.  The 
first   four   had   been   members   of    the    Convention  ;    and 


^ABi^T. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE  129 

although  none  of  them  had  been  famous  during  the  Reign 
of  Terror  for  any  atrocious  act,  still  the  three  first  had  voted 
the  death  of  the  King, — a  vote  which,  notwithstanding  the 
fatal  though  powerful  Consideration  that  may  be  presented 
in  alleviation,  placed  them  among  the  most  furious  Jacobins, 
and  was  prejudicial  to  the  respect  with  which  they  ought  to 
have  been  invested.  The  people  bore  impatiently  the  yoke 
of  men  who  recalled  to  their  minds  such  fatal  events  ;  and 
they  were  especially  disliked  by  the  Constitutionalists  of 
1 79 1,  who  reproached  them  at  once  with  the  destruction 
of  their  edifice,  and  the  persecutions  which  had  so  long 
weighed  upon   them. 

When  I  arrived,  the  contest  was  violent,  and  the  antago- 
nists of  Government  made  no  secret  of  their  wish  to  over- 
throw the  majority.  My  first  visit  was  to  Barras,  who 
seemed  to  have  preserved  favourable  sentiments  for  General 
Bonaparte,  and  who  expressed  to  me  a  wish  to  maintain  the 
friendship  which  had  so  long  united  them.  After  him  I  saw 
Carnot,  who  spoke  to  me  with  a  reserve  commanded  by  the 
intimate  connection  of  General  Bonaparte  with  Barras.  A 
diflference  of  systems  and  views  on  some  points  of  govern- 
ment had  created  between  these  two  Directors  an  animosity 
which  betrayed  itself  in  invectives  and  threats,  that  left  no 
opening  for  reconciliation.  Carnot,  however,  expressed  him- 
self with  candour.  "  It  is  impossible,"  he  said,  "  to  go  on 
any  longer  on  the  revolutionary  road.  If  a  lasting  system 
of  moderation  be  not  adopted,  all  is  lost.  France  feels 
horror  for  whatever  brings  to  mind  the  deplorable 
measures  to  which  the  necessity  of  saving  her  has  carried 
the  country.  The  public  mind  is  irritated,  and  unless  great 
care  be  taken,  the  effect  will  be  to  involve  us  again  in  a 
confusion,  out  of  which  we  shall  be  extricated  only  to  bend 
under  the  yoke  of  the  Bourbons.  The  faction  against  which 
I  am  struggling  does  not  blush  to  charge  me  with  being  a 
Royalist  ;  and  nevertheless,  nobody  is  more  convinced  than 
I  am  of  Pichegru's  treason,  and  the  necessity  of  punishing 

10 


I30  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

but  him  ;  they  want  to  govern  France  as  they  would  a  club. 
Narrow  views,  passionate  factious  spirit,  the  prejudices  of 
ignorance  and  fear,  ever  suspicious  and  blind,  preside  over 
all  our  acts  :  they  prefer  the  violence  that  irritates,  while 
moderation  and  firmness  would  be  sufficient  to  smooth 
everything.  My  situation  is  painful  ;  for  I  am  forced  to 
move  with  a  party  in  which,  exclusive  of  Pichegru,  there 
are  men  to  whom  I  am  obnoxious,  who  perhaps  conspire 
with  him,  and  who  will  ruin  the  Republic,  without  obtaining 
the  secret  aim  of  their  endeavours.  I  have  tried,"  he  added, 
"  to  reclaim  Pichegru  ;  I  was  not  personally  acquainted  with 
him  ;  but  the  conversation  I  had  with  him  convinced  me 
that  he  is  cleverer  than  I  thought,  and  that  he  has  taken 
his  final  resolutions.  I  do  not  know  what  are  his  means  of 
execution,  now  that  he  is  no  longer  with  the  army  ;  but, 
whatever  they  may  be,  they  will  miscarry  when  opposed  by 
the  firm  vigilance  of  Government,  and  by  public  opinion, 
which  is  strongl}^  declared  against  the  Bourbons." 

This  conversation,  of  which  I  have  only  recorded  the  most 
remarkable  parts,  was  the  only  one  I  had  with  Carnot.  The 
house  of  Barras  was  open  to  me,  and  I  went  there  so  often 
that  Carnot  could  not  but  look  upon  me  as  a  man  entirely 
devoted  to  the  party  of  that  Director  :  it  was,  however,  not 
so.  All  his  speeches  breathed  hatred  and  vengeance.  A 
month  before  the  catastrophe  took  place,  it  was  secretly 
resolved  to  make  it  terrible,  and  the  victims  were  marked 
out.  My  position  and  my  duty  forbade  me  taking  any  part 
in  the  contest,  but  I  wrote  the  truth  to  General  Bonaparte. 
I  observed  that  he  would  tarnish  his  glory  if  he  gave  any 
support  to  acts  of  violence,  which  the  situation  of  Govern- 
ment did  not  justify  ;  that  nobody  would  pardon  him  if  he 
joined  the  Directory  in  their  plan  to  overthrow  the  Constitu- 
tion and  liberty  ;  that  proscriptions  were  about  to  take  place 
against  the  national  representation,  and  against  citizens 
whose  virtues  made  them  worthy  of  respect  ;  that  punish- 
ments would  be  inflicted  without  trial,  and  that  the  hatred 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LAV  ALE  TTE.  1 3 1 

resulting  from  such  measures,  would  extend  not  only  to  the 
Directory,  but  to  the  whole  system  of  republican  govern- 
ment. Besides,  it  was  not  certain  that  the  party  they  were 
going  to  proscribe  really  wished  the  return  of  the  Bourbons  ; 
and  in  any  case  the  legal  punishment  and  banishment  of 
Pichegru  would  be  sufficient  to  destroy  any  plans  of  that 
sort.  These  considerations  made  so  much  impression  on 
the  mind  of  General  Bonaparte  that  he  soon  avoided,  in  his 
correspondence  with  the  Directory,  all  allusion  to  the  interior 
situation  of  France,  and  at  last  left  off  writing  to  them  alto- 
gether. His  long  silence  appeared  strange  to  Barras,  who, 
however,  easily  guessed  the  cause  of  it.  He  continued  seeing 
me  ;  but  I  perceived  by  his  gravity,  and  the  insidious  ques- 
tions of  his  favourites,  that  he  suspected  me  of  not  being  his 
friend.  I  never  loved  equivocal  situations,  and  I  hastened 
to  get  out  of  the  one  I  was  in  by  candidly  declaring  my 
sentiments  to  one  of  his  confidants.  "  I  know  enough,"  I 
said,  ''of  the  plans  of  Government  to  hurt  them  if  I  were  to 
acquaint  their  enemies  with  what  I  do  know  :  it  would,  how- 
ever, be  an  act  of  treason,  of  which  you  know  I  am  incapable. 
But,  as  a  citizen  and  an  honest  man,  I  cannot  dissemble  that 
I  do  not  approve  of  the  coup  cTetat  that  is  meditating  :  you 
are  going  to  trample  on  laws  and  liberty.  Such  a  system  or 
violence  will  sooner  or  later  recoil  on  your  own  heads.  After 
having  toiled  and  suffered  ten  years  to  obtain  a  representa- 
tive government,  it  is  distressing  to  reap  nothing  but  tyranny, 
or  the  convulsions  of  anarchy."  He  answered  me  by  some 
commonplace  observations  on  the  necessity  of  striking  a 
great  blow  at  a  faction  that  wanted  to  overthrow  the 
Republic.  Barras,  to  whom  this  conversation  was  reported, 
according  to  my  intention,  thought  it  requisite  to  dissemble  : 
he  did  not  treat  me  ill,  but  he  had  me  watched  with  a  vigi- 
lance that  extended  even  to  my  correspondence  with  General 
Bonaparte.  My  letters  to  him  were  written  in  cipher  ;  and 
that  proof  of  mystery  and  mistrust,  by  augmenting  their 
suspicions,  contributed  perhaps  to  hasten  the  catastrophe 


132  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

through  the  fear  that  Bonaparte  might  take  some  resolution 
that  would  perplex  the  Directory. 

I  may  here  briefly  describe  the  different  members  of  the 
Directorial  government,  whose  existence  was  so  short,  though 
its  operations  had  so  much  influence  on  the  destinies  of 
France  and  the  affairs  of  Europe. 

Barras,  who  then  discharged  the  functions  of  president, 
was  descended  from  one  of  the  most  ancient  families  of 
Provence.  A  restless  disposition,  and  the  wish  to  advance 
rapidly  in  the  military  career,  had  induced  him  to  go  to 
India,  where  he  served  in  a  colonial  regiment.  Having 
returned  to  France  in  lySq,  he  declared  himself  in  favour  of 
the  Revolution,  in  which,  however,  he  obtained  no  celebrity. 
Nature  had  refused  him  those  qualifications  which  ensure 
success  to  an  orator,  but  he  had  a  great  deal  of  resolution  ; 
and  his  conduct  at  the  fall  of  Robespierre,  by  bringing  upon 
him  the  hatred  of  the  Jacobins,  gave  him  a  share  in  the 
gratitude  all  France  felt  for  those  who  had  contributed  to 
the  destruction  of  their  horrible  tyranny. 

At  the  period  I  am  now  speaking  of,  Barras  was  the  most 
violent  of  the  three  members  of  the  Directory  who  wished 
for  an  alteration  in  the  councils.  His  hatred  of  Carnot  was 
so  strong  that,  a  few  days  before  the  i8th  Fructidor,  one  of 
his  confidants,  to  whom  I  made  the  observation  that  Carnot 
would  undoubtedly  find  means  of  escaping  from  persecution, 
answered,  "  Wc  will  kill  Mm.^''  He  had  continually  in  his 
mouth  the  most  insulting  expressions  against  those  whom 
he  suspected  of  being  Royalists.  On  the  other  hand,  how  is 
it  possible  to  reconcile  that  hatred  of  the  Bourbons  and  their 
friends  with  the  revelations  published  by  Fauche  Borel 
since  the  Restoration,  and  which  Barras  never  denied.  The 
above-mentioned  agent  of  Louis  XVIII.  has  asserted  that 
the  Director  had  consented  to  the  plan  of  the  Count  of  Lille 
to  bring  about  a  Royalist  revolution  ;  that  a  formal  pardon 
had  been  sent  to  him,  and  an  amnesty  for  his  vote  in  the 
trial  of  the  late  King  ;  finally,  that  several  millions  had  been 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  1 33 

promised  him  to  make  up  for  the  loss  of  his  rank  as  Director. 
If  the  assertion  of  Fauche  Borel  be  true,  the  animosity  of 
Barras  against  the  RoyaHst  party  can  only  be  explained  by 
the  impossibility  in  which  he  found  himself  of  accomplish- 
ing his  promises,  or  by  his  grief  at  being  obliged  to  share 
glory  and  the  profit  of  a  Restoration  with  persons  whom  he 
detested,  and  whose  reputation  and  talents  would  offer  the 
King  better  pledges  than  he  could  present.  The  conduct  of 
Napoleon  in  regard  to  Barras,  during  his  reign,  may  also 
be  explained  by  the  knowledge  he  had  acquired  of  his 
treason. 

Rewbell,  the  second  Director,  was  a  lawyer  from  iVlsatia  : 
his  name  will  hold  but  a  trivial  place  in  history.  He  was  at 
that  time  accused  of  amassing  his  fortune  with  an  avidity 
that  might  have  procured  him  immense  wealth  ;  however, 
that  charge  has  since  been  disproved  in  the  clearest  manner. 
After  living  fifteen  years  in  obscurity,  Rewbell  died  a  short 
time  ago,  leaving  a  very  middling  fortune. 

The  third  Director  was  named  La  Reveillere  Lepaux  :  he 
also  was  a  lawyer.  A  reputation  for  unsullied  integrity  and 
talent,  proclaimed  by  four  committees,  had  caused  him  to  be 
regarded  as  a  man  capable  of  governing  the  state.  Carnot 
has  used  him  very  ill  in  one  of  his  works.  I  believe  there 
is  a  great  deal  of  exaggeration  in  that  picture,  which  is 
traced  by  resentment  ;  several  features  of  it,  however^ 
approach  very  near  to  the  truth.  His  friends  and  his 
valets  used  to  call  him  the  good  soul  {le  bon  hovime)^  and  he 
wept  for  joy  when  on  the  i8th  Fructidor  he  heard  that 
thirty  legislators  were  to  be  transported  to  the  burning 
sands  of  Cayenne.  As  a  philosopher,  he  was  at  the  head  of 
a  sect,  and  the  Theophilanthropy  which  he  sought  to  propa- 
gate was  nothing  more  than  pure  Deism.  He  used  to  lay 
offerings  of  flowers  on  his  altars,  while  poor  Christian  priests 
under  his  government  expiated  the  crime  of  teaching  their 
religion  in  dark  and  solitary  dungeons. 

The    only  man    in  the  council  who  deserved   his   high 


134  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

station,  and  who  enjoyed  undisputed  respect,  was  Carnot. 
At  that  period  he  had  not  yet  completely  displayed  the 
inflexibility  of  conscience  and  the  wonderful  disinterested- 
ness that  have  made  him  hitherto  inaccessible  both  to  the 
seduction  and  to  the  threats  and  severity  of  power  ;  but 
those  who  approached  him  admired  in  him  a  dignity  of 
character  combined  with  virtue  and  vast  information, 
entirely  devoted  to  support  the  liberty  and  independence 
of  his  country.  The  turn  of  his  mind,  and  the  unshaken 
firmness  of  his  soul,  inspired  him  with  a  predilection  for  a 
Republican  government,  which  experience  does  not  seem  to 
have  weakened.  Being  himself  a  stranger  to  all  the  mean 
passions  that  animate  and  maintain  society,  he  did  not  calcu- 
late on  the  corruption  and  the  vanity  of  his  countrymen. 
A  republic  being  in  his  eyes  the  best  of  all  governments,  he 
thought  nothing  appeared  too  difficult  for  its  preservation, 
nor  perhaps  nothing  too  severe  to  insure  its  triumph.  This 
austere  Republican  was,  however,  a  good  and  amiable  man  : 
in  the  bosom  of  his  family,  he  was  indulgent  to  weakness  and 
error.  His  enemies  themselves  did  not  confound  him  with 
his  cruel  colleagues  of  the  Convention.  At  the  period  I  am 
speaking  of,  he  struggled  to  alleviate  the  situation  of  the 
emigrants  and  insure  the  tranquillity  of  their  families  :  he 
resisted  all  oppressive  measures,  and  wanted  to  establish  the 
prosperity  of  the  state  on  good  laws  and  the  benefits  of 
peace. 

The  ministers  who  formed  the  cabinet  under  this  Pent- 
archy  have  not  been  able  to  escape  oblivion,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  one  whose  name  will  be  recorded  in  history  on 
account  of  the  variety  of  parts  he  has  acted.  M.  de  Talley- 
rand left  France  in  1792,  as  bishop  of  Autun  ;  he  returned 
in  1796  a  Republican,  and  with  all  the  docile  modesty  of  a 
disgraced  man  who  wishes  to  return  to  favour.  He  possessed 
a  remarkable  degree  of  talent,  which  Avas  much  praised  by 
his  friends.  He  had,  however,  not  yet  attained  the  fame  he 
afterwards  enjoyed,  as  one  of  the  most  clever  diplomatists 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  135 

of  Europe.  In  that  respect  the  Directory  were  not  in  want 
of  his  services.  Numerous  and  important  treaties  had  been 
sighed  by  obscure  persons,  and  were  not  the  worse  for  that. 
But  the  vanity  of  the  Directors  was  flattered  at  having 
under  their  orders  a  man  who  had  formerly  been  a  grand 
seigneur.^  who  had  given  more  than  one  pledge  to  the 
Revolution,  had  lost  the  right  of  complaining  of  its  excesses, 
having  himself  professed  all  its  principles,  and  whose  supple- 
ness of  character  insured  his  obedience.  He  possessed, 
besides,  considerable  advantages  over  his  predecessor,  and 
even  over  his  new  masters — I  mean  his  connection  with 
influential  men  in  foreign  countries,  a  strong  taste  for 
politics,  and  the  most  perfect  polish  of  manner.  Notwith- 
standing their  rude  republican  pride,  the  Directors  were 
sensible  that,  in  their  negotiations  with  foreign  courts,  a 
man  of  birth  belonging  to  the  old  monarchy  might  be  of 
use  to  them. 

When  M.  de  Talleyrand  entered  the  ministry,  dissension 
was  at  its  greatest  violence.  He  gently  discarded  his  old 
friends  who  were  struggling  in  the  councils  against  the 
majority  of  the  Directory,  by  feigning  to  believe  that  they 
all  wished  for  the  return  of  the  Bourbons,  and  he  remained 
a  cool  spectator  of  their  disasters.  The  chief  point  he  had 
in  view  was  to  keep  his  place  and  re-establish  his  fortune, 
which  had  been  destroyed  by  former  disorders  and  public 
events.  He  quickly  obtained  his  aim,  from  which  nothing 
could  divert  him,  neither  the  clamour  raised  by  his  enemies, 
nor  the  reproaches  of  his  masters,  to  which  he  constantly 
opposed  a  calm,  patient,  and,  I  may  almost  say,  a  careless 
resignation.  I  have  witnessed  some  instances  of  it,  and  I 
felt  that  ambition  cannot  fail  to  create  disgust  when  bought 
at  such  a  price.  He  lived  on  a  footing  of  intimacy  with 
Madame  de  Stael,  already  celebrated  for  her  superior  mind, 
and  a  passion  for  fame,  united  to  kindness  of  heart  that  has 
not  been  sufficiently  appreciated.  To  say  the  truth,  it  was 
a  little  her  own  fault.     I  am  convinced  that  she  did   not 


136  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

foresee  the  cruel  proscriptions  that  oppressed  the  vanquished 
party  ;  but  I  certainly  never  witnessed  so  much  warmth  of 
persecution.  She  undoubtedly  saw  nothing  more  in  the 
struggle  than  the  triumph  of  her  political  opinions, — I 
should  rather  say  feelings  ;  but  still  it  must  be  acknowledged 
that  an  absence  of  all  reflection  could  alone  have  led  her  to 
embrace  so  openly  the  part  of  men  who  trampled  on  liberty 
and  national  representation,  the  two  most  cherished  objects 
of  her  worship.  All  that  time  she  carried  to  enthusiasm 
her  admiration  of  General  Bonaparte.  I  saw  her  for  the 
first  time  at  M.  de  Talleyrand's.  During  dinner,  the  praises 
she  lavished  on  the  Conqueror  of  Italy  had  all  the  wildness, 
romance,  and  exaggeration  of  poetry.  When  we  left  the 
table,  the  company  withdrew  to  a  small  room  to  look  at  the 
portrait  of  the  hero  ;  and  as  I  stepped  back  to  let  her  walk 
in,  she  said  :  "  How  shall  I  dare  to  pass  before  an  aide-de- 
camp of  Bonaparte  ?  "  My  confusion  was  so  great,  that  she 
also  felt  a  little  of  it,  and  our  host  himself  laughed  at  us.  I 
went  to  see  her  next  morning.  Her  reception  was  kind 
enough  to  make  me  return  often  to  her  house  ;  and  I  do 
affirm  that  her  lively  imagination  and  her  incredible  activity 
continued  unceasingly  the  same  up  to  the  catastrophe.  She 
had  nothing  before  her  eyes  but  the  counter-revolution,  the 
return  of  the  Bourbons,  the  revenge  of  the  emigrants,  and 
the  loss  of  liberty. 

The  denojieinent  grew  at  last  inevitable.  The  rage  of  the 
several  parties  had  reached  its  greatest  height.  The  jour- 
nals, pamphlets,  and  posted  bills  contained  the  most  violent 
provocations.  The  Constitution  not  having  left  the  Direc- 
tory space  enough  for  defence,  it  resolved  to  overthrow  all 
barriers.  Still,  there  was  wanted  a  celebrated  general  to 
put  the  plan  into  execution.  Augereau  came  to  their 
assistance.  The  day  before  he  arrived  from  Italy  I  received 
a  letter  from  General  Bonaparte,  in  which  he  said  :  "  Auge- 
reau is  going  to  Paris.  Place  no  confidence  in  him.  He 
has   brought  confusion    into  the  army  :  he  has  a  factious 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  1 37 

spirit."  When  I  returned  to  Italy,  I  learned  that  the  mis- 
understanding between  the  generals  and  the  officers  of  the 
two  divisions  of  Augereau  and  Bernadotte  had  extended  to  the 
private  soldiers,  and  that  they  taxed  one  another  mutually 
with  being  Jacobins  and  Royalists.  General  Augereau  had 
openly  declared  for  the  majority  of  the  Directory  :  Barras, 
who  reckoned  upon  him,  called  him  to  Paris  and  gave  him 
the  military  command. 

Government,  being  once  certain  of  the  support  of  the 
General,  marked  out  their  victims  ;  and  in  the  night  of  the 
17th  Fructidor,  orders  to  arrest  them  were  delivered.  As 
they  might  have  escaped  in  the  night  it  was  resolved  to 
wait  till  daybreak,  and  by  a  wretched  contrivance,  worthy 
of  a  melodrama,  this  outrage  was  immediately  announced 
by  the  discharge  of  a  four-and-twenty  pounder  on  the  plat- 
form of  the  Pont  Neuf.  The  explosion  broke  all  the 
windows  in  the  neighbourhood  and  spread  dismay  through 
the  city.  At  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  Director 
Barthelemy,  thirty  members  of  the  two  councils,  and  several 
writers,  were  sent  to  prison.  A  few  days  afterwards  a  part 
of  France  witnessed  their  representatives  dragged  along,  in 
trellised  carts,  like  wild  beasts.  They  were  taken  to  Roche- 
fort,  and  from  thence  to  Guyenne,  where  the  unwholesome 
climate  proved  fatal  to  some  of  these  unhappy  men.  Several 
of  the  victims  succeeded  in  escaping.    Carnot  found  a  refuge 

in  the  house  of  M.  ,  one  of  the  warmest  advocates  of 

the  arrest.  But  he  was  the  countryman  and  friend  of  the 
Director,  and  his  generous  soul  found  means  to  conciliate 
the  duties  of  friendship  with  the  passion  of  party  spirit. 

I  had  passed  the  evening  of  the  17th  with  Barras.  The 
ill-disguised  agitation  of  his  courtiers,  and  some  words 
which  I  caught  en  passant^  taught  me  the  secret  of  the 
night.  I  retired  early,  resolved  not  to  show  myself  the  next 
day,  as  I  did  not  wish  to  lead  any  one  to  suppose  by  my 
presence  that  General  Bonaparte  approved  of  such  unheard- 
of  violence.     I  went,  however,  to  Barras  on  the  day  after. 


138  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

As  soon  as  he  perceived  me  he  called  me  to  his  closet,  and 
then,  assuming  a  threatening  look  and  tone  of  voice,  he 
said  :  "  You  have  betrayed  the  Republic  and  your  General. 
For  the  last  six  weeks  Government  has  received  no  private 
letters  from  him.  Your  opinions  on  what  is  going  forward 
are  known  to  us,  and  you  have  undoubtedly  painted  our 
conduct  under  the  most  odious  colours.  I  declare  to  you 
that  last  night  the  Directory  deliberated  whether  you  ought 
not  to  share  the  fate  of  the  conspirators  that  are  on  the  road 
to  Guyenne.  Out  of  consideration  for  General  Bonaparte 
you  shall  remain  free,  but  I  have  just  sent  off  my  secretary 
to  explain  to  him  what  has  happened,  and  your  conduct." 
I  answered  very  coolly  :  "  You  have  been  deceived.  I  never 
betrayed  any  person  !  The  events  of  the  i8th  are  calami- 
tous. Nobody  shall  ever  persuade  me  that  Government 
has  a  right  to  punish  representatives  of  the  people  without 
trial,  and  in  contempt  of  the  laws.  I  have  not  written 
anything  else  for  the  last  six  weeks,  and  if  you  wish  to 
ascertain  the  fact  here  is  the  key  of  my  bureau  :  have  my 
papers  seized  ;  their  examination  will  cover  my  false  ac- 
cusers with  confusion."  This  moderate  and  firm  reply, 
but  especially  my  proposal,  pacified  him.  He  tried  to 
begin  an  explanation,  but  I  retired.  When  I  returned 
home  I  burned  my  correspondence  :  it  might  have  exposed 
my  general,  and  consequently  I  could  not  hesitate.  When 
that  was  done  I  sent  off,  as  an  express,  an  officer  of  the  staff 
who  was  at  Paris  to  acquaint  the  General  with  all  that 
had  happened  ;  and  not  wishing  that  my  sudden  departure 
should  be  attributed  to  fear,  I  remained  eight  days  longer 
in  town.  I  went,  however,  to  General  Augereau  to  inquire 
whether  he  had  any  commission  to  give  me.  Since  he  had 
been  in  Paris  he  was  like  a  man  beside  himself.  He  spoke 
to  me  of  the  General-in-chief  with  a  great  deal  of  flippancy, 
and  of  the  i8th  Fructidor  with  more  enthusiasm  than  he 
would  have  done  of  the  battle  of  Areola.  "  Do  you  know," 
he  said,  "  that  you  deserve  to  be  shot  for  your  behaviour  ? 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  139 

— but  you  need  not  be  uneasy,  and  you  may  rely  on  me." 
I  thanked  him  with  a  smile  ;  but  I  felt  it  would  be  useless 
to  put  his  kindness  to  the  proof,  and  the  next  day  I  set  off 
for  Italy. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

I  LEFT  Paris  on  the  ist  Vendemiaire,  just  as  the  Directory, 
the  Ministers,  and  all  the  constituted  authorities,  were 
going  to  the  Champ  de  Mars  to  celebrate  the  new  year, 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  time.  The  President  of 
the  Government  walked  up  to  the  altar  of  the  country  and 
made  a  speech,  in  which,  among  great  praise  bestowed  on 
the  armies,  were  frequently  introduced  threatening  insinua- 
tions against  the  enemies  of  Government,  and  abuse  against 
the  Sovereigns  at  war  with  the  Republic.  It  was  under 
the  canopy  of  heaven,  and  in  presence  of  the  Supreme 
Being  (to  use  the  then  fashionable  expression),  that  those 
sermons  were  preached  before  the  multitude,  which  never 
failed  to  be  very  numerous  if  the  weather  happened  to 
be  fine. 

1  was  very  anxious  to  be  on  the  other  side  of  the  Alps, 
that  I  might  know  what  the  General-in-chief  thought  of  my 
conduct.  At  the  passage  of  Mont  Cenis  I  met  an  aide-de- 
camp of  General  Augereau,  called  Deverine,  who  was  re- 
turning dismayed  with  the  harsh  reception  he  had  met  with 
from  General  Bonaparte,  and  who  acquainted  me  with  his 
misfortune.  He  had  been  sent  to  Italy  by  his  general  a 
few  days  after  the  i8th  Fructidor,  to  claim  from  the  pay- 
master of  the  army  600,000  francs  which  were  not  owing 
to  him,  and  which  he  thought  no  one  would  dare  to  refuse 
him.      The  same  officer  was  also  the  bearer  of  copies  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  141 

Clarke's  secret  correspondence  with  Carnot,  from  the  time 
of  his  entrance  into  Italy,  The  generals  of  the  army  to 
whom  Augereau  sent  copies  of  those  letters  were  very 
much  abused  in  them  by  the  military  diplomatist,  and  the 
General-in-chief  was  even  attacked  in  his  private  cha- 
racter. Enraged  against  Clarke,  they  thought  fit  to  deliver 
into  the  hands  of  their  chief  these  abusive  letters,  without 
dissembling  their  contempt  for  a  man  they  had  never  seen 
in  their  ranks.  General  Bonaparte,  having  heard  of  the 
demand  for  money  made  on  the  paymaster  of  the  army, 
ordered  him  not  to  pay  it  ;  and,  having  sent  for  the  poor 
aide-de-camp,  he  gave  him  a  severe  reprimand,  and  sent 
him  back  to  Paris  as  quickly  as  he  could.  The  young  man 
was  extremely  grieved  at  his  adventure,  and  bestowed  many 
imprecations  on  Augereau  for  having  exposed  him  by  such 
a  ridiculous  message. 

This  little  accident  gave  me  some  insight  into  General 
Bonaparte's  disposition,  and  I  hurried  the  more  to  rejoin 
him. 

I  was  entering  the  long  avenue  leading  to  the  castle 
of  Passeriano,  when  I  perceived  Clarke,  who  stopped  my 
carriage.  The  Directory  had  deprived  him  of  his  diplo- 
matic mission,  and  dismissed  him  as  a  general  on  half-pay. 
*'  I  am  in  the  most  wretched  condition,"  he  said  to  me, 
"  but  you  may  still  be  of  service  to  me.  Do  not  speak  of 
the  Directory's  being  incensed  against  me,  and  mention  my 
dismissal  as  a  natural  consequence  of  the  fall  of  Carnot. 
By  that  means  General  Bonaparte  will  keep  me  with  him. 
He  knows  the  secret  of  what  I  wrote  against  the  generals  ; 
he'll  silence  them."  Clarke  was  unfortunate.  I  had  been 
long  acquainted  with  him,  so  I  gave  him  my  word  that  I 
would  serve  him.  The  thing  was  not  altogether  very 
difficult :  the  General-in-chief  had  a  liking  for  him  ;  the 
Directory  forgot  him,  and  did  not  insist  on  his  leaving  the 
army. 

I  had  scarcely  arrived  at  the  castle  when  General  Bona- 


142  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNI  LAVALETTE. 

parte  sent  for  me  into  the  garden,  and  there  continued 
questioning  me  during  four  hours.  My  correspondence  had 
acquainted  him  with  all  the  particulars  of  the  event ;  but  I 
was  still  obliged  to  describe  the  hesitations,  fits  of  passion, 
and  almost  every  gesture  of  the  principal  actors.  His 
opinion  had  been  long  fixed  respecting  the  different  mem- 
bers of  the  Directory,  and  even  the  nature  of  the  Govern- 
ment itself.  "But,"  said  he,  "with  such  rude  forms,  why 
so  much  weakness  ?  Why,  then,  so  much  temerity  when 
firmness  would  have  been  sufficient.  There  was  cowardice 
in  not  daring  to  put  Pichegru  on  his  trial.  His  treason  was 
obvious,  and  the  witnesses  more  than  sufficient  to  convict 
him.  At  best,  if  the  High  Court  had  acquitted  him,  he 
would  nevertheless  have  been  dishonoured  in  the  face  of 
the  army  and  all  France.  Force  is  good  when  one  cannot 
do  otherwise  ;  but  when  one  is  free  to  choose,  justice  is 
better."  Then,  according  to  custom,  he  continued  for  a 
long  while  walking  about  in  silence.  At  last  he  added,  on 
taking  leave  of  me,  "  All  things  well  considered,  this  revo- 
lution will  prove  a  vigorous  stroke  to  the  nation."  When 
he  returned  to  the  castle  he  sent  for  Botteau,  the  secretary 
to  Barras  ;  had  a  long  conversation  with  him,  and  sent  him 
back  in  the  course  of  the  night. 

A  few  days  afterwards  Bernadotte  returned  from  Paris. 
I  soon  perceived  that  he  had  represented  events  under  a 
more  favourable  light  for  Government  than  I  had ;  but 
through  all  the  particulars  he  mentioned,  his  numerous 
animadversions  on  the  War  Department,  and  his  conjec- 
tures on  the  renewal  of  hostilities.  General  Bonaparte  had 
no  difficulty  in  penetrating  his  ambition  and  his  designs. 
The  Directory  had  loaded  him  with  praises  ;  the  Ministry  of 
the  War  Department  had  been  promised  him  ;  and  when,  a 
short  time  after,  the  General-in-chief  learned  the  nomina- 
tion of  General  Augereau  to  the  command  of  the  Army  of 
the  Rhine,  he  felt  that  with  so  weak  a  companion,  and  so 
ambitious   a  minister,  it  would  be  impossible  for   him  to 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  143 

advance  freely  and  to  obtain  glorious  results.  Peace  was 
consequently  resolved  on  in  his  mind.  I  am  far  from 
doubting  that  considerations  of  a  more  elevated  nature, 
and  especially  the  wish  to  give  peace  to  France,  then  sink- 
ing under  the  burthen  of  her  sacrifices,  swayed  his  resolu- 
tion ;  but  most  certainly  the  choice  of  those  two  men 
contributed  greatly  to  fix  it. 

During  the  long  unoccupied  days  that  the  diplomatic 
debates  aff'orded  him,  the  General-in-chief  used  to  pass  a 
part  of  his  evenings  with  the  learned  Monge,  whom  he  had 
summoned  near  his  person.  Among  the  varied  and  instruc- 
tive conversations  which  delighted  the  General-in-chief,  the 
plan  of  conquering  Egypt  so  often  presented  to  the  ministry 
in  the  reigns  of  Louis  XV.  and  Louis  XVI.  was  discussed. 
The  General,  who  always  went  to  the  bottom  of  everything, 
wished  to  read  all  that  had  been  written  on  the  subject. 
Monge,  having  held  for  some  time  the  portfolio  of  the 
Marine  Department,  was  enabled  to  procure  him  quickly  all 
the  most  interesting  papers.  The  measures  that  had  been 
proposed  appeared  faulty  to  the  General-in-chief ;  but  the 
fertility  of  his  mind  made  him  discover  the  advantages  he 
might  derive  from  his  position,  to  lay  down  a  plan  easier  of 
execution  and  better  in  its  result.  It  is  probable  that  the 
idea  was  at  that  very  moment  communicated  to  the  Direc- 
tory ;  for,  soon  after,  the  first  germs  of  its  execution  began 
secretly  to  develop  themselves.  M.  Pousseilgues,  late  Chief 
Clerk  of  the  Treasury,  was  at  that  time  Secretary  of  the 
French  Legation  at  Genoa.  This  gentleman  had  several 
relations,  merchants,  at  Malta.  He  was  called  to  the  head- 
quarters, and  from  thence  he  went  to  Malta.  His  mission 
was  to  sound  the  disposition  of  the  Government,  and  of  the 
French  Knights,  to  get  well  acquainted  with  the  spirit  of  the 
people,  and  to  ascertain  what  were  the  means  of  subsistence, 
or  the  obstacles  to  be  expected.  Finally,  he  was  to  do  his 
utmost  to  send  to  the  headquarters  some  of  the  Knights  of 
Malta  whom  Bonaparte  might  have  known  at  the  Military 


144  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

School.  This  mission  was  executed  with  great  secrecy  and 
intelhgence  ;  and  during  Pousseilgues'  absence,  secret  efforts 
in  furtherance  of  the  object  advanced  rapidly.  To  lead  curi- 
osity astray,  the  General  spoke  of  a  journey  he  proposed  to 
make  after  the  peace  was  concluded.  He  said  he  intended 
to  go  to  Germany  and  the  North  of  Europe  with  his  wife, 
Mongc,  Generals  Berthier  and  Marmont.  I  was  destined  to 
accompany  Eugene  Beauharnais,  who  at  that  time  was  no 
more  than  seventeen  years  of  age.  General  Bonaparte 
diverted  himself  with  setting  up  a  plan  of  studies  and  obser- 
vations, of  which  we  were  to  give  an  account  at  the  different 
places  where  we  were  to  meet.  That  plan  was  the  more 
reasonable,  as  General  Bonaparte  could  scarcely  live  at 
rest  in  France,  if  peace  lasted  any  time.  He  would  not 
have  been  able  to  avoid  the  clashing  of  the  different 
factions,  and  would  perhaps  have  been  forced  to  take 
part  in  the  measures  they  would  have  attempted,  with  a 
view  to  triumph.  The  Directory  was  afraid  of  him  ;  his 
glory  was  annoying ;  his  influence  over  the  enemy  could 
not  fail  to  be  immense.  On  the  other  hand,  he  was  too 
young  to  have  a  place  in  the  Directory,  and  the  idea  of 
being  the  minister  of  Barras  and  La  Reveillere  Lepaux  was 
not  to  be  borne. 

All  these  reflections  determined  him  to  make  peace,  not- 
withstanding the  contrary  orders  of  the  Directory.  Mis- 
understanding and  dissatisfaction  showed  themselves  in  all 
the  letters  he  addressed  to  the  Government.  His  unpub- 
lished correspondence  contains  three  of  those  letters,  in  which 
his  ill-humour  is  displayed  with  a  degree  of  energy  and  pride 
that  made  the  Directory  tremble,  and  was  the  source  of  the 
hatred  which  in  course  of  time  brought  on  the  1 8th  Brumaire. 
The  Directory  did  not  wish  to  sacrifice  Venice  to  Austria  : 
General  Bonaparte  wanted  to  retain  Mantua  ;  and  as  his 
instructions  did  not  prescribe  absolutely  that  he  should  not 
abandon  Venice,  he  took  upon  himself  to  sign,  on  the  4th 
Vendemiaire   (25th  September),  the  treaty  of   Passeriano, 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  VALE TTE .  145 

well  convinced  that  Government  would  not  dare  to  express 
discontent  openly  ;  and  that  France,  rejoiced  at  peace,  would 
overrule  with  her  applause  the  rumours  of  the  General's 
enemies.  According  to  our  calculations,  the  courier  of  the 
Directory  was  to  arrive  at  Passeriano  on  the  very  day  fixed  for 
the  signature.  Bonaparte  was  reckoning  with  me  the  dis- 
tance the  courier  had  to  go,  and  the  hour  he  might  arrive  ; 
and  he  candidly  acknowledged  the  perplexity  he  would  be  in, 
if  he  received  from  Government  an  order  not  to  go  any 
farther.  Recollecting  afterwards  with  disgust  the  slow  march 
of  Moreau  in  Germany,  a  few  months  before,  while  he  was 
at  Leoben,  and  the  appointment  of  Augereau  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  Rhine  army,  instead  of  Desaix,  whom  he  had 
recommended  in  the  most  pressing  manner,  he  added,  in  a 
tone  of  much  ill-humour,  "  I  see  very  well  that  they  are  pre- 
paring defeats  for  me.  That  man  (meaning  Augereau)  is 
incapable  of  conceiving  an  extensive  plan.  He  will  get  beaten, 
or  will  not  advance  at  all ;  all  the  Austrian  forces  will  then 
fall  upon  me,  and  my  beloved  Italy  will  be  the  grave  of  the 
French  army."  He  then  questioned  me  as  to  the  disposition 
of  that  part  of  France  through  which  I  had  travelled,  and  I 
assured  him  that  peace  would  be  received  with  enthusiasm  ; 
that  the  people  would  bestow  blessings  on  him,  and  that 
public  happiness  would  be  his  work. 

At  last,  on  the  27th  of  Vendemiaire,  the  ministers  of 
Austria  were  called  to  Passeriano,  and  the  secretaries  of  the 
tJivo  Legations  made  copies  of  the  treaty.  That  business 
lasted  the  whole  day.  The  General  was  delightfully  merry. 
No  more  discussions  !  He  remained  a  part  of  the  day  in  hir. 
saloon,  and  would  not  even  have  the  candles  lighted  when  it 
grew  dark.  We  sat  talking  and  telling  one  another  ghost 
stories,  like  a  family  living  in  an  old  castle.  At  last,  at  about 
ten  o'clock  at  night,  he  was  told  that  all  was  ready.  He  ran 
to  his  closet,  cheerfully  signed  the  document,  and  at  mid- 
night General  Berthier,  the  bearer  of  the  treaty,  was  on  the 
road  to  Paris.     Twelve  hours  afterwards,  the  courier  of  the 

II 


146  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

Directory  arrived.  The  orders  were  positive  ;  and,  if  they 
had  come  to  hand  the  day  before,  the  treaty  would  not  have 
been  signed.  The  next  day  the  General-in-chief  wrote  to 
the  Directory,  expressing  his  wish  to  leave  Italy,  and  to  come 
to  France  to  enjoy  a  little  repose  ;  but  it  was  absolutely 
necessary  first  to  organise  the  Cisalpine  Republic  ;  to  take 
prudential  measures  against  the  Pope  and  the  King  of 
Naples,  who  showed  the  most  hostile  intentions.  A  squad- 
ron, with  troops,  had  been  sent  to  Corfu,  Zante,  and  Cepha- 
lonia,  to  take  possession  of  these  Venetian  islands,  which 
had  been  given  to  France  by  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formio, 
and  the  General  did  not  think  fit  to  leave  Italy  before  he 
received  accounts  of  their  organisations. 

In  the  meanwhile,  M.  Pousseilgues  was  beginning  to  give 
the  required  information  respecting  the  disposition  of  the 
public  mind  at  Malta.     He  had  succeeded  in  sending  to  the 

General  M.  N ,  his  former  schoolfellow  at  the  Military 

School,  and  who  had  been  for  several  years  a  Knight  in  the 
island.  From  his  report,  and  the  letters  of  M.  Pousseilgues, 
it  appeared  that  the  Knights  of  the  French  tongue,  receiving 
neither  money  nor  reward  from  their  relations,  and  reduced 
to  the  most  miserable  shifts  to  live,  would  not  stand  much 
upon  their  fidelity  to  the  Order  ;  and  that  they  would  have 
no  objection  to  leave  the  island,  provided  they  got  leave  to 
return  to  France  ;  that  the  Grand  Master  Hompesch,  a  man 
devoid  of  strength  of  mind,  would  probably  make  no  use  of 
the  means  of  defence  he  possessed  in  his  military  position, 
and  the  land  and  sea  forces  he  had  at  his  disposal.  The  per- 
sons who  surrounded  him  had  an  influence  over  him,  so 
much  the  more  pernicious  on  account  of  the  desire  of  both 
the  English  and  the  Russians  to  gain  possession  of  the  island. 
The  Russian  consul  was  a  bold  and  active  man,  who 
frightened  the  Government  by  his  threats,  and  spread  dis- 
order and  terror  in  the  minds  of  every  one.  It  was  therefore 
of  great  consequence  to  General  Bonaparte  to  take  a  resolu- 
tion and  show  himself  before  the  island  with  an  imposing 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  147 

force,  that  might  decide  the  Grand  Master  in  favour  of 
France.  He  resolved  at  last  to  leave  Italy.  He  addressed  a 
proclamation  to  the  army,  and  left  it  under  the  command  of 
General  Kilmaine. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Bonaparte  crossed  Switzerland,  and  went  to  Rastadt :  his 
travelling  companions  were  Generals  Marmont,  Duroc,  my- 
self, his  secretary  Bourrienne,  and  Ivan  his  physician.  The 
only  place  at  which  he  stopped  was  Geneva,  where  the 
Directory  was  already  beginning,  by  underhand  manoeuvres, 
to  augment  the  number  of  its  adherents,  who  were  one  day 
to  effect  the  union  of  that  Republic  with  France.  Carnot 
had  sought  refuge  in  that  city,  and  General  Bonaparte  pri- 
vately sent  him  advice  to  leave  it  as  soon  as  possible,  so  as 
to  prevent  a  persecution  he  was  not  able  to  prevent. 

M.  Necker  was  then  living  on  his  estate  at  Coppet,  near 
Geneva.  He  still  looked  upon  himself  as  a  great  man,  and 
flattered  himself  that  the  Conqueror  of  Italy  would  pay  him 
a  visit.  I  do  not  know  what  was  at  that  time  General  Bona- 
parte's opinion  of  the  financial  talents  of  the  late  minister 
of  Louis  XVI.  ;  but  I  am  sure  he  had  but  little  esteem  for 
his  personal  character,  and  had  positively  declared  his  dis- 
approbation of  the  Sovereign's  choice  of  a  minister  for 
France.  We  had  a  great  desire  to  go  with  him  and  see  the 
seat  that  Voltaire  had  celebrated  in  the  latter  part  of  his 
life  ;  but  the  General-in-chief  had  also  a  grudge  against 
Voltaire.  He  therefore  thought  fit  not  to  make  either  of 
the  two  pilgrimages.  We  crossed  Switzerland  without  stop- 
ping anywhere.  However,  his  carriage  having  broken 
down  a  league  from  Morat,  we  travelled  that  part  of  the 
way  on  foot.  Though  it  was  no  more  than  seven  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  the   road  was   covered   with    people,    and 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  149 

especially  women,  who  had  passed  the  night  there,  to  get 
a  peep  at  the  Conqueror  of  Italy.  When  we  arrived  near 
the  bone-house,  where  lie  deposited  the  remains  of  the 
Burgundian  soldiers  killed  in  the  famous  battle  of  Morat, 
we  found  a  General  d'Erlac,  of  the  celebrated  family  of  that 
name,  who  was  waiting  for  the  General-in-chief,  in  the 
expectation  that  he  would  stop  to  see  the  monument. 
General  Bonaparte  not  being  in  military  uniform,  the 
stranger,  without  knowing  him,  gave  him  all  the  par- 
ticulars he  could  wish  respecting  the  victory  of  the  Swiss. 
After  he  had  examined  the  military  position,  he  only  said, 
"  Charles  the  Bold  must  have  been  a  great  madman  !  " 
This  reflection,  uttered  in  a  firm  tone,  apprised  M.  d'Erlac 
that  he  was  in  the  presence  of  the  hero  he  had  so  much 
wished  to  see.  A  respectful  bow,  and  a  compliment  ex- 
pressed with  emotion,  were  the  only  homage  he  was  enabled 
to  pay  him,  for  the  General  proceeded  on  his  journey. 

Two  days  afterwards  we  passed  through  Offenbach,  the 
headquarters  of  Augereau,  the  general-in-chief  of  the 
Rhine  army.  General  Bonaparte  stopped  before  his  door, 
and  sending  him  word  that  he  was  there,  but  in  too  great  a 
hurry  to  get  out  of  his  carriage,  he  added  that  he  wished  to 
see  him  for  one  moment.  The  lieutenant  of  the  general- 
in-chief  had,  however,  already  begun  to  forget  him,  and  his 
only  answer  was  that  he  was  dressing.  This  unpoliteness 
was  but  ill  repaired  the  next  day,  when  he  sent  his  aide-de- 
camp. Augereau's  hatred  of  General  Bonaparte  augmented 
in  proportion  with  his  wrongs,  and  only  ended  with  his  life. 

By  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formio  it  was  agreed  that  a 
congress  should  assemble  at  Rastadt  to  treat  of  peace 
between  the  Empire  and  the  French  Republic.  The  choice 
of  the  place  recalled  to  memory  the  celebrated  period  of 
1707,  when  the  Castle  of  Rastadt  united  on  its  walls  the 
Duke  de  Villars  and  Prince  Eugene  of  Savoy.  This  time 
the  Emperor  did  not  think  fit  to  be  represented  by  one  of 
his  warriors.     They  had  all   of  them  been  beaten  by  the 


1 50  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LAV  ALE  TTE. 

French.  Count  Metternich  represented  the  Roman  Em- 
peror, and  Count  Latorbach  the  King  of  Bohemia  and 
Hungary.  Count  Cobentzel  came  there  with  other  nego- 
tiators, who  had  signed  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formio.  On 
the  side  of  France  there  was  M.  Treilhard,  late  member  of 
the  Convention,  who  not  only  had  voted  for  the  death  of 
the  King,  but  who  had  even  boasted  at  the  time  that  it  was 
he  who  had  persuaded  the  Duke  of  Orleans  to  give  the  same 
vote.  He  was  a  very  learned  lawyer,  and  a  man  of  rigid 
character.  The  criminal  code  was  composed  by  him.  He 
was  far  from  being  eloquent,  and  had  not  even  an  easy  style 
of  elocution.  He  was  accompanied  by  M.  Bonnier  d'Arco, 
a  harsh  man,  of  a  violent,  and  frequently  untractable 
humour.  These  two  plenipotentiaries  were  all  but  pleasing 
to  the  diplomatists  covered  with  stars,  and  whose  ancient 
names  were  preceded  by  their  high-sounding  titles.  The 
contrast  was  singular  ;  for  the  two  ambassadors  of  the 
Republic  never  wore  any  but  round  hats,  and  their  shoes 
were  fastened  with  strings  ;  but  the  other  nations  were 
obliged  to  submit  to  the  French  Republic,  and  the  railleries 
to  which  these  two  gentlemen  were  exposed  were  never 
expressed  in  their  presence.  The  General-in-chief  had  no 
desire  to  remain  at  Rastadt.  The  obscure  discussions  of 
the  negotiation,  and  the  artful  finesse  of  the  German 
chancery,  would  have  been  a  sad  recompense  for  the  fatigue 
he  had  suffered  in  the  army,  and  a  still  sadder  one  for  his 
victories.  Nothing  therefore  took  place  but  mere  form. 
Only  one  remarkable  circumstance  happened  during  his 
short  stay.  The  King  of  Sweden,  in  his  qualit}'  of  the 
Grand  Duke  of  Pomerania,  had  sent  to  the  Congress  or 
Rastadt  Count  Fersen,  formerly  celebrated  at  the  Court  ot 
France,  and  who  had  acted  so  conspicuous  a  part  in  the 
famous  journey  to  Varennes.  The  hatred  of  his  Sovereign 
for  France  was  a  well-known  fact,  and  the  Count  could  not 
be  agreeable.  He  happened  to  express  the  fatal  wish  of  his 
being   presented  to   the    General.      When    he  was   in    his 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  151 

presence,  the  latter  said  to  him,  "  How  could  you  expect, 
sir,  you  could  be  able  to  serve  the  interests  of  Sweden — 
you  who  are  only  known  by  your  affection  for  a  government 
iustly  proscribed  in  France,  and  by  your  useless  exertions 
for  its  re-establishment  ?  "  M.  de  Fersen  replied  by  a  few 
words  which  we  did  not  hear.  General  Berthier,  who  was 
present,  wishing  to  relieve  him,  recalled  to  his  memory  that 
they  had  fought  together  in  America.  By  that  means  the 
ambassador  retired  a  little  less  perplexed,  and  the  next  day 
he  left  Rastadt,  whither  he  did  not  return  until  some  time 
after. 

Two  days  after  this  scene  General  Bonaparte  set  off  for 
Paris,  leaving  me  at  the  Congress  with  M.  Ferret,  Secretary 
of  the  Legation  at  Campo  Formio.  "  I  cannot  take  you 
with  me  to  Paris,"  he  said  ;  "  the  Directory  has  not  yet 
forgot  your  conduct  on  the  i8th  Fructidor,  and  this  is  not 
the  fit  moment  for  justifying  yourself.  I  shall  make  you 
amends  for  this  hereafter.  Remain  here.  Write  me  all 
you  hear  of  the  diplomatic  gossip.  You  will  not  easily 
find  again  the  same  opportunity  of  gaining  instruction.  I 
leave  Avith  you  some  of  my  servants,  for  I  want  people  to 
think  I  shall  soon  come  back." 

His  intention  was  not,  however,  to  return  to  Rastadt. 
The  diflSculties  brought  in  by  the  insinuations  of  M.  de 
Thougeat  every  moment  impeded  the  negotiations.  After 
three  months'  debates,  nothing  was  agreed  on  as  to  the 
manner  of  concluding.  The  deputies  of  the  powers  of  the 
second  order  in  Germany,  a  great  many  members  of  the 
"  immediate  "  nobility,  and  the  numerous  and  rich  holders  of 
livings,  sought  support  from  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  had 
neither  the  will  nor  the  power  to  protect  them.  Convinced 
of  the  hatred  of  the  Emperor,  and  of  his  resolution  to 
sacrifice  them,  the  greater  number  amongst  them  sought 
another  support  by  secret  negotiations  with  the  minister  of 
France. 

My  position  had  become  very  difficult.     I  was  detested  by 


152  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  members  of  the  Directory,  and  consequently  mistrusted 
by  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  Republic.  I  could  not 
mention  the  real  motive  that  kept  me  at  Rastadt.  My 
presence  at  the  Congress  was  displeasing  to  Messrs.  Treil- 
hard  and  Bonnier  ;  and  the  ministers  of  Germany,  obliged 
by  their  position  to  offer  a  kind  reception  to  the  French  who 
resided  with  them,  looked  upon  me  as  their  representative  ; 
and,  finding  it  less  painful  to  have  a  connection  with  an 
officer  who  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  General  Bonaparte, 
they  bestowed  on  me  alone  the  attention  they  ought  to  have 
divided  amongst  us,  and  left  nothing  but  cold  ceremony  for 
the  others.  Consequently,  I  was  continually  in  company 
with  Count  Cobentzel  and  the  family  of  Metternich.  But 
I  took  care  to  acquaint  General  Bonaparte  with  my  new 
position.  He  approved  of  it,  recommending  me,  however, 
to  act  with  due  discretion.  I  shall  not  repeat  the  particulars 
of  what  took  place  during  five  months  in  this  small  German 
town.  Diplomatic  prattle,  debates,  generally  without  result, 
grand  dinners,  and  ennui,  would  by  no  means  interest  the 
reader.  However,  he  may  possibly  be  glad  to  know  what  I 
have  since  learned  respecting  the  murder  of  the  plenipoten- 
tiaries of  the  Republic.  These  particulars  were  communi- 
cated to  me  by  the  Prince  of  Leiningen  and  the  Count  of 
Solms  Laubach,  with  whom  I  was  very  intimate.  They 
were  at  Rastadt  on  their  own  business,  and  showed  in  that 
catastrophe  much  courage  and  devotion  for  our  unfortunate 
ministers. 

These  ministers  had  eagerly  taken  advantage  of  the  secret 
proceedings  of  the  ministers  of  the  second  and  third  rank 
and  several  members  of  the  nobility  of  Germany.  In  hopes 
of  being  spared  if  the  war  broke  out  again,  they  promised  to 
side  with  France.  These  secret  dealings  could  not  escape 
me,  as,  by  the  situation  of  my  apartments  in  the  castle, 
I  frequently  met  the  Secretaries  of  Legation  of  the  small 
Princes  of  Germany  sneaking  in  at  Messieurs  Treilhard  and 
Bonnier's  lodgings,  which  were  not  very  distant  from  mine. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  153 

When  M.  Roberjot  came  instead  of  M.  Treilhard,  those 
manoeuvres  grew  still  more  frequent.  He  had  filled  several 
diplomatic  missions  ;  and  his  manners  were  more  polite  and 
attractive  than  those  of  his  colleagues.  Count  Lehrbach,  a 
man  of  determined  character,  full  of  energy,  and  a  sworn 
enemy  of  France,  was  undoubtedly  soon  acquainted  with 
the  disposition  of  the  hidden  foes  of  Austria.  The  more  the 
negotiations  advanced,  the  more  evident  it  appeared  that 
the  peace  would  not  be  of  long  standing  ;  and  the  war  was 
already  secretly  resolved,  when  the  news  came  that  General 
Bonaparte  had  embarked  for  the  East,  with  some  of  the 
most  able  French  generals,  and  thirty  thousand  of  the  best 
troops  of  the  Republic.  Count  Lehrbach  left  Rastadt  a 
short  time  before  the  commencement  of  hostilities,  and  it 
can  scarcely  be  doubted  but  that  it  was  he  who  induced 
the  Austrian  Cabinet  to  resolve  to  arrest  the  ministers  of 
France. 

A  regiment  of  hussars  of  Szeckler,  a  sort  of  pandiers, 
recruited  on  the  frontiers  of  Turkey,  already  surrounded 
Rastadt,  when  the  French  ministers  received  an  order  to 
leave  the  place.  The  Baden  commander  of  the  town  had  in 
vain  advised  them  to  set  off  in  the  morning,  that  they  might 
cross  the  Rhine  before  nightfall.  Their  preparations  caused 
delay  :  they  were  encumbered  with  papers  they  wished  to 
keep,  and  they  were  besides  convinced  that  their  sacred 
character  of  ambassadors  would  shelter  them  from  insult. 
The  day  was  far  advanced  when  they  departed.  At  a  few 
leagues  from  Rastadt  they  were  stopped  and  murdered.  I 
am  persuaded  that  the  Austrian  Government  did  not  give 
an  order  for  murdering  them,  but  only  for  seizing  their 
papers  ;  while  the  soldiers,  finding  a  great  deal  of  money 
about  them,  urged  by  avarice,  and  probably  intoxicated, 
thought  the  best  way  would  be  to  stifle  their  complaints  by 
murdering  them. 

I  arrived  at  Paris  about  a  month  before  our  departure  for 
Toulon. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

I  SHALL  speak  hereafter  of  my  marriage  with  Mademoiselle 
Emilia  Beauharnais.  The  preparations  of  the  Eastern 
expedition  had  been  made  very  secretly.  The  Directory 
had  not  even  entrusted  to  their  clerks  the  task  of  copying 
the  various  orders  that  were  to  be  transcribed,  and  the  secret 
had  been  so  well  kept  that  England  in  no  way  suspected  our 
design,  nor  could  take  any  means  to  prevent  it.  Fourteen 
ships  of  the  line  were  assembled  at  Toulon.  Each  ship  took 
only  half  the  necessary  number  of  seamen,  the  rest  of  the 
crews  was  composed  of  all  the  regiments  of  the  army. 
Admiral  Brueys  commanded  the  fleet  ;  and  the  officers  who 
served  under  his  orders,  all  full  of  ardour,  had  most  of  them 
already  acquired  reputation  as  clever  men. 

Besides  the  fleet  of  Toulon,  troops  who  were  embarked  at 
Genoa,  Ajaccio,  and  Civita  Vecchia  had  received  orders  to 
join  the  fleet  before  its  arrival  at  Malta.  I  embarked  on 
board  the  frigate  Arternisa^  which  was  a  sort  of  aide-de-camp 
to  the  admiral.  The  flotilla  of  General  Desaix  not  having 
come  to  the  rendezvous,  the  Artemisa  was  sent  on  discovery. 
General  Murat  joined  us  ;  and  when  we  were  not  far  from 
Malta,  he  obliged  the  captain  to  give  him  a  boat,  that  he 
might  go  down  to  the  outward  defences  of  Valetta.  This 
was  an  act  of  imprudence  :  he  was  also  guilty  of  another, 
which  I  shall  mention,  because  it  gives  an  idea  of  the 
character  of  that  general.  While  cruising  before  Malta^ 
the  only  man-of-war  the  Order  possessed  came  up  to  us, 
wanting  to  get  into   the  port.      Murat  made  a   signal  for 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  155 

her  to  steer  leeward  of  our  frigate.  This  was  contrary  to 
custom  :  but  the  captain  of  the  Maltese  ship  being  taken 
unawares,  and  intimidated  at  sight  of  the  tricoloured  flag, 
obeyed  the  signal  without  hesitation  ;  on  his  arrival  he 
spread  the  alarm  ;  and  the  city,  which  we  might  have  taken 
by  surprise,  was  in  a  state  of  defence  when  we  landed. 

On  the  loth  of  June  the  fleet  at  last  appeared  in  sight  of 
Malta.  The  aspect  of  so  large  a  fleet,  with  four  hundred 
transports  and  a  formidable  army,  threw  the  Grand  Master 
and  his  council  into  the  greatest  dismay,  and  spread  confu- 
sion among  the  Knights  and  inhabitants  of  the  island.  The 
disorder  augmented,  and  a  French  Knight  had  already  been 
murdered  by  the  populace  of  the  city,  when  the  General-in- 
chief  sent  his  aide-de-camp,  Junot,  to  summon  the  Grand 
Master  to  open  the  gates.  The  answer  being  that  the 
Government  was  resolved  to  defend  the  place,  a  part  of  the 
army  landed,  attacked  all  the  small  forts  which  defended  the 
shore,  took  possession  of  them,  and  soon  after  invested  the 
town.  The  fortifications  of  Valetta  consist  of  a  ditch  dug 
in  the  rock,  the  dimensions  of  which  make  an  attack 
extremely  difficult.  It  was  quite  impossible  to  open  the 
trenches,  as  all  the  island  together  could  not  have  procured 
us  wood  nor  even  earth  enough  to  establish  our  batteries 
and  shelter  us  from  the  fire  of  the  fortress.  Fortunately, 
the  Grand  Master  was  seized  with  fear.  The  Russian 
Consul  had  already  required  that  the  island  should  be 
delivered  over  to  some  Russian  troops  who  were  expected. 
The  Grand  Master,  fancying  that  the  Order  of  Malta  was 
irretrievably  lost,  and  forgetting  that  from  one  moment  to 
another  an  English  fleet  might  arrive  and  deliver  him, 
resolved  to  sign  a  capitulation  with  General  Bonaparte. 
The  treaty  was  soon  concluded  ;  and,  two  days  after  our 
arrival,  the  army  was  master  of  the  city  and  forts,  and  the 
fleet  at  anchor  in  the  fine  harbour  of  Valetta.  General 
Caff"arelli,  on  examining  more  minutely  the  fortifications, 
said  to  the  General-in-chicf — *'  It  is  very  lucky  for  us  that 


156  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

there  were  people  in  the  place  to  open  the  gates  for  us  ;  for 
if  it  had  been  deserted,  the  army  would  never  have  got 
in,  notwithstanding  all  our  exertions."  Next  day  the  Grand 
Master  and  all  his  officers  went  on  board  of  a  brig,  and  I 
received  orders  to  conduct  them,  with  the  frigate  Artcmisa, 
to  the  extremity  of  the  Adriatic  Gulf,  that  they  might  not 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Barbary  corsairs,  who  would  have 
considered  them  glorious  trophies.  Two  days  after  our  de- 
parture we  met  a  Ragusan  vessel,  from  whom  we  learned 
that  she  had  seen  in  the  morning  an  English  fleet  steering 
towards  Malta.  Fortunately  the  army  and  its  chief  were 
already  gone  off.  Our  great  fleet,  with  our  four  hundred 
transports,  sailed  during  the  night  along  the  north  coast 
of  Candia,  while  Nelson  was  waiting  for  it  on  the  south. 

It  was  long  discussed  in  the  fleet  what  would  have  been 
the  result  if  Nelson  had  met  us.  The  military  officers,  and 
especially  those  who  were  on  board  the  ships  of  the  line, 
were  convinced  that  we  should  have  beaten  the  English 
fleet :  General  Bonaparte  supported  that  opinion  by  all  the 
authority  his  name  could  add  to  it.  I  must,  however, 
acknowledge  that  I  never  shared  it.  Four  hundred  trans- 
ports, the  captains  of  which  were  but  in  a  small  part 
Frenchmen,  and  which  extended  along  all  points  of  the 
horizon,  would  quickly  have  been  dispersed  by  the  English 
frigates.  In  spite  of  all  our  exertions,  we  should  have 
experienced  great  losses.  The  Egyptian  expedition  would 
no  more  have  been  practicable  ;  but  the  army  might  have 
thrown  itself  on  the  coast  of  Sicily,  and  have  made  itself 
master  of  that  island.  The  cowardice  of  the  Grand  Master, 
and  the  wretched  defence  of  the  Knights  of  Malta,  were  a 
stroke  of  fortune  that  seemed  to  protect  the  destiny  of  the 
General-in-chief. 

I  had  received  an  order  to  inspect  the   fortifications  ot 
Corfu,  and   the   magazines  with  which  that  city  was   pro- 
vided.'     From  thence  I  was  to  go  and  acquaint  Ali,  the 
'  See  Appendix,  No.  I. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  157 

Pacha  of  Janina,  with  the  conquest  of  Egypt,  and  try  to 
persuade  him,  that  as  we  remained  friends  with  the  Grand 
Seigneur,  it  was  his  interest  not  to  break  with  France.  My 
mission  was  difficult  and  dangerous.  We  knew  Ah  Pacha 
for  a  man  incapable  of  keeping  faith.  He  Avas  then  on  a 
good  understanding  with  the  troops  dispersed  through  the 
Ionian  Islands,  and  the  coast  of  that  part  of  Greece  over 
which  he  had  command  ;  but  it  was  certain  he  would 
abandon  us  and  become  our  enemy  as  soon  as  his  policy 
might  show  him  any  advantage  on  the  other  side.  When  I 
arrived  at  Corfu  I  met  General  Chabot,  who  asked  me 
whether  I  was  the  bearer  of  rich  presents  for  Ali  Pacha,  and 
of  a  great  deal  of  money  to  pave  my  way  ;  for  he  added, 
"  These  are  the  best  arguments  you  can  make  use  of  with 
him.''  These  were  precisely  the  things  General  Bona- 
parte had  forgot.  "  But,"  said  he,  "you  need  not  be  uneasy  : 
the  Pacha  is  on  the  Danube,  fighting,  much  against  his  will, 
at  Udin,  with  Paswan  Ogla."  This  account  took  a  great 
burden  off  my  mind.  I  hastened  to  execute  the  other  part 
of  my  mission,  and  got  to  Egypt. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

At  a  few  leagues  from  Aboukir,  whither  I  had  received 
orders  to  go,  the  frigate  I  was  on  board  of  was  chased  by  an 
English  vessel  that  came  to  reconnoitre  the  fleet.  This  hap- 
pened on  the  2ist  of  July.  I  went  on  board  the  Orient  to 
see  Admiral  Brueys,  the  commander  of  the  fleet.  I  had  not 
expected  to  find  the  fleet  moored  in  the  roads  of  Aboukir. 
The  following  is  word  for  word  what  the  Admiral  said  to  me. 
"  When  General  Bonaparte  left  Alexandria  to  penetrate  into 
the  Desert,  he  gave  me  the  choice  either  to  enter  the  old 
port  of  Alexandria,  or  to  go  with  the  fleet  to  Corfu,  after 
having  landed  all  the  goods  and  provisions  of  the  army. 
Since  that  moment  I  have  received  no  account  whatever 
from  the  army,  nor  its  leader.  I  have  sounded  the  passes  of 
the  old  port  ;  but  it  can  only  be  entered  with  a  north-west 
wind,  and  by  boats  :  this  has  taken  up  much  time,  and  the 

is  the  only  ship  that  has  as  yet  been  able  to  get  into 

the  port.  It  is  quite  impossible  for  n,  to  leave  the  coast  of 
Egypt  before  I  receive  accounts  from  the  army.  Can  I  set 
off  and  enter  a  port  of  Europe,  without  having  any  satis- 
factory news  to  give  France  and  her  Government  ?  If,  what 
I  scarcely  think  possible.  General  Bonaparte  were  to  find  in 
the  country  insurmountable  obstacles,  and  if  he  were  obliged 
to  re-embark,  would  it  not  be  a  criminal  act  on  my  part  to 
deprive  him  of  the  only  means  of  retreat  he  has  left  at  my 
disposal  ?  I  have  seen  to-day  an  English  vessel  for  the  first 
time  since  I  have  been   here.     Most  probably  I   shall   be 

158 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  1 59 

attacked  to-morrow  or  the  day  after.  I  shall  send  for  the 
vessel  that  is  in  the  old  port.  If  you  follow  my  advice,  you 
will  remain  with  us.  We  have  sanguine  hopes  of  success, 
and  you  will  enjoy  the  satisfaction  of  carrying  to  your  Gene- 
ral the  intelligence  of  a  glorious  victory.  As  I  could  neither 
enter  the  old  port  of  Alexandria,  nor  go  away,  I  have  taken 
up  a  sort  of  military  position  here.  I  have  been  forced  to 
moor  the  ships  ;  because,  having  left  Toulon  with  half-crews, 
I  have  not  men  enough  to  fight  sailing."  To  this  Admiral 
Gantheaume  added :  "  We  are  at  some  distance  from  the 
island  you  see  yonder,  because  the  ground  there  will  not 
hold  our  anchors,  and  it  would  be  dangerous  to  run  nearer 
to  the  shore  ;  but  we  are  defended  from  that  side  by  a  for- 
midable battery." 

After  my  conversation  with  the  Admiral,  I  went  during 
the  night,  alone,  over  that  immense  ship,  which  carried  130 
guns.  I  did  not  meet  a  single  person  upon  deck  ;  it 
appeared  to  me  as  if  I  were  in  the  Church  of  Notre  Dame. 
A  circumstance  that  made  the  solitude  still  more  singular 
was  that,  before  our  landing,  there  had  been  2,145  persons 
on  board,  and  at  that  moment  there  were  not  above  six  hun- 
dred. The  more  I  examined  that  vast  floating  citadel,  the 
less  inclined  I  felt  to  take  part  in  the  battle.  In  fact,  I  was 
not  a  sea  officer,  and  my  duty  was  to  join  my  general.  There 
would  be  no  want  of  messengers  to  bring  him  intelligence  of 
a  victory,  whilst  I  should  reap  much  blame  and  very  little 
pity,  if  by  some  disaster  or  other  I  were  to  be  taken  prisoner 
or  killed.  I  went  therefore  to  the  Admiral  and  said  to  him  : 
"  After  mature  consideration,  I  am  resolved  to  continue  my 
journey.  I  must  give  an  account  of  my  mission,  and  the 
position  wherein  I  found  you."  He  gave  me  a  boat  to  carry 
me  to  Rosetta  ;  but  I  soon  repented  the  step  I  had  taken. 
The  swell  occasioned  by  the  meeting  of  the  Nile  with  the 
sea  was  then  very  strong,  and  a  violent  tempest  added  to  the 
danger  that  threatened  us.  A  vessel  laden  with  provisions 
had  just  been  totally  lost  ;  another   much  larger,  which  was 


i6o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

still  struggling,  was  kind  enough  to  throw  us  a  rope,  that 
we  might  fasten  the  boat  to  her,  and  avoid  running  out  to 
sea,  where  we  might  go  to  the  bottom,  or  split  upon  the 
breakers.  We  remained  seventeen  hours  in  that  situation, 
when  at  last,  the  sea  growing  a  little  less  boisterous,  I  pro- 
posed getting  forward  at  a  quick  rate,  so  as  to  gain  the 
mouth  of  the  Nile.  The  sailors  were  not  much  pleased  at 
my  plan  ;  but  I  was  seconded  by  the  ensign  who  commanded 
the  boat,  and  who  was  a  young  man  full  of  energy  and 
intrepidity.  The  first  billow  nearly  submerged  us.  One 
more  effort  was  necessary  ;  and  while  the  sailors,  pale  as 
death,  continued  rowing  with  vigour,  one  of  my  travelling 
companions,  an  officer  in  the  Guides,  fell  on  his  knees  and 
began  the  Lord's  Prayer,  of  which  he  did  not  omit  a  single 
word.  When  the  danger  was  over,  his  courage  returned, 
and,  ashamed  of  an  act  he  could  not  himself  comprehend,  he 
whispered  to  me  :  "I  am  now  thirty-eight  years  old,  and 
from  my  sixth  year  I  never  said  a  prayer  in  my  life.  I  can- 
not conceive  how  I  recollected  that  one  ;  and  I  do  declare 
that  at  the  present  moment  I  should  not  be  able  to  repeat  a 
single  word  of  it."  This  officer  was  nevertheless  one  of  the 
bravest  of  the  Egyptian  army.  I  think  he  died  a  general  of 
brigade  in  Spain. 

At  Rosetta  I  found  that  the  commander,  Bidon  Julien, 
knew  no  more  about  the  army  than  Admiral  Brueys  did. 
"  I  am,  however,  easy,"  he  said  to  me.  "  The  inhabitants  are 
perplexed,  and  that  is  a  sure  sign  that  we  are  victorious. 
You  have  nothing  to  fear  on  the  Nile  :  I  shall  give  you  an 
armed  vessel  to  carry  you  to  Cairo,  of  which  place  the  army 
must  by  this  time  have  taken  possession."  The  day  after  I 
embarked  on  the  Nile,  I  met  Arrighi  (now  Duke  of  Paduaj, 
who  had  come  from  Cairo,  and  was  conveying  to  the 
Admiral  an  account  of  our  victories,  with  the  reiterated 
order  to  go  to  Corfu.  When  I  told  the  General-in-chief  that 
the  fleet  was  still  at  Aboukir,  he  showed  signs  of  great  ill- 
humour  ;  and  fearing  that  Arrighi  might  encounter  diffi- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  i6r 

culties  in  his  way,  and  not  join  the  Admiral  quick  enough, 
he  sent  off  that  very  night  his  aide-de-camp,  JuHen,  with 
fresh  orders.  The  unfortunate  youth  went  down  the  Nile 
in  a  djerme,  escorted  by  a  dozen  soldiers.  His  want  of  ex- 
perience was  the  cause  of  his  death.  Having  entered  the 
branch  of  Alexandria,  he  thought  he  might  rest  for  the 
night  ;  but  the  Arabs  murdered  him  and  his  escort.  In  him 
General  Bonaparte  lost  one  of  the  best  officers  of  his  staff, 
and  I  a  most  excellent  friend. 

The  English  were  above  a  fortnight  without  showing 
themselves  ;  and  Arrighi  found  the  Admiral,  who  was 
convinced  that  they  had  counted  the  number  of  his  ships, 
and  did  not  dare  to  engage.  It  was  not  until  the  first  of 
August  that  Nelson  appeared  off  Alexandria  with  fourteen 
ships  of  the  line  and  several  frigates.  The  particulars  of 
the  battle,  at  which,  however,  I  was  not  present,  are  too 
well  known  to  require  my  repeating  them  here. 

Although  but  a  few  days  had  elapsed  since  the  arrival  of 
the  General-in-chief  in  Cairo,  he  had  been  preceded,  as  he 
was  everywhere  else,  by  such  strict  orders  and  excellent  ad- 
ministration, that  the  soldiers,  and  in  general  all  the  French, 
were  accustomed  to  walk  through  the  metropolis  and  its 
environs  without  feeling  the  slightest  uneasiness.  The  city 
of  Cairo  presented  a  curious  spectacle  to  the  Europeans 
who  saw  it  for  the  first  time.  I  had  landed  at  Boulack  on 
the  Nile,  at  a  great  distance  from  the  square  of  El  Bekir, 
where  General  Bonaparte  lived.  The  narrow  streets  of  the 
city  were  filled  with  camels  fastened  to  one  another  in  long 
rows,  carrying  all  sorts  of  goods  on  their  backs,  and  led  by 
a  single  man.  The  inhabitants  passed  through  the  small 
vacant  spaces  with  slow  gravity  and  with  their  pipes  in 
their  mouths  ;  while  our  soldiers,  mounted  on  donkeys, 
galloped  chet-rfully,  sliding  between  the  camels  and  bursting 
into  roars  of  laughter.  A  shocking  dust  and  an  offensive 
smell  of  mummies  suffocated  us.  Here  and  there  a  few 
grave  Mussulmans,  seated  on   their   mules,   opened   them- 

12 


i62  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

selves  a  passage  by  the  aid  of  their  stick-bearers,  who  struck 
all  that  opposed  them,  and  even  the  men  who  did  not  rise 
at  their  approach.  Beggars,  carefully  hiding  their  faces, 
and  little  inclined  to  discover  what  ours  show,  pestered  the 
passers-by  with  their  singular  cries,  and  seemed  to  be 
soliciting  alms  with  angry  imprecations. 

Mourad  Bey,  after  the  battle  of  the  Pyramids,  had  sought 
refuge  in  Upper  Egypt.  He  had  still  with  him  several 
thousand  Mamelukes.  His  influence  over  people  was  con- 
siderable ;  and,  as  it  might  prove  dangerous,  the  General- 
in-chief,  while  he  was  preparing  against  him  the  expedition 
entrusted  to  Desaix,  tried  to  gain  him  over  by  secret  negotia- 
tions. His  legitimate  wife  and  his  whole  harem  remained 
at  Cairo.  Bonaparte  sent  Eugene  Beauharnais  to  the  wife 
Avith  his  compliments,  and  the  assurance  that  she  had 
nothing  to  fear.  She  received  Eugene  politely,  and,  in 
return  for  the  presents  the  General  in-chief  had  sent  her, 
she  gave  him  her  husband's  beautiful  shawl  and  some  of  his 
arms.  But  the  respect  shown  to  the  wife  of  Mourad  Bey 
had  no  effect  on  that  chief.  The  vigour  and  talent  of 
General  Desaix,  and  the  courage  of  our  troops,  who  more 
than  once  forced  him  to  retire  to  the  Oasis,  and  reduced  his 
followers  to  a  few  faithful  friends,  could  not  persuade  that 
intrepid  leader  to  lend  an  ear  to  any  arrangement  whatever  ; 
and  it  was  not  until  after  two  years'  conflict  and  adversity 
that  he  had  at  last  consented  to  come  to  an  understanding 
with  the  head  of  the  French  army  ;  but  at  that  time  General 
Bonaparte  had  already  left  Egypt. 

It  had  been  supposed  that  in  so  fruitful  a  country  all  the 
wealth  of  the  East  would  be  accumulated.  Instead  of  that, 
we  found  misery  everywhere.  The  government  of  the 
Mamelukes  was  devoid  of  either  common  sense  or  modera- 
tion. Besides  the  miri  and  another  tax  which  the  people  of 
Egypt  were  obliged  to  pay  to  the  Grand  Seigneur,  they  were 
loaded  with  imposts,  which  the  caprice  and  tyranny  of  the 
subordinate  officers  were  perpetually  inventing.     The  Beys, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  163 

who  were  the  chiefs  of  the  Mamelukes,  the  officers  quartered 
in  the  different  provinces,  and  even  the  private  horsemen 
who  were  sent  to  maintain  order  in  the  villages,  thought 
themselves  entitled  to  impose  and  levy  taxes  more  or  less 
heavy.  The  fcUah^  or  peasant,  groaned  under  the  load  of 
these  numerous  exactions  ;  and  if  he  was  unfortunate 
enough  to  have  children  of  either  sex  that  drew  the  at- 
tention of  the  leaders,  they  were  taken  away  from  him  to 
satisfy  their  brutal  lust. 

One  of  the  first  measures  of  the  General-in-chief  was  to 
set  the  people  secure  in  regard  to  their  property,  to  make 
them  comprehend  the  plain  and  judicious  system  of  taxation 
about  to  be  established,  and  to  acquaint  them  that  for  the 
arbitrary  laws  to  which  they  were  subject  under  the  Mame- 
lukes would  be  substituted,  in  each  province,  divans  com- 
posed of  the  most  reputable  men,  to  judge  their  disputes. 
These  various  declarations  soon  dissipated  alarm  ;  and  we 
had,  in  fact,  no  cause  to  complain  of  the  people  during  the 
first  six  months  of  our  stay  in  the  country. 

The  Arab  tribes  were  still,  however,  very  dangerous. 
We  had  succeeded  in  making  peace  with  some  of  them  ; 
but  several  others,  more  numerous  and  better  armed,  con- 
tinued frequently  to  interrupt  our  communications  and 
plunder  our  convoys,  by  land  as  well  as  on  the  Nile.  We 
were  in  consequence  obliged  to  organise  a  system  of  pursuit, 
which  was  followed  up  with  so  much  energy  that  the  tribes 
felt  at  last  convinced  that  they  must  either  submit  or  retire 
to  other  deserts. 

Mourad  Bey,  who  was  now  in  Upper  Egypt,  gave  us  no 
more  cause  of  uneasiness  ;  but  Ibrahim  Bey,  next  to  Mourad 
the  most  powerful  leader  of  the  Mamelukes,  had  gone  for- 
ward to  meet  the  caravan  returning  from  Mecca  ;  and, 
under  the  pretence  of  defending  it  against  the  French 
army,  he  stopped  it  in  its  way,  and  plundered  it.  He 
afterwards  returned  to  Egypt  by  the  way  of  Salahieh,  and 
proclaimed  his  intention  of  attacking  the  French  army  from 


i64  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

that  side.  General  Regnier,  whom  I  accompanied  on  that 
short  expedition,  had  not  much  trouble  with  the  Arabs  and 
Mamelukes  of  the  vanguard  ;  but  he  was  conscious  that  his 
small  division  would  soon  be  destroyed  if  no  one  came  to 
his  assistance.  I  went  to  acquaint  the  General-in-chief  with 
this  circumstance,  who  immediately  flew  to  help  him,  at 
the  head  of  some  regiments  of  cavalry  which  he  had 
succeeded  in  mounting  with  the  horses  he  found  in  Lower 
Egypt.  The  Mamelukes  were  beaten  at  Salahieh,  from 
which  place  the  battle  took  its  name.  It  was  then  that  the 
General-in-chief  learned  the  disaster  of  our  fleet  at  Aboukir. 
The  news  was  brought  to  him  by  an  aide-de-camp  of 
General  Kleber.  The  officer's  horse  being  unable  to  go 
any  further,  he  had  written  some  particulars  in  an  open 
letter,  which  I  found  in  the  hands  of  a  peasant  to  whom  he 
had  entrusted  it.  I  read  the  letter,  and  advancing  towards 
the  General-in-chief,  I  begged  him  to  withdraw  for  a  moment 
from  the  group  of  staff  officers  which  surrounded  him.  I 
then  gave  him  the  note.  When  he  had  read  it  he  said  to 
me,  "  You  know  its  contents  ;  keep  the  secret."  We  re- 
turned to  Belbeys,  where  we  found  breakfast  on  the  table. 
Everybody  was  in  good  spirits,  and  particularly  the  troops, 
who  had  retaken  from  the  Mamelukes  the  spoil  of  the 
caravan.  They  were  going  to  sell  the  goods  for  almost 
nothing  ;  but  the  General-in-chief  forbade  the  officers  to 
buy  any  of  them  there,  and  ordered  the  soldiers  to  dispose 
of  them  on  their  return  to  Cairo.  All  of  a  sudden,  while 
breakfasting,  the  General-in-chief  said  to  his  guests  :  "  It 
seems,  you  like  this  country  :  that  is  very  lucky,  for  we 
have  now  no  fleet  to  carry  us  back  to  Europe."  He  then 
acquainted  them  with  the  particulars  of  the  battle  of 
Aboukir,  and  they  were  listened  to  with  as  much  earnest- 
ness as  the  General  had  related  them.  Every  one  soon 
appeared  reconciled  to  the  event,  and  nobody  talked  any 
more  of  it. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Ibrahim  Bey  had  retired  to  Syria,  and  there  was  no  doubt 
but  he  would  organise  in  that  country  considerable  bodies 
of  irregular  troops  which  would  disturb  our  frontiers.  The 
General-in-chief  had  also  learned  that  the  news  of  the 
invasion  of  Egypt  had  been  received  with  great  displeasure 
at  Constantinople. 

The  English,  enraged  at  the  conquest  of  Malta,  and 
sensible  of  the  important  consequences  of  the  occupation 
of  Egypt  to  their  establishments  in  India,  pressed  the  Turks 
to  go  to  war.  The  General-in-chief  had  therefore  reason  to 
expect  that  he  would  not  only  be  continually  harassed  by 
Ibrahim  Bey,  but  also  that  the  English  would  make  them- 
selves masters  of  the  ports  of  Syria.  He  took  a  resolution 
to  be  beforehand  with  them  ;  but  it  was  first  of  all  necessary 
to  know  what  might  be  the  dispositions  of  the  Pacha  who 
commanded  all  Syria.  The  name  of  the  Pacha  for  the  time 
being  was  Djezzar,  a  man  of  a  very  energetic  character,  who 
had  maintained  himself  for  several  years  in  his  post,  in  spite 
of  the  Sultan  himself,  and  who  enforced  obedience  by  the 
terror  his  cruelties  inspired.  The  General-in-chief  sent  to 
him  a  young  Frenchman,  just  come  home  from  Mascata 
with  the  Consul  Beauchamp,  and  who  was  very  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  Arabic  language.  Djezzar  sent  an 
ambiguous    answer,   which    served    to    convince    General 

Bonaparte  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  support  his  de- 

.65 


l66  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

clarations  with  an  army.  But  a  fatal  incident  occurred^ 
which  threatened  the  expedition  with  an  indefinite  delay. 
While  perfect  tranquillity  seemed  to  prevail  in  Cairo  and 
its  outskirts,  a  rebellion,  without  any  apparent  cause,  sud- 
denly broke  out  at  one  of  the  gates  of  the  city. 

A  number  of  wounded,  who  had  been  at  the  battle  of 
Salahieh,  and  some  invalids  of  the  division  of  Regnier, 
filling  about  twenty  transports,  were  murdered,  and  the 
rebellion  quickly  spread  through  the  city  like  wildfire. 
General  Dupuis,  commander  of  the  fortress,  immediately 
mounted  his  horse,  with  all  the  men  he  could  bring  together  ; 
but  he  was  assassinated,  with  several  of  his  companions.  To 
oppose  the  rebels  any  longer  in  the  streets  was  not  to  be 
thought  of.  Means  were,  however,  found  to  restrain  them, 
though  they  had  made  themselves  masters  of  one  of  the 
largest  mosques  in  the  town.  It  was  then  resolved  to  fire 
on  them  from  the  citadel.  The  bombs  and  howitzers  made 
great  havoc  among  them  ;  after  which,  some  battalions  of 
infantry  attacked  the  mosque,  where  all  the  rest  were  killed 
or  taken  prisoners.  This  rebellion  lasted  three  days,  and 
did  not  occasion  any  great  loss  to  the  army  ;  but  the 
General-in-chief  lost  one  of  his  best  aides-de-camp.  Colonel 
Sulkowski  had  already  been  wounded  at  Alexandria,  and 
also  at  the  battle  of  Salahieh,  and  was  not  yet  completely 
recovered,  when,  the  General-in-chief  wishing  to  send  some 
officer  to  reconnoitre  out  of  the  city,  he  offered  himself, 
pretending  that  it  was  his  turn  to  march,  and  that  his 
wound  was  entirely  healed.  Accompanied  by  fifteen  guides, 
he  was  crossing  that  part  of  the  Desert  that  separates  the 
town  of  Cairo  from  the  citadel,  when  a  troop  of  Arabs,  that 
had  concealed  themselves  behind  a  number  of  small  hillocks, 
suddenl}^  rushed  upon  him.  He  was  killed,  with  the  greatest 
part  of  his  escort ;  for  only  two  men  returned  to  Cairo, 
where  they  brought  the  fatal  tidings.  I  was  not  then  in 
Cairo."  By  order  of  the  General-in-chief,  I  was  accom- 
'  See  Appendix. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  167 

panying  General  Andreossi  on  an  expedition  to  the  lake 
Mensale  and  Peluse.  We  were  completely  ignorant  of  what 
was  going  forward  in  the  capital  ;  and  I  was  sailing  leisurely 
up  the  Nile,  when  I  learned  that  at  Mansoura,  or  Laman- 
sour,  the  hospital  containing  our  sick  and  wounded,  with  a 
detachment  of  soldiers,  had  been  surprised,  and  all  the  men 
butchered  without  mercy.  The  rebellion  of  Cairo  had 
reached  the  two  banks  of  the  river,  and  more  particularly 
the  branch  of  the  Damietta.  Some  revolted  villages  were 
burned  to  make  an  example.  The  General-in-chief  was 
very  desirous  to  know  whether  the  inhabitants  of  Mansoura 
had  retained  any  remembrance  of  their  victorious  resistance, 
when,  under  the  reign  of  St.  Louis,  they  had  been  so  im- 
prudently attacked  by  the  Count  d'Artois.  But  it  appeared, 
from  all  inquiries,  that  these  Egyptians  were  acquainted 
neither  with  the  name  of  St.  Louis,  nor  with  the  gallant 
actions  that  had  illustrated  their  ancestors. 

In  the  month  of  December,  1798,  the  General-in-chief 
had  not  yet  received  any  accounts  from  the  Directory.  The 
political  object  of  the  expedition  had  experienced  great 
impediments  by  the  loss  of  the  fleet.  It  was  no  longer  to 
be  hoped  we  should  ever  be  able  to  lead  the  army  to  India, 
the  superiority  of  the  English  being  now  concentrated  on 
the  sea.  All  that  remained  therefore  to  be  done  was  to 
profit  by  our  situation,  to  bring  back  the  Turks  to  their  old 
sentiments  of  friendship  for  the  French,  and  detach  them 
from  the  English,  or  at  least  to  prevent  the  two  Emperors 
of  Austria  and  Russia  from  concerting  with  each  other  the 
total  dismembering  of  the  Ottoman  empire.  The  General- 
in-chief  thought  himself  authorised  to  suppose  that  M.  de 
Talleyrand,  who  had  been  appointed  French  Ambassador  in 
Constantinople,  had  really  departed  for  that  metropolis,  and 
had  succeeded  in  maintaining  his  post  there.  In  those 
circumstances  it  was  important  to  correspond  with  him,  and 
the  best  way  appeared  to  be,  to  send  M.  Beauchamp  to 
Constantinople  ;  but  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  escape  the 


1 68  MEMOIRS  OF  COUA'T  LA  V ALETTE. 

watchful  eyes  of  the  English  cruisers.  General  Bonaparte 
contrived,  for  that  purpose,  the  following  plan.  The 
Turkish  caravella  which  had  come  over  to  bring  the  Sultan 
the  yearly  tribute  from  Egypt  was  then  riding  at  anchor  in 
the  port  of  Alexandria.  The  captain  of  that  vessel  was  a 
man  respected  in  his  own  country,  and  he  had  with  him  his 
two  sons.  He  received  an  order  to  carry  M.  Beauchamp  to 
Constantinople,  and  to  leave  one  of  his  sons  in  Alexandria 
as  a  hostage  for  the  safe  return  of  that  gentleman  to  Eg3'pt. 
The  ostensible  commission  of  the  Consul  was  to  require  the 
release  of  all  the  Frenchmen  who  were  detained  in  Syria, 
whether  merchants  or  consular  agents,  and  also  of  such 
military  as  had  been  made  prisoners  either  in  coming  to 
Egypt  or  in  returning  to  France.  He  was,  in  the  course  of 
his  negotiation  with  the  Grand  Vizier,  to  insinuate  that 
France  would  abandon  Egypt,  and  make  a  treaty  of  friend- 
ship with  Turkey,  if  the  latter  consented  to  give  up  all  her 
connections  with  England  ;  in  which  case,  the  French 
troops  would  join  those  of  the  Sultan,  either  to  put  an  end 
to  the  war  with  the  two  Emperors  by  one  common  treaty, 
or  to  give  him  support,  if  peace  should  not  take  place. 

Unfortunately,  AI.  Beauchamp  was  discovered  by  the 
English,  and  sent  to  the  Seven  Towers  at  Constantinople. 

It  was  about  this  time  that  the  plague  began  its  ravages 
at  Alexandria.  I  was  ordered  to  accompany  M.  Beauchamp 
to  that  place,  that  I  might  superintend  the  preparations  for 
his  departure,^  and  make  a  report  to  the  General-in-chief  on 
the  state  of  the  fortifications  there.  When  I  arrived,  I 
found  General  Marmont  commanding  the  province  and  the 
whole  seashore  as  far  as  Rosetta.  "  You  arrive  at  an  unfor- 
tunate moment,"  he  said:  "the  plague  has  broken  out 
yesterday  among  our  troops.  It  appears  that  the  order 
given  on  our  arrival  at  Alexandria,  to  burn  the  clothes  of 
the  persons  who  had  died  of  the  contagion,  has  been 
negligently  executed.  Some  of  the  inhabitants  have  worn 
'  See  Appendix. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  169 

them  again  ;  and,  our  troops  being  in  close  connection  with 
them,  the  contact  has  spread  the  plague  among  the  French, 
and  I  have  been  assured  that  it  cannot  fail  soon  to  break  out 
also  among  the  Turks.  Yesterday  four  Frenchmen  died  ; 
there  are  eight  sick  to-day,  who  will  probably  be  numbered 
with  the  dead  to-morrow." 

All  possible  precautions  had  already  been  taken  by 
General  Marmont :  the  troops  were  lodged  under  tents, 
and  all  communication  betwixt  them  and  the  inhabitants 
was  prohibited.  The  most  rigorous  orders  had  also  been 
issued,  forbidding  the  battalions  to  which  the  sick  belonged 
to  hold  any  connection  with  the  others  ;  but  the  careless- 
ness of  the  soldiers  destroyed  all  the  good  effects  of  these 
measures.  They  looked  upon  the  plague  as  an  enemy  it 
was  their  duty  to  challenge  ;  and  the  communication  of  the 
soldiers  with  each  other  continued,  notwithstanding  the 
severest  discipline.  My  orders  were  to  order  Commissary 
Michaud  from  Rosetta  to  Alexandria  ;  he  came  with  a 
suite  of  ten  persons,  and  lodged  with  us  at  General  Mar- 
mont's.  In  the  space  of  two  days  he  was  the  only  survivor 
of  all  those  he  had  brought  with  him.  One  of  his 
secretaries,  named  Renaud,  left  the  hotel  to  go  and  sign 
some  orders  at  the  lodgings  his  master  had  taken  in  the 
■city.  The  paper  on  which  he  wrote  sufficed  to  communicate 
the  disease  to  his  blood.  The  next  morning  he  sent  word 
that  he  was  not  very  well,  and  could  not  breakfast  at  the 
General's  table.  We  went  immediately  to  see  him.  He 
was  still  up  ;  but  his  features  already  bore  all  the  marks 
of  the  fatal  malady  :  his  eye  glared,  his  tongue  faltered, 
he  had  a  profuse  cold  perspiration,  and  pains  in  his  limbs. 
The  physician  who  was  called  to  visit  him  just  appeared  at 
the  door  of  his  room,  with  a  thick  long  stick  in  his  hand. 
After  having  looked  at  him  for  a  moment,  he  ordered  hot 
water  to  be  placed  before  him,  and  retired  without  adminis- 
tering any  other  remedy.  The  unfortunate  young  man 
begged  us  to  get  him  ink  and  paper,  that  he  might  write  to 


I70  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

his  family.     In  the  afternoon  he  expired  in  great  agony  ;  so 
that  his  iUness  did  not  last  above  fifteen  hours. 

The  contagion  soon  assumed  a  most  terrible  aspect.  All 
the  physicians  died  successively  ;  the  overseers  of  the  in- 
firmaries went  away,  and  it  was  no  longer  possible  to  enter 
the  hospitals  with  impunity.  We  were  obliged  to  take 
Turks  to  nurse  the  sick,  and  to  pay  a  very  great  price  for 
their  services  ;  while  the  superintendence  over  them  was  so 
relaxed,  on  account  of  the  danger  with  which  it  was  accom- 
panied, that  the  most  flagrant  misconduct  was  not  to  be 
prevented.  At  General  Marmont's  lodgings  we  had  been 
obliged  to  do  without  tablecloths  or  sheets  ;  all  our  clothes 
were  fumigated  ;  the  out-door  servants  had  no  connection 
with  those  of  the  interior.  The  carriage  gateway  was  nailed- 
up  ;  while  everything  that  was  brought  to  the  house  from 
out  of  doors,  and  even  the  meat,  was  thrown  through  a 
wicket  into  a  tub  of  water.  With  a  view  to  avoid  the 
infection  among  us,  we  divided  ourselves  into  two  brigades  ; 
and  during  the  night  we  pursued  each  other  from  room  to 
room,  throwing  water  in  our  faces,  which  was  the  only 
ammunition  we  possessed.  Among  the  few  soldiers  who 
consented  to  nurse  the  sick,  there  was  a  gunner  who  had 
been  in  Constantinople,  where  he  pretended  that  he  had 
escaped  the  plague.  According  to  his  assertion,  he  pos- 
sessed an  infallible  preservative  against  the  infection,  which 
was,  to  keep  his  face  and  hands  perpetually  moistened 
with  water.  But  it  was  discovered  that  he  washed  his- 
hands  in  oil.  Indeed,  it  had  been  observed  in  Cairo,  that 
the  lamplighters  never  caught  the  plague.  After  remaining 
six  weeks  in  the  unfortunate  city  of  Alexandria,  I  received 
from  the  General-in-chief  an  order  to  return  to  Cairo,  that 
I  might  accompany  him  in  his  campaign  to  Syria.^ 

The  Arabs  of  the  province  of  Damanhour,  being  well 
acquainted  with  the  situation  of  our  troops  at  Alexandria, 
took  advantage  of  it  to  renew  their  depredations.     I  set  off" 
'  See  Appendix. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  171 

with  an  escort  of  thirty  men,  and  two  small  cannons  we  had 
taken  at  Malta,  and  which  General  Marmont  was  kind 
enough  to  entrust  to  me,  to  increase  my  slender  means  of 
defence  ;  but  I  was  obliged,  according  to  custom,  to  take 
under  my  protection  a  numerous  caravan  of  peasants, 
women,  and  children,  who  profited  by  my  departure  to 
return  to  Damanhour  and  Ramanieh.  We  had  scarcely 
advanced  two  leagues  when  the  Arabs  began  to  hover  about 
our  flanks.  The  French  infantry,  which  a  few  months 
before  had  not  even  courage  enough  to  fly  before  the  Arabs, 
so  soon  accustomed  themselves  to  dare  them,  that  I  had  the 
greatest  trouble  to  prevent  them  from  strolling  about  the 
plain  for  the  purpose  of  firing  at  these  enemies.  Two  or 
three  Arabs  were  dismounted,  and  then,  to  put  them  com- 
pletely to  the  rout,  I  had  only  to  fire  my  two  cannons  at 
them.  On  my  arrival  in  Cairo,  the  General-in-chief  had 
already  gone  off.  He  had  left  the  place  two  da3's  before, 
leaving  me  an  order  to  traverse  the  city  in  all  directions 
with  the  Police  Aga,  to  know  whether  all  was  quiet.  The 
Aga  was  at  that  time  a  Greek,  called  Barthelemi.  He  was 
accompanied  by  his  guards,  the  executioner  and  his  servants. 
We  walked  with  a  solemn  pace,  and  at  the  sight  of  the  Aga 
all  the  pedlars  in  the  streets,  and  those  whose  conscience 
was  not  quite  clear,  immediately  disappeared.  In  the  Rue 
du  Petit  Thouars,  he  stopped  facing  a  coffee-house  ;  and  his 
stick-bearer,  who  walked  before  him,  dragged  along  by  force 
a  man,  to  whom  he  addressed  some  questions.  The  poor 
fellow  answered  in  great  confusion.  After  reflecting  for  a 
moment,  the  Cadi  slowly  made  a  horizontal  motion  with 
his  right  hand,  and  we  gravely  continued  our  walk.  The 
gesture  of  the  Cadi  appeared  singular  to  me.  When  we 
had  got  thirty  steps  farther,  I  turned  round,  and  seeing  a 
group  of  persons  assembled  before  the  coffee-house,  I  spurred 
my  horse,  and  perceived  with  horror  a  mutilated  corpse,  and 
the  executioner  calmly  putting  a  human  head  into  his  bag. 
"  What's  the  meaning  of  this  ?  "  said  I  to  the  Cadi.     "  Oh," 


172  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

•answered  he  coolly,  "  that  fellow  had  a  share  in  the  rebellion 
of  Cairo,  and  escaped  my  vengeance.''  I  insisted  on  his 
putting  the  whole  affair  regularly  down  in  writing,  to  be 
communicated  to  the  General-in-chief.  In  all  probability 
the  unfortunate  man  was  guilty  ;  but  I  am  convinced,  that 
my  presence,  and  the  wish  to  give  an  example  of  severe 
justice,  were  the  real  causes  of  his  death.  For  the  rest, 
executions  of  this  sort  were  not  rare.  The  Cadi  never  went 
out  but  accompanied  by  the  hangman.  The  smallest  in- 
fraction of  the  police  laws  was  punished  by  blows  on  the 
soles  of  the  feet — a  punishment  from  which  the  women 
themselves  were  not  exempted. 


CHAPTER    XIX. 

Before  we  enter  Syria,  I  think  it  will  be  well  to  give  an 
account  of  the  General's  motives  for  that  expedition. 

It  was  absolutely  necessary  to  ensure  the  conquest  of 
Egypt  by  that  of  Syria,  and  especially  by  the  possession  of 
the  maritime  places. 

The  two  countries  are  dependent  on  each  other,  as  well  in 
regard  to  natural  productions  as  political  connection. 

Egypt  has  no  wood,  and  a  part  of  Syria  is  covered  with 
forests.  The  mutual  exchanges  extend  even  to  many  other 
productions.  The  Desert  alone  separates  the  two  countries, 
and  the  necessity  of  establishing  one  or  two  forts  at  the 
entrance  of  the  Desert  is  indispensable  for  the  possession  of 
Egypt. 

To  these  general  considerations,  at  all  times  equally  in 
force,  must  be  added  some  particular  circumstances  which 
had  just  been  created  by  policy. 

In  declaring  war  against  France  the  Sultan  would  launch 
out  against  us  the  whole  armed  population  of  Syria.  The 
Pacha  who  commanded  in  that  province  had  a  personal 
interest  in  showing  himself  our  foe  :  he  would  effect  his 
reconciliation  with  the  Porte  by  the  services  he  might 
render  her  ;  he  would  draw  a  great  deal  of  money  out  of  the 
English,  and  find  war  the  means  of  subduing,  or  at  least 
removing,  Ibrahim  Bey,  whose  presence  in  Syria  was  dis- 
agreeable to  him,  and  caused  him  even  some  anxiety. 

»73 


174  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

On  the  other  hand,  General  Bonaparte  wished  to  deprive 
the  English  of  the  means  of  communicating  with  and  dis- 
embarking on  an  extent  of  coast  eighty  leagues  in  length. 
His  intention  was  to  make  himself  master  of  the  maritime 
places,  and  fortify  them.  He  had  hopes  of  drawing  over  to 
his  party  a  considerable  portion  of  the  inhabitants  of  Syria, 
especially  the  Druses  and  Maronists,  schismatic  Mussulmans,' 
whose  manners  are  at  variance  with  those  of  the  Turks,  and 
who  have  no  other  connection  with  them  but  through  the 
enormous  taxes  they  are  forced  to  pay,  and  the  multifarious 
oppression  under  which  they  labour.  Finally,  he  expected 
by  that  means  to  force  the  Porte  to  explain  herself  openly  ; 
for  he  was  not  yet  acquainted  with  the  declaration  of  war 
made  by  the  Turks  against  France.  He  placed  at  the  head 
of  the  expedition  General  Regnier  as  commander  of  the 
vanguard,  and  Generals  Kleber,  Bon,  and  Lannes,  and 
Murat  for  the  cavalry. 

He  left  in  Egypt  General  Desaix  vigorously  pursuing 
Mourad  Bey,  and  keeping  in  awe  all  the  provinces  of  the 
Upper  Nile  as  far  as  the  Cataracts.  General  Dugua  in  Cairo 
commanded  the  Delta  from  Rosetta  and  Damietta.  He 
had  under  his  orders  General  Lanusse,  whose  courage  and 
activity  were  sufficient  to  maintain  peace  in  all  those  exten- 
sive provinces.  The  season  was  favourable  for  the  expedition 
to  Syria,  which  began  in  January,  1799- 

The  Desert,  which  divides  Egypt  from  Syria,  is  eighty 
leagues  in  breadth.  In  that  space  of  land  are  found  the  wells 
of  Katisch,  which  were  enclosed  in  a  fort,  that  the  army 
might  not  be  without  water.  At  two  days'  march  beyond 
the  wells  is  the  fort  of  El  Arisch,  which  contains  better 
water  than  Katisch,  but  of  which  the  enemy  had  already 
made  himself  master.  We  were  forced  to  besiege  it,  and  it 
was  bravely  defended  by  2000  Arnauts.  They  were,  how- 
ever, constrained  to  capitulate,  after  a  vigorous  attack  of 

'  Here  Count  Lavalette  has  made  a  little  mistake.  The  Maronists  are 
Christians,  and  not  Mussulmans. — Note  of  the  Translator. 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  1 7  5 

three  days.  In  the  treaty  it  was  stipulated  that  they  should 
go  to  Damascus  ;  but  the  greater  number  among  them  threw 
themselves  into  Jaffa,  of  which  place  they  augmented  the 
garrison.  We  were  obliged  in  consequence  to  besiege  the 
town.'  Jaffa  was  taken  by  storm  a  few  days  after  the  first 
attack,  and  the  Arnauts  who  had  capitulated  at  El  Arisch 
being  found  within  its  walls,  were,  according  to  the  European 
custom,  shot  for  having  violated  the  treaty.  I  was  not  at 
that  time  with  the  General-in-chief,  having  joined  him  only 
the  day  after  the  taking  of  Jaffa. 

From  Jaffa  the  army  marched  to  Caiffa  ;  but  the  enemy 
had  abandoned  that  place,  though  it  possessed  a  fort  and 
strong  walls.  We  left  there  a  small  post,  and  continued  our 
way  to  St.  John  of  Acre,  near  which  city  we  arrived  on  the 
evening  of  the  27th  of  March.  While  the  tents  were  being 
pitched,  the  General-in-chief  was  surprised  to  hear  at  sea  a 
tolerably  brisk  cannonading.  I  went  by  his  orders  to  the 
shore,  and  soon  perceived  that  the  sound  was  becoming 
more  distant,  so  that  I  feared  it  might  be  the  announcement 
of  some  fatal  event. 

On  entering  Syria,  General  Bonaparte  had  given  orders 
to  Marmont  to  send  him  by  some  brig  the  ammunition  he 
should  want  for  the  sieges  of  the  Syrian  towns.  Captain 
Standley,  who  commanded  the  frigate  which  was  at  the 
head  of  the  expedition,   neglected   to  inquire  whether  we 

'  VVTien  General  Kleber  left  El-Arisch,  to  proceed  to  Kanjonnes,  he  was 
led  astray  by  his  guides,  who  threw  him  much  too  far  to  the  right  in  the 
Desert.  The  General-in-chief  followed  him,  not  doubting  that  General 
Kleber  had  crossed  the  village;  and  he  was  going  to  enter  it,  escorted  only 
by  his  staff  and  fifty  guides,  when  two  horsemen,  who  formed  the  vanguard, 
came  back  in  full  gallop,  after  having  fired  two  pistols  ;  and  we  discovered 
on  the  other  side  of  the  village  the  camp  and  cavalry  of  Abdallah  Pasha, 
who  appeared  disposed  to  charge  them.  The  army  was  two  leagues  behind. 
There  was  no  possibility  of  standing  against  six  hundred  well-armed  enemies, 
or  of  escaping  if  they  had  been  pursued.  Fortunately,  the  General,  on 
this  occasion,  showed  an  instance  of  the  admirable  presence  of  mind  he 
possessed.  He  ordered  the  commander  of  the  detachment  to  draw  up  his 
men  in  a  single  line  ;  the  enemy  thought  them  more  numerous  than  they 
really  were  ;  and  after  some  moments'  deliberation  he  came  to  a  resolution 
<jf  raising  his  camp  and  retreating. 


176  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

were  masters  of  Jaffa,  on  the  walls  of  which  place  we  had 
left  the  Turkish  flag  flying,  to  draw  in  the  enemy's  ships, 
which  might  bring  us  provisions,  and  news  from  sea. 
Standley,  persuaded  we  were  not  at  Jaffa,  went  in  to  St. 
John  of  Acre  ;  but  Commodore  Sir  Sidne}-  Smith,  who  was 
cruising  before  the  port  with  a  ship  and  a  frigate,  gave  him 
the  chase  and  took  a  part  of  his  vessels.  This  was  the  cause 
of  the  cannonading  we  heard  ;  and  General  Bonaparte  was 
convinced,  as  well  as  myself,  that  the  army  had  lost  all  its 
siege  ammunition.  The  next  day  the  army  encamped  to  the 
north  of  St.  John  of  Acre,  and  the  General-in-chief  stood 
during  several  hours  on  a  height  that  commands  St.  John  of 
Acre,  at  about  half  a  league  distant.  The  enemy,  perceiving 
the  staff,  made  trial  of  the  skill  of  their  gunners.  The 
bombs  fired  with  so  much  nicety  that  one  of  them  was 
buried  in  the  ground  three  paces  from  the  General,  between 
his  two  aides-de-camp.  Merlin  and  Beauharnais.  Another 
fell  and  burst  at  two  feet  from  the  soil,  in  the  midst  of  a 
group  of  soldiers  who  were  lying  down  and  preparing  their 
breakfast.  There  were  eleven  of  them,  and  not  one  survived 
an  instant. 

The  town  of  St.  John  of  Acre  is  situated  on  the  point  of 
a  narrow  slip  of  land,  fortified  towards  the  sea  by  batteries 
and  a  small  lighthouse,  and  also  protected  by  some  pieces  of 
cannon.  On  the  land  side  it  was  enclosed  by  a  high  wall, 
divided  by  a  tower  on  which  some  pieces  of  ordnance  had 
been  placed.  The  city  was  surrounded  at  a  considerable 
distance  by  gardens,  which  being  all  enclosed  with  hedges  of 
cactus,  we  had  much  trouble  in  repelling  the  riflemen  who 
harassed  us  from  behind  them. 

The  traveller  Volney,  whom  we  had  found  so  accurate  in 
his  description  of  Egypt,  asserts  that  St.  John  of  Acre  is  not 
surrounded  with  ditches.  This  assurance  proved  fatal  to  us 
in  the  beginning  of  the  siege.  Several  officers  of  engineers 
confirmed  us  in  our  prepossession,  and  particularly  Colonel 
Sampson,  who  was  wounded  in  his  hand  while  fighting  in  a 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  177 

muddy  rivulet  he  supposed  to  have  been  the  fosse  of  the 
town. 

After  we  had  fired  ten  days  on  the  tower  I  have  men- 
tioned, it  was  pierced,  and  the  breach  appeared  large  enough 
to  lodge  some  miners  with  an  officer  of  the  staff.  The 
troops  made  a  movement  to  rush  to  the  foot  of  the  town  ; 
but  they  were  suddenly  stopped  by  a  ditch  fifteen  feet  broad 
by  ten  or  twelve  deep,  and  lined  with  a  good  counterscarp. 
We  were,  in  consequence,  forced  to  establish  a  globe  of 
compression  to  blow  it  up.  The  concussion  took  place, 
and  young  Mailly-Chateau-Renaud,  an  officer  of  the  staff, 
received  orders  to  enter  the  tower  with  four  miners,  to 
remain  there  during  the  night,  and  to  pierce  it,  while  the 
infantry  endeavoured  to  make  themselves  masters  of  the 
ditch.  The  intrepid  young  officer  and  his  men  executed 
their  orders  ;  but  the  enemy  opened  so  strong  a  fire  on  our 
troops  that  they  were  forced  to  abandon  the  fosse.  Mailly 
and  his  gunners  were  killed  in  the  breach. 

The  aide-de-camp  Duroc  had  been  sent  an  hour  before 
into  the  ditch,  to  discover  the  progress  of  the  breach  :  a 
howitzer  that  burst  wounded  him  deeply  in  the  thigh,  and 
lamed  him.  The  night  falling  in,  we  were  constrained  to 
give  up  the  attack,  and  to  wait  until  the  arrival  of  a  larger 
supply  of  artillery  should  furnish  us  with  the  means  of 
making  breaches  on  all  sides  ;  but  just  at  that  moment  the 
General-in-chief  heard  that  all  his  ammunition,  all  his 
artillery,  sent  from  Alexandria,  had  been  captured  by  Sir 
Sidney  Smith  ;  while  at  the  same  time  we  learned  the  secret 
cause  of  the  astonishing  skill  of  the  Turkish  gunners. 

When,  a  few  years  before  the  period  I  am  speaking  of, 
General  Aubert  Dubayet  was  sent  by  the  French  Govern- 
ment to  Constantinople  as  ambassador,  he  obtained  leave  to 
take  with  him  a  company  of  light  artillery,  to  teach  the 
Turks  those  parts  of  gunnery  they  were  still  unacquainted 
with,  and  especially  all  that  concerned  the  letting  off  of 
bombs.     This  company  had  since  returned  to  France,  and 

13 


178  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

part  of  them  were  in  the  besieging  army,  but  their  pupils 
were  in  the  fortress  ;  so  that  Turkish  bombardiers,  instructed 
by  French  troops,  were  sending  us  our  own  projectiles,  of  which 
they  possessed  about  eighteen  hundred,  with  four  mortars. 

The  trenches  had  not  been  regularly  made,  and  the 
consequence  of  that  neglect  was,  that  the  soldiers,  not 
being  sufficiently  covered,  fell  victims  to  our  precipitation. 
General  Caffarelli,  commander  of  the  engineers  of  the  army, 
was  himself  struck  by  a  bullet  on  his  left  elbow,  and  he  lost 
his  arm.  He  had  already  suffered  the  loss  of  a  leg  several 
years  before,  during  the  retreat  of  Jourdan. 

The  Turks  are  wonderfully  good  soldiers  behind  a  wall  : 
we  had  more  than  one  instance  of  that  during  the  whole 
siege  of  St.  John  of  Acre.  It  was  almost  impossible  for  a 
Frenchman  to  show  himself  uncovered  without  being  struck. 
The  terrible  fire  of  the  besieged  was  supported  by  the 
batteries  of  Sir  Sidney's  ship  Theseus^  and  his  frigate. 

The  labours  of  the  siege  soon  grew  more  complicated. 
Sir  Sidney  Smith  had  with  him  a  Frenchman  named 
Philippeaux,  an  emigrant,  formerly  a  schoolfellow  of 
General  Bonaparte,  and  an  officer  of  engineers.  He  raised 
two  redoubts  beyond  the  fosse,  the  batteries  of  which  soon 
Tanged  along  the  branches  of  our  trenches,  and  forced  us  to 
begin  new  works  to  change  their  direction.^ 

The  field-pieces  being  too  weak  to  destroy  the  tower,  we 
had  recourse  to  mining  ;  but  while  we  were  working  with 
great  activity  and  secrecy,  we  continued  firing  on  the  town. 

'  I  think  I  have  mentioned,  that  among  the  persons  sent  to  St.  John  of 
Acre  to  carry  proposals  of  peace  to  Djezzar  Pacha,  was  a  young  man, 
named  Mailly  de  Chateau-Renaud,  who  had  returned  from  Mascate  with  M. 
Beauchamp.  This  unfortunate  young  man  was  locked  up  in  the  lighthouse 
at  Acre,  with  about  four  hundred  Christians  he  had  collected  on  the  coast 
of  Syria.  The  day  after  the  failure  of  the  first  storm,  some  soldiers  who 
were  in  the  trenches  mentioned  to  General  Vial,  then  upon  service,  that 
in  the  seaside  might  be  seen  a  great  many  dead  bodies  rolled  up  like  bales 
of  rice  or  coffee.  He  went  to  look  after  them,  and  recognised  poor  young 
Chateau-Renaud,  who  had  been  strangled  during  the  night.  Thus  the  two 
brothers,  who,  after  a  six  years'  absence,  had  met  for  a  few  hours  at  Cairo, 
w  ere  both  killed  at  the  same  instant  near  St.  John  of  Acre. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  179 

More  than  once  we  entertained  the  hope  of  gaining  a  footing 
in  it  and  destroying  it  ;  but  it  was  in  vain  that  our  grenadiers 
and  sappers  endeavoured  several  times  to  take  possession  of 
it.  The  part  that  looked  towards  the  town  continued  to  be 
occupied  by  the  besieged,  who  never  ceased  throwing  on  our 
troops  howitzers,  grenades,  and  even  bombs,  which  made 
the  post  exceedingly  dangerous.  Notwithstanding  all  our 
efforts,  the  two  redoubts  constructed  by  the  enemy  covered 
us  with  their  fire  every  time  our  troops  crossed  the  ditch  to 
storm  the  tower.  The  officer  of  engineers,  Philippeaux, 
soon  guessed  we  were  making  mines,  and  applied  himself  to 
destroy  those  we  were  laying  under  the  ditch.  In  con- 
sequence, on  the  1 8th  Germinal,  the  enemy  made  a  sortie 
with  so  much  abruptness  and  violence  that  a  part  of  our 
trenches  was  destroyed.  The  enemy's  columns  were  com- 
manded by  intelligent  English  officers,  one  of  whom  reached 
the  entrance  of  the  mine,  where  he  was  killed.  The  papers 
on  him  informed  us  that  he  was  Captain  Hatfield,  and  that 
he  had  been  the  first  at  the  attack  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 
His  fall  caused  some  confusion  among  the  troops  he  com- 
manded, who  soon  after,  being  attacked  with  energy,  hastily 
returned  to  the  city,  leaving  a  great  many  killed  behind 
them. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

While  we  were  fighting  under  the  walls  of  St.  John  of 
Acre,  like  the  Crusaders  beyond  the  Jordan,  Ibrahim  Bey, 
the  bearer  of  the  orders  of  Djezzar  Pacha,  assembled  all  the 
Arabs  of  the  mountains  of  Naplouse,  and  even  of  the 
environs  of  Damascus.  The  General-in-chief  had  taken  the 
precaution  to  make  himself  master  of  the  bridge  of  Jacoub 
and  the  port  of  Japhet.  The  banks  of  the  lake  of  Tabarieh 
were  constantly  overrun  by  the  cavalry  of  General  Murat. 
General  Junot  had  posted  himself  at  Loubi,  near  Nazareth. 
He  was  soon  attacked  at  a  short  distance  from  Gafarkala  ; 
and  though  he  had  only  with  him  a  part  of  the  2nd 
regiment  of  light  infantry,  three  companies  of  the  19th, 
and  one  hundred  and  fifty  dragoons,  he  did  not  hesitate  to 
dare  the  charge  of  above  three  thousand  horsemen.  Not- 
withstanding all  the  eflForts  of  the  enemy,  he  succeeded  in 
reaching  the  heights  of  Nazareth  without  having  been 
routed  ;  and  after  eight  hours  of  the  most  desperate  fighting, 
he  forced  the  enemy  to  a  temporary  retreat.  This  glorious 
defence  made  the  General-in-chief  feel  the  necessity  of 
terminating,  once  for  all,  the  annoyance  of  these  dangerous 
enemies,  whose  plan  was  no  less  than  to  come  and  attack 
him  under  the  walls  of  St.  John  of  Acre.  He  sent  General 
Kleber  against  them,  and  a  few  days  afterwards  he  marched 
himself  to  the  support  of  Junot  and  Kleber  with  the  rest  of 
his  cavalry,  the  division  of  General  Bon,  and  eight  pieces  of 

i3o 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  i8i 

artillery.  He  directed  his  way  towards  Fouli.  At  nine 
o'clock  in  the  morning  he  had  reached  the  last  heights, 
whence  the  prospect  extends  three  leagues  over  the  plain 
bounded  by  Mount  Thabor.  From  thence  we  perceived 
the  squares  of  General  Kleber,  presenting  a  black  line,  sur- 
rounded and  pressed  by  an  enormous  mass  of  cavalry  and 
infantry,  which,  at  three  leagues'  distance,  had  all  the 
appearance  of  an  ant-hill.  Sometimes  the  French  line 
disappeared,  and  we  thought  it  destroyed  ;  then  it  showed 
itself  again,  covered  by  its  own  fire,  during  some  minutes. 
The  General-in-chief  began  by  throwing  his  cavalry  on  the 
heights  to  his  right,  where  the  camp  of  the  Mamelukes 
had  been  established,  and  which  we  found  deserted.  He 
thus  formed  two  squares  of  infantry,  and  made  his  arrange- 
ments so  as  to  turn  the  enemy  at  a  great  distance.  When 
he  arrived  at  within  half  a  league  of  General  Kleber,  he  sent 
to  him  General  Rampon,  at  the  head  of  the  32nd  half 
brigade  ;  and  as  soon  as  that  troop  had  begun  to  march,  he 
made  known  his  presence  by  firing  a  twelve-pounder.  The 
effect  was  theatrical.  At  the  same  instant  we  saw  General 
Kleber,  quitting  his  defensive  attitude,  advancing  upon  the 
village  of  Fouli,  of  which  he  made  himself  master,  and  the 
enemy  flying  in  all  directions.  But  on  one  side  the  enemy 
found  before  him  General  Rampon,  while  General  Vial  had 
cut  off  his  retreat  to  the  mountains  of  Naplouse,  and  General 
Murat  was  waiting  for  him  at  the  bridge  of  Jacoub.  The 
guides  on  foot  attacked  him  near  Jenin  ;  so  that  his  only 
resource  was  to  fly  behind  Mount  Thabor,  from  whence, 
during  the  night,  he  reached  Elmekanieh,  and  further  up 
the  Jordan,  where  a  great  number  were  drowned  in 
attempting   to   cross   the   river. 

After  the  battle  the  General-in-chief  went  to  sleep  at 
Nazareth.  This  small  place  is  situated  a  good  way  within 
the  mountains,  in  a  very  picturesque  situation,  between  two 
groves,  one  of  sycamore  and  the  other  of  date-trees  :  the 
chief  part  of  the  inhabitants  are  Christians.     Before  Bona- 


1 82  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE. 

parte  entered  the  village,  he  stopped  near  an  ancient  fountain, 
where  a  considerable  number  of  cattle  were  drinking.  The 
elders  of  the  village  stood  there  waiting  for  the  General-in- 
chief :  the  whole  scene  recalled  to  memory  the  patriarchal 
times  so  beautifully  described  in  the  Bible.  The  French 
were  received  with  great  demonstrations  of  joy,  and  General 
Bonaparte  went  with  his  staff  to  pass  the  night  at  the  con- 
vent of  Nazareth. 

This  convent  was  evidently  built  in  the  time  of  the 
Crusades  :  the  edifice  is  not  very  large.  Next  morning  the 
General-in-chief  asked  the  superior  to  conduct  him  to  the 
church,  which  resembles  our  village  churches,  and  contains 
nothing  remarkable  but  the  chapel,  which  was  once,  they 
say,  the  bed-chamber  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  It  is  below  the 
chief  altar,  and  a  few  very  broad  steps  descend  to  it.  An 
altar  fills  the  place  of  the  bed  ;  and  being  cut  out  of  the 
rock,  it  is  no  more  than  seven  feet  in  height.  The  superior, 
who  was  a  Spaniard,  but  spoke  very  good  Italian,  made  us 
observe  on  the  left  side  of  the  altar  a  pillar  of  black  marble, 
the  shaft  of  which  touched  the  ceiling,  while  its  basement 
was  broken  off  some  feet  from  the  ground,  which  made  it 
appear  suspended.  The  prior  told  us,  in  the  gravest  manner 
possible,  that  when  the  Angel  Gabriel  came  to  announce  to 
the  Virgin  her  glorious  and  holy  destination,  he  touched  the 
pillar  with  his  heel  and  broke  it  in  two.  We  burst  out 
a-laughing  ;  but  General  Bonaparte,  looking  severely  at  us, 
made  us  resume  our  gravity.  Along  the  cloisters  were  lying 
about  thirty  men  who  had  been  wounded  on  the  preceding 
day  ;  several  of  them  had  just  expired,  and  these  latter  had 
nearly  all  received  from  the  monks  the  last  comforts  of 
religion.  This  was  probably  done  at  the  instigation  of  these 
pious  cenobites  ;  for,  at  that  period,  the  French  troops  were 
very  foreign  to  any  religious  feeling.  Neither  the  aspect  of 
the  country  wherein  they  fought,  nor  the  names  of  most 
of  those  places  which  had  been  familiar  to  them  during 
their  infancy  (nearly  all  of  them  being  born  between  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  1 83 

years  1775  ^"^  1780),  seemed  capable  of  recalling  to  their 
memory  the  sentiments  and  recollection  of  their  youth. 

At  Nazareth  we  lost  a  man  who  had  been  most  useful  to 
General  Bonaparte  and  the  army  ;  namely,  M.  Venture, 
first  interpreter  to  the  General-in-chief.  This  old  man  had 
passed  all  his  life  in  the  East,  and  his  wandering  life  had 
produced  a  strange  mixture  of  nations  in  his  family  ;  his 
wife  being  a  Greek,  his  daughter  an  Egyptian,  and  his 
son-in-law  a  Pole.'  He  was  very  much  regretted,  but  his 
place  was  adequately  filled  up  by  M.  Jaubert,  his  pupil, 
who,  notwithstanding  his  numerous  and  perilous  voyages, 
still  lives  for  his  friends  and  the  sciences. 

We  returned  to  St.  John  of  Acre,  and  on  our  arrival  before 
the  town  the  General-in-chief  finally  learned  that  Rear- 
Admiral  Duperrie  had  put  on  shore  three  four-and-twenty 
and  six  eighteen  pounders,  and  the  necessary  ammunition. 
The  works  of  the  mine  were  continued,  and  on  the  5th 
Floreal  it  was  decided  to  spring  it.  All  the  batteries  began 
to  play  upon  the  enemy,  in  order  to  deceive  him,  and  fire 
was  set  to  the  mine  ;  but  a  vault  that  existed  in  the  tower 
presented  a  line  of  slight  resistance.  One  side  only  was 
destroyed  :  it  remained,  however,  in  a  state  of  breach.  This 
breach  was  as  difficult  to  reach  as  it  had  been  before.  We 
were  therefore  obliged  to  begin  battering  afresh  the  curtain 
and  the  tower.  The  attack  of  the  6th  was  more  murderous 
than  the  former,  and  still  without  success.  Four  hundred 
men  remained  during  six  hours  in  the  breach  that  looked 
towards  the  ditch  ;  the  enemy,  posted  on  the  reverse,  con- 
tinued throwing  incessantly  burning  projectiles  into  the  midst 

'  I  was  present  at  Venture's  departure  from  Paris.  He  travelled  in  the 
same  coach  with  Colonel  Sulkowsky.  His  wife  and  daughter  were  bathed 
in  tears,  convinced  hy  I  know  not  what  omen  that  neither  of  them  would 
come  back.  After  an  hour's  grief  they  began  to  be  comforted,  when  the 
two  travellers  suddenly  reappeared.  Their  coach  had  broken  down  near 
the  barrier.  I  expected  fresh  lamentations  ;  l)ul,  to  my  great  astonish- 
ment, they  felt  the  greatest  joy  at  the  accident  that  had  occurred  ;  and  for 
the  same  reason  their  grief  was  so  much  stronger  when  they  heard  of  their 
death. 


1 84  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

of  that  mass  of  men,  who  were  unable  to  advance,  and  still 
would  not  consent  to  go  down.  At  last  the  break  of  day 
rendered  visible  the  most  horrible  disorder,  and  a  position 
which  could  not  possibly  be  maintained  ;  we  were  again 
obliged  to  abandon  the  tower.  We  had  lost  an  enormous 
number  of  officers,  especially  among  the  engineers  ;  General 
Caffarelli,  who  had  command  of  the  engineers,  showed  some 
gigns  of  recovery  ;  but  he  every  day  asked  why  his  comrades 
came  no  longer  to  see  him.  Though  the  utmost  care  was 
taken  to  conceal  from  him  the  fatal  news  of  their  death, 
grief  and  anxiety  augmented  his  sufferings.  He  sometimes 
said  to  me,  "  It  was  I  who  seduced — I  who  led  on  all  those 
hopeful  young  men.  Alas  !  that  they  should  have  fallen 
before  such  a  wretched  fortress  }  "  Finally,  the  death  of 
young  Say,  the  chief  of  his  staff,  which  could  not  be  kept 
a  secret  from  him,  threw  him  into  a  deep  melancholy,  and 
he  died  soon  after. 

He  was  not  regretted  by  the  army  alone.  To  extensive 
information,  Caffarelli  added  great  feeling  and  a  mildness  of 
disposition  that  will  make  his  memory  dear  to  all  those  who 
knew  him.  He  would  certainly  have  acted  a  very  important 
part  under  the  Empire  ;  for  General  Bonaparte  had  great 
esteem  and  consideration  for  him. 

The  army  had  already  stormed  the  city  twelve  times,  and 
withstood  twenty-six  sorties,  when  General  Kleber  and  his 
division  were  recalled  to  the  camp.  A  new  mine  had  been 
opened,  and  we  were  already  on  the  point  of  charging  it, 
when  the  enemy  once  more  gave  vent  to  it  :  notwithstanding 
all  our  efforts,  he  reached  the  branch  ;  so  that  we  were 
obliged  to  make  our  miners  retire  precipitately  out  of  the 
mine,  and  stop  it  up  by  explosion.  This  circumstance  was 
the  more  fatal,  as  by  it  we  lost  all  hopes  of  making  ourselves 
masters  of  the  town  by  that  means.  We  had  to  return  to 
cannonading,  which  also  speedily  relaxed,  the  gunpowder 
we  expected  from  Gaza  not  having  arrived.  On  the  next 
■day,  however,  we  received  a  sufficient  quantity  :  the  courage 


]{L1B1'B. 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  185 

of  the  soldiers  increased  ;  and  when  they  heard  that  the 
division  of  Kleber  was  coming,  the  whole  camp  went  to 
meet  it,  with  congratulations  and  prophecies  that  the  honour 
of  taking  the  town  would  belong  to  the  new-comers.  The 
batteries  had  destroyed  a  great  part  of  the  curtain,  which 
presented  a  space  wide  enough  to  mount  for  an  assault. 
The  grenadiers  of  Kleber's  division  received  that  honour- 
able though  perilous  commission  ;  but  just  as  they  were 
descending  into  the  ditch  in  order  to  cross  it,  the  enemy 
opened  on  their  flank  a  tremendous  fire  from  the  two  sides. 
The  grenadiers,  however,  penetrated  into  the  town  ;  but 
when  there  they  were  fired  upon  from  all  sides  of  a  large 
square,  and  from  the  Palace  of  Djezzar.  The  difficulty  of 
climbing  up  the  breach  prevented  our  soldiers  from  rushing 
easily  into  this  new  circle  :  the  bravest  among  them  were 
killed  ;  the  rest  hesitated.  It  became  necessary  to  lead  the 
troops  back  into  the  trenches. 

The  General-in-chief  could  not  resolve  to  order  the  four- 
teenth assault  ;  but  the  grenadiers  and  most  of  the  officers 
who  had  already  been  in  the  town  insisted  in  so  pressing  a 
manner  for  leave  to  go  up  once  more,  that  the  General-in- 
chief,  after  having  got  the  breach  widened,  let  them  advance 
again.  General  Kleber  placed  himself  on  the  reverse  of  the 
fosse,  where,  sword  in  hand,  he  animated  his  troops  with 
his  stentorian  voice,  amidst  the  dead  and  the  dying.  On 
looking  on  that  gigantic  figure,  a  whole  head  taller  than  the 
rest  of  the  soldiers,  one  might  have  taken  him  for  one  of 
the  heroes  of  Homer.  The  noise  and  smoke  of  the  cannon, 
the  cries  of  the  soldiers,  the  roaring  of  the  Turks — our  troops 
rushing  on  the  enemy,  made  our  hearts  beat  with  enthusiasm. 
Nobody  doubted  but  the  town  would  be  taken  ;  when  sud- 
denly the  column  stopped.  General  Bonaparte  had  placed 
himself  in  the  breach  battery,  to  examine  once  more  the 
movements  of  the  army.  He  had  fixed  his  glass  between 
the  fascines  of  the  battery,  when  a  ball  from  the  town  struck 
the  superior  fascine  ;  and  the  General-in-chief  fell  into  the 


1 86  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

arms  of  General  Berthier.  We  thought  him  killed  ;  but 
fortunately  he  had  not  been  touched  ;  his  fall  was  only 
an  effect  of  the  commotion  lof  the  air.  In  vain  General 
Berthier  pressed  him  to  retire  :  he  received  one  of  those 
harsh  and  dry  replies,  after  which  no  one  dare  insist.  While 
we  were  examining  the  singular  absence  of  all  motion  on 
the  part  of  the  troops,  a  bullet  entered  the  head  of  young 
Arrighi,  who  was  standing  between  the  General-in-chief 
and  me.  Some  others  were  killed  afterwards,  General 
Bonaparte  still  refusing  to  retire.  At  last  we  learned  what 
was  the  obstacle  that  prevented  the  troops  from  advancing. 
In  the  interval  between  the  two  assaults,  the  enemy  had 
filled  up  a  wide  ditch  with  all  sorts  of  inflammable  matter, 
so  that  repeated  and  terrible  explosions  killed  all  those  that 
came  near  it.  It  was  too  broad  to  be  crossed  ;  there  were  no 
means  of  turning  it ;  and  our  soldiers  stood  before  that  in- 
surmountable obstacle,  enraged  at  not  being  able  to  advance, 
and  still  resolved  not  to  go  back.  Several  generals  were 
wounded,  and  a  great  number  of  officers  and  soldiers  killed. 
We  lost  the  General  of  division  Bon,  the  Adjutant-general 
Fouler,  and  Croisier,  aide-de-camp  to  the  General-in-chief. 

To  continue  the  siege  would  have  been  paying  too  dearly 
for  the  conquest  of  a  city  already  ravaged  by  the  plague. 
The  disease  had  been  brought  to  the  camp  by  the  second 
light  demi-brigade  that  had  caught  it  at  Damietta.  The 
army  had  also  found  it  at  Jaffa  ;  and  though  it  was  not 
marked  here  by  those  terrible  symptoms  it  had  shown  at 
Alexandria,  and  went  under  the  name  of  a  benign  plague,  it 
still  swept  away  many  victims,  and  would  undoubtedly  have 
cost  us  more  men  still  if  we  had  taken  St.  John  of  Acre. 

General  Bonaparte  felt  convinced  that  that  fever  was 
really  the  plague  ;  the  Physician-in-chief,  Desgenettes, 
alleged,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  was  nothing  more  than  a 
common  fever.  His  opinion  and  arguments  served  to  tran- 
quillise  the  soldiers  ;  but  they  had  one  bad  effect — that  of 
disposing  them  to  neglect  the  caution  necessary  in  all  con- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  187 

tagious  diseases.  He  wished,  however,  to  add  practical 
demonstration  to  his  arguments  by  inoculating  himself 
with  the  plague.  In  the  middle  of  the  hospital,  and  in 
the  presence  of  all  the  sick,  he  plunged  a  lancet  into  the 
bubo  of  one  of  the  patients,  and  pricked  himself  with  it  in 
his  left  side.  This  act,  which  was  the  more  courageous  as 
he  afterwards  acknowledged  that  the  disease  had  really  all 
the  characteristics  of  the  plague,  excited  the  admiration  of 
the  whole  army,  and  insured  to  the  physician  lasting  glory 
with  posterity. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

The  General-in -chief  formed  the  resolution  of  returning  to 
Egypt.  The  favourable  season  for  landing  approached,  and 
he  had  received  advice  that  the  English,  united  with  the 
Turks,  were  to  attempt  one  in  Lower  Egypt.  Measures 
were  immediately  taken  for  sending  away  the  sick,  and 
provisioning  El  Arisch  and  Katisch.  All  the  posts  were 
drawn  back,  and  in  the  night  of  our  departure  the  brigade 
that  was  on  service  in  the  trenches  gradually  evacuated  the 
artillery,  and  only  set  off  themselves  the  next  day,  protecting 
all  they  had  before  them,  and  protected  in  their  turn  by 
the  cavalry.  The  invalids,  who  were  eighteen  hundred  in 
number,  and  who  had  all  been  wounded  by  fire-arms,  were 
placed  in  the  centre  of  the  divisions  to  which  they  belonged  ; 
and,  as  there  were  no  means  of  transport,  all  the  saddle 
horses,  and  even  all  the  asses,  which  the  soldiers  had  in  use 
when  they  came  to  Syria,  to  carry  water  and  provisions, 
served,  on  our  return,  to  bear  the  wounded.  But  when  they 
arrived  at  Jaffa,  the  soldiers,  seeing  before  them  the  terrible 
Desert,  and  aware  of  what  they  must  suffer  in  crossing  it 
without  water,  began  first  to  complain,  and  then  broke  out 
into  mutiny.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  General  Bonaparte 
gave  up  all  his  horses,  without  even  keeping  one  for  his 
private  use.  The  master  of  his  stables  having  had  the 
imprudence  to  supplicate  in  favour  of  the  beloved  mare  of 
the  General,  he  put  himself  in  such  a  passion  that  for  the 
first  time  in  my  life  I  saw  him  strike  a  man.  In  his  rage  he 
went  up  to  him,  and  whipped  him  across  the  body. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  189 

I  must  here  say  a  few  words  on  an  odious  imputation  made 
long  since  against  General  Bonaparte — I  mean  the  pretended 
poisoning  of  the  soldiers  sick  of  the  plague. 

It  is  so  contrary  to  truth  that  General  Bonaparte  proposed 
to  poison  the  unfortunate  men,  that  M.  Larry,  first  surgeon 
to  the  army,  never  ceased  to  pronounce  it  an  atrocious 
calumny  ;  and  he  several  times,  in  the  last  fifteen  years, 
pressed  M.  Desgenettes  to  declare  publicly  with  him  the  fact 
through  the  medium  of  the  press.  The  latter,  having  been 
ill-used  by  the  King's  government,  recoiled  probably  at  the 
thought  of  a  declaration  which  might  make  his  situation 
still  more  painful.  It  is,  besides,  impossible  to  name  any 
person  to  whom  the  proposal  should  have  been  made. 
Finally,  the  calumny  was  spread  by  the  English  while  they 
were  in  Egypt,  and  propagated  by  a  writing  of  Sir  Robert 
Wilson,  who  was  then  extremely  young,  and  who  in  maturer 
age  has  openly  declared  that  he  had  been  mistaken.' 

When,  in  our  return  from  St.  John  of  Acre,  we  stopped 
at  Jaffa,  where  the  plague  had  ceased  its  ravages,  I  received 
from  the  General-in-chief  an  order  to  go  through  the 
numerous  gardens  that  surround  the  town,  and  where  a  sort 
of  lazaretto  had  been  established  for  the  sick,  that  we  might 
take  along  with  us  all  that  were  not  too  ill  to  follow  the 
army.  I  found  five  or  six  poor  soldiers  lying  beneath  the 
trees  :  when  they  saw  me,  they  cried  out,  "  Pray,  Com- 
mander, take  us  with  you  !  We  are  still  able  to  bear  the 
march."  I  replied,  "Try  to  get  up;  endeavour  to  walk." 
But  all  the  symptoms  of  the  plague  were  already  evident. 
Not  one  of  them  could  rise,  and  I  was  obliged  to  leave  them, 
for  no  soldier  would  have  lent  them  his  aid.  I  went  and 
made  my  report  to  General  Bonaparte,  who  was  walking  on 
the  seashore.  He  listened  to  me  without  stopping,  and  we 
came  up  to  a  young  horseman,  who  asked  also  to  be  taken 
with  us,  and  who  succeeded  in  rising  from  the  ground.  The 
General,  touched  with  compassion,  ordered  one  of  his  guides 
'  See  the  Memoirs  of  Bourrienne. — Note  0/ the  Translator. 


I90  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

to  give  his  horse  to  the  poor  sick  man.  Neither  the  authority 
of  the  General,  nor  the  fear  of  punishment,  was  sufficient 
to  enforce  obedience.  The  Colonel  of  the  Guides  was 
obliged  to  go  up  to  him,  and  promise  him  in  a  whisper  a 
great  deal  of  money,  which  motive  was  the  only  one  by 
which  he  was  brought  to  a  decision  ;  and  even  then  the 
Colonel  was  forced  to  use  the  greatest  vigilance  lest  the 
sick  man  should  be  thrown  from  his  horse.  I  believe  he 
remained  at  El  Arisch,  and  I  do  not  know  what  became  of 
him.  As  for  the  poor  soldiers  I  mentioned,  it  is  to  be  hoped 
they  died  in  the  course  of  the  night,  or  at  least  the  following 
day,  so  as  to  have  escaped  from  the  cruel  death  the  Arabs 
prepared  for  all  those  who  fell  into  their  hands.  I  feel  no 
remorse  for  my  conduct  on  that  occasion.  All  I  had  seen 
of  the  plague  at  Alexandria  had  convinced  me  that  it  is  a 
fatal  humanity  that  induces  people  to  come  in  contact  with 
the  infected,  when  they  are  once  arrived  at  the  last  stage  of 
the  disease.  Nevertheless,  I  cannot  think  of  those  unfortu- 
nate men  without  pain  ;  and  if  it  had  been  possible  to  save 
them,  I  would  have  done  it. 

The  army  carried  with  it  eighteen  hundred  wounded  men. 
We  had  succeeded  in  constructing  about  twenty  litters  for 
the  general  officers,  such  as  Lannes  and  Veaux,  Duroc  and 
Croisier  :  the  two  latter  were  aides-de-camp  of  the  General- 
in-chief.  Croisier  died  in  the  Desert.  The  infected  that 
could  not  bear  a  long  journey  were  deposited  at  El  Arisch, 
but  placed  without  the  fort,  under  the  protection  of  a  detach- 
ment of  infantry  that  was  to  defend  them  against  the  attacks 
of  the  Arabs.  Several  of  them  recovered,  and  in  particular 
I  may  name  young  Captain  Digeon,  who  commanded  the 
breach  battery  during  the  whole  siege  :  he  was  a  most 
intrepid  officer,  and  fortune  spared  him.  He  is  now  a 
lieutenant-general.  We  lost  very  few  of  our  wounded 
while  crossing  the  Desert,  and  the  army  made  with  great 
eclat  its  entrance  into  the  capital  of  Egypt. 

This  Syrian  campaign  has  been  judged  with  great  severity 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  191 

by  ofiir  enemies  ;  and  during  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  it 
was  not  allowed  to  speak  impartially  of  its  result.  It  was 
undoubtedly  indispensable  to  enter  into  Syria  to  repel 
Ibrahim  Bey  and  the  troops  which  Djezzar  Pacha  was 
preparing  to  launch  against  Eg3'pt.  The  operations  were 
conducted  with  great  skill.  The  failure  of  St.  John  of  Acre 
must  only  be  attributed  to  some  fatal  circumstances  in- 
dependent of  the  General-in-chief  ;  but  we  must  not  there- 
fore conclude  with  General  Berthier,  that  the  French  army 
really  gained  all  the  advantages  it  expected  to  reap  in  Syria. 
We  lost  in  that  province  three  thousand  men,  several  skilful 
generals  and  hopeful  officers ;  and  we  were  obliged  to  abandon 
the  towns  we  had  taken.  In  quitting  Syria,  we  left  the 
country  just  as  it  was  before  we  entered  it.  Barren  victories 
must  not  be  looked  upon  as  real  advantages  ;  and  if  General 
Bonaparte  had  remained  in  Egypt,  he  would  undoubtedly 
have  beaten  the  Grand  Vizier  when  he  came  the  following 
year  to  drive  us  out  of  Egypt,  and  repulsed  the  English,  who 
had  taken  Aboukir.  But  most  certainly  he  could  not  have 
begun  the  campaign  of  Syria  over  again,  having  no  means 
of  receiving  supplies  from  France  ;  so  that  he  would  with 
difficulty  have  been  able  to  maintain  himself  some  years 
longer  in  Egypt. 

During  the  campaign  of  Syria,  General  Desaix  had  suc- 
ceeded in  keeping  quiet  possession  of  Upper  Egypt,  and 
reducing  Mourad  Bey  to  the  condition  of  a  fugitive.  Lower 
Egypt  had  been  the  scene  of  many  troubles,  occasioned  by  a 
sort  of  fanatic  who  styled  himself  the  Angel  El  Mahade  ; 
but  General  Lanusse  pursued  him  with  so  much  vigour, 
that  he  soon  destroyed  the  troops  he  had  collected. 

The  landing  season  was  fast  approaching.  The  General- 
in-chief  did  not  wish  to  leave  Cairo.  He  therefore  resumed 
the  administration  of  the  country  :  he  busied  himself  with 
filling  up  the  vacant  places  in  the  army  and  completing  the 
corps.  He  had  posted  himself  with  a  part  of  his  cavalry 
near  the  Pyramids,  waiting  for  the  accounts  General  Desaix 


192  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

would  transmit  him  respecting  Mourad  Bey,  whom  that 
general  was  pursuing  in  his  last  entrenchment,  and  who  it 
was  supposed  would  throw  himself  into  the  Oases  that  are 
situated  at  a  short  distance  from  the  Pyramids. 

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  great  Pyramid  had  been 
opened  several  centuries  ago  by  the  Arabs.  General  Bona- 
parte had  resolved  to  visit  the  interior  of  that  structure  with 
Messieurs  Monge,  Berthollet,  and  Duroc.  I  only  mention  this 
circumstance  because  his  name  has  been  written  in  the  great 
gallery  leading  to  the  chamber  called  the  King's  Chamber. 
He  had  scarcely  come  out  of  the  Pyramid,  when  an  express 
sent  off  by  General  Marmont,  who  commanded  at  Alexan- 
dria, brought  him  tidings  of  the  landing  of  a  Turkish  army 
at  Aboukir,  where  they  had  made  themselves  masters  of  the 
great  redoubt  and  of  the  fort,  after  having  massacred  our 
soldiers  that  defended  them.  The  attack  was  quite  un- 
expected, and  the  Turkish  army  was  so  numerous  that 
General  Marmont  had  not  thought  fit  to  march  against 
them  at  the  head  of  his  garrison,  for  fear  he  might  not 
be  able  to  prevent  their  disembarking,  and  might,  moreover, 
endanger  the  city  of  Alexandria,  the  fortifications  of  which 
were  not  yet  completed,  and  which  besides  contained  all  the 
resources  we  possessed  in  artillery  and  ammunition. 

It  was  to  be  expected  that  after  the  enemy  had  taken  the 
fort  he  would  spread  about  the  country  and  attack  either 
Alexandria  or  Rosetta.  Instead  of  that,  he  fortified  himself 
in  the  peninsula  of  Aboukir,  evidently  waiting  for  Mourad 
Bey,  with  whose  desperate  condition  he  was  not  yet 
acquainted. 

General  Bonaparte  resolved,  therefore,  to  march  rapidly 
against  him.  The  distance  from  the  Pyramid  to  Aboukir  is 
more  than  eighty  leagues.  On  the  fourth  day  the  army 
arrived  at  Alexandria  ;  on  the  7th  of  Thermidor  it  was 
assembled  within  a  league  of  Aboukir,  under  the  orders  of 
the  Division-Generals  Lannes  and  Lanusse,  and  Murat  for 
the  cavalry.    The  enemy  was  retrenched  in  front  of  Aboukir, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  193 

on  the  sandy  hillocks  of  which  he  had  made  redoubts,  and 
under  the  protection  of  the  English  gunboats.  His  force 
consisted  of  about  seventeen  thousand  men,  with  twelve 
pieces  of  cannon.  The  General  quickly  made  his  disposi- 
tions, and  ordered  General  Dastaneg  to  attack  the  enemy's 
left,  which  he  put  to  flight  after  a  long  resistance.  The 
Turks  fled  towards  the  village  of  Aboukir  ;  but  a  part  of  the 
cavalry,  that  was  in  the  centre,  pursued  them,  sabred  and 
drove  them  into  the  sea.  The  right  of  the  enemy  was 
attacked  with  equal  vigour.  The  division  of  Lannes  made 
themselves  masters  of  the  redoubt,  which  being  turned  by  a 
squadron  of  cavalry,  the  Turks  had  no  other  resource  left 
but  to  throw  themselves  into  the  sea.  It  was  a  horrible 
sight  to  contemplate  nearly  ten  thousand  men  of  whom 
nothing  was  to  be  seen  but  their  heads  covered  with 
turbans,  and  who  were  seeking  in  vain  to  reach  the 
English  fleet  anchored  at  more  than  half  a  league  from 
the  shore.  Two  thousand  men  had  sought  a  refuge  on 
the  strand,  at  the  foot  of  a  rock  that  covered  them.  It 
was  impossible  to  make  them  comprehend  that  they  might . 
surrender  by  laying  down  their  arms.  We  were  obliged  to 
kill  them  all  to  a  man,  but  they  sold  dearly  their  lives. 
General  Murat  was  wounded  by  a  bullet  in  his  head  ; 
Guibert,  aide-de-camp  to  the  General-in-chief,  was  killed, 
and  the  corps  of  engineers,  that  had  already  suffered  so 
severely,  lost  Colonel  Cretin,  who  had  succeeded  to  the  post 
of  General  Caffarelli.  Wounded  by  two  bullets,  the  Colonel 
was  lying  before  the  door  of  a  house  in  the  village  occupied 
by  the  Turks.  Eight  persons  had  already  been  killed  or 
wounded  in  seeking  to  get  him  away.  Bertrand,  who  was 
at  that  time  a  major  of  engineers,  devoted  himself  to  save 
his  commander  :  he  rushed  into  the  house,  followed  by 
twenty  sappers,  and  succeeded  in  killing  every  one  of  the 
Turks  ;  but  he  was  severely  wounded,  and  Colonel  Cretin 
did  not  survive  the  injuries  he  had  suffered. 

After  the  victory  was  gained,  the  fort  of  Aboukir,  still 

14 


194  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

remained  to  be  taken.  General  Lannes,  who  was  not  yet 
recovered  from  the  wounds  he  had  received  at  St.  John  of 
Acre,  got  the  command  of  the  troops  that  were  to  invest  the 
place.  I  was  with  him.  The  day  after  the  departure  of  the 
General-in-chief,  I  accompanied  General  Lannes  on  a  visit 
to  the  posts,  when  a  furious  sortie  of  Turkish  troops  sur- 
prised our  advanced  posts,  and  the  unfortunate  General 
received  a  bullet  in  his  leg.  It  was  the  eighth  wound  he 
got  from  fire-arms. 

Fortunately  the  enemy  had  no  water  in  the  fort  ot 
Aboukir,  so  that  he  surrendered  four  days  after  the  battle. 

During  the  short  stay  of  the  General-in-chief  at  Aboukir, 
he  had  some  communications  with  Sir  Sidney  Smith,  by  the 
medium  of  his  secretary.  We  had  not  received  for  a  long 
time  any  news  from  Europe,  and  the  English  Commodore 
took  a  malicious  pleasure  in  acquainting  us,  by  the  news- 
papers, of  the  situation  of  the  Republic.  We  learned  that 
the  whole  south  of  Italy  was  evacuated,  that  war  was  waging 
on  the  frontiers  of  Piedmont,  and  that  France  was  in  the 
most  desperate  condition.  General  Bonaparte  took  great 
care  not  to  let  the  army  know  these  dismal  accounts  ;  but, 
fi-om  that  moment,  he  resolved  to  return  to  Europe,  con- 
vinced that  he  alone  was  capable  of  repairing  the  evils  the 
bad  government  of  the  Directory  had  accumulated  on  the 
country. 

After  the  surrender  of  the  fort  of  Aboukir,  the  defence  of 
which  had  only  lasted  four  days.  General  Bonaparte  went 
back  to  Cairo  ;  but  not  before  he  had  given  secret  orders 
to  General  Gantheaume,  who  commanded  the  marines  at 
Alexandria,  to  arm  and  provision  the  two  frigates  Miiiron 
and  Carrere.  He  then  spread  the  report  that  he  was  going 
to  travel  to  Upper  Egypt,  but  that  he  would  perhaps  first 
take  a  trip  in  the  Delta.  The  news  of  his  intended  journey 
put  everybody  on  the  alert,  in  the  expectation  of  receiving 
his  praises.  He  spent  a  fortnight  in  regulating  once  more 
the  administration  of  Egypt,  provisioning  its  strong  places, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  195 

and  writing  to  the  Grand  Vizier  ;  and  when  all  his  measures 
were  duly  taken,  he  went  down  the  Nile  again,  after  having 
appointed  General  Kleber  to  meet  him  near  Alexandria, 
that  he  might  deliver  over  the  command  into  his  hands  ; 
but  that  general  not  having  arrived  in  time,  his  despatches 
were  sent  to  him  ;  and,  at  ten  o'clock  at  night,  the  General- 
in-chief,  accompanied  by  his  staff,  and  leaving  his  horses  on 
the  shore,  embarked  on  board  of  the  Miuron.  He  took  with 
him  Generals  Berthier  and  Gantheaume,  Messieurs  Monge 
and  Berthollet,  his  aides-de-camp,  Eugene  Beauharnais, 
Duroc,  Merlin,  and  his  private  secretary.  In  the  frigate 
Carrere  went  Generals  Lannes  and  Murat,  both  wounded, 
Marmont,  Messieurs  Denon,  Castas,  and  Parseval-Grand- 
maison.  The  scientific  commission  had  been  for  some 
months  in  Upper  Egypt. 

Our  passage  presented  many  difficulties.  The  secretary  of 
Sir  Sidney  Smith,  in  a  conversation  with  me,  had  allowed 
the  observation  to  escape  that  there  was  a  great  advantage 
in  blockading  out  of  sight.  We  were  therefore  to  expect 
that  we  should  find  the  English  Commodore  in  our  way. 
In  that  case  the  frigate  Carrere  had  received  orders  to 
engage,  so  as  to  give  the  Miiiron  time  to  escape.  But  both 
the  frigates  were  Venetian-built  ships,  and  very  bad  sailers  ; 
it  became  therefore  necessary  to  make  use  of  some  stratagem 
to  avoid  being  seen.  Admiral  Gantheaume  thought  the  best 
way  would  be  to  run,  for  thirty  days,  along  the  flat  shores  of 
Africa,  where  no  ships  reconnoitre,  and  to  make  short  tacks 
of  half  a  league,  without  ever  standing  far  out  to  sea.  The 
time  appeared  very  long  to  us  all  ;  for  it  would  have  been 
imprudent  to  keep  a  light  at  night,  so  that  we  were  obliged 
to  go  to  bed  with  the  sun.  Our  days  were  spent  in  reading, 
or  discussing  various  topics  ;  the  inexhaustible  information 
of  our  two  learned  travelling  companions  filled  up  our  time 
in  a  very  agreeable  manner.  Plutarch  frequently  came  to 
our  assistance  ;  and  sometimes,  during  our  long  evenings, 
the  General-in-chief  would  tell  us  ghost  stories,  in  which  he 


196  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

was  very  clever.  The  situation  of  France,  and  the  future 
state  of  the  country,  were  often  the  subjects  of  his  reflections. 
He  never  mentioned  the  government  of  the  Directory  but 
with  a  degree  of  severity  that  savoured  of  contempt.  In  the 
meanwhile  his  conversation  never  betrayed  what  he  intended 
to  do  ;  though  some  words  that  escaped  him,  some  musings, 
and  some  indirect  insinuations,  gave  a  wide  scope  to  our 
surmises.  His  administration  in  Egypt  had  been  pure,  his 
operations  full  of  genius  ;  but  was  that  enough  to  clear  him 
in  the  eyes  of  a  government  that  feared  him,  and  was  far 
from  wishing  well  to  him  ?  He  would  be  obliged  to  make 
war  ;  but  could  he  submit  to  the  plans  of  a  government 
deprived  of  military  knowledge,  that  might  place  him  in  an 
awkward  situation,  and  give  his  rivals  means  of  success  which 
they  would  refuse  to  allow  him  ?  These  different  ideas  made 
him  very  thoughtful. 

At  last  the  east  wind  began  to  blow  in  a  constant  manner. 
We  passed  Cape  Bone  during  the  night,  and  we  arrived 
speedily  at  Ajaccio.  This  little  town  is  the  birthplace  of  the 
General-in-chief :  he  had  left  it  eight  years  before,  when  he 
was  only  a  captain  of  artillery.  At  the  sight  of  this  place 
his  heart  was  deeply  affected.  Coming  from  Egypt,  where 
the  plague  still  prevailed,  it  was  impossible  for  us  to  enter 
the  port.  The  inhabitants,  surprised  to  see  the  Admiral's 
flag  hoisted  on  the  mainmast,  rushed  towards  the  shore  ;  but 
when  they  learned  that  their  illustrious  countryman  was  on 
board  his  old  friends  and  relations  threw  themselves  into  a 
number  of  boats,  came  on  board  the  frigate,  and  broke 
through  the  quarantine.  There  was,  however,  no  great 
danger,  for  after  forty-four  days'  navigation  we  had  not  one 
sick  person  on  board.  Among  the  crowd  that  was  bustling 
round  the  state  cabin  there  was  an  old  woman  dressed  in 
black,  who  continually  held  up  her  hands  to  the  General, 
saying,  "  Caro  figlio  !  "  without  being  able  to  attract  his 
attention.  At  last  he  perceived  her,  and  cried  out  '■'•  Madre  !  " 
It  was  his  nurse,  who  is  still  living  at  the  moment  I  write  this. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  197 

The  General-in-chief  learned  here,  though  in  a  confused 
manner,  what  had  happened  in  France  during  his  absence. 
Italy  was  lost,  and  Massena  continued  fighting  like  a  lion  in 
Switzerland.  In  the  interior  the  confusion  had  been  very 
great.  Treilhard  and  Merlin  were  no  longer  members  of  the 
Directory  ;  their  places  were  occupied  by  the  lawyer  Gohier 
and  General  Moulin.  On  hearing  the  latter  name,  the 
General-in-chief  turned  to  Berthier  and  said,  "  Who  is  this 
General  Moulin  ? "  "I  never  heard  his  name  mentioned 
before,"  answered  Berthier.  General  Bonaparte  put  the 
same  question  to  all  of  us,  and  received  the  same  answer. 
That  man's  nomination  caused  him  to  reflect  deeply. 
Astonished  not  to  see  any  of  the  authorities  from  the 
land,  he  soon  learned  that  the  members  of  the  munici- 
pality, and  those  of  the  departmental  directory,  had  sent 
each  other  to  prison.  The  commissary  of  the  Government, 
a  stranger  to  the  country,  was  sole  master  in  that  state  of 
confusion.  The  cabinet  revolution  had  soon  become  known 
at  Ajaccio,  and  the  different  parties  found  it  the  most 
natural  thing  in  the  world  to  persecute  one  another. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

It  was  necessary  to  re-establish  some  order  in  the  midst 
of  so  much  anarchy.  In  consequence,  the  General-in -chief 
went  to  his  own  house,  sent  for  the  magistrates,  whom  he 
delivered  out  of  prison,  exhorted  them  to  peace  and  concord, 
and  the  next  morning  the  two  frigates  left  the  port,  sailing 
in  the  direction  of  the  Isles  of  Hyeres.  The  whole  of  the 
first  day  our  navigation  was  very  favourable.  We  perceived 
already  the  hills  of  Provence,  and  our  joy  at  returning  to 
our  dear  country  was  carried  to  its  highest  pitch,  when  the 
sailor  who  was  on  the  look-out  said  he  espied  two  large  ships 
in  the  west.  They  could  be  no  other  than  enemy's  ships, 
and  soon  several  discharges  of  cannon  seemed  to  indicate 
that  they  had  discovered  us.  The  General-in-chief  called 
a  council,  and  the  universal  opinion, — even  that  of  the 
admiral, — was  that  General  Bonaparte  had  nothing  else  to 
do  than  to  throw  himself  into  the  post-boat  that  accompanied 
us  and  return  to  Ajaccio.  He  was  indignant  at  such  advice. 
"  Do  you  think,"  said  he,  "  that  I  can  consent  to  run  away 
like  a  coward,  when  fortune  has  never  ceased  to  favour  me  ? 
Let  us  continue  our  course.  My  destiny  is  not  to  be  taken 
and  die  here."  So  we  went  on  ;  but  instead  of  steering, 
as  we  had  done  till  then,  in  the  direction  of  the  Isles  of 
Hyeres,  we  resolved  to  go  to  Frejus.  The  General-in-chief 
had  judged  rightly.  The  enemy,  whom  we  distinguished 
with  facility,  because  they  were  under  the  setting  sun,  could 
not   perceive   us,   because   we  were   in  the_  shade.      After 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  199 

standing  on  the  whole  night,  the  two  frigates  reached  the 
roads  of  Frejus.  The  Sanitary  establishment  was  situated 
at  about  a  quarter  of  a  league  from  the  town.  An  officer 
of  the  frigate  went  towards  the  shore  in  a  boat.  We  dis- 
tinguished him  perfectly  well.  Some  men  came  to  meet 
him  ;  but  after  a  few  minutes  we  perceived  a  great  confusion : 
some  people  ran  towards  the  town,  and  soon  after  the  strand 
was  covered  with  an  immense  multitude  of  persons.  The 
boats  were  filled,  and,  as  at  Ajaccio,  a  number  of  men  rushed 
on  board  of  the  ship  through  the  portholes.  The  cries  of 
"  Long  live  Bonaparte  !  "  resounded  all  over  the  country. 
A  white  horse  was  brought  for  him,  and  he  went  to  the 
house  of  a  brother  of  the  Abbe  Sieyes,  who  lived  at  Frejus. 
The  sentiments  that  animated  the  whole  population  were 
expressed  in  a  manner  that  did  not  leave  even  the  shadow  of 
a  doubt.  "  You  alone  can  save  France,"  was  the  universal 
cry.  "  She'll  perish  but  for  you  :  it  is  Heaven  that  sent  you  ; 
seize  the  reins  of  government  !  "  His  journey  to  Lyons 
was  a  triumphal  march.  We  arrived  in  that  city  at  seven 
o'clock  in  the  morning.  His  having  landed  was  already 
known,  and  his  arrival  wished  for  with  an  ardour  impossible 
to  describe.  Lyons  was  still  famous  for  its  antipathy  to  the 
Republican  government,  and  we  imagined  that  the  General 
would  not  stop  ;  but  to  our  great  astonishment  he  declared 
that  he  intended  to  spend  the  remainder  of  the  day  there. 
He  received  all  the  authorities  and  most  distinguished 
citizens  ;  without  explaining  himself,  however,  on  the  direct 
insinuations  that  were  made  to  him  to  place  himself  at 
the  head  of  the  government,  but  receiving  with  a  cold 
severity  the  Republicans  that  had  organised  a  constitutional 
club,  and  who  came  to  congratulate  him.  He  had  been 
invited  to  go  to  the  theatre  of  the  Cclestins,  where  a  piece 
and  a  song  had  been  prepared  for  the  occasion.  He  chose 
one  of  the  boxes  on  a  level  with  the  pit ;  and  Duroc  having, 
by  his  order,  placed  himself  in  the  front  of  the  box,  the  call 
for  Bonaparte  grew  so  violent  and  so  unanimous,  that  the 


200  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

General-in-chief  was  obliged  to  change  places  with  him 
during  the  whole  representation. 

Towards  midnight  he  set  off,  and  passed  through  theBour- 
bonnais,  wishing  to  avoid  Macon,  where  the  Republican  club 
had  exasperated  the  aristocratic  classes.  From  the  very  first 
day  of  his  arrival  at  Paris,  the  General-in-chief  applied  him- 
self to  avoid  the  eyes  of  the  multitude,  who  were  so  desirous 
of  seeing  him  and  expressing  their  enthusiasm.  His  inter- 
view with  the  Directory  was  cold  and  unceremonious.  The 
members  that  composed  it  at  that  time  were  Barras,  General 
Moulin,  and  Gohier,  who  shared  the  same  sentiments  ; 
Sieyes  and  Roger  Ducos  were  in  the  opposition.  It  was 
said  at  that  time  that  the  two  latter,  despairing  of  being 
able  to  maintain  the  Republican  system,  and  wishing  to 
prevent  at  any  rate  the  re-establishment  of  the  Bourbons 
in  France,  had  cast  their  eyes  on  a  prince  of  the  House  of 
Spain,  whose  power  would  have  been  circumscribed  in  such 
narrow  limits  that  Liberty  and  all  the  principles  of  the 
Revolution  would  have  been  in  safety.  Whatever  may  be 
the  truth  of  that  anecdote,  it  is,  however,  certain  that  these 
two  Directors,  when  they  explained  to  General  Bonaparte 
the  disposition  of  the  people's  minds,  and  the  impossibility 
of  continuing  any  longer  under  the  directorial  form  of 
government,  entreated  him  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of 
an  insurrection  that  might  overthrow  it.  A  feeling  of 
affection  that  the  General  had  preserved  for  Barras  per- 
suaded him  to  make  some  indirect  overtures  to  that  Director 
to  draw  him  into  his  party.  Barras  refused,  either  because 
he  had  entered  into  secret  engagements  with  the  House  or 
Bourbon,  or  rather  by  a  want  of  enlightened  views,  and  by 
the  Republican  sentiments  he  could  not  decide  to  give  up. 

It  became,  therefore,  necessary  to  do  without  him,  and, 
moreover,  to  take  a  speedy  resolution.  France  was  op- 
pressed by  the  expenses  of  the  war,  and  disgusted  with  a 
violent  government  which,  perceiving  that  its  enemies 
were  augmented  from  day  to  day,  and  wishing  to  place  in 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  201 

the  same  predicament  the  disaffected  that  its  administration 
created,  with  its  inveterate  enemies  of  the  aristocratic  classes 
and  the  families  of  the  emigrants,  loaded  all  indiscriminately 
with  the  same  rigour.  The  fear  of  the  influence  of  the 
emigrants,  and  of  a  return  to  a  monarchical  system,  made 
the  Directors  lean  towards  those  rigorous  measures  that  had 
caused  the  success  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare,  and 
most  of  their  acts  bore  the  marks  of  these  measures.  Their 
partisans,  that  were  no  longer  to  be  found  anywhere  else 
than  among  a  part  of  the  public  officers,  were  perpetually 
exciting  their  anxiety  on  the  spirit  of  the  army  ;  and 
General  Bonaparte,  in  particular,  inspired  them  with  alarms 
that  could  not  fail  soon  to  produce  a  violent  attack  against 
him.  These  partisans  of  the  Directory  formed,  nevertheless, 
everywhere  a  minority,  and  especially  in  the  two  councils  ; 
but  their  activity  and  their  audacious  spirit  compensated 
for  the  smallness  of  their  numbers.  The  General-in-chief 
arrived  on  the  26th  of  Vendemiaire  ;  the  conspiracy  that 
was  to  overturn  the  Directory  was  arranged  and  decided  in 
the  first  days  of  Brumaire,  and  several  members  of  the  two 
Councils  had  been  entrusted  with  the  secret.  Government 
wishing,  however,  to  show  General  Bonaparte  a  public 
testimony  of  satisfaction,  resolved  to  give  him  a  splendid 
dinner.  It  was  decided  that  the  board  should  be  spread 
in  the  nave  of  the  Church  of  St.  Sulpice.  Arrangements 
were  made  to  bring  together  the  two  Councils  and  all  the 
high  officers  of  the  State.  The  General-in-chief  went  there 
with  a  few  generals  and  with  his  staff.  An  immense  table 
in  the  form  of  a  horseshoe  filled  the  whole  church.  The 
General-in-chief  sat  next  to  the  President  of  the  Directory. 
He  trusted  so  little  to  the  good  faith  of  the  Government  that 
he  ordered  a  loaf  of  bread  and  half  a  bottle  of  wine  to  be 
brought  there  for  his  private  use.  I  had  not  been  previously 
informed  of  that  circumstance,  and  I  only  learned  it  when 
Duroc  asked  me  in  the  church  for  those  two  articles  of 
provision  which  were  fetched  from  the  General's  coach.     I 


202  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

never  witnessed  a  more  silent  assembly,  nor  one  where  the 
guests  showed  less  confidence  and  cheerfulness.  Scarcely 
any  one  addressed  his  neighbour,  and  those  who  were  in  the 
secret  of  the  plot  preferred  not  to  speak  rather  than  to  risk 
dangerous  conversation  with  neighbours  who  might  differ 
in  opinion  with  them.  The  toasts  that  were  given  were 
received  without  enthusiasm,  even  the  one  meant  for 
General  Bonaparte,  so  deeply  were  the  minds  of  every 
one  prepossessed  with  their  own  private  thoughts.  After 
having  sat  for  about  half  an  hour,  the  General  got  up, 
walked  slowly  round  the  tables,  addressed  a  few  words  to 
the  guests,  escaped  by  a  side  door,  and  was  back  in  his 
own  lodgings  before  any  one  had  observed  his  absence. 

The  most  celebrated  general  officers  of  the  army  were 
at  the  time  nearly  all  at  Paris.  Moreau,  Macdonald, 
Bournonville,  generals-in-chief,  had  entered  into  the  plot. 
Augereau,  member  of  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred,  had 
not  been  made  acquainted  with  it,  nor  Bernadotte.  The 
opinions  of  the  latter  were  rather  violent ;  and  a  feeling 
of  jealousy,  the  cause  of  which  was  not  extremely  honourable 
to  them,  had  rendered  them  both  enemies  of  General  Bona- 
parte. His  having  formerly  commanded  in  Paris  insured 
him  the  friendship  of  all  the  officers  of  the  staff  ;  whilst  the 
colonels  of  the  regiments  that  held  garrison  in  the  metropolis 
were  all  equally  devoted  to  his  person. 

Notwithstanding  the  precautions  that  had  been  taken 
to  keep  the  whole  affair  a  secret,  it  had,  however,  spread 
among  the  higher  classes,  and  almost  all  the  military 
residing  in  Paris.  The  three  members  of  the  Directory 
learned  it  also  ;  and  then  for  the  first  time  the  force  of 
public  opinion  made  them  start  back  before  the  measures 
they  might  so  easily  have  taken  to  annihilate  the  conspiracy. 
It  would  undoubtedly  have  been  sufficient  to  have  appre- 
hended the  General  during  the  night  ;  but  then  what  would 
they  have  done  with  him  ?  How  would  they  have  made 
out  any  charge  against  him  ?     Where  would   they   have 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  203 

found  judges  ?  The  General-in-chief  was  so  sensible  of  his 
real  situation,  that  he  took  no  precaution  whatever  for  his 
personal  security.  He  was  surrounded  by  nobody  but  his 
aides-de-camp  :  he  seldom  went  out,  and  worked  principally 
with  Roedeur,  in  whom  he  placed  his  chief  confidence. 

On  the  1 6th  of  Brumaire  there  was  so  little  appearance 
of  the  plot  bursting  the  following  day,  that  Eugene  and  I 
passed  the  evening  at  a  ball,  where  he  remained  a  part  of  the 
night,  and  I  left  at  midnight  because  that  was  the  hour 
when  my  duty  began.  The  next  morning  at  six  o'clock  the 
sixty  officers  on  duty  in  the  quarter  were  assembled  in  the 
courtyard  of  the  General's  house  in  the  Rue  de  la  Victoire. 
The  General  explained  to  them  in  a  forcible  manner  the 
desperate  situation  of  the  Republic,  and  asked  of  them 
a  testimony  of  devotion  to  his  person,  with  an  oath  of 
allegiance  to  the  two  Chambers.  He  then  mounted  his 
horse  and  flew  to  the  Carrousel,  where  he  found  Sebastiani 
at  the  head  of  his  regiment,  the  fifth  dragoons.  On  entering 
the  Tuileries,  he  also  found  the  guards  of  the  Directory, 
whom  their  colonel  had  brought  to  remain  at  the  disposal 
of  the  Council  of  the  Elders.  The  Minister  of  the  War 
Department  had,  nevertheless,  two  days  beforehand  strictly 
prohibited  the  chiefs  of  the  different  corps  from  making  the 
slightest  movement  without  his  orders,  under  pain  of  death. 
But  besides  the  little  esteem  and  confidence  which  that 
minister  (Dubois  de  Crance)  inspired,  the  troops  were 
delighted  on  finding  themselves  placed  under  the  command 
of  General  Bonaparte.  Their  enthusiasm  was  so  great  that 
they  would  not  have  hesitated  a  moment  to  fire  on  the 
Directory  if  they  had  received  an  order  to  that  effect. 

General  Bonaparte  presented  himself  at  the  bar  of  the 
Elders,  where  M.  Le  Mercier  was  in  the  chair.  He  there 
received  the  decree  by  which  he  was  appointed  Gcneral-in- 
chief  of  the  troops  of  the  first  division,  and  an  order  to 
march  next  day  to  St.  Cloud,  where  the  two  Councils  were 
to  hold  their  sitting.     In  fact,  the  following  day  the  majority 


204  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

of  the  two  Councils  assembled  in  the  Palace  of  St.  Cloud. 
The  General  had  required  M.  Gohier,  President  of  the 
Directory,  to  tender  his  resignation  ;  but  he  refused  ;  and, 
as  a  lawyer,  the  reason  he  gave  was  that  the  order  was  con- 
trary to  the  Constitution.  His  wife  remained  with  Madame 
Bonaparte,  and  they  were  obliged  to  work  upon  her  alarm 
to  obtain  her  husband's  submission. 

The  Council  of  Elders,  not  being  very  numerous,  had 
been  easily  accommodated  in  one  of  the  large  apartments  ; 
but  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred,  which  was  to  sit  in  the 
Conserv^atory,  had  not  yet  been  able  to  assemble,  because 
the  preparations  were  not  completed.  In  consequence,  the 
sitting  did  not  open  till  three  o'clock.  Lucien  Bonaparte 
was  in  the  chair.  Great  excitement  prevailed  ;  the  friends 
of  the  Directory  seemed  to  be  more  numerous  than  the  day 
before.  They  all  showed  themselves  indignant  at  a  measure 
which,  bearing  all  the  characteristics  of  a  coup  d^etat,  pre- 
sented besides  what  they  called  liherticide  violence^  and  an 
odious  violation  of  the  Constitution.  Scarcely  had  the 
debates  begun,  when  one  of  the  members  proposed  that  each 
individually  should  mount  the  tribune,  and  swear  allegiance 
to  the  Constitution  of  the  Year  III.  The  General  had  given 
me  orders  to  remain  in  the  hall,  and  bring  him  every  five 
minutes  a  report  of  what  was  going  forward.  The  cere- 
mony of  the  oath  was  undoubtedly  meant  to  gain  time  and 
prolong  the  sitting  until  night  should  fall  in.  In  the  space 
of  five  minutes,  no  more  than  three  oaths  were  taken  ;  so 
that  it  was  evident  more  than  five  hours  would  elapse  before 
the  ceremony  was  terminated.  I  acquainted  General  Bona- 
parte with  the  circumstance,  and  found  him  walking  with 
much  agitation  in  an  apartment  that  had  no  other  furniture 
than  two  armchairs.  Sieyes  was  alone  with  him,  sitting 
next  to  the  chimney,  before  a  burning  faggot  which  he  was 
poking  with  a  stick,  for  there  was  not  even  a  pair  of  tongs. 
After  having  listened  to  what  I  had  to  say.  General  Bona- 
parte turned  abruptly  to  Sieyes  and  observed  :  "  Now  you 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  205 

see  what  they  are  doing." — "  Oh  !  oh  !  "  answered  the  other 
coolly,  "  to  swear  to  a  part  of  the  Constitution  may  be 
right  ;  but  to  the  whole  Constitution — that  is  too  much  !  " 

I  retired  to  the  adjoining  apartment,  where  I  found  about 
thirty  officers  of  the  staff,  and  General  Berthier  in  the  midst 
of  them.  All  their  faces  were  lengthened  ;  and  they  looked 
gloomy.  When  I  told  General  Berthier  what  was  going 
forward  at  the  Five  Hundred,  he  grew  pale  and  heaved 
a  sigh.  But  all  of  a  sudden  the  folding-door  opened,  and 
General  Bonaparte  appeared,  beating  the  floor  with  his  whip 
and  exclaiming:  "This  must  have  an  end!"  They  all 
rushed  out,  and  we  soon  found  ourselves  at  the  entrance  of 
the  courtyard,  where  a  regiment  of  infantry,  just  arrived 
from  Paris,  were  ranged  in  line  of  battle.  He  assembled  the 
officers,  harangued  them  for  a  few  minutes  ;  and  then,  turn- 
ing his  horse's  head,  he  galloped  back  to  the  foot  of  the 
great  staircase,  which  he  rapidly  ascended,  and  presented 
himself  at  the  bar  of  the  Council  of  the  Elders.  The  speech 
he  made  there  was  faithfully  reported  in  the  papers  of  the 
time  ;  but  his  agitation  of  mind  was  carried  to  such  a  pitch, 
that  he  hesitated,  and  his  words  were  uttered  with  the 
utmost  disorder.  When  he  arrived  at  that  part  of  his 
speech  where  he  mentioned  that  a  great  plot  had  been 
formed  against  Liberty,  one  of  the  members  of  the  Council 
said  coolly  to  him  :  "  General,  you  must  reveal  that  plot." 
Instead  of  answering  him,  the  General  continued  still  in 
a  little  confusion  ;  but  at  last  recovering  his  presence 
of  mind,  he  went  on  with  a  firmer  voice,  and  finished  his 
speech.  One  part  of  the  Council  had  shared  his  emotion  ; 
the  other,  on  the  contrary,  enjoyed  his  confusion  ;  and  as 
the  Council  was  to  deliberate  on  what  he  had  said,  he  with- 
drew. But,  instead  of  returning  to  the  place  he  had  come 
from,  he  went  to  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred.  In  the 
vestibule  he  found  the  grenadiers,  who  took  up  arms.  The 
noise  they  made  alarmed  the  Assembly  ;  and  when  Bona- 
parte presented  himself,  a  great  number  of  members  rushed 


2o6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

forward  to  meet  him  with  angry  cries,  among  which  one 
might  have  distinguished  the  word  dictator.  He  was  so 
pressed  between  the  deputies,  his  staff,  and  the  grenadiers, 
who  had  rushed  to  the  door  of  the  apartment,  that  I 
thought  for  a  moment  he  would  be  smothered.  He  could 
neither  advance  nor  go  back.  At  last  those  who  had 
accompanied  him  felt  that  it  was  necessary  to  open  a 
passage  for  him,  and  they  succeeded,  though  not  without 
violent  efforts.  He  then  went  down  again  to  the  court- 
yard, mounted  his  horse,  and  remaining  at  the  foot  of  the 
staircase,  he  sent  an  order  for  the  President  to  come  to  him, 
which  the  latter  did  as  soon  as  he  could  escape.  In  the 
meanwhile  the  confusion  in  the  Assembly  was  carried  to  the 
highest  pitch  :  several  members  rushing  towards  the  win- 
dows which  opened  into  the  courtyard,  pointed  to  him  and 
cried  out :  "  Down  with  the  Dictator  ! — let  him  be  out- 
lawed !  "  At  that  moment,  M.  de  Talleyrand,  Arnaud  the 
poet,  and  some  other  persons  with  whom  I  was  talking, 
suddenly  turned  as  pale  as  death  :  they  all  fled  except  those 
I  have  named.  The  terrible  word  of  outlaw  {liors  la  hi) 
still  possessed  all  its  magic  force  ;  and  if  a  general  of  some 
reputation  had  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  troops  of  the 
interior,  it  would  be  difficult  to  guess  what  might  have 
happened.  But  the  General  took  a  resolution,  and  gave 
Murat  orders  to  clear  the  hall.  Murat  placed  Colonel 
Dujardin  at  the  head  of  a  detachment  of  grenadiers,  who 
crossed  the  hall  at  a  quick  pace.  When  the  colonel  was  at 
the  end  of  the  hall,  he  turned  round  towards  the  members 
who  filled  the  benches  ;  but  these,  getting  out  by  the 
windows,  disappeared,  and  laid  down  their  costume,  which 
consisted  of  a  sort  of  Roman  toga  with  a  square  cap. 

When  General  Bonaparte  entered  the  hall  of  the  Council 
of  Five  Hundred,  one  of  the  grenadiers  who  had  followed 
him  received  a  thrust  from  a  dagger,  which  penetrated  his 
coat,  and  which  in  all  probability  had  been  meant  for  the 
General.     The  grenadier  was  rewarded,  and  I  think  died 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  207 

a  captain.  The  deputy  marked  out  as  the  assassin  was 
a  Corsican,  called  Arena  :  he  perished  a  short  time  after, 
being  implicated  in  the  conspiracy  of  which  Coracchi  and 
Topineau  Lebrun  were  at  the  head,  and  the  object  of  which 
was  to  assassinate  the  First  Consul  at  the  Opera,  in  the 
midst  of  the  confusion  they  intended  to  create  by  letting 
oflf  squibs.  Having  left  France  a  few  days  after  the  i8th 
Brumaire,  I  could  obtain  no  particulars  of  the  affair. 

Immediately  after  the  expulsion  of  the  deputies,  the 
members  of  the  two  Councils  who  had  been  appointed  to 
consult  on  the  measures  that  were  to  be  taken  met  ;  and  on 
the  19th  the  city  of  Paris,  and  soon  after  all  the  rest  of 
France,  learned  that  General  Bonaparte  had  been  created 
First  Consul,  and  that  Messrs.  Cambaceres  and  Lebrun  were 
to  be  Second  and  Third  Consuls  with  him.^  The  former 
had  been  a  magistrate  in  the  Parliament  of  Aix.  He  was 
celebrated  for  his  thorough  information  and  his  conciliating 
temper.  He  had  sat  in  the  Convention,  and  his  mitigated 
vote  in  the  King's  trial  gave  the  true  measure  of  the  weak- 
ness of  his  disposition.  The  Third  Consul,  M.  Lebrun,  was 
said  to  have  written  the  beautiful  ordinances  of  Chancellor 
Maupeon,  whose  Secretary  he  had  been.  He  was  a  very 
well-informed  man,  and  published  two  remarkable  transla- 
tions, one  of  the  "  Iliad,"  and  the  other  of  Tasso's  "  Jeru- 
salem Delivered."  He  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  great 
financier.  The  discernment  of  the  First  Consul  in  appoint- 
ing him  was  universally  applauded. 

The  Minister  of  Police  at  that  period  was  M.  Fouche, 

subsequently  Duke  of  Otranto.     On  the  17th  Brumaire  he 

had  pledged  his  word  to  General  Bonaparte  to  serve  him 

unreservedly  ;   but  on  the  i8th,  as  I  was  walking  up  and 

down  the  apartments  of  St.  Cloud,  I  met  one  of  my  old 

schoolfellows   named  Thurot,  whom  I  had  not  seen  since 

'  Count  Lavalette's  memory  has  again  betrayed  him  in  this  instance : — 
the  first  three  Consuls  were  Bonaparte,  Sieyes,  and  Roger  Ducos.  Cam- 
baceres and  Leljrun  succeeded  to  the  two  latter  a  short  time  afterwards. — 
Note  of  the  Translator. 


2o8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

I  left  college.  He  told  me  that  he  was  secretary-general 
of  the  police  ;  and  as  I  questioned  him  rather  in  a  pressing 
manner,  he  confessed  that  his  master  had  sent  him  to  St. 
Cloud  to  witness  the  event,  and  that  we  must  succeed  at  any- 
cost,  as  he  was  well  enough  acquainted  with  his  patron 
to  know  that  he  would  make  us  pay  our  failure  dearly.  In 
truth,  we  learned  since  that  the  Minister  had  taken 
measures  to  have  us  apprehended,  and  perhaps  shot,  if  the 
undertaking  at  St.  Cloud  had  not  completely  succeeded. 
The  Emperor  learned  that  circumstance  ;  and,  knowing  his 
own  strength,  he  used  sometimes  to  joke  with  his  minister 
about  it. 

Although  I  had  not  kept  up  my  connections  with  the 
family  of  Metternich,  the  First  Consul,  hoping  to  press  the 
Austrians  so  closely  that  peace  would  be  the  consequence 
of  the  first  campaign,  sent  me  to  Saxony  with  secret  powers 
to  sign  an  armistice,  in  case  the  events  of  the  Avar  should 
incline  the  Austrians  that  way. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

The  expulsion  of  the  late  Government  caused  no  manner  of 
regret  to  the  public,  though  the  terms  of  that  expulsion  created 
some  anxiety.  Notwithstanding  the  violence  of  the  preced- 
ing Governments,  the  nation  was  not  yet  accustomed  to  them. 
She  had  not  forgotten  the  aim  towards  which  all  her  exer- 
tions had  been  directed  for  the  last  twelve  years — the  estab- 
lishment of  liberty  founded  on  solid  and  respected  laws. 
She  found,  however,  in  the  new  Constitution  none  of  those 
securities  she  was  entitled  to  expect.  Although  the  First 
Consul  crowned  the  country  with  his  own  glory,  and  though 
his  genius  left  him  no  fears  for  its  independence,  France 
wished  to  find  in  the  result  of  victory  all  the  advantages  of 
peace,  and  all  the  wealth  of  industry  and  trade.  Therefore, 
when  the  periodical  press  was  consulted  on  the  question  of 
the  Consulate  for  life,  an  immense  majority  of  citizens  ex- 
pressed their  approbation  in  the  most  striking  manner,  con- 
vinced that  a  lasting  magistracy  offered  to  their  interests  a 
greater  security. 

One  of  the  earliest  measures  of  the  First  Consul  was  to 
send  new  diplomatic  agents  to  foreign  countries.  To  me  he 
entrusted  a  mission  to  Dresden,'  ordering  me,  immediately 
after  my  arrival,  to  write  to  Vienna  that  I  had  powers  to 
treat  for  a  cessation  of  hostilities,  in  case  the  Cabinet  of 
Vienna  should  prefer  addressing  itself  to  me.  The  condi- 
tions were  in  the  form  of  preliminaries  of  peace.  The 
circumstances  of  the  war  on  the  Rhine  hastened  its  con- 
'  See  Appendix,  Nos.  XVII.— XX. 

15  '°^ 


210  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

elusion,  and  it  was  signed  after  the  battle  of  Hohenlinden 
by  the  Under-Chief  of  the  Staff  of  Moreau. 

The  apparent  object  of  my  mission  to  Dresden  was  to 
maintain  good  friendship  between  Saxony  and  France.  I 
had  superseded  a  man  of  considerable  merit ;  but  his  having 
been  an  agent  of  the  Directory  was  suflficient  to  make  his 
situation  perplexing  and  unpleasant.  Mine  was  nearly  the 
same.  The  Elector  was  still  officially  at  war  with  France, 
as  a  member  of  the  Empire,  though  he  had  recalled  his 
troops  a  long  while  before.  I  should  have  been  obliged, 
in  a  manner,  to  force  the  posts,  and  thus  give  displeasure. 
My  instructions  gave  me  full  authority  to  act  in  that 
manner  ;  but  such  proceedings  were  not  to  my  taste  ;  and 
I  entertained  so  great  a  regard  for  a  prince  who  had 
rendered  his  throne  venerable  by  his  virtues,  that  I  should 
certainly  never  have  been  able  to  surmount  the  aversion 
I  felt  to  give  him  the  least  uneasiness.  I  never  even  saw 
him.  I  lived  at  Dresden  in  the  greatest  retirement.  The 
climate  did  not  agree  with  my  wife's  health,  and  my  want 
of  activity  was  disagreeable  to  me.  When  I  received  the 
news  of  the  battle  of  Marengo,  my  mind  was  filled  with 
grief  at  the  thought  that  a  military  career  was  for  ever 
closed  against  me,  and  that  I  should  soon  be  prohibited 
from  wishing  for  either  glory  or  advancement.  I  was,  how- 
ever, somewhat  comforted  by  the  permission  I  received  to 
pass  the  Carnival  of  1801  at  Berlin. 

A  great  many  emigrants  lived  at  Leipsic  and  Dresden 
who  owed  their  retreat  and  maintenance  to  the  generous 
bounty  of  the  Elector.  My  arrival  at  first  spread  alarm 
among  these  small  colonies.  My  predecessor  had  been  un- 
able to  afford  them  much  protection,  but  he  had  at  least 
removed  persecution.  They  imagined  that  an  aide-de-camp 
of  General  Bonaparte  would  not  fail  to  drive  them  out  of 
the  only  retreat  they  had  left.  Instead  of  that  I  endeavoured 
to  remove  their  fears.  I  had  no  great  merit  in  showing 
them  marks  of  humanity.     I  felt  naturally  inclined  to  con- 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  2 1 1 

sider  them  in  the  Hght  of  unfortunate  countrymen,  who  had 
ceased  to  be  dangerous  from  the  time  they  had  laid  down 
their  arms.  Besides  which,  I  had  received  from  the  First 
Consul  a  positive  order  to  facilitate  the  return  to  France  of 
all  such  as  appeared  willing  to  carry  back  to  their  country 
feelings  of  peace.  I  made  no  distinction,  and,  during  twelve 
years,  I  had  no  cause  to  repent.  I  now  seek  to  forget  that, 
in  1814,  some  of  them  repelled  the  gratitude  they  owed  me 
as  an  insult.  During  these  twelve  years,  at  least,  the  Im- 
perial government  was  not  displeasing  to  them.  The 
greatest  part  of  them  had  solicited  and  obtained  official 
situations. 

At  Berlin  we  lodged  with  the  French  Ambassador, 
General  Burnonville.  His  polite  attention  and  delicate 
friendship  enhanced  the  pleasure  that  reigned  that  year 
in  the  metropolis  of  the  Prussian  dominions.  It  was 
during  my  stay  there  that  peace  was  signed  with  Russia  ; 
and  I  could  not  help  remarking,  as  a  curious  circumstance, 
the  sudden  eagerness  with  which  the  Russians  sought  us, 
when  a  few  days  before  a  member  of  the  diplomatic  body 
would  not  have  dared  to  dance  in  the  same  quadrille  with  a 
French  lady.  I  had  the  honour  to  see  and  approach  fre- 
quently the  Queen,  who  was  still  more  to  be  respected  for 
her  virtues  than  admired  for  her  beauty.  It  is  impossible 
to  imagine  a  more  charming  person  united  with  a  more 
dignified  and  majestic  demeanour. 

The  simplicity  of  her  manners  added  a  still  more  sacred 
character  to  the  feelings  of  veneration  she  inspired.  She 
had  no  splendour,  no  retinue.  She  went  out  every  day  in 
the  plainest  carriage,  and  frequently  on  foot,  when  the 
weather  permitted.  The  inhabitants  of  Berlin,  or  at  least 
many  persons  attached  to  the  Court,  used  at  that  time  to 
express  themselves  with  perhaps  too  great  a  freedom  re- 
specting their  Sovereign  and  his  family  ;  but  never  was  the 
slightest  blame  mixed  with  the  praises  bestowed  on  the 
Queen.     Surrounded  by  her  lovely  children,  lavishing  on 


212  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

them  the  softest  caresses  with  the  most  touching  tenderness, 
and  without  the  least  affectation,  she  received  the  French 
with  a  grace  and  a  feeling  of  preference  dictated  by  policy  ; 
and  it  was  easy  to  perceive  that  her  attentions  were  owing 
to  the  title  of  Frenchman  more  than  to  any  particular  merit 
in  the  person  to  whom  she  addressed  them. 

She  had  then  with  her  the  Princess  of  Mecklenburg,  a 
sister  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  whose  beauty  was  dazzling, 
but  whose  noble  features  already  bore  traces  of  the  com- 
plaint of  which  she  died  a  short  time  after  :  the  whole 
expression  of  her  countenance  presented  something  so  pro- 
foundly melancholy  that  whenever  she  spoke  she  seemed 
to  bid  you  a  last  adieu. 

The  most  singular  man  of  the  Court  of  Berlin  was  Prince 
Henry  of  Prussia.  Posterity,  which  has  now  begun  for  him, 
fully  justifies  all  the  praises  of  fame,  and  I  owe  respect  to  its 
sentence  ;  still  I  must  say  that  that  sentence  has  not  been 
ratified  by  the  city  of  Berlin.  He  was  become  a  general 
object  of  raillery  and  disregard.  His  manner  of  living,  the 
eccentricity  of  his  tastes,  the  singularity  of  his  dress,  cer- 
tainly contributed  a  great  deal  to  the  feeling  of  the  public 
towards  him  ;  but  it  was  chiefly  owing  to  his  hatred  for 
Frederick  the  Great,  to  which  he  frequently  gave  vent  in 
the  most  bitter  sarcasms.  Louis  Bonaparte,  having  passed 
through  Berlin,  went  for  a  few  days  to  Rheinsberg,  the 
usual  residence  of  the  Prince.  On  his  return  to  town  he 
repeated  to  me  with  indignation  the  following  words  the 
Prince  had  uttered  at  table  :  "  You  have  a  great  idea  in 
France  of  my  brother  Frederick  ;  but  how  greatly  mistaken 
you  Frenchmen  are  !  You  do  not  know  the  secret  of  his 
victories.  He  ought  to  have  written  as  long  as  he  lived — 
it  was  for  that  alone  nature  destined  him."  A  thousand 
traits  of  this  kind  have  been  related  to  me  at  Berlin  by 
persons  of  rank.  The  most  strange  eccentricities  may  be 
united  with  the  greatest  merit ;  but  so  much  hatred,  such  a 
constant  wish  to  lower  in  public  estimation  so  great  a  man, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  213 

and  particularly  to  attack  him  in  his  most  justly  acquired 
glory,  is  conduct  unworthy  of  a  patriot,  a  prince,  and  a  man 
of  good  sense. 

The  truce  with  Austria  was  signed  on  the  4th  of  Nivose, 
and,  according  to  the  promise  of  the  First  Consul,  I  was 
soon  after  recalled.  When  I  arrived  in  Paris,  I  found  the 
public  still  in  the  first  excitement  occasioned  by  the  shock- 
ing event  of  the  Infernal  Machine.  The  execrable  attempt 
showed  how  much  hatred  the  House  of  Bourbon  had  con- 
ceived against  Bonaparte.  It  must  be  entirely  attributed  to 
the  Princes  ;  for  in  18 14  the  emigrants,  then  masters  of  the 
field,  openly  boasted  of  it,  and  made  no  secret  of  the  means 
they  had  employed.  Limoelan,  Carton,  and  St.  Rejant 
were  all  three  Vendeans,  who  had  come  from  England 
expressly  for  this  noble  enterprise.  Limoelan  escaped,  and 
nothing  further  has  been  heard  of  him  ;  St.  Rejant  also 
escaped  at  first,  but  was  retaken  afterwards  with  Georges. 
I  shall  here  mention  in  what  manner  he  was  discovered. 

I  expected,  on  returning  to  the  First  Consul,  to  resume 
the  functions  of  aide-de-camp  :  I  was  mistaken.  After 
passing  a  few  days  at  Malmaison,  the  First  Consul  sent 
me  word  by  Duroc  that  his  intention  was  I  should  fill  an 
official  post,  and  next  morning  I  read  in  The  Monitcitr 
that  I  was  appointed  one  of  the  directors  of  the  Sinking 
Fund.  This  appointment,  which  had  been  made  without 
consulting  me,  and  of  which  I  received  the  first  account 
through  a  newspaper,  vexed  me.  I  felt  for  that  sort  of 
employment,  and  for  Paris  life  in  general,  an  aversion 
which  the  catastrophe  of  181 5  has  but  too  well  justified. 
I  went  to  M.  Maret,  Secretary  of  State,  and  declared  that 
I  would  not  accept  the  situation  ;  and  that  I  preferred 
living  in  obscurity  to  accepting  a  post  to  which  I  felt 
aversion.  At  five  o'clock  I  went  to  dine  at  the  Tuileries, 
as  usual.  General  Lannes,  who  was  on  duty,  had  heard  of 
my  refusal  :  he  came  up  to  me,  approved  of  it,  and  en- 
couraged  me.     "  This  man   wants  to  send   away  his  most 


214  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

faithful  friends :  we  shall  see  what  he'll  gain  by  it."  The 
approbation  of  the  general  did  not  add  in  the  least  to  my 
resolution,  which  was  firmly  taken.  The  First  Consul 
passed  by  in  going  to  dine,  and  perceiving  me,  he  took  me 
to  the  window  and  said,  "  You  do  not  wish,  then,  to  enter 
into  official  employment  ?  "  I  answered  rather  drily,  "  No." 
"  Well,"  he  replied,  *'  you  shall  do  as  you  please  ;  I'll 
have  nothing  more  to  do  with  you."  Saying  that,  he  left 
me.  Those  were  the  only  harsh  words  I  had  ever  heard 
from  him  ;  but  they  went  to  my  heart.     I  retired  in  a  rage, 

and  sending  all  to  the  d 1.     Three  days  after,  observing 

my  absence,  Bonaparte  sent  Clarke  and  Eugene  to  order  me 
to  go  to  speak  to  him.  I  went  ;  and  he  spoke  so  persua- 
sively that  I  accepted  the  office.  He  then  told  me  that  his 
intention  was  to  make  me  Postmaster-General,  in  the  room 
of  a  man  who  was  wholly  devoted  to  M.  de  Talleyrand ;  but 
that,  his  secret  having  been  discovered,  he  had  encountered 
an  opposition  which  he  wished  to  defeat  by  side  measures. 
At  that  time  he  was  not  yet  absolute  master.  In  fact,  a 
few  months  afterwards  I  received  an  order  to  take  possession 
of  the  Post  Office.  I  entered  it  against  my  will.  I  never- 
theless did  my  duty  there  during  thirteen  years,  with  a 
devotedness  and  a  zeal  which  were  not  sufficient  to  ensure 
my  welfare,  and  for  which  I  have  been  cruelly  punished  in 

1815. 

When  I  took  the  management  of  the  Post  Office,  I  found 
the  fatal  custom  established  of  delivering  up  to  the  police  of 
every  corner  of  France  all  the  letters  claimed  as  suspicious. 
I  immediately  put  an  end  to  this  practice  by  sending  out  of 
office  those  directors  that  had  been  guilty  of  it.  From  that 
time,  at  least,  the  secrets  of  families  were  no  longer  pried 
into  by  the  worst  set  of  men.  I  soon  resolved  to  cut  off  all 
communication  with  Fouche — a  measure  which  he  never 
forgave  me. 

Government,  however,  met  with  the  approbation  of  all 
France.      The   new   system   of   administration   was   better 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  V ALETTE.  2 1 5 

appropriated  to  the  spirit  of  the  nation.  The  magistrates 
had  been  chosen  from  among  the  enlightened  classes  of 
society.  All  the  public  officers  felt  a  wish  to  please,  and 
the  necessity  of  being  friends.  Politeness,  and  the  good 
manners  customary  in  civilised  states,  had  taken  place  of 
the  vulgar  forms  of  the  Republic.  Order  reappeared  on 
all  sides.  The  First  Consul  had  promised  peace  :  he  gave 
it  with  every  appearance  of  durability. 

France  was  proud  of  her  First  Magistrate,  and  her  glory 
was  carried  to  the  highest  pitch.  Northern  Italy  had  been 
added  to  the  several  conquests  of  the  Revolution — a  brilliant 
acquisition  that  delighted  the  nation,  which  always  was 
destined  to  pay  dearly  for  it.  Peace  with  England  gave  the 
finishing  stroke  to  the  national  glory.  Imagination  itself 
could  set  no  bounds  to  the  expected  prosperity  of  France  ; 
and  all  those  golden  dreams  seemed  on  the  point  of  being 
realised.  The  expedition  to  St.  Domingo,  entrusted  in  too 
feeble  hands,  and  which  ought  perhaps  not  to  have  been, 
undertaken  at  all,  was  a  disappointment  ;  and  the  renewal 
of  the  war  with  England  a  misfortune.  But  France  was 
full  of  energy,  and  shared  the  boldness  and  good  fortune  of 
her  chief.  She  had  no  other  fear  but  that  of  losing  him  ; 
and  what  fate  could  not  effect  amidst  the  perils  of  war,  the 
Princes  of  the  House  of  Bourbon  attempted  once  more,  and 
nearly  succeeded.  Experienced  casuists  may  perhaps  find 
the  means  of  conciliating  the  maxims  of  the  Gospel,  and  the 
inspirations  of  piety,  with  a  resolution  to  commit  the  greatest 
of  all  crimes,  murder.  Certain  at  least  it  is,  that  the  Princes 
commanded  that  murder,  entered  into  all  the  details  of  its 
execution,  and  marked  out  the  victim  ;  whilst  one  of  them 
sent  over  with  that  purpose  his  most  faithful  servants  and 
most  devoted  friends. 

It  was  in  1804  that  this  event  took  place.  For  some  time 
previously,  the  First  Consul,  who  had  the  English  news- 
papers carefully  translated  for  his  perusal,  was  surprised 
not  to  find  in  them  the  usual  abuse  or  threats  against  his 


2i6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

person.  Their  silence  appeared  suspicious  :  and  one  night, 
being  unable  to  sleep,  he  arose,  and  looking  over  the  reports 
of  the  police  he  had  received  several  months  before,  he  found 
that  a  person  called  Ouerelle  had  been  arrested  on  the 
coast  of  Normandy,  with  two  other  individuals  ;  that  they 
had  been  kept  in  prison  since  that  time,  as  they  were 
strongly  suspected  of  being  Chouans,  and  of  having  come 
over  from  England  with  some  black  design.  He  immediately 
sent  an  order  to  put  these  young  men  on  their  trial.  They 
were  probably  found  guilty,  for  they  were  sentenced  to  die. 
The  commander  of  the  division  delivered  the  sentence  to  the 
chief  of  the  staff  for  execution.  That  gentleman  was  at  a 
ball  :  he  conned  the  letter  on  his  return  home,  and  went  to 
bed.  If  the  order  had  been  given  immediately,  and  executed 
next  morning  at  seven  o'clock,  it  is  probable  that  the  secret 
of  those  unfortunate  men  would  have  been  for  ever  buried 
in  their  graves  :  but  when  daylight  appeared  the  horror  of 
approaching  death  dismayed  the  mind  of  Querelle.  He  fell 
into  such  violent  convulsions,  that  he  was  supposed  to  have 
Deen  poisoned.  The  doctor  who  was  called  to  his  assistance 
tried  to  comfort  him  ;  and  some  broken  sentences  which 
escaped  him  led  the  doctor  to  the  idea  of  sending  him  a. 
person  who  might  draw  from  him  important  disclosures  by 
promising  him  his  pardon.  The  promise  was  made.  When 
his  companions  were  ready  to  go  to  the  fatal  spot,  they 
exhorted  him  to  remain  firm.  One  of  them  said  to  him, 
"  Thou'lt  say  more  than  thou  knowest.  Death  is  so  near, 
and  the  pang  so  short ;  a  little  more  courage,  and  all  will  be 
over  !  "  He  resisted  :  his  two  accomplices  left  him,  with  a 
shrug  of  the  shoulders,  and  went  calmly  to  be  shot.  How- 
ever, Querelle  acknowledged  that  several  emigrants  were 
to  have  left  England  to  assassinate  the  First  Consul  ;  that 
Georges  and  some  of  his  companions  had  a  share  in  the  plot. 
He  did  not  mention  General  Pichegru.  This  slight  indica- 
tion gave  a  clue  to  the  police.  Fouche  was  then  no  longer 
Minister  of  that  department  ; — it  had  been  joined  to  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  217 

•department  of  Justice ;  an  odd  adjunction,  universally 
blamed,  and  which  gave  Government  an  appearance  of 
odious  despotism  :  Justice  raised  her  veil  to  seize,  and 
lowered  it  to  judge.  Still  the  whole  structure  of  Fouche 
remained  ;  and  although  the  Grand  Judge,  Regnier,  did  not 
know  how  to  make  use  of  it,  perhaps  because  he  used  it 
against  his  will,  the  heads  of  the  police  set  on  this  occasion 
all  their  skill  to  work.  It  was  soon  known  that  M.  de 
Riviere  and  the  son  of  the  Duke  of  Polignac  had  arrived  in 
Paris.  They  were  arrested,  and  with  them  a  dozen  wretched 
bravoes,  who  had  gained  no  reputation  even  in  the  Vendee 
— robbers  of  diligences,  polluted  by  the  vilest  and  most 
odious  crimes.  Some  of  these  wretches  declared  that 
Georges  was  at  the  head  of  the  conspiracy.  One  of  the 
.accomplices  said  that  he  had  seen  in  Georges'  lodgings  a 
man  for  whom  that  chief  showed  the  greatest  consideration, 
and  whom  he  treated  with  evident  respect.  This  person 
was  supposed  to  be  the  Duke  d'Enghien  ;  and  Bonaparte 
sent  an-  aide-de-camp  to  Ettenheim,  to  inquire  what  the 
Duke  d'Enghien  was  doing  there,  and  whether  he  frequently 
left  that  residence.  The  aide-de-camp  came  back,  saying 
that  the  Duke  was  often  absent  from  ten  to  twelve  days,  and 
that  nobody  knew  where  he  went.  From  that  circumstance 
it  was  concluded  that  he  came  to  Paris  incognito,  and  that 
it  was  he  whom  Georges  treated  with  so  much  respect.  His 
arrest  was  decided.  A  few  days  after  his  death,  Pichegru  was 
also  arrested  ;  and  then  Picot,  who  had  made  the  declaration 
about  Georges,  being  confronted  with  the  prisoner,  said  it 
was  he  whom  he  had  meant  when  speaking  of  the  superior 
chief.  When  the  First  Consul  heard  this,  he  trembled  with 
despair,  and  cried,  "  Cursed  report !  fatal  aide-de-camp  !  " 
Pichegru  being  arrested,  Bonaparte  resolved  also  to  make 
sure  of  Moreau.  The  enmity  between  these  two  men  ought 
to  have  concluded  in  no  other  way  but  by  a  desperate  duel. 
The  former  had  been  betrayed  by  the  latter  before  the  i8th 
of  Fructidor.     Bonaparte  had,  nevertheless,  obtained  certain 


2l8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

proofs  that  their  quarrel  had  been  made  up  by  the  interposi- 
tion of  an  Abbe  David.  He  did  not,  however,  produce  these 
proofs,  and  he  acted  wisely.  In  the  hearing  of  the  cause,  no 
doubt  was  left  but  Georges  and  his  friends  had  come  to  Paris 
to  murder  the  individual  at  the  head  of  the  Government ; 
that  M.  de  Riviere,  first  aide-de-camp  to  Monsieur,  Comte 
d'Artois,  was  in  the  plot ;  that  he  had  been  sent  over  to 
take  a  leading  part  in  it  ;  that  Messieurs  de  Polignac,  attached 
by  affection  and  birth  to  the  House  of  Bourbon,  had  come 
with  the  same  intentions  ;  and  that  Pichegru  and  Moreau 
were  to  profit  by  the  attempt  to  recall  the  Bourbons  and 
replace  them  on  the  throne.  I  say,  to  profit  by  ;  because  it 
appears,  by  an  observation  that  escaped  Pichegru,  that  he 
had  refused  to  take  a  direct  share  in  the  murder  of  a  warrior 
to  whom,  at  least,  he  owed  considerations.  On  his  arrival 
in  Paris  he  saw  Georges  ;  and,  hearing  from  him  that  the 
act  was  not  yet  committed,  he  said  with  a  haughty  air, 
"  What  mean  all  these  delays  and  precautions  ?  In  London 
you  never  thought  of  calculating  anything.  Speedily  fulfil 
your  promise.  I  do  not  wish  to  see  you  until  all  is  ready." 
In  fact,  notwithstanding  his  intrepidity,  Georges,  on  his 
arrival,  had  not  calculated  everything.  He  remained  five 
months  and  a  half  concealed  in  Paris  :  during  so  long  a 
space  of  time,  fortune  presented  him  with  only  two  oppor- 
tunities of  committing  the  crime  he  meditated,  with  a  due 
regard  for  the  chances  of  success  and  his  own  safety.  The 
First  Consul  was  not  to  be  attacked  in  the  Tuileries,  and  it 
was  very  difficult  to  surprise  him  in  his  walks,  for  which  he 
had  no  regular  hours.  To  assassinate  him  in  a  playhouse 
was  become  impossible,  since  the  attempt  of  the  Infernal 
Machine  had  miscarried.  The  design  of  Georges  could 
therefore  only  be  put  in  execution  during  one  of  his 
journeys  ;  and  still  it  was  not  possible  at  the  moment  of 
his  starting.  The  army  was  then  assembled  at  Boulogne. 
The  First  Consul  went  twice  thither.  The  first  time  he 
started  from  Paris  ;  and  I  only  learned  his  departure  at  a 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  219 

ball  the  Second  Consul  gave.  Bonaparte  came  there.  It 
was  ten  o'clock  :  he  perceived  me,  as  he  was  walking  in  the 
saloon  ;  and,  having  made  me  a  sign,  I  stepped  into  an 
apartment  where  there  were  but  few  people.  He  said  to  me, 
en  passant^  "  I  intend  to  set  off  in  two  hours  for  Boulogne  : 
two  coaches,  six  horses,  eight  ponies,  and  General  Duroc." 
I  was  prepared.  The  usual  express  went  off  an  hour  before 
him,  and  he  arrived  before  any  one  knew  in  Paris  where 
he  was  gone.  But  his  return  was  easier  to  be  known.  It 
was  natural  to  imagine  that  he  would  not  remain  long  at 
Boulogne.  The  plan  of  Georges,  according  to  his  own  con- 
fession, was  to  waylay  him  on  his  return,  dressed  with  some 
of  his  accomplices  as  guides,  who,  mounted  on  ponies, 
fatigued  by  the  express  service,  generally  followed  the  coach 
at  a  considerable  distance.  They  were  to  stop  the  First 
Consul,  put  him  in  a  cabriolet  escorted  by  them,  drive 
rapidly  to  Normandy,  and  embark  him  for  England.  The 
latter  part  of  the  plan  was  evidently  too  absurd  for  a  man 
of  Georges'  sense  to  have  ever  thought  it  feasible.  He 
only  invented  that  fable,  because  he  was  ashamed  of 
acknowledging  that  he  intended  to  murder  the  First  Consul  ; 
and,  in  fact,  nothing  would  have  been  easier  for  him,  while 
accompanying  the  coach  as  a  guide,  than  to  let  off  a  tromblon^ 
the  shot  of  which  Bonaparte  could  not  have  survived.  At 
Bonaparte's  first  return,  Georges  had  not  yet  got  together 
all  his  people  :  he  wished,  besides,  to  strike  the  blow  in 
Paris.  The  second  journey  took  place  with  the  same  pre- 
cautions, only  that  Bonaparte  travelled  under  the  name  of 
General  Bessieres.  I  do  not  know  what  circumstance  pre- 
vented Georges  from  executing  his  plan  that  time. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

The  death  of  the  Duke  d'Enghien  was  partly  occasioned  by 
the  mistake  into  which  the  report  of  the  aide-de-camp  led 
the  First  Consul  ;  but  I  must  say  that  that  was  not  the  only 
cause  of  it.  Proofs  had  been  obtained  that  the  Prince  really 
did  come  from  time  to  time  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine, 

where  he  held   conferences  with  the  Mayor  of  ,  and 

stopped  at  the  village  of .  It  was  but  natural  to  con- 
clude from  that  circumstance  that  he  was  not  a  stranger  to 
the  plots  of  Pichegru.  In  truth,  what  was  the  plan  of  the 
conspirators,  according  to  their  own  confession  and  those  of 
their  friends  who  now  boast  of  it  ?  Pichegru  was  to  throw 
himself  into  Alsatia,  to  proclaim  the  King,  and  make  that 
province  declare  itself  in  favour  of  the  Bourbons  ;  while 
Moreau  was  to  do  the  same  with  the  army  of  the  coasts. 
Why  then  should  not  Pichegru  have  called  in  a  Prince  of 
the  House  of  Bourbon,  who  lived  at  seven  short  leagues 
distance  :  a  Prince,  the  only  one  of  his  family  who  had 
acquired  military  reputation  in  these  very  departments  of 
the  Rhine,  and  whose  presence  would  have  warmed  the 
hearts  and  moved  the  courage  of  every  one. 

Another  motive,  perhaps  the  most  peremptory,  must  be 
sought  for  in  Bonaparte's  character — impetuosity  and  love 
of  revenge,  which  might  be  called  vendetta  Corsica.  That 
feeling  was,  besides,  at  the  period  I  am  describing,  raised  to 
the  highest  degree  by  his  enemies.  I  heard  him  say  a  few 
days   afterwards,    *'  Let   them    throw   all    Europe    on    my 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  221 

shoulders  ;  my  part  will  then  be  to  defend  myself  :  their 
attack  is  a  legal  one.  But  to  blow  up  whole  streets,  to  kill 
or  maim  more  than  one  hundred  persons  in  the  hope  of 
coming  at  me  ;  to  send,  as  they  now  have  done,  forty 
bravoes  to  murder  me — that  is  too  much.  I  will  make 
them  shed  tears  of  blood.  They  shall  learn  at  their 
expense  what  it  is  to  make  murder  legal." 

Revenge  is  but  a  vulgar  passion,  and  still  it  is  the 
commonest  amongst  kings.  The  First  Consul  was  worthy 
of  setting  himself  above  it.  I  should  have  wished  him  to 
have  had  the  Duke  d'Enghien  arrested  and  condemned  ; 
but  after  the  judgment  to  have  sent  for  him,  have  given 
him  the  proofs  that  were  obtained  of  his  having  conspired 
against  him,  and  then  to  have  immediately  sent  him  over  to 
England.  I  am  sure  the  Prince's  heart  was  too  noble  not 
to  be  moved  by  such  an  act  of  magnanimity  ;  and  if  his 
family  were  destined  one  day  to  reign  again,  Bonaparte 
would  not  have  found  in  him  an  enemy,  nor  in  his  own 
heart  a  reproach  which  he  was  never  able  to  silence.  For 
the  rest,  their  actions  served  as  a  foundation  to  the  fabric 
of  horror  raised  against  him  all  over  France  and  Europe. 
But  without  naming  all  the  Princes  who,  after  having 
committed  the  same  fault,  have  nevertheless  retained  the 
respect  of  mankind,  does  not  the  greatest  and  wisest  of  our 
writers,  Montesquieu,  when  speaking  of  Alexander,  say, 
"  He  burned  Persepolis  and  killed  Clitus,  but  &c."  ?  I 
went  to  St.  Cloud  a  few  days  after  the  trial.  I  was  ac- 
customed, while  waiting  for  the  order  to  enter  the  closet 
of  the  First  Consul,  to  stop  in  the  library  with  a  young 
man  named  Ripaule,  who  took  care  of  his  books,  and  who 
told  me  that  the  day  before,  while  going  out  of  that  room, 
Bonaparte  perceived  a  bust  of  the  Great  Conde  placed  in 
a  passage  leading  to  his  closet  :  he  immediately  said  to 
Ripaule,  with  an  abrupt  tone  and  an  agitated  voice  :  ''  Let 
that  bust  be  placed  somewhere  else." 

The  arrival  of  the  Prince  and  his  death  were  known  at 


222  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  same  moment  at  the  palace.  Madame  Bonaparte  burst 
into  tears  and  threw  herself  at  her  husband's  feet,  to  ob- 
tain the  Prince's  pardon  ;  it  was  too  late.  His  sister-in-law, 
Madame  Elisa,  wrote  him  a  letter  composed  by  Fontanes : 
he  remonstrated  with  her  for  having  sent  it,  but  without 
any  appearance  of  resentment.  Caulaincourt,  on  his  arrival 
from  Strasburg,  learned  the  fatal  news  from  Madame 
Bonaparte.  His  grief  was  so  great  that  he  fainted.  I 
have  no  doubt  of  his  having  been  a  perfect  stranger  to 
the  arrest  of  the  Duke  d'Enghien,  and  my  proof  is  his 
having  accepted  the  place  of  chief  equerry.  Caulaincourt 
would  never  have  deigned  to  receive  the  wages  of  blood. 
His  elevation  was  only  owing  to  his  merit  and  attachment 
to  the  First  Consul. 

This  fatal  coup  d^etat  had  not  yet  ceased  harassing  Bona- 
parte's mind,  when  it  received  another  violent  shock  by  the 
death  of  Pichegru.  He  had  been  arrested,  examined,  and 
confronted.  The  worthless  behaviour  of  the  subalterns 
towards  him,  and  the  total  ruin  of  his  hopes,  made  him 
resolve  to  avert  the  horrors  he  had  still  to  encounter,  by 
ridding  himself  of  a  life  he  had  no  more  means  of  pro- 
longing. Perhaps  also  he  was  urged  to  the  act  by  the 
shame  of  having  associated  with  such  accomplices  for  the 
performance  of  such  a  crime.  He  was  found  dead  in  prison. 
It  would  be  insulting  both  Bonaparte  and  Pichegru  to 
imagine  that  one  of  the  two  could  have  taken  the  other's 
life  in  that  manner.  One  must  not  seek  to  rob  that 
energetic  soul  of  the  glory  of  having  nobly  escaped  from 
the  hands  of  his  enemies.  His  retreat  was  that  of  a  gallant 
warrior ;  and  if  all  the  particulars  that  have  been  published 
were  not  sufficient  to  exonerate  Bonaparte  from  the  suspicion 
of  having  murdered  him,  the  character  of  Pichegru,  well 
known  to  those  who  approached  him,  had  left  not  the  least 
doubt  in  their  minds. 

The  condemnations  of  the  other  prisoners  created  a 
general  feeling  of  pity,  particularly   among   the   family  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  223 

the  First  Consul,  and  those  who  were  devoted  to  his  person. 
Too  much  blood  had  already  been  spilled,  and  every  person 
sought  to  obtain  from  the  Sovereign  the  pardon  of  some 
victim  or  other,  Madame  Bonaparte  took  upon  her  to 
save  M.  de  Riviere  and  the  Polignacs.  I  accompanied  to 
St.  Cloud  Madame  Louis  Bonaparte,  having  by  her  side  the 
daughter  of  Lajolais.  The  mother  of  the  First  Consul,  and 
Madame  Joseph,  the  wife  of  General  Murat,  and  her  two 
sisters,  undertook  to  solicit  the  pardon  of  the  others.  When 
I  arrived  at  St.  Cloud,  the  First  Consul,  on  perceiving  me, 
«aid  :  "  What  are  they  doing  in  my  wife's  apartments  ? 
They  are  weeping,  and  she  the  most  of  all.  It  is  a  heart- 
breaking sight." 

I  had  found  him  agitated  ;  his  emotion  grew  more  and 
more  visible.  He  walked  two  or  three  times  up  and  down 
the  closet,  and  said  :  "The  wretches  wanted  to  murder  me  ! 
What  a  base  act  !  " 

He  then  went  out  of  the  room.  A  little  while  afterwards, 
the  sister  of  M.  de  Riviere  and  the  female  relations  of  the 
Polignacs  came  in,  led  by  Madame  Bonaparte,  and  fell  at 
his  feet.  He  did  not  hesitate  a  moment,  but  immediately 
signed  the  pardon  of  Alessieurs  de  Polignac  and  de  Riviere. 
Georges  had  written  to  Murat  a  very  noble  letter,  in  which 
he  solicited,  not  his  own  pardon,  but  those  of  his  com- 
panions. The  General  read  it  to  me  with  emotion.  He 
offered,  however,  to  be  the  first  to  throw  himself  on  the 
English  coast  if  life  was  granted  to  him.  It  was,  he  said, 
only  changing  the  manner  of  his  death  ;  but  in  that  way  at 
least  it  would  be  useful  to  his  country.  His  letter  was  read 
in  a  secret  council.  Bonaparte  himself  appeared  disposed  to 
pardon,  but  it  was  represented  to  him  that  those  men  had 
killed  public  functionaries  in  the  streets  ;  that  no  favour 
■could  be  allowed  to  a  double  murder  ;  that  it  would  be 
showing  a  sort  of  favour  to  murderers,  and  discourage  those 
whose  duty  it  was  to  defend  him  ;  that  Georges,  an  obscure 
inan  in  his  own  party,  was,  after  all,  nothing  but  a  leader  of 


224  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

banditti,  famous  only  for  atrocious  acts  ;  and,  in  one  word^ 
that  if  he  were  spared  nobody  could  with  justice  be 
punished.  He  was  executed  with  nine  of  his  accomplices  ; 
and  the  mob,  according  to  their  custom,  went  to  see  the 
tragedy  performed,  and  to  seek  emotions  at  the  sight  of  the 
violent  death  of  individuals  who  |had  attempted  to  recall 
the  Bourbons. 

This  conspiracy  made  the  First  Consul  sensible  that  he 
ought  to  hasten  his  ascent  to  the  throne.  It  was  the  secret 
wish  of  all  those  whose  ambition  looked  for  favours  which  a 
Republic  was  unable  to  bestow.  To  Bonaparte  it  offered 
not  alone  protection,  but  also  an  extent  of  power,  of  which 
he  felt  the  want  for  the  execution  of  his  great  design. 
Besides  that,  it  was  the  only  means  of  reconciling  to  his 
government  the  Sovereigns  of  Europe,  who  trembled  at  the 
thought  of  a  Republic.  England  alone  excepted,  being 
scarcely  a  monarchy  in  its  foreign  concerns,  all  the  other 
powers  were  convinced  that  the  presence  of  a  monarch  in 
France  would  stem  the  torrent  of  Republican  ideas,  and  the 
discontent  that  prevailed  among  all  nations.  Peace  had 
already  been  concluded  with  all,  and  confirmed  during  the 
Consulate.  The  Emperor  Paul  had  gone  farther  still.  In 
his  hatred  of  the  English,  he  found  a  powerful  auxiliary  in 
the  First  Consul.  Both  these  monarchs  sought  to  mark 
their  reign  by  illustrious  actions,  and  their  common  hatred 
of  the  English  had  brought  them  a  great  deal  nearer  to  one 
another.  There  had  been  some  questions  of  an  expedition 
to  India  by  their  joint  forces.  The  Emperor  Paul  im- 
prudently betrayed  his  secret,  and  perished.  His  death  was 
probably  as  much  owing  to  that  circumstance  as  to  the 
despotism  with  which  he  swayed  his  family  and  his  court. 

The  return  so  skilfully  prepared  from  republic  to  mon- 
archy was  marked  by  the  most  solemn  ceremony  the 
Christian  world  had  witnessed  for  the  last  thousand  years. 
All  Christendom  most  ardently  wished  that  the  kingdom  of 
France,  after  having  presented  to  the  world  a  deplorable 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  225 

example  of  scandalous  impiety,  might  also  offer  a  majestic 
instance  of  a  nearer  return  to  the  Christian  religion.  The 
Pope,  rising  above  all  mean  passions,  hatred,  and  prejudice 
— convinced,  besides,  that  the  leader  of  France  was  directed 
by  Providence — concluded  a  treaty  dictated  by  wisdom, 
policy,  and  the  sanctity  of  his  high  calling.  He  could  not 
have  resisted  the  wish  that  was  expressed  to  him,  to  conse- 
crate the  union  of  Church  and  State  by  the  authority  of  his 
presence,  and  the  pompous  ceremonies  of  that  worship, 
which  acknowledged  in  him  its  sovereign  pontiff.  He  left 
Rome,  and  came  to  France.  The  First  Consul  received 
him  at  Fontainebleau,  and  the  most  majestic  gravity  pre- 
sided over  their  mutual  relations  during  the  whole  of  his 
stay  in  France.  The  ceremony  of  the  coronation  was  the 
most  solemn  that  ever  had  bestowed  a  sacred  character  on 
the  legitimacy  of  a  sovereign.  The  Pope,  a  venerable  old 
man,  surrounded  by  all  his  prelates,  and  by  more  than  one 
hundred  French  bishops  ordained  with  his  consent,  the 
chief  functionaries  of  the  state,  the  whole  diplomatic  body 
of  Europe,  and  the  universal  assent  of  France  and  the  army, 
have  given  to  that  act  a  degree  of  legitimacy  which  the 
House  of  Bourbon  will  never  be  able  to  weaken.  These 
united  claims  to  all  that  is  legitimate  among  men  were 
perhaps  not  sufficiently  felt  by  the  Emperor,  when  he 
abdicated  at  Fontainebleau.  His  resistance  would  un- 
doubtedly have  cast  him  into  captivity  ;  but  what  ought 
his  own  fate  to  have  been  in  his  eyes  ?  He  was  persecuted 
as  a  sov'ereign.  But  his  son  never  could  forfeit  his  right  ; 
and  although  he  abdicated  in  his  favour,  that  modified  act 
was  void,  because  not  expressed  by  his  own  sacrifice.  I 
shall  have  an  opportunity  of  recalling  these  reflections  to 
mind. 

England  soon  felt  that  the  peace  with  the  whole 
Continent,  and  with  herself,  would  be  fatal  to  her.  The 
expedition  to  St.  Domingo  had  begun  successfully.  It  was 
altogether  a  bad  enterprise  that  ought  not  to  have  entered 

16 


226  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  I  ALETTE. 

into  the  plans  of  the  Emperor  ;  but  the  remembrance  of  the 
prosperity  of  St.  Domingo,  the  numerous  colonists  who  had 
fied  to  France  and  sighed  over  the  wreck  of  their  fortune, 
called  loudly  for  the  conquest  of  the  island.  The  Emperor 
yielded  to  the  general  delusion,  and  to  a  desire  of  employing 
his  navy,  which  was  eager  to  share  the  national  glory.' 
The  Directory  had  made  a  bad  choice  and  taken  half- 
measures  :  this  was  more  than  sufficient  to  produce  failure. 
The  general  to  whom  they  had  given  the  command  of  the 
expedition  was  a  man  of  little  capacity,  though  of  great 
personal  integrity.  He  failed,  and  fell  a  victim  to  the  skill 
of  the  blacks.  He  was  shipped  off  and  sent  away  with  the 
reputation  of  a  dupe,  and  the  disgrace  he  had  cast  on  the 
name  of  the  French.  The  general  to  whom  the  Emperor 
entrusted  the  second  expedition  had  more  sense  and  talent 
than  his  predecessor,  but,  like  him,  he  had  to  contend  with 
a  destructive  climate,  and  a  power  augmented  by  first 
success.  It  must  also  be  acknowledged  that  liberty,  with 
all  its  advantages,  its  energy,  and  its  hopes,  had  given  to  the 
negroes,  already  organised,  and  proud  of  their  former 
victory,  a  degree  of  strength  and  skill  over  which  it  was 
no  longer  possible  to  triumph.  The  General-in-chief  died 
a  victim  to  the  climate  ;  and,  although  he  had  sent  to 
France  Toussaint  Louverture,  the  chief  man  in  the  country, 
he  sunk  under  the  national  energy  and  advantageous 
positions  of  his  enemies. 

England  seized  the  moment  when  the  success  of  the 
expedition  was  doubtful,  to  break  the  peace.  Mr.  Pitt, 
accustomed  to  trample  on  the  most  sacred  rights  and 
conventions,  began  the  war  without  declaration,  captured 
trading  vessels,  ruined  merchants,  and  set  the  Continent 
again  on  fire.      Russia  and  Austria  united  took   up  arms 

'  It  is  easy  to  discover  that  the  writer  has  here  made  a  slight  mistake,  or 
rather  has  transposed  events.  The  expedition  to  St.  Domingo  took  place 
in  1802,  before  the  First  Consul  had  mounted  the  Imperial  throne,  and 
Toussaint  Louverture  died  at  Fort  Joux  on  the  14th  of  April,  1803. — Note 
/)/  the  French  Editor. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  227 

again.  The  Emperor  left  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic  for 
Austria,  and  made  the  admirable  campaign  which  termi- 
nated with  the  battle  of  Austerlitz.  It  was  then  that  I 
adopted  for  the  first  time,  on  a  large  scale,  the  system  of 
-expresses  the  Emperor  had  commanded  me  to  organise, 
and  the  invention  of  which  was  his.  He  had  felt  the 
inconvenience  of  letting  a  single  man  cross  such  a  vast 
extent  of  country.  More  than  once,  the  couriers,  oppressed 
with  fatigue  or  badly  mounted,  did  not  by  their  speed 
satisfy  his  impatience.  He  did  not  like  either  to  put  in 
the  hands  of  a  single  man  papers,  the  speedy  reception  of 
which  might  have  a  serious  and  sometimes  decisive  influ- 
ence over  the  most  important  events.  Consequently,  by 
his  orders  I  organised  the  express  service,  which  consisted 
in  sending  by  the  postillions  of  each  stage  the  cabinet  des- 
patches shut  up  in  a  portfolio,  of  which  he  and  I  had  each 
a  key.  When  a  postillion  arrived  at  a  stage,  he  delivered  to 
the  next  one  a  little  book,  on  which  the  name  of  all  the 
stages  was  inscribed,  and  in  which  the  hour  of  the  arrival 
and  departure  of  the  despatches  was  to  be  mentioned. 
Fines  and  severe  punishment  were  inflicted  for  the  loss 
of  the  little  book,  or  for  any  negligence  of  the  postmaster 
in  setting  down  the  hour  of  the  arrival  and  departure  of 
the  despatches.  I  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble  in  obtaining 
a  due  execution  of  those  forms  ;  but  by  means  of  an  active 
and  constant  superintendence  I  succeeded  at  last,  and  the 
service  continued  during  eleven  years  with  most  wonderful 
success.  I  was  enabled  to  account  exactly  for  a  day's  delay 
on  a  space  of  four  hundred  leagues.  The  express  departed 
and  arrived  every  day  from  and  to  Paris,  Naples,  Milan,  the 
mouths  of  the  Cataro,  Madrid,  Lisbon,  and,  at  a  later  period, 
also  Tilsit,  Vienna,  Petersburg,  and  Amsterdam.  This  plan 
besides  ensured  considerable  economy  :  the  couriers  used 
to  cost  seven  francs  and  a  half  per  post,  whereas  the  ex- 
presses were  no  more  than  three  francs.  The  Emperor 
received  on  the  eighth  day  the   answers  to  the  letters  he 


228  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

addressed  to  Milan,  and  on  the  fifteenth  to  those  of  Naples, 
This  service  was  very  useful  to  him,  and  I  may  say  without 
vanity  that  it  proved  one  of  the  elements  of  his  success. 

The  campaign  began  by  the  affair  of  Ulm,  which  came 
like  a  thunderbolt :  Russia  was  dismayed,  and  hastened  to 
hide  her  hostile  projects.  Austerlitz  forced  Austria  to  bend 
the  knee,  and  the  astonished  Russians  to  fall  back.  The 
following  year,  Prussia  was  defeated  in  the  battle  of  Jena,, 
and  added  a  fresh  proof  to  a  thousand  others,  that  an  abso- 
lute monarchy  is  nothing  if  its  leader  be  not  the  most 
skilful  man  in  the  nation.  This  event  was  also  a  proof  that 
Prussia  is  not  a  strong  nation.  Its  sov^ereign,  dismayed  by 
the  loss  of  one  battle,  sought  an  auxiliary  in  the  most 
distant  north  ;  while  its  army,  which  still  contained  pupils 
of  Frederick  the  Great,  had  lost  all  its  old  energy,  and  even 
the  enthusiasm  of  its  former  glory.  One  day  it  fought,  and 
the  next  it  was  nothing  more  than  a  mass  of  men  without 
discipline  or  energy.  One  only  saved  the  honour  of  the 
monarchy,  and  preserved  some  sparks  of  the  same  fire  that 
influences  all  hearts.  This  was  not  done  by  a  prince  of  the 
House  of  Prussia,  but  by  Bliicher,  and  his  march  towards 
Lubeck,  with  his  noble  defence,  gave  the  Prussians  a  great 
lesson  of  courage  in  adversity,  the  most  important  and  most 
useful  lesson  men  and  nations  can  receive. 

These  two  years'  triumph  did  not  inspire  the  Emperor 
with  an  idea  of  conquering  Europe  to  become  her  master  or 
her  president  ;  it  was  his  genius  and  his  character  that 
developed  the  idea  :  for  those  great  conquerors  of  the  world 
are  all  cast  in  the  same  mould — everywhere  they  mtist  he  the 
first,  or  perish  /  He  had  spent  four  years  of  his  consulate 
in  discussing  the  Civil  Code,  an  edifice  Avhich  has  already 
been  shaken  in  one  of  its  most  important  parts,  but  which 
will  never  be  destroyed  as  long  as  the  love  of  our  country 
and  a  taste  for  civilisation  shall  preside  over  our  destinies. 
In  the  interval  from  his  second  war  to  his  last,  he  busied 
himself  with   the  interior  administration.     Some  disorder^ 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  229 

occasioned  more  by  want  of  experience  than  by  dishonesty, 
had  arisen  during  his  absence.  On  his  return,  he  displaced 
some  persons,  rectified  some  of  his  choices,  and  gave  to  the 
general  administration  a  lively  though  steady  impulse.  His 
astonishing  memory  made  him  master  of  all  things,  not  only 
in  their  ensemble^  but  also  in  their  most  minute  details. 
The  consequence  of  this  was,  that  his  conversation  was 
extremely  perplexing  for  men  who  were  not  perfectly 
acquainted  with  the  subjects  they  were  to  demonstrate.  It 
was  his  constant  application  to  all  sorts  of  affairs,  and  his 
excellent  method  of  classing  them  in  his  mind,  that  enabled 
him  to  carry  his  success  so  far.  It  has  frequently  happened 
to  me  to  be  less  sure  than  he  was  of  the  distances  of  places, 
and  of  a  number  of  particulars  in  my  department  which  he 
knew  well  enough  to  correct.  M.  de  Talleyrand  told  me, 
that  as  he  was  one  day  travelling  with  him  from  Boulogne 
to  Paris,  a  short  time  after  the  army  had  left  the  court  for 
the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  the  Emperor  met  a  detachment  of 
soldiers  going  to  join  their  corps,  which  they  did  not  know 
where  to  find.  Having  inquired  the  number  of  their 
regiment,  he  immediately  calculated  the  day  of  their 
departure,  and  the  road  they  had  taken,  and  said  to  them — 
^'  You  will  find  your  battalion  at  such  a  place."  The  army 
was  at  that  time  two  hundred  thousand  men  strong.  The 
admirable  order  in  which  he  arranged  his  ideas,  and  his 
prodigious  memory,  made  him  as  much  beloved  by  the 
soldiers  as  respected  by  the  officers  of  the  army.  Every 
one  knew  that  he  never  forgot  the  name  of  a  brave  man, 
and  that  it  was  always  sufficient  to  recall  to  his  memory 
some  brave  action  to  ensure  its  recompense  ;  and  whenever 
he  promised  anything,  he  always  kept  his  word. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

I  NOW  proceed  to  the  campaign  of  1809.  The  success  of  the 
Wagram  campaign  had  a  considerable  influence  over  the 
destinies  of  France  :  not  so  much,  however,  because  peace 
was  once  more  ensured  to  the  Continent,  as  on  account  of 
the  alhance  between  the  two  crowns.  The  first  proposals  of 
the  marriage  of  the  Emperor  with  the  Archduchess  Maria 
Louisa  were  made  at  Vienna  with  Prince  Metternich,  not- 
withstanding the  exertions  of  a  considerable  party  that 
would  not  listen  to  such  an  alliance.  I  first  suspected  what 
was  going  forward  through  a  singular  circumstance.  The 
Emperor  did  not  well  know  how  to  divorce  a  woman  who 
was  so  deserving  of  his  love,  and  whose  adorable  qualities 
had  made  her  an  object  almost  of  worship  in  the  eyes  of  the 
French.  He  would  not  have  been  sorry  to  have  seen  others 
set  an  example  which  might  make  some  impression  on  the 
public,  and  render  the  matter  less  difficult  to  him  :  at  least^ 

I  have  always  thought  so.     Marshal  came  to  see  me 

the  day  after  his  arrival.  We  were  friends  of  long  standing  : 
he  placed  in  me  an  unbounded  confidence,  and  he  spoke  to 
me  of  his  wife  with  great  discontent.  I  had  always  thought 
him  jealous,  and  I  believe  he  did  not  do  his  wife  justice.  In 
our  conversations  he  even  went  so  far  as  to  say  he  could  not 
live  any  longer  with  her,  and  he  repeated  to  me  what  the 
Emperor  had  said  to  him  at  Vienna.  Napoleon  affected  to 
pity  the  Marshal's  domestic  vexations,  and  observed  that  the 
best  thing  he  could  do  would  be  to  end  them  by  a  divorce. 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  2 3 1 

"  You  will  never  have  any  children  by  her,"  he  added,  "  and 
still  you  ought  to  wish  that  a  name  like  the  one  you  bear 
be  not  lost.  Divorce  her,  and  then  you  may  choose  among 
the  most  illustrious  families  of  France  a  consort  who  will 
give  you  successors  to  your  rank  and  titles."  The  Marshal, 
when  he  mentioned  the  fact  to  me  and  asked  my  advice , 
was  as  far  as  myself  from  suspecting  the  secret  motive  of  the 
Emperor's  words.  I  had  not  the  least  doubt  of  his  wife's 
virtue :  she  possessed  many  amiable  qualities,  and  had 
brought  him  a  considerable  fortune.  I  advised  him  not  to 
take  a  step  he  might  perhaps  long  regret.  He  followed  my 
advice,  and  I  believe  he  acted  wisely. 

A  few  days  after  the  Emperor  returned  from  the  army, 
and  at  the  end  of  two  months  he  went  to  Fontainebleau. 
I  followed  him  thither  almost  immediately.  As  soon  as  I 
arrived,  the  Empress  sent  me  word  to  come  to  her  apart- 
ment by  a  back  staircase.  I  found  her  melancholy,  and 
her  countenance  betrayed  the  effect  of  strong  agitation. 
''  Fouche  has  just  left  me,"  she  said,  "  and  what  do  you 
think  he  said  to  me  ?  '  Madame,  your  Majesty  must  give 
France  and  the  Emperor  a  great  proof  of  devotion.  It  is 
necessary'  for  the  Emperor  to  leave  behind  hira  children  who 
may  perpetuate  his  name,  and  give  to  France  a  family  that 
may  deprive  the  Bourbons  of  all  hopes  of  return.  Ten 
years'  marriage  leaves  the  nation  and  the  Emperor  no 
expectations  of  his  having  any  children  by  your  Majesty. 
You  are  therefore,  in  this  respect,  the  only  obstacle  to  the 
solid  happiness  of  France.  Vouchsafe  to  follow  the  advice 
of  a  man  \<ho  is  wholly  devoted  to  you.  The  peculiar 
situation  in  which  you  are  placed  obliges  you  to  make  a 
great  sacrifice  to  your  own  glory  and  the  interest  of  all.  I 
know  how  hard  it  will  fall  upon  you  ;  but  your  noble  mind 
will  easily  learn  resignation.  The  Emperor  will  never  dare 
to  propose  it.  I  know  his  attachment  for  you.  Be  greater 
than  he  is  great,  and  give  this  last  token  of  devotion  to  your 
country  and  your  sovereign.     History  will  repay  you  for  it^ 


232  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

and  your  place  will  be  marked  above  the  most  illustrious 
women  that  have  sat  upon  the  throne  of  France.'  I  was 
utterly  disconcerted  at  that  speech,"  added  Josephine  ;  "the 
only  reply  I  could  give  to  so  strange  a  proposal  was  that  I 
would  consider  of  it,  and  give  him  an  answer  in  a  few  days. 
Lend  me,  therefore,  your  advice — you  who  are  at  once  a 
relation  and  a  friend  to  me.  Does  it  not  appear  past  all 
doubt  that  Fouche  has  been  sent  by  the  Emperor,  and  that 
my  fate  is  already  decided  ?  Alas  !  to  descend  from  a 
throne  is  no  sacrifice  to  me.  No  one  knows  how  many 
tears  I  have  shed  over  it !  But  to  lose  also  the  man  on 
whom  I  have  bestowed  all  my  affection — that  is  an  act  of 
self-denial  to  which  my  resolution  is  not  adequate." 

I  shared  the  Empress's  surmise,  that  Fouche  had  been 
sent  by  the  Emperor  ;  but  that  strange  news  surprised  me 
as  much  as  it  did  her,  and  I  asked  for  some  hours  to  reflect 
before  I  gave  her  an  answer.  It  required,  however,  but 
short  meditation  to  be  convinced,  that  whether  the  proposal 
had  really  been  made  by  order  of  the  Emperor,  or  that 
Fouche  wished  to  keep  to  himself  the  glory  of  such  a 
change,  it  was  altogether  too  advantageous  to  be  abandoned, 
and  that  the  sacrifice  was  therefore  unavoidable.  On  the 
other  hand,  I  was  too  well  acquainted  with  the  attachment 
of  the  Empress  to  her  husband  not  to  be  convinced  that  she 
never  would  of  her  own  accord  make  the  sacrifice.  I  had 
been  for  a  long  time  devoted  to  her  :  I  was  her  son's  friend, 
and  her  niece's  husband.  It  was  therefore  by  no  means 
proper  that  I  should  encourage  a  plan  which  had  perhaps 
no  other  source  than  Fouche's  ambition,  and  break  all  the 
ties  which  united  me  to  that  family  :  I  do  not  mean  only 
the  ties  that  might  be  of  service  to  me,  but  chiefly  those  of 
friendship.  I  have,  besides,  never  placed  much  confidence 
in  that  human  wisdom  which  pretends  to  control  events 
by  foretelling  them.  None  but  the  most  enlightened  and 
strongest  minds  are  able  to  see  the  future,  and  even  they  are 
often   mistaken.     I  advised  the  Empress   to  remain   silent 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  233 

on  the  subject,  to  let  the  Emperor  begin,  and  to  declare  to 
Fouche,  that  as  her  first  duty  was  attachment  to  the 
Emperor,  her  second  was  obedience,  and  that  in  consequence 
she  did  not  wish  to  hear  any  more  upon  the  subject  from 
any  other  person  than  the  man  who  held  her  fate  in  his 
hands.  She  approved  of  my  advice,  and  followed  it.  But 
the  storm  was  not  long  before  it  burst.  All  was  undoubtedly 
already  concluded  with  Austria,  when  the  Emperor  sent  for 
Eugene  from  Italy,  that  he  might  comfort  his  mother  at  the 
fatal  moment  of  the  divorce  ;  and  a  few  days  after  he  held  a 
secret  council,  where  he  admitted,  besides  the  grand  officers 
and  ministers,  the  members  of  the  family.  He  explained  in 
that  council  the  motives  which  had  swayed  his  decision,  by 
seeking,  for  the  advantage  of  the  state,  in  another  marriage, 
his  long-lost  hope  of  begetting  direct  issue.  He  gave  them 
afterwards  to  understand  that  he  was  at  liberty  to  choose  his 
new  consort  either  in  the  House  of  Austria,  or  in  that  of 
Russia,  or  in  some  of  the  sovereign  Houses  of  Germany. 
The  grand  officers  of  the  empire,  who  were  probably  already 
acquainted  with  his  secret  determination,  gave  their  votes 
for  an  Austrian  princess.  Prince  Eugene  was  of  the  same 
opinion,  and  adduced  as  his  principal  motive  the  Roman 
Catholic  religion,  in  which  the  Archduchess  was  bred.  The 
King  of  Naples  gave  his  vote  for  a  Russian  princess,  on 
account  of  the  advantage  that  would  accrue  from  a  union 
with  the  most  powerful  sovereign  of  Europe,  and  the  most 
distant  from  France  :  he  opposed  the  alliance  with  Austria, 
by  recalling  the  fatal  experience  we  had  already  reaped  from 
it.  "A  family  alliance,"  he  added,  "never  gave  to  France 
any  real  advantage.  France  will  be  obliged  to  support  all 
the  wrong  steps  of  the  foreign  government,  and  to  share  its 
heavy  and  dangerous  burthens.  Nothing  but  the  situation 
of  Austria  can  force  her  to  a  connection  which  in  her  proud 
heart  she  certainly  detests.  It  is  Austria  who  more  than 
any  other  power  has  given  the  force  of  a  maxim  to  the  idea 
that  sovereigns  have  no  relations.     France  will  be  obliged 


234  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

to  support  her  at  great  cost  in  her  awkward  and  frequently 
dishonest  poHcy,  and  in  the  wars  she  so  badly  manages  ;  and 
when  in  our  turn  we  shall  want  her  as  an  ally,  we  shall  find 
in  her  neither  energy  nor  fidelity.  An  alliance  with  Russia 
has  none  of  those  dangers  for  us." 

These  were  very  sensible  observations,  but  could  have  no 
efTect  against  a  fixed  resolution.  I  have  been  told  that  some 
proposals  of  a  marriage  with  a  Grand-duchess  had  really 
been  made,  and  the  person  who  entrusted  me  with  that 
secret  enjoyed  such  a  high  character  for  honesty,  and  was  in 
so  favourable  a  situation  to  get  acquainted  with  the  most 
important  affairs,  that  I  can  have  no  doubt  upon  the  subject. 
However,  the  Emperor  was  at  that  time  so  strongly  deter- 
mined, that  the  debate  of  which  I  have  been  speaking 
could  have  had  no  other  foundation  than  a  feeling  of  vanity,, 
to  which  he  was  perhaps  not  altogether  a  stranger,  and  some 
political  object  which  I  never  could  discover. 

A  few  days  before  he  had  sent  for  me.  He  had  been 
looking  out  for  some  friend  of  the  Empress  who  might  help 
to  sweeten  the  bitter  about  to  be  presented  to  her.  His 
choice  fell  on  me.  "  The  nation,"  he  said,  "  has  done  so 
much  for  me,  that  I  owe  her  the  sacrifice  of  my  dearest 
affections.  Eugene  is  not  young  enough  for  me  to  keep 
him  for  my  successor  ;  nor  am  I  old  enough  to  give  up  all 
hopes  of  having  children,  and  yet  by  Josephine  I  can  have 
none.  The  tranquillity  of  France  requires  my  choosing  a 
new  consort.  The  Empress  has  lived  already  for  several 
months  in  all  the  torment  of  uncertainty.  Everything  is 
settled  for  my  new  union.  You  are  the  husband  of  her 
niece  ;  she  honours  you  with  her  esteem  ;  will  you  not  take 
upon  you  to  acquaint  her  with  the  fatal  news,  and  prepare 
her  for  her  new  situation  ?  " 

I  answered  that  m}^  relationship  to  the  Empress  did  not 
permit  me  to  undertake  that  commission  ;  that  the  attach- 
ment I  had  at  all  times  professed  for  her  left  me  no  plausible 
reason  wherewith  to  justify  such  a  misfortune,  and  that  it. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  23s 

appeared  to  me  more  proper  that  his  Majesty  should  select 
some  person  for  whom  the  commission  might  be  of  a  less 
delicate  nature.     He  did  not  seem  at  all  offended  at  my 

refusal,  and  he  gave  the  charge  to  M.  N ,  who  acquitted 

himself  with  propriety  and  success.  The  arrival  of  Prince 
Eugene  was  a  great  comfort  to  Josephine.  When  in  the 
council,  before  the  Emperor,  and  in  the  presence  of  the 
grand  officers  of  the  empire,  she  was  obliged  to  declare  that 
she  consented  to  the  divorce,  she  displayed  so  much  courage 
and  firmness  of  mind  that  all  the  spectators  were  deeply 
moved.  The  next  day  she  left  the  Tuileries,  never  to 
return  more.  The  Emperor  had  during  the  preceding  day 
passed  some  hours  with  her  ;  his  grief  was  sincere  ;  and  the 
man  whom  the  most  important  events  could  not  even  shake 
for  an  instant  bent  his  knee  before  that  excellent  woman,, 
and  shed  abundant  tears.  I  went  to  see  her  the  morning 
before  her  departure.  Some  persons  of  the  Court  came 
coolly  to  take  leave  of  her,  and  express,  in  an  embarrassed 
way,  a  few  insincere  wishes  ;  and  when  she  got  into  her 
coach  with  the  Countess  d'Alberg,  her  lady  of  honour,  and 
with  her  chevalier  d'honneur,  not  one  single  person  remained 
to  show  her  a  grateful  face.  Every  wish,  every  pretension 
was  already  directed  towards  the  new  court.  The  Emperor 
retired  for  a  fortnight  to  Trianon.  His  grief  was  deep 
and  sincere  ;  but  the  Archduchess  arrived,  and  from  that 
moment  he  gave  himself  entirely  up  to  the  joy  his  new 
bride  promised  him. 

Fortune,  which  till  then  had  seconded  his  genius,  bestowed 
unreservedly  this  new  favour  upon  him.  The  young 
Empress  was  tall,  well  made,  and  in  excellent  health.  She 
appeared  adorned  with  all  the  grace  and  beauty  that  usually 
accompany  youth.  Her  face,  which  displayed  the  family 
features  of  the  Imperial  House  of  Austria,  was  remarkable 
for  an  air  of  kindness  ;  and,  unlike  the  rest  of  her  family, 
her  smile  was  amiable  and  sweet.  The  lustre  that  sur- 
rounded   her,   the    splendour   of    the   first    throne    in    the 


236  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

universe,  all  the  arts  vying  with  each  other  to  please  her  ; 
a  young,  brilliant,  and  warlike  court  at  her  feet,  the  atten- 
tions paid  her  by  the  Emperor,  whose  fame  had  for  several 
years  already  struck  her  imagination,  made  her  abode  in 
Paris  delightful  to  her.  She  frequently  expressed  her 
satisfaction  with  a  warmth  and  a  naivete  that  made  her 
generally  beloved.  The  marriage  ceremony  took  place  with 
great  pomp.  Many  persons,  however,  recalled  to  their 
memory  the  arrival  of  the  Archduchess  Marie  Antoinette, 
and  the  fatal  fireworks  let  off  in  the  Place  Louis  XV.  where 
so  many  lives  were  lost.  The  public  took  some  pleasure  in 
comparing  the  two  periods,  especially  on  the  occasion  of  the 
fete  given  at  the  Champ  de  Mars  by  the  Imperial  guard, 
where  the  most  admirable  order  had  prevailed  among  six 
thousand  people  assembled  in  a  temporary  wooden  room, 
surrounded  by  eighty  thousand  others  who  had  come  to 
enjoy  the  sight  of  the  fireworks.  All  these  rejoicings  were 
over,  when  the  Emperor  thought  he  could  not  refuse 
attending  a  soiree  given  by  the  Austrian  Ambassador, 
Prince  Schwartzenberg,  in  his  hotel.  Rue  de  Mont  Blanc. 
There  were  at  least  six  hundred  persons  present ;  and  the 
house  not  being  large  enough  for  so  numerous  a  company, 
the  Ambassador  had  ordered  a  round  temporary  saloon  of 
woodwork  to  be  erected  in  the  garden  communicating  with 
his  apartments.  The  architect  had  completed  all  the 
preparations  in  four  days.  Unfortunately  he  fixed  the  floor 
of  the  saloon  on  one  side  to  the  steps  that  went  down  to  the 
garden,  and  on  the  other  to  the  rock  of  a  grotto,  where 
there  never  entered  a  drop  of  water.  A  gallery  also  of 
wood  had  been  erected,  leading  to  the  Rue  de  Provence. 
It  was  in  the  beginning  of  summer,  and  the  heat  was 
excessive.  Gauze  and  muslin  draperies,  with  a  great  pro- 
fusion of  garlands,  lined  the  saloon  and  all  its  avenues.  An 
immense  quantity  of  wax  candles  added  to  the  heat  of  the 
atmosphere,  and  gave  to  all  the  ornaments  a  most  inflam- 
mable dryness.     A  candle  fell  against  one  of  the  curtains  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  237 

the  gallery  and  set  fire  to  it.  One  of  the  chamberlains,  a 
man  of  very  tall  stature,  perceived  it  and  tore  it  down  ;  but 
the  flames  extended  with  so  much  rapidity,  that  in  a  few 
seconds  they  reached  the  saloon,  and  quickly  spread  all 
round  the  room.  Everybody  ran  toward  the  garden  ;  but, 
as  there  was  only  one  door,  the  company  was  all  crowded 
to  the  same  point  ;  the  floor  gave  way,  and  many  persons 
fell  into  a  hollow  of  more  than  five  feet  deep.  The  con- 
fusion then  grew  excessive.  The  cries  of  despair  and  fright, 
the  dismay  and  the  wish  to  escape  from  the  danger,  that 
spared  neither  sex  nor  rank,  made  the  scene  horrible  to 
witness.  The  flames  having  soon  reached  and  consumed 
the  roof  of  the  saloon,  the  ceiling  fell  in,  and  the  whole 
presented  the  appearance  of  a  vast  furnace.  In  three 
minutes'  time  the  flames  had  spread  in  every  direction. 
The  company  escaped  to  the  gardens  and  the  streets,  half 
covered  with  the  remainder  of  their  burning  clothes.  The 
Emperor  had  retired  just  as  the  fire  began  to  communicate 
with  the  saloon  ;  but  after  having  placed  the  Empress  in 
safety,  he  quickly  returned  in  a  plain  dress  with  Prince 
Eugene,  who  had  saved  the  Princess  Augusta  with  great 
presence  of  mind.  At  that  mom.ent  the  sight  was  appalling. 
Some  unfortunate  women  who  had  fallen  under  the  floor 
had  attempted  to  get  out  through  the  beams  that  supported 
it  ;  but,  already  half  burnt,  they  vainly  extended  their 
wounded  arms  through  the  bars,  and  when  assistance  came 
it  was  too  late.  Those  who  were  saved  died  a  short  time 
after  in  excruciating  pain.  The  Princess  de  la  Dijon,  a 
woman  as  remarkable  for  her  beauty  as  she  was  respectable 
for  her  virtue,  was  carried,  nearly  half  burnt,  to  the  lodge 
of  a  poor  portress  of  a  neighbouring  hotel.  She  was  speech- 
less. The  old  woman  covered  her  with  her  own  clothes  ; 
and  a  Swedish  officer,  who  had  saved  her,  without  knowing 
who  she  was,  brought  her  in  a  hackney  coach  to  Passy, 
where  he  supposed  she  lodged,  as  that  had  been  the  only 
word  she  had  been  able  to  utter.     He  went  with  her  from 


238  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

door  to  door,  until  at  last  her  servants  recognised  her  voice. 
The  unfortunate  lady  died  four  days  afterwards,  in  the 
prime  of  her  age,  after  having  given  with  tears  her  blessing 
to  her  daughter,  who  was  married  at  her  bedside. 

The  fate  of  the  Princess  Schwartzenberg,  sister-in-law  to 
the  Ambassador,  was  no  less  tragical.  She  was  at  the  ball 
with  her  children  :  radiant  in  beauty,  splendidly  dressed, 
and  glittering  in  diamonds.  She  saved  herself  in  the 
garden,  where,  not  seeing  her  eldest  daughter  by  her  side, 
and  having  sought  for  her  in  vain,  the  courageous  mother 
flew  back  to  the  saloon.  The  floor  sunk  under  her  feet,  and 
she  was  engulfed  in  the  flames.  A  few  hours  later,  when 
the  fire  was  at  last  extinguished,  she  was  found  a  shapeless 
■corpse,  burnt  to  the  bones,  blackened,  and  shrunk  to  half 
her  size.  She  was  only  known  by  the  rings  she  wore  on 
her  fingers.  Some  business  had  kept  me  at  home  ;  the 
blaze  of  the  fire  and  the  public  alarm  made  me  fly  to  the 
fatal  scene.  It  was  no  longer  possible  to  come  near  it. 
The  mob  filled  all  the  avenues.  Their  unpitiful  memory 
recalled  the  misfortunes  of  the  Place  Louis  XV.  at  the 
marriage  of  Marie  Antoinette.  The  most  dismal  com- 
parisons, the  most  sinister  predictions  accompanied  the 
name  of  Maria  Louisa  ;  and  I  went  back,  my  heart  deeply 
grieved  at  the  behaviour  of  the  crowd,  who  showed  so  little 
sensibility  for  the  victims,  and  who,  by  the  cruel  malice  of 
their  observations,  gave  but  too  sure  a  proof  that  they  felt 
no  pity  for  the  unfortunate  persons,  whose  pleasures  and 
high  rank  wounded  their  vanity. 

The  fatal  forewarnings  of  the  people  were,  however,  not 
immediately  confirmed.  The  Empress  was  delivered  of  a 
son  on  the  twentieth  of  March.  Her  pregnancy  had  given 
great  hopes  ;  and  the  people,  who  had  frequently  enjoyed 
the  sight  of  her,  showed  her  all  the  interest  she  could  wish 
to  inspire.  Government  had  announced,  that  if  she  were 
delivered  of  a  son  the  salute  would  consist  of  a  hundred 
and  one  guns,  but  only  of  twenty-five  if  it  were  a  princess. 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VA  LE  TTE.  2  39 

At  the  twenty-sixth  gun  the  joy  of  the  people  was  carried 
to  a  fit  of  dehrium,  not  only  in  Paris,  but  all  over  France. 
I  call  the  whole  generation  to  witness  that  all  our  wishes 
were  fulfilled.  The  prosperity  of  the  state  seemed  assured, 
and  France  delivered  from  all  fear  of  revolution.  It  was 
then,  I  have  often  since  repeated  with  many  other  people — 
it  was  then  that  the  Emperor  ought  to  have  hung  up  against 
the  wall  his  conqueror's  sword,  and  sought  rest  in  the 
administration  of  his  extensive  empire.  France  would 
have  been  happy,  and  the  memory  of  the  Bourbons  for  ever 
buried  in  oblivion. 

The  Empress's  delivery  had  been  tedious.  She  suffered 
severely  for  several  hours.  I  arrived  at  the  palace  a  short 
time  before  it  was  over,  although  I  was  not  called  there  by 
my  rank  ;  but  I  had  free  access  at  all  hours.  The  Emperor 
was  much  agitated,  and  went  continually  from  the  saloons 
to  the  bedchamber  and  back  again.  At  last  the  medical 
gentlemen  appearing  in  some  doubt  as  to  the  mode  of 
delivering  the  Princess,  the  Emperor  said  to  them  in  a 
loud  voice  and  much  moved  :  "  Do  as  you  would  with  a 
citizen's  wife.  Save  the  mother,  by  all  means.''  The  child 
came,  however,  safe  into  the  world,  and  the  Emperor 
immediately  presented  it  to  us.  The  wishes  for  his  welfare 
and  the  general  emotions  were  sincere.  May  he  one  day 
realise  all  the  wishes  that  accompanied  his  birth  ! — and  if  it 
be  not  for  the  happiness  of  France,  may  she  still  one  day  be 
proud  that  he  was  born  among  her  children  ! 


CHAPTER    XXVI. 

Notwithstanding  the  glorious  resistance  of  the  Spaniards, 
and  the  varied  success  of  our  armies  in  Spain,  the  Emperor 
had  kept  a  part  of  Prussia  in  his  hands,  and  established  the 
centre  of  his  military  position  in  the  North  at  Hamburg^ 
which  was  intrusted  to  the  care  of  Marshal  Davoust.  The 
Marshal  deserved  the  Emperor's  confidence  by  his  noble 
conduct  at  Jena,  and  by  an  unbounded  devotion.  The 
conditions  of  the  Treaty  of  Tilsit,  in  regard  to  England, 
were  only  to  remain  in  force  for  three  years.  The  Emperor 
Alexander  was  perplexed  by  the  state  of  his  trade.  The 
produce  of  his  empire  remained  on  hand,  the  English 
refusing  to  receive  it ;  and  the  great  landowners  of  the 
country,  who  were  noblemen,  complained.  In  a  govern- 
ment where  the  life  of  the  sovereign  is  frequently  exposed 
to  the  effect  of  conspiracies,  it  is  perhaps  more  dangerous 
than  in  other  places  to  wound  the  passions  and  interests  of 
the  great,  as  it  is  not  necessary  there  to  stir  up  the  people, 
while  three  or  four  ferocious  rebels  and  a  handful  of  soldiers 
may  decide  the  fate  of  the  sovereign  and  the  empire.  This 
consideration  had  certainly  a  due  influence  on  the  new 
determination  of  the  Emperor  Alexander.  He  was  besides 
but  little  satisfied  with  his  ally  Napoleon.  The  rigour  with 
which  Prussia  had  been  used  displeased  him,  and  the 
sovereignty  of  Italy  vexed  him.  The  dominion  of  the 
French    in    the    latter   country,    and    the  possession  of  the 

seven  Venetian  Islands,  situated  so  near  Greece,  made  him 

240 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  241 

fear  a  watchful  and  terrible  enemy,  if  ever  he  wished  to 
resume  Catharine's  old  plans  in  regard  to  the  Ottoman 
empire  :  he  therefore  began  by  degrees  to  seek  a  recon- 
ciliation with  England. 

His  conduct  greatly  displeased  the  Emperor,  who  strongly 
felt  the  consequences  of  it.  All  the  powers  of  the  Continent 
had  suffered  severely  ;  Russia  alone  still  preserved  all  the 
energy  of  her  immense  strength.  The  Emperor  resolved 
to  attack  her.  He  did  not,  however,  carry  his  resolution 
into  effect  without  having  first  exhausted  all  means  of 
conciliation  ;  but  when  he  saw  how  stubborn  the  enemy 
remained,  he  opened  the  campaign.  The  Emperor  Alex- 
ander imagined  he  had  disposed  all  things  favourably  ;  but 
the  first  attacks  were  so  vigorous,  that  he  soon  grew  sensible 
he  should  be  obliged  to  make  one  of  his  last  resources  and 
sacrifice  everything  if  he  wished  to  get  the  advantage  in  this 
giants'  strife.  He  began  by  making  peace  with  the  Turks. 
Unfortunately  for  France,  the  Emperor  Napoleon  thought 
the  Divan  would  be  too  well  aware  of  its  true  interests,  to 
conclude  a  peace  with  its  mortal  enemy  at  a  moment  when 
that  enemy  was  going  to  be  so  powerfully  attacked.  He 
thought  that  the  Divan,  according  to  its  old  maxims,  leaving 
the  Christians  to  weaken  one  another  by  their  wars,  would 
profit  by  their  exhausted  state,  either  to  attack  them,  or 
at  least  to  obtain  that  degree  of  rest  which  would  ensure 
safety.      The   Emperor   sent   off  his   ambassador,   General 

,  too  late,  and  when  he  arrived  at  the  Turkish  frontiers 

he  learned  that  peace  had  been  concluded  between  the 
Ottoman  Porte  and  Russia.  Napoleon  had  another  enemy 
in  Bernadotte,  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden,  whom  he  had 
thought  attached  to  his  interests.  I  never  could  conceive 
why  he  remained  so  unconcerned  at  that  general's  exalta- 
tion. He  was  perhaps  not  sorry  to  get  him  out  of  France  ; 
and,  accustomed  to  obtain  everything  by  force  and  despise 
old  diplomatic  manoeuvres,  he  certainly  had  no  idea  that 
Bernadotte  would  be  in  a  situation  to  injure  him.    However, 

17 


242  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden  laid  down  a  plan  of  resistance, 
such  as  the  most  inveterate  enemy  of  France  could  scarcely 
have  imagined.  To  his  natural  policy,  as  Prince  of  Sweden, 
he  added  his  hatred  of  Napoleon,  which  made  him  give 
able  and  fatal  advice  to  Russia  ;  and  General  Moreau  was 
recalled,  with  a  view  of  being  placed  at  the  head  of  a  Russian 
army,  and  invading  France  as  the  head  of  a  party.  The 
campaign,  which  had  begun  in  so  brilliant  a  manner,  and 
which  with  a  little  more  prudence  the  Emperor  would  have 
concluded  in  good  time,  owed  a  part  of  its  disasters  to  the 
fatal  conviction  of  Napoleon  that  his  enemies  would  always 
yield,  and  that  accumulated  humiliation  would  never  pro- 
duce anything  but  ineffectual  fury.  I  have  often  heard  it 
repeated  that  the  King  of  Naples  greatly  contributed  to  our 
misfortunes,  by  keeping  the  Emperor  in  a  fatal  security. 
The  Russians  caressed  that  King  ;  they  intoxicated  him 
with  perfidious  praises,  which  unfortunately  had  too  much 
power  over  his  mind.  He  was,  they  said,  the  hero  of  the 
French  ;  the  Du  Guesclin,  the  Bayard  of  his  age  ;  he  was 
the  prop  of  the  throne,  and  the  support  of  national  glory  ; 
it  was  with  him  alone  that  they  would  consent  to  treat  ; 
every  concession  that  could  be  made  without  danger,  they 
would  offer  to  him,  happy  if  he  deigned  to  accept  their 
terms.  The  return  of  a  courier  sent  to  the  Emperor 
Alexander  was  looked  for  with  impatience,  and  then  peace 
was  to  be  immediately  signed.  The  King  of  Naples,  who 
had  already  entered  into  private  engagements  with  Russia 
for  the  preservation  of  his  Neapolitan  throne,  was  delighted 
by  finding  in  the  Russians  a  fresh  security.  He  therefore 
kept  the  Emperor  in  an  illusion,  which,  to  say  the  truth,  he 
shared  himself,  though  the  still  burning  ruins  of  Moscow 
ought  to  have  taught  them  that  a  sovereign  capable  of 
taking  such  a  step  would  never  sign  a  disgraceful  peace. 
In  fact,  the  Russians  were  already  preparing  to  harass,  by 
all  possible  means,  the  French  army  in  its  retreat.  The 
disasters   of  that  campaign  are  known.     While  they  were 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  243 

going  on,  the  city  of  Paris  witnessed  a  prodigy  such  as  is 
often  seen  on  the  eve  of  the  great  convulsions  of  nature. 
What  all  Europe  in  arms  had  not  dared  to  plan  for  the  last 
twenty  years,  namely,  the  conquest  of  Paris,  a  single  man, 
in  prison,  without  friends,  money,  or  reputation,  was  bold 
enough  to  attempt,  and  almost  succeeded.  I  had  served 
with  Mallet  as  staff  officer  in  1793.  He  was  a  man  of  an 
extraordinary  turn  of  mind  :  his  manners  were  eccentric, 
and  he  was  tormented  with  a  deep  melancholy  that  made 
him  morose  and  disagreeable  to  his  comrades.  The  acces- 
sion of  Bonaparte  to  the  throne  had  displeased  him,  and  he 
had  not  attempted  to  hide  his  feelings.  The  loss  of  his 
liberty,  added  to  the  grief  of  seeing  his  career  stopped 
when  so  many  officers  of  younger  standing  than  himself 
rose  to  the  highest  rank  and  acquired  great  reputation, 
made  him  take  a  part  in  an  ill-conceived  conspiracy  con- 
sisting of  those  old  remains  of  brawling  Jacobins,  who  take 
no  counsel  but  their  rage,  and  have  no  means  of  realising 
their  wretched  projects.  Mallet  was  discovered,  and  the 
particulars  of  the  plot  having  been  laid  before  the  eyes  of 
the  Emperor,  he  shrugged  up  his  shoulders  through  con- 
tempt. After  some  years'  imprisonment.  Mallet  obtained 
leave  to  remove  to  one  of  those  private  hospitals  [maisons 
de  saute)  which  surround  Paris,  and  which  were  for  the 
police  a  sort  of  seminaries,  where  they  kept,  subject  to  a 
severe  supervision,  all  such  persons  who  could  not  be 
convicted,  but  whom,  however,  it  would  have  been  danger- 
ous to  set  entirely  free.  We  had  remained  during  twenty- 
six  days  without  any  accounts  from  the  army  ;  sinister 
reports  were  beginning  to  circulate  ;  when  Mallet,  after 
having  combined  his  plan  with  the  Abbe  Constant,  a  com- 
panion of  his  captivity,  found  means  to  get  out  of  prison, 
dressed  in  a  field-marshal's  uniform,  and  went  at  four 
o'clock  in  the  morning  to  the  barracks  of  the  Municipal 
Legion.  Having  called  up  the  colonel,  who  was  still  asleep, 
he  told  him  with  an  air  of  dismay  that  the  Emperor  was 


244  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

dead  ;  that  the  Senate  was  assembled  to  restore  the 
republican  government  in  France  ;  and  that  he,  Mallet, 
who  had  been  appointed  commander  of  Paris,  wanted  six 
hundred  men  of  the  regiment  to  go  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville 
and  protect  the  Senate,  that  was  assembling  there.  At 
this  fatal  news  the  colonel  was  at  first  seized  with  alarm, 
and  his  grief  for  the  death  of  the  Emperor  made  him  shed 
tears.  The  disorder  of  his  mind  did  not  permit  him  to 
reflect  on  the  news  he  had  heard,  nor  cast  his  eyes  on  the 
suspicious  person  that  stood  before  him.  He  ordered  the 
guard  to  assemble,  and,  overwhelmed  with  consternation, 
left  Mallet  master  of  his  forces.  The  name  of  a  Republic, 
which  recalled  to  mind  licentiousness,  was  a  counterpoise 
to  the  death  of  the  Emperor.  The  most  brilliant  promises 
and  temptations  were  held  out ;  the  oflScers  all  believed 
what  Mallet  chose  to  tell  them.  Each  soldier  was  to  be 
rewarded  by  advancement  and  double  pay  ;  the  officers 
were  to  get  draughts  on  the  treasury  of  twenty  and  even 
fifty  thousand  francs  :  for  Mallet  had  provided  against  every 
difficulty.  He  soon  got  together  four  hundred  men,  at 
whose  head  he  went  to  seek  his  accomplices,  and  the  future 
ministers  of  France,  in  the  prison  of  La  Force.  In  that 
prison  there  had  been  in  confinement,  for  some  time,  an 
adjutant-general,  named  Guidal,  and  General  Lahorie,  of 
whom  I  have  already  spoken.  Both  had  served  with 
Mallet,  but  had  heard  nothing  more  of  him,  and  were  totally 
ignorant  of  his  plans.  Mallet  entered  the  prison,  claimed 
his  two  old  comrades,  and  told  the  great  news.  The  jailer 
refusing  to  deliver  his  prisoners,  he  signed  their  liberation, 
introduced  two  hundred  men,  and  went  to  Lahorie's 
chamber.  The  first  words  Mallet  said  to  him  were,  "You 
are  the  minister  of  police.  Rise,  dress  yourself,  and  follow 
me."  Poor  Lahorie,  who  now  saw,  for  the  first  time  during 
the  lapse  of  twelve  years,  a  man  whom  he  had  never  looked 
upon  as  quite  compos  mentis^  imagined  all  he  heard  was  but 
a  dream,  and  rubbed  his  eyes  while  looking  at  him.     At  last 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  245 

the  assurance  of  the  death  of  the  Emperor,  of  the  assembhng 
of  the  Senate,  of  the  re-establishment  of  the  RepubHc,  con- 
vinced him  that  he  once  more  witnessed  another  of  those 
revolutions  so  common  in  modern  history.  He  rose,  dressed 
himself,  and  found  six  hundred  men  at  the  gate.  With 
Guidal  by  his  side,  he  immediately  went  to  the  Minister  of 
Police,  who  was  still  in  bed.  The  soldiers  entered  quietly, 
and  without  any  obstacle  ;  when,  finding  the  door  of  the 
Minister's  chamber  locked,  they  broke  it  open  with  the  butt 
ends  of  their  muskets.  The  Minister,  waking  at  the  noise, 
jumped  out  of  bed,  and,  without  waiting  to  dress  himself, 
rushed  upon  the  murderers.  He  was  seized,  and  treated 
in  the  most  brutal  manner  ;  but  at  last,  at  sight  of  the 
prisoner  Lahorie,  and  the  intelligence  of  the  death  of  the 
Emperor,  he  began  to  comprehend  that  he  was  the  victim 
and  the  dupe  of  a  revolution.  He  obtained,  not  without 
some  trouble,  leave  to  dress  ;  and  Guidal  led  him,  escorted 
by  a  detachment,  to  the  prison  of  La  Force.  On  the  Pont 
Neuf  he  jumped  from  the  cabriolet,  but  was  retaken.  When 
he  arrived  at  the  prison  the  jailer  burst  into  tears.  Savary 
whispered  to  him — "Place  me  in  your  darkest  dungeon 
and  hide  the  key  of  it.  God  knows  what  is  the  meaning 
of  this,  but  it  will  all  clear  up."  A  few  minutes  later  the 
Prefect  of  Police  was  also  brought  to  the  prison  ;  a  detach- 
ment had  gone  to  fetch  him,  and  had  dragged  him  along. 
Whilst  the  heads  of  the  police  were  thus  treated.  Mallet 
went  to  General  Hullin,  commander  of  the  military 
division  and  of  the  city  of  Paris.  The  general  was  just 
getting  up  to  receive  an  order  from  the  Minister  of  the 
War  Department,  which  could  be  delivered  into  no  hands 
but  his  own.  Mallet  was  accompanied  by  some  ofllcers  of 
his  troop.  On  seeing  the  general,  he  said  to  him  with  the 
greatest  coolness,  and  with  an  air  of  gravity,  "  I  am  very 
mortified.  General,  to  have  so  painful  a  commission  to  execute ; 
but  my  orders  are  to  arrest  you."  Hullin  remonstrated,  and 
looking  at  Mallet,   whose  face   he   knew,  he  said,  "  How  ! 


246  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

Mallet,  is  it  you  ?  You  arrest  me — a  prisoner  ?  How  did 
you  come  here  ?  What  is  your  business  doing  here  ?  " — 
"  The  Emperor  is  dead."  These  words  struck  Hullin  dumb, 
and  Mallet  repeated  the  fable  he  had  invented.  However, 
the  arrest  and  the  order  to  go  to  prison  appeared  wondrous 
strange  to  the  general.  He  continually  spoke  ;of  the  death 
of  the  Emperor  and  his  own  imprisonment  : — at  length 
asked  Mallet  to  show  him  his  order.  "  Very  willingly," 
replied  the  other,  "  will  you  step  with  me  into  your  closet  ?  " 
Hullin  turned  round,  and  as  he  was  entering  the  closet  he 
fell,  struck  by  a  bullet  that  touched  his  head.  While  lying 
on  the  ground,  he  saw  his  murderer  looking  coolly  at  him, 
and  preparing  to  fire  once  more,  but,  thinking  him  dead,  he 
left  the  place.  He  crossed  the  Place  Vendome,  and  went 
to    the   staflF,    whither   he   had    sent   before   him    a    letter, 

acquainting    the    adjutant-general,    N ,    that    he    was 

advanced  to  the  rank  of  major-general.  The  latter,  when 
he  saw  Mallet,  could  not  disguise  his  doubts.  Struggling 
between  his  duty  and  his  ambition,  he  was  perhaps  at  the 
point  of  yielding,  and  entering  into  arrangements,  when 
one  of  the  heads  of  the  military  police,  the  old  Colonel 
Laborde,  came  into  the  apartment.  The  appearance  of  that 
man  showed  sufficiently  that  he  could  be  neither  deceived 
nor  seduced.  Mallet  was  therefore  going  to  blow  out  his 
brains,  when  Laborde  seized  him  abruptly  by  the  arm, 
called  for  assistance,  and  had  him  arrested.  This  Laborde 
was  an  old  soldier,  who,  having  long  retired  from  active 
service,  had  chosen  Paris  for  his  camp  and  the  scene  of  his 
observations.  Attached  to  the  police  under  all  possible 
governments,  no  one  could  impose  upon  him  by  illusions. 
His  youth  had  been  passed  in  vice,  and  he  now  felt  pleasure 
in  pursuing  it  in  its  last  holds.  He  made  use  of  his  privilege 
with  all  the  despotism  which  subalterns  of  that  class  love  to 
exercise  upon  the  rabble.  Rank,  titles,  glory,  virtue,  crime 
itself,  is  sacred  to  them  as  long  as  it  remains  prosperous  ; 
but,  as  soon  as  the  day  of  misfortune  arrives,  they  trample 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  247 

upon  everything,  and  neither  respect  nor  pity  must  be 
expected  from  them.  Laborde  had  seen  Mallet  in  prison. 
At  the  first  report  of  the  Minister  of  Police  being  arrested, 
he  set  himself  at  the  head  of  a  platoon  of  infantry,  went  to 
the  office,  and  found  Lahorie  calmly  seated  at  his  desk, 
writing  orders,  after  those  he  had  given  at  the  Hotel  de 
Ville.  He  had  him  immediately  seized  and  tied  to  his  arm- 
chair, while  he  addressed  to  him  reproaches  that  opened  the 
unfortunate  Lahorie's  eyes  to  the  madness  of  Mallet.  He 
then  went  to  the  staff,  where  he  arrested  the  latter,  and, 
flying  to  the  prison,  he  delivered  the  Minister  and  Prefect 
of  Police.  The  Prefect  went  home  ;  but  his  hotel  being  still 
full  of  the  soldiers  who  had  arrested  him,  they  pursued  him, 
and  he  was  glad  to  find  a  refuge  in  a  neighbouring  house. 
All  these  scenes,  well  deserving  of  a  place  in  the  Arabian 
Nights'  Entertainments,  happened  between  five  and  eight 
o'clock  in  the  morning.  By  nine  all  was  over  ;  and  the 
happy  inhabitants  of  Paris,  when  they  awoke,  learned  the 
singular  event,  and  made  some  tolerably  good  jokes  upon  it. 
The  attempt  of  Mallet  was  nothing  more  than  the 
extravagance  of  a  madman  whose  imagination  had  been 
excited.  It  made,  however,  a  deep  impression  on  the 
public,  and  became  a  subject  of  dismal  reflection.  In  the 
following  year  the  Royalists  did  not  fail  to  place  Mallet 
among  the  number  of  their  martyrs,  and  honoured  with 
the  name  of  a  Bourbonian  attempt  the  mad  freak  of  a 
man  who,  far  from  ever  having  belonged  to  that  party,  had 
always  been  worked  upon  by  Republican  ideas.  His  plan 
was  a  sufficient  demonstration  of  that.  He  had  planned  the 
assembling  of  the  Senate  ;  he  had  spoken  of  nothing  else  to 
the  soldiers  than  the  re-establishment  of  Liberty  and  the 
Republic  ;  and  he  could  only  hope  to  succeed  by  stirring 
up  the  lowest  classes  of  the  people.  Would  the  confusion 
have  been  considerable,  and  long  enough  for  him  to  have 
succeeded,  in  case  the  Emperor  had  really  been  killed  ?  I 
do  not  believe  it  ;  but  at  least  I  must  suppose,  from  the 


248  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

knowledge  I  had  of  his  character,  that  he  would  not  have 
fled,  but  would  have  committed  suicide.  The  noble  firm- 
ness he  showed  until  the  moment  of  his  death  is  a  proof  of 
that.  A  few  days  after  he  had  been  arrested  news  was 
received  from  the  Emperor.  He  was  by  no  means  discon- 
certed, and  expressed  no  other  feeling  than  that  of  regret 
for  the  loss  of  liberty  and  the  prolongation  of  the  Emperor's 
despotism.  The  most  incredible  thing  was  that  in  the 
midst  of  the  confusion,  during  three  hours,  nobody  thought 
of  the  Empress  or  her  son.  The  Prefect  of  the  department 
had  quietly  slept  at  his  country  seat  in  the  Forest  of  Vin- 
cennes.  He  was  coming  home  on  horseback,  when  an  express 
met  him  and  delivered  to  him  a  note,  wherein  he  found, 
written  with  pencil,  these  two  words,  "  Fuit  Imperator." 
At  first  they  appeared  inexplicable.  The  express  had  not 
waited  for  an  answer,  and  it  was  only  after  a  good  deal  of 
reflection,  and  after  having  read  the  note  four  times,  that 
he  at  last  understood  it.  He  hastened  to  the  Hotel  de 
Ville,  where  he  found  everything  in  confusion,  and  General 
Lahorie  already  giving  orders  for  the  Assembly.  He  then 
burst  into  tears,  and  found  no  other  resource  but  submis- 
sion. The  Colonel,  who  first  had  been  surprised  by  Mallet, 
did  not  show  either  more  firmness  or  more  presence  of  mind 
than  the  Prefect.  All  those  who  had  been  surprised  by  the 
news  carried  their  reflection  no  farther.  It  seemed  as  if 
everything  was  over  by  the  death  of  the  Emperor,  and  that 
he  had  taken  along  with  him  not  only  the  secret  of  the 
government,  but  all  the  foresight  and  energy  of  those  who 
were  devoted  to  him.  There  is  not  the  least  doubt  but  two 
hours  later  every  one  would  have  come  to  their  senses  ; 
but  then,  perhaps,  it  would  have  been  too  late.  I  did  not 
conceal  this  observation  from  the  Emperor,  who  looked 
very  grave  when  he  heard  it.  Generals  Mallet,  Lahorie, 
and  Guidal,  who  was  arrested  a  few  hours  after  the  rest, 
and  about  fifteen  poor  officers,  who  had  committed  no  other 
fault  than  obeying   generals  whom  they  looked   upon   as 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  249 

their  leaders,  were  condemned  to  death.  In  going  to  the 
fatal  spot  these  officers  cried,  "  Long  live  the  Emperor  !  " 
They  all  died  with  a  courage  bordering  on  indifference  : 
several  of  them  were  not  killed  at  the  first  discharge,  and 
they  reproached  the  soldiers  for  their  awkwardness. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

The  first  account  from  the  Emperor,  dated  from  the 
Beresina,  brought  the  distressing  particulars  of  the  retreat. 
Those  that  were  given  in  the  bulletins,  and  especially  in  the 
29th,  could  not  be  read  without  horror.  It  was  not  sur- 
prising that  many  persons  should  have  been  deluded  by  the 
austere  energy  that  had  presided  over  their  composition, 
and  should  even  feel  some  indignation  at  it.  Accustomed 
for  so  long  a  period  to  nothing  but  triumph,  the  particulars 
of  our  first  defeat,  accompanied  by  so  much  calamity,  spread 
consternation  all  over  France.  The  enemies  of  the  Em- 
peror grew  more  numerous,  and  skilfully  made  use  of  the 
circumstance  to  raise  an  outcry  against  his  tyranny.  Just 
as  the  agitation  of  the  public  mind  was  at  the  strongest,  his 
arrival  at  the  Tuileries  was  suddenly  published.  He  ad- 
mitted everybody  ;  showed  severity  towards  some — intre- 
pidity in  presence  of  all.  He  explained  the  cause  of  the 
misfortune  of  the  campaign,  and  without  seeking  to  dis- 
semble the  fault  that  had  been  committed,  he  boldly  claimed 
the  support  he  wanted,  to  begin  the  war  anew,  repel  the 
enemy,  and  conclude  a  peace,  of  which  he  more  than  any 
one  felt  the  absolute  necessity.  His  noble  courage  in 
wrestling  with  misfortune  electrified  the  whole  country. 
Three  hundred  thousand  men  were  granted  ;  the  young 
came  forward  with  courage,  the  old  with  firmness.  Within 
a  few  months  an  army  was  raised,  admirably  brave,  though 
still  uninstructed,  and  the  fields  of  Lutzen  and  Bautzen 
witnessed  fresh  triumphs.     The  disasters  of  the  campaign 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  2 5 1 

of  Moscow  had  brought  Russia  and  Austria  to  an  under- 
standing, and  alarmed  the  powers  of  the  second  class. 
Peace  was,  however,  proposed  to  the  Emperor,  but  they 
had  no  longer  to  treat  with  the  sovereign  of  the  world. 
He  began  to  feel  that,  after  having  been  conquered  by  the 
elements,  he  would  be  so  by  man.  Though  his  last  battles 
.  had  turned  out  in  his  favour,  he  now  saw  that  he  might 
have  rivals.  Pretensions  were  brought  forward,  the  most 
important  of  which  was  that  he  should  give  up  his  influence 
over  Germany,  and  abandon  that  part  of  the  continent  to 
the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine.  If  he  had  consented  he  would 
have  abandoned  the  Confederation,  the  House  of  Saxony, 
and  the  kingdom  of  Westphalia — that  is  to  say,  he  would 
have  dethroned  his  brother.  He  would  perhaps  have  done 
so  one  day  of  his  own  accord,  but  he  could  not  bear  to  be 
commanded.  The  Emperor  felt  that  a  power  contested  in 
that  way  is  a  fallen  power.  His  proud  mind,  which  never 
knew  how  to  stop,  recoiled  at  the  proposals.  The  negotia- 
tions broke  off,  and  he  began  the  war  again  without  con- 
sidering the  youth  and  inexperience  of  his  soldiers,  or  the 
discontent  of  his  generals-in-chief.  He  fought  like  a  lion, 
but  like  a  lion  forced  into  its  den.  I  must,  however, 
acknowledge  that  he  was  badly  seconded.  A  short  time 
after  that  period  some  particulars  were  told  me  in  confi- 
dence, but  with  so  much  appearance  of  truth  that  I  cannot 
omit  mentioning  them  here.  The  Cossacks  were  a  new 
engine  which  made  the  war  perilous,  especially  to  the 
officers  who  went  out  to  reconnoitre.  Several  of  them,  and 
particularly  those  of  the  general  staff,  who  were  chosen 
indiscriminately  by  the  major-general,  preferred  giving  us 
reports  taken  from  peasants,  to  exposing  themselves  at  a 
distance  to  the  attacks  of  the  Cossacks.  By  this  means  the 
Emperor  could  no  longer  ascertain  the  truth.  The  reports 
he  received  were  all  satisfactory,  because  they  were  not  true. 
He  thought  himself  able  to  resist,  because  he  entertained  a 
false  idea  of  the  strength  of  the  enemy.     He  commenced 


252  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

the  battle  of  Leipsic  in  the  full  persuasion  that  the  enemy's- 
forces  were  but  half  as  numerous  as  they  really  were.  He 
lost  the  battle,  and  that  defeat  completely  disorganised  his 
army.  His  new  retreat  was  more  disastrous  still  than  when 
he  came  from  Russia.  The  army  still,  however,  made  one 
effort  at  Hanau.  A  German  who  owed  the  first  foundation 
of  his  fortune  to  the  Emperor,  whose  praises  constitute  all 
his  glory,  dared  to  resist  him  at  Hanau,  after  having  abused 
the  confidence  of  his  sovereign,  and  forced  him  to  abandon 
his  allies  ;  but  the  troops  he  commanded  were  destroyed. 
This  was  the  last  struggle  of  Antaeus  in  the  arms  of  Her- 
cules. A  month  later,  when  he  had  again  set  his  foot  on 
the  land  of  his  birth,  his  strength  returned  ;  and  if  he  was 
finally  levelled  to  the  ground,  it  was  only  when  treason 
joined  its  efforts  to  those  of  violence. 

The  army  returned  in  the  most  grievous  disorder.  The 
sick  and  wounded  Avere  innumerable.  There  were  neither 
hospitals  nor  private  houses  sufficient  to  contain  them 
all,  and  the  most  destructive  of  all  diseases,  the  typhus, 
attacked  not  only  the  army,  but  all  the  towns  and  villages 
through  which  the  troops  passed. 

The  Emperor  returned  for  the  second  time  to  Paris  on 
the  loth  or  nth  of  November.  The  attachment  of  the 
French  for  him  was  so  great  that  on  all  sides  nothing  was 
heard  but  cries  of  grief ;  and  if  here  and  there  some  insults 
were  uttered,  they  must  be  laid  to  the  account  of  the  emi- 
grants, who  began  to  foresee  his  fall  and  the  return  of  the 
Bourbons.  He  remained  about  six  weeks  in  Paris.  I  think 
I  have  already  said  in  these  Memoirs,  that  whenever  he  was 
unfortunate  he  turned  to  me.  I  must  not  be  proud  of  that 
circumstance.  My  attachment  to  his  person  was  a  duty, — 
my  antipathy  to  ambition  and  intrigue  was  natural  to  me. 
A  habit  of  reflection  made  me  in  general  consider  affairs  in 
their  true  light  ;  and  as  I  was  very  conveniently  placed  for 
observing  them  in  their  ensemble^  I  gave  him  my  opinion 
with  a  frankness  and  sincerity  to  which  the  ear  of  sovereigns 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  253 

is  but  little  accustomed.  At  my  arrival  he  commanded  me 
to  come  every  evening  into  the  bath-room  next  to  his  bed- 
chamber. He  then  had  me  called  in  to  him,  while  he 
warmed  himself,  undressed  before  the  fire.  'We  talked 
familiarly  together  for  an  hour  before  he  went  to  bed. 
The  first  evening  I  found  him  so  cast  down,  so  over- 
whelmed, that  I  was  frightened.  I  went  to  see  his  secre- 
tary, who  was  my  friend.  I  communicated  to  him  my 
fears  that  his  mind,  formerly  so  strong,  had  begun  to  sink. 
■"  You  need  not  fear,"  he  replied  ;  "he  has  lost  nothing  of 
his  energy  ;  but  in  the  evening  you  see  him  quite  bent 
down  with  fatigue.  He  goes  to  bed  at  eleven  o'cleck,  but 
he  is  up  at  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  till  night 
every  moment  is  devoted  to  business.  It  is  time  to  put  an 
end  to  this,  for  he  must  sink  under  it,  and  I  shall  fall  before 
him." 

The  principal  subject  of  our  conversation  was  the  situa- 
tion of  France.  I  used  to  tell  him  with  a  degree  of  frankness, 
the  truth  of  which  could  alone  make  him  pardon  its  rude- 
ness, that  France  was  fatigued  to  an  excess  ;  that  it  was 
quite  impossible  for  her  to  bear  much  longer  the  burthen 
with  which  she  was  loaded,  and  that  she  would  undoubtedly 
throw  off  the  yoke,  and  according  to  custom  seek  an  allevia- 
tion to  her  sufferings  in  novelty,  her  favourite  divinity. 
I  said  in  particular  a  great  deal  of  the  Bourbons,  who, 
I  observed,  would  finally  inherit  his  royal  spoil,  if  ever 
fortune  laid  him  low.  The  mention  of  the  Bourbons  made 
him  thoughtful,  and  he  threw  himself  on  his  bed  without 
uttering  a  word  ;  but  after  a  few  minutes,  having  ap- 
proached to  know  whether  I  might  retire,  I  saw  that  he  had 
fallen  into  a  profound  sleep. 

He  was  then  busy  with  the  organisation  of  the  National 
Guards  of  Paris.  The  choice  of  the  commanders  was  a  very 
important  point.  He  spoke  frequently  with  me  about  that 
organisation.  I  wished  it  to  be  as  military  as  possible. 
It  appeared  to  me  of  very  great  consequence  to  compose 


254  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

it  of  ancient  warriors,  who,  having  their  homes  and  the 
national  glory  to  defend,  would  electrify  the  citizens,  and 
easily  find  in  the  ardent  youth  of  the  metropolis  an  army  of 
brave  men  sufficient  at  least  to  repel  the  enemy  from  their 
walls.  I  could  not  draw  from  him  a  single  observation  on 
the  point,  notwithstanding  the  warmth  with  which  I  spoke. 
The  list  of  the  superior  officers  was  at  last  presented,  I  do 
not   now   recollect   by  whom  ;    but,   the   very  day  of  the 

presentation,   the  Prefect  came   to   pay   me   a   visit, 

to  acquaint  me  that  I  stood  on  the  list  as  commander  of 
a  division.  In  the  evening  I  went  to  the  Emperor,  accord- 
ing to  custom.  Marshal  Berthier  came  there,  and  the 
Emperor  said  to  him  in  my  presence  :  "  Do  you  know 
whom  I  have  appointed  as  Colonel  of  the  National 
Guards  ? "  He  then  read  over  his  list,  and  instead  of 
my  name,  I  heard  that  of  Jaubert,  Governor  of  the  Bank 
of  France.  Berthier  thought  the  choice  very  good  ;  and 
I  was  not  surprised  at  it.  As  for  me,  I  was  angry  at  the 
circumstance  (though  there  was  nothing  but  blows  to  be 
gained),  and  I  left  the  room.  The  following  day,  after 
mass,  I  stood  at  the  audience  next  to  Jaubert.  He  was 
a  councillor  of  State,  formerly  a  barrister  at  Bordeaux,  an 
honourable  and  clever  man,  but  who  never  had  had  any- 
thing to  do  with  the  army,  and  who  was  besides  rather 
a  little  ridiculous  as  a  military  man  on  account  of  his  figure 
and  his  habits  of  life.  The  Emperor  went  up  to  him,  and 
he  thanked  him  respectfully  for  the  new  dignity  with  which 
he  had  been  invested.  The  Emperor  smiled,  and  said  with 
that  joking  air  so  severe  in  a  sovereign  :  "  You  never  rode 
on  horseback,  I  believe?"  "I  beg  your  pardon,  Sire!'' 
"  Oh  yes,  I  suppose  you  rode  on  a  pony  from  Bordeaux 
to  Tonnelle  ;  "  and  then  he  passed  on  to  another.  Poor 
Jaubert  nevertheless  loaded  his  two  shoulders  with  the 
marks  of  his  rank  ;  but  he  never  showed  himself  more 
worthy  of  the  lawyer's  cloak  than  the  day  the  enemy 
attacked  the  capital. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  255 

This  singular  composition  of  the  staff  of  the  National 
Guards  was  explained  by  the  still  more  singular  form  of  the 
Parisian  fortifications.  Plain  palisadoes  surrounded,  ridicu- 
lously enough,  the  barriers  of  the  city  ;  they  were  barely 
sufficient  to  stop  a  few  straggling  Cossacks  who  might 
intrude  so  far.  He  did  not  wish  to  frighten  the  Parisians, 
and  draw  them  from  their  amusements,  by  an  appearance 
of'formidable  fortifications,  and  by  a  warlike  composition  of 
the  National  Guards.  He  undoubtedly  thought  that  if  he 
proved  unable  to  beat  the  enemy,  it  would  be  useless  to  try 
to  defend  a  city  that  presented  so  few  means  of  resistance 
and  so  many  resources  for  rebellion.  Before  he  set  off,  he 
assembled  at  the  Tuileries  all  the  officers  of  the  National 
Guards,  and  taking  his  son  in  his  arms,  he  presented  him 
to  the  assembly,  and  made  a  speech  that  electrified  every 
heart.  The  cries  of  "  Long  live  the  Emperor  !  "  were  so 
energetic  and  so  unanimous,  that  I  was  persuaded  for  some 
time  that  a  feeling  expressed  with  so  much  enthusiasm 
might  perhaps  produce  some  fine  result.  A  little  reflection, 
however,  recalled  the  dismal  truth  that  penetrated  my  soul. 
I  saw  the  Emperor  again  in  the  evening  :  he  spoke  to  me 
of  what  had  happened  in  the  morning.  I  told  him  freely 
that  the  disposition  of  the  public  mind  would  remain  good 
as  long  as  the  enemy  should  not  come  near  Paris ;  but  that 
it  ought  not  to  be  put  to  the  test  if  the  enemy  approached. 
He  smiled,  and,  pulling  me  by  the  ear  according  to  his 
custom,  he  said  :  "  You  old  Roman  !  you  have  no  illusions." 
"  No,  Sire,"  I  replied;  "but  I  rest  great  hopes  on  this 
campaign,  and  a  fine  victory  will  do  more  good  than  all 
this  morning's  enthusiasm."  "  Ah  !  "  said  he,  getting  into 
bed,  "  it  must  be  gained  !  " 

I  remained  that  night  at  the  Tuileries.  He  started  at 
four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  He  appeared  cheerful,  firm, 
and  in  perfect  good  health.  I  had  always  seen  him  so  when 
departing,  and  the  state  of  his  mind  inspired  me  with  fresh 
confidence. 


256  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

General  Sebastian!  returned  from  the  army  and  remained 
two  days  at  Paris.  He  gave  me  sad  particulars  of  the 
campaign.  The  enemies  were  so  numerous,  the  disasters 
so  great,  the  country  so  horribly  ravaged,  that  it  appeared 
difficult  for  the  Emperor  to  hold  out  much  longer.  He 
soon  felt,  after  the  observations  I  made,  how  dangerous  it 
would  be  to  make  known  his  alarms,  which  he  had  already 
in  some  way  propagated  ;  and  wishing  to  neutralise  their 
effect,  he  mentioned  the  necessity  of  defending  Paris  as  the 
only  means  of  saving  France.  Furious  complaints  and 
sarcasms  arose  against  him  in  Talleyrand's  circle,  and 
among  all  the  high  nobility,  who  already  were  in  cor- 
respondence with  the  Count  d'Artois.  He  left  the  capital, 
hooted  by  the  emigrants  ;  and  if  he  told  the  Emperor  all 
he  really  thought,  I  cannot  but  think  that  it  was  upon  his 
report  that  the  Emperor  commanded  the  Minister  of  Police 
to  arrest  Prince  Talleyrand,  and  send  him  far  from  the 
metropolis. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

While  the  Emperor,  opposed  by  all  the  armies  of  Europe, 
was  struggling  like  a  lion,  running  from  one  to  another, 
thwarting  all  the  manoeuvres  of  the  enemy  by  the  rapidity 
of  his  movements,  deceiving  them  in  all  their  calculations, 
and  exhausting  them  with  fatigue,  other  foes,  much  more 
dangerous  than  they,  were  in  Paris  entering  into  a  secret 
league  with  foreigners  to  hasten  his  fall.  M.  de  Talleyrand, 
whom  they  had  chosen  for  their  leader,  did  not,  however, 
second  their  hostile  measures  as  much  as  their  impatience 
required.  The  great  name  of  Napoleon — fifteen  years  of 
brilliant  victories — the  inexhaustible  resources  of  his  genius 
— his  unconquerable  vigour  of  mind — the  still  existing 
possibility  of  a  peace  in  the  midst  of  battle — finally,  the 
sentiments  of  France,  who  still  wished  well  to  the  Emperor 
— all  these  circumstances  rendered  the  greatest  prudence 
necessary.  Besides,  what  had  he  to  expect  from  the 
Bourbons  ?  Could  they  have  forgotten  that  his  conduct 
had  been  ever  hostile  towards  them  for  the  last  five-and- 
twenty  years  ? — Director  of  the  Constituent  Assembly — 
Minister  of  the  Directory,  and  Napoleon — a  married  priest, 
how  could  he  find  grace  in  their  eyes  ?  On  the  other  hand, 
if  France  finally  triumphed  over  so  many  enemies,  what 
would  he  not  have  to  fear  from  an  irritated  conqueror,  who 
could  not  but  be  acquainted  with  his  treasonable  conduct  ? 
Was  he  destined  to  end,  far  from  his  country  and  in  exile, 
the  last  days  of  an  infirm  and  disgraced  old  age  ?  He  there- 
fore did  his  utmost  to  keep  his  friends  in  bounds  ;  and,  that 

I  8  .57 


258  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

he  might  not  be  crushed  by  the  violent  measures  of  the 
boisterous  Minister  of  Police,  his  ingenuity  and  skill  were 
exercised  to  throw  trouble  and  perplexity  in  the  way  of  the 
Duke  de  Rovigo.  It  was  he  who,  according  to  public 
report,  had  presided  at  the  execution  of  the  Duke 
d'Enghien  :  he  had  not  striven  to  hide  the  particulars  of 
it,  which  had  been  exaggerated  ;  and  nothing  could  equal 
the  hatred  the  royalists  bore  him.  He  had  a  numerous 
family,  and  his  fortune  was  not  sufficient  for  him  to  do 
without  the  salary  he  drew  from  Government. 

How  could  he,  besides,  preserve  his  rank,  or  even  his 
tranquillity,  under  the  reign  of  the  Bourbons  ?  M.  de 
Talleyrand,  after  having  presented  him  with  a  faithful 
picture  of  what  his  situation  would  be  in  case  the 
Emperor  should  fall,  an  event  which  appeared  scarcely 
to  be  avoided,  applauded  his  fidelity  and  devotion  ;  but 
advised  him  not  to  shut  out  from  himself  all  possibility 
of  pardon,  or  even  favour,  at  the  hands  of  Louis  XVIII. 
by  taking  measures  of  rigour  and  violence  against  the 
royalists,  the  consequences  of  which  might  be  fatal  even 
to  the  Emperor  himself,  as  they  might  occasion  disturbance 
in  the  capital  which  the  police  would  not  be  able  to 
suppress.  The  Minister  was  most  certainly  shaken.  The 
Messieurs  Polignac,  who  had  been  confined  since  the  affair 
of  Georges,  first  in  a  state  prison,  and  then  in  a  maison 
de  sante^  escaped  about  that  time,  after  having  given  a 
thorough  beating  to  the  police  inspector,  who  was  to  have 
transferred  them  to  a  prison  a  considerable  distance  from 
Paris.  The  Duchess  of  Rovigo  was  their  relative  ;  and 
a  few  days  after  the  entrance  of  the  Count  d'Artois,  the 
Duke  told  me  that  the  Messieurs  Polignac  had  just  been  with 
him,  and  had  requested  him  to  publish  in  print  that  it  was 
to  him  they  owed  their  liberty.  He  waived  the  proposal  ; 
but  it  was  easy  to  judge  that  he  was  not  sorry  the  Count 
should  believe  the  truth  of  the  anecdote. 

After  the  battle  of  Montereau,  the  Emperor  had  given 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  259 

the  Duke  de  Rovigo  an  order  to  send  M.  de  Talleyrand 
from  Paris,  with  a  positive  injunction  to  cut  off  all  .com- 
munications between  him  and  his  friends  in  the  metropolis. 
I  was  in  the  Duke's  closet  when  he  opened  the  despatch, 
which  grieved  him  extremely.  "What  is  the  Emperor 
thinking  of  ?  "  he  said.  *'  Have  not  I  enough  to  do  to  keep 
.  in  awe  all  the  royalists  in  France  ?  Does  he  want  to  throw 
another  Faubourg  St.  Germain  on  my  shoulders  ?  Talley- 
rand alone  is  able  to  keep  them  at  peace,  and  prevent  them 
from  taking  some  foolish  step.  I  shall  not  execute  that 
order,  and  by  and  by  the  Emperor  will  thank  me  for  it." 

The  measure  would  nevertheless  have  been  very  wise. 
The  royalists  would  have  been  without  leaders,  and  the 
enemy  without  directors  or  encouragement.  They  would 
perhaps  not  have  dared  to  venture  their  march  upon 
Paris,  which  proved  so  fatal  to  the  Emperor.  Marmont 
would  not  have  signed  the  truce  of  the  30th  of  March, 
and  Napoleon  would  have  gained  the  twelve  hours  he 
wanted  to  enable  him  to  reach  the  capital. 

That  deplorable  prepossession  of  the  Duke  de  Rovigo, 
who  nevertheless  remained  faithful,  was  not  the  only  cause 
of  our  misfortunes.  All  persons  attached  to  Government 
soon  shared  the  same  feeling — all  had  fallen  into  dismay 
and  discouragement ;  and  with  the  exception  of  Boulay 
de  la  Meurthe,  Thibaudeau,  and  some  other  retainers  of 
the  Revolution,  familiar  with  political  disturbances,  who 
had  nothing  to  expect  and  everything  to  fear  from  the 
Bourbons,  all  the  others  were  only  intent  on  saving  some 
part  of  the  wreck  for  themselves.  The  Emperor  had 
appointed  his  brother  Joseph  Lieutenant-General  of  Paris. 
That  Prince,  though  a  man  of  amiable  mind  and  extended 
information,  wanted  energy  :  he  could  neither  persuade  the 
Council  nor  excite  the  people,  who  were  only  waiting  for 
a  leader.  To  say  the  truth,  he  was  distinguished  by 
nothing  but  his  obsolete  title  of  King  of  Spain  ;  and  the 
Peninsular  war  had  cost  too  much  blood  for  any  gratitude 


26o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

or  confidence  to  attach  to  the  person  for  whose  profit  it  was 
undertaken.'  The  Archchancellor  Cambaceres,  a  learned 
lawyer,  but  a  stranger,  more  by  character  than  even  by  the 
habits  of  his  life,  to  those  energetic  resolutions  which 
great  dangers  require,  could  do  nothing  but  submit  to  the 
common  fate.  The  Duke  de  Feltre,  Minister  of  the  War 
Department,  a  good  secretary,  but  a  man  of  a  narrow  mind, 
and  the  slave  of  his  vanity,  which  stuck  to  everything, 
served  the  Emperor  with  suspicious  carelessness,  and 
dreamed  already  of  the  prodigious  honour  he  would 
acquire  by  being  a  minister  of  the  Bourbons.  A  council, 
at  which  the  Empress  presided,  was  held  at  the  moment  the 
enemy  entered  Nancy,  while  pursuing  Marshals  Ragusa  and 
Treviso.  The  Empress  requested  that  a  resolution  might 
be  taken  in  regard  to  herself  and  her  son,  for  she  relied  no 
longer  on  her  father,  and  no  accounts  had  arrived  for 
several  days  from  the  Emperor.  None  but  generous  advice 
ought  to  have  been  given  to  her.  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe 
took  the  task  upon  himself,  and  recalling  to  her  memory 
the  conduct  of  her  grandmother,  Maria  Theresa,  in  pre- 
sence of  the  Hungarians,  he  said,  "  Madam,  go  to  the  Hotel 
de  Ville  ;  cross  the  streets  of  Paris  with  your  son  in  your 
arms.  The  whole  capital  will  accompany  you  to  the  ad- 
vanced posts.  Acquaint  the  Allied  Sovereigns  with  your 
resolution  to  remain  in  Paris,  surrounded  by  your  faithful 
subjects,  to  share  their  dangers,  and  to  descend  only  by 
force  from  the  throne,  on  which  you  seated  yourself  amidst 
the  applause  of  those  very  nations  and  kings  who  now 
besiege  you." 

'  When  the  Duke  de  Ragusa  arrived  at  Meaux,  he  sent  his  aide-de- 
camp, Fabvier,  to  apprise  Government  of  his  perilous  position.  I  met 
that  officer  at  the  hotel  of  the  minister,  Clarke.  He  complained  bitterly 
that  Prince  Joseph  had  left  him  three  hours  waiting  in  the  Luxembourg, 
before  he  could  gain  admittance.  "  He  is  not  yet  up,"  was  all  the  answer 
he  received.  "Why  should  we  d'isturb  him?  You  will  not  be  better 
satisfied  with  this  one  than  with  the  other,"  said  I.  In  fact,  when  Fabvier 
came  out  of  the  closet  of  the  minister,  he  said  to  me — "  What  will  become 
of  us,  good  God?  We  have  nothing  else  to  do  than  to  get  ourselves 
killed." 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  261 

This  energetic  advice  appeared  to  the  weakness  of  the 
others  no  better  than  revolutionary  boasting.  Cambaceres 
read  a  letter  from  the  Emperor,  but  of  old  date,  which  con- 
tained the  order  never  to  expose  the  Empress  and  her  son 
to  the  risk  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  This  put 
an  end  to  all  debate,  and  a  resolution  was  taken  to  send  the 
Court  to  Blois,  with  the  members  of  Government. 

Among  the  considerations  that  determined  the  Council 
not  to  follow  the  advice  of  keeping  the  Empress  in  Paris, 
one  of  the  most  important,  and  which  had  a  great  influence 
over  the  deliberations,  was  the  fate  of  the  Emperor. 

In  fact,  what  would  have  become  of  him,  if  the  Allies  had 
acknowledged  the  King  of  Rome  and  the  Regency  ?  Paris 
would  have  shut  its  gates  upon  him.  The  people,  reduced 
to  the  utmost  extremity,  would  have  submitted  to  the  new 
Government.  The  army  would  undoubtedly  have  recoiled 
at  the  idea  of  a  civil  war,  or  the  enemy  would  quietly  have 
destroyed  it.  Besides,  could  the  Empress  sign  the  destruc- 
tion of  her  husband  ?  For  it  was  not  possible  to  keep  him 
at  liberty  near  France  ;  and  his  situation  would  have  become 
so  very  peculiar,  that  there  would  perhaps  not  have  been 
one  corner  in  all  Europe  where  the  Conqueror  of  the 
World  could  have  rested  his  head  in  peace  ;  whilst  his  wife 
and  his  best  friends  would  have  been  forced,  for  the  interests 
of  their  country,  to  wish  for  his  everlasting  proscription. 

When  the  Empress  was  leaving  Paris  with  all  the 
Ministers,  the  two  corps  of  Marshals  Marmont  and  Mortier 
hastily  retreated  to  the  heights  round  the  capital,  pursued 
by  the  Russians  and  Prussians,  who  had  at  last  resolved,  by 
the  pressing  solicitation  of  M.  de  Talleyrand,  to  advance  and 
make  themselves  masters  of  the  city.  The  two  corps  did 
not  muster  above  fourteen  thousand  men.  Some  thousand 
troops,  drawn  from  the  depots  at  Versailles  and  Rambouillct, 
were  sent  to  join  them.  The  brave  young  men  of  the 
Polytechnical  Institution  flew  to  their  aid  on  the  hills  of 
Chaumont,  and   a  few  battalions  of  National  Guards  went 


262  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

also  out  of  the  barriers.  All  these  troops  fought  bravely  ; 
but  the  forces  of  the  enemy,  augmenting  from  hour  to  hour, 
were  by  no  means  in  proportion  with  those  of  the  besieged. 
Prince  Joseph,  having  no  precise  instruction  for  so  unforeseen 
a  circumstance,  did  not  dare  to  take  upon  himself  to  prolong 
the  defence,  without  any  appearance  of  success.  The  people, 
and  especially  the  inhabitants  of  the  suburbs,  would  not  have 
refused  to  fight.  Some  already  prepared  to  unpave  the 
streets,  to  raise  battlements  on  the  houses  that  were  nearest 
to  the  barriers,  and  to  take  all  possible  precaution  against 
cavalry,  and  to  fire  in  case  the  enemy  were  to  carry  things 
to  such  an  extremity.  The  people,  as  I  have  said,  were  well 
disposed  ;  but  towards  the  evening  of  the  29th  of  March 
there  were  no  public  authorities  in  the  city  but  Marshal 
Moncey,  Commander  of  the  National  Guards,  the  two  Pre- 
fects of  the  Department,  and  the  police.  In  leaving  Paris, 
the  Ministers  had  enjoined  them  to  do  all  in  their  power  to 
preserve  the  peace,  and  provide  for  the  subsistence  of  the 
inhabitants.  Five  days  had  elapsed  since  any  certain  news 
had  arrived  from  the  Emperor,  and  all  means  of  communica- 
tion were  intercepted.  In  vain  I  sent  off  intrepid  couriers, 
and,  during  the  last  two  days,  several  fleet  and  clever 
messengers.  They  were  bearers  of  letters  written  in  cypher, 
wherein  I  begged  the  Emperor  to  return  at  any  price.  I 
told  him  that  the  police  was  no  longer  strong  enough  to 
repress  the  royalists  ;  that  his  presence  alone  could  put  a 
stop  to  the  evil,  and  that  he  was  lost  beyond  resource  if  the 
enemy  got  possession  of  the  capital.  It  is  unfortunately 
true  that  the  agents  of  Government,  attached  for  a  long 
time  to  a  system  of  absolute  authority,  and  accustomed 
never  to  take  the  smallest  responsibility  upon  themselves, 
trembled  at  the  idea  of  adopting  any  measure  without  the 
special  order  of  the  Emperor  :  some,  because  he  was  master 
of  all  ;  others,  because  the  passing  events  appeared  above 
all  human  power.  Prince  Joseph  was  the  first  who  yielded 
to  the  general  dejection.     After  casting  a  look  of  dismay  on 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  263 

the  plain  of  St.  Denis,  covered  with  foreign  soldiers  and 
smoking  villages,  he  fled  to  Blois,  authorising  the  two 
marshals  to  sign  a  capitulation  that  might  save  the  capital. 

Officers,  sent  on  parley  by  Prince  Schwartzenburg,  came 
to  the  Duke  de  Ragusa,  and  declared,  that  if  the  gates  of 
Paris  were  not  opened  to  them  before  night,  the  next  day 
it  would  be  too  late,  and  that  the  capital  would  be  delivered 
over  to  all  the  rigour  of  military  execution. 

The  Duke  had  no  news  from  the  Emperor  ;  and  although 
he  was  given  to  understand  that,  notwithstanding  the  threats 
of  the  enemy,  there  could  be  no  danger  in  waiting  till  next 
day, — that  it  was  possible  Napoleon  might  arrive  in  the 
night, — that  Alexander  would  certainly  not  rush  madly 
with  his  army  in  the  midst  of  so  populous  a  capital,  the 
inhabitants  of  which  were  highly  incensed  ; — yet  Marmont, 
confused,  and  not  wishing  perhaps  to  leave  to  another  the 
honour  of  saving  Paris,  resolved  to  sign  the  capitulation, 
without  having  received  any  direct  order  to  that  effect  from 
his  General  and  Sovereign. 

I  went  to  his  house  on  the  evening  of  the  30th  of  March. 
He  was  still  at  table,  and  next  to  him  sat  Count  Orloff,  and 
several  other  Russian  officers.  He  came  to  meet  me,  led  me 
to  a  private  room,  and  there  did  his  best  to  prove  that  he 
could  not  have  acted  otherwise  than  he  had  done  ;  that 
with  less  than  twenty-eight  thousand  men,  any  farther 
defence  would  be  but  useless  spilling  of  blood.  That,  I 
acknowledged  ;  but  could  he  not  wait  until  the  next  day  to 
sign  ?  Twelve  hours'  delay  might  be  of  an  immense  benefit 
to  the  Emperor.  I  could  not  suppose  it  possible  that  he 
should  not  be  met  by  at  least  one  of  the  great  numbers  of 
couriers  I  had  despatched.  I  was  convinced  that  his  presence 
would  re-establish  affairs.  The  Marshal  was  inflexible  :  he 
was  too  far  engaged  to  be  able  to  draw  back.  The  chief 
heights  round  the  capital  were  already  occupied  by  the 
enemy.  Our  situation  was  terrible,  it  is  true  ;  but  the 
presence  of  the  Emperor  was  alone  worth  an  army.     The 


264  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

people,  already  well  disposed,  and  full  of  ardour  at  the  sight 
of  their  Sovereign,  would  have  done  wonders. 

I  had  received  no  orders  to  go  to  Blois.  I  therefore 
thought  I  would  set  off  with  the  Duke  de  Ragusa,  who  had 
acquainted  me  with  his  plan  of  going  to  Fontainebleau.  I 
left  him  with  an  intention  of  coming  back,  when,  on  going 
out  of  the  apartment,  I  met  Prince  Talleyrand  and  his 
emissary  Bourrienne,  who  were  slipping  up  to  the  second 
floor.  The  sight  of  them  was  enough  for  me.  These  two 
men,  who  were  in  open  treason,  had  undoubtedly  come 
to  involve  the  Marshal  in  their  toils.  M.  Pasquier  had 
accompanied  me  in  my  carriage.  I  communicated  my 
suspicions  to  him.  "  What  shall  I  say  to  you  ? "  he 
answered  :  "all  seems  to  be  over  ;  there  is  nothing  more 
to  be  done."  I  set  him  down  at  the  Prefecture  of  Police, 
and  retired  to  my  lodgings  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain, 
determined  never  to  re-enter  the  Post-office.  A  little 
before  daybreak  I  received  an  express  with  letters  from  the 
Emperor  to  the  Empress.  The  courier  informed  me  that 
Napoleon  had  arrived  during  the  night  at  the  stage  called 
La  Cour  de  France,  and  that  there  he  had  heard  the  fatal 
news  of  the  capitulation.  The  unfortunate  Prince  had  been 
flying  with  all  his  speed  to  save  his  capital.  The  blow  was 
terrible  for  him  :  he  sat  down  on  the  parapet  of  the  foun- 
tains of  Juvisy,  and  remained  above  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
with  his  head  resting  on  his  two  hands,  lost  in  the  most 
painful  reflections  ;  after  which  he  set  off  again  for 
Fontainebleau. 

The  following  day  I  returned  to  M.  Pasquier's  :  he  had 
just  come  back  from  the  camp,  whither  he  had  been 
summoned  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia.  "  You  took  your 
resolution  last  night,"  he  said  to  me  ;  "  I  adopted  mine 
this  morning.  I  have  received  an  order  to  continue  my 
functions.  Napoleon's  reign  is  over,  and  I  have  written  to 
Fontainebleau  to  acquaint  them  that  they  must  no  longer 
reckon  upon  me.     My  family  has  always  been  attached  to 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  265 

the  House  of  Bourbon.  I  have  served  the  Emperor  faith- 
fully. I  have  taken  no  share  in  the  events  which  have  cast 
him  from  the  throne,  and  I  return  to  the  ancient  dynasty." 
"  I  do  not  pretend  to  discuss  your  motives,"  was  my  reply  ; 
"  but  for  me,  I  owe  everything  to  the  Emperor  :  I  shall  not 
go  near  his  successor.  My  public  career  is  at  an  end,  and  I 
return  to  my  obscurity.  I  have  only  one  favour  to  claim  of 
you  :  protect  me  in  that  retreat  where  I  intend  to  go  and 
live  with  my  family,  and  let  not  malevolence  disturb  the 
peace  I  wish  to  enjoy." 

With  these  words  we  separated.  I  was  already  convinced 
that,  with  the  men  Louis  XVIII.  was  obliged  to  make  use 
of,  his  difficulties  would  multiply  at  every  step  ;  and  without 
foreseeing  as  yet  the  events  that  broke  out  eleven  months 
later,  I  was  glad  to  remain  a  stranger  to  duties  for  which  I 
felt  so  strong  an  aversion,  that  neither  the  sanctity  of  an 
oath,  nor  the  most  rigid  integrity,  could  have  bound  me  to 
them  on  the  20th  of  March  following,  without  the  greatest 
struggle  and  grief  on  my  part. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  entered  the  city  at  the  head  of 
several  beautiful  divisions  of  infantry,  appointed  as  if  for  a 
parade.  He  was  preceded  by  a  numerous  and  brilliant  staff. 
As  the  procession  advanced  along  the  boulevards,  it  was  soon 
augmented  by  numbers  of  Frenchmen  whom  our  armies  had 
never  seen  in  their  ranks.  The  Montmorencys,  the  Don- 
deauvilles,  the  Noailles,  who  then  faced  the  enemy  for  the 
first  time,  were  eager  to  welcome  him  to  the  metropolis,  and 
to  lay  at  his  feet  the  homage  and  joy  of  the  French  people. 
One  might  have  thought  for  twenty  years  France  had  been 
wishing  for  their  presence.  A  little  farther,  all  the  genteel 
company  of  the  Paris  drawing-rooms  joined  the  retinue. 
Women  dressed  out  as  for  difete^  and  almost  frantic  with  joy, 
waved  their  pockethandkerchiefs  and  cried,  "  Long  live  the 
Emperor  Alexander  !  "  The  windows  of  the  houses  and  the 
open  windows  were  filled  with  people.  I  was  not  so  far  off 
but  that  I   distinguished   among  them   many  ladies  whose 


266  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

husbands  had  long  filled  elevated  stations  in  the  fallen  Court, 
and  who  themselves,  loaded  with  honour  and  riches,  had 
been  attached  to  the  service  of  the  two  Empresses.  I  might 
name  them, — but  wherefore  disgrace  their  memory  ?  Many 
of  them  will  have  descended  into  the  grave  before  this  work 
appears,  and  their  children  ought  not  to  be  punished  for  the 
shameful  conduct  of  their  parents. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  had  nowhere  on  his  march 
witnessed  this  boasted  enthusiasm  of  the  French  for  the 
King  and  his  family.  He  was  candid  enough  to  acknow- 
ledge this  at  a  council  held  at  M.  de  Talleyrand's.  It  was 
therefore  through  motives  of  policy,  and  the  necessity  of 
circumstances,  that  the  latter  persuaded  him  not  to  establish 
a  regency.  The  absence  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  the 
unpopularity  of  his  minister,  Metternich,  who  was  present, 
the  force  of  old  recollections,  and  perhaps  also  the  falling 
off  of  the  Duke  de  Ragusa,  swayed  his  resolution. 

While  these  discussions  were  going  on  in  Paris,  Napoleon, 
at  Fontainebleau,  had  already  recovered  from  the  blow  he 
had  experienced.  He  sounded  the  danger  of  his  position, 
and  calculated  his  resources.  He  every  day  reviewed  his 
troops,  animated  them  by  his  presence,  and  looked  as  if  he 
wished  to  familiarise  them  with  the  idea  of  marching  back 
to  Paris,  and  driving  the  enemy  from  the  capital.  Such  an 
act  of  despair,  in  a  man  like  him,  might  have  had  terrible 
consequences.  Notwithstanding  the  severe  discipline  to 
which  the  foreign  troops  were  subjected,  the  troops  being 
too  numerous  for  the  barracks  to  contain  them,  were 
encamped  at  considerable  distances  from  each  other.  Many 
officers  lodged  in  hotels,  far  from  their  troops.  The  play- 
houses, coffee-houses,  ale-houses,  and  bagnios,  were  filled 
with  them  until  a  late  hour  of  the  night.  Attacked  on  all 
sides,  finding  at  every  step  some  new  obstacle  to  their 
assembling,  with  enemies  in  every  street,  confusion  might 
soon  have  spread  among  the  troops,  and  the  terrible  cry  of 
"  Long  live  the  Emperor  !  "  resounding  on  a  sudden,  would 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  267 

have  augmented  the  disorder,  and  exasperated  the  people. 
If  driven  out  of  the  capital,  and  a  battle  lost  in  the  plain, 
what  would  have  been  the  fate  of  all  these  triumphant 
troops  ?  This  plan  appeared  feasible  during  forty-eight 
hours,  and  was  secretly  whispered  among  the  people.  Not 
only  the  soldiers,  but  even  three-fourths  of  the  officers,  were 
by  no  means  afraid  to  undertake  it.  But  it  was  discovered 
by  the  Marshals,  and  they  opposed  it  through  apparent 
motives  of  prudence,  but  in  fact  through  weariness  and  a 
secret  wish  to  abandon  the  Emperor.  The  correspondence 
with  Paris  grew  every  moment  more  frequent,  and  the 
defections  more  numerous.  Military  commanders  were  all 
rich  ;  their  families  were  in  the  enemy's  power.  To  the 
anxiety  with  which  they  were  tormented,  they  added  the 
hope  of  remaining  great  men  under  the  Bourbons.  The 
promises  made  by  the  conspirators  were  unbounded.  The 
Allies  and  the  King  would  open  their  arms  to  them.  They 
were  already  in  idea  marshals  of  France,  of  the  old  monarchy. 
The  Cross  of  St.  Louis,  the  Order  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  govern- 
ments. Court  favours,  their  uncontested  pre-eminence  over 
the  most  ancient  families,  their  names  placed  next  to  those 
of  Turenne  and  Villars,  seemed  in  their  eyes  to  give  them  a 
lustre  that  would  fear  no  comparison,  even  in  future  times. 
These  childish  illusions,  this  sordid  egotism,  made  them 
forget  natural  honour  and  the  faith  they  owed  to  their 
real  sovereign.  A  few  days  were  sufficient  to  deceive  most 
of  them. 

Alas  !  at  no  period  was  it  more  requisite  that  a  deep 
feeling  of  patriotism  should  have  animated  their  hearts  ! 
Twenty-two  years  before  (I  was  then  twenty-three),  when 
the  Prussians  spread  over  the  plains  of  Champaigne,  Paris 
and  all  France  rushed  out  against  the  enemy.  French 
youths,  devoid  of  experience  and  instruction,  but  conspicuous 
for  love  of  their  country,  exasperated  by  generous  fury, 
trampled  on  the  old  bands  instructed  by  Frederick  the 
Great.     Now  the  barbarians  of  Russia,  and  all  the  European 


268  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

armies  we  had  vanquished,  paraded  in  our  squares,  sat 
insolently  round  our  hearths  ;  and  the  French,  who  were 
again  grown  polite,  whom  prosperity  and  the  luxury  of  a 
Court  had  refined  and  enervated,  looked  on  the  strange 
scene  with  eyes  of  indifference.  We  deserved  but  too  well 
our  fate. 

The  fire  that  animated  our  soldiers  was  extinguished 
when  they  learned  that  the  Emperor  recoiled  before  ill 
fortune,  and  acknowledged  himself  vanquished.  It  was 
then  that  the  army,  in  despair,  felt  obliged  to  submit. 

However,  the  Allied  Sovereigns  had  not  expected  that  sub- 
mission, and  they  showed  their  satisfaction  by  the  treaty  of 
the  nth  of  April.  The  title  of  Emperor  was  left  to  Napo- 
leon ;  the  Island  of  Elba  was  given  to  him  in  full  sove- 
reignty ;  a  competent  income  was  allowed,  not  only  for 
him,  but  also  for  his  family,  and  gratuities  were  granted  to 
almost  all  the  members  of  his  military  household.  These 
various  arrangements  were  made  in  presence  of  the  Bour- 
bons. The  King  refused  to  sign  them,  under  the  pretence 
that  he  could  not  acknowledge  Napoleon  as  an  Emperor  ; 
but  it  was  agreed,  and  he  engaged  his  word,  that  the  treaty 
should  be  executed  in  all  its  stipulations. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Meanwhile  the  Emperor  departed  for  the  Island  of  Elba, 
and  the  rage  of  his  enemies  augmented  with  that  circum- 
stance. Neither  his  fall  nor  his  banishment  was  able  to 
satisfy  them  ;  they  sought  his  death  alone  ;  and  war  having 
spared  him,  they  resolved  to  get  rid  of  him  by  assassination. 
This  was  the  last  homage  paid  to  the  genius  of  the  Em- 
peror. A  sort  of  superstitious  awe  had  seized  the  minds  of 
all  those  who  had  contributed  to  his  overthrow.  "  As  long 
as  that  man  lives,"  they  said  at  the  Tuileries,  "  there  will  be 
no  repose,  no  security  for  France."  Maubreuil's  perverse- 
ness  and  desperate  character  give  a  great  deal  of  probability 
to  all  he  has  said  of  the  proposals  made  to  him  by  AI.  de 
Talleyrand.  But  that  was  not  the  only  attempt  made 
against  him  before  his  return  from  the  Island  of  Elba  :  he 
was  nearly  poisoned  at  Fontainebleau.  Generals  Drouet  and 
Bertrand  will  undoubtedly  publish  one  day  what  the  latter 
told  me  of  the  horrible  scenes  that  took  place  during  the 
Emperor's  journey  through  the  South  of  France,  and  all  the 
efforts  made  by  murderers  sent  to  the  Island  of  Elba  by  the 
Governor  of  Corsica,  M.  Brulard. 

King  Louis  the  Eighteenth  made  his  solemn  entrance 
into  Paris  on  the  3rd  of  May.  The  wealthy  portion  of  the 
population  now  took  upon  them  to  show  that  enthusiasm 
which  the  mob  is  accustomed  to  lavish  on  the  men  who 
dazzle  their  inconstant  and  unreflecting  imaginations.  The 
sun  shone  with  all  the  brightness  of  spring,  and  added  to 

the  magnificence  of  the   novel   scene.     Gendarmes  opened 

369 


270  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  procession  ;  then  came  a  great  number  of  officers  on 
horseback  :  some  who  the  day  before  had  been  our  foes  on 
the  field  of  battle  came  to  solicit  a  share  of  the  Royal 
largesse  ;  others,  old  servants  of  the  monarchy,  had  long 
held  out  their  hands  for  Imperial  favours.  By  a  singular 
distinction,  or  a  cruel  mockery,  two  companies  of  the  Im- 
perial Guards  preceded  the  golden  troop.  The  aspect  of 
those  old  warriors,  covered  with  scars — their  eyes  fixed  on 
the  ground,  their  countenances  dejected,  the  rage  of  their 
hearts  depicted  on  their  sun-burned  faces — inspired  compas- 
sion. At  last  the  King  appeared  in  an  open  caleche,  accom- 
panied by  the  Duchess  d'Angouleme  and  the  two  Princes  of 
the  House  of  Conde.  The  enormous  bulk  of  the  Monarch, 
his  harsh  look  and  severe  features,  disconcerted  the  enthu- 
siasm of  those  who  had  a  close  view  of  him  ;  and  after  the 
space  of  a  few  hours,  there  remained  nothing,  even  in  the 
mass  of  the  population,  but  cold  indifference  for  the  for- 
tunate brother  of  Louis  XVI. 

One  of  the  four  royal  personages  ought,  however,  to  have 
excited  very  deep  interest.  The  sight  of  the  King  recalled 
no  recollections  :  the  two  old  warriors,  leaders  of  a  legion 
that  had  shone  with  so  little  lustre,  represented  nothing  but 
an  illustrious  name  and  a  cruel  loss.  The  daughter  of 
Louis  XVI.  and  Marie  Antoinette,  on  the  contrary,  delivered 
up  in  her  tender  years  to  all  the  violence  of  revolutionary 
tyranny — deprived  of  her  parents,  who  died  on  the  scaffold — 
abandoned  in  the  dungeon  of  an  old  tower,  was  now  passing 
slowly  before  that  same  Palais  de  Justice  out  of  which  her 
mother  had  gone  in  a  cart  to  the  scaffold.  In  passing  that 
same  palace  she  was  about  to  inhabit,  what  cruel  recollec- 
tions, what  feelings  of  compassion  and  love  might  naturally 
have  been  excited  ! — and  still  the  marks  of  joy,  the  enthu- 
siasm were  lavished  alone  on  the  old  Monarch  !  Was  it  that 
policy  got  the  better  of  the  more  refined  feelings  of  humanity  ? 
or  that  the  women,  who  were  the  most  numerous  among  the 
crowd,  are  expected,  even  when  moved  by  the  most  noble 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  271 

feelings  of  the  heart,  to  show  always  the  smallest  part  to 
persons  of  their  own  sex  ? ' 

The  restoration  of  the  Royal  Family  had  been  prepared  with 
much  skill  by  M.  de  Talleyrand.  It  was,  however,  necessary 
to  give  it  a  legal  character ;  and  as  the  Legislative  Body  was 
not  at  that  time  sitting,  they  had  recourse  to  the  Senate, 
which  closed  its  political  existence  by  one  of  the  most  dis- 
graceful acts  recorded  in  history.  In  despite  of  all  laws,  the 
Senate  removed  from  the  throne,  and  delivered  over  to 
foreigners,  their  lawful  Sovereign,  whom  France  had  elected, 
and  to  whom  they  owed  their  existence.  They  had,  more- 
over, the  baseness  to  insult  the  Prince  they  disowned.  I  am 
far  from  refusing  to  acknowledge  the  noble  qualities,  the 
eminent  services,  and  even  the  conspicuous  virtues,  by  which 
many  members  of  the  Senate  were  recommended  to  public 
esteem  ;  but  the  stain  will  nevertheless  remain  for  ever  fixed 
on  that  Assembly,  since  no  effort  was  tried,  no  resignations 
offered,  no  protest  uttered  by  any  one  against  that  fatal 
sitting  over  which  M.  de  Talleyrand  presided. 

The  first  measure  of  the  new  Government  was  to  establish 
the  administration,  and  to  punish  or  stifle  the  disturbances 
which  disordered  passions  might  occasion  in  the  provinces 
at  the  news  of  the  installation. 

But  before  we  follow  that  Government  in  its  measures,  it 
is  necessary  to  cast  a  look  upon  the  nation  over  which  it  was 
about  to  rule.  France  had  been  subjected  to  the  forms  of  a 
Republic,  to  which  had  succeeded  the  Imperial  monarchy.  In 
1 8 14  but  few  influential  leaders  of  the  Republican  Govern- 
ment survived.  With  the  exception  of  Carnot  and  Barras, 
who  had  not  bowed  to  Napoleon,  the  rest  had  been  mowed 

'  The  translator  is  convinced  that  Count  Lavalette  was  completely  mis- 
taken in  Ixjth  his  surmises.  The  fact  is,  that  men  never  forgive  the  wrongs 
that  they  have  themselves  inflicted.  The  French  nation  had  behaved  like 
savage  cannibals  towards  the  virtuous  Duchess  of  Ang<julenie  an<l  her  inno- 
cent parents,  and  the  sight  of  her  was  an  everlasting  reproach  upon  their 
cruelty.  To  this  sentiment  must  also  be  attrijjuted  the  filthy  caricatures 
and  scandalous  libels  on  that  spotless  Princess  that  have  since  disgraced 
the  French  press. 


272  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

by  the  scythe  of  Time  or  seduced  by  the  head  of  the  empire. 
Merlin,  Treilhard,  Sieyes,  Fouche,  and  many  others,  had 
donned  the  robes  of  ministers  and  senators  ;  the  Brutuses  of 
1793  were  now  designated  by  the  titles  of  duke,  count,  and 
even  monseigneur.  In  the  army  I  find  none  but  Jourdan 
who  did  not  enlist  among  the  titled  generals.  Kleber, 
Hoche,  Desaix,  and  Moreau  were,  it  is  true,  no  more  ;  but 
would  it  be  too  much  to  suppose  that  these  illustrious 
warriors,  who  fell  in  defending  the  independence  of  their 
country,  would  have  also  bent  under  the  Imperial  yoke  ? 
The  whole  nation  had,  on  the  i8th  Brumaire,  preceded  the 
conversion  of  the  army.  The  First  Consul  found  every- 
where among  the  people  an  equal  disgust  for  Republican 
forms  and  government.  He  took  advantage  of  this  to  estab- 
lish the  Consulate — and  misused  it  to  place  the  crown  on  his 
head.  Vanity,  so  powerful  over  the  French,  and  hatred  of 
a  yoke  sprung  from  under  their  feet,  rendered  insupportable 
to  them  an  authority  brutal  in  its  forms  and  an  offensive 
equality.  The  persecutions  and  violent  deaths  which,  dur- 
ing more  than  two  years,  had  spread  mourning  and  dismay, 
left  such  a  deep  impression  on  the  people's  minds  that  they 
were  resolved,  cost  what  it  might,  never  to  go  back  to  them. 
The  defeats  the  French  armies  suffered  in  1799,  the  violent 
and  unskilful  measures  of  the  Directory,  their  coups  d^etat, 
and  especially  that  of  the  i8th  Fructidor,  added  to  the 
general  impatience  and  to  the  disrepute  in  which  they  had 
fallen  ;  so  that  when  General  Bonaparte  returned  from 
Egypt,  all  classes  of  citizens  opened  their  arms  to  him, 
and  begged  him  to  save  France.  The  i8th  Brumaire  took 
place.  But  the  Conqueror  of  Italy  was  accustomed  to  en- 
force obedience  :  he  therefore  organised  the  country,  and 
commanded  over  it  as  he  would  over  an  army.  The  won- 
derful success  at  Marengo,  order  re-established  in  the  finances 
as  if  by  enchantment,  everywhere  excited  enthusiasm.  The 
odious  attempts  of  the  infernal  machine,  and  of  the  Chouans, 
commanded  by  Georges  and  Pichegru,  excited  indignation 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  273 

against  the  English  and  the  Bourbons  to  the  highest  pitch. 
Then  it  was  that  Napoleon,  convinced  that  he  might  dare 
all  he  wished,  again  raised  up  the  throne  of  France  with  a 
view  to  master  Europe.  Fifteen  years'  glory  and  an  arbi- 
trary government  had  made  the  French  more  supple  ;  and 
the  Bourbons  never  doubted  but  their  government,  which 
they  called  paternal,  would  be  received  with  transports  of 
joy,  especially  as  it  appeared  a  sure  pledge  of  sincere  recon- 
ciliation with  the  rest  of  Europe. 

But  Louis  XVin.,  dazzled  by  the  easy  obedience  of  the 
nation  to  his  predecessor,  was  far  from  suspecting  what  had 
been  hidden  under  the  Imperial  purple.  He  did  not  know 
what  troubles,  what  cares,  what  increasing  obstacles,  per- 
petually arose  against  the  former  Government.  He  did  not 
suspect  that  the  passion  for  Liberty  had  only  been  sup- 
pressed, and  that  the  contempt  the  nation  felt  for  the  last 
kings  of  his  race  extended  to  him.  The  hatred  of  the  old 
Court  and  the  nobility,  indifference  in  regard  to  religion 
and  contempt  for  the  clergy,  had  acquired  new  energy  under 
the  Imperial  reign.  The  King  did  not  know  that  the  Em- 
peror had  lost  many  adherents  in  all  classes.  Finally,  since 
the  departure  of  the  present  King,  in  1791,  a  new  genera- 
tion had  arisen  and  taken  its  rank  in  the  social  state.  They 
were  a  grave  population,  full  of  energy,  nursed  in  deep 
study,  free  from  superstitious  mummery,  leaving  college  to 
fly  to  the  field  of  battle.  To  them  every  career  of  science 
and  ambition  was  open,  and  to  their  success  incapacity  was 
the  only  obstacle. 

Nobody  had  told  the  King  that  all  illusion  in  regard  to 
the  majesty  of  the  throne  had  vanished.  The  Emperor  had, 
in  fact,  never  been  a  monarch,  or  at  least  the  people  had 
never  experienced  for  him  the  superstitious  awe  with 
which  they  had  been  wont  to  look  upon  Louis  XIV.  and 
Louis  XV. 

He  was  admired  only  as  a  great  man.  The  people  beheld 
in  him  the  gainer  of  so  many  battles,  the  conqueror  of  so 

19 


274  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

many  kingdoms,  the  invincible,  the  man  of  fate  ;  but  still 
he  was  always  Bonaparte  —  a  glorious  name,  which  his 
enemies  have  not  been  able  to  tarnish,  nor  he  himself  to  deface. 

Louis  XVIII.  therefore,  on  his  return,  no  longer  found 
the  halo  of  his  House.  In  the  eyes  of  sensible  and  cool- 
thinking  persons,  he  was  nothing  more  than  an  old  gentle- 
man of  Versailles,  whom  circumstances  again  raised  to  a 
throne.  His  family  and  himself  returned,  however,  with 
the  old  prejudices  of  five-and-twenty  years  before.  They 
thought  that  the  Revolution  had  been  made  by  men,  and 
not  by  the  force  of  things — a  fatal  mistake  which  had 
already  ruined  Louis  XVI.  They  began,  therefore,  to 
inquire  of  all  they  saw  who  they  were,  and  what  they  had 
done  at  various  periods.  An  old  rancour  against  the  Con- 
stituents, an  affected  contempt  for  the  nobles  who  had 
declared  themselves  in  favour  of  the  Revolution,  a  haughty 
indifference  towards  all  the  members  of  the  preceding 
Government,  a  disdainful  and  humiliating  politeness  to- 
wards the  leaders  of  the  army  because  they  had  still  their 
arms  in  their  hands — such  were  the  features  that  marked 
the  conduct  of  the  Court. 

The  foreign  Sovereigns,  in  the  midst  of  the  intoxication  of 
their  triumph,  were,  however,  wise  enough  not  to  misuse  it ; 
and  far  from  treating  France  with  the  violence  of  a  con- 
queror who  thinks  he  may  dare  whatever  he  wishes,  they 
seconded  the  patriot  party  in  their  efforts  to  prevent  France, 
in  her  misfortune,  from  being  deprived  of  the  laws  by  which 
she  had  been  governed  for  the  last  thirty  years.  The 
pledges  required  by  a  civilised  age  were  therefore  laid  down 
in  a  charter  granted  by  the  King,  under  the  wretched  title 
of  Ordinance  of  Reformation.  The  forms  of  the  adminis- 
tration were  preserved,  and  the  agents  of  public  authority 
provisionally  maintained  in  their  posts.  Extraordinary 
commissaries  were  sent  into  all  the  departments,  to  en- 
lighten and  calm  the  public  mind.  These  commissaries, 
chosen   for   the   most   part   among   the   disinterested,    and 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  275 

•among  the  enemies  of  the  Emperor,  obtained  but  little 
success.  Private  interest,  however,  weariness,  and  neces- 
sity, produced  a  surer  effect.  The  people  showed  them- 
selves everywhere  distrustful  ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  if 
Government  had  advanced  with  firmness  and  good  faith  in 
the  principles  laid  down  by  the  charter,  it  would  soon  have 
gained,  if  not  affection,  at  least  confidence,  and  oblivion  of 
the  principles  with  which  it  was  surrounded. 

But  the  intoxication  of  a  triumph  so  easily  obtained 
turned  the  heads  of  the  royalists.  The  bragging  of  the 
emigrants  knew  no  bounds.  When  they  saw  the  Bourbons 
seated  on  the  throne,  they  imagined  themselves  masters  of 
their  sovereign  and  all  France.  They  asked,  or  rather 
demanded,  employments,  favours,  and  money.  All  was 
lavished  on  them.  Most  of  them  were  old  officers,  who  at 
the  time  of  their  emigration  enjoyed  but  an  inferior  rank 
in  the  army.  Five-and-twenty  years'  service  was  reckoned 
for  them.  Senior  lieutenants  became  colonels,  and  colonels 
majors  or  lieutenant-generals.  The  pretensions  of  these 
old  men  to  glory,  their  warlike  disposition,  now  so  out  of 
season,  cast  on  them  a  ridicule  that  was  eagerly  seized  by 
the  numerous  idle  young  oflficers  whom  peace  had  brought 
together  in  the  metropolis,  and  they  became  the  subjects  of 
biting  pleasantry  and  bitter  irony.  Songs  and  caricatures 
were  directed  against  these  people,  and  contributed  to  bring 
them  into  disrepute. 

An  unimportant  circumstance  gave  Government  an  idea  of 
the  exasperation  that  began  to  spread  among  the  people. 
An  actress  of  the  Theatre  Francais  died  about  that  time  in 
the  Chaussee  d'Antin.  Her  funeral  was  accompanied  by 
most  of  the  theatrical  characters  in  the  metropolis.  As  she 
had  enjoyed  a  good  deal  of  celebrity,  the  procession  was 
soon  augmented  by  a  great  number  of  those  persons  who 
had  applauded  her  talent.  When  they  arrived  in  front  of 
the  Church  of  St.  Roch,  they  found  the  doors  shut  by  order 
of  the  vicar,  according  to  the  ancient  custom,  by  which  in 


276  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

France  actors  were  considered  as  excommunicated.  The 
friends  of  the  deceased  were  unable  to  soften  the  obstinacy 
of  the  old  priest.  The  mob,  full  of  indignation,  broke  open 
the  doors  of  the  church,  lighted  the  wax  tapers,  and  began 
to  sing  the  prayers  consecrated  to  the  dead.  At  last  one  of 
the  King's  chaplains  came,  as  it  was  said,  to  fill  the  sacer- 
dotal functions,  and  the  ceremony  concluded  peaceably. 
For  this  unforeseen  disturbance  public  authority  was  un- 
prepared ;  and  if  the  King  had  followed  his  first  impulse, 
which  was  to  repel  the  people  by  his  guards,  a  riot  would 
in  all  probability  have  ensued,  the  consequences  of  which 
would  have  been  incalculable. 

This  state  of  the  public  mind  in  regard  to  Government, 
this  propensity  towards  resistance,  spread  rapidly  from 
Paris  to  the  departments.  The  awkward  position  of  the 
Imperial  magistrates  and  other  persons  who  had  been  kept 
in  office,  and  who  were  all  of  a  sudden  obliged  to  preach 
other  duties,  other  affections,  and  contrary  opinions,  cast  on 
them  a  sort  of  obloquy  ;  and  the  necessity  of  making  the 
Bourbons  forget  their  former  devotion  to  the  enemy  com- 
municated to  the  exercise  of  their  authority  a  sort  of 
violence  that  wounded  and  irritated  every  one. 

The  purchasers  of  national  property,  who  were  extremely 
numerous,  ten  millions  of  persons  being  supposed  to  be 
interested  in  those  sales,  were  soon  tormented  by  the  former 
proprietors,  who,  far  from  accepting  the  offers  that  had  been 
made  to  them  through  fear,  rejected  all  manner  of  arrange- 
ment. They  declared  openly  that  their  lands  would  be 
restored  to  them  by  the  King's  authority,  and  that  they 
ought  to  resume  the  possession  of  their  property  by  the  same 
title  by  which  he  had  recovered  his  crown  ;  that  the  loss  of 
the  subjects  and  the  monarch  having  been  the  same,  the 
restitution  ought  to  be  made  at  the  same  time  ;  finally,  that 
the  charter,  which  was  only  a  temporary  convention — a  plain 
ordinance  of  reformation — was  to  be  modified  on  that  pointy 
even  if  it  were  not  abolished  altogether. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  277 

The  King  had  returned  with  a  very  small  number  of  nobles 
who  remained  faithful  to  his  person  ;  but  all  the  emigrants 
-who  had  come  back  in  1801,  at  the  time  of  the  amnesty 
granted  by  the  First  Consul,  hastened  to  invade  the  Tuileries, 
and  added  to  the  joy  they  felt  at  the  return  of  the  Bourbons, 
complaints  on  their  former  sufferings  during  their  emigra- 
tion. They  appeared  every  day,  by  swarms,  at  the  chapel 
of  the  Tuileries,  most  of  them  dressed  in  plain  clothes, 
ornamented  with  shoulder  knots,  and  having  by  their  sides 
the  swords  of  their  deceased  regiments.  The  accounts  of 
their  ancient  prowess  at  Coblentz,  and  in  the  legion  of  Conde, 
appeared  pitiful  to  those  who  had  beaten  them  with  so  much 
facility.  They  seemed  as  if  they  had  returned  but  the  day 
before  ;  and  their  boastings,  supported  by  the  favours  of  the 
Court,  gave  great  offence  to  the  warriors  who  had  recently 
fallen  with  so  much  glory.  Finally,  after  a  space  of  twenty 
years,  the  whole  troop  of  Coblentz  and  the  banks  of  the 
Rhine  insolently  triumphed  in  18 14,  as  if  they  had  succeeded 
twenty  years  sooner. 

The  army  was  a  still  greater  cause  of  uneasiness.  Though 
exhausted  and  mutilated  by  the  last  campaign,  still  a  feeling 
for  glory  and  the  name  of  the  Emperor  remained  alive  in 
the  hearts  of  the  troops.  The  marshals,  and  many  of  the 
guards,  had  yielded  to  necessity  ;  but  the  greatest  part  of 
the  officers  remained  faithful  to  these  noble  sentiments. 
Discipline  and  the  military  virtues  were  nevertheless  pre- 
served, and  shone  with  a  new  lustre.  The  King  could  not 
review  the  troops  himself,  on  account  of  the  bad  state  of  his 
health  ;  and  the  Princes  affected,  every  time  they  saw  them, 
a  degree  of  distrust  and  neglect  which  seemed  augmented 
by  the  jealousy  they  felt  for  their  glorious  deeds. 

The  following  circumstance  has  been  related  to  me  by 
Count  d'Erlon.  The  Duke  de  Berri  was  one  day  reviewing 
some  regiments  garrisoned  in  the  province  of  which  Marshal 
Duke  de  Treviso  was  governor  and  Count  d'Erlon  com- 
■mander.     An  officer  came  out  of  the  ranks  and  asked  the 


278  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

Prince  for  the  cross  of  St.  Louis.  "  What  have  you  done  to- 
(leserve  it  ?  "  "I  have  served  thirty  years  in  the  French 
army."  "Thirty  years'  robbery!  "  repHed  the  Prince,  turn- 
ing his  back  on  him.  It  is  true  that,  the  Marshal  having 
remonstrated,  the  officer  obtained  the  next  day  what  he  had 
solicited  ;  but  the  words  were  reported  about,  and  I  leave 
the  reader  to  judge  of  the  eiTect  they  had  among  the  troops. 

The  corps  dispersed  on  the  surface  of  the  empire  were 
soon  deprived  of  a  part  of  their  officers,  whom  disgust  and 
forced  resignation  banished  from  the  army.  The  staff,  and 
that  crowd  of  military  agents  now  become  useless,  returned 
to  their  homes,  whither  they  carried  the  discontent  and 
hatred  that  filled  their  breasts.  The  two  last  campaigns 
had  been  ruinous  to  them.  They  had  almost  all  lost 
their  baggages.  Exasperated  by  the  presence  of  an  enemy, 
recently  victorious,  now  masters  of  the  country,  but  who 
had  been  beaten  during  twenty  years,  the  necessity  of  sub- 
mitting to  the  yoke  of  the  Bourbons,  whom  that  enemy  had 
brought  with  them,  soon  grew  unbearable.  Without  fortune 
or  possessions,  rejected  by  Government,  accustomed  to  the 
adventurous  life  of  a  camp,  they  saw  nothing  before  them 
but  misery  and  disgrace  if  the  Bourbons  remained  on  the 
throne.  They  wished  at  any  price  to  alter  their  situation,, 
and  their  thoughts  were  directed  with  dissatisfaction  towards 
the  Island  of  Elba. 

So  many  causes  of  confusion  were  still  not  sufficient  to 
open  the  eyes  of  the  Bourbons.  The  three  first  months 
passed  away  in  apparent  tranquillity.  Government  thought 
nothing  was  easier  than  to  subdue  the  dispersed  disaffected  ; 
and  the  Allied  Sovereigns,  who  began  to  fear  the  effect  which 
might  be  produced  on  their  troops  by  the  example  of  our 
easy  manners,  and  especially  our  opinions,  consented  to 
retire,  after  having  settled  their  accounts.  France  had 
immense  sums  of  money  to  pay  ;  the  terms  and  conditions 
of  payment  were  settled,  not  without  a  good  deal  of  difficulty. 
The  Allies  probably  carried  away  with  them  doubts  on  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  279 

long  continuance  of  a  government  that  began  so  ill ;  but 
they  were  satisfied  at  seeing  France  weakened  for  a  long 
while,  and  fallen  from  the  high  station  to  which  glory  and 
civilisation  had  raised  her. 

The  charter  had  instituted  two  chambers.  The  Chamber 
of  Peers,  which  was  the  former  Senate,  had  lost  all  considera- 
tion. The  honourable  men  it  contained  added  no  lustre  to 
it.  They  had,  besides,  all  risen  by  the  Revolution.  The 
King  introduced  into  it  all  the  old  peers  of  the  monarchy, 
and  some  of  these  who  had  of  late  served  with  distinction. 
The  new-comers  gave  to  that  body,  and  received  at  the  same 
time  from  it,  habits,  and  a  love  for  subservience  ;  and  if  the 
nation  took  but  little  interest  in  the  elevation  of  men  who 
numbered  in  their  ranks  the  Count  de  Bourmont  and  the 
Mayor  of  Bordeaux,  the  King  might  at  least  be  assured  that 
this  assembly  would  for  a  long  time  still  maintain  the 
traditional  obedience  of  the  Imperial  Senate. 

Things  were,  however,  not  quite  the  same  in  regard  to 
the  members  of  the  Legislative  Body :  they  had  been  chosen 
at  a  time  when  war  had  become  for  France  an  insufferable 
burthen.  Several  of  them  had  energetically  opposed  the 
demands  of  Government  in  1813.  But  the  number  of 
royalists  was  not  yet  very  considerable  ;  and  if  they  had 
consented  to  abandon  the  Imperial  Government,  it  was  not 
with  a  view  to  submit  to  arbitrary  law  under  the  authority 
of  a  king.  Government  found,  therefore,  if  not  obstacles, 
at  least  serious  warnings,  when  the  counsellors  of  the  crown 
submitted  to  the  Chamber  projects  which  but  ill  agreed  with 
the  principles  of  the  fundamental  law,  and  that  wounded  the 
feelings  and  prejudices  of  the  true  friends  of  Liberty.  One 
of  them.  Count  Ferrand,  disgusted  the  Assembly  when  he 
came,  in  the  King's  name,  and  established  distinctions  in  the 
conduct  of  the  French  at  the  different  periods  of  the  Revo- 
lution, distributing  praises  to  some  and  reproaches  to  others. 
His  comparison  of  the  straight  line  and  the  curved  line 
applied  even  to  those  who  had  rallied  round  Government, 


28o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

spread  alarm  and  indignation  in  every  one's  mind,  and  the 
Emperor  perfectly  well  appreciated  how  serious  that  im- 
prudence was,  when  he  said  :  "  I  came  with  M.  Ferrand's 
speech  in  my  hand,  convinced  that  the  whole  nation  would 
rally  round  me." 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

I  OBSERVED  all  these  seeds  of  confusion.  I  felt  that  the  storm 
was  not  far  distant,  and  I  separated  every  day  more  and  more 
from  the  persons  who  might  take  a  share  in  it.  I  must  here 
explain  the  singular  and  perilous  situation  in  which  I  was 
placed. 

The  day  before  the  Emperor  left  Paris  for  the  fatal  cam- 
paign of  Russia,  he  kept  me  with  him  at  the  close  of  the 
evening  ;  and  after  giving  me  all  the  necessary  orders  for 
his  journey,  he  said  to  me  :  "  Go  to  the  Grand  Marshal ;  he 
will  give  you  drafts  on  the  Treasury  for  1,600,000  fr.  You 
will  convert  them  secretly  into  gold,  which  the  Minister  of 
the  Treasury  will  procure  you  the  means  of  doing  ;  and  you 
will  wait  my  orders  to  send  it  me."  So  much  gold  was 
difficult  to  hide.  I  addressed  myself  to  the  keeper  of  the 
Ordnance  Depot  (M.  Regnier),  who  was  a  very  ingenious 
mechanic,  and  who  made  for  me,  in  a  very  clever  manner, 
several  boxes  which  looked  exactly  like  as  many  quarto 
volumes.  Each  of  them  contained  30,000  fr.,  and  I  placed 
them  in  my  library.  When  the  Emperor  came  back  from 
the  Russian  campaign,  he  seemed  to  have  entirely  forgotten 
the  money,  and  he  returned  to  Germany  for  the  campaign 
of  Leipsic  without  giving  me  any  particular  orders  on  the 
subject.  The  only  reply  he  made  to  my  question  respecting 
it  was,  *'  We  shall  speak  of  that  when  I  come  home."  At 
last,  when,  a  few  months  afterwards,  he  was  going  to  leave 
Paris  for  the  campaign  of  France,  1  insisted  on  his  relieving 
me  from  the  charge  of  a  treasure  for  which  I  might  perhaps 


282  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

not  be  able  to  answer  in  the  midst  of  the  important  events 
that  might  threaten  Paris.  *'  Well,  then,"  he  said,  "  hide  it 
at  your  country  seat."  It  was  in  vain  that  I  remonstrated, 
observing  that  the  castle  of  La  Verriere,  situated  on  the  road 
leading  from  Versailles  to  Rambouillet,  might  be  plundered 
by  stragglers  of  the  enemy  ;  that  my  occupation  in  Paris 
never  permitted  me  to  remain  long  in  the  country,  and  that 
chance  and  the  slightest  imprudence  might  make  me  lose 
the  money.  He  would  listen  to  nothing,  and  I  was  forced 
to  obey.  My  steward  was  an  honest  and  intelligent  man. 
He  made,  in  my  presence,  during  several  nights,  a  hole  under 
the  floor  of  a  closet  on  the  ground  floor.  There  we  deposited 
the  fifty-four  volumes  of  Ancient  and  Modern  History. 
Never  would  any  work  have  been  read  with  more  eager- 
ness, nor  appreciated  nearer  to  its  real  value.  The  inlaid 
floor  was  carefully  replaced,  and  nothing  was  suspected. 
The  taking  of  Paris  threw  the  Emperor  into  Fontainebleau. 
I  most  ardently  wished  to  share  his  fate,  or  at  least  to  receive 
probably  his  last  orders.  But  he  sent  me  word  by  the  Duke 
de  Vicenza  that  it  would  be  dangerous  if  I  were  to  come  to 
see  him  ;  that  he  wished  me  to  remain  in  Paris,  where  I 
might  act  as  I  pleased  ;  and  that  he  would  let  me  know  at 
some  later  period  how  I  was  to  dispose  of  his  money. 

That  circumstance  was  one  of  the  motives  that  made 
me  keep  so  carefully  at  a  distance  from  Government.  My 
attachment  to  the  person  of  the  Emperor,  the  oaths  of 
allegiance  I  had  made  to  him,  my  gratitude  for  his  kind- 
ness and  generosity,  made  me  shudder  at  the  idea  of  not 
devoting  to  him  the  remainder  of  my  life  ;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  honour  forbade  me  to  embrace  the  party  of  the  Bour- 
bons, when  I  was  placed  in  the  necessity  of  maintaining  a 
correspondence  with  him.  What  punishment  would  I  not 
have  suffered  and  deserved,  if  the  King's  government,  after 
having  received  my  oath,  had  discovered  that  I  had  in  my 
possession  a  part  of  Napoleon's  fortune,  and  that  I  disposed 
of  it  according  to  his  orders  ?     At  the  time  I  was  making 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  283 

those  painful  reflections,  three  hundred  Prussians  occupied 
the  castle  of  Verriere.  Fifteen  slept  in  the  very  room  where 
the  treasure  was  hid.  These  soldiers  were  far  from  suspect- 
ing that  they  would  have  had  only  to  raise  with  the  points 
of  their  swords  two  boards  of  the  floor,  to  fall  upon  heaps  of 
gold.  They  remained  there  nearly  two  months.  During 
all  that  time  I  was  in  continued  agony.  I  expected  every 
day  to  learn  that  all  had  been  discovered.  Fortunately  the 
Prussians  went  away  at  last,  and  I  was  easy,  at  least,  in  that 
respect. 

The  late  Empress  Josephine  had,  however,  returned  to 
Malmaison.  After  a  short  absence,  during  the  month  of 
April,  the  Emperor  of  Russia  invited  her  to  return  home. 
He  added  such  flattering  assurances,  that  she  soon  resumed, 
without  uneasiness,  her  usual  mode  of  living.  At  first  few 
persons  went  to  see  her  ;  but  the  Emperor  Alexander  and 
the  King  of  Prussia  having  visited  her,  a  great  number  of 
foreigners  appeared  in  their  train,  and  were  soon  followed 
by  many  Frenchmen,  who  still  felt  gratitude  and  attachment 
to  Josephine,  and  who  feared  no  longer  to  express  their 
feelings.  The  Emperor  of  Russia  went  frequently,  and  paid 
her  long  visits  :  their  conversations  on  Napoleon  were  in- 
exhaustible. The  Empress  Josephine's  mind  was  neither 
extensive  nor  cultivated  ;  but  she  possessed  a  sound  judg- 
ment, ingenuity,  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  good  society, 
and  inimitable  grace  ;  whilst  her  accent,  which  was  rather 
that  of  a  Creole,  added  a  great  charm  to  her  conversation. 
Alexander  appeared  delighted  with  her.  One  day  he  pre- 
sented his  brother  Constantine  to  her,  and  said,  "  Do  you 
not  think  that  the  whole  person  of  her  Majesty,  and  even 
the  sound  of  her  voice,  have  a  great  resemblance  to  the 
Empress  Catharine  ? " 

Notwithstanding  some  indiscreet  observations  that  escaped 
her  in  the  freedom  of  those  numerous  conversations,  Jose- 
phine never  belied  the  tender  afi"ection  she  still  felt  for 
Napoleon.     The  revolution  was  complete,  and  the   throne 


284  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

for  ever  lost,  and  still  she  never  ceased  to  implore  the 
generosity  of  the  Emperor,  that  he  might  soften  the  fate  of 
her  former  husband.  The  promises  he  made,  and  which 
she  repeated  to  me  with  sincerity,  were  speedily  forgotten 
at  Vienna,  if  it  be  true  that  even  at  that  time  Alexander 
consented  to  let  Napoleon  be  taken  from  the  Island  of  Elba 
and  sent  to  St.  Helena.  Prince  Eugene  came  to  Paris, 
about  the  time  I  am  speaking  of.  The  Emperor  Alexander 
took  a  liking  to  him,  made  him  many  professions  of  friend- 
ship, and  promised  to  give  him  in  Germany  a  principality, 
the  population  of  which  should  not  be  less  than  sixty 
thousand  inhabitants.  These  arrangements  were  afterwards 
altered  :  the  Prince  obtained  the  principality  of  Eichstadt, 
which  contains  scarcely  seven  thousand  inhabitants.  The 
day  before  his  departure,  the  Emperor  Alexander,  in  a 
moment  of  effusion,  said  to  Prince  Eugene,  "  I  do  not  know 
whether  I  shall  not  one  day  repent  having  placed  the 
Bourbons  on  the  throne.  Believe  me,  my  dear  Eugene, 
they  are  not  good  people.^  We  have  seen  them  in  Russia, 
and  I  know  from  experience  what  to  think  of  them." 

In  the  midst  of  these  splendid  comfortings,  surrounded  by 
the  homage  of  the  most  powerful  sovereigns  of  the  Con- 
tinent, death  overtook  the  Empress  Josephine.  She  was 
subject  to  catarrhal  colds,  which  a  little  care  and  repose 
usually  cured  in  a  short  time.  One  day,  as  she  felt  an 
attack  of  one  of  these  complaints,  she  walked  round  the 
Park  of  Malmaison  with  the  King  of  Prussia.  She  grew  in 
consequence  worse.     Three  days  afterwards  she  was  so  ill 

that  Dr.  N ,  having  been  called  in  on  consultation,  gave 

me  the  painful  commission  to  acquaint  Prince  Eugene  and 
the  Queen  of  Holland  that  within  a  few  days  they  would  be 
motherless.  The  Emperor  Alexander  brought  her,  the  next 
day,  his  own  physician,  and  remained  the  whole  day  with 

'  If  the  Emperor  Alexander  really  used  these  expressions,  he  was  not  of 
the  same  opinion  as  our  Yorick — "The  Bourbons  are  a  gentle  race" 
■{"  Sentimental  Journey"). — Note  of  Translator. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  285 

her  ;  but  on  the  Sunday  she  softly  expired  in  the  arms  of 
the  Countess  d'Arberg,  her  lady  of  honour,  and  her  friend. 
The  Empress  was  fifty-two  years  of  age.  She  was  an 
excellent  woman  in  all  respects  :  she  embellished  the  throne 
by  the  most  amiable  qualities.  Her  benevolence  and  her 
kindness  may  serve  as  models  to  all  those  whom  birth  or 
fortune  sentences  to  wear  a  crown. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  also  wished  to  make  a  provision 
for  the  Queen  of  Holland.  Her  husband  had  left  her. 
Alexander  procured  for  her  the  title  of  Duchess  of  St.  Leu. 
Louis  XVIII.  did  not  dare  to  refuse  openly,  but  his 
Minister  Blacas  made  so  many  difficulties,  that  Alexander 
sent  his  aide-de-camp  to  the  Tuileries  with  an  order  not 
to  leave  the  palace  until  the  patent  was  delivered  to  him,  if 
even  he  should  be  obliged  to  sleep  there. 

The  Empress  Josephine  was  buried  in  the  Church  of  Ruel. 
The  funeral  ceremony  was  celebrated  with  great  splendour, 
by  special  order  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  who  wished  to 
give  a  last  token  of  regard  to  the  memory  of  Josephine,  by 
sending  as  chief  mourner  Field  Marshal  Sacken,  of  all  his 
generals  the  one  for  whom  he  had  the  greatest  esteem,  and 
to  whom  he  had  entrusted  the  government  of  Paris. 

The  death  of  the  Empress  Josephine  was  the  last  blessing 
fortune  conferred  on  her.  Accustomed  to  all  the  enjoyment 
of  luxury,  and  not  knowing  how  to  set  bounds  either  to  her 
expenses  or  to  her  charity,  whilst  the  new  Government 
refused  to  pay  the  pension  that  had  been  granted  her  by 
the  treaty  of  the  nth  of  April,  she  was  on  the  point  of 
feeling  all  that  trouble  that  accompanies  want  of  order  and 
imprudence.  The  return  of  the  Emperor  on  the  20th  of 
March  would,  besides,  have  undoubtedly  compromised  her. 
Her  affection  for  him,  and  the  enthusiasm  his  presence 
would  have  created,  would  have  led  her  into  measures  for 
which  she  could  not  have  expected  pardon  from  the  Bour- 
bons. She  would  therefore  have  been  obliged  to  end  her 
unfortunate  days  far  from  France  and  her  friends. 


286  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

Prince  Eugene  was  going  to  return  to  Germany.  Not 
receiving  any  accounts  from  the  Island  of  Elba,  I  resolved 
to  acquaint  him  with  my  situation.  He  was  devoted  to  the 
Emperor,  and  he  was  my  friend.  I  proposed  to  him  to  take 
charge  of  800,000  francs,  and  send  them  to  the  Island  of 
Elba. 

Feeling  myself  a  little  easier  from  the  thought  of  having 
«aved  half  the  sum,  I  exerted  my  utmost  prudence  to  keep  the 
eyes  of  the  police  off  me.  M.  Pasquier  was  no  longer  there  ; 
and  his  successor,  prepossessed  by  the  idea  of  the  general 
excitement  which  was  daily  augmented  by  newspapers  and 
pamphlets  written  by  men  who  observed  no  moderation, 
naturally  forgot  a  person  like  myself,  whom  his  investigators 
never  met  with,  and  whose  name  was  never  uttered  in  his 
presence. 

What  I  had  foreseen  happened  at  last.  The  charter  was 
infringed  by  underhand  practices,  and  the  press  complained 
openly  of  them.  The  abuse  with  which  the  Emperor  was 
overwhelmed  by  the  Royalist  papers  exasperated  all  the 
adherents  and  friends  of  the  hero.  Recriminations  took  a 
violent  character,  and  some  writers  searched  the  old  Moni- 
tettrs,  and  published  the  odious  imputation  with  which  the 
King  had  formerly  been  charged  at  the  time  of  the  trial  of 
the  Marquis  de  Favras. 

M.  Rey,  a  lawyer  from  Grenoble,  described  in  a  work 
which  was  eagerly  read  all  the  infringements  made  on  the 
charter  from  the  day  it  had  been  granted.  Two  young 
men,  Messrs.  Comte  and  Dunoyer,  published  a  periodical 
work,  called  Le  Censetcr,  whence  the  principles  of  Liberty 
Avere  developed  with  an  energy  and  a  strength  of  argument 
that  gained  universal  applause.  The  writings  of  the  royalists 
contained  abuse  on  the  Revolution,  and  on  all,  without  dis- 
tinction, who  had  taken  a  share  in  it  ;  to  which  they  added 
such  provoking  threats,  that  it  was  impossible  not  to  perceive 
that  their  aim  was  to  punish  all. 

This  hostile  disposition  had  extended  all  over  France,  by 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  287 

the  very  measures  that  Government  took  to  alter  or  weaken 
it.  Fearing,  not  without  some  reason,  the  troops  assembled 
under  the  colours,  they  had  come  to  the  resolution  of  dis- 
"banding  more  than  half  of  them.  The  sufferings  of  want 
soon  took  the  place  of  the  happiness  they  had  enjoyed  on 
finding  themselves  returned  in  peace  to  their  homes.  The 
fatigues,  the  dangers,  and  even  the  disasters  of  the  last 
campaign  were  soon  obliterated  from  their  memory  ;  and 
they  only  retained  the  enthusiasm  with  which  the  recol- 
lection of  the  Emperor  inspired  them  in  their  idle  hours, 
mingled  with  pity  for  his  fall,  and  indignation  at  the  dis- 
graceful treatment  he  suflFered  from  enemies  he  had  so 
often  vanquished.  The  glory  they  had  been  promised,  the 
military  rewards  that  could  not  have  escaped  them,  the 
illustrious  title  of  soldiers  of  the  Grand  Army,  and  the 
universal  veneration  that  was  to  embellish  the  remainder  of 
their  days,  had  all  disappeared.  They  returned  to  their 
homes  poor  and  humbled,  and  had  moreover  to  suffer  from 
the  mistrust  of  the  agents  of  the  new  authorities,  and  from 
the  contempt  of  that  crowd  of  nobles,  most  of  them  old 
emigrants,  who  ranked  among  their  rights  and  privileges 
the  pleasure  of  detracting  from  the  military  glory,  and 
branding  with  the  name  of  revolt  the  heroic  exertions  of 
the  French  to  save  their  country  from  a  foreign  yoke. 

Most  of  the  generals  who  had  been  retained,  and  even 
those  who  commanded  military  divisions,  soon  perceived, 
by  the  reception  they  met  with  at  Court,  that  the  day  was 
not  far  off  when  they  would  be  set  aside  to  make  place  for 
the  royalists,  whose  long  idleness  was  repaid  by  an  accumu- 
lation of  rank. 

I  saw  none  of  my  old  companions  in  arms  ;  but  a  con- 
versation I  had  with  one  of  my  friends  opened  my  eyes, 
and  made  me  more  attentive  to  what  was  passing  around 
me.  My  lodgings,  which  were  situated  in  the  Faubourg 
St.  Germain,  placed  me  under  the  necessity  of  frequently 
crossing  the  garden  of  the  Tuileries.     I  met  there  one  day 


288  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

a  former  aide-de-camp  of  the  Emperor.  We  talked  about 
public  affairs,  and  he  said  to  me  :  "  I  have  just  met  Marshal 
Ney  ;  I  have  never  yet  seen  a  man  more  exasperated  than 
he  against  Government.  His  lady  was  yesterday  so  cruelly 
insulted  at  the  Tuileries  that  she  went  home  in  tears.  The 
old  duchesses  taxed  her  with  being  the  daughter  of  a 
chambermaid.'  Her  aunt,  Madame  Campan,  has  just  lost 
the  situation  of  superintending  lady  of  the  establishment  at 
Ecouen,  notwithstanding  the  Marshal's  solicitations.  The 
harsh  and  insolent  manner  of  Count  de  Blacas,  to  whom  the 
King  referred  him,  added  to  his  exasperation." 

This  account  appeared  so  singular  to  me,  from  the  dispo- 
sition in  which  I  supposed  the  Marshal  to  be,  that  I  could 
not  help  expressing  some  idea  that  it  might  be  exaggerated. 
"If  you  think  me  mistaken,"  returned  the  aide-de-camp, 
"  let  us  continue  our  walk.  He  will  soon  pass  through 
here  again  to  return  home,  for  I  know  he  is  gone  to  the 
Rue  du  Mont  Blanc,  and  you  may  hear  him  yourself." 

In  fact,  the  Marshal  appeared  in  about  an  hour.  We 
stood  at  the  entrance  of  the  terrace,  by  the  water-side. 
When  he  saw  me,  he  immediately  came  up  to  me,  and  we 
walked  all  three  together.  "  Well,"  said  he,  "  so  you  have 
kept  yourself  aloof  ;  you  are  at  peace,  far  from  this  puddle. 
How  happy  you  are,  that  have  no  insult  or  injustice  to 
suffer  !  These  people  are  so  ignorant,  they  know  not  what 
a  Marshal  Ney  is.     Shall  I  be  obliged  to  teach  it  them  ?  " 

He  continued  there  for  half  an  hour,  to  vent  his  passion  ; 
and,  notwithstanding  some  reflections  we  made  with  a  view 
to  calm  him,  he  left  us  abruptly.  This  fact  will  undoubtedly 
appear    a   considerable    charge    against    him  ;    and   many 

'  The  lady  of  Marshal  Ney  was  a  daughter  of  Madame  Anguie,  chamber- 
maid to  the  Queen.  Her  unfortunate  mother,  who  was  persecuted  in  1793 
by  the  revolutionarj-  committees,  threw  herself  into  a  well,  to  escape  from 
the  scaffold,  and  to  a%'oid  by  a  voluntary  death  the  confiscation  of  her  pro- 
perty. She  had  three  daughters,  all  of  them  remarkable  for  their  beauty 
and  the  most  amiable  qualities  :  Madame  Gamot  (afterwards  Madame 
Delaville),  the  lady  of  Marshal  Ney,  and  Madame  de  Broc,  who  met  with 
her  death  by  falling  into  a  torrent  near  Aix  in  Savoy. — Note  of  the  Author. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  289 

persons  will  be  tempted  to  connect  that  speech  with  his 
conduct  in  the  month  of  March  following.  This  would, 
however,  be  a  mistake.  The  Marshal  was  a  man  who  always 
acted  upon  the  first  impulse  :  he  did  not  love  the  new 
Government ;  but  (it  must,  alas  !  be  acknowledged)  he 
loved  the  Emperor  still  less.  A  few  days  after  the  con- 
versation I  mentioned,  he  went  to  his  seat  of  Coudreaux, 
and  remained  a  complete  stranger  to  all  that  follows. 


20 


CHAPTER   XXXI. 

The  youngest  and  most  ambitious  among  the  general 
officers  were  naturally  the  most  discontented.  Stopped  all 
of  a  sudden  in  the  midst  of  their  career,  forced  to  mix  again 
with  the  crowd,  fortune  and  honours  escaped  from  their 
hands,  when  they  seemed  to  have  only  one  step  more  to 
take  to  gain  them.  Accustomed  to  a  showy  life,  their  large 
salaries  were  suddenly  cut  off,  and  they  experienced  great 
disappointment  in  not  being  able  to  keep  up  the  brilliant 
rank  that  had  been  assigned  to  them  in  the  army  and  in  the 
world,  the  enjoyment  of  which  would  perhaps  have  com- 
forted them.  I  do  not  say  that  their  love  of  their  country 
and  their  devotion  to  the  Emperor  had  not  a  great  share  in 
their  resentment  ;  and  all  those  causes  added  together  made 
their  situation  insufferable.  The  universal  contempt  for 
the  new  Government,  and  the  clamour  that  was  raised  on 
all  sides,  persuaded  them  that  the  favourable  moment  for 
an  insurrection  had  arrived  ;  and  some  of  them  did  not 
hesitate  to  employ  for  that  end  the  troops  with  which 
Government  had  entrusted  them  for  its  defence,  in  full 
reliance  on  the  oath  of  allegiance  they  had  taken.     I  had 

not  the  least  knowledge  of  the  plot.     It  was  M.  de  P 

who  first  spoke  to  me  about  it,  and  who,  with  the  confidence 
and  levity  of  youth,  acquainted  me  with  all  its  particulars. 
He  did  not  even  seek  to  hide  the  names  of  any  of  its  leaders. 
By  all  I  had  heard,  I  soon  discovered  that  everybody  knew 
the  secret  except  Government.  It  was  Marshal  Soult  who 
held  the  portfolio  of  the  War  Department  ;  but  having  at 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  291 

that  time  no  other  wish  than  to  efface  by  his  new  zeal  the 
remembrance  of  his  old  affection  for  the  Republic  and  the 
Emperor,  he  consecrated  all  his  time  to  the  Vendeans  and 
their  history,  making  the  King  sign  an  ordinance  for  the 
monument  at  Quiberon,  and  placing  them  in  the  army. 
Far  from  enlightening  the  Sovereign  on  the  spirit  of  the 
army  and  the  people,  he  knew  so  little  about  it  himself, 
that  he  thought  it  quite  natural  to  assemble  with  great  eclat^ 
in  the  city  of  Nantes,  all  the  remains  of  the  old  rebels  of  the 
Vendee,  for  a  solemn  distribution  of  pensions  and  orders. 
The  Nantese,  at  the  sight  of  their  old  foes,  who  had  so 
frequently  shown  marks  of  cruelty,  were  at  the  point  of 
insurrection.  The  agent  of  the  Minister  was  obliged  to  run 
away,  leaving  behind  him  an  incensed  population,  ready  to 
take  up  arms  to  repel  this  counter-revolutionary  attempt. 

This  awkward  act  was  soon  after  followed  by  an  unjust 
and  brutal  measure,  which  augmented  the  exasperation 
of  the  military.  General  Excelmans,  one  of  the  most 
brilliant  leaders  of  the  army,  had  been  first  aide-de-camp 
to  the  King  of  Naples.  One  of  the  physicians  of  that 
Prince  setting  off  to  join  him,  Excelmans  gave  him  a  letter, 
wherein  he  feelingly  expressed  his  attachment  to  his  former 
general.  Some  loose  words  on  the  energy  of  the  army, 
which  still  subsisted  notwithstanding  the  peace,  and  offers 
of  service,  concluded  his  letter.  The  person  who  had  taken 
charge  of  it  was  arrested  ;  the  letter  was  then  delivered  to 
the  Minister  of  War  (then  General  Dupont),  who  repri- 
manded General  Excelmans  for  the  very  slight  impropriety 
he  h^d  committed.  But  the  letter  remained  in  the  office  of 
the  Minister.  One  of  the  first  measures  of  Marshal  Soult, 
when  he  took  the  portfolio,  was  to  decide  that  General 
Excelmans  should  leave  Paris,  and  go  and  reside,  until 
further  orders,  in  the  department  where  he  was  born.  The 
general  resisted,  alleging,  with  reason,  that  his  natural  home 
was  in  the  metropolis,  having  no  property  in  the  depart- 
ment, where   he  had  not   even    been  for    the  last    twenty 


292  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

years.  Finally,  he  only  solicited  a  respite.  Madame  Excel- 
mans  had  been  for  three  days  in  the  pains  of  child-birth. 
All  the  friends  of  her  husband  surrounded  him,  and 
encouraged  him  to  resist  an  order  which  had  all  the 
appearance  of  a  leitre  de  cachet.  The  Minister  was  going 
to  use  violence,  when  one  of  the  General's  companions 
in  arms,  General  Flahaut,  helped  him  to  escape.  A  court- 
martial  assembled  at  Lille  to  try  him  :  he  went  there  and 
was  acquitted.  This  acquittal  was  a  fresh  triumph  to  the 
friends  of  the  Emperor,  and  a  powerful  encouragement  to 
those  who  were  at  the  head  of  the  plot. 

One  of  the  leaders  was  General  Lallemant,  whom  I  had 
known  in  Italy  and  in  Egypt,  when  he  was  an  officer  of 
the  Guards,  and  afterwards  aide-de-camp  of  General  Junot. 
He  wished  me  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  conspiracy,  and 
especially  to  undertake  the  commission  of  acquainting  the 
Emperor  with  it.  He  observed  that  I  had  undoubtedly 
kept  secure  means  of  corresponding  with  him.  He  opened 
to  me  his  plans,  which  were  to  seize  the  persons  of  the 
Bourbons,  proclaiming  the  Emperor,  and  replace  him  on 
the  throne.  Marshal  Davoust,  the  Dukes  of  Otranto  and 
Bassano,  and  several  others,  whose  names  I  forget,  were  the 
heads  of  the  enterprise.  The  more  he  advanced  in  his 
explanation,  the  more  my  alarm  and  uneasiness  deprived 
me  of  all  power  of  replying.  In  listening  to  him,  it  was 
not,  I  acknowledge,  the  fate  of  the  King  that  caused  my 
anxiety,  but  that  of  the  Emperor.  I,  however,  answered, 
"  The  persons  whom  you  have  named  are  very  able,  and 
their  co-operation  undoubtedly  makes  your  success  very 
probable  ;  but  still,  it  seems  to  me,  you  dispose  very  freely 
of  the  Emperor,  simply  to  acquaint  him  with  an  under- 
taking, in  regard  to  which  he  has  not  been  previously 
consulted  :  to  dispose  of  his  fate  without  his  permission 
appears  to  me  a  very  bold  act.  First,  I  positively  declare 
I  have  no  sure  means  of  sending  him  a  letter.  I  even 
entreat  his  friends  not  to  address  him  any,  as  I  am  sure 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  293 

they  will  be  stopped  by  the  posts  of  France  and  Italy,  and 
sent  to  Vienna,  where  M.  de  Talleyrand  strongly  solicits 
a  more  distant  exile  for  the  Emperor.  The  motives  on 
which  he  grounds  his  demand  have  not  as  yet  appeared 
sufficient  to  determine  the  Allied  Powers  to  such  a  measure  ; 
but  I  leave  you  to  judge  what  effect  would  be  produced 
upon  them  by  a  correspondence  such  as  you  wish  to  under- 
take. I  am  convinced  the  Emperor  would  be  sent  to  the 
world's  end,  and  perhaps  even  murdered.  Who  knows 
whether  he  may  not  have  plans  of  his  own  which  yours 
may  counteract  and  destroy  ?  Do  you  think  his  mind  is 
weakened  ?  Has  he  no  friends  left  in  Italy  ?  Can  he 
not  easily  be  informed  of  what  happens  here  ?  Finally, 
has  he  left  his  orders  with  anybody  ?  Has  he  sent  any 
over  since  he  has  been  in  the  Island  of  Elba  ?  "  "As  you 
think  it  dangerous  to  write,"  replied  the  general,  "  we  shall 
strive  to  send  somebody  of  great  trust.  As  for  our  plan, 
it  is  too  far  advanced  for  us  to  delay  the  execution  of  it  any 
longer.  If  we  put  it  off  till  some  other  time,  the  Emperor 
will  be  one  day  unexpectedly  removed  from  the  Island  of 
Elba,  in  spite  of  the  brave  men  who  guard  him,  and  then 
all  will  be  lost  beyond  resource.  For  the  rest,  speak  to  the 
Duke  de  Bassano  ;  communicate  to  him  your  anxiety  ;  but 
be  sure  we  will  not.  This  government  is  not  to  be  borne  ; 
we  will  break  it  with  our  swords  ;  our  resolution  is  taken." 

I  went  the  day  after  to  the  Duke  de  Bassano,  whom  I 
had  not  seen  since  the  Restoration.  After  having  related 
the  conversation  I  had  had  with  Lallemant,  I  expressed  my 
fears,  not  only  in  regard  to  a  correspondence  with  the 
Island  of  Elba,  but  also  to  the  strange  trust  they  reposed 
in  the  Duke  of  Otranto.  Murat  spoke  openly  to  me — 
"  This  is  quite  a  military  operation,"  he  said  ;  "  we  have 
nothing  to  say  in  it  :  all  that  concerns  us  is  the  return  of 
the  Emperor.  I  know  not  how  to  acquaint  him  of  it,  if 
you  have  no  means,  and  if  you  think  them  all  dangerous.  I 
am,  moreover,  as  much  convinced  as  you  are  that  it  would 


394  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

be  his  certain  ruin  to  commit  even  a  single  word  to  paper  ,- 
and,  in  fact,  I  gave  no  letter  to  M.  Fleury  de  Chaboulon, 
who,  you  know,  set  off  more  than  a  fortnight  ago.  To  be 
sure,  when  he  left  us,  the  military  conspiracy  was  not  yet 
hatched  ;  or,  at  least,  I  had  no  knowledge  of  it.  As  to  the 
Duke  of  Otranto,  I  do  not  share  your  mistrust  :  he  has 
entered  on  the  business  with  so  much  ardour,  and  he  is  on 
such  bad  terms  with  the  Bourbons,  that  I  am  sure  he  will 
not  betray  us."  "  Very  well  ;  but  suppose  he  be  sincere  in 
this,  who  knows  whether  he  has  not  some  after-thought, 
and  whether  he  does  not  intend  to  work  for  another?" 
"I  do  not  know  for  whom  it  should  be:  he  can  have  no 
thoughts  on  the  Duke  of  Orleans.  Of  that  I  have  indis- 
putable proofs.  Neither  he  nor  any  other  would  dare  to 
touch  that  question  with  the  Prince.  Come  and  see  me 
often,  and  I  shall  make  you  acquainted  with  everything." 

My  conversation  with  the  Duke  de  Bassano  had  aug- 
mented my  fears  for  the  Emperor.  The  name  of  the  Duke 
of  Otranto  appeared  fatal  to  me,  and  I  returned  a  few 
days  afterwards  to  the  Duke's  house,  to  speak  again  with 
him  on  the  subject.  He  was  closeted  with  the  Prince  of 
Eckmiihl ;  but  I  found  Count  Thibaudeau,  who  was  very 
well  informed  of  the  whole  business,  and  knew  the  plot  in 
its  most  minute  particulars.  I  communicated  to  him  my 
anxiety  concerning  Fouche.  His  answer  was — "  It  is  not 
yet  very  clear  in  my  eyes  that  he  really  wishes  for  the 
return  of  the  Emperor,  but  he  will  remain  faithful  to  us 
on  the  occasion." 

While  we  were  talking  together,  the  Prince  of  Eckmiihl 
came  out  of  the  Duke's  cabinet,  and  the  latter  taking  us 
aside,  acquainted  us  that  the  Prince  had  just  declared  he 
gave  up  all  co-operation  in  the  undertaking.  The  reason 
he  gave  was,  the  levity  of  the  leaders,  and  the  certainty 
that  the  Court  had  already  some  suspicion  on  the  subject. 
His  resolution  came  rather  late  ;  his  name  had  encouraged 
all  the  others.     The  means  of  execution  had  been  submitted 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  295 

to  him,  and  he  had  approved  of  them  ;  it  was  therefore 
fear  that  made  him  recede,  for  repentance  could  scarcely 
find  a  place  in  the  heart  of  such  a  man.  Finally,  he  stopped 
rather  late,  the  motion  having  already  begun,  the  dike  being 
broken,  and  the  torrent  ready  to  overflow  on  all  sides. 
The  initiated  were  expecting  with  great  anxiety  the  news 
of  the  rising.  Only  three  days  more  were  wanted  for  us 
to  receive  it,  when  we  learned  that  Lallemant  and  Lefebvre 
Desnouettes  had  been  discovered  at  La  Feren,  through  the 
vigilance  of  General  Daboville  and  Colonel  Lyon  ;  that  Lalle- 
mant was  taken  with  his  brother,  and  that  a  court-martial 
was  already  convoked  to  try  them.  The  cause  seemed  lost 
beyond  resource.  Anxiety  and  despair  seized  all  the  friends 
of  the  Emperor.  Without  uneasiness  with  regard  to  myself, 
I  sighed  over  the  fate  of  so  many  brave  men,  who  were 
going  to  expiate  on  the  scaffold  their  fidelity  for  him  whom 
they  still  looked  upon  as  their  Sovereign,  when  suddenly 
an  extraordinary  event,  an  absolute  miracle,  began  to  be 
reported  about,  secretly  at  first,  but  soon  with  undoubted 
certainty.  It  was  on  Monday  the  7th  of  March.  I  was 
crossing  the  Tuileries  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when 
I  perceived  on  the  steps  of  the  gate  leading  to  the  Rue  de 
Rivoli,  M.  Paul  Lagarde,  late  Commissary-general  of  the 
Police  in  Italy.  I  saluted  him  with  my  hand  in  passing  by, 
and  continued  my  way  under  the  trees,  towards  the  terrace 
on  the  water-side.  Hearing  some  person  near  me,  I  was 
going  to  turn  round,  when  the  following  words  were  whis- 
pered in  my  ear  :  "  Make  no  gestures  ;  show  no  surprise  ; 
do  not  stop  ;  the  Emperor  landed  at  Cannes  on  the  ist  of 
March  ;  the  Count  d'Artois  set  off  last  night  to  oppose 
him."  It  would  be  impossible  for  me  to  express  the  con- 
fusion into  which  these  words  threw  me.  I  could  scarcely 
breathe  from  emotion  :  I  continued  walking  like  an  inebriated 
man,  and  repeating  to  myself — "  Is  it  possible  ?  Is  it  not 
a  dream,  or  the  most  cruel  mockery  ?  "  When  I  arrived 
on    the    terrace   on    the    water-side,    I    met   the    Duke   de 


296  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

Vicenza,  went  up  to  him,  and  I  repeated  to  him  the  news 
word  for  word,  and  in  the  same  tone  of  voice  in  which  I 
had  just  received  it.  He  being  of  a  hasty  temper,  and 
accustomed  to  view  things  on  the  worst  side,  exclaimed  : 
"  What  an  extravagance  !  How  !  to  land  without  troops ! 
He  will  be  taken  ;  he  will  not  advance  two  leagues  into 
France  ;  he  is  a  lost  man.  But  it  is  impossible  !  However,'' 
he  added,  "it  is  but  too  true  that  the  Count  d'Artois  set 
off  hastily  last  night." 

The  ill-humour  of  the  Duke  de  Vicenza  and  his  fatal 
forebodings  were  irksome  to  me.  I  left  him,  to  indulge 
at  liberty  the  joy  I  experienced.  At  home  I  found  no  one 
who  would  share  it.  Madame  Lavalette  was  dismayed  at 
the  news,  and  drew  sad  omens  from  it.  I  ran  to  the  Duchess 
of  St.  Leu,  and  found  her  bathed  in  tears  of  joy  and  emotion. 
After  a  lapse  of  a  few  moments,  we  began  to  calculate  the 
immense  distance  between  Cannes  and  Paris.  "  What  will 
the  generals  do  that  command  on  that  road  ?  What  the 
public  authorities  ?  What  the  troops  ?  What  effect  will 
the  arrival  of  the  Count  d'Artois  produce  ?  "  It  appeared 
to  us  as  if  nothing  could  resist  the  Emperor  ;  and  we  con- 
cluded that,  when  once  he  should  arrive  at  Lyons,  all 
opposition  would  become  impossible.  From  that  moment 
the  Duchess  closed  her  door.  All  the  suspicions  of  the 
royalists,  all  the  eyes  of  the  police,  centred  upon  her. 
During  the  eleven  months  that  had  elapsed,  her  house  had 
not  been  much  frequented.  Some  generals,  a  few  ladies  and 
young  men  of  the  new  Court,  visited  her  often  ;  but  the 
conversation  never  turned  upon  the  Emperor.  A  small 
number  of  faithful  friends  alone  now  and  then  inquired 
what  was  his  manner  of  living, — what  would  be  his  future 
situation. 

An  undefined  feeling  convinced  us  that  he  would  return  ; 
that  a  life  of  miracles  would  not  be  terminated  on  a  rock 
between  Italy  and  France  ;  but  how,  and  by  what  means, 
that  was  to  happen,  our  imagination,  active  as  it  was,  could 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  297 

not  conceive.  Every  day  we  counted  the  errors  Government 
committed,  those  they  were  supposed  to  commit,  and  the 
mass  of  prepossessions,  complaints,  violent  or  satirical 
writings,  in  which  the  ridicule  of  the  royalists  and  the 
absurdity  of  their  plans  were  exposed  to  light  with  so  much 
bitter  irony.  But,  notwithstanding  all  that,  the  people 
were  satisfied  with  laughing  and  shrugging  their  shoulders  : 
the  soldiers  obeyed,  and  the  mob  appeared  to  remain  quiet. 
How  could  the  Emperor,  therefore,  think  of  showing  him- 
self to  a  Government  that  appeared  strong,  and  to  a  people 
that  seemed  to  have  forgotten  him  ?  And  lo  !  all  of  a 
sudden  he  lands  in  France  ;  he  agitates  the  minds  of  every 
one  ;  his  formidable  name  spreads  dismay  and  discourage- 
ment among  those  who  command,  and  those  who  detest 
him.  The  days,  hours,  and  minutes  were  counted.  Every 
morning  the  newspapers  published  the  most  sinister  reports  : 
he  had  either  been  taken  or  had  fled  to  the  mountains.  No 
certain  accounts  were  received.  Our  consternation  augmented 
from  day  to  day.  I  took  long  walks  in  the  suburbs,  and  found 
everywhere  the  appearance  of  complete  indifference.  The 
labours  and  habits  of  the  people  remained  the  same.  But  the 
police,  who  carefully  gathered  the  movements  of  the  evening, 
in  the  cabarets  and  other  places  of  resort  of  the  lower  classes, 
were  struck  with  awe  at  the  energetic  speeches  and  terrible 
plans  that  were  secretly  circulated.  They  dare  not,  however, 
imprison  any  individual  of  those  classes,  for  fear  of  causing 
riots,  the  consequence  of  which  might  have  been  frightful.' 

'  I  occupied  at  that  time  a  part  of  the  old  Hotel  de  Lamoignon,  which 
l>elonged  to  M.  de  Lamoignon's  son-in-law,  M.  de  Caumont.  Madame  de 
Stael  lived  on  the  ground  floor  of  the  same  hotel.  The  day  after  the  news 
of  the  Emperor's  landing  had  arrived,  she  sent  to  beg  I  would  come  down 
to  her.  When  I  entered  her  drawing-room  she  came  to  meet  me, 
her  arms  crossed  before  her  breast,  and  said  with  a  faltering  but  still 
sonorous  voice:  "Well,  sir,  so  he  is  come  back!"  "He  is  not  yet 
arrived;  the  journey  is  long  and  I  fear  that  many  obstacles  .  .  ."  "He 
will  arrive  ;  he'll  be  here  in  a  few  days,  I  have  no  delusion  !  Oh  !  my 
God  !  Liberty  is  then  lost  for  ever  !  Poor  F'rance  !  After  so  many 
sufferings  ;  notwithstanding  such  ardent,  such  unanimous  wishes.  .  .  .  His 
despotism  will  prevail,  and  I  must  leave  the  country, — leave  it  undouljtodly 


298  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

It  must,  however,  be  acknowledged  that  the  tradespeople,, 
moneyed  men,  and  lawyers,  did  not  share  these  sentiments. 
The  position  of  the  Court  inspired  no  interest ;  the  jests 
to  which  it  was  exposed  gained  rapid  applause  ;  but  still, 
the  too  recent  presence  of  the  enemy  caused  great  anxiety 
and  a  sort  of  stupefaction  at  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor. 
Nevertheless,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  young  men  who 
enlisted  at  Vincennes  as  royalists,  nobody  appeared  willing 
to  fight.  The  Count  d'Artois  returned  in  despair,  unable 
to  place  any  confidence  in  the  army.     All  the  regiments  he 

for  ever  !  One  month  more,  and  I  should  have  united  those  two  poor 
children.  I  should  have  been  happy."  (She  pointed  to  the  room  in  which 
her  daughter  and  M.  de  Broglie  had  retired.)  "But,  Madame,  why 
should  you  take  so  desperate  a  resolution  ?  You  have  nothing  to  fear 
from  the  Emperor ;  misfortune  and  public  opinion,  which  is  so  powerful, 
will  have  great  influence  over  him."  "No,  I  will  go.  What  can  I  do 
here  ?  I  should  have  too  much  to  suffer.  Alas  !  when  I  saw  these 
Princes  in  England,  they  listened  to  truth.  I  depicted  to  them  the 
situation  of  France,  what  she  wished  to  have,  what  it  was  so  easy  to  give 
her.  I  thought  I  had  convinced  them  ;  and  here,  during  eleven  months, 
will  you  believe  that  I  have  not  been  able  once  to  speak  to  them  ?  I  saw 
them  advancing  towards  the  abyss,  and  my  warnings  have  been  rejected. 
I  love  them,  I  regard  them,  because  they  alone  can  give  me  liberty,  and 
because  they  are  honest  men.  I  do  believe  that  Bonaparte  will  not  dare 
to  oppress  me  at  present :  but,  to  live  under  his  eyes !  never  ! "  Then 
looking  full  in  my  face,  she  added  :  "  I  do  not  wish  to  discover  your 
secrets,  nor  to  know  what  share  you  have  had  in  this  foolish  expedition  ; 
but  I  reckon  upon  you  to  help  me  to  escape  from  the  ill-treatment  and 
persecution  that  may  begin  even  before  his  arrival  ;  for  all  this  appears  to 
me  so  well  prepared."  "For  my  part,  you  may  rely  on  me.  If  I  hear 
that  they  have  any  intention  of  using  you  ill,  you  will  find  my  doors  open 
at  any  hour  of  the  day,  and  means  of  escaping  through  my  garden  shall  be 
provided  for  you."  I  left  her,  deeply  touched  with  what  she  had  said,  and  with 
her  noble  spirit.  A  few  days  afterwards  she  gave  a  rout  to  eight  hundred 
persons  of  the  Court  and  the  city.  There  was  a  concert  and  a  supper.  One 
of  my  friends  who  had  been  there  came  up  to  me,  and  told  me  what  he  had 
witnessed.  The  scene  was  animated  with  the  greatest  apparent  freedom 
and  gaiety.  The  news  that  the  Emperor  had  landed  and  was  approaching 
Lyons  seemed  not  to  create  the  least  uneasiness.  If  his  name  was  pro- 
nounced, it  was  only  to  abuse  him.  Nobody  seemed  to  doubt  but  that  he 
would  be  obliged  to  fly,  and  would  perhaps  be  taken  ;  and  still  a  secret 
feeling  of  fear  disturbed  the  minds  of  every  one  ;  they  seemed  to  feel  the 
necessity  of  seeking  forgetfulness  in  noisy  diversions,  to  avoid  consternation 
and  terror.  I  saw  Madame  de  Stael  no  more.  She  left  Paris  a  few  days 
before  the  20th  of  March  ;  and  the  Emperor,  to  whom  I  spoke  of  her 
departure,  appeared  vexed  at  the  step  she  had  taken.  It  was  even  reported 
to  me  at  that  time  that  he  made  some  proposals  for  her  to  come  back. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  299 

had  met  with,  all  the  troops  he  had  assembled  at  Lyons, 
had  refused  to  obey  his  orders.  Marshal  Macdonald,  so 
beloved  by  the  army,  could  not  even  obtain  a  hearing.  The 
great  name  of  Napoleon  had  intoxicated  and  turned  the 
minds  of  every  one.  An  immense  number  of  peasants  had 
joined  the  army.  A  word,  a  sign,  would  have  been  suffi- 
cient to  make  them  murder  all  the  nobles  and  priests. 
Fortunately,  some  moderate  men  undertook  to  lead  the 
insurrection,  and  found  means  to  direct  it  solely  towards 
Bonaparte.  "  Do  not  tarnish  the  Emperor's  name  !  "  they 
cried  on  all  sides  ;  "  he  will  not  suffer  a  drop  of  blood  to  be 
spilt." 

Days  passed  away,  and  each  hour  made  the  danger  more 

imminent.     M.  D ,  the  Prefect  of  Police,  was  succeeded 

by  M.  Bourrienne.  The  friends  of  the  Emperor  knew  what 
they  had  to  fear  from  that  man,  who  was  a  former  school- 
fellow of  Napoleon,  at  the  military  college,  and  afterwards 
his  secretary.  He  had  been  dismissed  for  some  shabby  tricks,, 
and  at  the  Restoration  he  had  delivered  himself  up,  body  and 
soul,  to  the  royalist  party.  The  choice  of  this  person  had 
been  undoubtedly  fixed  upon  because  he  was  perfectly  well 
acquainted  with  all  the  friends  of  the  Emperor  and  their 
habits.  I  knew  that  he  was  capable  of  any  act,  and  I  was 
particularly  anxious  about  the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu  and  her 
two  children,  whom  it  was  resolved  to  take  as  hostages,  in 
case  the  Court  should  be  obliged  to  fly  to  foreign  parts.  She 
went  however,  betimes,  to  seek  a  refuge  with  an  old  Creole 
woman  from  Martinique,  who  was  entirely  devoted  to  her. 

Not  wishing  to  compromise  any  of  my  friends,  I  concealed 
myself  in  the  hotel  of  the  Duchess,  but  in  that  part  of  the 
house  kept  apart  for  the  servants.  It  was  the  14th  of  March  : 
I  had  no  news  from  the  provinces  ;  but,  notwithstanding  the 
false  accounts  with  which  the  papers  were  filled,  I  could  see 
that  the  Emperor  advanced  rapidly,  and  that  it  was  no 
longer  possible  to  oppose  any  obstacle  to  his  march.  The 
Duke  de  Berry  had  just  received  the  command  of  a  camp 


30O  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

near  Paris.  The  officers,  who  had  begun  by  immeasurable 
professions  of  fidelity,  soon  grew  colder  and  more  reserved. 
As  for  the  soldiers,  the  wind  itself  seemed  to  waft  to  them 
the  name  of  the  Emperor  ;  every  bird  they  saw  was  to  them 
the  Imperial  eagle.  The  rigour  of  military  discipline,  exhor- 
tations, entreaties,  were  not  capable  of  keeping  them  within 
bounds  ;  and  during  the  three  last  days  that  preceded  the 
arrival  of  the  Emperor,  woe  to  those  among  the  troops  who 
would  have  dared  to  abuse  him,  or  designed  to  attack  him  ! 
At  last,  on  the  20th  of  March,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing, I  learned  that  the  King  and  the  whole  Court  had  left 
Paris  during  the  night,  and  that  the  city  was  without 
magistrates  or  military  leaders.  I  left  my  retreat,  intendi  ng 
to  return  home  ;  for  I  was  anxious  about  my  wife,  whom  I 
had  left  indisposed,  and  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  eight  days. 
As  I  came  out  of  the  Rue  d'Artois,  to  cross  the  Boulevards, 
I  met  General  Sebastiani  in  a  cabriolet.  He  told  me  the 
news  of  the  King's  departure  ;  but  he  knew  nothing  of  the 
Emperor.  "  I  have  a  mind,"  I  said,  "to  go  and  inquire  at 
the  Post-office."  I  seated  myself  next  to  him.  When  I 
entered  the  audience-room  that  precedes  the  closet  of  the 
Postmaster-general,  I  found  a  young  man  sitting  before  a 
table,  and  asked  him  whether  Count  Ferrandwas  still  in  the 
house.  He  answered  that  he  was,  and  I  gave  my  name, 
begging  him  to  ask  for  me  a  few  moments'  conversation  with 
Count  Ferrand.  I  had  never  seen  him  before,  but  had  heard 
that  he  was  an  infirm  old  man,  and  the  father  of  a  family.  I 
was  surprised  at  his  delay  in  setting  off ;  and,  through  a  feel- 
ing of  generosity,  I  wished  to  protect  his  escape,  and  ensure 
his  safety.  M.  Ferrand  came  ;  but,  without  stopping  or 
listening  to  me,  he  opened  his  closet  :  I  did  not  follow  him 
there  ;  but  I  went  to  another  room,  where  I  found  the  chief 
clerks  delighted  to  see  me  again,  and  disposed  to  do  any 
thing  to  oblige  me.  M.  Ferrand,  after  having  put  up  his 
papers,  went  away,  and  left  his  closet  at  my  disposal.  I  had 
a  great  desire   to   fly  to  Fontainebleau   and   embrace   the 


COUNT         LAVALETTE 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  301 

Emperor  ;  but  I  wished  to  see  my  wife  before  I  went.     To 
reconcile  these  two  feelings,  I  resolved  to  write  to  Fontaine- 
bleau.    An  express  was  given  me,  who  went  off  immediately. 
I  acquainted  the  Emperor  with  the  departure  of  the  King, 
and  solicited  his  orders  for  the  Post-office,  which  M.  Ferrand 
had  left  vacant.     As  soon  as  the  express  was  gone,  I  went 
home  and  remained  there  an  hour.    I  was  far  from  thinking 
that  the  short  and  natural  step  I  had  taken  would  be  charged 
upon  me  as  a  crime.  I  had  so  little  desire  to  take  possession  of 
the  Post-office,  that  I  went  to  Prince  Cambaceres  to  consult 
him  on  what  I  was  to  do.     T  found  him,  according  to  the 
custom    of  his   whole    life,  complaining   of  ill-health,  and 
struggling  against  the  sufferings  caused  by  his  daily  medi- 
cines.   I  communicated  to  him  riy  visit  to  the  Post-office.    I 
pointed  out  to  him  the  situation  of  Paris — deprived  of  magis- 
trates, and  perhaps  at  the  point  of  an  explosion  of  the  most 
dangerous  character.     I  had  forgotten  to  mention,  that  after 
the  departure  of  Count  Ferrand,  my  fear  that  the  cash  might 
be  plundered  made  me  go  to  General  Dessolles,  the  com- 
mander of  the  National  Guards,  and  beg  he  would  send  a 
detachment  of  soldiers  to  protect  the  money.     The  officer 
who  commanded  them  did  not  even  consult  me  in  placing 
the  sentries.     One  of  the  clerks  took  that  task  upon  himself. 
When  the  Prince  learned  these  particulars,  he  replied  with 
his  usual  coolness  and  gravity  :    '*  You  have  undoubtedly 
acted  very  wisely  :  I  foresee  all  the  confusion  that  will  pre- 
vail in  Paris  ;  but  I  shall  take  great  heed  not  to  say  a  word 
or  make  a  sign  by  which  the  Emperor  may  suspect  that  I 
have  anticipated  his  resolutions.     I  have  not  forgotten  that 
he  reprimanded  me  on  his  return  from  the  Russian  campaign. 
I  will  tell  you  the  circumstance  for  your  information.     You 
know  that,  during  his  absence,  it  was  I  who  presided  at  the 
Council.      The  affair  of  Mallet  took  us  by  surprise.     You 
know  he  was  sentenced  with  some  of  his  accomplices.    They 
were  executed.  When  the  Emperor  arrived  at  the  Tuileries, 
he  sent  for  me,  and  as  soon  as  he  perceived  mc,  he  came  up 


302  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

to  me  with  looks  that  seemed  to  pierce  me  through  and 
through.  '  Who  allowed  you,'  he  said,  trembling  with 
anger,  '  to  shed  the  blood  of  my  subjects  without  my  order  ? 
They  were  brave  soldiers,  who  had  a  hundred  times  exposed 
their  lives  for  me  and  the  glory  of  their  country.  Have  you 
forgotten  that  the  most  precious  jewel  in  my  crown  is  to 
pardon  ?  I  know  not  what  prevents  me  from  punishing 
you  severely  for  it.'  It  is  not  necessary,  I  think,"  added 
Prince  Cambaceres,  "  for  me  to  say  any  more  in  the  matter, 
and  you  may  easily  suppose  that  I  have  not  the  least  wish 
to  expose  myself  once  more  to  his  resentment."  "As  for 
me,  Monseigneur,"  I  answered,  "  I  act  for  his  interest,  and 
have  despatched  to  him  an  express.  I  shall  undoubtedly 
receive  an  answer,  for  which  I  am  going  to  wait  at  the  Post- 
office." 

On  my  return  there,  I  was  really  surprised  to  learn  that 
Count  Ferrand  was  not  yet  gone.  The  post-horses  had  been 
waiting  with  the  carriage  from  six  o'clock  in  the  morning. 
The  old  man  appeared  quite  beside  himself,  and  all  the  exer- 
tions of  his  family  were  unable  to  persuade  him  to  leave  the 
place.  He  wanted  to  go  to  Ghent,  and  sent  to  me  for  a 
permit  for  post-horses.  I  repeatedly  refused  to  give  him  one, 
declaring  that  I  had  nothing  to  say  there  ;  that  he  was  the 
sole  master  at  the  Post-office,  and  might  protect  himself 
by  his  own  signature.  But  M.  Ferrand,  prepossessed  with 
the  idea  that  the  return  of  the  Emperor  was  owing  to  some 
great  conspiracy,  of  which  I  was  one  of  the  heads,  insisted 
on  having  some  paper  in  which  my  handwriting  should 
stand,  convinced  that  that  alone  would  protect  him  in  his 
journey,  and  especially  in  the  streets  of  Paris.  His  wife  said 
to  me  :  "  It  is  for  his  safety  that  we  ask  you  that  permit." 
At  these  words  I  hesitated  no  longer,  and  I  enclosed  the 
paper,  of  which  he  made  no  use,  not  having  been  once  obliged 
to  draw  it  out  of  his  pocket-book,  until  he  arrived  at  Orleans, 
where  he  remained  more  than  six  weeks. 

The  conduct   of  the   ministry   in   those   last   days,   and 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  303 

especially  that  of  M.  Ferrand,  was  inexplicable.     The  King, 
before  he  went  away,  had  issued  a  proclamation,  wherein  he 
exhorted  the  Parisians,  and  consequently  all  France,  to  sub- 
mission.    This  proclamation  was  inserted  in  the  Moniteiir  of 
the  20th.     Its  aim  was  to  make  all  the  royalists  lay  down 
their  arms,  and  still  one  of  my  crimes  was   stopping  the 
departure  of  the  Moniteur  and  other  journals.     But  if  such 
great  importance  was  attached  to  the  publication  of  that  last 
will  of  the  King's,  why  did  not  M.  Ferrand  despatch  it  the 
day  before  by  expresses  ?      It  might  have   travelled    sixty 
leagues  in  twenty-four  hours,  in  all  directions,  except  on  the 
road  to  Lyons,  and  the  Prefects  would  at  least  have  known 
how  to  act.     I  always  suspected  that  the  reason  why  M. 
Ferrand  did  not  send  it  off  was  because  it  did  not  please  him. 
The  man  has  so  publicly  acknowledged  his  wishes  and  his 
opinions,  that  I  do  not  think  I  speak  ill  of  him  in  saying 
that  he  wanted  a  civil  war  to  break  out,  which  the  procla- 
mation might  prevent.     As  for  the  rest,  I  own  I  did  wrong 
in  stopping  the  journals  ;  they  could  do  no  harm.     Besides, 
the  proclamation  was  stuck  up  in  all  the  streets  ;  and  who- 
ever wished  to  read  it  might  do  so.     Though  I  wish  to  be 
sparing  in  anecdotes,  I  cannot,  however,  omit  one  that  paints 
admirably  well  the  men  who  at  that  time  had  so  fatal  an 
influence  over  our  affairs.     The  proclamation  I  mentioned 
had  been  digested  by  the  Chancellor  d'Ambray  ;  but  the 
order  for  its  insertion  in  the  Moniteur  had  not  been  delivered. 
The  editor  of  that  journal  went  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening 
to  M.  de  Vitrolles,  Secretary  of  the  Council,  to  ask  for  the 
order.     M.  de  Vitrolles  sent  him  to  the  Chancellor.     After 
having  repeatedly  rung  the  bell,  the  porter  appeared  at  a 
small   window,  and  said  that  no   one   could    then   see  his 

master,  who  was  asleep.     M.  M ,  vexed  at  not  being  able 

to  obtain  an  audience,  even  of  the  porter,  made  a  great  noise, 
saying  that  he  came  by  order  of  the  King,  and  at  last  they 
were  obliged  to  let  him  in  and  walk  upstairs.  There  he  had 
a  fresh  ceremony  to  go  through  before  he  could  penetrate  to 


304  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

his  Excellency.  The  valet  de  chambre  was  to  be  awakened 
and  dressed,  and  afterwards  the  master  himself  roused  from 

the  arms  of  Morpheus.     At  last  M found  himself  in  the 

presence  of  the  head  of  the  law,  whom  he  asked  for  an  order 
of  insertion  in  the  Moniteiir.  "  Oh  yes,  to  be  sure,  the  pro- 
clamation !  Have  you  seen  it  ?  "  Then,  without  waiting 
for  an  answer,  my  Lord  took  it  from  under  his  pillow,  and 
began  to  read  it  slowly,  complacently,  and  with  pauses  and 
inflexions  of  his  voice,  which  showed  all  his  paternal  affec- 
tion for  that  masterpiece  of  composition.  "  This  is,"  said  he, 
"  one  of  the  things  I  have  written  most  correctly,  and  I  fear 
not  to  say  that  it  is  one  that  will  make  the  greatest  sensation. 
Yes,  you  may  print  it."  So  saying,  he  laid  himself  down 
again  on  his  pillow  and  closed  his  eyes. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

My  thoughts  were  solely  occupied  with  the  fearful  burthen 
I  should  have  upon  my  shoulders  in  a  few  hours  later  (for  I 
was  resolved  not  to  accept  of  any  other  employment  than 
that  of  the  Post-office),  and  I  found  myself  by  degrees  en- 
gaged in  fulfilling  the  duties  of  Postmaster-general.  I  was 
encouraged  and  seconded  by  the  commissioners,  and  by  all 
the  clerks,  who  were  delighted  at  seeing  the  Bourbons  put 
to  flight,  and  convinced,  as  well  as  myself,  that  we  should 
never  look  upon  them  again.  Indeed,  they  were  already  so 
completely  forgotten,  that  their  reign  of  eleven  months  ap- 
peared to  us  nothing  more  than  an  uneasy  dream  of  a  few 
hours.  After  having  arranged  the  business  of  the  Post-office 
in  the  best  way  I  could  for  the  interest  of  the  Emperor,  T 
went  to  the  Tuileries.  Five  or  six  hundred  officers  on  half- 
pay  were  walking  in  the  extensive  court-yard,  wishing  each 
other  joy  at  the  return  of  Napoleon.  In  the  apartments  the 
two  sisters-in-law  of  the  Emperor,  the  Queens  of  Spain  and 
of  Holland,  were  waiting  for  him,  deeply  affected.  Soon 
after,  the  ladies  of  the  Household  and  those  of  the  Empress 
came  to  join  them.  The  fleurs-de-lis  had  everywhere  super- 
seded the  bees.  However,  on  examining  the  large  carpet 
spread  over  the  floor  of  the  audience-chamber  where  they 
sat,  one  of  the  ladies  perceived  that  a  flower  was  loose  :  she 
took  it  off,  and  the  bee  soon  reappeared.  Immediately  all 
the  ladies  set  to  work,  and  in  less  than  half  an  hour,  to 
the  great  mirth  of  the  company,  the  carpet  again  became 
Imperial. 

21  30s 


3o6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

In  the  meanwhile  time  passed  on  :  Paris  was  calm.  Those 
persons  who  lived  far  from  the  Tuileries  did  not  come  near 
it  ;  everybody  remained  at  home.  The  departure  of  the 
King  and  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor  were  such  singular 
events,  that  the  fourteen  centuries  the  monarchy  had  existed 
did  not  in  their  course  present  one  as  extraordinary.  And 
nevertheless  indifference  seemed  to  pervade  the  minds  of  all. 
Were  these  events  above  the  capacity  of  common  men  ?  or, 
rather,  did  not  the  good  sense  of  the  people  make  them  feel 
that  it  was  not  for  their  happiness  the  two  monarchs  were 
wrestling  for  the  throne,  and  that  they  would  reap  from  it 
nothing  but  sufferings  and  sacrifices  ? 

But  it  was  not  the  same  in  the  country.  Officers  who 
arrived  at  Fontainebleau,  preceding  the  Emperor,  told  us  it 
was  extremely  difficult  to  advance  on  the  road.  Deep  columns 
of  peasants  lined  it  on  both  sides,  or  rather  had  made  them- 
selves masters  of  it.  Their  enthusiasm  had  risen  to  the 
highest  pitch.  It  was  impossible  to  say  at  what  hour  he 
would  arrive.  Indeed  it  was  desirable  that  he  should  not  be 
recognised  ;  for,  in  the  midst  of  their  delirium  and  confusion, 
the  arm  of  a  murderer  might  have  reached  him.  He  there- 
fore resolved  to  travel  with  the  Duke  de  Vicenza  in  a  common 
cabriolet,  which,  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  stopped 
before  the  first  entrance  near  the  iron  gate  of  the  quay  of 
the  Louvre.  Scarcely  had  he  alighted,  when  the  shout  of 
"  Long  live  the  Emperor  !  "  was  heard  ;  a  shout  so  loud 
that  it  seemed  capable  of  splitting  the  arched  roofs.  It  came 
from  the  officers  on  half-pay,  pressed,  almost  stifled  in  the 
vestibule,  and  who  filled  the  staircase  up  to  the  top.  The 
Emperor  was  dressed  in  his  famous  grey  frock-coat.  I  went 
up  to  him,  and  the  Duke  de  Vicenza  cried  to  me,  "  For  God's 
sake  !  place  yourself  before  him,  that  he  may  get  on  !  "  He 
then  began  to  walk  upstairs.  I  went  before,  walking  back- 
wards, at  the  distance  of  one  pace,  looking  at  him,  deeply 
affected,  my  eyes  bathed  in  tears,  and  repeating,  in  the'excess  of 
my  joy  :  "  What !    It  is  you  !    It  is  you  !    It  is  you,  at  last !  " 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  307 

As  for  him,  he  walked  up  slowly,  with  his  eyes  half  closed, 
his  hands  extended  before  him,  like  a  blind  man,  and  express- 
ing his  joy  only  by  a  smile.  When  he  arrived  on  the  land- 
ing-place of  the  first  floor,  the  ladies  wished  to  come  to  meet 
him  ;  but  a  crowd  of  officers  from  the  higher  floor  leaped 
before  them,  and  they  would  have  been  crushed  to  death  if 
they  had  shown  less  agility.  At  last  the  Emperor  succeeded 
in  entering  his  apartments  :  the  doors  were  shut,  not  with- 
out difficulty,  and  the  crowd  dispersed,  satisfied  at  having 
seen  him. 

Towards  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  received  an 
order  to  go  to  the  Tuileries  ;  I  found  in  the  saloon  the  old 
ministers,  and,  in  the  midst  of  them,  the  Emperor,  talking 
about  the  affairs  of  Government  with  as  much  ease  as  if  we 
had  gone  ten  years  back.  He  had  just  come  out  of  his  bath, 
and  had  put  on  his  undress  regimentals.  The  subject  of  the 
conversation,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  carried  on, 
the  presence  of  the  persons  who  had  so  long  been  employed 
under  him,  contributed  to  efface  completely  from  my 
memory  the  family  of  the  Bourbons  and  their  reign  of  nearly 
a  year.  However,  on  one  of  the  tables  there  stood,  in  con- 
fusion, marble  busts  of  Louis  XVI.,  the  Dauphin,  father  of 
the  present  Prince,  and  some  of  the  Princesses.  These  busts 
recalled  to  our  memory  the  recollection  of  the  day  before. 
On  the  following  day  they  all  disappeared. 

When  the  Emperor  perceived  me,  he  advanced  a  few 
steps,  drew  me  into  another  chamber,  or  rather  pushed  me 
gently  before  him.  Then  pulling  me  by  the  ear,  he  said  : 
"  Ah  !  are  you  here,  Mr.  Conspirator  ?  "  "  No,  indeed,  Sire  ; 
and  you  know,  if  the  truth  has  been  told  to  you,  that  I  would 

have  nothing  to  do  with  a  business  in  which  M. "     "  It 

is  well,  it  is  well !  " 

Fouche  was  already  Minister  of  the  Police.  Our  conver- 
sation, or  rather  the  Emperor's  everlasting  questions,  began. 
He  concluded  by  off"ering  me  the  Ministry  of  the  Home 
Department.     "  No,  Sire  !  your  Majesty  will   want  a  man 


3o8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

accustomed  to  general  business,  and  who  ought  to  bear  a 
name  celebrated  in  the  Revolution.  I  entreat  you  to  give 
me  again  the  Post-office,  where  I  may  be  of  service  to  you." 
"Well  then,"  said  he,  "I  shall  name  Carnot  for  the  Home 
Department." 

This  was  a  good  choice.  Not  but  that  the  manners  of 
Carnot,  which  were  rather  dry,  and  his  want  of  experience, 
gave  rise  to  some  complaints  ;  but  he  was  a  sincere  man,  who 
ardently  wished  the  good  of  France.  Two  months  afterwards, 
the  Emperor  still  congratulated  himself  with  his  choice,  and 
said  to  me,  "  Carnot  is  a  very  honest  man  !  " 

My  audience  had  been  preceded  by  one  given  to  M.  Mole, 
who  had  refused  the  appointment  of  Minister  of  Justice  and 
of  Foreign  Affairs,  to  return  to  the  Roads  and  Bridges,  which 
had  been  entrusted  to  him  before  the  last  reign.  These 
several  audiences  continued  till  very  late.  At  last,  at  about 
three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  Emperor  returned  to  the 
saloon,  and  said,  "  Make  out  the  patents  for  all  these  gentle- 
men. As  for  Lavalette,  he  does  not  want  any  ;  he  has 
conquered  the  Post-office." 

There  was  in  the  tone  with  which  he  uttered  these  words 
something  satirical,  and  even  a  little  bitter,  that  made  me 
feel  he  was  hurt  at  my  conduct.  In  fact,  I  officiated  during 
the  three  months  at  the  Post-office  without  having  obtained 
any  letters  patent.  This  strange  count  might  therefore  have 
been  added  to  my  indictment,  and  they  might  have  put  in — 
"  Accused  of  having,  during  the  reign  of  the  Emperor,  filled 
the  situation  of  Postmaster-general  without  any  written 
authorisation  from  him." 

This  was  the  second  time  Napoleon  had  taken  possession 
of  France.  The  first  was  on  the  i8th  of  Brumaire,  in  1799, 
when  he  came  back  from  Egypt.  France  was  then  a  Repub- 
lic, governed  by  the  Directory, — a  machine  worn  out,  as  well 
by  the  powerful  attacks  of  foreigners,  as  by  its  own  bad 
administration.  Detested,  and  fallen  into  disrepute,  civil  war 
was  rising  up  before  its  eyes.     Rebellion  triumphed  over  its 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  309 

power,  and  the  people  seemed  only  waiting  for  a  man  who 
might  help  them  to  cast  off  the  hateful  yoke.  Nevertheless, 
how  much  solicitude,  how  many  manoeuvres  were  required 
to  arrive  at  the  Revolution  of  the  i8th  Brumaire  !  On  his 
way  from  Frejus  to  Paris,  and  particularly  at  Lyons,  all 
Tanks  of  men,  aristocrats,  emigrants,  citizens,  peasants, — all 
whispered  in  his  ear — "  Overturn  the  Directory  ;  take  the 
power  into  your  hands  !  "  But  on  all  sides  also  he  must  have 
heard  the  firm  voice  of  the  republicans,  who  said  aloud  to 
him — "  Take  the  power  into  your  hands  !  Conquer,  but  let 
us  be  free  !  "  To  succeed,  he  wanted  the  consent  of  Sieyes, 
a  grave  and  theoretical  organiser  of  Republics,  and  of  Roger 
Ducos,  his  colleague.  If  the  majority  of  the  Directory  had 
possessed  energy,  they  might  have  had  him  arrested  ;  and 
then,  even  if  the  sword  of  justice  had  not  dared  to  strike 
him,  he  would  have  expiated  his  glory  and  his  temerity  by 
banishment,  and  perhaps  transportation. 

How  wide  was  the  difference  in  March,  1815  !  Fallen  from 
the  throne,  erased  from  the  list  of  sovereigns,  banished  to  the 
rock  of  the  Island  of  Elba,  he  returned  almost  alone  :  scarcely 
did  he  set  his  foot  on  the  French  shore,  when  the  people 
everywhere  rose  up.  All  France  repeated  with  enthusiasm 
— "  Napoleon  !  no  more  Royalty  !  no  more  Bourbons  !  It 
is  Napoleon  alone  that  France  wishes  to  have  ;  it  is  his  glory, 
his  genius  she  stands  in  need  of.  Woe  to  those  who  shall 
dare  to  raise  a  finger  against  him  !  or  rather,  woe  to  those 
who  shall  not  declare  in  his  favour  !  "  And  in  fact,  peasants, 
soldiers,  citizens — all  hastened  to  meet  him  ;  all  hailed  him 
with  their  wishes  and  their  gratitude,  like  a  good  genius,  like 
a  Providence.  The  royalty  of  the  Bourbons  was  no  longer 
anything  more  than  a  dream  :  it  appeared  as  if  royalists, 
nobles,  emigrants,  had  never  existed.  It  was  not  the  conse- 
quence of  a  conspiracy  ;  it  was  a  great  national  movement, 
like  that  of  1789  for  Liberty,  of  the  9th  Thermidor  against 
tyranny,  of  the  i8th  Brumaire  against  incapacity.  At  what 
period  did  man  witness  defections  so  abrupt,  so  remarkable. 


3 1  o  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VA  LE  TTE. 

and  in  some  respects  so  sincere  ?  What  were  the  sentiments 
which  at  that  time  filled  all  hearts  ?  Patriotism,  love  of 
glory,  and  an  enlightened  conviction  that  the  newly  accepted 
dynasty  was  unable  to  do  anything  for  the  happiness  and 
independence  of  the  kingdom  ;  .  .  .  and  three  months  after- 
wards, this  second  dream  also  vanished  ! !  ! 

In  the  meanwhile  I  had  taken  again  upon  me  the  busi- 
ness of  the  Post-office,  whither  I  returned  on  the  morning 
of  the  2 1  St.  Nothing  had  been  wanting  in  the  material  part 
of  that  service,  for  that  would  have  been  impossible  ;  but  the 
late  Postmaster-general  had  thrown  the  persons  employed 
into  the  most  deplorable  confusion.  He  had  not  only  urged 
and  favourably  received  the  most  absurd  informations,  but 
he  had  even  rewarded  them.  In  consequence,  hatred  and 
distrust  had  made  the  greater  part  of  the  clerks  enemies  to 
one  another.  They  were  all  either  Jacobins  or  noblemen. 
I  learned,  for  the  first  time,  that  in  a  department  I  had 
governed  during^thirteen  years,  there  were  priests,  regicides, 
knights  of  St.  Louis,  and  emigrants.  The  latter  especially^ 
so  supple  and  incapable,  had  persecuted  their  superiors  with 
incredible  fury,  in  hopes  to  get  into  their  places.  I  put  an 
end  to  such  scandalous  practices,  by  refusing  to  take  any 
interest  in  them  ;  and  these  gentlemen  were  the  foremost 
to  sign  the  Additional  Act  to  the  Constitution,  and  take  the 
oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Emperor. 

Within  eight  days'  time  I  was  perfectly  aware  of  the  deep 
gulf  that  was  opening  beneath  us.  The  too  famous  pro- 
clamation of  the  Congress  of  Vienna  had  reached  France 
before  that  of  the  Emperor.  It  was  impossible  to  entertain 
a  doubt  of  its  authenticity  ;  and  the  Emperor,  although  he 
did  not  acknowledge  it,  was  as  sensible  as  any  one  that  the 
storm  could  not  be  averted.  I  had  wished  that,  renouncing 
the  past,  he  had  taken  no  other  title  than  Lord  Lieutenant 
of  the  Kingdom,  governing  in  the  name  of  his  son.  I 
was,  however,  soon  convinced  that  such  a  measure  would 
have  been  impossible.     Nothing,  therefore,  remained  but  to 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LAV  ALE  TTE.  3 1 1 

advance  boldly  with  the  Imperial  crown  upon  his  head. 
Was  he  to  maintain  the  Constitution  ?  I  know  that  that 
question  was  debated  very  warmly,  and  that  it  found  able 
antagonists.  In  putting  it  aside,  it  was  said,  nothing 
remained.  The  great  fault  of  Napoleon's  reign  was  then 
paid  for — I  mean,  the  want  of  ensemble^  the  absence  of  all 
those  laws,  so  strongly  claimed  by  the  old  friends  of  Liberty, 
which  before  had  ruined  all,  and  which  still  poisoned  our 
present  situation.  What  a  deplorable  idea  it  was,  to  wish 
to  maintain  those  numerous  contradictory  decrees,  a  hundred 
times  more  dangerous  than  the  ordinances  of  the  King ! 
It  was  in  the  name  of  Independence  that  he  ought  to  have 
spoken  ;  in  the  name  of  his  son  that  he  ought  to  have 
commanded.  The  enemy  once  beaten,  it  was  time  to  think 
of  settling  the  internal  contest.  But  I  must  acknowledge 
that  the  Emperor  was  awed  by  the  energy  of  all  that 
surrounded  him.  The  eleven  months  of  the  King's  reign 
had  thrown  us  back  to  1792,  and  the  Emperor  soon  per- 
ceived it  J  for  he  no  longer  found  the  submission,  the  deep 
respect,  and  the  Imperial  etiquette  he  was  accustomed  to. 
He  used  to  send  for  me  two  or  three  times  a  day,  to  talk 
with  me  for  hours  together.  It  happened  sometimes  that 
the  conversation  languished.  One  day,  after  we  had  walked 
up  and  down  the  room  in  silence,  tired  of  that  fancy,  and 
my  business  pressing  me,  I  made  my  obeisance  and  was 
going  to  retire.  "  How  !  "  said  he,  surprised,  but  with  a 
smile  ;  "  do  you  thus  leave  me  so  ?  "  I  should  certainly  not 
have  done  so  a  year  before  ;  but  I  had  forgotten  my  old 
pace,  and  I  felt  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  get  into  it 
again.  In  one  of  those  conversations,  the  subject  of  which 
was  the  spirit  of  Liberty  that  showed  itself  on  all  sides  with 
so  much  energy,  he  said  to  me,  in  a  tone  of  interrogation, 
"  All  this  will  last  two  or  three  years  ?  "  "  That  your 
Majesty  must  not  believe.     It  will  last  for  ever." 

He  was  soon  convinced  of  the  fact  himself,  and  he  more 
than  once  acknowledged  it.     I  have  even  no  doubt,  that  if 


312  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

he  had  vanquished  the  enemy  and  restored  peace,  his  power 
would  have  been  exposed  to  great  danger  among  the  civil 
broils.  The  Allies  made  a  great  mistake  in  not  letting  him 
alone.  I  do  not  know  what  concessions  he  would  have 
made,  but  I  am  well  acquainted  with  all  those  the  nation 
would  have  demanded,  and  I  sincerely  think  he  would  have 
been  disgusted  with  reigning,  when  he  must  have  found 
himself  a  constitutional  king  after  the  manner  of  the 
patriots.  Nevertheless,  he  submitted  admirably  well  to  his 
situation — at  least,  in  appearance.  At  no  period  of  his  life 
had  I  seen  him  enjoy  more  unruffled  tranquillity.  Not  a 
harsh  word  to  any  one  ;  no  impatience  ;  he  listened  to 
everything,  and  discussed  with  that  wonderful  sagacity  and 
devoted  reason  that  were  so  conspicuous  in  him.  He  ac- 
knowledged his  faults  with  most  touching  ingenuousness,  or 
examined  his  own  position  with  a  penetration  to  which  his 
enemies  themselves  were  strangers. 

The  enthusiasm  of  the  nation  soon  cooled.  It  has  often 
been  said  that  the  change  was  caused  by  the  Additional 
Acts.  That  measure,  no  doubt,  contributed  greatly  to  it  ; 
but  there  was  another  reason  still,  which  was  that  the 
people  felt  less  love  for  the  Emperor  than  hatred  for  the 
Bourbons.  The  latter  being  once  repulsed,  the  nation  was 
satisfied  ;  and  when  they  received  the  Emperor  with  so 
much  warmth,  the  French,  according  to  their  custom,  did 
not  think  of  the  morrow.  Contented  to  see  the  royalists, 
who  had  made  themselves  the  enemies  of  everybody, 
humbled  and  restrained,  they  were  soon  shocked  at  dis- 
covering that  their  victory  would  cost  them  peace,  the 
advantages  of  trade,  and  all  the  sacrifices  that  an  obstinate 
war  draws  after  it  ;  and  nevertheless,  such  a  revolution 
could  not  be  made  without  running  some  risk,  the  foreign 
sovereigns  considering  it  a  point  of  honour  to  maintain  the 
House  of  Bourbon  on  the  throne.  In  the  meanwhile,  all 
those  who  had  already  fought  nobly  answered  to  the  call  of 
honour  and  necessity  ;  but  as  it  was  no  longer  possible  to 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  3 1 3 

think  of  conscription,  instead  of  400,000  men  whom  Govern- 
ment declared  to  be  under  arms,  there  were  scarcely  250,000, 
and  with  those  we  were  forced  to  begin  the  war.  The 
Bourbons  had  been  strongly  shaken  in  public  opinion  ;  the 
Emperor  was  still  more  so.  The  royalists,  who  had  not 
shown  themselves,  because  they  had  been  taken  unawares, 
began  to  feel  more  easy  under  the  shelter  of  a  Liberty  they 
were  soon  going  to  crush  ;  and  all  the  patriots,  who  must 
be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  friends  of  the  country, 
found  themselves  face  to  face,  covered  with  the  colours 
under  which  they  fought.  Old  quarrels  sprang  up  again, 
and  the  new  camp  soon  presented  the  image  of  anarchy. 
The  election  was  made  in  the  same  spirit,  and  the  same 
divisions  appeared  in  the  Chamber  of  Representatives. 
The  Emperor  had  thought  of  the  Champ  de  Mai  with  a 
view  of  making  an  impression  on  the  public  mind  ;  but  the 
electors  who  were  sent  there  were  shocked  at  the  sight  of 
the  throne,  at  the  splendour  of  the  Court,  and  even  at  the 
mass  that  was  celebrated  ;  for  their  prejudiced  eyes  saw 
nothing  but  the  Emperor  and  his  arbitrary  law,  without 
thinking  of  the  enemies  that  were  assembling.  A  great 
many  were  thinking  of  the  miracles  of  1792,  without  re- 
flecting on  the  difference  of  the  periods.  In  1792  France 
possessed  an  almost  inexhaustible  treasure  in  her  paper 
money.  She  was  not  embarrassed  by  a  government  she 
had  recently  destroyed  ;  nor  by  her  interior  foes,  whom  the 
people  had  all  murdered  or  put  to  flight  ;  nor  by  preten- 
sions, everybody  being  reduced  to  the  same  level — now  the 
ignorance  of  war  appeared  complete.  Still,  enthusiasm  was 
raised  to  its  highest  pitch,  and  the  French  wished  for  inde- 
pendence at  any  price.  The  people  were  enraged,  barbarous, 
but  not  corrupt  ;  the  army  was  brave,  ambitious  of  glory, 
but  indifferent  to  wealth  and  favour.  Now  all  was  changed. 
The  men  who  had  employments  wished  to  keep  them,  and 
were  in  consequence  wavering  and  without  resolution  ;  the 
army  had  its  marshals,  ashamed  of  the  wretched  part  they 


314  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

had  played  at  the  Restoration,  and  despised  by  the  soldiers — 
finally,  in  the  presence  of  their  old  master,  detesting  the 
Bourbons,  and  fearing  their  return,  but  still  more  fearful  of 
a  new  war,  which  they  were  sensible  they  could  no  longer 
wage  with  the  former  advantages,  which  had  procured  them 
so  much  glory  and  fortune. 

The  Emperor  had  resumed  all  his  titles,  and  even  the 
offensive  form  of  "  Napoleon,  by  the  grace  of  God  and  the 
Constitution  of  the  Empire.''  The  Council  of  State  took  a 
fancy  to  proclaim  the  Sovereignty  of  the  People.  This 
declaration  was  not  very  agreeable  to  him,  but  he  let  it 
pass  :  he  could  no  longer  dictate  laws,  I  recollect  that  the 
day  it  was  signed  at  the  Council,  I  was  not  at  the  sitting. 
When  I  crossed  the  Section  of  the  Interior,  the  Secretary 
proposed  to  me  to  sign  it.  I  did  so  without  even  reading 
it  ;  and  meeting  Regnaud  de  St.  Jean  d'Angely,  I  asked 
him  what  it  was.  "  It  is,"  replied  he,  laughing,  "  an  act 
that  compromises  you  strongly."    I  was  not  much  perplexed 

at  what  he  said.     But  M ,  to  whom  I  mentioned  the 

circumstance  the  next  morning,  told  me  he  had  thought 
proper  to  sign  it  also.  I  appeared  surprised  that  he  should 
have  done  it ;  but  he  told  me  in  confidence,  "  The  Emperor 
has  not  taken  it  amiss."  I  then  read  the  paper  with 
attention,  and  I  found,  in  fact,  that  it  could  not  have  been 

very  pleasing  to  the  Sovereign  ;  so  that  M ,  instead  of 

doing  an  act  of  courage,  made  only  the  calculation  of  a 
courtier. 

The  fatal  division  of  opinions  put  in  part  a  stop  to  the 
national  enthusiasm,  and  extended  its  influence  over  all  the 
details  of  the  administration.  Many  prefects  were  changed. 
That  was  an  indispensable  measure  ;  but  among  some 
excellent  choices,  favour  also  produced  many  bad  ones. 
Several  young  men,  full  of  ardour,  were  selected,  but  who 
could  not  inspire  much  confidence.  The  reign  of  the  laws 
was  preached  everywhere,  whilst  the  commissaries  extra- 
ordinary of  the  Emperor,  sent  into  the  Departments,  every- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  315 

where  dismissed  the  persons  in  employment,  to  put  in  their 
places  either  those  who  had  held  the  situations  before  them^ 
or  some  who  had  in  former  times  given  proofs  of  patriotism. 
These  measures  not  only  impeded  public  business,  which  so 
greatly  required  expedition,  but  added  also  greatly  to  the 
number  of  the  disaffected.  Such  changes  were  undoubtedly 
necessary,  in  as  far  as  the  chiefs  were  concerned,  who  cor- 
responded directly  with  the  Ministers  ;  but  it  was  easy  to 
have  an  eye  on  the  subalterns,  and  their  treasonable  practices 
could  not  be  very  dangerous  in  the  beginning.  I  struggled 
as  long  as  I  could  against  that  fatal  system,  but  without 
success.  To  my  remonstrances  they  always  opposed  the 
situation  of  affairs,  and  the  success  that  had  formerly  been 
obtained,  chiefly  by  keeping  the  friends  of  the  Bourbons  out 
of  all  public  employments.  But  they  did  not  sufficiently 
consider  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  persons  employed  by 
Government  were  not  traitors  ;  but  weak  men,  whose  chief 
aim  was  to  keep  their  situations,  who  wished  in  some  degree 
well  to  the  Emperor,  prayed  for  his  success,  but  feared  above 
all  things  a  defeat.  I  spoke  to  the  Emperor  of  the  harm  his 
emissaries  did.  He  answered,  "  I  want  a  victory  ;  I  can  do 
nothing  before  that.  I  am  perhaps  the  only  man  in  the 
empire  who  is  cool  ;  and  still  I  cannot  give  the  impulse 
everywhere,  and  direct  all  motions.''  He  could  not  even 
repulse  his  enemies,  so  far  was  his  position  changed.  A  few 
days  after  his  arrival.  General  Bourmont  presented  himself 
at  his  levee  ;  he  was  in  full  regimentals  ;  and  although  he 
had  placed  himself  in  the  first  rank,  the  Emperor  went  by 
without  stopping,  and  without  looking  at  him.  He  was 
not  disheartened,  and  came  back  three  days  successively. 
I  soon  learned  that  he  had  obtained  the  command  of  a 
division  in  the  Grand  Army.  I  expressed  my  surprise,  and 
asked,  with  indignation,  who  had  achieved  such  a  master- 
piece. "  I,"  answered  Labcdoycre,  turning  round  ;  "  I 
pledged  myself  for  him.  He  is  a  good  officer,  who  loves 
only  his  country.     He  will  fight  well,  and  serve  faithfully." 


3 1 6  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE. 

*'  I  wish  it  may  be  so,"  was  all  the  reply  I  made  ;  and  when 
I  saw  Labedoyere  again,  after  he  had  returned  from  the 
campaign,  I  spoke  to  him  of  his  protege.  "  What  could  he 
do  ?  "  he  observed  :  "  his  father  had  been  arrested  in  the 
Vendee."  A  fine  excuse,  indeed !  Could  he  not  have 
solicited  the  Emperor  to  set  him  at  liberty,  who  would 
certainly  not  have  refused  him  ?  And  besides,  was  that  a 
suflBcient  motive  to  betray  his  country  and  the  Sovereign 
he  had  acknowledged  ? 

Napoleon  had  undoubtedly  expected  that  the  Empress 
and  his  son  would  be  restored  to  him  :  he  had,  at  least, 
published  his  wishes  as  a  certainty  ;  and  it  was,  in  fact,  the 
worst  thing  the  Emperor  of  Austria  could  have  done.  His 
hope  was,  however,  soon  destroyed.  About  a  month  after 
his  arrival,  the  Duke  de  Vicenza  called  upon  me,  and 
presented  to  me  a  letter  without  address,  which  a  courier, 
just  arrived  from  Vienna,  had  delivered  to  him  among 
several  others,  saying  that  it  had  been  sent  to  him  by  M.  de 

,  who  had  not  dared  to  put  the  direction  on  it.     I  was 

not  dntimate  enough  with  M.  de to  suppose  he  could 

have  written  to  me,  so  I  refused  to  take  the  letter.  Caulain- 
court  said :  "  Be  not  too  hasty  ;  I  am  convinced  it  is  for 
you.  You  would  perhaps  do  well  to  open  it  ;  for  if  you 
persist  I  shall  give  it  to  the  Emperor."  "  You  may  do  so," 
I  replied  ;  "  I  have  no  interests  in  Vienna,  and  I  wish  the 
Emperor  may  read  it." 

In  the  evening  I  was  summoned  to  the  palace.  I  found 
the  Emperor  in  a  dimly  lighted  closet,  warming  himself  in 
a  corner  of  the  fireplace,  and  appearing  to  suffer  already 
from  the  complaint  which  never  afterwards  left  him. 
"  Here  is  a  letter,"  he  said,  "  which  the  courier  from  Vienna 
says  is  meant  for  you  ;  read  it."     On  first  casting  my  eyes 

on  the  letter,  I  thought  I  knew  the  handwriting  of ; 

but  as  it  was  long,  I  read  it  slowly,  and  came  at  last  to  the 
principal  object.  The  writer  said  that  we  ought  not  to 
reckon  upon  the  Empress,  as  she  did  not  even  attempt  to 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  317 

conceal  her  hatred  of  the  Emperor,  and  was  disposed  to 
approve  of  all  the  measures  that  could  be  taken  against 
him  ;  that  her  return  was  not  to  be  thought  of,  as  she 
herself  would  raise  the  greatest  obstacles  in  the  way  of  it, 
in  case  it  should  be  proposed  ;  finally,  that  it  was  not 
possible   for   him   to   dissemble   his   indignation ;   that  the 

Empress,  wholly  enamoured  of  ,   did  not   even   take 

pains  to  hide  her  ridiculous  partiality  for  that  man,  who 
had  made  himself  master  of  her  mind  as  well  as  of  her 
person.  The  handwriting  of  the  letter  was  disguised,  yet 
not  so  much  but  that  I  was  able  to  discover  whose  it  was. 
I  found,  however,  in  the  manner  in  which  the  secret  was 
expressed,  a  warmth' of  zeal  and  a  picturesque  style  that 
did  not  belong  to  the  author  of  the  letter.  While  reading 
it,  I  all  of  a  sudden  suspected  it  was  a  counterfeit,  and 
intended  to  mislead  the  Emperor.  I  communicated  my 
idea  to  him,  and  the  danger  I  perceived  in  this  fraud. 
As  I  grew  more  and  more  animated,  I  found  plausible 
reasons  enough  to  throw  the  Emperor  himself  into  some 

uncertainty.       "  How   is    it    possible,"    I    said,    "  that  

should  have  been  imprudent  enough  to  write  such  things 
to  me,  who  am  not  his  friend,  and  who  have  had  so  little 
connection  with  him  ?  How  can  one  suppose  that  the 
Empress  should  forget  herself  in  such  circumstances,  so  far 
as  to  manifest  hatred  to  you,  and,  still  more,  to  cast  herself 
away  upon  a  man  who  undoubtedly  still  possesses  some 
power  to  please,  but  who  is  no  longer  young — whose  face 
is  disfigured,   and   whose  person,    altogether,    has    nothing 

agreeable  in  it?"     "But,"  answered  the  Emperor,   " 

is  attached  to  me  ;  and,  though  he  is  not  your  friend,  the 
postscript  sufficiently  explains  the  motive  of  the  confidence 
he  places  in  you."  The  following  words  were,  in  fact, 
written  at  the  bottom  of  the  letter  :  "  I  do  not  think  you 
ought  to  mention  the  truth  to  the  Emperor  ;  but  make 
whatever  use  of  it  you  think  proper."  I  persisted,  however, 
in  maintaining  that  the  letter  was  a  counterfeit  ;  and  the 


3i8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

Emperor  then  said  to  me  :  "  Go  to  Caulaincourt.  He  pos- 
sesses a  great  many  others  of  the  same  handwriting.  Let 
the  comparison  decide  between  your  opinion  and  mine." 

I  went  to  Caulaincourt,  who  said  eagerly  to  me  :  "  I  am 

sure  the  letter  is  from ;  and  I  have  not  the  least  doubt 

of  the  truth  of  the  particulars  it  contains.  The  best  thing 
the  Emperor  can  do  is  to  be  comforted  :  there  is  nothing 
to  be  expected  from  that  side." 

So  sad  a  discovery  was  very  painful  to  the  Emperor,  for 
he  was  sincerely  attached  to  the  Empress,  and  still  hoped 
again  to  see  his  son,  whom  he  loved  most  tenderly. 

Fouche  had  been  far  from  wishing  the  return  of  the 
Emperor.  He  was  long  tired  of  obeying,  and  had  besides 
undertaken  another  plan,  which  Napoleon's  arrival  had 
broken  off.  I  shall  perhaps  resume  this  part  of  his  history 
another  time.  I  suppress  it  at  present  without  any  scruple, 
because  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  mine.  The  Emperor, 
however,  put  him  again  at  the  head  of  the  police,  because 
Savary  was  worn  out  in  that  employment,  and  a  skilful 
man  was  wanted  there.  Fouche  accepted  the  office,  but 
without  giving  up  his  plan  of  deposing  the  Emperor,  to  put 
in  his  place  either  his  son,  or  a  sort  of  a  republic  with  a 
president.  He  had  never  ceased  to  correspond  with  Prince 
Metternich  ;  and,  if  he  is  to  be  believed,  he  had  tried  to 
persuade  the  Emperor  to  abdicate  in  favour  of  his  son. 
That  was  also  my  opinion ;  but,  coming  from  such  a 
quarter,  the  advice  was  not  without  danger  for  the  person 
to  whom  it  was  given.  Besides,  that  advice  having  been 
rejected,  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Minister  either  to  think  no 
more  of  his  plan,  or  to  resign  his  office.  Fouche,  however, 
remained  in  the  cabinet,  and  continued  his  correspondence. 
The  Emperor,  who  placed  but  little  confidence  in  him,  kept 
a  careful  eye  upon  him.  One  evening  the  Emperor  had  a 
great  deal  of  company  at  the  Elysee  ;  he  told  me  not  to  go 
home,  because  he  wished  to  speak  to  me.  When  everybody 
was  gone,  the  Emperor  stopped  with  Fouche  in  the  apart- 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  3 1 9 

ment  next  to  the  one  I  was  in.  The  door  remained  half 
open.  They  walked  up  and  down  together,  talking  ver}' 
calmly.  I  was  therefore  greatly  astonished  when,  after  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  I  heard  the  Emperor  say  to  him  gravely  : 
"  You  are  a  traitor  !  Why  do  you  remain  Minister  of  the 
police,  if  you  wish  to  betray  me  ?  It  depends  on  me  to 
have  you  hanged,  and  everybody  would  rejoice  at  your 
death  !  "  I  did  not  hear  Fouche's  reply,  but  the  conversa- 
tion lasted  above  half  an  hour  longer,  always  walking  up 
and  down.  When  Fouche  went  away,  he  bade  me  cheer- 
fully good-night,  and  said  that  the  Emperor  had  gone  back 
to  his  apartments.  In  truth,  when  I  Avent  in  he  was  gone  ; 
l3ut  the  day  after  he  spoke  to  me  of  that  conversation.  "  I 
suspected,"  he  said,  *'  that  the  wretch  was  in  correspondence 
with  Vienna.  I  have  had  a  banker's  clerk  arrested  on  his 
return  from  that  city.  He  has  acknowledged  that  he 
brought  a  letter  for  Fouche  from  Metternich,  and  that  the 
answer  was  to  be  sent  at  a  fixed  time  to  Bale,  where  a  man 
was  to  wait  for  the  bearer  on  the  bridge.  I  sent  for  Fouche 
a  few  days  ago,  and  kept  him  three  hours  long  in  my 
garden,  hoping  that  in  the  course  of  a  friendly  conversation 
he  would  mention  that  letter  to  me  ;  but  he  said  nothing. 
At  last,  yesterday  evening,  I  myself  opened  the  subject." 
(Here  the  Emperor  repeated  to  me  the  words  I  had  heard 
the  night  before,  "  You  are  a  traitor,"  &c.)  "  He  acknow- 
ledged, in  fact,"  continued  the  Emperor,  "  that  he  had 
received  such  a  letter  ;  but  that  it  was  not  signed,  and 
that  he  had  looked  upon  it  as  a  mystification.  He  showed 
it  me.  Now  that  letter  was  evidently  an  answer,  in  which 
the  writer  declared  over  again,  that  he  would  listen  to 
nothing  more  concerning  the  Emperor,  but  that,  his  person 
excepted,  it  would  be  easy  to  agree  to  all  the  rest." 

I  expected  that  the  Emperor  would  conclude  his  narrative 
by  expressing  his  anger  against  Fouche  ;  but  our  conversa- 
tion turned  on  some  other  subject,  and  he  talked  no  more 
of  him.     Two  days  afterwards  I  went  to  Fouche  to  solicit 


320  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

the  return  to  Paris  of  an  ofiicer  of  musketeers,  who  had 
been  banished  far  from  his  family.  I  found  him  at  break- 
fast, and  sat  down  next  to  him.  Facing  him  sat  a  stranger. 
"  Do  you  see  this  man  ?  "  he  said  to  me,  pointing  with  his 
spoon  to  the  stranger  :  "  he  is  an  Aristocrat,  a  Bourbonite, 

a  Chouan  :  it  is  the  Abbe  M ,  one  of  the  editors  of  the 

Joxtrnnl  dcs  Debats — a  sworn  enemy  to  Napoleon,  a  fanatic 
partisan  of  the  Bourbons  ; — he  is  one  of  our  men." 

I  looked  at  him.  At  every  fresh  epithet  of  the  minister, 
the  Abbe  bowed  his  head  on  his  plate  with  a  smile  of  cheer- 
fulness and  self-complacency,  and  with  a  sort  of  leer.  I 
never  saw  a  more  ignoble  countenance.  Fouche  explained 
to  me,  on  leaving  the  breakfast-table,  in  what  manner  all 
those  valets  of  literature  were  men  of  his  ;  and  while  I 
acknowledged  to  myself  that  the  thing  might  be  necessary, 
I  scarcely  knew  who  were  really  more  despicable — the 
wretches  who  thus  sold  themselves  to  the  highest  bidder, 
or  the  minister  who  boasted  of  having  bought  them,  as  if 
their  acquisition  were  a  glorious  conquest.  Judging  that 
the  Emperor  had  spoken  to  me  of  the  scene  I  described 
above,  Fouche  said  to  me  :  "  The  Emperor's  temper  is 
soured  by  the  resistance  he  finds,  and  he  thinks  it  is 
my  fault.  He  does  not  know  that  I  have  no  power  but 
by  public  opinion.  To-morrow  I  might  hang  before  my 
door  twenty  persons  who  have  that  opinion  against  them, 
though  I  should  not  be  able  to  imprison  for  four-and -twenty 
hours  any  individual  favoured  by  it."  As  I  am  never  in  a 
hurry  to  speak,  I  remained  silent ;  but,  reflecting  on  what 
the  Emperor  had  said  concerning  Fouche,  I  found  the 
comparison  of  their  two  speeches  remarkable.  The  master 
could  have  his  minister  hanged  with  public  applause,  and 
the  minister  could  hang — whom  ?  Perhaps  the  master 
himself,  and  with  the  same  approbation.  What  a  singular 
situation  ! — and  I  believe  they  were  both  in  the  right  ;  so 
far  public  opinion,  equitable  in  regard  to  Fouche,  had 
swerved  concerning  the  Emperor. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

The  ceremony  of  the  Champ  de  Mai  took  place  at  last  ; 
it  was  on  the  ist  of  June.  Nothing  could  be  more  singular 
than  that  assemblage  in  the  open  air.  It  had  but  little 
success,  because  it  had  been  badly  announced.  The 
Emperor  wanted  time  :  the  minds  of  the  people  were  not 
prepared  ;  the  influence  of  the  patriots  had  not  had 
sufficient  opportunity  to  exercise  its  power,  or  rather  no 
one  yet  knew  where  to  find  them.  Those  who  had  begun 
the  Revolution  were  old,  retired  from  public  life,  and  few 
in  number  ;  those  of  1793  were  fallen  into  contempt.  The 
Imperialists,  or  Bonapartists,  were  not  much  regarded  : 
they  had  perpetually  received  and  frequently  misused 
popularity.  There  were  no  persons  truly  respectable  but 
the  military  :  though  discontented  and  humbled,  they  alone 
still  knew  how  to  express  themselves  with  dignity  concern- 
ing their  country  and  Liberty.  But  they  were  no  longer 
mixed  with  the  people,  having  already  joined  their  corps. 
The  majority  of  the  electors,  and  many  deputies,  brought 
with  them  a  good  spirit  ;  but  the  French,  whose  imagina- 
tion is  so  lively,  never  know  how  to  enter  into  the  reality 
of  things  until  their  first  fire  is  extinguished  :  when  pre- 
possessed by  a  first  impression,  it  is  not  till  after  much 
extravagance  that  they  re-enter  the  path  of  common  sense. 
In  the  beginning  they  only  think  of  advancing,  without 
caring  which  way.  Now,  the  way  they  had  taken  was  bad. 
At  first  they  saw  only  a  despot  in  the  Emperor,  and  forgot 
entirely  the  enemy  :  they  never  could  feel  that  it  was  first 

22  3" 


322  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

of  all  necessary  to  beat  their  foreign  foes.  I  never  could 
bring  that  idea  into  the  head  of  people  who  nevertheless 
were  full  of  merit  and  long  experience.  "  We  will  have 
no  more  scnaUis-constdtiim^  no  double  legislative  body, 
no  arbitrary  practices, — finally,  no  master.  We  want  a 
moderator,  and  nothing  else.  We  are  numerous  enough 
to  beat  the  enemy,  if  he  attack  us.  If  he  triumph,  each 
department  will  become  a  Vendee.  France  will  never 
hesitate  between  slavery  and  civil  war."  The  imprudent 
men  did  not  observe  that  by  such  speeches  they  stopped 
the  enthusiasm  of  the  people,  who  preferred  to  live  in 
expectation  of  what  was  to  happen,  rather  than  throw 
themselves  into  the  fatigues  and  dangers  of  a  struggle 
which  appeared  distant  and  uncertain,  notwithstanding  the 
evident  approach  of  the  enemy.  The  ceremony  of  the 
Champ  de  Mai  was,  however,  a  noble  one  ;  but  all  France 
was  not  there,  and  even  there  the  feeling  for  the  Emperor 
was  sincere  among  the  crowd.  The  magistracy  were  opposed 
to  him.  All  the  judges  preferred  Louis  XVIII.  to  the 
Emperor  :  the  pretension  they  put  forward  of  succeeding 
to  the  parliaments,  of  which  they  were  the  dross,  flattered 
their  vanity.  Under  a  weak  prince  they  enjoyed  real 
authority,  and  the  love  of  the  Bourbons  for  old  institu- 
tions gave  them  a  degree  of  power  they  greatly  hoped  to 
augment.  Under  the  Emperor,  on  the  contrary,  they  were 
forced  to  obey.  All  the  heads  and  clerks  in  the  public 
offices  were  in  a  false  position  :  they  had  everything  to 
fear,  and  nothing  to  hope  :  for  they  could  not  help  seeing 
that  we  were  beginning  a  new  era  of  revolutions,  in  which 
all  things  would  become  uncertain.  Finally,  the  impression 
of  the  horrors  that  had  accompanied  the  first  invasion  was 
far  from  being  blotted  out,  and  the  public  mind  shuddered 
at  the  idea  of  a  second  one  ! 

The  speech  delivered  to  the  Emperor  by  M.  Dubois 
d' Angers  was  full  of  energy.  It  contained  a  summary  of  all 
the  wishes,  and  expressed  clearly  the  national  will.     But 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  323 

could  a  power  that  had  nothing  left  give  all  that  was 
expected  ?  The  answer  of  the  Emperor,  which  was  not 
directed  to  that  speech,  was  above  all  sincere.  He  promised 
a  great  deal ;  but  still  he  was  obliged  to  explain  what  he 
wished,  in  his  turn,  as  the  executive  power.  He  displeased 
his  auditors  by  that.  I  soon  perceived  it  in  talking  with 
some  deputies  who  had  heard  him.  After  the  celebration 
of  mass,  to  which,  by  the  bye,  everybody  turned  their 
backs,  the  Emperor  went  down  and  took  his  place  on  an 
amphitheatre  in  the  middle  of  the  Champ  de  Mars,  from 
whence  he  was  to  distribute  the  eagles  to  all  the  cohorts  of 
the  departments.  This  was  a  beautiful  scene,  for  it  was  a 
national  one.  The  situation  besides  was  true.  The  Emperor 
took  care  tO  address  a  word  to  each  of  the  corps  that  re- 
ceived these  colours,  and  that  word  was  flattering  and  full 
of  enthusiasm.  To  the  departments  of  the  Vosges  he  said  : 
"You  are  my  old  companions."  To  those  of  the  Rhine  : 
"You  have  been  the  first,  the  most  courageous,  and  the 
most  unfortunate  in  our  disasters."  To  the  departments  of 
the  Rhone  :  "  I  have  been  bred  amongst  you."  To  others  : 
*'  Your  bands  were  at  Rivoli,  at  Areola,  at  Marengo,  at 
Tilsit,  at  Austerlitz,  at  the  Pyramids."  These  magic  names 
filled  with  deep  emotion  the  hearts  of  those  old  warriors, 
the  venerable  wrecks  of  so  many  victories.  But,  as  I  have 
already  said,  all  France  was  not  present  at  that  ceremony, 
and  the  enthusiasm  of  the  spectators  was  not  communicated 
to  the  people  in  the  departments.  A  few  days  afterwards 
the  Emperor  set  off.  I  left  him  at  midnight.  He  suffered 
a  great  deal  from  a  pain  in  his  breast.  He  stepped,  how- 
ever, into  his  coach  with  a  cheerfulness  that  seemed  to 
show  he  was  conscious  of  victory.  The  particulars  of  that 
campaign  are  too  well  known  for  me  to  repeat  them  here  ; 
but  I  saw  with  grief  too  many  unworthy  Frenchmen  form 
wishes  for  his  defeat.  The  Assembly  of  Representatives 
did  not  adopt  the  attitude  or  speak  the  language  its 
influence    over   the  public  mind   rendered   necessary.     Old 


324  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

hatred,  former  opinions,  the  hope  of  the  return  of  the 
Bourbons,  and  great  anxiety  in  many  respecting  the  conduct 
the  Emperor  would  pursue  if  he  returned  victorious,  threw 
confusion  on  the  labours  of  the  Assembly.  It  had  been 
said  to  them  that  the  first  point  was  to  save  the  Country  ; — 
but  they  answered  :  "  Let  us  save  Liberty  !  "  as  if  Liberty 
could  be  saved  when  the  soil  was  invaded  ! 

At  last  I  learned  the  fatal  news  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo^ 
and  the  next  morning  the  Emperor  arrived.  I  flew  to  the 
Elysee  to  see  him  :  he  ordered  me  into  his  closet,  and  as 
soon  as  he  saw  me,  he  came  to  meet  me  with  a  frightful 
epileptic  laugh.  "  Oh  !  my  God  !  "  he  said,  raising  his  eyes 
to  heaven,  and  walking  two  or  three  times  up  and  down  the 
room.  This  appearance  of  despair  was,  however,  very  short. 
He  soon  recovered  his  coolness,  and  asked  me  what  was 
going  forward  at  the  Chamber  of  Representatives.  I  could 
not  attempt  to  hide  that  exasperation  was  there  carried  to  a 
high  degree,  and  that  the  majority  seemed  determined  to 
require  his  abdication,  and  to  pronounce  it  themselves  if  he 
did  not  send  it  willingly.  "  How  is  that  ?  "  he  said.  "  If 
proper  measures  are  not  taken,  the  enemy  will  be  before  the 
gates  in  eight  days.  Alas  !  "  he  added,  "  I  have  accustomed 
them  to  such  great  victories,  that  they  know  not  how  to 
bear  one  day's  misfortune  !  What  will  become  of  poor 
France  ?  I  have  done  all  I  could  for  her."  Then  he 
heaved  a  deep  sigh.  Somebody  asked  to  speak  to  him  ;  and 
I  left  him,  with  an  order  to  come  back  at  some  later  hour. 
I  passed  the  day  in  seeking  information  among  all  my 
friends  and  acquaintances.  I  found  in  all  of  them  either 
the  greatest  dejection  or  an  extravagant  joy,  which  they 
disguised  by  feigned  alarm,  and  pity  for  myself,  which  I 
repulsed  with  great  indignation.  No  hope  could  rest  on  the 
Chamber  of  Representatives.  They  all  said,  they  wished 
for  Liberty  ;  but,  between  two  enemies  who  appeared  ready 
to  destroy  it,  they  preferred  the  foreigners,  the  friends  of 
the  Bourbons,  to  Napoleon,  who  might  still  have  prolonged 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  325 

the  struggle,  because  they  were  silly  enough  to  despise 
the  former  and  fear  the  latter.  Besides,  each  person  took 
counsel  only  from  his  resentment  or  egotism.  Some  hoped 
to  escape  in  the  confusion,  because  they  were  unknown  ; 
others  thought  they  might  draw  advantage  from  circum- 
stances ;  and  the  majority,  foolishly  trusting  to  the  promises 
of  the  foreign  Powers,  were  still  persuaded  that  the  Bour- 
bons would  not  return  to  Paris,  or,  at  least,  that  the  King, 
convinced  of  his  weakness  and  incapacity  for  government, 
would  be  so  strongly  bridled  and  fettered,  that  he  would 
neither  be  able  to  revenge  himself  nor  to  violate  the  Con- 
stitution. Those  who  held  the  latter  opinion  were  the 
friends  of  Fouche,  who  had  given  them  to  understand  that 
nothing  remained  for  them  but  to  submit,  but  that  he  alone 
would  find  means  to  save  them,  and  erect  the  edifice  of 
Liberty.  The  Chamber  of  Peers  presented  a  much  sadder 
spectacle.  Except  the  intrepid  Thibaudeau,  who  till  the 
last  moment  expressed  himself  with  admirable  energy 
against  the  reign  of  the  Bourbons,  almost  all  the  others 
thought  of  nothing  else  but  of  getting  out  of  the  scrape 
with  the  least  loss  they  could.  Some  took  no  pains  to  hide 
their  wish  of  bending  again  under  the  yoke  ;  and  looked 
upon  themselves  as  being  paid  in  advance,  either  by  their 
remaining  in  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  or  the  necessity  of 
■disarming  revenge.  The  majority,  however,  wished  to  fall 
with  dignity  ;  but  there  existed  no  firm  will.  The  Chamber 
waited  for  the  resolutions  of  the  Representatives,  and  in- 
trenched itself  behind  them,  as  if  that  shield  could  have 
•saved  it.  I  sued  in  vain  to  those  who  consented  to  listen  to 
me  :  *'  We  have  no  means  of  escaping  :  you  must  give  up 
all  hopes.  The  other  Chamber  has  been  named  by  the 
people  with  the  forms  consecrated  by  the  Constitution  ;  we, 
on  the  contrary,  are  nothing  but  the  Ex-Emperor's  friends  ; 
we  have  not  been  forced  to  accept.  Each  of  us,  in  setting 
our  foot  here,  has  received  a  sentence  of  proscription  from 
the    Bourbons.      It   is   we  who  are  the  rebels  :    we  have 


326  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

nothing  more  to  do  than  to  signahse  our  last  moments 
by  a  noble  energy,  and  to  fall  with  a  good  grace." 

But  I  talked  to  men  too  old  to  give  up  the  sweets  of  life,, 
and  who  had  nothing  left  in  their  hearts  but  the  wish  to 
preserve  them,  and  the  fear  of  adversity.  I  must,  however, 
make  some  few  exceptions,  among  which  I  shall  name  old 
Sieyes,  who  maintained  fully  the  opinion  I  had  formed  of 
him.  He  wanted  the  habit,  and  perhaps  the  courage,  to 
speak  in  public  ;  but  I  never  heard  any  one  express  with 
greater  energy  a  hatred  of  slavery,  and  more  forcible  and 
generous  ideas  on  the  necessity  of  fighting  to  the  end 
against  it. 

The  next  day  I  returned  to  the  Emperor.  He  had 
received  the  most  positive  accounts  of  the  state  of  feeling 
in  the  Chamber  of  Representatives.  The  reports  had,  how- 
ever, been  given  to  him  with  some  little  reserve  ;  for  he  did 
not  seem  to  me  convinced  that  the  resolution  was  really 
formed  to  pronounce  his  abdication.  I  was  better  instructed 
on  the  matter  ;  and  I  came  to  him,  without  having  the  least 
doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  only  thing  he  could  do  was  to 
descend  once  more  from  the  throne.  I  communicated  to 
him  all  the  particulars  I  had  just  received  myself ;  and  I  did 
not  hesitate  to  advise  him  to  follow  the  only  course  worthy 
of  him.  He  listened  to  me  with  a  sombre  air  ;  and,  though 
he  was  in  some  measure  master  of  himself,  the  agitation 
of  his  mind  and  the  horrors  of  his  position  betrayed  them- 
selves in  his  face  and  in  all  his  motions.  "  I  know,"  said  I,. 
"  that  your  Majesty  may  still  keep  the  sword  drawn  ;  but 
with  whom,  and  against  whom  ?  Dejection  has  chilled  the 
courage  of  every  one  ;  the  army  is  still  in  the  greatest  con- 
fusion. Nothing  is  to  be  expected  from  Paris,  and  the  cottp 
d^etat  oi  the  i8th  Brumaire  cannot  be  renewed."  "That 
thought,"  he  replied,  stopping,  "  is  far  from  my  mind.  I 
will  hear  nothing  more  about  myself.     But  poor  France  !  " 

At  that  moment,  S and  C entered,  and  having 

drawn  a  faithful  picture  of  the  exasperation  of  the  Deputies^ 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  327 

they  persuaded  him  to  send  in  his  abdication.  Some  words 
he  uttered  proved  to  us  that  he  would  have  considered  death 
preferable  to  that  step  ;  but  still  he  took  it. 

This  great  act  being  performed,  he  remained  calm  during 
the  whole  day,  giving  his  advice  on  the  position  the  army 
was  to  take,  and  on  the  manner  the  negotiations  with  the 
enemy  were  to  be  conducted.  He  insisted  especially  on  the 
necessity  of  proclaiming  his  son  Emperor,  not  so  much  for 
the  advantage  of  the  child,  as  with  a  view  to  unite  on  one 
head  all  the  power  of  sentiments  and  affections.  Unfortu- 
nately, nobody  would  listen  to  him.  Some  men  of  sense  and 
courage  rallied  round  that  proposition  in  the  two  Chambers ; 
but  fear  swayed  the  majority  ;  and  among  those  who  re- 
mained free  from  it,  many  thought  that  a  public  declaration 
of  Liberty,  and  the  resolution  to  defend  it  at  any  price, 
would  make  the  enemy  and  the  Bourbons  turn  back. 
Strange  delusion  of  weakness  and  want  of  experience  !  It 
must,  however,  be  respected,  for  it  had  its  source  in  love  of 
their  country  :  but  while  we  excuse  it,  can  it  be  justified  ? 
The  population  of  the  metropolis  had  resumed  their  usual 
appearance,  which  was  that  of  complete  indifference,  with 
a  resolution  to  cry  "  Long  live  the  King  !  "  provided  the 
King  arrived  well  escorted  ;  for  one  must  not  judge  of  the 
whole  capital  by  about  one-thirtieth  part  of  the  inhabitants, 
who  called  for  arms,  and  declared  themselves  warmly  against 
the  return  of  the  abandoned  family. 

On  the  23rd  I  returned  to  the  Elysee.  The  Emperor  had 
been  for  two  hours  in  his  bath.  He  himself  turned  the 
discourse  on  the  retreat  he  ought  to  choose,  and  spoke  of 
the  United  States.  I  rejected  the  idea  without  reflection, 
and  with  a  degree  of  vehemence  that  surprised  him.  "  Why 
not  America  ?  "  he  asked.  I  answered,  "  Because  Moreau  is 
retired  there."  The  observation  was  harsh,  and  I  should 
never  have  forgiven  myself  for  having  expressed  it,  if  I  had 
not  altered  my  opinion  a  few  days  afterwards.  He  heard  it 
without  any  apparent  ill-humour  ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  that 


328  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

it  must  have  made  an  unfavourable  impression  on  his  mind. 
I  insisted  on  his  choosing  England,  and  the  reason  I  gave 
appeared  plausible  ;  but  after  I  had  left  him,  I  met  General 

F in  the  saloon,  and  communicated  our  conversation  to 

him.  His  answer  was :  "  You  are  mistaken  in  respect  to 
the  English  Government.  In  that  country,  all  the  institu- 
tions are  excellent  for  the  nation  itself ;  but  foreigners  are 
not  admitted  to  enjoy  their  benefits.  The  Emperor  will 
never  find  anything  in  that  •  country  but  oppression  and 
injustice.  The  nation  will  not  be  consulted  on  the  treat- 
ment he  will  undergo  ;  and,  believe  my  words,  far  from 
finding  protection  there,  all  possible  outrages  will  be 
invented  for  revenge." 

These  reflections  struck  me,  and  I  begged  F to  com- 
municate them  to  the  Emperor.  I  could  not,  however, 
admit  them  without  some  restriction.  I  covUd  conceive 
that  the  English  Government  might  think  it  necessary  to 
the  safety  of  Europe,  to  prevent  all  connection  between  the 
Emperor  and  his  numerous  adherents  ;  but  to  sentence  him 
to  the  slowest  and  most  horrible  death, — to  exercise  on  his 
person  all  manner  of  cruelty, — to  invent  for  him  sufferings 
unknown  to  the  most  cruel  tyrants — (for  in  what  other 
light  can  be  viewed  the  insufferable  separation  from  all 
connection  with  civilisation  and  human  kind  ; — from  his 
wife  and  child,  from  whom  he  could  not  even  receive  letters 
to  comfort  him  in  his  banishment)  : — these  are  things  an 
honourable  mind  could  never  have  expected.  After  such 
conduct,  we  may  be  allowed  to  suspect,  that  in  England, 
a  nation  so  estimable  in  other  respects,  there  exists  a 
coldness  of  heart,  with  a  total  absence  of  humanity  and 
generosity,  from  the  moment  her  pride  is  wounded. 

The  Emperor  went  to  inhabit  Malmaison.  He  was 
accompanied  thither  by  the  Duchess  de  St.  Leu,  Bertrand 
and  his  family,  and  the  Duke  de  Bassano.  I  went  there 
several  times  a  day  ;  for  I  could  not  leave  Madame  de  St. 
Leu,    who   had   suffered   much  in   her  health  by  the  late 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  329 

•events.  The  day  he  arrived  in  that  retreat,  he  proposed  to 
me  to  accompany  him  abroad.  "  Drouet,"  he  said,  "  remains 
in  France.  I  see,  the  War  Minister  wishes  him  not  to  be 
lost  to  his  country.  I  dare  not  complain  ;  but  it  is  a  great 
loss  for  me  ;  I  never  met  with  a  better  head,  or  a  more 
upright  heart.  That  man  was  formed  to  be  a  prime  minister 
anywhere."  I  refused  to  accompany  him,  in  the  following 
words  :  "  I  have  a  daughter  of  thirteen  years  of  age  :  my 
wife  is  four  months  advanced  in  pregnancy  ;  I  cannot 
resolve  to  leave  her.  Allow  me  some  time,  and  I  will 
join  you  wherever  you  may  be.  I  have  remained  faithful 
to  your  Majesty  in  better  times,  and  you  may  reckon 
upon  me.  Nevertheless,  if  my  wife  had  not  a  claim  on  me, 
I  should  do  better  to  go  with  you,  for  I  have  sad  forebodings 
respecting  my  fate." 

The  Emperor  made  me  no  answer  ;  but  I  saw  by  the 
expression  of  his  countenance  that  he  had  no  better  augury 
of  my  fate  than  I  had.  However,  the  enemy  was  approach- 
ing, and  for  the  last  three  days  he  had  solicited  the  Provi- 
sional Government  to  place  a  frigate  at  his  disposal,  with 
which  he  might  go  to  America.  It  had  been  promised  him  ; 
he  had  even  been  pressed  to  set  off ;  but  he  wanted  to  be  the 
bearer  of  the  order  to  the  captain  to  convey  him  to  the 
United  States,  and  that  order  did  not  arrive.  We  all  felt 
that  the  delay  of  a  single  hour  might  put  his  freedom  in 
jeopardy.  After  we  had  talked  the  subject  over  among 
ourselves,  I  went  to  him,  and  strongly  painted  to  him  how 
dangerous  it  might  be  to  prolong  his  stay.  He  observed 
that  he  could  not  go  without  the  order.  "  Depart  never- 
theless," I  replied  ;  "  your  presence  on  board  the  ship  will 
still  have  a  great  power  over  Frenchmen  ;  cut  the  cables, 
promise  money  to  the  crew,  and  if  the  captain  resist,  have 
him  put  on  shore,  and  hoist  your  sails.  I  have  not  the 
least  doubt  but  Fouche  has  sold  you  to  the  Allies."  "  I 
believe  it  also  ;  but  go  and  make  the  last  effort  with  the 
Minister  of  Marine."     I  went  off  immediately  to  M.  Dccres. 


330  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

He  was  in  bed,  and  listened  to  me  with  an  indifference  that 
made  my  blood  boil.  He  said  to  me :  "  I  am  only  a 
minister.  Go  to  Fouche  ;  speak  to  Government.  As  for 
me,  I  can  do  nothing.  Good  night."  And  so  he  covered 
himself  up  in  his  blankets.  I  left  him  ;  but  I  could  not 
succeed  in  speaking  either  to  Fouche  or  to  any  of  the 
others.  It  was  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  when  I  returned 
to  Malmaison  ;  the  Emperor  was  in  bed.  I  was  let  into  his 
chamber,  where  I  gave  him  an  account  of  the  result  of  my 
mission,  and  renewed  my  entreaties.  He  listened  to  me,  but 
made  no  answer.  He  got  up,  however,  and  spent  a  part  of 
the  night  in  walking  up  and  down.  The  following  day  was 
the  last  of  that  sad  drama.  The  Emperor  had  gone  to  bed 
again,  and  slept  a  few  hours.  I  entered  his  closet  at  about 
twelve  o'clock.  "  If  I  had  known  you  were  here,"  he  said, 
"  I  would  have  had  you  called  in."  He  then  gave  me,  on 
a  subject  that  interested  him  personally,  some  instructions 
which  it  is  needless  for  me  to  repeat.  Soon  after  I  left  him,, 
full  of  anxiety  respecting  his  fate,  my  heart  oppressed  with 
grief,  but  still  far  from  suspecting  the  extent  to  which  both 
the  rigour  of  fortune  and  the  cruelty  of  his  enemies  would 
be  carried. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

A  FEW  days  after  the  departure  of  the  Emperor,  I  was  told 
that  a  list  of  proscriptions,  which  was  said  to  contain  the 
names  of  two  thousand  persons,  was  making  up  under  the 
inspection  of  Messieurs  de  Talleyrand  and  Fouche,  by  order  of 
the  Princes  ;  and  that  Madame  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme 
vouchsafed  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  measure.  Many 
persons  had  already  fled  from  France.  The  intrepid  Thi- 
baudeau,  who,  a  few  days  after  the  return  of  the  King,  had 
openly  protested  against  his  reign  at  the  Chamber  of  Peers, 
took  some  pains  to  make  me  comprehend  the  danger  I  stood 
in.  The  Duke  de  Bassano,  at  his  departure,  wished  to  per- 
suade me  to  follow  him  quickly  ;  but  I,  prepossessed  by  the 
idea  that  my  conduct  was  above  all  reproach,  rejected  the 
cautions  of  friendship.  The  Princess  de  Vaudemont  entreated 
me  at  least  to  seek  some  retreat  for  a  short  time.  She  told 
me  that  it  was  Fouche's  wish  that  I  should  ;  but  he  never 
thought  of  offering  me  the  passport  I  might  stand  in  need 
of.  The  situation  of  my  wife,  who  was  far  advanced  in 
pregnancy  and  very  unwell,  made  the  idea  of  my  flight 
impossible  for  me  to  bear.  From  within  the  walls  of  a 
prison,  said  I  to  myself,  I  may  still  protect  her.  Prejudice 
will  diminish,  and  the  Royal  resentment  will  undoubtedly 
vent  itself  on  those  who  are  absent.  The  more  I  examined 
my  conduct,  the  more  I  was  convinced  that  my  cause  could 
only  be  brought  before  the  Correctional  Police,  and  the 
result  would  be  no  more  than  an  imprisonment  for  two  or 
five  years,  for  having  taken  upon  me  the  superintendence  of 

33> 


332  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  Post-office  a  few  hours  before  the  Emperor  arrived. 
Having  made  up  my  mind  to  this,  I  was  the  more  obstinate 
in  my  refusal  to  fly  ;  and  I  proposed  to  the  Princess  de 
Vaudemont  to  give  her  a  letter  addressed  to  M.  de  Talley- 
rand, in  which  I  should  explain  my  conduct.  She  consented 
to  lay  it  before  him.  In  that  letter  I  unfolded  to  the 
Ministry  my  whole  conduct  since  the  Restoration  ;  all  the 
steps  I  had  taken  on  the  20th  of  March  ;  and  I  concluded 
by  soliciting  my  trial.  My  wishes  in  that  respect  were  soon 
complied  with.' 

On  the  1 8th  of  July  I  was  sitting  at  dinner  with  Madame 
Lavalette  and  M.  de  Meneval,  when  an  inspector  of  the 
police  came  to  tell  me  that  the  Prefect,  M.  Decazes,  wished 
to  speak  to  me.  When  I  stepped  into  the  hackney-coach,  I 
saw  that  I  was  surrounded  by  three  or  four  spies,  who  were 
good  enough  to  act  the  part  of  footmen,  and  stepped  up 
behind  the  carriage.  In  less  than  half  an  hour  I  was  in  the 
registering  room  of  the  prison  of  the  Prefecture.  I  was 
introduced  to  the  jailer,  who  paid  little  attention  to  me, 

'  Far  from  having  any  uneasiness  on  my  own  account,  my  whole  anxiety 
was  for  the  fate  of  my  friends.  The  Countess  de  .Souza,  the  aunt  of  Labe- 
doyere,  knowing  that  he  was  still  in  Paris,  entreated  me  to  go  and  see  him, 
to  thrust  him,  if  necessary,  by  the  shoulders  out  of  the  barriers,  and  to  per- 
suade him  to  seek  refuge  with  the  Army  of  the  Loire,  from  whence  he  might 
go  abroad.  I  went,  therefore,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  to  Labedoyere. 
He  was  still  in  bed,  playing  with  his  child,  and  his  lovely  wife  next  to  him. 
When  we  were  alone,  I  warmly  pressed  him  to  depart,  and,  by  a  singular 
prepossession,  I  gave  him  the  same  reasons,  made  him  the  same  entreaties, 
placed  before  his  eyes  the  same  dangers  with  which  my  friends  harassed  me 
on  my  own  account.  He  listened  to  me  with  a  smile  and  a  yawn,  and 
turned  himself  round  in  his  bed.  I  was  obliged  to  put  an  end  to  that  dis- 
course, and  talk  of  the  fate  of  the  Emperor  and  France,  which  interested 
him  more  than  his  own.  We  had  already  lost  more  than  three  hours  in  useless 
conversation,  when  his  valet-de-chambre  came  to  tell  him  that  two  Prussian 
officers,  who  were  billeted  in  his  house,  refused  the  apartment  that  had  been 
offered  to  them,  and  insisted  on  taking  possession  of  his  wife's.  At  these 
words  Labedoyere  flew  out  of  bed  like  a  madman,  and  taking  scarcely  time 
to  slip  on  his  clothes,  he  wanted  to  go  immediately  and  cut  off  the  ears  of 
these  two  insolent  fellows.  It  required  considerable  exertions  on  my  side 
to  make  him  keep  quiet  and  wait  the  result  of  his  wife's  mother's  remon- 
strances. He  did  not  set  off  till  the  evening.  He  gained  the  banks  of  the 
Loire.     I  shall  mention  hereafter  how  he  returned  from  thence. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  333 

being  busy  with  distributing  lodgings  to  several  new-comers, 

among  whom  I  discovered  M.  de  P ,  who  had  been  long 

secretary  to  the  Duke  de  Rovigo,  and  appeared  to  be  the 
person  in  whom  he  placed  the  greatest  confidence.  He 
seemed  so  grieved  and  mortified  to  be  where  he  was,  that  I 
went  up  to  him,  and  had  already  begun  to  express  my  pity 
for  his  misfortune,  when  all  of  a  sudden  he  turned  aside,  and, 
pointing  to  me,  said  to  the  turnkey,  "  Conduct  this  gentle- 
man to  No.  17";  after  which  he  disappeared.  This  man, 
thought  I,  has  very  cleverly  turned  his  coat  ;  and  I  followed 
my  guide,  blushing  at  the  mistake  I  had  made.  He  intro- 
duced me  into  a  dirty  garret  with  a  window  that  opened  in 
the  roof  at  twelve  feet  from  the  floor.  I  was  permitted,  if  I 
could,  to  open  it  by  means  of  an  iron  bar  with  notches,  but 
so  heavy  that  it  was  not  possible  for  me  to  raise  it.  When 
one  enters  into  prison,  anger  always  follows  the  first  surprise. 
I  began  by  throwing  out  some  energetic  exclamations  against 
the  Prefect,  who  had  not  deigned  to  receive  me  in  his  apart- 
ments, though  he  had  sent  for  me  to  come  and  speak  to  him. 
I  was  not  yet  acquainted  with  the  code  of  politeness  of  the 
Prefects  of  Police  ;  but  I  soon  made  great  improvement  in 
that  branch  of  knowledge.  As  there  was  no  bell,  I  was 
obliged  to  wait  three  hours  before  I  received  a  visit  from  the 
turnkey,  who  brought  me  for  dinner  some  disgusting  prison 
ragout.  I  made  some  inquiries  respecting  the  prisoners  who 
lodged  on  the  floor  above  me.  I  had  seen,  through  a  key- 
hole, men  carrying  bottles  and  all  the  preparations  for  a 
feast.  "They  seem  to  be  very  merry,"  I  added.  "They 
are  two  aides-de-camp  of  General  Labedoyere."  "How  !  is 
he  then  arrested  ?  "     "I  believe  so." 

The  next  day  these  two  officers  were  set  at  liberty  ;  and  I 
afterwards  learned  the  following  particulars.  The  unfortu- 
nate Labedoyere,  after  the  Army  of  the  Loire  had  been  dis- 
banded, had  retired  to  the  outskirts  of  Riorn,  with  several  of 
his  friends,  among  whom  was  General  Flahaut,  his  near 
relation.     The  latter,  who  possesses  a  cool  head  and  unites 


334  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

prudence  to  much  courage,  immediately  perceived  the 
danger  of  their  position.  He  was  convinced  that  nothing 
remained  for  them  to  do  but  to  pass  the  frontiers  as  quickly 
as  they  could.  Labedoyere  was  of  the  same  opinion  ;  but 
no  persuasion  could  make  him  alter  his  plan.  He  wanted 
to  go  to  the  United  States,  but  on  his  way  to  pass  through 
Paris,  where  he  wished  to  take  leave  of  his  family  and  raise 
some  money.  All  the  exertions  of  friendship  had  no  power 
over  him.  He  stepped  into  the  diligence  under  a  false  name, 
and  found  among  his  travelling  companions  two  wretches  in 
regimentals,  who  pretended  they  came  from  the  Army  of  the 
Loire,  and  who  were  scarcely  arrived  in  Paris  when  they 
informed  against  him.  These  were  the  two  prisoners  who 
were  merrily  feasting  on  a  part  of  the  money  they  had 
received  as  the  reward  of  their  treachery. 

By  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  jailer  came  to  call  me 
down  to  the  chief  clerk,  who  was  to  examine  me.  In  my 
situation,  this  might  be  looked  upon  as  some  amusement :  I 
was  therefore  far  from  wishing  to  decline  it,  and  I  was  con- 
ducted, through  a  labyrinth  of  passages,  to  a  room  on  the 

ground  floor,  where  I  found  M.  V ,  who  was  dismissed  a 

little  while  after.  This  inquisitor,  who  was  a  short,  fat  man, 
was  seated  in  his  armchair,  where  for  the  space  of  twenty- 
nine  years  he  had  been  asking  questions  at  all  hours  of  the 
day  and  night,  under  all  possible  governments.  After  having 
taken  down  in  writing  three  or  four  pages  of  questions  and 
answers,  he  stopped,  and  as  we  had  neither  of  us  much 
inclination  for  sleep,  he  eagerly  took  advantage  of  some 
inquiries  I  made  about  his  occupations  to  relate  to  me  all 
the  prowess  of  the  prefects  of  police,  the  manner  the  prisoners 
made  their  defence,  and  the  confessions  he  extorted  from 
them  ;  his  skill  in  troubling  their  conscience,  in  disconcerting 
their  firmness,  in  surprising  their  tenets,  in  pursuing  their 
confessions,  and  finally  in  sounding  the  bottom  of  their 
hearts.  I  cannot  help  recording  here  one  of  these  anecdotes, 
which  I  thought  remarkable,  in  the  words  he  gave  it  to  me. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  335 

"  Among  the  conspirators  of  the  Infernal  Machine  was 

one  M.  N ,  an  intimate  friend  of  Limoelan,  the  first 

inventor  of  the  plot.     He  had  served  among  the  Chouans, 
and  the  police  supposed,  reasonably  enough,  that  he  was  in 
Paris.     After  being  hunted  like  a  fox  for  several  days,  he 
slept  at  night  in  the  charcoal-boats  in  the  Pot  au  Bled. 
,  When  the  pursuit  had  ceased  in  that  part  of  the  town,  he 
ventured  to  seek  a  retreat  in  a  miserable  garret  in  a  public- 
house.     The  next  day,  the  police  came  back  ;  but  he  had 
escaped,  and  was  seen  no  more.     His  room  was  searched, 
and  near  the  bed  was  found  a  scrap  of  half-burned  paper, 
which  he  had  used  to  light  his  pipe.     This  paper  contained, 
however,  some  written  lines,  which  seemed  to  be  part  of  the 
rough  draft  of  a  letter  addressed  to  some  general,  who  was 
supposed  to  be  Georges.     On  the  last  line  were  the  following 
words  :  '  I  cannot  write  any  more  to-day,  as  I  have  a  great 
pain  in  my  eyes.'     This  unfortunate  man  was  afterwards 
implicated  and  taken  in  the  conspiracy  of  Georges,  and  I 
had  the  pleasure  of  examining  him.     He  was  sitting  where 
you  are,  his  face   between  two  wax  candles,   as   yours  is. 
While  I  was  talking  with  him  I  continued  writing.     He 
was  my  countryman.      I  spoke  to  him  of  his  parents,  of 
his  first  affections,  of  his  schoolfellows  ;  and  having  observed 
that  he   began   to   gain   assurance,   and   that   his   answers 
betrayed    a    little   more   cheerfulness,    I   stopped   all   of    a 
sudden,  and  said  in  the  most  natural  tone  I  could  :  '  But 
the  light  annoys  you  :  you  may  put  out  the  candles  if  you 
choose.'    '  No  ;  I  have  no  pain  in  my  eyes.'    '  I  thought  you 
had.'     '  No,  not  at  present ;  my  eyes  were  bad,  it  is  true, 
about  two  years  ago.'     We  continued  our  conversation.     At 
last  I  slowly  read  to  him  his  examination  :  he  was  surprised 
to  find  I  had  inserted  in  it  so  trivial  a  circumstance,  and 
asked  why  I  had  done  it.    *  It  is  my  custom.'    Now,  will  you 
believe  that  this  very  trivial  circumstance  convicted  him  ? 
The  half-burned  scrap  of  paper  had  been  preserved.      The 
writing  was  compared  with  his,  and  his  presence  in  Paris,  at 
the  time  of  the  Infernal  Machine,  was  proved." 


336  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

"  And  what  became  of  him  ?  "  said  I.  "  He  was  guillo- 
tined," answered  V ,  with   a   most   fiendish   look   and 

gesture.  He  said  to  mc  :  "I  am  fond  of  my  profession  :  I 
cannot  remain  one  day  out  of  this  apartment.  I  might  go 
to  the  play  and  divert  myself  with  my  friends,  my  wife,  my 
children.  But,  no,  I  must  be  here."  While  listening  to  him, 
I  observed  that  by  custom  he  constantly  leered  to  the  left 
side,  where  the  prisoners  were  placed  ;  and  I  am  convinced 
that  if  they  had  been  put  at  his  right,  he  would  have  lost 
half  his  skill.  When  he  read  my  examination  to  me,  and 
before  I  signed  it,  I  asked  why  he  had  not  inserted  his  anec- 
dote in  it.  "  Oh,  your  business  cannot  go  far,"  he  said  : 
"  you  are  not  an  important  man  for  me." 

I  remained  a  fortnight  in  that  temporary  prison  without 
seeing  M.  Decazes,  who  might  have  been  a  little  troubled  at 
having  me  so  near  him,  if  he  had  not  entirely  forgotten  our 
former  connection.  The  bad  air  and  the  vexations  of  a 
prison  gave  me  an  inflammatory  complaint.  My  physician, 
who  was  also  the  medical  attendant  of  M.  Decazes,  prescribed 
for  me  with  great  care,  which  contributed  to  make  them 
change  my  prison,  and  send  me  speedily  on  my  trial,  for 
fear  I  should  escape  by  a  natural  death  from  the  one  they 
were  preparing  for  me.  On  Sunday,  the  24th  of  July,  I  was 
abruptly  put  into  a  hackney-coach  to  be  conveyed  to  the 
Conciergerie,  at  a  small  distance  from  where  I  was.  There 
are  many  people  in  Paris  wholly  unacquainted  with  the 
existence  of  the  dungeons  of  the  Conciergerie,  which  are 
beneath  the  magnificent  apartments  of  the  Palais  de  Justice, 
and  which,  it  is  reported,  served  in  the  time  of  St.  Louis  as 
kitchens  and  pantries  for  the  royal  household.  I  was  intro- 
duced into  the  registering  room,  where  I  found  the  jailer,, 
whose  name  was,  I  think,  Landrajein.  He  was  a  tall  man, 
disagreeably  familiar,  though  with  tolerably  polite  manners. 
He  began  to  make  out  aloud  the  description  of  my  person,, 
and  invited  me  afterwards  to  follow  him  to  the  end  of  a  dark 
passage  where  my  new  abode  was  situated.     This  was  a  long 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  in 

and  narrow  space,  terminated  by  a  window  covered  with  a 
slanting  roof,  that  just  enabled  me  to  distinguish  a  square 
foot  of  the  sky.  Bare  walls,  covered  with  names  and 
exclamations  of  despair,  traced  with  charcoal,  were  the 
only  ornaments  of  this  dungeon.  A  wretched  bed,  an  old 
table,  one  chair,  and  two  tubs  of  foul  water,  were  all  its 
furniture.  I  describe  it  thus  minutely,  because  it  was  there 
that  Marshal  Ney  passed  the  three  first  weeks  that  he 
remained  in  prison.  I  was  weaker  than  he,  for  he  did  not 
complain  of  it ;  but  when  I  saw  that  it  would  be  impossible 
for  me  to  read  during  half  an  hour,  I  burst  into  reproaches, 
and  wrote  to  the  Prefect  of  Police  that  disease  would  soon 
kill  me  if  my  lodging  were  not  changed.  In  the  evening  the 
jailer  came  to  lead  me  to  the  promenade  in  a  large  yard 
called  the  Green  ;  and  at  nine  o'clock,  instead  of  bringing 
me  up  again  to  my  dungeon,  he  introduced  me  into  a  room 
on  the  ground  floor,  where  I  found  a  fireplace,  and  a  window 
looking  into  a  small  yard,  separated  from  the  women's  yard 
by  a  high  wall.  "I  could  not  place  you  here  this  morning," 
he  said,  "  because  General  Labedoyere  was  locked  up  in  the 
next  room  ;  but  he  has  been  transferred  to  the  Abbaye." 
The  next  day  I  wished  to  see  his  chamber.  It  was  still  more 
inconvenient  and  more  dismal  than  the  one  I  had  left.  He  had 
remained  there  eight  days  in  the  most  rigorous  solitary  con- 
finement, abandoned  in  a  manner  by  the  keepers,  who  only 
visited  him  twice  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  dungeon  was 
so  narrow  that  he  could  not  even  walk  about  in  it,  though 
that  was  the  only  diversion  left  him,  as  he  was  deprived  of 
books,  newspapers,  and  even  of  all  manner  of  correspondence. 
They  began,  according  to  custom,  to  keep  me  during  six 
weeks  without  any  communication.  I  could  receive  no  letters 
unless  they  were  opened,  nor  see  a  friend  except  in  the 
presence  of  the  registrar.  The  accounts  I  received  from  my 
wife  were  painful.  Her  tremulous  handwriting,  the  suffer- 
ings she  sought  in  vain  to  dissemble  by  repeated  assurances 
of  good  health,  her  five  months'   pregnancy,  of  which  she 

23 


338  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

never  spoke,  all  added  to  my  anxiety.  I  soon  felt  also  the 
inconveniences  of  my  prison.  Next  to  my  room  was  an 
enormous  iron  door,  that  was  opened  at  every  hour  of  the 
day  and  the  night  to  relieve  the  sentry  :  its  violent  motion 
shook  my  bed  and  interrupted  my  sleep,  while  the  cold  and 
damp  of  the  air  obliged  me  to  have  fire  night  and  day. 

Such  torments,  every  instant  renewed,  were,  however,  far 
from  discouraging  me,  and  I  had  no  need  to  seek  moral 
force  in  meditation,  or  in  delusions  that  vanished  every  day 
more  and  more  before  the  sad  truth  :  I  found  it  in  my 
attachment  for  the  Emperor.  I  suffered,  but  it  was  for 
him  :  my  misfortune  was  heightened  by  the  consideration 
of  the  cause  that  had  given  it  birth.  My  name  and  fate 
were  united  to  his  immortal  name  ;  and  besides,  were  not 
his  sufferings  worse  than  mine  ?  The  perfidy  of  the  English 
Government  was  leading  him  to  St.  Helena.  How  many 
torments  were  preparing  for  him  in  his  banishment  at  the 
world's  end  !  I  should  have  blushed  to  complain  in  presence 
of  such  a  disaster.  The  vengeance  of  kings  fell  heavy  on  us 
both,  and  I  found  at  once  honour  and  glory  in  sharing  it 
with  him.  It  was  that  thought  that  constantly  bore  me  up, 
and  saved  me  from  all  weakness.  The  idea  that  he  would 
read  my  trial,  and  that  my  death  would  cause  him  some 
emotion  ;  that  I  showed  myself  worthy  of  his  attachment 
and  his  trust,  elevated  me  in  my  own  eyes.  I  shall  explain 
hereafter  how  that  feeling  of  energy  against  misfortune 
received  a  powerful  support  from  another  cause. 

A  few  weeks  after  my  imprisonment,  as  I  was  one  day 
walking  in  the  yard,  I  saw  Marshal  Ney  at  the  bottom  of 
the  staircase  which  led  to  my  former  dungeon.  He  bowed 
to  me  as  he  went  quickly  up,  accompanied  by  the  jailer  and 
an  officer  of  the  gendarmes.  It  was  thus  I  learned  that  he 
was  arrested.  Like  me,  he  had  scorned  to  leave  the  king- 
dom, and  had  only  sought  refuge  in  the  country-seat  of  one 
of  his  wife's  relations  near  Cahors.  His  sabre,  which  he  had 
left  in  the  drawing-room,  betrayed  him  for  the  first  time. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  339 

He  suffered  himself  to  be  taken,  convinced  that  they  would 
not  dare  to  condemn  him.     After  he  had  remained  a  month 
in  that  dungeon,  he  was  at  last  placed  above  me  in  the 
registrar's  lodging.     There  was  a  stove  that  defended  him 
from  the  cold  ;  and  his  grated  window,  being  higher  than 
mine,  procured  him  a  less  unwholesome  air  than  what  I 
breathed.     But  his  name  and  his  rank  could  not   protect 
him  from  the  hardships  they  seemed  to  take  pleasure  in 
inflicting  on  him.     He  played  tolerably  well  on  the  flute, 
and  during  several  days  he  amused  himself  with  his  instru- 
ment.    He  was,  however,  deprived  of  this  resource,  under 
the  pretence  that  it  was  against  the  rules  of  the  prison.     He 
repeatedly  played  a  waltz,   which  I  long  recollected,  and 
frequently  hummed  in  my  evening  musings.     I  had  never 
heard  it  anyAvhere  else,  till  once  again  it  struck  my  ear  in 
Bavaria.     It  was  at  a  bal  chanipUre  on  the  borders  of  Lake 
Starnberg.      I   had   before   my   eyes   young    peasant   girls 
merrily  skipping  on  the  fresh   green  sward.     The  air  was 
■sweet  and  melancholy,  and   when  played   on  the  flute,  it 
immediately  recalled  to  my  memory  the  Conciergerie,  and 
T  retired,  unable  to  repress   my  tears,  and  repeating  with 
bitter  feelings  the  name  of  the  unfortunate  Marshal.     Dur- 
ing the  day  we  shared  the  right  of  walking  in  the  small 
yard,   without   being,  however,  allowed   to    remain    there 
together,   though   he  was  always   accompanied    by  a  gen- 
darme.    I  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  my  walk  at  six  o'clock 
in  the  morning  :  the  Marshal  wished  to  take  that  hour  for 
his  walk  ;  I  resigned  it  to  him  with  great  pleasure,  and  this 
arrangement  lasted  until   his   solitary  confinement   ended. 
From  that  time,  his  lady  and  children  came  every  day  to 
dine  with  him.     She  always  accompanied  him  in  his  walks. 
One  day  she  came  near  my  window  and  said  to  me  :  "  The 
sentry  that  guards  us  is  an  old  soldier  who  has  served  under 
the  Marshal  ;  he  wishes  very  much  to  talk  with  you."     The 
Marshal  in  consequence  came  up  :  our  conversation  could 
not  be  long.     He  said  to  me  :  "  I  am  easy  as  to  what  con- 


340  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

cerns  myself.  A  great  many  friends  watch  over  me  :  the 
Government  is  advancing  fast  again  towards  its  ruin.  The 
foreigners  already  take  our  part  ;  the  public  indignation  has 
communicated  itself  to  them  ;  and  if  you  wish  to  have  a 
proof  of  it,  read  these  papers  and  burn  them  when  you  have 
done."  He  then  slipped  through  the  bars  a  file  of  pamphlets 
and  some  manuscript  sheets.  I  found  in  them  violent  threats 
and  even  provocations,  that  appeared  to  me  very  ill-advised  : 
there  was  also  a  great  deal  of  absurd  news.  According  to 
their  accounts,  the  English  already  repented  having  replaced 
the  House  of  Bourbon  on  the  throne  ;  and  there  was  a  long 
protest  of  the  Empress  Maria  Louisa  against  the  resolution 
of  the  Sovereigns  who  kept  her  out  of  France.  What  the 
Marshal  had  told  me  about  his  friends  was  more  correct  ; 
but,  some  time  after,  I  learned  that  he  had  failed  in  an 
attempt  to  escape  from  the  Conciergerie,  and  that  six  thou- 
sand officers  on  half-pay  had  been  forced  to  leave  the  metro- 
polis by  order  of  the  Minister  of  War.  A  little  while  after 
that  conversation,  we  again  exchanged  the  hours  of  our 
walks.  He  then  went  down  in  the  evening,  accompanied  by 
his  wife,  his  brother-in-law,  and^  his  sister-in-law,  Madame 
Gamot.  The  prisoners  had  retired  to  their  dormitories  ; 
among  them  was  a  soldier  called  Dieu,  whose  good  voice  and 
comic  songs  diverted  the  Marshal. 

I  felt  a  very  great  wish  to  see  him  again  ;  and  one  evening 
I  ventured  to  ask  permission  to  go  up  to  the  Green.  The 
jailer  was  gone  out  :  the  turnkey  opened  the  door  and  led 
me  there,  where  I  found  Marshal  Ney  and  M.  Gamot.  I 
joined  them.  It  was  about  three  months  after  our  first  con- 
versation. At  that  period,  all  his  delusions  seemed  to  have 
vanished.  "  Labedoyere,"  said  he,  "  has  crossed  the  fatal 
passage.  Now  it  will  be  your  turn,  my  dear  Lavalette, 
and  mine  afterwards."  "  It  is  all  one,"  I  answered,  *'  who 
fall  first.  I  know  there  is  no  hope  left."  "  Oh,  oh  !  that 
we  shall  see.  However,  all  these  lawyers  annoy  me  ;  they 
do  not  understand  my  situation  ;  but  I  shall  speak  for  myself." 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

Time  passes  very  slowly  in  prison.  I  did  not  know  what  to 
do  with  myself  :  I  was  discontented  without  reason  with  my 
situation,  and  uneasy  in  respect  to  my  poor  Emilie.  Each 
day  brought  me  worse  and  worse  accounts  of  her  health.  I 
had  obtained  her  promise  that  she  would  not  come  to  see 
me  before  her  accouchement  ;  the  visit  might  have  killed 
her.  My  time,  so  ill-employed  in  seeking  to  discover  the 
future,  in  exhausting  all  conjectures,  in  cursing  the  new 
Revolution,  threw  me  into  a  fatal  dejection.  I  felt  the 
want  of  raising  my  spirits  by  the  only  diversion  I  was  per- 
mitted to  take — reading.  I  sent  for  Hume's  History  of 
England.  When  I  perused  the  narrative  of  all  the  royal 
misfortunes  with  which  it  is  filled,  I  found  my  own  more 
bearable,  and  I  reaped  both  courage  and  comfort  from  it. 
Finally,  in  recurring  to  my  own  situation,  I  rested  on  the 
idea  that  it  was  not  possible  I  could  be  sentenced  to  capital 
punishment,  and  that  I  should  certainly  come  off  with  a  few 
years'  imprisonment.  This  prospect  was  not  cheerful  ;  but, 
as  I  entertained  the  hope  of  being  confined  in  one  of  the 
prisons  of  Paris,  I  might  see  my  family,  comfort  them,  and 
put  my  affairs  in  order.  I  also  frequently  thought  of  the 
scaffold,  but  only  as  a  vague  threat  that  could  never  be 
realised.  I  was  in  the  abode  of  crime  ;  and  I  often  figured 
to  myself  the  terrors  of  a  thief,  and  especially  of  a  murderer, 
awaking  in  the  night  at  the  fancied  cries  of  his  victims,  and 
.struggling,   in  vain,  under  the  hands  of  the  executioner. 


342  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

What  must  not  his  sufferings  be  !  As  for  me,  I  could  at 
least  return  without  remorse  to  the  20th  of  March.  The 
indignation  of  the  Sovereign,  the  anger  of  his  adherents, 
could  not  make  my  heart  beat  more  quickly.  I  felt  myself 
strong  against  their  vengeance,  and  I  escaped  from  it  in 
imagination,  by  following  the  Emperor,  in  a  solitary  bark, 
on  his  way  to  St.  Helena. 

I  also  took  a  fancy  to  know  who  were  my  new  compatriots 
in  this  strange  country  ;  for  the  Conciergerie  is  like  a  distant 
region,  separated  from  all  civilised  nations — a  sort  of  colony 
of  the  New  World,  governed  by  brutal  and  despotic  laws, 
and  whose  population  consists  only  of  the  dregs  of  society^ 
and  where  ferociousness  and  depravity  must  be  constantly 
watched  and  repressed.  To  penetrate  into  that  region, 
passports  are  with  difficulty  obtained,  and  many  humiliating 
forms  must  be  observed.  The  prisoner  can  see  his  relations, 
friends,  and  counsel,  only  across  double  bars,  which  keep 
them  at  several  feet  distance,  surrounded  by  turnkeys,  who 
are  the  privileged  spies  of  his  words  and  most  trivial  gestures^ 
and  who  trifle  with  the  most  painful  feelings,  by  enjoining 
them  a  rigorous  silence. 

I  took  great  pains  to  obtain  any  information.  The  turn- 
keys could  not  answer  any  questions  :  but,  from  my  own 
observations,  I  think  there  must  have  been,  at  the  time  of 
my  confinement,  about  fifty  prisoners.  They  slept  in  about 
twenty  rooms,  containing  each  five  or  six  beds,  for  which 
they  paid  ten  francs  a  month  :  this  was  called  being  a  la 
pistole.  Those  who  did  not  possess  the  means  of  paying, 
passed  the  night  in  a  sort  of  shed,  on  straw  very  seldom 
renewed.  The  greatest  part  of  these  wretches  were  doomed 
to  the  galleys,  and  most  of  them  had  committed  theft  or 
forgery.  Their  indifference  as  to  the  fate  that  awaited  them 
was  quite  inconceivable. 

Not  to  deprive  Madame  Lavalette  of  the  services  of  my 
man-servant,  I  had  accepted  for  myself  those  of  a  condemned 
prisoner  who  was  respited  for  a  few  months.     He  had  filled 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  343 

a  responsible  employment  in  one  of  the  Government  offices, 
and  had  embezzled  the  money  that  passed  through  his 
hands,  for  which  crime  he  was  to  go  for  six  years  to  the 
galleys.  He  was  a  spy  over  me.  His  honeyed  words  and 
affected  officiousness  inspired  me  with  a  great  disgust  ;  but, 
on  the  one  hand,  my  pity  for  his  fate,  that  seemed  to  frighten 
him,  and  on  the  other,  my  fear  of  getting,  instead  of  him, 
one  still  more  perverse,  determined  me  to  keep  him.  At 
last,  however,  a  perfidious  trick  he  played  to  some  others 
became  the  cause  of  our  separation.  He  slept  with  six  other 
prisoners,  in  a  room  situated  in  the  western  part  of  the 
edifice.  These  wretches  took  it  into  their  heads  to  get  out 
of  prison,  by  digging  a  hole  in  the  wall  twelve  feet  thick, 
and  so  to  escape  on  the  Quai  des  Lunettes.  My  honest 
servant  procured  them  one  of  those  large  iron  bars  called  by 
the  prisoners,  I  believe,  chanceliere  ;  but  he  had  begun  by 
betraying  them,  and  the  jailer  let  them  go  on  for  some  time 
in  their  work.  Every  night  they  filled  their  pockets  with 
the  rubbish,  and  in  the  morning  they  cleverly  dispersed  it 
in  the  yard.  To  arrive  at  the  outward  wall,  they  were 
obliged  to  take  out  and  replace,  every  night,  an  enormous 
stone  of  six  feet  in  length.  They  had  been  already  for 
several  months  at  work,  and  they  only  wanted  one  night 
more  to  regain  their  liberty,  when  the  jailer  came  to  pay 
them  his  visit,  and  all  was  easily  discovered.  The  traitor 
was,  in  appearance,  condemned  to  the  same  punishment 
that  was  inflicted  on  them  all.  But  his  companions  were 
not  to  be  duped  by  this  ;  and  the  jailer  told  me  that  he  ran 
the  risk  of  being  murdered  in  the  galleys.  It  would  be  even 
difficult  to  let  him  travel  thither  with  them.  The  galley- 
slaves  never  pardon,  among  one  another,  a  treachery  of  that 
sort.  Ten  years  would  not  be  sufficient  to  make  them 
forget  it. 

The  yard  of  the  female  prisoners  was,  as  I  have  said, 
facing  my  window,  and  separated  from  it  by  a  high  wall. 
That  circumstance  was  a  continued  source  of  annoyance  to 


344  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

me.  From  eight  in  the  morning  to  seven  in  the  evening,  I 
was  stunned  by  a  deluge  of  the  most  vulgar,  coarse,  and 
depraved  expressions  in  the  French  language.  The  turn- 
keys were  frequently  obliged  to  go  and  restore  good  order 
among  those  harpies.  It  was  on  this  yard  that  the  two 
windows  of  the  Queen's  prison  opened.  During  my  con- 
finement, that  chamber,  situated  on  my  passage  when  I 
went  to  the  Green,  served  as  a  speaking  parlour  for  those 
privileged  prisoners  who  were  allowed  to  receive  visits  from 
their  friends.  It  was  a  large  room,  divided  in  two  by  a  sort 
of  pillar  that  formed  two  arches.  The  floor  was  paved  with 
bricks  placed  on  the  thick  side,  and  must  have  been  very 
old,  as  the  figures  they  represented  are  long  since  out  of 
use.  The  entrance  was  at  the  bottom  of  a  dark  passage. 
The  Queen  had  only  a  miserable  bed,  a  table,  and  two 
chairs  :  a  large  piece  of  tapestry  that  hung  across  the  room 
separated  her  from  the  gendarme  and  the  jailer,  who,  how- 
ever, left  her  during  the  night.  How  many  times  have  I 
not  walked  up  and  down  in  that  prison,  when  grief  and  low- 
ness  of  spirits  used  to  oppress  me  !  There  I  found  strength 
and  courage  :  I  blushed  to  complain  of  the  fate  that  might 
be  preparing  for  me,  when  I  recollected  the  horrible  destiny 
of  a  Queen  of  France.  I  was  certainly  the  first  person  who 
openly  expressed  the  wish  that  this  dungeon  might  be  con- 
verted into  a  chapel.  A  short  time  after  my  escape,  the 
order  was  really  given  and  executed. 

The  jailer,  with  his  obsequious  manners,  began  to  weary 
me  ;  and  his  everlasting  questions,  his  long  narratives  of 
prison  adventures,  became  quite  insufferable.  He  used  to 
come  eight  or  ten  times  a  day,  and  interrupt  me  while  I  was 
reading  or  meditating.  I  was  imprudent  enough  to  speak 
in  his  presence  of  chess  ;  and  from  that  instant  I  was  obliged, 
every  evening,  to  let  myself  be  beaten  during  three  hours  by 
him.  A  circumstance  of  small  importance  happily  delivered 
me  of  that  bore.  He  had  been  at  a  former  period  verger  of 
the  Criminal  Court,  and  had  sold  his  oflfice  to  a  man  who 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  345 

could  not  pay  him.  Having  heard  that  I  was  particularly 
acquainted  with  M.  Pasquier,  then  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  he 
begged  me  to  write  a  few  words  to  Madame  Lavalette,  that 
she  might  solicit  for  him  permission  to  resume  his  office. 
She,  however,  being  rather  mistrustful,  was  convinced  that 
under  his  claim  might  be  some  dangerous  plot  against  me  ; 
and  she  sent  my  letter  to  the  Minister  of  Police,  Decazes  : 
communications  of  that  sort  with  the  prisoners  are  wholly 
prohibited  ;  so  the  jailer  was  sent  away.  This  was  very 
fortunate  for  us  at  the  time  of  my  escape.  Having  been 
born  and  bred  in  a  prison,  he  was  full  of  artifice,  sagacity, 
and  penetration.  He  would  undoubtedly  have  observed  my 
disguise,  and  all  would  have  been  lost. 

They  put  in  his  place  a  man  from  Bordelais,  a  protege 
of  M.  Decazes.  This  man  was  of  a  harsh  humour  ;  his 
manners  were  severe,  and  even  rude  ;  and  he  was  very 
enthusiastic  in  his  political  opinions.  He  wanted  at  first  to 
imitate  his  predecessor  ;  to  come  into  my  room  at  all  times, 
and  enter  into  conversation  with  me  :  but  I  took  such  a 
high  tone  with  him,  that  I  silenced  him  the  very  first  day. 
Consequently,  I  only  used  to  see  him  in  the  morning  and  in 
the  evening,  when  he  came  to  examine  whether  all  was 
right. 

I  had  chosen  M.  Tripier  for  my  counsel,  whom  I  did  not 
know,  and  he  had  taken  for  his  assistant  M.  Lacroix  Frain- 
ville.  My  friends  had  a  great  desire  that  I  might  be  for- 
gotten, and  frequently  expressed  a  wish  that  I  might  fall 
sick.  Count  Alexander  de  La  Rochefoucault,  who  came 
very  often  to  see  me,  continually  reproached  me  with  my 
looking  too  well.  "  If  you  were  ill,"  he  said,  "  and  obliged 
to  keep  your  bed,  they  would  be  forced  to  put  off  your  trial  : 
time  would  by  degrees  calm  passions,  and  your  friends  would 
do  the  rest  for  you."  I  was  certainly  of  his  opinion  ;  but 
where  was  I  to  find  an  illness  ?  I  could  not  come  to  the 
resolution  of  breaking  one  of  my  legs  or  arms  ;  and  one 
•cannot  have  just  at  the  time  one  wishes  it  an  inflammation 


346  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALET7E. 

on  the  lungs  or  in  the  stomach.  I  was  therefore  under  the 
necessity  of  keeping  my  health,  and  with  it  all  the  dangers 
of  my  situation.  It  was  at  last  decided  that  I  should  be 
examined  by  one  of  the  judges  of  the  Royal  Court,  and  M. 
Dupuis  was  chosen  for  my  reporter.  I  had  several  years  before 
frequently  dined  with  him  at  the  house  of  a  mutual  friend. 
When  I  came  before  him,  we  knew  each  other  again.  The 
presence  of  the  registrar  kept  me  silent.  The  magistrate 
appeared  to  me  to  be  moved  by  generous  compassion  ;  but 
as  the  examination  went  on,  he  was  soon  convinced  that  he 
need  not  observe  any  particular  delicacy  in  regard  to  me. 
I  took  the  advance  on  the  required  explanation.  I  urged 
them  on  in  all  possible  ways,  and  the  first  examination  lasted 
five  hours,  though  he  wanted  several  times  to  stop  it,  think- 
ing I  might  be  fatigued.  But  I  felt  myself  so  completely 
innocent,  I  laid  so  much  importance  on  destroying  all  pre- 
possessions, all  superstructure  of  false  imputations  whicli 
filled  the  indictment,  that  I  should  have  continued  for  two 
hours  longer  if  he  had  wished  it.  The  next  day  we  had 
another  sitting,  which  lasted  again  four  hours.  I  have 
heard  from  my  friend,  that  M.  Dupuis  did  not  conceal  his 
surprise  at  the  importance  that  was  attached  to  my  business  ; 
and  that,  at  the  news  of  my  being  condemned,  he  expressed 
his  indignation  with  a  generous  frankness.  Two  months 
elapsed,  I  believe,  between  this  examination  and  my  trial  ;. 
but  time  did  not  alleviate  the  hatred  to  which  I  was  exposed. 
My  friends  were  discouraged  at  the  violence  of  the  Paris 
drawing-room  against  me.  The  royalists  were  enraged  at 
the  recollection  of  their  unworthy  conduct  in  the  month  of 
March,  and  sought  to  cover  their  shame  by  the  imaginary 
plot  which  they  said  had  brought  back  the  Emperor  ;  and 
they  appeared  to  have  no  doubt  but  that  I  had  been  at  the 
head  of  the  undertaking.  According  to  them,  a  very  active 
correspondence  had  taken  place  with  the  Island  of  Elba 
during  the  eleven  months  of  the  first  reign,  and  all  the  old 
clerks  of  the  Post-office  had  taken  a  part  in  it.     The  mails 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  347 

which  went  to  the  South  of  France  were  filled  with  letters 
from  me.  Head  clerks,  under-clerks,  couriers,  postmasters 
in  the  departments — all  had  been  in  the  secret,  and  had 
abetted  in  my  design.  To  tell  the  truth,  if  I  had  been  the 
chief  contriver  of  such  a  plan,  I  might  claim  credit  for  it  : 
its  conception  and  execution  would  have  ensured  me  ever- 
lasting fame  ;  I  should  have  been  the  most  profound  of  all 
conspirators,  and  I  might  pretend  to  a  great  part  of  the  glory 
which  people  too  frequently  bestow  on  men  who  have  made 
themselves  famous  by  great  enterprises,  even  when  their  aim 
is  contrary  to  morals  and  humanity  ;  but  nothing  must  go 
before  truth. 

In  1 8 14,  I  had  carefully  avoided  all  connection  with  the 
clerks  of  the  Post-office.  With  my  ardent  wish  for  seeing 
the  Emperor  again,  I  mixed  no  thought  of  ambition.  The 
love  cherished  for  him  by  France  ;  the  conviction  I  shared 
with  the  country,  that  he  alone  could  govern  her,  and  place 
her  on  a  solid  footing  in  the  first  rank  among  the  nations  of 
the  globe  ;  the  hope,  that  to  all  the  benefits  he  had  already 
bestowed  on  her  he  would  also  add  the  restitution  of  her 
liberties  ;  and  finally,  a  deep  feeling  of  gratitude, — were  the 
only  motives  of  my  conduct.  A  thousand  others,  in  my 
place,  would  have  done  as  much.  Millions  have  been  led 
on  by  the  same  impulses.  On  his  road,  at  his  arrival,  the 
people  pressed  forward  to  meet  him  :  the  greatest  in  the 
land  had  rushed  to  serve  him, — as  well  those  whom  the 
Bourbons  had  discarded,  as  those  whom  they  had  retained. 
One  lost  battle  had  decided  our  fate  ;  but  if  victory  had 
remained  faithful  to  us,  the  Empire,  re-established  on  its 
true  foundation,  would  have  repulsed  for  a  long  time,  and 
perhaps  for  ever,  the  family  of  the  Bourbons,  and  thus 
Liberty  would  have  undoubtedly  found  her  place  with  glory 
and  peace  ! 

I  was  very  much  afraid  that,  during  my  confinement, 
there  would  be  some  execution.  The  condemned  cell  was 
next  to  mine,   at  the  bottom  of  the  yard  where  I  used  to 


348  MEMOIRS  OF  C0UN2  LAVALETTE. 

walk.  Two  persons,  accused  of  murder,  were  tried,  but 
acquitted  :  one  of  them  was  a  young  man  who  had  served 
in  the  Life-guards.  He  had  murdered  his  mistress  in  cold 
blood,  after  having  passed  the  night  with  her  :  the  parti- 
culars of  his  crime  were  horrible.  He  first  fired  a  pistol  at 
her,  and  then  discharged  one  at  himself  ;  but  his  own  wound 
was  slight.  He  was  acquitted,  as  I  have  said,  and  they 
brought  him  back  to  the  vestibule  adjoining  my  dungeon, 
where  he  was  to  wait  until  the  accustomed  forms  had  been 
gone  through  to  set  him  at  liberty.  I  was  not  yet  made 
acquainted  with  the  verdict,  when  cries  and  sobs  struck 
my  ear.  I  thought  he  had  been  condemned,  and  I  must 
confess  that  my  courage  was  greatly  shaken.  It  was  not 
until  two  hours  afterwards  that  I  was  told  that  joy  had 
produced  on  him  a  violent  nervous  attack.  Fortunately, 
his  fear  of  passing  another  night  in  prison  gave  him 
strength  enough  to  go  away.  The  other  prisoner  was  a 
woman  who  was  accused  of  having  pushed  her  invalid 
sister  into  the  river,  where  she  had  been  drowned.  This 
unfortunate  person  edified  even  the  jailer  with  her  good 
behaviour  ;  so  that  he  employed  rigorous  means  to  prevent 
her  odious  companions  from  extending  their  abuse  into  real 
outrages.  The  day  she  was  tried,  she  dressed  herself  with 
particular  care.  When  she  left  the  court  she  fainted, — but 
her  joy  was  moderate  ;  and  on  leaving  the  prison,  she 
wished  to  distribute  among  her  wretched  companions  some 
marks  of  her  benevolence  ;  but  as  the  money  she  possessed 
did  not  make  a  considerable  sum,  she  sent  to  beg  ten  francs 
of  me,  to  add  to  the  present  she  made  them,  saying  that 
she  would  pray  to  God  that  I  might  find  as  equitable  a  jury 
as  hers  had  been. 

When  the  time  of  my  solitary  confinement  was  over, 
some  friends  came  to  visit  me.  In  the  foremost  rank  I 
must  place  Count  Alexander  de  La  Rochefoucault,  whose 
constant  friendship  never  ceased  softening  my  sufferings, 
and   who   gave    me  an  affecting  proof  of   it   by  accepting 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALET TE.  349 

the  charge  of  siibroge  tiiteur '  to  my  wife  during  her  illness, 
and  M.  de  Vandeuil,  at  present  a  member  of  the  Chamber 
of  Deputies.^  As  he  was  obhged  to  go  down  to  the  country, 
and  remain  there  all  the  autumn,  he  put  one  day  into  my 
hand  two  hundred  gold  louis,  begging  me  to  keep  them, 
saying,  "  Your  communications  with  your  family  may  become 
difficult,  and  money  can  never  do  any  harm.  It  is  better 
for  you  to  have  some  now  in  your  possession,  than  to  be 
obliged  to  ask  for  it."  And  indeed  these  two  hundred  louis 
were  of  great  service  to  me  when  I  fled  to  Bavaria  two 
months  afterwards.  His  mother  has  been  an  angel  of 
kindness  to  my  wife  :  it  was  she  who  brought  her  the  first 
consolation  in  her  prison.  Colonel  Briqueville,  who  was 
not  yet  cured  of  two  wounds  he  received  at  the  affair  of  Ver- 
sailles, frequently  left  his  bed  to  come  and  talk  with  me  for 
several  hours  together.  I  owe  also  many  thanks  to  Messieurs 
Frank  O'Hagarty  and  de  Fidieres  for  the  marks  of  attach- 
ment they  lavished  on  me.  But  the  most  active  friend  of 
all  was  one  of  our  relations,  Tascher  de  St.  Roses,  aide- 
de-camp  to  Prince  Eugene.  This  excellent  young  man, 
though  suffering  from  an  asthmatic  complaint  which,  from 
his  childhood,  never  allowed  him  to  sleep  in  a  bed,  and  the 
attacks  of  which  put  him  regularly  twice  a  month  in  the 
most  imminent  danger,  used  to  come  and  pass  whole  days 
with  me.  The  charms  of  his  conversation,  and  the  gentle 
cheerfulness  of  his  temper,  made  me  forget  at  once  my 
dungeon  and  my  future  fate.  He  continually  maintained 
that  I  would  be  sentenced  to  banishment,  and  he  pressed 
me  to  accompany  him  to  Martinique,  where  he  was  born. 
He  painted  to  me,  with  the  enthusiasm  of  a  colonist,  its 

'  Minors  and  insane  persons  have,  in  France,  liesidcs  their  common 
guardians  (tuteurs),  a  subroge  ttUeur,  who  takes  up  the  minor's  interests 
whenever  they  come  in  collision  with  those  of  their  guardian. — Note  of 
the  Translator. 

'  The  reader  must  not  forget  that  these  Memoirs  were  l)egun  in  exile, 
and  finished  in  Paris.  This  part  appears  io  have  heen  written  by  M. 
Lavalette  after  the  election  of  1827. — No/e  of  the  French  Editor. 


350  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

beautiful  climate,  its  cool  shades,  the  various  pleasures  its 
inhabitants  enjoyed,  the  singularity  of  their  manners,  and 
the  attentions  I  should  meet  with  from  a  numerous  family 
of  which  he  was  the  favourite.  He  sung  to  me  Negro  songs, 
talked  the  sweet  jargon  of  the  Negro  women,  and  thus  took 
a  pleasure  in  preparing  for  me,  my  wife  and  her  child,  a 
happy  life  in  the  New  World. 

I  had  not  seen  my  daughter  since  my  confinement, 
through  the  fear  of  adding  consternation  to  her  grief  at 
the  sight  of  the  horrors  of  my  prison.  Her  mother, 
nevertheless,  sent  her  to  me  to  receive  my  blessing,  the 
day  before  her  first  communion.  My  daily  correspondence 
with  my  family  was  all  my  love  for  them  required.  I 
thought  I  should  have  been  able  to  set  bounds  to  my 
expansive  affection  for  her  ;  but  when  I  saw  my  only  child, 
adorned  with  all  the  graces  of  youth,  falling  into  my  arms, 
bathed  in  tears,  and  afterwards  at  my  feet  in  a  deep  swoon, 
all  the  anguish  and  agonies  of  paternal  tenderness  lacerated 
my  heart.  For  the  first  time,  I  felt  how  great  was  my 
misfortune.  I  could  not  master  my  grief ;  silent  tears 
mixed  with  my  daughter's  sobs,  and  when  I  placed  my 
hands  on  her  head,  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  utter  a 
single  word. 

This  scene  made  me  reflect  on  my  situation.  I  began 
to  consider  it  under  its  real  aspect  ;  and  my  counsel,  in 
their  conferences,  tore  off  a  part  of  the  veil  which  till  then 
had  covered  my  eyes. 

The  first,  M.  Tripier,  was  a  man  whose  mind  was  cool, 
accurate,  and  logical.  The  best  way  he  found  to  prepare 
himself  for  my  defence  was  to  attack  me  on  all  points. 
What  had  I  to  do  at  the  Post-oflfice  ?  Why  did  I  go 
there  so  early  in  the  morning?  Why  did  I  send  a  courier 
to  Fontainebleau  ?  Why  did  I  give  orders  during  the 
day  ?  Why  that  bulletin  sent  all  over  France  by  the  mail  ? 
Finally  :  Why  did  I  stop  the  newspapers,  and  especially 
the  Momteur  that  contained  the  King's  proclamation  ?     He 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  351 

had  never  done  with  his  questions.  My  answers  appeared 
to  him  to  be  sincere  and  satisfactory  ;  but  they  did  not 
clear  me  of  the  fault  I  had  committed.  He  was,  however, 
soon  convinced  that  I  had  merely  yielded  to  imprudent 
impatience.  But  that  was  not  enough  to  acquit  me  ;  and 
until  the  day  before  my  sentence  was  passed,  he  thought 
I  should  be  condemned  to  five  years'  imprisonment  for 
having  usurped  the  public  power. 


CHAPTER   XXXVI. 

The  preliminary  conferences  continued  twice  a  week  during 
nearly  a  month.  A  few  days  before  the  opening  of  the 
debates,  the  Mom'teu?'  acquainted  me  with  the  terrible 
Letter  addressed  to  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  and  signed  by 
the  Duke  de  Richelieu,  against  Marshal  Ney.  How  could 
that  man,  of  whom  public  fame  proclaimed  the  frankness, 
the  gentle  manners,  the  impartial  and  independent  character, 
— how  could  he  attack  before  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  with 
such  brutal  and  sanguinary  rage,  one  of  the  most  honour- 
able Frenchmen  of  our  time, — one  of  our  most  illustrious 
warriors, — an  unfortunate,  accused,  but  unjudged  man, 
whose  examination  was  not  yet  known,  and  whom  the 
law  ought  to  have  surrounded  with  a  generous  compassion  ? 
When  M.  de  Lacroix  Frainville,  one  of  my  counsel,  entered 
my  room,  I  showed  him  the  Moniteiir.  Deep  emotion  was 
visible  in  his  features  while  he  read  it  ;  and  when  he  had 
done,  he  said  to  me  with  an  air  of  consternation,  after  a  few 
moments'  reflection,  "  Sir,  I  see  but  too  clearly  what  they 
want  to  come  to  :  but  I  am  old  ;  I  wish  to  pass  my  last 
days  free  from  political  storms,  and  my  health  is  too  weak 
to  bear  the  persecution  that  is  about  to  spread  on  all  sides. 
Permit  me,  therefore,  to  deposit  into  other  hands  the  bur- 
dens I  have  taken  upon  me.  My  friend  Tripier  will  easily 
find  a  fellow  lawyer  that  will  help  him  with  your  defence. 
I  shall  continue  with  my  advice,  but  I  do  not  feel  strength 
enough  to  appear  before  the  court." 

The  old  man  appeared,  in  fact,  so  overcome,  that  I  made 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  353 

no  comment  on  these  observations.  At  that  instant  M. 
Tripier  entered  the  room  ;  and  his  colleague,  after  having 
put  the  newspaper  into  his  hands,  repeated  his  resolution, 
and  was  going  to  name  some  other  la^vyer  to  take  his  place, 
when  M.  Tripier  said  coolly,  "  I  want  nobody  ;  I  shall 
defend  my  client  alone.  It  is  my  duty,  and  no  considera- 
tion shall  make  me  turn  away  from  it : "  and  then  our 
conference  began. 

While  I  was  thus  debating  for  my  life,  my  new-born  child 
was  dying  in  the  arms  of  its  poor  mother.  This  misfortune 
would,  I  feared,  have  most  fatal  consequences  for  her.  I 
reckoned  upon  that  child  to  comfort  her  grief  after  I  should 
be  dead.  The  motherly  care  it  would  require,  and  which 
she  would  lavish  on  it  with  so  much  affection  and  tender- 
ness, would,  I  expected,  give  still  a  zest  to  her  life  ;  and  it 
was  abruptly  taken  away  from  her  in  the  space  of  a  few 
hours.  This  circumstance  threw  me  into  despair.  The 
following  day,  when  Lacroix  Frainville  came  in,  the  situa- 
tion in  which  he  found  me  made  him  suspect  that  the  fear 
of  a  sentence  of  death  was  the  cause  of  my  trouble  ;  and 
he  was  going  to  offer  me  some  commonplace  comfortings, 
when  I  acquainted  him  of  the  fresh  blow  that  had  shook 
me.  "  My  God  !  "  he  cried,  pressing  me  in  his  arms  ;  ''  this 
is  too  much  at  one  time.  Pray  forget  the  momentary 
weakness  that  I  showed  yesterday.  I  will  not  leave  you  ; — 
yes,  I  will  defend  you."  And  he  nobly  kept  his  word  by 
coming  into  court,  and  assisting  his  fellow  counsel  during 
all  the  debates. 

My  greatest  anxiety,  however, was  the  situation  of  Madame 
Lavalette.  That  son,  the  object  of  the  wishes  of  all  her 
life,  had  been  snatched  away  from  her.  I  had  required 
of  her  not  to  come  to  the  Conciergerie  during  her  preg- 
nancy. The  dismal  sight  of  a  prison,  and  of  the  dungeon 
in  which  I  was  confined,  might  have  had  a  fatal  effect  upon 
her.  Through  the  same  motive  I  had  forbid  them  to  bring 
my   son  to   me.      All  that  had    been   reported    to   me   of 

24 


354  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

the  passionate  love  of  the  mother  for  her  child  made  me 
tremble  for  her  health.  St.  Roses  only  spoke  to  me  of 
her  tears  and  her  grief,  but  tried  to  make  me  easy  as  to 
consequences.  Now,  what  would  be  the  result  of  the  trial  ? 
Five  years'  confinement  was  a  severe  punishment  ;  but  still 
I  might  see  her,  comfort  her,  keep  in  my  hands  the  manage- 
ment of  our  mutilated  fortune — in  one  word,  offer  her  the 
prospect  of  more  happy  times  to  come.  But  if  death 
awaited  me,  what  would  become  of  her  in  her  misfortune  ? 
Through  some  fatality,  too  common  in  our  revolution,  her 
family,  not  very  numerous  of  itself,  was  dispersed,  or  had 
disappeared.  Her  father  was  indeed  returned  from  abroad  ; 
but  he  had  brought  with  him  a  second  wife,  who  had  borne 
him  children.  Although  he  was  an  excellent  man,  new 
ties,  new  affections,  and  the  distance  at  which  he  lived  from 
Paris,  did  not  promise  that  he  would  be  a  very  effectual 
consolation  for  his  daughter.  My  only  hope  rested  on 
Count  Alexander  de  La  Rochefoucault,  who  was  related  to 
her  by  marriage,  and  who  had  given  us  for  the  last  month 
courageous  proof  of  his  affection. 

While  my  mind  was  thus  agitated,  I  was  informed  that 
the  trial  would  open  on  the  19th  of  November.  The  list 
of  the  jury  was  laid  before  me  on  the  i8th.  Not  one  among 
the  thirty-six  names  was-  known  to  me.  I  had  to  choose 
among  them  twelve  men,  whose  conscience  might  be  firm, 
and  whose  minds  enlightened  enough  to  resist  the  corrup- 
tion of  party  spirit  and  the  threats  of  Government.  The 
list  was  composed  of  tradesmen,  lawyers,  and  two  members  of 
the  Council  of  State, — all  men,  the  independence  of  whose 
position,  except  that  of  the  former,  was  not  extremely 
certain.  I  had  several  copies  made  of  that  list,  and  my 
friends  hastened  to  make  inquiries  concerning  them,  and 
to  visit  them.  But  it  was  Sunday,  and  consequently  difficult 
to  meet  them.  The  notes  I  received  the  next  day  were  so 
contradictory  that  I  knew  not  whom  to  reject  or  admit.  I 
was,  however,  obliged  to  go  up  to  court.     Before  I  entered 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  355 

the  room  where  the  jury  was  assembled,  they  made  me  wait 
in  the  President's  closet,  where  I  found  a  verger  of  the 
Criminal  Court.  He  was  a  young  man,  whose  eyes,  fixed 
upon  me  with  an  appearance  of  great  interest,  seemed  to 
question  me  respecting  the  list  I  held  in  my  hand.  "  Read 
the  list  to  me,"  he  said,  with  emotion  ;  "  your  fate  lies  in 
that  paper.  I  can  direct  you  better  than  any  one."  I  did 
as  he  bade  me,  and  at  each  name  I  mentioned  he  cried — 
"  That  one  is  doubtful  ;  this  other  shocking  ;  quickly  erase 
the  name."  He  had  scarcely  heard  twelve  of  them  when 
I  was  called  to  assist  at  the  drawing  of  the  jury.  It  was 
an  imposing  scene.  Thirty-six  persons  assembled,  standing 
in  presence  of  the  magistrates  and  the  prisoner  :  twelve 
were  to  decide  his  fate.  My  looks  wandered  over  the 
assembly.  I  sought  for  good-will,  or  at  least  for  impar- 
tiality, and  methought  I  perceived  a  sort  of  sympathy 
for  me.  The  gravity  of  their  countenance,  their  downcast 
looks,  the  air  of  melancholy  spread  over  their  features, 
infused  a  degree  of  tranquillity  into  my  mind,  that  aug- 
mented with  each  minute.  I  challenged  the  first  names 
that  came  out  of  the  urn,  because  they  had  been  so  by 
my  kind  verger  ;  but  I  accepted  the  thirteenth,  M.  Horon 
de  Villefosse.  The  information  my  friend  had  given  me 
was  favourable  to  him.  He  was  an  engineer,  who  had  been 
employed  by  the  Emperor  in  the  mines  of  the  Hartz,  in 
Hanover.  I  had  been  assured  he  was  a  learned  and  sensible 
man  :  he  had  been  Master  of  Requests  during  my  time.  I 
congratulated  myself,  therefore,  for  having  him  for  foreman 
of  my  jury.  To  his  name  followed  that  of  M.  Jurien,  now 
Councillor  of  State,  and,  I  believe,  formerly  an  emigrant.  I 
accepted  him  with  a  secret  reluctance,  and  with  a  sort  of 
foreboding  that  he  would  prove  inimical.  The  sequel  will 
show  in  how  far  I  was  mistaken. 

My  intention  is  not  to  retrace  here  all  the  particulars  of 
my  trial.  I  cannot  however  pass  over  in  silence  some  facts, 
which  are  not  explained  by  the  perusal  of  the  proceedings. 


356  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

On  the  20th  of  March,  the  two  nephews  of  M.  Ferrand  were 
at  the  Post-office.  One  of  the  two  accompanied  Madame 
Ferrand  when  she  came  to  ask  me  for  a  permit  for  post- 
horses.  It  was  the  first  time  in  my  life  that  I  had  seen  this 
young  man  ;  and  it  was  not  he  that  came  up  as  a  witness 
against  me.  The  one  who  appeared  had  neither  his  stature, 
his  features,  his  eye,  nor  the  tone  of  his  voice.  I  did  not 
know  there  were  two  brothers,  and  in  my  first  astonishment 
on  finding  myself  in  the  presence  of  an  utter  stranger,  I 
made  the  observation  aloud.  The  witness,  however,  posi- 
tively affirmed  that  it  was  he  who  had  accompanied  his 
aunt.  The  President  asked  me  what  use  I  wished  to  make 
of  so  serious  a  charge,  which  might  have  involved  the 
witness  in  a  trial  for  perjury.  My  counsel,  whom  I  con- 
sulted, was  at  a  loss  what  answer  he  should  give  me  ;  and 
in  all  probability  I  should  not  have  succeeded  in  eliciting 
the  truth.  I  nevertheless  remain  convinced  that  I  was  in 
the  right.  What  could  have  been  the  motive  of  that 
change  of  individuals  ?  The  eldest,  who  really  accompanied 
his  aunt,  was  a  Master  of  Requests  :  could  it  have  been 
repugnant  to  his  feelings  to  present  himself  as  a  witness 
against  me  ?  I  have  not  seen  either  of  these  two  gentlemen, 
since  that  time  ;  and  when  I  returned  to  France,  after  five 
years'  banishment,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  throw 
any  light  on  so  strange  a  circumstance. 

The  Advocate-General  Hua  was  a  man  of  very  violent 
opinions ;  and  I  am  not  the  only  victim  of  the  unjust 
severity  which  he  showed  at  that  time,  with  several  other 
officers  on  the  Crown  side  of  the  court.  He  had  shown 
himself  my  private  enemy.  The  violence  of  his  attacks,  his 
obstinate  hatred  of  me,  made  him  reject  in  a  brutal  manner 
all  that  seemed  to  militate  in  my  favour.  The  result  of  the 
trial  was  advantageous  to  his  personal  interests  :  he  is  at 
present  a  counsellor  at  the  Court  of  Cassation. 

The  first  day  was  spent  in  examinations  ;  the  second  was 
devoted  to  the  pleadings  of  my  advocate,  and  of  the  King's- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  357 

attorney.  I  stood  in  the  presence  of  numerous  spectators, 
none  of  whom  were  my  friends.  However,  the  great 
animosity  which  prevailed  during  the  first  day,  and  which 
expressed  itself  more  than  once  by  groans,  was  afterwards 
softened.  The  second  day  appeared  to  me  much  more 
favourable.  At  last,  towards  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the 
jury  were  going  to  retire,  when  the  manner  of  putting  the 
questions  was  discussed  between  the  King's  advocate  and 
mine.  The  latter  wanted  them  to  be  put  in  the  following 
manner  :  ist.  Is  the  prisoner  guilty  of  conspiracy  ?  2nd,  Is 
lie  guilty  of  an  usurpation  of  public  authority  ?  It  was  clear 
that  I  had  had  no  share  in  the  conspiracy,  for  that  charge 
had  been  abandoned  from  the  beginning  of  the  proceedings  ; 
and  the  jury  would  undoubtedly  have  acquitted  me  on  the 
first  question.  On  the  second  I  should  certainly  have  been 
declared  guilty.  But  by  that  means  death  was  avoided. 
By  separating  the  plot  from  the  usurpation  of  authority,  the 
jury  would  have  saved  me,  as  my  crime  was  no  longer  a 
felony,  but  a  misdemeanour.  That  was,  however,  not  the 
object  of  Government ;  death  was  the  result  they  demanded 
from  the  jury,  and  the  following  were  the  infamous  means 
made  use  of  to  gain  over  the  majority.  It  was  secretly 
observed  to  the  jury  :  "  That  after  a  great  act  of  justice  (the 
condemnation  of  Marshal  Ney),  it  is  very  important  for  the 
King  to  do  a  great  act  of  clemency.  Good  policy  and  the 
interest  of  the  monarch  will  have  it  so.  Give,  therefore,  a 
verdict  against  the  prisoner.  His  life  shall  be  spared,  while 
Justice  will  be  satisfied,  society  avenged,  and  the  King's 
bounty  will  shine  in  all  its  splendour."  Thus  the  two 
questions  were  joined  in  one,  and  delivered  over  to  the 
conscience  and  timidity  of  the  jury.  I  was  brought  back  to 
prison,  where  St.  Roses,  who  had  been  in  the  court,  came 
to  keep  me  company.  My  hopes  had  all  vanished,  but  I 
tried  to  prolong  those  of  this  excellent  young  man.  After  a 
very  sad  dinner,  I  prepared  to  play  a  game  at  chess,  and  I 
•won  it,  contrary  to  custom,  for  he  was  the  better  player. 


35«  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

The  more  the  hours  adv^anced,  the  more  his  courage 
slackened  ;  and  when  at  ten  o'clock  he  was  obliged  to 
leave  me,  he  burst  into  tears  and  could  scarcely  resolve  to 
go.  I  remained  alone  during  two  whole  hours  ;  for  it  was 
not  till  after  midnight  that  I  was  called  up  to  hear  my 
sentence  pronounced.  The  verdict  had  been  read  during 
my  absence  ;  so  that  the  gendarmes  who  received  me  at  the 
top  of  the  staircase  and  accompanied  me  to  the  President's 
closet  observed  the  most  dismal  silence.  I  sat  down,  and 
looking  at  them  attentively,  I  read  my  fate  in  their  faces. 
"  Well,"  said  I  to  the  brigadier,  "  I  am  condemned  ?  How 
could  an  aide-de-camp  of  Bonaparte  expect  to  be  ac- 
quitted ?  "  Without  giving  me  any  answer,  he  led  me 
before  the  judges.  A  deep  silence,  an  absence  of  all  motion,, 
prevailed  in  the  extensive  and  dimly-lighted  hall.  The 
benches  were  still  filled  with  ladies.  My  eyes,  wandering 
around  me,  sought  in  vain  a  look  of  compassion  and  kind- 
ness. One  of  the  jurymen  had  his  face  covered  with  his- 
handkerchief :  it  was  M.  Jurien.  At  last  the  President 
ordered  the  Registrar  to  read  the  verdict  of  the  jury.  It 
was  as  I  expected  ;  but  fearing,  above  all  things,  to  see  the 
cross  of  the  Legion  of  Honour  torn  from  my  breast,  I  had 
taken  care  to  lay  it  by,  as  well  as  the  great  ribbon  and  other 
insignia  of  the  Orders  of  the  Iron  Crown  and  Holland. 
The  judges  retired  pro  forma  for  a  few  minutes,  and  on 
their  return  the  President  repeated  aloud  the  article  of  the 
Criminal  Code  by  which  I  was  sentenced  to  die.  Fortunately^ 
the  ceremony  of  tearing  off  the  cross  of  the  Legion  of  Honour 
was  omitted.  This  outrage  could  alone  have  destroyed  the 
tranquillity  of  my  mind.  The  minute  circumstances  re- 
corded by  the  public  papers  are  correct  :  I  shall  therefore 
not  repeat  them  here.  At  half-past  twelve  I  went  down 
again  to  my  dungeon.  In  the  passage  that  leads  to  it  I  met 
the  jailer,  who  questioned  me  with  great  indifference.  I 
answered  :  "  All  is  over  !  "  The  man  started  back  as  if  he 
had  received  a  violent  blow,  and  disappeared.     I  had  re- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  359 

strained  my  feelings  in  presence  of  the  public,  but  night 
and  solitude  recalled  to  my  memory  the  fatal  words,  "  Pain 
of  Death  I ''  The  agitation  of  mind  began  to  show  itself  by 
an  effusion  of  violent  indignation.  I  walked  backwards  and 
forwards  with  long  strides  ;  I  appealed  to  all  France  against 
the  iniquity  of  my  sentence.  However,  I  grew  calm  by 
degrees,  and  soon,  in  a  deep  sleep,  I  forgot  my  misfortune. 

The  next  day  I  received  authentic  particulars  of  what  had 
passed  the  day  before  at  the  discussion  of  the  jury.  The 
foreman  had  enforced  the  charges  with  inconceivable  obsti- 
nacy, and  M.  Jurien  had  confuted  them  with  wonderful 
strength  of  argument.  The  discussion  lasted  six  hours  with 
a  great  deal  of  animosity,  and  such  loud  speeches  that  they 
were  heard  very  far  from  the  room  where  the  jurymen  sat. 
At  last  the  foreman  got  the  better,  notwithstanding  all  the 
efforts  of  M.  Jurien  :  eight  votes  against  four  pronounced 
me  guilty. 

I  wished  to  die  without  appealing  to  the  Court  of  Cassa- 
tion. I  concluded  that  the  forms  had  been  undoubtedly  too 
well  observed  for  me  to  hope  that  the  verdict  could  be  set 
aside.  Besides,  why  should  I  languish  in  agony  during  a 
fortnight,  or  perhaps  a  month  ?  Why  let  myself  be  dragged 
to  the  scaffold  among  the  rabble  in  the  streets,  and  perhaps 
amidst  the  hootings  of  the  royalists  ?  But  then,  when  I 
thought  of  my  wife  and  child,  reason  and  coolness  recovered 
their  sway,  and  this  was  the  only  fit  of  despair  which  I 
experienced. 

The  first  thing  to  be  done  was  to  communicate  the  dread- 
ful news  to  Madame  Lavalette.  I  wrote  to  an  old  friend, 
Madame  de  Vandeuil,  and  to  the  Princess  de  Vaudemont. 
They  both  went  to  her,  and  the  mourning  they  had  put 
on  acquainted  her  immediately  with  her  misfortune.  But 
the  Princess  de  Vaudemont,  whose  firm  character  was 
capable  of  foreseeing  everything,  made  my  wife  write  a 
letter  to  the  Duke  de  Duras,  First  Gentleman  of  the  Bed- 
chamber, to  obtain  an  audience  of  the  King.     It  was  very 


36o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

doubtful  whether  it  would  be  granted.  The  ladies  of  Labe- 
doyere  and  Ney  had  been  refused.  Nevertheless,  contrary 
to  all  expectation,  an  hour  afterwards  she  received  per- 
mission to  go  to  the  palace.  "  The  King  expects  Madame 
de  Lavalette  in  his  closet."  Such  was  the  answer  sent  to 
her.  She  stepped  in  consequence  into  the  Princess's  coach 
with  my  daughter,  and  alighted  at  the  Tuileries  at  the 
apartments  of  the  First  Gentleman  of  the  Bedchamber. 
The  Duke  de  Duras  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  led  her, 
amidst  all  the  courtiers,  to  the  King's  closet.  There  she  fell 
at  the  feet  of  Louis  XVIIL,  who  said  to  her  :  "  Madame,  I 
have  received  you  immediately,  to  give  you  a  proof  of  the 
interest  I  feel  for  you."  These  were  the  only  words  he 
uttered.  She  was  raised,  and  went  out  of  the  chamber. 
But  the  words  of  the  King  had  been  heard  ;  they  circulated 
as  Madame  de  Lavalette  passed  ;  and  her  grief,  her  beauty, 
her  noble  and  graceful  demeanour,  notwithstanding  the 
evident  dejection  under  which  she  laboured,  aflFected  all  who 
saw  her.  They  recollected  that  she  was  the  daughter  of 
an  emigrant,  and  nobody  doubted  but  my  pardon  would 
be  granted,  the  King  having  once  admitted  her  into  his 
presence.     They  were  nevertheless  mistaken. 


CHAPTER  XXXVTI. 

The  next  iday  Madame  Lavalette  came  to  see  me  for  the 
first  time  during  four  months.  Her  pale,  emaciated,  and 
dejected  countenance  made  me  shudder.  Her  voice  was 
scarcely  audible,  and  during  half  an  hour  I  could  not  draw 
a  single  word  out  of  her.  She  recovered,  however,  by 
degrees,  and  acquainted  me  with  the  particulars  of  the 
reception  she  had  met  with  from  the  King.  She  came 
alone,  but  Count  Carvoisin  came  to  fetch  her  and  conduct 
her  home.  Gratitude  does  not  permit  me  to  forget  that 
worthy  friend.  I  had  known  M.  de  Carvoisin  eight  years 
before  at  Surene,  where  we  were  country  neighbours.  He 
had  at  that  time  with  him  a  young  niece,  who  afterwards 
married  the  Count  de  Clermont  Tonnerre.  Though  he  had 
not  yet  attained  old  age,  he  had  already  some  of  its  in- 
firmities. Subject  to  an  asthmatic  complaint  from  the  time 
of  his  infancy,  he  had  left  the  army  before  the  Revolution 
broke  out,  and  lived  at  present  the  life  of  a  Christian 
philosopher,  far  from  the  world  he  did  not  love.  He  was 
solely  occupied  with  the  education  of  his  young  ward,  and 
with  a  charitable  society  of  which  he  had  urged  the  estab- 
lishment, and  which  prospered  through  his  benevolence. 
We  were  far  from  sharing  the  same  opinions  on  several 
political  questions  ;  but  by  yielding  a  little  on  both  sides, 
the  greatest  harmony  had  never  ceased  to  reign  between  us. 
I  had  lost  sight  of  him  since  the  Restoration  ;  but  he 
returned  to  me  in  my  misfortune,  and  during  the  last  and 
most  terrible  month  of  my  confinement  he  used  to  come 

361 


362  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

every  day  to  see  me,  after  having  assisted  at  a  mass  he 
ordered  to  be  said  every  morning  for  my  liberation.  He 
was,  however,  admirably  moderate  in  his  opinions.  My 
situation  seemed  to  require  from  him  that  he  should  offer 
me  the  comforts  of  religion.  His  conversation  had  a  most 
seducing  charm  :  he  gave  to  his  words  a  devoutness,  and  an 
openness  of  heart,  that  touched  me  ;  but  I  was  too  sincere 
not  to  acknowledge  that  there  was  no  hope  of  our  agreeing. 
I  explained  to  him,  in  the  most  simple  manner,  all  that  it 
was  impossible  for  me  to  admit,  and  he  ceased  his  entreaties 
without  showing  the  least  impatience  or  the  slightest  cold- 
ness. 

Now  that  Madame  de  Lavalette  is  about  to  fill  a 
prominent  part  in  these  Memoirs,  I  think  fit  to  enter  into 
some  particulars  concerning  her  and  our  marriage. 

Louise  Emilie  de  Beauharnais  was  born  in  1780,  Her 
father,  Francis,  Marquis  de  Beauharnais,  had  married  his 
first  cousin,  the  daughter  of  the  Countess  Fanny  de  Beau- 
harnais, who  has  acquired  some  celebrity  in  literature, 
and  sister  to  the  Count  de  Beauharnais  who  died  a  Peer 
of  France,  and  whose  daughter  is  now  Grand-Duchess  of 
Baden.  M.  de  Beauharnais  was  the  head  of  his  family. 
His  brother  Alexander,  who  had  married  Mademoiselle 
Josephine  Tascher  de  la  Fagerie,  had  two  children,  Eugene 
and  Hortense.  My  father-in-law  had  only  one  surviving 
daughter. 

At  the  convocation  of  the  States-General,  Alexander  was 
elected  deputy  of  the  nobility  of  Blaisois.  The  eldest 
brother,  Francis,  was  named  supernumerary  member  of  the 
nobility  of  Paris,  and  only  took  his  place  in  the  Chamber 
after  the  6th  October,  1789,  in  lieu  of  M.  de  Lally  Tollendal, 
who  left  France  at  that  period.  Alexander  embraced  the 
cause  of  Liberty,  and  was  rewarded  by  the  scaffold.  Francis 
always  voted  with  the  right  side,  and  in  1792  he  rejoined 
the  Princes  at  Coblentz.  Madame  de  Beauharnais  soon 
shared  the  fate  of  all  the  nobles  who  remained  in  France. 


s^' 


VWler  L  CalU.Ph  J 


COUNTESS       UAVALETTE 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  363 

She  was  put  in  prison,  where  she  stayed  more  than  two 
years.  Young  Emihe  was  entrusted  to  the  care  of  a 
governess,  or  rather  abandoned  to  the  vulgar  caprice  of 
some  domestics  who  shared  the  movements  and  passions  of 
the  mob.  Born  of  emigrant  parents,  the  poor  child  was 
obliged  to  assist  at  the  patriotic  processions  which  took 
place  every  month  on  the  Republican  holidays.  She  often 
said  :  "  I  was  very  ill-used  on  those  occasions  by  my  com- 
panions, the  young  girls  of  the  neighbourhood.  They 
could  not  forgive  me  my  tall  stature  and  genteel  features, 
which  contrasted  with  those  of  the  greatest  part  among 
them.  The  daughter  of  an  emigrant  marquis  and  an  im- 
prisoned mother  could  scarcely  share  the  honour  of  their 
company.  As  for  me,  the  exclusion  had  nothing  disgraceful 
in  my  eyes  ;  but  my  governess,  though  she  had  none  of 
the  prejudices  of  my  companions,  took  great  care  to  con- 
duct me  to  their  assemblies  for  her  own  interest.  The  least 
reluctance  she  would  have  shown  for  it  might  have  exposed 
her  to  be  arrested." 

At  that  terrible  period  of  madness  and  fanaticism,  private 
life  was  subject  to  jealous  and  perpetual  supervision.  The 
porter  of  a  nobleman's  house  was  obliged,  for  his  individual 
safety,  to  become  a  spy  and  an  informer.  The  servants 
were  again  the  masters,  or  rather  the  tyrants,  of  those  who 
employed  them.  They  were  displeased  that  the  daughter 
of  an  emigrant  was  not  bound  in  apprenticeship,  and  that 
she  maintained  in  her  manners  and  occupations  something 
genteel  and  delicate.  The  two  cousins  of  Emilie  were  both 
apprentices — Hortense  to  her  mother's  mantua-maker  ; 
Eugene  to  a  joiner  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain.  The 
9th  Thermidor  having  overthrown  tyranny,  Madame  de 
Beauharnais  got  out  of  prison,  and  Emilie  was  sent  with 
her  cousin  to  a  boarding-school  which  Madame  Campan 
had  established  at  St.  Germain-en-Laye.  There  she  con- 
tinued her  education,  which  had  been  interrupted  during 
two  years. 


364  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

General  Bonaparte,  to  whom  I  was  at  that  time  aide-de- 
camp, had  sent  mc  in  1796  to  Paris,  that  I  might  follow 
the  motions  of  the  two  Councils  and  the  Directory.  I  had 
written  to  him  the  truth,  with  a  frankness  that  made  him 
sensible  how  dangerous  and  how  disgraceful  it  would  be  to 
confirm,  by  his  assent,  the  coup  (Tetat  of  the  i8th  Fructidor. 
The  Directory  soon  became  acquainted  with  my  opinions  ; 
and  though  they  dared  not  punish  me  for  them,  they  ex- 
pressed so  great  a  resentment,  that  General  Bonaparte  did 
not  think  fit  to  take  me  with  him  to  Paris,  when  he  re- 
turned from  the  Army  of  Italy.  He  left  me  at  the  Congress 
of  Rastadt ;  and  I  rejoined  him  only  three  weeks  before  his 
departure  for  the  Egyptian  expedition.  All  my  comrades 
had  obtained  advancement  :  the  General  wished  to  reward 
me  also  ;  but,  not  willing  to  expose  himself  to  a  refusal 
from  Government,  he  determined  to  bring  about  a  marriage 
between  me  and  Mademoiselle  Beauharnais.  One  day, 
when  I  had  accompanied  him  to  the  Treasury,  to  expedite 
the  sending  off"  of  the  sums  that  were  required  at  Toulon 
for  the  fleet,  he  ordered  his  coachman  to  drive  along  the 
new  Boulevards,  that  he  might  have  at  his  leisure  a  con- 
versation with  me.  "  I  cannot  make  a  major  of  you,"  he 
said  ;  "  I  must  therefore  give  you  a  wife  :  you  shall  marry 
Emilie  de  Beauharnais.  She  is  very  handsome,  and  very 
well  educated.  Do  you  know  her  ?  "  "I  have  seen  her 
twice.  But,  General,  I  have  no  fortune.  We  are  going  to 
Africa  :  I  may  be  killed — what  will  become,  in  that  case,  of 
my  poor  widow  ?  Besides,  I  have  no  great  liking  for 
marriage."  "  Men  must  marry  to  have  children  ;  that  is 
the  chief  aim  of  life.  Killed  you  certainly  may  be.  Well, 
in  that  case  she  will  be  the  widow  of  one  of  my  aides- 
de-camp — of  a  defender  of  his  country.  She  will  have  a 
pension,  and  may  again  marry  advantageously.  Now,  she 
is  the  daughter  of  an  emigrant  that  nobody  will  have  :  my 
wife  cannot  introduce  her  into  society.  She,  poor  girl  ! 
deserves  a  better  fate.     Come,  this  business  must  be  quickly 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  365 

settled.  Talk  this  morning  with  Madame  Bonaparte  about 
it :  the  mother  has  already  given  her  consent.  The  wedding 
shall  take  place  in  eight  days;  I  will  allow  you  a  fortnight 
for  your  honeymoon.  You  must  then  come  and  join  us  at 
Toulon  on  the  29th."  (It  was  then  the  9th.)  I  could  not 
help  laughing  all  the  while  he  spoke  : — at  last  I  said  :  "  I 
will  do  whatever  you  please.  But  will  the  girl  have  me  ? 
I  do  not  wish  to  force  her  inclinations."  "  She  is  tired  of 
her  boarding-school,  and  she  would  be  unhappy  if  she  were 
to  go  to  her  mother's.  During  your  absence,  she  shall 
live  with  her  grandfather  at  Fontainebleau.  You  will  not 
be  killed  ;  and  you  will  find  her  when  you  come  back. 
Come,  come  !  the  thing  is  settled.  Tell  the  coachman  to 
drive  home." 

In  the  evening,  I  went  to  see  Madame  Bonaparte,  She 
knew  what  was  going  forward,  and  was  kind  enough  to 
show  some  satisfaction,  and  call  me  her  nephew.  "  To- 
morrow," she  said,  "  we  shall  all  go  to  St.  Germain.  I  will 
introduce  you  to  my  niece.  You  will  be  delighted  with 
her  :  she  is  a  charming  girl !  " 

Accordingly,  next  day,  the  General,  Madame  Bonaparte, 
Eugene,  and  I,  went  in  an  open  carriage  to  St.  Germain, 
and  stopped  at  Madame  Campan's.  The  visit  was  a  great 
event  at  the  boarding-school :  all  the  young  girls  were  at 
the  windows,  in  the  parlours,  or  in  the  courtyard,  for  they 
had  obtained  a  holiday.  We  soon  entered  the  gardens. 
Among  the  forty  young  ladies,  I  sought  anxiously  her  who 
was  to  be  my  wife.  Her  cousin,  Hortense,  led  her  to  us, 
that  she  might  salute  the  General,  and  embrace  her  aunt. 
She  was,  in  truth,  the  prettiest  of  them  all.  Her  stature 
was  tall,  and  most  gracefully  elegant  ;  her  features  were 
charming  ;  and  the  glow  of  her  beautiful  complexion  was 
heightened  by  her  confusion.  Her  bashfulness  was  so 
great  that  the  General  could  not  help  laughing  at  her  ; 
but  he  went  no  farther.  It  was  decided  that  we  should 
breakfast  on  the  grass  in  the  garden.     In  the  meanwhile  I 


366  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

felt  extremely  uneasy.  Would  she  like  me  ?  Would  she 
obey  without  reluctance  ?  This  abrupt  marriage,  and  this 
speedy  departure,  grieved  me.  When  we  got  up,  and  the 
circle  was  broken,  I  begged  Eugene  to  conduct  his  cousin 
into  a  solitary  walk.  I  joined  them,  and  he  left  us.  I  then 
entered  on  the  delicate  subject.  I  made  no  secret  of  my 
birth,  nor  of  my  want  of  fortune  ;  and  added  :  "  I  possess 
nothing  in  the  world  but  my  sword  and  the  good-will  of  the 
General ;  and  I  must  leave  you  in  a  fortnight.  Open  your 
heart  to  me.  I  feel  myself  disposed  to  love  you  with  all  my 
soul  ;  but  that  is  not  sufficient.  If  this  marriage  does  not 
please  you,  repose  a  full  confidence  in  me  ;  it  will  not  be 
difficult  to  find  a  pretext  to  break  it  off.  I  shall  depart ; 
you  will  not  be  tormented,  for  I  will  keep  your  secret." 

While  I  was  speaking,  she  kept  her  eyes  fixed  on  the 
ground  ;  her  only  answer  was  a  smile,  and  she  gave  me 
the  nosegay  she  held  in  her  hand.  I  embraced  her.  We 
returned  slowly  to  the  company  ;  and  eight  days  afterwards 
we  [went  to  the  municipality.  The  following  day,  a  poor 
priest  who  had  not  taken  the  oaths  married  us  in  the  small 
convent  of  the  Conception,'  in  the  Rue  St.  Honore.  This 
was  in  some  manner  forbidden,  but  Emilie  set  a  great 
importance  on  that  point :  her  piety  was  gentle  and  sincere. 

A  few  days  after  our  marriage  I  was  obliged  Ho  begin 
secretly  to  prepare  for  my  journey  to  Toulon,  where  the 
General  had  already  arrived.  It  was  agreed  that  Emilie 
should  divide  the  time  of  my  absence  between  her  aunt  and 
her  grandfather,  who  was  then  eighty-six  years  old,  but  who 
preserved  at  that  advanced  age  a  sound  understanding,  an 
amiable  and  'even  temper,  and  who  doted  on  his  grand- 
daughter. I  left  her  without  taking  leave  of  her  :  for  our 
separation  would  have  been  too  painful.  I  did  not  return 
until  eighteen  months  afterwards.  My  forebodings  were 
not  fulfilled.  Of  the  eight  aides-de-camp  of  the  General, 
four  perished.  Julien  and  Sulkowski  were  murdered 
'  This  convent  no  longer  exists. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  367 

by  the  Arabs,  Crosier  was  killed  at  the  siege  of  St.  John 
of  Acre,  and  Guibert  at  the  battle  of  Aboukir.  Duroc 
and  Eugene  Beauharnais  were  severely  wounded.  Merlin 
and  I  escaped.  Glory  and  fortune  were  dearly  bought  with 
General  Bonaparte. 

On  my  return  to  France,  and  a  short  time  after  the  i8th 
Brumaire,  I  received  an  order  to  go  to  Saxony,  with  full 
power  to  negotiate  a  peace  with  Austria,  in  case  she  might 
be  inclined  so  to  do  in  the  midst  of  the  war.  I  took 
Madame  de  Lavalette  with  me.  Since  the  year  1792  the 
people  of  the  North  of  Germany  had  not  seen  a  French- 
woman. They  were  convinced  that  they  were  all  dissolute 
persons,  without  education,  and  almost  naked.  Their  as- 
tonishment was  great  when  they  saw  a  young  woman, 
perfectly  modest,  extremely  bashful,  and  dressed  with  a 
decorum  and  good  taste  that  might  have  served  as  a  model 
to  the  most  prudish  of  her  sex. 

The  admiration  she  obtained  increased  the  more  she  was 
known.  We  passed  the  Carnival  at  Berlin.  The  whole 
Court,  and  especially  the  Queen,  loaded  her  with  kindness 
and  attention.  She  was  the  means  of  destroying  the 
extravagant  prejudices  that  were  entertained  against  the 
French  ladies,  and  of  rendering  the  Germans  very  fas- 
tidious in  respect  to  those  that  came  after  her. 

My  stay  in  Germany  was  no  longer  necessary  after  the 
victory  of  Hohenlinden.  In  consequence  the  First  Consul 
recalled  me  near  his  person  ;  and  when  he  placed  the 
Imperial  Crown  on  the  head  of  Josephine,  her  niece  was 
named  Dame  d'Atours.  Her  functions  were  not  easy  to 
fulfil.  The  Emperor,  who  wanted  to  govern  his  household 
as  he  did  his  extensive  empire,  was  far  from  obtaining  the 
same  obedience  there.  He  had  ordered  that  the  trades- 
people who  supplied  the  toilet  of  the  Empress  should  only 
be  admitted  into  her  presence  one  day  in  the  week  ;  that 
the  Dame  d'Atours  should  assist  at  all  the  bargains,  keep  an 
account  of  what  was  bought,  and   be   answerable   for   all 


368  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

want  of  order.  These  rules  soon  displeased  the  Empress, 
The  Dame  d'Atours  remonstrated ;  she  fell  into  disgrace,, 
and  by  degrees  her  functions  were  reduced  to  those  of  a 
Dame  du  Palais.  Fortunately  for  her,  the  Emperor  was 
not  dissatisfied  with  her.  But  what  she  had  been  unable 
to  do,  the  Emperor  could  not  do  either  ;  and  the  lady  of 
honour,  Madame  de  La  Rochefoucault,  could  not  avoid  many 
petty  discussions  that  made  her  very  uncomfortable.  The 
divorce  of  the  Emperor,  and  his  marriage  with  Maria 
Louisa,  restored  Madame  de  Lavalette  to  her  liberty.  From 
that  time  she  appeared  no  more  at  the  Tuileries  ;  so  that 
the  catastrophe  of  1814  found  her  prepared,  and,  excepting 
the  pain  her  gratitude  for  the  Emperor  made  her  feel  on  his 
account,  she  accustomed  herself  without  much  trouble  to 
the  obscure  life  she  had  led  for  the  last  three  years. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

I  NOW  return  to  my  dungeon.  During  the  night  that 
followed  my  condemnation,  I  had  written  to  two  of  my 
friends,  General  Clarke  and  M.  Pasquier.  I  imagined  that 
the  former  could  not  forget  an  important  service  he  received 
from  me  when  he  was  disgraced  by  the  Directory  on  the 
1 8th  Fructidor.  "I  have  kept  no  secret  from  you  (these 
were  the  words  of  my  letter)  ;  I  have  revealed  everything 
to  my  judges.  See  what  you  can  do  for  me.  Endeavour 
at  least  to  spare  me  the  horrible  agony  of  the  scaffold.  Let 
me  be  shot  by  brave  soldiers.  In  that  manner,  at  least, 
death  will  be  almost  a  favour  to  me."  I  will  not  give  here 
literally  his  answer.  I  shall  only  mention  the  following 
phrase  :  "You  have  nothing  more  to  do  than  to  recommend 
your  wife  and  child  to  the  inexhaustible  bounty  of  the 
King."  The  sentence  of  my  death  was  less  painful  to  me 
than  the  perusal  of  that  letter.  In  my  indignation  I  was 
going  to  write  to  him  all  his  cruelty  made  me  feel.  I  how- 
ever contented  myself  with  the  agreeable  thought,  that  my 
wife  and  child  would  never  be  found  to  implore  the  pity  of 
him  who  had  deprived  them  of  a  father  and  a  husband.  I 
was  still  full  of  the  agitation  into  which  the  letter  of  the 
Minister  of  War  had  thrown  me,  when  my  door  was 
mysteriously  opened.  A  man  approached,  pressed  my 
hand,  and,  slipping  a  note  into  it,  disappeared  immediately. 
It  was  M.  Angles,  the  Prefect  of  Police.  The  note  was 
from  M.  Pasquier,  and  contained  the  following  words  : 
"  Keep    up    your   spirits  ;    all   is    not   lost.      His  Majesty 

2q  369 


370  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

is  surrounded  by  several  of  your  friends,  and  all  that  can 
be  attempted  to  soften  him  shall  be  done  with  courage. 
Hope  still." 

Among  the  Peers  who  might  interest  themselves  for  me, 
I  was  far  from  reckoning  the  Duke  de  Ragusa.  We  had 
been  for  a  long  time  united  by  the  most  cordial  friendship  ; 
but  his  conduct  towards  the  Emperor  in  1814  had  separated 
us,  and  I  broke  off  our  connection.  I,  however,  received 
a  letter  from  the  Marshal,  in  which  he  mentioned  :  "  I  used 
to  go  twice  a  week  to  the  Tuileries  ;  now  I  shall  go  twice 
a  day.  I  will  speak,  I  will  solicit  even  till  I  grow  trouble- 
some. Whoever  has  any  heart  will  join  with  me,  and  I 
hope  to  obtain  my  greatest  wish  in  the  world." 

These  comfortings  of  courageous  friendship  could  deceive 
me  no  longer.  I  saw  that  I  had  been  condemned,  as  Marshal 
Ney  was  going  to  be,  to  serve  as  an  example.  He  was, 
by  his  reputation,  the  first  on  the  military  hierarchy  ;  while 
I  was  in  the  eyes  of  the  Court  the  most  important  man  in 
the  civil  order — the  late  Aide-de-Camp  of  General  Bona- 
parte, first  cousin  of  Prince  Eugene  and  the  Queen  of 
Holland,  whom  they  detested,  Postmaster-General  during 
twelve  years,  and  by  that  circumstance  the  depositary  of  a 
great  many  secrets  it  would  be  good  to  stifle  (such  was  at 
least  their  opinion).  My  death  was  irrevocable.  I  therefore 
sought  resignation,  to  regard  with  a  firm  eye,  and  make  my- 
self familiar  with  all  the  details  of  that  death  I  was  shortly 
to  undergo.  The  turnkeys  had  frequently  described  to  me 
the  last  moments  of  most  of  the  unfortunate  men  who  had 
left  them  for  the  Place  de  Greve.  But  I  wanted  to  know  all 
that  concerned  what  they  call  the  toilet.  A  little  before  four 
o'clock  the  culprit  is  brought  into  the  registering  room  ; 
scarcely  has  he  crossed  the  low  door  that  opens  into  that 
chamber,  when  the  executioner  and  his  men  appear  ;  they 
make  him  sit  down  on  a  bench,  take  off  his  coat,  cut  off  his 
hair  and  the  collar  of  his  shirt  ;  after  which  they  tie  his 
hands  behind  his  back.   They  lead  him  thus  to  the  cart  that 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  yj  i 

-stands  waiting  at  the  door.  This  moment  is  terrible.  Those 
who  till  then  have  shown  the  greatest  courage  and  strength 
•of  mind,  fall  into  a  complete  dejection  and  confusion  ;  but 
the  open  air  and  the  crowd  of  people  generally  revive  them 
on  the  way.  Sometimes  also  the  exhortations  of  the  con- 
fessor have  their  effect.  I  listened  with  attention,  repeated 
my  questions,  multiplied  my  observations,  and  asked  every 
day  to  hear  the  fearful  description  over  again,  sometimes  by 
one  person  and  sometimes  by  another.  There  were  some  who 
made  it  with  reluctance  ;  but  the  oldest  among  the  jailers 
seemed  to  delight  in  it. 

By  that  means  I  augmented  my  sufferings  without  reason. 
I  experienced  a  horror  and  a  shuddering  that  agitated  my 
inmost  frame.  I  walked  in  dismay  up  and  down  my  room, 
and  my  sleepless  nights  were  terrible.  However,  by  my 
perseverance  in  recurring  to  the  same  idea  I  obtained  at 
last  what  I  so  much  wished  for  :  a  tranquillity  at  which  the 
turnkeys  were  themselves  surprised.  At  first,  when  listen- 
ing to  them,  I  used  to  grow  pale  ;  I  now  could  hear  them 
without  emotion  or  reluctance.  I  had  some  time  before 
concealed  in  my  straw  mattress  a  table-knife  that  belonged 
to  me  ;  I  lost  all  idea  of  making  use  of  it.  I  found  a  sort 
of  glory  in  challenging  death — in  awaiting  it  as  I  would 
have  done  on  the  field  of  battle. 

The  Minister  of  Justice,  Count  Barbe  Marbise,  was 
-endeavouring  to  delay  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Cassa- 
tion as  long  as  possible,  in  hopes  that  time  would  moderate 
the  feelings  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  palace  ;  for  all  my  ene- 
mies were  there.  The  Princess  de  Vaudemont,  through  her 
name  of  Montmorency,  happened  to  be  related  to  the  most 
considerable  persons  of  the  Court.  Almost  all  of  them  owed 
to  her  their  return  to  France,  and  the  tranquillity  they  had 
enjoyed  under  the  Emperor  ;  for  though  the  Emperor  did 
not  like  her,  and  mistrusted  her,  she  had  a  great  deal  of 
influence  over  Messieurs  de  Talleyrand  and  Fouche,  and  made 
use  of  it  with  courage  and  generosity.     The  King  and  his 


372  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

family  had  inherited  the  Emperor's  disHke  of  her.  They 
could  not  forgive  her  former  connections  with  their  two 
powerful  Ministers.  However,  at  her  house  there  had  been 
held  some  of  the  meetings  which,  in  1814,  prepared  the 
downfall  of  the  Empire  :  and  though  she  only  took  in  them 
a  very  indirect  and  timid  part,  I  had  left  off  visiting  her,, 
after  confessing  openly  the  reasons  of  my  conduct.  But  in 
my  misfortune  I  found  her  animated  with  all  the  courage- 
ous devotion  of  a  real  friend.  Through  her  M.  de  Riche- 
lieu was  perpetually  assailed.  A  great  number  of  persons, 
whose  names  I  scarcely  knew,  made  it  a  point  of  honour  to 
obtain  my  pardon.  Madame  de  Vauderaont  recalled  to 
their  memory  my  behaviour  in  Saxony  towards  the  un- 
fortunate French  whom  I  had  found  there,  and  in  France 
during  fourteen  years.  I  had  facilitated  the  return  of  a 
great  many ;  and  as  I  never  regarded  them  otherwise  than 
as  unfortunate  countrymen,  I  had  frequently  employed  my 
influence  to  be  serviceable  to  them.  Some  of  these  kept  it 
in  their  memories.  But  party  spirit  ran  too  high,  and  in 
particular  the  wound  inflicted  by  the  20th  of  March  was 
still  too  painful  for  the  voice  of  generosity  to  be  heard. 
Had  my  courage  failed  during  the  thirty  days  that  elapsed 
between  the  judgment  of  the  Assize  Court  and  that  of  the 
Court  of  Cassation,  I  must  have  died  or  have  gone  mad. 
Every  morning  I  learned  the  measures  that  had  been  taken, 
and  the  obstacles  that  had  been  overcome,  and  every  even- 
ing I  received  the  most  desperate  news  : — the  stubbornness 
with  which  the  Royal  Family  rejected  all  solicitations  ;  the 
timidity  and  discouragement  of  M.  de  Richelieu  ;  and, 
finally,  the  impossibility  of  softening  the  Monarch.  From 
time  to  time  some  courageous  friends  came  to  see  me  in  my 
prison,  in  spite  of  Government,  who  might  have  punished 
them. 

M.  Pasquier,  though  a  Secretary  of  State,  and  M.  de  Fre- 
ville.  Master  of  Requests,  both  told  me  to  hope  for  the  best ; 
but  I  easily  discovered,  through  their  professions,  a  secret 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  373 

discouragement,  over  which  they  could  not  triumph  in  my 
presence.  "  I  could  never  have  had  the  courage  to  come," 
said  M.  de  Freville,  "  if  I  had  not  reckoned  on  the  success 
of  your  friends." 

But  Avhile  he  was  talking,  the  tears  rolled  in  his  eyes,  and 
his  trembling  hand,  that  pressed  mine,  destroyed  the  hope 
his  words  were  meant  to  convey. 

It  was  during  this  interval  that  Marshal  Ney  was  tried. 
Even  before  the  trial  came  on,  the  number  of  his  guards  had 
been  considerably  augmented.  Day  and  night  three  sentries 
were  stationed  under  his  window,  which  was  also  mine  :  one 
gendarme,  one  National  Guard  on  horseback,  and  one 
grenadier  of  the  Old  Guard,  or  rather  a  disguised  Life- 
guard ;  for  they  could  not  place  confidence  enough  in  the 
soldiers  of  the  old  army.  I  was  soon  satisfied  in  regard  to 
that  disguise  by  one  of  our  relatives.  Mademoiselle  Du- 
bourg,  who  had  obtained  permission  to  see  me.  She  had 
seen  one  of  her  cousins  standing  sentry,  and  in  the  uniform 
of  an  old  grenadier  of  the  cavalry  of  the  Guards.  Every 
evening  the  Marshal  was  conveyed  in  a  coach  to  the  Luxem- 
bourg, and  brought  back  to  the  Conciergerie  next  morning. 
On  the  7th  of  December  he  did  not  return.  I  questioned 
the  turnkey,  who  showed  some  confusion  ;  and,  on  insisting, 
I  learned  that  the  Marshal  had  been  executed.  "  Was  it  in 
the  Place  de  Greve,  on  the  scaffold  ?  "  "  No  ;  he  has  been 
shot."  "  What  a  happy  man  he  is  !  "  I  joyfully  exclaimed  ; 
and  the  poor  turnkey,  who  did  not  understand  what  I 
meant,  thought  I  was  run  mad. 

Time,  however,  passed  on  ;  one  of  my  counsel  advised 
me  not  to  wait  for  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Cassation, 
but  to  write  to  the  King  and  invoke  his  clemency.  I  had 
an  invincible  reluctance  to  take  such  a  step.  Besides,  his 
colleague  was  not  of  the  same  opinion.  "  It  might  be  very 
•dangerous,"  he  said,  "  or  at  best  produce  no  effect  at  all.  If 
the  King  wishes  to  pardon  him,  he  will  wait  for 'the  judg- 
ment  of  the  Court.     If  he  is  decided  not  to  do  it,  he  still 


374  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

will  wait.  It  is  therefore  preferable  not  to  alter  anything^ 
in  the  present  progress  of  the  business." 

The  Duchess  of  Placencia,  a  daughter  of  the  Minister  of 
Justice,  came  one  day  to  fetch  Madame  Lavalette,  and  con- 
duct her  to  her  father.  The  two  ladies  fell  at  the  feet  of 
the  venerable  old  man.  His  daughter  was  bathed  in  tears  ; 
she  pressed  his  hands  in  hers,  and  solicited  with  a  degree 
of  vehemence  of  which  those  who  know  her  can  alone  have 
an  idea.  While  he  listened  to  her  the  tears  trickled  in 
silence  down  the  cheeks  of  the  minister,  but  she  could  not 
obtain  a  single  word  of  him.  This  was  a  bad  omen.  It  was 
evident  that  he  had  but  little  hope.  Finally,  on  the  20th  of 
December,  the  cause  came  on  before  the  Supreme  Court  of 
Judicature.  Six  motions  for  laying  the  verdict  aside  were 
alleged  in  the  writ  of  error  ;  but,  notwithstanding  the  elo- 
quent pleadings  of  M.  Darrieux,  the  sentence  was  confirmed. 
It  was  M.  Baudus,  one  of  my  friends,  who  came  to  acquaint 
me  with  the  fatal  news  ;  but  he  endeavoured  to  counteract 
the  impression  it  made  on  me  by  holding  out  hopes, 
which  in  fact  appeared  so  certain  that  I  began  to  share 
them.  An  hour  after  he  was  gone,  M.  de  Carvoisin  came 
into  my  room.  The  terrible  impression  the  judgment  had 
made  on  him  was  visible  in  his  face  :  he  still  hoped  ;  but  his 
arguments  were  those  of  a  prepossessed  mind,  who  would 
have  found  it  easier  to  talk  to  me  of  resignation. 

Three  days  were  now  all  that  were  left  to  me  ;  and 
in  that  short  space  of  time  means  were  to  be  found  to 
approach  the  King.  The  Duke  de  Ragusa  took  that  charge 
upon  himself.  General  Foy  came  in  his  name  to  fetch 
Madame  de  Lavalette,  and  led  her  by  roundabout  passages  ta 
the  entrance  of  the  Galerie  de  Diane,  where  she  found  the 
Marshal,  who  offered  his  arm,  and  read  to  her  the  memorial 
she  was  to  present  to  the  King.  It  was  during  mass.  The 
whole  Court  was  at  the  chapel.  The  King  was  obliged  tO' 
pass  through  that  same  gallery  to  return  to  his  apartments. 
Unfortunately,  one  of  the  vergers  who  was  there  knew  my 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  375 

wife  ;  and  as  it  was  against  the  custom  for  any  one  to  stand 
in  the  gallery  without  a  special  order,  he  thought  it  neces- 
sary to  acquaint  the  Marshal  with  that  circumstance,  and 
beg  he  would  lead  Madame  de  Lavalette  away.  "This 
lady  shall  remain,"  said  the  Marshal  in  a  firm  tone.  The 
verger  went  to  acquaint  an  officer  of  the  Palace  of  what  had 
happened,  who  repeated  the  warning  in  so  positive  a  tone 
that  the  Marshal  might  look  upon  it  as  an  order  :  however, 
he  replied  :  "  This  lady,  being  here,  shall  remain  ;  I  will 
answer  for  everything."  In  the  meanwhile  the  Court  was 
advancing.  The  King,  who  had  been  informed  of  the  fact, 
felt  it  was  too  late  to  send  away  an  unfortunate  woman,  who 
might  perhaps  cause  some  tumult  by  her  resistance.  He 
therefore  advanced  ;  and  when  he  came  facing  Madame  de 
Lavalette  she  fell  at  his  feet  and  presented  her  memorial. 
The  Monarch  bowed  to  her,  took  the  paper,  and  saying, 
"  Madame,  I  can  do  nothing  but  my  duty,"  '  went  on.  My 
wife  held  in  her  hand  a  second  memorial  for  the  Duchess  of 
Angouleme.  The  Duke  de  Ragusa,  seeing  her  hesitate, 
pressed  her  to  go  after  the  Princess  and  give  it  to  her.  She 
was  already  advancing,  when  M.  d'Agoult,  Chevalier  d'Hon- 
neur,  with  his  two  arms  extended  and  his  hands  open, 
forced  her  to  stop.^ 

This  observation  of  the  King  was  very  unlike  the  one  he 
had  made  a  month  before,  when  Madame  de  Lavalette  was 
admitted  into  his  closet.  He  now  talked  of  his  duty  when 
his  clemency  was  invoked.  The  word  was  appalling.  Eniilie 
seemed  at  first  not  to  feel  its  full  force  ;  but  my  fate  was 
decided  by  it,  and  I  quickly  began  to  think  what  I  should 
do  to  deceive  and  keep  my  wife  and  child  away  during  two 
days.    In  regard  to  the  former,  that  was  no  easy  thing.    Her 

'  By  Appendix  No.  I.  which  contains  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  the  Duke 
de  Ragusa  on  the  subject,  the  reader  will  observe  that  this  answer  of  the 
King  is  here  misrepresented. — Note  of  the  Translator. 

*  The  Duke  de  Ragusa  fell  into  long  disgrace  and  was  very  ill-treated 
for  his  courageous  kindness  on  this  occasion.  I  have  l)een  told  that  a 
Prince,  who  is  now  no  more,  forgot  himself  so  far  in  his  passion  as  to  say  : 
"He  deserves  to  be  sent  to  the  galleys." — Note  of  the  Author. 


376  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

courage  augmented  in  proportion  to  my  danger,  and  she 
resolved  to  make  a  fresh  appeal  to  the  Duchess  of  Angou- 
leme.  The  Princess  lodged  on  the  ground-floor  of  the 
Tuileries,  in  the  apartments  previously  occupied  by  the 
King  of  Rome.  Madame  de  Lavalette  put  off  the  black 
dress  she  had  worn  the  day  before  at  the  Palace,  got  out  of 
her  sedan-chair  in  a  neighbouring  street,  and  presented  her- 
self at  the  Princess's  door  at  the  usual  hour  of  admittance. 
Her  pale  features,  her  swollen  eyes,  her  slow  step,  soon  told 
the  footman  who  she  was.  The  door  was  immediately  shut, 
and  an  order  given  not  to  let  any  one  in.  Finding  that 
entrance  was  prohibited  at  this  door,  she  hastened  to  seek  it 
at  the  grand  vestibule  ;  but  a  footman  ran  before  her  to  tell 
of  her  arrival,  and  she  was  also  repulsed  there.  Exhausted 
with  fatigue,  she  sat  down  on  the  stone  steps  leading  to  the 
court-yard,  and  remained  there  a  full  hour,  still  in  the 
delusive  hope  that  she  would  be  admitted.  She  attracted 
the  notice  of  all  who  passed  by,  and  especially  all  those  who 
went  into  the  Palace  ;  but  no  one  dared  to  show  her  the 
least  compassion.  At  last  she  resolved  to  leave  the  place 
and  return  to  my  dungeon,  where  she  arrived  exhausted  and 
heart-broken. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

I  FELT,  however,  that  my  hours  were  numbered  :  I  had  no 
more  than  forty-eight  left,  for  only  three  days  are  allowed 
for  convicts  to  apply  for  mercy.  The  Keeper  of  the  Seals 
chose  not  to  present  his  petition  before  the  second  day.  The 
King  had  already  silenced  the  Duke  de  Richelieu  on  the 
subject.  All  my  friends  were  in  despair.  The  turnkeys 
themselves  came  no  longer  near  me.  Eberle,  who  was  more 
especially  attached  to  my  service,  spoke  no  more  to  me.  He 
wandered  about  my  room,  apparently  without  knowing  what 
he  did.  It  was  on  a  Sunday  evening.  "They  usually  execute 
criminals  on  a  Friday  ?  "  I  said.  "  Sometimes  on  a  Saturday," 
he  answered,  stifling  a  sigh.  "  The  execution  generally  takes 
place  at  four  o'clock?"  "Sometimes  in  the  morning."  Saying 
these  words,  he  went  out  and  forgot  to  shut  the  door.  A 
female  turnkey  of  the  women's  prison  was  just  going  by  at 
the  time  :  seeing  me  alone,  she  rushed  into  the  room,  seized 
the  cross  of  the  Legion  of  Honour  I  wore,  kissed  it  with 
transport,  and  ran  away  in  tears.  This  enthusiastic  action 
of  a  woman  I  had  never  seen  but  at  a  distance,  and  to  whom 
I  had  never  spoken,  told  me  at  last  my  fate.  My  wife  came 
at  six  o'clock  to  dine  with  me.  She  brought  with  her  a 
relation.  Mademoiselle  Dubourg.  When  we  were  alone,  she 
said  :  "  It  appears  but  too  certain  that  we  have  nothing  to 
hope  ;  we  must  therefore,  my  dear,  take  a  resolution,  and 
this  is  what  I  propose  to  you.  At  eight  o'clock  you  shall 
go  out  dressed  in  my  clothes,  and  accompanied  by  my  cousin. 
You  shall  step  into  my  sedan-chair,  which  will  carry  you  to 

377 


37S  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  Rue  des  Saints-Peres,  where  you  will  find  M.  Baudus  with 
a  cabriolet,  who  will  conduct  you  to  a  retreat  he  has  pre- 
pared for  you,  and  where  you  may  await  without  danger  a 
favourable  opportunity  of  leaving  France." 

I  listened  to  her  and  looked  at  her  in  silence.  Her  manner 
was  calm,  and  her  voice  firm.  She  appeared  so  convinced 
of  the  success  of  her  plan,  that  it  was  some  time  before  I 
dared  to  reply.  I  looked,  however,  upon  the  whole  as  a  mad 
undertaking.  I  was  at  last  obliged  to  tell  her  so  ;  but  she 
interrupted  me  at  the  first  word  by  saying  :  "  I  will  hear  of 
no  objections.  I  die  if  you  die.  Do  not  therefore  reject  my 
plan.  I  know  it  will  succeed.  I  feel  that  God  supports  me  !  " 
It  was  in  vain  that  I  reminded  her  of  the  numerous  turn- 
keys with  whom  she  was  surrounded  every  evening  when 
she  left  me  ;  the  jailer  who  handed  her  to  her  sedan-chair  ; 
the  impossibility  of  my  being  suflficiently  disguised  to  deceive 
them  ;  and  finally  my  invincible  reluctance  to  leave  her  in 
the  hands  of  the  prison  keepers.  "  What  will  they  do,"  I  said^ 
"  when  they  discover  that  I  am  gone  ?  These  brutes,  in 
their  blind  rage,  will  they  not  forget  themselves  and  perhaps, 
strike  you  ?  "  I  was  going  on,  but  I  soon  saw,  by  the  pale- 
ness of  her  countenance  and  the  movements  of  convulsive 
impatience  that  were  beginning  to  agitate  her,  that  I  ought 
to  put  an  end  to  all  objections.  I  remained  silent  for  a  few 
minutes,  at  the  end  of  which  I  continued  thus  :  "  Well,, 
then,  I  shall  do  as  you  please  ;  but  if  you  want  to  succeed^ 
permit  me  to  make  at  least  one  observation.  The  cabriolet 
is  too  far  off.  I  shall  be  scarcely  gone  when  my  flight  will 
be  discovered,  and  I  shall  most  undoubtedly  be  stopped  in 
the  chair,  for  near  an  hour  is  required  to  go  to  the  Rue  des. 
Saints-Peres.  I  cannot  escape  on  foot  with  your  clothes."  This 
reflection  seemed  to  strike  her.  "  Change,"  I  added,  "  that 
part  of  your  plan.  The  whole  of  to-morrow  is  still  at  our 
disposal  :  I  promise  to  do  to-morrow  all  you  wish."  "Well,, 
you  are  in  the  right.  I  will  have  the  cabriolet  stationed 
near.     Give  me  your  word  that  you  will  obey  me,  for  that 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  y]^ 

is  our  last  resource."  I  took  her  hand  and  answered  :  "  I 
will  do  all  you  wish,  and  in  the  manner  you  wish  it."  This 
promise  made  her  easy,  and  we  separated. 

The  more  I  reflected  on  her  plan,  the  more  impracticable 
it  appeared  to  me.  She  was  full  half  an  inch  taller  than  I 
am  ;  all  the  turnkeys  were  accustomed  to  see  her  ;  her  figure 
was  slender  and  flexible.  It  is  true  that  my  troubles  had 
made  me  much  thinner  ;  but  nevertheless  the  diff'erence 
between  us  was  striking.  On  the  other  hand,  I  was  so  well 
prepared  to  die  !  I  had  in  truth  begun  again  during  the 
last  two  days  to  deliberate  with  myself  whether  I  should  not 
use  my  hidden  means  of  self-destruction.  The  toilet  of  the 
executioner,  the  slow  march  from  the  Conciergerie  to  the 
Greve,  startled  me  ;  but  still  my  heart  remained  firm.  And 
all  of  a  sudden  I  was  obliged  to  turn  my  eyes  from  death, 
and  direct  my  thoughts  on  the  details  of  an  escape,  impos- 
sible to  be  realised,  and  which  to  me  appeared  extravagant. 
The  burlesque  was  about  to  be  mixed  with  the  tragic  part  of 
my  story  ;  for  I  should  certainly  be  retaken  in  woman's 
clothes,  and  they  would  perhaps  be  cruel  enough  to  expose 
me  to  the  public  under  that  ridiculous  disguise.  But,  on  the 
other  side,  how  could  I  refuse  ?  Emilie  appeared  so  happy 
at  her  plan,  so  sure  of  its  success  !  It  would  be  killing  her 
not  to  keep  my  word. 

The  following  day,  while  I  was  still  absorbed  in  these 
dismal  thoughts,  she  came.  I  learned  from  her  that  on 
leaving  me  the  evening  before,  she  had  gone  to  the  Rue  du 
Bac,  and  had  stepped  out  of  her  chair  at  a  short  distance 
from  the  Hotel  of  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  ;  M. 
Baudus  having  advised  her  to  make  one  more  endeavour 
with  that  Minister.  But  ingenuity  was  required  to  come  at 
him.  She  had  asked  the  porter  which  were  the  apartments 
of  M.  Bresson,  Treasurer  of  the  Department  ;  and  as  he 
lived  in  the  first  court,  she  stopped  for  a  few  minutes  on  the 
staircase,  and  then  went  into  the  second  court  and  arrived  at 
the  Minister's  antechamber.     She  was  told  that  his  Excel- 


.38o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

lency  was  out.  "  I  will  wait,"  was  her  reply.  The  valet- 
de-chambre,  to  whom  she  addressed  herself,  recognised  her, 
and  went  to  complain  to  the  porter,  to  whom  orders  had 
been  given,  since  the  morning,  not  to  let  her  in  ;  for  her 
presence  before  the  door  of  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme  had 
put  everybody  on  the  alert.  The  porter  came,  much  out  of 
humour,  and  among  many  reproaches  he  said  to  her,  "You 
put  me  in  danger  of  losing  my  place."  "  I  deceived  you, — 
there  was  no  fault  of  yours.  I  am  resolved  to  see  the 
Minister.  If  he  is  out,  I  will  wait  for  him  ;  if  he  is  at  home 
I  will  pass  the  night  in  this  room.  Violence  alone  shall  drag 
me  out  of  it  ;  you  may  go  and  say  so  to  your  master."  What 
could  the  Minister  do  ?  He  admitted  her  :  Madame  Lava- 
lette  explained  to  him  in  a  clear  and  brief  manner  the  whole 
trial  ;  expressed  with  force  how  unjust  my  condemnation 
was,  and  concluded  with  invoking  his  intercession  with  the 
King.  The  Duke  de  Richelieu  listened  to  her  with  down- 
cast eyes.  He  seemed  to  pity  her,  but  at  last  confessed  that 
the  King  had  forbidden  him  to  say  a  word  more  about  the 
business.  "Then,  Sir,  save  him  yourself."  "Madam,"  he 
replied,  "  that  would  be  a  criminal  act."  "  Cannot  you  at 
least  present  a  fresh  memorial  in  my  name  ?  "  The  Duke, 
eagerly  seizing  the  idea,  answered  :  "  I  consent  to  that. 
Send  it  me  to-morrow  by  eight  o'clock,  and  I  give  you 
my  word  that  it  shall  be  delivered  without  delay  to  his 
Majesty."  " 

"  I  went,"  said  Emilie,  "  immediately  to  your  lawyer  for 
that  memorial.  M.  de  Richelieu  has  received  it  this  morn- 
ing, and  it  must  be  by  this  time  in  the  hands  of  the  King. 
My  plan  shall  nevertheless  be  executed  to-night.  To-morrow 
it  would  certainly  be  too  late,  as  we  have  received  no 
accounts  from  the  Palace.  I  shall  come  and  dine  with  you  : 
keep  up  your  spirits,  you  will  want  them.  As  for  me,  I  feel 
I  have  courage  for  four-and- twenty  hours,  and   not  for  a 

'  All  these  particulars  were  given  to  me  since  by  M.  Baudus,  to  whom 
the  Minister  communicated  them. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  381 

moment  longer,"  she  added  with  a  sigh,  "  for  I  am  exhausted 
with  fatigue.  She  was  right  to  count  the  hours.  She  was 
scarcely  gone  when  the  jailer  came  in  and  said  :  "  An  editor 
of  the  Qiiotidienne  has  been  with  me  to  inquire  whether  it 
was  true  that  you  had  asked  for  four  confessors,  that  he 
might  print  it  in  his  paper." — "  Four — that's  a  great  many  ; 
and  what  answer  did  you  give  him  ?  " — "  The  truth.  That  I 
had  not  introduced  a  single  one."  (I  guessed  that  this  was 
a  covert  warning.)  '*  Well,  wait  a  little  ;  by  and  by  I 
shall  give  you  the  address  of  a  clergyman.  This  whole  day 
is  my  own."  He  made  no  reply,  and  went  away  shaking  his 
head  ;  a  little  while  afterwards  M.  de  Carvoisin  arrived.  He 
threw  himself  into  my  arms  and  burst  into  tears  ;  I  made 
him  sit  down,  and  sought  to  soothe  him  ;  my  own  tran- 
quillity made  him  recover  a  little.  "  The  vicar  of  St. 
Sulpice,"  he  said,  "  has  just  been  at  my  home  ;  he  will  not 
refuse  to  lend  you  his  spiritual  aid  if  you  require  it,  because 
you  are  one  of  his  parishioners,  but  I  beg  you  to  spare  him. 
He  has  assisted  Marshal  Ney  in  his  last  moments,  and  he  has 
confessed  to  me  that  the  scene  affected  him  so  much,  he  does 
not  feel  the  courage  to  go  through  another.  He  is  never- 
theless ready  to  come,  if  you  insist  upon  it."  "  Thank  him, 
my  friend — I  have  another  clergyman  in  view  ;  I  shall  send 
for  him  this  evening,  but  not  before." 

The  excellent  man  wished  to  enter  into  some  particulars, 
but  he  had  not  the  power  to  do  so.  At  that  moment  my 
daughter  was  introduced  with  an  old  nun,  the  portress  of 
L'Abbaye  aux  Bois.  Josephine  wept  in  silence  ;  the  nun 
exclaimed  :  "  What  have  I  done,  that  God  dooms  me  to 
witness  such  horror  ?  "  Her  sighs,  her  sobs,  her  endless 
invocations,  annoyed  me  at  last.  I  felt  that  I  should  lose 
all  my  courage  if  I  did  not  quickly  put  an  end  to  the  scene. 
I  therefore  took  M.  de  Carvoisin  aside  and  said  to  him, 
"  Take  leave  of  me  and  go  away  softly  ;  your  grief  distresses 
me  : — adieu  !  do  not  forget  me."  I  should  have  wished  to 
retain  my  daughter  much  longer  ;  but  the  sight  rent  my 


382  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

heart  to  pieces  :  I  took  her  on  my  knee — her  head  fell  on 
my  breast.  I  attempted  to  speak  to  her,  but  it  was  im- 
possible for  me  to  utter  any  words  of  comfort.  At  last  I 
placed  her  in  a  chair,  and  began  to  walk  up  and  down  the 
room,  panting  in  vain  for  breath.  I  was  therefore  obliged 
to  take  a  resolution  with  her  also.  "Go  back  to  your 
convent,"  I  said  ;  "  I  shall  see  you  again  to-morrow,  I 
promise  it  you  :  my  affair  is  in  a  better  way  than  you 
think.  Do  not  speak  to  any  person  about  it,  but  be  sure  I 
shall  see  you  to-morrow."  She  was  scarcely  gone  when  all 
my  strength  left  me.  I  burst  into  tears  at  the  parting  of 
my  only  child,  and  I  had  a  great  deal  to  do  to  regain  my 
wonted  courage.     I  succeeded,  however,  at  last. 

At  five  o'clock  Emilie  came,  accompanied  by  Josephine, 
whom  I  saw  again  with  as  much  surprise  as  pleasure.  "  I 
believe,"  she  said,  "  it  is  better  to  take  our  child  with  us.  I 
shall  make  her  do  with  more  docility  what  I  want."  She 
was  dressed  in  a  pelisse  of  merino  richly  lined  with  fur, 
which  she  was  accustomed  to  put  on  over  her  light  dress  on 
leaving  a  ball-room.  She  had  taken  in  her  reticule  a  black 
silk  petticoat.  "This  is  quite  sufficient,"  she  said,  "  to  dis- 
guise you  completely."  She  then  sent  my  daughter  to  the 
window,  and  added  in  a  low  voice,  "  At  seven  o'clock  pre- 
cisely you  must  be  ready  ;  all  is  well  prepared.  In  going 
out  you  will  take  hold  of  Josephine's  arm.  Take  care  to 
walk  very  slowly  ;  and  when  you  cross  the  large  registering- 
room,  you  will  put  on  my  gloves  and  cover  your  face  with 
my  handkerchief.  I  had  some  thoughts  of  putting  on  a 
veil,  but  unfortunately  I  have  not  been  accustomed  to  wear 
one  when  I  come  here ;  it  is  therefore  of  no  use  to  think  of  it. 
Take  great  care,  when  you  pass  under  the  doorways,  which 
are  very  low,  not  to  break  the  feathers  of  your  bonnet,  for 
then  all  would  be  lost.  I  always  find  the  turnkeys  in  the 
registering-room,  and  the  jailer  generally  hands  me  to  my 
chair,  which  constantly  stands  near  the  entrance  door  ;  but 
this  time  it  will  be  in  the  yard,  at  the  top  of  the  grand 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  383 

rstaircase.  There  you  will  be  met  after  a  short  time  by  M. 
Baudus,  who  will  lead  you  to  the  cabriolet,  and  will  acquaint 
you  with  the  place  where  you  are  to  remain  concealed. 
Afterwards,  let  God's  will  be  done,  my  dear.  Do  exactly  all 
I  tell  you.  Remain  calm.  Give  me  your  hand,  I  wish  to 
feel  your  pulse.  Very  well.  Now  feel  mine.  Does  it 
denote  the  slightest  emotion  ?  "  I  could  perceive  that  she 
■was  in  a  high  fever.  "  But  above  all  things,"  she  added, 
•"  let  us  not  give  way  to  our  feelings,  that  would  be  our 
ruin."  I  gave  her,  however,  my  marriage-ring,  on  the 
pretence  that  if  I  were  stopped  in  my  journey  to  the 
frontiers,  it  would  be  advisable  not  to  have  anything  about 
me  by  which  I  might  be  known.  She  then  called  my 
daughter  and  said  to  her,  "  Listen  attentively,  child,  to  what 
I  am  going  to  say  to  you,  for  I  shall  make  you  repeat  it.  I 
shall  go  away  this  evening  at  seven  o'clock  instead  of  eight ; 
you  must  walk  behind  me,  because  you  know  that  the  doors 
are  narrow  ;  but  when  we  enter  the  long  registering-room, 
take  care  to  place  yourself  on  my  left  hand.  The  jailer  is 
accustomed  to  offer  me  his  arm  on  that  side,  and  I  do  not 
choose  to  take  it.  When  we  are  out  of  the  iron  gate,  and 
ready  to  go  up  the  outside  staircase,  then  pass  to  my  right- 
hand,  that  those  impertinent  gendarmes  of  the  guard-house 
may  not  stare  in  my  face  as  they  always  do.  Have  you 
understood  me  well  ?  "  The  child  repeated  the  instructions 
with  wonderful  exactness.  She  had  scarcely  finished  when 
St.  Roses  came  to  us.  He  had  got  introduced  under  the 
pretence  of  accompanying  Madame  de  Lavalette  home  ; 
hut  his  real  aim  was  to  see  me  once  more,  for  he  was  not 
in  our  confidence.  His  presence  would  have  been  a  great 
restraint  upon  us.  I  took  him  therefore  aside,  and  said  to 
him,  "  Leave  us  now,  my  friend.  Emilie  has  as  yet  no  idea 
of  her  misfortune.  We  must  let  her  continue  in  her  igno- 
rance. Come  back  at  eight  o'clock  ;  but  do  not  come  in  if 
the  sedan-chair  is  no  longer  there.  In  that  case,  go  im- 
mediately to  her  house,  for  she  will  be  there." 


384  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

I  embraced  him,  and  forced  him  out  of  the  door.  But 
there  soon  came  another  visitor  ;  it  was  Colonel  Briqueville, 
whose  wounds  had  kept  him  at  home  for  above  two  months. 
He  had  not  expected  to  see  my  wife,  and  he  soon  perceived 
that  his  presence  might  be  intrusive,  though  he  was  not  yet 
acquainted  with  the  whole  extent  of  my  horrible  situation. 
So  great  was  his  emotion,  that  I  was  afraid  it  would  become 
contagious.  "Leave  us,"  I  w^hispered  to  him:  "  this  is  the 
last  time  I  see  her.  One  moment's  weakness  may  kill  her." 
At  last  we  remained  alone.  I  looked  at  Emilie  ;  I  thought 
of  all  the  obstacles  I  should  find  in  my  way,  and  which 
would  overwhelm  us.  A  fatal  idea  crossed  my  mind  : 
"  Suppose,"  said  I,  "  you  were  to  go  to  the  jailer  and  offer 
him  one  hundred  thousand  francs  if  he  will  shut  his  eyes 
when  I  pass  :  he  will  perhaps  consent,  and  we  shall  all  be 
saved."  She  looked  at  me  for  a  moment  in  silence,  and 
then  replied,  "  Well,  I  will  go."  She  went  out,  and  came 
back  after  a  few  minutes.  I  already  repented  the  step  I 
had  made  her  take.  I  was  sensible  how  useless,  how  im- 
prudent it  was.  But  when  she  returned,  she  said  to  me 
calmly,  "It  is  of  no  use.  I  drew  from  the  jailer  but  a 
few  words,  and  these  were  sufficient  to  convince  me  of  his 
honesty,  therefore  let  us  think  no  more  of  it." 

Dinner  was  at  last  brought  up.  Just  as  we  were  going 
to  sit  down  to  table,  an  old  nurse  of  ours,  Madame  Dutoit, 
who  had  accompanied  Josephine,  came  in  very  ill.  Madame 
de  Lavalette  had  left  her  in  the  registering-room,  intending 
to  send  her  after  me  when  I  should  be  gone  ;  but  the  heat 
of  the  German  stove  and  her  emotion  had  made  her  so  ill, 
and  she  had  so  long  insisted  on  seeing  me  once  more,  that 
the  turnkey  let  her  in  without  the  permission  of  the  jailer. 
Far  from  being  useful  to  us,  the  poor  woman  only  added  to 
our  confusion.  She  might  lose  her  presence  of  mind  at  the 
sight  of  my  disguise  ;  but  what  was  to  be  done  ?  The  first 
object  was  to  make  her  cease  her  meanings,  and  Emilie  said 
to  her  in  a  low  but  firm  voice,  "  No  childishness.     Sit  down 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  385 

to  table,  but  do  not  eat  ;  hold  your  tongue,  and  keep  this 
smelling-bottle  to  your  nose.  In  less  than  an  hour  you  will 
be  in  the  open  air." 

This  meal,  which  to  all  appearance  was  to  be  the  last  of 
my  life,  was  terrible.  The  bits  stopped  in  our  throats  ;  not 
a  word  was  uttered  by  any  of  us,  and  in  that  situation  we 
were  to  pass  almost  an  hour.  Six  and  three-quarters  struck 
at  last.  "  I  only  want  live  minutes,  but  I  must  speak  to 
Bonneville,"  said  Madame  de  Lavalette.  She  pulled  the 
bell,  and  the  valet-de-chambre  came  in  ;  she  took  him  aside, 
whispered  a  few  words  to  him,  and  added  aloud,  "  Take  care 
that  the  chairmen  be  at  their  posts,  for  I  am  coming. — 
Now,"  she  said  to  me,  "  it  is  time  to  dress." 

A  part  of  my  room  was  divided  off  by  a  screen,  and 
formed  a  sort  of  dressing-closet.  We  stepped  behind  the 
screen,  and,  while  she  was  dressing  me  with  charming 
presence  of  mind  and  expedition,  she  said  to  me,  "  Do  not 
forget  to  stoop  when  you  go  through  the  doors  ;  walk 
slowly  through  the  registering-room,  like  a  person  exhausted 
with  fatigue."  In  less  than  three  minutes  my  toilet  was 
complete.  We  went  back  to  the  room,  and  Emilie  said  to 
her  daughter,  "  What  do  you  think  of  your  father  ?  "  A 
smile  of  surprise  and  incredulity  escaped  the  poor  girl  :  "  I 
am  serious,  my  dear,  what  do  you  think  of  him  ?  "  I  then 
turned  round,  and  advanced  a  few  steps  :  "  He  looks  very 
well,"  she  answered  ;  and  her  head  fell  again,  oppressed,  on 
her  bosom.  We  all  advanced  in  silence  towards  the  door. 
I  said  to  Emilie,  "  The  jailer  comes  in  every  evening  after 
you  are  gone.  Place  yourself  behind  the  screen,  and  make 
a  little  noise,  as  if  you  were  moving  some  piece  of  furniture. 
He  will  think  it  is  I,  and  will  go  out  again.  By  that  means 
I  shall  gain  a  few  minutes,  which  are  absolutely  necessary 
for  me  to  get  away."  She  understood  me,  and  I  pulled  the 
bell.  "  Adieu  !  "  she  said,  raising  her  eyes  to  heaven.  I 
pressed  her  arm  with  my  trembling  hand,  and  we  exchanged 
a  look.     If  we  had  embraced,  we  had  been  ruined.     The 

26 


386  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

turnkey  was  heard  ;  Emilie  flew  behind  the  screen  ;  the 
door  opened  ;  I  passed  first,  then  my  daughter,  and  lastly 
Madame  Dutoit.     After  having  crossed  the  passage,  I  arrived 
at  the  door  of  the  registering-room.     I  was  obliged,  at  the 
same  time,  to  raise  my  foot  and  to  stoop  lest  the  feathers  of 
my  bonnet  should  catch  at  the  top  of  the  door.     I  succeeded  ;. 
but,  on   raising  myself  again,  I  found  myself  in  the  large 
apartment,  in  the  presence  of  five  turnkeys,  sitting,  standing,, 
and  coming  in  my  way.     I  put  my  handkerchief  to  my  face, 
and  was  waiting  for  my  daughter  to  place  herself  on  my 
left  hand.     The  child,  however,  took  my  right  hand  ;  and 
the  jailer,  coming  down  the  stairs  of  his  apartment,  which 
was  on  the  left  hand,  came  up  to  me  without  hindrance, 
and,  putting  his  hand  on  my  arm,  said  to  me,  "You  are 
going  away  early,  Madame."     He  appeared  much  affected,, 
and  undoubtedly  thought  my  wife  had  taken  an  everlasting 
leave  of  her  husband.     It  has  been  said,  that  my  daughter 
and  I  sobbed  aloud  :  the  fact  is,  we  scarcely  dared  to  sigh. 
I  at  last  reached  the  end  of  the  room.     A  turnkey  sits  there 
day   and   night,  in   a   large  armchair,  and   in    a  space  so 
narrow  that  he   can  keep  his  hands  on  the  keys  of  two 
doors,  one  of  iron  bars,  and  the  other  towards  the  outer 
part,  and  which  is  called  the  first  wicket.     This  man  looked 
at  me  without  opening  his  doors.     I  passed  my  right  hand 
between  the  bars,  to  show  him  I  wished  to  go  out.     There 
my  daughter  did  not  mistake  again,  but  took  my  right  arm. 
We  had  a  few  steps  to  ascend  to  come  to  the  yard  ;  but  at 
the  bottom  of  the  staircase  there  is  a  guard-house  of  gen- 
darmes.    About  twenty  soldiers,  headed  by  their  officer,  had 
placed  themselves  a  few  paces  from  me  to  see  Madame  de 
Lavalette  pass.     At  last,  I  slowly  reached  the  last  step,  and 
went  into  the  chair  that  stood  a  yard  or  two  distant.     But 
no  chairman,  no  servant  was  there.     My  daughter  and  the 
old  woman  remained  standing  next  to  the  vehicle,  with  a 
sentry  at  six  paces  from  them,   immovable,  and   his   eyes 
fixed  on  me.     A  violent  degree  of  agitation  began  to  mingle 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  387 

with  my  astonishment.  My  looks  were  directed  towards 
the  sentry's  musket,  like  those  of  a  serpent  towards  its 
prey.  It  almost  seemed  to  me  that  I  held  that  musket  in 
my  grasp.  At  the  first  motion,  at  the  first  noise,  I  was 
resolved  to  seize  it.  I  felt  as  if  I  possessed  the  strength  of 
ten  men  ;  and  I  would  most  certainly  have  killed  whoever 
.  had  attempted  to  lay  hands  on  me.  This  terrible  situation 
lasted  about  two  minutes  ;  but  they  seemed  to  me  as  long 
as  a  whole  night.  At  last  I  heard  Bonneville's  voice  saying 
to  me,  "  One  of  the  chairmen  was  not  punctual,  but  I  have 
found  another."  At  the  same  instant,  I  felt  myself  raised. 
The  chair  passed  through  the  great  court,  and,  on  getting 
out,  turned  to  the  right.  We  proceeded  to  the  Quai  des 
Orfevres,  facing  the  Rue  de  Harlay.  There  the  chair 
stopped  ;  and  my  friend  Baudus,  offering  me  his  arm,  said 
aloud,  "You  know,  Madame,  you  have  a  visit  to  pay  to  the 
President."  I  got  out,  and  he  pointed  to  a  cabriolet  that 
stood  at  some  distance  in  that  dark  street.  I  jumped  into 
it,  and  the  driver  said  to  me,  "  Give  me  my  whip."  I 
looked  for  it  in  vain  ; — he  had  dropped  it.  "  Never  mind," 
said  my  companion.  A  motion  of  the  reins  made  the 
horse  start  off  in  a  quick  trot.  In  passing  by,  I  saw  Jose- 
phine on  the  Quai,  her  hands  clasped,  and  fervently  offering 
up  prayers  to  God.  We  crossed  the  Pont  St.  Michel,  the 
Rue  de  la  Harpe,  and  we  soon  reached  the  Rue  de  Vau- 
girard,  behind  the  Odeon  theatre.  It  was  not  till  then 
that  I  breathed  at  ease.  In  looking  at  the  driver  of  the 
cabriolet,  how  great  was  my  astonishment  to  recognise 
Count  Chassenon,  whom  I  was  very  far  from  expecting  to 
find  there.  "  What !  "  I  said,  "  is  it  you  ?  "— "  Yes  ;  and 
you  have  behind  you  four  double-barrelled  pistols,  well 
loaded  ;  I  hope  you  will  make  use  of  them."  "  No,  indeed, 
I  will  not  compromise  you."  "  Then  I  shall  set  you  the 
example,  and  woe  to  whoever  shall  attempt  to  stop  your 
flight !  " 

We  entered  the  new  Boulevard  at  the  corner  of  the  Rue 


388  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

Plumet  :  there  we  stopped.  I  placed  a  white  pocket- 
handkerchief  in  the  front  of  the  cabriolet.  This  was  the 
signal  agreed  upon  with  M.  Baudus.  During  the  way  I  had 
thrown  off  all  the  female  attire  with  which  I  was  disguised, 
and  put  on  a  dicky  great-coat  with  a  round  silver-laced  hat. 
M.  Baudus  soon  joined  us.  I  took  leave  of  M.  de  Chassenon, 
and  modestly  followed  my  new  master.  It  was  eight  o'clock 
in  the  evening  ;  it  poured  of  rain  ;  the  night  was  extremely 
dark,  and  the  solitude  complete  in  that  part  of  the  Faubourg 
St.  Germain.  I  walked  with  difficulty.  M.  Baudus  went 
on  more  rapidly,  and  it  was  not  without  trouble  that  I  could 
keep  up  with  him.  I  soon  left  one  of  my  shoes  in  the  mire, 
but  I  was,  nevertheless,  obliged  to  get  on.  We  saw  gen- 
darmes galloping  along,  who  were  undoubtedly  in  search  of 
me,  and  never  imagined  that  I  was  so  near  them.  Finally, 
after  one  hour's  walk,  fatigued  to  death,  with  one  shoe  on 
and  one  off,  we  arrived  in  the  Rue  de  Grenelle,  near  the 
Rue  de  Bac,  where  M.  Baudus  stopped  for  a  moment.  "  I 
am  going,"  he  said,  "  to  enter  a  nobleman's  hotel.  While 
I  speak  to  the  porter,  get  into  the  court.  You  will  find 
a  staircase  on  your  left  hand.  Go  up  to  the  highest  story. 
Go  through  a  dark  passage  you  will  meet  with  to  the  right, 
and  at  the  bottom  of  which  is  a  pile  of  wood.  Stop  there." 
We  then  walked  a  few  steps  up  the  Rue  du  Bac,  and  I  was 
seized  with  a  sort  of  giddiness  when  I  saw  him  knock  at 
the  door  of  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  the  Duke  de 
Richelieu.  M.  Baudus  went  in  first  ;  and,  while  he  was 
talking  to  the  porter,  who  had  thrust  his  head  out  of  his 
lodge,  I  passed  rapidly  by.  "Where  is  that  man  going  ?  " 
cried  the  porter.  "  It  is  my  servant."  I  quickly  went  up 
to  the  third  floor,  and  reached  the  place  that  had  been 
described  to  me.  I  was  scarcely  there,  when  I  heard  the 
rustling  of  a  silk  gown.  I  felt  myself  gently  taken  by  the 
arm,  and  pushed  into  an  apartment,  the  door  of  which  was 
immediately  shut  upon  me.  I  stepped  on  towards  a  lighted 
fire,  which  cast  around  the  room  a  very  faint  glimmering. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  389 

Having  placed  my  hands  upon  the  stove  to  warm  myself, 
I  found  a  candlestick  and  a  bundle  of  matches.  I  guessed 
that  I  might  light  a  candle.  I  did  so  ;  and  I  examined  my 
new  abode.  It  was  a  middle-sized  room,  on  the  garret-floor. 
The  furniture  consisted  of  a  very  clean  bed,  a  chest  of 
drawers,  two  chairs,  and  a  small  German  stove,  of  earthen- 
ware. On  the  chest  of  drawers  I  found  a  paper,  on  which 
the  following  words  were  written: — "Make  no  noise. 
Never  open  your  window  but  in  the  night,  wear  slippers  of 
list,  and  wait  with  patience."  Next  to  this  paper  was  a 
bottle  of  excellent  claret,  several  volumes  of  Moliere  and 
Rabelais,  and  a  basket  containing  sponges,  perfumed  soap, 
almond-paste,  and  all  the  little  utensils  of  a  gentleman's 
dressing-box.  The  delicate  attentions  and  the  neat  hand- 
writing of  the  note  made  me  guess  that  my  hosts  com- 
bined with  their  most  generous  feelings  elegant  and  refined 
manners.  But  why  was  I  in  the  Hotel  of  Foreign  Affairs  ? 
I  had  never  seen  the  Duke  de  Richelieu.  M.  Baudus  was 
indeed  attached  to  that  department,  but  in  a  very  indirect 
manner.  I  could  not  have  inspired  any  interest  in  the 
King.  Besides,  in  that  case,  it  would  have  been  more 
natural  to  pardon  me.  If  I  was  there  by  the  connivance  of 
the  Minister,  what  reason  could  he  have  had  to  violate  his 
sacred  duties,  belie  the  loyalty  he  owed  to  his  Sovereign, 
associate  himself  with  the  party  of  Bonaparte,  and  protect 
a  criminal  sentenced  for  a  conspiracy  ? 


CHAPTER  XL. 

I  REMAINED  lost  in  these  reflections  when  the  door  slowly 
opened  and  I  found  myself  in  the  arms  of  M.  Baudus. 
After  the  first  transports  of  joyful  emotion  were  over,  I 
hastened  to  address  to  him  the  questions  that  perplexed 
me,  but  he  interrupted  me  by  saying  : — "  I  comprehend 
you  ;  but  keep  your  curiosity  within  bounds  :  the  truth 
is,  that  the  day  before  yesterday  Madame  de  Lavalette  sent 
for  me,  and  when  the  servants  were  gone  and  the  door 
shut,  she  said  :  '  I  am  resolved  to  save  my  husband,  as  his 
pardon  cannot  be  obtained  ;  but  I  do  not  know  where  to 
conceal  him.  My  relations  and  friends  are  unable  to  serve 
me.  I  address  myself  to  you  with  confidence.  Procure 
him  only  a  hiding-place,  and  he  shall  be  free  to-morrow.' 
This  appeal  was  abrupt,  and  disconcerted  me.  You  know 
I  mix  very  little  in  society.  To  conceal  you  in  my  lodgings 
would  have  been  impossible  :  I  live  in  a  furnished  hotel, 
where  there  are  thirty  persons  besides  myself.  I  men- 
tioned this  to  Madame  de  Lavalette.  '  Think  about  it 
immediately,'  she  replied  ;  '  you  must  find  for  me  what  I 
want.'  At  last,  after  a  great  deal  of  hesitation,  I  requested 
two  hours'  time  ;  observing  that  I  was  connected  with  a 
family  who  had  suffered  misfortune  themselves,  and  who 
entertained  most  admirable  feelings  of  courage  and  devotion. 
'  Go  quickly,  and  acquaint  them  with  my  situation.  I  shall 
owe  my  life  to  them,  if  they  conceal  my  husband.'  I 
asked  for  some  particulars.     'No,  no,'  she  said  ;  'you  shall 

know   all   when   you   come   back  ;  but   first   run   to   your 

390 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  391 

friends.'  I  left  her,  and  came  hither. — Stop  ;  no  im- 
patience !  you  are  at  M.  Bresson's,  the  Treasurer  for  the 
Department  of  Foreign  Affairs.^  Let  me  go  on.  Madame 
Bresson,  since  her  husband's  proscription,  had  made  a  vow, 
in  the  excess  of  her  gratitude  towards  those  who  had  con- 
•cealed  him,  to  save  some  person  condemned  for  a  pohtical 
crime,  if  ever  Providence  favoured  her  sufficiently  for  any 
one  to  fall  in  her  way.  I  therefore  came  to  her  and  said, 
that  the  time  was  come  for  the  fulfilment  of  her  vow, 
and  I  acquainted  her  with  your  history  and  Madame  de 
Lavalette's  resolution.  '  Let  him  come  ! '  she  said,  with 
enthusiasm  :  '  my  husband  is  not  at  home  ;  but  I  need  not 
consult  him  for  the  performance  of  a  good  action.  He 
shares  all  my  sentiments,  I  shall  immediately  prepare  a 
room,  where  the  unfortunate  man  will  be  safe.  Go  and 
acquaint  Madame  de  Lavalette.'  I  went  back  to  her,  and 
then  she  explained  to  me  her  plan.  I  listened  to  her  in 
silence  :  this  was  not  a  fit  moment  for  objections.  She 
talked  with  so  much  confidence — she  seemed  so  sure  of 
success,  that  I  entered  with  ardour  into  all  the  details  of 
the  enterprise  ; — but  I  wanted  a  private  cabriolet.  With 
Madame  de  Lavalette's  permission,  I  went  to  M.  de 
Chassenon,  whom  I  knew  to  be  a  man  both  devoted  and 
resolute.  These  are  the  means  by  which  you  came  here, 
for  the  success  of  which  a  sort  of  miracle  was  required  ;  for, 
I  must  confess,  I  do  not  myself  comprehend  how  it  was 
done.  Now  you  must  be  sensible  of  how  much  importance 
it  is  to  your  generous  friends  that  nobody  may  ever  know 
they  afforded  you  this  retreat  :  the  whole  family  would  be 
ruined.     M.  Bresson  cannot  do  without  his  situation  :  he 

'  I  had  never  seen  M.  Bresson  but  twice  ;  but  I  knew  his  history. 
When  a  deputy  in  the  National  Convention,  he  spoke  very  stronf^ly  against 
the  trial  and  sentence  of  Louis  XVI.  He  voted  against  dcatli,  and  was 
soon  outlawed,  and  was  obliged  to  fly.  His  wife  and  he  found  a  retreat 
amidst  the  mountains  of  the  Vosges,  in  the  house  of  an  honest  family,  who, 
notwithstanding  they  saw  inevitable  death  before  them  if  llie  unfortunate 
couple  were  discovered,  kept  them,  nevertheless,  concealed  during  two 
years  with  admirable  fidelity. 


392  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

has  a  daughter  and  nephews  to  estabhsh.  Being  a  pubHc 
functionary,  and  lodged  under  the  King's  roof,  honoured 
with  the  trust  of  his  minister,  he  knows  full  well  all  the 
irregularity  of  his  conduct.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
is  convinced  of  your  innocence  ; — and  what  are  all  other 
considerations  when  they  are  put  in  the  scale  with  a  man's 
life  ?  We  shall  now  set  about  getting  you  away  from  hence 
and  beyond  the  frontiers,  which  will  not  be  an  easy  matter  ; 
but  the  most  important  object  is  achieved,  and  Providence 
will  not  leave  the  work  imperfect." 

M.  Baudus  then  left  me,  and  I  remained  alone  during 
two  hours,  scarcely  daring  to  make  any  motion,  or  even 
to  breathe,  buried  in  sad  reflections  on  the  situation  of  my 
poor  Emilie,  who  remained  as  a  hostage  in  my  dungeon. 
At  about  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  door  opened 
once  more,  and  I  saw  a  lady  enter  my  lodgings.  She  was 
dressed  in  the  highest  fashion,  and  her  face  was  covered 
with  a  veil  ;  she  was  accompanied  by  a  young  girl,  who 
appeared  to  be  about  fourteen  years  old.  The  lady  threw 
herself  into  my  arms,  while  the  child  remained  standing 
bashfully,  and  in  tears,  next  to  her  mother.  In  the  midst 
of  the  deep  emotions  that  agitated  us  all,  I  could  not  help 
saying — "For  Heaven's  name!  Madame,  raise  that  veil,, 
that  I  may  see  the  features  of  the  angelic  person  to  whom 
I  owe  my  life!"  "We  are  not  acquainted,"  she  replied^ 
raising  her  veil  ;  "  but  I  feel  happy  in  taking  a  part  in  the 
heroic  action  of  Madame  de  Lavalette."  In  fact,  I  never 
had  seen  Madame  Bresson.  She  was  at  that  time  forty 
years  of  age  ;  but  her  fine  complexion  and  elegant  figure 
made  her  look  at;  least  ten  years  younger.  She  placed  on 
the  stove  a  sort  of  tureen.  "  That  is  your  dinner,"  she 
said  ;  "  the  two  courses  are  in  the  same  vessel  :  you  will 
make  but  sorry  fare,  but  we  are  obliged  to  rob  ourselves  to 
feed  you.  I  do  not  choose  to  tell  our  secret  to  any  of 
our  servants  ;  they  all  sleep  in  this  corridor,  and  the  next 
room  is  occupied  by  my  nephew  Stanislaus.     So  make  no 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  393 

noise  in  the  morning,  but  make  your  bed  and  sweep  your 
room  yourself.  The  apartment  you  are  in  never  having 
been  inhabited,  the  least  sound  might  ruin  us  all," 

She  left  me  after  an  hour's  conversation.  M.  Bresson 
came  afterwards  :  I  had  wept  with  the  ladies, — his  visit 
made  me  rather  merrier.  I  was  no  better  acquainted  with 
him  than  with  his  Vv^ife.  I  had  seen  him  once,  fifteen  years 
before,  at  the  time  I  went  to  Saxony  ; — once  more  also,  I 
think,  at  my  return  ;  and  our  acquaintance  having  ended  by 
my  not  pursuing  the  diplomatic  career,  we  had  not  met 
again.  M.  Bresson  had  very  agreeable  features,  an  elegant 
and  cultivated  mind,  and  an  energetic  character,  of  which 
he  had  more  than  once  given  the  most  striking  proofs.  It 
was  not  his  attachment  to  the  Emperor  that  had  persuaded 
him  to  place  himself  in  such  a  dangerous  situation  to  serve 
me,  and  I  do  not  believe  that  he  ever  was  very  fond  either 
of  Napoleon  or  his  government  :  it  was  a  deep  feeling  of 
humanity,  and  a  courageous  protest  against  those  political 
condemnations  of  which  he  had  been  himself  a  victim.  "  I 
just  come,"  said  he,  "from  the  drawing-rooms  of  some  of 
our  grand  dignities.  You  cannot  form  an  idea  of  the  alarm 
and  consternation  that  fill  the  minds  of  every  one.  At  the 
Tuileries,  nobody  will  go  to  bed  to-night.  They  are  con- 
vinced that  your  escape  is  the  result  of  a  great  plot  that  is 
going  to  burst  over  them  ;  they  see  you  already  at  the  head 
of  the  old  army  marching  against  the  Tuileries,  and  all 
Paris  flying  to  arms.  I  should  not  be  surprised  if  they  stop 
the  march  of  the  foreign  troops  who  are  already  preparing 
for  their  departure.  They  talk  of  shutting  the  barriers. 
Think  only  of  the  terrible  consequences  of  such  a  measure  ! 
The  milk-women  will  not  be  able  to  get  into  town  to- 
morrow ! — there  will  be  no  milk  for  the  old  women's 
breakfasts  !  and  I  listening  to  all  these  lamentations, — I 
who  have  you  under  lock  and  key  !  " 

He  then  examined  with  the  most  minulc  attention  all 
my  modest  furniture,  and  what  they  had  brought  me.     The 


394  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

chest  of  drawers  was  filled  with  his  linen  and  clothes. 
"  Open  only  half  your  shutters,"  he  added,  "  and  let  no 
more  light  in  than  just  as  much  as  you  want  to  read  ;  if 
you  catch  a  cold,  thrust  your  head  when  you  cough  into 
this  closet."  I  had  asked  for  some  beer,  to  quench  the 
thirst  that  tormented  me  for  the  last  month.  "  You  cannot 
have  any.  We  never  drink  beer,  and  some  observation 
might  be  made  on  the  circumstance.  I  have  not  forgot  the 
history  of  M.  de  Montmorin,  who  was  discovered,  and  died 
on  the  scaffold,  through  having  eaten  a  chicken,  the  bones 
of  which  had  been  thrown  at  the  corner  of  the  door.  A 
neighbour,  who  knew  that  the  woman  who  concealed  him 
was  too  poor  to  buy  chicken,  guessed  that  she  had  in  her 
house  an  outlaw,  and  informed  against  her.  You  shall  have 
as  much  sugar  and  refreshing  syrups  as  you  may  wish,  but 
no  beer." 

I  passed  the  first  night  of  my  liberty  in  walking  up  and 
down,  and  breathing  the  fresh  air  through  the  half-opened 
window.  I  could  not  see  into  the  Rue  du  Bac,  but  I  heard 
everything  distinctly,  and  the  frequent  passing  of  men  on 
horseback  sometimes  startled  me.  At  last,  in  the  morning, 
fatigue  got  the  better  of  my  anxiety,  and  I  fell  asleep.  Two 
hours  afterwards  I  was  awakened  by  noise  near  me,  and  to 
my  great  astonishment  I  saw  in  my  room  a  little  man,  who 
was  putting  the  furniture  in  order,  sweeping  and  rubbing 
with  great  precaution.  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Mon- 
sieur's valet-de-chambre."  "  But  it  was  agreed  with  your 
master  that  nobody  should  come  in  my  room."  "  They 
have  altered  their  minds,  and  if  you  please  to  get  up,  you 
may  step  into  my  chamber  while  I  put  everything  in  order 
here." 

I  got  up,  and  he  led  me  into  another  room  facing  the  one 
where  I  slept.  When  he  was  gone,  I  began  to  examine 
the  place  I  was  in.  It  was  much  too  well  furnished  for  a 
servant's  room.  The  chimney  was  ornamented  with  a  clock, 
and  china  vases  containing  flowers  ;  the  bed  was  elegant. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  395 

I  opened  a  closet  at  the  head  of  the  bed,  and  found  several 
articles  of  female  attire.  "  What's  the  meaning  of  all  this  ? 
Could  the  man  be  married,  and  his  wife  in  the  secret  ? 
How  !  there  are  already  a  child  and  two  servants  entrusted 
with  my  fate,  and  that  in  this  house  !  Is  that  very  pru- 
dent ?  "  These  reflections  troubled  me  so  much  that  my 
heart  throbbed  within  me.  I  attempted  to  rise,  but  I  fell 
on  the  floor  in  a  deep  swoon.  The  servant  came  back  in 
about  half  an  hour,  and  finding  me  insensible,  he  dragged 
me  to  my  bed,  where  he  had  great  trouble  to  bring  me 
to  myself.  "  Do  all  you  can,"  he  said,  "  to  keep  up  your 
spirits,  for  neither  my  master  nor  my  mistress  can  come 
back  until  this  evening.  I  shall  come  if  I  can.  But,  for 
Heaven's  sake  !  do  not  fall  sick,  for  how  could  we  call  in  a 
doctor  ?  " 

I  was  but  too  sensible  of  the  truth  of  all  this  good  man 
said  to  me,  and  added  to  myself,  "  Suppose  I  were  to  die, 
what  would  they  do  with  my  body  ?  "  I  was  soon  diverted 
from  these  painful  reflections  by  the  voice  of  a  newsvender 
who  was  crying  something  in  the  street.  I  could  not  well 
distinguish  what  he  said,  but  I  thought  I  heard  my  own 
name.  I  ran  to  the  window,  but  the  man  was  already  too 
far  for  me  to  catch  a  word  of  what  he  uttered.  I  was 
obliged  to  wait  until  another  went  by,  and  four  hours 
elapsed  before  the  second  came.  This  time  it  was  a  woman, 
whose  shrill,  sharp  voice  brought  distinctly  to  my  ears  the 
words  ^^  Lav  alette  —  householders — landlords."  It  was 
undoubtedly  an  ordinance  proclaiming  severe  penalties  on 
those  who  would  give  me  refuge  (this  did  not  make  me 
uneasy),  but  at  the  same  time  offering  rewards  to  those  who 
might  denounce  me.  And  who  could  know  whether  among 
the  servants  of  the  house  there  might  not  be  found  one 
whom  the  love  of  lucre  might  incite  to  such  an  act  ?  I 
was  very  unjust :  for  Andre  Joineau  and  his  wife,  whom 
they  called  Montet,  were  old  domestics,  whose  fidelity  and 
devotion  were  proof  against  all  seduction.     The  woman,  in 


396  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LAV  ALE  TTE. 

particular,  was  a  pretty  Protestant,  remarkable  for  the  good 
education  she  had  received,  and  her  elevated  sentiments. 
At  last,  about  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  while  I  was  still 
without  light,  a  lady  came  in  and  seated  herself  at  the  foot 
of  my  bed  :  she  inquired  in  a  low  voice  how  I  was.  I 
endeavoured  to  tranquillise  her,  and  repeated  my  thanks  for 
her  kindness.  "  I  am  not  Madame  Bresson,"  she  said  ;  "  I 
am  her  lady's-maid  ;  my  mistress  will  certainly  come  home 
in  an  hour  or  two  :  but  she  has  heard  that  you  were  not 
very  well,  and  she  wished  to  have  some  account  of  your 
health."  "  Here  is  another  witness  !  "  said  I  to  myself  with 
a  sigh.  "  I  pray  to  God  that  so  many  confidants  may  not 
spoil  the  business  ;  but  I  have  great  fears."  At  last 
Madame  Bresson  came.  I  spoke  to  her  of  the  cries  I  had 
heard  in  the  street.  "  It  is  nothing,"  she  replied  ;  "  merely 
the  renewal  of  an  old  Police  Ordinance  of  the  year  1793, 
that  makes  everybody  laugh,  for  the  joy  is  incredible  in 
Paris.  Madame  de  Lavalette  is  extolled  to  the  skies. 
Nothing  can  be  more  diverting  than  the  observations  of  the 
women  among  the  lower  classes,  and  particularly  in  the 
markets.  At  the  theatres,  the  slightest  allusions  are  seized 
with  enthusiasm  ;  and  if  Government  were  to  attempt  to 
stifle  these  transports, — which,  by  the  bye,  are  something 
worse  than  disaffection, — their  agents  would  no  doubt  be 
murdered.  So  you  may  rest  easy  in  that  respect.  As  for 
the  confidants  we  have  made  around  us,  M.  Bresson  and 
myself  have  decided  that  it  would  be  much  safer  to  tell  the 
whole  business  to  the  two  servants  who  sleep  facing  you. 
Notwithstanding  the  greatest  precautions,  they  might  have 
heard  you,  been  alarmed  at  the  unusual  noise,  and  have 
mentioned  it  to  their  comrades.  It  was  much  better  to 
close  their  mouths  by  trusting  them  with  our  secret.  They 
are  married,  and  have  lived  with  us  during  the  last  twenty 
years  ;  they  are  a  very  worthy  couple,  and  would  most 
willingly  expose  their  lives  for  us.  We  have  moreover 
resolved  that  Stanislaus  should  also  be  told,  for  he  is  your 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  397 

next-door  neighbour.  I  will  bring  him  to  you  this  even- 
ing," She  did  so.  He  was  a  young  man  of  twenty,  very 
well  informed,  and  whose  address  was  agreeable.  We  soon 
became  friends.  He  used  to  remain  with  me  from  eleven  at 
night  till  two  in  the  morning.  I  taught  him  to  play  chess  ; 
and  he  brought  me  the  journals  and  the  news  of  Paris. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

I  MUST  now  return  to  the  Conciergerie.  I  had  scarcely- 
passed  the  outer  door  when  the  jailer  entered  my  room,  and, 
as  I  had  foreseen,  retired  when  he  heard  a  noise  behind  the 
screen.  But  he  returned  about  five  minutes  afterwards  ; 
and  not  seeing  any  one,  though  the  same  noise  was  once 
more  repeated,  he  took  a  fancy  to  remove  one  side  of  the 
screen.  At  the  sight  of  Madame  Lavalette,  he  uttered  a  loud 
exclamation  and  ran  to  the  door.  She  caught  hold  of  his 
coat,  and  said  to  him,  *'  Wait  a  minute  ;  let  my  husband  get 
off!  "  "  You  will  ruin  me,  Madame,"  he  said  in  a  rage  ;  and, 
disengaging  himself  with  so  great  an  effort  that  he  left  a 
piece  of  his  coat  in  the  hands  of  my  wife,  he  went  off  calling 
aloud,  "  The  prisoner  has  escaped  !  "  With  those  words  he 
ran,  tearing  his  hair,  to  the  Prefect  of  Police.  In  an  instant,, 
all  the  turnkeys  and  gendarmes  were  sent  about  in  all 
directions.  Two  of  the  former  reached  the  sedan-chair,  that 
was  leisurely  advancing  on  the  quay.  They  opened  it,  and 
finding  no  one  in  it  but  my  daughter,  they  left  it.  Soon^ 
however,  the  pursuit  began  in  regular  order  ;  and  during 
the  whole  night,  the  houses  of  my  friends  and  acquaintances, 
and  even  of  all  the  persons  with  whom  my  late  situation  in 
the  world  could  have  given  me  the  least  connection,  were 
rigorously  examined.  The  next  day  the  barriers  were  shut, 
and  the  joy  of  the  whole  capital  in  witnessing  the  despair  of 
the  police  was  inexpressible.  Madame  Lavalette,  a  little 
easier  after  half  an  hour,  began  to  get  the  better  of  her 
agitation  ;  and  she  would  have  enjoyed  her  happiness,   if 

398 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  399 

the  brutal  turnkeys,  who  had  left  her  door  open,  had  not 
uttered  against  her  the  most  horrible  abuse,  and  assured  her 
it  was  impossible  I  should  not  be  retaken  in  a  very  short 
time. 

The  arrival  of  the  Procureur-General  Bellart  put  an  end 
to  their  abusive  language.  He  sat  himself  gravely  down  to 
examine  her,  and  addressed  reproaches  to  her  that  were 
only  ridiculous.  By  his  order,  she  was  treated  with  so  much 
severity,  that,  in  the  state  of  health  in  which  she  then  was, 
that  usage  became  the  chief  cause  of  the  disorder  under 
which  she  laboured  during  twelve  years,  but  from  which 
she  has  at  last  recovered.  They  placed  her  in  the  chamber 
of  Marshal  Ney,  where  there  was  no  chimney,  but  a  German 
stove,  the  suffocating  heat  of  which  made  her  suffer  a  great 
deal  night  and  day.  The  window  opened  into  the  women's 
yard.  To  hear  the  noisy  cries  of  those  wretches  during  the 
whole  day,  and  their  vulgar  and  obscene  language,  was 
agony  to  so  delicate  a  female.  No  person  could  come  near 
her  ;  even  her  maid  was  excluded,  and  she  was  attended  by 
one  of  the  female  turnkeys.  None  of  her  letters  could  cross 
the  threshold  of  the  prison,  nor  could  any  communication 
from  her  friends  reach  her.  She  was  for  ever  assailed  with 
a  thousand  different  terrors,  especially  in  the  night,  when 
the  sentries  were  relieved.  She  always  imagined  it  was  her 
husband  they  were  bringing  back.  During  more  than  five- 
and-twenty  days  and  nights,  she  did  not  enjoy  one  moment's 
sleep.  I  was  far  from  thinking  she  could  be  so  unhappy.  I 
had  been  told,  with  the  view  of  comforting  mc,  tliat  she  was 
lodged  in  the  apartments  of  the  lady  of  the  Prefect  of  Police, 
treated  with  the  greatest  attention  and  respect,  and  that 
she  would  soon  obtain  permission  to  return  home. 

My  daughter  had  returned  to  her  convent  in  an  ecstasy  of 
joy,  and  agitated  with  so  strong  an  emotion  that  she  could 
not  explain  in  what  manner  she  had  contrived  to  save  her 
father.  But  when,  next  day,  the  whole  business  was  ex- 
plained, the  Superior,  who  had  just  succeeded  in  obtaining 


400  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  protection  of  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme  for  her  house, 
was  seized  with  alarm  :  my  daughter  was  ordered  to  hold 
her  tongue  ;  and  the  nuns  and  some  of  the  boarders  shrunk 
away  from  her,  as  if  she  had  had  the  plague.  Will  it  be 
believed  when  I  add,  that  the  parents  of  several  of  those 
boarders  declared  to  the  Superior,  that  they  would  take 
their  children  home  if  Josephine  Lavalette  remained  in  the 
convent  ?  So  that  a  virtuous,  generous  action,  which  ought 
to  have  been  presented  as  an  example  to  be  followed  by 
young  persons,  was  through  fear,  personal  interest,  and 
perhaps  also  by  meaner  passions,  regarded  as  a  sort  of  crime 
and  a  cause  of  proscription.  Six  weeks  afterwards,  when 
Madame  de  Lavalette  was  set  at  liberty,  she  hastened  to 
take  her  daughter  from  the  convent. 

I  passed  the  first  ten  days  very  quietly  in  my  retreat, 
loaded  with  the  most  touching  marks  of  friendship.  My 
kind  protectors  sought,  above  all,  to  ease  my  mind.  As 
long  as  I  remained  with  them,  I  had,  they  said,  no  danger 
to  fear.  I  might  stay  whole  months  in  my  hiding-place, 
without  putting  them  to  the  least  inconvenience.  I  was, 
however,  not  of  the  same  opinion.  M.  Baudus,  who  came 
now  and  then  to  see  me,  could  not  dissemble  that  the 
activity  of  the  police  had  not  relaxed  in  the  least  :  they 
were  certain  that  I  had  not  crossed  the  frontiers  either  at 
Strasburg  or  at  Metz.  General  Excelmans,  who  was  an 
outlaw,  and  had  fled  to  Brussels,  wrote  to  his  wife,  as  a  great 
secret,  as  soon  as  he  had  heard  the  history  of  my  flight,  that 
he  had  just  supped  with  me.  The  anecdote  was  industriously 
circulated,  but  the  police  were  not  deceived  by  it.  It  was  in 
Paris  that  they  continued  their  searches.  My  friends  were 
watched  with  a  strictness  inspired  by  the  hope  of  a  con- 
siderable reward.  M.  Berton  de  Vaux,  then  Secretary- 
General  of  the  Police,  explained  to  M.  Baudus  the  hidden 
cause  of  so  obstinate  a  persecution.  The  Ultra  party 
accused  the  Minister  of  having  yielded  to  old  connections 
of  friendship  with  me,  and  to  the  wish  of  making  a  merit  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  401 

my  flight  in  the  eyes  of  Louis  Bonaparte  and  his  whole 
family,  and  thus  insuring  himself  a  title  of  gratitude  for 
some  future  contingency.  These  absurd  charges  might 
come  to  the  ears  of  the  King  ;  and  M.  Decazes,  fearing 
above  all  things  to  lose  his  credit,  and  perhaps  to  fall 
beneath  the  hatred  to  which  he  was  exposed,  augmented, 
from  day  to  day,  the  activity  of  his  inquiries.  It  was  there- 
fore necessary  for  me  to  fly  ; — but  by  what  means  ?  It  was 
proposed  that  I  should  once  more  assume  the  garb  of  the 
other  sex,  and  go  secretly  to  a  sea-port,  where  smugglers 
would  undertake  to  convey  me  to  England.  I  rejected  that 
plan  as  quite  extravagant.  Neither  did  it  please  Baudus. 
A  few  days  afterwards,  he  came  and  told  me  that  a  Russian 
general  offered  to  take  charge  of  me  ;  that  I  should  be  con- 
ducted to  his  inn  during  the  night,  and  then  concealed  in 
the  back  of  his  carriage.  Thus  I  might  pass  the  barrier 
without  any  accident.  But  for  that  I  first  was  to  lay  down 
eight  thousand  francs  to  pay  his  debts,  and  then  take  upon 
me  all  the  expenses  of  the  journey.  The  money  was  ready, 
but  the  plan  miscarried.  The  Russian  wanted  to  know  the 
name  of  the  outlaw  ;  and  when  he  heard  it,  the  fear  of  being 
sent  to  Siberia,  in  case  I  were  discovered,  made  him  draw 
back.  After  that,  it  was  proposed  that  I  should  join  a 
battalion  of  Bavarian  soldiers  that  were  going  to  leave 
France,  by  trusting  my  secret  to  the  commander,  who 
would  undoubtedly  be  very  glad  to  save  a  relation  and 
friend  of  Prince  Eugene.  This  plan  appeared  unobjection- 
able to  me.  I  too  well  knew  the  King  of  Bavaria  to  fear 
that  the  officer  would  be  punished  ;  and  that  excellent 
Prince,  to  whom  I  mentioned  the  fact  a  few  months 
afterwards,  said  to  me  with  emotion,  *'  I  would  have 
attached  him  to  my  person,  if  he  had  succeeded  in  saving 
you  !  " 

But  I  was  also  obliged  to  abandon  this  project  :  the  police, 
having  guessed  that  I  might  make  resort  to  it,  watched  the 
•troop  with  so  much  vigilance,  and  the  officers  were  so  com- 

27 


402  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

pletely  circumvented,  that  it  became  quite  impossible  to  have 
any  connection  with  them.  At  last,  on  the  eighteenth  day 
after  I  had  left  prison,  Baudus  came  to  me  with  a  jo}d"ul 
countenance  and  embraced  me,  saying,  "We  shall  at  last 
succeed.  Some  Englishmen  have  offered  to  serve  you,  and 
I  believe  they  possess  the  means  of  doing  so."  These  are 
the  particulars  of  what  had  happened.  The  Princess  de 
Vaudemont,  uneasy  at  knowing  me  to  be  still  in  Paris, 
though  she  was  not  acquainted  with  the  place  of  my  con- 
cealment, looked  about  for  persons  who  might  help  me  away. 
She  spoke  of  her  anxiety  to  Madame  de  St.  Aignan  Caulain- 
court,  one  of  the  cleverest  women  born  in  France,  whose 
kindness  is  inexhaustible,  and  whose  courage  is  unbounded  : 
she  proposed  to  the  Princess  to  sound  a  young  Englishman, 
Mr.  Bruce,  who  used  to  visit  both  their  houses.  Bruce, 
delighted  at  the  idea  of  saving  an  unfortunate  man  who 
had  escaped  the  scaffold  in  so  wonderful  a  manner,  accepted 
with  enthusiasm  the  proposal  of  the  ladies,  and  went 
immediately  to  consult  Sir  Robert  Wilson  on  the  subject. 

Sir  Robert  shared  his  young  friend's  enthusiasm.  He 
had  failed  in  his  attempt  to  save  Marshal  Ney,  but  he  hoped 
to  take  his  revenge  in  my  case.  He  made  quite  a  military 
expedition  of  the  business  ;  and  as  Bruce  was  not  in  the 
army,  it  became  necessary  to  find  one  or  two  officers, 
independent  men,  of  liberal  opinions,  who  might  be  dis- 
posed to  play  off  a  good  trick  on  the  Government  of  the 
Bourbons.  The  road  to  Belgium,  by  Valenciennes,  was 
specially  assigned  to  the  English  army,  and  it  was  there- 
fore chosen  for  my  escape.  They  asked  no  more  than  two 
days  to  finish  their  preparations.  I  received  a  very  particular 
instruction  concerning  my  dress  :  no  mustachios  ;  an  English 
wig  ;  my  beard  shaved  very  clean,  after  the  manner  of  the 
officers  of  that  nation  ;  a  great-coat  with  buttons  of  the 
English  Guards  :  the  regimentals  and  hat  were  to  be  given 
me  at  the  instant  of  our  departure. 

We  held  council,  and,  as  it  occurs  in  most  cases,  our  first 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  405 

steps  were  wrong.  It  was  looked  upon  as  very  necessary  to 
get  my  coat  made  by  the  tailor  of  an  English  regiment  ;  but 
he  would  want  my  measure  :  my  friend  Stanislaus  took  it 
with  fine  white  paper  ;  and  instead  of  the  notches  that  the 
tailors  are  accustomed  to  make,  he  wrote  on  it,  '''•Length  of 
the  forearm^  breadth  of  the  breast^^  &c.,  in  a  fine  neat  hand, 
and  carried  it  boldly  to  the  tailor  of  the  regim.ent  of  the 
Guards.  He  quickly  made  the  coat,  however — not  without 
observing  that  the  measure  had  not  been  taken  by  a  tailor. 
M.  Bresson  had  been  to  buy  me  another  great-coat  at  an  old 
clothes  shop,  and  vv^as  naturally  obliged  to  measure  it  on 
himself.  He  was,  however,  tall  and  thin  ;  so  that  in  less 
than  forty-eight  hours  I  had  two  coats,  neither  of  which 
could  be  of  any  service  to  me.  I  had  no  boots,  and  all  our 
speculations  were  useless  in  contriving  to  procure  me  a  pair. 
I  was  forced  to  put  on  a  pair  belonging  to  M.  Bresson :  they 
were  at  least  two  inches  longer  than  my  foot  ;  I  could 
scarcely  walk  in  them,  and  we  all  laughed  much  at  the 
awkward  figure  I  cut. 

On  the  9th  of  January,  181 6,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the 
evening,  I  at  last  took  leave  of  my  kind  friends.  We  were 
all  very  much  affected,  and  particularly  myself,  who  was 
leaving  them  with  so  little  hope  of  ever  seeing  them  again. 
I  did,  however,  meet  them  again.  I  write  this  at  twenty 
minutes'  walk  from  a  delightful  country  seat,  on  the  right 
bank  of  the  Seine,  which  they  inhabit  the  whole  year 
through.  I  see  them  every  day  :  they  are  happy  and 
independent.  Fedora,  their  only  daughter,  is  married  to 
M.  de  Montjoyeux,  an  amiable  young  man.  They  have 
two  pretty  children  ;  and  Fedora  is  one  of  the  cleverest, 
handsomest,  and  most  agreeable  women  I  know.  I  take 
some  pleasure  in  thinking  that  the  happiness  this  family 
enjoy  is  partly  the  reward  of  their  generous  and  courageous 
conduct  towards  me. 

After  I  had  embraced  them,  Messieurs  Bresson  and  Baudus 
brought  me  to  the  corner  of  the  Rue  de  Grenellc,  where  I 


404  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

found  again  the  faithful  Chassenon,  with  his  cabriolet.  In 
going  to  my  destination,  we  crossed  the  Place  du  Carrousel. 
I  could  not  help  smiling  when  I  passed  so  near  the  numerous 
sentries  stationed  along  the  railings  of  the  Tuileries,  and 
when  I  saw  the  place  lighted  up,  and  filled,  as  I  had  reason 
to  imagine,  with  people  enraged  at  not  being  able  to  seize 
me,  while  I  was  not  more  than  fifty  yards  from  them. 

We  stopped  at  a  house  in  the  Rue  du  Helder,  near  the 
Boulevard  :  there  I  took  leave  of  my  friend  Chassenon.  As 
I  walked  slowly  up  the  stairs,  I  was  surprised  at  meeting 
Mademoiselle  Dubourg.  There  would  have  been  too  much 
danger  in  our  appearing  to  know  each  other.  I  afterwards 
learned  that  she  was  going  to  M.  Dupuis,  my  Reporting 
Judge,  who  lived  on  the  second  floor  of  the  house  ;  so  that 
I  was  going  to  pass  the  night  under  the  same  roof  with  the 
magistrate  who  had  during  my  trial  examined  me  twice  at 
length,  and  with  great  severity.  This  circumstance,  however, 
by  no  means  troubled  me.  M.  Dupuis  was  an  honourable 
man,  to  whom  I  had  shown  no  reserve — who  was  convinced 
of  my  innocence,  and  did  not  fear  to  declare  it  openly,  with 
an  energy  that  might  be  hurtful  to  his  fortune. 

When  I  reached  the  first-floor,  I  saw  before  me  a  gentle- 
man of  tall  stature  and  noble  features — it  was  Sir  Robert 
Wilson.  He  introduced  me  to  two  persons  who  were 
expecting  me  in  the  parlour  ;  in  one  of  the  two  I  re- 
cognised Mr.  Bruce,  whom  I  had  met  sometimes  during 
the  preceding  winter  at  the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu's.  Mr. 
Hutchinson,  to  whom  the  apartments  belonged,  was  a 
Captain  in  the  English  Guards.  He  received  me  in  a 
friendly  manner.  We  seated  ourselves  round  a  bowl  of 
punch.  Our  conversation  turned  on  public  aff"airs,  and 
we  talked  with  as  much  ease  and  freedom  as  if  we  had 
been  together  in  London.  These  gentlemen  did  not  appear 
to  entertain  the  least  uneasiness  in  respect  to  our  next  day's 
journey  ;  and  at  last,  after  sitting  for  about  an  hour.  Sir 
Robert  and  Mr.  Bruce  rose,  and  the  former,  shaking  hands 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  405 

with  me,  said  :  "Be  up  to-morrow  by  six  o'clock,  and  be 
very  careflil  about  your  dress.  You  will  find  here  the  coat 
of  a  Captain  in  the  Guards,  which  you  must  put  on.  At 
eight  o'clock  precisely  I  shall  expect  you  at  the  door."  "As 
for  me,"  said  Bruce,  "  I  am  going  to  spend  three  days  at  the 
country-seat  of  the  Princess  de  la  Moskowa  ;  for  you  will  not 
want  me  any  longer.  My  wishes  go  along  with  you,  and  I 
shall  receive  accounts  from  you  by  my  friends." 

When  they  were  gone,  Mr.  Hutchinson  offered  me  his 
bed  ;  but  I  had  no  desire  to  sleep,  and  I  laid  myself  down 
on  a  sofa.  While  my  host  was  lying  in  a  profound  sleep,  I 
looked  about  the  apartments  to  find  a  corner  where  I  might 
conceal  myself,  in  case  the  police  should  come  and  pay  us  a 
visit  ;  but  it  was  very  scantily  furnished,  and  consisted  only 
of  two  rooms  and  a  closet.  It  would  have  been  impossible 
to  elude,  even  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  the  most  superficial 
search.  I  opened  the  window  to  ascertain  the  distance  I  was 
from  the  street  ;  that  distance  was  too  considerable  for  me 
to  leap.  I  could  not  hope  to  save  myself  after  my  fall,  and 
still  too  near  the  ground  for  me  to  be  killed  at  once. 
Fortunately,  I  recollected  the  pistols  M.  de  Chassenon  had 
given  me.  I  took  one  of  them  in  my  hands  and  examined 
it  with  care.  I  placed  it  under  my  pillow,  and  was  as  easy 
after  that,  as  if  I  had  had  in  my  possession  the  surest 
talisman.  I  soon  fell  asleep  ;  but  about  one  o'clock  in  the 
morning  I  was  awakened  by  a  great  noise  and  a  very 
animated  conversation  that  was  taking  place  at  the  carriage- 
door  of  the  house.  By  listening,  I  discovered  that  somebody 
wanted  to  get  in.  I  immediately  awoke  my  companion,  and 
said,  "I  believe  I  am  discovered.  Some  person  wishes  to  get 
into  the  house."  Mr.  Hutchinson  went  out  of  the  apartment 
in  the  calmest  manner,  and  in  about  five  minutes,  which 
appeared  horribly  long  to  me,  he  came  back,  saying,  "  It  is 
only  a  dispute  between  the  portress  and  a  French  officer 
who  lives  on  the  third  floor.  She  is  complaining  that  he 
comes  home  too  late.  So  let  us  go  to  sleep  again  without  fear." 


4o6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

At  last,  after  having  counted  ever}-  hour  of  the  night,  I 
heard  six  o'clock  strike  :  I  immediately  set  about  my  toilet, 
and  at  eight  o'clock  precisely  I  found  Sir  Robert  Wilson  in 
the  street,  dressed  in  his  full  regimentals,  and  seated  in  a 
pretty  gig.  Mr.  Hutchinson  soon  appeared  also  on  horse- 
back, and  we  set  off.  The  weather  was  beautiful  ;  all  the 
shops  were  open,  everybody  in  the  streets,  and  by  a  singular 
coincidence  they  were  just  at  that  moment  putting  up  in  the 
Place  de  Greve  the  gibbet  which,  according  to  custom,  is 
used  to  execute  in  effigy  persons  declared  guilty  in  con- 
tumacy. 


CHAPTER  XLII. 

We  entered  the  Rue  de  Clichy  which  leads  to  the  barrier 
of  the  same  name.  As  I  had  on  the  regimentals  and 
cap  of  the  Guards,  the  English  soldiers  we  met  saluted 
us  in  the  military  manner.  Two  officers  we  met  on  the 
Toad  appeared  very  much  surprised  at  seeing  with  Sir 
Robert  one  of  their  comrades  with  whom  they  were  un- 
acquainted ;  but  Mr.  Hutchinson  went  up  to  them  and 
talked  to  them  while  we  were  approaching  the  barrier.  To 
the  right  and  to  the  left  were  two  guard-houses — the  one 
English,  and  the  other  French.  The  soldiers  drew  up 
under  arms.  Fortunately  the  French  were  National 
Guards,  and  it  was  not  probable  they  could  know  me,  as 
they  did  not  belong  to  my  quarter  of  the  town.  We  crossed 
the  barrier  with  a  slow  step  ;  and  when  we  were  out,  I 
thanked  Sir  Robert  with  as  much  gratitude  as  if  we  had 
crossed  the  barriers  of  the  kingdom.  We  went  on  thus  to 
the  village  of  La  Chapelle.  There  we  were  obliged  to  take 
another  horse,  to  be  able  to  go  to  Compiegne.  This  horse 
had  been  baited  at  a  large  inn.  When  we  approached  the 
house,  we  perceived  four  gendarmes  standing  in  front  of  the 
door.  Sir  Robert  went  up  to  them  :  they  separated,  that 
we  might  pass  ;  and,  to  prevent  them  from  paying  attention 
to  us,  Mr.  Hutchinson  began  a  conversation  with  them. 
His  inquiries  were  chiefly  directed  to  the  number  of  stables 
and  the  quantity  of  forage  and  lodgings  that  were  to  be 
found  in  the  village  :  from  all  which  they  concluded  that 
English  troops  were  expected,  and  one  of  them  invited  the 

407 


4o8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

English  captain  to  accompany  him  to  the  Mayor.  "  Not 
at  present,"  he  answered  :  "  I  am  going  forward  to  meet 
the  waggons,  and  in  two  hours  I  shall  be  back."  The 
conversation  could  not  last  very  long  with  an  Englishman 
who  knew  but  little  of  our  language.  But  the  horse  was 
quickly  changed,  and  we  had  the  satisfaction,  on  going 
away,  to  exchange  salutes  with  the  gendarmes.  I  then 
learned  that  the  man  who  had  brought  us  thus  far 
belonged  to  M.  Auguste  de  St.  Aignan.  On  the  road  we 
met  with  several  gendarmes  in  pursuit  of  malefactors,  or 
bearing  military  correspondence.  They  all  fixed  their  eyes 
on  us  without  suspecting  anything.  I  had  accustomed 
myself,  on  seeing  them,  to  shut  my  eyes,  but  with  the 
precaution  of  placing  my  hand  on  my  pistol, — fully 
resolved,  if  I  should  be  recognised  and  apprehended,  to 
blow  my  brains  out  ;  for  it  would  have  been  too  great  a 
stupidity  to  suffer  myself  to  be  brought  back  to  Paris. 

We  arrived  at  last  at  Compiegne.  At  the  entrance  of 
the  suburb  stood  a  non-commissioned  English  officer,  who, 
on  seeing  his  general,  turned  to  the  right  and  marched  with 
gravity  through  several  small  streets,  until  he  stopped  at  a 
small  house  in  a  very  lonely  part  of  the  town.  There  we 
found  an  officer  who  received  us  very  well,  and  we  waited 
for  Sir  Robert's  carriage,  which  Mr.  Wallis  was  to  bring 
from  Paris  for  him.  That  officer  had  ordered  post-horses 
for  General  Wallis,  brother-in-law  to  Sir  Robert  Wilson, 
who  travelled  under  his  name.  Mr.  Wallis  arrived  at 
about  six  o'clock  ;  after  having  been  followed  a  great  part 
of  the  way  by  the  gendarmes.  We  had  not  an  instant  to 
lose  :  the  carriage  advanced  rapidly.  We  experienced  a 
great  delay  at  Conde,  in  getting  through  the  town,  but  it 
was  during  the  night.  At  last,  next  morning,  at  seven 
o'clock,  we  arrived  at  Valenciennes,  the  last  French  city 
on  that  frontier.  I  was  beginning  to  feel  more  easy,  when 
the  postmaster  told  us  to  go  and  have  our  passports 
examined  by  the  captain  of  the  gendarmerie.     "  You  forgot, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  409 

I  suppose,  to  read  who  we  were,"  said  Sir  Robert  calmly  : 
"  let  the  captain  come  here,  if  he  chooses  to  see  us."  The 
postmaster  felt  how  wrongly  he  had  acted  ;  and  taking  our 
passports,  he  went  himself  to  get  them  signed.  As  it  was 
very  long  before  he  came  back,  I  began  to  be  tormented 
by  a  most  horrible  anxiety.  Was  I  going  to  be  wrecked 
in  the  harbour  ?  Suppose  the  officer  of  gendarmes  were 
to  come  himself  to  verify  the  signatures  and  to  apprehend 
me  ?  Fortunately  the  weather  was  very  cold,  it  was 
scarcely  daylight,  and  the  officer  signed  the  passports 
without  rising  from  his  bed.  We  got  out  of  the  gate.  On 
the  glacis,  an  officer  of  the  Preventive  Service  wanted  to 
see  whether  we  were  in  order  ;  but  having  satisfied  his 
curiosity,  we  went  on  and  stopped  no  more.  We  flew 
along  the  beautiful  Brussels  road.  From  time  to  time  I 
looked  through  the  back  window,  to  see  whether  we  were 
not  pursued.  My  impatience  augmented  with  every  turn 
of  the  wheels.  The  postillions  showed  us  at  a  distance 
a  large  house,  that  was  the  Belgian  Custom-house  :  I  fixed 
my  eyes  on  that  edifice,  and  it  seemed  to  me  as  if  it 
remained  always  equally  far  off".  I  imagined  that  the 
postillion  did  not  get  on  :  I  was  ashamed  of  my  impatience, 
but  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  curb  it.  At  last  we  reached 
the  frontier :  we  were  on  the  Belgian  territory  : — I  was 
saved  !  I  pressed  the  hands  of  Sir  Robert,  and  expressed 
to  him,  with  a  deep  emotion,  the  extent  of  my  gratitude. 
But  he,  keeping  up  his  gravity,  only  smiled,  without 
answering  me.  About  half  an  hour  afterwards  he  turned 
to  me,  and  said  in  the  most  serious  tone  possible  :  "  Now, 
pray  tell  me,  my  dear  friend,  why  did  you  not  like  to  be 
guillotined  ?  "  1  stared  at  him  with  astonishment,  and 
made  no  reply.  "  Yes,"  he  continued  ;  "  they  say  that 
you  had  solicited,  as  a  favour,  that  you  might  be  shot  ? " 
"  It  is  very  true.  When  a  man  is  guillotined,  they  put 
him  in  a  cart,  with  his  hands  bound  behind  his  back  ; 
and    when  he  is  on  the    scaffold,  they  tie  him    fast    to   a 


4IO  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

plank,  which  they  lower  to  let  it  slip  thus  under  the 
knife."  "  Ah  !  I  understand  :  you  did  not  like  to  have 
your  throat  cut  like  a  cal/y 

We  arrived  at  Mons  at  about  three  o'clock  in  the  after- 
noon, and  we  stopped  at  the  best  inn.  While  dinner  was 
preparing,  I  wrote  a  few  letters,  of  which  Sir  Robert  was 
kind  enough  to  take  charge  ;  and  after  having  gone  with 
me  to  buy  some  things  I  wanted,  and  having  given  me  two 
letters,  one  for  the  King  of  Prussia  and  the  other  for  Mr. 
Lamb,  the  English  resident  in  Munich,  we  separated, — he 
to  return  to  Paris,  and  I  to  go  farther  into  Germany  and 
try  to  reach  Bavaria. 


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

I  REMAINED,  howevcr,  the  night  at  Mons.  Next  day  I  could 
not  go  any  farther  than  Namur.  I  travelled  under  the 
name  of  a  Colonel  Losack,  sent  by  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton on  a  mission  to  Munich  and  Vienna.  I  had  purchased 
at  Mons  a  bad  cabriolet  ;  I  had  no  servant ;  and  the 
weather  was  so  severe,  and  my  health  so  feeble,  that  I 
could  not  travel  above  twenty  leagues  a  day.  It  was  very 
dangerous  for  me  to  remain  so  long  on  the  road.  The 
description  of  my  person  had  been  sent  everywhere  about : 
I  might  meet  with  Englishmen,  and  my  passport,  great- 
coat, and  buttons  with  the  arms  of  England,  would  all 
betray  me,  as  I  could  not  speak  the  language.  I  arrived, 
however,  without  any  accident,  at  Worms.  I  knew  enough 
German  to  serve  my  purpose,  and  I  hastened  to  read  the 
papers.  How  great  was  my  consternation  when  I  read  in 
the  Gazette  that  Madame  de  Lavalette  remained  in  the 
Conciergerie,  and  that  Sir  Robert  Wilson  and  his  two 
friends  had  been  apprehended  ! 

The  General  had  brought  with  us  to  Mons  a  young 
servant  who  could  not  speak  French.  When  he  returned, 
the  spies  who  were  on  the  look-out  for  me,  observed  in  the 
yard  of  the  hotel  where  he  lived  his  coach  covered  with 
mud.  They  inquired  of  the  portress,  who  told  them  that 
the  General  was  just  come  home  from  a  journey,  on  which 
he  had  been  absent  only  three  days.  The  police  suspected 
him  :  the  young  servant  was  seduced  by  one  of  the  spies, 
who   questioned    him    artfully,  and   he    confessed  that  his 


4 1 2  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LAV  ALE  TTE. 

master  had  been  to  Mons  with  an  officer  of  the  Guards 
who  could  not  speak  a  word  of  Enghsh.  The  description 
of  my  person  given  by  the  young  man  put  the  police  on 
the  track  ;  but  proofs  were  necessary.  It  was  this  ser- 
vant who  used  to  carry  the  correspondence  of  Sir  Robert 
Wilson  to  the  English  embassy.  They  promised  him 
money  if  he  would  bring  his  dispatches  to  the  Prefect 
of  Police.  He  did  not  fail  to  do  so.  The  first  letter  they 
opened  was  directed  to  the  Earl  Grey.^  The  history  of 
our  journey  was  related  in  it,  with  all  its  details.  Having 
gained  possession  of  this  document,  the  police  had  the 
three  Englishmen  apprehended. 

The  perusal  of  the  journals  grieved  me  beyond  expression. 
I  took  a  resolution  to  go  to  Russia,  to  solicit  from  the 
Emperor  Alexander  that  my  wife  and  friends  might  be  set 
at  liberty  ;  and  I  flew  to  Manheim  to  get  a  letter  from  the 
Grand-Duchess  of  Baden,  first  cousin  to  my  wife.  She  was 
out  of  town  ;  and  from  what  I  learned  from  my  landlord,. 
I  should  be  forced  to  keep  up  a  most  severe  incognito. 
The  Grand-Duke  refused  the  passage  through  his  territories 
to  the  outlaws  who  came  from  France  ;  not  so  much, 
however,  out  of  ill-will  towards  them,  as  for  fear  of  com- 
promising himself  with  the  French  Government.  When 
I  left  Manheim,  1  wrote  nevertheless  to  the  Grand-Duchess, 
and  continued  my  journey,  like  a  madman,  through  Wir- 
temberg,  where  I  was  nearly  arrested  at  Stuttgard.  The 
King  who  at  that  time  occupied  the  throne  would  not 
have  failed  to  make  me  acquainted  with  his  dungeons. 
I  succeeded  at  last  in  passing  through  Ulm,  and  found 
myself  in  safety  in  the  Bavarian  territory. 

When  the  King  of  Bavaria  heard  of  my  escape  from  the 
Conciergerie,  he  said  to  Prince  Eugene — "  As  for  him,  he 
may  come  to  me  ;  I  will  take  care  of  him." 

I  went  in  consequence  to  Munich,  and  wrote  a  note  to 
Baron  d'Arnay,  secretary  to  the  Prince,  to  beg  he  vyould 
'  For  this  letter,  see  Appendix  No.  XII. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  413 

come  to  see  me.  He  came,  but  after  having  delivered  my 
note  to  the  Prince,  who  dined  that  da}'  with  the  King. 
The  news  was  communicated  to  his  Majesty  after  dinner. 
They  reckoned  no  longer  upon  me,  thinking  me  gone  to 
America.  My  arrival  surprised  the  King,  who  did  not 
wish  to  have  disagreeable  discussions  with  France.  After 
a  moment's  reflection,  he  said,  "He  cannot  remain  here  : 
not  even  under  a  feigned  name.  That  ferret,  the  Duke 
d'Alberg,  is  at  Munich,  and  would  soon  find  him  out. 
Remain  two  days  with  him,  and  let  him  set  off  the  third 
for  Frayssingen.  He  will  be  in  safety  there."  That  small 
town  is  surrounded  with  woods,  the  cold  was  severe ;  but 
I  felt  so  happy  at  being  at  liberty,  that  I  could  not  bear  to 
remain  in  my  room,  and  went  out  ten  times  a  day  to  stroll 
about  in  the  forest,  notwithstanding  the  snow  and  ice.  My 
strange  manners  surprised  the  inhabitants  ;  and  a  French 
emigrant,  who  lived  at  Munich,  came  to  my  abode,  soon 
discovered  who  I  was,  and  carried  the  news  to  the  capital. 
I  was  in  consequence  obliged  to  leave  my  retreat,  and  the 
King  was  kind  enough  to  send  me  to  Starnberg,  a  wretched 
village,  situated  near  the  lake  of  that  name.'  I  was  uncom- 
fortable there  ;  but  spring  was  approaching.  The  forests 
in  that  part  of  the  country  are  beautiful,  and  of  immense 
extent  :  while  the  banks  of  the  lake  are  lined  with  delight- 
ful country  seats.  Prince  Eugene  used  to  come  twice  a  week 
to  the  house  of  a  gamekeeper,  two  leagues  from  Munich, 
where  I  went  to  meet  him.  He  brought  me  newspapers 
and  books,  and  acquainted  me  with  all  that  was  going 
fonvard.  I  thus  reached  the  month  of  May  ;  but  I  was 
again  obliged  to  leave  Starnberg.  I  had  been  recognised  ; 
and  the  Prince  Royal,  who  learned  that  I  resided  in  that 
remote  corner  of  the  country,  remonstrated  with  his  father 
on  my  stay  in  Bavaria,  and  the  difficulties  into  which  he 
might  get  involved  with  France,  in  case  they  should  learn 
in  Paris  that  he  had  given  me  a  retreat.  The  King  denied 
'  See  Appendix,  No.  XV. 


4 1 4  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

my  being  in  his  states  ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  sent  me  an 
order  to  retire  to  the  farther  end  of  the  lake.  By  the  advice 
of  Prince  Eugene,  I  went  and  concealed  myself  in  the  house 
of  a  gardener,  four  leagues  farther  still.  "  You  will  be  more 
comfortable  there,"  said  the  Prince  :  "  in  about  a  fortnight, 
I  shall  come  to  reside  in  the  royal  seat  that  is  no  more  than 
a  league  from  your  new  abode.  We  shall  be  able  to  see  each 
other  every  day."  He  soon  came  there  with  his  family, 
and  I  used  to  go  every  morning  to  the  castle,  and  did  not 
go  home  till  the  evening.  The  friendly  reception  I  met 
with  from  Princess  Augusta,  the  kind  attentions  bestowed 
on  me  by  all  the  persons  that  surrounded  her,  contributed 
greatly  to  alleviate  my  grief  and  restore  my  health.  The 
Prince  said  to  me  one  day — "  The  King  is  accustomed 
annually  to  spend  one  day  in  this  place.  When  I  went 
yesterday  to  take  his  orders  on  the  subject,  he  accepted  my 
invitation,  but  on  condition  that  you  would  come  and  dine 
with  him." 

I  went.  His  Majesty  received  me  with  open  arms.  He 
was  accompanied  by  some  officers  of  his  household,  and 
among  others  by  Count  Charles  von  Reichberg,  who  told 
us  that  he  had  left  Paris  eight  days  after  my  escape  from 
prison.  Though  the  gendarmes  had  been  present  at  his 
departure,  and  had  examined  his  passport  with  a  great  deal 
of  care,  he  was  nevertheless  stopped  on  the  Boulevard,  and 
obliged,  as  well  as  his  two  travelling  companions,  to  get  out 
of  their  carriage,  that  the  descriptions  of  their  persons  might 
be  verified,  and  that  it  might  be  ascertained  that  I  was  not 
among  them.  The  King  was  very  merry,  and  took  a  great 
deal  of  pleasure  at  seeing  me  where  I  was,  after  having  been 
exposed  to  so  many  dangers.  During  the  five  hours  that  he 
remained  with  the  Prince,  he  never  ceased  loading  me  with 
the  most  delicate  attentions.  The  pains  he  perpetually  took 
to  bring  to  my  mind  his  former  stay  in  Paris,  when  I  had 
the  honour  of  paying  my  court  to  him  ;  the  slight  service  I 
had  rendered  to  him  in  my  quality  of  Postmaster-General, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  415 

and  the  attachment  with  which  the  Emperor  had  honoured 
me,  were  meant  to  show  the  persons  who  surrounded  him 
that  I  was  under  his  especial  protection,  and  that  my  mis- 
fortunes augmented  the  interest  he  vouchsafed  to  express  for 
me.  When  he  was  ready  to  go,  he  came  up  to  me,  and, 
pressing  my  hand,  said,  '*  Remain  at  peace  in  my  country, 
hve  among  your  friends,  and  reckon  upon  my  attachment 
and  protection." 

I  soon  obtained  permission  to  settle  in  Munich  under  a 
feigned  name.  I  went  every  night  to  the  theatre ;  and  when 
the  play  was  over,  I  finished  the  evening  with  the  Prince, 
who  lived  en  famille  ;  but  it  was  quickly  known  in  Paris. 
The  Duke  de  Richelieu  took  it  amiss,  and  a  formal  demand 
was  transmitted  to  Munich,  to  send  me  away  from  Bavaria. 
Count  d'Erlon,  who  lived  in  the  outskirts  of  the  city,  was 
comprehended  in  the  sentence  of  proscription,  though  he  did 
not  live  there  under  his  own  name.  The  cabinet  of  Munich 
replied  to  that  of  Paris  that  they  knew  nobody  in  Bavaria 
who  bore  our  names  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  King  pro- 
posed to  us  to  take  refuge  in  Silesia,  where  he  possessed 
several  castles,  as  Duke  of  Deux-Ponts.  The  measure  was 
a  dangerous  one  :  could  the  King  of  Bavaria's  protection 
follow,  and  defend  me  at  so  great  a  distance,  and  in  the 
heart  of  a  Prussian  province  ?  Should  I  not  be  obliged  to 
go  from  thence  to  Russia,  whither  I  felt  they  wanted  to  drive 
me  ?  I  answered  by  begging  he  would  rather  shut  me  up 
in  some  prison  in  Bavaria.  Fortunately,  the  diplomatic 
correspondence  relaxed  by  degrees  on  that  subject  ;  Count 
d'Erlon  remained  at  his  country-seat,  and  I  escaped  by  going 
to  Eichstadt,  in  the  principality  of  Prince  Eugene,  and  after- 
wards to  Augsburg,  to  his  sister,  the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu. 
I  passed  with  her  the  last  year  of  my  banishment  ;  the 
attentions  and  kindness  she  showed  me  might  liave  made 
me  perhaps  forget  France  if  my  dearest  affections  had  not 
made  life  intolerable  far  from  my  country. 

Madame  de  Lavalette  had  got  out  of  prison  after  six  weeks' 


4i6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

ill-usage.  Deep  melancholy  and  perpetual  alarm  inspired 
her  with  a  great  disgust  for  society,  and  threw  her  mind 
into  such  a  state  that  she  was  said  to  suffer  from  mental 
derangement.  Though  my  daughter  was  at  that  time  no 
more  than  fifteen  years  old,  her  mother  hastened  to  establish 
her,  that  she  might  enjoy  the  protection  of  a  husband,  when 
the  state  of  her  own  health  would  not  permit  her  to  keep  a 
watchful  eye  over  her.  She  wrote  to  me  :  "  I  feel  it  is  high 
time  to  shelter  my  daughter  from  our  misfortunes."  She 
fixed  her  choice  on  M.  de  Forget,  the  son  of  a  gentleman  of 
Auvergne,  whose  name  had  been  long  respected.  He  had 
been  Auditor  to  the  Council  of  State.  I  had  observed  in  him 
a  great  deal  of  talent,  and  an  excellent  heart.  I  gave  my 
consent,  and  my  daughter  is  now  happy  and  honoured  in 
her  province. 

Finally,  after  six  years  of  outlawry,  the  gates  of  France 
were  again  opened  for  me.  Before  my  departure,  I  obtained 
an  audience  of  the  King  of  Bavaria.  He  pressed  me  in  his 
arms  with  emotion,  and  said  :  "  I  embrace  M.  Cossar — (that 
was  the  name  under  which  I  went  in  Germany) — but  I 
require  of  M.  de  Lavalette  to  come  and  thank  me  within 
two  years.  I  am  growing  old  :  he  must  not  tarry  too  long." 
My  political  situation  in  France  was  very  uncomfortable, 
and  the  severity  of  the  Government  too  great  to  have  per- 
mitted me  to  fulfil  the  engagement  the  King  had  made  me 
take,  and  which  was  so  consonant  to  the  wishes  of  my  grate- 
ful heart.  Death  has  since  snatched  him  from  his  subjects, 
who  adored  him,  and  who  never  will  forget  him  whom  they 
were  wont  to  call  "  the  good  King." 

I  left  Prince  Eugene  in  the  prime  of  his  life,  enjoying 
excellent  health,  in  the  most  happy  situation,  beloved  by 
the  King  as  if  he  had  been  his  son,  surrounded  by  a 
numerous  and  charming  family,  loaded  with  all  the  gifts 
of  fortune,  of  whom  he  had  nothing  more  to  demand,  his 
name  shining  with  bright  and  unsullied  glory.  He  had 
a  fall  from  a    sledge    in    1816,  in  consequence  of  which   a 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  417 

gathering  took  place,  they  say,  in  his  head.  The  pain  being 
very  shght,  he  neglected  the  necessary  remedies.  Seven  or 
eight  weeks  afterwards,  the  gathering  appeared  with  symp- 
toms which  the  physicians  did  not  comprehend  ;  and  he  died 
at  the  age  of  forty-four,  leaving  a  disconsolate  widow  and 
children,  whose  education  was  not  yet  finished,  but  also  a 
reputation  for  courage,  wisdom,  and  generosity,  that  neither 
France,  Italy,  nor  Bavaria  will  ever  forget. 

When  I  came  back  to  France,  I  was  obliged  to  have  my 
letters  of  pardon  registered.  This  ceremony,  which  might 
have  become  painful  to  my  feelings,  was  managed  by  the 
magistrates  at  Colmar  with  a  discretion  for  which  I  shall 
always  be  thankful.  The  Advocate-General,  M.  Rossec, 
only  said,  "He  had  been  sentenced  for  conduct  which,  from 
day  to  day,  appears  less  serious."  I  came  to  Paris,  where  I 
fixed  my  abode,  and  lived  in  retirement,  forgotten  by  most 
of  my  former  friends,  and  also  by  the  police,  who  might 
have  made  my  life  very  uncomfortable. 

At  last,  the  health  of  Madame  de  Lavalette  recovered 
sufficiently  to  permit  me  to  take  her  home.  A  deep 
melancholy  throws  her  frequently  into  fits  of  abstractedness  ; 
but  she  is  always  equally  mild,  amiable,  and  good.  We  pass 
the  summer  in  a  retired  country-house,  where  she  seems 
to  enjoy  herself.  I  have  preserved  my  independence,  the 
first  of  all  mortal  riches,  without  pension,  salary,  or 
gratuity  of  any  sort,  after  a  long  life,  consecrated  to  the 
service  of  my  Country,  offering  up  for  her  liberty  prayers 
that  will  perhaps  never  be  fulfilled,  and  living  with  the 
recollections  of  a  great  period  and  a  great  man. 


28 


APPENDIX. 


No.  I. 

Toulon,  28  Floreal,  Year  VI. 
The  General  of  Division,  chief  of  the  General  Staff  of  the  Army, 
orders  Citizen  Lavalette,  Captain,  Aide-de-camp  to  the  General-in 
chief,  to  go  on  board  the  frigate  Aricmisa,  and  to  sail  with  the 
expedition, 

Alex.  Berthier 

No.  II. 

TO  CITIZEN   LAVALETTE,  AIDE-DE-CAMP. 

Head-quarters  at  Malta,  29  Prairial,  Year  VI. 

The  Artemisa,  Citizen,  has  orders  to  anchor  off  the  coast  of 
Albania,  to  give  you  the  means  of  conferring  with  Ali  Pacha. 

You  are  to  deliver  to  him  the  enclosed  letter,  the  contents  of 
which  only  mention  that  he  is  to  believe  all  you  say  to  him,  and 
call  an  interpreter  whom  he  can  trust,  so  that  you  may  hold  a 
private  conversation  with  him.  You  are  to  give  the  said  letter  into 
his  own  hands,  and  you  will  take  care  that  he  reads  it  himself 

Afterwards  you  are  to  tell  him  that  having  conquered  Malta,  and 
being  at  present  in  those  seas  with  thirty  ships  and  fifty  thousand 
men,  I  shall  of  course  enter  into  communication  with  him,  and  that 
I  wish  to  know  whether  I  may  rely  upon  him. 

That  I  wish  he  would  send  to  me  by  the  frigate  a  man  of  note 
in  whom  he  places  confidence.  That  considering  the  service  he 
has  rendered  to  the  Republic,  his  personal  cjualities,  courage,  and 

4'9 


420  APPENDIX. 

gallantry,  if  he  trust  me,  and  consents  to  second  me,  1  am  able  to 
increase  considerably  his  glory  and  his  fortune. 

You  are  to  make  general  inquiries  respecting  the  political  and 
military  situation  of  the  different  states  of  those  regions. 

You  are  to  write  down  whatever  Ali  Pacha  says  to  you,  and 
re-embark  in  the  frigate  to  return  and  make  me  a  report  on  the 
result  of  your  mission. 

When  you  pass  by  Corfu  you  must  see  General  Chabot,  and  tell 
him  to  send  us  wood,  and  issue  a  proclamation  to  the  inhabitants 
of  Corcyra  and  other  islands,  directing  them  to  send  to  the  squad- 
ron wine,  dried  raisins,  and  other  objects,  for  which  they  shall  be 
liberally  paid. 

BON.\PARTE. 

No.  III. 

BONAP.\RTE,   GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,   TO   CITIZEN    LAVALETTE. 
Head-quarters,  Cairo,  22  Frimaire,  Year  VII. 

You  must  set  off  on  board  the  djerme  La  Veniticnjic,  with  Citizen 
Beauchamp,  to  go  to  Alexandria.  You  must  inspect  the  situation 
of  the  fortifications,  magazines,  and  of  every  ship  of  our  squadron. 

You  must  deliver  the  sabre  you  receive  herewith  to  Rear-Admiral 
Perde. 

You  must  inspect  the  fort  of  Rosetta. 

You  must  endeavour  to  get  from  Ale.xandria  to  Rosetta  my 
travelling  carriage  and  the  carriage  I  brought  from  Malta.  At 
Rosetta  you  will  embark  them  on  a  djerme  for  Boulac. 

You  are  not  to  come  back  until  you  have  seen  Citizen  Beauchamp 
under  weigh. 

Bonaparte. 

No.  IV. 

BONAPARTE,   GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,  TO   CITIZEN   LAVALETTE. 

Head-quarters,  Cairo,  18  Nivose,  Year  VII. 
I  have  received  your  letters  of  28  and  i  Nivose  :  stay  at  Alexan- 
dria until  the  caravella  be  gone,  and  set  off  immediately  after. 

General  Bonaparte. 


APPENDIX.  421 

No.  V. 

BONAPARTE,  GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,  TO  CITIZEN   LAVALETTE. 

Head-quarters,  Cairo,  18  Vendemiaire,  Year  VII. 

You  must  set  off  this  day,  Citizen,  on  board  the  little  Cisalpine, 
taking  with  you  the  cange  La  Corcyre,  and  the  canoe  the  Rlio7te. 

You  are  to  conduct  the  convoy  bound  to  Salahieh  to  Mit-Kamas, 
where  it  will  be  placed  under  the  orders  of  General  Murat,  who  is 
to  send  it  farther  up. 

You  are  then  to  continue  your  passage  with  the  armed  vessels, 
and  go  to  Mansoura  ;  there  you  will  see  General  Dugua,  and  inquire 
what  news  he  may  have  received  either  from  Damietta  or  from 
Menzale.  You  will  go  on  to  Damietta,  take  on  board  of  the  three 
vessels  all  the  troops  they  are  able  to  carry,  and  go  with  them  to 
rejoin  General  Andreossi  and  newly  man  his  flotilla.  You  will 
follow  that  General  on  his  reconnoitring  trip  to  Peluse. 

You  v;ill  write  to  me  from  Mansoura  and  from  Damietta;  and, 
if  there  be  any  newly  arrived  vessels  in  the  roads  of  Damietta,  will 
question  them  and  send  me  a  report. 

Bonaparte. 

No.  VI. 

report  addressed  TO  the  general-in-chief  on  my  journey 

TO  peluse. 

Cairo,  6  Brumaire. 

I  left  Boulac  on  the  evening  of  the  i8th  Vendemiaire,  on  board 
of  the  cange  La  Conyre,  bound  for  Damietta,  with  the  Cisalpine, 
and  the  canoes  the  Rhone  and  the  Seine. 

I  sent  General  Vial  before  Mit-et-Koli,  at  the  moment  that  village 
had  been  plundered  for  having  murdered  some  Frenchmen.  He 
had  with  him  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  of  the  13th  and  25th  half 
brigade.  No  inhabitants  were  found  in  that  village.  The  same 
circumstance  took  place  in  regard  to  two  others  which  had  been 
equally  guilty.  In  returning  to  Damietta  on  the  23rd,  the  General 
stopped  at  Farescout,  surrounded  the  village,  and  required  of  the 
chiefs  that  they  should  deliver  up  to  him  the  arms  of  their  in- 
habitants. He  obtained  only  eighteen  muskets,  and  took  two 
sheiks  as  hostages,  who  were  sent  off  to  Cairo.     Farescout  is  the 


422  APPENDIX. 

village  the  inhabitants  of  which  are  the  most  devoted  to  Hassan 
Toubar.  It  was  there  that  the  insurrection  of  the  24th  Fructidor 
was  decided. 

I  left  Damietta  on  the  24th,  and  passed  the  night  at  the  tower 
of  Bogaz,  the  wind  not  having  allowed  me  to  go  any  farther.  That 
tower  contains  a  garrison  of  twenty  or  thirty  men.  The  wall  that 
has  been  raised  round  it  shelters  it  against  a  surprise.  But  the 
cannons  that  defend  it  are  ill-placed,  and  the  platforms  are  not  in 
a  state  to  support  them  long. 

On  the  25th  I  went  to  Dibbe  by  land.  The  road  from  Bogaz  to 
the  mouth  of  the  lake  is  eight  leagues  in  length,  and  the  soil  a  firm 
sand  ;  the  heaviest  artillery  may  pass  over  it  without  danger. 

Dibbd  consists  of  about  thirty  fishermen's  huts.  Several  in- 
habitants came  to  meet  us,  and  brought  us  provisions. 

Having  the  advantage  of  a  fair  wind,  I  arrived  at  Menzale  in 
twelve  hours.  This  is  a  considerable  place,  containing  about  five 
thousand  inhabitants.  However,  not  more  than  one-fifth  of  them 
were  there  when  I  passed.  Hassan  Toubar  was  the  owner  of  two 
houses  there  :  he  had  taken  everything  with  him.  We  found 
nothing  in  them  but  some  cattle  and  wretched  furniture.  Though 
the  inhabitants  trade  on  the  lake,  the  boats  are  obliged  to  anchor 
at  half  a  league  distance,  the  lake  not  being  deep  enough  for  them 
to  approach  nearer  to  Menzaltf,  which,  besides,  is  not  built  on  the 
shore.  The  anchoring  place  is  unprotected,  but  possesses  sweet 
water,  which  is  brought  to  a  small  distance  from  it  by  the  emptying 
of  the  canals  of  the  Nile  in  the  season  of  the  inundation. 

On  the  27th,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I  left  Menzale  to  join 
General  Andreossi,  to  whom  I  brought  water  and  provisions.  I 
found  him  on  the  28th  at  the  mouth  of  Aroum  Farregge. 

He  had  with  him  fifteen  barks  ;  his  troops  consisted  of  a  battalion 
of  the  25th,  and  a  detachment  of  the  2nd  light  infantry. 

On  the  29th,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I  set  off  for  Peluse 
with  the  General  and  a  detachment  of  thirty  men. 

The  distance  from  the  mouth  of  Aroum  Farregge  to  El  Farameh 
is  three  leagues.  This  ruined  town  presented  nothing  remarkable. 
At  three-quarters  of  a  league  from  the  sea  we  found  an  enormous 
quantity  of  dust  and  bricks,  which  are  supposed  to  have  been  the 
fortress  of  Peluse.  There  is  yet  a  wall  standing,  and  some  arches 
that  have  been  examined.  The  ruins  of  the  town  extend  to  about 
three  thousand  paces.     In  all  that  space  we  found  nothing  but  a 


APPENDIX.  423 

few  pillars  of  granite  of  large  size,  and  a  sort  of  tower  partly  in 
ruins. 

On  our  return  we  observed,  at  eighteen  hundred  toises  from 
Peluse,  an  edifice  which  is  thought  to  be  a  ruined  mosque. 
Nothing,  however,  remains  but  the  brick  walls  and  a  part  of 
the  arched  roof.  We  saw  there  several  cannons  unfit  for  use, 
and  granite  balls. 

On  the  30th  we  left  Aroum  Farregge,  and  I  separated  from 
General  Andreossi  near  Tanis. 

I  found  on  my  arrival  at  Damietta  the  train  of  artillery  designed 
for  Salahieh.  They  were  embarking  it  on  the  lake,  and  it  was  to 
go  off  the  following  day  for  Sann. 

General  Dugua  had  arrived  the  preceding  day  at  Damietta.  He 
told  me  that  the  government  of  that  province  was  not  yet  organised, 
but  that  he  was  going  to  look  after  it. 

General  Barras  complained  of  the  difficulties  he  met  with  in  the 
discharge  of  his  duty.  The  secretary  they  have  given  him  is  a 
young  man,  who  understands  nothing  about  the  business  ;  and  the 
state  of  his  health  will  not  allow  him  to  do  all  himself.  He  was 
unable  to  give  me  a  very  exact  account  of  the  property  of  Hassan 
Toubar.  As  soon  as  he  shall  have  made  the  necessary  inquiries 
on  the  subject,  he  will  acquaint  you  with  the  result. 

General  Vial  complains  that  he  has  not  troops  enough  to  guard 
Mansoura.  He  has  not  two  thousand  able  men  under  his  com- 
mand, and  twenty  thousand  peasants  aseemble  every  week  in  the 
market-place  of  that  town. 

I  accompanied  General  Murat  on  his  expedition  to  ,  the 

inhabitants  of  which  had  the  day  before  massacred  some  dragoons 
of  the  14th,  and  stolen  their  horses.  The  village  was  surrounded 
at  ten  o'clock  at  night ;  and  next  morning  the  General  sent  into  it 
two  companies  of  grenadiers,  who  slaughtered  more  than  one 
hundred  peasants.  In  their  houses  were  found  two  sheaths  of 
dragoons'  sabres,  and  some  helmets. 

Lavalette. 

No.  VII. 

BONAPARTE,  GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,  TO   CITIZEN   LAVALETTE. 
Head-quarters  at  Cairo,  27  Nivose,  Year  VII. 
You  will  please,  Citizen,  to  come  back  to  Cairo  as  soon  as  possible. 
I  have  received  your  report. 

Bonaparte. 


424  APPENDIX. 

No.  VIII. 

BONAPARTE,   GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,  TO  CITIZEN   LAVALETTE. 
Head-quarters  at  Cairo,  9  Pluviose,  Year  VII. 
You  will  please,  Citizen,  to  come  to  Cairo  as  soon  as  possible. 
I  want  you  for  the  new  campaign  that  is  about  to  commence. 

BONAPARTE. 

No.   IX. 

BONAPARTE,  GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,  TO  CITIZEN  LAVALETTE. 
Head-quarters  at  Cairo,  20  Pluviose,  Year  VII. 
You  must  set  off,  Citizen,  as  soon  as  possible,  to  join  me.  You 
need  not  wait  for  the  departure  of  the  caravella.  At  your  arrival 
at  Cairo  you  must  remain  three  days  there,  to  gain  a  perfect  know- 
ledge of  the  situation  of  affairs  ;  and  you  must  not  depart  until  a 
favourable  opportunity  offers. 

Bonaparte. 

No.  X. 

extract  of  a  letter  of  the  duke  de  ragusa  to 

M.   . 

I  had  been  intimately  acquainted  with  Lavalette,  but  political 
events  had  separated  us.  The  cruel  fate  that  threatened  him 
caused  a  renewal  of  my  friendship  for  him.  He  wrote  to  me  the 
letter  you  have  in  your  possession.  I  carried  it  to  the  King,  who 
read  it  from  beginning  to  end.  My  prayers  and  solicitations  were 
without  effect ;  I  obtained  neither  his  pardon  nor  a  commutation 
of  the  sentence;  it  was  even  in  vain  that  I  hoped  Louis  XVIII. 
would  consent  to  Lavalette's  last  wish,  and  change  the  manner  in 
which  he  was  to  die.     The  King  was  inexorable. 

I  then  went  to  Madame  Lavalette  to  concert  with  her  a  petition 
she  was  to  present.  She  told  me  she  had  means  of  procuring  her 
husband's  escape.  I  tried  to  persuade  her  not  to  make  any  use  of 
them  as  long  as  she  had  any  hopes  of  another  nature.  The  report 
was  brought  to  the  Palace  that  she  intended  to  come  there,  and 
orders  were  given  not  to  let  her  in.  I  took  upon  me  to  conduct 
her,  and  gave  her  my  arm.  I  chose  to  enter  into  the  Saloon  of 
the  Guards  at  a  moment  when  the  sentry  turned  his  head  another 
way,  and  then  I  found  myself  all  of  a  sudden,  with  her,  in  the 


APPENDIX.  425 

middle  of  the  saloon.  The  Life-guard  stopped  us,  and,  without 
failing  in  any  way  in  the  respect  he  owed  to  me,  executed  his 
orders  in  the  most  rigorous  manner.  The  officer  came  and 
delivered  his  soldier  from  the  awkward  situation  in  which  he  was, 
and  I  persuaded  M.  de  Bartillat — this  was  the  name  of  the  officer 
— that,  should  he  even  risk  a  few  days'  arrest,  he  ought  to  lend  his 
aid  to  do  a  good  action.  So  he  allowed  Madame  Lavalette  to 
remain  in  the  Saloon  of  the  Guards.  I  had  chosen  to  enter  the 
moment  the  King  was  hearing  mass.  I  knew  that  if  I  had  come 
earlier  the  King  would  rather  have  gone  that  day  without  mass 
than  run  the  risk  of  meeting  this  poor  woman;  but  once  in  the 
Chapel,  he  could  not  help  coming  back.  IM.  de  Glandeves,  major 
of  the  Life-guards,  came  and  told  me  that  orders  had  been  given 
not  to  admit  Madame  Lavelette.  "But,"  said  I,  "have  you  an 
order  to  put  her  out  of  the  apartment,  now  that  she  is  in  ?  "  He 
answered,  that  he  had  not.  "  In  that  case,"  I  continued,  "  I 
remain."  The  King  came.  Madame  Lavalette  threw  herself  at 
his  feet :  he  answered — "  Your  grief  is  very  natural,  Madame,  and 
I  appreciate  it,  and  sharp  in  it  as  I  ought  to  do  ;  but  I  have  duties 
to  fulfil  which  cannot  be  dispensed  with  ; "  and  he  continued  his 
walk.  I\Iadame  Lavalette  threw  herself  also  at  the  feet  of  the 
Duchess  of  Angouleme,  who  avoided  her,  and  went  by  without 
saying  a  word.  We  went  out.  The  ne.xt  day  was  the  Duchess  of 
Angoulcme's  birthday,  and  the  anniversary  of  her  leaving  the 
Temple.  We  prepared  ourselves  to  stand  by  when  she  should 
pass.  Measures  were  taken  to  insulate  her,  and  sentries  placed 
up  to  the  roof  of  the  Tuileries  to  prevent  our  coming  by  a  round- 
about way. 

From  that  moment  I  looked  upon  Lavalette  as  a  lost  man,  and 
I  said  so  plainly  to  his  wife,  telling  her  that  if  she  possessed,  as 
she  had  said,  means  of  getting  him  away,  she  would  do  well  to  try 
them.  Her  other  friends  endeavoured  to  keep  up  a  delusion  to 
which  she  seemed  but  too  well  disposed.  She  said  to  me — "  They 
want  to  pardon  him  on  the  scaffold."  ''  Do  not  believe  that,"  I 
answered;  "  if  he  gets  upon  it,  he  is  lost."  I  had,  even  in  her 
presence,  a  discussion  with  the  Duke  de  Plaisance,  who  entertained 
the  same  false  idea.  She  believed  me,  and  her  husband  escaped 
the  next  day.  This  poor  woman  has  often  repeated — at  first, 
while  she  still  possessed  her  reason,  and  afterwards,  when  she  had 
lost  it — that  I  was  the  only  person  who  had  not  deceived  her. 


426  APPENDIX. 

No.  XI. 

LETTER   OF   M.   ,   AIDE-DE-CAMP  OF  THE  DUKE   DE 

RAGUSA,  TO   M.  . 

The  day  after  the  Marshal  had  placed  Madame  de  Lavalette  in 
the  King's  passage,  he  went  early  to  the  Palace,  to  discover  what 
was  going  forward.  The  most  rigorous  measures  had  been  taken. 
The  passage  was  guarded  —  only  one  chance  remained  :  the 
antechamber  of  the  Captain  of  the  guard  upon  duty  has  a  second 
door,  leading  to  the  King's  staircase,  directly  facing  the  apartment 
of  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme.  To  pass  through  that  door  was 
the  only  manner  of  getting  Madame  Lavalette  where  she  wished  to 
be  ;  but  the  Marshal  stood  too  much  in  public  view  to  be  able  to 
accompany  her.  He  gave  the  commission  to  one  of  his  aides-de- 
camp, with  the  necessary  instructions.  Madame  Lavalette  left  her 
home  alone,  and  the  aide-de-camp  went  with  General  Foy  to  meet 
her  sedan-chair  that  she  left  at  the  bottom  of  the  Pont  Royal, 
where  General  Foy  remained  wailing  for  her  while  she  went  into 
the  Tuileries  with  the  officer.  The  hour  had  been  calculated  so 
as  to  make  her  arrive,  towards  the  end  of  the  mass,  at  the  moment 
that  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme  should  leave  the  Chapel.  She 
arrived  at  the  apartments  of  the  Captain  of  the  guards,  after  whom 
the  officer  asked,  knowing  very  well  that  he  was  just  then  with  the 
King  ;  he  would  not,  as  he  was  afraid,  enter  into  the  saloon  to 
wait  for  him,  but  stopped  in  the  antechamber,  where  he  made 
Madame  Lavalette  sit  down.  The  door  of  the  antechamber  was 
open  ;  he  went  into  it  in  an  unaffected  manner  ;  and  when  he  saw 
the  Duchess  of  Angouleme  come  down,  he  called  out  to  Madame 
Lavalette,  "  Come,  cousin,  and  see  the  Duchess  pass."  Madame 
Lavalette  stood  up  ;  but  while  they  had  been  waiting,  the  officers 
of  the  Life-guards  had  crossed  the  antechamber  and  recognised 
Madame  Lavalette  ;  so  that  when  she  came  to  the  door,  the  door- 
keeper rushed  forward  and  locked  it.  The  officer  tried  to  turn 
the  key.  "  It  is  not  permitted  to  pass."  "Come,  come  ;  people 
every  day  stand  in  the  staircase  ;  and  my  cousin,  who  is  from  the 
country,  has  never  seen  the  Royal  Family  ;  so  that  I  should  be  very 
glad  if  she  could  seize  this  opportunity."'  "  It  is  impossible  :  I 
know  who  this  lady  is,  and  I  have  positive  orders  not  to  let  her 
pass."  "  Well,  then,  fifty  louis,  a  good  action,  and  the  protection 
of  the   Marshal."    The  doorkeeper  was  not  to  be  bribed  ;  and 


APPENDIX.  427 

during  the  conversation  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme  got  into  her 
apartments.  They  were  forced  to  go  away.  After  having  handed 
Madame  Lavalette  back  to  her  chair,  the  officer  re-entered  the 
court  of  the  Tuileries.  A  httle  while  afterwards,  a  Life-guard 
came  to  ask  him  whether  Madame  Lavalette  was  still  in  the 
Palace.  Louis  XVIII .  was  to  have  gone  out ;  but  he  remained, 
for  fear  of  meeting  Madame  Lavalette. 

No.  XII. 

LETTER   OF  SIR   ROBERT    WILSON   TO    THE    RIGHT    HONOURABLE 
EARL  GREV.' 

MY   DEAR    LORD,- 

I  am  just  returned  from  a  journey  of  about  three  hundred  and 
fifty  miles,  the  first  half  of  which  was  undoubtedly  the  most 
interesting  I  ever  made. 

The  question  was  one  of  immediate  life  or  death  for  my  com- 
panion, and  of  all  that  such  responsibility,  accompanied  by  the 
most  aggravating  circumstances,  might  lead  to  for  myself 

Acknowledged  as  the  victim  of  breach  of  faith  with  my  country,  he 
had  claims  to  my  personal  efforts  even  at  the  foot  of  the  scaffold  ; 
and  to  the  most  powerful  claims  on  humanity  he  added  a  character 
by  which  he  had  acquired  to  himself  the  general  esteem  of  all 
classes  of  society. 

It  was  the  fifth  of  this  month  ^  that,  already  acquainted  with  his 
perilous  position,  I  also  learned  that  his  persecutors  had  obtained 
certain  knowledge  that  he  was  still  in  Paris  ;  that  they  had  dis- 
covered the  traces  of  their  prey,  and  were  multiplying  their  efforts 
to  ensure  their  bloody  triumph  :  there  was  no  longer  any  hope  of 
pardon. 

The  virtues  of  Madame  Lavalette,  and  the  interesting  circum- 
stances of  her  husband's  first  extraordinary  escape,  had  only  the 
more  enraged  the  monsters. 

'  This  letter  was  intercepted  by  the  French  Police,  at  Paris,  and  laid  the 
first  foundation  to  the  charges  against  Sir  Robert  Wilson  and  his  numerous 
friends. — Note  of  the  French  Editor. 

^  The  reader  will  please  to  observe  that  this  letter  must  have  been  first 
written  in  English,  but  appears  here  re-traiislatcd  from  the  French  ;  so  that  it 
may  happen  that  some  expressions  are  not  in  exact  accordance  with  the 
original — Note  of  the  Translator. 

3  January,  1816. 


428  APPENDIX. 

It  was  for  me  to  decide  whether  rage  or  vengeance  should  be 
satisfied, — whether  all  the  preceding  eftorts  should  be  rendered 
useless, — whether  the  cause  of  liberty  and  humanity  attached  to 
his  fate  should  be  disgraced  by  his  catastrophe,  or  whether  criminal 
hopes  should  be  deceived, — whether  England  should  escape  from 
the  shame  of  again  participating  in  murder, — and  whether  every 
honest  and  independent  man  in  Europe  should  have,  at  least  for 
once,  an  occasion  for  rejoicing  in  these  times  of  mourning  and 
infamy. 

I  did  not  hesitate :  if  I  had,  I  am  sure  you  would  have  blamed 
a  weakness  that  would  have  made  me  unworthy  of  the  opportunity 
I  then  had  of  becoming  the  protector  of  the  oppressed.  I  had 
only  one  thought  left — that  of  ensuring  the  success  of  the  enter- 
prise. The  secret  had  been  entrusted  first  to  young  Bruce,  who 
had  been  authorised  to  communicate  it  to  me.  His  friendly  zeal 
in  favour  of  Ney  had  rendered  him  too  suspicious  in  the  eyes  of 
the  Court  for  his  steps  not  to  have  been  watched  ;  so  that, 
although  he  was  disposed  to  dare  and  undertake  everything,  still 
he  was  sensible  that  an  active  interference  on  his  side  might  make 
our  plan  miscarry.  I  was  myself  too  fearful,  watched  as  I  knew 
I  was,  to  absent  myself  from  the  capital  ;  but  one  officer  of  the 
Guards  whom  I  consulted  not  having  been  able  to  get  leave  of 
absence,  and  another  officer  whom  I  sounded  not  judging  fit 
that  he  should  leave  his  post,  I  resolved  not  to  hazard  anything 
more  by  these  half  confidences,  and  to  take  the  execution  on 
myself. 

It  was,  however,  necessary  to  find  some  persons  of  trust  who 
might  facilitate  the  necessary  dispositions,  and  our  choice  fell  upon 
Ellister,  of  the  fifth  regiment  of  the  Guards,  and  John  Hutchinson, 
as  well  on  account  of  the  confidence  we  placed  in  their  honour,  as  . 
because  we  knew  that  they  had  been  already,  once  before,  engaged 
in  a  business  of  the  same  nature;  and,  in  fact,  Ellister  was  the 
person  who  had  first  undertaken  to  put  our  plan  into  execution  if 
he  could  have  obtained  a  temporary  leave  of  absence. 

We  decided  that  the  fugitive  should  wear  the  regimentals  of  an 
English  officer,  and  that  I  should  conduct  him  out  of  the  barriers 
in  an  English  cabriolet,  myself  being  in  a  military  costume  ;  that 
I  should  have  a  fresh  horse  ready  at  La  Chapelle,  from  whence  I 
should  go  to  Compiegne,  where  Ellister  was  to  bring  me  my  coach, 
into  which  I  should  step  with  Lavalette,  to  reach  Mons  by  way  of 


APPENDIX.  429 

Cambrai.  On  my  solicitation  and  responsibility,  I  easily  obtained 
from  Stuart  passports  for  a  General  Wallis  and  a  Colonel  Losack, 
names  we  chose  because  their  initials  corresponded  with  those  of 
the  real  names.  These  passes  were  duly  signed  by  the  Minister 
for  Foreign  Affairs  ;  only,  when  they  were  presented  for  signature, 
one  of  the  secretaries  asked  Hutchinson,  that  brought  them,  who 
was  Colonel  Losack  ;  upon  which  he  immediately  answered — "  He 
is  the  brother  of  the  Admiral."  This  important  part  of  our 
negotiation  being  finished,  Ellister  went  to  the  police  with  Colonel 
Losack's  passport,  and  asked  for  post  horses  for  my  carriage  ;  and 
at  the  same  time,  to  prevent  all  suspicion,  he  took  apartments  and 
a  coach-house  at  the  Hotel  du  Helder,  in  the  name  of  Colonel 
Losack. 

Bruce  fortunately  learned  that  the  brigade  of  his  cousin,  General 
Brisbane,  was  at  Compiegne,  and  that  his  aide-de-camp  was  to 
leave  Paris  on  the  7th  of  the  month,  to  go  to  Compiegne  with  the 
horses  and  baggage  of  the  General,  who  was  at  that  time  in 
England.  We  saw  him  at  Bruce's,  where  we  had  appointed  to  meet 
him  ;  and  I  told  him  that  some  very  particular  circumstances 
obliged  me  to  pass  through  Compiegne  with  a  person  who  wished 
not  to  be  known,  and  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  us  to  remain 
there  an  hour  or  two  in  some  retired  part  of  the  town.  He  answered 
obligingly,  that  his  confidence  in  us  was  unreserved  ;  that  his 
existence  depended  on  his  situation  ;  but  that  he  would  not  hesi- 
tate in  satisfying  us,  knowing  that  we  took  an  interest  in  the  matter. 
I  do  confess  that  it  went  much  against  my  inclination  to  implicate 
such  a  person  in  the  business  ;  but  the  cause  was  too  important  a 
one  for  me  to  stop  at  such  a  consideration  ;  and  I  conceived  a 
hope  that  a  day  would  come  when  I  should  have  it  in  my  power 
to  acknowledge  that  service  either  by  myself  or  by  my  friends. 
Bruce  procured  Lavalette's  measure  ;  Hutchinson  gave  it  to  a  tailor, 
saying  it  was  that  of  a  quartermaster  of  his  regiment,  who  wanted 
immediately  a  great-coat,  a  waistcoat,  and  a  pair  of  pantaloons. 
The  tailor  observed  that  it  was  the  measure  of  a  lusty  man,  and 
that  it  had  not  been  taken  by  a  tailor.  His  observations  alarmed 
me  so  much,  that  I  thought  fit  to  send  Hutchinson  back  to  him  to 
say,  that  the  quartermaster  not  being  able  to  wait  for  his  clothes 
until  Saturday  evening,  they  were  to  be  carefully  folded  up  in  a 
box,  so  that  they  might  be  sent  after  him.  Hutchinson  and 
Ellister   took,   besides,  all    the   necessary   measures   to   procure 


430  APPENDIX. 

horses,   and   went   the   day  before   to   reconnoitre   the   barriers, 
posts,  &c. 

All  these  preparations  being  made,  and  all  the  precautions  taken 
it  was  finally  decided  that  Lavalette  should  go  to  Hutchinson's 
lodgings  on  Sunday  evening  the  yth,  at  half-past  nine  pre- 
cisely ;  that  I  should  be  on  Monday  morning  at  half-past  seven 
at  his  door,  in  Bruce's  cabriolet,  with  my  servant,  who  was  to 
follow  on  my  well-harnessed  mare,  as  if  I  were  going  to  pass  an 
inspection  ;  that  Hutchinson  should  ride  next  to  the  cabriolet, 
talking  with  us  ;  and  that,  in  case  any  stoppage  should  occur, 
Lavalette  should  get  upon  his  horse,  and  I  on  my  mare,  that  we 
might  be  more  at  liberty  and  get  on  with  speed. 

I  should  certainly  have  preferred  crossing  the  barriers  on  horse- 
back, but  we  thought  that  our  English  mode  of  riding  might 
attract  attention  ;  while  the  crossing  them  in  full  daylight,  and  in 
an  open  cabriolet,  would  be  showing  so  much  assurance  that  no 
suspicions  would  arise.  At  last,  the  hour  fixed  for  our  departure 
drawing  near,  Hutchinson,  Ellister,  Bruce,  and  I  came  to  Hutchin- 
son's apartments,  under  the  pretence  of  taking  a  bowl  of  punch. 
The  moment  came  when  we  were  to  fix  our  eyes  upon  a  man  whose 
fate  hung  on  the  plan  we  had  formed  to  save  him,  and  whose  days 
had  already  been  counted  by  his  enemies, — a  man  who  was  the 
object  of  all  the  hatred  and  affection  of  the  two  opposite  parties, 
and  who,  if  he  were  discovered,  would  occasion  us  all  the  sufferings 
that  enemies,  or  even  friends  deluded  in  their  hopes,  might  heap 
upon  us  under  the  form  either  of  punishment  or  of  reproach. 
Bruce  went  on  the  staircase,  and  immediately  Lavalette  took  him 
by  the  hand,  and  we  saw  before  us  that  interesting  individual.  He 
was  dressed  in  blue  regimentals,  and  so  well  disguised  that  he 
would  not  have  been  remarked  even  in  an  Englishman's  apart- 
ment. The  friend  who  had  brought  him  did  not  come  in,  but  he 
^■^ave  to  Hutchinson,  for  the  use  of  Lavalette,  a  two-barrelled 
pistol  that  I  have  kept  to  this  day.  The  latter  appeared  at  first 
much  affected,  but  we  did  not  leave  him  the  leisure  to  express  his 
•^ratitude  ;  and,  after  a  few  moments,  Ellister  and  myself  went 
away,  leaving  him  to  the  care  of  Bruce  and  Hutchinson.  At 
midnight,  Bruce  retired,  and  Lavalette  laid  himself  down  on  a 
bed  that  was  prepared  for  him.  In  about  half  an  hour,  somebody 
knocked  at  the  house-door  :  Lavalette  sprang  from  his  bed,  crying, 
"  We  are  undone  1 "     But  Hutchinson  soon  discovered  that  it  was 


APPENDIX. 


431 


a  drunken  French  officer,  who,  in  going  to  his  apartment,  had 
made  all  that  noise.  You  may  well  think  that  not  one  of  us  spent 
a  very  tranquil  night  ;  and,  in  fact,  I  was  not  without  anxiety  as 
long  as  Lavalette  remained  in  Paris — for  I  also  thought  of  my 
family.  I  had  barely  mentioned  to  Lady  Wilson  that  I  was 
engaged  in  a  plan  to  save  one  of  the  outlaws,  and  that  I  was 
obliged  to  conceal  his  name  and  the  arrangement  that  had  been 
taken.  I  did  not  think  fit,  in  the  first  moment,  to  enter  into  any 
further  particulars  with  her,  though  I  knew  she  would  have  been 
able  to  keep  the  secret  if  it  had  been  necessary,  and  would  more- 
over, I  am  sure,  have  given  willingly  all  the  aid  in  her  power. 
She  perhaps  suspected  the  truth  from  my  air  of  uneasiness  ;  but 
I  must  say  to  her  praise,  that  she  did  not  say  a  single  word  that 
could  make  me  suppose  she  wished  to  dissuade  me  from  the  plan, 
though  she  constantly  suffered  a  great  deal  as  the  time  drew  near 
when  I  was  going  to  deliver  myself  up  to  the  chapter  of  accidents, 
having  under  my  charge  so  precious  a  deposit. 

I  was  at  Hutchinson's  door  at  half-past  seven.  I  went  upstairs 
to  call  Lavalette,  and  within  five  minutes  we  were  together  on  the 
way  to  the  Barriere  de  Clichy.  We  met  an  officer  who  appeared 
surprised  at  seeing  a  superior  officer  he  did  not  know,  but  my 
servant  eluded  his  inquiries.  I  crossed  the  barrier  at  a  slow  pace  ; 
the  gendarmes  looked  steadfastly  at  us  ;  but  the  act  of  presenting 
arms  gave  Lavalette  an  opportunity  of  concealing  his  profile  in  the 
bow  he  made.  When  we  were  passed,  Lavalette  pressed  my  leg 
with  his  ;  and  when  we  had  no  more  fear  of  being  observed,  I  saw 
his  face  glistening  with  pleasure  at  this  first  favour  of  fortune. 

The  road  was  covered  with  all  sorts  of  people  ;  but  whenever 
we  met  any  public  conveyance,  1  began  a  very  long  conversation 
in  English  ;  and  I  remarked  that  the  hat  ornamented  with  a  white 
feather  that  Lavalette  held  in  his  hand  attracted  the  attention 
of  travellers,  and  drew  off  their  curiosity  from  our  persons. 

The  features  of  Lavalette  are  so  remarkable,  and  his  face  is  so 
well  known  to  all  the  postillions  and  postmasters,  that  it  required 
the  greatest  caution  lest  he  should  be  recognised.  At  La  Chapelle 
we  changed  our  horses,  and  we  had  a  moment's  alarm  at  the  sight 
of  four  gendarmes  hovering  around  us  ;  but  Hutchinson,  to  whom 
they  addressed  themselves,  got  rid  of  them  by  saying  that  we  had 
come  to  look  out  for  quarters  for  an  English  division.  We  were 
afterwards  obliged  to  pass  near  other  gendarmes,  who  had  in  their 


432  APPENDIX. 

possession  the  description  of  Lavalette's  person  ;  and  it  may  be  re- 
marked by  the  bye  that  it  had  been  distributed  everywhere  through- 
out France.  As  we  came  near  Compi^gne,  I  remarked  some  white 
hairs  that  showed  themselves  under  his  brown  wig  :  and  having 
fortunately  a  pair  of  scissors  about  me,  I  dressed  his  hair  by  the 
way.  At  the  entrance  of  Compitgne,  we  found  the  orderly  com- 
manded by  Captain  Fennell,  who  led  us  through  the  town  to  a 
very  well-chosen  place,  for  we  were  not  disturbed  by  the  spectators 
in  the  street. 

Nobody  saw  us  enter  except  some  English  soldiers  and  domestics 
who  served  us  while  we  were  waiting  for  the  carriage.  Mr.  Fennell 
offered  us  a  luncheon,  which  would  not  have  detained  us  like  Louis 
XVI.,  but  enabled  us  to  spend  very  agreeably  the  time  that  began 
to  hang  heavy  on  our  hands,  and  which  otherwise  would  have  been 
lost.  At  last,  towards  night,  as  it  had  been  agreed,  Ellister  came 
with  the  carriage,  which  had  been  got  out  by  the  Barriere  St.  Denis, 
and  had  been  followed  by  gendarmes  to  La  Chapelle.  Horses  were 
immediately  ordered. 

The  postillion  having  come  alone,  I  had  the  lamps  of  the  coach 
lighted,  not  only  for  safety,  but  also  to  show  that  we  were  without 
uneasiness  within.  We  left  our  friends,  and  entered  the  carriage 
that  was  to  be  for  us  either  a  hearse  or  the  chariot  of  fortune.  We 
were  well  armed,  and  prepared  to  resist  in  case  we  were  attacked. 
But  I  reckoned  more  upon  presence  of  mind  than  upon  force,  if 
any  difficulties  should  arise. 

We  were  frequently  questioned  at  the  different  post-houses  ;  but 
Colonel  Losack  '  always  kept  himself  back,  and  I  took  care  to  cover 
the  door  as  much  as  possible.  My  servant  and  the  postillion  said 
at  every  stage  that  it  was  an  English  general ;  and  my  carriage 
being  English  produced  a  good  effect.  I  must  observe,  that  we 
took  only  three  horses  and  one  postillion,  for  fear  four  horses  might 
make  it  appear  as  if  we  were  in  too  great  a  hurry  to  get  on  :  we 
besides  avoided  by  that  means  the  eyes  of  the  second  postillion  we 
should  have  been  obliged  to  take,  and  who  would  have  been  a  spy 
upon  us. 

We  experienced  no  delay  until  Cambrai,  where  we  lost  three 

hours  at  the  gate  by  the  obstinacy  of  the  English  sentry,  who,  not 

having  any  order  to  call  the  gatekeeper,  whose  duty  it  is  to  let  the 

couriers  in  during  the  night,  would  listen  neither  to  entreaties  nor 

'  That  was  the  name  Lavalette  had  taken. 


APPENDIX.  433 

to  threats — a  negligence  which  has  already  caused  considerable 
delay  in  the  communications  of  Government,  and  might  have 
proved  fatal  to  us.  In  passing  through  Valenciennes,  we  were 
three  times  severely  examined,  and  our  passports  were  carried  to 
the  commander  of  the  gendarmerie  ;  we  got  off,  however,  and, 
about  five  miles  from  thence,  we  had  finally  the  happiness  of  cross- 
ing the  last  barrier,  and  being  examined  for  the  last  time. 

I  shall  not  attempt  to  paint  the  feelings  of  Lavalette.  I  shall 
only  say  that  from  that  moment  his  mind  appeared  quite  calm. 
He  was  not  only  saved,  but  triumphant.  What  seemed  to  gratify 
him  most  was  the  idea  that  the  effort  dictated  by  his  wife's 
devoted  affection  had  been  finally  crowned  with  success. 

We  did  not  stop  till  we  arrived  at  Mons  :  there  we  dined,  and 
made  arrangements  for  the  farther  journey  of  Lavalette.  I  wrote 
several  letters  to  facilitate  to  him  the  means  of  reaching  his  desti- 
nation ;  and  having  also  provided  all  that  was  necessary  for  his 
safety  and  satisfaction,  I  took  leave  of  him,  and  returned  to  Paris, 
where  I  arrived  last  night  by  the  road  of  Maubeuge,  Soissons,  and 
the  Porte  St.  Martin. 

My  absence  having  lasted  only  sixty  hours,  my  journey  cannot 
have  been  much  remarked  ;  and  up  to  the  present  moment  I  have 
no  very  bad  consequences  to  fear  from  my  undertaking.  I  do  not 
wish  either  to  be  put  into  prison,  or  lose  my  rank  in  life,  but  I  had 
made  up  my  mind  to  both  before  I  embarked  in  this  enterprise ; 
there  is,  however,  no  appearance  that  I  shall  have  reason  to  regret 
an  attempt  that  has  so  completely  succeeded. 

I  have  had  at  times  an  idea  of  communicating  confidentially  to 
the  Duke  of  York  what  I  had  done,  to  avoid  the  suspicion  of  having 
conspired  clandestinely  ;  but  I  fear  to  compromise  those  whose 
interests  I  am  bound  to  defend,  and  therefore  I  only  for  the 
moment  acquaint  you  with  what  has  happened,  begging  you 
would  send  this  letter  to  my  brother  at  Arundel '  after  having 
perused  it,  not  having  sufficient  time  to  write  separately  to  him, 
and,  in  fact,  being  rather  fearful  of  sending  to  his  address  a  letter 
on  this  subject. 

You  may  well  imagine  that  I  have  learned  most  interesting  par- 
ticulars ;  but  I  must  wait  to  communicate  them  until  I  can  write 
to  you  again  by  some  safe  opportunity. 

I  should  be  very  glad  if  Lord  Holland  were  to  know  what  1 
■  In  the  county  of  Sussex. 
29 


434  APPENDIX. 

have  done,  for  he  is  acquainted  with  Lavalette,  and  has  taken 
interest  in  his  fate:  I  mentioned  this  to  the  latter,  who  learned 
the  fact  with  gratitude. 

Lavalette  will  send  to  him  his  protest  concerning  the  Conven- 
tion, and  will  claim  his  protection  as  soon  as  Madame  Lavalette 
gets  out  of  prison  and  is  in  safety.  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  get 
the  written  opinion  of  Fouchd  on  the  subject,  and  the  explanation 
of  his  motives  for  signing  the  list  of  the  outlawed :  it  seems  that 
he  did  it  from  a  wish  to  save  a  great  many  others. 

I  have  just  heard  that  Soult  is  to  be  placed  in  the  first  list,  and 
that  the  Princes  make  the  greatest  efforts  to  ensure  his  con- 
demnation and  his  execution  : — this  report  coming  from  a  person 
who  enjoys  the  confidence  of  Feltre,  I  shall  put  Soult  upon  his 
guard. 

I  am  for  ever,  my  dear  Lord,  most  sincerely, 

(Signed)  R.  W. 

It  cannot  but  be  e.xtremely  agreeable  for  me  to  know  your 
opinion.  Let  me  know  as  soon  as  possible  whether  I  ought  to 
write  to  the  Duke,  or  beg  Gordon  to  speak  to  him. 

I  am  sorry  I  cannot  make  a  fair  copy  of  my  letter,  but  I  have 
no  time  ;  and  you  must  pardon  me  if  you  are  obliged  to  decipher 
my  scrawl,  having  just  received  a  letter  from  Lord  H.  that  will  take 
me  a  week  to  read. 

R.  W. 

No.  XIIL 

EXTRACT  OF  A    LETTER    FROM    COUNT    LAVALETTE    TO    M.   

London,  the . 

The  first  public  sitting  for  the  election  opened  this  morning. 
There  are  three  candidates  for  the  Borough  of  Southwark — Sir 
Robert  Wilson  and  Mr.  Calvert,  the  late  members,  and  Mr. 
Polhill,  a  candidate  to  be  elected  instead  of  one  of  them.  Each 
candidate  wears  his  colours  :  Sir  Robert  has  chosen  blue  Marie 
Louise  ;  Mr.  Calvert,  sky  blue  ;  and  Mr.  Polhill,  orange  or  yellow. 
It  was  agreed  that  I  should  be  at  Sir  Robert's  at  half-past  eight  or 
nine  o'clock.  We  stepped  into  an  elegant  landau  drawn  by  two 
beautiful  horses :  Sir  Robert  and  his  eldest  daughter,  Jemima, 
sat  on  the  back  seat  j  the  youngest  and  myself  on  the  front  one. 
They  were  elegantly  dressed,  though  with  simplicity  ;  their  father's 


APPENDIX.  435 

colours  shone  on  their  bonnets  and  sashes.  The  two  footmen,  the 
coachman,  his  whip  and  the  horses,  were  all  covered  with  those 
ribands.  All  went  well  till  we  arrived  at  the  entrance  of  the 
Borough ;  but  there  the  crowd  entirely  filled  up  the  broad  street  we 
were  going  through,  and  we  were  soon  stopped  by  an  immense 
number  of  people  bearing  the  banners  of  Wilson,  and  music 
playing.  The  horses  were  taken  from  the  carriage,  which  was 
dragged  along  by  the  people  for  nearly  half  a  league,  with  cries  of 
"  Hun-ah — Wilson  for  ever  / ''  It  was  a  tumult — a  confusion 
which  the  strongest  heads  could  with  difficulty  have  borne.  In  the 
front  of  the  people  that  dragged  us  along  were  placed  the  banners, 
with  deafening  music,  and  behind  them  the  carriages  of  several 
Frenchmen,  such  as  Messrs.  de  Stael,  Francis  and  Alexander  Deles- 
sert,  the  lady  of  the  latter,  young  Montebello,  the  son  of  Duvergier 
de  Haurranne,  Daru,  Montalevet,  and,  among  others.  Sir  Robert  was 
standing  at  the  bottom  of  the  open  landau,  bowing  to  everybody, 
offering  his  bare  hand  to  the  dirtiest  hands  I  ever  saw.  Women 
of  the  lowest  classes  stretched  out  their  children  to  him,  that  he 
might  caress  them  ;  while  the  windows,  and  even  the  roofs  of  the 
houses,  were  literally  covered  with  inhabitants,  crying  out  as  loud 
as  they  could,  and  carrying,  on  the  walls  and  before  the  shops, 
large  bills  fastened  to  long  sticks,  with  the  following  words  : — 
"  Wilson,  the  friend  of  humanity P'  "  Wilson  and  Liberty.'^'' 
"  Wilson  and  the  Abolitio7i  of  Slavery  !  "  "  Wilson  and  the 
Protestant  Constitution  .'  "  "  Wilson  for  ever!  "  We  advanced 
slowly.  Sir  Robert  said  : — "  We  shall  soon  arrive  in  the  enemy's 
country."  In  fact,  a  little  while  afterwards  we  passed  before  Mr. 
Polhill's  door.  Yellow  began  to  show  itself  on  the  windows, 
coaches,  handbills — but  the  crowd  that  accompanied  us  redoubled 
their  cries  of  "  Wilson  for  ever  /  "  Five  minutes  later,  we  saw  Mr. 
Polhill  pass  in  a  very  elegant  coach,  but  a  shut  one,  and  all 
his  followers  covered  with  yellow  ribands.  The  mixed  cries  of 
"  Wilson  !  "  "  Polhill  !  "—the  hurrahs,  the  hissings— the  thick 
crowd,  made  such  a  confusion,  that  I  certainly  thought  we  were 
going  to  be  overthrown,  and  crushed  to  death.  I  observed  the 
young  ladies  growing  pale,  but  they  felt  so  happy  at  being  near 
their  father,  that  it  renewed  their  courage  ;  and  the  emotion  that 
was  visible  in  their  handsome  faces  was  the  only  thing  that 
betrayed  the  anxiety  that  tormented  them.  They  did  not  make 
a  motion,  nor  utter   a   cry.      I    endeavoured   to    tranquillise   the 


436  APPENDIX. 

eldest,   who    sat    facing    me.      "  No,   no !  "    she    said,    "  I    am 
only  afraid  for  the  poor  people  that   surround  us."     Generous 
in  their  hostility,  the  two  rivals  bowed  to  one  another  as  they 
passed,  and  we  arrived  at  last  before  the  Hustings,  situated  in 
a   place  where   the   street    divides   in    two,   and   forms   a   small 
square,  scarcely  wide  enough  for  a  battalion  of  six  hundred  men 
to  mancEuvre,   and   where,   however,   more   than   four  thousand 
persons  were  assembled.     We  stepped  out  with  difficulty  before 
the  hustings,  at  the  house  of  a  wealthy  tradesman,  a  zealous  partisan 
of  Wilson's,  and  from  a  parlour  on  the  first  floor  we  distinctly  saw 
the  whole  sight  of  the  election.     What  they  call  the  Hustings  is  a 
scaffolding  large  enough  to  hold  two  hundred  people,  and  covered 
with  boards  as  a  shelter  from  the  rain, — something  like  what  we 
see  in  our  public  ceremonies  on  our  quays  and  boulevards.     Sir 
Robert  left  us  to  get  on  the  hustings.     The  High  Bailiff,  a  magis- 
trate delegated  by  the  Lord  Mayor  or  the  Sheriff,  opened  the 
meeting  in  presence  of  all  the  people,  by  declaring  that  the  election 
was  about  to  take  place.     He  read  the  writ,  proclaimed  the  names 
of  the  candidates,  and  made  known  the  forms  that  were  to  be 
observed  in  the  election.     Afterwards,   according  to   custom,   a 
friend  of  the  first  candidate  made  a  speech,  in  which  he  expatiated 
on  the  titles  of  the  candidate  to  the  suffrages  of  the  people,  his 
public  conduct,  his  opinions  in  regard  to  Parliamentary  Reform 
and  Catholic  Emancipation.     Then  came  the  friend  of  Sir  Robert. 
The  celebrity  of  his  name,  the  splendour  of  his  life,  rendering  it 
unnecessary  for  the  orator  to  enter  into  particulars,  he  bounded 
himself  with  praising  his  parliamentary  conduct,  and  explaining 
to  his  hearers  that  the  attempts  made  to  expel  him  from  the  House 
had  been  directed  by  a  party  that  might  endanger  Liberty.   After- 
wards, the    candidates,  presenting  themselves   in   person,   were 
received, — the  two  first,  Sir  Robert  and  Calvert,  with  a  great  deal 
of  favour ;  while  Mr.  Polhill  could  never  succeed  in  obtaining  a 
hearing.     The  hootings,  hissings,  and  cries  of  all  sorts  perpetually 
covered  his  voice.     Wilson,  at  last,  went  up   to  him,  took  him 
under  his  protection,  and  claimed  silence  from  the  mob.     Mr. 
Polhill  seemed  touched  by  this  generous  act  of  his  rival,  but  he 
did  not  reap  any  more  assurance  from  it.   He  looked  embarrassed  ; 
and  some  person  who  went  near  the  foot  of  the  hustings  to  listen 
to  what  he  said,  assured  me  that  the  House  of  Commons  would 
not  have  gained  an  orator  in  him  if  he  had  been  elected.     At  last, 


APPENDIX.  437 

after  three  hours'  speeches,  to  which  the  people  listened  with  an 
attention  that  proves  how  fond  they  are  of  political  discussions, 
the  High  Bailiff  said  that  the  election  was  about  to  take  place,  and 
invited  the  electors  to  hold  up  their  hands  for  the  candidate  they 
preferred  when  they  heard  his  name  uttered.  Mr.  Polhill  had 
very  few  hands  for  him,  the  greatest  part  of  the  crowd  being  for 
the  two  others.  A  great  number  of  the  electors'  tickets  were  then 
thrown  among  the  people.  The  polling  took  place  on  the  front 
of  the  hustings,  with  books  prepared  to  receive  the  votes  of  the 
electors.  Each  voter  came  with  his  ticket,  and  put  down  the 
name  of  one  of  the  candidates  :  this  operation  lasted  about  two 
hours.  At  four  o'clock,  the  number  of  voters  was  counted  and 
proclaimed  aloud,  as  also  by  means  of  a  bill  stuck  up.  The  result 
was,  175  for  Sir  Robert  Wilson,  170  for  Mr.  Calvert,  and  106  for 
Mr.  Polhill.  The  polling  will  continue  to-morrow,  and  probably 
the  day  after.  The  candidates  will  speak  the  whole  morning,  and 
from  two  till  four  o'clock  the  books  will  be  opened,  and  the  votes 
taken  down  :  nevertheless,  if  during  the  space  of  an  hour  not  one 
voter  appears,  the  book  is  definitively  closed,  and  the  majority  of 
the  voters  decides  the  nomination.  It  is  probable  that  Mr. 
Polhill  will  give  up  the  contest. 

;;<  ;;:  :;;  >;=  *  * 

No.  XIV. 

LETTER   OF   M.    BALLOUCHEY,   ADDRESSED  TO  COUNT 

LAVALETTE. 

i6th  May,  1827. 

M.    LE   COMTE, 

I  hasten  to  transmit  you  the  information  the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu 
asked  of  you  concerning  the  moneys  received  on  account  of  her 
august  mother,  the  Empress  Josephine,  during  the  time  that  I  had 
the  honour  of  being  charged  with  her  affairs, — that  is  to  say,  from 
the  1st  of  Messidor  of  the  twelfth  year  (20th  of  June,  1804)  until 
the  year  1809  inclusive  ;  and  I  add  to  that  only  the  sums  delivered 
by  M.  Dumenil  during  the  eleventh  year  and  the  first  nine  months 
of  the  twelfth. 

The  expenditure  of  the  Empress's  household,  as  well  as  that  of 
the  estate  of  Malmaison,  were  each  year  fixed  by  the  common 
budget  of  their  Majesties.     That  budget  received  the  Emperor's 


438  APPENDIX. 

approbation,  who  examined  the  accounts  at  the  end  of  each  year  ; 
and  when  any  sum  remained  disposable  out  of  those  allowed  for 
the  household  of  the  Empress,  instead  of  being  delivered  over 
into  the  hands  of  her  Majesty,  they  returned  to  the  treasury  of 
the  Crown. 

The  same  thing  took  place  in  regard  to  the  revenues  of  Mal- 
maison  :  they  were  gathered  by  the  treasurer  of  the  Crown,  and 
entered  in  compensation  of  the  sum  allowed  by  the  budget  for  the 
expenses  of  the  estate,  so  that  the  Empress  never  received  any 
portion  of  them. 

On  the  common  budget  of  their  Majesties'  household  an  annual 
sum  of  480,000  francs,  payable  monthly  at  the  rate  of  40,000  francs, 
was  allowed  to  the  Empress,  of  which  30,000  francs  were  for  her 
toilet  and  personal  expenses,  and  10,000  for  her  cassette  of  pensions 
and  alms.  This  latter  part  being  almost  always  insufficient  to 
meet  the  numerous  charitable  gifts  bestowed  by  the  Empress,  her 
Majesty  was  obliged  to  draw  upon  the  30,000  francs  designed  for 
her  toilet,  for  the  overplus  of  the  expenses  of  her  cassette,  as  well 
as  the  support  she  allowed  to  a  great  number  of  planters,  &c.,  left 
almost  wholly  to  her  charge,  and  whose  children  she  paid  for  in 
various  boarding-schools,  and,  finally,  the  sums  disposed  of  in 
payment  of  objects  of  art  and  other  things  she  purchased  in  the 
course  of  the  month,  to  distribute  as  presents  of  all  sorts.  The 
remainder  of  the  30,000  francs  not  being  sufficient  to  meet  the 
expenses  of  her  Majesty's  toilet,  the  result  was  an  account  of 
arrears  that  was  balanced  from  time  to  time  by  means  of  the 
extraordinary  sums  of  which  the  Emperor  disposed  by  special 
orders. 

In  consequence,  the  total  sums  received  on  account  of  her 
Majesty  the  Empress  Josephine,  during  the  space  of  about  seven 
years,  was  5,354,435  fr-  44  c. ;  to  wit  :— 

By  M.  Dumenil  during  the  eleventh  year  and  the  first  months  of 
the  twelfth,  according  to  an  account  of  which  I  possessed  a 
duplicate   certificate  by   M.    Esteve,    then   Treasurer  of   the         fr.         c. 
Crown  ..         ..         ..         ..         ..         .,         ..         ..         .,       960,841  92 

And  by  me,  here  undersigned,  from  the  ist  of  Messidor  of  the 
twelfth  year  (June  20,   1804)  until  the  year  1809  inclusive,  a 
sum  of  4,393, 593fr.  52c. 
That  is : — 

At  the  Treasury  of  the  Crown  for  the  use  of  the 
Empress's  toilet  and  wardrobe  ;   for  expenses 


APPENDIX.  439 

previous  to  her  coming  to  the  throne  ;  for 
extraordinary  expenses  during  her  Majesty's 
journeys,  including  gifts,  presents,  indemnities 
allowed  to  different  persons  for  travelling  ;  and,         fr.  c. 

finally,  for  unforeseen  expenses,  &c.,  &c.  ..  3,231,86475 
Do.  for  the  cassette  of  provisions,  and  various 
charities  allowed  by  her  Majesty  in  her  dif- 
ferent places  of  residence,  as  well  as  for  various 
charities  distributed  during  her  journeys  in 
France,  and  abroad         . .         . .         . .         . ,      925, 307  12 


Reed,  at  the  Treasury  of  the  Crown         . .         . .  4, 157, 171  87 
Moreover,  received  at  the  Public  Treasury,  for 

the  dividends  of  her  Majesty's  five  per  cent. 

stock,  and  at  the  Bank  of  France  for  more  of 

her  Bank  stock,  2oi,626fr.  65c. 
Moreover,  for  different  objects  sold  by  order  of 

H.M.  34,795fr 236,42165      4.393.593  52 


5.354.435  44 


RECAPITUL.A.TION. 


Received  at  the  Treasury  of  the  Crown  by  M.  Dumenil  . .         . .      960,841  92 
Do.  do.  M.  Ballouchey  ..         ..  4,157,171  87 


Total   sum   received   at   the  Treasury  of    the    Crown   for   the 

Empress  Josephine  during  the  space  of  about  seven  years..  5,118,013  79 

Moreover,  received  at  the  Public  Treasury,  the  Bank  of  France, 
and  of  sundries  . .         . .         . .       236,421  65 


Sum  equal  to  the  above        . ,         . .         . .         . .    5,354,435  44 

The  uses  to  which  the  sums  received  during  nearly  seven  years 
on  account  of  her  Majesty,  and  amounting  according  to  the 
statement  here  above  to  5,354,435  fr.  44  c.,  have  been  applied,  is 
authenticated  by  accounts  duly  balanced,  and  which  prove  evi- 
dently that  the  Empress  laid  nothing  by.  It  is  besides  a  known 
fact,  that  the  taste  of  her  Majesty  led  her  to  display  still  more 
liberality,  more  generosity,  than  her  means  permitted. 

It  would  be  easy  to  convince  oneself  of  the  above-mentioned 
result  by  consulting  the  papers  of  the  Treasury,  and  by  examining 
the  accounts,  of  which  I  have  duplicates  in  my  possession. 

I  could  have  wished,  M.  le  Comte,  to  be  able  to  give  you  more 
ample  information,  so  as  to  meet  the  wishes  of  the  Duchess  of  .St. 
Leu,  by  recurring  to  the  period  of  the  marriage  of  her  august 


440  APPENDIX. 

mother  ;  but  I  do  not  possess  the  necessary  documents  to  that 
effect.  They  would  moreover  have  been  of  Httle  use,  the  Empress 
having,  during  that  space  of  time,  received  much  less  money  than 
after  her  succession  to  the  throne. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be  most  respectfully,  M.  le  Comte,  your 
most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

(Signed)  Ballouchev. 

No.  XV. 

FIRST  LETTER  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE  TO  THE  DUCHESS   OF 
RAGUSA. 

From  the  Banks  of  Lake  Starnberg,  28th  July,  1816. 

I  do  not  know  how  to  express  to  you,  my  dear  friend,  all  I 
experienced  at  the  sight  and  perusal  of  your  letter.  I  had  heard 
that  you  were  in  this  quarter,'  but  I  could  not  believe  it ;  and  a 
letter  from  you  was  a  thing  I  never  expected.  I  am  so  far  from  all 
civilisation,  that  a  letter  from  a  living  being,  from  a  friend,  makes 
a  terrible  impression  on  me.  Since  this  morning,  I  have  read  it 
ten  times  over,  and  the  particulars  it  contains  have  made  me  weep 
like  a  child.  It  is  the  only  one  that  has  given  me  any  details  on 
the  fatal  period  ;  and  you  spread  such  charms  over  what  you 
describe,  so  much  sincerity  and  fuiivch',  that  in  reading  your 
narrative,  I  once  more  felt  all  the  sentiments  that  had  agitated  me 
during  that  extraordinary  denouement. 

And  so  it  is  true  that  my  poor  Emilie  -  is  well  :  I  had  been  told 
so,  but  not  as  by  you.  I  congratulate  you  both  in  your  reconcilia- 
tion. You  are  worthy  of  comprehending  and  loving  her.  It  is 
what  most  people  in  the  world  cannot  do.  They  now  know  what 
noble,  devoted,  courageous  sentiments  were  concealed  beneath 
features  so  calm,  so  tranquil,  so  cold  in  appearance.  Take  all  of 
you  good  care  of  her,  I  pray  you  ;  watch  over  her  ;  do  not  let 
wretches  torment  her.  She  is  a  sacred  being,  the  honour  of  her 
sex  ;  and  it  were  an  everlasting  shame  if  they  were  to  make  her 
expiate  by  persecution  her  noble  and  generous  conduct.  As  for  me, 
dear  friend,  I  have  passed  five  months  in  the  deepest  solitude, 
with  an  energy  of  heart,  and  an  elevation  of  soul,  that  I  did  not 
know  what  to  do  with  (I  need  not  add  that  I  was  not  discouraged), 
but  at  the  same  time  with  a  grief  that  threw  me  into  convulsions. 

'  The  Duchess  of  Ragusa  was  then  at  Baden. 
~  Madame  Lavalette. 


APPENDIX.  441 

And,  nevertheless,  I  did  not  curse  humanity  ;  for  where  is  there  a 
man  who  has  less  to  complain  of  it  than  I  have  ?  Relations,  friends, 
servants,  and  even  strangers,  have  all  behaved  perfectly  well 
toward  me.  In  this  country  I  should  have  nothing  to  do  but  to 
mention  my  name  to  find  friends  ;  and  to  the  eternal  shame  of 
those  wretches,  I  might  cross  the  Continent,  their  proclamation  on 
my  breast,  without  meeting  with  an  insult.  This  is  my  comfort. 
But  my  poor  heart  is  so  pained,  so  horribly  lacerated,  that,  to  be 
able  to  support  my  situation,  I  have  need  of  courage,  which  will 
finally  be  exhausted.  I  do,  however,  all  I  can  to  divert  my  melan- 
choly. I  live  in  a  hole  in  the  mountains,  in  the  midst  of  the 
waters.  I  have,  as  a  companion,  a  good  young  man,  a  skilful 
draughtsman,  with  whom  I  sketch  a  part  of  the  day.  I  spend  the 
other  part  in  going  over  the  studies  of  my  youth,  and  in  the  com- 
pany of  the  giants  of  antiquity,  who  mocked  adversity  and  sup- 
ported misfortune  in  so  noble  and  graceful  a  manner.  I  pray  and 
weep  when  I  think  of  those  I  love,  and  of  my  poor  country,  so 
fallen,  so  degraded,  that  I  scarcely  dare  name  her.  I  learn  the 
language  of  this  country,  for  my  companion  does  not  know  a  word 
of  mine.  I  talk  with  the  peasants,  who  bear  cheerfully  their  situa- 
tion. They  are  governed  by  a  sovereign  who  is  not  praised  in  the 
newspapers,  but  whose  name  is  blessed  in  the  cottages  :  they 
know  neither  my  person  nor  my  misfortunes  ;  but  they  seem  dis- 
posed to  love  me  because  I  have  not  the  appearance  of  a  bad  man, 
and  because  I  am  charitable  to  them. 

The  wretches  who  have  used  me  so  cruelly  never  suspected  that 
a  woman  so  weak,  so  unfortunate,  so  oppressed,  would  be  stronger 
and  more  courageous  than  all  of  them  together.  I  wish  them  no 
ill  :  I  am  revenged  by  the  contempt  I  feel  for  them  ;  but  I  cannot 
think  that  they  will  succeed  by  following  their  bloody  track. 

I  say  nothing  of  the  friend  I  have  here : '  a  brother  would  have 
been  less  good,  less  generous.  I  have  seen  him  and  his  family 
frequently  for  some  time.  They  are  angels  of  goodness.  How 
happy  he  is  !     The  sight  of  his  bliss  does  me  a  great  deal  of  good. 

And  so,  you  have  seen  my  poor  little  Josephine.  My  dod  ! 
What  will  become  of  her?  I  shudder  when  I  think  how  unfortu- 
nate she  will  perhaps  one  day  be.  Alas  !  how  agreeable  it  would 
have  been  for  me  to  complete  her  education  !  When  I  think  on 
'  Prince  Eugene. 


442  APPENDIX. 

all  that,  I  thrust  my  head  against  the  wall,  and  I  do  not  know  what 
I  might  not  be  able  to  do  to  myself.  Tell  me,  repeat  to  me  with 
a  noble  friend,'  who  has  been  so  kind  to  me, — repeat  to  me  that  I 
shall  see  you  all  again,  and  shall  enjoy  your  happiness,  for  mine 
is  gone  for  ever,  and  I  have  a  forewarning  that  a  little  corner  of 
ground  awaits  me  in  a  country  churchyard. 

Amiable  Caroline  !  ^  So  she  is  with  you.  May  God  bless  you  ! 
She  deserves  a  friend  like  you.  Tell  me  where  is  her  husband  ? 
Is  it  true  that  he  directs  his  steps  to  the  East  ?  Where  is  he  going 
to?  I  am  uneasy  on  his  account, for  he  has  one  of  the  most  noble 
hearts  I  ever  met  with.  You  will  meet  again  with  our  good  friend 
Mollein.  Tell  him  that  I  love  him,  and  that  I  think  of  him  every 
day,  and  a  great  part  of  each  day.  Remember  me  to  his  lovely 
wife  ;  I  wish  her  happiness.  She  is  the  last  person  I  saw ;  for  it 
was  in  coming  from  her  home  that  I  lost  my  liberty,  and  her  soft 
compassion  has  remained  engraved  in  my  heart.  Remember  me 
also  to  Freville  ;  he  has  given  me  a  proof  of  friendship  of  which  I 
keep  a  dear  remembrance.  Think  on  me,  all  of  you,  and  you  in 
particular,  my  dear  friend — you  of  whom  I  love  so  much  the  noble 
disposition  and  courageous  mind.  I  hope  you  love  my  dear  Eng- 
lish friends.  Why  did  so  noble  an  action  draw  on  them  so  odious 
a  persecution  ?  What  will  become  of  them  ?  The  misfortune  of 
Bruce  will  make  me  doubly  unfortunate  myself !  It  costs  dear  to 
act  nobly  ;  Vice  is  luckier  !     Adieu  I  Adieu  ! 

P.S.  If  you  are  back  at  Emilie's  yiV^,  send  her  a  flower  in  my 
name. 

No.  XVI. 

SECOND   LETTER. — FROM   THE   SAME   TO  THE  SAME. 

From  the  Banks  of  Lake  Starnberg,  14th  August,  1816. 

I  shall  not  speak  of  the  pleasure  your  letter  gave  me,  dear 
friend  ;  that  would  be  ridiculous.  You  must  however  know,  that 
the  day  I  received  it,  that  is  to  say,  the  day  before  yesterday,  I 
read  it  twice  in  the  morning,  and  twice  again  in  the  evening.  It 
appeared  to  me  as  if  I  heard  you  speak,  and  almost  as  if  I  saw  you. 
In  the  morning  I  went  to  read  it  under  the  cover  of  a  thick  wood 
that  surrounds  my  hermitage,  and  threatened  by  a  storm,  that  would 
not  have  driven  me  away  if  I  had  not  feared  that  the  rain  would 

'  The  Queen  Hortense.       ^  Madame  Lallemand,  the  wife  of  the  General. 


APPENDIX.  443 

wet  your  dear  writing.  How  sweet  are  the  comforts  of  friendship 
to  the  hearts  of  the  unhappy  !  Past  sufferings  vanish  while  read- 
ing your  letter ;  futurity  smiles  on  me  ;  and  my  misfortune  itself 
gets  charms,  by  the  idea  that  in  any  other  situation  I  should  not 
have  the  same  enjoyment. 

A  few  days  before  the  arrival  of  your  letter,  I  experienced  a 
moment  of  very  great  happiness.  My  friend's  father-in-law '  whom 
you  saw  at  the  watering-place,  came  to  dine  with  his  son-in-law, 
and  brought  his  son  with  him.  He  had  made  it  a  condition  that  I 
should  be  of  the  party.  He  spoke  to  me  of  you  with  such  sincere, 
such  high  praise,  that  I  found  him  a  hundred  times  more  venerable 
than  he  was.  He  repeated  several  times  the  same  words.  His 
reception  of  me  was  perfect.  He  treated  me  with  a  degree  of  kind- 
ness and  delicacy  it  would  be  difficult  for  me  to  describe.  I  owe 
this  good  fortune  to  his  son-in-law  and  daughter,  who  are  exceed- 
ingly kind  to  me ;  but  let  me  hope  that  you  also  spoke  to  him  of 
me.     The  thought  does  me  good. 

You  ask  me  for  particulars  on  my  manner  of  living  : — here  they 
are. 

I  shall  not  speak  of  my  first  six  months.  My  wound  was  deep  ; 
but  my  mind  was  raised  to  a  very  high  pitch.  Now  all  my 
delusions  are  destroyed.  Cold  reason,  implacable  truth  says, 
"  Thou  must  die  in  a  foreign  land,  far  from  the  objects  of  thy  love  ; 
thou  must  efface  all  the  past  from  thy  memory,  or  consume  thyself 
in  grief  by  living  on  thy  recollections."  Dear  friend,  I  struggle 
against  that  terrible  sentence.  I  wear  out  my  life  with  labour,  and 
especially  with  reading.  I  have  got  only  two  works,  but  they 
charm  my  solitude  without  fatiguing  my  imagination.  These  are 
Condillac  and  Plutarch.  The  former  is  a  man  of  excellent  judg- 
ment, vast  erudition,  and  who  speaks  only  to  reason.  His  work 
is  a  complete  course  of  education.  I  find  in  him  Locke  raised  to 
perfection,  with  the  elements  of  history  and  mathematics.  On  the 
other  hand,  Plutarch  fortifies  my  mind  against  the  strokes  of  fate. 
I  learn  in  reading  him,  how  one  may  fall  into  misfortune  while  ful- 
filling all  one's  duties,  and  how,  in  that  case,  misfortune  is  prefer- 
able to  all  the  vain  happiness  of  the  world.  A  horrible  truth  ! 
Three-quarters  of  the  men  whose  history  he  wrote  died  violent 
deaths  ;  it  is  the  same  in  our  modern  and  wretched  history. 

Do  you  recollect  Mrs.  Sullivan's  old  husband,  that  Englishman 
'  The  old  King  of  Bavaria. 


444  APPENDIX. 

who  was  so  sick  and  had  such  a  beautiful  collection  of  pictures  ? 
I  went  there  one  day  with  the  Queen  of  Naples.  We  entered  a 
saloon  where  there  were  thirteen  magnificent  portraits.  All  the 
persons  they  represented  had  perished  either  by  the  hand  of  the 
executioner  or  by  that  of  assassins,  except  Louis  XL,  who  had  so 
many  others  killed.  They  were  the  Duke  de  Montmorency,  Cinq- 
Mars,  and  De  Thou,  Henry  IIL,  Henry  IV.,  Don  Carlos  and  his^ 
unfortunate  stepmother,  who  died  poisoned  by  the  detestable 
Philip  IL,  Coligny,  and,  finally,  the  Prince  of  Conde,  assassinated 
in  so  dastardly  a  manner  on  the  field  of  battle.  When  one 
witnesses  such  horrors,  which  have  reigned  for  so  long  a  time,, 
the  heart  is  rent  by  a  sort  of  despair.  One  curses  civilisation,  and 
blushes  at  being  a  man. 

I  do,  however,  not  always  give  way  to  such  dismal  thoughts  : 
I  should  be  unworthy  of  my  misfortune  if  it  did  not  afford  me 
sweet  comforts.  I  frequently  think  myself  happy,  not  at  having 
escaped  from  the  scaffold,  but  at  having  been  saved  by  such 
generous  hands.  Wife,  child,  friends,  domestics,  and  even  those 
noble  strangers — all  have  united,  all  have  wrestled,  all  have 
suffered,  all  have  triumphed  for  me  !  I  have  no  right  to  complain 
of  men  :  never  was  an  unfortunate  one  honoured  by  so  much 
devotion,  so  much  courage  !  I  have  lost  nothing  in  the  wreck, 
and  still  my  grief  at  times  almost  becomes  despair.  Alas  !  my 
friend,  I  was  so  happy  ! — my  recollections  kill  me  :  and  when  I 
succeed  in  driving  them  away,  or  in  subjugating  them,  the  phantom 
of  my  poor  country  torn  to  atoms,  and  so  vilely  betrayed,  throws 
me  into  a  state  of  melancholy  that  makes  me  burst  into  tears. 

Can  it  be  possible,  say,  that  we  should  be  cast  into  the  whirl- 
pool of  infamy,  without  being  able  to  get  out  of  it .''  What  !  so 
many  noble  efforts,  so  bloody  a  struggle,  so  many  triumphs — all 
terminating  in  horrible  disgrace  !  No,  no,  dear  friend  !  I  will 
never  see  my  country  again  !  Never  will  I  consent  to  cast  down 
my  eyes  to  the  cowardly  outrages  that  are  heaped  on  us — never  ! 
But  enough  of  that — for  the  expression  of  my  indignation  might  be 
hurtful  to  your  feelings. 

I  am  going  to  sketch  for  you,  but  I  shall  not  send  you  anything 
for  some  time.  At  present  1  only  daub  : — you  may  ask  Louisa,' 
who  has  two  of  my  paintings.     Wait  a  little. 

You  ask  where  I  live,  and  how  ?     I  live  retired,  on  the  borders 
'  Mademoiselle  Cochelet,  who  was  at  that  time  with  Queen  Hortense. 


APPENDIX.  445 

of  a  lake  that  would  be  no  disparagement  to  Switzerland,  for  it  is 
five  leagues  long  by  one  broad.  I  occupy  a  chamber  and  a  cabinet 
in  the  lodging  of  the  keeper  of  a  pretty  forsaken  country  seat.  I 
have  before  my  eyes  magnificent  waters,  beautiful  wooded  hills, 
and  high  mountains  topped  with  snow.  For  my  walks,  I  have 
fine  woods,  agreeably  cut  in  lanes,  and  full  of  deer,  which  I  leave 
in  peace.  My  hosts  are  honest  peasants,  who  know  how  to  cook 
tolerably  well  the  Spartan  black  broth  ;  and  it  is  not  without 
pleasure  that  I  eat  of  their  brown  bread.  I  have  no  servant — his 
presence  might  be  dangerous.  My  companion  is  an  honest  artist, 
without  reputation,  who  knows  not  a  word  of  my  language,  and 
smokes  the  livelong  day  ;  but  I  teach  him  French,  and  we  under- 
stand each  other  tolerably  well.  He  wakes  me  every  morning  at 
six  o'clock  :  we  sketch  till  nine.  After  the  most  frugal  breakfast, 
we  set  ourselves  to  work  again  till  twelve  o'clock  ;  and  after  dinner, 
from  two  to  five  we  work  again.  I  afterwards  devote  two  hours  to 
reading.  At  seven  we  walk  till  supper-time.  I  have  taught  him 
to  play  chess  :  we  play  till  ten  o'clock,  and  then  I  lock  myself  up  ; 
but  I  do  not  go  to  bed  until  one  in  the  morning.  These  night- 
hours  are  sacred  to  the  anguish  of  my  heart,  and  to  all  my  dismal 
recollections.  I  write  little — my  mind  is  ill-disposed  for  that  :  you 
will  observe  it  too  well  by  this  letter.  But  1  talk  much  to  myself ; 
and  I  believe  that  if  I  had  pleaded  my  cause  as  I  do  while  walking 
in  my  cell,  I  should  indeed  not  have  won  it,  but  I  should  have 
made  the  wretches  blush  that  have  used  me  so  ill.  At  last, 
fatigued  with  my  long  soliloquies,  I  read  until  sleep  forces  me  to  lie 
down  on  one  of  the  worst  beds  in  Germany,  and  to  suspend  for  a 
few  hours  the  recollection  of  my  sufferings,  and  those  occupations 
by  which  I  strive  to  divert  them. 

Adieu,  adieu  !  Why  should  your  friend  not  write  to  me "'  We 
are  both  unhappy  !  Alas  !  her  ring  has  not  destroyed  the  power 
of  the  Genius  of  Evil— but  that  was  not  her  fault.  I  love  her  much  : 
I  should  wish  to  know  she  is  happy;  for,  now  that  I  have  no  hopes 
of  happiness  for  myself,  that  of  my  friends  can  alone  do  me  good. 
But,  adieu,  dear  and  excellent  friend  !  write  often  to  me,  and  if 
any  letters  annoy  you,  you  will  be  indulgent.  When  you  return  to 
Paris,  promise  me  you  will  go  and  embrace  my  poor  child  at  her 
boarding-school;  but  do  not  show  this  letter  to  ICmilie,  it  would 
make  her  uneasy.  Tell  her  only  that  I  am  well  and  tranquil, 
.^dieu  ! — once  more  adieu  ! 


446  APPENDIX. 

15th  August. 

I  thought  this  letter  would  go  oft"  to-morrow.  The  opportunity 
is  delayed  by  which  I  was  to  send  it  to  you,  or  rather  to  Louisa, 
who  will  forward  it  into  your  hands.  I  send  you  a  few  words  for 
Emilie.  See  her  often,  comfort  her,  protect  her  if  you  can.  You 
see  a  great  many  strangers  ;  praise  her  to  them  ;  so  that,  in  case 
she  should  be  attacked,  she  may  find  some  support  in  the  good 
sentiments  of  their  sovereign.  Embrace  your  brother  for  me  : — 
let  me  know  whether  he  has  many  children.  Alas  !  dear  friend, 
you  cannot  imagine  how  the  death  of  my  child  has  afflicted  me  I 
I  should  be  so  happy  if  it  were  on  its  mother's  breast  !  Poor 
Emilie,  how  dear  I  cost  her  !  Adieu.  Try  to  write  to  me  some- 
times :  the  letters  I  receive  from  my  friends  are  my  only  comfort ; 
and  that  will  last  long,  for  I  do  not  intend  to  change  my  manner 
of  living.     The  sight  of  men  makes  me  tremble. 

When  you  go  home,  you  must  do  one  thing  on  which  I  set 
great  importance — you  must  persuade  Emilie  to  have  her  portrait 
painted  in  oil  colours  by  one  of  our  first  artists,  such  as  Gerard  or 
Girodet.  I  have  entreated  her  for  it  already  these  twelve  years  : 
I  had  mine  painted  on  purpose  to  set  her  the  example.  Her  bad 
health,  and  a  little  negligence,  have  till  now  made  her  forget  her 
promise  :  force  her  to  keep  it,  I  beseech  you.  Settle  that  business, 
and  tell  her  that  she  will  do  me  a  very  great  pleasure :  I  shall 
write  to  her  on  the  subject,  but  speak  also  to  her.  It  will  be  easy 
to  do  it  without  drawing  public  attention  :  I  should  prefer  Gerard  ; 
he  has  been  a  little  acquainted  with  me,  and  I  should  feel  very 
grateful  if  he  would  exert  all  his  talent  in  it. 


No.   XVII. 

INSTRUCTIONS    FOR    CITIZEN    LAVALETTE    ON    HIS     DEPARTURE 
ON   A   MISSION  TO   SAXONY. 

Paris,  isth  Pluviose,  8th  year  of  the  Republic. 
Citizen  Lavalette  shall  write  to  the  First  Consul  from  the  chief 
places  through  which  he  will  pass.     He  shall  give  information — 
On  the  public  spirit. 
The  coming-in  of  the  taxes. 
The  conscripts. 
The  conduct  of  the  civil  and  military  agents. 


APPENDIX.  447 

Citizen  Lavalette  shall  seek  in  Saxony  the  best  maps  of  Germany 
he  can  find.'  He  shall  get  all  those  that  may  have  appeared  since 
that  time. 

He  shall  make  inquiries  into  the  situation  of  the  Austrian  armies 
in  Italy,  in  Bavaria,  in  Suabia. 

He  shall  write  twice  in  each  decade  to  the  Minister  of  the  Foreign 
Department. 

Independently  cf  the  diplomatic  news,  Citizen  Lavalette  shall 
spare  no  expense  to  obtain  all  the  information  he  can  on  the  situa- 
tion of  the  armies,  the  generals,  the  infantry,  the  cavalry,  the  field 
artillery,  and  the  siege  artillery. 

He  shall  give  me  all  the  information  he  will  be  able  to  collect 
on  the  situation  of  Ulm,  and  the  various  towns  of  Bavaria  and 
Bohemia. 

He  shall  direct  particular  attention  to  the  Russian  army,  the 
number  of  its  regiments,  and  their  position.  He  shall  inquire 
what  is  going  forward  in  Poland. 

He  shall  address  all  his  military  information  to  General  Clarke. 

When  he  lays  out  any  money  to  get  the  required  informations, 
he  shall  send  over  an  account,  and  the  sum  shall  be  reimbursed. 

Bonaparte. 

No.   XVIII. 

ABSTRACT     OF      THE     GENERAL      INSTRUCTIONS     GIVEN     TO     M. 
LAVALETTE  ON  HIS   ABOVE-MENTIONED   MISSION   TO   SAXONY. 

2  Pluviose,  8th  Year. 

Political  agents  in  foreign  countries  represent  the  vigilance  and 
force  of  the  government  that  sends  them.  In  that  double  point  of 
view,  their  functions  are  graduated  on  a  scale  of  activity  which  it 
is  important  to  unfold  in  a  distinct  and  precise  manner. 

I.  The  political  agent  secretly  observes  and  watches  assiduously 
over  the  Government  near  which  he  resides.  The  observations  he 
makes,  the  information  he  gets,  are  by  him  transmitted  with  exact- 
ness to  his  own  Government  ;  and  it  is  by  such  means  that  that 
Government  sees  by  the  eyes  of  its  agent  all  that  is  useful  to  the 
national  interests,  or  hurtful  to  them. 

'  When  I  was  in  Illyria  and  Carinthia,  they  printed  very  fine  maps  not  only 
of  the  Hereditary  States,  but  also  of  all  Germany. 


448  APPENDIX. 

2.  The  political  agent  manifests  his  watchfulness,  and  acquaints 
the  ministers  of  the  Government  that  is  the  object  of  it,  that  such 
a  measure,  or  such  an  attempt,  that  they  meditate,  has  not  escaped 
his  sagacity;  and  that  from  the  moment  the  first  indication  of 
execution  shall  threaten  to  disturb  in  any  degree  the  existing  con- 
nection between  the  two  countries,  he  will  find  means  to  oppose 
them  with  all  the  zeal  and  energy  his  duty  may  require. 

3.  The  political  agent  enters  directly  and  ostensibly  into  con- 
nection with  the  Government  near  which  he  resides;  but  unless  he 
has  already  precise  and  especial  instructions  concerning  the  direct 
object  his  communications  have  in  view,  he  is  satisfied  with 
notifying  to  that  Government  that  he  is  disposed  to  discuss  it,  and 
is  going  to  take  the  orders  of  his  Government. 

4.  Finally,  the  political  agent  has  received  the  orders  of  his 
Government ;  in  this  case,  he  addresses  declarations  to  the  local 
Government,  and  replies  to  them.  He  debates,  discusses,  transacts 
— in  one  word,  he  negotiates. 

Such  is  the  scale  of  the  various  functions  political  agents  have 
to  fulfil  abroad.  The  Government  of  the  Republic  having  given 
their  approbation  to  the  unfolding  of  it,  recommend  its  study  to 
the  particular  attention  of  each  agent.  They  equally  approve  of 
the  following  reflections,  which,  comprising  the  general  rules  of 
conduct  they  are  to  follow,  will  acquaint  them  with  the  extent 
of  their  responsibility,  and  with  the  means  by  which  they  may 
fulfil  it. 

The  first  class  of  duties  political  agents  have  to  fulfil  is  entirely 
limited  to  the  exercise  of  their  vigilance.  That  vigilance  sup- 
poses that  they  have  acquired,  and  that  they  use  all  their 
endeavours  to  complete  their  exact  knowledge  of  the  interest 
and  natural  rights  of  the  country  where  they  write,  which  com- 
prises necessarily  the  whole  extent  of  our  commercial  connections, 
and  the  whole  of  our  political  connections.  This  knowledge  is 
extended  and  completed  by  the  practice  of  a  well-exercised  agency. 
For  the  obstacles  which  social  intercourse  raises  to  the  activity 
and  amelioration  of  commercial  connection,  and  the  fetters  which 
intrigue,  personal  ambition,  and  the  individual  character  of  those 
who  govern,  perpetually  lay  on  the  freedom  of  political  con- 
nections, are  essential  parts  of  political  science,  and  can  only 
be  well  known  to  those  whose  business  it  is  daily  to  wrestle  with 
them. 


APPENDIX. 


449 


In  the  first  class  of  their  duties  the  political  agents  are  kept 
back  by  no  restrictions  ;  they  are  in  the  full  and  unlimited  exercise 
of  their  zeal.  They  try  to  discover  all  that  is  susceptible  of  being 
known  :  they  transmit  to  the  Government  of  the  Republic  all 
they  have  succeeded  in  discovering. 

But  when  they  enter  into  the  second  class  of  the  duties  of 
their  situation,  prudence,  which  is  one  of  the  most  important 
qualities  that  situation  requires,  must  accompany  all  their  deter- 
minations. They  have,  as  yet,  nothing  to  do,  but  to  let  the 
ministers  of  the  Government  near  which  they  reside  see  that 
they  have  penetrated  such  or  such  indications  of  their  views  ; 
that  they  follow  them  in  their  secret  attempts ;  that  they  are 
in  the  track  of  their  projects.  However,  they  must  not  decide 
without  reflection  on  such  a  manifestation  of  their  watchfulness, 
for  the  natural  effect  must  be  to  prevent  or  stop  the  progress 
of  these  ministers  ;  and  there  are  some  cases  in  which  it  may 
be  more  useful  to  let  them  go  on  ;  to  leave  them  a  wider  scope,  so 
as  to  pronounce  themselves  more  clearly.  It  may  happen  also 
that  not  being  certain  of  repairing  the  ambition  or  the  ill-will  of 
an  enterprising  minister,  it  may  be  more  prudent  to  do  as  if  one 
did  not  perceive  views  which  national  dignity  might  wish  to  see 
retracted  as  soon  as  they  are  discovered.  The  skill  of  the  agents 
must  in  these  cases  consult  the  spirit  of  the  mission  which  is 
entrusted  to  them,  and  the  honour  of  the  Government  they  present. 
Here  their  responsibility  lies  entirely  in  the  exercise  of  their 
discernment. 

As  to  the  third  class  of  duties  of  political  agents,  it  is  easier  to 
seize  its  object  than  to  perceive  its  guarantee.  Here  the  political 
agent  puts  himself  in  an  ostensible  connection  with  the  ministers 
of  the  local  Government.  He  must  perpetually  bear  in  mind  the 
systems  of  national  rights  which  are  clearly  traced  by  the  existing 
state  of  things,  the  received  customs,  the  wording  of  treaties  ;  and, 
if  the  question  is  to  ameliorate  the  established  connection,  he 
must  seek  his  titles  in  the  spirit  of  these  treaties,  and  in  the 
general   system  of  mutual  interests  of  the  two  Governments. 

But  although,  in  the  execution  of  this  class  of  duties,  the 
political  agent  may  see  with  one  glance  of  his  eye  the  road  that 
lies  open  before  him,  he  must  however  call  all  his  prudence  to 
his  aid  before  he  engages  in  it:  as  long  as  a  political  agent 
observes,  he  has  no  connection  but  with  his  own  Covernment  ; 

30 


450  APPENDIX. 

when  he  lets  his  observations  be  perceived,  he  enters,  in  some 
respect,  into  an  indirect  connection  with  the  ministers,  whom 
he  acquaints  that  they  are  the  objects  of  his  attention  ;  never- 
theless, these  ministers  as  yet  see  nothing  but  power,  and  can 
derive  no  advantage  from  the  knowledge  they  have  of  the  manner 
in  which  he  fulfils  the  obligation  of  his  situation  ;  but  when  the 
political  agent  speaks  officially,  the  ministers  see  in  him  the 
Government  of  which  he  is  the  organ,  and  that  thought  must  be 
for  him  a  perpetual  motive  of  circumspection  and  discretion. 

The  first  rule  to  be  observed  in  that  respect  is,  to  presume 
nothing  ;  never  to  act  without  interrogating  ;  to  solicit  precise 
instructions,  and  to  be  well  imbued  with  this  principle,  that 
in  a  matter  of  positive  discussion,  whether  it  be  in  declaring  or 
in  replying,  the  Government  alone  prepares  and  negotiates,  while 
the  diplomatical  agents  are  only  its  organs. 

The  diplomatical  agents  have  no  right  either  to  choose,  or  to 
allow,  or  to  refuse,  or  to  transact.  They  officially  declare  the 
determination  of  the  Government  they  represent.  But  if  they  are 
organs  without  a  will  of  their  own,  they  must  not  be  organs 
without  intelligence.  When  they  expect  the  decision  they  are  to 
interpret,  they  must  plead  justice,  and  choose  the  most  favourable 
time  and  means  to  insure  their  success.  Their  responsibility 
lies  wholly  in  the  care  with  which  they  keep  within  the  bounds 
of  their  instructions,  the  sagacity  that  teaches  them  their  real 
bounds,  and  the  exactness  with  which  they  conform  their  conduct 
to  them. 

In  every  instruction  regarding  a  discussion  of  right,  there 
are  degrees  of  demands  or  sacrifices  which,  after  these  instructions 
have  once  been  laid  down  by  the  Government  that  approved 
of  them,  seem  to  leave,  to  the  discernment  of  the  agent 
who  is  to  act,  a  great  latitude  of  power  ;  but  in  this  he  must 
not  be  mistaken.  The  responsibility  of  an  agent  is  not 
determined  by  the  maximum  of  sacrifices  or  the  minimum 
of  demands  contained  in  his  instructions.  The  duty  of  his 
mission  consists  essentially  in  acting  in  the  best  way  pos- 
sible :  he  must  have  continually  the  best  way  before  his  eyes, 
to  animate  his  zeal  and  encourage  his  endeavours ;  and  it  is  by 
these  endeavours  alone,  and  not  by  the  result  of  them,  that 
his  conduct  shall  be  judged.  For,  as  prudence,  discretion,  and 
skill,  in  their  fullest  extent,  belong  to  the  really  important  part 


APPENDIX.  451 

of  a  diplomatical  agent  ;  so  also,  justification  and  guarantee,  to 
their  fullest  extent,  enter  essentially  into  the  means  of  his 
responsibility. 

M.  Talleyrand. 


No.  XIX. 

INSTRUCTIONS    FOR   CITIZEN    LAVALETTE. 

Since  the  beginning  of  the  war  there  have  existed  no  direct 
connections  between  the  Republic  and  the  Government  of  Saxony. 
The  Elector  entered  the  Coalition,  in  consequence  of  the  general 
feeling  of  anxiety  and  hatred  which  not  one  of  the  Governments  of 
the  Empire  could  resist ;  he  quitted  it  by  the  sole  act  of  drawing 
back  his  quota,  and  by  a  declaration  he  published  containing  his 
intention  of  remaining  neutral. 

From  the  period  of  the  above-mentioned  declaration,  the 
accession  of  that  prince  to  the  neutrality  of  the  North  of  Germany 
was  acknowledged  by  the  Government  of  the  Republic  ;  but  that 
transaction  took  place  by  intermediate  means.  The  act  which 
consecrated  it  was  signed  only  by  the  Ministers  of  the  King  of 
Prussia,  as  vouchers  of  the  Conventions  of  Neutrality,  and  the 
Plenipotentiary  of  the  Republic. 

However,  towards  the  middle  of  the  sixth  year,  the  Executive 
Directory  wished  to  have  a  regular  agent  near  the  Elector  of 
Saxony.  They  named  Citizen  Helfflinger,  who,  having  no  pre- 
decessor at  Dresden,  went  himself  throu^'h  the  necessary  forms 
with  the  Saxon  Ministers.  He  was  generally  well  received,  and 
the  Elector  expressed  his  satisfaction  at  having  an  agent  of  the 
Republic  near  his  person. 

But  Citizen  Helfflinger,  though  acknowledged  by  the  Ministers, 
and  treated  by  them  with  great  consideration,  displayed  no  public 
character  at  Dresden.  His  mission  was  barely  one  of  observation, 
and  the  conversation  he  was  authorised  to  hold  with  the  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs,  giving  opportunities  rather  to  officious  than  to 
official  communications,  served  only  to  keep  up  the  mutual  good 
disposition  of  the  two  Governments,  and  to  preserve  some  trace  of 
the  ancient  friendship  that  connected  the  two  countries. 

That  is  the  point  of  view  under  which  Citizen  Lavalette  must 
consider  the  mission  that  is  entrusted  to  him.     As  an  observer, 


452  APPENDIX. 

his  part  his  susceptible  of  great  activity  ;  as  a  diplomatic  agent, 
his  mission  lies  wholly  in  expectance. 

The  policy  of  the  Court  of  Saxony  is,  under  various  aspects,  like 
the  agency  of  the  Ministers  who  reside  there,  an  observation 
policy  : — how  exterior  and  interior  circumstances  oblige  us  to 
act  with  the  greatest  reserve,  and  the  personal  sentiments  of  the 
Prince  agree  perfectly  with  those  principles  of  prudence  and 
circumspection  which  circumstances  prescribe  him  to  follow. 

The  Saxon  nation  is,  of  all  the  nations  of  Germany,  that  which, 
through  its  character,  approaches  to  the  wise  and  reflecting  part 
of  the  French  nation.  A  constitution  which  in  many  points 
resembles  that  of  England,  by  classing  and  circumscribing  the 
prerogative  of  some  classes,  maintains  the  rights  of  all,  and  the 
jealousy  of  Liberty  always  struggles  with  advantage  against  the 
pretensions  and  encroachments  of  hereditary  power. 

This  persevering  struggle,  which  the  grand  impulsion  given  to 
public  opinion  by  the  French  Revolution  has  animated  with  a 
double  strength,  necessarily  obliges  the  Saxon  Government  to 
use  great  prudence  in  all  resolutions  that  might  hurry  it  on  to 
an  augmentation  of  expenses,  or  to  political  combinations  of  an 
unknown  tendency.  Thence  a  constant  attention  to  keep  exterior 
connections  in  bounds,  and  to  avoid  whatever  might  lead  to 
engagements.  The  Court  of  Saxony  has  no  other  wish  but  that 
of  remaining  insulated  in  the  midst  of  those  movements  that  tend 
to  place  all  the  states  of  Europe  in  a  situation  of  mutual  dis- 
traction and  enmity.  Wholly  occupied  with  her  domestic  adminis- 
tration, and  its  preservation,  she  has  succeeded  in  neutralising 
her  ambition  as  well  as  her  territory.  She  would  perhaps  have 
also  succeeded,  by  a  principle  of  interest  and  wisdom,  in  guarding 
herself  from  anti-revolutionary  impressions,  if  those  impressions 
were  not  attached  to  prejudices  and  passions  that  nothing  can 
cure. 

There  exist,  therefore,  many  reasons  to  believe  that  Saxony 
will  not  abandon  her  system  of  inactivity,  unless  she  be  forced  to 
do  so,  and  that  she  will  resist  with  all  her  strength  the  instigation 
of  our  enemies.  She  will  be  protected  in  this  wise  determination 
by  her  position,  the  good  state  of  her  military  force,  and  the 
personal  reputation  of  the  Elector. 

Nevertheless,  as  the  obstinacy  and  petulance  of  the  apostles 
and  ministers  of  the  Coalition  stop  before  no  obstacles,  Citizen 


APPENDIX.  453 

Lavalette  will  find  them  constantly  occupied  in  conspiring  against 
the  system  adopted  by  the  Saxon  Government.  Their  attempts 
must  everywhere  be  the  object  of  the  assiduous  observation  of 
an  agent  of  the  Republic.  They  must  be  the  principal  tint  of 
the  information  that  Citizen  Lavalette  must  unceasingly  seek  to 
acquire  and  carefully  to  transmit  to  Government. 

By  the  intrigues  that  he  will  see  going  forward,  and  of  which 
he  must  study  to  discover  the  source,  he  will  keep  his  eyes  con- 
stantly open  on  Russia  and  England.  If  he  knows  how  to  figure 
to  himself  the  real  and  just  situation  in  which  it  is  fit  that  Saxony, 
for  her  own  interest,  should  remain  in  respect  to  these  two  Powers, 
he  will  perfectly  feel  how  false  and  absurd  is  the  policy  that  may 
wish  to  place  her  in  any  other. 

The  Ministers  of  the  Neutral  Powers  must  also  be  the  objects  of 
his  watchfulness.  The  greatest  part  of  them,  departing  from  the 
principles  of  their  mission,  by  prepossessions  of  caste  and  personal 
considerations  of  patronage  and  ambition,  show  themselves  fre- 
quently the  officious  advocates  of  a  cause  inimical  to  the  interests 
of  the  Government  they  represent.  Their  mistaken  ideas,  by 
leading  them  perpetually  out  of  the  line  of  the  real  enemies  of 
their  country  with  the  one  they  reside  in,  will  make  Citizen 
Lavalette  fully  understand  (and  help  him  in  ruling  his  own 
conduct)  the  system  of  real  connections  which  ought  to  exist 
between  Saxony  and  the  Governments  that  have  not  acceded  to 
the  Coalition.  That  is  the  rule  to  which  he  will  conduct  the 
inquiries  he  will  constantly  apply  himself  to  make  on  the  plans 
and  manner  that  will  seem  to  deviate  from  them. 

There  exists  in  Saxony  no  able  agent  of  any  friendly  Power 
except  Spain.  Citizen  Lavalette  will  receive  from  his  predecessor, 
on  his  connection  with  that  Minister  as  on  his  personal  connec- 
tion with  the  foreign  agents,  and  with  those  of  the  Electors,  all 
the  information  he  will  stand  in  need  of.  Citizen  Helffiinger  is 
generally  respected  at  Dresden.  The  notice  and  advice  he  will 
be  eager  to  give  to  his  successor  cannot  but  be  extremely  useful  to 
the  success  of  the  missions  entrusted  to  him. 

M.  Talleyrand. 


454  APPENDIX. 


No.  XX. 

Paris,  12  Nivose,  of  the  9th  Year  of  the  French  Repubhc, 
One  and  Indivisible. 

the  minister  of  the  foreign  department  to  citizen 
lavalette. 
Citizen, 

I  hasten  to  acquaint  you  with  the  convention  for  a  cessation  of 
arms  that  has  been  concluded  between  General  Moreau  and  the 
Archduke  Charles.  You  will  find  the  particulars  of  it  in  this  day's 
Monitcur,  which  I  enclose-  This  new  suspension  of  hostilities, 
consented  to  before  the  gates  of  Vienna,  before  an  army  whose 
march  no  army  could  stop,  will  be  in  the  eyes  of  Europe  a  fresh 
proof  of  the  moderation  of  Government  and  its  invariable  disposi- 
tion not  to  pursue  the  war  in  any  other  view  than  to  obtain  peace. 
We  may  at  least  believe  that  Austria  will  yield  to  necessity,  and 
that  the  present  truce  will  be  converted  into  a  definite  peace. 

I  salute  you. 

M.  Talleyrand. 


INDEX. 


Abdication  of  Napoleon,  327 

Aboukir,  Turkish  defeat,  192 

Acyorte,  117 

Ajaccio,  Bonaparte  at,  196 

Alexander,  Emperor,  240,  265 

Alexandria,  plague  at,  168 

All  Pacha,  157 

Andreossi,  General,  xxiii.,  421 

Angouleme,  Duchess  of,  271,  376, 

400,  425 
Areola,  victory  of,  107 
Army,    Revolutionary,    85 ;     under 

the  Restoration,  278,  287 
Aroum  Farregge,  422 
Arrest  of  Lavalette,  332 

of  Sir  R.  Wilson,  41 1 

Arrighi,  Duke  of  Padua,  160 
Artois,  Count  of,  258,  296,  298 
Augereau,  136,  138,  140,  145 
Austerlitz,  battle  of,  227 

Bailly  elected  mayor,  10 
Barbe-Marbise,  Count,  371 
Barras,  95,  99,  129,  132,  137,  200, 

423 
Barthelemi  (Police  Aga),  171 
Barthelemy,  137 
Basochc,  La,  4 
Bassano,  Duke  of,  293 
Bastille,  capture  of,  6 
Baudus,  374,  380,  403 
I'avaria,  King  of,  401,  412,  416 
,  Lavalctte's  residence  in, 

413 
Bcauchamp,  167,  420 


Beauharnais, 
loi,  362 


Alexander,    71,    73, 


Countess 


416,  441 


Emilie,    see    Lavalette, 

Eugene,  100,  144,  284, 

see  Holland,  Queen  of, 
and  Josephine 

Bellart,  Procureur-General,  399 

Bernadotte,  115,  142,  241 

Berri,  Duke  of,  277 

Berthier,  Prince  of  Neufchatel,  14, 
145,  205,  254 

Berthier  de  Savigny,  murder  of,  8 

Bertrand,  56 

Bessieres,  31 

Bidon  Julien,  160 

Blacas,  285,  2SS 

Bliicher,  228 

Boissy  d'Anglas,  93 

Bonaparte,  Joseph,  259 

,  Louis,  no,  212 

,  Lucien,  204 

,  Madame,  125 

Bonaparte,  Napoleon,  defeats  the 
revoltecl  Sections,  95 ;  thanked 
by  the  Convention,  99  ;  marries 
Josephine,  lOo;  promotion,  100; 
self-reliant  character,  I02  ;  de- 
parture for  Italy,  103  ;  reception 
of  Lavalette,  108  ;  jjortrait  by 
Gros,  III;  treaty  with  the  Pope, 
114;  treaty  of  Lcohen,  I20; 
attitude  towards  the  Directory, 
131, 144 ;  peace  with  Austria,  143; 


456 


INDEX. 


projected  conquest  of  Egypt,  143  ; 
treaty  of  Passeriano,  I44;slight8d 
by  Augereau,  149  ;  Rastadt  Con- 
gress, 150;  capture  of  Malta, 
155  ;  administrative  reform,  163  ; 
naval  disaster,  164 ;  Syrian  cam- 
paign, 165,  173  ;  siege  of  St. 
John  of  Acre,  175  ;  visits  Naza- 
reth, 181  ;  accused  of  poisoning 
the  sick,  1S8  ;  evacuation  of 
Syria,  188  ;  visit  to  the  Great 
Pyramid,  192 ;  return  from 
Egypt,  194;  reception  at  Ajaccio, 
196  ;  landing  at  Frejus,  199  ; 
interview  with  Directory,  200 ; 
1 8th  Brumaire,  201  ;  attempted 
assassination,  206 ;  Consulate, 
207  ;  clemency  to  emigrants, 
210;  conspiracy  to  murder,  213  ; 
becomes  Emperor,  224  ;  capacity 
for  government,  228  ;  campaign 
of  1809,  230;  divorce  of  Jose- 
phine, 230 ;  marries  Maria  Louisa, 
235 ;  fatal  fire  during  wedding 
festivities,  236  ;  birth  of  a  son, 
238;  Russian  campaign,  241  ; 
renewal  of  hostilities,  250 ;  return 
from  Russia,  250  ;  defeat  of 
Leipsic,  252  ;  fresh  disasters, 
256  ;  capitulation  of  Paris,  264  ; 
Josephine's  attachment,  283  ; 
Josephine's  death,  284 ;  plot  for 
a  restoration,  290;  return  from 
Elba,  295  ;  arrival  at  Tuileries, 
306;  causes  of  his  downfall,  311  ; 
the  Hundred  Days,  311  ;  cam- 
paign of  1815,  313  ;  infidelity  of 
Maria  Louisa,  316 ;  Fouche's 
treachery,  319;  Champ  de  Mai, 
321  ;  distribution  of  eagles,  323  ; 
Waterloo,  323  ;  return  to  Paris, 
324 ;  abdication,  327  ;  projects 
of  escape,  329 ;  official  despatches 
and  diplomatic  notes,  419,  446 

Bonneville,  385 

Botteau,  142 

Boulay  de  la  Meurthe,  260 

Bourbon,  Duke  of,  79 

Dynasty,  99 

family  traits,  284 

Princes,  215 

Bourmont,  315 


Bournonville,  67,  202 
Bourrienne,  299 
Bresson,  391,  403 

,  Madame,  392 

,  Stanislaus,  396 

Briqueville,  349 
Brisbane,  General,  429 
Bruce,  Mr.,  402,  42S 
Brueys,  Admiral,  154 
Brumaire,  i8th,  203 
Brune,  113 

Brunswick,  Duke  of,  52 
Burnonville,  211 

Caffarelli,  178,  183 

Cairo,  French  occupation  of,  161  ; 

rebellion  at,  166 
Cambacer^s,  260,  301 
Campaign,  Rhine,  67  ;  Italian,  103, 

120 ;  of  1809,  230  ;  of  1815,  313 
Campan,  Madame,  363 
Carnot,  Lazare,  129,  134,  137,  148, 

308 
Carteaux,  97 
Carvoisin,  361,  3S1 
Caulaincourt,  222 
Chabot,  157,  420 
Champ  de  Mai,  321 
Charette,  103 

Charles,  Archduke,  112,  454 
Chateau-Renaud,  177 
Charter  of  1814,  274,  286 
Chassenon,  387,  404 
Cisalpine  Republic,  146 
Clarke,    Duke  of  Feltre,   72,    141, 

260,  369,  434 
Clermont-Tonnerre,  23 
Cochelet,  Mademoiselle,  444 
Commissioners  of  the  Convention, 

69.75 
Comte,  286 
Conciergerie,  336,  342 
Congress  at  Rastadt,  149 
Conspiracies     against      Bonaparte, 

206,  213 
Constituent  Assembly,  11 
Consulate  established,  207 
Convention,  policy  of  the,  91 
Coquebert,  68 
Corbin,  75 

Corsica  revisited  by  Bonaparte,  196 
Cossar,  xxxi. 


INDEX. 


457 


Cretin,  193 
Crossier,  no 
Custines,  63,  68,  84 

D'Ambray,  303 

D'Alberg,  Duke,  413 

Danican,  98 

Darrieux,  374 

Dastaneg,  193 

D'Aubonne,  59 

Davoust,  240 

De  Bartillat,  425 

De  Broglie,  33 

Decazes,  345 

Ue  Fidieres,  349 

De  Forget,  416 

De  Freville,  372 

Delmas,  73 

De  Loriol,  66 

D'Entraigues,  127 

Desaix,  68,  80,  83,  88,  162,  174 

D'Erlon,  Count,  415 

Desgenettes,  186,  189 

De  Stael,  Madame,  135,  297 

De  Tourzel,  Madame,  53 

De  Vaudemont,  Princess,  371 

De  Verdiere,  37,  50 

De  Villefosse,  Horon,  355 

D'Hilliers,  56,  71,  81,  94,  103,  106 

Dieudonne,  79 

Directory  instituted,  100 ;  its  in- 
herent weakness,  126;  Bourbon 
plot,  127  ;  events  of  iSth  Fructi- 
dor,  137 ;  disobeyed  by  Bona- 
parte, 144  ;  i8th  Brumaire,  203  ; 
disliked  by  the  nation,  200  ; 
satirical  sketch,  xx. 

Djezzar  Pacha,  165 

Dommanget,  2 

D'Ormesson  de  Moiseau,  19 

Dream,  terrible,  xxviii. 

Dubois  d'Angers,  322 

Dubourg,  Mademoiselle,  377,  404 

Dugua,  General,  174,  423 

Dumouricz,  67 

Dunoyer,  286 

Dupuis,  346,  404 

Duras,  Duke  of,  360 

Duroc,  109 

Dutoit,  Madame,  384 

Eastern  expedition,  154 


Education,  pre-revolutionarj-,  2 
Election  for  Soulhwark,  434 
Egypt,  condition  of,   162  ;  expedi- 
tion to,  143 
Egj'ptian  justice,  171 
Eighteenth  Brumaire,  203 
Eighteenth  Fructidor,  137 
El  Mahade,  191 
Ellister,  428 
Emigrants,  aristocratic,  26,  58,  105, 

210,  275,  277 
Emperor^jec  Bonaparte 
Empire,  French,  founded,  225 
Enghien,  Duke  of,  217,  221 
England,  policy  of,  328,  338 
Erlon,  Count,  277 
Eugene,    Prince — sec    Beauharnais, 

Eugene 
Excelmans,  291,  400 
Execution  of  Louis  XVI.,  64 

Favras,  Marquis  of,  23,  286 

Feltre,  Duke  of — see  Clarke 

Fennell,  Captain,  432 

Ferme-generale,  5 

Ferrand,  279,  300 

Fersen,  150 

Fire  at  Austrian  Embassy,  236 

Flahaut,  292 

Fouche,  Duke  of  Otranto,  207,  214, 

231,  294,  307,  318,  329 
Foulon,  murder  of,  8 

Foy,  374  .  .      „ 

France,  condition  of,  m  1814,  272 
Frenchwomen,  German  opinion  of, 

367 
Frotte,  Count,  104 
Fructidor,  i8th,  137 

Galley-slaves,  French,  343 
Gantheaume,  195 
Geneva,  Bonaparte's  visit  to,  148 
Genoa,  disturbances  at,  123 
Georges,  conspirator,  213,  223 
German  opinion  of  Frenchwomen, 

367 
Gohier,  204 

Gouvion  St.  Cyr,  79,  84 
Grey,  Earl,  Sir   K.  Wilson's  letter 

to,  427 
Guidal,  244 
Guillotine,  a  travelling,  78 


458 


INDEX. 


Hassan  Touhar,  422 

Helfflinger,  451 

Henry,  Prince,  212 

Hoche,  80,  104 

Holland,  Lord,  433 

Holland,  Queen  of,  285,  296,  328, 

415,442 
Hompesch,  146 
Hortense,      Queen — see     Holland, 

Queen  of 
Houchard,  63,  69 
Hua,  Advocate-general,  356 
HuUin,  245 
Hutchinson,    Captain,    xxxi.,   404, 

428 

Ibrahim  1?ey,  163,  165,  173,  180 
Infernal  machine,  213 
Italian  campaign,  103,  120 

Jaffa,  town  stormed,  175;  plague 
at,  188 

Jaubert,  183,  254 

Jena,  battle  of,  228 

Josephine,  married  to  Bonaparte, 
100  ;  mutual  attachment,  1 1 1  ; 
divorced,  230 ;  at  Malmaison, 
283  ;  death,  284  ;  household  ex- 
penses, 437 

Joubert,  114,  120 

Jourdan  of  Avignon,  51 

Journalists,  servility  of,  320 

Junot,  108,  114,  155,  180 

Kilmaine,  147 
King  of  Bavaria — see  Bavaria 
Kleber,  General,  xxiii.,  68,  82,  181, 
185 

LABEDOYfeRE,  332,  337,  34O 

Laborde,  246 

Lacroix  Frainville,  345,  352 

Lafayette,  chief  of  National  Guard, 

10  ;  at  Versailles,  12  ;  flight  and 

imprisonment,  40 
Lafont,  execution  of,  98 
Lahorie,  74,  85,  127,  244,  248 
Lallemand,  292 
Lallemand,  Madame,  442 
La  Reveillere  Lepaux,  133 
La     Rochefoucault,     Count,     345, 

348,  354 


La  Rondo,  59 

Larry,  188 

Laudremont,  74 

Lavalette,  Count,  parentage  and 
education,  l,  xvii.  ;  studies  law,  2  ; 
joins  National  Guard,  4 ;  aver- 
sion to  cruelty,  8  ;  employed  by 
the  King's  librarian,  19 ;  royalist 
sympathies,  21  ;  attack  on  the 
Tuilerics,  44  ;  events  of  Septem- 
ber 2,  53  ;  his  sense  of  honour, 
XXV.  ;  enlists  in  the  army,  56 ; 
reviews  his  own  character,  57  ; 
adventure  at  Vermanton,  58  ; 
ordered  to  the  Rhine,  64  ;  arrival 
at  Worms,  66 ;  opening  of  cam- 
paign, 1794,  79  ;  hardships  of 
war,  87  ;  behaviour  under  fire,  88 ; 
return  to  Paris,  89;  13th  Vende- 
miaire,  97  ;  Vendean  war,  104  ; 
Italian  campaign,  107  ;  appointed 
aide-de-camp,  108  ;  sent  to  the 
Tyrol,  114  ;  adventure  at  Lienz, 
117  ;  mission  to  Genoa,  124  ; 
sent  to  Paris,  128  ;  interview 
with  Carnot,  129  ;  meeting  with 
Madame  de  Stael,  136  ;  i8th 
Fructidor,  137  ;  return  to  the 
army,  140;  Rastadt  Congress,  149; 
marriage,  xxii.,  154,  362;  visits 
Corfu,  156;  plague  at  Alexandria, 
170  ;  Syrian  campaign,  173  ; 
visits  Nazareth,  182;  voyage  to 
France,  195  ;  i8th  Brumaire, 
201  ;  mission  to  Saxony,  208, 
446  ;  visits  Berlin,  210  ;  ap- 
pointed Postmaster-general,  214  ; 
Imperial  postal  service,  227  ; 
capitulation  of  Paris,  263  ;  retire- 
ment from  office,  265  ;  hidden 
treasure,  281  ;  restoration  plot, 
292  ;  visit  to  the  Post-ofifice,  300  ; 
a  significant  letter,  316;  Water- 
loo, battle  of,  324  ;  counsels  abdi- 
cation, 326  ;  letter  to  the  Ministry, 
332  ;  arrest,  332 ;  judicial  pro- 
ceedings, 334,  346  ;  a  judge's 
anecdote,  335  ;  sent  to  the  Con- 
ciergerie,  336  ;  prison  life,  338, 
348 ;  a  prison  spy,  343 ;  visited 
by  his  daughter,  350  ;  death  of 
his   infant  son,  353  ;  choosing  a 


INDEX. 


459 


j^O')  354  '■>  ^f'^'  ^nd  sentence, 
358 ;  visited  by  his  wife,  361  ; 
a  terrible  dream,  xxviii. ;  thoughts 
of  suicide,  371  ;  preliminaries  of 
evasion,  377  ;  escape,  377  ;  finds  a 
hiding-place,  388  ;  public  opinion, 
393  ;  vigilance  of  the  police,  4CX)  ; 
schemes  for  quitting  Paris,  401  ; 
protected  by  English  friends, 
402  ;  a  night  alarm,  405  ;  journey 
to  Belgium,  407  ;  crosses  the 
frontier,  409  ;  reaches  Bavaria, 
412 ;  life  in  exile,  413,  443 ;  a 
royal  pardon,  xxxii.,  416  ;  re- 
turns to  France,  417  ;  Sir  R. 
Wilson's  letter,  427  ;  visit  to  Lon- 
don, 434 ;  letters  to  Duchess  of 
Ragusa,  440  ;  death,  xxxiv. 

Lavalette,  Countess,  marriage,  154, 
363  ;  early  life,  362  ;  death  of 
her  infant,  353  ;  implores  royal 
clemency,  359,  374,  424;  visits 
her  husband  in  prison,  361  ;  resi- 
dence in  Germany,  367  ;  at  Jose- 
phine's court,  368  ;  contrives  her 
husband's  escape,  377  ;  her  im- 
prisonment, 399;  released,  415; 
mental  derangement,  417  ;  estim- 
able character,  440 

Lavalette,  Mademoiselle,  350,  399, 
416,  441 

Lebrun,  207 

Lefebvre  Desnouettes,  295 

Legislative  Assembly,  31 

Lehrbach,  153 

Le  Marrois,  no 

Lienz,  adventure  at,  117 

Lorraine  and  Alsatia,  82 

Losack,  Colonel,  429 

Louis  XVL,  XV.;  weakness  of 
character,  il,  21,  30;  personal 
appearance,  22 ;  the  flight  to 
Varenncs,  28 ;  events  of  lOth 
August,  44  ;  imprisonment,  50 ; 
execution,  64 

Louis  XVIIL,  265,  270,  300,  360, 
425 

Macdonai.d,  202,  299 
Mallet's  plot,  243,  248 
Malta,    secret     mission     to,     143  ; 
Knights  of,  146  ;  capture  of,  155 


Mandar,  42 

Mantua,  capitulation  of,  114 
Maria  Louisa,  238,  260,  316,  340 
Marie  Antoinette,  17,  22,  344 
Marmont,    Duke   of   Ragusa,    109, 

168,  263,  370,  424 
Marseillaise  Hymn,  87 
Massacres  of  2nd  September,  53 
Massena,  115,  197 
Mecklenburgh,  Princess  of,  212 
Menou,  94 

Mentz,  siege  of,  70,  81 
Metternich,  150 
Michaud,  76,  169 
Military  discipline,  62 
Mole,  308 
Monge,  143 
Montigny,  104 
Mourad  Bey,  162,  191 
Moreau,  Si,  128,  202,  242,  454 
Montereau,  battle  of,  258 
Montesquiou,  33,  61 
Murat,  108,  154,  206,  242,  293,  423 
Murder  of  French  emissaries,  152 

Napoleon — see  Bonaparte 
National  Guard,  10,  26,  34,  253 
National  property,  276 
Nazareth,  Bonaparte  at,  181 
Necker,  5,  148 
Nelson,  156,  16  r 

Ney,  Marshal,  288,  338,  352,  373 
Nile,  battle  of  the,  161 
Nobility,  French,  16 
Nobility — see  Emigrants 

O'Hagarty,  349 
Orleans,  Duke  of,  5,  27 
Otranlo,  Duke  of — see  P'ouche 

Padua,  Duke  of,  160 

Paris,  capitulation  of,  263 

Pasquier,  264,  369,  372 

Paul,  Emperor  of  Russia,  224 

Pelusc,  Lavalette's  journey  lo,  421 

Petion,  38 

Piche^ru,  76,  80,  93,  127,  217,  222 

Pitt,  William,  226 

Pius  VL,  114 

Plague  at  Alexandria,  1O8 

Plague  in  Syria,  186 

Plaisancc,  Duke  of,  425 

Polignac,  Messrs.,  223,  258 


460 


INDEX. 


Postal  service,  Imperial,  227 
Post-office   under    Lavalette,    xxv., 

300,  305 
Pousseil^ues,  143,  146 
Prison  discipline,  338 
Prussia,  Queen  of,  211,  367 
Pyramids  visited  by  Bonaparte,  192 

Queen  of  Holland — sec  Holland 
Queen — see  Marie  Antoinette 

Ragowski,  49 
Ragusa,  Duchess  of,  440 
Ragusa,  Duke  of — see  Marmont 
Rastadt,  Congress  at,  149 

Regnier,  164,  174 

Restoration,  269,  331 

Revolution,  French,  premonitory 
tumults,  3  ;  States-General  con- 
voked, 4  ;  capture  of  the  Bastille, 
6  ;  Constituent  Assembly,  1 1  ; 
march  to  Versailles,  12  ;  flight  to 
Varennes,  28 ;  interference  by 
the   Powers,   32 ;    declaration  of 

.  war,  33  ;  mob  at  the  Tuileries, 
35  ;  Federation  of  July  14th,  38  ; 
events  of  August  loth,  43  ;  the 
Girondins,  51  ;  September  mas- 
sacres, 54 ;  execution  of  the 
King,  64 ;  popular  distress,  89  ; 
social  eccentricities,  90  ;  Conven- 
tion described,  91  ;  Directory 
established,  100  ;  weakness  of 
the  Directory,  126 ;  Bourbon 
plot,  127;  i8th  Fructidor,  137; 
1 8th  Brumaire,  203 

Revolutionary  Army,  85 

Rewbell,  133 

Rhine  campaign,  67,  82 

Richelieu,  Duke  of,  352,  380 

Robespierre,  33 

Roederer,  45,  203 

Ross,  Major,  62 

Rovigo,  Duke  of— 56'^  Savary 

Royalists,  insolence  of,  288 

Russian  campaign,  241 

Sacken,  Marshal,  285 
St.  Domingo,  expedition  to,  225 
St.  John  of  Acre,  siege  of,  175 
St.  Just,  harsh  conduct  of,  77 
St.  Leu,  Duchess  oi—sec  Holland, 
Queen  of  ' 


St.  Roses,  Tascher  de,  349 

Salahieh,  battle  at,  164 

Santerre,  54 

Savary,  245,  258 

Saxony,  P^lector  of,  210 

Saxony,  French  emigrants  in,  372  ; 

Lavalette's  mission  to,  208,  446 
Schneider,  the  Rhenish  Marat,  78 
Schwartzenberg,  Prince,  236 
Sebastiani,  256,  300 
Serrurier,  115 
Sieyes,  204 

Smith,  Sir  Sidney,  176,  194 
Soult,  Duke  of  Dalmatia,  290,  434 
Standley,  Captain,  175 
States-General  convoked,  4 
Sulkowski,  no,  166 
Swiss  guards,  5,  47 
Switzerland,  Bonaparte  in,  148 
Syrian  campaign,  165,  173,  190 

Talleyrand,  134,  167,  206,  257, 

271.  447 
Thibaudeau,  Count,  294,  325 
Toussaint  Louverture,  226 
Treaty  of  Basil,  81  ;  of  Leoben,  120 ; 

of  Passeriano,  144  ;  of  Tilsit,  24a 
Treilhard  and  Bonnier,  152 
Tripier,  xxvii.,  345,  350 
Tuileries  attacked,  44  ^ 

Tyrol,  expedition  to,  114         ^",    ^■ 

Vandeuil,  349 
Varennes,  flight  to,  28 
Vaudemont,  Princess,  331 
Vendee,  civil  war  in,  103,  291 
Vendemiaire,  13th,  91 
Venetian  states,  122 
Venture,  183 
Versailles,  march  to,  12 
Vial,  General,  421,  423 
Villemanzy,  75 
VitroUes,  303 
Von  Reichberg,  Count,  414 

Wallis,  Mr.,  408 

Waterloo,  battle  of,  323 

Westermann,  49 

Wilson,  Sir  Robert,   189,  402,  404,. 

411,  427-434 
Wurmser,  76,  107 

Zayonjeck,  117 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


AA    000  849  473    4 

ITRAL  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 
University  of  California, 


CEN' 


Diego 


DATE  DUE 


ii^AY  0*"  ^'^ 

IV[/   1  I         \'     , 

\  j^  1    ~   V,       : ,  rj 

CI  39 

UCSD  Libr. 

